THE DECADES of the new world or west India, Conteynyng the nauigations and
conquestes of the Spanyardes, with the particular description of the most
rich and large lands and Islands lately found in the west Ocean perteynyng
to the inheritance of the kings of Spain. In the which the diligent reader
may not only consider what commodity may hereby chance to the hole christian
world in time to come, but also learn many secreates touching the land, the
sea, and the stars, very necessary to be known to al such as shall attempt
any nauigations, or otherwise have delight to behold the strange and
wonderful works of God and nature. Written in the Latin tongue by Peter
Martyr of Angleria, and translated into English by Richard Eden.

LONDINI. In aedibus Guilhelmi Powell. ANNO. 1555.

POTENTISSIMO AC SERENISSIMO PHILIPPO, AC SERENISsimae potentissimaeque Mariae,
Dei gratia Regi ac Reginae, Angliae, Franciae, Neapolis, Jerusalem, et
Hiberniae: Fidei defensoribus, Principibus Hispaniarum et Siciliae,
Archiducibus Austriae, Ducibus Mediolani, Burgundiae, et Brabantiae, comitibus
Haspurgi* Flandriae, et Tirolis, Richardus Edenus perpetuam optat foelicitatem.
CVM IN PRIMO VESTRO ingressu in hanc celeberimam Londini vrbem (illustrissimi
Principes) cernerem quanto omnium applausu, populi concursu, ac ciuium
frequentia, qua^to insuper spectaculorum nitore, nobilium virorum splendore,
equorum multitudine, tubarum clangore, caeterisque magnificis pompis ac
triumphis, pro dignitate vestra accepti estis dum omnes quod sui est officij
facere satagebant, vbi in tanta hominum turba vix vnus reperiatur qui non
aliquid agendo aduentum vestrum gratulabatur, coepi et ego quoque aliorum
exemplo (propius presertim ad me accedentibus Celsitudinibus vestris) tanto
animi ardore ad aliquid agendum accendi ne solus in tanta hominum corona
otiosus viderer, quod vix me continebam quin in aliquam exte^porariam orationem
temere erupuissem, nisi et praesentiae vestrae maiestas, et mea me obscuritas a
tam audaci facinore deterruissent. Verum, cum postea penitius de hac re mecum
cogitassem, consyderassemque quam haec omnia alioqui per se lau de digna,
vestris tamen meritis ac regiae dignitatis eminentiae comparata, plebeia ac
ludicra videantur, coepi denuo cum animo meo reputare qua in re ita cum
immortali rerum memoria foelicissimum vestru^ aduentum gratularer, vt inde
nominis vestri fama et splendour, non vllis spectaculorum temporarijs osten it is,
sed rerum gestarum gloria, ad posteros perpetuo emanaret. Excutio statim
diuitias meas. Perscrutor si quid ex penu meo depromere possum quod me ad
aliquid agendum vestris heroicis virtutibus dignum excitet. Sed cum penes me
nihil tale reperio, agnosco nuditatem meam, atque ad vos confugio. Patrum,
auorum, proauorum, atque atauorum vitas et facta recolo. Syluam rerum gestarum
video, totque preclarissimorum principum propagines, vt merito ab ipsis
heroibus, Saturno videlicet, Jove, ac Hercule, caete^^que theanthropis,
originem duxisse videantur. Quod cum ita sit, non aliunde profecto quam ex hac
sylua materies mihi petenda erit quo in mentibus hominum et aeterna rerum
memoria, perpetua spectacula rerum a vobis et progenitoribus vestris praeclare
gestarum, in mundi theatro ab omnibus cum su^ma nominis vestri fama ac
veneratione cernantur. Cum itaque inter caetera a maioribus vestris praeclare
gesta, nihil sit admirabilius aut maiori laud dignu^, quam quod incredibili
fiducia et plus quam Herculeis laboribus superato Oceano, foelicissimo tandem
eue^tu, Indiae Occidentalis ditissimas Insulas atque Continentis amplissimas
regiones, mortalium primi inuenerunt, in quibus infinitas incolarum myriades ad
fidem Christi conuerterunt (quo nihil augustius aut Christianis principibus
magis dignum excogitari potest) visus sum mihi quod non alia in re magis posse^
foelicitati vestraemerito gratulari, qua^ si nostris quoque hominibus quibus
haec hactenus nihil aut parum cognita sunt, innotescere faciam, vt perspectis
illorum simul et vestrorum amplissimis imperijs non sine diuina prouide^tia (vt
credere par est) ad ipsos vsque Antipodes et PLUS VLTRA terminatis, omnes boni,
ipsa rerum magnitudine in admiratione^ ducti, vos ament et venerentur: Malis
vero et impro bis, os obstruatur si quam in maledicendo voluptatem capiunt.
Haec dum cogito, venit mihi in mente^ quod olim adolescens perlegi Decades de
Nouo Orb a Petro Martyr ab Angleria, illustrissimi Ferdina^di regis
Catholici, ac tui (Serenissime rex) proaui oratore, Latin conscriptas, atque
sacrae Caesariae maiestati patri tuo d^dicatas. Tanti itaque autoris fide et
eruditione motus, eum prae caeteris in nostram linguam traducendum suscepi,
quod non solum vt historicus res Indicas cum summa fide scriptis mandauit, sed
etiam vt philosophus (quod in caeteris scriptoribus desyderatur (naturalium
rerum occultas causas reddit, ac admirabilium naturae operum (quibus haec
vestra India plena est) rations inuestigat. Atque vt h^ius Indiae posterior
status cognoscatur* quantusque thesaurus auri, gemmarum, aromatum, aliarumque
ditissimarum mercium ac annui census inde quotannis in Hispaniam aduehitur,
adiunxi doctissimi viri Gonzali Ferdinandi Ouiedi libellum quem ille Indicae
historiae generalis Summarij titulo inscripsit, eiusdemque illustrissimi Caroli
Imperatoris patris tui nomini consecrauit: Caeteraque plurima ex recentioribus
scriptoribus excerpsi, que mihi in tam immensa rerum memorabiliu^ bibliotheca,
praecipue adnotanda videbantur. Quae, quanta et qualia sunt, qua^tisque
parasangis, omnium heroum ac Argonautaru^ res gestas toto terrarum orb
tantopere celebratas superent, haec mea sequens praefacio vulgari sermon ad
huius historiae lectores populumque Anglicu^ conscripta, satis prolixa oratione
indicabit, adeo vt idem hic repetere superuacaneum sit, minimeque necessarium,
quandoquidem Anglica lingua tibi Serenissima Regina vernacula est, idemque
illustrissimo Regi quod tibi scriptum aut dictum existimen, non solum quod
diuino vinculo vnum sitis in carne vna, sed etiam quod eade^ animi lenitate,
humanitate, affabilitate, caeterisque virtutibus, non minus animi moribus qua^
carnis vinculo vnum sitis. Sed neque hic opus est vt ego Latino sermon vestras
virtutes, animi moderationem, clementiam, religionem, pietatem, educatione^,
castitatem foelicitatem, fortunas, opes, munificentiam, victorias, imperia,
stemmata, caeteraque huiusmodi multa enumere^, cum praesertim vir nobilis et
doctus Leonhardus Goretius Polonus de his omnibus deque foelicissimo vestro
matrimonio, orationae satis fusa tractauit, in qua nihil pretermisit quod ad
Celsitudinis vestrae et progenitorum vestrorum gloriam virtute partam,
pertineat. Caeteru^ cum regiae vestre virtutes nominisque sple^dor ac regnorum
amplitudo alias per vniuersa Christiani orbis imperia satis nota sint, nisi
forte ibi minime vbi maxim nota esse debere^t, nempe in hoc Angliae regno,
ideo operepraecium et rem omnibus bonis gratam, quodque mei est officij erga
Celsitudines vestras me facturum existimaui, si haec nostris (vt dixi)
hominibus, nostraque lingua ob oculos contemplanda proposuero. Quod quam
foeliciter aut dextre a me factum sit, aliorum esto iudicium. Quam vero
fideliter, sincere, ac animo in Maiestatis vestras propenso hoc idem aggressus
sum, testis est mihi conscientia mea in conspectu illius qui hominum corda et
renes scrutatur. Macteigitur virtutis istius animi vestri estote Serenissimi
Principes, atque Diuino auxilio freti, pergite ea qua coepistis fiducia, huius
deploratae ac collapsae reipub* nostrae statum, pristino decori restituere, id
quod omnes a vobis expectant atque eff^agitant, pollicentes insuper vobis in eo
negotio suam operam in nullo defuturam. Ne terreat vos quoru^dam canum latratus
qui bonis omnibus oblatrant, et tunc desinent latrare cum desinent viuere.
Vulgatissimum semper fuit improbos homines viris probis vel propter inuidiam
vel propter dissimilitudinem, solere latrare. Et tamen ille pro bus semper
habitus est, quem peruersi maxim improbauerint. Non est igitur curandum quid
de nobis homunculi, sed quid viri boni loquantur. Cogitat (Serenissimi
Principes) quod magnanimitate ac ma iorum insignijs, aquilis et leonibus
similes estis. Aquilae natura est, alta petere, et aduersus solis radios in
altum volare. Leonis proprium est parcere subiectis et debellare superbos.
Generosus equus per plateas incedens, canes vt animalcula imbella praeterit non
perturbatus* Virtus non exercita (inquit Seneca ad Neronem) paruam laudem
meretur. Non admodum magnificum fuerit mediocrem fortunam probe administrare:
Sed tanta rerum omnium licentia non abuti, hoc vero admirabile est: Multo autem
admirabilius in iuuenili ac lubrica aetate cui accedat aetas magistra: hijs
praesertim qui contumelia lacescuntur, quae alioqui homines vel placidissimos
solet de gradu deijcere. Sed (vt supra dixi) non est hic me^propositi
(Serenissimi Principes) vestras lauds pro meritis decantare, aut exprimere quo
modo in summo rerum fastigio vos humiles praebuistis, de quare fu^ius in
praefacione ad lectores tractaui. Iam itaque vt huic epistolae dedicatoriae
finem imponam, rogo Serenissimas Maiestates vestras vt has meas lucubrationes
in hijs autoribus vertendis, (quas vestro nomini consecraui) ea humanitate ac
fauore suscipiatis, quibus omnes beneuolo animo ad vos accedentes, facile
admittitis ac neminem reijcitis. Que^admodum enim qui pomarium aut vineam
plantauit ac maturos inde fructus collegit, illi merito primitias soluit a quo
prima semina primasque arborum insitiones habuit, ita et ego qui a maiorum
vestrorum rebus gestis primis sumptis seminibus, hos qualescumque ^tuctus
aedidi, videor profecto mihi, debito vestro honor vos defraudasse, nisi eosde^
vestro nomini ac numini obtulissem. Deus. Opt. Max. Celsitudines vestras
perpetuo seruat incolumes, faxitque vt foecunda sobolis propagine, summaque
pace ac tra^quillitate, huius regni habenas ad Diuini nominis gloriam, diu
gubernetis.

FINIS.
The table of the contents of this book. Beside the Decades (the table of
whose contents you may read in the end of the book) are contained
furthermore in this boooke these things following.
Of the lands and Islands lat^ly found. Folio. 149. The popes bulle and
donation. 167. and. 171. The history of the Weste Indies, written by Gonzalus
Ferdinandus. 174. The ordinary navigations from Spain to the Weste Indies.
175. Of two notable things as touching the West Indies: and of the great
riches brought from thense into Spain. 176 Of the gold mines and manner of
woorkynge in them. 177. The manner of fysshynge for pearls. 180. The
familiarity that the Indians have with the devil. 181. Of temperate and
habitable regions under the Equinoctial line. etc. 184. Of diverse particular
things, as woormes, serpents, beasts, fowls. etc. 185. Of trees, fruits,
and plants. etc. 194. Of the venomous apples wherewith the Canibales inueneme
their arrows. 199. Of fysshes and their manner of fysshynge. 201. Of the
rysynge and faulynge of owre Ocean sea and the south sea cauled the sea of Sur.
204. Of the straight of land being between the north and south sea. 205. How
things of one kind, dyffer by the nature of the place: and of the beasts
cauled Tigers. 206. Of the manners and customs of the Indians of the firm
land and of their women. 208. Of the Islands Hispaniola and Cuba. 210. Of the
Island of Cuba and other. 213. Of the land of Baccallaos. 213. Other notable
things gathered out of diverse autours: and of the universal card and new
world. 214. A discourse of the marvelous vyage made by the Spanyardes round
about the world. 215. The order of the stars about the pole Antartike. 222.
The prices of precious stones and sp^ces with their weightes and measures as
they are soulde both of the Moors and Gentyles. 233. Of the weightes of
Portugale and India, and how they agree. 239. Of the dooues of the Island of
Madera. 239. Of the Island of saint Thomas under the Equinoctial line. 240. The
debate and strife between the Spanyardes and Portugales for the division of the
Indies and the trade of spyces. 240. Of the pole Antartike and the stars
about the same: and of the quality of the regions and disposition of the
elements about the Equinoctial line: Also of certain secreates touching the
art of saylynge. 245. A discourse of diverse vyages and ways by the which
spices, precious stones, and gold were brought in owlde time from India into
Europe and other parts of the world. Also of the vyage to Cathay and East
India by the north sea: And of the viages of Sebastian Cabot. 249. Of the
vyages to Moscouia and Cathay. 249. A brief description of Moscouia. 259. The
description of the north regions: and how they are habitable, contrary to
thopinion of the owlde writers. 264. Scondia. 267. Gronlande. 268. Islande.
269. Laponia. 270. Norway. 273. Suetia or Suethlande. 275. Gothia or Gothlande.
276. Finlande and Eningia. 276. Bothnia. 275. The dy^ference of regions and
causes of great cities. 277. The history of Paulus Iouius of the ambassade of
great Basilius Prince of Moscouia to pope Clement the seventh. 278. Other
notable things as concerning Moscouia, gathered out of the books of
Sigismundus Liberus. 289. The description of the regions and people lyinge
North and East from Moscouia to the river Petzora and the province of Iugaria
and the river Obi. etc. 294. Of the famous river of Tanais. 297. More directly
from Moscouia to ^athay. 298. Of the Tartars. 299. The navigations by the frosen
se^* 303. The letters missiue which king Edward the.vi. sent to the kings,
princes, and other potentates inhabitynge the north east parts of the world
toward the Empire of Cathay. 306. and. 308. The letters of the prince of
Moscouia sent to king Edward. 319. Other notable things as touching the
Indies: and of the foreknowleage that the poet Seneca had of the finding of
the new world and other regions not then known. 310 Of the great Island
which Plato cauled Atlantica or Atlantide. 310. Of the color of the Indians.
311. Why they were cauled Indians. 311. The first discovering of the West
Indies. 312. What manner of man Christopher Colon was, and how he came first to
the knowleage of the Indies. 313. What labor and travail he took in
attemptynge his first vyage to the Indies. 313. Of new Spain cauled Noua
Hispania or Mexico. 315. Of Peru. 316. Of the great river cauled Rio de la
Plata. 316. Of the higher or superior India cauled India Tercera or Terciera.
317. Again of the lands of Laborador and Baccalaos. 318. The discovering of
the land of Florida. 319. An opinion that Europe, Africa, and Asia, are
Islands: and of certain Nauigations about the same. 320. That the Spanyardes
have sailed to the Antipodes which inhabit the undermost half of the baule
of the earth, contrary to thopinions of the owlde writers. 321. Who first
found the nedle of the compass and the use thereof. 322. The situation and
byggenesse of the earth. 323. What degrees are. 324. A demonstration of the
roundenesse of the earth. 324. What credit owght to be given to writers as
touching the works of nature. 325. The preface to the book of metals. 326.
Of the generation of metalles and their mines, with the manner of finding the
same. 327. Of the mine of gold and the quality thereof. 334. Of the mine of
silver. 340. The manner of woorkynge in the gold mines of Egypt in oulde time.
342. The description of the two vyages made out of England to Guinea in
Afrike. 343. A brief description of Afrike. 344. The first vyage to Guinea.
345. The second vyage to guynea. 350. The manner of finding the Longitude of
regions by diverse ways. 360. A new manner of finding the Longitudes of
regions. 361* A brief rehearsal of the contents of the books of the
Decades. etc.
FINIS.
The interpretacion of certain Words.
Continente (that is) the firm land not enclosed with water, or no Island. A
Carauel or Caruel, a kind of ships. Hemispherium, the half globe of the
earth and water. Pesus, a ducate and a half. Equinoctial, the line that
divides the heaven and the earth in the myddest between the two poles, in the
which when the son comes, the days and nyghtes are of equal length Clime,
is a portion of the world between north and south. Paralleles, are lines
whereby the son passing causes variation of time. Gatti Mammoni, Monkeys.
Schoenus, is a space of.xl. furlonges. Werst, is an Italian mile. Colonie, an
habitacion.
The Indian language.
Canoa, a boat or bark. Caciqui, kings or governors. Zemes an Idol. Tuyra,
the devil, Machana, a sword. Areitos, songs or balades. Tona, the moon.
Tonatico, the soonne. Quines, prestes. Chiuy, a man. Ira, a woman. Boa, a
house. Cauni, gold. Mayani, nothing. etc.
Note that the Island of Hispaniola, is now cauled San Domingo by reason of
the chief city so named. Also saint John's Island cauled sancti Iohannis, or
Burichena, is otherwise cauled Boriquen.

Richard Eden to the reader.
THe most famous oratoure and learned Philosopher Marcus Tullius Cicero,
writes, that in all consultations as touching owre behauoure and order of
living among men, it behooves us ever to bear in mind how far the
dignity of man's nature, excels the condition of brute beasts. For they,
being ruled altogether by sense, delight in nothing but beastely appetites,
whereunto they run headlonge as to their only felicity. But the mind of
man, being of more noble nature, is nurysshed with knowleage, and takes
pleasure in diuisynge or excogitatynge sum honest thing, whereby it not only
leaves among men a memory of his immortal nature, but also engendereth the
like affection in other that delight to see and hear such things as are
commendable in their predicessours And this surely think I to be the cause
that either the famous factes of worthy men, Commendation of noble factes.
or ingenious inventions of expert artificers, have not only nobilitate the
autours and diuisers of the same, or such to whom they have been dedicate, but
also that part of their commendations have redounded to all such as have
spente their time and taken peynes in illustratynge and setting furthe their
doings. For who should at this day have known Mausolus the king of Caria,
Mausolus.
with his wife Artemisia, or these famous artificers, Cunning artificers.
Scopa, Bryaces, Timotheus, Leochares, or Pythis, if the wonderful and
sumptuous work of the sepulcher which Artemisia made for king Mausolus her
husband (being of such woorkemanshyppe that it was accounted for one of the
marueyls of the world) had not given unto all these immortal fame, whereas
nevertheless it could not defend it self against thiniurie of time
consumynge all things. There remains at this day no token of the laborious
Tabernacle which Moises builded, The Tabernacle of Moises.
or of the renoumed and maru^^lous Temple that was builded in Jerusalem by
Solomon and renewed by Esdras. The Temple of Solomon.
Yet shall the name of the excellent artificers Ooliab and Beselchel, and
Hyram the king of Tyrus, Hyram.
live for ever in the memory of men. Furthermore also, Solomon him self,
although he were many other ways famous, yet gave he a great part of his
glory to that princely building. But certeynely the most true and permanent
glory, True glory.
proceeds of such monumentes as bring sum great and notable commodity and
profit to the life of men, rather then of the hugious heaps of stones of the
Pyramides of Egypt, wherein is naught else to see but the fond and barbarous
ostentation of superfluous riches: Great and su^ptuous works,
Or of the Mazes cauled Labyrinthi, or of horrible great Images cauled Colossi,
of knottes inexplicable, of brazen caudrons of monstrous byggenesse, of havens
with echo seven times reboundynge, and diverse such other portentous
inventions, the which as they do delight us in considering the marvelous art
and wit of such artificers as divised and made the same, so are they
otherwise unprofitable: And bring rather a fame to their inuentoures, then
true glory. Fame differs from true glory.
Perillus was famous by diuisynge his brazen bulle: yet so, that it had been
better for him to have been obscure and unknown. They have therefore deserved
more true commendation which in building of cities, towns, fortresses,
bridges, cundites, havens, ships, and such other, have so joined
magnificence with profecte, that both may remain for an eternal testimony of
absolute glory, Absolute glory.
whose perfection extends to the gratifyinge of universal mankind as far as
man's mortality will permit. The which thing while I consider, and caul to
memory how Cicero defines true glory to be a fame of many and great
deserts either toward owre citizens, What is true glory.
owre country, or toward all man kind, and the same to be of such
excellency that the owlde poets for sum effect feigned it to be the sweet
Ambrosia and Nectar wherewith the gods are fed, and that of such force that
who so may drink thereof, shall also become a god, (that is to say immortal and
happy) me think verily that (if man may be a god to men as holy scripture
speaks of Moises and other) the kings of Spain of late days (if I may
speak it without offense of other) may so much the more for their just
deserts and good fortune be compared to those gods made of men (whom the
antiquity cauled Heroes and for their manyfolde benefits to man kind
honored them with The kings of Spain. Heroes.
divine honor) as their famous factes so far excel al other, as I dare not
speak to such as have not yet hard or read of the same, least the greatness
thereof should at the first brunte so much astonyshe the reader that he might
give the less credit to the autoure of this book, who nevertheless has
most faithfully written this hystorye of such things whereof he has seen a
great part him self (as being by the most catholyke and puissaunt king
Ferdinando appointed a commissionarie in thaffayres of India) and gathered the
residewe partly by information and partly out of the wrytinges of such as have
been (as Uyrgyll writes of Eneas, The certentie of this hystory
Et quorum pars magna fui) that is, doers and part of such things as are
contained in the history: as Governors, Lieuetenauntes, Capitaynes, Admirals,
and Pylottes, who by their paineful trauayles and prowes, have not only
subdued these lands and seas, but have also with like diligence committed
thorder thereof to wrytinge: And not this only, but for the better trial of
the truth herein, have and yet do in manner daily send from thense into
Spain such monumentes as are most certain testimonies of their doing, as you
may read in diverse places in this book. This new world is now so much
frequented, the Ocean now so well known, and the commodities so great, that
the king erected a house in the city of Siuile (cauled the house of the
contractes of India) perteynynge only to thaffayres of the Ocean, The house of
the contractes of India.
to the which al such resort for necessaries as attempt any vyage to this
new world, and likewise at their return make their account to the counsel
for the Indies for the gold and such other things as they bring from
thense. The counsayl for the Indi^s
It is therefore apparent that the heroical factes of the Spaniardes of these
days, The heroical factes of the Spanyardes.
deserve so great praise that thautour of this book (being no Spanyarde)
does woorthely extolle their doing above the famous acts of Hercules and
Saturnus and such other which for their glorious and virtuous enterpryses were
accoumpted as gods among men. And surely if great Alexander and the Romans
which have rather obtained then deserved immortal fame among men for their
bluddye victories only for their own glory and amplifyinge their empire
obtained by slawghter of innocents and kept by violence, Great Alexander.
The ^panyardes wars in the Indies.
have been magnified for their doings, how much more then shall we think these
men worthy just commendations which in their merciful wars against these
naked people have so used themselves toward them in exchaungynge of benefits
for victory, that greater commodity has thereof ensewed to the vanquisshed
then the victourers. They have taken nothing from them but such as they them
selves were well willing to depart with, and accoumpted as superfluities, as
gold, perles, precious stones and such other: for the which they recompensed
them with such things as they much more esteemed. The benefits that the
Indians have received by the Spanyardes.
But sum will say, they possess and inhabyte their regions and use them as
bondemen and tributaries, where before they were free. They inhabit their
regions in deed: Yet so, that by their diligence and better manurynge the
same, they may now better sustain both, then one before. Their bondage is
such as is much rather to be desired then their former liberty which was to
the cruel Canibales rather a horrible licenciousnesse then a liberty,
Liberty.
The Canibales,
and to the innocent so terrible a bondage, tha^ in the myddest of their
ferefull idleness, Fearful idleness.
they were ever in danger to be a pray to those manhuntynge woolues. But now
thanked be God, by the manhodde and policy of the Spanyardes, this deuelysshe
generation is so consumed, partly by the slaughter of such as could by no
means be brought to civility, and partly by reserving such as were oue^come
in the wars, and converting them to a better mind, that the prophecy may
herein be fulfilled that the woolfe and the lamb shall feed together, Isai.
65.
and the wild fields with the vale of A^hor, shall be the fold of the heard of
gods people. Moises as the minister of the law of wrath and bondage given in
fire and te^pestes, The wars of Moises.
was commanded in his wars to save neither man, woman, nor child, and yet
brought no commodity to the nations whom he overcame and possessed their
lands. But the Spaniardes as the mynisters of grace and liberty, The Indians
subdued to the faith.
browght unto these new gentyles the victory of Christ's death whereby they
being subdued with the worldely sword, are now made free from the bondage of
Satan's tyranny, by the mighty pour of this triumphante victourer, Isai. 42.
whom (as says the prophet) god has ordained to be a light to the gentyles,
to open the eyes of the blind, and to deliver the bound out of prison and
captivity. What other men do fantasy herein, I can not tell: but suer I am,
that like as the slow and brutyssh^ wits, for the sclendernesse of their
capacity and effeminate hearts, do never or seldom lift up their minds to
the contemplation of gods works and majesty of nature, The contemplation of
gods works.
but like brute beasts lookynge ever downewarde, think the world to be in
manner no bygger then their own dungehylles or cagies, little passing whether
the Chrystian faith do spread through the world, or be driven to one corner:
Even so al good wits and honest natures (I doubt not) will not only rejoice
to see the kyngedome of God to be so far enlarged upon the face of the
earth, to the confusion of the devil and the Turkysshe Antichryste, The
Christian Empire enlarged.
but also do the uttermost of their pour to further the same. For surely, as
Gonsalus Ouiedus writes to the Emperors majesty in his history of the Weste
Indies, that he thinks him no true Spanyarde which rejoices not in the
good fortune of their kings by whose aid and godly zeal this myghtie portion
of the world has been added to the flock of Christ's congregation, The
conuertion of the gentyles.
Even so do I think them no true Chrystian men that do not rejoice with the
Angels of heaven for the delivery of these owre brootherne, owre flesh, and
owre bones, from the hands of owre commune enemy the oulde serpente who has
so long had them in his possession, until the fullness of the gentyles be
accomplysshed according to the time prefinite by him, who unto the year after
his incarnation.M.CCCC.lxxxxii. has suffered the great serpente of the sea
Leuiathan, Leuiathan.
to have such dominion in the Ocean and to cast such mystes in the eyes of
men, that sense the creation of the world until the year before named, there
has been no passage from owr known parts of the world to these new lands,
whereas now the same are most certeynely known to be not past.xxx. days
saylynge from Spain. Neither yet had the church of Europe any knowleage of the
myghtie Chrystian Empire of Preciosus Johannes, otherwise cauled Presbyter
Johannes, Emperor of many Chrystian nations in Ethiope, Prester John the
Christian Emperor of Ethiope.
until the year of Christ.M.CCCC.xxxiii. as largely appears in the
nauigations of the Portugales, and especially in the book of Damianus a Goes,
written to the bishop of Rome, Paul the third of that name, of the faith and
religion of the Ethiopians which they have had sense the time of the
Apostles. A thing certes most wonderful, and such, that if the same were
not hid hitherto by gods unsearchable providence, I can not but think much
negligence or ignorance in owr forefathers and predicessours until the days
of the right noble, prudent, and Catholic king of Aragon Don Ferdinando
grandfather to Themperours majesty by his eldest dowghter, Don Ferdinando
king of Aragon.
and to the queens highness by his second dowghter the most virtuous lady
queen Catherine her graces moother: A prince doubtelesse of such nobility,
prowes, magnificence, and all other virtues commendable in a prince, that who
so shall indifferentely way all his doings and good success in all his
affairs, comparinge the same to thenterpryses and doings atchyued by such
famous princes in whom the Greeks and Romans have so greatly gloryed, may
with one eye perceive not only how far his noble factes do surmount theyrs,
but also well consider what noble branches of isshewe were like to spring out
of so worthy a stock. And suerly if sense the beginning of the world, the
favor of god toward men has been known by such benefits and blessings as he
has given to men, The favor of god known by his benefits.
it seems to me that in manner (only Christ excepted) there never lived man
to whom god has given greater benefits and showed more favor. Great
doubtless was the favor and mercy that god showed unto Noe, Noe.
by whom he saved the remanent of mankind being but few in number. But much
greater was the grace which he showed to king Ferdinando under whom and by
whose means he saved not only the bodies but also the souls of innumerable
millions of men inhabytynge a great part of the world heretofore unknown and
drowned in the deluge of error. What god has wrought by king Ferdinando.
What should I here speak of Abraham the father of faith whose promyses were
great, Abraham,
and he cauled the friend of god? Did he or his posterity see Israel increase
to such multitudes and nations as king Ferdinandos posterity may see
thincrease of this spiritual Israel unto whom as a second Abraham he was
the father of faith? Spiritual Israel.
Moises was so great in the sight of god that he disclosed unto him his
secreate name, Moises.
and miraculously caused a corner of the sea to open at his prayer. But how
greater a miracle was it that he opened unto the navy of Don Ferdinando the
great Ocean thowght before that time to be without end, where nevertheless
he and his posterity the kings of Spain have now planted a new Israel
much greater then that which Moises led through the red sea. It were here
superfluous to speak of David whom Godde found a man according to his hearts
desire: David.
and yet may it be doubted whether his plages and scourges were greater then
his benefits? His son Solomon for all his inconstant and wauerynge wisdom
and his great riches obtained by his nauigations to Ophir, Solomon.
Ophir.
yet was there at this time no knowleage of Antipodes, Antipodes.
neither did any of his ships sail about the hole world, perce the Ocean,
The navigations round about the world.
and trauerse the Equinoctial line to thinferiour hemispherie or half globe of
the earth and sea as did the famous ship Uictoria sent forth by Themperours
majesty. A thing doubtless so strange and marvelous that as the like was
never done before, so is it perhaps never like to be done again: so far have
the nauigations of the Spanyardes excelled the vyage of Jason and the
'Argonautae to the region of Colchos, or all that ever were before. And
although in the book of kings and Paralipomenon it be hyperborically written
that in the da^es of Solomon gold and silver were in Jerusalem in manner as
plentiful as stones, and that his servants brought from Ophir four hundredth
and fifty talentes of gold, yet do we not read that any of his ships were
so laden with gold that they soonke, as did a ship of king Ferdinandos as
you may read in the last book of the first Decade. Neither was the dominion
of Solomon extended from the river of Euphrates to the land of the Philistians
and thextreme confines of Egypt to be compared with the large Empire which
the kings of Spain have in the west Indies: The dominion of Solomon. Paral, 9.
The Indies.
Nor his riches of gold to be thought much in respect of that which has been
browght from thense into Spain as shall plainly appear to al such as will
seek to know the truth hereof. But to let pass to speak any further of the
miracles which god has wrought by the hands of this noble prince in this new
world among these new gentyles. The wars of king Ferdinando against the
Sarasens.
Is it not well known to al^ the world what a defense and brazen wall he has
been to all Chrystendome in that he has quite driven out of Spain the Moors
or Sarasens and Jews which so many hundredth years possessed a great part of
Spain to no smaule daungioure of the hole Christian Empire, and yet could
never before be clean vanquysshed until the days of this noble and
Catholyke prince so named for his wars ageynste the infidelles, whom God
raised for a Captain of his people as an other Gedion under whose banner they
might overcome their enemies and pourge his vineyarde from such wicked weeds.
The which thing doubtelesse may seem so much the greater and more difficulte,
forasmuch as in the myddest of the chief heat of his chargeable wars
ageynste the Moors of Granada, he even then and at the same time sent forth
ships for the conquestynge of the Indies, The conqueste of the Indies
as thowgh he and the nation of the Spanyardes had been appointed by god either
to subdue the enemies of the faith or to bring them to Christ's religion. The
self same king Ferdinando also abowte the year of Christ. 1503. sent a navy
of ships into Italy, where they vanquysshed, chased, and s^ewe the
Frenchemen, and recovered the kyngedome of Naples with all the dominions
belonging thereunto. The conqueste of Naples.
By which noble victory, his succession and posterity as themperours majesty
and now his son the king owre master and sovereign lord have ever sense
enjoyed thinheritaunce of the same as of antiquity by just and right title
dew to them and their predicessours. And as it is the nature of god not only
to show his love and favor to such as have pleased him, but also to pour
forth the plenty of his grace upon their succession from generation to
generation, so has he with like fecilitie prospered the reign of Themperours
majesty who by his wisdom and prowes has not only pollitikly governed, The
Emperors majesty
but also augmented and enlarged such dominions as fell to him by discente of
inheritance. What should I speak of his wars and conquestes in India, in
Aphrike, in Italy, in France, in Germany, and in Flaunders: all the which to
be declared accordyngely would rather require hole volumes then few sheets of
paper. Yet has one in few words effectually expressed his dominions and
conquestes in these verses following.

Impiger expauit rapidas transire per vndas
Oceani Alcides: continuitque gradum.
Maximus at Caesar, PLUS VLTRA tendere cur^um
Ausus, et ignotis est dare iura locis.
Et domita aurifera nunc victor gente reuersus,
Caetera sub sceptro ponat vt ipse suo.
Nam pater omnipotens vt famam terminet astris
Iussit, et imperium fineat Oceano.
An other also breefely has declared the same in these verses.

Consortem Imperij voluit quia Iuppiter orbis.
Astra Deo cedunt, Carole terra tibi.
And certes who so well considers the progeny of kings that in so short a
time have linially descended from Don Ferdinando, and how many kyngedomes they
possess, may see that God has fulfilled in him also the promises and
blessings of Abraham, Genesis 17.
as to make him the father of many nations, and his seed to grow great upon
the earth: Also that many kings should come forth of his loins, and to make a
perpetual league and conuenaunt with him and his posterity to be their god
for ever. And here to omytte to speak of other: Was there ever better hope or
more likeness then now, that these blessings and promyses of god should
continewe in this princely progeny, sith the virtues and felicity of the^ al
do so shine and florisshe in owr noble and gracious prince king Phylyppe, The
kings majesty.
to whom even in his youth his father (occupied in the wars of Italye and
Aphrike) committed the hole governance of the kyngedomes of Spain and the
Indies. Of his behauour in England, his enemies (which canker, virtue never
lacked) They I say (if any such yet remain) have greatest cause to report
well: ye so well, that if his natural clemency were not greater then was
their unnatural indignation they know them selves what might have followed.
The properties of ^ooles and wise men are declared in these owld verses.

Quid stulti proprium? Non posse et velle nocere.
Quid sapie^tis opus: Non velle et posse nocere.
That is to say: What is the property of a fool: To will to do hurt and can
not. What is the work of a wise man? Not to will to hurt though he may. But
whether he has lacked pour or will, it is known to barbers and blere eyde
men. Who lamented their folly more then he? Who more humbly admytted their
suits and supplications? Ye who obtained their pardon but he? Being a Lion he
behaved him self as a lamb, Apostrophe to England.
and struck not his enemy having the swoorde in his hand. Stoop England
stoop, and learn to know thy lord and master, as horses and other brute
beasts are taught to do. Be not indocible like Tigers and dragons, and such
other monsters noyo^s to man kind. God by the mouth of Isaias the prophet
reproves the Israelites that they knew not so well their dewtie toward him
as did the brute beasts the mangiers of their masters. Isai. 1.
The ox and the ass (says he) knows the mangier of their master, but
Israel knows not me. For shame let us not be worse then oxen and asses, and
like unto horses and mules in whom is no understanding. But O unthankful
England and void of honest shame? Who has given the the face of a hoore and
toonge of a serpent withowt shame to speak venomous words in secreates
against the anointed of god. O painted hoore that have Christ in thy mouth
and the devil in thy heart. Has not the pocke of thy licentiousness brus^e
forth in manner to thine own destruction. How long wylt thou nurysshe in thy
boosome that serpente whose nature is to devour her moother? Take a vomyte in
time least thy disease become incurable. What need I rehearse unto the thy
manyfolde infirmities and deformities which thou art faulen into by thine
own owtragiousnesse? If the greefes of them be to thee insensible by reason
of thy feebleness and long sickness, take unto the that glass wherein thou
gloryest with the Jew and thynkest that thou see at things and ^^nst judge
all mysteries. Look I say in that pure glass and behold thy own
deformities, which thou canste not or wylt not feel. I fear greatly that if
thou look therein diligently and look even through thy self* thou will
abhor thy self to see how many monsters lie hid in the under the shape of
man. Monstrou^ byrthes.
There is even now great talk of the in the mouths of all men that thou have
of late years brought furthe many monsters and strange byrthes, whereof diverse
men make diverse interpretacions more monstrous then the monsters them selves.
But shall I breefely and simply declare unto thee the signification of thy
monsters? The significations of monstrus byrthes.
First then consider that they are monsters of mankind and not of other
beasts. Secundarily mark well that in them al, the headde is perfect, so that
the monstrosit^e grows out of the body, although not out of the hole body but
certain parts thereof. But not to go to far. Consider again that disorder
of the parts is a deformity to the hole. One has well interpreted that such
monstrous byrthes signify the monstrous and deformed minds of the people
mysshapened with fantastical opinions, The deformity of monstrous minds.
dissolute living, licentious talk, and such other vicious behauoures which
monstrously deforme the minds of men in the sight of god who by such signs
does certify us in what similitude we appear before him, and thereby gives
us admonition to amend before the day of his wrath and vengeance. What
deformed beasts are more monstrous then lyinge, rebellion, strife, contention,
privy malice, slaunderynge, mu^terynge, conspiraces, and such other deuilysshe
imaginations. But O England while time is given thee, circumcise thy heart.
Put to only thy good will, and thou may find grace and favor to recover
thine aunciente beauty which has so long been defaced. The king and Queen.
Thou haste now a king and queen that desire thee to remember thy dewtie,
and hold their arms abroad to embrase thee if thou wylt draw nere unto them.
They are sorry to occupy the whyppe if thou might otherwise be brought to
obedience. But if thou take pleasure to persist in froward stoobbernesse,
know thou that they are Lions whelps and conquerours of monsters whereof thou
have had such experience, that proudely trusting (...) thine own strength,
and attemptynge like an other Nemroth to build a n^we tower of confu^^on, the
works of thy giantes were miraculously overthrown by a woman who delivered
thee from that captivity, whereby thou oughtesse to know the daungiour thou
wast in, and be thankful to thy deliverer. Beware therefore least while
thou contemn the peaceable princes that god has sent the, thou be like unto
Isopes frogs to who^ for their unquietness, Jupiter sent a hearon to pick
them in the hedes. Consider what benefi^es than may receive at their hands
if thou do thy dewtie toward them. Consider again that as they are able, so
may thy gentelnesse make them willing to recomp^nse the same. Stop thine
ears from vain fables as from the inchauntynge Mermaydes. For as many speak
of Robbyn Hoode and of his bow that never shot therein, so do fools prate of
such things as they know not. But O god? what fantasies are now in the
head^s of men? How ^edy they are to invent lies and tales? and of how smaul
sparks they kyndle great flames? Sum are so curious to find fault in
other, How curious sum are to find fault in other.
that for lack of just matter worthy reproach in them whom they desire to
deprave, they speak evil of their parents and kynred of whom they know as
little. And not so satisfied they despise and with lyinge disprayse their hole
nation and country. Ye sum take such pleasure herein, that if they can find
naught else to disprayse, they will find fault in such as they favor not,
because they wear not their apparel as they do, or perhaps are not so
effeminate as they, or eat not as they eat, or fight not as they fight, so
parciall is the iudgenent of fools in their own rudeness, thynkyng them
selves the better for dispraysynge of other. Lies Imagined.
Spain is a beggarly country says one: The Emperor is but poor says an
other: He is dead says an other: The Indies have rebelled says an other, and
either there comes no more gold from thense, or there is no more found
now: with such other false and licentious talk divised by unquiet brains in
whose heads the hammers of sedition sease not to forge ingens of iniquiti^. If
I should here answer to all these querels particularly and as the woorthynesse
of the thing requires, I might find matter sufficient to make a volume of
just quantity and perhaps be tedious to sum. Yet not to pass over so
great a matter untouched, and partly to stop the mouths of such impudence
liars, I have thought good to speak sumwhat hereof. First therefore to speak
of Spain, Commendations of Spain
and by the testimony of oulde autours to declare the commodities thereof:
Pliny a grave and faithful autour, in the last book and last chapiture of his
natural history greatly commending Italy above al other contreys, gives the
second praise unto Spain, as well for all such things as in manner the heaven can
give and the earth bring forth for the commodity of this life as also for the
excellent wits of men and Civil governance. Also Diodorus Siculus in the
sixth book of his Bibliotheca speaking of Spain (cauled of the Greeks
Iberia) writes that when in the mountains named Pyrine^ thinhabitantes bu^nte
up the wooddes, Rich silver mines in Spain,
there ran out of the mountains as it were diverse streams of pure silver
molten by the heat of the fire. But the estimation and price of silver being
at those days to them unknown, the Phenician merchants bought the same of
them for things of smaule value: And caryinge it into Grecia, Asia, and other
countries, got great richesse thereby. For the desire o^ gaynes (says he) so
greatly moved the merchants, that when more silver remained then might lade
their ships, they took the lead from their ankers, and put silver in the
place thereof. The Phenices by this gaynes being made very rich, did assign
many colonies both in Sicilie and the Islands there about, and also in Libya,
Sardinia, and Iberia. But after many years when the Iberians (that is the
Spaniardes) knew the price of silver, and applied them selves to the seekynge
of metals and found great plenty of silver, they obtained great riches
thereby forasmuch as in manner all that earth of the mountains is so replenysshed
with silver that it is a marvelous thing to con^yder the nature of the region
and the continual labor of the woorkemen in those mines. Likewise when
afterward the Romans subdued the Iberians, The Romans enriched by the silver
of Spain.
the Italians which for the desire of gaynes searched those metals, got great
richesse by the same. For they deputed to that labor a multitude of bowght
servants, which searchynge the haynes of metals in diverse places, and
percyng the earth diverse ways for the space of many furlonges, browght furthe
great plenty of gold and silver. But the richesse of these mines was first
found at such time as the Carthaginenses (the enemies of the Roman Empire)
had the Iberians in subjection: The Carthaginenses enriched by the silver of
Spain.
which was the cause that their pour afterward increased. For, with monye
hyringe the best and most expert^ soldiers, they kept grievous wars against
their enemies. And not using the aid either of their own soldiers or their
associates, they were a terror to the Romans, Sicilians, and Libyans, whom
they browght into great daungiour by reason they passed them al in abundaunce
of gold and silver. With better fortune therefore, and greater hope of gain
are rich metals sought in Spain, the goodness of whose soil yeldeth cloddes
of earth containing much gold and silver. And these be the very words of
Diodorus Siculus, which the later writers do also confirm. For Julius Solinus
in his Polyhistor, compares Spain to the best contreys in plenty of grain,
vyttayles, oil, silver, gold, and Iron. Likewise Strabo, Statius, and
Claudius, do no less commend it. It were to long here to speak of the
great plenty of fine woolles little inferior unto owrs: also abundaunce of
sugar, The commodities of Spain
vines, pome granates, limondes, and orangies in such plenty that they suffice
not only Spain, but also in manner all Europe: whereas the apples and crabbes
of England are scarsely able to serve it self. And althowghe here sum will
obiecte, that they lack corn, woodde, and certain other things, yet are
their commodities so great otherwise, that al such things are browght them
out of other countries for their wares: and that in such plenty, that they are
there better chepe then ever they were in England sense the sign of the
steeple the poor man's Inn was pulled down in all places. The sign of the
steeple.
Sum for lack of other matter, find great fault that in trauaylynge in
Spain, men shall be served with half a hen, and go to the cooks for their
meat and to the tavern for their drink. And what then I pray you? What
inconvenience enseweth hereof? Is it not better so to do then to pay thryse
for one thing as is the manner to do in sum of owre Innes and in tauernes
where all that eat roste meat are beaten with the spitte, as where they that
of late in Barthelmewe fair paid forty pense for a pygge, where the good man
of the house was not a shamed to make his vaunte that he had made four
shyllynges of a pygge, and had in one day taken four pound for pigs. But if
I should here particularly and at large declare how England is in few years
decayed and impouerysshed, England impouerisshed, Spain enriched.
and how on the contrary part Spain is inryched, I should perhaps
displease more in descrybyng the myserie of the one, then please other in
expressing the florysshynge state of the other, which by all reason is like
daily to increase, as well for the great richesse that are yearly browght
thither from the Indies, as also for the rich silver mines that are found of
late in Spain in the country of Asturia as I was credably informed by the
worthy and learned gentelman Augustinus de Ceratta, Silver mines found of late
in Spain.
Contador (that is) the auditour of the kings myntes who had long before been
surueyoure of the gold mines of Peru, Silver brought from Peru into England.
and browght from thense and from Rio de Plata.xiii. thousand pound weight of
silver which was coined to the kings use in the tower of London where never so
much has been seen at once as such as have been owlde officers in the mynte
do affirm. What should I hear speak of the gold which themperours majesty
receaueth from all the Indies, The^perours revenues from the Indies.
whereas only in the two meltynge shoppes of the gold mines of the Island of
Hispaniola, is molten yearly three hundredth thousand pound weight of.viii.
ounces to the pound, whereof the fyfte part is dew unto him, which amounts
to three score thousand weight yearly. Yet do I not here speak of the gold
mines of the other Islands and the firm land reachynge.viii. thousand miles
from the north to the south: Neither of the rich Islands of the south sea
cauled Mare del Sur, The Islands of the South Sea.
where the king of one little Island named Tararequl, Margaritea, or de las
Perlas, lying in the goulfe of Saint Michael, pays yearly for his tribute a
hundredth pound weight of perles: Neither yet of the fyfte part of other
things, as precious stones, brasile, gossampine cotton, spices, and diverse
other things, whereas also the rich Islands caused the Maluchas perteyne to
the inheritance of Castile, The Islands of Maluca.
althowgh the king of Portugale enjoy them for certain years by composition.
But the Indies have rebelled (say they) and there comes no more gold from
thense. But what if sum of them have rebelled? does it thereby follow that
there comes no more gold from the other that live under obedience? But if
thou will say that they have al rebelled at once, thou must prove that thou
say either by history or witness of such as know the truth hereof, as I
(having made diligent search for the same) am able to prove the contrary, and
that such talk is only imagined by busy headdes. Again: what if they have
rebelled in sum provinces? does it follow that they may not again be
browght under subjection as were oftentimes the provinces of the Romans and as
were in owre days diverse countries of England which have been sore afflicted
with that plage. But whether the sands of the ryuers and the mountains of the
Indies be so emptied with gold that no more can be found there, I think it
here superfluous to answer to this objection, forasmuch as it is hereafter
confuted in the book of metals where you shall find by experience that metals
grow and increase, and that after certain years, such owlde caves of the
mines as have been dygged, are again replenysshed with ure: Also that the
sprynges of such mountains turnynge their course and breaking forth in other
places, bring with them great plenty of such golden sand as is found in
the ryuers into the which they faule. What impudency is it therefore with
words of reproach to caul him poor whose pour is so great, his treasure
so infinite, and his doings so chargeable, that I believe that when so ever it
please almyghtie God to caul him from this life to the great damage of all
Chrystendome, it shall be hard to find an other that shall in all points be
so well able to supplye that room and maynteyne thimperiall dignity. Let al
honest natures therefore learn to speak well of princes according to the
sentence De Principibus nil nisi bonum, forasmuch as they are the ministers of
god who has their hearts in his hand and rules the same as seems best
unto him. For there is no pour neither good nor badde, but of god: and he that
resysteth or speaks evil of the pour, resists and speaks evil of god.
Thou shall not speak evil of the prince or ruler of thy people says saint
Paul.

But whereas now by the pour of Neptunus (I wot nere with what wind) I have
been driven thus far from my nauigations, The nauigations of the Spanyardes
I have though^ good to turn my sails and to follow the ordinary course
which I began, and by thexemple of this worthy captain king Ferdinando,
encourage al other to their pour to attempt the like vyages: As touching the
which in few words to declare my opinion, if any man s^ulde as^e me what I
think these things will grow to in time, I will answer as does the autoure
of this book, that when I consider how far owre posterity shall see the
Christian religion enlarged, I am not able with tongue or pen to express
what I conceive hereof in my mind. Yet one thing I see which enforces me to
speak and lament, that the harvest is so great and the workmen so few. The
Spanyardes have showed a good exemple to all Chrystian nations to follow. But
as god is great and wonderful in all his works, so beside the portion of
land perteynyng to the Spanyardes (being eight times bygger then Italye as
you may read in the last book of the second Decade) and beside that which
pertains to the Portugales, Itali is (...) miles in length and, 126. in
breadthe.
there yet remains an other portion of that main land reachynge toward the
northeast, thought to be as large as the other, and not yet known but only by
the sea coasts, neither inhabyted by any Christian men: whereas nevertheless
(as wryte^h Gemma Phrisius) in this land there are many fair and fruitful
regions, high mountains, and fair ryuers, with abundaunce of gold and diverse
kinds of beasts. Also cities and towers so well builded and people of such
civility, that this part of the world seems little inferior to owre
Europe, if thinhabitauntes had received owre religion. They are wytt^e people
and refuse not barterynge with strangers. These regio^s are cauled Terra
Florida and Regio Baccalearum or Bacchallaos of the which you may read sumwhat
in this book in the vyage of the worthy owlde man yet living Sebastiane
Cabote, The land cauled Terra florida, and regio baccalearum.
in the.vi. book of the third Decade. Look the last book. third decade.
But Cabote touched only in the north corner and most barbarous part hereof,
This region is now cauled Noua Hispania. S^m think that this c^tie is Quinsa^
of marcus P^ulus.
from whense he was repulsed with Ise in the month of July. Nevertheless, the
west and south parts of these regions have sense been better searched by other,
and found to be as we have said before. The chief city in the southwest
parts of these regions, is cauled Temixtetan, or Mexico in manner under the
circle cauled Tropicus Cancri, and s^rongely defended by the nature of the
place. Look the last book of the 3. decade, and the be^^n^ing of the book of
^he land^s lately ^ound.
For it stands in a very great lake having about it innumerable bridges, and
buyldynges to be compared to the works of Dedalus. Th^nhabitaun^es also can
write and read. Sum writers connecte th^s land to the firm land of Asia:
But the truth hereof is not yet known. And although the Spanyardes have
certain colonies in that part of this land that is now cauled Noua Hispania,
yet are the people for the most part Idolatours. How much therefore is it to
be lamented, and how greatly does it sound to the reproach of all
Christendom, and especially to such as dwell nerest to these lands (as we
do) being much nearer unto the same then are the Spanyardes (as within.xxv.
days saylinge and less) how much I say shall this sound unto owre
reproach and inexcusable slothfulness and negligence both before god and the
world, that so large dominions of such tractable people and pure gentiles, not
being hitherto corrupted with any other false religion (and therefore the
easyer to be allured to embrase owres) are now known unto us, and that we
hau^ no respect neither for gods cause nor for owre own commodity to
attempt sum vyages into these coasts, to do for owr parts as the
Spaniardes have done for theyrs, and not ever like sheep to haunte one trade,
and to do nothing worthy memory among men or thanks before god, who may
herein woorthely accuse us for the slackenesse of owre dewtie toward him.
Saint Paul the doctoure of the gentiles (to whose Apostelshippe also these
new gentiles do perteine) was of such zeal toward the Jews whom god had
rejected, The godly zeal of. S. Paul.
that he wysshed him self to be accursed of god for their sakes. He went from
Damascus to Arabie, preached the gospel in Grecia, came prisoner to Rome, was
scourged and stoned, and suffered thryse shypwracke, what then think you he
would do if he were now alive? Is it to be thought that he would not
adventure.xxv. days saylynge to come to such a mart of souls in such
readiness to be easily obtained? I believe verily that neither death, nor the
devil, nor Leuiathan, nor the world, should let him but that he would give
thonset against them all in hope of victory by him by whom he says he can do
all things. He was not negligent in his office nor ignorant of his reward,
but trusted to the promise of him that said by the mouth of the prophet Isai:
Isai. 66.
Of them that shall be saved, I will send sum to the gentyles in the sea, into
Aphrike and Libia, Italy, and Grecia, and into the Islands a far of, to the^
that have not hard of me, and have not seen my glory. The like zeal that
Paul had, and proceadynge of the same spirit, has ever sense Christ's time,
moved not only the Apostles, but also many other famous and godly men (as
superuisours of his testamente) to send owte preachers into diverse parts of
the world to show forth the glad tydynge of the gospel. By this zeal did
Gregorye bishop of Rome and first of that name, Gregory the First.
when he saw English men's children in Rome and asked what nation they were,
when answer was made him in the laten tongue that they were Angli, (that is,
English men) he said (alludyng to the similitude of the word) that they
might well be cauled Angeli, that is, Angels: Thoffice of bishops.
Meaning thereby that like as god had done his part in geuyng them bodies of
natural beauty and comeliness, so it apperteyned to his office being the
chief pastoure of gods flock, to provide that their souls might be made
worthy to inhabit such bodies and the hole nation consecrated unto god by
baptism. For he said furthermore: It is meet that unto these also, the
gospel of life be preached: And hereuppon immediately sent preachers into
England whereby the hole nation was in short time converted to Christ's
faith, England converted to the faith of christ.
although sum had received the gospel long before even from Christ's time by
the preaching of Joseph of Arimathia who asked the body of Christ of Pilote,
and buried it reverently. I would to god that there were now many mo such
Gregory's in the world: And that there might like zeal and gentelnesse be
found in us English men toward other nations, as we have found in other
toward us. Owre predicessoures were not utterly vnmyndefull of these
benefits, but applied them selves likewise to spread the gospel in other
nations. For Uadianus in his book De tribus terrae partibus, writes, that
more then seven hundrethe years after the death of Christ, one Unefride an
English man and bishop of Mogunce (now cauled Mense) was the first that
tawght the faith of Christ among the Germaynes, This vnifrid^ was afterward
named Boneface.
at such time as the Frankes and Almaynes had passed over the ryuers of Rhene
and Danubius, and by putting the garrysons of the Romans to flight, had
possessed a great part of their most no^able provinces. For albeit that these
rude and barbarous nations then accustomed only to war and robbery did
hardly admit that wholesome doctrine at the beginning. Yet by the pollic^e and
wisdom of the Frankes, it came so to pass that in manner through out all
Germany, great increase of the Christian religion followed there most ample
victories, as the like success is also seen in these barbarous nations
subdued by the Spanyardes. Whereby it is apparent, that although sum hold
opinion that none owght to be compelled to the faith, Whether any may be
comp^ll^d to the faith.
yet we see by experience that withowt disputynge of opinions (lest the
pacientes should dye before the physicians agree of the remedy) these
enterprises have taken good effect to the great glory of god who cauleth men
unto him by diverse means and at diverse ages of the declinynge world,
otherwise now then in the time of Christ and his Apostles when the pour of
miracles was given unto men to confirm the new faith which had yet prevailed
no where in the world. The time of miracles.
Albeit, I believe verily, that if we would take the matter in hand
accordyngly, god would not forget to aid us with miracles if it should so be
requ^site, as you may read in this book how he wrought miracles by the
faith of a simple mariner even in thinfancie of faith. Miracles of l^te days.
And suerlye, like as there is no cause why we should any thing doubt of
gods goodness in this behalf if the faue be not in owre selves. Even so, if
we would first set owre hands to the plowe, we ought to hope that he would
give increase and work with us as he has done with other, by whose
prosperous success we may plainly see that it was his will that such things
should go forward. For even Israel to whom promise was made by signs and
miracles that they should possess the land to thinheritaunce whereof, How
Israel possessed the land of promise.
the sea opened it self to give them free passage, yet were they commanded by
the pour of the swoorde to make way, with great loss and slaughter of men
and by force of arms to obtain the land promised to their fathers, which
nevertheless few of them possessed that first fought for the same, but left
their carkeses in the wilderness. Is it not also written of the Iuwes which
repaired the walls of the city of Jerusalem after their captivity in
Babylon, ^^dra. 2. cap. 4.
that Nehemias their captain set the people in order with swoordes, spears,
and bows to defend the woorkemen? And that also even the Princes of Judah
wrought upon the walls and carried burdens? likewise that they wrought with
one hand and held their swoordes in the other? And if it were lawful for
Israel according to the flesh, to use all means and policies to build up
the walls of earthly Jerusalem, how much more then ought the spiritual
Israelites to use all possible means to build up the walls and temples of
spiritual Jerusalem, The buylding of spiritual Jerusalem.
whose fundation is Christ, willing all the nations of the world to be
builded upon the same. It is the property of a wise buylder to use such
tools as the work requires. And not at all times or in all works to use
one tool. For that that serves in soft timber, will not serve in knottie
pieces, nor yet for stones. Thexpert physician uses v^hement remedies for
desperate diseases: And cunninge surgians use burning and cuttynge if the case
so require, as in cuttynge of the finger to save the hand, or in cuttyng of
the hand to save the hole body. Ye it has sumtymes so chaunsed that whereas
men have ente^ded hurt, there has good proceaded thereof in fine: As he that
would have slain Prometheus, wounded his wenne with his swoorde, whereby he
was healed of that disease. So is god able to turn evil into good, and to
make things that are not, as things that are. Even so although sum will
obiecte that the desire of gold was the chief cause that moved the Spanyard^s
and Portugales to search the new found lands, trewly albeit we should
admit it to be the chief cause, yet does it not follow that it was the
only cause, forasmuch as nothing lets but that a man may be a warrier or a
marchaunte, and also a Christian. Therefore what so ever owre chief intent
be, either to obtain worldely fame or richesse, (although the zeal to
increase Christian religion ought ch^efly to move us) I would to god we would
first attempt the matter: And then I doubt not but that it would so comme to
pass with us as it did with them who of long time after the beginning of the
world before men were accustomed to eat flesh, thought it first
sufficient so to use them selves among beasts that they were not hur^e of
them: but shortly after, used them for their commodity: Then begun to wear
their skins: And in fine, fell to eating of their flesh, and to use
certain parts of the^ for remedies against diseases. Even so may these
barbarians by the only conversation with the Christians, (although they were
enforced thereto) be brought to such familiarity with civility and virtue,
that not only we may take great commodity thereby, but they may also
herewith imbibe true religion as a thing accidental although neither they nor
we should seek the same. For like as they that goo much in the soonne, are
colored therewith although they go not for that purpose, So may the
conversation of the Christians with the gentyles induce them to owre religion,
The conversion of the gentiles.
where there is no greater cause of contrary to resyste as is in the Iuwes and
Turks who are already drowned in their confirmed error. But these simple
gentiles lyuinge only after the law of nature, may well be lykened to a
smoothe and bare table unpainted, or a white paper unwritten, upon the which
you may at the first paynte or write what you list, as you can not upon
tables already painted, unless you raze or blot out the first forms. They may
also theslyer be allured to the Christian faith, The ch^istian faith.
for that it is more agreeable to the law of nature then either the cerimonious
law of Moises, or portentous fables of Mahometes Alcharon. If we were therefore
as desirous to enlarge the faith of Christ as to seek worldly gooddes, why do
we defer to adventure that wherein we may do both. We must not now look
for a new Paul or doctoure of the gentiles to be converted by heavenly
revelations: Or for a new Moises to lead men through the sea: Or for an Angel
to carry men in the air from one place to an other as Habacucke the prophet
was carried by the hear of his head from Judea to Babylon: Or as Phylippe
thappostle was carried by the spirit from Gaza to Azotus: but must (as says
the prophet Isaias) every man exhort his neighbor, Isai. 4^.
and bid his broother be of good chere: That the mason and carpenter may build
together, and say to the glewe or cemente, it is good and fast byndynge. What
negligence and slackenesse has hitherto been in Christian men in this kind of
building of gods lively temple, the great clerk Erasmus has declared in
his book intiteled Ecclessiastes, whose words for the woorthynesse of the
autoure, I have here thowght good to rehearse as they are written by him in the
laten tongue in the fyrhe book of the said work. He writes therefore as
follows.

Audimus quotidianas queremonias deplorantiu^ collapsa^ Christiana^ religione^,
^ugust^^ Christi^^^ di^ionis.
eamque ditione^ quae quondam complexa est vniuersum terrarum orbem, in has
angustias esse contractam Hoc igitur quibus ex animodolet, eos decet ardentibus
assiduisque votis flagitare a Christo vt operarios dignetur mittere in messem
suam, aut (vt melius dicam) seminatores mittere in segetem suam. Deum
immortalem, quantum in orb patet agrorum in quibus aut non dum iactu^ est
semen Euangelicum, aut ita iactum est, vt plus sit zizaniarum quam tritici.
Orbis minima pars est Europa: Omnium florentissima pars est Graecia et Asia
minor in quam magno successu primum a Iudaea demigrauit Euangelium. At haec
fere tota, nonne tenetur a Mahumetanis et ijs qui Christi nomen habent inuisum?
Iam in Asia maiore quae latissime pater, quid obsecro nostrum est? quum ipsa
Palestina vnde primo eff^uxit lux Euangelica, seruiat Allophylis? In Aphrica
vero quid nostrum est? Nec dubitandum est quin in tanta vastitate regionum sint
populi rudes et simplices qui facile possent ad Christum alici, si mitterentur
qui facerent bonam sementem. Quid quod quotidie regiones hactenus incognitae
reperiuntur, ferunturque superesse quo nullus adhuc nostratium peruenit. Omitto
nunc infinitam Iudaeorum vim nobis admixtam: omitto plurimos qui titulo Christi
tegunt Ethnicos: omitto tantas schismaticorum et haereticorum phalanges.
Quantus in his esset prouentus Christo, si guaui ac fideles mittere^tur
operarij qui iaciant semen bonum, qui reuellant zizaniam, qui plantent
plantulas bonas, malas exterpent, qui extruant domum Dei, demoliantur
structuras non innitentes petrae Christo, denique qui metant maturam segetem,
sed Christo metant non sibi, et animas Domino colligant, non opes sibi. Nuper
Aethiopiae rex quem vulgus appellat Presteian, ^resteian Aethiopia rex.
per oratorem suum submisit se sedi Romanae, non nihil expostulans cum
pontifice quod ea gens quum a fide Christi non sit aliena, tam diu fuerit a
tocius orbis pastore neglecta. Quidam viri boni, et propagandae religionis
studiosi, queruntur Pilapios Scythiae septentrionalis populum mire simplicem ac
rudem, ^^apii.
a nescio quibus principibus Christianis teneri ditione, sed ita duro premi
iugo humano, vt eis non imponatur suaue iugum Christi, atque ita spoliari bonis
externis, vt non ditentur opibus euangelicis. Pulcherrimum, Deoque gratissimum
erat dare potius qua^ accipere ijs quos studemus Christo lucrifacere, ac sic
eos in ditionem nostram recipere vt gaudeant se subiectos esse principibus sub
quorum imperio commodius degant quam ante degebant. Nouimus cicutare bestias
feras et horribiles, vel ad voluptatem, vel ad vsum vulgarem: et non nouimus
mansuefacere homines vt seruiant Christo? Monarchae alunt qui doceant
elephantos ad saltandum, qui doment leones ad lus^m, qui doment lynces et
leopardos ad venatum: et monarcha ecclesiae non inuenit quo homines alliciat ad
amabile Christi seruicium? Scio vix vllam reperiri beluam domitu difficiliorem
quam est Iudaeus obstinatus, et obduratus haereticus: quanquam nullum est
animal tam immite quod non cicuretur beneficentia et suauitate. Erepertis
regionibus euehitur aurum et g^mmae: Sed triumpho dignius erat illuc inuehere
Christianam sapientiam auro preciosiorem, ac margaritum euangelicum quod
omnibus diuenditis benae comparatur. Dominus iubet suis rogare dominum messis
vt extrudat operarios quod messis esset ampla, operarij pauci. Non minus opus
est nunc rogare deu^ vt in tam late patentes agros eijciat operarios, Sed
excusant omnes, alius aliud. Franciscani Ser^phici.
Atqui Christiana ditio tot habet myriadas Franciscanorum in quibus probabile
est quamplurimos esse qui vere flagrant igni seraphico: nec pauciores sunt
myriades Dominicanorum, et in his consentaneum est permultos esse Cherubici
spiritus. Dominicani Cherubici.
Ex his cohortibus eligantur viri, mundo vere mortui, Christo viui, qui sincere
apud barbaras gentes doceant verbum Dei. Excusatur linguae imperitia. Linguae
imperic^^.
Atqui principes ob humanas legationes inueniunt qui varias linguas perdiscant:
Et Themistocles Athenienses vno anno sic didicit Miracula.
sermonem Asiaticum vt absque interpret cum rege lo qui posset: An idem non
studebimus in tam sublimi negocio? Inter barbaras et ignotas nationes Aposto
liinuenerunt victum et amictum: et Deus pollicitus est nihil defuturum
quaerentibus regnum Dei. Nec miracula quidem defutura sunt si res postulet,
modo ad sit syncera fides cum seraphica charitate. etc. Furthermore Damianus a
Goes, Damianus a Goes
writes in his book De deploratione Lappianae gentis, that he was the first
that moved Erasmus to speak sumwhat hereof: And that he (Erasmus I mean) was
determined to write a just volume of this matter if he had not been prevented by
death. Albeit (says Damianus) in his book entiteled Ecclesiastes, he did not
keep silence of so wicked an ungodliness, which surely is such, that it may
in manner make all Christian men (and especially such unto whom god has given
pour and knowleage) guilty of so heyghnous a crime, To the christian princes.
that he may take vengeance of them in the day of judgment before the just
judge Christ. Now therefore (says he) let the Christian Monarchs take heed
what accoumpte they shall make before the tribunal of Christ at the last day,
when neither favor, nor pardon, or flattery can take place to be any excuse
for the loss of so many souls. And these be the very words of the
woorshipful and learned man Damianus a Goes, written to the bishop of Rome
Paul the third of that name, whom he further charge to look diligently
hereunto, as a thing most chiefly perteynynge to the office of Christian
prelates. Me think verily that the sheep of Europe should by this time be so
well fed, The sheep of Europe.
that they should by good reason be so strong and mighty in Christ's religion
(except they be infected with the disease which the physicians caul Cachexia,
being an evil disposition of the body whereby the more they are fed the worse
they like) that many sheppardes might well be spared to be sent to other
sheep which ought to be of the same foulde. For this purpose the doctoure of
divinity when he commenseth, The doctoure of divinity
has his scapular cast over his headde in token that he has forsaken the
world for Christ's sake: And his boots on his legs in token that he shall
ever be in a readiness to go forward in preaching the gospel, as I doubt
not there be many in England would gladly do even among these new gentyles
if they were thereto mainteyned by the aid of the secular pour as in this case
it shall be requisite for the furniture of necessaries hereunto apperteynynge, An
admonition to rich men.
I must now therefore appele unto you, you rich men and rulers of the world,
to whom god has given gooddes as things neither good nor badde of them
selves, but only as they are used well or evil. If you use them well, they are
the gifts of god wherewith you may do many things acceptable both to god and
men. And if you use them otherwise, you possess not them, but they possess
you, and their canker and ruste (as says the Apostle) shall be a testimony
against you in the day of the great audit. Think not therefore that this thing
perteyneth not unto you, if you perteyne unto Christ and look to have any
part with him. Consider with yowre selves if it were only to get worldely
riches, how redye and greedy you would be to venture a great deal to get a
third part, with out casting of any perell by land or by sea, as the wyttie
poet Horase has in few words descrybed the merchants desire and adventures
to obtain richesse. The merchant
Impiger extremos currit mercator ad Indos,
Per mare pauperiem fugiens, per saxa, per ignes.
The which verses are thus much to say in effect.
The merchant in hope great richesse to find,
By fire and by water passes to Inde,
By the burnte line or Equinoctial,
To fly from poverty and hasarde al
As the poet has in these verses, by the merchant declared the desire that
covetous men have to obtain slippery riches, the like affection to obtain
worldly fame and honor, The desire of wordely fame.
may we see in valiant and noble capitaynes in the wars where they contend
to put them selves forward to the most dangerous adventure as to have the
forewarde of the battle: a token surely of much nobility and manly courage.
But oh immortal god? Is it not to be lamented that men can be so valient,
slowte, and in manner desperate in their own private matters, perteynyng only
to their bodies, and yet so could, negligent, Men are slothful in gods
cause.
and fearful in gods cause and things touching the health of their
souls? If there were neither devil nor law to accuse men before god in this
case, shall not their own consciences be a law of condemnation ageynste
them in that they have not showed that love to mankind, which the very law
of nature moves brute beasts to show one to an other in their generations?
But what hope is there (except god would in manner by miracle convert the
hearts of such men) what hope is there I say, that they will depart with any of
their gooddes, much less adventure their bodies, to the furtheraunce of
Christ's religion in these regions being so far from them, whereas many show
little love, charity, or liberality (if not rather cruelt^e, tyranny, and
oppression) to their poor neighbors and brootherne dwelling even at home at
their own elbowes. But as this covetousness is to be reproved, so is the
liberality of such to be commended as have been at great coaste and charges in
setting forward such viages: wherein not only the merchants of London,
but also diverse noble men and gentelmen as well of the counsel as other,
Uyages from England.
which both with their money and furtheraunce otherwise have furnysshed and
sent forth certain ships for the discovering of such lands and regions as
were heretofore unknown, have herein deserved immortal fame, for as much as
in such attemptes and dangerous vyages, they have showed no smaule liberality
upon uncertain hope of gain: wherein they have deserved so much the greater
praise as their intent seemed to be rather to further honest en^erprises then
for respect of vantage. And here certeynely in the mention of these viages I
might seem ungrateful if I should omit to give dew commendations to the
two chief capitaynes of the same as the worthy knight sir Hugh Wylloby and
the excellent pilotte Richard Chaunceler who have therein adventured their
lives for the commodity of their country: Sir Hugh Wylloby and Richard
Chaunceler.
Men doubtless woorthye for their noble attemptes to be made knights of the
Ocean or otherwise preferred if ever god send them home again although they
fail of their purpose. For as such have obtained absolute glory that have
browght great things to pass, Glory and fame.
so have they deserved immortal fame which have only attempted the same:
forasmuch as fortune (who sumtymes favors the vnworthyest) is not in the
pour of man. Xerses obtained glory in making a bridge over the sea
Hellespontus ioynynge Europe to Asia, and Darius over Bosphorus when he passed
with his army toward the Scythians. No less fame and commendation (although
not like glory) deserved Demetrius, Caesar, Calligula, and Seleucus Nicanor,
which attempted to cut in sundre certain places cauled) Isthmi, (being
narowe portions of land so diuidynge two seas, that there is no passage from
the one to the other) and yet never finisshed that they took in hand, being
hyndered either by death, The reward of noble enterprises.
wars, or other chances. The ancient Romans and Greeks gave such glory
unto them that had either well deserved of the common welthe, or otherwise
attempted such great enterprises as might be profitable for mankind, that
after their death they caused Images of gold, silver, brass, Iuery, and
marble to be made to their likeness, and the same to be placed in their
solemn haules, palaices, or temples, with certain verses made to the
comnendation of them whom the Images represented. And th^s no less to provoke
and encorage other forward natures to themula^ion of their virtues, then al^o
to give them the due honor of their just deserts. And surely if ^uer sense
the beginning of the world any enterprise have deserved great praise as a
thing atchyued by men of heroical virtue, doubtless there was never any more
worthy commendation and admiration then is that wh^che owre nation have
attempted by the north seas to discover the mighty and rich empire of Cathay,
The vyage to Ca^hay by the north seas.
by which vyage not only gold, silver, precious stones, and spices, may be
browght hither by a safer and shorter way, but also much greater matters may
hereof en^ewe in time if it shall please God to give unto Christian men such
passage into those regions, whereby such familiarity may further grow between
the Christian princes of Europe and the great emperor of Cathay, that (as
writes Haytho De societate Christianorum et Tartarorum) there can nothing be
imagined more effectual for the confusion of the Turk if the great Cham of
Cathay and the Sophie of Persia on the one side, Society between the T^e^a^s
and the Christians. The Turk. The Sophie.
and the Christian Princes on the other side, should with one consent invade
his dominions, as did Tamburlanes Themperoure of the Tartars who abowte the
Tambulanes. Baiasetes.
year of Christ.M.CCC.lxxxxviii. took prisoner Baiasetes Ottomanus
Themperoure of the Turks and slew.xx. thousand of his men in one battle
beside many other great victories, as you may further read in this book in
the history of Paulus Iouius. And to have said thus much in manner of a
preface it may suffice.

To the most noble Prince and Catholic king, Charles, Peter Martyr of
Angleria wysheth perpetual felicity.
THe divine providence, from the time that he first created the world, has
reserved unto this day the knowleage of the great and large Ocean sea: The
largenes of the Ocean unknown to this day.
In the which time he has opened the same, chiefly unto you (most mighty
Prince) by the good fortune and happy success of yowr grandfather by yowr
mothers side. The same providence (I know not by what destenie) has brought
me out of my native country of Milane, and out of the city of Rome (where I
continued almost.x. years) into Spain, that I might particularlye collecte,
these marvelous and new things, which should otherwise perhaps have line
drowned in the whirlepoole of oblivion: forasmuch as the Spanyardes (men
worthy great commendation) had only care to the general inventions of these
things. Notwithstanding, I do not challenge unto me only, the thanks of the
travail bestowed herein, whereas the chief reward thereof is due to Ascanius
vicounte Cardinal, Cardinal Ascanius.
who perceiving that I was wylling to depart out of the city to be present
at the wars of Granatum, The wars of Granatum against the Moors.
dissuaded me from my purpose. But seeing that I was fully resolved to depart,
exhorted and required me to write unto him such news as were famous in Spain
and worthy to be noted. I took therefore my journey into Spain chiefly for
the desire I had to see thexpedition which was prepared against the enemies of
the faith: forasmuch as in Italye, by reason of the dissension among the
Princes, I could find nothing wherewith I might feed my wit, being a
young man desirous of knowleage and experience of things. I was therefore
present at the wars: from whense I writ to Cardinal Ascanius, and by
sundry epistels certifyed him of such things as I thought most woorthye to be
put in memory. But when I perceived that his fortun^ was turned from a
natural moother to a steppedame, I ceased from writing. Yet after I saw,
that by thouerthrowe of the enemies of owre faith, Spain was pourged of the
Moors as of an evil weed plucked up by the roots, Least I should bestow
my slippery years in unprofitable Idleness I was minded to return to Italy.
But the singular benignity of both the Catholyke king and queen now
departed, and their large promises toward me upon my return from my legacy
of Babylon, deteyned me from my purpose. The autour was ^ent ambassador to
the Soltane of Alcayr in Egypt.
Yet does it not repent me that I drew back my foot: As Well for that I see
in no other place of the world at this time the like worthy things to be
done: As also that in manner throwgh out all Italy, by reason of the discord of
the Christian Princes, I perceived all things to run headelonge into ruin,
Italy disqui^ted with wars.
the countries to be destroyed and made fat with humane bludde: The cities
sacked, virgins and matrones with their gooddes and possessions carried away as
capt^ues and miserable innocents without offense to be slain unarmed within
their own houses. Of the which calamities, The sequeles of water.
I did not only hear the lamentable owtcryes, but did also feel the same.
For even the bludde of mine own kinsfolks and friends, was not free from that
cruelty. As I was therefore musing with my self of these things, the
Cardinal of Arragonie, after that he had seen the two first books of my
Decades written to Ascanius, required me in the name of king Frederike his
uncle, King Frederike.
to put forth the other eight epistell books, In the mean time also, while I
was void of all care as touching the matters of the Ocean, the Apostolical
messengers of the bysshopppe of Rome Leo the tenth, Leo the tenth* bishop of
Rome.
(by whose wholesome counsel and authority we trust the calamities of Italy
shall be fynysshed) raised me as it were from sleep, and encoraged me to
proceade as I had begun. To his holiness I writ two Decades co^prysed in
short books after the manner of epistels, and added them to the first, which was
printed withowt mine advise, as shall further appear by the preface following.
But now I return to you (most noble Prince) from whom I have sumwhat
digressed. Spain subdued from the Moors,
Therefore whereas yowr graundefathers by yowre moothers side, have subdued all
Spain under yowr dominion except only one corner of the same, and have also
left you the kyngedome of Naples with the fruitful Islands of owr seas, The
kyndome of Naples.
it is suerly a great thing and worthy to be noted in owre cronacles. But
not offendynge the reverence due to owre predicessours, what so ever from the
beginning of the world has been done or written to this day, Note, from the
beginning of the world
to my judgment seems but little, if we consider what new lands and
countries, what new seas, what sundry nations and tounges, what goldemynes,
what treasuries of perles they have left unto yowre highness, beside other
revenues. The which, what they are and how great, these three Decades shall
declare. Come therefore most noble Prince elected of God, and enjoy that high
estate of things not yet understood to men. We offer unto you the
Equinoctial line hitherto unknown and burnte by the furious heat of the
soonne and uninhabitable after the opinion of the owlde writers a few excepted:
The temperatnes of the Equinoctial unknown to the owlde writers.
But now found to be most replenisshed with people, fair, fruitful, and
most fortunate, with a thowsande Islands crowned with gold and bewtifull
^erles, beside that great port^on of earth supposed to be part of the firm
land, exceeding in quantity three Europes. Continente or firm land as bygge
as three Europes
Come therefore and embrase this new world, and suffer us no longer to consume
in desire of yowr presence. From hense, from hense I say (most noble young
Prince) shall instruments be prepared for you, Riches are the instruments of
conquestes.
whereby all the world shall be under yowr obeysaunce.

And thus I bid yowr majesty farewell: To whose taste if I shall perceive the
fruits of this my tyllage to be delectable, I will hereafter do my endeavor
that you may receive the same more abundauntly. From Madrid. The day before
the Calendes of October, In the year of Christ. M. D. XVI.

FINIS.
The first decade.
THE FIRST BOOK OF THE DECADES of the Ocean, written by Peter Martyr of
Angleria, Milenoes, counsiler to the king of Spain and Protonotarie
Apostolical, To Ascanius Sphorcia, vicount Cardinal. etc.
THE REVERENDE AND thanckefull antiquite was accustomed to esteem those men as
gods, The reward of vert^e
by whose industry and magnanimity such Lands and Regions were discovered,
as were unknown to their predicessoures. But unto us having only one god
whom we honor in triplicitie of person, this rests, that albeit we do not
woorship that kind of men with divine honor, yet do we reverence them, and
woorthely marvel at their noble acts and enterprises. Unto kings and princes
we give due obeysaunce, by whose governance and furtheraunce they have bin
aided, to perfurme their attemptes. we commend both, and for their just
deserts worthily extol them. Wherefore, as concerning the Islands of the west
Ocean, The Islands of the weste Ocean.
lately discovered, and of the auctours of the same, (which thing you desire
by your letters to know) I will begin at the first auctoure thereof, lest I
be injurious to any man. Take it therefore as follows.

Christophorus Colonus (other wise called Columbus) A gentilman of Italy,
Christophorus Colonus.
borne in the city of Genua, persuaded Fernando and Elyzabeth, catholic
princes, that he doubted not to find certain Islands of India, India*
nere unto owre Occean sea, if they would furnysshe him with ships and other
things apperteynynge. Affyrminge that thereby not only the Christian religion
might be enlarged, but Spain also enryched by the great plenty of gold,
pearls, precious stones, and spices, which might be found there. At the
lenghte three ships were appointed him at the kings charges: of the which
one was a great caracte with deckes: and the other two were light marchaunte
ships without deckes, which the Spaniardes call Carauelas. Thus he departed
from the costs of Spain about the calendes of September, in the year of
Christ 1492. and set forward on his viage, The first viage of Colonus.
being accompanied with C C. xx. Spanyardes. The fortunate Islands (as many
think them to be, which the Spaniardes call Canariae, The Islands of Canarie.
found but of late days) are distaunte from the Islands of Gades, Gades or
Calls mals.
a thousand and two hundredth miles, according to their account: for they say
they are distant three hundredth leaques: A leaque, what it conteyneth by sea.
whereas such as are expert sea men, affirm that every leaque conteyneth four
miles, after their supputations. These Islands were called fortunate, the
fortunate Islands.
for the temperate air which is in them. For neither the coldenesse of winter
is sharp unto them, nor the heat of summer intolerable. Yet some men are of
opinion, that those were in old time called the fortunate Islands, Cabouerde.
which the Portugales call Capo Verde. Colonus therefore sailed first to the
Islands of Canariae, to the intent there to refreshe his ships with fresh
water and fuel, before he committed him self to this so laborious a vyage.
And because I have here made ment^on of the Islands of Canariae: It shall not
be much from my purpose to declare how of unknown they became known, and of
saluage and wild, better manured. For by the long course of many years, they
were forgotten, and remained as unknown.

These seven Islands (the^fore) called the Canaries, The seven Islands of
Canarie.
were found by chance by a french man, called Betanchor, Betanchor A french
man subdued the Islands of Canarie.
by the permission of queen Katharine, protectrixe of king John her son, while
he was yet in his nonage, about the year of Christ. M. CCCC. V. This Betanchor
invaded two of these Islands called Lancelotus and Fort^suentura, L^ncelotus.
Fortisue^tura.
which he inhabited and brought to better culture. He being dead, his son
and heir sold both the said Islands to certain Spaniardes.

After this, Fernandus Peraria and his wife, invaded Ferrea and Gomera. Ferrea.
Gomera.
The other three were subdued in our time. Grancanaria, Grancanaria.
by Perrus de Vera, citezen of the noble city of Xericium, and Michaell of
Moxica. Palma and Tenerifen, Palma.
Tenerifen.
by Alphonsus Lugo, at the kings charges. Gomera and Ferrea were easily
subdued: But the matter went hard with Alphonsus Lugo. Alphonsus Lugo.
For that naked and wild nation, fyghtinge only with stones and clubbes,
drove his army to flighte at the first assault, and slew about four
hundredth of his men. But at the length he overcame them. And thus all the
Islands of Canariae were added to the dominion of Spain. From these Islands
Colonus directing his viage toward the weste, folowinge the fallinge of the
son, but declining somewhat toward the left hand, sailed on forward.xxxiii.
days continually, having only the fruition of the heaven and the water. Then
the Spanyardes which were accompanied with him, began first to murmr
secretly among them selves: and shortly after with words of reproach spoke
evil of Colonus their gouernoure, Colonus men rebel against him.
and consulted with them selves, either to rydde him out of the way, orelles
to cast him into the sea: Ragyng that they were deceived of a stranger, an
outlandishe man, a Ligurian a Genues, and brought into such dangerous places,
that they might never return again. And after.xxx. days were paste, they
furiousely cried out against him, and threatened him that he should pass no
further. But he ever with ientyll words and large promyses, Fair wo^des and
promises.
appeased their fury, and prolonged day after day, some time desyring them to
bear with him yet a while, and some time putting them in remembrance that if
they should attempt any thing against him, or otherwise disobey him, it would
be reputed for treason. Thus after a few days, with cherefull hearts they
espied the land long looked for. In this first navigations, he discovered.vi.
Islands, whereof two were exceeding great: Of which, the one he called
Hispaniola, hispaniola.
and the other Iohanna. Iohanna.
But at that time he knew not perfectely that Iohanna (other wise called
Cuba,) was an Island. As they coasted alonge by the shore of certain of these
Islands, they hard nyghtingales sing in the thycke woods in the month of
November. Nightingales sing in November.
They found also great rivers of fresh water, and natural havens, of
capacity to harborowe great nauies of ships. Saylinge by the coasts of
Iohanna, from the north point to the west, he rode little le^se then eight
hundredth miles (for they call it a hundredth and four score leaques) supposyng
that it had been the continent or fyrme land, because he could another find the
lands end, nor any token of the end, as far as he could judge with his
eye: wherefore he determined to return back again, being thereto partly
enforced by the roughness of the sea. for the sea banckes of the Island of
Iohanna, by sondrye wyndinges and turnynges, bend them selves so much toward
the North, that the northnortheaste wind roughely tossed the ships by
reason of the winter. Turnynge therefore the stemmes of his ships toward the
East, he affyrmed that he had found the Island of Ophir, The Island of Ophir.
whyther Salomons ships sailed for gold. But the description of the
Cosmographers well considered, it seems that both these, and the other
Islands adioynyng, are the Islands of Antilia. The islands of Anti^ia.
This Island he called Hisp^niola: on whose north side as he approached nere to
the land, the keele or bottom of the biggeste vessel ran upon a blind
rock covered with water, A shypwrack
and cloue in sunder. But the playnenesse of the rock was a help to them that
they were not drowned. Making haste therefore with the other two sh^ps to help
them, they brought away all the men without hurt. Here coming first a land,
they saw certain men of the Island: The people of the Iland^.
who perceiving an unknown nation coming toward them, flocked together and
ran al into the thycke wooddes, as it had been hares courc^d with
grehoundes. Naked people.
Owre men pursuing them, took only one woman, whom they brought to the
ships: where fyllinge her with meat and wine, and apparelinge her, they let
her depart to her company. Shortly after a great multitude of them came
runnynge to the shore to behold this new nation, whom they thought to have
descended from heaven. They cast them selves by heaps into the sea, and came
swimminge to the ships, bryngyng gold with them, Expert swimmers* go^d for
earth and glass.
which they changed with owre men for erthen pottes, drinking gla^ses,
points, pynnes, hawks belles, lokinge gla^ses, and such other trifles. Thus
growing to further familiarity, owre men were honorably enterteyned of the
king of that part of the Island, Many kings
whose name was Guaccanarillus: for it has many kings, as when Eneas arrived
in Italy, he found Latium divided into many kyngedomes and provinces, as
Latium, Mezeurium, Turnum, and Tarchontem, which were separated with narow
bounds, as shall more largely appear hereafter. At the even tide about the
faulyng of the son, Relygious and human people
when owre men went to prayer, and kneled on their knees after the manner of the
Christians, they did the like also. And after what manner so ever they saw them
pray to the cross, they followed them in all points as well as they could.
They showed much humanity toward owre men: and helpen them with their
lighters or small boats (which they call Canoas) to unlade their broken
ship: Canoas.
And that with such celeritie and cherefulnesse, that no friend for friend, or
kynseman for kynseman, in such case moved with pity, could do more. Their
boats are made only of one tree, Mono^yla. They have no Iren.
made holow with a certain sharp stone (for they have no iron.) And are very
long and narowe. Many affirm that they have seen some of them with forty
ores. The wild and myscheuous people called Canibales, or Caribes, which were
accustomed to eat man's flesh (and called of the old writers,
Anthropophagi) molest them excedyngly, Can^bales or Caribes Anthropophagi.
inuadynge their country, taking them captive, kyllyng and eating them. As
owre men sailed to the Islands of these meke and humayne people, they left the
Islands of the Canibales, in manner in the midst of their viage toward the
south. They complained that their Islands were no less vexed with the
incursions of these manhuntyng Canibales when they go forth a rouynge to seek
their pray: The cruelty of the Canibales.
then are other tame beasts, of Lions and Tigers. Such children as they take,
they geld to make them fat as we do cock chikyns and young hogs, and eat
them when they are well fed: of such as they eat, they first eat the
intralles and extreme parts, as hands, feet, arms, neck, and head. The
other most fle^shy parts, they powder for store, as we do pestelles of porke
and gammondes of bakon. Yet do they absteyne from eating of women and count
it vile. Therefore such young women as they take, they keep for increace, as
we do hens to leye eggs. The old women, they make their drudges. They of
the Islands (which we may now caul owres) both the men and the women when
they perceive the Canibales coming, have none other shyfte but only to fly:
for although they use very sharp arrows made of reeds, yet are they of
small force to repress the fury of the Canibales: for even they them selves
confess, that ten of the Canibals are able to overcome a hundredth of them if
they encountre with them. Their meat is a certain root which they call Ages:
Ages. Roots ^n the steed or meat.
much like a na^ew root in form and greatness: but of sweet taste, much
like a green chestnutte. They have also an other kind of roots, which they
call Iucca, whereof they make bread in like man^^. Iucca. Bread of roots.
They use Ages more often roasted or sodden, then to make bread thereof. But
they never eat Iucca, except it be first sliced and pressed, (for it is full
of lycoure) and then baked or sodden. But this is to be marueled at, that the
juice of this root is a poison as strong as Aconitum, an herb of a straung^
nature.
so that if it be drunk it causes present death, and yet the bread made of
the ^a^e thereof, is of good taste and wholesome, as all they have proved. They
make also an other kind of bread of a certain pulse, called ^anicum, Ma^^^um.
much like unto wheat, whereof is great ple^tie in the dukedom of Mylane,
Spain, and Granatum.

But that of this country is longer by a spanne, somewhat sharp toward the
end, and as bygge as a man's arm in the brawne: The graynes whereof are set
in a marvelous order, and are in form somewhat like a pease. While they be
sour and unripe, they are white: but when they are ripe they be very black.
When they are broken, they be whyter then snow. This kind of grain, they
call Maizium. Gold is of some estimation among them: ^olde in esti^ation.
for some of them hang certain small pieces thereof at their ears and
nosethrilles. A little beyond this place, our men went a land for fresshe
water, where they chanced upon a River whose sand was myxed with much gold.
Gold in the sands of ryuers.
They found there no kinds of four foted beasts except three kinds of
little conyes. These Islands also nourishe serpents: Serpents without vem^ne.
but such as are without hurt. Likewise wild geese, turtle doves, and duckes,
Turtle doves Duckes.
much greater then ours, and as white as swannes, with heads of purple
colo^re. Also Popiniaies, Popingiayes.
of the which some are green, some yelowe, and some like them of India, with
yelowe rings about their necks, as Pliny describes them. Plini.
Of these they brought forty with them, of most lively and delectable
colors, having three feathers entermengled with green, yelowe, and purple,
which variety, deliteth the sense not a little. Thus much thought I good to
speak of Potingiaies, (right noble Prince) specially to this intent, that
albeit the opinion of Christophorus Colonus (who affirms these Islands to be
part of India) does not in all points agree with the judgment of ancient
writers as touching the bigness of the Sphere and compass of the Globe as
concerning the nauigable portion of the same being under us, These Iland^s
are part of India. The Indians are Antipodes to the spaniardes.
yet the Popingiaies and many other things brought from thence, do declare
that these Islands sauoure som^hat of India, either being nere unto it, or
else of the same nature: forasmuch as Aristotle also, Aristotle.
about the end of his book De C^elo et Mundo. and likewise Seneca, Seneca.
with diverse other authors not ignorant in Cosmography, do affirm that India
is no long tracte by sea, distante from Spain by the weste Ocean, India not
far from Spain
for the soil of these Islands, brings forth Mastir, Mastir.
Aloes, Aloe.
and sundry other sweet gummes and spyces as does India. Cotton also of the
gossampine tree, Gossampyne cotton or bo^base.
as in India in the country of the people called Seres. Seres.


The languages of all the nations of these Islands, The language of these
Indians.
may well be written with our Latin letters. For they call heaven Tur^i. A
house, Boa. Gold, Cauni. A good man, Taino. nothing Mayani. All other words
of their language, they pronounce as plainly as we do the Latin tongue. In
these Islands they found no trees known unto them, but pyne appe trees, and
date trees: Trees and fruits unknown to us.
And those of marvelous heyght and exceeding hard, by reason of the great
moystnesse and fatness of the ground, Far and moist ground.
with continual and temperate heat of the son, heat continual and
temperate.
which endures so all the hole year. They plainly affirm the Island of
Hispaniola to be the most fruiteful land that the heaven compasses about,
The fru^tfulnes of hispaniola
as shall more largely appear hereafter in the particular description of the
same, which we intend to set forth when we shall be better instructed.

Thus making a leage of frendshyppe with the king, and leaving with
him.xxxviii. men to search the Island, he departed to Spain taking with
him.x. of the inhabitauntes to learn the Spanishe tongue, to the intent to use
them afterward for interpretours. Colonus therefore at his return, was
honorably received of the king and queen: who caused him to sytte in their
presence, which is a token of great love and honor among the Spaniardes. He
was also made Admiral of the Ocean: and his brother gouenoure of the Island.

Toward the second viage, The second viage of Colonus.
he was furnished with.xii. ships: whereof there were great caractes of a
thousand tun: xii. were of that sort, which the Spaniardes call Carauelas:
without deckes: and two other of the same sort somewhat bygger, and more apt
to bear deckes, by reason of the gretnesse of their mastes. He had also a
thousand and two hundredth armed footmen well appointed: Among which were
many artificers, as smythes, carpenters, myners, and such other: Certain
horsemen also, well armed: Likewise mares, shiepe, heyghfers, and such other of
both kinds for incrase. Likewise all kind of pulse or grain and corn, as
wheat, barlye, rye, beans and pease, and such other, as well for food as to
sow: Come and seeds to sow,
Beside vynes, plants and seeds, of such trees, fruits, and herbs, as
those countries lack. And (not to be forgotten) sundry kinds of artillery
and iron tools, Tools and artillery.
as bows, arrows, crossebowes, bylles, hargabuses, broad swoordes, large
targettes, pikes, mattockes, sh^ouelles, hammers, nails, sawes, ares, and
such other. Thus being furnished accordyngely, they set forward from the
Islands of Gad^s, (now called Calls,) the.vii. day before the calendes of
October, in the year of Christ.1493. and arrived at the Islands of Canarie, at
the calendes of October. Of these Islands, the last is called Ferrea, in
which there is no other water that may be drunk, but only that is gathered
of the dew which continually distilleth from one only tree growing on the
h^ghest back of the Island, water droppyng from a tree continually.
and falls into a round trenche made with man's hand. We were infourmed of
these things within few days after his departure. what shall succeed, we will
certify you hereafter. Thus fare ye well, from the court, at the Ides of
November.1493.

The second book of the first Decade to Ascanius Ph^rcia, vicounte
Cardinal. etc.
You repete (right honorable Prince) that you are desirous to know what
news we have in Spain from the new world: and that those things have
greatly delyted you which I wrote unto yowre highness of the first
navigations. You shall now therefore receive what has succeeded. Methymna Campi,
Methymna Campi.
is a famous town in high Spain in the respect from you, and is in that
part of Spain which is called Castella Vetus: Castella vetu^.
being distante from Gades about.xl. miles. Here the court remained, when
about the.ix. of the kalendes of Aprell in this year of nynetie and four,
there were posts sent to the king and queen, certifyinge them that there
were.xii. ships come from the new Islands and arrived at Gades. Gades
But the gouernoure of the ships sent word to the king and queen that he
had none other matter to certify them of by the posts, but only that the
Admiral with five ships and.iiii. score and ten men remained still in
Hispaniola, to search the secrets of the Island. And that as touching other
matters, he him self would shortly make ralation in their presence, by word
of mouth. Therefore the day before the nones of Aprel, he came to the court
him self. What I learned of him and other faythefull and credible men which
came with him from the Admiral, I will rehearse unto you in such order as they
declared the same to me when I demanded them. Take it therefore as follows.
The third day of the Ides of October, departing from Ferrea, The Island of
Ferrea.
the last of the Islands of Canariae, and from the costs of Spain with a
navy of.xvii. ships, they sailed.xxi. days before they came to any Island:
inclyning of purpose more toward the left hand then at the first viage,
following the northnortheast wind: and arrived first at the Islands of the
Canibales, Islands of the Canibales.
or Caribes of which, only the fame was known to our men. Among these, they
chaunsed first upon one, so beset with trees, that they could not se so much
as an elle space of bare earth or stony ground. this they called Dominica,
The Island of Dominica.
because they found it on the sunday. They tarried here no time, because they
saw it be deserte. In the space of these.xxi. days, they think that they
sailed.viii. hundredth and.xx. leaques, viii. hundredth and.xx. leaques in.xxi.
days.
the Northenortheast wind was so full with them, and so fresshely followed the
stern of their ships. After they had sailed a little further, they espied
diverse Islands replenysshed with sundry kinds of trees, from the which came
fragrant savors of spyces and sweet gummes. Here they saw neither man nor
beast, except certain lisartes of huge bigness, Lysertes,
as they reported which went alande to view the country. This Island they
cauled Galana, or Galanta. The Island of Galanta.
From the cape or point of this Island, espying a mountain a far of, they
sailed thither. About.xxx. miles from this mountain, they saw a river
disce^ding which seemed to be a token of some great and large fludde. This is
the first land which they found inhabited from the Islands of Canariae, and
is an Island of the Canibales, The Island of Guadalupea.
as they learned by the interpretours which they took with them from
Hispaniola into Spain at their first viage. Searching the Island, they found
innumerable villages of.xx. houses or.xxx. at the most, set round abowte
in order, Uilages of.xx or.^xx. houses.
making the street in coompasse like a markette place. And for as much as I
have made mention of their houses, it shall not be greatly from my purpose to
describe in what manner they are builded. They are made round like belles or
round pauylions. The building of their houses.
Their frame is raised of exceeding high trees, set close together and fast
rampaired in the ground, so standing a slope and bending inward that the
tappes of the trees join together and bear one against an other, having
also within the house, certain strong and short props or posts which
sustain the trees from ^allynge. They cover them with the leaves of date trees
and other trees strongly compact and hardened, wherewith they make them close
from wind and wether. At the shore posts or proppes with^n the hou^e, they
the ropes of the ^otto^ of (...) trees, ^^^ampine ^otton.
or other ropes made of certain long and toughe ^^tes much like unto the
shrubbe called Sp^r^^m. whereof in old time they used to make bonds for v^nes
(...) and rop^^ for ships. These they tie over (...) the hou^e from post to
post. On these they ley as it (...) matt^e^^es made of the cotton of the
gossamp^ne tress, wh^che g^^we plentifully in these Islands.

Th^s cotton the Spani^^des call Algodon, and the Italians B^m^^sine. And thus
they ^^eepe in hanging beds. Bomba^e. han^in^e beds.
At the enteraunce of one of their hou^es, they saw two Images of woodde like
unto serpents, wh^che they thought had been such idols as they honor. But
they le^ned afterward that they were se^te there only for cooml^nesse. For
they know none other god then the Sun and Moon, although they make
certain Images of gossampine cotton to the similitude of such fantasies as
they say appear to them in the night. Images.
Our men found in their houses, all kinds of erthen vessels, not much unlike
unto ours. They found also in their kichens, man's flesh, duckes fless^e,
and goose flesh, al in one pot: Fine cookery
and other on the spittes redye to be laid to the fire. Entering into their
inner lodgings, they found faggottes of the bones of men's arms and legs,
which they reserve to make heads for their arrows, Arrowe heds of bones*
because they lack iron. The other bones they cast away when they have eaten
the flesh. They found likewise the head of a young man fastened to a post
and yet bledinge. They have in some villages, one great haule or pallaice,
about the which their common houses are placed. To this they resort, as often
as they come together to play. When they perceived the coming of our men,
they fled, in their houses they found also about xxx. children and women
captives which were reserved to be eaten, but our men took them away to use
them for interpretoures. Searchyng more diligently thynner parts of the
Island, they found.vii. other ryuers, bygger then this which we spoke of
before, runnyng through the Island, with fruitful and pleasante banckes,
delectable to behold. This Island, they called Guadalupea, for the similitude
that it has to the mount Guadalupus in Spain, The mount Guadalupus^
where the Image of the virgin MARIE is religiously honored. But the
inhabitauntes caul it Carucueria. Carucueria.
or Queraquiera. It is the chief habitation of the Canibales. They brought
from this Island.vii. Popinpayes, bygger then phesantes, Popyngayes bygger then
phesauntes
much differynge from other in color: having their backs, breasts, and
bealies of purple color, and their wings of other variable colors. In all
these Islands is no less plenty of popingiayes then with us of sparrowes or
starlinges. As we bring up capons and hens to francke or make them fat, so
do they these bigger kinds of popyngaies for the same purpose. After that they
had thus searched the Island and driven these Canibales to flyghte, The
Canibales dry^en to flight.
(which ran away at their first approach as soon as they had espied them)
they cauled their company together. And as soon as they had broken the
Canibals boats or lyghters (which they call Canoas) they lowsed their ankers
the day before the Ides of November, and departed from Guadalupea. Colonus the
admiral, for the desire he had to se his companions, which at his first
vyage he left the year before in Hispaniola to search the country, let
pass many Islands both on his right hand and left hand, and sailed
directly thither. By the way, there appeared from the North. A great Island
which the captives that were taken in Hispaniola, cauled Madanino, or Matinino:
Matinino an I^ande of women.
Affirmynge it to be inhabited only with women: To who^ the Canibales have
access at certain times of the year, as in owlde time the Thracians had to the
Amazones in the Island of Lesbos. The men children, they send to their
fathers. But the women theye keep with them selves. They have great and
strong caves or dens in the ground, to the which they fly for safegarde if
any men resort unto them at any other time then is appointed. And there
defend them selves with bows and arrows, ag^nst the violence of such as
attempt to enuade them. They could not at this time approach to this Island,
by reason of the Northenortheast wind which blewe so vehemently from the
same, where as they now followed the Eastesoutheaste. After they departed from
Madanino, and sailed by the space of.xi. miles, they passed not far from an
other Island which the captyues said to be very peopulous, and replenyshed
with all things necessary for the life of man. This they cauled Mons
Serratus, The Islands of Mons Serratus.
because it was full of mountains. The captyues further declared that the
Canibales, are wont at some time to goo from their own coasts above a
thousand mile to hunte for men. hunt^nge for men.
The day following, they saw an other Island the which, because it was
rownde, they cauled Sancta Maria Rotunda. Sancta Maria Rotunda.
The next day, theye found an other, which they cauled S. Marrini. Sanctus
Mar^inus.
Which they let pass also because they had no leisure to tarry. Likewise the
third day they espied an other, whose Diamerral side extendynge from the
East to the weste, they judged to be a hundredth and fyftie mile.

Theye affirm all these Islands to be marvelous fair and fruitful. This
last, they cauled Sancta Maria Antiqua. Sancta Maria Antiqua,
Saylyng yet forward, and leaving many other Islands, after they had sailed
about forty mile, they chanced upon an other much bygger then any of the
rest, which thinhabitans caul Ay Ay, but they named it Insula crucis. Insula
crucis An Island of the Canibals
Hear they cast anchor to fetch fresshe water. The Admiral also
commanded.xxx. men to go a land out of his own ship, and to search the
Island Here they found four dogs on the shore. The Inhabitants are
Canibales, The Canibales are expert archers.
and marvelous expert in shutinge, as well women as men: And use to infecte
their arrows with poison: when they had tarried there two days, they saw a
far of, a Canoa, in the which were eight men and as many women having with
them bows and arrows. Arrows infected with veneme.
They fearsly assailed owre men without all fear, and hurt sum of them with
their venomous arrows. Among these there was a certain woman to whom the
other gave reverence and obeyde as though she were their queen. Her son
waited upon her, being a young man, strongly made, of terrible and frowning
countenance and a lions face. A conflict ^ith the Canib^les.
Owre men least they should take the more hurt by being wounded a far of,
thowght it best to join with them. Therefore with all speed settinge forewarde
with their ores the brigantine in which they were set alande, they
ouerturned their Canoa with a great violence, which being overwhelmed, they
notwithstondinge, as well the women as the men swymminge, cast their darts at
owre men, thick and threefowlde. At the length, gatherynge them selves
together upon a rock covered with the water, they fowght manfully until they
were overcome and taken, one being slain, and the queens son sore wounded.
When they were browght into the Admirals ship, they did no more put of their
fiernes and cruel countenances, The fiercenes and terrible counten^unce of the
Canibales.
then do the Lions of Libia when theye perceive the^ selves to be bownde in
chains. There is no man able to behowlde them, but he shall feel his bowelles
grate with a certain horroure, nature has endewed them with so terrible
menacynge, and cruel aspecte. This conjecture I make of my self and other
which often times went with me to see them at Methymna Campi. Methymna Campi.
But now to return to the viage. Proceadinge thus further and further, more
then five hundrethe miles, first toward the Westesoutheweste, then toward
the Southwest, and at the length toward the Weste northeweste, they entered
into a main large sea having in it innumerable Islands, Innumerable islands.
maruelouslye differinge one from an other, for sum of them were very
fruitful and full of herbs and trees. Other sum, very dry, barren, and
rowgh with high rockye mountains of stone, whereof sum were of bright blewe or
asurine color, and other glysteringe white: wherefore they supposed them by
good reason to be the mines of metalles and precious stones. The mines of
Metales and precious stones.
But the rowghnes of the sea, and mult^tude of Islands standinge so thick
together, hindered them so, that they cowlde cast no anchor least the bigger
vessels should run upon the rocks. Therefore they deferred the searchinge
of these Islands until an other time They were so many and stood so thick,
that they could not number them. Yet the smauler vessels which drew no
great depthe, entered emonge them and numbered forty and six Islands. But
the bigger vessels, kept aloof in the main sea for fear of the rocks.
They caul the sea where this multitude of Islands are situate, Archipelagus.
The sea cauled Archipelagus*
From this tracte proceadinge forrewarde, in the mydde way there lies an
Island which thinhabitantes caul Burichena, or Buchona. But they named it
Insula. S. Iohannis, Insula. S. Johannes o^ Buchena.
Diverse of them whom we had delivered from the Canibales, said that they
were borne in this Island: affirminge it to be very peopulous and fruitful,
having also many fair wooddes and havens. There is deadly hatred and
continual battle between them and the Canibales, They have no boats to pass
from their own coasts to the Canibales. But if it be their chance to
overcome them, when they make incursion into their countreye to seek their
pray (as it sumtyme happens, the fortune of war being uncertain) they
serve them with like sause, requiringe death for death. Death for d^athe
For one of them mangeleth an other in pieces, and roste them and eat them
even before their eyes. They tarried not in this Island. Yet in the weste angle
thereof, a few of them went a land for fresshe water, and fownd a great and
h^gh house after the manner of their buylding, having.xii. other of their
vulgar cotages placed abowte the same: The mountains are coulder then the
playnes.
but were all left desolate, whether it were that they resorted to the
mountains by reason of the heat which was that time of the year, and to
return to the plain when the air wareth cowlder, or else for fear of the
Canibales which make incursion into the Island at certain seasons. In all this
Island is only one king. The south side hereof extends abowte two hundrethe
miles. Shortly after, they came to the Island of Hispaniola, being distante
from the first Island of the Canibales, five hundrethe leaques. From Dominica
to hi^paniola five hundredth leaques
Here they fownde all th^nges out of order, and their fellows slain which they
left here at their first vyage. In the beginning of Hispaniola, (having in
it many regions and kyngedomes as we have said) is the region of Xamana whose
king is named Gua^canarillus. The Spany^^des left in the Island are s^ayne.
king Guaccanari^lus rebelleth.
This Guaccanarillus joined frendeshippe with owre men at the first viage, and
made a league with them: But in the absence of the Admiral, he rebelled, and
was the cause of owre men's destruction, althowgh he dissimuled the same, and
pretended friendship at the Admirales return. As owre men sailed on yet a little
furthe^, they espied a long Canoa with many ores, in which was the b^other of
Guaccanarillus with only one man waytinge on him. He browght with him two
Images of goulde, Two images of goulde.
which he gave the Admiral in the name of his brother. And towlde a ^ale in
his language as concerning the death of owre men, as they proved afterward,
but at this time had no regard to his communication for lack of
interpretours, which were either all dead, or escaped and stoulne away when
they drew nere the Islands. But of the.x.vii. dyed by change of air and dyer.
The inhabitants of these Islands have been ever so used to live at libert^e,
in play and pastyme, Liberty and idleness.
that they can hardely away with the yoke of servitude which they attempt to
shake of by all means they may. And surely if they had received owre
religion, I would think their life most happy of all men, A happy kind of
life.
if they might therewith enjoy their aunciente liberty. A few things
content them, having no delight in such super^luites, Superfluite.
for the which in other places men take infinite pains and commit many
unlawful acts, and yet are never satisfied, whereas many have to much, and
none inowgh. many have to much and none enough.
But emonge these simple sowles, a few clothes serve the naked: we^ghtes and
measures are not needful to such as can not skyll of craft and deceyte and
have not the use of pestifetous monye, the seed of innumerable myscheues. So
that if we shall not be ashamed to confess the truth, they seem to live in
that goulden world of the which owlde writers speak so much* The goulden
world
wherein men lived simplye and innocentlye without inforcement of laws, without
quarellinge Judges and libelles, content only to satisfy nature, without
further vexation for knowelege of things to come. Yet these naked people also
are tormented with ambition for the desire they have to enlarge their
dominions: Naked men troubled with ambicion.
by reason whereof they keep war and destroy one an other: from the which
plage I suppo^e the golden world was not free. For even then also, Cede, non
c^dam, that is, give place, Give place.
and I will not give place, had entered emonge men. But now to return to the
matter from which we have digressed. The admiral desirous to know further of
the death of his men, sent for Guaccanarillus to come to him to his ship,
dissimulinge that he knew any thing of the matter. The Admira sends for the
king.
After that he came aboard ship, saluting the Admiral and his company gyuing
also certain gold to the Capetaynes and officers, turned him to the women
captives which not long before our me^ had delivered from the Canibales. And
ernestly beholding one of them whom owre men cauled Catharyne, he spoke
gentelly unto her. No horses in the Islands.
And thus when he had seen and marueyled at the horses and such other things
as were in the ship, unknown to them, and had with a good grace and merelye
asked leave of the Admiral, he departed. Yet sum there were which counseyled
the Admiral to keep him still: that if they might by any means prove that he
was consentinge to the death of owre men, he might be punished accordingly.
But the Admiral considering that it was yet no time to incense thinhabitantes
minds to wrath, A time for all things.
dysmyssed him. The next day following, the kings brother resortyng to the
ships, either in his own name or in his brothers, seduced the women. For on
the next night about mydnight, this Katherine as well to recover her own
liberty as also her fellows, being suborned thereto either by the king or his
brothers promises attempted a much more difficulte and dangerous adventure
then did Cloelia of Rome, A desperate adventure of a woman.
Cloelia of Rome.
which being in hostage with other maids to the king Porcena, deceived her
kepers, and rode over the river Tiber, with the other virgins which were
pledges with her. For whereas they swamme over the river on horseback. This
Katharyne with seven other women, trusting only to the strength of their
own arms, swamme above three long miles: and that also, at such time as the
sea was sumwhat rowghe. For even so far of from the shore, lay the ships
at rode, as nigh as they could conjecture But owre men folowinge them with the
shippeboates, by the same light seen on the shore whereby the women were led,
took three of them: supposinge that Katharyne with the other four, went to
Guaccanarillus. For in the spring of the morninge, certain messengers being
sent to him by the Admiral, had intelligence that he was fled with all his
family and stuff, and the women also. which thing ministered further
suspection that he was consentinge to the death of owre men. Wherefore the
Admiral sent forth an army of three hundrethe men, over the which he
appointed one Melchior to be captain, wylling him to make diligent search to
find owte Guaccanarillus. Melchior therefore with the smauleste vessels
enteringe into the countreye by the ryuers and scouringe the shores,
Guaccanarillus is sought. ^^l^hior.
chanced into certain crooked goulfes defended with.v little and stiepe hills,
supposinge that it had been the mouth of sum great river. He found here also a
very commodious and safe haven, and therefore named it Portus Regalis. They
say that the enteraunce of this is so crooked and bendinge, that after the
ships are once within the same, whether they turn the^ to the left hand, or
to the right, they can not perceive where they came in until they return to
the mouth of the river: Although it be there so broad that three of the
byggeste vessels may sail together on a froont. The sharp and high hills on
the one side and on the other, so brake the wind, that they were uncertain how
to rule their sails. In the myddle gulf of the river, there is a promontorie
or point of the land with a pleasant grove full of Popingayes and other
birds which breed therein and singe very sweetlye. Popingayes and birds
They perceived also that two ryuers of no smaule largenes fell into the haven.
While they thus searched the land between both, Melchior espied a high house
a far of, where supposinge that Guaccanarillus had line hyd, he made toward
it. And as he was going, there met him a man with a frowning countenance
and a grymme look, with a hundredth men following him, armed with bows and
arrows, and long and sharp staves like iauelynnes, made hard at the ends
with fire. Who approchyng toward owre men, spoke owte alowde with a terryble
voice, saying that they were Taini, Taini.
(that is) noble men, and not Canibales. But when owre men had given them
signs of peace, they left both their weapons and fiercenes. Thus geuynge
each of them certain hawks belles, hawks belles*
they took it for so great a reward, that they desired to enter bonds of
nere frendeshyppe with us, and feared not immediately to submit them selves
under owre power, and resorted to our shyps with their presents. They that
measured the house (being made in round form fownde it to be from side to
side.xxxii. great paces, A large house
compased abowte with.xxx. other vulgar houses, having in them many beams
cross over, and covered with reeds of sundry colors, Reeds of sundry
colors.
wrethed and as it were weaued with marvelous art When owre men asked sum of
them where they might find Guaccanarillus. They answered that that Region was
none of his. But their kings being there present. Yet they said they
supposed that Guaccanarillus was gone from the plain to the mountains.
Making therefore a brotherly league with this Caccicus, Caccius.
(that is to say a king) they returned to the Admyrall to make relation what
they had seen and hard.

whervppon he sent forth diverse other Centurians with their hundrethes to
search the country yet further. Emonge the which were Hoiedus and Gorualanus,
ho^edus and Gorualanus.
noble young gentlemen and of great courage. And as they went toward the
mountains to seek Guaccanarillus, dyuidinge the mountains between the^ one
of them fownde on the one side thereof four ryuers faulynge from the same
mountains: and the other found.iii. on the other side. In the sands of all
these ryuers is fownd great plentye of goulde, Gold in ryuers faulinge from
mountains.
which thinhabitantes of the same Island which were with us, gathered in this
manner. Making holes in the sand with their hands, a Cubette deape, and
taking up sand with their left hands from the botome of the same, The manner
of gathering gold.
they picked out graynes of goulde with their right hands withowte any more
art or cunning. Graynes of gold.
And so delivered it to owre men: who affirm that many of them thus gathered,
were as bygge as tares or fytchis. And I my self saw a mass of rude goulde,
A mass of rude go^de weighinge.ix ounces.
(that is to say, such as was never molten) like unto such stones as are
found in the bottomes of ryuers, weighinge nine ownces, which Hoieda him self
fownde. Being contented with these signs, they returned to the Admiral to
certify him hereof. For the Admiral had commanded under pain of punyshement
that they should meddle no further then their commission: which was only to
search the places with their signs. For the fame went that there was a
certain king of the mountains from whense those ryuers had their faule, whom
they caul Cacicus Caunaboa that is, the lord of the house of gold. Cannaboa,
king of the house of gold
For they caul a house Boa, goulde, Cauni: and a king or Lord, Cacicus, as
we have said before. hol^ome water and plenty of fysshe.
They affirm that there can no where be found better fysshe, nor of more
pleasant taste, or more wholesome then in these ryuers: also the waters of the
same to be most holsom to drink. Melchior him self towld me, that in the
month of December, The day and night of equal length in Dece^ber.
the days and nyghtes be of equal length among the Canibalis. But the sphere
or circles of the heaven, agrees not thereunto. ^yrdes breed in December
Albeit that in the same month, sum birds make their nestes, and sum have
already hatched their eggs by reason of the heat being rather continual then
extreme. He towlde me also when I questioned with him as concerning the
elevation of the pole from the horizontal line, The elevation of the po^e
that all the sterres cauled Plastrum or charles wayne, The stars are cauled
gardens of the pole,
are hid under the North pole to the Canibales. And surely there returned
none from thense at this viage, to whom there is more credit to be given, then
to this man. But if he had been skillful in Astronomye, he should have said
that the day was almost equal with the night. For in no place toward the
stay of the son (cauled Solsticium) can the night be equal with the day. And
as for them, they never came under the Equinoc^iall, The Equinotial line.
for as much as they had ever the north pole their guide, and ever eleuate in
sight above the Horizontal. Thus have I briefly written unto yowre honor, as
much as I thought sufficient at this time. And shall shortly hereafter (by
Gods favor) write unto you more largely of such matters as shall be daily
better known. For the admiral him self (whom I use famylyerly as my very
friend) has promised me by his letters, that he will give me knowledge of al
such things as shall chance. He has now chosen a strong place where he may
buyld a City nere unto a comodious haven. And has already builded many houses
and a chapel in the which (as in a new world heretofore void of all
religion) god is daily served with.xiii. priests according to the manner of
owre churches. A chapel and priests.
When the time now approached when he promised to send to the king and
queen, and having prosperous wind for that purpose, sent back the.xii.
Carauelles whereof we made mention before it was no smaul hynderance and grief,
unto him: Especially considering the death of his men whom he left in the
Island at the first vyage, whereby we are yet ignorant of many places and other
secrets whereof we might otherwise have had further knowleage. But as time
shall reveal them again, so will I aduertyse you of the same. And that you
may the better know by conference had with the Apothecaries and merchant
strangers Sirophenicians, Marchaunts Sirophenicians.
what these Regions bear, and how hot their ground is, I have sent you all
kinds of graynes, with the bark and inner parts of that tree which they
suppose to be the Cinamome tree. The Cynamome tree.
And if it be your pleasure to taste either of the graynes, or of the smaule
seeds the which you should perceive to have fawlen from these graynes, or of
the wodde it self, touch them first softely mouinge them to your lyppes. For
although they be not hurtefull, yet for their excess of heat, they are
sharp and byte the tongue, if they remain any while thereon. But if the tongue
be blystered by tastynge of them, the same is taken away by drinking of water.
Of the corn also whereof they make their bread, this brynger shall deliver
sum graynes to your Lordeshyppe both white and black: And therewith also, a
Trunk of the tree of Aloes The which if you cut in pieces, Xiloaloes or
lignu^ Aloes.
you shall feel a sweet sauoure to proceade from the same. Thus fare you
heartily well. From the court of Methimna Campi. The third day before the
Calendes of May. Anno. Domini, M. CCCC. XCIIII.

The third book of the first Decade, to Lodouike Cardinal of Aragonye and
Neuie to the king.
You desire that folyshe Phaeton should ageine rule the Chariotes of the
Sun: The fable of Phaeton.
And contend the draw sweet lycoures out of the hard flynte, whereas you
require me to dysscribe unto you the new world, fownde in the weste by the
good fortune and governance of the Catholic Princes Ferdinandus and
Helisabeth, king Ferdinandus and queen Helizabeth
your Uncle and Aunte: showing me also the letters of king Frederike your
uncle, written to me in the same behalf. But sithe you have laid this burden
on my back, in whose power it is to command me to take upon me more then I
am well able. Ye both shall receive this precious stone, rudely closed in lead
after my manner of workemanshyppe. Wherefore when you shall perceive the learned
sort frendelye: The malicious, enuiously: And the backebyters, furiously, to
bend their sclaunderous darts against owre fair Nymphs of the Ocean,
hereides. He means the Islands.
You shall freely proteste in how short time, and in the myddeste of what
troubles and calamities, you have enforced me to write of the same. Thus fare
you well from Granata the ninthe day before the Calendes of May.

We have declared in the book here before, how the Admiral passed by the
coasts of the Canibales to the Island of Hispaniola with his whole navy.
hispaniola.
But now we entende further to show what he fownde as concerning the nature
of this Island, after that he had better searched the seacreates of the same:
Likewise of the Island of Cuba nere unto it which he yet supposed to be the
firm land. Hispaniola therefore (which he affirms to be Ophir, ^phir
whether Salomons ^hips sailed for gold.
whereof we read in the third book of the kings) is of latitude, five southe
degrees: having the north pole eleuate on the north side.xxvii. degrees: And
on the Southe side (as they say) xxii. degrees. It reaches in length from the
East to the Weste, seven hundrethe and four score miles. It is distant from
the Islands of Gades (cauled Cales) xlix. degrees, and more as sum say. The
form of the Island, resembles the leaf of a chesnutte tree. Upon a high
hill on the North side of the Island, he builded a city, Isabella.
because this place was most apt for that purpose by reason of a mine of
stones which was nere unto the same, serving well both to build with, and
also to make lyme. At the bottom of this hill, is there a great plain of
three score miles in length: A plain of threescore miles of length.
and in breadth sumwhere.xii. sumwhere.xx. miles where it is brodest, and.vi.
miles where it is narowest Through this plain run diverse fair ryuers of
wholesome waters. But the greatest of them which is nauigable, fauleth into the
haven of the city for the space of half a furlonge. How fertile and
fruitful this valley is, you shall understand by these things which follow. On
the shore of this river, A token of marvelous fruitfu^nes,
they have lymyted and enclosed certain ground to make gardeynes and
orchiardes, in the which al kinds of bygger herbs, as radyshe, letuse,
colewortes, borage, and such other, wax ripe within.xvi. days after the seed
is sown. Likewise Melones, Gourdes, Cucumers, and such other, within the
space of.xxxvi. days. These garden herbs, they have fresshe and green all
the whole year. herbs grene at the hole year.
Also the roots of the canes or reeds, of the lycour whereof, sugar is made,
grow a cubette high within the space of.xv. days: Sugar reeds Plants and
vines.
but the lycoure is not yet hardened. The like they affirm of plants or
shrouddes of young vines: And that they have the second year gathered ripe
and sweet grapes of the same. But by reason of to much rankenes, they bear
but few clusters. Furthermore, a man of the country sowed a little wheat
about the Calendes of February, and brought with him to the city a handefull
of the ripe ears of the same the third day before the calendes of Aprell:
which was that year the vigile of the Resurrection of owre Lord. Also, al
kinds of pulse, as beans, peason, fytches, tares, and such other, are ripe
twyse in the year, Corn and grain ripe twice a year
as all they which come from thense, affirm with one voice: Yet that the
ground is not universally apt to bear wheat. In the mean time while these
things were doing, the Admiral sent owte a company of xxx. men to search
the Region of Cipangae, otherwise cauled Cibana This Region is full of
mountains and rocks: The Region of C^panga or Cibana.
And the myddle ba^ke of the hole Island in the which is great plenty of
goulde. Gold.
When they that went to search the Region, were returned they reported
marvelous things as touching the great riches of this Region. From these
mountains, descend four great ryuers, Four great ryuers.
which by the marvelous industrye of nature, divided the hole Island into four
parts, in manner equal, ouerspreadinge and wateringe the hole Island with
their branches. Of these four ryuers, the one reaches toward the East. This
the inhabitants caul Iunna: An other, toward the Weste, and is cauled
Attibunicus. The third toward the North, named Iachem: the last reaches
into the Southe, and is cauled Naiba. The day before the Ides of March, the
Admiral him self with all his horse men and four hundredth footmen, The golden
region of Cibana.
marched directly toward the South side of the goulden Region. Thus passinge
over the river, the plain and the mountain which environed the other side of
the plain, he chanced upon an other vale the which a river much bygger then
the first, and many other mean ryuers run throwgh. When he had also
conueighed his army over the river and passed the second vale which was in
no part inferior to the first, he made away through the third mountain,
Uales and mountains.
where was no passage before, and descended into an other vale which was now
the beginning of Cibana. The vale of Cibana.
Through this also run many fluddes, and ryuers, out of every hill, and in
the sands of them all, is fownde great plenty of goulde. And when he had
now entered three score and twelve miles into the goulden region from the
city he intended to build a fortress upon the top of a hill, standing by
the shore of a certain great river, that he might the better and more safelye
search the secreates of the inner parts of the Region. This he cauled the
fortress of saint Thomas. The which in the mean time while he was building,
thinhabitantes being desirous of hawks belles and other of owre things,
Gold for hawks bells.
resorted daily thither. To whom the Admiral declared, that if they would
bring goulde, they should have what so ever they would ask, Forthwith
turninge their backs and runnynge to the shore of the next river, they
returned in a short time, brynginge with them their hands full of goulde.
Amongst al other, there came a owld man bringynge with him two pybble stones
of goulde weighinge an ounce, Graynes end pipple stones of gold.
desiring them to give him a bell for the same who when he saw our men
marvel at the byggenes thereof, he made signs that they were but smaule and of
no value in respect of sum that he had seen. And taking in his hand four
stones the least whereof was as bygge as a walnut, and the byggest as bygge as
an orange, he said that there was fownde pieces of goulde so bygge in his
country, being but half a days journey from thense, and that they had no
regard to the gatheringe thereof. Whereby we perceive that they pass not much
for goulde in as much as it is goulde only, They pass not for gold, in that it
is gold only but. etc.
but so far esteem it, as the hand of the artificer has fashioned it in
any coomely form. For who does greatly esteem rowgh marble or unwrought
Iuerye. But if they be wrought with the cunninge hand of Phidias or
Praxiteles, and shaped to the similitude of the fair nymphs or fayeres of the
sea (cauled Nereiades) or the fayres of the wods, (cauled Hamadriades) they
shall never lack buyers. Beside this owld man, there came also diverse other,
brynginge with them pypple stones of gold weighing.x. or.xii. drammes: And
feared not to confess, that in the place where they gathered that gold, there
were found su^tyme stones of gold as bygge as the head of a child When he had
tarried hear a few days, Stones of gold as byg as the head of a chy^de,
he sent one Luxanus, a noble young gentylman with a few armed men to search
all the parts of this Region. Who at his return, reported that thinhabitantes
showed him greater things the^ we have spoken of here before. But he did
openly declare nothing thereof: which they thought was done by the Admirales
commandment. They have wooddes full of certain spyces: Spyces*
but not such as we commonly use. These they gather even as they do gold:
that is as much as will serve for their purpose, every man for him self, to
exchange the same with the inhabitants of other countries adioyninge to them,
for such things as they lack, as dysshes, pottes, stools, and such other
necessaries. As Luxanus returned to the Admiral, (which was about the Ides of
March) he fownde in the wooddes, certain wild vines, ripe and of pleasant
taste. wild Vines of pleasant taste.
But thinhabitantes pass not on them. This Region though it be full of stones
and rocks (and is therefore cauled Cibana, which is as much to say as a
stone) yet it is well replenyshed with trees and pastures. F^uitful mou^t^ynes.
Ye they instantly affirm, that if the grass of these mountains be cut,
it grows again within the space of four days, higher then wheat. And for
as much as many showers of rain do faule in this Region, whereof the ryuers
and fluddes have their increase, in every of the which, gold is fownde myrte
with sand in all places, they judge that the gold is driven from the
mountains, Gold in the lands of ryuers faulinge from the mountains.
by the vehement course of the streams which faule from the same, and run
into the ryuers. The people of this Region are given to Idelnes and play.
Liberty and Idelnes.
For such as inhabyte the mountains, sit quakynge for could in the winter
season, The mountains are could.
and had rather so wander up and down Idelly, then take the peines to make
them apparel, whereas they have wooddes full of gossa^pine cotton. But such as
dwell in the vales or plains feel no could in winter. When the Admiral had
thus searched the beginning of the region of Cibana, he repaired to Isabella
(for so he named the city) where, leauinge the governance of the Island with
his deputies, he prepared him self to search further the lymettes of the
Island of Cuba or Iohanna, which he yet doubted to be the firm land, The
Island of Cuba.
and distant from Hispaniola. only three score and ten miles. This did he with
more speedy expedicion, caulyng to remembrance the kings commandment, who
wylled him first with all celeritie to over run the coasts of the new
Islands, least any other prince should in the mean time attempt to invade
the same. Least any other prince. etc
For the King of Portugale affirmed that it perteyned only to him to discover
these unknown lands. But the bishop of Rome Alexander the.vi. to avoid the
cause of this discention, Discencion between the Portugales and Spaniardes.
granted to the King of Spain by thauctoritie of his leaden bulls, that no
other prince should be so boulde as to make any viages to any of those
unknown regions, lyenge without the precinct of a direct line drawn from the
North to the Southe a hundredth leaques westwarde without the paralelles of the
Islands cauled Capud Viride. or Cabouerde, which we think to be those that in
owlde time were cauled Hesperides. The Islands o^ Cabouerde o^ hisperides
These perteyne to the king of Portugale. And from these, his pylottes which
do yearly search new coasts and regions, direct their course to the
East, The Portugales viages
saylynge ever toward the left hand by the back of Aphrike and the seas of
the Ethiopians: Neither to this day had the Portugales at any time sailed
Southwarde, or Westewarde from the Islands of Cabouerde. Preparyng therefore
three ships, he made haste toward the Island of Iohanna or Cuba whyther he
came in short space, and named the point thereof where he first arrived, Alpha
and O: Alpha and O
that is, the first and the last: for he supposed that there had been thend of
owre East because the son fauleth there: And of the weste, because it ryseth
there. For it is apparente, that westwarde, it is the beginning of India
beyond the river of Ganges: And Eastewarde, the furthest end of the same: The
end of the East and West.
which thing is not contrary to reason forasmuch as the Cosmographers have
left the lymites of India beyond Ganges vndetermyned: where as also sum were
of opinion that India was not far from the coasts of Spain as we have said
before. Note. India not far from Spain.
Within the prospecte of the beginning of Cuba, he found a commodious haven
in the extreme angle of the Island of Hispaniola. For in this part, the Island
receaueth a great goulfe. This haven, he named saint Nycolas port, Saint
Nycolas port.
being scarsely.xx. leaques from Cuba. As he departed from hense and sailed
westwarde by the south side of Cuba, the further that he went, so much the
more the sea seemed to be extended in breadth and to bend toward the south.
On the south side of Cuba, he fownde an Island which thinhabitantes caul
Iamaica. The Island of Iamaica.
This he affirms to be longer and brother then the Island of Sicilie: having
in it only one mountain, which on every part beginning from the sea, ryseth
by little and little into the myddest of the Island: And that so plainly
without rowghnes, that such as goo up to the top of the same, can scarsely
perceive that they ascend. Iamaica.
This Island he affirmed to be very fruitful and full of people as well in
thinner parts of the same as by the shore: And that thinhabitantes are of
quicker wit then in the other Islands, Quick wytted people.
and more expert artificers and warrelyke men. For in many places where he
would have arrived, they came armed against him and forbodde him with
threatening words But being overcome, The composeinge of the earth.
they made a league of frendeship with him. Thus departing from Iamaica, he
sailed toward the Weste with a prosperous wind for the space of three^core
and ten days: thinkinge that he had passed so far by the compass of the
earth being underneath us, that he had been nere unto Aurea Chersonesus (now
cauled Malaccha, Aurea Chersonesus, or Malaccha.
) in owre East India beyond the beginning of Persides. For he plainly
believed that he had left only two of the twelve hours of the son, A
secreate of Astronomy.
which were unknown to us, for the owlde writers have left half the course
of the son untouched, where as they have but only discussed that
superficial part of the earth which lies between the Islands of Gades and
the river of Ganges: The river of Ganges.
or at the vttermoste, to Aurea Chersonesus. In this navigations, he chanced on
many furious seas, running with a faule as it had been the streams of fluddes:
Also many whorlepooles, and shelfes, with many other dangers, and streyghtes
by reason of the multitude of Islands, Dangerous streightes by reason of many
Islands.
which ley on every side. But not regardinge all these perelles, he determined
to proceade until he had certain knowledge whether Cuba were an Island or
firm land. Thus he sailed forward coastinge ever by the shore toward the
weste for the space of CC.xxii. leaques, that is, abowte a thousand and three
hundredth miles: And gave names to seven hundredth Islands by the way: The
Admiral gave names to seven hundrethe Islands.
Leaving also on the left hand (as he feared not to report) three thousand
here and three. three thousand Islands.
But let us now return to such things as he fownde worthy to be noted in
this navigations. Saylinge therefore by the side of Cuba, and searchinge the
nature of the places, he espied not far from Alpha and O, a large haven of
capacity to harborowe many ships: A large haue^
whose enteraunce is bendinge, being enclosed on both sides with capes or
points which receive the water. This haven is large within, and of exceadinge
depthe. Saylinge by the shore of this port, he saw not far from the same,
two cotages covered with reeds, and in many places fire kyndeled. Here he
sent certain armed men owte of the ships to the cotages: where they fownde
another man nor woman, but rostemeate enowgh. For they fownde certain spyttes
of woodde lyenge at the fire, having fyshe on them about a hundredth pownde
weight, and two serpents of.viii foot long a piece, Roasted fysshe and
serpents of.viii. foot long.
whereat marueylinge, and lokynge about if they could espy any of
thinhabitantes, and that none appeared in sight (for they fled all to the
mountains at the coming of owre men) they fell to their meat, and eat the
fyshe taken with other men's travail: But they absteyned from the serpents,
which they affirm to differ nothing from Crocodiles of Egypt, Crocodiles of
Egypt.
but only in byggenes. For (as Pliny says) Crocodiles have sumetymes been
fownde of.xviii. cubettes long. But of these the byggest were but of.viii.
foot. Thus being well refresshed, they entered into the next woodde where they
fownde many of the same kind of serpents hanging upon bowghes of trees: of
the which, sum had their mouths tied with strings, and sum their teethe
taken owte. And as they searched the places nere unto the haven, they saw
abowte.lxx. men in the top of a high rock, which fled as soon as they
had espied owre men. Who by signs and tokens of peace, caulinge them again,
there was one which came nere them and floode on the top of a rock, seeming
as thowgh he were yet ferefull. But the Admiral sent one Didacus to him,
Didacus thinterpretour.
a man of the same country, whom he had at his first vyage taken in the
Island of Guanahaini, being nere unto Cuba: wyllinge him to come nere and not
to be afraid. When he hard Didacus speak to him in his own tongue he came
bowldly to him: and shortly after resorted to his company, persuadinge them to
come without all fear. After this message was done, there descended from the
rocks to the ships, about three score and ten of thinhabibitantes,
proferinge frendeshippe and gentelnes to owre men: which the Admiral accepted
thankefully, and gave them diverse rewards: And that the rather, for that he
had intelligence by Didacus thenterpretoure, that they were the kings
fysshers, The kings. fysshers.
sent of their lord to take fysshe against a solemn feast which he prepared
for an other king. And whereas the Admirales men had eaten the fysshe which
they left at the fire, they were the gladder thereof, because they had left
the serpents. Serpents esteemed for delicate mea^ Ophiophagi*
For there is nothing among their delicate dysshes, that they esteem so
much as these serpents: In so much that it is no more lawful for the
common people to eat of them, then peacockes or phesantes among us. As for
the fysshes, they doubted not to take as many more the same night. Being asked
why they first roasted the fysshe which they intended to bear to their king.
They answered, that they might be the fressher and uncorrupted. Thus ioyninge
hands for a token of further frendeship, every man resorted to his own. The
Admiral went forward as he had appointed, following the faulinge of the son
from the beginning of Cuba cauled Alpha and O. The shores or sea banks even
unto this haven, albeit they be full of trees, yet are they rowgh with
mountains. Of these trees, su^e were full of blossoomes and flowers, and other
laden with fruits. Blossoms and fruits both at one time.
Beyond the haue^ the land is more fertile and peopulous, whose inhabitants
are more gentle and more desirous of owre things. For as soon as they had
espied owre sh^ppes, they flocked all to the shore, brynginge with them such
bread as they are accustomed to eat, and gourdes full of water, offeringe
them unto owre men, and further desyringe them to coome alande. In all these
Islands is a certain kind of trees as bygge as elmes, which bear gourdes in
the stead of fruits. Trees which bear gourds
These they use only for drinking pottes, and to fetch water in, but not for
meat, for the inner substance of them, is sowrer then gaul, and the bark as
hard as any shelle. At the Ides of May, the watch men lokinge owte of the
top castle of the ship toward the Southe, saw a multitude of Islands
standinge thick together, A multitude of Islands.
being all well replenished with trees, grass, and herbs, and well inhabyted.
In the shore of the continent, he chanced into a nauigable river whose water
was so hot, hot water.
that no man might endure to abide his hand therein any time. The day
folowinge, espying a far of a Canoa of fysher men of thinhabitantes, fearinge
least they should fly at the sight of owre men, he commanded certain to
assail them pryuily with the ship boats. But they fearinge nothing, tarried
the coming of owre men. Now shall you hear a new kind of fyshinge. A
strange kind of fysshynge.
Like as we with greyhoundes do hunte hares, in the plain fields. So do
they as it were with a huntyng fysshe, A h^ntynge ^ysshe.
take other fysshes. This fysshe was of shape or form unknown unto us: but
the body thereof, not much unlike a great yele: having on the hinder part of
the head, a very towgh skin, like unto a great bag or purse. This fysshe
is tied by the side of the boat with a cord let down so far into the
water, that the fysshe may lie close hyd by the keele or bottom of the same,
for she may in no case abide the sight of the air. Thus when they epsy any
great fysshe, or tortoyse (whereof there is great abundance bygger then great
targettes) they let the cord at length. Abu^^ance of to^oy^es.
But when she feels her self loosed, she enuadeth the fysshe or tortoyse as
swiftly as an arrowe. And where she has once fastened her howld she casts
the purse of skin whereof we sp^ke before: And by drawyng the same together,
so graspeleth her pray, that no man's strength is sufficient to unloose the
same, except by little and little drawinge the line, she be lyfted sumwhat
above the brymme of the water. For then, as soon as she sees the brightness of
the air, she lettethe goo her howlde. The pray therefore, being now drawn
nere to the brymme of the water, Fyssher men.
there leapeth soodenly owte of the boat into the sea so many fysshers, as
may suffice to hold fast the pray, until the rest of the coompany have
taken it into the boat. Which thing done, they loose so much of the cord,
that the hunting fysshe, may again return^ to her place with in the water:
where by an other cord, they let down to her a piece of the pray, as we use
to reward greyhoundes after they have killed their game. This fysshe, they
caul Guaicanu^, The fysshe Guaicanum.
But owre men caul it Reuersum. They gave owre men four tortoyses taken by
this means: And those of such byggenes that they almost filled their
fysshinge boat. For these fysshes are esteemed among them for delicate meat.
Owre men recompensed them again with other rewards, and so let them
depart. Being asked of the coompasse of that land, they answered that it
had no end westewarde. Most instantly defyringe the Admiral to coome alande:
human people.
or in his name to send one with the^ to salute their Cazicus, (that is) their
king: Affirmynge that he would give owre men many presents, if they would goo
to him. But the Admiral, least he should be hyndered of the vyage which he
had begun, refused to goo with them. Then they desired to know his name, and
towld owre men likewise the name of their king. Thus sailing on yet further
ever toward the West, within few days he came nere unto a certain exceeding
high mountain, well inhabyted by reason of the great fertility of the same. A
moun^aine fruitful and well inhabited.
Thinhabitauntes of this mountain, browght to owre ship, bread, gossampine
cotton, cunnies, and sundry kinds of wyldfowle: demaun^ynge relygiously of
thinterpretoures, if this nation descended not from heaven. The king of this
people, and diverse other sage men that stood by him, informed him that that
land was no Island. Shortly after, enteringe into one of the Islands being on
the left hand of this land, they fownde no body therein: for they fled al
at the coming of owre men. Yet fownde they there four dogs of marvelous
deformed shape, Dogs of strange shape and dumme.
and such as could not bark. This kind of dogs, they eat as we do goats.
Here is great plenty of geese, duckes, Duckes.
and hearons. hearons
Between these Islands and the continente, he entered into so narowe
streyghtes, that he could scarsely turn back the ships: And these also so
shalowe, that the keele of the shyps sumtyme rased on the sands The water of
these streyghtes, Streightes.
for the space of forty miles, was white and thycke like unto milk, white and
thick water.
and as thowgh mele had been sparkeled throwgh owte all that sea. And when they
had at the length escaped these strayghtes, and were now coome into a main
and large sea, and had sailed thereon for the space of four score miles, they
espied an other exceeding high mountain, whyther the Admiral resorted to
store his ships with fresshe water and fuel. Hear among certain wooddes of
date trees, wooddes of date trees.
and pyneable trees of excedyng height he fownd two native sprynges of fresshe
water. In the mean time while the woodde was cuttynge and the barrelles
fyllyng, one of owre archers went into the wood to hunt: where he espied a
certain man with a white vesture, Men appareled like white friars.
so like a friar of thorder of saint Marye of Mercedis, that at the first
sight he supposed it had been the Admiralles preeste which he browght with him,
being a man of the same order. But two other followed him immediatlye owte of
the same wooddes, shortly after, he saw a far of a hole coompany of men
clothed in apparel, being abowte.xxx. in number. Then turning his back and
cryinge owte to his fellows, he made haste to the ships with all that he
might drive. These apparelled men, made signs and tokens to him to tarry and
not to be afraid. But that notwithstanding, he ceased not to fly. The
Admiral being advertised hereof, and not a little reioysynge that he had
fownde a civil people, in continently sent forth armed men, with
commandment, that if need should so require, they should enter forty miles
into the Island, until they might find either those apparelled men, or other
inhabitants of that country. When they had passed over the woodde, they
came into a great plain full of grass and herbs, in which appeared no token
of any pathe way. Here attemptinge to goo throwgh the grass and herbs, they
were so entangled and bewrapte therein, that they were scarsely able to pass a
mile, the grass being there little lower then owre ripe corn. grass almost
as high as corn
Being therefore weryed, they were enforced to return again, fyndyng no pathe
way. The day following he sent forth.xxv. armed men an other way: Commanding
them to make diligent search and inquisition what manner of people inhabited
the land. Who departinge, when they had fownde not far from the sea side
certain steps of wild beasts, Steps of wyld beasts feet.
of the which they suspected sum to be of Lions feet being stricken with
fear, returned back again. As they came they fownde a woodde in the which
were many native vines here and there crepinge abowte high trees, Native vines
with many other trees bearinge aromaticall fruits and spyces. Trees bearinge
spyces and sweet fruits.
Of these vines they browght with them into Spain many clusters of grapes very
ponderous and full of lycoure. But of the other fruits, they browght none
because they putrified by the way in the ship, and were cast into the sea.
They say also that in the laundes or meadows of those wooddes, they saw
flocks of great cranes twyse as bygge as owres. Great Cranes.
As he went forward and turned his sails toward certain other mountains, he
espied two cotages on the shore, in the which he saw only one man: who
being browght to the ship, signified with head, fyngers, and by all other
signs, that he could devise that the land which lay beyond those
mountains, was very full of people. And as the Admiral drew nere the shore
of the same, there met him certain Canoas having in them many people of the
country, who made signs and tokens of peace and frendeshyp. But here Didacus
thinterpretour which understood the language of thinhabitantes of the
beginning of Cuba, Diverse languages in the Island of Cuba.
understood not them one whytte, whereby they consydred that in sundry provinces
of Cuba, were sundry languages He had also intelligence, that in the inlande of
this Region, was a king of great power, and accustomed to wear apparel. He
says that all the tracte of this shore, was drowned with water and full of
mudde, besette with many trees, after the manner of owre marysshes, Yet whereas
in this place they went alande for fresshe water, they fownde many of the
shelfysshes in the which pearls are gathered. Pearls in ^helfysshes.
But that could not cause the Admiral to tracte the time there, entendinge at
this viage, only to prove how many lands and seas he could discover
accordin^e to the kings commandment. As they yet proceeded forward, they
saw here and there all the way alonge by the shore, a great smoke rysinge,
until they came to an other mountain four score miles distant. There was no
rock or hill that could be seen, but the same was all of a smoke. But
whether these fyers were made by thinhabitantes for their necessary busynes, or
as we are wont to set beacons on fire when we suspecte thapproche of owre
enemies, thereby to give warninge to their neighbors to be in a redines, and
gather together if perhaps owre men should attempt any thing against them,
or otherwise as seemethe most lykely, to caul them together as to a wonder to
behold owre ships, they knew yet no certentie. In this tracte, the shores
bended sumetyme toward the Southe, and sumetyme toward the Weste and
westesouthwest: And the sea was every where entangeled with Islands: The sea
entangeled with Islands
by reason whereof, the keeles of the ships often times rased the sands for
shalownes of the water: So that the ships being very sore bruised and
appayred the sails, cables, and other tackelinges, in manner rotten, and the
vytayles, (especially the byskette bread) corrupted by taking water at the
riftes evil closed, the Admiral was enforced to turn back again. This
last point where he touched of Cuba (not yet being known to be an Island)
he cauled Euangelista. Euangelista.
Thus ^urning his sails toward other Islands lyinge not far from the
supposed continente, he chanced into a main sea where was such a multitude
of great tortoyses, A multitude of great tortoyses
that sumtyme they stayed the ships. Not long after, he entered into a gulf
of white water, A goufe of white water human people.
like unto that whereof we spoke before. At the lengh fearing the shelfes of the
Islands, he returned to the shore of Cuba by the same way which he came. Here a
multitude of thinhabitantes, as well women as men, resorted to him with
cheerful countenance and without fear: bringynge with them popingayes
bread, water, and cunnyes: But especially stock doves much bygger then owres:
which he affirms, in savor and taste, to be much more pleasant then owre
partryches. Stock doves of more pleasant taste the^ partriches.
Wherefore where as in eatinge of them he perceived a certain sauoure of spyce
to proceade from them, he commanded the croppe to be opened of such as were
newely killed, and fownde the same full of sweet spyces, which he argued to
be the cause of their strange taste. For it stands with good reason, that
the flesh of beasts, should draw the nature and quality of their
accustomed nury^hemente. As the Admiral hard mass on the shore, there came
toward him a certain gouernoure, The humanity of a reverend owlde governor.
a man of four score years of age, and of great gravity, althowgh he were
naked sauinge his pryuie parts. He had a great train of men waytinge on
him. All the while the preeste was at mass, he showed him self very humble
and gave reuerente attendaunce with grave and demure countenance. When the
mass was ended, he presented to the Admiral, a baskette of the fruits of his
country, delyueringe the same with his own hands. When the Admiral had
gentelly interteyned him, desyringe leave to speak, he made an oration in the
presence of Didacus thinterpretoure, in this effect. An oration of the naked
governor.
I have been advertised (most mighty prince) that you have of late with great
power subdued many lands and Regions hitherto unknown to you: and have
browght no little fear upon all the people and inhabitants of the same. The
which your good fortune, you shall bear with less insolency, Their opinion of
the (...) of man.
if you remember that the souls of men have two iourneyes after they are
departed from this body. The one foul and dark, prepared for such as are
injurious and cruel to man kind: The other pleasant and delectable, ordained
for the^ which in their life time, loved peace and quietness. If therefore you
acknowleage your self to be mortal, and consider that every man shall
receive condign reward or punysheme^t for such things as he has done in
this life, you will wrongefully hurt no man. When he had said these words and
other like, which were declared to the Admiral by thinterpretour, he
marueylinge at the judgment of the naked owlde man, answered, that he was
glad to hear his opinion as touching the sundry iourneys and rewards of
sowles departed from their bodies: Supposinge that another he, or any other of
thinhabitantes of those Regions, Desire of gold found that which religion
could not find.
had had any knowleage thereof. Declaringe further that the chief cause of his
coming thither was to instruct them in such godly knowleage and true
religion: And that he was sent into those countries by the Christian king of
Spain (his lord and master) for the same purpose: Virtus post nummos. etc.
And specially to subdue and punish the Canibales and such other mischeuous
people: And to defend innocents against the violence of such evil doers
willing him and all other such as embrased virtue, in no case to be afraid:
But rather to open his mind unto him, if either he, or any other such quiet
men as he was, had sustained any wrong of their neighbors: and that he would
see the same revenged. These comfortable words of the Admiral so pleased the
owlde man, that notwithstanding his extreme age, he would gladly have gone
with the Admiral as he had done in deed, if his wife and children had not
hyndered him of his purpose. But he marueyled not a little, that the Admiral
was under the dominion of an other: And much more, when thinterpretour towlde
him of the glory, magnificence, pompes, great power, and furnymentes of war
of owre kings, and of the multitudes of cities and towns which were under
their dominions. Intendyng therefore to have gonne with the Admiral, his wife
and children fell prostrate at his feet, with tears desiring him not to
forsake them and leave them desolate. At whose pytifull requests, the worthy
owlde man being moved, remained at home to the comfort of his people and
famylie, satisfyenge rather them then him self. For not yet ceasinge to
wonder, and of heavy countenance because he might not depart, he demanded
oftentimes if that land were not heaven, which browght forth such a kind of
men. For it is certain, that among them, the land is as common as the son
and water: The Island as common as the sun and water.
And that Mine and Thine (the seeds of all myscheefe) have no place with them.
They are content with so little, that in so large a country, they have
rather superfluity the^ scarsenes. So that (as we have said before) they
seem to live in the goulden world, The golden world.
without toil, lyuinge in open gardens, not entrenched with dykes, dyuyded
with hedges, or defended with waules. They deal trewely one with an other,
without laws, without books, and without Judges. They take him for an evil
and myscheuous man, which takes pleasure in doing hurt to other. And albeit
that they delight not in superfluities, yet make they provision for thincrease
of such roots, Provision without care.
whereof they make their bread, as Maizium, Iucca, and Ages, contented with
such simple diet, Simple diete
whereby health is preserved, and dyseases avoided. The Admiral therefore
departinge from thense, and myndinge to return again shortly after, chanced
to coome again to the Island of Iamaica being on the sowthe side thereof: The
Island of Iamaica.
and coasted all a long by the shore of the same, from the Weste to the East.
From whose last corner on the East side, when he saw toward the North on his
left hand, certain high mountains he knew at the length that it was the
sowthe side of the Island of Hispaniola, hispaniola.
which he had not yet passed by. Wherefore at the Calendes of September,
enteringe into the haven of the same Island, cauled saint Nycolas haven, he
repaired his ships to the intent that he might again wast and spoil the
Islands of the Canibales, The Canibales.
and burn all their Canoas, that those raueninge wolves might no longer
persecute and devour the innocent sheep. But he was at this time hyndered of
his purpose by reason of a disease which he had gotten with to much watchinge.
Sickness of to much watchinge.
Thus being feeble and weak, he was led of the maryners to the city of
Isabella, where, with his two brytherne which were there, and other his
familiers, he recovered his health in short space. Yet could he not at this
time assail the Canibales, by reason of sedicion that was risen of late among
the Spanyardes which he had left in Hispaniola, whereof we will speak more
heareafter. Thus fare ye well.

The fourth book of the first decade to Lodouike Cardinal of Aragonie.
COlonus the Admiral of the Ocean, returning (as he supposed) from the
continent or firm land of East India, East India.
had advertisement that his brother Boilus and one Peter Margarita, an owld
familier of the kings, and a noble man, with diverse other of those to whom he
had left the government of the Island, The Spanyarde^ rebelle in the Admir^ls
absence.
were of corrupted mind against him, departed into Spain. Wherefore as well to
purge him of such crimes as they should ley to his charge, as also to make a
supply of other men in the place of them which were returned, and especially to
provide for vitailes, as wheat, wine, oil, and such other which the Spanyardes
are accustomed to eat, because they could not yet well agree with such meats
as they fownde in the Islands, determined shortly to take his vyage into
Spain. But what he did before his departure, I will brefely rehearse.

The kings of the Islands which had hitherto lived quietly and content with
their little which they thowght abundante, The kings of the Island rebel.
whereas they now perceived that owre men began to fasten foot within their
Regions and to bear rule among them, took the matter so grievously, that they
thowght nothing else but by what means they might utterly destroy them, and
for ever abolysshe the memory of their name. For that kind of men (the
Spanyardes I mean which followed the Admiral in that navigations, The
Spaniardes m^sbehauour.
) was for the most part unruly, regarding nothing but Idleness, play, and
liberty: And would by no means absteyne from injuries: Rauyshynge the women
of the Islands before the faces of their husbands fathers, and brethrene: By
which their abhomynable mysde maynour, they disquieted the minds of all
thinhabitantes: In so much that where so ever they fownde any of owre men
unprepared, they slew them with such fyercenes and gladness, as thowgh they
had offered sacryfyce to God. Intending therefore to pacify their troubled
minds, and to punyshe them that slew his men before he departed from thense,
he sent for the king of that vale, which in the book before, we descrybed to
be at the foot of the mountains of the Region of Cibaua. This kings name
was Guarionexius: Guarionexius the king of the greatyale Didacus the
interpretour
who, the more streyghtly to concyle unto him the frendeshyppe of the Admiral,
gave his sister to wife to Didacus, a man from his chyldes age browght up with
the Admiral, whom he used for his interpretoure in the provinces of Cuba. After
this, he sent for Caunaboa, cauled the lord of the house of goulde: that is,
of the mountains of Cibaua, For this Caunaboa, Caunaboa, the king of the
house of gold.
he sent one captain Hoieda, whom the ditionaries of Caunaboa had enforced to
keep his howlde bysiegeinge for the space of.xxx. days, the fortress of
saint Thomas, in the which Hoieda with his fyftie soldiers, stood at their
defense, until the coming of the Admiral. While Hoieda remained with
Caunaboa, Captain hoieda.
many ambassadors of the kings of diverse Regions were sent to Caunaboa,
persuadinge him in no condition to permit the Christians to inhabit the
Island, except he had rather serve then rule. On the other party, Hoieda
advertised Caunaboa to goo to the Admiral, and to make a league of frendeship
with him. But the ambassadors on the contrary part, threatened him, that if he
would so do, the other kings would invade his Region. But Hoieda answered
them again, that whereas they conspired to maynteyne their liberty, they
should by that means be browght to servitude and destruction if they intended
to resist or keep war against the Christians. Thus Caunaboa on the one side
and the other, king Caunaboa, ^ad s^ain the Spanyarde^.
being troubeled as it were a rock in the sea, beaten with contrary fluddes,
and much more vexed with the storms of his gyltie conscience for that he had
privily slain.xx. of owre men under pretense of peace feared to coome to the
Admiral. But at the length, having excogitated this deceyte, Caunaboa
co^spireth the Admiralle^ death.
to have slain the Admiral and his coompany under the color of frendshippe
if opportunity would so have serude, he repaired to the Admiral with his hole
family and many other waiting on him, armed after their manner. Being
demanded why he browght so great a rout of men with him, he answered that
it was not decente for so great a prince as he was, to goo forth of his house
without such a band of men. But the thing chanced much otherwise then he
looked for. For he fell into the snares which he had prepared for other. For
whereas by the way he began to repent him that he came forth of his house,
Hoieda with many fair words and promyses, Fair word make fools feign.
browght him to the Admiral: At whose commandment, he was immediately taken
and put in prison: So that the sowles of owre men were not long from their
bodies unrevenged. Thus Caunaboa with all his family being taken, the
Admiral was determined to run over the Island. But he was certified that
there was such famine among thinhabitantes, Famine in the Island of hispaniola.
that there was alredye fyftie thousand men dead thereof: And that they dyed
yet daily as it were cotton sheep: The cause whereof was well known to be
their own obstinacy and frowardnes. For where as they saw that owre men
intended to choose them a dwelling place in the Island, supposinge that they
might have driven them from thence if the vytailes of the Island should fail,
they determined with them selves, not only to leave sowing and plantyng, but
also to destroy and pluck up by the roots every man in his own region, The
hunger of gold causes great famine.
that which they had alredye sown of both kinds of bread whereof we made
mention in the first book. But especially among the mountains of Cibaua,
otherwise cauled Cipanga, for as much as they had knoweleage that the gold
which abundeth in that Region, was the chief cause that deteyned owre men in
the Island. In the mean time, he sent forth a Captain with a band of men
to search the sowthe side of the Island. Who at his return, reported that
throwghe out all the Regions that he trauayled, there was such scarsenes of
bread, that for the space of.xvi. days he eat nowght else but the roots of
herbs, and of young date trees, or the fruits of other wild trees, But
Guarionexius, the king of the vale lyinge beneth the mountains of Cibaua,
whose kyngedoome was not so wasted as the other, gave owre men certain
vytayles.

Within a few days after, both that the iourneys might be the shorter, and
also that owre men might have more safe places of refuge, if the inhabitants
should hereafter rebel in like manner, he builded an other fortesse (which he
cauled the tower of Co^ception) between the city of Isabella and saint Thomas
fortress, The tower of conception.
in the marches of the kingdom of this Guarionexius within the precinct of
Cibaua upon the side of A hill, having a fair river of wholesome water runnynge
hard by the same. Thus when the inhabitants saw new buyldynges to be daily
erected, and owre ships lying in the haven rotten and half broken, they
began to despair of any hope of liberty, and wandered up and down with
heuie ^here. From the tower of Conception, searchynge diligently the inner
parts of the mountains of Cibaua, there was A certain king which gave them
a mass of rude gold, as bygge as a man's fyst, weighing.xx. ounces. A mass of
gold weighinge.xx. ounces.
This gold was not fownde in the bank of that river, but in a heap of dry
earth: and was like unto the stone cauled Tofus, Tofus.
which is soon resolved into sand. This mass of gold, I my self saw in
Castile, in the famous city of Methymna Campi, where the court lay all that
winter. I saw also a great piece of pure Electrum: Electrum is a metal
naturally mix^ of one portion of gold and another of ^iluer being of
property to bewray poison, and was therefore in owlde time in greater
estimation then gold.
of the which belles and apothecaries morters, and many such other vessels
and instruments may be made, as were in owlde time of copper of the city of
Corinthus. This piece of Electrum, was of such weight, that I was not only
with both my hands unable to lift it from the grownde, but also not of
strength to remove it either one way or an other. They affyrmed that it wayde
more then three hundredth pownde weight, after.viii. ounces to the pownde. It was
fownde in the house of a certain prince, and left him by his predecessors. And
albeit that in the days of thinhabitantes yet living, Electrum was no where
dug, yet knew they where the mine thereof was: The mine of Electrum.
but owre men with much adoo, could hardely cause them to show them the
place, they bore them such privy hatred. Yet at the length, they browght
them to the mine, being now ruinate and stopped with stones and rubbisshe. It
is much easier to dygge then is the iren mine: and might be restored agein,
if myners and other woorkemen skylfull therein, were appointed thereto. Not far
from the tower of Conception, in the same mountains, is fownd great plenty of
Amber: An other kind of amber is taken out of great whale fishes
and owte of certain rocks of the same distilleth a substance of the yelowe
color which the paynters use. Orpement or oker.
Not far from these mountains are many great wooddes, in the which are none
other trees then brasile, which the Italians caul Verzino. wooddes of brasile
trees.
But here perhaps (right noble prince) you would ask what should be the
cause, that where as the Spanyardes have brought owte of these Islands certain
ships laden with brasile, sumwhat of gossampine cotton, a quantity of amber,
a lyttel gold, and sum spices, why they have not brought such plenty of
gold and such other rich marchaundies as the fruitfulness of these regions
seem to promise. To this I answer, Causes of hinderance.
that when Colonus the admiral was likewise demanded the cause hereof, he
made answer that the Spanyardes which he took with him into these regions,
were given rather to sleep, pley, and idleness; then to labor: And were more
studious of sedition and news, then desirous of peace and quietness: Also
that being given to lycenciousnes, Licenciusnes of to much l^bertie
they rebelled and forsook him, finding matter of false accusations against
him, because he went about to repress their owtragiousenes.

By reason whereof he was not yet able to break the power of the inhabytantes,
and freely to possess the full dominion of the Island. And these hynderaunces
to be the cause that hitherto the gaynes have scarsely counteruayled the
charges. And this only gathered and not dug out of the bodi of the min^
Albeit, even this year while I write these things at owre request, they
gathered in two moonethes the sum of a thousand and two hundredth pounds
weight of gold. But because we intend to speak more largely of these things
in their place, we will now return from whense we have digressed. When the
inhabitants perceived that they could by no means shake the yoke from their
necks, they made humble supplication to the Admiral that they might stand to
their tribute, The people make ^u^^lica^ion to st^d to their tribute
and apply them selves to reincrease the fruits of their country, being now
almost wasted. He granted them their request: and appointed such order that
every Region should pay their tribute, with the commodities of their
countries, according to their portion, and at such time as they were agreed
upon. But the violent famine did frustrate all these appoyntmentes. Famine.
For all the trauayles of their bodies, were scarsely able to suffice to find
them meat in the wooddes, whereby to sustain their lives, being of long
time contented with roots and the fruits of wild trees. Yet many of the
kings with their people, even in this extreme necessity, browght part of
their tribute: Most humbly desyringe the Admiral to have compassion of their
calamities, and to bear with them yet a while, until the Island were restored
to the owlde state. Promysinge further, that that which was now wantinge,
should then be dowble recompensed. But few of the inhabitants of the
mountains of Cibaua, kept their promise, because they were sorer oppressed
with famine then any of the other. The nature of the Region dispo^eth the manner
of the people.
They say, that the inhabitants of these mountains, differ no less in
manners and language from them which dwell in the playnes, the^ among us, the
rusticalles of the country from gentylmen of the court: whereas
notwithstanding, they live both as it were under one portion of heaven, and in
many things, much after one fasshion, as in nakedness, and rude simplicity:
But now let us return to Caunaboa, king Caunaboa in captivity.
the king of the house of gold, being in captivity. When he perceived him
self to be cast in prison, fretinge and gratinge his teethe as it had bin a
lion of Libia, and daily and nightlye deuisinge with himself how he might be
delivered, The persuasion of Caunaboa.
began to persuade the Admiral, that for as much as he had now taken unto
his dominion the Regio^ of Cipanga or Cibaua (whereof he was king) it should be
expedient to send thither a garryson of Christian men, to defen^e the same
from the incursions of his owld enemies and borderers. For he said, that it
was signyfied unto him, that the countreye was wasted and spoiled with such
incursions. By this crafty devise, he thought to have browght to pass, that
his brother which was in that regyon, and the other his kynsefolkes and
friends with their adherentes, should have taken, either by sleyghte or force,
as many of owre men, as might have redeemed him. But the Admyrall
understanding his crafty meaning, sent Hoi^dae with such a coompany of men,
as might vanquishe the Cibauians, if they should move war ageynste them. Owre
men had scarsely entered into the Region, but the brother of Caunaboa came
agenste them with an army of five thousand naked men, Caunaboa his brother
rebelleth.
armed after their manner with clubbes, arrows typte with bones, and spears
made hard at the ends with fire. He stole upon owre men being in one of their
howses: and encamped rownde about the same on every side. This Cibauian, as a
man not ignorant in the disciplyne of war, abowte the distance of a furlonge
from the house, divided his army into five batayles, appoyntinge to every of
them a circuit by equal division: And placed the froont of his own battle,
directlye against owre men. When he had thus set his batayles in good array, he
gave certain signs that the hole army should march forward in order with
equal paces, and with a larome fresshly assail their enemies, A conflict
between the Cibauians and the Spanyardes.
in such sort that none might escape. But owre men iudginge it better to
encounter with one of the batayles, then to abide the brunt of the hole army,
gave onset on the main battle aranged in the plain, because that place was
most commodious for the horsemen. When the horsemen therefore had given the
charge, they ouerthrewe them with the breasts of their horses, and slew as
many as abode the end of the fight. The Cibauians have the overthrow.
The residue being stryken with fear, disparcled, and fled to the
mountains and rocks: from whense they made a pytifull houlynge to owre men,
desyringe them to spare them: protestinge that they would never more rebelle,
but do what so ever they would command them, if they would suffer them to
live in their own country. Thus the brother of Caunaboa being taken, the
Admiral licenced the people to resort every man to his own. These things
thus fortunately atchiued this Region was pacified. Among those mountains,
the vale which Caunaboa inhabited, is cauled Magona, and is exceeding
fruitful: having in it many goodly springes: and ryuers, in the sand whereof,
is fownde great plenty of gold. The same year in the mooneth of June, A
great tempest in the month of June.
they say there rose such a boystous tempeste of wind from the sowtheaste,
as has not lightly ben hard of: The violence hereof was such that it plucked
up by the rooes what so ever great trees were within the reach of the force
thereof. When this whirle wind came to the haven of the city, it beat down
to the bottom of the sea, three ships which lay at anchor, Three ships
drowned lyinge at anchor
and broke the cables in sundre: and that (which is the greater maruail)
without any storm or rowghnes of the sea, only turnynge them three or four
times abowte. The inhabitants also affirm, that the same year, the sea
extended it self further in to the land, and rose higher then ever it did
before by the memory of man, by the space of a cubet. The people therefore,
muttered among them selves, that owre nation had trowbled the elements, and
caused such portentous signs. These tempests of the air (which the Grecians
caul Tiphones, that is, whyrle wyndes) they caul, whyrle wyndes.
Furacanes: Furacanes.
which they say, do often times chance in this Island: But that neither they
nor their great grandfathers ever saw such violent and furious Furacanes,
that plucked up great trees by the roots: Neither yet such surges and
vehement motions on the sea, that so wasted the land. As in deed it may
appear, for as much as, where so ever the sea banks are nere to any plain
there are in manner every where, flourishing meadows reachinge even unto the
shore. But now let us return to Caunaboa. As king Caunaboa therefore and his
brother should have binne browght into Spain, The death of king Caunab^a and
his brother.
they dyed by the way for very pensiveness and anguyshe of mind. The Admiral,
whose ships were drowned in the forsayde tempeste, perceauinge him self to
be now enclosed, commanded forthwith two other ships (which the
Spaniardes caul Carauelas) to be made. For he had with him, all manner of
artificers perteyninge thereunto. While these things were dooinge, he sent
forth Bartholomeus Colonus his brother, being leauetenaunt of the Island,
with an army of men to search the gold mines being dystant three score
leaques from the city of Isabella, Bartholomeus Colonus the ^eauete^a^nt
sear^he^^ the go^d^ ^^nes.
which were fownde by the conducte of certain people of the Island, before
the mines of Cipanga or Cibaua, were known. In these mines, they fownde
certain deep pittes which had been dug in owlde time, owte of these pyttes,
the Admiral (who affirms this Island of Hispaniola to be Ophir, as we have
said before) supposes that Solomon the king of Hierus^lem had his great
riches of gold whereof we reed in the owlde testamente: The gold mines of
Solomon.
And that his ships sailed to this Ophir by the goulfe of Persia cauled Sinus
Persicus. But whether it be so or not, it lies not in me to judge, but in my
opinion it is far of. As the myners dygged the superficial or uppermost
part of the earth of the mines, Gold in the superficial parts of the earth.
during for the space of.vi. miles, and in diverse places syfted the same on
the dry land, they fownde such plenty of gold, that every hired labourer
could easily find every day, the weight of three drammes. These mines being
thus searched and fownde, the Lieuetenaunte certifyed the Admiral hereof by
his letters. The which when he had received the.v. day of the Ides of March.
Anno. 1495. he entered into his new ships, and took his viage directly to
Spain to advertise the king of all his affairs, The Admiral takes his viage
to spain
leauinge the hole regiment of the Island with his brother the Lieuetenaunte,

The fyfte book of the first decade, to Lodouike Cardinal of Aragonie.
AFter the Admyralles departing into Spain his Brother the Lieuetenaunte,
builded A fortesse in the gold mines, as he had commanded him. This he cauled
the golden tower, The golden tower.
because the laborers fownde gold in the earth and stone whereof they made the
waules of the fortress. He consumed three months in making the instruments
wherewith the gold should be gathered, washed, tried, and molten. Lack of
vytayles.
Yet was he at this time by reason of want of vitayles, enforced to leave all
things imperfecte, and to goo seek for meat. Thus as he with a band of
armed men, had entered three score miles further within the land, the people
of the country here and there resorting to him, gave him a certain portion of
their bread in exchange for other of owre things. But he could not long tarry
here, because they lacked meat in the fortress, whyther he hasted with such
as he had now gotten. Leauyng therefore in the fortress a garryson of ten
men, with that portion of the Island bread which yet remained, huntinge
hounds.
leaving also with them a hownde to take those kinds of little beasts which
they caul Vsias, not much unlike owre conyes, he returned to the fortress of
Conception. This also, was the moonthe wherein the king Guarionexius, and also
Manicautexius, king Manicautexius.
bortherer unto him, should have brought in their tributes. Remaining there
the hole moonthe of June, he exacted the hole tribute of these two kings, and
vytayles necessary for him and such as he brought with him, which were about
four hundredth in number. Shortly after, abowte the calendes of Iulye, there
came three Caraueles from Spain, Uytayles browght from Spain.
bringynge with them sundry kinds of vitayles, as wheat, oil wine, bacon,
and marckelmas beafe: which were dyuyded to every man according as need
required. Sum also was lost in the carriage for lack of good lookyng too. At
the arryuall of these ships, the lieuetenaunte received commaundment from the
king and the Admyrall his brother, that he with his men should remove their
habitation to the sowthe side of the Island, because it was nerer to the gold
mines: Also that he should make dilygent search for those kings which had
slain the Christian men, and to send them with their confederates, bownd into
Spain. At the next vyage therefore, he sent three hundredth captives with three
Kings: And when he had diligently searched the coasts of the south side, he
transported his habitation, and builded a fortress there, upon the top of a
hill, near unto a shure haven.

This fortress, he cauled saint Dominikes tower. Saint Dominikes tower.
Into this haven, runs A river of wholesome water, replenyshed with sundry
kinds of good fysshes. They affirm this river to have many benefytes of
nature. For, where so ever it runs all things are exceeding pleasant and
fruitful: having on every side, groves of date trees, Groves of date trees.
and diverse other of the Island fruits so plentyfully, that as they sailed
alonge by the shore, often times the branches thereof laden with flowers and
fruits, hunge so over their heads, that they might pluck them with their
hands. Also that the frutefulnes of this grownde, is either equal with the
soil of Isabella, or better. In Isabella, Isabe^l^.
he left only certain sick men and ship wrightes, whom he had appointed to
make certain carauels The residue of his men, he conueighed to the sowth, to
saint Dominickes tower. After he had builded this fortress, leauinge therein a
garryson of.xx. men, he with the remanent of his soldiers, prepared them
selves to search the inner parts of the Weste side of the Island, hitherto
known only by name. Therefore abowte.xxx. leaques, (that is) four score and
ten miles from the fortress, he chanced on the river Naiba, The river of
Naiba
which we said to descend from the mountains of Cibaua, right toward the
sowth, by the myddest of the Island. When he had ouerpassed this river with a
coompanye of armed men divided into.xxv. decurions, that is, ten in a company
with their capitaynes, he sent two decurions to the regions of those kings in
whose lands were the great woods of brasile trees. wooddes of brasile trees.
Inclyninge toward the left hand, they fownde the woods, entered into them,
and felled the high and precious trees, which were to that day, untouched. Each
of the decurions filled certain of the Island howses with the trunkes of
brasile, there to be reserved until the ships came which should carry them
away. But the Lieuetenaunt directinge his journey toward the right hand, not
far from the banks of the river of Naiba, fownde a certain king whose name
was Beuchius Anacauchoa, king Beuchius Anacauchoa.
encamped against thinhabitantes of the province of Naiba, to subdue them under
his dominion, as he had done many other kings of the Island, bortherers unto
him: The palaice of this great king, is cauled Xaragua: The palaice of ^aragua.
and is situate toward the Weste end of the Island, distante from the river
of Naiba.xxx. leaques. All the princes which dwell between the Weste end and
his palaice, are ditionaries unto him. All that Region from Naiba,, to the
furtheste marches of the weste, is utterly withowte gold, althowgh it be full
of mountains. Mountains without gold
When the king had espied owre men, layinge a part his weapons, and gyuinge
signs of peace, he spoke gentelly to them, incerteyne whether it were of
humanity or fear) and demanded or the^ what they woolde have. The
Lieuetenaunte answered: That he should pay tribute to the Admiral his
brother, Tribute.
in the name of the Christian king of Spain. To whom he said: How can you
require that of me, whereas never a Region under my dominion brings forth
gold. For he had hard, that there was a strange nation entered into the
Island, which made great search for gold. But he supposed that they desired
none other thing. The leauetenaunt answered again: God forbydde that we
should enjoin any man to pay such tribute as he might not easily forbear, or
such as were not engendered or growinge in the Region: But we understand that
your Regions bring forth great plenty of Gossampine cotton, and hemp, The
woolfe entreats. the sheep.
with such other, whereof we desire you to give us part. When he hard these
words, he promised with cherefull countenance, to give him as much of these
things as he would require. Thus dismissinge his army, and sendynge messengers
before, he him self accoompanyed the Leauetenaunte and browght him to his
palaice, being dystante (as we have said).xxx. leaques. In all this tracte,
they passed throwgh the Jurisdiction of other princes being under his
dominion: Of the which, sum gave them hemp, of no less goodness to make
tackelinges for ships then owre woodde. Other sum, browght bread, and sum
gossampyne cotton: hemp and gossampine cotton.
And so every of them paid tribute with such commodities as their countries
browght forth. At the length they came to the kings mansion place of
Xaragua. Before they entered into the palaice, how the Lieuetenant was
received at the kings palaice.
A great multitude of the kings servants and subjects resorted to the
court, honorably (after their manner) to receive their king Beuchius
Anacauchoa, with the strangers which he browght with him to se the magnificence
of his court. But now shall you hear how they were interteyned. Among
other tryumphes and syghtes, two are especially to be noted. First there
met them a company of xxx. women, being all the kings wives and concubines,
The kings wives.
bearinge in their hands branches of date trees, singinge and daunsinge: They
were all naked, saving that their pryuie parts were covered with breeches of
gossampine cotton. But the virgins, having their hear hanging down abowte
their shulders, tied abowte the foreheade with a fyllet, were utterly naked.
well fauered women.
They affirm that their faces, breasts, pappes hands, and other parts of
their bodies, were exceeding smoothe, and well proportioned: but sumwhat
inclyning to a lovely brown. They supposed that they had seen those most
beawtyfull Dryades, Dryades.
or the natyue nymphs or fayres of the fontaynes whereof the antiquites speak
so much. The branches of date trees which they bore in their right hands when
they daunced, they delivered to the Leauetenaunt with low curtesy and smiling
countenance. Thus enteringe into the kings house, they fownde a delycate
supper prepared for them after their manner. A delicate supper.
When they were well refreshed with meat, the night drawinge on, they were
browght by the kings officers, every man to his lodginge, according to his
degree, in certain of their howses abowte the palaice, where they rested them
in hanging beds after the manner of the country, hanginge beds.
whereof we have spoken more largely in an other place.

The day following they browght owre men to their common haule, A common haule.
into the which they coome together as often as they make any notable games or
triumphs, as we have said before. Here, after many daunsynges, synginges,
maskinges runnynges, wrestlynges, and other tryinge of mastryes, soodenly there
appeared in a large plain nere unto the haule.ii. great armies of men of
war, which the king for his pastyme had caused to be prepared, A pretty
pastyme.
as the Spaniardes use the play with reeds which they caul Iuga de Canias.
As the armies drew near together, they assailed the one the other as
fiercely, as if mortal ennemies with their baners spleade, should fight for
their goods, their lands, their lives, their liberty, their country, their
wives and their children.

So that within the momente of an hour, four men were slain, Four men
slain in ^port
and many wounded. The battle also should have continued longer, if the
king had not at the request of owre men, caused them to cease. The third day,
the Lieuetenant conselynge the king to sow more plenty of gossampine upon
the banks nere unto the waters side, that they might the better pay their
tribute privately according to the multitude of their howses, he repaired to
Isabella to vysite the sick men which he had left there, and also to see
how his works went forward. In the time of his absence.xxx. of his men
were consumed with diverse diseases. Provision for diseased men
Wherefore being sore trowbled in his mind, and in manner at his wits end
what he were best to do, for as much as he wanted al things necessary as
well to restore them to health which were yet acrased, as also vitayles to
mayntaine the hole multitude, where as there was yet no ship coome from
Spain, as at the length he determined to send abroad the sick men here and
there to sundry Regions of the Island, and to the castelles which they had
erected in the same. for directly from the city of Isabella to saint Dominikes
tower, that is, from the north to the south, The castles or towers of
hispaniola.
throwgh the Island, they had builded thus many castelles. First.xxxvi. miles
distante from Isabella, they builded the castle of Sperantia. from Sperantia.
xxv. miles, was the castle of saint Catharine. from saint Catharines.xx.
miles, was saint James tower. Other.xx. miles from saint James tower, was A
stronger fortress then any of the other, which they cauled the tower of
Conception: which he made the stronger because it was situate at the roots of
the golden mountains of Cibaua, The golden mountains of Cibaua.
in the great and large plain so fruitful and well inhabited as we have
before described. He builded also an other in the mydde way between the tower
of Conception and saint Dominikes tower. The which also was stronger then the
tower of Conception, because it was within the lymittes of A great king,
having under his dominion five thowsande men: whose chief City and head of
the Realm, being cauled Bonauum, Bonauum
he wylled that the castle should also be cauled after the same name.

Therefore leaving the sick men in these castles and other of the Island
howses nere unto the same, he him self repaired to saint Dominikes, Tribute.
eractinge tributes of all the kings which were in his way. When he had
tarried there A few days, there was a rumor spredde, that all the kings
abowte the borders of the tower of Conception, had conspyred with desperate
minds to rebel agenste the Spaniardes. The kings rebelle.
When the Lieuetenaunte was certified hereof, he took his iorneye toward them
immediately, not being discoraged either by the length of the way, or
feebleness of his souldyers, being in manner forweried with travail. As he
drew nere unto them, he had advertisement that king Guarionexius was chosen
by the other princes to be the Captain of this rebellion: Guarionexius
captain of the conspiracy.
And that he was enforsed thereto half unwilling, being seduced by their
persuasions and prouocations. The which is more lykely to be true, for that
he had before had experience of the power and policy of owre men. They came
together at a day appointed, accoompanied with.xv. thousand men, An army of
xv thou^ande Barbarians.
armed after their manner, once again to prove the fortune of war. Here the
Lieuetenaunte consultynge with the Captain of the fortress and the other
soldiers of who^ he had the conducte, determined to set upon them unawares in
their own howses before they could prepare their army. He sent forth
therefore to every king, a Centurian, that is, a captain of a hundredth, which
were commanded upon a sudden to invade their howses in the night, and to take
the^ sleepinge, before the people (being scattered here and there) might
assemble together. Thus secreatly enteringe into their vylages, not fortified
with waules, trenches, or bulwarks, they broke in upon them, took them,
bound them, The kings are taken p^^soners.
and led away every man his prisoner according as they were commanded. The
Lieuetenaunt him self with his hundredth men, assailed king Guarionexius as
the woorthier personage, whom he took prisoner as did the other capitaynes
their kings, and at the same hour appointed. Fourteen of them were browght
the same night to the tower of Conception. Shortly after, when he had put to
death two of the kings which were the chief autours of this new reuolte, and
had suborned Guarionexius and the other kings to attempt the same: least the
people for sorrow of their kings should neglecte or forsake their country,
which thing might have been great incommoditie to owre men, who by thincrease
of their seeds and fruits were oftentimes aided, he freely pardoned and
dismissed Guarionexius and the other kings. king Guarionexius is pardoned.
The people in the mean time flocked together abowte the tower, to the number
of five thowsande withowte weapons, with pytiful houling for the delyueraunce
of their kings: The air thundered, and the earth trembeled throwgh the
vehemency of their owtery The Lieuetenaunt warned Guarionexius and the other
kings, with threatenynges, with rewards, and with promyses, never hereafter
to attempt any such thing. Then Guarionexius made an oration to the people
of the great power of owre me^, of their clemency toward offenders, and
liberality to such as remain faithful: desyringe them to quiet their
minds: and from hensefoorth another in deed nor thowght to interpryse any
thing against the Christians, but to obey and serve them, except they would
daily br^nge them selves into further calamyties. When the oration was
fynyshed, they took him up and set him on their shulders, and so carried him
home to his own palaice. And by this means, this Region was pacified for a
while. But owre men, with heavy countenance wandered up and down, as
desolate in a strange country, lackinge vytailes, Lack of vytayles.
and worn owte of apparel, whereas.xv. moonethes were now passed sense the
Admirals departure: duringe which time, they could hear nothing owte of
Spain. The Leauetenaunt comforted them all that he could with fair words
and promyses. In the mean time, Beuchius Anacauchoa (the king of the Weste
parts of the Region of Xaragua (of whom we spoke before) sent messengers to
the Lieuetenaunt to signifye unto him, Beuchius Anacauchoa, the king of
Xaragua.
that he had in a redynes the gossampine cotton and such other things as he
wylled him to prepare for the paymente of his trybute. Whervppon the
Lieuetenaunt took his journey thither, and was honorably received of the king
and his sister, su^tyme the wife of Caunaboa the king of Cibaua, Queen
Anacaona, the wife of king Caunaboa.
bearing no less rule in the governance of her brothers kyngedome, then he
him self. For they affirm her to be a wise woman, of good manners, and
pleasant in company. She ernestly persuaded her brother by thexample of her
husband, to love and obey the Christians. This woman was cauled Anacanoa. He
fownde in the palaice of Beuchius Anacauchoa.xxxii. kings which had browght
their tributes with them, xxx^i. kings.
and abode his coming. They browght with them also beside their trybute
assigned them, further to demerite the favor of owre men, great plenty of
vytayles: as both kinds of bread, cunnyes, and fysshes, already dried because
they should not putrify: Serpents also of that kind which we said to be
esteemed among them as most delicate meat, Serpents eaten.
and like unto Crocodiles saving in byggenes. These serpents they caul
Iuannas, which owre men learned sumewhat to late to have been engendered in the
Island. For unto that day, none of them durst adventure to taste of them by
reason of their horrible deformity and loathe sumnes. Yet the Lieuetenaunt
being entysed by the pleasantnes of the kings sister, determined to taste of
the serpents. But when he felt the flesh thereof to be so delicate to his
tongue, he fell too, amayne without al fear. The which thing his coompanyons
perceauinge, were not behind him in greedines: In so much that they had
now none other talk then of the sweetenes of these serpents: which they
affirm to be of more pleasant taste, then either owre phesauntes or
pertriches. But they lose their taste, except they be prepared after a
certain fasshion: as do peacockes and phesauntes except they be interlarded
before they be roasted. They prepare them therefore after this manner. The
dressing of serpents to be eaten.
First taking owte their bowels even from the throat to the thyghes, they
wa^^e and rub their bodies very clean both within and withowte. Then
rouling them together on a cyrcle, inuolued after the manner of a slepynge
snake, they thruste them into a pot of no bygger capacity then to houlde
them only. This done, puttinge a little water unto them with a portion of the
Island pepper, they seethe the^ with a soft fire of sweet woodde, and such as
makes no great smoke. Of the fat of them being thus sodde, is made an
exceeding pleasant brothe or potage. They say also, that there is no meat to
be compared to the eggs of these serpents, Serpents eggs eaten.
which they use to seethe by them selves. They are good to be eaten as soon as
they are sodde: And may also be reserved many days after. But having said
thus much of their intertaynement and dainty fare, let us now speak of
other matters. When the Lieuetenaunt had filled one of the Island howses with
the gossampine cotton which he had received for trybute, Gossampine cotton.
the kings promised furthermore to give him as much of their bread, as he
would demand. He gave them hearty thanks and gentely accepted their freendly
profer. In the mean time while this bread was gatheringe in sundry Regions to
be browght to the palaice of Beuchius Anacauchoa king of Xaragua, he sent
messengers to Isabella for one of the two carauelles which were lately made
there: intendinge to send the same thyt^er again laden with bread. The
maryners glad of these tidings, sailed abowte the Island, and in short space
browght the ship to the coasts of Xaragua. The sister of king Beuchius
Anacauchoa, that wise and pleasant woman Anacaona, ^ueene Anacaona.
(the wife sumtyme of Caunaboa the king of the golden house of the mountains
of Cibaua, whose husband dyed in the way when he should have been carried into
Spain,) when she hard say that owre ship was arrived on the shore of her
native country, persuaded the king her brother that they both might goo
together to see it. For the place where the ship lay, was not paste.vi. miles
distante from Xaragua. They rested all night, in the mydde way, in a certain
vyllage in the which was the treasurye or jewel house of An^caona. The
treasury of Queen Anacaona.
Her treasure was another goulde, silver, or precious stones, but only things
necessary to be used, as cheyars, stools, settels, dysshes, potingers,
pottes, pannes, basins, treyes, and such other howsholde stuff and
instruments, workemanly made of a certain black and hard shyninge woodde
which that excellent learned physician John baptiste Elisius, affirms to be
hebene. hebene woodde.
What so ever portion of wit nature has given to the inhabitants of these
Islands, the same does most appear in these kind of works, in which they
show great art and cunnyng. But those which this woman had, were made in the
Island of Guanabba, The Island of Guanabba
situate in the mouth of the weste side of Hispaniola. In these they grave the
lively Images of such fantasies as they suppose they see walk by night which
the Antiquity cauled Lemures. Also the Images of men serpents, Conninge
artificers.
beasts, and what so ever other thing they have once seen. What would you
think (most noble Prince) that they could do, if they had the use of Iren
and steel? For they only first make these soft in the fire, and afterward
make them holowe and carue them with a certain stone which they find in the
ryuers. A stone in the steed of Iren
Of stools and chayers, she gave the Lieuetenaunt.xiiii. And of vessels
perteynynge to the table and kychen, she gave him three score, sum of wood and
sum of earth. Also of gossampine cotton ready spunne four great bottomes of
exceeding weight. The day following when they came to the sea side, where was an
other vylage of the kings, the Lieuetenaunt commanded the ship boat to be
browght to the shore. The king also had prepared two canoas, painted after
their manner: one for him self and certain of his gentelmen: an other for his
sister Anacaona and her waytinge women. But Anacaona desired to be carried in
the ship boat with the Lieuetenaunte. When they now approached nere unto the
ship, Gunnes.
certain great pieces of ordinance were discharged of purpose. The sea was
filled with thunder, and the air with smooke. They trembled and quaked for
fear, supposinge that the frame of the world had been in danger of fauling. But
when they saw the Lieuetenaunte lawgh, and look cherefully on them, they
cauled again their spirits. Musical instruments.
And when they yet drew nerer to the ship, and hard the noise of the
fluites, shalmes, and dru^mes, they were wonderfully astonyed at the sweet
harmony thereof. Ignorance causes admiration.
Entering into the ship and beholdinge the foreshippe and the stern, the
top castle, the maste, the hatches, the cabens, the keele, and the
tackelinges, the brother fixinge his eyes on the sister, and the sister on the
brother, they were both as it were dumme and amassed, and wyste not what to
say for to much wonderynge. While beholdinge these things they wandered up
and down the ship, the Lieuetenau^t commanded the ankers to be loosed, and
the sails to be hoysed up. Then were they further astonyshed, when they saw
so great a mole, to move as it were by it self, without ores and without the
force of man. For there arose from the earth such a wind as a man would have
wyshed for of purpose. Yet furthermore, when they perceived the ship to move
su^tyme forward and sumtyme backewarde: sumtyme toward the right hand and
sumtyme toward the left, and that with one wind and in manner at one
instante, they were at their wits end for to much admiration. These things
fynished and the ships being laden with bread and such other rewards,
they being also recompensed with other of owre things, he dismissed not only
the king Beuchius Anacauchoa, and his sister, but likewise all their
servants and women replenyshed with joy and woonderinge. After this, he him
self took his journey by foot with his soldiers to the city of Isabella:
where he was advertised that one Roldanus Ximenus, Roldanus Xeminus.
a nawghty fellow, (whom before being his seruante, he had preferred to be
captain of the myners and laborers, and after made him a Judge in causes of
controversy) had used him self owtragiously and was malyciously minded
against him, and further, the cause of much myschiefe in his abse^ce. The
intemperancie and malice of a servile wit advanced.
For king Guarionexius (who a while before was pardoned of his former
rebellion, and persuaded the people to obey the Spanyardes) was by his nawghty
usage, and such other as were confethered with him, so accensed to revenge the
injuries which they sustained at his hands, bysyde the abominable acts which
they following only the law of nature, abhorred to admytte, that he with his
famelie, famylyers, and ditionaries, of desperate mind fled to the
mountains being distant from Isabella only ten leaques Westwarde, toward
the north side of the sea. These mountains, Cignaian^*
and also the inhabitants of the same they caul by one name Ciguaios. The
great king of all the kings and regions of these mountain, is cauled
Maiobanexius: Maiobanexius, the great king of the mountains
and his court or palaice is named Capronus. The mountains are rowgh, high,
and such as no man can pass to the tops thereof. They are also bendynge: and
have their corners reachinge down to the sea. Between both the corners of the
mountains, is there a great plain, by the which many rivers faule from the
mountains into the sea. The people are very fierce and warlyke men, The
inhabytantes of the mountains.
having their original of the Canybales. For when they descend from the
mountains to the playnes to keep war with their bortherers, they eat all
such as they kill. Guarionexius therefore, Guarionexius rebelleth again.
flyinge to this king of these mountains, gave him many presents of such
things as are wantinge in his country: therewith declaringe how vylely,
vylaynously, and violently, he had been used of owre men: with whom he could
nothing prevail another by fair means, nor by foul: another by humilytie nor
by stoutnes. And that to be the cause of his resortinge to him at that time:
most humbly desyring him to be his defense against thoppressions of such
myscheuous people. Maiobanexius here upon, made him promise to aid and help
him against the Christians all that he might. The Lieuetenaunt therefore made
have to the fortress of Conception: whyther as soon as he was coome, he sent
for Roldanus Xeminus, Roldanus Xeminus rebelleth.
who with such as followed him, lay in certain of the Island vylages, twelve
miles distant from the fortres. At his coming, the Leauetenaunt asked him
what al these sturres and tumultes meant. He answered without abasheme^t: Yowre
brother the Admiral has to do therewith, and shall answer for the same
before the king. For we perceive that the king has so put him in trust,
that he has had no regard to us. Here we peryshe for hunger while we follow
you: and are driven to seek owre unhappy food in the deserts. Yowre brother
also, assigned me assistant with you in gouerninge the Island. Wherefore sith
you have no more respect unto us, we are determined no longer to be under
yowre obedience. When Roldanus had spoken these words and such other, the
Lieuetenaunte would have laid hands on him: but he escaped his fyngers, and
fled to the weste parts of the Region of Xaragua, having with him a train
of threescore and ten men which were of his confetheracie. Here this fylthy
synke of rebels thus conspired, played their vages and lived with loose brydels
in all kinds of myschefe robbynge the people, spoylinge the country,
Licenciou^nes in l^berte
and rauyshinge both wives and virgins. While these things were doing in the
Island, the Admiral had eight ships appointed him by the king: Of the
which he sent two laden with vitayles, from Cales or Gades of Hercules
pyllers, hercules pyllers.
directly to the Lieuetenaunt his brother. These ships by chance arrived
first on that side of the Island where Roldanus Xeminus ranged with his
coompanyons. Roldanus in short time had seduced them: promysinge them in the
stead of mattockes, A violente persasion.
wenches pappes: for labor, pleasure: for hunger, abundance: and for wearynes
and watchinge, sleep and quietness. Guarionexius in the mean time, The fury
of guarionexius
assemblynge a power of his friends and confetherates, came oftentimes down
into the plain, and slew as many of the Christian men, as he could meet
conuenientlye, and also of the Island men which were their friends:
wasting their ground, destroyinge their seeds, and spoylinge their vylages.
But Roldanus and his adherentes, albeit they had knowleage that the Admiral
would shortly coome, yet feared they nothing because they had seduced the new
men which came in the first ships. While the Lieuetenaunt was thus tossed
in the midst of these storms, in the mean time his brother the Admyrall set
forward from the coasts of Spay^e: But not directly to Hispaniola: For he
turned more toward the southe. In the which vyage, The third vyage of ^olenus
the Admiral.
what he did, what coasts both of the land and sea he coompased, and what
new regions he discovered, we will first declare. For to what end and
conclusion the said tumultes and seditions came, we will express in the end
of the book following. Thus fare ye well.

The syxte book of the first decade, to Lodouike Cardinal of Aragonie.
COlonus the Admyral, the third day of the Calendes of June, in the year of
Christ.1498. hoysed up his sails in the haven of the town Barramedabas, not
far distante from Cales: and set forward on his vyage with eight ships
laden with vytayles and other necessaries. He diuerted from his accustomed raze
which was by the Islands of Canarie, by reason of certain frenchemen pirates
and couers on the sea, French me^ pirates.
which lay in the right way to meet with him. In the way from Cales to the
Islands of Canarie, abowte four score and ten miles toward the left hand,
is the Island of Madera, The Island of Madera.
more southwarde then the city of Civil by four degrees. For the pole artyke
is eleuate to Civil, xxxvi. degrees: But to this Island (as the mariners say)
only.xxxii. He sailed therefore first to Madera. And sendinge from thense
directly to Hispaniola, the resydue of the ships laden with vytayles and
other necessaries, he him self with one ship with deckes, and two merchant
carauelles coasted toward the southe to coome to the Equinoctial line, The
Admiral ayleth to the Equinoctial.
and so forth to follow the tracte of the same toward the West, to the intent to
search the natures of such places as he could find under or nere unto the
same, leauinge Hispaniola on the north side on his right hand. In the myddle
of his raze, lie xiii. Islands of the Portugales, which were in owlde time
cauled Hesperides: And are now cauled Caput Viride, or Caboeurde. ^ixii.
Islands of hesperides, now cauled Cabouerde.
These are situate in the sea, right over against the inner parts of Ethiope,
Westwarde two days saylinge. One of these the Portugales caul Bonauista. With
the snayles, or rather tortoyses of this Island, many leprous men are healed
and cleansed of their leprositie. healynge of the leper.
Departing suddenly from hense by reason of the contagiousnes of the air, he
sailed.CCCCLXXX miles toward the Weste southwest, which is the myddest between
the weste and the southe. There was he so vexed with maladies and heat (for it
was the month of June) that his ships were almost set on fire. Contagious
air and extreme heat
The hoopes of his barrels cracked and brake, and the fresshe water ran owte.
The men also complained that they were not able to abide that extremity of
heat. Here the north pole was eleuate only.v. degrees from the Horizontall.
The pole eleuate.v. degrees.
For the space of.viii. days in the which he suffered these extremites, only
the first day was fair: but all the other, clowdy and rayny: yet nevertheless
fervent hot. Wherefore it oftentimes repented him not a little that ever he
took that way. Being tossed in these dangiours and vexations eight contynuall
days, at the length an Eastsoutheaste wind arose, and gave a prosperous
blaste to his sails. Which wind folowinge directly toward the weste, he
fownde the stars over that paralelle, placed in other order, The stars
placed in other order.
and an other kind of air, as the Admiral him self towlde me. And they al
affirm, that within three days saylinge, they fownde most temperate and
pleasant air. The Admiral also affirms, that from the clime of the great
heat and unwholesome air, he ever ascended by the back of the sea, as it were
by a high mountain toward heaven. A sea rysyng like a mountain.
Yet in all this time, could he not once see any land. But at the length, the
day before the Calendes of July, the watcheman lookynge forth of the
toppecastell of the greatest ship, cried owte alowde for joy that he espied
three exceeding high mountains: Exhortinge his fellows to be of good cheer,
and put away all pensiuenes. For they were very heavy and sorrowful, as well
for the grief which they sustained by reason of thintollerable heat, as also
that their fresh water failed them, which ran owte at the ryftes of the
barels, caused by extreme heat as we have said. heat causes the barrels to
break.
Thus being well conforted, they drew to the land. Yet at their first
approach, they could not arryue by reason of the shalownes of the sea nere the
shore. Yet lookyng owte of their ships, they might well perceive that the
Region was inhabyted and well cultured. For they saw very fair gardens, and
pleasant meadows: from the trees and herbs whereof, when the morning dewes
began to rise, there proceaded many sweet sauoures. Sweet savors
proceadynge from the land.
Twenty miles distant from hense, they chanced into a haven, very apt to
harborowe ships, but it had no river runninge into it. Saylinge on yet
sumwhat further, he fownde at the length a commodious haven wherein he might
repair his ships and make provision of fresshe water and fuel. Arenalis
cauleth this land Puta. The Island of Puta.
They fownd no houses nere unto the haven: but innumerable steps of certain
wild beasts feet, of the which they fownde one dead much like a goat. The
day following, People of ly corporature and long hear nere the Equin^ctiall.
they saw a Canoa coming a far of, having in it.xxiiii, young men of
godly corporature and high stature, al armed with targets, bows and arrows
The hear of their heds, was long and plain, and cut on the forheade much
after the manner of the Spanyardes. Their privy parts were covered with
fillettes of gossampyne cotton, of sundry colors enterlaced: And were beside
al over naked. Here the Admiral consideringe with him self the corporature of
this people and nature of the land, he beleaued the same to be so much the
nerer heaven then other Regions of the same paralelle, The higher the coulder.
and further removed from the gross vapors of the vales and marysshes, how
much the hygheste tops of the byggest mountains are distante from the deep
vales. For he ernestly affirms, that in all that navigations, he never went
owte of the paralelles of Ethiope: So great difference is there between the
nature of thinhabitantes and of the soyles of diverse Regions all under one
clyme or paralelle* as is to see between the people and regions being in the
firm land of Ethiope, Difference between people of one c^ime. Ethiopia.
and them of the Islands under the same clime, having the pole star eleuate
in the same degree. For the Ethiopians are all black, having their hear
curld more like wulle then hear. But these people of the Island of Put^ (being
as I have said under the clyme of Ethiope) are white, with long hear, and of
yelowe color. Wherefore it is app^rente, the cause of this so great
difference, Note the cause of difference.
to be rather by the disposition of the earth, then constitucion of heaven.
For we know, that snow fauleth on the mountains of the Equinoctial or
burnte line, and the same to endure there continually: We know likewise that
thinhabitantes of the Regions far distante from that line toward the
north, are molested with great heat.

The Admiral that he might allure the young men to him with gentelnes, showed
them lokynge glasses, fair and bright vessels of copper, hawks belles, and
such other things unknown to them. But the more they were cauled, so much
the more they suspected craft and deceate, and fled backewarde. Yet did they
with great admiracion behold owre men and their things, but still having
their ores in their hands ready to fly. When the Admiral saw that he could
by no means allure the^ by gifts, he thought to prove what he could do with
musical instruments: Musical instruments.
and therefore commanded that they which were in the greatest ship, should
play on their drums and shalmes. But the young men supposinge this to be a
token of battle, left their ores, and in the twynlynge of an eye had put
their arrows in their bows and their targettes on their arms: And thus
directinge their arrows toward owre men, stood in expectacio^ to know what
this noise might mean. Owre men likewise preparinge their bows and arrows,
approached toward the^ by little and little. But they departinge from the
Admirals ship, and trustinge to the dexterity of their ores came so near
one of the less ships, that one of them plucked the clooke from the
governor of that ship, and as well as they could by signs, required him to
coome alande, promysinge feyth that they would common with him of peace. But
when they saw him goo to the Admirals ship whether he went to ask leave
that he might common with them, suspectinge heareby sum further deceate, they
lept immmediatly into the Canoa, and fled as swyft as the wind. So that to
conclude, they could by no means be allured to familiarity.

Wherefore the Admiral thowght it not convenient to bestow any long time
there, at this vyage. No great space from this Island, ever toward the
weste, the Admiral says he fownde so owteragious a faule of water, runninge
with such a violence from the East to the Weste, The violent course of the
water from the East to the Weste.
that it was nothing inferioure to a mighty stream faulynge from high
mountains. He also confessed, that since the first day that ever he knew
what the sea mente, he was never in such fear. Proceadinge yet sumwhat
further in this dangerous vyage, he fownde certain goulfes of.viii. miles, as
it had been thenteraunce of sum great haven, into the which, the said violent
streams did faule. These goulfes or streyghtes, he cauled Os Draconis, The
goulfe cauled Os Draconis.
that is, the dragons mouth. And the Island directly over ageynste the same, he
named Margarita. Owte of these streyghtes, isshewed no less force of fresshe
water which encounteringe with the saulte, did strive to pass forth: So
that between both the waters, was no smaule conflict. A conflict between the
fre^he water and the salt.
But enteringe into the goulfe, at the length he fownde the water thereof very
fresshe and good to drink. The Admyrall him self, and they which were his
companions in this vyage, being men of good credit, and perceauinge my
diligence in searchinge for these matters, towlde me yet of a greater thing.
That is, that for the space of.xxvi, leaques, amountynge to a hundredth and
four miles, he sailed ever by fresh water: A sea of fresh water.
In so much, that the further he proceaded, especially toward the west, he
affirms the water to be the fre^her. After this, he came to a high
mountain, marmasets and monkeys.
inhabited only with moonkeys or marmasits on that part toward the East. For
that side was rowgh with rockye and stony mountains: And therefore not inhabyted
with men. Yet they that went a land to search the country, fownde nere unto
the sea, many fair fields well tylled and sown: But no people, nor yet
houses or cotages. Parhappes they were gone further in to the country to sow
their corn and apply their husbandry, as we often see owre husband men to
leave their stations and vyiages for the same purpose. In the weste side of
that mountain, they espied a large plain, whither they made haste, The fair
and large region of paria.
and cast anchor in the broad river. As soon as the inhabitants had knowleage
that a strange nation was arrived in their coasts, they came flockinge
withowte all fear to see owre men. We understood by their signs and
poyntynges, that this Region was cauled Paria: and that it was very large: In
so much that the further it reaches toward the weste, to be so much the
better inhabited and replenished with people. The Admiral therefore, taking
into his ship four of the men of that land, searched the weste parts of
the same. By the temperatenes of the air, the pleasauntnes of the grownde,
Temperate air and frutful ground.
and the multitude of people which they saw daily more and more as they sailed,
they coniectured that these things portended sum great matter: As in deed
their opinion failed them not, as we will further declare in his place. The
soonne not yet risen, but beginning even now to rise, being one day allured
by the pleasauntnes of the place and sweet savors which breathed from the
land to the ships, Sweet s^uours proceadynge from the land.
they went alande. Here they fownde a greater multitude of people then in any
other place. As owre men approached toward them, there came certain messengers
from their Cacici, that is, the kings of the country, to desire the Admiral
in the name of their princes to coome to their palayces withowte fear, humayne
people.
and that they and al theyrs should be at his commandment. When the Admiral
had thanked them and made his excuse for that time, there came innumerable
people with their boats to the ships: having for the most part cheynes
abowte their necks, garlandes on their heads, and braselettes on their arms
of pearls of India: Cheynes and garlandes of gold and perles
And that so commonly, that owre women in plays and tryumphes have not
greater plenty of stones of glass and crystal in their garlandes, crowns,
gerdels, and such other tyrementes. Being asked where they gathered them,
they poynted to the next shore by the sea banks. They signified also by
certain scorneful giestures which they made with their mouths and hands,
that they nothing esteemed perles. Baskettes full of pearls, I know who had
bags full.
Taking also baskettes in their hands, they made signs that the same might
be filled with them in short space. But because the corn wherewith his
ships were laden to be carried into Hispaniola, had taken hurt by reason of
the salt water, he determined to defer this mart to a more convenient time.
Yet he sent to land two of the ship boats laden with men, to the intent to
fetch sum garlandes of perles for exchange of our things, and also sumwhat to
search the nature of the Region and disposition of the people. They
enterteyned owr me^ gentelly: how the Admirals men were enterteyned.
and came flockynge to them by heaps, as it had been to behold sum strange
monsters. First there came to meet owre men, two men of gravity, whom the
multitude followed. One of these was well in age, and the other but young. They
think it was the father with his soonne which should succeed him. When the
one had saluted and embrased the other, they browght owre men into a certain
rownde house, nere unto the which, was a great court. Hither were browght
many chayers and stools made of a certain black woodde, cheyers and st^les
of hebene.
and very coonningely wrowght. After that owre men, and their Princes were
set, their waiting men came in laden, sum with sundry delicate dysshes, and
sum with wine. Fruits and wine.
But their meat, was only fruits: and those of diverse kinds and utterly
unknown to us. Their wine was both white and read: not made of grapes, but of
the lycour of diverse fruits, and very pleasant in drinking. wine of the
lycour of fruits.
After this banquette made in the owlde man's house, the young man browght them
to his tabernacle or mancion place, where was a great coompany both of men
and women, but they stood deceauered the one from the other. They are white,
white men nere the Equinoctial
even as owre men are, saving such as are much conversant in the son. They
are also very gentle, and full of humanity toward strangiers. They coouer
their pryuie parts with gossampine cotton wrowght with sundry colors: and
are beside all naked. There was few or none, that had not either a collar, a
cheyne, or a braselette of gold and pearls, and many had all. Being asked
where they had that gold, they poynted to certain mountains, mountains are
the matrices of gold.
seeming with their countenance to dissuade owre men from goinge thither. For
puttinge their arms in their mouths, and grynninge as thowgh they bytte the
same, stylle poyntinge to the mountains, they seemed to insinuate that men
were eaten there: But whether they mente by the Canibales, Canibales
or wild beasts owre men cowlde not well perceive. They took it exceeding
greeuouslye, that they could another understand owre men, nor owre men them.
When they which were sent to land, were returned to the ships abowte three
of the clock at after noone the same day, bringinge with them certain
garlandes and collers of pearls, they loosed their ankers to depart, myndinge
to coome again shortly, when all things were set in good order in
Hispaniola. But he was prevented by an other, which defeated him of the reward
of his travail. He was also hyndered at this time by reason of the shalownes
of the sea and violent course of the water, Shalownes of the sea,
which with continual tossing, broosed the greatest ship as often as any great
gale of wind arose. To avoid the daungiours of such shalowe places, and
shelfes, he ever sent one of the smaulest carauelles before, The use of
careuelles or brigantines.
to try the way with soundinge: and the byggest sh^ppes followed behind. The
Regions being in the large province of Paria for the space of.CCXXX. miles,
are cauled of thinhabitantes, Cumana,, and Manacapana: Cumana and Manacapana
regions of the province of Paria. Curiana.
from these regions distant three score leaques, is there an other Region
cauled Curiana. When he had thus pass^d over this long tract of sea, supposing
still that it had been an Island, and doutinge that he might pass by the Weste
to the North directlye to Hispaniola, he chanced into a river of.xxx.
cubettes depthe, and of such breadth as has not lightly been hard of. A river
of marvelous depth and breadth.
For he affirms it to be.xxviii. leaques. A little further toward the Weste,
yet sumwhat more sowthwarde as the bending of the shore required, ^he entered
into a sea full of herbs or weeds. A ^ea of weeds.
The seed of the herbs which swymme on the water, are much like the berryes
of the tree cauled Lentiscus, Lentiscus.
which bears the sweet gu^me cauled M^stix. Mastix.
They grew so thick, that they sumetyme in manner stayed the ships. The
Admiral reported, that here there is not one day thorowghe owte all the year
much longer or shorter then an other: And that the North pole is here eleuate
only five degrees as at Paria, The elevation of the pole at Paria.
in whose tracte all these coasts lie. He also declared certain things as
concerning the variete of the north pole: The which because they seem
contrary to thoppinions of all the Astronomers, Note a secre^te as concerning
the pole star.
I will touch them but with a dry foot as says the proverb. But it is well
known (most noble prince) that the star which we caul the pole star, or
north star, (cauled of the Italians Tramontana) is not the very point of the
pole Artyke upon the which the axes or extremities of heavens are turned
abowte. The which thing may well be proved, if when the stars first appear,
An experience
you beeholde the pole star throwgh any narowe hole. For so, applyinge
yowre instrument thereto in the morninge sumwhat before the day spring have
blemyshed their light, if then you look throwgh the same hole, you shall
perceive it to be moved from the place where you saw it first. But how it
comes to pass, that at the beginnynge of the euenyng twilight, it is eleuate
in that Region only five degrees in the month of June, and in the morninge
twylight to be eleuate.xv. degrees by the same quaadrante, A marvelous
secreate.
I do not understand. Nor yet do the reasons which he brings, in any point
satysfye me. For he says, that he hereby coniectured, that the earth is not
perfectlye rownde: But that when it was created, there was a certain heap
raised thereon, That the earth is not perfectly rownde.
much higher the^ the other parts of the same. So that (as he says) it is not
rownde after the form of an apple or a bal (as other think) but rather like a
pear as it hangs on the tree: And that Paria is the Region which possesses
the supereminente or highest part thereof nereste unto heaven. In so much
that he ernestly contendeth, the earthly Paradyse to be situate in the tops
of those three hills, paradise is in the mountains of paria.
which we said before, Look the nin^h book second decade.
that the watch man saw owte of the top castle of the ship: And that the
outrageous streams of the fre^he waters which so violentlye isshewe owte of
the said goulfes and strive so with the salt water, faule headlonge from the
tops of the said mountains. But of this matter, it shall suffice to have
said thus much. Let us now therefore return to the historye from which we
have dygressed. When he perceived him self to be thus inwrapped in so great
a goulfe beyond his expectacion, so that he had now no hope to find any
passage toward the north whereby he might sail directly to Hispaniola, he
was enforced to turn back the same way by the which he came, and directed his
viage to Hispaniola by the north of that land lyinge toward the East. They
which afterward searched this land more curiou^lye, will it to be part of
the continente or firm land of India, Paria is part of the firm land of
india
and not of Cuba as the Admiral supposed. For there are many which affirm that
they have sailed rownd about Cuba. But whether it be so or not, or whether
enuyinge the good fortune of this man, they seek occasions of querelinge
ageynste him, I can not judge: But time shall speak, which in time appointed,
reuealeth both truth and falsehod. Time reuealeth al things
But whether Paria be Continent or not, the Admiral does not much contend.
But he supposes it to be Continente. He also affirms that Paria is more
southewarde then Hispaniola, Paria more southewarde then hispaniola
by eight hundredth fourscore and two miles. At the length he came to
Hispaniola (to see his soldiers which he left with his brethren) the third
day of the calendes of September: In the year 1498. But (as often times
chances in humayne things,) among his so many prosperous, pleasant, and
luckye affairs, fortune mengeled sum seeds of wormewoodde, and corrupted his
pure corn with the malicious weeds of coccle.

The seventh book of the first decade, to the same Lodouike Cardinal. etc.
WHen the Admiral was now coome to the Island of Hispaniola, he fownde all
things confounded and owte of order. For Roldanus (of whom we spoke before)
refused in his absence to obey his brother, The spanyardes rebe^l in the
Admirals absence
trustinge to the multitude of such as were confethered with him. And not only
behaved him self proudely against the Admiralles brother and Lieuetenaunt
sumtyme his master, but also sent letters to his reproach to the king of
Spain, therein accusinge both the brehtren, leying heinous matters to their
charges. But the Admiral again, sent messengers to the king, which might
inform him of their rebellion: Instantly desyringe his grace, to send him a
new supplye of men, whereby he might suppress their lice^ciousnes and punyshe
them for their mischeuous acts. They accused the Admiral and his brother to
be unjust men, The Spanyardes accu^e the Admiral.
cruel enemies and sheaders of the Spanyshe bludde: declarynge that upon every
light occasion, they would rack them, hang them, and head them: And that
they took pleasu^e therein. And that they departed from them as from cruel
tyrants and wild beasts reioysinge in bludde, also the kings enemies.
Affyrminge likewise that they well perceived their intent to be none other
then to usurp Thempire of the Islands: which thing (they said) they
suspected by a thousand conjectures. And especially in that they would permit
none to resort to the gold mines, but only such as were their familiers. The
Admirales answer.
The Admiral on the contrary part, when he desired aid of the king to
infringe their insolency, avouched that al those his accusers, which had
devised such lies ageynste him, were nowghtye fellows, abominable knaves and
vylaynes, thieves and baudes, ruff^ans aduouterers and rauishers of women faulse
perjured vagabundes, and such as had been either convict in prysons, or fled
for fear of Judgment: so escaping punyshement, but not leauinge vice wherein
they still continued and browght the same with them to the Island, lyuinge
there in like manner as before, in theft, lechery, and all kinds of myscheefe:
And so given to Idleness and sleep, In^olencie and idelnes of liberty.
that whereas they were browght thither for myners, laborers, and scullyans,
they would not now goo one furlonge from their houses except they were borne
on men's backs, like unto the^ which in owlde time were cauled Ediles Curules.
For, These had the cust^^^es of the te^p^ts.
to this office, they put the miserable Island men, whom they handeled most
cruelly. For least their hands should discontinewe from sheadinge of bludde,
and the better to try their strength and manhod, they used now and then for
their pastyme to strive among them selves and prove who could most cleanely
with his swoorde at one stroke stryke of the head of an innocente. A cruel and
deuel^she pastyme.
So that he which could with most agilitie make the head of one of those
poor wretches to fly quyte and clean from the body to the ground at one
stroke, he was the best man and counted most honorable. These things and many
such other, the one of them laid to the others charge before the king.
While these things were doing, the Admiral sent his brother the
lieuetenaunt with an army of four score and ten footmen, and a few
horsemen, (with three thousand of the Island men which were mortal enemies to
the Ciguauians) to meet the people of Ciguaua, with King Guarionexius their
graunde captain, king Guarionerius is captain of.vi. thousand Ciguauians.
who had done much myscheefe to owre men and such as favored them.
Therefore when the Lieuetenaunt had conducted his army to the banks of a
certain great river runnynge by the plain which we said before to lie
between the corners of the mountains of Ciguaua and the sea, he fownde two
scoutes of his enemies lurkinge in certain busshes: whereof the one, casting
him self head long into the sea, escaped: and by the mouth of the river
swamme over to his coompanyons. The other being taken, declared that in the
woodde on the other side the river, there lay in camp six thousand
Cyguauians ready, unawares to a^sayle owre men passing bye. Wherefore the
Lieuetenaunte fyndyng a shalowe place where he might pass over, he with his
hole army entered into the river. The which thing when the Ciguauians had
espied, they came runnynge owte of the wooddes with a terrible cry and most
horrible aspect, much like unto the people cauled Agathyrsi of whom the poet
virgile speaks. Pie^i Agathyrsi.
For they were all painted and spotted with sundry colors, and especial with
black and read which they make of certain fruits nooryshed for the same
purpose in their gardens, Naked men painted with the joyce of certain fruits.
with the joyce whereof they paynt them selves from the forheade, even to the
knees: having their hear (which by art they make long and black if nature
deny it them wrethed and rolled after a thousand fasshions. hear made long
and black by art.
A man would th^nke them to be deuylles incarnate newly broke owte of hell,
they are so like unto helhoundes. As owre me^ waded over the river, they
s^otte at them and hurled darts so thick, that it almost took the light of
the son from owre men. In so much that if they had not borne of the force
thereof with their targettes, The use of targettes.
the matter had gonne wrong with them. Yet at the length, many being
wounded, they pa^^ed over the river, which thing when the enemies saw, they
fled^e: whom owre men persuinge, slew sum in the chase: The Ci^uani an^
(...) dryue^ to ^l^ght.
but not many, by reason of their swyftenes of foot. Thus being in the
wooddes, they shot at owre men more safely. For they being accustomed to the
wooddes and naked without any let, passed throwgh the busshes and shrubbes as
it had been wild bores or hearts: whereas owre men were hyndered by reason of
their apparel, targettes, long iauelens, and ignorance of the place.
Wherefore, when he had rested there all that night in vain, and the day
following saw none steringe in the wodes, he went (by the council and conducte
of the other Island men which were in his a^mye) immediately from thense, to the
montaynes in the which king Maiobanexius had his chief mansion place in the
vylage cauled Capronum, king Maiobanexius.
by the which name also, the kings palaice was cauled, being in the same
vylage. Thus marchinge forward with his army, abowte twelve mile of, he
encamped in the vylage of an other king, which thinhabitantes had forsaken for
fear of owre men. Yet making dyligent search, they fownde two, by whom they
had knowleage that there was ten kings with Maiobanexius in his palaice of
Capronum, with an army of eight thousand Ciguauians. An army of viii. thousand
Ciguau^a^^.
At the Lieuetenantes first approach, he durst not give them battle until he
had sumwhat better searched the Region: Yet did he in the mean time skyrmysshe
with them twyse. The next night abowte mydnyght, he sent forth scoutes, and
with them guydes of the Island men which knew the country. Whom the
Ciguauians espyenge from the mountains, prepared them selves to the battle
with a terrible cry or alarome after their manner: A Larome.
but yet durst not coome owte of the wooddes, supposing that the Lieuetenaunt
with his main army had been even at hand. The day following, when he brought
his army to the place where they encamped, leaping out of the wooddes, The
Ciguauians out to f^yght ageine
they twyse attempted the fortune of war, fiercely assayling owre men with a
main force, and woundinge many before they could coouer them with their
targettes. Yet owre men put them to flight, slew many, and took many. The
resydewe fled to the wooddes, where they kept them still as in their most
safe houlde. Of them which were taken, he sent one, and with him an other of
the Island men which was of his part to Maiobanexius with commandment in
this effect. The Lieuetenaunt brought not hither his army (O Maiobanexius) to
keep war either against you or yowre people: The Lieuetenaunt his embassage
to king Maiobanexius.
For he greatly desires yowre frendeshippe. But his intent is, that
Guarionexius who has persuaded you to be his aid ageynste him to the great
destruction of yowre people and undoing of yowre country, may have dew
correction as well for his disobedience toward him, as also for raising
tumultes among the people. Wherefore, he requires you and exorteth you, to
deliver Guarionexius into his hands. king Guarionexius.
The which thing if you shall perform, the Admiral his brother will not
only gladly admit you to his frendeshyppe, but also enlarge and defend
yowre dominion. And if herein you refuse to accomplys^^e his request, it will
follow, that you shall shortelye repent you thereof. For yowre kyngedome shall
be wasted with swoorde and fire, and you shall abide the fortune of war^e
whereof you have had experience with favor, as you shall further know here
after to yowre pain, if with stobernes you provoke him to show the
vttermoste of his pour. When the messenger had thus done his errante,
Maiobanexius answered, Maiobanexius h^s answer.
that Guarionexius was a good man, endued with many virtues as all men knew:
And therefore he thought him worthy his aid: especially in as much as he
fled to him for succoure, and that he had made him such promise, whom also
he had proved to be his faithful friend. Natural hatred of vice.
Again, that they were nawghty men, violent and cruel, desyringe other men's
goodd^s, and such as spared not to sheede innocents bludde: In fine, that he
would not have to do with such myscheuous men, nor yet enter into
frendeshippe with them. When these things came to the Lieuetenauntes ear, he
commanded the vylage to be burnte where he him self encamped, with many other
vylages there abowte. And when he drew nere to the place where M^iobanexius
lay, he sent messengers to him again, to common the matter with him, and to
will him, to send sum one of his most feythful friends to entreat with him
of peace. Where upon the king sent unto him one of his chief gentelmen, and
with him two other to wait on him. When he came to the Lieuetenauntes
presence, The Lieuetenaunte^ gentelnes toward Ma^obanexius
he friendly required him to persuade his lord and master in his name, and
ernestly to admonysshe him, not to suffer his floryshinge kyngedome to be
spoiled, or him self to abide the hasarde of war for Guarionexius sake: And
further to exhort him to deliver him, ex^epte he would procure the destruction
both of him self, his people, and his country. When the messenger was
returned, Maiobanexius assembled the people, declaring unto them what was
done, but they cried owte on him to deliver Guarionexius: And began to curse
the day that ever they had received him, A rare faythfulnes in a barbarous
king.
thus to disturb their quietness. Maiobanexius answered them, that Guarionexius
was a good man, and had well deserved of him, giuinge him many princely
presents: And had also tawght both his wife and him to sing and dance,
which thing he did not little esteem. And was therefore fully resolved in no
case to forsake him, or ageynste all humanity to betraye his friend which
f^edde to him for succoure: but rather to abide al extremities with him, then
to minister occasion of obloquye to slaunderes to report that he had betrayed
his geste whom he took into his house with warranties, Thus dismissinge the
people sighinge and with sorrowful hearts, he cauled Guarionexius before him,
promysinge him again, that he would be partaker of his fortune while life
lasted. In so much that he thowght it not best to send any further word to
the Lieuetenaunt: but appointed him whom before he sent to him, to keep the
way with a garryson of men, to the intent that if any messengers should be sent
from the Lieuetenaunt, to sleye them by the way, and admit none to
communication or further entretie of peace. In the mean time, the Lieuetenaunt
sent two, whereof the one was a captive C^guauian, and the other an Island man
of them which were friends to owre men: They were both taken and slain. The
Lieuetenauntes messengers are slain.
The Lieuetenaunt followed the^ only with ten footmen and four horsemen.
Fyndinge his messengers dead in the way, he was further provoked to wrath,
and determined more extremely to deal with Maiobanexius. And therefore went
forward incontinently with his hole army to his chief palaice of Capronum
where he yet lay in camp. At his approach, all the kings fled, A^ the
k^nges are driven to ^lyght.
every man his way, and forsook their captain Maiobanexius: who also with
all his famelye, fled to the rowgh mountains. Sum of the Ciguauians, sowght
for Guarionexius to sley him, for that he was the cause of all these troubles.
But his feet saved his life. For he fled in time to the mountains where he
lurked in manner alone among the desola^e rocks.

Whereas now the Lieuetenauntes soldiers were forweryed with long war,
with watchinge, labor, and hunger, (for it was now three moonethes sense the
wars began) many desired leave to depart to the tower of Conception, where
they had graneges and exercised tyllage. He gave them their pa^seportes with
alowance of vytayles, and so that only thyrtie remained with him. These three
moonethes war, they continued very paynefull and myserablye: So that during
all that time, The Spanyardes are peinful in the wars.
they had none other meat but only Cazibi: that is, such roots whereof they
make their bread, and that but syldome to their fill: Also Vsias, that is,
little beasts like Conyes, if by chance now and then, they took sum with
their hounds. Their drink was none other then water, such as they fownde,
sumtyme sweet, and sumtyme muddy saueringe of the marysshes. Emonge these
delicates, that little sleep that they had, was ever for the most part
abroad under the firmamente: And that not without watchemen, and in contynual
remoouinge as the nature of war requires. A desperate adventure with.xxx. men
With these few therefore, the Lieuetenaunt determined to search the
mountains, dens, and caves, if he could in any place find the steps of
Maiobanexius or Guarionexius. In the mean time certain of his men (whom
hunger enforced to goo a huntinge to prove if they could take any conies)
chanced upon two of Maiobanexius familyers, which were sent to certain
vylages of his, to make provision of bread. These he enforced to declare where
their lord lay hid. And used the same also for guides to bring owre me^ to
the place. Twelve of owre men took this enterprise in hand, painting them
selves after the manner of the Ciguauians. So that by this stratageme or
policy, A police,
they came suddenly upon Maiobanexius, king Maiobanexius is taken.
and took him prisoner with his wife, children, and family, and conueighed
them to the tower of Conception to the Lieuetenaunt. Within a few days after,
hunger compelled Guarionexius to coome owte of the dens: whom, certain of
the people fearinge the Lieuetenaunt, bewrayde to owre hunters. The
Lieuetenaunt being certified hereof, sent furthe a band of foot men,
commanding them to lie in ambushe until such time as Gu^rionexius went from
the playnes to the mountains, Guarionexius is taken.
and then soodenly to intrappe him. They went as they were commanded, took
him, and browght him away with them. And by this means were all the Regions
nere abowte, pacified and quyeted. A certain noble woman of nere kynred to
Maiobanexius, and wife to an other king whose dominion was yet untouched,
followed him in all these adversities. They affirm this woman to be the fairest
and most bewetifull that ever nature browght foor^he in the Island. A
Bewtifull woman.
Whom, when the king her husband who looued her most ardently (as her
bewetie deserved) hard say that she was taken prisoner he wandered up and
down the deserts like a man owte of his wit, not knowinge what to do or
say. But at the length, he came to the Lieuetenaunte, promysinge most
faithfully that he would submit him self and all that he could make, under
his pour, so that he would restore him his wife. The Lieuetenant accepted the
condition and restored him his wife, with certain other rulers and gentelmen
which he had taken prisoners before: Charginge them, and byndinge them with an
oath, to be ever redye at his commandment. Shortly after, this king, of his
own free motion, came again to the Lieuetenaunt, bringyng with him five
thousand men without weapons, saving only such instruments as they use in
tyllage of their grownde. A king sends the lieuetenaunt five thousand me^ to
till the grownde.
He brought with him also, seeds to sow: wherewith at his own charge, he
caused such plenty of their corn and fruits to grow in sundry places of
the large vale whereof we spoke before, that shortly after, were seen many
fair and fruitful fields that came thereof. And for his gentelnes being
rewarded of the Lieuetenaunte with certain of owre things, he departed
joyfully. When the report hereof came to the Ciguauians, The kings submit them
selves to the Lieuetenaunt
it moved the minds of the kings to hope of clemency. Where upon they came
together to the Lieuetenaunt with humble submission and faithful promise ever
after to be under his obedience: desyring him to restore unto them their
king, with his famylie. At their request, the kings wife and his householde
was set at Liberty, but he kept still as a prisoner. These things did the
Lieuetenaunt in the Island, not yet knowinge what his a^uersaries and accusers
had laid to his charge before the king of Spain: who being disquyeted with
their quarelinges and accusacions, and especially for that by reason of their
discention, of so great abundaunce of gold and other things, there was as
yet but little browght into Spain, appointed a new governor which should see
a redress in these things: A new gouen^our of the island.
And either to punyshe such as were fautie, or else to send them to him.
What was fownde ageynste the Admiral and his brother, An unworthy r^warde for
so great pains.
or against his adversaries which accused him, I do not well know. But this I
am sure of, that both the brethrene are taken, browght, and cast in prison,
with their goods confiscate. But as soon as the king understood that they
were browght bound to Cales, he sent messengers in post, with commandment
that they should be loosed and coome freely to his presence: whereby he
declared that he took their troubles greeuouslye. It is also said, that the
new gouernoure sent letters to the king, written with the Admiralles hand in
strange and unknown sypheringes, to his brother the Lieuetenaunt being
absente, willing him to be in a redynes with a pour of armed men to coome
and aid him if the Gouernoure should profer him any violence. Whereof the
governor having knowleage (as he says) being also advertised that the
Leauetenaunt was gonne to his brother before the men which he had prepared were
in a redines, apprehended them both unawares, before the multitude came
together. What will follow, time, the most true and prudent Judge, will
declare. Thus fare ye well.

The eyghth book of the first Decade, to Cardinal Lodouike.
THe great rich, and plentiful Ocean sea, heretofore unknown, The Ocean sea
heretofore unknown.
and now fownde by Christophorus Colonus the Admyrall, by thautoritie and
furtherance of the Catholyke king, I have presented unto yowre honor (right
noble Prince) like a golden cheyne vnwoork manly wrought. But you shall now
receive a precious jewel to be appendaunt thereto. T^erfore emonge such as
were pylottes or gouernoures under the Admyrall, Shipmasters under the Admiral.
and had dylygently marked the courses and differences of the wyndes, many had
licenses granted them of the king to seek further of their own charges,
upon condition to pay him faithfully his portion, The fifte portion dew to
the king.
which is the first part. But because emonge all other, one Petrus Alphonsus
cauled Nignus by his surname) sailed toward the Southe with more prosperous
fortune then any of the other, The na^igation of Petrus A^phonsus.
I think it best first to speak sumwhat of his vyage. He therefore, with only
one ship, well furnyshed at his own charges, after that he had his
passeporte with commandment in no case to cast anchor paste fyftie leaques
distante from any place where the Admyrall had touched, sailed first to
Paria where the Admyrall fownde both the men and women so laden with cheynes,
Paria.
garlandes, and braselettes of pearls, as we have said before. Coastynge
therefore alonge by the same shore according to the kings commandment, (yet
leauinge behind him the Regions of Cumana and Manacapana) he came to the
Region which thinhabitantes thereof, Cumana.
Manacapana*
caul Curiana: Curiana.
where he fownd a haven (as he says) much like the port of Gades or Cales.
In to the which enteringe, he saw a far of certain howses on the shore, and
perceived when he drew nere, that it was a vylage of only eight howses.
Proceadynge yet further for the space of three miles, he espied an other vylage
well replenyshed with people, where there met him fyftie naked men on a
coompany having with them a certain ruler, who desired Alpho^sus to coome to
their coasts. He browght with him at this time, many hawks belles, pynnes,
nedels, braselettes, cheynes, garlandes, and rings with counterfeit stones and
glasses, and such other tryfelles, Perles for tryfels.
the which within the momente of an hour, he had exchaunged for.xv. ounces of
their pearls which they wore abowte their necks and arms. Then they yet more
ernestly desired him to sail to their coasts: Promising him that he should
there have as many pearls as he would desire. Great plenty of pearls.
He condecended to their request: And the day following, came to the place
where they appointed him: Lyinge there at anchor, a great multitude of people
resorted to him, humayne people.
instantely requyringe him to coome alande. But when he considered the
innumerable multitude of people which was there assembled, and that he had
only.xxxiii. men in his coompany, he durst not commyt him self to their
hands, but gave them to understand by signs and tokens that they should coome
to the ship with their canoas. For their boats (which the men of the Island
caul Canoas) are made only of one hole piece of woodde as in the Islands: yet
more rude, and not so artificially as theyrs are. These they caul Gallitas:
They swarmed therefore to the ship as fast as they might, brynginge with them
great plenty of pearls (which they caul Tenoras) exchaunginge the same for
owre marchaundies. He fownde this people to be of gentyl nature, simple and
innocente, being conversant with them in their houses, for the space of.xx.
days. Their houses are made of woodde, coouered with the leaves of date trees.
Their meat for the most part, is the shelfysshes in the which pearls are
engendered, Shel fy^hes in which perles are engend^^d
whereof their sea coasts are full. They have also great plenty of wild
beasts, as hearts, wild bores, and coonys like unto hares, both in color and
byggenes. Beasts and fowls.
Stock doves also, and turtle doves. Likewise geese and duckes which they
nooryshe in their houses as we do. Peacockes fly abowte in manner in every
woodde and grove: but they are not distinct with sundry colors as ours are:
for the cocks are like unto the hens. These people of Curiana, are crafty
hunters and exceeding cunning archers, hunters and archers.
so that they will not lightly mysse any beast or bird that they shoot at.
Owre men consumed certain days here very plesauntely. During which time, who
so ever brought them a peacocke, Their manner of bargening
had for the same, four pynnes. He that brought a pheasaunt, had two: And for
a stock dove or turtle dove, one: And for a goose, a smaul lookyng glass or a
little stone of glass. Thus they bought and soulde with proferynge and
bidding, denyinge and refusinge as it had been in a great market. When pynnes
were proffered them, The use of pynnes.
they asked what they should do with them, being naked. But owre men
satisfied them with a crafty answer, declaring by tokens that they were very
necessary to pick their teeth and to pull thorns owte of their flesh. But
above al things hawks belles were most esteemed among them, hawks bells in
great estimation.
for their sound and fair color: And would therefore give much for one of
the^. Owre men lodginge in their houses, hard in the night season horrible
noyses and rorynges of wild beasts in the wooddes which are full of
exceadinge great and high trees of sundry kinds. Roringe of Wyld beasts
But the beasts of these wooddes, are not noisome to men. For the people of
the country goo daily a hunting, naked, with their bows and arrows: Yet has
it not been hard of, that any man has been slain of any wild beast. As many
hearts or wild bores as owre men woolde desire them to bring, hearts and wyl^
bores.
they woolde kill in the wooddes with their bows and arrows, and not fail to
bring them. They lack kyne, goats, and sheep. Their bread is made of
roots, as is theyrs of the Islands. This nation, has black hear, gross and
sumwhat curlde, yet long also. They keep their teeth very white: Black and
curlde hear. White teethe.
And for that purpose use to carry a certain herb between their lyppes for the
most part of the day, and to wasshe their mouths when they cast it away. The
women do all their busynes at home in their howses, and have also the cure of
tyllage of the ground. But the men apply them selves to the wars and
hunting, to play, Earthen Uessels.
singynge and daunsing. They have sundry kinds of water pottes, iugges, and
drinckinge cups made of earth in other places about them and brought
thither for exch^unge of other things: For they use fayres and markettes for
the same purpose: and are greatly desirous of such things, as are not brough^
forth or made in their country, as nature has given a disposition to al men
to desire and be delyted with new and strange things. Many of them, had
hanging at their pearls, Conninge a^t^ficers.
the Images of certain beasts and birds very artificiously made of gold,
but not pure. These also are brought them from other places for exchange of
other things. The gold whereof they are made, Base gold.
is native, and of much like finenes to that whereof the florenes are coined.
The men of this country, in close their privy members in a gourde, cut
after the fashion of a coddepiece: or else, coouer the same with the shelle of a
tortoyse, A strange m^ner of coueringe their pr^uities.
tied abowte their loins with laces of gossampine cotton. In other places of
that tract, they thrust the synew with in the sheethe thereof, and bind the
skin fast with a stringe. The great wild beasts whereof we spoke before,
and many other things which are not found in any of the Islands, testify
that this regio^ is part of the co^tine^t or firm land. Tokens of the
continent or firm land.
But the chiefest conjecture whereby they argue the same, is, that by the
coasts of that land, from Paria toward the weste, they sailed about three
thousand miles, finding no sign or token of any end. These people of
Curiana (which sum caul Curtana) being demanded where they had such
plenty of gold, signified that it was brought them from a Region cauled
Canchieta or Cauchieta, The g^^den Regio^ of Cauchieta.
being distant from them six soonnes, that is, six days journey westwarde:
And that their Images of goulde, were m^de in the same Region. Where upon owre
men directed their vyage thither immediately: and arrived there at the calendes
of November, in ^he year of Christ a thousand and five hundredth. The people
of the country resorted to them without fear, bringing with them of the
gold which we said to be natyue in that Region. This people had also collers
of pearls abowte their necks, which were brought them from Curiana for
exchange of their marchandies. None of them would exchange any of those
things which they had owte of other countries: as another the Curians gold,
nor the Canchietans pearls. Yet among the Canchietans, they fownde but little
gold ready gathered. They took with the^ from thense, certain very fair
marmasets or munkeys, and many popingayes of sundry colors. In the monethe of
November, Temperate air ^n November.
the air was there most temperate, and nothing could. The gardens of the
north pole, were owte of sight to both these people, they are so nere to the
Equinoctial. The Equinoctial line.
Of the degrees of the pole, they can give none other accoumpte. These people,
humane people.
are well disposed men, of honest conditions, and nothing suspicious. For all
most all the night long, they resorted to the ship with their boats, and
went aboorde ship withowte fear, as did the Curians. They caul pearls,
Corixas. They are sumwhat ielyous. For, when any strangers coome emonge them,
they ever place their women behynd the^. In this Region of Canchieta, the
gossampine trees grow of them selves commonly in many places, Gossampine trees.
as do with us elmes, wyllowes, and salowes. And therefore they use to make
breeches of cotton, Chorlyshe people
wherewith they coouer their pryuie parts in many other Regions there about.
When they had yet sailed on forward by the same coasts, there came forth
ageynste them abowte two thousand men, armed after their manner, forbydding
them to coome aland. These people were so rude and saluage, that owre men
could by no means allure them to familiarity. Owre men therefore, contented
only with their pearls, returned back the same way they came: where they
remained with the Curians continually for the space of twenty days, Alpho^sus
returns to Paria.
and filled their bellyes well with good meat. And here it seems to me, not
far from my purpose, to declare what chanced unto them in their return,
when they came now within the sight of the coaste of Paria. Can^bales in the
goulfes of Paria.
They happened therefore in the way, at Os Draconis and the goulfes of Paria,
(whereof we spoke before) to meet with a navy of.xviii. Canoas of Canibales
which went a rouyng to hunt for me^. Who soon as they had espied owr men,
assailed their ship fiercely and without fear enclosed the same, disturbing
owre men on every side with their arrows. But owre men so feared them with
their gunnes, that they fled immediately, whom owre men folowinge with the
ship boat, took one of their Canoas, and in it, only one Canibal (for the
other had escaped) and with him, an other man bownde: Who, with tears runninge
down his cheeks, and with giesture of his hands, eyes, and head, signified
that six of his coompanyons had been cruelly cut in pieces and eaten of that
myscheuous nation: and that he should have been likewise handeled the day
following. Wherefore they gave him pour over the Canyball, to do with him what
he would. Death for death.
Then with the Canibales own clubbe, he laid on him all that he might drive
with hand and foot, grinninge and fretinge as it had been a wild bore:
Thinking that he had not yet sufficiently revenged the death of his
companyons, when he had beaten owte his brains and guts. When he was
demanded after what sort the Canibales were wont to invade other contreys,
how the canibales fortify their ca^pe
he answered that they ever used to carye with them in their Canoas, a great
multitude of clubbes: The which, where so ever they land, they pitche in the
grownde, and encampe them selves within the coompasse of the same, to lie the
more safely in the night season. In Curiana, they fownde the head of a
captain of the Canibales, nailed over the door of a certain gouernoure, for
a token of victory, as it had been the standerde or helmette taken from the
enemy in battle. In these coasts of Paria, is a Region cauled Haraia,
Haraia.
in the which, great plenty of salt is gathered after a strange sort. For
the sea being there tossed with the pour of the wyndes, dryueth the salt
waters into a large plain by the sea side: Salt engendered of the water of the
sea.
where: afterward when the sea waxes c^ulme, and the soonne begynnethe to
shine, the water is congeled into most pure and white salt, wherewith
innumerable ships might be laden, if men do resort thither for the same
before there faule any rain. For the rain meltethe it, and causes it to
synke into the sand, and so by the pores of the earth, to return to the
place from whense it was driven. Other say, that the plain is not filled from
the sea, but of certain springes whose water is more sharp and salt the^ the
Sprynges of of salt water.
water of the sea. Thinhabitantes do greatly esteem this bay of salt. Which
they use, not only for their own commodity, but also woorkinge the same into
a square form like unto brickes, they sell it to strangers for exchange of
other things which they lack. In this Region, they stretche and dry the
dead bodies of their kings and noble men, The bodies of princes dried and
reserved
layinge the same upon a certain frame of woodde much like unto a hurdle or
grediren, with a gentell fire under the same, thus by little and little
consuminge the flesh and keepinge the skin hole with the bones enclosed
therein. These dried carcases, they have in great reverence, and honor them
for their householde and famylier gods. They say that in this place they saw
a man, and in an other place a woman, thus dried and reserved. When they
departed from Curiana, the.viii day of the Ides of February to return to
Spain, they had three score and.xvi. pounds weight (after.viii. ounces to the
pownde) of perles, which they bought for exchange of owre things, amountinge
to the value of five shyllinges. Threescore and xvi. pounds weight of perles
for.v. shillynges.
Departinge therefore, they consumed three score days in their journey
(althowgh it were shorter then from Hispaniola) by reason of the contynuall
course of the sea into the weste, The course of the sea toward the weste.
which did not only greatly stey the ship, but also sumtymes drive it
back. But at the length they came home so laden with perles, that they were
with every maryner, in manner as common as chafe. But the master of the ship,
Petrus Alphonsus, perles as common as chafe ^etrus Alpho^sus in prison.
being accused of his coompanyons that he had stowlen a great multitude of
precious perles, and defrauded the king of his portion which was the fyueth
part, was taken of Fernando de Vega, a man of great lerninge and experience
and governor o^ Gallecia, where they arrived, and was there kept in prison a
long time. But he still denyethe that ever he deteyned any part of the
perles. Many of these perles were as bygge as hasell nuttes, Orient perles as
bygge as hasel nuttes.
and orient, (as we caul it) that is, like unto them of the East parts. Yet
not of so great price, by reason that the holes thereof are not so perfect.
When I my self was present with the right honorable duke of Methyna, and was
bidden to dinner with him, in the city of Civil, they browght to him above a
hundre^h and twenty ounces of perles to be soul^e: which surely did greatly
delight me with their fayrenes and brightness. Sum say, that Alphonsus had not
these perles in Curiana being distante from Os Draconis more the^ a hundredth
and twenty leaques, Curiana
Os Draconis.
but that he had them in the Regions of Cumana and Manacapana, Cumana.
Manacapana.
nere unto Os Draconis and the Island of Margarita. The Island of Margarita.
For they deny that there is any perles fownde in Curiana. But sith the matter
is yet in controversy, we will pass to other matters. Thus much you have
whereby you may conjecture what commodity in time to coome may be looked
for from these new lands of the west Ocean, whereas at the first
discoueringe, they show such tokens of great riches. Thus fare ye well.

The.ix. book of the first Decade to Cardynall Lodouike.
VIncentiagnes Pinzonus, and also Aries Pinzonus, The navigations of vincentius
and Aries Pinzonus.
his neuie, by his brothers side, which accompanied the Admiral Colonus in his
first vyage, and were by him appointed to be masters of two of the smaule
ships which the Spaniardes caul Carauelas, being moved by the great
riches and amplytude of the new lands, furnyshed of their own charges, four
carauels in the haven of their own country which the Spanyardes caul Palos,
bortheringe on the weste Ocean. Having therefore the kings license and
passeporte to depart, License and passeporte.
they loosed from the haven, abowte the Calendes of December, in the year
1499. This haven of Palos is three score and twelve miles distant from Gades,
commonly cauled Cales: and three score and four miles from Civil. Cales.
Civil.
All thinhabitantes of this town, not one excepted, are greatly given to
searchinge of the sea, and continually exercysed in sailing. They also directed
their vyage first to the Islands of Canarie by the Islands of Hesperides, The
Islands of Canarie
now cauled Cabouerde, Cabouerde.
which sum caul Gorgodes Meducias. Saylinge therefore directly toward the
southe from that Island of the Hesperides which the Portugales (being
possessers of the same) caul Sancti Iacobi, and departinge from thense at the
Ides of January, they followed the southwest wind, s. James Island.
being in the myddest between the south and the weste. When they supposed that
they had sailed about three hundrethe leaques by the same wind, they say that
they lost the sight of the North star: The North pole owte of sight.
and were shortelye after, tossed with exceeding tempests both of wind and
sea, and vexed with intolerable heat. Yet sailed they on further (not without
great danger) for the space of two hundrethe and forty leaques, following
yet the same wind by the lost pole. Wherefore, whether habitable Regions be
under the Equinoctial line or not, habitable Regions under the Equinoctial
line.
let these men and the owlde writers, as well Philosophers as poets and
cosmographers discuss. For these men, affirm it to be habitable, and
maruelou^ly replenished with people: and they, that it is uninhabitable by reason
of the soon beams dependinge perpendicularly or directlye over the same. Yet
were there many of the oulde writers, which attempted to prove it habitable.
These maryners being demanded, if they saw the south pole, they answered
that they knew no star there like unto this pole, that might be decerned
about the point. But that they saw an other order of stars, and a certain
thick mist rysynge from the horizontall line, An other order of stars A
thycke mist
which greatly hyndered their sight. They contend also, that there is a great
heap or rysynge in the myddest of the earth, A rysinge in the myddest of the
earth.
which takes away the sight of the southe pole, until they have utterly
passed over the same. But they verily believe that they saw other images of
stars, much differinge from the situation of the stars of owre hemispherie
or half circle of heaven. How so ever the matter be, as they inform us,
we certify you. At the length, the seventh day of the calendes of
Februarye, they espied land a far of. And saying the water of the sea to be
troubelous, soundinge with their plummet, they found it to be.xvi. fathames
deep. Goinge a land, and tarienge there for the space of two days, they
departed because they saw no people steringe, althowghe they fownde certain
steps of men by the sea side. Thus grauinge on the trees and the stones nere
unto the shore, the kings name and theyrs, and the time of their coming
thither, they departed. Not far from this station, following the fyers on the
land by night, they found a nation lyinge under the open fyrmamente after the
manner of war. Owre men thought it not best to trowble them until the
morninge. Therefore, at the rysinge of the soonne, forty of owre men well
armed, went toward them: against whom came forth.xxxii. of them, with bows,
slinges and darts, even ready to the feyght. The other coompanye followed them,
armed after the same manner. Owr men affirm that they were of higher stature
then either the Almaynes or Pannonians. People of high stature.
They beheld owre men with frowning and threatenynge countenance. But owre
men thought it not good to faule to bickeringe with them, uncertain whether it
were for fear, or because they would not drive the^ to flight. Wherefore they
went about to allure them by fair means and rewards. But they refused all
kind of gentelnes, and stood ever in a redines to feight, declaringe the same
by signs and tokens. Thus owr men resorted to their ships, and they to the
place from whence they came, without any further busynes. The same night abowte
mydnyght, they fled, and left the place void where they lay in camp. Owre
men suppose them to be a vagabunde and wanderinge nation like unto the
Scythians, A vagabunde kind of men
withowte houses or certain dwellinge places, lyuinge only with the fruits
of the earth, having their wives and children folowinge them. Such as measured
their footesteppes in the sand, affirm with great oaths, that one of their
feet is almost as long as two feet of owre men of the mean sort. Saylinge
on yet further, Giantes.
they found an other river, but not of deapth sufficient to bear the
carauels. They sent therefore the four ship boats to land, full of armed men
to search the country. They espied upon a high hill nere unto the sea side,
a great multitude of people, to whom owre coompany sent furthe one man with
certain of owre things to allure them to exchange. And when he had cast a
hawks bell toward them, they cast down a wedge of gold a cubette long. The
which as he stouped to take up, they soodenly enclosed him, and carried him
away. But he was shortly after rescued by his coompanyons, to sum of their
pains: for they slew eight of owre men, and wounded many a far of, with
their arrows, and darts made of wood hardened at the ends with fire. After
this, they encoompased owre ship boats within the river, and came rasshelye
within the reach of owre men, Desperate bouldenes.
layinge houlde on the boats sides, where they were thrust throwgh and hewn
in pieces as it had been sheep, by reason they were naked. Yet would they not
for all this, give over: but took from owre men one of their boats, having no
men in it. For the governor thereof being slain with an arrowe, the other
fled and escaped. And thus they left this fierce and warlyke people,
saylinge toward the northweste alonge by the same coasts, with sorrowful
hearts for the death of their coompanyons. When they had sailed abowte.xl.
leaques, they chanced into a sea of such fresshe water, A sea of fresshe
water.
that they filled their barelles and hogs heads therewith. Searching the
cause hereof, they understood that a vehement course of ryuers descended with
great violence from the tops of certain great hills. They say also that
there lies within the sea, many fortunate and fruitful Islands, Many
fruitful Islands.
and well inhabyted: And that thinhabitantes of this tracte are men of meek
nature and such as do not refuse strangers: humane people.
Yet little profitable to them, because they had no marchandyes for their
purpose, as gold or precious stones. For lack whereof, they brough^ from
thense thyrtie captives to sell for slaves. Thinhabitantes caul this Region
Mariatambal. Mariata^ball.
The Region of the east part of that river, is cauled Camomorus: Camomorus.
And that of the weste part, Paricora: Paricora.
in the midlande whereof, thinhabitantes signified that there is great plenty
of gold. For, following this river directly toward the North (as the bendynge
of the shore required) they recovered again the sight of the north pole. All
the coaste of this tracte, perteyneth to Paria, Regions of Paria.
the which (as we said before) was first found by Colonus him self, Gold and
perles.
and has in manner in every place, great abundaunce of pearls. They say that
these coasts are adioynynge unto, and all one with Os Draconis, Os Draconis.
and also bortherynge upon the Regions of Cumana, Cumana.
Manacapana, Manacapana.
Curiana, Curiana
Cauchieta, and Cuchibachoa. Wherefore they thought it to be part of the firm
land of India beyonge the river of Ganges. For the great and large coompa^se
thereof, does not permit that it should be an Island. Albeit, the hole earth
uncovered with water, largely taken, may be cauled an Island. The hole earth
largely tak^^* may be cauled an Island.
From the point of that land where they lost the sight of the north pole,
saylynge by a continual tracke abowte three hundredth leaques toward the weste
side of Paria, they say that almost in the mydde way, they chanced into a
river cauled Maragnonum, Maragnonus a river of excead^nge bread^h and full of
Islands look decade ^i. liber. ix.
which they affirm to be of such exceeding breadth, that it might seem
incredible, if the antiquity did not make mention of the like. Being
demanded of me if it were not salt water where it divided the land, they
answered, that the water thereof was very fresshe and sweet: And that the
further it ran, to be so much the fressher: Also full of Islands and
homsome fyshe. They bare auouche the breadth thereof, to be more then thirty
lea^ues. Yet if we well weighe and consider the largenes and wydenes of
Boriostomea and Spiriosiomea, the mouths of the famous river of Ister (now
cauled Danubius) and how far they violate or corrupt the salt water with
their freshenes, Boriostomea, and Spirios^omea* mouths of the river of
Danubius,
we shall cease to marvel, althowgh this other river be greater. For, who
can diminysshe the pour of nature, but that it may make this bigger then the
other, and an other bygger then this. And I suppose this to be the river
whereof Colonus the Admiral made mention in the description of his vyage in
these coasts. But we shall hereafter have further knowleage hereof. Let us
now therefore return to the commodities of these Regions. They fownde in many
Islands abowte Paria, The commodities of the Regions and Islands about Paria.
Brasile.
great wooddes of brasile trees: And brought away with them, three thousand
pounds weight thereof. They say that the brasile of Hispaniola, is much
better then this, to dye clothe with a more fair and durable color. From
hense, following the wind (which the Spanyardes caul Norduest, and the
Italians Graeco) they passed by many Islands very fruitful, yet left
desolate and wasted by reason of the cruelty of the Canibales. Mani fruitful
Islands left desolate.
For they went alande in many places, and fownde the ruins of many destroyed
howses. Yet in sum places, they found men, but those exceadinge fearful,
flyinge to the mountains, rocks, and wooddes at the sight of every stranger
or ship, and wanderinge without houses or certain abydinge places, for fear
of the Caniballes layinge wait and huntinge after them. Canibales.
Here they found those great trees which of the^ selves in diverse places
bring forth the fruit or spice which the Apothecaries caul Cassia f^stula:
Trees of Cassia fistula.
And that of no less goodness then that which the physicians minister to such
as be diseased with the ague. Bu^ it was not ripe at their being there. They
affirm that there are trees of such byggenes, Trees of marvelous byggenes.
that.xvi. men ioyninge hands together and standinge in coompasse, can
scarsely embrase sum of them. Emonge these trees is fownde that monstrous
beast with a snowte like a fox, a tail like a marmasette, A monstrou^ be^ste.
ears like a batte, hands like a man, and feet like an ape, bearing her
whelps abowte with her in an owtwarde bellye much like unto a great bag or
purse. The dead carkas of this beast, you saw with me, and turned it over and
over with yowre own hands, marueylynge at that new belly and wonderful
provision of nature. They say it is known by experience, that she never
lets her whelps goo owte of that purse, exexcept it be either to play, or
to suck, until such time that they be able to get their living by them
selves. They took this beast with her whelps: But the whelps dyed shortly
after in the ships. Yet the damme lived certain moonethes: But at the
length, not being able to abide so great alteration of air, and change of
meat, Alteracion of air and change of meat
she dyed also in the way. But of this beast, we have said enowgh. Let us
now therefore return to the autoures of these things. These two Pinzoni, the
uncle and the neuie, sustained many great trowbles and horrible tempests and
perilles in this navigations. For when they had now sailed by the coasts of
Paria abowte.vi. hundredth leaques, and (as they supposed) beyond the city of
Cathay and the coasts of East India beyond the river of Ganges, Cathay in
India beyond the river of Ganges
there rose soodenly so fierce a tempeste in the mooneth of July, that, of the
four carauels which they had with them, two were drowned even before their
eyes: A shipwreck by tempest.
and the third lyenge at anchor, with like soodennes carried owte of their sight
throwgh the violence of the tempeste: The fourth also lyinge at anchor, was so
shaken and broosed, that all the seames thereof were almost loosed. Yet came they
to land out of this last ship, but utterly despayrynge of the ship.
Wherefore consultynge with them selves what was best to be done in so
extreme a case, and how to provide them a safe dwellinge place in those
Regions being out of al hope how to depart from thense, Extreme remedy in a
desperate case
they determined to sley all the inhabitants of the country nere abowte them,
least they with the other should conspire together to kyl them, but their
fortune was better. For the carauell which the tempeste had carried a way, was
coome to them again. This had in it.xviii. men: And the other that remained,
was saved and repaired. With these two therefore, they took their vyage
directly to Spain And thus being tossed with tempests and vexed with
adversities, they returned to their native country of Palos, to their wives and
children, the day before the Calendes of October, with the loss of many of
their dear friends and neighbors. they browght with them Cinamome and gynger:
Cinamome and gynger
but not very good, because they were not there fully seasoned with the heat
of the soon before they brought them from thense. They browght also, certain
precious stones, which Baptista Elysius. that excellent philosopher and yowre
lordeshippes physician, affirms to be true Topases. Topases.
After these men's return, other of their neighbors being moved thereto by a
certain emulation, to prove if their fortune would be any better, like men
of good courage, Men of noble courage.
being nothing discomforted by the hard fortune of their neighbors,
knowinge that it often times chances that that which is one man's undoing is
an other man's making, attempted a new vyage toward the sowthe by the coasts
of Paria, A another vyage
following the steps of Colonus the Admiral, who had first discovered the
same. They also browght with them great plenty of Cassia fistula: And fownde
that precious medecin cauled of the Spanyardes, Animae album, Animae album.
whose perfume is of most excellent effect to heal the reumes, murres, and
heaviness of the head. As touching this vyage, as yet I know no other news
that I thought worthy to certify you of. Wherefore, I will now make an end of
this book, because you put me so often in rememberance of your departure. Yet
to accomplysshe the Decade, I will declare sumwhae of the superstitions of
Hispaniola. The superstitions of hispaniola.
You shall now therefore understand the illusions wherewith the people of the
Island have been seduced after the errors of the owlde gentilitie, The errors
of the owlde gentilitie.
and wandered in the ignorance and blyndenes of humane nature corrupted by the
disobedience of owr first parents, which has remained in all nations upon the
face of the earth, except where it has pleased god by the light of his spirit
by his word, to pour upon his elect the grace of renouation, The grace of
renouation.
by the light whereof the natural darkness receaueth sum clearenes as in a
glass, until imperfection shall be abolyshed. Owre men therefore, were long in
the Island of Hispaniola, before they knew that the people thereof honorede
any other thing the^ the lyghtes of heaven, or had any other Religion. But
when theye had byne now long conuersante with them, and by understanding
their language, drew to a further familiarity, they had knowleage that they
used diverse rytes and superstitions. I have therefore gathered these few
things following, owte of a book written by one Ramonus an heremyte, Ramonus
an heremyte.
whom Colonus had left with certain kings of the Island to instruct them in
the Christian faith. And bycau^e in manner their hole religion is none other
thing then Idolatry, I will begin at their Idols. Ido^atry and Idols.
It is therefore apparente by the Images which they honor openly and commonly,
that there appear unto them in the night seasons certain phanta^ies and
illusions of evil spirits, Illu^ions of evil spirits.
seducinge them into many fond and folyshe errors. For they make certain
Images of gossampine cotton foulded or wrethed after their manner, Images of
gossamp^ne cotton.
and hard stopped within. These Images they make sytting, much like unto the
pictures of sprites and deuelles which owr paynters are accustomed to pa^nt
upon waules. But forasmuch as I my self sent you four of these Images, you
may better presently signify unto the king yowre uncle, what manner of things
they are, and how like unto painted deuelles, then I can express the same by
writing. These Images, thinhabitantes caul Zemes: zemes.
whereof the least, made to the lykenes of young deuels, young deuyls.
they bind to their forheades when they goo to the wars against their
enemies: And for that purpose have they those strings hanging at them which
you see. Of these, they believe to obtain rain if rain be lackyng, and
likewise fair wether. For they think that these Zemes are the mediators and
messengers of the great god, Mediators.
whom they acknowleage to be only one, eternal, Only one god eternal.
withowte end, omnipotent and invisible. Thus every king has his particular
Zemes which he honors. The names of god.
They caul the eternal god, by these two names, Iocauna, and Guamaonocon, as
their predicessours tawght them. Affirminge that he has a father cauled by
these five names: The father of god.
that is, Artab^ra, Mamona, Cuacarapita, Liella, Guimazoa. Now shall you
hear what they fable on the earth as touching the original of man. The
original of man kind
There is in the Island a Region cauled Caunana, where they feign that mankind
came first owte of two caves of a mountain: and that the byggest sort of
men, came forth of the mouth of the byggest cave, and the least sort owte of
the least cave. The rock in the which these caves are, they caul Cau^a. The
greatest den, they name Cazibaxagua, and the less Amaiauna. Fables much like
Ouide his transformations.
They say, that before it was lawful for men to come forth of the cave, the
mouth of the cave was kept and watched nyghtly by a man whose name was
Machochael. This Machochael, departinge sumwhat far from the cave to
thintente to see what things were abroad, was soodenly taken of the soonne
(whose sight he was forbidden) and was turned into a stone. They feign the like
of diverse other, that whereas they went forth in the night season a
fysshynge, so far from the cave that they could not return before the
rysynge of the soon (the which it was not lawful for them to behold) they were
transformed into myrobalane trees, The original of Mirobalane trees.
which of them selves grow plentifully in the Island. They say furthermore,
that a certain ruler cauled Vagoniona, sent one forth of the cave to goo a
fysshynge, who by like chance was turned into a nyghtyngale because the soonne
was risen before he came again to the cave: The nightingale.
And that yearelye abowte the same time that he was turned into a bird, he
does in the night with a moornynge song bewail his mysfortune, and caul for
the help of his master Vagoniona. And this they think to be the cause why
that bird sings in the night season. But Vagoniona, being sore troubled in
his mind for the loss of his familier friend whom he loved so intierly,
leauinge the men in the cave, brought forth only the women with their
suckynge children, leauinge the women in one of the Islands of that tracte,
cauled Mathinino, The Island of Mathinino.
and carried the children away with him: which poor wretches oppressed with
famine, fainted and remained on the bank of a certain river where they were
turned into frogs, Children turned into frogs.
and cried toa, toa, that is, mama, mama, as children are wont to cry for the
mothers pappe. And hereof they say it comes that frogs use to cry so
pytifully in the spring time of the year: And that men were scattered abroad
in the caves of Hispaniola withowte the company of women. They say also, that
whereas Vagoniona him self, was accustomed to wander in diverse places, and yet
by a special grace, A special grace.
never transformed, descended to a certain fair woman whom he saw in the
bottom of the sea, and received of her certain pibple stones of marble
(which they caul Cibas) and also certain yelowe and bright plates of laton,
which they caul Cuaninos. These things to this day are had in great
estimation among the kings, as goodly jewels and most holy relics. holy
relics
These men which we said before were left in the caves withowte women, went
forth in the night (as they say) to wasshe them selves in a ponde of rain
water and saw a far of by the way a great multitude of certain beasts in
shape sumwhat like unto women, creping as thick as antes about the myrobalane
trees: And that as they attempted to take these beasts, women are slippery
cattayle.
they slypped owte of their hands as they had been yeles. Where upon they
consulted, and determined bythaduice of the elders, Al wisdom gothe not by
age.
that al such should be sowght forth among them, as were scabbyd and
leprous, to thintente that with their rowghe and hard hands, they might
theselyer take hold of them. These men, they caul Caracaracoles: And sent
them forth a huntinge to take these beasts. But of many which they took,
they could keep but only four: The which as they would have used for women,
they fownde that they lacked woman's priuities. Wherefore caulinge thelders
again to counsel, to consult what were best to be done in this case, here
needs sum tropologicall interpretour.
their advice was that the bird which we caul the Pie, should be admitted
with his byll to open a place for that purpose, while in the mean time these
men cauled Caracaracoles, should hold fast the women's thighs abroad with
their rowgh hands. Full wisely therefore was the pie put to this office, and
opened the women's priuities, and hereof the women of the Island have their
original and ofspringe. But now do I cease to marueyle that the owlde Greeks
did fable and write so many books of the people cauled Myrmidones, Myrmidones
which they feigned to be engendered of antes or pissemeres. These and such
like, the sagest and wysest of the people, Preachers for the devil.
preach continually to the simple sort, and rehearse the same as most holy
oracles. But it is yet more chyldysshe that they fable as touching thoriginall
of the sea. For they say that there was once in the Island, a man of great
power, whose name was Iaia: whose only soonne being dead, he buried him within
a great gourde. A vengeable great gourd.
This Iaia, greuouslye taking the death of his soonne, after a few moonthes,
came again to the gourde: The which when he had opened, there isshewed forth
many great whales and other monsters of the sea: The original of the sea.
where upon he declared to such as dwelt abowte him, that the sea was
enclosed in that gourde. By which report, four brethren (borne of one woman
who dyed in her trauail) being moved, came to the gourde in hope to have many
fysshes. The which when they had taken in their hands, and espied Iaia
coming, (who oftentimes resorted to the gourd to viset the boones of his
soonne, fearing least he should suspecte them of theft and sacrileage,
sodaynely let the gourde faule owte of their hands: which being broken in the
faule the sea furthwith brake owte at the ryftes thereof, and so filled the
vales, and ouerflowed the playnes, that only the mountains were uncovered,
which now conteyne the Islands which are seen in those coasts. The
original of Islands.
And this is the oppinion of their wise men as concerning thoriginall of the
sea. But now (most noble prince) you shall hear a more pleasant fable. There
is a certain cave cauled Iouanaboina, in the territorye of a certain king
whose name is Machinnech. This cave they honor more religiously then did the
Greeks in time paste, Corinth, Cyrrha, or Nysa: A holy cave.
And have adourned it with pictures of a thousand fasshions. In thenterance of
this cave they have two graven Zemes, whereof the one is cauled Binthaitel, and
the other Marohu. Images.
Being demanded why they had this cave in so great reverence, they answered
ernestly, because the Soonne and the Moon came first out of the same to give
light to the world. The original of the soon and moon.
They have religious concourse to these caves, as we are accustomed to goo on
Pylgramage to Rome or Uaticane, Pylgramage.
Compostele, or Jerusalem, and most holy and head places of owre Religion.
They are also subject to an other kind of superstition. walking sprytes.
For they think that dead folks walk in the night, and eat of the fruit
cauled Guannaba, unknown unto us, and sumwhat like unto a quynse. Affirmynge
also that they are conversant with living people, Incubi.
even in their beds, and to deceive women in taking upon them the shape of
men, showing them selves as thowgh they would have to do with them: But when
the matter comes to actual deed, soodenly to vanysshe away. A remedy
against walkyng sprites.
If any do suspecte that a dead body lies by him when he feels any
strange thing in the bed, they say he shall be out of dout by feelynge of
the belly thereof: affirmyng that the spirits of dead men may take upon them
all the members of man's body, sauinge only the navel. If therefore by lack of
the navel he do perceive that a dead body lies by him, the feelynge is
immediately resolved. They believe verily, that in the night, and often times in
their iourneys, and especially in common and high ways, dead men do meet
with the living. Ageynste whom, if any man be stout and owte of fear, the
phantasye vanyssheth incontinentely. Fantasies proceadynge of fear.
But if any fear, the phantasy or vysion does so assaute him and stryke him
with further fear, that many are thereby astonysshed and have the lymmes of
their bodies taken. Thinhabytantes being demanded of whom they had those
vain supersticions, Al is not good that is owlde
they answered that they were left them of their forefathers as by descent of
inheritance: And that they have had the same (before the memory of man)
composed in certain rymes and songs, which it was lawful for none to learn
but only the kings soonnes, who committed the same to memory, Singing and
playinge
because they had never any knoweleage of letters. These they sing before
the people on certain solemn and festival days, as most religious
ceremonies: while in the mean time they play on a certain instrumente made of
one hole piece of woodde sumwhat holowe like a tymbrell. Their priests and
divines (whom they caul Boitios) instruct them in these superstitions.
Priests and divines.
These priests, are also physicians, Physicians.
diuisinge a thousand crafts and subtylties how to deceive the simple people
which have them in great reverence. For they persuade them that the Zemes use
to speak with them familierlye, Ignorance is noryshed with superst^tion.
and tell them of things to come. And if any have bin sick and are recovered,
they make them believe that they obtained their health of the Zemes. These
Boitii, bind them selves to much fasting and owtewarde clenlynes and
pourgeinges: Fasting and outward clenlynes.
Especially when they take upon them the cure of any Prince. For then they
drink the powder of a certain herb, by whose quality they are driven into a
furye: At which time (as they say) they learn many things by revelation of
the Zemes. A powder of marvelous effect.
Then, puttinge secreatly in their mouths, either a stone, or a bone, or a
piece of flesh, they coomme to the sick person, commaundinge al to depart
owte of that place, Iuggelynge.
except one or two, whom it shall please the sick man to appoint. This
done, they goo about him three or four times, greatly deforminge their faces,
lyppes, and nosethrils with sundry fylthy giestures: A strange ma^er of curing
blowynge, breathinge, and suckyng the forheade, temples, and neck of the
pacient, whereby (they say) they draw the evil air from him, and suck the
disease out of his veins. Then rubbinge him about the shoulders, thyghes, and
legs, and drawing down their hands close by his feet, holdinge them yet
fast together, they run to the door being open, where they unclose and
shake their hands, affirminge that they have driven away the disease, and that
the pacient shall shortly be perfectly restored to health. After this,
coming behind him, he conueygheth the piece of flesh owte of his own mouth
like a iuggeler, and shows it to the sick man, saying, behoulde what you
have eaten to much: you shall now be hole, because I have taken this from
you. But if he intend yet further to deceive the pacient, he persuadeth him
that his Zemes is angry, Angery gods
either because he has not builded him a chapel, or not honored him
religiously, or not dedicated unto him a grove or garden. And if it so chance
that the sick person dye, his kinsfolks by wytchecrafte enforce the dead to
confess whether he dyed by natural destenye, They make the dead to speak.
or by the negligence of the Boitius, in that he had not fasted as he should
have done, or not mynistred a convenient medicine for the disease. So that if
this physician be found fautie, they take revenge of him. Of the stones or
bones which these Boitii carye in their mouths, if the women can coome by
them, they keep them religiously beleauinge them to be greatly effectual to
help women which travail with child: And therefore honor them as they do
their Zemes. For diverse of thinhabitantes, honor Zemes of diverse fasshions.
Sum make them of woodde, Diverse Idols of sundry shape.
as they were admonyshed by certain visions apperinge unto them in the
wooddes. Other, which have received answer of them among the rocks, make
the^ of stone and marble. Sum they make of roots to the similitude of such as
appear to them when they are gathering the roots cauled Ages, whereof they
make their bread, as we have said before. These Zemes, they believe to send
plenty and frutefulnes of those roots, as the antiquity believed such
fayries or spirits as they cauled Dryades, Hamadryades, Satyros, Panes, and
Nereides, Fayries or spirits of the gentyles.
to have the cure and providence of the sea, wooddes, sprynges and fountaynes,
assigninge to every thing, their peculier gods. Peculier gods.
Even so do thinhabitantes of this Island attribute a Zemes to every thing,
supposinge the same to give ear to their inuocations. Wherefore, as often as
the kings ask counsel of their Zemes as concerning their wars, They ask
co^saile of Ido^s
increase of fruits or scarsnes, or health and sickness, they enter into the
house dedicate to their Zemes, where, snuffinge up into their nosethryls the
powder of the herb cauled Cohobba (wherewith the Boitii are driven into a
furye) they say that immediately they see the houses turn topsy turnye, The
^ouder of the herb Cohobba.
and men to walk with their heels upward: of such force is this powder
utterly to take away all sense. As soon as this maddenes cease, he embraseth
his knees with his arms, holding down his head. And when he has remained
thus a while astonysshed, he lyfteth up his head as one that came new out of
sleep: And thus loking up toward heaven, First he fumbeleth certain
confounded words with him self. Then certain of the nobility or chief
gentelmen that are about him (for none of the common people are admytted to
these mysteries) with loud voices give tokens of rejoicing that he is returned
to them from the speech of the Zemes, Secreate mysteries.
demanding of him what he has seen. Then he openinge his mouth, doateth
that the Zemes spoke to him during the time of his trance: declaring that he
had revelations either concerning victory or destruction: Revelations.
famyne or plenty: health or syckenes, or what so ever happens first on his
toonge. Now (most noble Prince) what need you hereafter to marueyle of the
spirit of Apollo so shaking his Sibylles with extreme fury? The spirit of
Apollo.
The Sibilles
You had thowght that the superstitious antiquity had peryshed. But now
whereas I have declared thus much of the Zemes in general, I thowght it not
good to let pass what is said of them in particular. They say therefore,
that a certain king cauled Guamaretus, I have hard the like of other in
England.
had a Zemes whose name was Corochotum: who (they say) was often times woonte
to descend from the hygheste place of the house where Guamaretus kept him
fast bound. They affirm, that the cause of this his breaking of his bands
and departure, was either to hyde him self, or to goo seek for meat, hungery
and ^echerous Gods.
or else for the act of generation: And that sumtymes being offended, that the
king Guamaretus had been negligent and slack in honouringe him, he was wont
to lie hyd for certain days. They say also that in the kings vylage there
are sumtyme children borne having two crowns which they suppose to be the
children of Corochotum the Zemes. Children with two crowns
They feign likewise, that Guamaretus being overcome of his enemies in the
battle, and his vylage with the palaice consumed with fire, Corochotus brake
his bands and was afterward found a furlonge of, safe and withowte hurt. He
has also an other Zemes cauled Epileguanita, made of woodde, in shape like a
four footed beast: who also is said, wanderinge Images.
often times to have gonne from the place where he is honored, in to the
wooddes. As soon as they perceive him to be gonne, a great multitude of them
gather together to seek him with devout prayers: And when they have fownde
him, bring him home religiously on their shulders to the chapel dedicated
unto him. But they coomplayne that sense the coming of the Christian men into
the Island, he fled for all together, and could never sense be found,
whereby they diuined the destruction of their country. They honored an other
Zemes in the lykenes of a woman, on whom waited two other like men, as they
were ministers to her. One of these, executed thoffice of a mediator to the
other Zemes which are under the power and commandment of this woman,
Mediators,
A woman zemes of great pour.
to raise wyndes, clouds, and rain. The other is also at her commandment a
messenger to the other Zemes which are joined with her in governance, to
gather together the waters which faule from the high hills to the valleys,
that being loosed, they may with force brust owte into great fluddes and
ouerflowe the country if the people do not give due honor to her Image.
There remains yet one thing worthy to be noted, wherewith we will make an
end of this book. It is a thing well known, and yet fresshe in memory
among the inhabitants of the Island, that there was sumetyme two kings (of
the which one was the father of Guarionexius of who^ we made mention before)
which were wont to absteyne five days together continually from meat and
drink, Five days fasting.
to know sumwhat of their Zemes of things to coome: A marvelous il^usion of
the devil.
And that for this fasting being acceptable to their Zemes, they received
answer of them, that within few years, there should coome to the Island a
nation of men covered with apparel, which should destroy all the customs and
cerymonyes of the Island. and either sley all their children, The devil sumtyme
tells truth.
or bring them into servitude. The common sort of the people, understood this
oracle to be mente of the Canibales. And therefore when they had any knowleage
of their coming, they ever fled, and were fully determined never more
thaduenture the battle with them. But when they saw that the Spanyardes had
entered into the Island, consultinge among them selves of the matter, they
concluded that this was the nation which was me^t by thoracle. The Idols
abolyshed.
Wherein, their opinion deceived them not. For they are now all subject to the
Christians, all such being slain as stoobernely resisted. Nor yet remains
there any memory of their Zemes: for they are al brought into Spain, that we
might be certified of their illusions of evil spirits and Idols, the which
you yowre self (most noble Prince) have seen and felt when I was present
with you. I let pass many things because you put me in remembrance that to
morrow you take yowre journey toward yowre country, to bring home the queen
yowre aunte, whom you accoompanyed hither at the commandment of king
Frederyke yowre uncle. Wherefore I bid you farewell for this time, desiring
you to remember yowre Martyr, whom you have compelled in the name of the
king yowre uncle, to gather these few things owte of a large feelde of
hystoryes.

The tenth and last book of the first decade, as a conclusion of the former
books: Written to Inacus Lopez Mendocius, county of Tendilla, and viceroye of
Granata.
AT the first beginning and new attempt, when Colonus had taken upon him
thenterpryse to search the Ocean sea, I was ernestly moved and required by the
letters of certain of my friends and noble men of Rome to write such things
as should happen. For they whyspered with great admiracion, that where as
there were many new lands found, and nations which lived naked and after the
law of nature, The Law of nature.
they could here no certentie thereof, being greatly desirous of the same.
In this mean time had fortune overthrown Ascanius (his brother Lodouike
being cast out of Mylayne by the frenchmen) whose authority would not suffer me
to be idle, Milayne in the hands of the frenchmen
but ever to have my pen in hand. To him I write the two first books of this
decade, beside many other of my hyd commentaries which you shall see
shortly. Fortune did no less withdraw my mind from writing, then
disturb Ascaniu^ from power. As he was tossed with contrary storms and ceased
to persuade me, even so slacked my feruentnes to inquire any further, until
the year of Christ.1500. When the court remained at Granata where you are
viceroye: At which time Lodouike the Cardinal of Aragonie, neuie to king
Frederike by his brothers side (being at Granata with the queen Parthenopea
the sister of owre catholic king) browght me king Frederikes letters, whereby
he exhorted me to fynyshe the other books which followed the two epistle
books, Epistel books
which I write to Ascanius. For they both acknowleaged that they had the
copy of all that I write to cardinal Ascanius. And albeit that even then I
was sick (as you know) yet took I the burden upon me, and applied my self
to writing. I have therefore chosen these few things, owte of a great heap
of such as seemed to me most worthy to be noted among the large wrytynges
of the autoures and searchers of the same. Wherefore, forasmuch as you have
endeavored to wreste out of my hands the hole exemple of al my works, to
add the same to the innumerable volumes of yowre library, I thowght it good
now to make a brief rehersall of those things which were done from that
year of a thowsande and five hundredth, The historye following, conteyneth the
acts of ten year.
even unto this year which is the tenth from that. For I entende to write more
largelye of these things hereafter, if god grant me life. I had written a
hole book by it self of the superstitions of the people of the Island,
supposinge therewith to have accomplyshed the hole Decade consistynge of ten
books. But I have added this to the tenthe as a perpendiculer line, and as it
were a back guide or rerewarde to the other: So that you may knytte the first
tenthe, to the nynthe, and impute this to occupy the place of the tenthe to
fill up the Decade. This order have I appointed, lest I should be compelled
often times to write over the hole work, or send you the same defaced with
blottes and interlynynge. But now let us coome to owre purpose. The ship
masters and maryners ran over many coasts during these ten years: But
ever followed such as were first fownde by Colonus. For rasinge continually
alonge by the tracte of Paria, Paria, part of the firm la^d of East India
which they believe to be part of the firm land or continent of east India,
sum of them chanced upon certain new lands toward the east, and sum
toward the weste, in which they fownde both goulde and frankensence. Gold
and frankensence.
For they browght from thense many jewels and ouches of gold, and great
plenty of frankensence, which they had of the people of those countries,
partly for exchange of sum of owre things, and partly by force, over
coming them by war. Yet in sum places, althowgh they be naked, The
fiercenes of the naked people.
they overcame owre men, and slew hole armies. For they are exceeding fierce,
and use venomous arrows, and long staves like iauelens, made hard at the
end with fire. They fownde many beasts, Innumerable beasts unlike unto owres.
both creepinge and four footed, much differinge from owres, variable and of
sundry shapes innumerable: yet not hurtflul, except Lions, Tigers, and
Crocodiles. This I mean in sundry Regions of that great land of Paria: but
not in the Islands: No not so much as one. For all the beasts of the
Islands, are meek and withowte hurt, Nothing hurtful in the Islands.
except men which (as we have said) are in many Islands deuourers of man's
flesh. There are also diverse kinds of fowls. And in many places battes of
such bygnes, that they are equal with turtle doves. Battes as bygge as turtle
doves.
These battes, have often times assauted men in the night in their sleep, and
so bytten them with their venomous teethe, that they have been thereby almost
driven to madness, in so much that they have been compelled to fly from such
places, as from ravenous harpies. In an other place, where certain of them
slepte in the night season on the sands by the sea side, a monster coming
owte of the sea, A man devoured of a monster of the sea
came upon one of them secreatly and carried him away by the myddeste owte of
the sight of his fellows to whom he cried in vain for help until the beast
lepte into the sea with her pray. It was the kings pleasure that they should
remain in these lands, The Spanyardes profer them selves to subdue the new
lands.
and build towns and fortresses. Where unto they were so well willing, that
diverse proffered them selves to take upon them the subduing of the land,
making great suit to the king that they might be appointed thereto. The coaste
of this tracte is exceadynge great and large: and the Regions and lands
thereof extend marvelous far: Note the largenes of the new lands.
So that they affirm the continent of these Regions with the Islands abowte
the same, to be thryse as bygge as al Europe, beside those lands that the
Portugales have fownde southwarde, which are also exceadynge large. Therefore
doubtless Spain has deserved great praise in these owre days,
Commendacion of the Spaniardes.
in that it has made known unto us so many thowsandes of Antipodes which
leye hyd before and unknown to owre forefathers: Antipodes.
And has thereby mynystred so large matter to write of, to such learned wits
as are desirous to set furthe knowleage to the commodity of men: to whom I
opened away when I gathered these things rudely to gyther as you see: The
which, nevertheless I trust you will take in good part, as well for that I
can not adourne my rudenes with better vesture, The autours excusse.
as also that I never took pen in hand to write like an historiographer,
but only by epistels scribeled in haste, to satisfy them, from whose
commandments I might not draw back my foot. But now I have digressed
enowghe. Let us now therefore return to Hispaniola. Hispaniola.
Owre men have found by experience, that the bread of the Island is of smaule
strength to such as have been used to owr bread made of wheat: And that their
strenthes were much decayed by using of the same, Wherefore the king has of
late commanded that wheat should be sown there in diverse places and at
sundry times of the year. The nature of the place, alters the forms and
qualities of things. Wheat. herbs. Catayle,
It grows into holowe reeds, with few ears, but those very bygge and
fruitful. They find the like softenes or delicatenes to be in herbs, which
grow there to the height of corn. Neat or cattall, becoome of bygger stature
and exceadynge fat, but their flesh is more unsavory, and their bones (as
they say) either withowte marye, or the same to be very waterysshe. But of
hogs and swyne, hogs.
they affirm the contrary, that they are more holsoome and of better taste,
by reason of certain wild fruits which they eat, being of much better
nooryshement then maste. There is almost none other kind of flesh commonly
soulde in the market. The multitude of hogs, are excedingly increased,, and
becoome wild as soon as they are owte of the swyneheardes keepynge. They have
such plenty of beasts and fowls, Plenty of beasts and fou^e.
that they shall heareafter have no need, to have any brought from other
places. Thincrease of all beasts, grow bygger then the brood they came of,
by reason of the rankenes of the pasture, althowgh their feadynge be only of
grass, withowte either barley or other grain. But we have said enowgh of
Hispaniola. They have now fownde that Cuba, Cuba, is an Island.
(which of long time they thowght to have been firm land for the great
length thereof) is an Island. Yet is it no marvel that thinhabitantes them
selves towlde owre men when they searched the length thereof, that it was
withowte end. For this nation being naked and content with a little, and with
the limittes of their own country, is not greatly curyous to know what their
neighbors do, or the largenes of their dominion. Nor yet knew they if there
were any other thing under heaven, beside that which they walked on with
their feet. Cuba, The description of Cuba.
is from the East into the Weste, much longer then Hispaniola: And in
breadthe from the North to the Southe, much less then they supposed at the
first: for it is very narowe in respect to the length: And is for the most
part, very fruitful and pleasant. Eastwarde not far from Hispaniola, there
lyethe an Island, less then Hispaniola more then by the half, which owre men
cauled Sancti Iohannis, The Island of Burichema or S. Iohannis.
being in manner square. In this they found exceeding rich gold mines. But
being now occupied in the gold mines of Hispaniola,, Gold mines
they have not yet sent laborers in to that Island. But the plenty and
reuenewe of gold of al other Regions, give place to Hispaniola, where they
give them selves in manner to none other thing then to gather gold, The order
of woorkynge in the gold mines.
of which work this order is appointed. To every such wyttie and skylfull man
as is put in trust to be a suruoier or ouerseer of these works, there is
assigned one or more kings of the Island with their subjects. The kings
bring their subjects to work in the gold mines.
These kings according to their league, coome with their people at certain
times of the year, and resort every of them to the gold mine to the which he
is assigned: where they have all manner of dygginge or myninge tools delivered
them: And every king with his men, have a certain reward allowed them for
their labor. For when they depart from the mines to sowynge of corn, and
other tyllage (whereunto they are addict at certain other times, Tyllage.
least their food should fail them) they receive for their labor, one a
ierken, or a dublet, an other a sherte, an other a cloak or a cappe. For they
now take pleasure in these things, and goo no more naked as they were wont
too do. And thus they use the help and labor of the inhabitants both for
the tyllage of their ground, and in their gold mines as thowghe they were their
servants or bondemen. They bear this yoke of servitude with an evil will:
but yet they bear it. They caul these hired laborers, Anaborias. Yet the
king does not suffer that they should be used as bondemen: And only at his
pleasure they are set at liberty or appointed to work. At such time as
they are cauled together of their kings to work (as soldiers or pioners are
assembled of their centurians) many of them stele away to the mountains and
wooddes, where they lie luckynge, They abhor labor
being content for that time to live with wyld fruits, rather then take the
pains to labor. They are docible and apt to learn, They are docible.
and have now utterly forgotten their owlde supersticions. They believe godly,
and bear well in memory such things as they have learned of owre faith. Their
kings children are brought up with the chiefest of owre men, The kings
children.
and are instructed in letters and good manners. When they are grown to man's
age, they send them home to their countries to be exemple to other, and
especially to govern the people if their fathers be dead that they may the
better set forth the Christian Religion, and keep their subjects in love
and obedience. By reason whereof, they coome now by fair means and gentell
persuasions to the mines which lie in two Regions of the Island about thirty
miles distante from the city of Dominica: whereof the one is cauled Sancti
Christophori: The two chief gold myres of hispaniola.
And the other being distante about four score and ten miles, is cauled
Cibaua, not far from the chief haven cauled Portus Regalis. These regions
are very large: In the which in many places here and there, are fownd sumtyme
even in the upper crust of the earth and sumtyme among the stones, Gold
found in the upper part of the earth.
certain round pieces or plates of gold, sumtyme of smaule quantity, and in
sum places of great weight: In so much that there has been found round pieces
of three hundredth pound weight, and one of three thousand, three hundredth and
ten pound weight: A piece of gold weighinge three thousand three hundredth
and ten pounds. A coastly shipwrake.
The which (as you hard) was sent hole to the king in that ship in the
which the governor Boadilla was coming home into Spain, the ship with all
the men being drowned by the way, by reason it was over laden with the weight
of gold and multitude of men. Albeit, there were moo then a thowesande persons
which saw and handeled the piece of gold. And whereas here I speak of a
pound, I do not mean the common pound, but the sum of the ducate of
gold, with the coin cauled Triens, which is the third part of a pound,
which they caul Pesus. Pesus.
The sum of the weight hereof, the Spanyardes caul Castellanum Aureum. All the
gold that is dygged in the mountains of Cibaua and Port Regale, The fynynge
and (...) of go^de.
is carried to the tower of Conception, where shoppes with all things
apperteyninge are ready furnysshed to fine it, melte it, and cast it into
wedges. That done, they take the kings portion thereof, which is the fyfte
part, and so restore to every man his own which he got with his labor.
But the gold which is fownde in saint Christophers mine and the Region there
about, is carried to the shoppes which are in the vylage cauled Bonauentura.
In these two shoppes, is molten yearly, above three hundredth thousand pound
weight of gold. Three hundredth thousand weight of gold molten yearly (...)
^ispaniola.
If any man be known deceatefully to keep back any portion of gold,
whereof he has not made the kings officers pryuie, he forfiteth the same for
a fine. There chance among them often times many contentions and
controversies, Controuerses
the which unless the magistrates of the Island do fynysshe, the ease is
removed by applelation to the high counsel of the court, from whose
sentence it is not lawful to appele in all the dominions of Castyle. But let
us now return to the new lands from whense we have digressed. The new
lands.
They are innumerable, diverse, and exceadynge fortunate. Wherefore the
Spanyardes in these owre days, and their noble enterpryses, The Spanyardes
noble enterpryses. are not inferior to the acts of hercules or Saturnus. etc.
do not give place either to the factes of Saturnus, or Hercules, or any other
of the ancient princes of famous memory which were canonized among the gods
cauled Heroes for their searchinge of new lands and regions, and bringinge
the same to better culture and civility. Oh God: how large and far shall
owre posterity see the Christian Religion extended? Enlarging of the Christian
Religion
How large a camp have they now to wander in, which by the true nobility
that is in them, or moved by virtue, will attempt either to deserve like
praise among men, or reputacion of well doing before god. What I conceive in
my mind of these things, The original of true nobility.
I am not able to express with pen or tongue. I will now therefore so make
an end of this perpendiculer conclusion of the hole Decade, as myndinge
hereafter to search and gather every thing particulerlye, that I may at
further leisure write the same more at large. For Colonus the Admiral with
four ships, and a hundredth threescore and ten men appointed by the king,
discovered in the year of Christ.1520. the land over ageynste the weste
corner ^f Cuba, distant from the same about a hundredth and thirty leaques: In
the myddest of which tracte, lies an Island cauled Guanassa. The Island of
Guanassa
From hense he directed his vyage backewarde toward the East by the shore of
that coast, supposinge that he should have found the coasts of Paria: but it
chanced otherwise. It is said also that Vincentius Agnes (of whom we have
spoken before) and one Johannes Diaz (with diverse other of whose vyages I have
as yet no certain knowleage) have over run those coasts. The vyage of
Johannes Diaz.
But if God grant me life, I trust to know the truth hereof and to advertise
you of the same. Thus fare ye well.

The second Decade follows.
THE FIRST BOOK OF THE SECOND Decade, to Leo bishop of Rome, the tenthe of
that name, of the supposed Continent or firm land.
SENSE the time that Galeatius Butrigarius of Bononie, and Johannes Cursius of
Florence (most holy father) came to the catholyke king of Spain, the one,
of yowre holiness ambasage, and the other for thaffaires of his common wealth, I
was ever for the most part in their coompanie, and for their virtues and
wysedoome, had them in great reverence. And whereas they were greatly given to
study, and continual reuoluinge of diverse autours, they chanced upon
certain books negligently let slyppe owte of my hands, entreatinge of the
large lands and Regions hitherto lyinge hyd, and almost west Antipodes, west
Antipodes.
fownde of late by the Spanyardes. Yet being allured and delited with the
newenes and strangenes of the matter althowgh rudely adourned, they commended
the same: Therewith ernestely desyringe me in their own names, and requyring me
in the name of yowr holiness, to add here unto all such things as were fownde
after that time, and to give them a copy thereof to send to yowre holiness,
that you might thereby understand, both how great commodity is chanced to
the progenye of mankind, as also increase of the militante congregation in
these owre days, The ^ncrea^e of the Christian congregation.
by the fortunate enterpryses of the kings of Spain. For like as rased or
vnpaynted tables, are apt to receive what forms so ever are first drawn
thereon by the hand of the paynter, even so these naked and simple people, do
soon receive the customs of owre Religion, and by conversation with owre men,
shake of their fierce and native barbarousnes. I have thowght it good therefore
to satisfy the request of these wise men, especially vsinge thautoritie of
yowre name, whereunto not to have obeyed, I should esteem my self to have
committed a heinous offense. Wherefore I will now brefely rehearse in order,
what hyd coasts the Spanyardes ouerranne, who were the autours thereof, where
they rested, what further hope they browght, and fynallye what great things
those tractes of lands do promise in time to coome. In the declaration of my
decade of the Ocean, which is now printed and dispersed throwghowte
Christendom unawares to me, I described how Christophorus Colonus fownde those
Islands whereof we have spoken, Christophorus Colonus.
and that turnynge from thense toward the left hand southwarde, he chanced
into great regions of lands, and large seas, distant from the Equinoctial
line, only from five degrees to ten: Of lands distante from the
Equinoctial from five degrees to ten.
where he found broad ryuers and exceadinge high mountains covered with snow
and hard by the sea banks, where were many commodious and quiet havens. But
Colonus being now departed owte of this life, The death of Colonus.
the king began to take care, how those lands might be inhabited with
Christian men to thincrease of owre faith: Where upon he gave license by his
letters patentes to al such as would take the matter in hand, A general
license.
and especially to two, whereof Diego Nicuesa was one, and the other was
Alphonsus Fogeda. The navigations of Alphonsus Fogeda.
Wherefore about the Ides of December, Alphonsus departinge first with three
hundredth soldiers from the Island of Hispaniola (in the which we said the
Spanyardes had builded a city, and planted their habitacion) and saylynge in
manner full southe, he came to one of the havens found before which Colonus
named Portus Carthaginis, Portus Carthaginis.
both because of the Island standing ageynste the course of the stream, and
also that by reason of the largenes of the place and bendynge sides, it is
much like to the haven of Spain cauled Carthago. Thinhabitantes caul the
Island Codego, as the Spanyardes caul the Island of their haven, Scombria.

This Region is cauled of the inhabitants Caramairi: The Region of Caramairi*
In the which they affirm both the men and women to be of goodly stature,
People of goodly stature
but naked. The men have their hear cut rownde by their ears, but the women
were it long. Both the men and women are very good archers. Owre men fownde
certain trees in this province, which bore great plenty of sweet apples, but
hurteful, for they turn into worms when they are eaten. Apples which turn
into woo^mes.
Especially the shadow of the tree, A tree whose shadow is hurtful.
is contagious, for such as sleep under it any time, have their headdes
swollen and lose their sight. But if they sleep but a while, their sight
comes again after a few days. This port is dystant four hundredth fyftie
and six miles from that part of Hispaniola which the Spanyardes caul Beata,
in the which also they furnysshe them selves when they prepare any vyage to
seek other new lands. When Fogeda had entered into the haven, Fogeda his
authority confirmed by the kings letters patents.
he invaded, slew, and spoiled the people, whom he found naked and
scattered. For they were given him for a pray, by the kings letters patentes
because they had bin before time cruel against the Christians, and could
never be allured to permytte them quietly to coome within their dominions.
Here they found gold, but in no great quantity, nor yet that pure. They make
of it, certain breast plates and brooches, which they wear for coomelynes. But
Fogeda not content with these spoils, vsinge certain captives which he had
taken before, for guydes, entered into a vyllage twelve miles distante from
the sea side further into the land, into the which they were fled whom he
first invaded. warlyke people.
Here he found a naked people, but apt to war. For they were armed with
targettes, shieldes, long swoordes made of wood, and bows with arrows typte
with bone, or hardened with fire. As soon as they had espied owre men, they
with their gestes whom they had received, assailed them with desperate minds,
being thereto more ernestly provoked, beholding the calamity of these which
fled unto them, by the violence done to their women and children, in the
spoil and slawghter. In this conflicte owre men had the otherthrowe: The
Spanyardes have the ou^rthrowe.
In the which, one Johannes de Lacossa (being in authority next unto Fogeda
the captain, and also the first that gathered gold in the sands of Vraba)
was slain with fyftie soldiers. For these people infecte their arrows with
the deadly poison of a certain herb. Arrows infected with poison.
The other with their captain Fogeda being discomfited, fled to the
ships. While they remained thus in the haven of Carthago sorrowful and
pensive for the loss of their companions, the other captain Diego Nicuesa,
The navigations of Diego Nicuesa.
(whom they left in Hispaniola, preparyng him self toward the vyage in the
haven Beata) came to them with five ships and seven hundrethe four score
and fyfteene men. For the greater number of souldyers, followed Nicuesa, both
because free liberty was given them to choose which of the capytaynes them
list, and also that by reason of his age, he was of greater authority: But
especially because the rumoure was that Beragua being by the kings commission
appointed to Nicuesa, The regions of vraba and ^eragua.
was rycher in gold then Vraba assigned to Alphonsus Fogeda. Therefore, at the
arryuall of Nicuesa, they consulted what was best to be done: And determined
first to revenge the death of their fellows. Where upon, setting their
battle in arraye, they marched in the night toward them which slew Cossa
with his coompanyons, The Spanyardes revenge the death of their companyons.
Thus stealing on them unawares in the last watch of the night, and
encoompasinge the vyllage where they lay, consistynge of a hundredth howses and
more, having also in it thryse as many of their neighbors as of them selves,
they set it on fire, with diligent watch that none might escape. And thus in
short time they browght them and their howses to ashes, and made them pay
the ransom of bludde with bludde. A great slawghter.
For of a great multitude of men and women, they spared only six children,
al other being destroyed with fire or sword except few which escaped priuilye.
They learned by the reserved children, that Cossa and his fellows were cut in
pieces and eaten of them that slew them. By reason whereof, they suppose that
these people of Caramairi took their original of the Caribes otherwise cauled
Canibales. Canibales.
Here they found sum gold among the ashes. For the hunger of gold, The
hunger of gold.
did no less encorage owr men to adventure these perels and labors then did
the possessynge of the lands. These things thus fynysshed, and the death of
Cossa and his fellows revenged, they returned to the haven. After this, Fogeda
which came first, first likewise departinge with his army to seek Vraba,
committed to his governance, sailed by an Island cauled Fortis, The Island
Fo^tis.
lyinge in the mydwaye between Vraba and the haven of Carthago. In to the which
descendinge, he fownde it to be an Island of the Canybales, brynginge with him
from thense two men and seven women: for the residue escaped. Here he fownde
in the cotages of them that fled, a hundrethe four score and ten drammes
of gold, cast and wrought in diverse forms. wrought gold
Saylynge forward from hense, he came to the East coasts of Vraba, which
thinhabitantes caul Caribana, Caribana.
from whense the Caribes or Canibales of the Islands are said to have their
name and original. Here he began to build a fortress, and a vyllage nere
unto the same, therein intending to place their first habitacion. Shortly
after, being instructed by certain captyues that there was about twelve
miles further within the land, a certain vyllage cauled Tirufi, having in it
a rich gold mine, A gold mine.
he determined to destroy the vylage. To the which when he came, he fownde
thinhabitantes redye to defend their right: The Spanyardes are repulsed.
And that so stoutly, that encounteryng with them, he was repulsed with shame
and damage. For these people also, use bows and venomous arrows. within a
few days after, being enforsed for lack of vytales to invade an other
vyllage, he him self was stryken in the thyghe with an arrowe. Fogeda i^
wounded.
Sum of his fellows say, that he was thus wounded of one of thinhabytantes
whose wife he had led away captive before. They say also that he had first
friendly comoned with Fogeda for redemynge of his wife, and had appointed a day
to bring a portion of gold for her ransom: Ransom.
And that he came at the day assigned, not laden with gold, but armed with
bows and arrows, with eight other confetherate with him, which had bin
before partetakers of the injuries done to them first at the haven of
Carthago, and afterward at the burning of the vyllage. In revenge whereof they
had desperately consecrated them selves to death. But the matter being known,
the captain of this conspiracy was slain of Fogeda his coompanyons, and his
wife deteyned in captivity. Fogeda also throwgh the maliciousnes of the
veneme, consumed and was dried up by little and little. While these things
chanced thus, they espied Nicuesa the other captain to whom Baragua the
region of the weste side of Vraba, Fogeda consumes by force of the Beragua and
Uraba.
was assigned to inhabit. He gave wind to his sails to take his vyage
toward Beragua, the day after that Fogeda departed owte of the haven of
Car^hago. Nicuesa.
He with his army which he browght with him, coasted ever alonge by the shore
until he came to the goulfe Coiba, The goulfe Coiba.
whose kings name is Careta. Here he found their language to be in manner
nothing like unto that of Hispaniola or of the haven of Carthago: whereby he
perceived that in this tracte there are many languages differinge from their
own bortherers. Diverse languages.
Nicuesa departinge from Coiba, went to the province or Lieuetenauntshippe of
Fogeda his companion. Within a few days after he him self enteringe into one
of those merchant ships which the Spanyardes caul Carauelas, commanded
that the bygger vessels, should follow far behind. He took with him two
smaule ships commenly cauled bergantines or brygantynes. Bergantines or
briga^t^nes.
I have thowght it good in all the discourse of these books, to use the common
names of things, because I had rather be plain then curious: especially
forasmuch as there do daily arise many new things unknown to the
antiquity, whereof they have left no true names. After the departure of
Nicuesa, there came a ship from Hispaniola to Fogeda, the captain whereof,
was one Barnardino de Calauera, Barnardino de (...).
who had stoulne the same from Hispaniola with three score men, withowte leave
or advice of the Admiral and the other governors. With the vytayles which
this ship browg^t they refresshed them selves and sumewhat recovered their
strengthes much weakened for lack of meat, Fogeda his companyons whyspered
and muttered ageynste him daily more and more, that he fed them furthe with
vain hope. For he had towlde them that he left Ancisus in Hispaniola (who^ he
chose by the kings commission to be a Judge in causes, Ancisus.
because he was learned in the law) to coome shortly after him with a ship
laden with vytayles: And that he marueyled that he was not coome many days
sense. And herein he said nothing but truth. For when he departed, he left
Ancisus half ready to follow him. But his fellows supposinge that all that he
said of Ancisus had been feigned, sum of them determined privily to steal
away the two brigantynes from Fogeda, and to return to Hispaniola. But
Fogeda having knowleage hereof, prevented their divise. For leaving the
custody of the fortress with a certain noble gentelman cauled Francisco
Pizarro, he him self thus wounded, with a few other in his company, entered
into the ship whereof we spoke before, and sailed directly to Hispaniola,
Fogeda returns to hispaniola.
both to heal the wound of his thygh if any remedy might be found, and also
to know what was the cause of Ancisus taryinge: Leaving hope with his fellows
(which were now browght from three hundredth to three score, partly by famyne
and partly by war) that he would return within the space of.xv. days: Famyne
prescribyng also a condition to Pizarro and his companions, that it should not
be imputed to them for treason to depart from thense if he came not again at
the day appointed with vytayles and a new supply of men. These.xv. days
being now paste, whereas they could yet hear nothing of Fogeda, and were
daily more and more oppressed with sharp hunger, they entered into the two
brigantynes which were left, and departed from that land. And as they were
now saylynge on the main sea toward Hispaniola, a tempeste soodeynly
arysynge, A brigantine drowned with the stroke of a fyshe.
swalowed one of the brygantynes with all that were therein. Sum of their
fellows affirm that they plainly saw a fyshe of houge greatenes swimming
abowte the brygantyne (for those seas bring furthe great monsters) and that
with a stroke of her tail, she broke the rudder of the ship in pieces:
which faylynge, the brigantine being driven about by force of the tempest, was
drowned not far from the Island cauled Fortis, The Island Fortis.
lyinge between the coasts of the haven Carthago and Vraba. As they of the
other brygantyne would have landed in the Island, they were driven back with
the bows and arrows of the fierce barbarians. Proceadynge therefore on their
vyage, they met by chance with Ancisus between the haven of Carthago,
Ancisus.
and the Region of Cuchibacoa in the mouth of the river which the Spanyardes
cauled Boiu^ gatti, The Region of Cuchibacoa.
Boiu^ gatti.
that is, the house of the catte, because they saw a catte first in that
place: and Boium, in the toonge of Hispaniola, is a house. Ancisus came with a
ship laden with all things necessary, both for meat and drink, and
apparel, bringing also with him an other brigantine. This is he for whose
coming the captain Fogeda looked for so long. He loosed anchor from
Hispaniola in the Ides of September: And the fourth day after his departure, he
espied certain high mountains, Mountains covered with snow.
the which for the abundance of snow which lies continually in the tops
thereof, the Spanyardes cauled Serra Neuata, Serra Neuata.
when Colonus the first fynder of those Regions passed by the same. The fyfte
day, he sailed by O^ Draconis. Os Draconis.
They which were in the brygantyne, towlde Ancisus that Fogeda was returned to
Hispaniola. But Ancisus supposing that they had feigned that tale, commanded
them by thautoritie of his commission to turn back again. The brigantiners
obeyed and followed him: yet made they humble suit unto him that he woolde
grant them that with his favor they might either goo again to Hispaniola,
or that he him self woolde bring them to Nicuesa: And that they woolde for
his gentelnes declared toward them in this behalf, reward him with two
thousand drammes of gold. For they were rich in gold, but poor in bread.
Rich in gold and pore in bread.
But Ancisus assented to neither of their requests: affirmynge that he might
by no means goo any other way then to Vraba the province assigned to Fogeda.
Where upon, by their conduct, he took his vyage directly toward Vraba. But
now let it not seem tedious to yowre holiness to hear of one thing worthy to
be remembered, which chanced to this Lieuetenaunt Ancisus as he came thither.
For he also cast anchor in the coasts of the region of Caramairi which we
said to be famous by reason of the haven of Carthago: The Region of Caramairi
and of the goodly stature, strength, and beawty of both men and women being
in the same. Here he sent certain to goo alande on the shore, both to fetch
fresshe water, and also to repair the ship boat which was sore broosed. In
this mean time A great multitude of the people of the country armed after
their manner, Fear on both parts.
came about owre men as they were occupied abowte their busynes, and stood in
a redynes to feight, for the space of three days contynually: during which
time, neither durst they set upon owre men, nor owre men assail them. Thus
both parties keepynge their arraye, stood still three hole days the one
gasynge on the other. Yet all this time owre men applied their work, placinge
the shippewrightes in the myddeste of their army. Ship w^yghtes.
As they stood thus amassed, two of owre coompanye went to fill their water
pottes at the mouth of the river nere unto them both, where soodenly there
came furthe ageynste them a captain of the barbarians with ten armed men
which enclosed them, and with terrible countenance bent their arrows ageynste
them, but shot them not of. One of owre men fled: but the other remained,
caulynge his fellow again and rebukynge him for his fearefulnes. Then he spoke
to the barbarians in their own language which he had learned being conversant
with the captives that were carried from thense long before. They marueylynge
to here a stranger speak in their native tongue, put of their fiercenes and
fell to friendly communication, demaundinge who were the capitaynes of that
coompanie which were arrived in their land. He answered that they were
strangers passing by: And that he marueyled why they would attempt to drive
them from their coasts and disturb their ships: arguinge them of follye
and cruelty, and further threatinge their ruin and destruction, except they
woold use them selves more frendely toward them. For he advertised them that
there would shortly coome into their land armed men, in number like to the
sands of the sea: And that to theyrter destruction, not only if they resysted
them not, but also except they received them and enterteyned them honorably.
In the mean time Ancisus was informed that his men were deteyned. Wherefore
suspectinge sum deceate, he browght forth al his target men for fear of their
venomous arrows: The use of targettes agenst venomous arrows.
And settinge them in battle arraye, he marched forward toward them which
steyed his men. But he which communed with the barbarians, gyuinge him a sign
with his hand to proceed no further, he steyed. And cauling to him the other,
he knew that all was safe. For the barbarians proffered him peace, because they
were not they whom they suspected them to have been: meaning by Fogeda and
Nicu^sa, who had spoiled the vyllage standinge there by the sea side, and
carried away many captives, and also burnte an other vyllage further within the
land. And therefore (as they said) the cause of their coming thither, was
to revenge those injuries, if by any means they could. The barbarian^ have
respect to justice
Yet that they woolde not exercise their weapons ageynste the innocente. For
they said it was ungodly to feyght against any, not being provoked.

Layinge a part therefore their bows and arrows, they enterteyned owre men
gentelly, and gave them great plenty of salted fysshe and bread of their
country: Salted fi^he.
And filled their vessels with syder made of their country fruits and seeds,
wine of fr^t^s and see^es.
not inferior to wine in goodness. Thus Ancisus having entered into frendshyp
and made a league of peace with thinhabitantes of Caramairi which were before
sore provoked by other capitaynes, he lanched from that land, and directed his
course to Vraba by the Island Fortis, Vr^^a.
having in his ship a hundredth and fyftie fresshe men which were substitute
in the place of such as were dead. Also twelve mates, and many swine, and
other beasts both males and females for increase. Likewise, Art^ller^e.
fyftie pieces of ordinance, with a great multitude of targettes, swoordes,
iauelyns, and such other weapons for the wars. But all this with evil speed
and in an evil hour. For as they were even now enteringe into the haven,
Ancisus ship w^acke.
the governor of the ship which satte at the helm, stroke the ship upon
the sands, where it was so fast enclosed, and beaten with the waves of the
sea, that it opened in the myddes^e, and al lost that was therein. A thing
surely miserable to behold. For of all the vytayles that they had, they saved
only twelve barels of meal, with a few chieses, and a little bysket bread.
Meal. chee^es, and bysket.
For all the beasts were drowned: And they them selves escaped hardly and half
naked by help of the brigantine and ship boat, caryeng with them only a few
weapons. Thus they fell from one calamity into an other, being now more
careful for their lives then for gold. Yet being browght alive and in health
to that land which they so greatly desired, they could do no less then to
provide for the susteynynge of their bodies, because they could not live only
by air. And whereas their own failed, they must needs live by other men's. Yet
among these so many adversities, one good chance offered it self unto them.
For they found, not far from the sea side, a grove of date trees, A grove of
date trees.
among the which, and also among the reke or weeds of the maryshes, they
espied a multitude of wild bores, wild bores.
with whose flesh they fed the selves well certain days. These they say to
be less then owres: And with so short tails, that they thought they had
been cut of. They dyffer also from owres in their feet: for their hinder
feet are hole undivided, and also withowte any houfe. But they affirm that
they have proved by experience their flesh to be of better taste and more
holsoome then owres. During this time, they fed also of dates and the rotes
of young date trees, which they eat like wise in Civil and Granata where
they caul them Palmitos, of the leaves whereof they make biesomes in Rome.
Sumetymes also, they eat of the appels of that Region, Apples of a strange kind
which have the taste of prunes, and have also stones in them, and are but
little and of read color. I suppose them to be of that kind whereof I eat
in the city of Alexandria in Egypt in the month of Aprell: The trees whereof,
the Jews that dwell there, being learned in the law of Moses, affirm to be
the Ceders of Libane, Ceders of Libane.
which bear owlde fruits and new all the year as does the orange tree.
These apples are good to be eaten, and have a certain sweetness myxte with a
gentell sharpnes, as have the fruits cauled Sorbes. Sorbes are cauled in french
Cou^^er they grow not in England.
Thinhabitantes plant these trees in their orchyardes and garedens, and
nooryshe them with great diligence as we do cheries, peaches, and quynses.
This tree in leaves, heyght, and trunk, is very like unto the tree that
bears the fruit cauled Zizipha, which the Apothecaries caul Iuiuba. But
whereas now the wild bores began to fail them, they were again enforced to
consulte and provide for the time to coome. Where upon with their hole army,
they entered further into the land. The Canibales of this province, are most
expert archers. The fruit cauled ^i^ipha or Iuiuba Canibales.
Ano^sus had in his coompany, a hundredth men. They met by the way with only
three men of thinhabitantes, naked, Men of desperate boldness.
and armed with bows and venomous arrows, who without al fear, assailed owr
men fiercely, wounded many, and slew many: And when they had emptied their
quyuers, fled as swyftely as the wind: For (as we have said) they are
exceeding swyfte of foot by reason of their loose goinge from their chyldes
age They affirm that they let slyppe no arrowe owte of their bows in vain.
Owre men therefore returned the same way that they came, much more unfortunate
then they were before and consulted among them selves to leave that land:
especyally because thinhabitantes had overthrown the fortress which Fogeda
builded, and had burnte thirty houses of the vyllage, as soon as Pizarrus and
his company left of Fogeda, had forsaken the land. By this occasion
therefore, being driven to seek further, they had intelligence that the weste
side of that goulfe of Vraba, The goulfe of Uraba.
was more fruitful and better to inhabit. Wherefore, they sent the one half
of their men thither with the brigantine, and left the other nere to the sea
side on the east p^rt. This goulfe, is.xxiiii. miles in breadth: And how much
the further it enters into the firm land, it is so much the narower. Into
the goulfe of Vraba, there faule many ryuers: but one (as they say) more
fortunate then the river of Nilus in Egypt. This river is cauled Darien,: The
great river of Darie^, fauleth into the goulfe of Uraba.
upon the banks whereof, being very fruitful of trees and grass, they
intended to playnte their new colonie or habitacion. But thinhabitantes
maruelynge at the brygantine being bygger then their canoas, and specially at
the sails thereof, first sent away their children and weakeste sort of their
people with their baggage and household stuff, and assembled all such
together both men and women, as were meet for the wars: Thus being armed
with weapons and desperate minds, they stood in a redynes to feight, and
tarried the coming of owre men upon a little hyl, as it were to take
thaduantage of the ground. Owre men judged them to be about five hundredth in
number. Then Ancisus the captain of owre men, and Lieuetenaunt in the steed
of Fogeda, settinge his men in order of battle array, and with his hole
coompany kneelinge on his knees, they al made humble prayers to god for the
victory, and a vow to the Image of the blessed virgin which is honored in
Civil, Prayer and vows.
by the name of Sancta Maria Antiqua, promysinge to send her many golden
gifts and a stranger of that country: also to name the vyllage Sancta Maria
Antiqua after her name: likewise to ^erecte a temple cauled by the same name:
or at the least to dedicate the king of that province his palaice to that use,
if it should please her to assiste them in this dangerous enterprise. This
done, all the soldiers took an oath, The soldiers make an oath.
that no man should turn his back to his enemies. Then the capytayne
commaundinge them to be in a redines with their targets and iauelens, and the
trumpyter to blow the battle, they fiercely a^sayled their enemies with a
larome. But the naked barbarians, not long able to abide the force of owre
men, were put to flight, The barbarians are driven to flight.
with their king and captain Cemaccus. Owre men entered into the vyllage,
where they fownde plenty of meat such as the people of the country use,
sufficient to assuage their present hunger, as bread made of roots, with
certain fruits unlike unto owres, which they reserve for store as we do
chestnuttes. Chestnuttes.
Of these people, the men are utterly naked: but the women from the navel
downewarde, are covered with a fine clothe made of gossampine cotton. This
Region is utterly withowte any sharpenes of winter. For the mouth of this
river of Darien, is only eight degrees distante from the Equinoctial line:
The river of Darien, but viii. degrees from the Equinoctial.
So that the commone sort of owre men, scarsely perceive any difference in
length between the day and night all the hole year. But because they are
ignorant in astronomy, they can perceive no smaule difference. Therefore we
need not much pass if the degree do differ sum what from their opinion, for
as much as the difference can not be great. The day after that they arrived
at the land* they sailed alonge by the river, where they found a great
thicket of reeds continuinge for the space of a mile in length supposing (as
it chanced in deed) that the bortherers there about which had fled, had
either line lurkynge there, or else to have hyd their stuff among those
reeds: Where upon, armynge them selves with their targettes, Gold found in
a thicket of reeds.
for fear of the people lyinge in ambusshe, they searched the thicket
dilygently, and found it withowte men, but replenyshed with householde st^ffe
and gold. They fownde also a great multitude of sheets, made of the sylke or
cotton of the gossampine tree. Sheets of gossampine.
Likewise diverse kinds of vessels and tools made of woodde, and many of
earth: Also many breast plates of gold and ouches wrought after their manner,
Breast plates of gold.
to the sum of a hundredth and two pound weight. For they also take pleasure
in the beauty of gold, and work it very artificially, although it be not the
price of things among them as with us. They have it owte of other Regions for
exchange of such things as their country brings furthe. For such Regions
as have plenty of bread and gossampine, lack gold: And such as bring
forth gold, are for the most part rowght with montaynes and rocks, and
therefore baren. The golden Reg^on^ are for the most pa^te baren.
And thus they exercise marchandies withowte the use of money. Rejoicing
therefore with double gladdenes, as well in that they saw great lykenes of
gold, as also that fortune had offered them so fair and fruitful a
country, they sent for their fellows who^ they had left before in the east
side of the goulfe of Vraba, Yet sum say that the air is there unwholesome,
because that part of the Region lyethe in a low valley environed with
mountains and marysshes.

The second book of the second decade, of the supposed continente.
I Have described to yowre holiness where Fogeda with his coompany (to whom the
large tractes of Vraba was assigned to inhabit) intended to fasten there
foot. Fogeda, the Lieuetenaunt of Uraba.
Let us now therefore leave them of Vraba for a while, and return again to
Nicuesa to whom the governance and Lieuetenaunteshippe of the most large
province of Beragua (being the weste side of the goulfe of Vraba) was
appointed. Nicuesa the Lieuetenaunt of Beragua.
We have declared how Nicuesa departinge with one carauell and two
brigantines from Vraba the jurisdiction of his friend and companyon Fogeda,
directed his course westwarde to Beragua, leauinge the bygger ships sumewhat
behind him, Nicuesa lost his fellows in the night.
to follow him a far of. But he took this divise in an evil hour. For he
both lost his fellows in the night, and went past the mouth of the river of
Beragua, which he chiefly sowght. One Lupus Olanus a Cantabrian, Lupus Olanus
and gouernoure of one of the great ships, had the conducte of one of the
brigantines. He coming behind, learned of thinhabitantes which was the way
Eastewarde to the goulfe of Beragua over passed and left behind of Nicuesa.
Olanus therefore directinge his course toward the East, met with the other
brigantine which had also wandered owte of the way by reason of the darkness of
the night. The governor of this brigantine, was one Petrus de Vmbria. Petrus
de vmbria
Thus both being glad of their meetinge, they consulted what was best to
be done, and which way they could conjecture their governor had taken his
vyage. The capitaynes consu^te where to find their lost governor.
After deliberation, they judged that Nicuesa could no more lack sum to put
him in rememberaunce of Beragua, then they them selves were myndful thereof,
hoping also to find him there. They sailed therefore toward Beragua: where
they found within.xvi. miles dystant, a river which Colonus named Lagartos,
because it nooryshethe great lysardes which in the Spanysshe toonge are
cauled Lagartos. The river Lagartos.
These lysertes are hurtful both to man and beast, and in shape much like
unto the Crocodiles of the river of Nilus in Egypt. In this river, they found
their companyons and fellows of their error lyinge at anchor with the great
ships which followed behind by the governors commandment. Here the hole
assemble being careful and disquieted by reason of the governors error,
after consultacion, by thaduise of the capitaynes of the brigantines, who had
rased nere unto the coasts of Beragua, they sailed directly thither. Beragua,
in the language of thinhabitantes of the same province, is as much to say, as
the golden river. The golden river of Beragua.
The region it self is also cauled by the same name, taking name of the
river. In the mouth of this river, the greatest vessels cast anchor, and
conueighed al their vytailes and other necessaries to land with their ship
boats: and elected Lupus Olanus to be their governor in the steed of
Nicuesa whom they had lost. By thaduice therefore of Olanus and the other under
capitaynes, that all hope of departure might be taken from the soldiers which
they had now browght thither, and to make them the more wyllinge to inhabit
that land, they utterly forsook and cast of those ships being now rotten
for age, and suffered them to be shaken and broosed of the surges of the sea.
Yet of their soundeste plankes, with other new, made of the trees of that
Region (which they say to be exceeding bygge and high) they framed a new
carauel shortly after, which they might use to serve for their necessity. But
Beragua was found by the unfortunate destenie of Petrus de Vmbria. The
enterprise and death of Petrus de Umbria.
For he, being a man of prompt wit and apt forwardenes to attempt things
(in which sumetyme fortune will bear a stroke notwithstanding owre
providence) took upon him thaduenture to search the shore to the intent to find
a way for his fellows where they might best coome alande. For this purpose,
he chose him twelve maryners, and went aboorde the ship boat which served
the greateste ships. The flowinge of the sea, raged and rored there, with a
horrible whurlinge as we reed of the dangerous place of Scylla in the sea of
Scicilie, The dangerous place of Scilla in the sea of Cicilie.
by reason of the houge and ragged rocks reachyng into the sea, from which the
waves rebounding with violence, make a great noise and rowghnes on the water,
which rowghnes or reflowinge, the Spanyardes caul Resacca. In these dangers
wretched Vmbria wresteled a while. But in short space, a wave of the sea
almost as bygge as a mountain, reboundinge from the rocks, overwhelmed the
boat and devoured the same with the men, even in the sight of their fellows:
So that of them all, only one escaped by reason he was expert in swymmynge.
Swymminge
For gettinge hold of the corner of a rock, and susteynynge the rage of the
sea until the next day when it wexed caulme, and the shore was dry by the
faule of the water, he escaped and resorted to his coompanye. But Vmbria with
the other eleven, were utterly cast away. The resydue of the coompany, durst
not commite them selves to the ship boats, but went alande with their
brigantines. Where remaining a few days, and saylinge alonge by the river,
they found certain vyllages of thinhabitantes, which they caul Mumu. Here
they began to build a fortress, and to sow seeds after the manner of their
country, in a certain vale of fruitful grownde, because in other places the
region is baren. As these things were thus dooinge in Beragua, one of their
coompanye standing upon the top of a high rock of especial, and lyftynge
his eyes toward the Weste, began to cry, Lynnyn sails, lynnyn sails. And
the nerer it drew toward him, he perceived it to be a ship boat coming
with a little sail. Yet received they it with much reioysinge: for it was the
fyssher boat of Nicuesa his carauele, The fyssher boat of Nicuesa his
carauele.
and of capacity to carye only five men, and had now but three in it, which
had stoulne it from Nicuesa because he refused to give credit to them that he
had passed Beragua, and left it behind him Eastwarde. For they saying Nicuesa
and his fellows to consume daily by famynne, thowght they woolde prove fortune
with that boat, if their chance might be to find Beragua, as in deed it
wss. Debatinge therefore with their fellows, of these matters, they declared
how Nicuesa erred and lost the carauele by tempest, The miserable case of
Nicuesa.
and that he was now wanderinge among the marysshes of unknown coasts, full
of myserie and in extreme penury of all things, having now lived for the
space of three score and ten days, only with herbs and roots, and syldoome
with fruits of the country, contented to drink water, and yet that often
times faylynge, because he was instant to travail westwarde by foot,
supposing by that means to come to Beragua. Colonus the first fynder of this
main land, had coasted alonge by this tracte, and named it Gratia Dei: but
the inhabitants caul it Cerabaro. The Region of Gratia Dei or Cerabaro.
Throwghe this Region, there runs a river which owre men named Sancti
Matthei, The river of Sancti Matthei.
distante from the weste side of Beragua about a hundrethe and thirty miles.
Here I let pass the name of this river, and of many other places by the
names which thinhabitantes use, because owre men are ignorant thereof. Thus
Lupus Olanus the conductor of one of the ships of Nicuesa, and now also vice
Leauetenaunt in his steed, after that he had received this information of
the maryners, sent thither a brigantine under their guydynge, these maryners
therefore, which came in the fyssher boat, found Nicuesa, The rigorousnes of
Nicuesa.
and browght him to the place where Olanus lay, whom at his coming he cast
in prison, and accused him of treason because he usurped thautoritie of the
Lieuetenauntshippe, and that for the desire he had to bear rule and be in
authority, he took no care of his errors: also that he behaved him self
negligently: demaundinge further more of him, what was the cause of his so
long delay. Likewise he spoke to all the under officers sharplye and with a
troubled mind: And within few days after commanded them to trusse up their
packes, and make them redye to depart. They desired him to quiet him self,
and to forbear them a while until they had reaped the corn that they had
sown, which would shortly be ripe. For all kind of corn waxes ripe there
every fourth moonethe after it is sown. Come wa^eth ripe every fourth month
But he utterly denied to tarry and whytte: but that he woolde forthwith
depart from that unfortunate land: And plucked up by the roots all that ever
was browght into the goulfe of Beragua, and commanded them to direct their
course toward the East. After they had sailed about the space of.xvi. miles,
a certain young man whose name was Gregory, a Genues borne, and of a child
browght up with Colonus, The commendacion of a young man browght up with
Colonus
cauled to rememberance that there was a haven not far from thense: And to
prove his saying true, he gave his fellows these tokens: that is, that they
should find upon the shore, an anchor of a lost ship half covered with
sand: And under a tree next unto the haven, a spring of clear water. They
came to the land: found the anchor and the spring, and commended the wit
and memory of the young man, that he only among many of the marynes which
had searched those coasts with Colonus, bore the thing so well in mind.
This haven, Colonus cauled Portus Bellus. Portus Bellus.
Whereas in this vyage for lack of vytayles they were sumetymes enforced to goo
alande, they were euel entreated of the inhabitants. By reason whereof, their
strengthes were so wekened with hunger, weakness of hunger.
that they were not able to keep war against naked men, or scarsely to bear
their harnes on their backs. And therefore owre men lost twenty of their
coompanie, which were slain with venomous arrows. They consulted to leave the
one half of their fellows in the haven of Portus Bellus: And the other part
Nicu^sa took with him toward the East: where abowte twenty and eight miles
from Portus Bellus, he intended to build a fortress hard by the sea side
upon the point or cape which in time paste Colonus named Marmor. Cap Marmor.
But they were so feeble by reason of long hunger, that their strength served
them not to sustain such labor. Yet he erected a little tower able to
resyst the first assaute of the inhabitants. This tower he cauled Nomen Dei.
Nomen Dei.
From the time that he left Beragua, what in the journey among the sandy
playnes, then also for hunger while he builded the tower, Nicuesa his men
consumed
of the few which remained a live, he lost two hundredth. And thus by little
and little, the multitude of seven hundredth four score and five men, was now
browght to scarsely one hundredth. While Nicuesa lived with these few miserable
men, there arose a conte^tion among them of Vraba, Contencion about the
lieuetenauntship of Uraba.
as concerning the Lieuetenantshippe. For one Vaschus Nunnez, Ua^chus Nunnez
month sedition.
by the judgment of all men, trusting more to his strength then wit,
stoured up certain light fellows against Ancisus, saying that Ancisus had not
the kings letters patentes for that office: And that it was not sufficient
that he was autorised by Fogeda. Ancisus lieuetenaunt for Fogeda.
And therefore forbodde that he should execute the office of the
Lieuetenaunteshippe: And wylled them to choose certain of their own
coompanye, by whose counsel and authority they might be governed.

Thus being divided into factions by reason that Fogeda, their captain came
not again, whom they supposed to be now dead of his venomous wound, they
contended whether it were best to substitute Nicuesa in his place. The wyseste
sort such as were famylier with Nicuesa, and could not bear thinsolencie of
Vaschus Nunnez, thowght it good that Nicuesa should be, Nicu^sa.
sowght out throwgh out all those coasts. For they had knoweledge that he
departed from Beragua because of the barennes of the ground: And that by
thexemple of Ancisus, and such other as had made shippewracke, it were
possible that he might wander in sum secreate place: And that they could not
be quiet in their minds until they knew the certe^tie, whether he with his
fellows were alive or dead. But Vaschus Nunnez, fearinge least at the coming
of Nicuesa he should not be had in authority emonge his fellows, said they
were mad men to think that Nicuesa lived: And althowgh he were alive, yet that
they had no neade of his help. For he avouched that there was none of his
fellows, that were not as meet to rule as Nicuesa. While they were thus
reasonynge too and froo, one Rodericus Colmenaris arrived in those coasts with
two great ships having in them three score fresshe men, Rodericus
Colmenaris.
with great plenty of vitailes and apparel. Of the navigation of this
Colmenaris, The navigations of Rodericus Colmenaris.
I intend to speak sumewhat more. He therefore departed from the haven of
Hispaniola cauled Beata (where they prepare and furnysshe them selves which
make any viage into these lands) about the Ides of October in the year.1510:
And landed the.ix. of November in a Region in the large province of Paria
found by Colonus between the haven Carthago and the Region of Cuchibachoa.
Cuchibacoa.
In this viage what by the rowghnes of the sea and fiercenes of the barbaria^s,
he suffered many incommodities. For when his fresshe water failed, he sailed to
the mouth of a certain river which thinhabitantes caul Gaira, The river
Gaira.
being apt to receive ships. This river had his course from the top of an
exceadinge high mountain covered with snow, An exceeding high mountain
covered with snow.
higher then the which, all the coompanyons of this captain Rodericus, say
that they never saw. And that by good reason, if it were covered with snow in
that Region which is not past ten degrees distante from the Equinoctial line.
As they began to draw water out of their shippeboate, a certain King made
toward them appareled with vestures of gossampine cotton, having twenty
noble men in his coompanye appareled also: Appareled men.
Which thing seemed strange to owre men, and not seen before in those
parties. The Kings apparel, hunge loose from his shoulders to his elbowes:
And from the ge^dle downewarde, it was much like a woman's kertle, reachinge
even to his heels. As he drew near toward owre men, he seemed friendly to
admonysshe them to take none of the water of that river, affirminge it to be
unwholesome for men: And showed them that not far from thense, there was a
river of good water. They came to the river. And endeuouringe to coome nere the
shore, they were driven back by tempeste. Also the burbulinge of the sand,
declared the sea to be but shalowe there. They were therefore enforced to
return to the first river where they might safely cast anchor. This King
laid wait for owre men. For as they were fyllinge their barrelles, he set on
them with about seven hundredth men (as owre men judged) armed after their
manner, althowgh they were naked. For only the king and his noble men were
appareled. They took away the shippeboate, and brook it in manner to chips:
so fiercely assylynge owre men with their venomous arrows, Seven and forty
Spanyardes are s^aine with venomous arrows.
that they slew of them forty and seven before they could cover them selves
with their targettes. For that poison is of such force, that albeit the wounds
were not great, yet they dyed thereof immediately. For they yet knew no remedy
ageynste this kind of poison, Ierua.
A remedy agenste venomous arrows
as they after learned of thinhabitantes of Hispaniola. For this Island brings
forth an herb which quenches and mortifieth the violent poison of the herb
wherewith their arrows are infected, so that it be ministered in time. Yet of
owre coompany which went for water, seven escaped that conflicte, and hyd them
selves in a hollow tree, Seven men left behind.
lurkynge there until night. Yet escaped they not the hands of their enemies.
For the ship departed from thense in the night season and left them there,
supposinge that they had been slain. Thus by many* such perels and dangers
(which I lightly ouerpasse because I will not be tedious to yowre holiness) he
arrived at the length at the haven of Vraba, The haven of Uraba.
and cast anchor at the east side thereof, from whense not long before, owre
men departed to the west side by reason of the barennes of that soil. When he
had continued a while in the haven, and saw no man stourynge, marueylinge at
the silence of the places (for he supposed there to have fowunde his fellows)
he could not couiecture what this should mean: and there upon began to
suspecte that either they were dead, or that they had changed the place of
their habitacion. To know the certentie hereof, he commanded all the great
ordinance and other smaule gunnes which he had in his ships, to be charged:
And fyers to be made in the night upon the tops of the rocks. Thus the
fyers being kyndeled, he commanded all the gunnes to be shot of at one
instante: by the horrible noise whereof, the goulfe of Vraba was shaken, The
gou^fe of Uraba.
althowghe it were.xxiiii. miles distante: for so broad is the goulfe. This
noise was hard of their fellows in Dariena: Dariena.
And they answered them again with mutual fyers. Wherefore, by the following
of these fyers, Colmenaris browght his ships to the Weste side. Here those
wretched and miserable men of Dariena which now tho rowgh famen and feeblenes
held their weary sowles in their teethe ready to depart from their bodies by
reason of the calamities which beefell unto them after Ancisus shippewracke,
Famen.
lyftinge up their hands to heaven, with the tears runnynge down their
cheeks both for joy and sorrow, embrased Rodericus and his fellows with such
kind of reioysinge as their present necessity seemed to require. For whereas
they were before his coming, withowte vytayles and almost naked, he brought
them abundance of meat, drink, and apparel. It restethe now (most holy
father) to declare what came of the dissension among them of Vraba, what
became of the contencion of Uraba
as concerning the governance after the loss of their capitaynes.

The third book of the second Decade of the supposed continent.
ALl the chief officers in Beragua, Beragua.
and such as were most politic in counsel, determined that Nicuesa should
be sowght owte if by any means he could be found. Where upon they took
from Ancisus the gouernoure refusinge the coming of Nicuesa, a brygantyne
which he made of his own charges: And agreed, against both the will of
Ancisus, and the master of fence Vaschus Nunnez, that Nicuesa should be sowght
forth to take away the strife as touching the government. Nicuesa is sought
forth
They elected therefore Colmenaris (of whom we spoke before) to take this matter
in hand: willing him to make diligent search for Nicuesa in those coasts
where they supposed he erred. For they hard that he had forsaken Beragua, the
region of an unfruitful ground. They gave him therefore commandment to
bring Nicuesa with him, and further to declare unto him that he should do
right good service to coome thither, in taking away thoccasion of their
seditions. Colmenaris took the thing upon him the more gladly because
Nicuesa was his very friend: Supposinge that his coming with vytayles should
be no less thankful to Nicuesa and his coompanie, then it was to them of
Vraba. Furnysshynge therefore one of his own ships which he browght with
him and also the brigantyne taken from Ancisus, he frayghted the same with
part of the vytayles and other necessaries which he browght with him before
from Hispaniola to Vraba. Thus coursynge alonge by all the coasts and goulfes
nere there abowte, at the length at the point cauled Marmor, he found
Nicuesa, Nicuesa is found in a miserable case.
of all living men most unfortunate, in manner dried up with extreme hunger,
filthy and horrible to behold, with only three score men in his company,
left alive of seven hundredth. They al seemed to him so miserable, that he no
less lamented their case, then if he had found them dead. But Colmenaris
conforted his friend Nicuesa: and embrasinge him with tears and cherefull
words, relyued his spirits, and further encoraged him with great hope of
better fortune: declarynge also that his coming was looked for and greatelye
desired of all the good men of Vraba, for that they hoped that by his authority,
their discord and contention should be fynysshed. Nicuesa thanked his friend
Colmenaris. after such sort as his calamity required. Thus they took ship
to gyther, and sailed directly to Vraba. But so variable and unconstant is the
nature of man, that he soon grows owte of use, becomes insolente and
vnmyndful of benefits after to much felicity. In^olencie of to much felicity.
For Nicuesa, after thus many tears and weepynges after diverse bewaylinges of
his unfortunate desteny, after so many thanks geuynge, ye after that he had
faulen down to the ground and kyssed the feet of Colmenaris his savior, he
began to quarrel with him before he came yet at Vraba, reprouinge him and them
all for thalteracion of the state of things in Vraba, and for the gatheringe
of gold: Affirming that none of them owght to have laid hand of any gold
with owte the advice of him or of Fogeda his coompanion. When these sayings
and such like, came to the ears of them of Vraba, they so stoured up the
minds of Ancisus Lieuetenaunte for Fogeda, and also of Vaschus Nunnez, of the
contrary part, ageinste Nicuesa, Nicuesa fauleth from one misery into an
other.
that shortly after his arryuall with his three score men, they commanded him
with threatenynge to depart from thense. But this pleased not the better sort.
Yet fearing least tumult should be among the people whom Vaschus Nunnez had
stered to factions, the best part was feign to give place to the greatest. The
greatest part overcomes the best
This wretched man therefore Nicuesa thus drowned in miseries, was thruste into
the brigantyne which he him self browght: and with him only seuentene men, of
his three score which remained alive. He took ship in the Calendes of March
in the year.1511. intending to goo to Hispaniola to coomplayne of the
rasshenes of Vaschus Nunnez, and of the violence done to him by Ancisus. The
death of Nicuesa.
But he entered into the brigantine in an unfortunate hour: for he was never
seen after. They suppose that the brigantine was drowned with all the men
therein. And thus unhappy Nicuesa faulynge headlonge owte of one miserye into
an other, ended his life more myserablye then he lived. Nicuesa being thus
vylely rejected, Famen enforseth them to faule to spoylynge.
and al their vytayles consumed which Colmenaris browght them, faulynge in
manner mad for hunger, they were enforced like raueninge woolues seakynge
their pray, to invade such as dwelte abowte their confynes. Vas^hus Nunnez
therefore, Uaschus usurps thautorit^e of the Lieuetenantshippe.
their new captain of their own election, assembling together a hundredth
and thirty men, and settinge them in order of battle after his swoordeplayers
fasshion, puffed up with pride, placed his soldiers as pleased him in the
forewarde and rereward, and sum as pertisens about his own person. Thus
associatinge with him Colmenaris, he went to spoil the kings which were
bortherers there abowte, and came first to a Region abowte that coaste, cauled
Coiba, (whereof we made mention before) imperiously and with cruel countenance
commaundinge the king of the region whose name was Careta, Careta, k^nge of
Coiba.
(of whom they were never troubled as often as they passed by his dominions)
to give them vytayles. But Careta denied that he could give them any at that
time: alleagyng that he had oftentimes aided the Christians as they passed by
those coasts: by reason whereof his store was now consumed: Also that by the
means of the contynuall war which he kept ever from his chyldes age with a
king whose name is Poncha, bortheringe upon his dominion, he and his famelie
were in great scarsenes of all things. But Vaschus woolde admytte none of
these excuses: And thervppon took Careta prisoner, king Careta is taken and
spoiled.
spoiled his vyllage, and browght him bownd with his two wives and children
and all his famelie to Dariena. With this king Careta, they found three of
the fellows of Nicuesa, the which when Nicuesa passed by those coasts to
seek Beragua, fearing punysshement for their evil deserts stoule away from
the ships lyinge at anchor: And when the navy departed, committed them selves
to the mercy of Careta, who enterteyned them very frendely. They had now
bynne there.xviii. moonethes, and were therefore as utterly naked as the people
of the country. Duringe this time, the meat of thinhabitances seemed unto them
delicate di^shes and princely fare: hunger is the best sauce.
especially because they enjoyed the same withowte any strife for mine and
thine, Wine and thine the seeds of al mischefe.
which two things move and enforce men to such hard shyftes and miseries,
that in living they seem not to live. Yet desired they to return to their
owlde cares, of su^he force is education and natural effection toward them
with whom we have been browght up. The vytayles which Vaschus browght from the
vyllage of Careta to his fellows left in Dariena, was rather sumewhat to
assuage their present hunger, and utterly to take away their necessity. But as
touching Anc^sus being Lieuetenaunt for Fogeda, Ancisus, lieuetenaunt for
Fogeda is cast in prison.
whether it were before these things or after, I know not. But this I am sure
of, that after the reiectinge of Nicu^sa, many occasions were sought agenst
Ancisus by Vascus and his factionaries. How so ever it was, Ancisus was
taken, and cast in prison, and his goods confiscate. The cause hereof was, (as
Vaschus alleged) that Ancisus had his commission of the Lieuetenauntshippe,
of Fogeda only whom they said to be now dead, and not of the king.
Saying that he woolde not obey any man that was not put in office by the king
him self by his letters patentes. Yet at the request of the graueste sort, he
was sumwhat pacified, and dealt more gentelly with him, having sum compassion
of his calamities. And thervppon commanded him to be loosed. Ancisus being
at liberty, took ship to depart from thense to Hispaniola. Anci^us takes
his vyage to hispaniola.
But before he had hoysed up his sail, all the wysest sort resorted to
him, humbly desyringe him to return again: promising that they would do
their diligence, that Vaschus being reconciled, he might be restored to his
full authority of the Lieuetenauntshippe. But Ancisus refused to consent to
their request and so departed. Yet sum there were that murmured that god and
his angels showed this revenge upon Ancisus, The reueng of God.
bycau^e Nicuesa was rejected throwgh his counsel. How so ever it be, the
searchers of the new lands, faule headlonge into ruin by their own follye,
consuminge them selves with civil discord, The inconveniences of discord.
not weighinge so great a matter, nor employinge their best endeavor about
the same as the woorthynes of the thing requires. In this mean time, they
determined all with one agreemente, to send messengers into Hispaniola to the
young Admiral and viceroy, son and heir to Christophorus Colonus the
fynder of these lands, The son and heyr^ of Colonus, is Admiral and viceroy
of hispaniola.
and to the other gouernoures of the Island (from whom the new lands receive
their aid and laws) to signify unto the^ what state they stood in, and in
what necessity they lived: also what they had found, and in what hope they
were of greater things if they were furnyshed with plenty of vytayles and
other necessaries. For this purpose they elected at the assignement of Vascus,
one Valdiuia,, Valdiuia.
being one of his faction, and instructed by him against Anc^sus. And to be
a^sistant with him, they appointed one Zamudius a Cantabrian: So that
commandment was given to Valdiuia to return from Hispaniola with vytayles:
And Zamudius was appointed to take his vyage into Spain to the king. zamudius
and Ancisus, take their vyage to Spain.
They took ship both together with Ancisus, having in mind to certify the
king how things were handeled there, much otherwise then Zamudius
information. I my self spoke with both Ancisus and Zamudius at their coming
to the court. While they were occupied about these matters, those wretched
men of Dariena loosed Carera the king of Coiba upon condition that he should
aid them in their wars against his enemy and theyrs, king Poncha
bortheringe upon his dominions. king Po^cha.
Careta made a league with the^, promysinge that as they passed by his
kyngedome, he woolde give them all things nece^sarie, and meet them with an
army of men, to goo forward with them to the battle agenst Poncha. Their
weapons are another bows nor venemed arrows, as we said thinhabitantes to
have which dwell eastwarde beyond the goulfe. They feight therefore at hand,
with long swords (which they caul Macanas) made of wood because they have
no Iren. Swoordes of woodde.
They use also long staves like ia^elens hardened at the ends with fire, or
typte with bone. Also certain stynges and darts. Thus after the league made
with Careta, both he and owre men had certain days appointed them to till
their ground and sow their seeds. This done, by the aid of Careta and by
his conduction, they marched toward the palaice of Poncha, king Careta
conspireth with the Spanyardes agenst king Poncha.
who f^edde at their coming. They spoiled his vyllage and mytigated their
hunger with such vytayles as they found there. Yet could they not help their
fellows therewith by reason of the far distance of the place, althowghe they
had great plenty. For the vyllage of Poncha, was more then a hundredth miles
distant from Dariena: whereas was also none other remedy but that the same
should have been carried on men's backs to the sea side being far of, where
they left their ships in the which they came to the vyllage of Car^ta. Here
they found certain powndes weight of gold, graven and wrought into sundry
ouches. wrought gold
After the sacking of this vyllage they resorted toward the ships intendyng to
leave the kings of the inland untouched at this time, and to invade only them
which dwelt by the sea coasts. Not far from Coiba, in the same tracte, there
is a Region named Comogra, The region of Comogra, distant from Dariena xxx.
leaques.
and the King thereof, cauled Comogrus after the same name. To this King they
came first next after the subvertion of Poncha: And found his palaice situate
in a fruitful plain of twelve leaques in bredthe, at the roots of the
further side of the next mountains. Comogrus had in his court a certain
noble man of nexe consanguinitie to King Careta, which had fled to Comogrus
by reason of certain dissension which was between Careta and him. These noble
men, they caul Iura. king Comogrus.
This Iura therefore of Coiba, met owre men by the way, and conciled Comogrus
to them, because he was well known to owr me^ from the time that Nicuesa
passed first by those coasts. Owre men therefore went quietlye to the palaice
of Comogrus being distante from Dariena thirty leaques by a plain way
abowte the mountains, This King Comogrus, had seven sons, The kings
palaice.
young men of comelye form and stature, which he had by sundry wives. His
palaice was framed of posts or proppes made of trees fastened togeyther after
a strange sort, and of so strong bylding, that it is of no less strength
then waules of stone. They which measured the length of the flower thereof,
found it to be a hundredth and fyftie pases, and in breadthe, four score
foot: being roofed and paued with marvelous art. They found his store
house, furnysshed with abundance of delicate vitailes after the manner of their
country: And his wine celler replenished with great vessels of earth and
also of woodde filled with their kind of wine and syder. wine and syder
For they have no grapes. But like as they make their bread of those three
kinds of roots cauled Iucca, agis, and Naizium, (whereof we spoke in the
first decade) So make they their wine of the fruits of date trees, and syder
of other fruits and seeds, as do the Almaynes, Flemynges English men, and
owre Spanyardes which inhabit the mountains, as the Uascons and Asturians:
likewise in the mountains of the Alps, the Noricians, Sueuians, and
Heluetians, make certain drynkes of barley, wheat, hoppes, and apples. They
say also that with Comogrus, they droonk wynes of sundry tastes, both white and
black. Black wine.
But now you shall hear of a thing more monstrous too behoulde. Entering
therefore i^to the inner parts of the palaice, they were browght into a chamber
hanged about with the carkeses of men, The bo^yes of dead kings, religiously
honored.
tied with ropes of gossampine cotton. Being demanded what they meant by that
superstition, they answered that those were the carkeses of the father,
graundefather, and great graundfather with the other ancestors of their King
Comogrus. Declaringe that they had the same in great reverence, and that they
took it for a godly thing to honor them religiously: And therefore appareled
every of the same sumptuouslye with gold and precious stones according unto
their estate. After this sort did the antiquity honor their Penates,
Penat^s.
which they thowght had the governance of their lives. How they dry these
carkeses upon certain instruments made of wood, The carcases of men dried
like unto hurdels, with a soft fire under the same, so that only the skin
remains to houlde the bones together, we have described in the former decade.
Of Comogrus his seven soonnes, the eldest had an excellent natural wit. The
kings son a young man of excellent wit,
He therefore thowght it good to flatter and please this wandrynge kind of men
(owr men I mean) living only by shifts and spoil, least being offended
and seekynge occasions ageynste him and his family, they should handle him as
they did other which sowght no means how to gratify them. Wherefore, he
gave Vaschus and Colmenaris four thousand ounces of gold artificially
wrought, Four thousand ounces of wrought gold.
and also fyftie slaves which he had taken in the wars. For such, either
they sell for exchaunce of other things, or otherwise use them as them
lysteth* For they have not the use of money. This gold with as much more
which they had in an other place, owre men wayed in the porche of Comogrus his
palaice to separate the fyfte part thereof, The distribution of gold.
which portion is due to the Kings escheker. For it is decreed that the fyft
part of both gold, perles, and precious stones, should be assigned to the
Kings treasourers: And the resydue, to be divided emonge them selves by
composition. Here as brabblynge and contention arose emonge owr men about the
diuidinge of gold, this eldeste soonne of King Comogrus being present, whom
we praised for his wisdom, coming sum what with an angery countenance
toward him which held the balences, he struck them with his fyste, and
scatered all the gold that was therein, Young Comogrus his oration.
abowte the porche, sharply rebukynge them with words in this effect. What
is the matter you Christian men, that you so greatly esteem so little a
portion of gold more then yowr own quietness, which nevertheless you entend
to deface from these fair ouches and to melte the same into a rude mass. If
yowre hunger of goulde be so insatiable that only for the desire you have
thereto, The hunger of gold.
you disquiete so many nations, and you yowre selves also sustain so many
calamites and incommodities, living like banished men owte of yowre own
country, I will show you a Region floweinge with goulde, A reg^on flowinge
with gold.
where you may satisfy yowr raueninge appetites. But you must attempt the
thing with a greater pour: For it stands you in hand by force of arms to
overcome kings of great puissaunce, and rigorous defenders of their
dominions. For bysyde other, the great king Tumanama will coome forth
ageynste you, king Tumanama.
whose kengdome is most rich with gold, and distante from hense only syx
soonnes: that is, syx days: for they number the days by the son. Canibales.
Furthermore, or ever you can coome thither, you must pass over the
mountains inhabited of the cruel Canybales a fierce kind of men, deuourers
of man's flesh, living withowte laws, wanderinge, and withowte empire. For
they also, being desirous of gold, have subdewed them under their dominion
which before inhabited the gold mines of the mountains, The gold mines of
the mountains.
and use them like bondemen, vsyng their labor in dygginge and workynge their
gold in plates and sundry Images like unto these which you see here. For we
do no more esteem rude gold unwrought, Unwrought gold not esteemed.
then we do cloddes of earth, before it be formed by the hand of the
workman to the similitude either of sum vessel nece^sarie for owre use, or
sum ouche bewetifull to be worn. These things do we receive of them for
exchange of other of owre things, as of prisoners taken in war, Exchange.
which they bye to eat, or for sheets and other things perteynynge to the
furnyture of householde, such as they lack which inhabit the mountains: And
especially for vitayles whereof they stand in great need by reason of the
barrennes of the mountains. This journey therefore, must be made open by force
of men. And when you are passinge over these mountains (poyntinge with his
finger toward the southe mountains) you shall see an other sea, where they
sail with ships as bygge as yowres (meaning the caraueles) vsinge both
sails and ores as you do, Abundance of gold.
althowghe the men be naked as we are. All the way that the water runnethe
from the mountains, and all that side lyinge toward the Southe, brings
forth gold abundantly. As he said these words, he poynted to the vessels
in which they use to serve their meat, affirmyng^ that king Tumanama, and
all the other kings beyond the mountains, had such and al their other
householde stuff of gold: householde stuff of gold
And that there was no less plenty of gold among those people of the
Southe, then of Iren with us. For he knew by relation of owre men, whereof owre
swoordes and other weapons were made. Owre capitaynes marueylyng at the oration
of the naked young man (for they had for interpretours those three men which
had been before a year and a half conversant in the court of king Careta)
pondered in their minds, and ernestly considered his sayings. So that his
rasshenes in scatteringe the gold owte of the balances, they turned to mirth
and vrbanitie, commending his dooinge and saying therein. Then they asked him
frendely, upon what certain knoweleage he spoke those things: Or what he
thowght best herein to be done if they should bring a greater supplye of
men. To this, young Comogrus, stayinge a while with him self as it were an
orator preparinge him self to speak of sum grave matter, and disposynge his
body to a giesture meet to persuade, spoke thus in his mother tongue. Give
ear unto me o you Chrystians. Albeit that the gredie hunger of gold has
not yet vexed us naked men, Naked people tormented with ambition
yet do we destroy one an other by reason of ambition and desire to rule.
Hereof springs mortal hatred among us, and hereof commethe owre
destruction. Owre predicessours kept wars, and so did Comogrus my father
with princes being bortherers abowte him. In the which wars, as we have
ouercoome, so have we been over coome, as does appear by the number of
bondemen among us, which we took by the overthrow of owre enemies, of the
which I have given you fifty. Likewise at an other time, owre adversaries
having thupper hand agenste us, led away many of us captive. For such is
the chance of war. Also, among owre familiers (whereof a great number have
been captives with them) behold here is one which of long time led a
paynefull life in bondage under the yoke of that king beyond the mountains,
in whose kingdom is such abundance of gold. Of him, and such other
innumerable, and likewise by the resort of free men on their side coming to
us, and again of owre men resortinge to them by safe conduct, these things
have been ever as well known unto us, A vehement persuasion.
as owre own possessions. But that you may be the better assured hereof,
and be owte of all suspection that you shall not be deceived, make me the
guide of this viage, byndynge me fast and keepyng me in safe custody to be
hanged on the next tree, if you find my sayings in any point untrue. Follow
my counsel therefore, and send for a thousand Christian men apt for the
wars, by whose power we may with also the men of war of Comogrus my father
armed after owre manner, invade the dominions of owre enemies: where, both you
may be satisfied with gold, and we for owre conductinge and aydynge you in
this enterprise, shall think owre selves abun^antly rewarded, in that you
shall help to deliver us from the injuries and perpetual fear of owre
enemies. After these words, this prudente young Comogrus held his peace.
And owre men moved with great hope and hunger of gold, A token of hunger.
began ageine to swalowe down their spertle.

The fourth book of the second Decade, of the supposed Continent.
AFter that they had tarried here a few days and baptized Comogrus with all
his famelie, king Comogrus is baptized with his famely.
and named him by the name of Charles after the king of Spain, they returned
to their fellows in Dariena leauinge with him the hope of the thousand
souldyers, which his son required to pass over those mountains toward the
South sea. Thus enteringe into the vyllage which they had chosen to inhabit,
they had knowleage that Valdiuia was returned, Ualdiuia returns from
hispaniola.
within six moonethes after his departure: but with no great plenty of
vytayles, because he browght but a smaule ship: yet with hope that shortly
after, there should be sent them abundance of vytayles with a new supply of
men. For young Colonus, the Admiral and viceroy of Hispaniola, and the other
governors of the Island, acknowleaged that hitherto they had no respect to
them of Dariena, because they supposed that Ancisus the Lieuetenant had safely
arrived there with his ship laden with vatayles: willing them from
hensefoorth to be of good cheer, and that they should lack nothing
hereafter: But that at this present time, they had no bygger ship whereby
they might send them greater plenty of necessaries by Valdiuia. The vytayles
therefore which he browght, served rather sumwhat to mytigate their present
necessity, then to satisfye their lack. Wherefore within a few days after
Valdiuia his return, they fell ageine into like scarsnes: especially for as much
as a great storm and tempest which came from the high mountains with
horrible thunder and lyghtnynge in the mooneth of November, horrible thunder
and ^ightnynge in the month of November.
browght with it such a fludde, that it partly carried away and partly drowned
all the corn and seeds which they had sown in the moonethe of September in
a fruitful ^rounde before they went to king Comogrus. The seeds which they of
Hispaniola caul Maizium, Bread of Maizius and hobba
and they of Vraba caul Hobba: Whereof they make their bread, which also we
said to be ripe thryse every year, because those Regions are not bytten with
the sharpnes of winter by reason of their nerenes to the Equinoctial line. It
is also agreeable to the principles of natural philosophy, that this bread
made of Maizius or Hobba, should be more wholesome for thinhabitantes of those
contreys then bread made of wheat, by reason that it is of easyer digestion.
Digestion strengthened by owtwarde cold.
For whereas could is wantinge, the natural heat is not driven from the
owtewarde parts into the inward parts and precordials, whereby digestion is
much strengthened. Being therefore thus frustrate of the increase of their
seeds, and the kings nere abowte them spoiled of both vytayles and gold,
they were enforced to seek their meat further of: hunger.
And therewith to signify to the governors of Hispaniola with what great
necessity they were oppressed: And what they had learned of Comogrus as
concerning the Regions toward the Southe: willing them in consideration
thereof to aduertyse the king to send them a thousand soldiers, A new
supply of a thousand souldyers.
by whose help they might by force make way throwghe the mountains diuidynge
the sea on both sides, if they could not bring the same to pass quyetly.
The same Valdiuia was also sent on this message, caryinge with him to the
kings treasourers (having their office of recepte in Hispaniola) three
hundredth pounds weight of gold after eight ounces to the pound, for the
fyfte portion dew to the kings escheker. This pound of.viii. ounces, the
Spanyardes caul Marcha, Marcha.
which in weight amounts to fyftie pieces of gold cauled Castellani. But
the Castilians, caul a pound Pesum. We conclude therefore, Pesus.
that the sum hereof, was.xv. thousand of those pieces of gold cauled
Castellani. And thus is it apparente by this account, that they received of
the barbarous kings, a thousand and five hundredth pounds of eight ounces to
the pound. A thousand and five hundredth pounds weight of wrought gold
All the which they found ready wrought in sundry kinds of ouches, as
cheynes, braselets, tablets, and plates, both to hang before their breasts,
and also at their ears, and nosethryls. Valdiuia therefore took shyppinge in
the same carauell in the which he came last, and returned also before the
third day of the Ides of January, in the year of Christ M.D.XI. What chanced
to him in this vyage, we will declare in place convenient. But let us now
return to them which remained in Vraba. After the dismissinge of Valdiuia,
being pricked forward with owtragious hunger, they determined to search the
inner parts of that goulfe in sundry places. The goulfe of Uraba.
The extreme angle or point of the same goulfe is distant from the entrance
thereof, about four score miles. This angle or corner, the Spanyardes caul
Culata. Culata.
Vaschus him self came to this point with a hundredth men, coastynge alonge by
the goulfe with one brygantine and certain of the boats of those regions,
which the Urabians caul Vru, Uaschus searches the goulfe of Uraba.
like unto them which thinhabitantes of Hispaniola caul Canoas. From this
point, there fauleth a river from the East into the goulfe, A marvelous great
river* faulyng into the g^u^fe of Uraba.
ten times bygger then the river of Dariena which also fauleth into the same.
Saylyng alonge by the river about the space of thirty miles (for they caul it
nine leaques) and sumwhat inclynynge toward the right hand southwarde, they
found certain vyllages of thinhabitantes, the King whereof, was cauled
Dabaiba. Owre men also were certifyed before, that Cemacchus the king of
Dariena whom they put to flight in the battle, king Dabaiba and ^hemacchus,
are driven to flight.
fled to this Dabaiba. But at the coming of owre men, Dabaiba also fled.
It is thowght that he was admonysshed by Cemacchus, that he should not abide
the brunte of owre men. He followed his counsel: for^ooke his vyllages, and
left all things desolate. Yet owre men found heaps of bows and arrows:
Also much household stuff and many fysshyng boats. But those maryshe grounds
were neither apt for sowinge of seeds or planting of trees. Marysshe ground
By reason whereof, they found there few such things as they desired that
is, plenty of vytayles. For thinhabitantes of this Region, have no bread but
such as they get in other contreys nere abowte them by exchange for their
fy^she, only to serve their own necessity. Yet found they in the houses of
them that fled, gold wrought and graven, amountynge to the sum of seven
thousand of those pieces which we said to be cauled Castellani: wrought
gold wheyghynge vii. thousand Castellane^.
Also certain canoas: of the which they brought away two with them, and great
plenty of their hou^holde stuff, with certain bundels of bows and arrows.
They say, that from the marysshes of that river, there coome certain battes
in the night season, as bygge as turtle dooues, Battes as bygge as turtle doue^.
inuadyng men and bytinge them with a deadly wound, as sum of them testify
which have been bytten of the same. I my self communing with Ancisus the
Lieuetenant whom they rejected, Ancisus bytten of a batte
and among other things asking him of the venomous bytinge of these battes,
he toulde me that he him self was bytten by one of them on the heel, his
foot lyinge uncovered in the night by reason of the heat in summer season:
But that it hurt him no more, then if he had been bytten by any other beast
not venomous. Other say, that the bytynge of sum of them is venomous: Yet
that the same is healed incontinently, Remedies against venomous arrows
if it be washed with water of the sea. Ancisus toulde me also, that the
venomous wounds made by the Canibales arrows infected with poison, are healed
by washing with water of the sea, and also by cauterising with hot Irens:
And that he had experience thereof in the region of Caribana, where many of his
men were so wounded. They departed therefore, from the point of the goulfe of
Vraba, not well contented because they were not laden with vitailes. In this
their return, there arose so great a tempest in that wide goulfe, A tempest.
that they were enforced to cast into the sea, all the householde stuff
which they took from the poor wretches which lived only by fisshinge. The
sea also swalowed up the two boats that they took from them, wherewyth the
men were likewise drowned. The same time that Vaschus Nunnez attempted to
search the point of the goulfe toward the southe, even then by agremente,
did Rodericus Colmenaris take his viage toward the mountains by the east,
Colmenaris takes his vyage toward the montains
with threscormen, by the river of the other goulfe. About forty miles
distante from the mouth of the river, (for they caul it twelve leaques) he
found certain vilages situate upon the banks of the river, whose Chiui,
(that is,) king, they caul Turui. With this king did Colmenaris yet remain
when Vaschus after his return to Dariena, sailing by the same river, came to
him. Here refresshinge their hole coompany with the vitailes of this Turui,
king Turui.
they departed from thense together. Other forty miles from hense, the river
encoompaseth an Island inhabited with fyssher men. In this, because they saw
great plenty of the trees which bear Cassia f^stula, they named the Island
Cannafistula. The Island of Cannafistula.
They found in it, threescore villages of ten cotages apiece. On the right
side of the Island there runs an other river, whose channel is of depth
suffiente to bear brigantines. This river they cauled Riuum Nigrum: She river
or Riuu^ Niger. A to^^e of v. hundredth houses.
from the mouth whereof about xv. miles distante they found a town of five
hundredth houses severed: whose Chebi, (that is,) king, was cauled Abenamachei.
They all forsook their houses as soon as they hard of owre men's coming.
But when they saw that owre men pursued them, they turned again and ran
upon them with desperate minds, as men driven from their own possessions.
Their wepons, are swords of wod, and long staves like iauelens, hardened at
the end with fire: But they use neither bows nor arrows: nor any other of
thinhabitantes of the weste side of the goulfe. Th^nhabitantes of the west ^yde
of the goulfe.
The pore naked wretches were easily driven to flight with owre weapons. As
owre men followed them in the chase, they took the king Abenamachei and
certain of his noble men. king Abenamachei, is taken and his arm cut of.
A common soldier of owres whom the king had wounded, coomminge to him when
he was taken, cut of his arm at one stroke with his swoorde. But this was
done unawares to the capitaynes. The number of the Christian men which were
here, was about a hundrethe and fifty: the one half whereof, the capytaynes
left here, and they with the resydue, rowed up the river again with twelve
of the boats of those Regions, which they caul. Vru, as they of Hispaniola
caul them Canoas, as we have said. From the river of Riuus Niger and the
Island of Cannafistula, Many other ryuers fauling into Riuus Niger.
for the space of threescore and ten miles, leaving both on the right hand and
on the left many rivers faulinge into it bigger then it self, they entered
into one by the conductynge of one of the naked inhabitants, being appointed
a guide for that purpose. Upon the bank of this river next unto the mouth of
the same, there was a king cauled Abibeiba: king abibeiba dwellethe in a tree.
who, because the Region was full of marysshes, had his palaice builded in the
top of a high tree, a new kind of byldynge and seldom seen. But that
land bears trees of such exceeding height, Abundance of moyster and heat is
cause of byggenes.
that emonge their branches, a man may frame large houses: As we reed the
like in diverse autoures how in many Regions where the ocean sea rysethe and
ouerflowethe the land, the people were accustomed to fly to the high trees,
and after the faule of the water, to take the fysshe left on the land. The
rysynge of the Ocean sea.
This manner of buyldinge, is to lay beams cross over the branches of the
trees, fast bownde together, and there upon to raise their frame, strongly
made ageynste wind and wether. Owre men suppose that they build their houses
in trees, by reason of the great fluddes and ouerflowinge of ryuers which
often times chance in those Regions. These trees are of such height, Trees
of marvelous height
that the strength of no manes arm is able to hurl a stone to the houses
builded therein. And therefore do I give the better credit to Pliny and other
autours which writ that the trees in sum places in India are so high by
reason of the frutefulnes of the ground, Pliny.
abundance of water, and heat of the Region, that no man is able to shute
over them with an arrowe. And by judgment of all men, it is thowght that
there is no frutfuller ground under the soonne, Fruitful ground.
then this is whereof we now entreat. Owr men measuringe many of these
trees, found them to be of such biggnes, that seven men, ye sumetymes
eight, holdinge hand in hand with their arms streached furthe, were scarsely
able too fath^me them about. Yet have they their cellers in the ground,
Cellers in the ground.
well replenysshed with such wynes whereof we have spoken before. For albeit
that the vehemency of the wind, is not of pour to cast down those houses,
or to breeke the branches of the trees, yet are they tossed therewith, and
swaye sumwhat from side to side, by reason whereof, the wine should be much
troubeled with moouinge. All other necessary things, they have with them in
the trees. When the king or any other of the noble men, dyne or suppe in these
trees, their wives are browght them from the celleres by their servants,
which by means of exercise, are accustomed with no less celeritie to run
up and down the steares adherente to the tree, then do owre waiting boys
upon the plain ground, fetch us what we caul for from the cobbarde bysyde
owr dyninge table. Owre men therefore, came to the tree of king Abibeiba, and
by thinterpretoures cauled him forth to communication, gyuinge him signs of
peace, and there upon willinge him to coomme down. But he denied that he
woolde coomme owte of his house: Desyringe them to suffer him to live after his
fasshion. But owre men fell from fair words to threateninge, that except he
would descend with all his famelie, they would either overthrow the tree, or
else set it on fire. When he had denied them again, they fell to hewinge the
tree with their axes. Abibeiba seeinge the chippes faule from the tree on every
side, Abibeiba, the king of the tree, yeldethe to Uaschus.
changed his purpose, and came down with only two of his soones. Thus after
they had entreated of peace, they communed of gatheringe of gold. Abibeiba
answered that he had no gold, and that he never had any need thereof, nor yet
regarded it any more then stones. But when they were instante upon him, he
said unto them. Gold no more esteemed then stones.
If you so greatly desire gold, I will seek for sum in the next
mountains, and bring it unto you. For it is plentifully engendered in those
mountains. Then he appointed a day when he would bring this gold. But
Abibeiba came neither at the day, nor after the day appointed. They departed
therefore from thense well refresshed with his vitailes and wine, but not with
goulde as they hoped. Yet were they informed the like by Abibeiba and his
ditionaries as concerning the gold mines and the Canibales, as they hard
before of king Comogrus. Saylinge yet further about thirty miles, they
chanced upon certain cotages of the Canibales: Canibales.
But utterly void with owte men or stuff. For when they had knowleage that
owre men wandered in the provinces nere about them they resorted to the
mountains, caryinge al their goods and stuff with them.

The fyfte book of the second Decade of the supposed continent.
IN the mean time while these things were done alonge by the shores or
banks of the river, a certain Decurian, that is a capytayne over ten, of
the coompanye of those which Vascus and Colmenaris had left for a garryson in
Riuo Nigro in the dominion of king Abinamachei, whether it were that he was
compelled throwgh hunger, or that his fataule days was now coome, he
attempted with his soldiers to search the countries nere there about, and
entered into the vyllage of a king cauled Abraiba. king Abraib^
This capitaynes name was Raia: whom Abraiba slew, with two of his fellows:
but the resydue fled. Within a few days after, Abraiba having compassion
of the calamity of his kynseman and neighbor Abenamacheius being driven from
his own possessions (whose arm also we said before that one of the soldiers
cut of at the river of Riuo Nigro and now remaining with Abraiba to whom he
fled by stelth after he was taken, went to Abibeiba thinhabitour of the tree,
who had now likewise forsaken his country for fear of owre men, and wandered
in the desolate mountains and wooddes. When he had therefore found him, he
spoke to him in this effect. Abraiba causes the kings to rebel.
What thing is this Oh unfortunate Abibeiba? or what nation is this that so
tormenteth us that we can not enjoy owre quiet liberty? How long, how
long I say shall we suffer their cruelty? were it not much better for us to
die, then to abide such injuries and oppre^sions as you, as Abinamacheius owre
kynseman, as Cemacchus, as Careta, as Poncha, as I and other princes of owr
order do sustain? Can any thing be more intolerable then to see owre
wives, owre children, and owre subjects, to be led away captives, and owre
goods to be spoiled even before owre faces.

I take the gods to wytnes, that I speak not so much for mine own part as
I do for you whose case I lament. For albeit they have not yet touched me,
neuer^helesse, by the example of other, I owght to think that my destruction
is not far of. Men good enowgh if they had ^ren
Let us therefore (if we be men) try owre strength and prove owre fortune
against them which have delte thus cruelly with Abenam^cheius, and driven him
owte of his country. Let us set on them with all owre pour, and utterly
destroy them And if we can not sleye them al, yet shall we make them afraid
either to assail us again, or at the least dimynysshe their pour. For what
so ever shall befaule, nothing can chance worse unto us then that which we
now suffer. When Abibeiba hard these words and such other like, he
condecended to do in all things as Abraiba would require: Where upon they
appointed a day to bring their conspiracy to pass. But the thing chanced
not according to their desire. For of those which we said to have passed to
the Canibales, there returned by chance to Riuus Niger the night before the
day appointed to work their feate, thirty men to the aid of them which
were left there if any sedition should rise they suspected. The kings are
driven to flight.
Therefore at the daunyng of the day, the confetherate kings with five hundredth
of their ditionaries armed after their manner, beseaged the vyllage with a
terrible alarome, knowing nothing of the new men which came thither the
same night. Here owre target men came forth against them, and first assailed
them a far of with their arrows, then with their pykes, and last with their
swoordes: But the naked seely sowles, perceauinge a greater number of their
adversaries the^ they looked for, Captyues.
were soon driven to flight, and slain for the most part like scaterynge
sheep. The kings escaped, they slew many, and took many captives which
they sent to Dariena where they use them for laborers to till and sow their
ground. These things thus happily atchyued, and that province quyeted, they
returned by the river to Dariena, leauinge their thyrtie men for a garryson
under the governance of one Furatado a captain. A garyson of xxx. men.
This Furatado therefore, sent from Riu^ Nigro where he was appointed
gouernoure, twenty of his fellows and one woman, with, xxiiii. captives to
Vaschus and his company, in one of the byggest Canoas of that province. As they
rowed down by the river, xviii. Spanyardes slain and drowned
there came forth soodenly ouerthwarte the river against them, four great
Canoas, which overthrew their boat and slew as many of them as they could
coome by, because they were unprepared suspecting no such thing. Owre men
were all drowned and slain except two, which hyd them selves among certain
fagottes that swamme on the water, in the which they lay lurkynge, and so
escaped to their fellows in Dariena: who by them being aduertysed hereof,
began to cast their wits what this thing might mean: being no less
solicitate for them selves, then meditatynge in what danger their fellows had
been in Riuo Nigro, except by good fortune, those thirty new men which were
sent to them, had coome to the vyllage the night before the conspiracy should
have been wrought. Consultinge therefore what was best to be done herein, at
the length with dylygent searchynge they had intelligence that five king,
that is to wit, Abibeiba the inhabitoure of the tree, The kings which
conspired the death of the Christians.
and Cem^cchus driven from his vyllage which owre men now possessed,
Abraiba also and Abenamacheius, kynsemen, with Dabaiba the king of the fysher
men inhabytinge the corner of the goulfe which we cauled Culata, were all
a^sembled to conspire the Christian men's destruction at a day assigned. Which
thing had surely coome to pass, if it had not been otherwise hyndered by gods
providence. It is therefore ascrybed to a miracle: A strange chance.
And trewly not unworthily if we weye how chance detected and bewrayed
wrayed the counsel of these kings. And because it is worthy to be hard, I
will declare it in few words. Vaschus Nunnez therefore, Vaschus.
who rather by pour then by election, usurped the governance in Dariena,
being a master of fence, and rather a rasshe royster then politic captain
(althowgh fortune sumtyme favors fools) among many women which in diverse
of these regions he had taken captyue, had one which in favor and beauty
excelled all other. To this woman her own brother often times resorted, women
can keep no coun^ayle.
who was also driven owte of his country with king Cemacchus, with whom he was
very familier and one of his chief gentelmen. Among other communication which
he had with his sister whom he loved entierly, he uttered these words. My
dear and well-beloved sister, give care to my sayings, and keep most
secreatelye that which I will declare unto you, if you desire yowre own
wealth and mine, and the prosperity of owre country and kynsefolkes. The
insolency and cruelty of these men which have driven us owte of owre
possessions, is so intolerable, that the princes of the land are determined
no longer to sustain their oppressions.

By the conductinge therefore of five kings (which he named in order) they have
prepared a hundredth great Canoas, An army of C^anoas and live. W^men
with five thousand men of war by land and by sea, with vitailes also in
the village of Tichiri, sufficient to maintain such an army. Declaringe
further, that the kings by agremente, had divided emonge them the goods and
headdes to owre men: Tryu^phe before victory
And therefore admony^hed her, at the day appointed by sum occasion to
conueigh her self owte of the way, lest she should be slain in the
confusion of the bataile. For the soldier victourer, is not woonte to spare
any that commethe in his raze. And thus shewinge his sister the day a^^igned
to the slawghter, Affection corru^teth true judgment.
he departed. But the young woman (for it is the sword that women fear and
observe more then the gravity of Cato,) whether it were for the love or fear
that she had to Vaschus, forgettinge her parents, her kynsfolkes, her
country and all her friends, ye and all the kings into whose throtes Vaschus,
had thruste his swoorde she opened all the matter unto him, and conceled none
of those things which her indiscreet broother had declared to her. When
Vaschus therefore had hard the matter, he caused Fuluia, (for so had they named
her) to send for her brother, who came to her immediately, was taken, and
enforced to tell the hole circunstances of the matter. Where upon, he plainly
confessed that king Cemacchus his lord and master, sent those four canoas
to the destruction of owre men, and that these new conspiraces were attempted
by his consaile. The con^pir^ti^ of the kings is detected.
Likewise that Cemacchus sowght the destruction of Vaschus him self when he
sent him forty men under pretense of fren^shippe to till and sow his grownd
after the manner of the country, gyuinge them in commandment to sleye Vaschus
at Marris, whyther he resorted to comfort his labors as the manner is of all
good husbands. Yet durst they at no time execute their lords commandment
upon him, because Vaschus came never emonge them afoote or unarmed, king
Cemacchus, con^^^reth the o^th of Uaschus.
but was accustomed to ride to them in harnes with a iauelen in his hand and
a swoorde by his side. Wherefore Cemacchus being frustrate of his particu^er
con^aile, took this last thing in hand to his own destruction and his
neighbors. For the conspiracy being detected, Vaschus cauled threescore and
ten soldiers, Ua^chus purseweth the kings with threescore and ten men.
commaundinge them to follow him, but declared nothing unto them whether he
went or what he intended to do. He went forward therefore first toward
Cemacchus which ley from him, only ten miles. But he had knowleage that he
was fled to Dabaiba the king of the marshes of Culata. Yet searchinge his
village, he found a noble man a ruler under him and also his kinsseman, whom
he took prisoner with many other of his familiers and friends both men and
women. The same hour that he set forward to seek for Cemacchus, Rodericus
Colmenaris rowed up the river with four of their biggeste Canoas and
threescore men by the conduction of the maids brother who browght him to the
village of ^ichiri, Colmenaris ^acketh the vylage of Cichiri.
in the which we said all their vitailes to remain which were prepared for
their army. Colmenaris therefore, sacked the village, and possessed all their
vitayles and wine of sundry colors: likewise took the gouernoure thereof
prisoner, and hanged him on the tree in which he dwelte him self,
commaundinge him too be shot throwgh with arrows in the sight of
thinhabitantes, Five rulers hanged and shot th^owgh with arrows.
and with him four other rulers to be hanged on iebbettes to the exemple of
other rebels. This punysshmente thus executed upon the conspiratours,
s^rooke the hearts of all thinhabitantes of the province wych such fear, that
there is not now a man that dare stoore his finger against the wrath of owre
men. They live now therefore quietly: And the other kings by their exemple
do the gladlyer live in subjection, with less offense bearinge the yoke
which they can by no means shake of.

The syxte book of the second decade of the supposed continente.
THese things, thus fynysshed, assemblinge all their company together they
determined with one consent, that a messynger should forth with be sent to
Hispaniola (from whense they have their laws and aid) to declare the hole
order of all these affairs, first to the admiral and gouernoure of the
Island, and afterward to the King of Spain, and to persuade him to sen^e
those thousand men which young Comogrus said to be expediente to pass over
the mountains lying between them and the golden regions toward the Southe.
The golden region^ on the south side the mountains.
Vaschus him self did greatly affecte this embasage: But neither woolde the
resydewe of his fellows elect him thereto, nor his factionaries suffer him to
depart: As Well for that thereby they thought they should be left desolate, as
also that they murmured that if Vaschus should once goo from them, he would
never return to such turmoyles and calamities, by thexemple of Valdiuia and
zamudius, The death of Ualdiuia and zamudius.
who had been now absente sense the mooneth of January, in so much that they
thowght they woolde never coomme ageine. But the matter was otherwise then they
took it, as I will show in his place. For they were perissh^d. At the lengeth
after many scrutinies, they elected one John Quicedus, Johannes Quiced^s is
sent to Spain
a grave man well in years, and treasourer of the kings escheker in those
provinces. They had conceived a good opinion of this Quicedus that all things
should be well browght to pass by his means, as well for his wisdom, as also
that they were in good hop of his return, because he had brought his wiffe
with him to those regions, whom he left with his fellows for a pledge of his
coming again. When they had thus elected Quicedus, they were again of
diverse opinions whom they might join with him for assistance: Affirminge that
it were a dangerous thing to commit so weightye a matter to one man's
hands. Not that they mistrusted Quicedus. but because the life of man is
frail, and the change of the air perelous, Change of the air is dangerous.
especially to them having now of long time been accustomed to the
temperature nere unto the Equinoc^iall, if they should be compelled to return
to the North with alteration of air and diet. They thowght it therefore good to
appoint a co^panio^ to Quicedus, that if ^y chance the one should fayl the other
might remain: And that if they both escaped, the king should give the better
credit to the relation of both: After long consultatio^ therefore, they chose
Rodericus Colmenaris a man of good experience, Rodericus Colmenaris assist^nt
wi^^ Quicedus.
of who^ we have often times made mention. For from his youth, he had trauayled
over al Europe by land and by sea, and was present at the doings of all
things in Italy against the Frenchemen: Of whose return also, they had no
smaule hope because he had many fermes and h^dde tylled and sown much ground
in Dariena, by thincrease whereof he might get much gold by sellyng the same to
his felows. He left therefore the charge of al his affairs in Dariena, with
his partener Alphonsus Nunnez, a Judge of the law, who also was like to have
been chosen procuratoure of this vyage before Colmenaris if one had not put
them in remembrance that he had a wife at Matritis: A wife is a hynderance
fearyng least being ouercoome with her tears, he woolde no more return.
Colmenaris therefore, a free man and at liberty being associate assistant with
Quicedus they took shyppyng together in a brigantine, the fourth day of the
Calendes of November, in the year of Christ.1512.

In this vyage, being tossed with sundry tempests, they were by the violence
of the wind, cast upon the Weste coasts of that large Island which in the
first Decade we cauled Cuba, Cub^.
supposed to have been fyrme land. They were sore oppressed with hunger. For it
was now three moonethes sense they departed from their fellows. Three
moo^eth^^ from (...) to Cuba, by reason of tepest^
By reason whereof, they were enforced to take land to prove what aid they
could get among the inhabitants. Their chance therefore, was to arryue in
that part of the Island, where Valdiuia was driven alande by tempest. But oh
you wretched men of Dariena? Tarry for Valdiuia whom you sent to provide to
h^lpe yowre nece^sities? (...)
Provide for yowre selves rather and trust not to them whose fortune you know
not. For when he arrived in Cuba, thinhabitantes slew him with all his fellows,
and left the carauell wherein they were carried, torn in pieces and half
covered with sand on the shore: where Quicedus and Colmenaris fyndyng the
fragmentes thereof, bewailed their fellows mysfortune. But they found none of
their carkeses: supposinge that they were either drowned, or devoured of the
Canibals, which oftentimes make incursions into that Island to hunte for men.
But at the length, by two of the Island men which they had taken, they had
knowleage of Valdiuia his destruction: And that thinhabitantes the more
greedely attempted the same, hurt of lauyshenes of the tongue.
for that they had hard by the babbling of one of his fellows that he had
great plenty of gold. For they also take pleasure in the beauty of gold, which
they form artificially into sundry ouches. Thus owre men stryken with
pensiveness for the cruel destenie of their fellows, and in vain seekynge
revenge for their injuries, determined to forsake that unfortunate land,
departing from those covetous naked barbarians with more sorrow and necessity
then they were in before. Or ever they had passed the South side of Cuba, they
fell into a thousand mysfortunes: and had intellygence that Fogeda arrived
thereaboute, The calamity and death of Fogeda.
leadynge a miserable life, tossed and turmoyled with tempests and vexed with
a thousand perplexities: So that departing from thense almost alone, his
fellows being for the most part all consumed with maladies and famyn,
Maladies and famen.
he came with much difficulty to Hispaniola, where he dyed by force of the
poison of his venomous wound which he had received in Vraba as we have said
before. But Ancisus elected Lieuetenaunt, The prosperous vyage of Ancisus.
sailed by all those coasts with much better fortune. For as he him self
toulde me, he found prosperous wyndes in those parties, and was well
enterteyned of thinhabitantes of Cuba. But this specially in the dominion of a
certain king whose name was Commendator. A king of Cuba ^aptised by the name
of Commendator.
For whereas he desired of the Christian men which passed by, to be baptized,
demanding the name of the governor of the Island next unto Hispaniola,
being a noble man and a knight of thorder of Galatraua of which order al are
cauled Commendatores, this kings desire was to be named after him. King
Commendator therefore, frendely received Ancisus, and gave him great abundance
of al things necessary. But what Ancisus learned of their religion during the
time of his Ancisus
remaining there, I have thowght good to aduertyse yowre holiness. You shall
therefore understand, A maruelou^ history how God wrought miracles by the
simple faith of a maryner.
that certain of owre men saylinge by the coasts of Cuba, left with king
Commendator* a certain poor maryner being diseased. Who in short space
recoueringe his health, and having now sumwhat learned their language, began
to grow into great estimation with the king and his subjects, in so much
that he was oftentimes the kings Lieuetenaunt in his wars against other
princes his bortherers. This man's fortune was so good, that all things
prospered well that he took in hand. And albeit that he were not learned, yet
was he a virtuous and well meaning man according to his knowleage, and did
religiously honor the blessed virgin, bearing ever about with him her
picture fair painted upon paper and sowd in his apparel nere unto his breast:
Be not rash in judgment
Signifyinge unto the king, that this holiness was the cause of al his
victories: persuadynge him to do the like, and to cast away all his Zemes
which were none other then the symilitudes of evil spirits, Zemes,
most cruel enemies and deuourers of owre sowles: And to take unto him the
holy virgin and moother of god to be his patroness if he desired all his
affairs as well in war as in peace to succeed prosperously. Also that the
blessed virgyn woolde at no time fail him, but be ever ready to help him and
his, if they woolde with devout hearts caul upon her name. The maryner had
soon persuaded the naked nation: And there upon gave the king (who demanded
the same) his pycture of the virgin, to whom he builded and dedicate a chapel
and an altar, A chapel builded to the picture of the virgin Mary
ever after contemnynge and reiectynge his Zemes. Of these Zemes made of
gossampine cotton to the similitudes of sprytes walking in the night which
they oftentimes see, and speak with them familierly, we have spoken
sufficiently in the nynth book of the first Decade. Furthermore, according to
the institution of this maryner; when the soonne draws toward the faule,
this king Commendator with all his famely both men and women, resort daily
to the said chapel of the virgin Marie, God re^pecteth the infancy of fa^the
for zeles sake
where kneelyng on their knees and reverently bawyng down their heads,
holding their hands joined together, they salute thimage of the virgin with
these words: Aue Maria, Aue Maria. For few of them can rehearse any more
words of this prayer. At Ancisus his being there, they took him and his
fellows by the hands, and led them to this chapel with reioysinge, saying
that they woolde show them marvelous things. When they were entered, One
Religion turned into an other, holds still many th^nges of the first.
they poynted with their fyngers to the Image of the virgin altobeset and
hanged abowte with ouches and jewels and many earthen pottes, filled sum with
sundry meats, and sum with water, rownde about all the tabernacle. For these
things they offer to the image in the sleede of sacrifice, according to their
owlde supersticion toward their Zemes. Being demanded why they did thus,
they answered, A strange fantasy.
least the image should lack meat if perhaps it should be a hungerd. For they
most certainly believe that images may hunger, and that they do eat and drink.

But what aid and help they confess that they have had of the godly pour of
this image, that is of the blessed virgin, it is a thing worthy to be hard,
and most assuredly to be taken for a truth. For by the report of owre men,
there is such fervent godly love and zeal in these simple men toward the holy
virgin, that to them being in the dangers of war against their enemies,
they do in manner (if I may so term it) compel her to descend from heaven to
help them in their necessities. The effect of godly zeal.
For such is the goodness of god, that he has left unto men in manner a price
whereby we may purchase him with his holy angels and saints, that is to wit,
burning love, charity and zeal. How therefore can the blessed virgin at any
time be absent from the^ which call for her help with pure faith and fervent
love? Commendator him self, with all his noble me^ and gentelmen, do testify
with one voice, that in a fought battle in the which this maryner was
captain, bearyng with him this picture of the virgin Marie, A miracle in the
time of the battle
the Zemes of their enemies turned their backs and trembeled in the presence
of the virgins Image and in the sight of them all. For every of the^ bring
their Zemes to the battle, hoping by their help to obtain the victory. Ye
they say further, that during the time of the battle, they saw not only an
Image, but a lively woman clothed in fair and white apparel, aydynge them
against their enemies: which thing also the enemies them selves acknowleaged,
The virgin Mary* is present at the battle.
confessing that on the contrary part she appeared to them, shaking a
septer in her hand with threatenynge countenance, which caused their hearts
to shake and faint for fear. But after that this maryner departed from them,
being taken into a ship of certain Christians passing by those coasts,
Commendator declared that he with all his subjects, continually observed his
institucions: In so much that being at contention with an other prince,
which of their Zemes were most holy and of greateste pour, the matter grew
to such extremity that they tried it with hand strokes: And that in all
these attemptes, the blessed virgin never failed him, but was ever present in
the brunte of the battle, and gave him easy victory with a smaule pour of
men, against a main army of his enemies. Being demanded with what words
they cried upon the virgin Mary when they assailed their enemies, they
answered that they had learned no other words of the mariners doctrine, but
Sancta Maria adiuua nos, Sancta Maria adiuua nos: That is, holy Mary help us,
holy Marye help us: And this also in the Spanysshe tongue. For he had left
these words in the mouths of all men. A maruelus experience of faith
While they murdered and destroyed them selves thus on both sides, they fell
to entreatie of peace and agreed to try the matter, not hand to hand by
combatte of certain chosen for both parties as the manner was among the
Romans and diverse other nations in the owlde time, or by any slyght or
policy, but that two young men should be chosen, for each party one, with
their hands bound fast behind them in the plain field, both parties
being sworn to acknowleage that Zemes to be the better, which first loosed
the bands of the young man which stood bound for the trial of his
religion. Thus diuidinge them selves, Much like unto this, is read in. Reg.
xviii.
and placeinge the said young men before them in the sight of them al, with
their hands fast bound by their enemies, the contrary part cauled first on
their Zemes (that is, the devil to whose similitude their Images are made) who
immediately appeared in his lykenes about the young man that stood bound in
the defense of Satan's kyngedome. The devil appears in his lykenes


But as soon as Commendator with his coompanye cried Sancta Maria adiuua nos,
Sancta Maria adiuua nos, forthwith there appeared a fair virgin clothed in
white, at whose presence the deuell vanquisshed immediately. But the virgin
having a long rod in her hand, and putting the same on the bands of the
young man that stood for Commendator, his hands were loosed immediately in
the sight of them all, and his bands found about the hands of him that
stood for the other party, An other miracle.
in so much that they them selves fownde him dowble bound. But for all this,
were not the enemies satissyed: querelinge that this thing was done by sum
slyght or divise of man, and not by the pour of the better Zemes. And there
upon required for thaduoydynge of all suspection, that there might be eight
grave and sage men appointed, for each side four, which should bind the men
in the sight of them all, and also give judgment whether the thing were
done withowte craft or gyle. Oh pure simplicity and constant faith: Oh
golden and blessed confidence. Commendator and his familiers, doubted not to
grant their enemies their request with like faith wherewith the diseased
woman obtained health of the flux of her bludde, Math. 14.
and whereby Peter feared not to walk on the sea at the sight of his master
Christ. These young men therefore were bound in the presence of these eight
grave men, and were placed within their lystes in the sight of both parties.
Thus upon a sign given, when they cauled upon their Zemes, there appeared in
the sight of them all, The devil appears agein.
a devil with a long tail, a wide mouth, great teeth, and horns,
resemblyng the similitude of the Image which the king being enemy to
Commendator, honored for his Zemes. As this devil attempted to loose the
bands of his cliente, the blessed virgin was immediately present as before at
the caul of Commendator and his subjects, The Uirgin Mary overcomes the
devil.
and with her rod loosed the bands of her suppliant, which were again
likewise found fast tied about the hands of him that stood for the
contrary part. The enemies therefore of Commendator, being stryken with
great fear and amassed by reason of this great miracle, confessed that the
Zemes of the virgin was better the^ their Zemes. For the better proof whereof,
these pagans being bortherers to Commendator, Infidels converted by miracle*
and baptized.
which had ever before been at continual war and enmity with him, when they
had knowleage that Ancisus was arrived in those coasts, they sent
ambasadoures unto him, to desire him to send them priests of whom they might
be baptized: Where upon he sent them two which he had with him there at
that present. They baptized in one day a hundredth and thirty of
thinhabitantes, sumtyme enemies to Commendator, but now his friends and joined
with him in aliance.

All such as came to be baptized, gave the priests of their own
liberality, The preeste and reward.
either a cock or a hen. But no capons: for they can not yetskyl how to
carue their cock chycke^s to make them capons. Also certain salted fysshes,
and new fine cakes made of their bread: likewise certain fowls franked and
made fat. When the priests resorted to the ships, six of these new
baptized men accoompanied them laden with vitailes, wherewith they led a
joyful Easter. For on the Sunday two days before saint Lazarus day, they
departed from Dariena, and touched at that time, only to the cape or angle of
Cuba nere unto the East side of Hispaniola. At the request of Commendator,
Ancisus left with him one of his coompanie, to thintente too teach him and
his subjects with other his bortherers, the salutacion of the angel which we
caul the Aue Maria. Aue Maria.
For they think them selves to be so much the more beloved of the blessed
virgin, as they can rehearse the more words of that prayer. Thus Ancisus
taking his leave of king Commendator, directed his course to Hispaniola, from
which he was not far. Shortly after, he took his viage to Spain, Ancisus
vyage to Spain
and came to Valladoleto to the king, to whom he made grievous complaint of the
insolency of V^schus N^nnes, Ancisus complayneth of Uaschuz.
in so much that by his procuremente, the King gave sentence ageynste him.
Thus much have I thowght good (most holy father) whereof to aduertyse yowr
holiness as concerning the religion of these nations, not only as I have been
instructed of Ancisus (with whom I was daily couersante in the court and used
him familiarlye) but also as I was informed of diverse other men of great
authority, to thintente that yowre excellency may understand how docible
this kind of men is, and with what facility they may be allured to embrase
owr religion. But this can not be done soodenlye. The harvest is great, but
the laborers are few.
Yet we have great cause to hope that in short time they will be all drawn by
little and little to the evangelical law of Christ, to the great increase of
his flock. But let us now return to the messengers or procuratours as
concerniynge the affairs of Dariena.

The seventh book of the second decade of the supposed continente.
FRom Dariena to Hispaniola is eyghte days sailinge and sumtymes less with a
prosperous wind. From Dariena to hispaniola viii. days saylyng.
Yet Quicedus and Colmenaris the procuratoursof Dariena, by reason of tempests
and contrary wyndes, could scarsely sail it in a hundrethe days. When they
had tarried a few days in Hispaniola, and had declared the cause of the
coming to the admiral and the other governors, they took shippinge in two
marchante ships being redye furnysshed, which were also accustomed to sail
too and froo between Spain and the Island of Hispaniola. They departed from
Dariena (as we said before) the fourth day of the calendes of november in the
year of Christ.1512, and came not to the court before the calendes of May in
the year folowinge being the year of Christ.1513. The procuratours of
Dariena, are honorably received at the court.
At thyr coming to the court, Johannes Fonseca (to whom at the beginning
the charge of these affairs was committed, whom also for his faithful service
toward the king, yowre holiness created general commissarie in the wars
ageynste the moors) received them honorably, as men coming from the new
world, from naked nations, and lands unknown to other men.

By the prefermente therefore of the bysshope of Burges, Quicedus and
Colmenaris were brought before the king, and declared their legacy in his
presence. Such news and presents as they brought, were delectable to the
king and his noble men, for the newnes and straungnes thereof. They also
suiorned with me often times. Their complexion is altered
Their countenaunces do declare the intemperatenes of the air and region of
Dariena. For they are yelowe like unto them that have the yelowe gaundies: And
also swollen. But they ascrybe the cause hereof, to the hunger which they
sustained in time past. I have been advertised of thaffayres of this new
woorlde, not only by these procuratours of Dariena, Of whom the autour had
information
and Ancisus, and Zamudius, but also by conference with Ba^^ia the lawier, who
ran over a great part of those coasts. Likewise by relation of Vincentius
Annex the patron of the ships, and Alfonsus Nignus, both being men of great
experience and well trauayled in those parties, beside many other, of whom we
have made mention in other places For there came never any from thense to the
court, but took great pleasure to certify me of al things either by word
of mouth or by writing. Of many things therefore which I learned of them, I
have gathered such as to my Judgment seem most worthy to satisfy them that
take delight in hystories. But let us now declare what followed after the
coming of the procuratours of Dariena. Therefore, before their arryuall there
was a rumoure spread in the court, that the chief gouernoures and
Lieuetenauntes Nicuesa and Fogeda, also Johannes De la Gossa (a man of such
reputacion that by the kings letters patentes he was named the great master
of the kings ships) were all peryshed by mischaunce: The great master of
the kings ships
And that those few which yet remained alive in Dariena, were at contencion
and discord among them selves: So that they neither endeavored their
diligence to allure those simple nations to owre faith, nor yet had regard to
search the natures of those Regions. In consideration whereof, the king was
determined to send a new captain thither which should restore and set all
things in good order, and put them owte of authority which had usurped
thempire of those provinces withowte the kings special commandment. To this
office, was one Petrus Arias assigned, Petrus arias is e^ected governor of
Dariena.
a man of great prowes and a citisen of Segouia. But when the procuratours of
Dariena had published in the court how great a matter it was, and of what
moment, many labored ernestly to the king, to take the office owte of his
hands. But the bishop of Burges being the kings chief chaplayne, and one
of the commissioners appointed by him in these matters, being advertised
hereof, came immediately to the king, and spoke to him in this effect.
Thoracion of the bishop. of Burges in the def^nce of Pe^^us arias.
May it please yowre hyghnes to understand (most catholyke Prince) that whereas
Petrus Arias a man of valiente courage and great service, has offered him
self to adventure his life in yowre majesty's affairs, under uncertain hope
of gain and most certain perels, yet that notwithstanding sum other have
ambiciously maliced his felicity and preferme^t labouringe for thoffice
whereto he is elected: It may please yowre grace herein so to show him yowr
favor and permit him to enjoy his said office, as yowre majesty do know
him to be a worthy and meet man for the same, having in time paste had
great experience of his prowess and valianenesse, as well in behauinge him
self as orderinge his soldiers, as yowr hyghnes may the better consider if it
shall please you to caul to remembrance his doings in the wars of Aphrica,
The wars of Aphrica.
where he showed him self both a wise Captain, and valient soldier. As
concerning his manners and vsages other ways, they are not unknown to yowre
majesty, under whose wynge he has of a child been browght up in the court,
and ever found faithful toward yowre highness. Wherefore, to declare my
opinion under yowre graces favor (whom it has pleased to appoint me a
commissioner in these affairs) I think it were ungodly that he should be put
from his office at the suit of any other, especially being thereto moved by
ambition and covetousness: who perchance woold prove them selves to be the same
men in the office if they should obtain it, as they now show them selves in
the ambitious desirynge of the same. When the bishop had said these
words, the king confirmed the election of Petrus Arias in more ample manner
then before: Petrus Arias Lieuetenante of Dariena.
willing the bishop to appoint him a thousand and two hundredth soldiers
at his charges, making him a warrante to thofficers of his escheker to deliver
him money in priest for the same purpose. Petrus Arias therefore being thus put
in office and authorysed by the kings letters patentes under his broad seal,
Petrus Arias has a thousand and tw^o hundredth me^ appointed at the kings
charges.
chose a great number of his soldiers in the court, and so departed from
Valladoleto about the calend^s of October in the year 1513: And sailed first
to Civil being a very rich city and well replenyshed with people: where by
the kings magistrates he was furnyshed with men and vytayles and other
necessaries perteynynge to so great a matter. For the king has in this city
erected a house seruinge only for thaffayres of the Ocean, A house in Civil
appointed to the affairs of India.
to the which al they that goo or coome from the new lands and Islands,
resort to give accomptes as well what they carry thither as what they bring
from thense, that the king may be truly answered of his custom of the fyfte
part both of gold and other things as we have said before. This house,
they caul the house of the Contractes of Indi. Petrus Arias found in Civil
above two thousand young men which made great suit to goo with him: Perularia.
likewise no small number of covetous owlde men: of the which, many offered
them selves to goo with him of their own charges withowt the kings stipende.
Many proof them selves to go of they^ own charges.
But lest the ships should be pestered with to great a multitude, or least
vytayles should fail them, the liberty of free passage was restraynt. It was
also decreed that no stranger might pass withowt the kings license. Wherefore
I do not a little marvel at Aloisius Cadamustus a venetian and writer of the
Portugales vyages, Aloisius Cadamustus i^ reproved.
that he was not a shamed to write thus of the Spanyardes nauigations: we went:
we saw: we did. Whereas he never went, not any Uenetian saw. But he stoule
certain annotacions owte of the three first books of my first Decade written
to Cardinal Ascanius and Arcimboldus, supposinge that I woolde never have
publysshed the same. It might also happen that he came by the copy thereof at
the hand of sum ambasadoure of Uenice. For I have granted the copy to many
of them, and was not dangerous to forbid them to communicate the same to
other. How so ever it be, this honest man Aloisius Cadamustus feared not to
challenge unto him the fruit of an other man's labor. Of the inventions of the
Portugales (which surely are wonderful) whether he have written that which
he has seen (as he says) or likewise bereaved other men of the just
commendations of their trauayles, The Port^gales inue^tions.
I will not judge, but am content to let him live after his manner. Emonge the
company of these soldiers, there were none embarked but such as were licenced
by the king, except a few Italians, Genues, who by frendshippe and suit were
admitted for the Admirals sake young Colonus, son and heir to Christophorus
Colonus the first fynder of those lands. Petrus Arias therefore took shippyng
in the river Betis (now cauled Guadalqueuir) runnyng by the city of Civil,
The nauigatio^ of Petrus Arias.
about the beginnynge of the year of Christ.1514. But he loosed anchor in an
evil hour. A shipwreck
For such a tempeste followed shortly after his departure, that it rent in
pieces two of his ships, and so tossed the other that they were enforced to
heave over boorde part of their vytayles to lyghten them. All such as escaped,
sailed back again to the coasts of Spain: where, being newely furnyshed
and refreshed, by the kings officers, they went forward on their viage. The
master pylot of the gouernoures ship, was Johannes Vesputius a Florentine,
the neuie of Americus Vesputius, Americus Vesputius.
who left him as it were by discente of inheritance, thexperience of the
mariners faculty, and knowleage of the sea, card and compass. But we were
advertised of late by certain which came from Hispaniola, that they had passed
the Ocean with more prosperous wind. For this merchant ship coming from
Hispaniola found them landinge at certain Islands nere there about. But in
the mean time while my importunate caulers on, Galeaceus Butrigarius and
Johannes Cursius, men studious by all means to gratify yowre holiness, ceased
not to put me in rememberance that they had one in a redines to depart into
Italy, and tarried only to carry with him unto yowre holiness these my fair
Nereides althowgh rudely decked, least I should bestow much time in vain, I
have let pass many things, and will rehearse only such as seem in my
judgment most woorthye memory, althowgh sumwhat disordered as occasion has
served. So it is therefore that this Petrus Arias has a wife named Helisabeth a
Boadilla, A notable exemple of a valient woman.
being niese by the broothers side to the marquis of Boadilla, which rendered
the city of Segouia to Fernando and Helisabeth princes of Spain at such time
as the Portugales invaded the kingdom of Castile: by reason whereof they were
encoraged fy^ste to resyste, and then with open war to assail and expulse
the Portugales for the great tresure which king Henry brother to queen
Helisabeth had gathered together there. king henry.
This marquess while she lived, did ever show a manly and stout mind,
both in peace and war, so that by her counsel many noble things were
browght to good effect in Castile: unto this noble woman, the wife of Petrus
Arias was niese by her brothers side. She following the magnanimity of her
aunt, perceauinge her husband now furnyshyng him self to depart to the
unknown coasts of the new woorlde, and those large tractes of land and sea,
spoke these words unto him. My most dear and well-beloved husband, The wife
of Petrus Arias.
we owght not now to forget that from owre young years we have been joined
together with the yoke of holy matrimony to thintente that we sh^lde so live
together and not a sunder during the time of owre natural life. Wherefore for
my part to declare my affection herein, you shall understand, that whyther
so ever yowre fatal destenye shall drive you, either by the furious waves of
the great Ocean, or by the manyfoulde and horrible dangers of the land, I
will surely bear you coompany. There can no perell chance to me so terrible,
nor any kind of death so cruel, that shall not be much easyer for me to
abide, then to live so far separate from you. It were much better for me to
dye, and either to be cast into the sea to be devoured of the fysshes, or on
the land to the Canibales, then with continual mourning and bewaylinge, to
live in death and dye lyuinge, while I consume in lookyng rather for my
husbands letters then for him self. This is my full determinacion, not
rashely nor presentely excogitate, nor conceived by the light fantasy of
woman's brain, but with long deliberatio^ and good aduisement. Now therefore
choose to whether of these two you will assente: Either to thruste yowre
swoorde in my throat, or to grant me my request. As for the ch^ldren which
god has given us as pledges of owr inseparable love, (for they had four
sons and as many dowghters) shall not stay me a moment. Let us leave unto them
such gooddes and possessions as have been left us by owre parents and friends
whereby they may live among the woorshipful of their order. For other things I
take no care. When this noble matrone of manly virtue had fynisshed these
words, her husband saying the constant mind of his wife, and her in a
redynes to do according to her words, had no heart to deny her louinge
peticion: but embrasinge her in his arms, commended her intent and consented
to her request. She followed him therefore as did Ipsicratea her Mithridates
with her hear hangeinge loose about her shulders. For she loves her
husband as did Halicarnassea of Caria, hers being dead, and as did Artemisia
her Mausolus: We have also had aduertiseme^t sense their departure that she
(being browght up as it were among soft feathers) has with no less stout
courage sustained the roringes and rages of the Ocean, then did either her
husband or any of the maryners brought up even among the sourges of the sea.
But to have said thus much hereof, this shall suffice. Let us now speak of
other things no less worthy memory. Therefore, whereas in the first Decade
we have made mention of Vincentius Annez Pinzonus, ye shall understand that he
accoompanyed Christophorus Colonus the Admiral in his first vyage, and
afterward made an other vyage of his own charges with only one ship.
Again, the first year after the departinge of the Capitaynes Nicuesa and
Fogeda, he ran over those coasts from Hispaniola, The third navigations of
Uincentiu^ Pinzonus.
and searched all the southe side of Cuba from the East to the weste, and
sailed rownde about that Island which to that day for the great length
thereof, was thowght to have bin part of the continent or firm land, al thowgh
sum other say that they did the like. Vincentius Annez therefore, knowing now
by experience that Cuba was an Island, sailed on further, and found other
lands westward from Cuba, Cuba.
but such as the Admiral had first touched. Wherefore, being in manner
encompased with this new land, turninge his course toward the left hand,
and rasing the coasts of that land by the East, ouerpassinge also the mouths
of the goulfes of Beragua, Beragua.
Vraba, Vraba.
and Cuchibachoa, Cuchibacoa.
he arrived at the Region which in the first Decade we cauled Paria and Os
Draconis: Paria.
Os Draconis
And entered into the great goulfe of fresshe water, which Colonus discovered,
being replenished with great abundance of fysshe, and famous by reason of the
multitude of Islands lyinge in the same, being distant Eastwarde from Curiana
about a hundredth and thirty miles, Curiana,
in the which tract are the Regions of Cumana and Manacapana, Cumana.
Manacapana,
which also in the syxte book of the first Decade we said to be Regions of
the large province of Paria, where many affirm to be the greteste plenty of
the best pearls, Plenty of Pearls.
and not in Curiana.

The kings of these regions (whom they caul Chiacones, as they of Hispaniola
caul them Cacici) being certified of the coming of owre men, sent
certain spies to enquire what new nation was arrived in their coasts, what
they browght, and what they woolde have: and in the mean time furnysshed a
number of their Canoas (which they caul Chichos) with men armed after their
manner. For they were not a little astonisshed to behold owre ships with the
sails spread, whereas they use no sails, nor can use but smaule ons if they
woolde, by reason of the narownes of their canoas. Swarmynge therefore about
the ship with their canoas (which we may well caul Monoxyla, Monoxyla. The
Barbarians assail owre men being in their ships.
because they are made of one hole tree,) they feared not to shute at owr men
being yet within their ships and keepinge them selves under the hatches as
safely as if they had been defended with stone waules. But when owre men had
shot of certain pieces of ordinance against them they were so discomfited
with the noise and slawghter thereof that they drove them selves to flight. The
use of gunnes.
Being thus disparcled, owr men chased them with the ship bote, took many,
and slew many. When the kings hard the noise of the gunnes, and were
certyfied of the loss of their men, they sent ambasadours to Vincentius Agnes
to entreat of peace, fearinge the spoil of their goods and destruction of
their people, if owre men shuld^ coomme alande in their wrath and furye. They
desired peace therefore, Great abundance of gold and frankensence.
as could be coniectured by their signs and poyntinges: For owre men
understood not one word of their language. And for the better proof that
they desired peace, they presented owre men with three thousand of those
weights of gold that the Spanyardes caul Cas^ellanum Aureum, which they
commonly caul Pesum. Olibanum.
Also a great barell of woodde full of most excellent masculine
frankensence, weighing about two thousand and six hundredth pounds weight
after eight ounces to the pound: Whereby they knew that that land browght
furthe great plenty of frankensence. Sabea, ^is a country in Arabie, which
brings forth frankensence
For there is no intercourse of marchaundies between thinhabitantes of Paria
and the sabeans being so far distante, whereas also the of Paria know
nothing with owte their own coasts. Paria.
With the gold and frankensence which the presented to owre men, they gave
them also a great multitude of their peacockes, Peacockes which we cause
Turkye cocks.
both cocks and hens, dead and alive, as well to satisfy their present
necessity, as also to carry with them into Spain for increase. Likewise
certain carpettes, coouerlettes, table clothes and hanginges made of
gossampine silk fynelye wrought after a strange divise with plesante and
variable colors, ^arpets and couerlett^s fynely wrought.
having golden belles and such other spangles and pendauntes as the Italians
caul Sonaglios, and the Spanyardes Cascaueles, hanging at the purfles thereof.
They gave them furthermore speakinge popingiais of sundry colors as many as
they woolde ask. Popyngayes.
For in Paria, there is no less plenty of popingiais, then with us of dooues
or sparous, Thinhabitantes of these Regions both men and women are appareled
with vestures made of gossampine cotton, Thapparell of the ^^h^bittants o^ paria
the men to the knees, and the women too the calfe of the leg. The fasshion
of their apparel, is simple and plain much like unto the Turks. But the
men's, is double and quilted like that which the Turks use in the wars. The
princes of Paria, are rulers but for one year: Rule^s for one year.
But their authority is no less emonge the people both in peace and war,
then is thautoritie of other kings in those Regions. Their villages are
builded in coompasse, (...) great goulfe of Paria.
along by the banks of all that great goulfe. Five of their princes came to
owre men with their presents, whose names I thowght worthy to be put in this
history in remembrance of so notable a thing Chiaconus Chiauaccha, (that is
the prince of Chiauaccha, for they caul princes or kings Chiaconos) Chiaconus
Pintiguanus, Chiaconus Chamailaba, Chiaconus Polomus, and Chiaconus Potto. The
goulfe being first found of the admiral Colonus, they caul, Baia
Natiuitatis, Baia Natiuitatis the great goulfe of Pa^ia.
because he entered into the same in the day of the nativity of Christ: But
at that time he only passed by it withowte any further searching. and Baia in
the Spanysshe tongue, signifies a goulfe. When Vincentius had thus made a league
with these Princes, folowinge his appointed course, he found many regions
toward the East, Uincentuis makes a league with v. princes. of Paria.
desolate by reason of diverse finddes and over flowynges of waters: also many
standing pooles in diverse places, and those of exceeding largenes. He ceased
not to follow this tracte until he came to the point or cape of that most
long land. This point semethe as though it woolde invade the monte Atlas in
Aphrica. Mount Atlas in aphrike.
For it prospectethe toward that part of Aphrike, which the portugales caul
Caput Bonoe Sperantiae. The points or capes of the mount Atlas, are rough and
saluage nere unto the sea. The cape of Bona Speranza, gatherethe thirty and
four degrees of the Southe pole, cauled the pole antartike: But that point,
only seven degrees. I suppose this land to be that, which I find in owlde
writers of Cosmographie to be cauled the great Island Atlantike, The great
Island atlantike.
withowt any further declaringe either of the sytuation, or of the nature
thereof.

The eight book of the second decade of the supposed continente.
WHen Johan the king of portugale lived which was predicessoure to him that
now reigns, Contention between the Castilians and Portugale^ for the new
lands
there arose a great contention between the Castilians and Portugales as
concerning the dominion of these new found lands. The Portugales, because
they were the first that durst attempt to search the Ocan sea sense the
memory of man, affirmed that all the nauigations of the Ocean, owght to
perteyne to them only. The Castilians argued on the contrary part, that
what so ever god by the ministratio^ of nature has created on the earth, was
at the beginning common among men: And that it is therefore lawful to every
man to possese such lands as are void of Christian inhabitours. While the
matter was thus vncerteynly debated, both parties agreed that the controversy
should be decerned by the bysshope of Rome, and plighted faith to stand to
his arbitrimente. The kyngedome of Castile was at that time governed by that
great Queen Helisabeth with her husband: for the roialme of Castile was her
dowerye. The bishop of Rome divides the land
She also and the king of Portugale, were cosyn germaynes of two systers: by
reason whereof the dissension was more easily pacified. By thassent therefore of
both parties, Alexander the bishop Rome, the.vi. of that name, by thautorite
of his leaden bull, drew a right line from the North to the South a hundredth
leaques westwarde withowte the paralelles of those Islands which are cauled
Caput Viride or Cabouerde, Cabouerde look decade i. lib. iii
Within the compase of this line (althowgh soomme deny it) faulethe the point
of this land whereof we have spoken, which they caul Caput Sancti Augustini,
otherwise cauled Promontorium Sancti Augustini, that is, saint Augustines cape
or point. And therefore it is not lawful for the Castilians to fasten foot in
the beginnynge of that land. Vincentius Annez therefore, departed from thense,
being advertised of thinhabitantes, that on the other side of the high
mountains toward the South, lyinge before his eyes, there was a Region cauled
Ciamba, The golden region of Ciamba.
which browght forth great plenty of gold. Of certain captives which he
too^e in the goulfe of Paria (which certainly perteyneth to the dominion of
Castile) he browght sum with him to Hispaniola, and left them with the young
Admiral to learn owre language. But he him self, repaired to the court to
make ernest suit to the king that by his favor, he might be governor of
the Island of Sancti Iohannis (otherwise cauled Burichena, The Island of S.
Johannes
being distante from Hispaniola only.xxv. leaques) because he was the first
fynder of gold in that Island. Before Vincentius made suit for this office,
one Don Christopher a Portugale, the soonne of the county of Camigna, was
gouernoure of the Island: whom the Canibales of the other Islands slew, with
all the Christian men that were in the same, except the bishop and his
familiers, which fled and shyfted for them selves, forsakynge the church and
all the ornaments thereof. For yowre holiness has consecrated five bishops
in these Islands at the request of the most catholyke king. Five bishops of
the Island made by the bishop of Rome.
In Sancto Dominico being the chief city of Hispaniola, Garsia de Padilla, a
reguler friar of the order of saint Fraunces, is bishop. In the town of
Conception, doctor Petrus Xuarez of Deza: And in the Island of saint John or
Burichena, Alfonsus Mansus a licenciate, being both obseruantes of
thinstitucion of saint Peter. The fourth, is friar Barnarde of Mesa, a man of
noble parentage, borne in Toledo, a preacher, and bishop of the Island of Cuba.
The fyfte is Johannes Cabedus, a friar preacher, whom yowre holiness anointed
mynister of Christ, to teach the Christian faith among the inhabitants of
Dariena. The Canibales shall shortly repent them, and the bludde of owre men
shall be revenged: And that the sooner, because that shortly after they had
committed this abominable slaughter of owre men, they came again from their
own Island of Sancta Crux (otherwise cauled AyAy) to the Island of Sancti
Iohannis. The Canibales of the Island of Sancta Crux.
and slew a king which was a friend to owre men, and eat him and all his
famely, utterly subuertinge his vyllage, upon this occasion that violatinge
the law of hostage, he had slain seven Canibales which were left with him
by composition to make certain canoas, because the Island of Sancti Iohannis
bears greater trees and apter for that purpose, then does the Island of
Sancti Crux the chief habitacion of the Canibales. These Canibales yet
remaining in the Island, certain of owre men sailing from Hispaniola,
chanced upon them. The thing being understood by thinterpretoures, owre men
quarelynge with them and caulynge them to account for that mischeuous deed,
they immediately directed their bows and venomous arrows against them, and
with cruel countenaunces threatened the^ to be quiet, least it should repent
them of their coming thither. Owre men fearing their venomous arrows (for
they were not prepared to fight) gave them signs of peace. Being demanded why
they destroyed the vyllage, and where the king was with his famelye, they
answered that they rased the vyllage and cut the king with his famelie in
pieces and eat them in the revenge of their seven woorkemen: And that they had
made faggottes of their bones to carry them to the wives and children of their
slain woorkemen, in witness that the bodies of their husbands and parents
lay not unrevenged: and therewith showed the faggottes of bones to owre men:
who being astonyshed at their fiercenes and cruelty, were enforced to
dissimble the matter and houlde their peace, quarelynge no further with them
at tha^ time. These and such other things do daily c^aunce, the which I do
let pass least I should offend the ears of yowr holiness with such bluddy
narrations. Thus have we sufficiently digressed from the regions of Beragua
and Vraba being the chiefeste foundations of owre purpose. Beragua and Uraba.
We will now therefore entreat sumewhat of the largenes and depthe of the
ryuers of Vraba: The ryuers of Uraba.
Also declare both what they and the lands which they run through do
bring forth: likewise of the greatness of the land from the East to the
West, and of the breadth thereof from the Southe to the North, and what their
opinion and hope is of things yet unknown in the same. We will therefore
begin at the new names wherewith the Spanyardes have named these provinces
sense they were under the dominions of the Christians.

The nynth book of the second Decade, of the supposed Continent.
BEragua therefore, they cauled Castella Aurea, that is golden Castile: And
Vraba they named Andaluzia Noua, that is, new Andalusia. Beragua, cauled
Castella aurifera, and Uraba, Andaluzia noua. Sum caul Peru, Noua Castilia.
And like as of many Islands which they subdued, they choose Hispaniola for the
chief place of their habitacion, so in the large tract of Paria, they
appointed their coloine or bydyng place in the two regions of Vraba and
Beragua, Beragua and Uraba, regions of Paria*
that all such as attempt and vyages in those coasts, may resort to them as
to safe ports to be refreshed when they are weary or driven to necessity. All
owre seeds, and plants, The frutefulnes of Uraba
do now maruelously increase in Vraba. Likewise blades, settes, slippes,
graffes, sugar canes, and such other as are brought from other places to those
regions, as also beasts and fowls as we have said before. O marvelous
frutefulnes. Twenty days after the seed is sown, they gather ripe cucumers,
and such like, But colwortes, beetes, Letuse, Borage are ripe within the space
of ten days. Gourdes, melones, and pompones, within the space of.xxviii.
days. Dariena has many native trees and fruits of diverse kinds with sundry
tastes, The frutfu^nes of Dariena.
and wholesome for the use of me^: Diverse holsomy fruits of ^rees.
of the which I have thowght it good to descrybe certain of the best. They
noorysshe a tree which they caul Guaiana, Guaiana,
that bears a fruit much resembling the kind of citrous which are commonly
cauled limones, of taste sumwhat sharp myxt with swetenes. They have also
abundance of nuttes of pynetrees, and great plenty of date trees, Pine trees.
Date trees.
which bear fruits bygger then the dates that are known to us: but they are
not apt to be eaten for their to much sowernes. Wild and baren date trees,
grow of them selves in sundry places, the branches whereof they use for
biesommes, and ea^e also the buddes of the same. Guarauana, Guarauana
being higher and bygger then the orange tree, brings forth a great fruit as
bygge as pome citrous.

There is an other tree much like to a chestnut tree whose fruit is like to the
bygger sort of fygs, being wholesome and of pleasant taste. Mameis, Mameis,
is an other tree that brings forth fruit as bygge as an orange, in taste
nothing inferioure to the best kinds of melones. Guananala, Guananala.
bears a fruit less then any of the other, but of sweet sauoure like spice,
and of delectable taste. Houos, Houos.
is an other tree whose fruit both in shape and taste, is much like to prunes,
but sumwhat bygger. They are surely persuaded that this is the Myrobalane-tree.
Mirobalani, Hogs fed with mirobalanes
These grow so abundantely in Hispaniola, that the hogs are fed with the
fruit thereof as with maste among us. The hogs like this kind of feadynge
so well, that when these fruits wax ripe, the swyneherdes can by no means
keep them owte of the wooddes of these trees: by reason whereof, a great
multitude of them are becoome wild. They also affirm, that in Hispaniola,
swynes flesh is of much better taste and more wholesome then mutton. Swynes
fle^she of better taste and more holsum then mutton.
For it is not to be doubted, but that diverse kinds of meats do engender
sundry tastes and qualities in such as are noryshed therewith. The most
puissaunte prince Ferdinandus, declared that he had eaten of an other fruit
browght from those lands, being full of scales with keys much like a pine
apple in form and color, but in tenderness equal to melopepones, and in taste
excedyng al garden fruits. For it is no tree, but an herb much like unto an
archichoke, or Acantho. The king him self, gave the cheifest commendation to
this. I have eaten none of these fruits. For of a great number which they
browght from thense, Fruits putrifyed on the sea.
only one remained uncorrupted, the other being putrified by reason of the
long vyage. All such as have eaten of them newely gathered in their natyue
soil, do maruelou^ly commend their swetenes and pleasant taste. They dygge
also owte of the ground certain roots growing of them selves, which they
caul Betatas, Betatas,
much like unto the navy roots of Mylayne, or the great puffes or musheroms
of the earth. How so ever they be dressed, either fried or sodde, they give
place to no such kind of meat in pleasant tenderness. The skyn is sumwhat
towgher then either of nauies or mussheroms, and of earthy color: But the
inner meat thereof, is very white. These are noorysshed in gardens, as we
said of Iucca in the first Decade. They are also eaten raw, and have the
taste of raw chestnuttes, but are sumwhat sweeter. We have spoken
sufficiently of trees, herbs, and fruits. We will now therefore entreat of
things sencitiue. The laundes and desolate pastures of these regions, are
inhabited and devoured of wild and terrible beasts, as Lions, Tigers, Lions
and Tigers.
and such other monsters as we now know, and have been descrybed of owlde
autoures in time past. But there is especially one beast engendered here, A
strange beast.
in which nature has endeavored to show her cunnyng. This beast is as bygge
as an ox, armed with a long snoute like an Elephant, and yet no Elephant. Of
the color of an ox and yet no ox. With the houfe of a horse, and yet no
horse. With ears also much like unto an Elephant, but not so open nor so
much hangyng down: yet much wyder the^ the ears of any other beast. Of the
beast which bears her whelps about with her in her second b^lly as in a
purse (being known to none of the owlde writers) I have spoken in the first
Decade which I doubt not to have coome to the hands of yowre holiness. Let us
now therefore declare what rests of the fluddes and ryuers of Vraba. The
ryuers of Uraba.
The river of Dariena fauleth into the goulfe of Vraba with a narowe chanel,
The river of Darien fauleth into the goulfe of Uraba.
scarsly able to bear the canoas or lyghters of that province, and runs by
the vyllage where they chose their dwelling place. But the river in the corner
of the goulfe which we said that Vaschus passed by, they found to be.xxiiii.
furlonges in breadth (which they caul a league) and of exceadynge depthe, A
league is xxiiii furlo^ges
as of two hundredth cubettes, faulynge into the goulfe by diverse mouths. They
say that this river fauleth into the goulfe of Vraba, like as the river Ister
(otherwise cauled Danubius, Danubius.
and Danowe) fauleth into the sea Pontike, and Nilus into the sea of Egypt:
wherefore they named it Grandis, Grandis or Rio grandis.
that is great: which also they affirm to nooryshe many and great Crocodyles,
A crocodile is much like an eute, but of excedyng bigness.
as the owld writers testify of Nilus, and especially as I have learned by
experience, having sailed up and down the river of Nilus when I was sent
ambasadoure to the Soldane of Alcayr at the commandment of the most
catholyke King.

What I may therefore gather owte of the wrytynges of so many learned autours as
concerning the river of Nilus, The autoure of this book was in Egypt The
river Nilus in Egypt
I know not. For they say that nature has given two rivers of that name to
water the land, whether they will them to spring owte of the mountains of
the moon or the soonne, Montes,
or owte of the tops of the rowgh mountains of Ethiopia: Lunae.
Affirming one of the same to faule into the goulfe of Egypt toward the
North, and the other into the South Ocean sea. What shall we say in this
place? Of that Nilus in Egypt, there is no doubt. The Portugales also which
sail by the coasts of the Ethiopians cauled Nigritae, The Portugales
nauigacions.
and by the kyngedome of Melinda passinge under the Equinoctial line, among
their m^ruelous inventions have found an other toward the South, and ernestly
affirm the same to be also derived from the mountains of the moon: And that
it is an other channel of Nilus, because it brings forth Crocodyles, whereas
it has not been read before time that any other river noorysshed Crocodyles
sauinge only Nilus. This river, the Portugales caul Senega. The river Senega*
an other channel of the river of Nilus.
It runs throwgh the Region of the Nigritas, being very fruitful toward
the north shore: but on the southe side sandy and rowghe. Crocodiles are also
engendered herein. What shall we then say of this third: ye I may well say the
fourth. Crocodiles. The third and fourth Nilus.
For I suppose them also to be Crocodiles which Colonus with his coompany
found armed with scales as hard as shelles in the river cauled Delagartos
whereof we have made mention before. Delagartos.
Shall we say that these ryuers also of Darien and Vraba, have their original
from the mountains of the moon, whereas they spring owte of the next
mountains, and can by no means have the same original with Nilus in Egypt,
or that in Nigrita, The ryuers spring out of the mountains
or else that in the kyngedome of Melinda, from whense so ever they are
deryued. Whereas these other (as we have said) spring out of the next
mountains which deuyde an other southe sea with no great distaunce from the
North Ocean. Wherefore it appears by experience of such as have trauayled the
world in owre time, that other waters beside the river of Nilus in Egypt,
Crocodiles engendered in other ryuers beside Nilus ^n Egypt.
may likewise bring forth Crocodiles. In the marysshes also and fennes of
the Regions of Dariena, are found great plenty of Phesauntes and peacockes,
(but not of variable colors) with many other kinds of birds and fowls
unlike unto owres, Birds and fowls.
as well apt to be eaten, as also to delight the ears of men with pleasant
noise. But owre Spanyardes, because they are ignorant in foulynge, take but
few. Also innumerable popingayes of sundry kinds are found chattering in the
groves of those fenny places. Of these there are sum equal to Capons in
byggenes, and sum as little as sparowes. But of the diversity of popingayes,
Popingayes.
we have spoken sufficientely in the first Decade. For in the raze of this
large land, Colonus him self browght and sent to the court a great number
of every kind, A philosophical discourse as cu^cerning thoriginal of springes
and ryuers.
the which it was lawful for all the people to behold, and are yet daily
browght in like manner. There remains yet one thing most worthy to be put
in hystorye: The which I had rather to have chanced into the hands of Cicero
or Liuie, then into mine. For the thing is so marvelous in my estimation,
that I find my wit more entangeled in the description hereof, then is said
of the hen when she sees her young chekyn inwrapped in towe or ^laxe. The
breadth of that land from the North Ocean to the south sea is only six days
journey by relation of thinhabitantes. The breadth of the ^ande at Uraba from
the North Ocean to the South sea.
The multitude therefore and grea^nes of the ryuers on the one side and on the
other side the narowenes of the land, bring me into such doubt how it can
coome to pass, that in so little a space of three days journey, measurynge
from the high tops of those mountains, I do not understand how so many
and so great ryuers, may have recourse into this north sea. For it is to be
thought that as many do flow toward thinhabitantes of the southe. These
ryuers of Vraba are but smaule, in comparison of many other in those coasts.
For the Spanyardes say, that in the time of Colonus, they found and passed by
an other river after this, A river of marvelous byggenes look the first decade
the ix. book.
whose goulfe faulynge in to the sea, they affirm to be little less then a
hundredth miles in the first coasts of Paria, as we have said elsewhere. For
they say that it fauleth from the tops of high mountains with so swyfte
and furious a course, that by the violence and greatness thereof, it dryueth
back the sea althowgh it be rowghe and enforced with a contrary wind. They
all affirm likewise, that in all the large tracte thereof, they felt no sower
or salt water, but that all the water was fresshe, sweet, and apt to be
droonke. Thinhabitantes caul this river Maragnonum: The great river
Maragnonus. l^ber. i^. decade i.
And the regions adjacent to the same, Mariatambal, Mariatambal.
Camamorus, Camamorus.
and Paricora. Paricora.
Beside those ryuers which I have named before, as Darien, Grandis, Dabaiba,
Beragua, Sancti Mathei, Boius ga^ti, Delagartos, and Gaira, they which of late
have searched those coasts, have found many other. Deliberatinge therefore
with my self, from whense these mountains being so narowe and nere unto the
sea on both sides, have such great holowe caves or dens of such capacity,
and from whense they are filled to cast forth such abundance of water, hereof
also asking them the opinions of the inhabitants, they affirm them to be of
diverse judgments herein: Alleagynge first the greatness of the mountains to
be the cause, which they say to be very high, which thing also Colonus the
first fynder thereof affirms to be true: Adding there unto that the Paradise
of pleasure is in the tops of those mountains which appear from the goulfe
of Paria and Os Draconis, Paradise. Look.vi, ^oke first decade.
as he is fully persuaded. They agree therefore that there is great caves
within these mountains: but it rests to consy^er from whense they are
filled. The sea.
If therefore all the ryuers of fresshe waters by thoppinion of many, do so
flow owte of the sea as driven and compelled throwghe the pa^sages or pores of
the earth by the ponderous weight of the sea it self, as we see them break
forth of the sprynges and direct their course to the sea again, The land
enclosed with two seas.
then the thing is less to be marueyled at here then in other places. For
we have not read that in any other place two such seas have environed any
land with so narowe lymittes. For it has on the right side, the great Ocean
where the son goes down on the left hand: And an other on the other side
where the son ryseth, nothing inferioure to the first in greatenes, for they
suppose it to be myxte and joined as all one with the sea of East India.

This land therefore being burdened with so great a weight on the one side and
on the other (if this opinion be of any value) is enforced to swalowe up such
devoured waters, and again to cast forth the same in open springes and
streams. But if we shall deny that the earth draws humors of the sea, and
agree that all fountaynes or sprynges are engendered of the conversion or
turnynge of air into water distilling within the halowe places of the
montaynes (as the most part think) we will give place rather to thautoritie of
them which stycke to those reasons, then that owre sense is satisfied of the
full truth thereof. Yet do I not repugne that in sum caves of mountains,
water is turned into air. Conursion of air into water in the caves of
mountayn^s.
For I my self have seen, how in the caves of many mountains in Spain, in
manner showers of rain do faule continually: And that the water gathered by
this means, does send forth certain ryuers by the sides of the mountains,
wherewith al such trees as are planted on the s^iepe or foot of the
mountains, as vines, Olive trees, and such other, are watered. And this
especially in one place: As the right honorable Lodouike the Cardinal of
Aragonie most obsequious to yowre holiness, and two other bishops of Italy,
whereof the one is Siluius Pandonus, and the other an Archebysshop (whose name
and title I do not remember) can bear me wytnes. For when we were together
at Granata, lately delivered from the dominion of the Moors, and walked for
owre pastyme to certain pleasant hills (by the which there ran a fair
river) While Cardinal Lodouike occupied him self in shutynge at birds which
were in the bushes nere unto the river, I and the other two bishops
determined to clime the mountains to search thoriginall and spring of the
river: for we were not far from the tops thereof. Following therefore the
course of the river, we found a great cave in which was a continual faule
of water as it had been a ^houre of rain: Showers of rain in the caves of
montaynes
the water whereof, faulyng into a trenche made with man's hand, increases to a
river, and runs down by the sides of the mountains. The like is also seen
in this famous town of Valladoleto (where we now suiorne) in a certain
green close, not past a furlonge distant from the waules of the town. I
grant therefore that in certain places by conversion of the ayrie dew into
water within the caves of such mountains, many sprynges and ryuers are
engendered. But I suppose that nature was not sollicitate to bring furthe such
great fluds by this so smaule industry. Two reasons therefore, do sound best
to my judgment: whereof the one is, the often faule of rain: The often fall of
ra^ne and cont^nuall spring time.
The other, the continual autumn or spring time which is in those regions
being so nere unto the Equinoctial that the common people can perceive no
difference between the length of the day and the night throwgh out all the year
whereas these two seasons are more apt to engender abundance of rain then
either extreme winter or fervent summer An other reason in effect much like
unto the first, The Equinoc^iall.
is this: If the sea be full of pores, and that by the pores thereof being
opened by the Southe winds, The pores of the sea and the South wynd.
we shall consent that vapors are lyfted up whereof the watery clouds are
engendered, this land must needs be moysted with moo shoures then any other,
if it be as narowe as they say, and environed with two main seas
collaterally beatinge on the same. How so ever it be: I can not but give
credit to the report of such worthy men as have recourse to those regions: And
can no less then declare the same albeit it may seem incredible to sum
ignorant persons not knowing the pour of nature to whom Pliny was persuaded
that nothing was impossible. Nothing impossible to the pour of naure.
We have therefore thought it good to make this discourse by the way of
argument, least on the one side, men of good lernyng and judgment, and on the
other side, such as are studious to find occasions of quarelynge in other
men's wrytynges, should judge us to be so vndescreete lightly to give creditte
to every tale not being consonant to reason. But of the force and great
violence of those fresshe waters, The cause of the greatness and force of the
goulfe.
which repulsinge the sea make so great a goulfe (as we have said) I think
the cause thereof to be the great multitude of fluddes and ryuers, which
being gathered together, make so great a poole: and not one river as they
suppose. And for as much as the mountains are exceeding high and stiepe,
high and stiepe hills
I think the violence of the faule of the waters to be of such force, that
this conflicte between the waters, is caused by thimpulsion of the poole that
the salt water can not enter into the goulfe. But here perhaps sum will
marueyle at me why I should marueyle so much hereat, speaking unto me
scornefully after this manner. Why does he so marueyle at the great ryuers of
these Regions? Has not Italye his Eridanus, The fludde Eridanus.
named the king of ryuers of the owlde writers? Have not other regions also
the like? as we reed of Tanais, Tanais.
Ganges, Ganges.
and Danubius, Danubius.
which are said so to ouercoome the sea, that fresh water may be drawn
forty miles within the fame. These men I woolde satisfy with this answer.
The famous river of Padus in Italye (which they now caul Po, Padus.
and was of the Greeks cauled Eridanus) has the great mountains cauled
Alps diuidinge France, Alps.
Germany, and Pannonie from Italye, lyinge at the back thereof as it were
bulwarges agger, full of moisture: And with a long tracte receauinge Ticinum
with innumerable other great ryuers, Ticinum.
fauleth into the sea Adriatike. The sea Adriatike, sum caul the go^lfe of
Uenes.
The like is also to be understood of the other. But these ryuers (as owre men
were informed by the kings) faul into the Ocean sea with larger and fuller
channels nere hand. And sum there are which affirm this land to be very
large in other places althowgh it be but narowe here. There comes also to my
remembrance an other cause: the which althowgh it be of no great force, An
other reason
yet do I entende to write it. Perhaps therefore the length of the land
reachyng far from the East to the weste, if it be narowe, may be a help
hereunto. For as we read that the river Alpheus passethe through the holowe
places under the sea from the city of Elis in Peloponoso, The river Alpheus.
and breaks forth at the fountain or spring Arethusa in the Island of
Sicilia, Arethusa
so is it possible that these mountains may have such long caves perteynynge
unto them, Long caves in the mountains.
that they may be the receptacles of the water passing through the lands
being far distante: And that the same waters coming by so long a tracte,
may in the way be greatly increased by the conversion of air into water, as
we have said. Thus much have I spoken freely, permittinge both to them
which do frendely enterprete other men's doings, and also to the malicious
scorners, to take the thing even as them lysteth. For hitherto I can make no
further declaration hereof. But when the truth shall be better known, I will do
my diligence to commit the same to writing. Now therefore, forasmuch as we
have spoken thus much of the breadth of this land, we ente^d to describe the
length and form of the same.

The tenth book of the second Decade, of the supposed Continent.
THat land reaches forth into the sea even as does Italy, althowgh not like
the leg of a man as it does. The length and form of the Island. Cap. S.
Augusti.
But I now compare a Pigmean or a dwarf to a giant. For that part thereof
which the Spaniardes have over run from the said East point which reaches
toward the sea Atlantike (the end not being yet found toward the Weste) is
more then eight times longer then Italye. Eight times bygger t^en Italy beside
that part which the Portugales po^sesse. Italy is in length a thou^and and two
hundredth miles, and in breadth four hundredth and ten.
And by what reason I am moved to say eight times, yowre holiness shall
understand. From the time therefore that I first determined to obey their
requests who wylled me first in yowre name to write these things in the
laten tongue, I did my endeavor that al things might coome forth with dew
trial and experience.

Whereupon I repaired to the bishop of Burges being the chief refuge of this
navigations. As we were therefore secretly together in one chamber, we had many
instruments perteynynge to these affairs as globes and many of those mappes
which are commonly cauled the shipmans cards, or cards of the sea. Cards of
the sea.
Of the which, one was drawn by the Portugales, whereunto Americus Vesputius is
said to have put to his hand, being a man most expert in this faculty and
a Florentyne borne: The card of Americus Uesputius.
who also under the stipende of the Portugales, had sailed toward the south
pole many degrees beyond the Equinoctial. In this card we found the first
front of this land to be brooder then the kings of Vraba had persuaded owre
men of their mountains. To an other, Colonus the Admiral while he yet lived
and searched those places had given the beginnynge with his own hands: The
card of Colonus.
Whereunto Bartholomeus Colonus his brother and Lieuetenaunt had addid his
judgment, for he also, had sailed about those coasts. Of the Spanyardes
likewise, as many as thought them selves to have any knowleage what perteyned
to measure the land and the sea, drew certain cards in parchement as
concerning these nauigations. Of all other, they most esteem them which
Johannes de la Cossa the coompanion of Fogeda (whom we said to be slain of
the people of Caramairi in the haven Carthago, The card of Johannes de la
Cossa.
) and an other expert pylot cauled Andreas Moralis, The card of Andreas
moralis.
had set forth. And this as well for the great experience which they both
had (to whom these tractes were as well known as the chambers of their own
houses) as also that they were thought to be cunninger in that part of
Cosmographie which teaches the description and measuringe of the sea.
Conferringe therefore all these cards together, in every of the which was
drawn a line expressinge, not the miles, The manner of measuring the cards.
but leagues after the manner of the Spanyardes, we took owre compases and
began to measure the sea coasts after this order. From that point or front
which we said to be included within the line perteynynge to the Portugales
jurisdiction, Look decade i. liber. iii.
being drawn by the paralelles of the Islands of Cabouerde, The Island of
Cabouerde.
but a hundredth leagues further toward the weste (which they have now also
searched on every side) we found three hundredth leagues to the entrance of
the river Maragnonum: Maragnonum
And from thense to Os Draconis, Os Draconis
seven hundredth leagues: but sumwhat less in the description of sum: For they
do not agree in all points exquisitely. The Spanyardes will that a league
conteyne four miles by sea and but three by land. A league.
From Os Draconis, to the cape or point of Cuchibacoa, Cuchibachoa.
which being pa^sed, there is a goulfe on the left hand, we measured three
hundrethe leagues in one card, and much thereabout in an other. From this
point of Cuchibacoa, to the region of Caramairi in which is the haven Carthago
(which sum caul Carthagena) we found about a hundredth and seventy leagues.
Caramairi.
Carthago.
From Caramairi to the Island Fortis,, The Island Fortis.
fifty leagues. From thense to the goulfes of Vraba among the which is the
vyllage cauled Sancta Maria Antiqua where the Spanyardes have appointed their
habitacion, Vraba.
only.xxxiii. leagues. From the river of Vraba in the province of Dariena to
the river of Beragua where Nicuesa had intended to have fastened his foot if
god had not otherwise decreed, Beragua.
we measured a hundredth and thirty leagues. From Beragua to that river which
we said of Colonus to be cauled Sancti Matthei, R. Sancti Matthei.i
in the which also Nicuesa loosinge his carauell, wandered in great
calamities, we found in owre cards, only a hundredth and forty leagues: Yet
many other which of late time have coome from these parts, have descrybed many
moo leagues in this tracte from the river of Sancti Matthei: In which also,
they place diverse ryuers, as Aburema with the Island cauled Scutum Cateba R.
Aburema
Scutum Cateba
lyinge before it, whose kings name is Facies combusta. Likewise an other
river cauled Zobraba: R. Zobroba.
after that, Vrida: Vrid^.
and the^ Duraba in the which gold is found. Duraba,
Furthermore, many goodly havens, as Cerabaro and Hiebra, Cerabaro,
Hiebra,
so cauled of thinhabitantes. And thus if yowre holiness will confer these
numbers together, you shall find in this account, a thousand five hundredth
twenty and five leagues, Note.
which amounte to f^ue thousand and seven hundredth miles from the point of
Sancti Matthei, R. d^ los perdides
which they caul Sinum perditorum: that is, the goulfe of the lost men. But
we may not leave here. For after this, one Astar Ouetens^s, otherwise named
Johannes Dias de Solis, The navigations of I^^annes Dias.
borne in Nebrissa (which bringe^h forth many learned men) saylinge from this
river toward the weste, over ran many coasts and leagues: But the myddeste
of that shore, bendethe toward the North: And is not therefore directly placed
in order with the other. Yet may we gather by a diameter or right line, about
three hundredth leagues. Hereby may you gather what is the length of this
land. The eleuatio^ of the pole.
But of the breadth, perhaps we shall hereafter have further knowleage. Let
us now speak sumwhat of the variety of the degrees of the elevation of the
pole stars. This land therefore, althowgh it reach forth from the East into
the Weste, yet is it crooked and has the point bendynge so toward the south,
that it loses the sight of the North pole, The iuri^diction of the Po^tugales.
and is extendend beyond the Equinoctial line seven degrees toward the South
pole. But the point hereof, perteyneth to the jurisdiction of the Portugales as
we have said. Leauinge this point and saylinge toward Paria the north star
is seen again, Paria,
and is so much the more lyfted up, in how much the region enclyneth more
toward the Weste. The Spanyardes therefore, have diverse degrees of eleuations,
until they come to Dariena being their chief station and dwelling place in
those lands. Darlena.
For they have forsaken Beragua, Beragua.
where they found the North pole eleuate.viii. degrees But from hense the land
does so much bend toward the North, that it is there in manner equal with
the degrees of the strayghtes of Hercules pyllers: hercules pyllers.
especially if we measure certain lands found by them toward the North
side of Hispaniola. Emonge the which, there is an Island, about three hundredth
and.xxv. leagues from Hispaniola, as they say which have searched the same,
named Boiuca or Agnaneo, in the which is a continual spring of runnynge water
of such marvelous virtue, that the water thereof being dronk, The Island Boiuca
or Agnaneo.
perhaps with sum dyete, makes owld men young again. And here must I make
protestacion to yowre holiness, not to think this to be said lightly or
rashely. A water of marvelous virtue.
For they have so spredde this rumor for a truth throwghowt all the court,
that not only all the people, but also many of them whom wisdom or fortune
has divided from the common sort, think it to be true. But if you shall ask
my opinion herein, The renouation of age.
I will answer that I will not attribute so great pour to nature: but that
god has no less reserved this prerogative to him self, then to search the
hearts of men, or to give substance to privation, (that is) being to no
being: Except we shall believe the fable of Colobis of Eson renouate, to be
as true as the wrytinges of Sibylla Erythrea. Albeit perhaps the scoles of
physicians and natural philosophers will not much stycke to affirm that by
thuse of certain secreate medecines and dyete, The accidents of age may be
hydden.
the accidents of age (as they caul them) may be long hydden and deferred,
which they will to be understood, by the renouacion of age. And to have said
thus much of the length and breadthe of these Regions, and of the rowghe and
hugious mountains with their watery caves, also of the diverse degrees of that
land, I think it sufficient. But I thowght it not good to let pass what
chanced to these miserable men among their general calamities. I remember
that when I was a child, me thowght my bowelles grated and that my spirits
were maruelouslye troubeled for very pity, when I readde in the poet Uirgyl
how Achemenides was left of Ulysses upon the sea banks among the giantes
cauled Cyclopes. Achemenides,
Vlyss^s.
Encas.
where for the space of many days from the departinge of Vlyss^s until the
coming of Encas he eat none other meat but only berryes and hawes. But owre
unfortunate Spanyardes which followed Nicuesa to inhabit Beragua, Extreme
hunger.
woolde have esteemed hawes and berryes for great delicates. What should I
hear speak of the head of an ass bowght for a great price, and of such
other extremities as men have suffered in towns beseaged? This was at the
^iege of hieru^alem.
After that Nicuesa had determined to leave Beragua for the barrennes of the
soil, he attempted to search Por^um Bellum, Portus B^llus
and then the coasts of the point cauled Marmor, Ma^mo^.
if he might there find a place more fortunate to inhabit. In this mean
time, so grievous famen oppressed his soldiers, that they neither absteyned
from eatinge of mangie dogs which they had with them as well for their defense
as for hunting (for in the war against the naked people, Mangy dogs eaten.
dogs stood the^ in great stead) nor yet sumtymes from the slain
inhabitants. For they found not there any fruitful trees or plenty of
fowls as in Dariena, but a barren ground and not meet to be inhabited. Here
certain of the soldiers made a bargein with one of their fellows for the
price of a lean dog, who also was almost dead for hunger: A mangy dog dear
sold.
They gave the owner of the dog many of those pieces of gold which they
caul Pesos or golden Castellans. Thus agreinge of the price, they fleid the
dog to be eaten, and cast his mangie skin with the bones of the head
hanging thereto, among the bushes. The day following, a certain foot^man of
their company, chanced to find the skin being now full of maggottes and
stynkynge. He brought it home with him, sodde it, and eat it. Many resorted to
him with their dysshes for the brothe of the sodde skin, Broth of a mangy
dogs skin.
proferinge him for every dysshefull a piece of gold. An other found two
toades and sodde them which a sick man bought of him for two fine shertes
curiously wrought of lynen intermyxt with gold. Toades eaten
Certain other wanderinge abowte to seek for vytayles, found in a patheway in
the myddest of a fyelde, a dead man of thinhabitantes which had been slain of
his own coompanye and was now rotten and stynkynge. A dead man eaten.
They drew him a side, dismemberde him secreatly, roasted him and eat him,
therewith asswagynge their hunger as if they had been fed with pheasauntes.
One also, which departinge from his companions in the night season, went a
fyshyng among the reeds of the marysshes, lived only with slyme or mudde for
the space of certain days, until at the length creepinge and almost dead,
he found the way to his fellows. And thus these miserable men of Beragua vexed
with these and such other aflictions, were browghe from the number of seven
hundredth three score and ten soldiers, scarsely to forty, being now also
added to the coompany of them in Dariena. Few were slain of thinhabitantes.
But the resydewe consumed by famen, breathed out their weary sowles, opening a
way to the new lands for such as shall coome after them, appeasinge the fury
of the barbarous nations, with the price of their bludde. Note.
Consyderinge therefore after these storms, with what case other men shall
ouerrunne and inhabit these lands, in respect to the calamities that these
men have suffered, they shall seem to goo to bryde feasts where all things
are ready prepared against their coming. But where Petrus Arias arrived with
the kings navy and new supply of men, Petrus Arias whom the Spanyardes caul
Ped^arias.
to this hour I know no certentie. What shall chance herafter I will make
diligente inquisition if I shall understand this to be acceptable to yowre
holiness. Thus I bid you heartily farewell: from the court of the most
Catholyke king, the day before the nones of December, in the year of
Christ, M. D. XIIII.

The first book of the third Decade, to the bishop of Rome Leo the tenth.
I Was determined (most holy father) to have closed up the gates to this new
world, supposinge that I had wandered far enowgh in the coasts thereof,
while in the mean time new letters were brought me from thense, which caused
me again to take my pen in hand. For I received letters not only from
certain of mine acquaintance there, but also from Vaschus Nunnez whom we
said by the confidence of his own pour with his confetherates, Ua^chus
Nunn^z, governor of Dariena.
to have usurped the governance of Dariena after the rejecting of Nicues^ and
Ane^sus, Lieuetenantes. By his letter written after his warlyke manner, we
understand that he has passed over the mountains, diuidyng the Ocean known
to us, The new south Ocean.
from the other main sea on the south side of this land hitherto unknown.
His epistell is greater then that cauled Capreensis de Seiano. But we have
gathered out of that and other, only such things as we thowght most worthy
to be noted. Vaschus so behaved him self in these affairs, that he did not
only pacify the kings displeasure conceived against him, but also made him
so favorable and gracious good lord toward him, that he rewarded him and his
coompanions with many honorable gifts and privileges for their attemptes.
Wherefore I desire yowre holiness to inclyne yowre attentive cares, and to
consider with a joyful mind what they have browght to pass in these great
enterpryses. ^^mmendati^^ of the Spa^^ardes.
For this valiante nation (the Spanyardes I mean) have not only with great
pains and innumerable dangers subdued to the Christian empire, infinite
hundre^es and legions, but also myriades of men. Vaschus Nunnez therefore,
whether it were that he was impacient of Idleness (for a valiente mind can not
rest in one place or be unoccupied) or least any other should prevent him in
so great a matter (suspecting the new governor Petrus Arias) or being moved
by both these causes, ^ Ualient mind can not ^ee idle.
and especially for that the king had taken displeasure with him for such
things as he had done before, took thaduenture upon him with a few men to
bring that to pass which the son of king Comogrus thought could hardly
have been done with the aid of a thousand men, ^ desperate ^duenture
whereof Petrus Arias was appointed captain for the same purpose. Assemblynge
therefore certain of the owlde soldiers of Dariena, and many of those which
came lately from Hispaniola, allured by the fame of greater plenty of gold,
Uaschus his v^age toward ^he golden ^ountaynes.
he gathered an army of a hundredth fourscore and ten men. Thus being
furnysshed and ready to take his vyage by sea, while the wind served him, he
departed from Dariena with one brygantine and ten of their boats which
they caul Canoas as we have said. First therefore arryuynge in the dominion
of Careta king of Coiba and friend to the Christians, Careta king of Coiba
and leaving his ship and boats there, he made his devout prayers to
almyghtie god, and therewith went forward on his journey by land toward the
mountains. Here he first entered into the region of king Poncha, king Poncha
who fled at his coming as he had done before. But Vaschus sent messengers
to him by the conduct of certain of Careta his men, promysinge him frendsh^p
and defense against his enemies, with many other benefits. Poncha thus entysed
with the fair speech and frendely profers both of owre men and of the
Caretans, came to owr men gladly and wyllyngely making a league of frendshippe
with them, Vaschus enterteyned him very frendely, and persuaded him never
thereafter to stand in fear. Thus they joined hands, embrased, and gave
great gifts the one to the other to knytte up the knotte of contin^all
amity. Ponc^a gave Vaschus a hundredth and ten pounds weight of gold, A
hundredth and x. pounds weight of gold.
of that pound which the Spanyardes caul Pesum. He had no greater plenty of
gold at this time, by reason he was spoiled the year before as we have said.
Vaschus to recompense one benefyte with an other, gave him certain of owre
things, Strange things are counted precious.
as counterfeit rings, Crystal stones, copper cheynes and brase lettes, hawks
belles, lokynge glasses, and such other fine stuff. These things they set
much by and greatly esteem. For such things as are strange, are every
where counted precious. He gave also to Poncha certain axes to fell trees:
which he accepted as a princely gift, because they lack Iren and all other
metals except gold: Lack of ^ren.
by reason whereof they are enforced with great labor to cut their trees to
build their houses, and especially to make their boats holowe withowte
instruments of Iren, with certain sharp stones which they find in the
ryuers. A stone in the steed of Ire^.
Thus Vaschus leaving all things in safety behind him, marched forward
with his army toward the mountains, by the conducte of certain guydes and
laborers which Poncha had given him, as well to lead him the way, as also to
carry his baggages and open the straightes through the desolate places and
craggy rocks full of the dens of wild beasts. For there is seldoome
intercourse or byinge and selling between these naked people, because they
stand in need of few things and have not the use of money. Superflu^ties
hinder liberty.
But if at any time they exercise any bartering they do it but nere hand,
exchangynge gold for household stuff with their confines which sumewhat
esteem the same for ornamente when it is wrough^. Other superfluities they
utterly contemn, as hynderances of their sweet liberty, for as much as they
are given only to play and Idelnes. And for this cause, the high ways which
lie between their regions are not much worn with many journeys. Yet have their
scoutes certain privy marks whereby they know the way the one to invade
the others dominions, and spoil and infeste them selves on both sides with
mutual incursions privily in the night season. By the help therefore of their
guydes and laborers, with owre carpenters, Carpenters.
he passed over the horrible mountains and many great ryuers lyinge in the
way, over the which h^ made brydges either with pyles or trunkes of trees.
Brydges.
And here do I let pass many things which they su^fered for lack of
necessaries, being also in manner overcome with extreme labor, least I
should be tedious in rehersinge things of smaule value. But I have thought it
good not to omit such doings as he had with the kings by the way.
Therefore or ever he came to the tops of the high mountains, he entered into
a Region cauled Quarequa, The region of Quarequa.
and met with the king thereof cauled by the same name, with a great hand
of men armed after their manner, as with bows and arrows, long and broad two
handed swords made of wodde, long staves hardened at the ends with fire,
darts also and slings. He came proudely and cruelly against owre men, and
sent messengers to them to bid them stand and proceed no further: demanding
whyther they went and what they had to do there. king Quarequa is driven to
flight.
Herewith he came forth and showed him self being appareled with all his
nobility: but the other were all naked. Then approchinge toward owre men, he
thretened the^ with a lions countenance to depart from thense except they
woolde be slain every mothers son. When owre men denied that they woolde
goo back, he assailed them fiercely. But the battle was sone fyny^^^ed. For
as soon as they hard the noise of the hargabu^^es, hargabus^es.
they believed that owre men carried thunder and lightening about with them.
Many also being slain and sore wounded with quarrels of crossebowes,
Crossebow^s
they turned their backs and fled. Owre men following them in the chase,
hewed them in pieses as the butchers do flesh in the shamwelles, from one an
arm, from an other a leg, from him a buttocke, vi. C. Barbarians are s^aine
from an other a shulder, and from sum the neck from the body at one stroke.
Thus, six hundredth of them with their king, were slain like brute beasts.
Vaschus found the house of this king infected with most abominable and
unnatural lechery. Unnatural lechery.
For he found the kings brother and many other young men in women's apparel,
smoth and effeminately decked, which by the report of such as dwelte abowte
him, he abused with preposterous venus. Of these abowte the number of forty,
he commanded to be given for a pray to his dogs. For (as we have said) the
Spaniardes vs^ he help of dogs in their wars against the naked people whom
they invade as fiercely and rauenyngely as if they were wild boares or hearts.
The use of dogs in the war agenst the naked Barbarians.
In so much that owre Spanyardes have found their dogs no less faithful
to them in all daungiours and enterpryses, then did the Colophonians or
Castabalenses which instituted hole armies of dogs so made to serve in the
wars, that being accustomed to place them in the fore froonte of the
battayles, they never shrunk or gave back. When the people had hard of the
severe punysshement which owr men had excecuted upon that fylthy kind of men,
Naturaul hatred of unnatural sin.
they resorted to them as it had been to Hercules for refuge, by violence
bryngyng with them al such as they knew to be infected with that pestilence,
spettynge in their faces and cryinge owte to owre men to take revenge of them
and rydde them owte of the world from among me^ as contagious beasts. This
stinkynge abomination had not yet entered among the people, Palatini.
but was exercised only by the noble men and gentelmen. But the people
lyftinge up their hands and eyes toward heaven, I would all men were of this
opinion.
gave tokens that god was grievously offended with such vile deeds. Affirmynge
this to be the cause of their so many thunderinges, lyghtnynge, and tempests
wherewith they are so often troubeled: And of the ouerflowinge of waters which
drown their sets and fruits, whereof famenne and diverse diseases ensue, as
they simplye and faithfully believe, although they know none other god then the
soonne, whom only they honor, thinking that it does both give and take
away as it is pleased or offended. Yet are they very docible, The harue^^ is
great and the woorkemen but few.
and easy to be allured to owre customs and religion, if they had any
teachers. In their language there is nothing unpleasant to the ear or hard
to be pronounced, but that all their words may be written with latin
letters as we said of thinhabitantes of Hispaniola. It is a warlyke nation,
warre^yke people.
and has been ever hitherto molestous to their bortherers. But the region is
not fortunate with frutful ground or plenty of gold. Yet is it full of great
barren mountains being sumewhat cold by reason of their heyght. The higher
the cou^der.
And therefore the noble men and gentelmen are apparelled. But the common people
live content only with the benefytes of nature. There is a region not past two
days journey distant from Quarequa, in which they found only black Moors: A
region of black moors
and those exceeding fierce and cruel. They suppose that in time paste
certain black mores sailed thither out of Aethiopia to rob: and that by
^hippewracke or sum other chance, they were driven to those mountains.
Thinhabitantes of Quarequa live in continual war and debate with these
black men. Here Vaschus le^uinge in Quarequa many of his soldiers (which by
reason they were not yet accustomed to such trauayles and hunger, Diseases of
change of air and diet.
fell into diverse diseases) took with him certain guydes of the Quarequatans
to conduct him to the tops of the mountains. From the palaice of king
Poncha, to the prospect of the other south sea, The south sea.
is only six days journey: the which nevertheless by reason of many
hynderances and chances, and especially for lack of vytayles, he could
accomplish in no le^se then.xxv. days. But at the length, the seventh day
of the calendes of October, Ua^chus is coome to the fight of the new south sea.
he beheld with woonderinge eyes the tops of the high mountains showed unto
him by the guydes of Quarequa, from the which he might see the other sea so
long looked for, and never seen before of any man coming owte of owre
world. Approchinge therefore to the tops of the mountains, he commanded
his army to stey, and went him self alone to the top, as it were to take
the first possession thereof. Prayer.
Where, faulynge prostrate upon the ground, and raysinge him self again
upon his knees as is the manner of the Christians to pray, lyftynge up his
eyes and hands toward heaven, and directinge his face toward the new found
south sea, he poored forth his humble and devout prayers before almyghtie God
as a spiritual sacrifice with thanks gyuing, God rayseth the poor from the
dungehyl
that it had pleased his divine majesty to reserve unto that day the victory
and praise of so great a thing unto him, being a man but of smaule wit and
knowleage, of little experience and base parentage.

When he had thus made his prayers after his warlike manner he beckened with his
hand to his coompanions to coome to him, showing them the great main sea
heretofore unknown to thinhabitantes of Europe, Aphrike, and Asia. Here again
he fell to his prayers as before: desyringe almyghtie God and the blessed
virgin to favor his beginninges, and to give him good success to subdue those
lands to the glory of his holy name and increase of his true religion. All
his coompanions did likewise, and praised god with loud voices for joy. Then
Vaschus, with no less manlye courage then Hanniball of Carthage showed his
soldiers Italye and the promontories of the Alps, hanniball of Carthage.
exhorted his men to lift up their hearts, and to behoulde the land even now
under their feet, and the sea before their eyes, which should be unto them a
full and just reward of their great labors and trauayles now ouerpa^sed.
When he had said these words, he commanded them to raise certain heaps of
stones in the steed of alters for a token of possession. Uaschus takes
possession of the mountains
Then descendynge from the tops of the mountains, least such as might come
after him should argue him of lyinge or falshod, he wrote the king of
Castelles name here and there on the barks of the trees both on the right
hand and on the left: and raised heaps of stones all the way that he went,
until he came to the region of the next king toward the south whose name
was Chiapes. king Chiapes.
This king come forth ageynste him with a great multitude of men:
threateninge and forbyddynge him not only to pass through his dominions, but
also to goo no further. Herevppon, Vaschus set his battle in array, A
battle.
and exhorted his men (being now but few) fiercely to assail their enemies,
and to esteem them no better then dogs meat as they should be shortly.
Placeinge therefore the hargabusiers and masties in the forefroonte, they
saluted king Chiapes and his men with such a larome, Chiapes is d^yuen to
f^yght.
that when they hard the noise of the gunnes, saw the flames of fire, and
sme^te the savor of brymstone (for the wind blewe toward them) they drove
them selves to flight with such fear least thunderboultes and lyghtnynges
followed them, that many fell down to the ground: whom owre men pursuinge,
first keepinge their order, and after breakyng their array, slew but few and
took many captive. For they determined to use no extremity, but to pacify
those Regions as quie^lye as they might. Enteringe therefore into the palaice of
king Ch^apes, Vaschus commanded many of the captives to be loo^ed (...)
lynge them to search owte their king, Ua^chus sen^^th for king (...).
and to (...) to coome ^hyther: And that in so doing, he woolde h^e his
friend and profer him peace, beside ma^y (...) ^enefites. But if he refused to
coome, it should turn to the destruction of him and his, and utter subversion
of his country. and that they might the more assuredly do this message to
Chiape^ he sent with them certain of the guydes which came with him from
Qnnrequa.

Thus Chiapes being persuaded as well by the Quareqans who could conjecture to
what end the matter woolde coome by thexperience which they had seen in them
selves and their king, as also by the reasons of his own men to whom Vaschus
had made so frendely promyses in his behalf, came forth of the caves in
the which he lurked, and submytted him self to Vaschus, Chiapes submits
him self to Uaschus.
who accepted him frendelye. They joined hands, embrased the one the other,
made a perpetual league of frendeshippe, and gave great rewards on both
sides. Chiapes gave Vaschus four hundredth pounds weight of wrought goulde of
those pounds which they caul Pesos: iiii.C. pounds weight of wrought gold.
And Vaschus recompensed him again with certain of owre things. Thus being
made friends, they remained together a few days until Vaschus soldiers
were coome which he left behind him in Quarequa. Then caulinge unto him the
guydes and laborers which came with him from thense he rewarded them
liberallye and dismissed them with thanks. Shortly after, by the conduct of
Chiapes him self, and certain of his men, departinge from the tops of the
mountains, he came in the space of four days to the banks of the new sea:
where assemblynge al his men together with the kings scribes and notaries,
they addicted all that maine sea with all the lands adjacent there unto to the
dominion and Empire of Castile. Uaschus addicteth the new land and sea, to the
dominion of Castile.
Here he left part of his soldiers with Chiapes that he might theselier
search those coasts. And taking with him nine of their lyghters made of one
hole tree (which they caul Culchas as thinhabitantes of Hispaniola caul them
Canoas) and also a band of fourscore men with certain of Chiapes men, he
passed over a great river and came to the region of a certain king whose
name was Coquera. king Coquera is driven to flygh^.
He attempted to resyste owre men as did the other, and with like success: for
he was ouercoome and put to flight. But Vaschus who intended to win him with
gentelnes, Uaschus uses both gentelnes and rigor.
sent certain Chiapeans to him to declare the great pour of owre menner
how invincible they were: how merciful to such as submit them selves, also
cruel and severe to such as obstinatly with stand them. Promysinge him
furthermore, that by the fre^dshippe of owre men, he might be well assured by
thexemple of other, not only to live in peace and quietness him self, but also
to be revenged of thiniuries of his enemies. Wylling him in conclusion so to
weigh the matter, that if he refused this gentelnes proffered unto him by so
great a victourer, he should or it were long, learn by feelynge to repent him
to late of that perel which he might have avoided by hearing. Coquera with
these words and exemples, shaken with great fear, came gladly with the
messengers, bryngyng with him six hundredth and.l. Pesos of wrought gold, vi.C.
and.l. pounds weight of wrought gold
which he gave unto owre men. Vaschus rewarded him likewise as we said before
of Poncha, Coquera being thus pacified, they returned to the palaice of
Chiapes. Where, visitinge their companions, and resting there a while, Vaschus
determined to search the next great goulfe, the which, from the furthest
reachynge thereof into the land of their countries, from the enteraunce of the
main sea, they say to be threescore miles. A goulfe of threescore miles.
This they named saint Mychaeld goulfe, Saint Mich^els goulfe
which they say to be full of inhabited Islands ans hugious rocks. Enteringe
therefore into the nine boats or Culchas wherewith he passed over the river
before, having also with him the same coompanye of fourscore hole men, he
went forward on his purpose, although he were greatly dissuaded by Chiapes,
who ernestly desired him not to attempt that vyage at that time, The manly
courage and godly zeal of Uaschus
affirming the goulfe to be so tempestious and stormy three moonethes in the
year, that the sea was there by no means nauigable: And that he had seen
many Culchas devoured of whirlepoles even before his eyes. But invincible
Vaschus, impaciente of idleness, and void of all fear in gods cause,
answered that god and his holy saints woolde prosper his enterpryses in this
case, forasmuch as the matter touched God and the defense of the Christian
religion, for the maynetenaunce whereof it should be necessary to have great
abundance of riches and treasure as the synewes of war ageynste the enemies of
the faith. Ryche^ are the synewea of war
The faythfulnes of king Chiapes.
Thus vsinge also thoffice both of an oratoure and preacher, and having
persuaded his coompanyons, he lanched from the ^lande. But Chiapes, least
Vaschus should any thing doubt of his faythfulnes toward him, proffered him
self to goo with him whither so ever he went: A tempest on the sea.
And would by no means assent that Vaschus should depart from his palaice,
but that he woolde bring him on the way and take part of his fortune.
Therefore as soon as they were now entered into the maine sea, such sourges
and conflictes of water arose against them that they were at their wits ends
whither to turn them or where to rest. Thus being tossed and amassed with
fear, the one looked on the other with pale and vncherefull countenaunces. But
especially Chiapes and his coompany, who had before time with their eyes seetle
thexperience of those ^eoderdies, were greatly discomforted. Yet (as god
woolde) they escaped all, and landed at the next Island: Where making fast
their boats, they rested there that night. Here the water so increased, that
it almost ouerdowed the Island. The increasing of the South sea.
They say also that that south sea does so in manner boil and swelle, that
when it is at the highest it does cover many great rocks, which at the faule
thereof, are seen far above the water. But on the contrary part, all such
as inhabit the North sea, The North Ocean.
affirm with one voice, that hit scarsely rises at any time a cubet above the
banks as they also confess which inhabit the Island of Hispaniola and other
Islands situate in the same. The Island therefore being now dry by the faule
of the water, they resorted to their boats which they found all overwhelmed
and full of sand, and sum sore bruised, with great ryftes, and almost lost by
reason their cables were broken. hard shyft in necessity.
Such as were bruised, they tied fast with their gyrdels, with slippes of the
barks of trees, and with tough and long stalks of certain herbs of the sea,
stopping the ryftes or chynkes with grass according to the present
necessity. Thus were they enforced to return back again like unto men that
came from shippewracke, being almost consumed with hunger, because their
vytayles were utterly destroyed by tempeste. Thinhabitantes declared that there
is hard all the year horrible rorynge of the sea among those Islands as
often as it rysethe or fauleth. But this most especially in those three
months in the which it is most boystious as Chiapes towlde Vaschus before:
Meaning (as they could conjecture by his words) October, November, and
December: for he signify) the present moon and the two moons following,
countynge the moonethes by the moons, whereas it was now October. Here
therefore refresshynge him self and his soldiers a while, and passing by one
unprofitable king, he came to an other whose name was Tumaccus, The Region
Tumacca.
after the name of the region, being situate on that side of the goulfe. This
Tumaccus came forth ageynste owre men as did the other, and with like fortune.
For he was ouercoome, driven to flight, king Tumaccus is driven to flight.
and many of his men slain. He him self was also sore wounded, but yet
escaped. Vaschus sent certain messengers of the Chiapeans to him to return,
and not to be afraid. But he could be nothing moved nether by promysses nor
threateninges. Yet when the messengers were instant, and ceased not to
threaten death to him and his famely, with the utter desolation of his
kyngedome if he persisted in that obstinacy, at the length he sent his soonne
with them: whom Vaschus honorably enterteyninge, apparelinge him gorgiously and
gyuing him many gifts, sent him to his father, willing him to persuade him of
the puissaunce, munificence, liberality, humanity, and clemency of owre men.
Tumaccus being moved by this gentelnes declared toward his son, came with
him the third day, bringing nothing with him at that time. But after that he
knew that owre men desired goulde and pearls, Gold and perles,
he sent for six hundredth and.xiiii. Pesos of gold, and two hundredth and
forty of the biggest and fairest perles beside a great number of the smaulest
sort. Owre men marueyled at the byggenes and fayrenes of these perles although
they were not perfectely white because they take them not owte of the sea
musculs except they first roast them, Musculs of the sea.
that they may theselyer open them self, and also that the fysshe may have
the better taste, which they esteem for a delicate and princely dysshe, and
set more thereby then by the perles them selves. Of these things I was
informed of one Arbolantius being one of Vaschus coompanions whom he sent to
the king with many perles and certain of those sea musculs. But when Tum^ccus
saw that owre men so greatly regarded the beauty of the perles, he commanded
certain of his men to prepare them selves to goo a fysshynge for perles.
Fysshyng for perles
Who departinge, came again within four days, bringynge with them twelve
pound weight of orient perles after eight ounces to the pound. xii pound
weight of perles.
Thus reioysinge on both parties, they embrased and made a league of continual
frendeshippe. Tumaccus thought him self happy that he had presented owre men
with such thankeful gifts and was admitted to their frendshippe: and owre men
thinking them selves happy and blessed that they had found such tokens of
great riches, swalowed down their spettle for thyrste. The thyrst of gold.
At all these doings, king Chiapes was present as a wytnes and coompanion. He
also reioysed not a little, as well that by his conductinge he saw that owre
men should be satisfied of their desire, as also that by this means he had
declared to the next king his bortherer and enemy, what friends he had of
owre men, by whose aid he might live in quyetnes and be revenged of his
adversary if need should so require. Ambition among naked men.
For (as we have said) these naked kings infeste them selves with grievous
wars only for ambition and desire to rule. Vaschus bosteth in his epistell,
that he learned certain marvelous secreates of Tumaccus him self as
concerning the great riches of this land: whereof (as he says) he woold
utter nothing at this present, This Island is cauled Margarites Dives, or
Dites.
for as much as Tumaccus toulde it him in his ear. But he was informed of
both the kings, that there is an Island in that goulfe, greater then any of
the other, having in it but only one king, and him of so great pour, A
king of great pour.
that at such times of the year as the sea is caulme, he inuadethe their
dominions with a great navy of Culchas, spoiling and caryinge a way for a
pray, all that he meets. This Island is distant from these coasts, only
twenty miles: So that the promontories or points thereof rechyng into the
sea, may be seen from the hills of this Continent. In the sea nere about
this Island, sea musculs are engendered of such quantity, that many of them are
as broad as buckelers, Biggeperles.
In these are perles found (being the hearts of those shell fysshes) often
times as bygge as beans, sumtymes bygger then olyues and such as sumptuous
Cleopatra might have desired. Cleopatra, queen of Egypt resolved a pearl in
vinegar and drunk it, price.v. thousand pound of owr money. thef^rcenes of
U^schus.
Although this Island be so nere to the shore of this firm land, yet is
the beginning thereof in the main sea without the mouth of the goulfe. Vaschus
being joyful and merry with this rych communication, fantasinge now in manner
nothing but princes treasures, began to speak fierce and cruel words
against the tyranne of that Island, meaning hereby too woonne the minds of the
other kings, and bind them to him with a nearer band of frendeship. Yet
therefore raylynge further on him with spytefull and opprobrious words, he
swore great oaths that he woolde furthwith invade the Island, spoylynge,
destroyinge, burning, drownynge, and hanging, sparinge neither swoorde nor
fire, until he had revenged their injuries: And therewith commanded his
Culchas to be in a redynes. But the two kings Chiapes and Tumaccus, exhorted
him friendly to defer this enterprise until a more quiet season, because
that sea was not nauigable withowte great danger, being now the beginning
of November. Wherein the kings seemed to say true. For as Vaschus him self
writes, great roryng of the sea was hard among the Islands of the goulfe by
reason of the raginge and conflicte of the water. Great ryuers also descending
from the tops of the mountains the same time of the year, Great ryuer^
faulyng from mounta^nes.
and ouerflowyng their banks, dryuyng down with their vyolence great rocks
and trees, make a marvelous noise. Likewise the fury of the South and
Northeast wyndes, associate with thunder and lyghtnynge at the same season, did
greatly moleste them. Thunder and lyghtnynge in November.
While the wether was fair they were vexed in the night with could: and in the
day time, the heat of the son troubled them: whereof it is no marvel,
forasmuch as they were near unto the Equinoctial line, Cold in the night
nere the Equinoctial.
although they make no mention of the elevation of the pole. For in such
regions, in the night, the moon and other could planettes: but in the day,
the soon and other hot planettes, do chiefly exercise their influence:
Althowghe the antiquity were of an other opinion, habitable regions under the
Equinoctial line.
supposinge the Equinoctial circle to be uninhabitable and desolate by reason
of the heat of the soonne having his course perpendiculerly or directly over
the same: except a few of the contrary opinion, whose assertions the
Portugales have at these days by experience proved to be true. The
natiuitations of the Portiugales toward the southe pole. Antipodes. he means
S. Augustine and Lectautius.
For they sail yearly to thinhabitantes of the south pole, being in manner
Antipodes to the people cauled Hyperborei under the North pole, and exercise
marchaundies with them. And here have I named Antipodes, forasmuch as I am not
ignorant that there has been men of singular wit and great lernyng, which
have denied that there is Antipodes: that is, such as walk feet to feet. But
it is most certain, that it is not given to any one man to know all things.
For even they ^lso were men: whose property is to err and be deceived in
many things. Nevertheless, the Portugales of owre time, have sailed to the
five and fyftie degree of the south pole: The stars ^b^i^^e the southe pole.
Where, coompasinge abowte the point thereof, they might see throughowte all the
heaven about the same, certain shynynge white clouds here and there among
the stars, like unto them which are seen in the tracte of heaven cauled
Lactea via, Lactea via.
that is, the milk white way. They say, there is no notable star near
about that pole like unto this of owres which the common people think to be
the pole it self (cauled of the Italians Tramontana, and of the Spanyardes
Nortes) but that the same fauleth benethe the Ocean. A simyli^ude declarynge
Antipodes.
When the son descends from the myddeste of the exiltree of the woorlde
from us, it rysethe to them, as a pair of balances whose weight inclynynge
from the equal poyse in the myddest toward either of the sides, causes the
one end to rise as much as the other fauleth. When therefore it is autumn
with us, it is spring time with the^: And summer with us when it is winter
with them. But it su^fiseth to have said thus much of strange matters. Let us
now therefore return to the history and to owre men.

The second book of the third Decade.
VAschus by thaduice of king Chiapes and Tumacus, determined to defer his
vyage to the said Island until the next spring or summer, at which time
Chiapes offered him self to accoompany owre men and aid the^ therein all that
he might. In this mean time Vaschus had knowleage that these kings had nets
and fysshynge places in certain stations of that sea nere unto the shore,
where they were accustomed to fyshe for sea musculs in the which perles are
engendered: The manner of fysshynge for perles.
And that for this purpose they had certain diverse or fysshers exercised from
their youth in swymmynge under the water. But they do this only at certain
times when the sea is calm, T^^e kinds o^ per^es.
that they may theselyer coome to the place where these shell fyshes are woonte
to lie. For the bygger that they are, so much ly they the deaper and nerer to
the bottom But the lesser, as it were dowghters to the other, are nerer the
bryme of the w^ter. Likewise the least of all, as it were their nieses, are
yet nearer to the superficial part thereof. Too them of the byggeste sort
which lie loweste, the fysshers descend the depthe of three men's heyght, and
sumtyme four. But to the daughters or nieses as their succession, they descend
only to the mydde thygh. Sumtymes also, after that the sea has been
disquyeted with vehemente tempests, they find a great multitude of these
fysshes on the sands, being driven to the shore by the vyolence of the water.
The perles of these which are found on the sand, are but little. The fisshe
it self, is more pleasant in eating then are owre oysters as owre men
report. But perhaps hunger the sweet cause of all meats, caused owre men
so too think. Whether perles be the hearts of sea musculs (as Aristotell
supposed) or the birth or spaune of there intrals (as Plinye thought) Or
whether they cleave contynually to the rocks, Diverse questi^s as concerning
perles
or wander by coompanies in the sea by the guydinge of thelde^e: Whether every
fysshe bring forth one perle or more, at one birth or at diverse: Also
whether theye be fyled from the rocks whereunto theye cleave, or may be
easylye pulled away, or otherwise faule of by them selves when theye are
coomme to there full grouth: Likewise whether perles be hard within the
shelle or soft, owre men have as yet no certain experyence. But I trust or
it be long, too know the truth hereof. For owre men are even now in hand
with the matter. Also, as soon as I shall be aduertysed of the arryuall of
Petrus Arias the capytayne of owre men, Petrus arias
I will desire him by my letters to make diligent search for these things,
and certifye me thereof in all points. I know that he will not be slack or
omytte any thing herein. For he is my very friend: and one that takes great
pleasure in considering the works of nature. And surely it seeme^h unto me
vndecente, that we should with silence ouerslyppe so great a thing which
as well in the owlde time as in owre days, has, and yet doothe, draw both
men and women to emmoderate desire of superfluous pleasure. wanton and
superfluous pleasures.
Spain therefore shall be able hereafter with perles to satisfy the gredye
appetite of such as in wanton pleasures are like unto Cleopatra and Asopus So
that from hensforth we shall neither envy nor reverence the nyse frutefulnes
of Stoidum, Cleopatra.
A^opus.
Stoidum.
or Taprobana, Taprobana,
or the re^de sea. But let us now return to owre purpose. Vaschus therefore
determined with the fysshers of Chiapes to prove what might be done in his
fyshe pooles or stations of sea muscules. Chiapes to show him self obediente
to Vaschus his request, although the sea were boystyous, coommaunded thirtye
of his fysshers to prepare them selfs and to resort to the fysshinge places.
Vaschus sent only six of his men with them to beeholde them from the sea
banks, but not to coommitte them selves to the danger of the sea. The
fysshynge place was distante from the palayce of Chiapes about ten miles.
The fysshing place of king Chiapes.
They durst not adventure to dyue to the bottom by reason of the furye of the
sea. Yet of the muscules which lie highest, and of such as were driven to the
shore by the vyolence of the water, theye brought six great farthels in the
space of a few days. The perles of these were but little, about the bygnes
of smaule fytches: yet very fair and bewtyfull, by reason theye were taken
newely owte of the fysshe, being yet raw. And that they should not be
reproved of lyinge as concerning the bigness of these sea musculs, they sent
many of them into Spain to the king with the perles, the fysshe being taken
owte. We think verily that there may in no place bygger be found. These
shelle fysshes therefore being thus found here in so many places in that
sea, and gold in manner in every house, Gold in manner in every house.
do argue the rich treasurye of nature too be hyd in those coasts,
forasmuch as such great riches have been found as it were in the little
finger of a giantes hand. The rich treasurye of nature.
What then may we think of the hole hand of the gyante (for hitherto theye
have only bynne in hand with the confynes of Vraba) when theye shall have
thoroughly searched all the coasts and secreates of the inner parts of all that
large land. But Vaschus contented with these signs and joyful of his good
success in these enterprises, determined by an other way to return to his
fellows in Dariena, where also, they have gold mines about ten miles from
the village. The gold mines of Dariena.
He gave therefore king Chiapes leave to depart, and to follow him no further:
Consailyng him to continue faithful to the christian king his lord and
master. Thus embrasinge the one the other, and ioyninge hands, Chiapes
departed, with tears declaring the good mind which he bore to owre men.
Vaschus leaving his sick me^ with Chiapes, Went forward on his journey with
the resydue, having also with him for guydes three of Chiapes maryners. He
conueyghed his army over a great river into the dominion of a certain king
cauled Teaocha: King Teaocha enterteyneth vaschus frende^ye.
who being advertised of the coommyng of owre men, of whose famous acts he
had hard much before, was very glad thereof and enterteyned them honorably:
So that for a token of his frendely affection toward them, he gave Vaschus
twenty pounds weight of wrought gold after eight ounces to the pound:
Twentye pound weight of wroughte gold.
Also two hundredth big perles: but not fair, by reason they were taken out
of the musculs after they had been sodden. After they had joined hands, Vaschus
recompensed him with certain of owre things. Likewise rewardynge his guydes
the servants of Chiapes, he dismissed them with commendations to their lord.
King Teaocha at the departure of owr men from his palaice, did not only
appoint them guydes to conduct them in the way, but also gave them certain
slaves in the steed of beasts to carry their vytayles, because they should
pass throwgh many deserts, Deserts full of wild beasts.
baren and rowgh mountains and terrible wooddes full of tigers and Lions. He
sent also one of his sons with these slaves, ladynge them with salted and
dried fysh^, Dried fysshe
and bread of those regions, made of the roots of Maizium and Iucca. He also
commanded his son not to depart from owr men until he were licenced by
Vaschus. By their conductinge therefore, Vaschus came to the dominion of an
other king whose name was Pacra, a cruel tyranne, King Pacr^ a tyranne.
fearful to the other kings his bortherers, and of greater pour then any of
them. This tyran, whether it were that his guilty conscience for his mischeuous
acts, put him in fear that owre men woolde revenge the same, or that he
thought him self inferior to resist them, fled at their coming. Vaschus
writes that in these regions in the mooneth of November he was sore afflicted
with great heat and intolerable thirst, Great heat in the monethe of
November.
by reason that side of the mountains has little water: In so much that
they were in danger to have perisshed but that certain of thinhabitants
showed them of a spring which was in the secreate place of a woodde, whither
Vaschus with all speade sent two quycke and strong young men of his
coompanions with their gourdes and such water vessels as Teaocha his men
browghte with them. Of thinhabitantes, there durst none depart from there
coompany because the wild beasts do soon invade naked men. For in those
mountains, and especially in the wooddes near unto the spring, they say
that they are sumtymes taken owte of there houses in the night, except they
take good heed that the doors be well sparde. It shall not be from my
purpose hereto declare a particular chance before I enter any further in this
matter. hurt by wild beasts.
Theye say therefore that the last year the regyon of Dariena was noolesse
infested and trowbeled with a fierce tiger, A tiger.
then was Calidonia in time paste with a wild bore, Calydonia is a foreste in
Scotland.
and Nemea with a horrible lion. Nemea is a wodde in Greece.
For they affirm that for the space of six hole moonethes there passed not
one night withowte sum hurt done: so that it killed nyghtlye either a
bullock, a mare, a dog, or a hog, sumtimes even in the high ways of the
village. For owre men have now greatheardes of cattayle in those regions. They
say also that when this tiger had whelps, Tigers whelps.
no man might safelye goo furthe of his doors, because she spared not men if
she met first with them. But at the lengeth, necessitye enforced them to
inuente a policye how they might be revenged of such bludshed. Searchynge
therefore dilygently her footesteppes, Thus the Egiptians take Crocodiles.
and following the pathe wherbye she was accustomed in the night season to
wander owte of her den to seek her pray, theye made a great trenshe or
pytte in her walk, coueringe the same with hurdels whervppon theye cast part
of the earth and dispersed the resydue. The dog tiger chaunsed first into
this pitfaul, The dog tiger taken. The rorynge of the tiger.
and fell upon the points of sharp stakes and such other ingens as were of
purpose fyxed in the bottom of the trenshe. Being thus wounded, he rored so
terrybly, that it grated the bowels of such as hard him, and the wooddes and
montaynes near about, rebounded the noise of the horrible cry. When they
perceived that he was laid fast, they resorted to the trenshe and slew him
with stones, darts, and pykes. With his teethe and claws, he broke the darts
into a thousand chyppes, Being yet dead, he was fearful to all such as
beheld him: what then think you he woolde have done being alive and loose.
One Johannes Ledisma of Civil, a nere frynde to Vaschus and one of the
coompanyons of his trauayles, toulde me that he him self did eat of the
flesh of that tiger: Tigers flesh eaten.
and that it was nothing inferyor to biefe in goodness. Being demanded how
they knew hit to be a tiger forasmuch as none of them had ever seen a
tiger, they answered that they knew hit by the spots, fiercenes, agilitye,
and such other marks and token whereby the anciente writers have described the
tiger. For sum of them, had before time seen other spotted wild beasts, as
lybardes and panthers. The dog tiger being thus killed, theye following the
trase of his steps toward the mountains, came to the den where the bytche
remained with her two young suckynge whelps. The bitche tiger.
But she was not in the den at there coommynge. Theye first carried away
the whelps with them. But afterward fearing least they should dye because
theye were very young, Tigers whelps.
entendynge when they were bygger to send them into Spain, they put cheynes
of yren about there necks, and carried them again to there den: whither
returning within a few days after, theye found the den emptye and the
cheynes not removed from there place. A strange thing.
Theye suppose that the damme in her furye fore them in pyeces and carried them
away, lest any should have the fruition of them. For theye plainly affirm
that it was not possible that they should be loosed from the chains alive.
The skin of the dead tiger stuffed with dry herbs and straw, theye sent
to Hispaniola to the admyrall and other of the chief rulers from whom the
new lands receive there laws and succoure. It shall at this time suffyce to
have written thus much of the tigers, as I have learned by the report of them
which both sustained damage by there rauenynge, and also handeled the skin
of that which was slain. Let us, now therefore return to king Pacra from
whom we have disgressed. king Pacr^.
When Vaschus had entered into the houses forsaken of Pacra, he sent
messengiers to reconcyle him as he had done the other kings. At the first he
refused to coomme. But after threatenynges, he came with three other kings in
his coompanye. Vaschus writethe that he never saw a more monstrous and
deformed creature: And that nature has only given him humane shape, and
otherwise to be wor^e the^ a brute beast, with manners according to the
linyamentes of his body. He abused with most abominable lechery the
daughters of four kings his brotherers from whom he had taken them by
vyolence. Of the filthy behauoure of Pa^ra, Natural hatred of vice.
of his crueltye and iniuryes done by him, many of the other kings made
grievous coomplayntes to Vaschus as unto a high Judge and just revenger: Most
humblye besechyng him to see such things punysshed, forasmuch as theye took
him for a man sent of god for that purpose. Herevppon Vaschus as well to win
their good wylles, as also too show an exemple of terroure to such as used
like fasshions, Four kings deuo^red of dogs.
coommaunded that this monstrous beast with the other three kings which were
subject to him and of like conditions, should be given for a pray to his
feyghtinge dogs, and their torn carkeses to be burned. Of these dogs
which theye use in the wars, The use of dogs in war against naked men.
theye tell marvelous things. For theye say that theye run upon
thinhabitantes armed after there manner, with no less fiercenes then if theye
were hearts or wild bores, if the Spaniardes do but only point toward them
with their fyngers: In so much that oftentimes they have had no need too
drive their enemies too flight with swoordes or arrows: But have done the
same only with dogs placed in the forefronte of their battle, and lettynge
them slyppe with their watch word and priuye token. Wheruppon the barbaryans
stryken with fear by reason of the cruel countenaunces of the masties, with
their desperate bouldenes and unaccustomed houlynge and backynge, have
disparcled at the first onsette and broke their arraye. Yet it chaunseth
otherwise when theye have any conflicte against the Canibales and the people
of Caramairi. For these are fyerser, and more warrelyke men: Also so expert
arches, The Canybales are expert archers.
that theye can most certenlye dyrect their venomous arrows against the
dogs with such celeritye as if theye were thunderboltes: By reason whereof,
they sumtymes kyl many of the^. Thinhabytantes of these montaynes, do not
keep war with bows and arrows: But use only M^chanis, that is certain
long and broude swords made of woodde: Swoordes of woodde.
Also slings, long pykes and darts hardened at the ends with fyere. While
king Pacra yet lived, no man could know of him neither by fair means nor
by foul, where he had the gold which was found in his house. For owre men
found in his jewel house fyftye pounds weight of gold. F^^tie pound w^^ght
of gold.
Being therefore demanded where he had it, he answered that they which
gathered the same in those montaynes in his fathers days, were all dead: And
that sense he was a child, he never esteemed gold more then stoones. More
then this, theye could not get of him. By this severe punishment executed
upon Pacra, Vaschus concyled unto him the minds of all the other kings of
that prouynce. And by this means it came too pass, that when he sent for the
sick men which he left behind him with king Chiapes, an other king which
was in the mydde way (whose name was Bononiama) enterteyned them gentellye,
king Bononiama, fr^nde to the christians.
and gave them.xx. pound weight of pure wrought gold, wroughte gold.
beside great plentye of vyttayles. And not this only, but also accoompanyed
them him self until he had brought them safely from his palaice into the
domynyon of Pacra: Where taking each of them by the right hands, he
delivered them to Vaschus him self, as a faythefull pledge committed too his
charge, and therewith spoke to Vaschus in this effect. Most mighty and
valyaunte vyctourer, behold I here deliver unto you, yowre coompanions in
such plight as I received them: The oration of king Bonon^ama
wisshynge that I had been as well able to give them health, as they were
hertely welcoome to such pore enterteynement as I was able to show them. For
the favor and gentelnesse which I have found both in you and them, he
shall reward you which sends thunderynge and lyghtelyng to the destruction
of myscheuous men, The spark of the law of nature, is the law written in the
hearts of men.
and of his clemencye gives unto good men plenty of Iucca and M^^izium in
dew season. As he spoke these words, he lyfted up his hands and eyes
toward the soonne whom they honor for god. Then he spoke further to
Vaschus, saying: In that you have destroyed and slain owre vyolent and
proud enemies, you have browght peace and quietness to us and owre famelyes,
and bound us for ever to love and obey you. You have so ouercoome and
tamed wild monsters, that we think you to be sent from heaven for the
punyshement of evil men and defense of innocents, that under the protection
of yowre mighty swoorde, we may hereafter lead owre lives withowte fear,
and with more quietne^se give thanks to the giver of all good things for h^s
mercy showed unto us in this behalf. When thinterpretoure had toulde Vaschus
that king Bononiama had said the^e words, and such like, Vaschus rendered
him like thanks for his humanitye declared toward owre men, and rewarded him
as he had done other in whom he found like gentilnesse. Vaschus writes that
he learned many things of this king as concerning the great richesse of
these regions: ^ut that he woolde at this present speak nothing thereof: And
rehersethe the same as things like to have good success. What this implicate
Hiperbole, Hiperbole.
or advancement means, I do not well understand. But he plainly seems
hereby to promysse many great things. And surely it is to be thought that
according to his hope, great riches may be looked for. For they came in
manner into none of thinhabytauntes houses, Great plenty of gold.
but that they found in them, either bresteplates or curettes of gold, or
else golden ouches, jewels, or garlandes to wear about there heads, necks,
or arms. I conjecture therefore thus by a symilitude of owre houses: A
symilitude for the proof of plentye of gold.
If among us any man of great pour were moved with the desire to have great
plentye of Iron, and woolde enter into Italye with a main force as did the
Goths in time paste, what abundaunce of Iron should he have in their houses:
where as he should find in one place a friyngpan, in an other a chauldron,
here a tryuet, and there a spytte, and these in manner in every pore man's
house, with such other innumerable: Whereby any man may conjecture that Iren
is plentifully engendered in such regions where they have so great use
thereof. Owre men also perceived that thinhabytantes of these regions do no more
esteem gold then we do Iren: Iren more esteemed then gold.
nor yet so much after they saw to what use Iren served us. Thus much have
I thought good to write too yowre holiness of such things as I have
gathered owt^ of the letters of Vaschus Nunnez, and learned by word of mouth
of such as were his co^panyons in these affairs. As we receive them, so we
give them unto you. Time which reueleth all secrets, shall hereafter mynyster
larger argument of writing. Theye could at this time do no great thing in
searchynge the gold mines, forasmuch as of a hundredth fourscore and ten
men which Vaschus brought with him from Dariena, there remained only
threescore and ten, or at the most fourscore, whose aid he now used in these
dangerous adventures, leaving ever the crased men behynd him in the kings
houses all the way that he went But they most especially fell into sundry
diseases, Change of diet is dangerous.
which came lately from Hispaniola. For they were not able to abide such
calamities as to live only contented with the bread of those regions, and
wild herbs without salt, drinkinge none other then river water, and that
oftentimes either lackinge or unwholesome, where as before their stomakes had been
used to good meats. But the owlde soldiers of Dariena, Owld^ soldiers.
were hardened to abide all sorrows, and exceadynge tolerable of labor,
heat, hunger, and watchynge: In so much that merilye they make their booste
that they have observed a longer and sharper lent then ever yowre holiness
enjoined. A long len^.
For they say that for the space of four hole years, they eat none other
then herbs and fruits, except now and then perhaps fyshe, and very
seldoome flesh: Yea, and that sumtime for lack of al these, they have not
abhorr^d from mangye dogs and fylt hye toades as we have said before. The
owlde soldiers of Dariena, I caul those which first followed the capytaynes
Nicuesa and Fogeda to inhabyte the land, of the which now few were living.
But let us now omytte these things, and return to Vaschus the victourer
of the montaynes.

The third book of the third Decade.
WHen Vaschus had remained thirtye days in the palayce of king Pacra,
concilynge unto him the mids of thinhabitantes and prouidinge things
necessary for his coompanions, he departed from thense by the conducte of
certain of king Teaocha his men, and came too the bank of the river
Comogrus, Comogrus*
whereof the region and king thereof, are named by the same name. He found the
sides of these montaynes so rude and baren, that there was nothing apt to be
eaten, but wild roots and certain vnpleasante fruits of trees. Two kings
being near of bludde, inhabyted this unfortunate region, Two poor kings.
which Vaschus ouerpassed with all speed for fear of hunger. One of these
poor kings was named Cotochus, and the other Ciuriza. He took them both
with him to guide him in the way, and dismyssed Teaocha his men with vytayles
and rewards. Thus for the space of three days, he wandered through many
deserte wooddes, Deserts.
craggye mountains, and muddy marysshes full of such quamyres that men are
oftentimes swalowed up in them if they look not the more warelye to their
fiete. Also through places not frequented with resort of men, and such as
nature had not yet opened to their use, forasmuch as thinhabitantes have
seldoome intercourse between them, but only by sundry incurtions, the one to
spoil and destroy the other: Being otherwise contented to live only after
the law of nature, withowte worldly toil for superfluous pleasures. Thus
enteringe at the length into the territorye of another king whose name was
Bechebuea, king Bechebuea submytteth him self
they found all things void and in silence: For the king and his subjects,
were all fled to the wooddes. When Vaschus sent messengers to fetch him, he
did not only at the first submytte him self, but also promysse his aid with
all that he might make: Protestynge furthermore, that he fled not for fear
that owre men woolde do him any injury, but that he hyd him self for very
shame and grief of mind, for that he was not able to receive them honorablye
according unto their dignitye, because his store of vitayles was consumed. Yet
in a token of obedience and frendeshyppe, he sent owre men many vessels of
gold, Uessels of gold.
desyring them to accept them as the gift of a frind whose good will wanted
not in greater things if his abilytye were greater. By which words the
poor man seemed to insinuate that he had been robbed and otherwise cruelly
handled of his bortherers. By reason whereof, owre men were enforced to depart
from thense more hungerly then theye came. As theye went forward therefore,
they espied certain naked men coomminge down from a hylle toward them.
Vaschus coommaunded his army to stay, and sent his interpretours to them to
know what they would have. Then one of the^ to whom the other seemed to give
reverence, spoke in this effect. Owre lord and king Chiorisus, king
Chiorisus ^endeth Ua^chus xxx. dysshes of pure gold.
greeteth you well: Willing us to declare that he has hard of yowre
puissaunce and virtue whereby you have subdued evil men and revenged the
wrongs done to innocents. For the which yowre noble factes and justice, as
he doothe honor yowre fame, so woolde he think him self most happy if he
might receive you into his palaice. But, forasmuch as his fortune has been so
evil (as he imputes it) that being owte of yowre way, you have ouerpassed
him, he has sent you this gold in token of his good will and fryndshyppe
toward you. And with these words he delivered to Vaschus thirty disshes of
pure gold. Adding hereunto, that when so ever it should please him to take
the pains to coomme to their king, he should receive greater gifts. He
declared further, that a king which was their bortherer and mortal enemy,
was very rich in gold: And that in subduynge of him they should both obtain
great richesse, and also deliver them from daily vexations: which thing
might easilye be done by their help because they knew the country. Vaschus
put them in good coomforte, and gave them for reward certain Iren axes which
they more esteemed then great heaps of gold. Axes of Iren more este^med then
any gold
For they have little need of gold, having not thuse of pestiferous money.
But he that may get but one axe or hatchet, thinks him self rycher then
ever was Crassus. For even these naked men do perceive that an axe is
nece^sarye for a thousand uses: And confess that gold is desired only for
certain vain and effeminate pleasures, Su^erfluous an^ effemynate plesur^^
as a thing which the life of man may lack withowte any inconvenience. For
owre glutteny and superfluous sumptuousness has not yet corrupted them: By
reason whereof they take it for no shame to lack cobardes of plate, where as
the pride and wantonness of owre time does in manner impute it to us for
ignominye to be withowte that, whereof by nature we have no need. An exemple
of the life of owre first parents.
But their contentation with the benefytes of nature doothe plainly declare
that men may lead a free and happy life withowt tables, table clothes,
carpettes, napkyns, and towels, with such other innumerable whereof they have
no use, except perhaps the kings furnishe their tables with a few golden
vessels. But the common people drive away hunger with a pyece of their bread
in the one hand, and a piece of broylde fyshe or sum kind of fruit in the
other hand. For they eat flesh but seldom. When their fingers are imbrued
with any ounctuous meats, they wype them either on the souls of their feet,
or on their thyghes, ye and sumtymes on the skynnes of their priuye members in
the steed of a nappekynne. And for this cause do they often times wash them
selves in the ryuers. Owre men therefore went forward laden with gold,
Plentye of gold and scarceness of m^are.
but sore afflicted with hunger. Thus they came at the length to the dominion
of king Pocchorrosa who fled at their coommynge. Here for the space of
thirtye days they filled their emptye bellies with bread of the roots of
Maizium. In the mean time Vaschus sent for Pocchorrosa: kn^g Pecchorro^a
^ub^ytteth him self.
who being allured with promises and fair words, came and submytted him
self brynginge with him for a present.xv. pounds weighte of wrought gold,
xv. pound weyghte of wroughte gold.
and a few slaves. Vaschus rewarded him as he had done other before. When he
was minded to depart, he was advertised that he should pass through the
dominion of a certain king whose name was Tumanama. king Tumanama, look
decad. ii. lib. (...)
This is he whom the soonne of king Comogrus declared to be of so great
pour and fearful to all his bortherers, and with whom many of Comogrus
familyers had been captyue. But owre men now perceived that they measured his
pour by their own. For their kings are but guattes compared to elephantes,
in respect to the pour and pollicye of owre men. Owre men were also informed
by such as dwelte near about Tumanama, that his region was not beyond the
montaynes as they supposed: Nor yet so rich in gold as young Comogrus* had
declared. Yet consulted they of his subduyng: which they thought they might
theaslyer bring to pass because Pocchorrosa was his mortal enemy, who most
gladly promised them his advice and aid herein. Vaschus therefore, leaving his
sick men in the vyllage of Poochorrosa, took with him threscore of his most
valiante soldiers, and declared unto them how king Tumanama had oftentimes
spoken proud and threatnyng words ageynste them: A good policye.
Likewise that it now stood them in hand of necessitye to pass through his
dominion: And that he thought it best to set upon him unawares. The
soldiers consented to his advice, an^ exhorted him to give thaduenture,
promisinge that they woolde follow him whether so ever he went. They
determined therefore to go two days journey in one day, that Tumanama not
knowing of their sooden coming, might have no leisure to assemble an army.
The thing came to pass even as they had devised. For in the first watch of
the night, owre men with the Pocchorrosians, invaded the vyllage and palaice of
Tumanama, where they took him prisoner suspectynge nothing less. (...) is
tak^ prisoner.
He had with him two young men which he abused unnaturally: Also fourscore
women which he had taken vyolently from diverse kings. Likewise a great number
of his gentelmen and subjects were taken stragelynge in other vyllages near
about his palaice. For their houses are not adherent together as owres be,
because they are oftentimes troubeled with vehement whrilewyndes by reason of
the sudden chaunges and motions of the air caused by the influence of the
planetes in the equality of the day and night being there in manner both of
one length throughowte all the year, forasmuch as they are near unto the
Equinoctial line as we have said before. The cause of vehemente wyndes nere
he Equinoc^ial.
Their houses are made of trees, covered and after their manner thetched with
the stalks of certain towghe herbs. To the palayce of Tumanama, king
Tum^nama his palaice.
was only one house adherent, and that even as bygge as the palayce it self.
Either of these houses were in length a hundredth and twenty pases; and in
breadth fyftie pases as owre men measured them. In these two houses the king
was accustomed to muster his men as often as he prepared an army. When
Tumanaman therefore, was thus taken captyue with all his Sardanapamcall famelye,
the Pocchorrosians bragged and threatened him being now bound, that he
should shortly be hanged. The other kings also his bortherers, reioysed at
his mysfortune. Whereby owre men perceived that Tumanama was nolesse troublesome
to his neighbors, then was Pacra to the kings of the southe side of the
montaynes. Vaschus also the better to please them, threatened him grievously: But
in deed intended no evil toward him. He spoke therefore sharply unto him with
these words: Uaschus his words to king Tumanama.
Thou shalt now su^fer punishment thou cruel tyranne, for thy pride and
abominations. Thou shalt know of what pour the christians are whom thou
haste so contemned and threated to draw by the hear of their heads to the
next ry^er and there to drown them as thou haste often times made thy vaunte
emonge thy naked slaves. But thou thy self shalt first feel that which
thou haste prepared for other.: And herewith commanded him to be taken up.

Nevertheless gyuynge a priuye tooken of pardon to them which laid hands on
him. Thus unhappy Tumanama, fearing and beleuynge that Vaschus had mente in
ernes^e as he commanded, fell prostrate at his feet and with tears desired
pardon: Protestynge that he never spoke any such words. But that perhaps
his noble men in their droonkennesse had so abused their toonges which he
could not rule. For their wynes although they be not made of grapes yet are
they of force to make men droonken. He declared furthermore that the other
kings his bortherers had of malice surmysed such lies of him enuyinge his
fortune because he was of greater pour then they. Oderunt quen metuunt.
Most humbly desyringe Vaschus that as he took him to be a just vyctourer,
so to give no credytte unto their unjust and malycious complaints. king
Tumanama his words.
Adding hereunto that if it woolde please him to pardon him not having
offended, he woolde bring him great plenty of gold. Thus layinge his right
hand on his breast, he swore by the son, that he ever loved and feared the
chrystians sense he first hard of their fame and vyctoryes: Especially when
he hard say that they had Machanas, that is, swoordes sharper then thearse,
and such as cut in pieces al things that coomme in their way. Then
directing his eyes toward Vaschus who had his swoorde in his hand, he spoke
thus. Who (except he were owte of his wit) dare lift up his hand
ageynste this swoorde of yowres wherewith you are able with one struck to
clean a man from the head to the navel. Let no man therefore persuade you
(o most mighty victourer) that ever such words proceeded owte of my mouth.
As Tumanama with trembeling spoke these words, therewith swalowynge down the
knot of death, Vaschus seemed by his tears to be moved to compassion:
T^manama is pardoned.
And speaking to him with cheerful countenance commanded him to be loosed.
This done, he sent immediately to his palaice for.xxx. pounds weight of pure
gold artifycially wrought into sundry ouches which his wives and concubynes
used to wear. xxx. pound weyghte of wroughte gold.
Also the third day following, his noble men and gentylmen sent threscore
pounds weight of gold for their fine and raunsumme. lx pounds weight of
gold.
Tumanama being demanded where they had that gold, answered that it was not
gathered in his dominions But that it was brought his ancestors from the
river Comogrus toward the southe. But the Pocchorrosians and other his enemies,
said that he lied: Affirmynge that his kingdom was rich in gold. Tumanama on
the contrary part, instantly protested that he never knew any gold mine in
all his dominions. Yet denied not but that there has sumtimes been found
certain smaule grains of gold, to the gatherynge whereof, he never had any
regard, because they could not get it without great and long labor. They
abhor labor.
While these things were dooinge, the sick men which Vaschus had left in
the village of Pocchorrosa, came to him the.viii. day of the Calendes of
January in the year of Christ. M.D.XIII. bringyng with them certain
laborers from the kings of the southe with sundry instruments to dygge the
ground and gather gold. Thus passing over the day of the natiuitye of Christ
without bodily labor, upon saint Steuens day he brought certain myners to
the side of a hill not far dystante from the palaice of Tumanama, where (as
he says) he perceived by the color of the earth that it was lykely to bring
furthe gold. When they had dygged a pytte not past a hand breadth and a half,
The color of the golden earth and a trial of the same.
and syfted the earth thereof, they found certain smaule graynes of gold no
bygger then lintell seeds, amountynge to the weight of twelve graynes as they
prouyd with their balances of assaye before a notarie and witness that the
better credytte might be gyu^n thereto. Whereby they argued that the rychenesse
of that land was agreeable to the report of the bortherers, although Vaschus
could by no means cause Tumanama to confess the same. They suppose that he
nothing esteemed so smaule a portion. But other say that he denied his
country to be fruitful of gold, least by reason thereof the desire of
gold, might intyse owre men to inhabyte his kingdom, as in deed the seely
king was a prophet in so thinking. For they chose that and the region of
Pocchorrosa to inhabyte, and determined to build towns in them both, if it
should so please the king of Castyle: As Well that they might be baytinge
places and vytailynge houses for such as should journey toward the southe, as
also that both the regions were frutfull and of good ground to bear fruits
and trees. Intending now therefore to depart from thense, he tried the earth
by chance in an other place, where the color of the ground with certain
shyninge stones, seemed to be a tooken of gold. where causynge a smaule ^itte
to be dygged little beneath thupper cruste of the ea^the, he found somuche
gold as weighed that pyece of gold which the Spaniardes caul Castellanum
aureum, and is commonly cauled Pesus, Tokens of great plenty of go^de.
but not in one grain. Reioysynge at the^e tookens in hope of great riches, he
badde Tumanama to be of good coomforte, promising him that he woolde be his
friend and defender, so that he troubeled not any of the kings which were
friends to the Christians. He also persuaded him to gather plentye of gold.
Su^me say that he led away all Tumanam^ his women, and ^p^yled him least
he should rebel. Yet he delivered his soonne to Vaschus to be brought up
with owre men, to learn their language and relygyon, that he might thereafter
the better use his help as well in all things that he should have to do with
owre men, as also more polytykely rule, and obtain the love of his own
subjects. Vaschus at this time fell into a vehement fever by reason of excess
of labor, Ua^chus fauleth ^icke.
immoderate watchyng, and hunger: In somuche that departing from thense, he
was feign too be borne upon men's backs in shietes of gossampyne cotton.
Feeblenes of hunger and watchinge.
Likewise also many of his soldiers which were so weak that they could
another go nor stand. To this purpose they used the help of thinhabytantes,
who showed themselves in althynges willing and obedyente. Also sum of them
which were su^what feeble and not able to travail, although not grievously
sick, were led by the arms until they came to the domynion of king
Commogrus a great friend to the Christyans, king Comog^us frende^ to the
Chris^ians
of whom we have largely made mention before. At Vaschus coming thither, he
found that the owlde king was dead, and his soonne (whom we so pray^ed for
his wisdom) to raygne in his stead: And that he was bapti^e^ b^ the name of
Charles. The palayce of this Comogrus, is situate at the foot of a st^epe hill
well cultured. H^uynge toward the southe a plain of twelve leages in b^eadth
and veary fruitful. The large and ^^^teful plain o^ ^auana.
This plain, they caul Zauana. Beyond his, are the great and high montaynes
which ^e^yd^ the two seas whereof we have spoken before. Owte of the styepe
hills, spryngeth the river Comogrus, Tho river Comogru^.
which runs throwgh the said plain to the high montaynes, receauynge
into his channel by their valleys, all the other ryuers, and so fauleth into
the south sea. It is distante from Dariena, about threscore and ten leages
toward the weste. As owre men therefore came to these parties, king Comogrus
(otherwise cauled Charles by his christian name) met the^ joyfully and
entertained them honorably, gyuynge them their fill of pleasant meats and
drynkes. He gave also to Vaschus, twenty pound weight of wrought gold. xx.
pound weight of wrought gold
Vaschus recompensed him with things which he esteemed much more: As axes and
sundry kinds of carpenters tools. Also a soldiers cloak, and a fair sherte
wrought with needle work By these gifts, Comogrus thought him self to be
half a god among his bortherers. Vaschus at his departing from hense,
ernestly charged Comogrus and the other kings to remain faithful and
obedient to the christian king of Castile, if they desired to live in peace and
quietness: And that they should hereafter more diligently apply them selu^s
to the gatheringe of gold to be sent to the great christian Tiba (that is)
king. Declaryng fur^her, that by this means they should both get them and
their posterity a patron and defender against their enemies, and also obtain
great abundaun^e of owre things. These affairs thus happily achiu^d, he went
forward on his vyage to the palaice of king Poncha, where he found four
young men which were come from Dariena to certify him that there were
certain ships coomme from Hispaniola laden with vyttayles and other
necessaries. Uaschus re^u^neth to Dariena.
Wherefore taking with him twenty of his most lusty soldiers, he made haste
to Dariena with long journeys: leauinge the resydue behynd him to follow at
their leisure. He writes that he came to Dariena the.xiiii. Call. of Fe, An.
1514. The date of his letter is: From Dariena, the.iiii. day of march. The good
fortune of Uaschus.
He writes in the same letter, that he had many sore conflictes, and that he
was yet neither wounded, or lost any of his men in the battle. And therefore
in all his large letter, there is not one leaf without thanks geuynge to
almighty god for his delyuery and preservation from so many imminent pecels. He
attempted no enterprise or took in hand any viage withowt thinuocation of god
and his holy saints. Thus was Vaschus Balboa of a vyolen^e Goliath, turned
into Hels^as: Uaschus wa^ turned from G^^^^th to ^^^^eus,
And from Anteus too Hercules the conqueror of monsters. Being therefore
thus turned from a rasshe royster to a polytyk^ and discreate captain, he
was judged worthy to be advanced to great honor. By reason whereof, he
was both received into the kings favor, and therevppon created the general
or Lieuetenaunt of the kings army in those Regions. O flaterynge fortune,
look his death in the book of the Island lately found.
Thus much have I gathered both by the letters of certain my faythefull
friends being in Dariena, and also by word of mouth of such as came lately
from thense. If yowre holiness desire to know what I think herein, Suerly as
by such things as I have seen, I believe these things to be true, even so
thorder and agreinge of Vaschus and his coompanions warrelyke letters, seem to
confirm the same. The earth is owre general mother.
The Spanyarde therefore shall not need hereafter with vndermynynge the earth
with intolerable labor to break the bones of owre mother, and enter many
miles into her bowels, and with innumerable dangers cut in sunder hole
mountains to make a way to the court of infernal Pluto, The court of
infernal Pluto.
to bring from thense wicked gold the seed of innumerable mischeues,
withowte the which notwithstanding we may now scarsely lead a happy life
sith iniquity has so prevailed and made us slaves to that whereof we are
lords by nature: The Spanyarde (I say) shall not need with such trauayles and
difficulty to dygge far into the earth for gold, but shall find it
plentifully in manner in the upper crust of the earth, or in the sands of
ryuers dryded up by the heat of summer, only washing the earth softely
from the same: And shall with like facilite gather plenty of pearls. There
i^ a better way then this.
Certainly the reverent antiquity (by all the Cosmographers assent obtained not
so great a benefyte of nature, nor yet aspired to the knowleage hereof,
because there came never man before owte of owre known world to these
unknown nations: The Sp^niardes conquestes.
At the least, with a pour of men, by force of arms, in manner of conquest:
whereas otherwise nothing can be gotten here, forasmuch as these nations are for
the most part severe defenders of their patrimonies, and cruel to strangers,
in no condition admittinge them otherwise then by conquest: especially the
fierce Canibales or Caribes. For these wylye hunters of men, Manhunters
give them selves to none other kind of exercise but only to manhuntynge and
tyllage after their manner. At the coming therefore of owre men into their
regions, they look as suerly to have them faule into their snares as if they
were hearts or wild bores: The fiersenesse of the Can^bales.
and with no less confydence lick their lips secreately in hope of their
pray. If they get the upper hand, they eat them greedely: If they
mystruste them selves to be the weaker part, they trust to their feet, and
fly swyfter then the wind. Again, if the matter be tried on the water,
as well the women as men can dyue and swymme, as though they had been ever
brought up and fed in the water. It is no maruayle therefore if the large
tracte of these regions have been hitherto unknown. But now sith it has
pleased God to discover the same in owre time, Owre duty to god, and natural
love to mankind.
it shall becoome us to show owre natural love to mankind and dewtie to God,
to endeavor owre selves to bring them to civility and true religion, to
thincrease of Christ's flock, to the confusion of Infidels and the Devil
their father who delytethe in owre destruction as he has done from the
beginning. By the good success of these first fruits, owre hope is, that the
Christian regilion shall streache forth her arms very far. Which thing
should the sooner coome to pass if all men to their pour (especially
Christian Princes to whom it chiefly perteyneth) would put their hands to the
plowe of the lords vineyarde. Thoffyce of Chrystian princes. The harvest is
great. etc.
The harvest suerly is great, but the woorkemen are but few. As we have said
at the beginning, yowre holiness shall hereafter nooryshe many myriades of
broodes of chekins under yowre wings. But let us now return to speak of
Beragua being the weste side of Vraba, Beragua.
and first found by Colonus the Admiral, then unfortunately governed by Diego
Nicuesa, Nicuesa.
and now left in manner desolate: with the other large regions of those
provinces brought from their wild and beastly rudenes to civility and true
religion.

The fourth book of the third Decade.
I Was determined (most holy father) to have proceeded no further herein, but
that on^ fierye spark yet remaining in my mind, woolde not suffer me to
cease. Whereas I have therefore declared how Beragua was first fownde by
Colonus, my think I should commytte a heinous crime if I should defraude the
man of the due commendations of his trauayles, The fourth navigations of Colonus
the Admiral.
of his cares and troubles, and finally of the daungeours and perels, which he
sustained in that navigations.

Therefore in the year of Christ.1502. in the.vi. day of the Ides of May, he
hoysed up his sails and departed from the Islands of Gades with.iiii.
ships of fyftie or.iii. score tun a piece, with a hundredth threscore and
ten me^, and came with prosperous wind to the Islands of Canari^ within five
days folowinge, from thense arryuinge the.xvi. day at the Island of Dominica
being the chief habitation of the Canibales, he sailed from Dominica to
Hispaniola in five other days. Thus within the space of.xxvi. days, with
prosperous wind and by the swyfte faule of the Ocean from the East to the
west, he sailed from Spain to Hispaniola: Which course is counted of the
mariners to be no less then a thousand and two hundredth leagues. From
Spain to hispan^ola a thou^ande and two hundredth leagues
He tarried but a while in Hispaniola, whether it were wyllingly, or that he
were so admonisshed of the viceroye. Directing therefore his vyage from thense
toward the weste, leauyng the Islands of Cuba and Iamaica on his right hand
toward the north, he writes that he chaunsed upon an Island more
southewarde then Iamaica, which thinhabitantes caul Guanassa, so florysshinge
and fruitful that it might seem an earthlye Paradyse. The flory^shyng Island
of Guanassa.


Coastynge alonge by the shores of this Island, he met two of the Canoas or
boats of those provinces, which were drawn with two naked slaves against the
stream. In these boats, was carried a ruler of the Island with his wife and
children, all na^ed. The slaves seeing owre men a land, made signs to them
with proud countenance in their masters name, to stand owte of the way,
and threatened them if they woolde not give place. Simple. people.
Their sympelnes is such that they another feared the multitude or pour of
owre men, or the greatness and straungenes of owre ships. They thought that
owre men woolde have honored their master with like reverence as they did.
Owre men had intelligence at the length that this ruler was a great marchaunte
which came to the mart from other coasts of the Island. A great merchant.
For they exercise byinge and selling by exchange with their confinies. He
had also with him good stoore of such ware as they stand in need of or take
pleasure in: as laton belles, rasers, knyues, and hatchettes made of a certain
sharp yelowe bright stone, with handles of a strong kind of woodde. Also many
other necessary instruments with kychen stuff and vessels for all necessary
uses. Likewise sheets of gossampine cotton wrought of sundry colors. Owre
men took him prisoner with all his famely. But Colonus commanded him to be
losed shortly after, and the greatest part of his goods to be restored to win his fryndeshippe. Being here instructed of a land lyinge further
toward the southe, he took his vyage thither. Therefore little more then ten
miles distant from hense, he found a large land which thinhabitantes cauled
Quiriquetana: But he named it Ciamba. The regyon of Queriquetana or Ciamba.
When he went a land and commanded his chaplain to say ma^se on the sea
banks, a great confluence of the naked inhabitants flocked thither symplye
and without fear, brinkynge with them plenty of meat and fresh water,
marueylynge at owre men as they had been sum strange miracle. Gentle people.
When they had presented their gifts, they went sumwhat backewarde and made
low curtesy after their manner bowinge their heads and bodies reverently. He
recompensed their gentylnes rewardinge them with other of owre things, as
counters, braslettes and garlandes of glass and counterfecte stoones, lookynge
glasses, nedelles, and pynnes, with such other trashe, which seemed unto them
precious marchaundies. In this great tracte there are two regions whereof the
one is cauled Taia and the other Maia. The regyons of Taia and Maia.
He writes that all that land is very fair and wholesome by reason of the
excellent temperatnesse of the air: And that it is inferior to no land in
fruitful ground being partly full of mountains, and partly large playn^s:
Also replenyshed with many goodly trees, wholesome herbs, and fruits,
continuynge green and floryshynge all the hole year. It bears also very
many holy trees and pyne aple trees. Also.vii. kinds of date trees whereof
sum are fruitful and sum baren. Seven kinds of date trees.
It brings forth likewise of it self Pelgoras and wild vynes laden with
grapes even in the wooddes emonge other trees. wild vines.
He says furthermore that there is such abundaunce of other pleasant and
profitable fruits, that they pass not of vynes. Of one of those kinds of date
trees, they make certain long and broad swoordes and darts. These regyons
bear also gossampyne trees here and there commonly in the woodd^s. Likewise
Mirobalanes of sundry kinds, M^robalanes
as those which the physicians caul Emblicos and Chebulos. Maizium also,
Iucca, Ages, and Battatas, like unto those which we have said before to be
found in other regions in these coasts. The same nooryssheth also lions,
Tigers, Hearts, Roes, Goats, and diverse other beasts. Likewise sundry kinds
of birds and fowls: Birds and fowls.
Emonge the which they keep only them to frank and feed, which are in
color, bygnes, and taste, much like unto owre pehennes. He says that
thinhabitantes are of high and goodly stature, People of goodly stature
well lym^ed and proportioned both men and women: Covering their priuye parts
with fine breeches of gossampine cotton wrought with diverse colors. And that
they may seem the more cumlye and bewtifull (as they take it) they paynte
their bodies read and bla^ke with the iuce of certain apples which they
plant in their gardens for the sa^e purpose. Sum of them paynte their hole
bodies: They paynt their bodies
sum but part: and other sum draw the portitures, of herbs, flowers, and
knottes, every one as seems be^te to his own phantasye. Their language
differs utterly from theirs of the Islands nere about them. The ^wyfte
cour^e of the sea from the East to the West.
From these regions, the waters of the sea ran with as full course toward
the weste, as if it had been the faule of a swyfte river. Nevertheless he
determined to search the East parts of this land, reuoluynge in his mind
that the regions of Paria and Os Draconis with other coasts found before
toward the East, Pari^.
should be near theraboute as in deed they were. Departing therefore from the
large region of Quiriquetana the xiii. day of the calendes of September, when
he had sailed thirty leaques, he found a river, without the mouth whereof he
drew fresh water in the sea. Fresshe water in the sea.
Where also the shoore was so clean withowte rocks, that he found ground
every where, where he might aptely cast anchor. He writes that the swifte
course of the Ocean was so vehement and contrary, that in the space of fortye
days he could scarcelye sail threscore and ten leaques, and that with
much diffy^ultie with many fetches and coompasynges, F^^ches and compasinges
fyndyng him self to be sumtimes repulsed and driven far back by the
vyolente course of the sea when he woolde have taken land toward the
evening, le^s^e perhaps wandering in unknown coasts in the darckenes^e of
the night, he might be in danger of shypwracke: He writes that in the space
of eight leaques, he found three great and fair ryuers upon the banckes
whereof, Fair ryuers. Great reeds
there grew reeds bygger then a man's thygh, In these ryuers was also great
plentye of fyshe and great tortoyses: Great tortoyses.
Likewise in many places, mul^itudes of Crocodiles lyinge in the ^ande, and
yanyng to ^ake the heat of the soonne: Beside diverse other kinds of beasts
whereunto he gane no names. He says al^o that the soil of that land is very
diverse and variable: being sumwhere stonye and full of rough and ^e^ggie
promonto^^es or points reachynge into the sea. And in other places as frutfull
as may be. They have also diverse kings and rulers. Diverse languages.
In sum places they caul a king Cacicus: in other places they caul him
Quebi, and sumwhere Tiba. Such as have behaved them selves valiantly in the
wars ageynste their enemies, and have their faces full of scarres, they caul
Cupras, and honor them as the antiquity did the gods which they cauled
Heroes, Hero^^*
supposed to be the souls of such men as in their life time excelled in
virtue and noble acts. The common people, they caul Chiui: and a man, they
caul Ho^^cu^. When they say in their language, take man, they say Hoppa home.
After this, he came to an other river apt to bear great ships: Before the
mouth whereof, l^ye four smaule Islands full of florisshing and frutfull
trees. These Islands he named Quatuor tempora. Quatuor tempora.
From hense saylynge toward the East for the space of.xiii. leaques still
ageinste ^he vyolent course of the water, he found twelve other smaule
Islands. In the which because he found a new kind of fruits much like unto
owre lemondes, he cauled them Limonares. Twel^e Ila^ds na^ed Li^^^na^es.
Wandering yet further the same way for the ^pace of.xii. leaques, he found
a great haven enteryng into the land after the manner of a goulfe the space of
three l^aqu^s, and in manner as broad, into the which fell a great river. He^e
was Nicuesa lost afterward when he soug^te Ber^ga^: By reason whereof they
cauled it Rio delos perdido^: Rio de los pe^didos.
that is the river of the lost men. Thus Colonus the Admiral yet further
con^ynuynge his cour^e ageynste the furye of the ^ea, found many high
montaynes and horrible valleys, with diverse ryuers and havens, from all the
which (as he says) proceaded sweet sauers greatly rec^eatynge and
confortynge nature. In so much that in all this long tracte there was not one
of his men desea^ed until he ca^e to a region which thinhabitantes cause
Quicuri, The region of Qu^curi.
in the which is the haven cauled Cariai, named M^robalanus by the admyrall
because the Mirobalane trees are native in the regions therabout. In this haven
of Cariai, The haven of Cariai or Mirobalanus
there came about two hundredth of thinhabitantes to the sea side with every of
them three or four darts in their hands: Yet of condition gentell enoughe,
and not refusyng strangers. Their coming was for none other purpose then to
know what this new nation mente, or what they brough^e with them. When owre
men had given them signs of peace, they came swymmynge to the ships and
desired to barter with them by exchange. The admyrall to allure them to
frend^hippe, gave them many of owre things: But they refused them, suspectynge
sum disceate thereby because he woolde not receive theirs. They wroughte all
by signs: Civil and human^ people
for one understood not a word of the others language. Such gifts as were
sent them, they left on the shore and woolde take no part thereof. They are of
such ciuilitye and humanytie, that they esteem it more honorable to give then
to take. They sent owre men two young women being vyrgines, of commendable
favor and goodly stature, sygnifyinge unto them that they might take them
away with them if it were their pleasure. These women after the manner of their
country, were covered from their ancles sumwhat above their priuye parts with
a certain clothe made of gossampine cotton. But the men are al naked. The
women use to cut their hear: But the men let it grow on the hinder parts
of their heads, and cut it on the fore part. Their long hear, they bind
up with fyllettes, and wind it in sundry rowles as owre maids are
accustomed to do. The virgins which were sent to the Admiral he decked in
fair apparel, and gave them many gifts, and sent them home again. But
likewise all these rewards and apparel they left upon the shore because owre
men had refused their gifts. Yet took he two men away with him (and those
very wyllyngly) that by lernyng the Spanyshe tongue, he might afterward use
them for interpretours. He considered that the tractes of these coasts were
not greatly troubeled with vehement motions or ouerflowynges of the sea,
forasmuch as trees grow in the sea not far from the sh^re, sy^e.
even as they do upon the banks of ryuers. The which thing also other do
affirm which have latelyer searched those coasts, declaring that the sea
rises and fauleth but little there about. He says furthermore, that in the
prospecte of this land, there are trees engendered even in the sea, Trees
growyn^^ in the sea after a strange sor^*
which after that they are grown to any height, bend down the tops of
their branches into the ground: which embrasing them causes other branches to
spring out of the same, and take root in the earth, bringynge forth trees in
their kind successively as did the first root from whense they had their
original, as do also the settes of vines when only both the ends thereof are
put into the ground. Pliny in the twelfth book of his natural history
makes mention of such trees, Pliny,
describynge them to be on the land, but not in the sea. The Admiral writes
also that the like beasts are engendered in the coasts of Cariai, as in other
provinces of these regions, and such as we have spoken of before. Yet that
there is one found here in nature much differinge from the other. This beast
is of the byggenes of a great moonkeye, A strange kind of moonkeys.
but with a tail much longer and bygger. It lives in the wooddes, and
remoueth from tree to tree in this manner. Hanging by the tail upon the
branch of a tree, and gatheryng strength by swayinge her body twyse or thryse
too and fro, she casts her self from branche to branche and so from tree to
tree as though she flewe. An archer of owres hurt one of them. Who perceauinge
her self to be wounded, A moonkeye feyghteth with a man.
leapte down from the tree, and fiercely set on him which gave her the wound,
in so much that he was feign to defend him self with his swoorde. And thus
by chance cuttyng of one of her arms, he took her, and with much a do
brought her to the ships where within a while, she waxed tame. While she was
thus kep^e and bownde with cheynes, certain other of owr hunters had chased
a wild bore out of the maryshes nere unto the sea side. For hunger and desire
of flesh, caused the^ to take double pleasure in hunting. In this mean time
other which remained in the ships, goinge a land to recreate them selves,
took this moonkey with them. Who, as soon as she had espied the bore, set up
her brystels and made toward her. The bore likewise shook his bristels and
whette his teethe. The moonkey furiously invaded the bore, ^ conflict between a
monkey and a wild bore.
wrappynge her tail about his body, and with her arm reserved of her
victourer, held him so fast about the throat, that he was suffocate. These
people of Cariai, use to dry the dead bodies of their princes upon hurdels,
and so reserve them inuolued in the leaves of trees. The bodies of kings dried
and reserved
As he went forward about twenty leagues from Cariai, he found a goulfe of
suc^ largenes that it contained.xii. leagues in compa^se. In the mouth of this
goulfe were four little Islands so nere together, that they made a safe haven
to enter into the goulfe. This goulfe is the haven which we said before to be
cauled Cerabaro of thinhabitantes. Cerabaro.
But they have now learned that only the land of the one side thereof, lyinge
on the right hand at the entering of the goulfe, is cauled by that name. But
that on the left side, is cauled Aburema. Aburema.
He says that all this goulfe is full of fruteful Islands well replenysshed
with goodly trees: And the ground of the sea to be very clean withowt
rocks, and commodious to cast anchor: Likewise the sea of the goulfe to have
great abundance of fysshe: and the land^ of both the sides to be inferior to
none in frutfulnes. At his first arryuynge, he espied two of thinh^bitan^es
having cheynes about their necks, Cheynes of gold.
made of ouches (which they caul Cuauines,) of base gold artificially wrought
in the forms of Eagles, and lions, with diverse other beasts and fowls. Of
the two Cariaians which he brought with him from Cariai, he was informed that
the regions of Cerabaro and Aburema were rych in gold. And that the people of
Cariai have all their gold from thense for exchange of other of their
things. Plenty of gold.
They towlde him also, that in the sa^e regi^ns there are five vyllages not
far from the sea ^yde, whose inhabitants apply the^ selves only to the
gathering of gold The names of the^e vyllages are these: Chirara, Puren,
Chitaza, Iureche, Atamea. Five villages rych in gold.
All the men of the province of Cerabaro, go naked, and are painted with diverse
colors. They take great pleasure in wearynge garlan^es of flowers, and
crowns made of the claws of Lions and Tigers. Crowns of beasts claws
The women cover only their privy parts wi^h a fyller of gossampine cotton.
Departinge from hen^e and ^oastynge still by the same shore for the space
of.xviii. leagues, he came to another river, wh^re he espied about three
hundredth naked men in a company. When they saw the ships draw near the
land, they cried owte aloude, with cruel countenaunces shaking th^yr wooden
swoordes and hurlynge darts, taking also wa^er in their mouths and spoutyng
the same against our men: Soytefu^l people.
whereby they seemed to insinuate that they woolde receive no condition of peace
or have owght to do with them. Here he commanded certain pieces of
ordinance to be shot of toward them: Yet so to ouershute them, that none might
be hurt thereby. For he ever determined to deal quietly and peaceably with
these new nations. At the noise therefore of the gunnes and sight of the fire,
they fell down to the ground, and desired peace. Guns make peace.
Thus enteringe into further frendshippe, they exchaunged their cheynes and
ouches of gold for glasses and hawks belles and such other marchandies. They
use drums or tymbrels made of the shelles of certain sea fysshes, wherewith
they encorage them selves in the wars. In this tract are these seven ryuers,
Acateba, Quareba, Zobroba, Aiaguitin, Vrida, Duribba, Beragua, Seven golden
ryuers
in all the which, gold is found. They defend them selves ageynste rain
and heat with certain great leaves of trees in the stead of clokes.
Departinge from hense, he searched the coasts of Ebetere, and Embigar, into
the which faule the goodly ryuers of Zohoran and Cubigar: Note where the
plenty of gold ends
And here cease the plenty and frutefulnes of gold, in the tracte of fifty
leagues or there about. From hense only three leagues distant, is the rock
which in the unfortunate discourse of Nicuesa we said was cauled of owre men
Pignonem. Pignonem.
But of thinhabitantes the Region is cauled Vibba. Vibba.
In this tracte also about six leagues from thense, is the haven which
Colonus cauled Portus Bellus (whereof we have spoken before) in the region
which thinhabitantes caul Xaguaguara. Portus Bellus.
This region is very peopulous: but they go all naked. The king is painted with
black colors, but all the people with read. Painted people.
The king and seven of his noble men, A strange sight.
had every of them a little plate of gold hanging at their nosethrylles down
unto their lyppes. And this they take for a cumly ornamente. A she^ in the
steed of a codpiece.
The men enclose their privy members in a shell: And the women cover theyrs
with a fyl^et of gossampine cotton tied about their loins. In their gardens
they noorysshe a fruit much like the nutte of a pine tree: the which (as we
have said in an other place) grows on a shrubbe much like unto an
archichocke: But the fruit is much softer, and meat for a king. Also
certain trees which bear gourdes, whereof we have spoken before. This tree,
they caul Hibuero. In these coasts they met sumtymes with Crocodiles lyinge
on the sands. the which when they fled, or took the water, they left a very
sweet savor behind them sweeter then musk or Castoreum. Crocodiles of
^weete savor.
When I was sent ambassador for the catholic king of Castile to the Soltane
of Babylon or Alcayer in Egipte, Alcayr or Babylon in Egypt
thinhabitantes nere unto the river of Nilus toulde me the like of their female
Crocodiles. Affyrmyng furthermore that the fat or sewette of them is equal
in sweetness with the pleasant gummes of Arabic. But the Admiral was now at
the length enforced of necessytie to depart from hense, as well for that he was
no longer able to abide the contrary and vyolente course of the water, as also
that his ships were daily more and more putrified and eaten throwgh with
certain worms which are engendered of the warmenes of the water in all those
tractes nere unto the Equinoctial line. Ships eaten with worms.
The Uenetians caul these woormes Bissas. The same are also engendered in two
havens of the city of Alexandria in Egypt and destroy the ships if they lie
long at anchor. Alexandria in Egypt.
They are a cubet in lengch, and sumwhat more: not passing the quantity of a
finger in bygnesse. The Spanyshe mariner cauleth this pestilence Broma. Broma.
Colonus therefore whom before the great monsters of the sea could not fear,
now fearyng this Broma, being also soore vexed with the contrary faule of the
sea, directed his course with the Ocean toward the west, and came first to the
river Hiebra, Hiebra,
distant only two leaques from the river of Beragua, because that was
commodious to harborowe great ships. This region is named after the river,
and is cauled Beragua the less: Beragua.
Because both the ryuers are in the dominion of the king which inhabiteth the
region of Beragua.. But what chaunsed unto him in this vyage on the right
hand and on the left, le^te us now declare. While therefore Colonus the
Admiral remained yet in the river Hiebra, he sent Bertholomeus Colonus his
brother and Lieuetenaunte of Hispaniola, with the ship boa^es and threscore
and.viii. men to the river of Beragua, how the king of Beragua enterteyn^d the
lyeuetenaunte.
where the king of the region being naked and painted after the manner of the
country, came toward them with a great multitude of men waiting on him, but
all unarmed and without weapons, gyuinge also signs of peace. When he
approached nerer, and entered communication with owre men, certain of his
gentelmen neareste about his person, rememberinge the majesty of a king, and
that it stood not with his honor to bargen stondynge, took a great stoone
owte of the river, washing an^ rubbing it veary^ decently, and so put it
under him with humble reverence. The^r reverence to their king.
The king thus syttyng, seemed with signs and tokens to insinuate that it
should be lawful for owre men to search and view all the ryuers within h^s
dominion. Wherefore, the vi. day of the Ides of February, leaving his boats
with certain of his coompany, he went by land a foot from the banks of
Beragua until he came to the river of Duraba, Gold in the ry^er of Duraba.
which he affirms to be richer in gold then either Hiebra or Beragua. For
gold is engendered in all the rivers of that land. In so much that emonge the
roots of the trees growing by the banks of the ryuers, and among the stones
left of the water, Great plenty of gold.
and also where so ever they dygged a hole or pyt in the ground not paste the
deapthe of a handful and a half, they found the earth taken owte thereof,
myxte with gold: Where upon he determined to fasten his foot there and to
inhabyte. Which thing the people of the country perceiving and smelling
what inconuenyence and myschiefe might thereof ensewe to their country if they
should permit strangers to plant their habitation there, assembled a great
army, and with horrible owte cry assailed owre men (who had now begoonne to
build houses) so desperately that they were scarcely able to abide the first
brunte. These nake^ barbarians at their first approach, used only slings and
darts: Slings and darts.
But when they came nearer to hand strookes, they fought with their wooden
swoordes which they caul Machan^s, as we have said before. A man woolde not
think what great malice and wrath was kyndeled in their hearts against owre
men: And with what desperate minds they fought for the defense of their
liberty which they more esteem then life or richesse. L^berty mo^e esteemed
the^ riches.
For they were now so void of all fear, and contemnynge death, that they
neither scared long bows or crossebowes, nor yet (which is most to be
marueyled) were any thing discouraged at the terryble noise of the gunnes
shot of from the ships. They retired once. But shortly after encreasynge
their noumber, they returned more fiercely then at the first. They woolde have
been contented to have received owre men friendly as strangers, but not as
inhabitours. The more instante that owre men were to remain, so much the
greater multitude of bortherers flocked together daily, disturbyng the^ both
night and day sumtymes on the one side and sumtymes on the other. The
Spanyardes are driven to flight.
The shyps lying at anchor near unto the shore, warded them on the back half.
But at the length they were feign to forsake this land, and return back the
same way by the which they came. Thus with much diffyculty and danger, they
came to the Island of Iamaica lyenge on the south side of Hispaniola and Cuba,
The Island of Iamaica.
with their ships as full of holes as sieues, and so eaten with woormes, as
though they had been bored through with wimbles. The water entered so fast at
the ryftes and holes, that if they had not with the paynefull labor of their
hands empted the same as fast, they were like to have perysshed. Where as yet
by this means they arrived at Iamaica, although in manner half dead. But
their calamity ceased not here. For as fast as their ships leaked, their
strength dimynisshed so that they were no longer able to keep them from
synkynge. A miserable case.
By reason whereof, faulynge into the hands of the barbarians, and enclosed
withowte hope of departure, they led their lives for the space of ten months
among the naked people more myserably then ever did Achemenides emonge the
gyantes cauled Ciclopes: rather living the^ being either contented or
satisfied with the strange meats of that Island: and that only at such times
as pleased the barbarians to give them part of theirs. The deadly enmity and
malice which these barbarous kings bear one against an other, made greatly
with owre men. For at such times as they attempted war against their
bortherers they woold sumtymes give owre men part of their bread to aid
them. But how miserable and wretched a thing it is to live only with bread
gotten by beggynge, yowre holiness may easylye conjecture: Especially where
all other accustomed food is lacking, as wine, oil, flesh, butter, chiese,
and milk, wherewith the stomakes of owr people of Europe have ever been
noorisshed even from their cradelles. Necessytie has no law how far life
is to be esteemed.
Therefore as necessyty is subject to no law, so doothe it enforce men to
attempt desperate adventures. And those the sooner, which by a certain
nobylytie of nature do no further esteem life then it is joined with sum
felicity. Bertholomeus Colonus therefore, intending rather to prove what god
woolde do with him and his companyons in these extremities, A dangerous
enterprise.
then any longer to abide the same, commanded Diegus Mendez his steward with
two guydes of that Island whom he had hired with promysses of great rewards
at their return, to enter into one of their canoas and take their viage to
Hispaniola.

Being thus tossed on the sea two and fro from rock too rock by reason of
the shortenesse and narownes of the canoa, they arrived at the length at the
last corner of Hispaniola, being distante from Iamaica forty leagues. Here
his guydes departing from him, returned ageine to Colonus for the rewards
which he had promised them. But Diegu^ Mendez went on forward a foot until
he came to the city cauled Sanctus Dominicus being the chief and head city
of the Island. Sanctus Dominicus.
The officers and rulers of Hispaniola, being informed of the matter,
appointed him two ships wherewith he returned to his master and coompanions.
As he found them, so came they to Hispaniola, very feeble and in manner
naked. What chanced of them afterward, I know not as yet. Let us now
therefore leave these particulers, and speak sumwhat more of generals. In all
those tractes which we said here before to have bynne found by Colonus the
Admyrall, Lands found by Colonus.
both he him self writes, and all his coompanyons of that vyage confess,
that the trees, herbs, Temperate regions and wholesome aier
and fruits, are floryshing and green all the hole year, and the air so
temperate and wholesome, that of all his coompanye there never fell one man
sick, nor yet were vexed either with extreme could or heat for the space of
fyftie leagues from the great haven of Cerabaro to the ryuers of Hiebra and
Beragua. Cerabaro.
Hiebra.
Beragua.


Thinhabitantes of Cerabaro, and the nat^ons which are betwyxte that and the
said ryuers, apply not them selves to the gatherynge of gold but only at
certain times of the year: And are very expert and cunnyng herein, as are
owre myners of silver and Iren. Expert myners.
They know by long experience in what places gold is most abundantly
engendered: as by the color of the water of the ryuers, and such as faule from
the montaynes: And also by the color of the earth and stones. They believe a
certain godly nature to be in gold, A god^y nature in gold.
for as much as they never gather it except they use certain relygious
expiations or pourgynge, as to absteyn from women, and all kinds of plesures
and delycate meats and drinks, d^ring all the time that their golden harvest
laste^he. Go^den harvest.
They suppose that men do naturally live and dye as other beasts do, and
therefore honor none other thing as god. Yet do they pray to the soonne, and
honor it when it ryseth. But let us now speak of the montaines and
situation of these lands. From all the sea banks of these regyons, exceeding
great and high mountains are seen toward the Southe, high and great
mountains.
yet reachynge by a continual tracte from the East into the weste. By reason
whereof I suppose that the two great seas (whereof I have spoken largly before)
are divided with these montaynes as it were with bulwarks, least they should
join and repugne, as Italye deuideth the sea cauled Tirrhenum, Ty^rhenuum is
now cauled Tu^eane
from the sea Adriatyke, which is now commonly cauled the goulfe of Uenes.

For which way so ever they sailed from the point cauled Promontorium, S.
Augustini (which perteyneth to the Portugales and prospecteth ageynste the sea
Atlantike) even unto Vraba and the haven Cerabaro, Cap. S. Augustini.
Vraba.
Cerabaro.
and to the furthest lands found hitherto westwarde, they had ever great
mountains in syghte both nere hand and far of, in all that long raze.
These mountains were in sum place, smooth, pleasant and frutfull, Frutful
mountains.
full of goodly trees and herbs: And sumwhere, high, rowgh, full of rocks, and
baren, as chaunseth in the famus mountain of Taurus in Asia, and also in
diverse coasts of our mountains of Apennini, A^ennini are mountains which
d^uide Italy lute.ii. parts
and such other of like byggenesse. The rydgies also of these mountains are
divided with goodly and fair valleis. That part of the mountains which
includes the lymettes of Beragua, Beragaa.
is thought to be higher then the clouds, The mountains of Beragua higher
then the cl^udes.
in so much that (as they say) the tops of them can seldom be seen for the
multitude of thick clouds which are beneath the same. Colonus the Admiral
the first fynder of these regions, affirms that the tops of the montaynes
of Beragua are more then fifty miles in heyghth. Montaynes of fifty miles
heyght.
He says furthermore that in the same region at the rotes of the montaynes the
way is open to the south sea, and compares it as it were between Uenice and
Genua, or Ianua as the Genues will have it cauled, which fable that their
city was builded of Ianus. Ianus otherwy^e cauled Iaphet, the son of Noe.
He affirms also that this land reaches forth toward the south: And that
from hense it takes the beginning of breadth, like as from the Alps owte of
the narowe thygh of Italy, Italy is like unto a leg in the sea, and the
mountains of the alps, are in the thyghe thereof.
we see the large and main lands of France, Germanye, and Pannonye, to the
Sarmatians and Scythyans, even unto the mountains and rocks of Riphea and the
frosen sea, and embrase therewith as with a continual bond, all Tracia, and
Grecia, with all that is included within the promontorie or point of Malea and
Hellespontus southwarde, and the sea Euzinus and the marysshes of Maeotis in
Scythia northwarde. The Admiral supposethe, Colonus his opinion of the
suppo^ed Continent. By this conjecture, the way should be open to Cathay by the
hiperbore^^.
that on the left hand in saylynge toward the weste, this land is joined to
India beyond the river of Ganges: And that on the right hand toward the
North, it be extended to the frosen sea, beyond the Hyperboreans and the
North pole: So that both the seas (that is to mean that south sea which we
said to be found by Vaschus, and owre Ocean) should join and meet in the
corners of that land: And that the waters of these seas do not only enclose
and compass the same withowt division as Europe is enclosed with the seas of
Hellespontus and Tanais, with the frosen Ocean and owre sea of Tyrrhenum with
the Spanysshe seas. But in my opinion, the vehement course of the Ocean toward
the weste, does signify and let that the said two seas should not so join
together: Look the n^uigation of Cabote. deca. iii. lib. vi.
But rather that that land is adherent to the firm lands toward the North,
as we have said before. It shall suffice to have said thus much of the
length hereof. Let us now therefore speak sumwhat of the breadth of the same,
The breadth of the land
We have made mention before how the south sea is divided by narowe lymittes
from owre Ocean, as it was proved by thexperience of Vaschus Nun^ez and his
coompanions which first made open the way thither. But as dyuersly as the
mountains of owre Alps in Europe are sumwhere narowe and in sum place broad,
even so by the like prouide^c^ of nature, this land in sum part thereof
reaches far in breadth, and is in other places coarcted with narowe limettes
from sea to sea, with valleys also in sum places, whereby men may pass from
the one side to the other. Where we have descrybed the regions of Vraba and
Beragua to be situate, The regions of Uraba and Beragua.
these seas are divided by smaule distaunce. Yet owght we to think the region
which the great river of Maragnonus runs through, The great river
Maragnonus.
to be very large if we shall grant Maragnonum to be a river and no sea, as
the fresh waters of the same owght to persuade us. For in such narowe caves
of the earth, there can be no swalowinge goulfes of such bygnesse as to
receive or nooryshe so great abundance of water. The like is also to be
supposed of the great river of Dabaiba which we said to be from the corner of
the goulfe of Vraba in sum place of forty fathomes depth, The great river
Dabaiba, or sancty Iohannis.
and sumwhere fifty: Also three miles in breadth, and so to faule into the
sea. We must needs grant that the earth is broad there, by the which the
river passes from the high mountains of Dabaiba from the East and not from
the west. They say that this river consists and takes his increase of four
other ryuers faulynge from the mountains of Dabaiba. The ryuers have their
increase from the sprynges of the montaynes.
Owre men caul this river Flumen. S. Iohannis. They say also that from hense
it fauleth into the goulfe of Vraba by seven mouths as doothe the river of
Nilus into the sea of Egypt. The river of Nilus in Egypt.
Likewise that in the same region of Vraba there are in sum places narowe
streyghtes not passing fyftene leaques: and the same to be saluage and
withowt any passage by reason of diverse marysshes and desolate ways, Marisshes
and desolate ways.
which the Latins caul Lamas: But the Spanyardes according to their
variety, caul the^ Tremedales, Trampales, Cenegales, Sumideros, and
Zabondaderos. But before we pass any further, it shall not be greatly from
owr purpose to declare from whense these mountains of Dabaiba have their name
according unto thantiquities of thinhabitantes. A superstitious opinion of
thoriginall of montaines of Dabaiba.
They say therefore that Dabaiba was a woman of great magnanimity and
wisdom emonge their predicessours in owlde time: whom in her life, all
thinhabitantes of those provinces did greatly reverence, and being dead gave
her divine honor and named the regio^ after her name, beleuynge that she
sends thunder and lyghtnynge to destroy the fruits of the earth if she be
angered, and to send plenty if she be well pleased. This superstition has
been persuaded them by a crafty kind of men under pretense of religion to
the intent that they might enjoy such gifts and offeringes as were brought to
the place where she was honored. Dragons and crocodiles in the marshes
This is sufficient for this purpose. They say furthermore that the marysshes
of the narowe land whereof we have spoken, bring forth great plenty of
Crocodiles, dragons, battes, and gnattes being very hurtful. Therefore when
so ever they take any journey toward the south, they go owte of the way toward
the mountains, and eschew the regions near unto those perelous fennes or
maryshes. Sum think that there is a valley lyinge that way that the river
runs which owre men caul Rio de los perdidos, that is, the river of the
lost men (so named by the misfortune which there befell to Nicuesa and his
coompany) and not far distant from the haven Cerabaro which divides those
mountains toward the south. The haven Cerabaro.
But let us now fynishe this book with a few other things worthy to be
noted. They say therefore that on the right hand and left hand from
Dariena, there are twenty ryuers in all the which, Twenty golden ryuers.
great plenty of gold is found. Being demanded what was the cause why they
brought no greater abundance of gold from thense, they answered that they
lacked myners: And that the men which they took with them from Spain thither,
were not accustomed to labor, but for the most part brought up in the
wars. This land seems also to promise many precious stones. Precious
stones.
For beside those which I said to be found near unto Cariai and Sancta
Martha, one Andreas Moralis a pylot (who had trauayled those coasts with
Johannes de la Cossa while he yet lived) had a precious diamonde which he
bought of a naked young man in the region of Cumana in the province of Paria.
a precious diemonde of ercedynge bygnes.
This stone was as long as two joints of a man's middell finger, and as bygge
as the first ioynte of the thumme: being also painted on every side,
consistynge of eight squares perfectly formed by nature. They say that with
this they made scarres in anuilles and hammers, and brake the teethe of fyles,
the stone remaynyng vnperysshed. The young man of Cumana, wore this stone
about his neck emonge other ouches, and soulde it to Andreas Moralis for five
of our cou^terfect stones made of glass of diverse colors wherewith the
ignorant young man was greatly delyted. They found also certain topases on
the shore. Topases.
But thestimation of gold was so far entered into the heads of owre men,
that they had no regard to stones. Also the most part of the Spanyardes, The
Spanyerdes contemn effeminate plesures
do lawgh them to scorn which use to wear many stones: specially such as are
common: Iudginge it to be an effeminate thing, and more meet for women then
men. The noble me^ only when they celebrate solemn marriages, or set forth any
triu^phes, wear cheynes of gold byset with precious stones, and use fair
apparel of sylke embrothered with gold intermixed with pearls and precious
stones: And not at other times. They think it no less effeminate for men to
smell of the sweet savors of Arabie: Sweet sauoru^.
And judge him to be infected with sum kind of fylthy lechery, in whom they
smell the savor of musk or Castoreum. But like as by one apple taken from a
tree, we may perceive the tree to be frutfull, and by one fyshe taken in a
river, we may know that fyshe is ingendered in the same, even so, by a lyttel
gold, and by one stone, we owght to consider that this land brings forth
great plenty of gold and precious stones. A similitude proving great plenty
of gold and precious stones.
What they have found in the port of Sancti Martha in the region of Cariai
when the hole nauye passed thereby under the governance of Petrus Arias and his
coompany with certain other of the kings officers, The haven of Sancta Martha.
Cariai.
I have suffyciently declared in his place. To be short therefore, all things
do so florysshe, grow, increase, and prosper, that the last are ever better
then the first. And surely to declare my opinion herin, The heroical factes of
the Spaniardes.
what so ever has here^ofore been discovered by the famous trauayles of
Saturnus and Hercules, with such other who^ the antiquity for their heroical
factes honored as gods, seems but little and obscure if it be compared to
the Spanyardes victorious labors.

This I bid yowre holiness fare well, desyringe you to certifye me how you
like these first fruits of the Ocean, that being encoraged with yowre
exhortations, I may the gladlyer and with less tediousness write such
things as shall chance herafter.

The fyft book of the third decade.
AL such living creatures as under the cercle of the moon bring forth any
thing, are accustomed by thinstincte of nature as soon as they are delivered
of their birth, either to close up the matrice, or at the least to be
quyete for a space. But owre most fruitful Ocean and new woorlde,
engendereth and brings furthe daily new byrthes whereby men of great wit,
and especially such as are studyous of new and marvelous things, may have
sumwhat at hand wherewith to feed their minds. If yowre holiness do ask to
what purpose is all this, ye shall understand, that I had scarcely fynysshed the
historye of such things as chaunsed to Vaschus Nunnez and his coompanye in
their vyage to the southe sea, when soodenly there came new letters from
Petrus Arias the new governor whom the king had appointed the year before
with an army of men and a nauye of ships to sail to these new lands. He
sygnifyeth by his letters, that he with his nauye and coompany, arrived all
safelye.

Furthermore, Johannes Cabedus (whom yowre holiness at the request of the
most catholyke king had created bishop of that prouynce of Dariena) and
three other of the chief officers joined in commission to be his assystance,
The bishop of Dariena.
as Alfonsus de Ponte, Diegus Marquis, and Johannes de Tauira, confyrmed the
same letters and subscribed them with their names. The nauygation therefore of
Petrus Arias, The navigations of Petrus Arias.
was in this manner. The day before the Ides of Apryll, in the year of
Christ.1514. he hoysed up his sails in the town of saint Lucar de
Barrameda, Saint Lucar.
sytuate in the mouth of the river Batis,, which the Spaniardes now caul
Guadalchebir. The seven Islands of Canaria are about four hundredth miles
distant from the place where this river fauleth into the sea. The Island of
Canarie.
Sum think that these are the Islands which the owlde writers did caul the
fo^t^n^te Islands. But other think the contrary. The name of the^e Islands,
are these. The two which appear first in sight, are named Lanzelota and
Fortisuentura. On the backehalfe of these, lies Magna Canaria or Grancanaria.
Beyond that is Teurife: and Gomera sumwhat toward the north from that.
Palma and Ferrea, lie behind as it were a bulwark to all the other. Petrus
Arias therefore, arrived at Gomera the eyghte day after his departure, with a
nauye of.xvii. ships and a.M. and five hundredth men, although there were
only a thousand and two hundredth assygned him by the kings letters. It is
said furthermore that he left behynd him more then two thousand very
pensive and syghynge that they also might not be received, proferynge them
selves to go at their own charges. He tarried.xvi. days in Gomera to thintente
to make prouysyon of fuel and fresh water: Provision of fresshe water and
fuel.
But chiefly to repair his ships being sore brosed with tempests, and
especially the governors ship which had lost the rudder. For these Islands
are a commodious resting place for all such as intend to attempt any
nauygations in that main sea. Departing from hense in the nones of May, he
saw no more land until the third day of June, at the which he arrived at
Dominica an Island of the Canibales, The Island of Dominica.
being distant from Gomera about eight hundredth leaques. Here he remained
four days, making new provision of fresh water and fuel, during which
time he saw no man nor yet any steps of men: But found plenty of sea
crabbes and great lysartes. From hense he sailed by the Islands of Matinina
(otherwise cauled Madanino) Guadalupea, Guadalupea, otherwy^e cauled
Carucuer^a, or Queraquiera.
and Galanta (otherwise cauled Galana) of all which, we have spoken in the
first decade. He passed also through the sea of herbs or weeds, continuyng
a long tracte. Yet another he, nor Colonus the Admyrall (who first found these
Islands and sailed through this sea of weeds) have declared any reason how
these weeds should coome. The sea of herbs.
Sum think the sea too be very muddye there, and that these weeds are
engendered in the bottom thereof, and so being loosed, to ascend to the
vppermooste part of the water, as we see oftentimes chance in certain
stondynge pooles, and sumtymes also in great ryuers. Other suppose that they
are not engendered there, but to be beaten from certain rocks by the
vyolence of the water in tempests. And thus they leave the matter in dowte:
Neither have they yet any certain experyence whether they stycke fast and
give place to the ships, or wander loose upon the water. But it is to be
thought that they are engendered there. For otherwise they should be driven
together on heaps by thympulsyon of the ships even as a beasome gathers
the swepynges of a house, and should also let the course of the ships. The
fourth day after that he departed from Dominica, These mountains are cauled
Montes Niuales or Serra Neuata, dec^de ii. liber. i and.ii.
the high mountains covered with snow (whereof we have spoken in the second
decade) appeared unto him. They say that there the seas run as swyftely
toward the weste, The swyfte cour^e of the sea toward the west.
as it were a river faulyng from the tops of high montaynes: Although they
sailed not directly toward the west, but inclined sumwhat to the south. From
these montaynes fauleth the river of Gaira, The river Gaira.
famous by the slaughter of owre men at such time as Rodericus Colmenares
passed by those coasts as we have said before. Likewise many other fair
ryuers have their original from the same montaynes. This prouynce (in the
which is also the regyon of Caramairi) has in it two notable havens,
Caramairi.
of the which owre men named the one Carthago or Carthagona, Carthago.
and the other Sancta Martha, the region whereof, thinhabitantes caul Saturma.
Saturma.
The port of Sancta Martha, is nearer to the montaines covered with snow
cauled Montes Niuales: Mountains covered with snow.
for it is at the roots of the same montaines. But the haven of Carthago, is
more westewarde about fyftie leaques. He writes marvelous things of the
haven of Sancta Martha, which they also confirm that came lately from the^se:
Of the which young Vesput^us is one to who^ Americus Vesputius his uncle
(being a Flore^tine borne) left the exact knowledge of the mariners faculty,
Americus Vesp^tius.
as it were by inheritance after his death for he was a very expert master in
the knowledge, of his card, his compass, and the elevation of the pole star
with all that pertains thereto. This young Vesputius was assygned by the king
to be one of the masters of the governors ship, because he was cunninge in
iudgyng the degrees of the elevation of the pole star by the quadrante. For
the charge of gouernynge the rudder, was chiefly coommytted to one Johannes
Serranus a Spaniarde, who had oftentimes over run those coasts. Vesputius is
my very familyar friend, and a wyttie young man in whose coompany I take
great pleasure, and therefore use him oftentimes for my geste. He has also
made many vyages into these coasts, and diligently noted such things as he
has seen. Petrus Arias therefore writes, and he confyrmeth the same, that
thinhabitantes of these regyons took their original of the Caribes or
Canibales, as appeared by the desperate fiercenes and cruelty which they
oftentimes showed to owre men when they passed by their coasts. Such
stou^enes and fortitude of mind is natu^^llye engendered in these naked
Barbarians, The stoutnes of the Barbarian^.
that they feared not to a^sayle owre hole navy and to forbid them to coome a
land. They feyght with venomous arrows as we have said before. Perceiving
that owre men contempned their threatenings, they ran furiously into the sea,
even up to the breasts, The Canibales feygh^ in the water.
nothing fearinge either the bygnes or multitude of owre ships, but ceased
not continually being thus in the water, to cast darts and shute their
venomous arrows as thick as hayle: In so much that owre men had bynne in
great danger if they had not been defended by the cages or pauisses of the
ships and their targettes. Yet were two of them wounded which died shortly
after. But this conflycte continued so sharp, that at the length owre men were
enforced to shute of their byggest pieces of ordinance with hayleshotte: The
use of gunnes.
At the slaughter and terrible noise whereof the barbarians being sore
discomfited and shaken with fear, thinking the same to be thunder and
lyghtnynge, The generation of thunder and lyghtnynge.
turned their backs and fled amayne. They greatly fear thunder because
these regyons are oftentimes vexed with thunder and lyghtnynge by reason of the
high montaynes and nearenesse of the same to the region of the air wherein
such fiery tempests are engendered which the philosophers caul Meteora.
Meteora.
And all be it that owre men had now driven their enemies to flight, and saw
them disparcled and owte of order, yet dowted they and were of diverse opinions
whether they should pursue them or not On the one party, shame pricked them
forward, and on the other side fear caused them to cast many perelles,
especially considering the venomous arrows which these barbarians can
direct so certeynely. Uenemous arrows
To depart from them with a dry foot (as says the proverb) with so great
a nauye and such an army, they reputed it as a thing greatly soundynge to
their reproach and dishonor. At the length therefore shame ouercommyng fear,
they pursued them and came to land with their ship boats.

The gouernoure of the navy, and also Vesputius do write, that the haven is
no less then three leagues in compass, being also safe withowt rocks, and
the water thereof so clear, that a man may see pybble stones in the bottom
twenty cubettes deape. They say likewise that there fauleth two fair ryuers
of fresshe water into the ha^^n: but the same to be meeter to bear the canoas
of these provinces then any bygger vessels. It is a delectable thing to hear
what they tell of the plenty and variety, and also of the pleasant taste of
the fysshes as well of these rivers as of the sea there about. By reason whereof
they found here many fyssher boats and nets woonderfully wrought of the
stalks of certain her^bes or weeds dried and tawed and wrethed with cords
of spunne gossampine cotton. Plenty of fysshe.
For the people of Caramairi, Gaira, Cunning fysshers.
and Saturma, are very cunning in fysshynge, and use to sell fysshe to their
bortherers for exchange of such things as they lack. When owre men had thus
chased the Barbaryans from the sea coasts, and had now entered into their
houses, they assailed them with new skyrmushes, especially when they saw them
faule to sackynge and spoylyng, and their wives and children taken captive.
Their householde stuff was made of great reeds which grow on the sea banks,
Their householde stuff.
and the stalks of certain herbs beaten and afterward made hard. The
flowers thereof were strewed with herbs of sundry colors: And the waules
hanged with a kind of tapstry artificially made of gossampine cotton, Tapstry.
and wrought with pictures of Lions, Tigers, and Eagles. The doors of their
houses and chambers were full of diverse kinds of shelles hanging loose by
smaule cords, A strange phantasy.
that being shaken by the wind they might make a certain rattelynge and also
a whystelynge noise by gatherynge the wind in their holowe places. For herein
they have great delight, and impute this for a goodly ornamente. Diverse have
showed me many wonderful things of these regions: Especially one Conzalus
Fernandus Ouiedus being one of the maiestrates appointed in that office which
the Spanyardes caul Veedor, This is he whom Card^nus praises.
who has also hitherto entered further into the land then any other. He
affirms that he chanced upon the fragmente of a sapphire bygger then the
egg of a goose. And that in certain hills where he trauayled with thirty
men, he found many of the precious stones cauled Smaragdes, Precious stones
The Smaragde is the treweme^od^
calcidones, and Iaspers, beside great pieces of amber of the montaines. He
also with diverse other do affirm that in the houses of sum of the Canibales
of these regions, Another kind of amber is found in whales.
they found the like precious stones set in gold and enclosed in the tapstry
or arras (if it may so be cauled) wherewith they hang their houses. The same
land brings forth also many wooddes of brasile trees and great plenty of
gold: Gold and brasile.
In so much that in manner in all places they found on the se^ banks and on the
shoores, certain marchasites in token of gold. Marchasites are flowers of
metals, by the colors whereof the kinds of metals are known.
Fernandus Ouiedus declares furthermore that in a certain region cauled Zenu,
lyinge four score and ten miles from Dariena Eastwarde, they exercise a
strange kind of marchaundies. For in the houses of the inhabitants, they
found great chestes and baskets made of the twigges and leaves of certain
trees apt for that purpose, being all full of gressehoppers, grylles,
crabbes, or crefysshes: snayles also, and locustes which destrowe the fields
of corn, These locustes burn the corn with toching and devour the residewe
they are in India of.iii. foot length. The fair region of Caramairi.
all well dried and salted. Being demanded why they reserved such a multitude
of these beasts, they answered that they kept them to be soulde to their
bortherers which dwell further within the land: And that for the exchange of
these precious birds and salted fysshes, they received of them certain
strange things wherein partly they take pleasure, and partly use them for
their necessary affayers. These people dwell not together, but scattered here
and there. Thinhabitantes of Caramairi, seem to dwell in an earthly Paradise,
their region is so fair and fruitful, withowt owtragious heat or sharp
could, with little difference of the length of day and night throwghowt all
the year. After that owre men had thus driven the barbarians to flight, they
entered into a valley of two leagues in breadth and three in length, extendynge
to certain frutful mountains full of grass, Fruteful montaynes.
herbs, and trees, at the roots whereof, lie two other valleys toward the
right hand and the left, throwgh either of the which runs a fair river,
whereof the river of Gaira is one, but unto the other they have yet given no
name. In these valleys they found many fair gardeyns and pleasant fyeldes
watered with trenshes distrybuted in marvelous order, Gardens. In^ubres are
now cauled Lumbardes, and hetrusci, Tuseans.
with no less art then owre Insubrians and Hetrurians use to water their
fyeldes. Their common meat, is Ages, Iucca, Maizium, Battatae, with such
other roots and fruits of trees, and also such fysshe as they use in the
Islands and other regions of these provinces. They eat man's flesh but
seldom, because they meet not oftentimes with strangiers, except they goo
forth of their own dominions with a main army of purpose to hunt for men,
Many countries left desolate by the fiercenes of the Canibales.
when their rauenynge appetite pricketh them forward. For they absteyne from
them selves, and eat none but such as they take in the wars or otherwise by
chance. But suerly it is a miserable thing to hear how many myriades of men
these fylthy and unnatural deuourers of man's flesh have consumed, One
my^iade is ten thousand.
and left thousands of most fair and frutfull Islands and regions desolate
withowte men: By reason whereof owre men found so many Islands which for
their fayrenes and frutefulnesse might seem to be certain earthly Paradyses,
and yet were utterly void of men. Hereby yowre holiness may consider how
pernicious a kind of men this is. We have said before that the Island named
Sancti Iohannis (which thinhabitantes caul Burichena) is next to Hispaniola.
It is said that only the Canibales which dwell in the other Islands nere
about this, as in the Island cauled Hayhay or Sancte Crucis, and in Guadalupea
(otherwise cauled Queraqueiera, A miserable hearing.
or Carucuiera) have in owre time vyolentely taken owte of the said Island of
Sancti Iohannis, more then five thousand men to be eaten. But let it suffice
thus much to have wandered by these monstrous bludsuckers. We will now
therefore speak sumewhat of the roots whereof they make their bread,
forasmuch as the same shall hereafter be food to Christian men in steed of
bread made of wheat, Bread of roots.
and in the stead of radysshe with such other roots as they have been
accustomed to eat in Europe. We have oftentimes said before that Iucca is a
root whereof the best and most delicate bread is made both in the firm
land of these regions, and also in the Islands. But how it is tylled or
husbanded, how it grows, and of how diverse kinds it is, I have not yet
declared. Therefore, when they intend to plant this Iucca, The manner of
plantinge the root Iucca.
they make a hole in the earth knee deape, and raise a heap of the earth taken
owte of the same, fashionynge it like a square bed of nine foot breadth on
every side, setting twelve trunkes of these roots (being about a foot and
a half long a piece) in every of the said beds containing three roots of
a side, so laid a slope, that the ends of them join in manner together in the
center or myddest of the bed within the ground. Out of the joints of the
roots and spaces between the same, spring the tops and blades of new
roots, which by little and little encreasynge, grow to the byggenes and
length of a man's arm in the brawne, and oftentimes as bygge as the thygh: So
that by the time of their full rypenes, in manner all the earth of the heap,
is converted into roots. Earth turned into roots.
But they say that these roots are not ripe in less time then a year and a
half: And that the longer they are su^fered to grow even until two years
complete, they are so much the better and more perfect to make bread thereof.
how bread is made of roots.
When they are taken forth of the earth, they scrape them and slyse the^ with
certain sharp stones scruynge for the same purpose: And thus layinge the^
between two great stones, or putting them in a sack made of the stalks of
certain towgh herbs and smaule reeds, they press them (as we do cheese or
crabbes to draw owte the iuse thereof) and so let them dry a day before they
eat them. The iuse or lyquoure, they cast away: for (as we have said) it is
deadly poison in the Islands. A strange thing.
Yet is the iuse of such as grow in the firm land, wholesome if it be sodde,
as is the whey of owre milk. They say that there are many kinds of this
Iucca, whereof su^e are more pleasant and delycate then the other, and are
therefore reserved as it were to make fine manchet for the kings own tables.
But the gentelmen eat of the meaner sort, and the common people of the
basest. The fynest they caul Cazabbi, Cazabbi.
which they make round like cakes in certain presses before they sees it or
bake it. They say furthermore that there are likewise diverse kinds of the
roots of Ages and Battata. Ages and Battata.
But they use these rather as fruits and dysshes of service, then to make
bread thereof, as we use rapes, radysshes, mussheroms, nauies, perseneppes, and
such like. In this case, they most especially esteem the best kind of
Battatas, which in pleasant taste and tenderness far exceadeth owre musheromes.
It shall suffice to have said thus much of roots. Panicum is a grain
sumewhat like (...) The Italians caul it Me^^ca.
We will now therefore speak of an other kind of their bread. We declared
before that they have a kind of grain or pulse much like unto Panicum, but
with sumwhrt bygger grains, which they beat into meal upon certain great
hollow stones with the labor of their hands when they lack Iucca: And of
this is made the more vulgar or common bread. It is sown thrice a year, so
that the frutfulnesse of the ground may bear it by reason of the equality of
the time, whereof we have spoken suffyciently before. he meanethe the equal
length of day and night which i^ continually in regions under the Equinoctial
line.
In these regyons they found also the grain of Maizium, Maizium
and sundry kinds of fruits of trees diligentely planted and well husbanded.
The way between the regyons of Caramairi and Saturma, is fair, broad, and
right forth. They found here also sundry kinds of waterpottes made of
earth of diverse colors, Earth of diverse colors.
in the which they both fetch and keep fresh water. Likewise sundry kinds
of iugges, godderdes, drynkyng cups, pottes, pannes, dysshes, and platters
artifycially made.

When the governor had given commandment by proclamation, that
thinhabitantes should either obey the Christian king and embrase owre
relygion, or else to depart owte of their country, they answered with
venomous arrows. In this skyrmyshe, owre men took sum of them: whereof
clothing the most part in fair apparel, they sent them again to their
own coompany: But leadyng the resydue to the ships to thin^ent to show them
the pour and magnyfycence of the christians that they might declare the same
to their coompanions, thereby to win their favor, they appareled them
likewise and sent them after their fellows.

Theye affirm that in all the ryuers of these coasts, theye saw great
arguments and tokens of gold. Gold in ryuers.
They found here and there in their houses good store of hearts flesh and
bores flesh wherewith they fed them selves dilycately. hearts and bores.


They also, have great plenty of sundry kinds of birds and fowls, Fowls.
whereof they bring up many in their houses, sum for necessary food, and
other for daynty dysshes as we do hens and partriches. Owre men hereby
conjecture that the air of these regions is veary wholesome, wholesome air.
for as much as sleapynge all night under the fyrmament on the banks of the
ryuers, none of them were at any time offended with reumes or head ache by
reason of any noisome humor or vapoure proceadynge from the earth, air, or
water. Owre men furthermore, found there many great bothomes of gossampyne
cotton ready spunue, and fardelles of diverse kinds of feathers whereof they make
them selue^ crestes and plumes Gossampine cotton. Feathers.
after the manner of owre men of arms: also certain clokes which they esteem
as most cumly ornaments. They found likewise an innumerable multitude of
bows and arrows. Bows and ar^owes.
Thinhabitantes also of these regio^s, in sum places use to burn the
carkeses of their princes when theye are dead, and to reserve their bones
buried with spyces in certain hills. Dead bodies reserved
In other places, they only dry them and imbaume them with spyc^s and sweet
gummes, and so reserve them in sepulchers in their own houses. Sumwhere also,
they dry them, spyce them; adourne them with precious jewels and ouches, and
so reverently place them in certain tabernacles made for the same purpo^e in
their own palayces. When owre men had many of their tabellets, braslettes,
collers, and such other ouches (which they caul Guanines) they found them
rather to be made of laton then of gold: Ouches of laton.
Gonzalus Ouiedus, says that they gilt maruelo^^^y with the iuse of a
certain. herb.
whereby they suppo^e that they have used to exchange their ware with sum
crafty strangers which brought the^ those counterfect ou^hes to defraude
them of their gold. For even owre men perceived not the deceate until they
came to the meltynge. Furthermore, certain of owre buylders wandering a
little way from the sea coasts, chanced to find certain pyeces of white
marble. white marble.
Whereby they think that in time paste sum strangers have coome too those
lands, which have dygged marble owte of the mountains, and left those
fragmentes on the plain. There owre men learned that the river Maragnonus
descends from the montaynes covered with snow cauled Montes Niuales or
Serra Neuata: The great river Maragnonus. This joins with the mighty river
cauled Flumen Amazonum, found of late.
And the same to be increased by many other ryuers which faule into it
throughowte all the low and watelye regions by the which it runs with so
long a tracte from the said montaynes into the sea: And this to be the cause
of the greatness thereof. These things being thus brought to pass, the
governor commanded the trumpitour to blow a retraite: Whervppon they which
were sent to land (being five hundredth in noumber) making a great shoute
for joy of their victory, set them selves in order of battle, and so
keeping their array, returned to the ships laden with spoil of those
provinces, and shynynge in soldiers clokes of feathers, Clokes of feathers.
with fair plumes and crestes of variable colors. In this mean time having
repaired their ships and furnysshed the same with all necessaries, they
loosed anchor the xvi. day of the Calendes of July, directing their course to
the haven of Carthagena, in the which viage they destroyed and wasted certain
Islands of the Canibales lyinge in the way, according as they were commanded
by the king. But the swifte course of the water deceived both Johannes
Serranus the chief Pilet of the governors ship, The swyfte course o^ the
water.
and all the other, although they made their boste that they perfectely knew
the nature thereof. For they affirm that in one night they were carried forty
leaques beyond their estimation. x^. leaques in one night.


The syxte book of the third Decade.
HEre must we sumwhat digress from cosmography, and make a philosophical
discourse to search the secreate causes of nature. For whereas they al affirm
with on consent, that the sea runs there from the East to the weste as
swyftly as it were a river faulinge from high mountains, Sundry opinions why
the sea runs with so swyft course from the East into the west.
I thought it not good to let so great a matter slyppe untouched. The which
while I consider, I am drawn into no smaule ambyguitie and doubt, whether
those waters have their course which flow with so contynuall a tracte in
circuit from the East, as thowghe they fled to the west never to return,
and yet neither the weste thereby any whitte the more filled, nor the East
emptied. If we shall say that they faule to their center (as is the nature of
heuye things) and assign the Equinoctial line to be the center (as sum
affirm) what center shall we appointe to be able to receive so great
abundance of water? The equinoctial line.
why all waters move toward the south or Equinoctial, ^reade Cardanus de
subtili^. l^ber.ii. de E^ementis.
Or what circumference shall be found weate? They which have searched those
coasts, have yet found no lykely reason to be true. Many think that there
should be certain large straightes or enterances in the corner of that great
land which we described to be eight times bygger then Italye, Strayghtes.
and the corner thereof to be full of goulfes, whereby they suppose that sum
strayghtes should pass through the same lyinge on the weste side of the Island
of Cuba: And that the said straightes should swalowe up those waters, and so
convey the same into the weste and from thense ageyn into owre East Ocean, or
north seas as sum think. As by the straight of Magellanus. The north lands.
Other will, that the goulfe of that great land be closed up: and the land
to reach far toward the north on the back side of Cuba: so that it
embrace the north lands which the frosen sea encompaseth under the north
pole: And that all the land of those coasts, should join together as one
fir^e land: Whereby they conjecture that those waters should be turned about
by the obiecte or resystaunce of that land so bendynge toward the north, as
we see the waters ^courned about in the crooked banks of certain ryuers. But
this agrees not in all points. For they also which have searched the frosen
sea, The frosen sea.
and sailed from thense into the weste, do likewise affirm that those north
seas flow^ contynually toward the weste, although nothing so swiftely. These
north seas have been searched by one Sebastian Cabot a Uenetian borne,
Sebastian Cabot.
whom being yet but in manner an infant, his parents carried with them into
England having occasion to resort thither for trade of marchandies, as is the
manner of the Uenetians too leave no part of the world unsearched to obtain
richesse. The venetians.
He therefore furnisshed two ships in England at his own charges: The viage
of Sebastian Cabot from England to the fro^en sea.
And first with three hundredth men, directed his course so far toward the
north pole, that even in the mooneth of July he found monstrous heaps of Ise
swimming on the sea, Frost in the month of July.
and in manner continual day light. Yet saw he the land in that tracte, free
from Ise, which had been molten by heat of the sun. Thus seeing such heaps
of Ise before him he was enforced to turn his sails and follow the weste, so
coastynge still by the shore, that he was thereby brought so far into the
southe by reason of the land bendynge so much southward that it was there
almost equal in latitude with the sea cauled Fretum Herculeum, Fretum
herculeum, divides Spain and the Moors and is now cauled the strayghtes of
Marrok.
having the north pole eleuate in manner in the same degree. He sailed likewise
in this tracte so far toward the weste, that he had the Island of Cuba his
left hand in manner in the same degree of langitude. As he traueyled by the
coasts of this great land (which he named Baccallaos) he says that he
found the like course of the waters toward the west, Ba^^^llaos, or Terra
Baccallea^um.
but the same to run more softely and gentelly then the swifte waters which
the Spanyardes found in their nauigations southeward.

Wherefore, it is not only more like to be true, but ought also of
necessity to be concluded, that between both the lands hitherto unknown,
there should be certain great open places whereby the waters should thus
continually pass from the East into the weste: which waters I suppose to be
driven about the globe of the earth by the vncessaunt mouynge and impulsion of
the heavens: The mouyng of heaven causes the sea to move.
and not to be swalowed up and cast out again by the breathynge of Demogorgon
as sum have imagined because they see the seas by increase and decrease,
Demogorgon is the spirit of the earth.
to flow and re^^owe. Sebastian Cabot him self, named those lands
Baccallaos, because that in the seas therabout he found so great multitudes of
certain big fysshes much like unto ^umes (which thinhabitantes caul
Baccallaos) that they sumtymes stayed his ships. He found also the people of
those regions covered with beasts skynnes: People covered with beasts sk^n^
Yet not without thuse of reason.

He says also that there is great plenty of bears in those regions, which
use to eat fysshe. how bears take and eat fysshes of the sea.
For plungeinge them selves into the water where they perceue a multitude of
these fysshes to lie, they fasten their claws in their scales, and so draw
them to land and eat them. So that (as he says) the bears being thus
satisfied with fysshe, are not noysom to men. He declares further, that in
many places of these regions, Perhaps this laton is copper which ho^deth
gold. For lato^ has no mine, and is an artificial metal and not natural.
Cabot cauled out of Englands into Spain.
he saw great plenty of laton among thinhabitantes. Cabot is my very friend,
whom I use famylierly, and delight to have him sumtymes keep me company in
mine own house. For being cauled owte of England by the commandment of the
catholyke king of Castile after the death of Henry King of England the
seventh of that name, he was made one of owre counsel and assystance as
touching the affairs of the new Indies, lookynge daily for ships to be
furnysshed for him to discover this hyd secreate of nature. This vyage is
appointed to be begun in March in the year next following, The Second viage
of Cabot.
being the year of Christ M. D. X^I. What shall succeade, yowre holiness
shall be advertised by my letters if god grant me life. Sum of the Spanyardes
deny that Cabot was the first fynder of the land of Baccallaos: And affirm
that he went not so far westewarde. But it shall suffice to have said thus
much of the goulfes and strayghtes, and of Cebastian Cabot. Let us now
therefore return to the Spanyardes. At this time, they let pass the haven of
Carthago untouched, with all the Islands of the Canibales there about, The
Islands of the Canybales.
which they named Insulas Sancti Bernardi: Leaving also behind their backs,
all the region of Caramairi. Hear by reason of a sooden tempeste, they were
cast upon the Island Fortis, The Island Fortis.
being about fyftie leagues distante from the enteraunce of the goulfe of
Vraba. In this Island, they found in the houses of thinhabitantes, many
baskets made of certain great sea reeds, full of salt. For this Island has
in it many goodly salt bays: by reason whereof they have great plenty of
salt which they sell to other nations for such things as they stand in need
of. Salt
Not far from hense, A strange thing.
a great curlewe as bygge as a storke came flying to the governors ship, and
suffered her self to be ^easely taken: which being carried about among all
the ships of the navy, dyed shortly after, They saw also a great multitude
of the same kind of fowls on the shore a far of.

The governor his ship which we said to have lost the rudder being now
sore broosed and in manner unprofitable, they left behind to follow at
leisure. The navy arrived at Dariena the twelfth day of the Calendes of July,
how Petrus Arias with the kings navy arrived at Dariena.
and the governor his ship (being void of men) was driven a land in the
same coasts within four days after. The Spanyardes which now inhabited
Dariena, with their Captain and Lieuetenant Vuschus Nunnez Balboa (of whom we
have largely made mention before) being certified of tharryual of Petrus Arias
and his coompanye, how Uaschus received the new governor.
went forth three miles to meet him, and received him honorably and
religiously with the psalm Te deum Laudamus, giving thanks to god by whose
safe co^ducte they were brought so prosperously thither to al their confortes.
They received them gladly into their houses builded after the manner of those
provinces. I may well caul these regions, Provinces, why these regions are
cau^ed pro^^^ces.
a Procul victis, (that is) such as are overcome far of, forasmuch as owre
men do now inhabit the same all the barbarous kings and Idolatours being
eiected. They enterteyned them with such chere as they were able to make them:
as with the fruits of those regions, and new bread both made of roots and
the grain Mai^ium. Other delicates to make up the feast, were of their own
store which they brought with them in their ships, as poudered flesh,
salted fysshe, and bread made of wheat. For they brought with them many
barrelles of wheat meal for the same purpose. Barrelles of meal.
Here may yowre holiness not withowt just cause of admiracion behold a kings
navy and great multitude of Christians, inhabytinge not only the regions
situate under the circle of heaven cauled Tropicus Cancri, but also in manner
under the Equinoctial line, habitable regions under the Equinoctial line.
contrary to thopinion of the owlde writers, a few excepted. But after that
they are now met together, let us further declare what they determined to
do. Therefore, the day after that the navy arrived, there assembled a
coompany of the Spanyardes thinhabitoures of Dariena, to the number of four
hundredth and fyftie men. Petrus Arias the governor of the navy and his
coompany, conferred with them both privily and openly of certain articles
whereof it was the kings pleasure he should enquire: And most especially as
concerning such things whereof Vaschus the first fynder and Admiral of the
Southe sea, made mention in his large letter sent from Dariena to Spayn. In
this inquisition they found all things to be trewew, hereof Vaschus had
certifyed the king by his letters: And there upon concluded that in the
dominions of Comogra, Pocchorrosa, and Tumanama, at thassignement of Vaschus,
certain fortresses should be erected forthwith to thintente there to plant
their colonie or habitacion. where the new governor planted his habitatio^
To the better accomplysshemente hereof, they sent immediately one Johannes
Aiora a noble young gentelman of Corduba and under Lieuetenant, The viage of
Johannes Aiora
with four hundredth men and four carauelles and one other little ship. Thus
departinge, he sailed first directly to the haven of Comogrus, The haven of
Comogrus
dystant from Dariena about twenty and five leagues, as they write in their
last letters. From hense, he as appointed to send a hundredth and fyftie of
his four hundredth, toward the South by a new and ryghter way found of late,
by the which (as they say) it is not paste.xxvi. leagues from the palaice of
king Comogrus to the enteraunce of the goulfe of Sancti Michaelis. Saint
Mychaels goulf^
The residewe of the four hundredth, shall remain there to be an aid and
succor to all such as shall journey to and fro. Those hundredth and fifty which
are assigned to go southwarde, take with them for interpretours certain of
owre men which had learned the sootherne language of the bond men which were
given to Vaschus when he ouerranne those regions, and also certain of the
bondem^n them selves which had now learned the Spanysshe tongue. They say that
the haven of Pocchorrosa, The haven Pocchorrosa.
is only seven leaques distante from the haven of Comogrus. In Pocchorrosa,
he is assigned to leave fyft^e men with the lyghtest ship which may be a
passinger between them: A passynger ship.
that like as we use post horses by land, so may they by this current ship,
in short space certify the Lieuetenaunt and thinhabitours of Dariena of such
things as shall chance. They entende also to build houses in the region of
Tumanama. The palaice of king Tumanama, King Tumanama.
is distant from Pocchorrosa about twenty leaques. Of these four hundredth
men, being of the owlde soldiers of Dariena and men of good experience,
fyftie wear appointed to be as it were Decurians to guide and conducte the
new men from place to place to do their affairs. Decurians are officers
divided into ^ennes, etc.
When they had thus set all things in order, they thought it good to
advertise the king hereof, and therewith to certifye him that in those provinces
there is a king named Dabaiba whose dominion is very rich in gold: King
Dabaiba.
But the same to be yet untouched by reason of his great power. His kingedome
joins to the second great river named Dabaiba after his name, The gold
mines of Dabaiba
which fauleth into the sea out of the corner of the goulfe of Vraba as we
have largely declared before. The common report is, that all the land of his
dominions is rich in gold. The palayce of king Dabaiba is fyfty leaques
distante from Dariena. The pallaice of king Dabaiba.
Thinhabitantes say that from the palaice, the gold mines reach to the
borthers on every side. The gold mines of Dariena.
Albeit, owre men have also gold mines not to be contempned, even within
three leaques of Dariena, in the which they gather gold in many places at this
present: Yet do theye affirm greater plenty to be in the mines of Dabaiba.
In the books of owre first fruits written to yowre holiness, we made mention
of this Dabaiba, wherein owre men were deceived and mystooke the matter. ^n
error.
For where they found the fyssher men of king Dabaiba in the marysshes, they
thought his region had been there also. They determined therefore to send to
king Dabaiba, three hundredth choice young men to be chosen owte of the hole
army as most apt to the wars, E^pedition against king Dabaiba.
and well furnysshed with all kinds of armoure and artillery, to the intent to
go unto him and will him, either friendly and peaceably to permytte them to
inhabyte part of his kingdom with the fruition of the gold mines, or else
to bydde him battle and drive him owte of his country. In their letters,
they often ^ymes repete this for an argument of great richesse to coome, Great
plenty of gold,
that they in manner dygged the ground in no place, but found the earth
myxte with sparks and smaule graynes of gold. They have also advertised the
king that it shall be commodious to place inhabitours in the haven of Sancta
Martha in the region of Saturma, The regyon of Saturma
that it may be a place of refuge for them that sail from the Island of
Dominica from the which (as they say) it is but four or five days saylyng
to that haven of the regyon of Saturma: The Island of Dominica,
And from the haven, but three days saylyng to Dariena. Dariena.
But this is to be understood in going and not in returning. For the
returnyng from thense is so laborious and difficulte by reason of the contrary
course of the water, Difficulte saylyng against the course of the sea,
that they seem as it were to ascend high montaynes and strive ageynste the
pour of Neptunus. This swyfte course of the sea toward the Weste, is not so
violente to them which return to Spain from the Islands of Hispaniola and
Cuba: Although they also do labor ageynste the faule of the Ocean: The cause
whereof is, that the sea is here very large, so that the waters have their full
scoope. But in the tracte of Paria, the waters are constrained together by the
bendynge sides of that great land, and by the multitude of Islands lyinge
ageynste it, as the like is seen in the straightes or narowe seas of Sicilie
where the violent course of the waters cause the dangerous places of Scylla
and Charybdis, The dangerous straightes of Scylla and Charybdis,
by reason of those narowe seas which contain Ionium, Libicum, and Tirrhenum.
Colonus the first fynder of these regyons, has left in writing, that
saylynge from the Island of Guanassa, Guanassa.
and the prouynces of Iaia, Iaia,
Maia, Maia.
and Cerabaro, Cerabaro.
being regyons of the west marches of Beragua, Beragua.
he found the course of the water so vehemente and furious ageynste the fore
part of his ship while he sailed from those coasts toward the East, that
he could at no time touch the ground with his soundynge plummet, but that
the contrary vyolence of the water woolde bear it up from the bottom. The
vehement course of the sea fro the east to the west.
He affyrmeth also, that he could never in one hole day with a meately good
wind, win one mile of the course of the water. And this is the cause why
they are oftentimes enforced to sail first by the Islands of Cuba and
Hispaniola, and so into the main sea toward the North when they return to
Spain, that the North wyndes may further their vyage which they can not
bring to pass by a direct course. The north^ wind
But of the motions of the Ocean sea to and fro, this shall suffyce. Let us now
therefore rehearse what they write of Dariena, and of their habitation there,
which they caul Sancta Maria Antiqua, Sancta Maria Antiqua, the fy^st
habitation of the spaniardes in the fyrme land.
planted on the sea banks of Dariena. The situation of the place, has no
natural munition or defense: And the air is more pestiferous then in Sardus.
Sardus the Island of Sardinia,
The Spanyshe inhabitours, are all pale and yelowe, like unto them that have
the yelowe gianndyes. Which nevertheless comes not of the nature of the
region as it is situate under the heaven. For in many regyons being under the
self same degree of latitude, having the pole of the same elevation, The
variety of regions lynge under one parallel,
they find wholesome and temperate air, in such places where as the earth
brings forth fair sprynges of water, or where wholesome ryuers run by banks
of pure earth without mudde: but most especyally where they inhabyte the
sides of the hills and not the valleys. But that habytation which is on the
banks of the river of Dariena, is sytuate in a deep valley, and environed on
every side with high hills: By reason whereof, it receaueth the soonne beams
at noonetyde directly perpenticular over their heads, and are therefore sore
vexed by reflection of the beams both before, behind, and from the sides.
For it is the reflection of the soonne beams which causes feruente heat, By
what means the ^onne beams are cause of fervent heat*
and not their access or nerenesse to the earth. Forasmuch as they are not
passyble in them selves as does manyfestly appear by the snow lyinge
contynually vnmolten upon certain high montaynes, as yowre holiness knows
right well. The soonne beams therefore faulyng on the montaynes, are reflected
downewarde into the valley by reason of thobiecte of the declynynge sides of
the hills, as it were the faule of a great round stoone rolled from the
top of a montayne. The valley therefore receaueth, both those beams which
faule directly thereon, and also those which are reflected downwarde from every
side of the montaynes. Their habitation therefore in Dariena, The pernicious
air of Darien^.
is pernicious and unwholesome only of the particular nature of the place, and
not by the sytuation of the regyon as it is placed under the heaven or ^^eare
to the soonne. The place is also contagious by the nature of the soil, by
reason it is coompased about with muddy and stynkynge marysshes, thinfection
whereof is not a little increased by the heat. The vyllage it self, is in a
maryshe, and in manner a standing puddle, where, of the drops faulyng from
the hands of the bond men while they water the pauementes of their houses,
Toades and flees engendered of drops of water,
toades are engendered immediately, as I my self saw in an other place the
drops of that water turn into flees in the soomer season. Furthermore, where
so ever they dygge the ground the deapthe of a handefull and a half, there
springs owte unwholesome and corrupt water of the nature of the river which
runs through the deep and muddy chanel of the valley, and so fauleth into
the sea. Now therefore they consulte of remouyng their habytation. Necessytie
caused them first to fasten their foot hear, Necessytie has no ^aw^
because that they which first arrived in those lands, were oppressed with
such vrgente hunger, that they had no respect to change the place although
they were thus vexed by the contagion of the soil and heat of the soonne,
beside the corrupt water and infectious air by reason of venomous vapors and
exhalations rysynge from the same. An other great incommoditie was, that the
place was destitute of a commodious haven, being three leaques distante from
the mouth of the goulfe. The way is also roughe and diffyculte to bring
vyttayles and other necessaries from the sea. But let us now speak sumwhat
of other particular things which chaunsed.

Therefore shortly after that they wear arrived, there happened many things
whereof they had no knowledge before. A certain well learned phisytion of
Civil, whom partly thautorytie of the bishop of Dariena, and partly the
desire of gold had allured to those lands, was so scarred with lyghtnynge in
the night season lyinge in bed with his wife, that the house and all the
stuff therein being set on fire and burnte, A hou^e set on fire with
lyghtnynge,
he and his wife being both soore scorched, ran forth cryinge and almost
naked, hardely escapynge the danger of death. At an other time, as certain
of them stood on the shoore, a great Crocodyle suddenly carried away a masty of
a year and a half owlde, A dog devoured of a crocodyle,
as a kyte should have snatched up a chicken: Tanquam canis e Nilo.
And this even in the presence of them all, where the miserable dog cried in
vain for the help of his master. In the night season they were tormented
with the bytynge of battes which are there so noisome that if they byte any
man in his sleep, The biting of battes.
they put him in danger of life, only with drawing of bludde: In so much
that sum have dyed thereof, faulynge as it were into a consumption through the
malyciousnesse of the venomous wound. If these battes chance to find a cock
or a hen abroad in the night season, they byte them by the combs and so kill
them. They also which went last into these regions, do write, that the land
is troubeled with Crocodyles, Lions, and Tigers: Lions and tigers,
But that they have now devised arts and ingens how to take them. Likewise
that in the houses of their fellows, they found the hydes and cases of such
Lions and Tigers as they had killed. They write furthermore, that by reason of
the rankenesse and frutefulnesse of the ground, kyne, swyne, and horses, do
maruelously increase in these regions, and grow to a much bygger quantity
then they which wear of the first brood. Beasts were bygger in the^r kind,
Of the exceeding highness of the trees with their fruits, of the garden
herbs, fruits, plants, and seeds which owre men brought from Spain and
sowed and set the same in these regyons, likewise of the hertes and other four
footed beasts both tame and wild, also of diverse kinds of fowls, birds,
and fysshes, they write even as we have declared in the decades before. Careta
the king of the regyon of Cioba, how the governor enterteyned king Careta,
was with them for the space of three days: whom when they had friendly
enterteyned and showed him the secreate places of their ships, their horses
also with their trappars, bardes, and other furnimentes, beside many other
things which seemed strange to him, and had further delited his mind with
the harmony of their musycall instruments, and given him many rewards, they
dysmyssed him half amassed with to much admyration. Note.


He sygnifyed unto them, that their trees in that prouynce, of the planckes
whereof, if ships were made, they should be safe from the woormes of the sea
which they caul Bromas. Broma or Bissa, are worms which destroy ships,
How these woormes knawe and corrode the ships, we have declared before.
Owre ships are greatly trou^eled with this plage if they lie long in the
havens of these regyons. But they affirm that the woodde of this tree is so
bitter, that the woormes will not taste thereof. There is also an other tree
peculyar to these lands: A venomous tree.
whose leaves if they only touch the bare in any place of a man's body, they
cause great blysters, and those so malycious that except the same be
forthwith healed with salt water or fasting spyttle, they do incontynently
engender deadely pains. They say likewise, that the savor of the woodde is
present poison: Perhaps they^ venomous arrows are made of this woodds or.
etc.
And that it can no whither be carried without danger of life. When
thinhabitauntes of the Island of Hispaniola had oftentimes attempted to shake
of the yoke of seruytude, and could never bring the same to pass neither by
open war nor yet by priuye conspiraces, they were determined in the night
season to have killed owre men in their sleep with the smoke of this woodde.
But when the Christian men had knowledge hereof, they compelled the poor
wretches to confess their intent, and punysshed the chief autours of the
deuyse. They have also a certain herb with the favor whereof they are
preserved from the hurt of this venomous woodde so that they may bear it
safely. A preservative against poison,
Of these smaule things it shall suffyce too have said thus much. They look
daily for many greater things to certyfye us of from the Islands of the south
sea. The Islands of the south sea,
For at such time as the messenger which brought owre letters departed from
thense, Petrus Arias prepared an expedition to that rich Island which lies
in the mouth of the goulfe cauled Sinus S. Michaelis, and reaches into the
southe sea, The rich Island cauled Dites,
being also left untouched of Vaschus by reason that the sea was at that time
of the year sore troubeled with tempests, as we have further declared in
Vaschus his vyage to the southe. We look therefore daily for greater things
then are hitherto paste. For they have now taken in hand to subdue many other
prouynces, which we suppose too be either very rich, or to bring furthe
sum strange works of nature. Johannes Diaz Solistus of Nebrissa (of whom
we have made mention before) is sent by the froonte of the cape or point of
Sancti Augustini (which reaches seven degrees beyond the Equinoctial line,
Cab, sancti Augustini, Of the evil success of these viages, read decade iii,
Liber, ix,
and perteyneth to the dominion of the Portugales) to the intent to over run
the southe side from the back half of Paria, Cumana, Cuquibacoa, with the
havens of Carthag^ and Sancta Martha, of Dariena also and Beragua, that more
perfect and certain knowledge may be had of those tractes. Furthermore, one
Johannes Poncius was sent forth with three ships to destroy the Canibales
both in the land and Islands there about: An expedition to destroy the
Canibales,
as well that the nations of the more humane and innocente people may at the
length live without fear of that pestiferous generation, as also the better
and more safely to search the secreates and richesse of those regions. Many
other likewise were sent diverse and sundry ways: as Gasper Badaiocius too
search the West parts: Franciscus Bezerra, to sail by the corner of the
goulfe: And Valleius, to pass by the mouth or enteraunce thereof to the East
coasts of the goulfe to search the secreates of that land, in the which
Fogeda with his coompanye had of late begun to plant their habitation,
Fogeda.
and had builded a fortress and a vyllage. Badaiocius departed first from
Dariena with four score soldiers well appointed: Whom Lodouicus Mercado
followed with fyftye:

To Bezerra were also fourscore assygn^d, and three score and ten to
Valleius. Look. decad. (...) Lib. ix,
Whether they shall arryue at safe and commodious havens, or faule into
unfortunate stations, he only knows whose prouydence rules all: For as for
us men we are included within the knowledge of things after they have
chanced. Let us now therefore coome to other matters.

The seuenthe book of the third decade.
PEtrus Arias the governor of the supposed continente, was scarsly entered into
the main sea with his nauye onwarde on his vyage to Dariena. But I was
advertised that one Andreas Moralis a pilot who had oftentimes over run the
coasts of these new seas and the Islands of the same, The nauigations of
An^reas Mo^alis
was coome to the court to sell such marchaundies as he brought with him
from thense. This man had dyligently searched the tracte of the supposed
continente, and especyally thinner regyons of the Island of Hispaniola,
whereunto he was appointed by his brother Nicolaus Ou^ndos (the governor of the
Island and chief Commendatory of the order of the knights of Alcantara)
because he was a wytty man and more apt to search such things then any
other: So that with his own hands he drew fair cards and tables of such
regyons as he discovered. Wherein as he has bynne found faithful of such as
have sense had better trial hereof, so is he in most credyt amongst the best
sort. He therefore resorted to me as all they are accustomed to do, wh^che
return from the Ocean. A particular description of the Island of hispaniol^
What I learned of him and diverse other of things heretofore unknown, I will
now declare. The beginnynge of this narration, shall be the particular
description of the Island of Hispaniola, forasmuch as it is the head and as
it wear the principal mart of all the lyberality of the Ocean, and has a
thousand and again a thousand fair, pleasant, Nereides are nymphs of the
^ea* he means Islands,
bewtifull, and rich Nereides which lie about it on every side, adournynge
this their lady and moother, as it were an other Tethis the wife of Neptunus,
T^this the wife of Neptunus and goddess of the sea,
enuyronynge her about, and attendynge upon her as their queen and
patroness. But of these Nereiades (that is to say, the Islands placed about
her) we will speak more hereafter. Let us in the mean time declare sumwhat
of the Island which owre men named Margaritea Dives (which the Spanyardes
caul De las perlas) being now well known, The Island of Margaritea Dives,
and lyinge in the southe sea in the goulfe cauled Sinus Sancti Michaelis (that
is) saint Michaels goulfe. Saint Michaels goulfe
This Island has presently brought to owre knowledge many strange and
wonderful things and promysseth no smaule hope of greater things in time to
coome. In this is found great plenty of pearls so fair and great, Great
perles
that the sumptuous queen Cleopatra might have seemed to wear them in her
crowns, chains, and braslettes. Of the shelfysshes wherein these are
engendered, we will speak sumwhat more in the end of this narration. But let
us now return to Hispaniola most like unto the earthly paradyse. hispaniola
like unto the earthly paradyse,
In the description hereof, we will begin of the imposytion of diverse names:
Then of the form of the Island, temperate air and benefyciall heaven: And
finally of the deuisyon of the regyons. Therefore for the ryghter pronunsyation
to the names, yowre holiness must understand that they are pronounced with
thaccent, as you may know by the verge set over the heddes of the vowels, as
in the name of the Island Matinino, where the accente is in the last vowell,
and the like to be understood in all other names. They say therefore, that the
first inhabitours of the Island were transported in their Canoas (that is
boats made of one hole pyece of woodde) from the Island of M^tinino, The fy^st
inhabitours of hi^paniola
being like banysshed men driven from thense by reason of certain contrary
factions and diuisyons emonge them selves, like as we read how Dardanus came
from Corytho, Dardanus.
and Teuerus from Creta into Asia, Teu^rus.
and that the regyon where they placed their habitation, was afterward cauled
Troianum. Troianum.
The like we read how the Tirians and Sidonians arrived with their nauye in
Libya by the fabulous conduction of Dido. T^rians,
Sidonians:
These Matininans in like manner being banysshed from their own country,
planted their first habytation in that part of the Island of Hispaniola which
they caul Cabonao, upon the bank of the river named Bahaboni: As is read in
the beginning of the Romans that Eneas of Troy aryued in the region of
Italy cauled Latium upon the banks of the river of Tiber. Eneas.
Latium.
Within the mouth of the river of Bahaboni, lies an Island where it is said
that thinhabitauntes builded their first house which they named Camoteia.
This house they consecrated shortly after, and honored the same reverently
with continual gifts and monumentes, even until the coming of owre men, like
as the Christians have ever relygyously honored Jerusalem the fountain and
oryginall of owre faith: jerusalem
As also the Turks attribute the like to the city of Mecha in Araby, Mecha.
and thinhabytantes of the fortunate Islands (cauled the Islands of Canarye) to
Tyrma builded upon a high rock from the which many were wounte with joyful
minds and songs to cast them selves down headlonge, The Islands of Canarie,
being persuaded by their priests that the souls of all such as so did for
the love of Tyrma, should thereby enjoy eternal felycity. The conquerours of
the Islands of Canarie, found them yet remaynyng in that superstition, even
until owre time: Nor yet is the memory of their sacrifyces utterly worn
away: The rock also reserueth the owlde name unto this day. I have also
learned of late, that there yet remains in the Island sum of the faction of
Betanchor the Frenshe man and first that brought the Islands Betanchor, a
Frenchman,
to good culture and civility being thereto lycenced by the king of Castile as
I have said before. These do yet (for the most part) observe both the
language and manners of the Frenshemen, although the eyres and successors of
Betanchor, had soulde the two subdued Islands to certain men of Castile. Yet
thinhabitours which succeeded Betanchor, and builded them houses and increased
their families there, do continue to this day: And live quietly and
pleasauntly with the Spanyardes, not grieved with the sharp could of France.
But let us now return to thinhabitauntes of Matinino and Hispaniola. The
Island of Hispaniola was first named by the first inhabitours, The first
names of hispaniola.
Quizqueia, and then Haiti.

And this not by chance, or at the pleasure of such as divised these names,
but of credulity and belefe of sum great effect. For Quizqueia, is as much
to say as a great thing: And that so great that none may be greater. They
interpret also, that Quizqueia sygnifyeth, large, universal, or al, in like
signification as the Greeks named their god cauled Pan: Pan.
Because that for the greatness thereof, these simple souls supposed it to be
the hole world: And that the soonne beams gave light to none other world
but only to this Island with the other adiacente about the same: And
thervppon thought it most worthy to be cauled great, as the greatest of all
other known to them. Haiti is as much to say by interpretation, as roughe,
sharp, or craggie. But by a fyguratiue speech cauled denomination (whereby the
hole is named by part) they named the hole Island Haiti (that is) roughe: For as
much as in many places the face of this Island is rough b^ reason of the
craggie montaynes, The roughness of hispaniola
horrible thick wooddes, and terrible dark and diepe valleys enuyroned with
great and high montaynes, although it be in many other places exceadynge
bewtifull and florysshynge.

Here must we sumwhat digress from thorder we are entered into. Perhaps
your holiness will marvel by what means these simple men should of so
long contynuance bear in mind such principles, where as they have no
knowledge of letters. So it is therefore, that from the beginning, their
princes have ever been accustomed to commit their children to the governance
of their wise men which they caul Boitios, to be instructed in knowledge,
The manner of learning.
and to bear in memory such things as they learn. They give them selves
chieflye to two things: As generally to learn thoriginall and success of
things: And particularlye to rehearse the noble factes of their graundefathers
great graundefathers and ancestors as well in peace as in war. These two
things they have of owlde time composed in certain myters and ballettes in
their language. These rhymes or ballettes, Ballets and rhymes.
they caul Ar^itos. And as owre mynstrelles are accustomed too sing to the
harp or lute, so do they in like manner sing these songs and dance to the
same, playinge on tymbrelles made of shells of certain fysshes. These tymbrels
they caul Maguei. They have also songs and ballettes of love: And other of
lamentations and moornyng: Singing and daunceing.
Soonges of love and moornynge.
Sum also to encorage them to the wars, with every of them their tewnes
agreeable to the matter. They exercise them selves much in daunceinge, wherein
they are very actyue and of greater agilitie then owre men, by reason they
give them selves to nothing so much, and are not hyndered with apparel which
is also the cause of their swiftenesse of foot. In their ballettes left them
of their ancestors, they have prophecies of the coming of owre men into
their country. These they sing with moornyng and as it were with gronyng,
Prophesies,
bewail the loss of their liberty and servitude. For these prophecies make
mention that there should coome into the Island Maguacochios, Note
that is, men clothed in apparel, and armed with such swoordes as should
cut a man in sunder at one stroke: under whose yoke their posterity should
be subdued. And here I do not marvel that their predicessours could
prophecye of the servitude and bondage of their succession, if it be true
that is said of the familiarity they have with spirits which appear to them
in the night, Their familiarity with spirits
whereof we have largely made mention in the nynth book of the first decade,
where also we have entreated of their Zemes (that is) their Idols and Images
of diuelles which they honored. The devil is driven away by baptism
But they say that sense these Zemes were taken away by the Christians, the
spirits have no more appeared. Owre men ascribe this to the sign of the
cross wherewith they defend them selves from such spirits. For they are
now all cleansed and sanctified by the water of bapt^me whereby they have
renounced the deuel and are consecrated the holy members of Christ. They are
universally studyous to know the bounds and lymettes of their regions and
kingdoms: And especially their Mitaini (that is) noble men. So that even they
are not utterly ignorante in the surueyinge of their lands. Surueyers
The common people have none other care then of setting, sowynge, and
plantynge. They are most expert fysshers, They live as much in the water as
on the land
by reason that throughowte the hole year, they are accustomed daily to
plounge them selves in the ryuers, so that in manner they live no less in the
water then on the land. They are also given to hunting. For (as I have said
before) they have two kinds of four footed beasts, whereof the one is little
cunnes cauled Vtias, and the other Serpents named Iuannas, Serpents
much like unto Crocodiles, A Crocodile is much like to owr ewte or Lyserte
of eight foot length, of most pleasant taste, and living on the land.
All the Islands nooryshe innumerable birds and fowls: Birds and fowls
As stock doves, duckes, geese, hearons, bysyde nolesse number of popingiais
then sparowes with us. Popingayes
Every king has his subjects divided to sundry affairs: As sum to
hunting, other to fysshynge, and other sum to husbandrye. But let us now
return to speak further of the names. We have said that Quizqueia and Haiti,
were the oulde names of this Island.

The hole Island was also cauled Cipanga of the region of the montaynes
aboundynge with gold: Cipanga.
Like as owre anciente poets cauled all Italye Latium of part thereof. Italy
cauled Latium
Therefore as they cauled Ausonia and Hesperia, Italy, even so by the names of
Quizqueia, Haiti, and Cipanga, they understood the hole Island of Hispaniola.
Owre men did first name it Isabella of queen Helisabeth which in the
Spanyshe tongue is cauled Isabella: Isabella
And so named it of the first Colonie where they planted their habitation upon
the bank nere unto the sea on the North side of the Island, as we have
further declared in the first decade. But of the names, this shall suffyce.
Let us now therefore speak of the form of the Island. The form of the
Island of hispaniola
They which first over ran it, described it unto me to be like the leaf
of a chestnutte tree, with a goulfe toward the west side, lyinge open against
the Island of Cuba. But the expert ship master Andreas Moralis, brought me
the form thereof sumwhat differynge from that. For from both the corners, as
from the East angle and the West, he described it to be indented and eaten
with many great goulfes, and the corners to reach forth very far: and
places many large and safe havens in the great goulfe on the East side. But I
trust shortly so to travail further herein, that a perfect card of the
particular description of Hispaniola may be sent unto yowre holiness. A
particular card of hispaniola.
For they have now drawn the Geographicall description thereof in cards, even
as yowre holiness has seen the form and sytuation of Spain and Italye with
their montaines, valleys, ryuers, cities, and colonies. Let us therefore
without shamfastnesse compare the Island of Hispaniola to Italy, hispaniola
compared to Italy,
sumtyme the head and queen of the hole world. For if we consider the
quantity, it shall be found little less, and much more fruitful. It
reaches from the East into the Weste, five hundredth and fortye miles
according to the computation of the later searchers: Although the Admyrall
sumwhat increased this number as we have said in the first decade. It is in
breadth sum where, almost three hundredth miles: And in sum places narower
where the corners are extended. But it is suerlye much more blessed and
fortunate then Italy: The temperature of hispaniola.
Being for the most part thereof so temperate and florysshynge, that it is
neither vexed with sharppe could, nor afflycted with immoderate heat. It has
both the steyinges or conuersyons of the soonne (cauled Solstitia) in manner
equal with the Equinoctial, The equinoctial.
with little difference between the length of the day and night throughout
all the year. For on the the south side, the day ascends scarcely an hour
in length above the night, or contrary wise. But the dyfference is more on the
north side. Could accidental, and not by the sytuation of the region,
Yet are there sum regions in the Island in the which the could is of sum
force. But yowre holiness must understand this to be incident by reason of
the obiecte or nearenesse of the mountains, as we will more largely declare
hereafter. Yet is not this could so pearcynge or sharp, that thinhabitantes
are molested with snow or bytynge froste. In other places, the Island enjoys
perpetual spring time, and is fortunate with contynuall soomer and harvest.
Perpetual ^pringe and ^oomer,
The trees floryshe there all the hole year: And the meadows continue always
green. All things are exceadynge fortunate, and grow to great perfection.
How wonderfully all garden herbs and fruits do increase, Marvelous frutfulnes
so that within the space of syxtene days after the seed is sown, al herbs
of smaule steames, as lettesse, borage, radyshe, and such other, coome to
their full rypenesse: And also how herbs of the bygger sort, as gourdes,
melones, cucumers, pompons, citrous, and such other, coome to their perfection
in the space of thirty days, we have sufficiently declared else where. Of
the beasts transported out of Spain thither, Beasts
we have said how they grow too a much greater kind: In so much that
when they faule into communication of the oxen or kyne, they compare them in
bigness to elephantes, and swyne to mules: Oxen and swyne of exceadyng
bygnesse,
But this sumwhat by an excessyue kind of speech. We have also made mention
how their swynes flesh is more sauourye and of far better and more
pleasant taste and more wholesome then owres, by reason they are fed with the
fruits of Myrobalane trees, Swyne fed with Myrobalanes
and other pleasant and nurysshynge fruits of that country, which grow
there of them selves, as do with us beeches, holly, and oaks. Uynes woolde also
prosper there with marvelous increase, Uines
if they had any regard to the plantinge thereof. The like increase comes of
wheat if it be sown upon the mountains where the cold is of sum strength:
wheat
but not in the playnes, by reason of to much fatnes and rankenes of the
grownde. It is in manner incredible to hear, that an ear of wheat should be
bygger then a man's arm in the brawne, An ear of wheat as byg as a ma^s arm
in the brawne
and more then a spanne in length, bearing also more then a thousand graynes,
as they all confess with one voice, and ernes^ly affirm the same with oaths.
Yet they say the bread of the Island (cauled Cazabbi made of the root of
Iucca, The bread of the Island.
to be more wholesome, because it is of easyer digestion, and is cultured with
less labor and greater increase. The residue of the time which they spend
not en setting and plantynge, they bestow in gatheringe of gold. Gold,
They have now such plenty of four footed beasts, Great plenty of cattayle,
that horses and ox hydes with sheep skynnes and goat skyns and such other,
are brought from thense into Spain: So that now the daughter in many things
helps and succurreth her mother. Of the trees of brasile, Brasile,
spices, the grain which colors scarlet in bright shinynge read, mastix,
Mastyx,
gossampine cotton, Gossampine
the precious metal cauled Electrum, Electrum.
and such other commodities of this Island, we have spoken sufficiently before.
What therefore can chance more happy unto man upon the earth, then there to
live where he need not to be driven to close chaumbers with sharp could or
fayntynge heat? Incommodities of intemperat regio^s
Nor yet in winter either to be laden with heavy apparel, or to burn the
shinnes with continual syttyng at the fire, which things make men oulde in
short time by resoluinge the natural heat, where of a thousand diseases ensue.
wholesome air and water
They also affirm the air to be very healthful: and the waters of the
ryuers to be no less wholesome, as they which have their continual course
through the earth of the golden mines. Gold every where
For there is in manner no river, no mountains, and but few playnes that are
utterly without gold. But let us now at the length coome to the particular
description of the inner parts of this blessed Island. The description of the
inner parts of ^he Island,
We have before declared how it is in manner equally divided with four great
ryuers descendynge from high mountains: whereof that which runs toward the
East, is cauled Iunna, as that toward the West is named Attibunicus: The
third is Naiba or Haiba which runs Southwarde: The fourth is cauled Iache,
and fauleth toward the North. But this ship master, has brought an other
description observed of thinhabitantes from the beginning.

Let us therefore divide the hole Island into five parts, caulynge the regions
of every province by their owlde names: and finally make mention of such
things as are woorthye memory in every of them. The beginning of the Island
on the East side, is contained in the province named Caizcimu: so named for
that in their language Cimu, signifies the front or beginning of any thing.
After this, follows the province of Huhabo, and then Caihabo. The fourth is
Bainoa, Guaccaiarima conteyneth the west corner. But the last save one, Bainoa
is of larger bounds then the three other. Caizcimu reachethe from the first
front of the Island to the river Hozama, which runs by the city of saint
Dominicke. The city of s. Dominicke
But toward the North side, it is ended at the rough mountains of Haiti. The
mountains of haiti
Huhabo, is included within the mountains Haiti and the river Iaciga. Caeiabo
the third province, conteyneth all that lies between Cubaho and Dahatio, even
unto the mouth of the river of Iaccha or Iache (one of the four which divide
the Island equally) and ascendethe to the mountains of Cibaua, The mountains
of Cibaua
where the greateste plenty of gold is found: Owte of the which also the
river Demahus springs: and ioynynge with the springes of the river of Naiba,
(being an other of the four which divides the Island toward the south sea)
fauleth to an other bank of the river of saint Dominicke. Bainoa, begins at
the confines of Caiabi, and reaches even unto the Island of Cahini which lies
near unto the sea banks of the north side of the Island where we said that
they erected the first colonie or habitacion. The Island of Cahini
The province of Guaccaiarima, Of provinces divided into region^
occupies the remanent toward the west. This they named Guaccaiarima, because
it is the extreme or uttermost part of the Island. For Iarima in their
language signifies the tail or end of any thing: And Gua, is an article
which they use often times in the names of things: And especially in the
names of their kings: as Guarionexius, and Guaccanarillus. In the province of
Caizimu, are these regions: Higuei, Guanama, Reyre, Xagua, Aramana, Arabo,
Hazoa. Macorix, Caiacoa, Guaiagua, Baguanimabo and the rough mountains of
Haiti. Here let us speak sumewhat of their aspirations which they use
otherwise then the Latins do. Of their aspirations
It is to be noted that there is no aspiration in their vowels, which has not
theffecte of a consonant. So that they pronounce their aspirations more
vehemently then we do the consonant.f. Ye, all such words as in their tongue
are aspirate, are pronounced with like breath and spirit as is.f. saving that
herein the nether lyppe is not moved to thuppermost teethe. With open mouths
and shaking their breasts, they breath out these aspirations, ha, he, hi, ho,
hu, as the Hebrews and Arabians are accustomed to pronounce theyrs. The
pronunciation of the hebrews and Arabians,
I find also that the Spanyardes use the like vehemence in the aspirations of
those words which they have received of the Moors and Arabians which
possessed Spain, The Moors and Arabia^s possessed Spain.
and continued there many years: As in these words: Almo hadda, which
signifies a pyllowe or bolster: Also Almohaza, that is, a horse comb: with
diverse such other words which they speak in manner with panting breasts and
vehement spirit. I have thought it good to rehearse these things, because
among the Latins it often times so chances that only the accent or
aspiration, changes the signification of the word: how the aspiration
changes the signification of words
as hora, for an hour, and ora for the plurale number of this word os, which
signifies the mouth: Also ora, which signifies regions or coasts. The like
also chances in the diversity of the accente, as occido I kill, and occi^o I
faule. Even so in the language of these simple men, there are many things to
be observed. But let us now return to the description. In the province of
Hubabo, are these regions: Xamana, Canabacoa, Cuhabo, with many other, the
names whereof I have not yet learned. The province of Caibabo, conteyneth these
regions: Magua, and Cacacubana. Thinhabitantes of this region, have a peculyar
language much differinge from the common language of the Island, Diverse
languages in the Island
and are cauled Macoryxes. There is also an other region cauled Cubana, whose
language differs from the other. Likewise the region of Baiohaigua, has a
diverse toonge. There are also other regions, as Dahabon, Cybaho, and Manabaho.
Catoy is in the myddle of the Island. By this runnethe the river Nizaus: And
the montaynes cauled Mahaitin, Hazua, and Neibaymao, confine with the same. In
the province of Bainoa, are the regions of Maguana, Iagohaiucho, Bauruco,
Dabaiagua, and Attibuni, so named of the river: Also Caunoa, Buiaici,
Dahabonici, Maiaguariti, Atiei, Maccazina, Guahabba, Anniuici, Marien,
Guaricco, Amaguei, Xaragua, Yaguana, Azzuei, Iacchi, Honorucco, Diaguo, Camaie,
and Neibaimao. In Guaccaierima the last province, these regions are contained:
Mauicarao, Guabagua, Taquenazabo, Nimaca, Bainoa the less, Cabaymi, Iamaizi,
Manabazao, Zauana, Habacoa, and Ayqueroa. But let us entreat sumwhat of the
particulars of the regions. In the province of Caizcimu, with in the great
goulfe of the beginnynge, there is a great cave in a hollow rock under the
root of a high mountain, A great cave in the rock of a mountain,
about two furlonges from the sea. The enterie of this cave is not much unlike
the doors of a great temple, being very large and turnynge many ways.
Andreas Moralis the ship master, A daungerus enterprise
at the commandment of the gouernoure, tempted to search the cave with the
smaulest vessels. He says that by certain privy ways, many ryuers have
concourse to this cave as it were to a sink or channel. Rivers devoured of
caves,
After thexperience here of, they ceased to marvel whither other ryuers ran
which coming fourscore and ten miles, were swalowed up, so that they
appeared no more, nor yet fell into the sea by any known ways. Now therefore
they suppose that ryuers swalowed up by the holowe places of that stony
mountain, faule into this cave. As the shipmaster entered into the cave his
ship was almost swalowed. For he says that there are many whyrlepooles and
rysinges or boylinges of the water, which make a violent conflicte and horrible
rorynge one encounteryng the other. Also many huge holes and holowe places: So
that what on the one side with the whirle pooles, whirlepooles and conflict^ of
waters,
and on the other side with the boiling of the water, his ship was long in
manner tossed up and down like a baule. It greatly repented him that he had
entered, yet knew he no way how to come forth. He now wandered in darkness,
as well for the obscurenesse of the cave into the which he was far entered,
Clouds in the cave.
as also that in it were thick clouds engendered of the moist vapors
proceading of the conflicte of the waters which continually faule with great
violence into the cave on every side. He compares the noise of these waters,
to the faule of the famous river of Nilus from the montaines of Ethyope. The
Cataractes of Nilus
They were al so deaf, that one could not here what an other said. But at the
length with great danger and fear, he came forth of the cave as it had been
owte of hell. About three score miles distante from the chief city of saint
Dominicke, there are certain high montaynes upon the tops whereof is a lake
or standing poole inaccessible, A standing poole in the t^ppe of a high
mountain.
never yet seen of them which came latelye to the Island, both by reason of
the roughness of the montaines, and also for that there is no pathe or open
way to the tops of the same. But at the length the ship master being
cond^cted thither by one of kings, ascended to the tops of the montaines and
came to the poole. He says that the could is there of sum force. And in
token of winter, he found fern and bramble busshes, which two, grow only
in could regions. Fern and bramble busshes, grow only in could regions.
These montaynes, they caul Ymizui Hibabaino. This poole is of fresh water
three miles in compass, and well replenysshed with diverse kinds of fysshes.
Many smaule rivers or brooks faule into it. It has no passage owte, because
it is on every side enclosed with the tops of mountains. But let us now
speak of an other poole which may well be cauled a sea in the mydlande, and
be coompared to the Caspian or Hircanian sea in the fyrme land of Asia: The
Caspia^ and hircanian sea.
with certain other lakes and pooles of fresshe water.

The eyghte book of the third decade.
THe prouynce of Bainoa being thrice as bygge as the three first, that is,
Caizcimu, Vhabo, and Caihabo, includes a valley named Caiouani, in the which
there is a lake of salt, sour, and bitter water, as we read of the sea
cauled Caspium, A great lake of sour and salt water.
lyinge in the firm land between Sarmatia and Hircania. We have therefore
named it Caspium, although it be not in the region of Hircania. It has many
swalowinge goulfes, Swalowinge goulfes.
by the which, both the water of the sea springs into it, and also such as
faule into it from the montaines, Sea fysshes in lakes of the midlande
are swalowed up. They thyncke that the caves thereof, are so large and deep,
that great fysshes of the sea pass by the same into the lake. Emonge these
fysshes, there is one cauled Tiburonus which cutteth a man in sunder by the
myddest at one snappe with his teethe, The devouring fysshe cauled T^buronus.
and deuoureth him. In the river Hozama, runnynge by the chief city of
sayncte Dominicke, these Tiburoni do sumtymes coome from the sea and devour
many of thinhabitauntes: Especially such as do daily ploonge them selves in
the water to the intent to keep their bodies very clean. The ryuers which
faule into the lake, The ryuers that fau^e into the lake Caspium,
are these. From the North side, Guaninicabon: From the Southe, Xaccoei: from
the East, Guannabo And from the West, Occoa. They say that these ryuers are
great and continual: And that beside these, there are.xx. other smaule ryuers
which faule into this Caspium. CC^ sprynges within the space of a furlonge.
Also on the North side within a furlonge of the lake, there are above two
hundredth springes, occupyinge likewise about a furlonge in circuit, the water
whereof is could in soomer, fresh also, and wholesome to be droonke. These
sprynges make a river than can not be waded over, which near at hand
ioynynge with the other, fauleth into the lake. Here must we stay a while.
The king of this regyon found his wife praying in a chapel builded by the
Christians with in the precinct of his dominion, A miracle.
and required her coompanie to satisfye his fleshely lust. His wife reproved
him, and put him in remembrance to have respect to the holy place. The
words which she spoke to him, The Indian language.
were these: Teitoca, Teitoca: which is as much to say, as, be quiet, be
quiet: Techeta cynato guamechyna: That is, god will be greatly angerie.
Guamechyna, sygnifyeth god, Techeta greatly, Cynato angry. But the husband
halynge her by the arm, said: Guaibba, that is, go: Cynato macabuca
guamechyna: That is: what is that to me if god be angerye? A king stricken
dumme and lame by ^ miracle.
And with these words as he proffered her violence, soodenlye he became dumme
and lame. Yet by this miracle being stricken with repentance, he ever after
led a relygious life: In so much that from thense forth he woolde never
suffer the chapel to be swepte or decked with any other man's hand. By the
same miracle, many of thinhabitauntes and all the Christians being moved,
resorted devoutly to the chapel. They take it in good part that the king
suffered the revenge of that reproach. Let us now return to Caspium. That
salt lake is tossed with storms and tempests: And oftentimes drowneth smaule
ships or fyssher boats, and swaloweth them up with the maryners: Such as
are drowned in the lake are not cast up again.
In so much that it has not been hard of, that any man drowned by
shyppewracke, ever ploonged up again, or was cast on the shore, as commonly
chances of the dead bodies of such as are drowned in the sea. These
tempests, are the deintie banquetes of the Tiburones. This Caspium, is cauled
Hagueigabon. In the myddest hereof, lies an Island named Guarizacca, The
Island Guarizacca in the myddest of the poole. A lake of salt and fresh water.
to the which they resort when they go a fysshynge: But it is not cultured.
There is in the same plain, an other lake next unto this, whose water is
myxte of salt and fresh: And is therefore another apt to be droonke, not yet
to be refused in vrgente necessytie. This contains in length.xxv. miles, and
in breadth eight miles: In sum places also nine or ten. It receaueth many
ryuers which have no passage owte of the same, but are swalowed up as in the
other. Water springs out of the sea into this also: but in no great
quantity, which is the cause that it is so commyxte. In the same prouynce
toward the Weste side, there is an other lake of fresh water, A lake of
fresshe water
not far distante from Caspius. This thinhabitauntes caul Iainagua. The same
salt lake, has on the North side thereof, an other named Guaocaa. This is but
little: as not past three or four miles in breadth, and one in length. The
water of this, may well be droonke. On the southe side of the salt lake,
there lies an other named. Babbareo, of three miles in length and in manner
round. The water of this is fresh as of ^he two other. This lake because it
has no passage owte nor yet any swalowynge goulfes, conueyeth the superfluous
waters to the sea if it be increased with the streams which faule sumtimes
more abondantly from the montaines. This is in the region of Xamana in the
province of Bainoa. There is an other cauled Guaniba, lying between the East
and the South nere unto the side of Caspius. This is ten miles in length and
almost round. A lake of ten miles in l^ngth
There are furthermore many other smaule standing pooles or lakes disparsed
here and there in the Island, which I will let pass lest I should be
tedious in remainyng to long in one thing. I will therefore make an end with
this addition, that in all these, great plenty of fyshe and foul is
nourysshed. All these lakes lie in a large plain, the which from the East
reaches into the West a hundredth and twenty miles: A plain of a hundredth and
twenty miles
being of breadth.xviii. miles where it is narowest, and.xxv. where it is
largest. Lookyng toward the West, it has collaterally on the left hand the
montaines of Daiguani: And on the right hand, the montaines, of Caigua, so
cauled of the name of the vale it self. At the roots of the montaines of
Caigua toward the North side, there lies an other vale much longer and larger
then that before named. For it contains in length, almost two hundredth
miles: A plain of two hundredth miles in length.
And in breadth.xxx. where it is largest, and about.xx. where it is narowest This
vale in sum part thereof, is cauled Maguana: In an other place, Iguamu, and
else where, Hathathiei. And forasmuch as we have here made mention of this
part of the vale named Hathathiei, we will sumwhat digress from the
discourse of this description, and entreat of a thing so strange and
marvelous, that the like has not vyn hard of. So it is therefore, that the king
of this region named Caramatexius, takes great pleasure in fysshinge. Into his
nets chanced a yonnge fyshe of the kind of those huge monsters of the sea
which thinhabitours caul Manari, The marvelous fysshe Manari.
not found I suppose in owre seas nor known to owre men before this time.
This fy^he is four footed, and in shape like unto a tortoyse although she be
not covered with a shel, but with scales: And those of such hardness and
couched in such order, that no arrowe can hur^e her. Her scales are byse^ and
defend with a thousand knobbes. Her back is plain, and her head utterly like
the head of an ox. She lives both in the water and on the land: She is
slow of mouynge: of condition meek, gentell, A monster of the sea fed with
man's hand.
assocyable and loving to mankind and of a marvelous sense or memory as are
the elephant and the delphyn. The king norisshed this fyshe certain days at
home with the bread of the country, made of the root of Iucca and Panycke
with such other roots as men are accustomed to eat. For when she was yet
but young, he cast her into a poole or lake near unto his palaice there to
be fed with hand. This lake also receaueth waters and casts not the same
forth ageine. It was in time pass cauled Guaurabo: But is now cauled the
lake of Mana^i after the name of this fyshe which wandered safelye in the same
for the space of.xxv. years, and grew excedyng byg. What so ever is written
of the Delphines of Baian or Arion, are much inferior to the dooinges of this
fysh: which for her gentle nature they named Matum, that is gentle or noble.
Therefore when so ever any of the kings familyers, especially such as are
known to her, resort to the banks of the lake and caul Matum, Matum, Matum.
then she (as myndefull of such benefits as she has received of men)
lyftethe up her head and comes to the place whither she is cauled, A fyshe
caryeth men oue^ the lake.
and there receaueth meat at the hands of such as feed her. If any desirous
to pass over the lake, make signs and tokens of their intent, she boweth her
self to them, therewith as it were gentelly inuitynge them to amount upon
her, and conueyeth them safely over. It has been seen that this monstrous
fysshe has at one time safely carried over ten men singinge and playinge. A
maruelou^ thing.
But if by chance when she lyfteed up her head she espied any of the
Christian men, she woolde immediately ploonge down again into the water and
refuse to obey, because she had once received injury at the hands of a
certain wanton young man among the Christians, who had cast a sharp
darte at her, although she were not hurt by reason of the hardenes of her
skin being roughe and full of skales and knobbes as we have said. Yet did
she bear in memory thiniurie she sustained, with so gentell a revenge
requitynge thingrat^tude of him which h^d delte with her so vngentelly. From
that day when so ever she was cauled by any of her familiers, she woolde first
look circum^pectly about her, least any were present appareled after the manner
of the Christians. She woolde oftentimes play and wrestle upon the bank with
the kings chamberlens: And especially with a young man whom the king
favored well, being also accustomed to feed her. She woolde be sumetymes
as pleasant and full of play as it had been a moonkey or marmaset: And was of
long time a great comfort and solace to the hole Island. For no smaule
confluence as well of the Christians as of thinhabitantes, had daily concourse
to behold so strange a miracle of nature, the contemplation whereof was no
less pleasant then wonderful. They say that the meat of this kind of
fysshe, is of good taste: And that many of them are engendered in the seas
therabout. But at the length, this pleasant playfelowe was lost, and carried
into the sea by the great river Attibunicus, The river Attibunicus.
one of the four which divide the Island. For at that time there chanced so
terrible a tempest of wind, and rain, with such fluds ensewing that the like
has not lightly been hard of. By reason of this tempest, the river Attibunicus
so ouerflowed the banks, that it filled the hole vale and myxt it self with
all the other lakes. At which time also, this gentell Matum and pleasant
companyon, The situation of the great ^ale.
following the vehemente course and faule of the fluddes, was thereby restored
to his oulde moother and natyue waters, and sense that time never seen again.
Thus having digressed sufficiently, let us now coome to the situation of the
vale. It has collaterally the mountains of Cibaua and Caiguam which bring
it to the South sea. The mountains of Cibaua and Caiguam.
There is an other vale beyond the mountains of Cibaua toward the North.
This is cauled the vale of Guarionexius, because that before the memory of
man, the predicessours and ancestors of king Guarionexius to whom it is
descended by right of inheritance, The great vale of Guari^nexius.
were ever the lords of the hole vale. Of this king, we have spoken largely
in the first narration of the Island in the first Decade. This vale is of
length from the East to the West, a hundredth and fourscore miles: And of
breadth from the South to the North, thirty miles where it is narowest, and
fifty where it is brodeste. It begins from the region Canobocoa by the
provinces of Huhabo and Caiabo: And ends in the province of Bainoa and the
region of Mariena. It lies in the myddest between the mountains of C^baua,
and the mountains of Cabonai and Cazacubuna. There is no province nor any
region, which is not notable by the majesty of mountains, Mountains,
frutefulnes of vales, Uales.
pleasantness of hills, hills.
and delectablenes of playnes, Playnes.
with abundaunce of fair ryuers runnynge through the same. Ryuers.
There are no sides of mountains or hills, no ryuers, which abound not with
gold and delycate fysshes, Gold in all mountains, and gold and fysshe in
all ryuers.
except only one river which from thoriginall thereof, with the sprynges of the
same breaking forth of the mountains, comes out salt and so contynueth
until it peryshe. This river is cauled Bahuan: and runs through the myddle
of the region Maguana in the province of Bainoa. They suppose that this river
has made it self away under the ground by sum passages of plaster or
salt earth. For there are in the Island many notable salt bays, Salt bays,
whereof we will speak more hereafter. We have declared how the Island is
divided by four ryuers and five provinces. how the Island is divided with
mountains.
There is also an other particion, which is this. The hole Island consysteth
of the tops of four mountains which divide it by the myddest from the East to
the weste. In all these is abundance of nooryshynge moisture and great plenty
of gold: Gold.
of the caves also of the which, the waters of all the rivers (into the which
the caves empty them selves) have their original and increase. The ryuers
have their increase from the caves of the mountains
There are likewise in the^ horrible dens, obscure and dark vales, and
myghtie rocks of stone. There was never any noisome beast found in it: Nor
yet any rauenynge four footed beast. No hurtful or raueninge beast in the
Island.
No lion, no bear no fierce tigers, no crafty foxes, nor devouring woolfes.
Al things are blessed and fortunate: And now more fortunate, for that so many
thousands of men are received to be the sheep of Christ's flock, all their
Zemes and Images of deuylles being rejected and utterly out of memory. The
autours excuse.
If I chance now and then in the discourse of this narration to repeat one
thing diverse times or otherwise to make digression, I must desire yowre
holiness therewith not to be offended. For while I see, hear, and write these
things, me seems that I am herewith so affected, that for very joy I feel
my mind stirred as it were with the spirit of Apollo as were the Sibylles,
whereby I am enforced to repeat the same again: Especially when I consider
how far the amplitude of owre religion spreads her wings. Yet among
these so many blessed and fortunate things, this one greeueth me not a little:
That these simple poor men never brought up in labor, By what meane^ the
people of the Island are greatly consumed.
do daily peryshe with intolerable travail in the gold mines: And are thereby
brought to such desperation, that many of them kill them selves, having no
regard to the procreation of children. In so much that women with child,
perceiving that they shall bring forth such as shall be slaves to the
Christians, use medecines to destroy their conception. And albeit that by the
kings letters patentes it was decreed that they should be set at liberty,
yet are they constrained to serve more then seems convenient for free men.
The number of the poor wretches is woonderfully extenuate. They were once
rekened to be above twelve hundredth thousand heads: But what they are now,
I abhor to rehearse. We will therefore let this pass: and return to the
pleasures of Hispaniola. The plesures of hispaniola.
In the mountains of Cibaua, which are in manner in the myddest of the Island
in the province of Caiabo (where we said to be the greatest plenty of natyue
gold) there is a region named Cotohi, situate in the clouds, The region of
Cotohi, ^ituate in the Clouds.
environed with the tops of high mountains, and well inhabited. It
consists of a plain of.xxv. miles in length, and.xv. in breadth. This plain
is higher then the tops of other mountains: A plain in the tops of
mountains
So that these mountains, may seem to be the chief and progenitors of the
other. The higher, the coulder.
This plain suffers alterations of the four times of the year: as the
Spring, Soomer, Autumn, and winter. Here the herbs ware wythered, the trees
loose their leaves, Moderate could in the mountains.
and the meadows become hoar: The which things (as we have said) chance not
in other places of the Island, where they have only the Spring and Autumn. The
soil of this plain brings forth fern and bramble busshes bearing black
berries or wild raspes, Fern of marvelous bigness
which two are tokens of could regions. Yet is it a fair region: for the
could thereof is not very sharp: neither does it aflicte thinhabitantes with
froste or snow. They argue the frutefulnes of the region by the fern, whose
stalks or steames are bygger then a spear or iauelen. The sides of those
mountains are rich in gold. Gold.
Yet is there none appointed to dygge for the same, because it shall be needful
to have apparelled myners, and such as are used to labor. For thinhabitantes
lyuinge confeuted with little, are but tender: And can not therefore away with
labor or abide any could. Thinhabitantes of hispaniola can abide no labor
nor could.
There are two ryuers which run through this region, and faule from the
tops of the present mountains. One of these is named Comoiayxa, whose course
is toward the West, and fauleth into the channel of Naiba. The other is cauled
Tirecotus: which runnynge toward the East, joins with the river of Iunna. In
the Island of Creta (now cauled Candie) as I passed b^ in my legacy to the
Soldane of Alcayr or Babylon in Egypt, The Island of Creta of Candie, under the
dominion of the Uenetians.
the Uenetians toulde me that there lay such a region in the tops of the
mountains of Ida, which they affirm to be more fruitful of wheat corn
then any other region of the Island. But forasmuch as once the Cretenses
rebelled agenst the Uenetians, and by reason of the straight and narowe way to
the tops thereof, long defended the region with arms against thauctoritie of
the Senate, and at the length being forweryed with wars, rendered the same,
the Senate commanded that it should be left deserte, and the streightes of
thenteraunces to be stopped, lest any should ascend to the region without
their permissyon. Yet in the year of Christ M. D. ii. license was granted to
the husband men to till and manure the region, on such condition that no such
as were apt to the wars, might enter into the same. There is also an other
region in Hispaniola named Cotoby after the same name. This divides the
bounds of the provinces of Vhabo and Caiabo. It has mountains, vales, and
plains. But because it is baren, it is not much inhabited. Yet is it richest
in gold: For the original of the abundaunce of gold, begins here: In so
much that it is not gathered in smaule grains and sparks as in other places:
but is found hole, Pure and massy gold in the region of Cotoy.
massy, and pure, emonge certain soft stones and in the veins of rocks, by
breaking the stones whereof, they follow the veins of gold. They have found
by experience, that the vain of gold is a lyuinge tree: The vain of gold,
is a living tree.
And that the same by all ways that it spreads and springs from the root
by the soft pores and passages of the earth, These colers or flowers are
cauled Marchasites, Pyntes.
puts forth branches even unto the uppermost part of the earth, and cease
not until it discover it self unto the open air: At which time, it shows
forth certain bewtifull colors in the steed of flowers, round stones of
golden earth in the steed of fruits, and thynne plates in steed of leaves.
These are they which are disparcled throughout the hole Island by the course
of the ryuers, eruptions of the spr^nges owte of the montaines, and violent
faules of the fluddes. For they think that such grains are not engendered
where they are gathered: especially on the dry land: but otherwise in the
rivers. They say that the root of the golden tree extends to the center of
the earth and there takes norishe^mt of increase. The root of the golden tree.
For the deaper that they dygge, The branches of the golden tree.
they find the trunkes thereof to be so much the greater as far as they may
follow it for abundaunce of water springing in the montaines. Of the branches
of this tree, they find sum as smaule as a threde, and other as bygge as a
man's finger according to the largeness or straightness of the ryftes and
clyftes. They have sumetimes chanced upon hole caves sustained and borne up as
it were with golden pyllars: Caves sustained with pyllers of gold.
And this in the ways by the which the branches ascend: The which being
filled with the substance of the truncke creapynge from beneath, the branche
makes it self way by which it may pass owte. The stones of the gold
mines.
It is oftentimes divided by encounterynge with sum kind of hard stone. Yet
is it in other clyftes noorisshed by the exhalations and virtue of the root.
But now perhaps you will ask me what plenty of gold is brought from
thense. You shall therefore understand that only owte of Hispaniola, what
^old is brought yearly from hispaniola into Spain.
the sum of four hundredth and sumtymes five hundredth thousand ducates of gold
is brought yearly into Spain: as may be gathered by the fyfthe portion dew
to the kings Excheker, which amounts to the sum of a hundredth and fourscore,
or fourscore and ten thousand Castellanes of gold, and sumtymes more. What
is to be thought of the Island of Cuba and Sancti Iohannis (otherwise cauled
Burich^na) being both very rich in gold, we will declare further hereafter.
To have said thus much of gold, Salt of the mountains, very hard and
clear.
it shall suffyce. We will now therefore speak sumwhat of salt wherewith we
may season and reserve such things as are bought with gold. In a region of
the province of Bainoa, in the montaynes of Daiaguo, about twelve miles distant
from the salt lake cauled Caspius, there are salt bays in the montaynes in a
manner as hard as stoones, also clearer and whiter then cristall. There are
likewise such salt baies which grow woonderfully in Lai^ta^ia (now cauled
Cataloma) in the territory of the duke of Cadona the chief ruler in that
region. But such as know them both, affirm that these of Bainoa are most
notable. They say also that this can not be clefte without wedges and
beatelles of Iron. But that of Lale^ana, Salt as hard as stones.
may easlye be broken as I my self have proved. They therefore compare this
to such stoones as may easily be broken: And the other to marble. In the
province of Caizimu* in the regions of Iguanama, Caiacoa, and Guariagua, there
are sprynges whose waters are of marvelous nature, Sprynges of salt, fresshe
and sower water.
being in the superfytial or vppermooste part, fre^he: In the myddest, myxte
of salt and fre^he: And in the lowest part, salt and sower. They think
that the salt water of the sea, issheweth owte softely, and the fresh, to
sprinke owte of the mountains. The one fauleth down and the other ryseth: and
are not therefore so vniue^sally myxt whereby the one may utterly corrupt
the other. If any man lay his ear to the ground near to any of these
springe^, he shall perceive the ground there to be so hollow, holowe caves in
the ground
that the reboundyng noise of a horseman coming may be hard for the space of
three miles, and a foot man one mile. In the last region toward the southe
named Guaccaiarima, in the lordshyp of Zauana, Certain wyld men living in
caue^ and dens
they say there are certain wyld men which live in the caves and dens of
the montaynes, contented only with wild fruits. These men never used the
company of any other: nor will by any means becoome tame.

They live without any certain dwelling places, and with owte tyllage or
culturynge of the ground, as we read of them which in oulde time lived in
the golden age. They say also that these men are withowte any certain
language. Men without a certain language
They are sumtymes seen. But owre men have yet laid hands on none of them.
If at any time they coome to the sight of men, and perceive any making toward
them, they fly swifter then a heart. Ye they affirm them to be swifter then
grehowndes. Men as swift as greihou^ds
What one of these solytarie wanderers did, it is worth the hearing. So it is
that owr men having granges adjoining nere unto the thick wods, certain of the^
repaired thither in the mooneth of September in the year.M.D.xiiii. In the
mean time, A wyld man runs away with a child
one of these wild men came leaping owte of the woodde. And approchynge
sumwhat toward them with smyling countenance, soodenly snatched up a child
of therse being the soonne of the owner of the graunge, which he begotte of a
woman of the Island. He ran away with the child, and made signs to owre
men to follow him. Many followed as well of owre men as of the naked inhabytantes,
but all in vain. Thus when the pleasant wanderer perceived that the
Christians ceased to pursue him, he left the child in a cross way by the
which the swyneheardes were accustomed to drive the swyne to their pasture.
Shortly after, a swynchearde found the child and brought him home to his
father yet tormentynge him self for sorrow, supposing that wild man to have
been one of the kind of the Canibales, and that his soonne was now deuowred.
In the same Island they gather pytche which sweateth owte of the rocks,
Pitche of the rock.
being much harder and sourer then the pitche of the tree: and is therefore
more commodious to calke or defend ships ageynste the woormes cauled Bromas,
whereof we have spoken largely before. This Island also brings forth pitche
in two kinds of trees, Pitche of two kinds of trees.
as in the Pyne tree and an other named Copeia. I need not speak of the pyne
tree, The pine tree.
because it is engendered and known in manner every where. Let us therefore
speak sumwhat of the other tree cauled Copeia: The tree Copeia.
Pitche is likewise gathered of it as of the pyne tree: although sum say
that it is gathered by distyllyng or droppyng of the wood when it is burnt. It
is a strange thing to here of the leaf thereof: and how necessary provision
of nature is showed in the same. It is to be thought that this is the tree in
the leaves whereof the Chaldeans (being the first fynders of letters)
expressed their minds before the use of paper was known. The leaf of a tree
in the steed of paper.
This leaf is a spanne in breadth and almost round. Owre men write in them
with pynnes or nedles or any such instruments made of metal or woodde, in
manner as well as on paper. It is to be lawghed at what owre men have persuaded
the people of the Island as towchynge this leaf. They believe that leaves do
speak.
The simple souls believe that at the commandment of owre men, leaves do speak
and disclose secreates. A pretty story.
They were brought to this credulity by this means. One of owre men dwelling
in the city of Dominica the chief of the Island, delivered to his servant
(being a man borne in the Island) certain roasted connies, (which they caul
Vtias being no bygger then myse) willing him to carry the same to his friend
which dwelte further within the Island. This messenger, whether it were that
he was thereto constrained through hunger, or entysed by appetite, devoured
three of the counnies by the way.

He to whom they were sent, writ to his frynde in a leaf how many he
received. When the master had looked a while on the leaf in the presence of
the servant, he said thus unto him. Ah soonne, where is thy faith? Could
thy gredye appetyte prevail so much with the as to cause the to eat the
connies committed to thy fydelytie? The poor wretch trembelynge and greatly
amassed, confessed his fault: And therewith desired his master to tell him how
he knew the treweth thereof. This leaf (quod he) which thou browghtest me,
has toulde me all. Then he further rehearsed unto him the hour of his
coommynge to his friend, Ignorance causes admiration.
and likewise of his departing when he returned. And thus they meryly
deceive these seely souls and keep them under obedyence: In so much that
they take owre men for gods, at whose coommaundement leaves do disclose
such things as they thyncke most hyd and secreate. Both the sides of the
leaf receaueth the forms of letters even as does owre paper. The leaf
wherein they write.
It is thycker then double parchement, and marvelous toughe. While it is yet
florys^hynge and new, it shows the letters white in green. And when it is
dry, it becomes white and hard like a table of woodde: but the letters wexe
yelowe. It does not corrupt or putrifye: nor yet loses the letters though
it be wette: nor by any other means except it be burnte. There is an other
tree named Xagua: the iuise of whose sour apple being of a dark read
color, A strong color of the iuise of an apple.
stayneth and colors what so ever is touched therewith: And that so
fyrmely, that no washing can take it away for the space of twenty days.
When the apple is full ripe, the iuise loses that strength. The apple is
eaten, and of good taste. There is also an herb whose smoke (as we have
rehearsed the like before of a certain woodde) is deadly poison. On a time when
the kings assembled together and conspired the destruction of owre men, An
herb who^e smoke is poison.
where as they durst not attempt thenterprise by open war, their divise
was, priuilye to lay many bundels of those herbs in a certain house, which
shortly after they intended to set on fire, to thinten^ that owre men making
haste to quenshe the same, might take their death with the smoke thereof. But
their purposed practyse being bewrayed, thautours of the divise were punysshed
accordyngly. Now (most holy father) for as much as yowre holiness writes
that what so ever we have written of the new world, does please you right
well, we will rehearse certain things owte of order, but not greatly from
owre purpose. Of the setting the roots of Maizium Agis, Iucca, Battatas, and
such other being their common food, and of thuse of the same, we have spoken
sufficiently before. But by what means they were first applied to the
commodity of men, we have not yet declared. We now therefore entende to
entreat sumwhat hereof.

The nynth book of the third Decade.
THEY say that the first inhabitours lived contented with the roots of
dates, The kinds of fruits wherewith thinhabitantes lived first.
and Magueans, which is an herb much like unto that which is commonly cauled
Sengrene or Orpin. Also the roots of Guaiegans, which are round and great
much like unto puffes of the earth or mussheromes. They did likewise eat
Guaieros, like unto perseneppes: Cibaios like nuttes, Cabaioes and Macoanes,
like unto onions, with diverse other such roots. They say that after many
years, a certain Boi^ion, that is, a wise oulde man, saw upon the banks
side, a bushe like unto fenel: and transplantyng the root thereof, brought it
from wyldenes to a better kind, by noorysshynge it in gardens. Necessity the
moother of all arts.
This was the beginning of Iucca, which at the first was deadely poison to
all such as did eat thereof raw. But for as much as they perceived it to be
of pleasant taste, they determined many ways to prove the use thereof: And at
the length found by experience that being sodde or fried, it was less
hurtefull: by which means also, they came to the knowledge of the veneme
lyinge hyd in the iuse of the root. Thus by dryinge, saltynge, seasonynge, and
otherwise temperynge it, they brought it to their fine bread which they caul
Cazabbi, The fine bread Cazabb^, made of the roots of Iucca.
more delectable and wholesome to the stomach of man then bread made of
wheat, because it is of easyer digestion. The same is to be understood of
other roots and the grain of Maizium which they have chosen for their chief
meat among the seeds of nature, as we read how Ceres the daughter of
Saturnus, how Ceres first found wheat and ^arly in Egypt.
gathered wheat and barley (with such other corn as are now most in use
among men) in Egypt of certain graynes taken out of the mudde driven from
the mountains of Ethiopia by thincrease of the river Nilus, and left in the
plain at such time as Nilus resorted again to his channel. For the which
fact, we read that the antiquity gave divine honor to Ceres, who first
norished and increased such chosen seeds. There are innumerable kinds of
Ages: The ^ootes of ages.
the variety whereof, is known by their leaves and flowers. One kind of
these, is cauled Guanaguax. This is white boothe within and without An other
named Guaraguei is of vyolet color without and white within. The other kinds
of Ages, they caul Zazaueios. These are red without and white within.
Squiuetes, are white within and without. Tunna, is all together of vyolet
color. Hobos is yelowe booth of skin and inner substance. There is an other
named A^ibunicix: The skin of this is of violet color, and the substance
white. Aniguamar, has his skin also of vyolet color, and is white within.
Guaccaracca. has a white skin, and the substance of vyolet color. There are
many other which are not yet brought to us. But I fear me least in the
rehearsal of these, The autour^ excu^e.
I shall provoke the spurs of malicious persons against me which will scorn
these owr doings for that we have written of many such smaule things to a
prince occupied in such weyghty affairs, as unto yowre holiness upon whose
shulders rests the burden of the hole Christian world. But I would ask of
these malycious en^yers of other men's trauayles, whether Pliny and such other
famous writers, Pliny.
when they dyrected and dedicated such things to kings and princes, intended
only to profit them to whom they consecrated the fruit of their knowleage.
They sumtymes intermyxte famous things with obscure things, light with
heavy, and great with smaule, that by the foortheraunce of princes, their
universal posterity might enjoy the fruition of the knowleage of things. At
other times also, being intent about particular things, and desirous of new
things, they occupied them selves in the searchinge of particular tractes and
coasts, with such things as nature brought forth in the same, by this
means to coome the better to more absolute and universal knowleage. Let them
therefore contemn owre doing: And we will laugh to scorn, not their
ignorance and slothfulnes, but pernicious curiousnes: And therewith having
pity of their froward dispositions, will commit them to the venomous
serpents of whom envy took his first orginall. It shall in the mean time
abundantly content us that these things do please yowre holiness: And that
you do not despise owre simple vestures wherewith we have only weaued together
and not adourned, gathered and not described such marvelous things in the
garnyshynge whereof, nature has sufficiently showed her cunning. Owre desire
is none other but herein for yowre sake to do owre endeavor that these
things may not peryshe. Let every man take hereof what lyketh him best. Of
the sheep or bullock soulde in the market, nothing remains in the
evening, because the shulder pleases one, the leg an other, and the neck
an other. Ye, sum have most fantasy to the bowels, and sum to the feet.
Thus having enough wandered, let us return to owre purpose and declare with
what words they salute the kings children when they are first borne: or how
they apply the beginning of their lives to the end: And why their kings are
cauled by many names. Therefore when the king has a son borne, such as dwell
near about his pallaice or vyllage, repair to the queens chamber, where one
saluteth the new borne child with one name, and an other with an other name.
By what names they salute the kings children when they are borne.
God save the thowe shyninge lamp says one: An other cauleth him bright and
clear. Sum name him the victourer of his enemies: and other sum, the
puissaunt conqueror descended of bludde royal, and bryghter then gold, with
diverse other such vain names. Therefore like as every of the Roman emperors
was cauled Adiabenicus, The names and ytles of the Roman Emperors.
Par^^icus, Armenicus, Dacicus, Go^bicus, and Germanicus, according to the
titles of their parents and ancestors, even so by thimposition of names
invented by other kings, Beucbicus Anacachoa the lord of the region of Xaragua
(of whom and of the wise woman Anachaona his sister, we have spoken largely in
the first Decade) was cauled by all these names following: Tureigua Hobin:
which is as much to say, as, a king shynynge as bright as laton. Starei,
that is, bryghte: Huibo, highness: Duih^ynequen, a rich fludde. With all
these names and more then fortye other such, does king Beuchius magnifye
him self as often as he commands any thing to be done or causes any
proclamation to be made in his name. If the crier by negligence leave owte any
of these names, the king thinks it to sound greatly to his contumely and
reproach. The like is also of other. How fondely they use them selves in
making their testamentes, how they make their testamente^
we will now declare. They leave thinheritaunce of their kyngedomes to
theldest soonnes of their eldest systers. If she fail, to theldest of the
second sister and so of the third if the second also fail. For they are owte
of doubt that those children coome of their bludde. But the children of their
own wives, they count to be not legitimate. If there remain none of their
systers children, they leave thinheritaunce to their broothers. So did grea
Alexander
And if they fail, it descends to their own soonnes. Last of all, if al
these fail, they assygne it to the woorthiest, as to him that is of greatest
power in all the Island, that he may defend their subjects from their
ancient enemies. They take as many wives as them lysteth. They suffer the best
beloved of the kings wives, and concubynes to be buried with him. The kings
wives and concubines are buried with him.
Anachaona the sister of Beuchius the king of Xaragua, being a woman of such
wisdom and cunning that in making of rhymes and balettes she was counted a
prophetisse emonge the best, commanded, that emonge all the wives and
concubynes of the king her brother, the fayrerest (whose name was
Guanahattabenechina) should be buried alive with him, and two of her waytyng
maids with her. She woolde also have appointed diverse other to that office,
if she had not been otherwise persuaded by the prayers of certain friars of
saint Fraunces order which chanced then to be present. They bury their
jewels with them. A dream of an other life after this.
They say that this Guanahattabenechina had none in all the Island comparable
to her in beauty. She buried with her all her iewelles and twenty of her best
ornaments. Their custom is, to place beside every of them in their
sepultures, a cup full of water and a portion of the fine bread of Cazabbi.
In Xaragua, the regyon of this king Beuchius, and in Hazua, part of the
regyon of Caiabo, also in the fair vale of salt and fresh lakes, and
likewise in the region of Yaquino in the prouynce of Bainoa, it rayneth but
seldom. where it rayneth but seldom.
In all these regyons are fosses or trenches made of oulde time, whereby they
conueye the waters in order to water their fyeldes, with no less art then do
thinhabitours of new Carthage, and of the kyngedome of Murcien in Spartaria
for the feldoome faule of rain. The region of Maguana, deuydeth the prouynce
of Bainoa from Caiabo, where it rayneth much.
and Zauana from Guaccaiarima. In the deep vales, they are troubled with rain
more often then ned^th. Also the confynes of the chief city named saint
Dominike are moister then is necessary. In other places, it rayneth moderately.
There are therefore in the Island of Hispaniola, diverse and variable motions of
the elements, Uariable motions of the elements.
as we read the like of many other regions. Of their colonies or mantions
which the Spaniardes have erected in this Island we have spoken suffycientelye
before. The colonies and vyllages which the Spanyardes have builded
They have sense that time builded these vyllages: Portus Platae, Portus
Regalis, Lares, Villanoua, Azuam, and Saluaterra. Having said thus much of
the Island of Hispaniola the moother and lady of the other Islands, The other
Islands about hispaniola,
and as it were Tethys the most bewtifull wife of Neptunus the god of the sea,
let us now entreat sumwhat of her Nymphs and fair Nereides which wait
upon her and adourne her on every side. We will therefore begin at the
nearest cauled the new Arethusa, The Island Arethusa.
so named of the fontayne Arethusa in the Island of Sicilie. This is famous by
reason of a spring: but otherwise unprofitable. Owre men named it of late,
Duas Arbores, because it has only two trees groynge in it: nere unto the
which is a fountain that comes from the Island of Hispaniola through the
secreate passages of the earth under the sea, and breaks forth in this
Island, as the river Alpeus in Achaia runs under the sea from the city of
Elide, and breaks forth in the Island of Sicilie in the fountain Arethusa.
A spring runnyng under the sea from hispan^ola to Arethusa.
That the fou^tayne of this new Arethusa has h^s original from the Island of
Hispaniola, it is manifest hereby, that the water isshewynge owte of the
fountain, brings with it the leaves of many trees which grow in
Hispaniola, and not in this Island. They say that the fountain has his
original from the river Yiamiroa in the region of Guaccaiarima confynynge with
the land of Zauan^ This Island is not pas^e a mile in circuit, and commodious
for fyssher men. Directly toward the East (as it were the porter keeping the
enterie to Tothys) lies the Island of Sancti Iohannis (otherwise cauled
Burichena) whereof we have spoken largely before. The Island of Sancti Iohannis.
This abounds with gold: and in fruitful soil, is equal with her moother
Hispaniola. In this are many colonies or mansions of Spaniardes, which apply
them selves to gatherynge of gold. Toward the west on the North side, great
Cuba (for the longenesse thereof, The Island of Cuba.
long supposed to be the continent or fyrme land) wardeth owre Tethys on the
back half. This is much longer then Hispaniola: And from the East to the
Weste, is diuyded in the myddest with the circle cauled Tropicus Cancri.
Hispaniola and the other lyinge on the South side of this, are included almost
in the mydde space between the said Tropyke and the Equinoctial line,
habitable regions under the Equinoctial.
which many of the oulde writers supposed to be uninhabitable and desert by
reason of the fervent heat of the soonne in that clyme as they coniectured.
But they were deceived in their opinion. They affirm that rytcher gold mines
are found in Cuba then in Hispaniola. The rich gold mines of Cuba.
They say also that even now while I write these things, there is gold
gathered together ready to the meltyng, amountynge to the quantity of a
hundredth and fourscore thousand Castellans of gold, an argument surely of
great richesse. Iamaica is more toward the Southe then these: The Island of
Iamaica.
And is a pleasant and fruitful Island, of soil apt for corn, graffes,
and settes, it consysteth of only one mountain. Thinhabitauntes are warrelyke
men and of good wit. Colonus compared it to Sicilie in bygnesse. They which
of late searched it more exactely, say that it is sumwhat less: but not
much. It is thought to be without gold and precious stoones, as the like was
supposed of Cuba at the beginning. The Island of Guadalupea (first named
Caraqueira) lyinge on the Southe side of Hispaniola, The Island of Guadalupea.
is four degrees nearer the Equinoctial. It is eaten and indented with two
goulfes (as we read of great Britanye now cauled England, and Calidonia
now cauled Scotland) being in manner two Islands. England and Scotland.
It has famous ports, In this they found that gum which the Apothecaries
caul Animae Album, The gum cauled Anim^ album.
whose fume is wholesome against reumes and heaviness of the head. The tree
which engendereth this gum, bears a fruit much like to a date, Dates.
being a spanne in length. When it is opened, it seems to conteyne a
certain sweet meal. As owre husband men are accustomed to reserve
chestenuttes and such other hard fruits all the winter, so do they the
dates of this tree, Pine trees.
being much like unto a sygge tree. They found also in this Island, Pyne
trees of the best kind, and such other deyntie dysshes of nature, whereof we
have spoken largely before. Ye, they thyncke that thinhabitauntes of other
Islands, had their seeds of so many pleasant fruits from hense. For the
Canibales being a wild and wandering people, The Caniba^es.
and over runnynge all the countries about them to hunte for man's flesh,
were accustomed to bring home with them what so ever they found strange or
profitable in any place. They are intractable, and will admytte no straungiers.
It shall therefore be needful to ouercoome them with great pour. whereby it
was thought that there were Islands of women*
For as well the women as men, are expert archiers, and use to inueneme their
arrows. When the men go forth of the land a man hunting, the women
manfully defend their coasts against such as attempt to invade the same.
And hereby I suppose it was thought that there were Islands in the Ocean,
inhabited only with women, as Colonus the admiral him self persuaded me, as
I have said in the first decade. This Island has also fruitful mountains
and playnes, and notable ryuers. It nouryssheth honye in trees, and in the
caves of rocks, honey in trees and ro^kes.
as in Palma one of the Ilandea of Canarie, honye is gathered among the briers
and bramble busshes. About.xviii. miles Easteward from this Island, lies an
Island which owr men named Desiderata, The Island Desiderata.
bring.xx. miles in circuit and very fair. Also about ten miles from
Guadalupea toward the Southe, lies the Island of Galanta, The Island Galanta.
being thirty miles in circuit and plain. It was so named for the
neatenesse and bewtifulnes thereof. Nine miles distant from Guadalupea toward
the East, there are six smaule Islands named Todos Sanctos or Barbara. The
Islands of Todos Sanctos or Barbara.
These are full of rocks and barren: Yet necessary to be known to such as
use to travail the seas of these coasts. Again, from Guadalupea.xxxv. miles
toward the North, there is an Island named Monsserratus, The Ilande^
monsserratus
containing in circuit fortye miles, having also in it a mountain of
notable heyght. The Island named Antipua, The Island Antiqua,
distante from Guadalupea thirty miles, is about fortye miles in circuit.
Diegus Colonus the soonne and heir of Christophorus Colonus, told me that his
wife (whom he left in the Island of Hispaniola a^ his coming into Spain to
the court) did write unto him, that of late emonge the Islands of the
Canibales, there is one found which abounds with gold. On the left side
of Hispaniola toward the Southe, near unto the haven Botea, there lies an
Island named Portus Bellus. The Island Portus Bellus Great Tortoyses.
They tell marvelous things of the monsters of the sea about this Island, and
especially of the tortoyses. For they say that they are bygger then great
round targettes. At such time as the h^ate of nature moves them too
generation, The generation of Tortoyses.
they coome forth of the sea: And making a deep pytte in the sand, they
lay three or four hundredth eggs therein. When they have thus emptied their
bag of conception, they put as much of the sand again into the pytte, as
may suffyce to cover the eggs: And so resort again to the sea, nothing
careful of their succession. At the day appointed of nature to the
procreation of these beasts, there creapeth owte a multitude of tortoyses, as
it were pyssemares swarmynge owte of an ante hill: And this only by the heat
of the soonne withowte any help of their parents. They say that their eggs
are in manner as bygge as geese eggs. The eggs o^ Tortoyses.
They also coompare the flesh of these tortoyses, to be equal with veale in
taste. There are beside these, innumerable Islands the which they have not yet
searched: Innumerable Islands.
nor yet is it greatly necessary to syfte this meal so fynely. It may
suffyce to understand that there are large lands and many regyons which shall
hereafter receive owre nations, tounges, and manners: and therewith embrase owre
relygion. The Troyans did not soodenly replenyshe Asia, Trojans*
the Tyrians Libia, Tirians.
nor the Greeks and Phoenices Spain. Greeks.
P^en^t^ns.


As touching the Islands which lie on the north side of Hispaniola, I have let
pass to speak. For albeit they are commodious for ty^lage and fysshynge, yet
are they left of the Spanyardes as poor and of smaule value. The North
Iland^s.
We will now therefore take owre leave of this owlde Tethis with her moist and
watery Nymphs: The Islands of the south sea,
And receive to owre new acquaintance the bewetifull lady of the South sea
rychely crowned with great pearls, the Island of Dites being rich both in
name and in treasure. In my epistell book which I sent unto yowre holiness
this last year, I declared how Vaschus Nunnez Balboa the captain of them
which passed over the dangerous mountains toward the South sea, The Island
of pearls.
learned by report that in the prospect of those coasts there lay an Island
aboundynge with pearls of the greatest sort: And that the king thereof was
rich and of great power, infestynge with wars the other kings his
bortherers, and especially Chiapes and Tumacchus. We declared further how at
that time it was left vntouthed by reason of the ragynge tempests which
troubled that South sea three moonethes in the year. But it is now better
known to owre men, who have now also brought that fierce king to humanity:
and converted him from a cruel tiger to one of the meek sheep of Christ's
flock sanctified with the water of baptism with all his famelie and
kyngedome. wild beasts must be tamed with the rod.
It shall not therefore be from owre purpose to declare by the governance of
what capitaines or by what means these things were so happily atchyued.

The tenth book of the third Decade.
TT the arryuall of Petrus Arias the new governor of Dariena, he gave
commaundment that one Gaspar Moralis should take in hand thexpedition to the
Island of Dites. An expeditio^ to the Island of Dites in the south sea
He therefore took his vyage first to Chiapes and Tumacchus kings of the
South, whom Vaschus before had concyled and left fryndes to the Christians.
They frendely and magnifycally enterteyned owr men who prepared them a navy of
the kings boats to pass over into this Island, which they caul Dites and
not Margarita or Margaritea, The Island of Margaritea.
although it abound with pearls which in the latin tongue are cauled
Margaritae. For they first cauled an other by this name, which lies next to
the mouth of Os Draconis in the region of Paria, O^ Draconis.
Paria.
in the which also is found great plenty of pearls. Gaspan brought with him
only threescore armed men to the Island, for that he could convey over no
greater number by reason of the smaulenes and narownes of their boats or
barks which they caul Culchas, made of one hole piece of timber as we have
said before. A conflict.
The king of the Island came forth against them fiercely with cruel and
threatenynge countenance, and with a great band of armed men cryinge in manner
of a larome and in token of the battle, Guazzauara, Guazzauara, which is as
much to say as, battle against the enemy: And is as it wear a watch word
to give thonset, wherewith also they threw their darts. For they have not
thuse of bows. They were so obstinate and desperate that they assailed owre
men with four Guazzauaras* that is, battayles. At the length owre men with
certain of Chiapes and Tumacchus men (being oulde enemies to this king of
the Island, got the upper hand by reason they assailed the king soodenly
and unawares. Yet was he determined to assemble a greater power, and once again
to attempt the fortune of war, but that he was otherwise persuaded by the
kings his bortherers which counceled him to give over and submyt him self:
sumtyme by thexemple of them selves and other threatenynge the destruction of
his flooryshynge kyngedome: And otherwhyles declarynge unto him the humanity
and gentelnes of owre men, by whose friendship he might obtain honor and
quyetnes to him and his: wyllyng him furthermore to consider what chanced unto
them which the year before resysted and adventured the hasarde of the battle
as did these kings, Poncha, Pocchorrosa, Quarequa, Chiapes, and Tumaccus with
such other. By these persuasions, the king submytted him self and came
freendely to owre men whom he conducted to his palaice which they say to be
maruelously adourned and princelyke. The king of the Island of Dites
submits him self.
As soon as they entered into the pallaice, The kings pal^aice.
he brought forth a basket of curious woorkemanshyp and full of pearls which
he gave them. The sum of these pearls amounted to the weight of a hundredth
and ten pounds after.viii. ounces to the pound. A hundredth and ten pound
weight of pearls.
Being again rewarded of owre men with such tryfles as they brought with them
of purpose, as garlandes of Crystal and glass and other counterfeit stones of
diverse colors, with lookyng glasses also and laton belles, and especially two
or three Iren hatchets (which they more esteem then great heaps of gold) he
thaught him self abundantly recompensed. axes and hatchets more esteemed the^
gold.
They laughe owre men to scorn that they will depart with so great and
necessary a thing for any sum of gold: affyrmynge an axe or hatchet to be
profitable for many uses of men: and that gold serves only for wanton
pleasures, and not to be greatly necessary. Being therefore joyful and glad
of the frendeshyppe of owre men, he took the captain by the hand and brought
him with certain of his familiars to the highest tower of his palaice, from
whense they might prospecte the main sea. The kings words.
Then castyng his eyes about him on every side, and lookynge toward the East,
he said unto them. Behold here lies open before you the infynite sea
extended beyond the soonne beams. Then tournyng him toward the Southe and
Weste, he sygnyfied unto them that the land which lay before their eyes, the
tops of whose great montaynes they might see, Islands rych in gold and
pearls.
was exceadynge large. Then coommynge sumwhat nearer, he said: Behold these
Islands on the right hand and on the left, which all obey unto owre empire,
and are rich, happy, and blessed, if you caul those lands blessed which
abound with gold and perle. We have in this Island little plenty of gold:
But the deep places of all the seas about these Islands, are full of perles:
whereof you shall receive of me as many as you will require, so that ye
persyste in the bond of frendeshyppe which you have begun. I greatly
desire yowre frendeshyppe, and woolde gladlye have the fruition of yowre
things, which I set much more by then myllyons of perles. You shall
therefore have no cause to doubt of any unfaithfulness or breach of
frendeshyppe on my behalf. Owre men gave him like friendly words: and
encouraged him with many fair promysses to do as he had said. When owre men
were now in a redynesse to depart, they couenaunted with him to pay yearly
to the great king of Castyle a hundredth pound weyghte of perles. C. pound
weight of perles yearly for a tribute.
He gladlye agreed to their request, and took it for no great thing: nor yet
thought him self any whitte the more to becoome tributarie. With this king
they found such plenty of hearts and connies, Plenty of hearts and conni^^.
that owre men stondynge in their houses might kill as many as them list with
their arrows. They live hear very pleasauntly, having great plenty of al
things necessary. This Island is scarsely six degrees distant from the
Equinoctial line. They have the same manner of bread made of roots and the
grain of Maizium, and wine made of seeds and fruits, wine of fruits and
seeds
even as they have in the region of Comogra and in other places as well in the
Islands as in the firm land. This king is now baptized with all his
familye* and subjects. The king is baptized.
His desire was at his baptism, to be named Petrus Arias after the name of
the governor. When owre men departed, he accompanied them to the sea side and
furnysshed them with boats to return to the continent. The fyft part of
perles due to the king.
Owre men divided the perles emonge them, reseruyng the fyfte portion to be
delivered to thoffycers of the kings Excheker in those parts. They say that
these perles were marvelous precious, fair, orient, and exceadynge bygge: Byg
perles.
In so much that they brought many with them bygger then hasell nuttes. Of
what price and value they might be, I consider by one perle the which Paulus
predicessour to yowre holiness, A perle for a pope.
bowght at the second hand of a merchant of Uenece for four and forty
thousand ducates. Yet emonge those which were brought from this Island, there
was one bought even in Dariena for a thousand and two hundredth Castelans of
gold. This was almost as bygge as a mean walnutte: An other perle of great
price.
And came at the length to the hands of Petrus Arias the gouernoure, who gave
it to that noble and faithefull woman his wife, of whose manner of departure
with her husband, we have made mention before. We must then needs think
that this was very precious which was bowght so dear emonge such a multitude
of perles where they were not bought by one at once, but by pounds and at the
least by ounces. It is also to be thought that the Uenecian marchaunte boughte
his for no great sum of money in the East parts. But he sold it the dearer for
that he chanced to live in those lascivious and wanton days when men were
given to such nyse and superfluous pleasures, Nise and superfluous pleasures.
and met with a merchant for his purpose. But let us now speak sumwhat
of the shelfysshes in the which perles are engendered. It is not unknown to
yowre holiness, that Aristotell, and Pliny his follower, were of diverse
opinions as concerning the generation of perles. Diverse opinions of the
generation of pearls.
But these Indians and owre men, rest only in one assertion, not assentyng to
them in any other: as either that they wander in the sea, or that they move at
any time after they are borne. They will therefore that there be certain
gree^^ places as it were meadows in the bottom of the sea, h^rbes in the
bottom of the sea.
bringing forth an herb much like unto thyme, and affirm that they have
seen the same: And that they are engendered, norysshed, and grow therein, as
we see thincrease and succession of oysters to grow about them selves. Also
that these fysshes delyteth not in the conversation or coompanye of the sea
dogs: Nor yet to be contented with only one, two, or three, or at the
most four pearls: Affyrmyng that in the fysshynge places of the king of
this Island, there was found a hundredth pearls in one fyshe, A hundredth
perles ^n one shell fysshe.
the whirhe Gaspar Moralis the captain him self, and his coompanions,
diligently numbered. For it pleased the king at their being there and in
their presence, to command his diverse to go a fysshynge for those kind of
fysshes. They compare the matrices of these fysshes, The matrice of the perle
fysshe.
to the places of conception in hens, in the which their eggs are
engendered in great multitudes and clusters: And believe that these fysshes
bring forth their birth in like manner. For the better proof whereof, they say
that they found certain pearls coommynge forth of their matreces, as
being now coome to the time of their full rypenesse, The ^yrth of perles.
and moved by nature to coome owte of their moothers womb opening it self in
time convenient. Likewise that within a while after, they saw other succeed in
like manner. So that to conclude, they saw sum coommynge forth, and other
sum yet abydinge the time of their perfection: which being complete, they
also became loose and opened the matrice. They perceived the pearls to be
enclosed in the myddest of their bellies, there to be noris^hed and increase
as an infant suckynge his moothers pappes within her womb, before he move to
coome forth of her priuye places. And if it chance any of these shelfysshes
to be found scatered in the sand of the sea (as I my self have seen oysters
disparcled on the shores in diverse places of the Ocean) they affirm that they
have been violently driven thither from the bottom of the sea by force of
tempests, and not to have wandered thither of them selves. But, that they
becoome white by the clearenesse of the morning dew, or wax yelowe in
troubled wether, or otherwise that they ^eeme to rejoice in fair wether and
clear air, or contrarywyse to be as it were astonisshed and dymme in thunder
and tempests, with such other, the perfect knowledge hereof is not to be
looked for at the hands of these unlearned men which handell the matter but
grossly, and enquire no further then occasyon serves. Yet do they affirm by
thexperience and industry of the diverse, that the greatest pearls lie in the
deepest places, where the byggest, mean, and least pearls are engendered
they of the mean sort higher, and the least highest of all and nearer to the
brymme of the water. And say therefore that the greatest do not wander: but
that they are created, nourysshed, and increase in the deepest places of the
sea, whether few, diverse, and that but seeldome dare adventure to diue so
deep to gather them, as well for fear of the sea crabbes which wander emonge
these perle fyshes to feed of them, Sea crabbes
and for fear of other monsters of the sea, as also lest their brethe should
fail them into long remayninge in the water. And this they say to be the
cause why the owldest and therefore byggest sea muscles, The sea muscles wherein
perles are engendered.
inhabyte the deepest places from whense they are not lightly moved by
tempests. Furthermore, how much the bygger and oulder these fyshes are, they
say that in their larger matrices, the greater number and bygger pearls are
found: And that for this cause, there are fewer found of the byggest sort.
They thyncke also, that when they first faule from their fysshes in the deep
places, they are devoured of other fysshes, because they are not yet hard.
Again, the smaulest differ from the byggest in a certain swellynge or
impostumation which the Spaniardes caul a tympane. For they deny that to be
a pearl which in oulde muscles cleaves fast to the shel: But that it is a
warte, which being rased from the shell with a fyle, is round and bright but
only of one side, and not precious, being rather of the nature of the fyshe
it self, then of a pearl. They confess that they have seen certain of
these muscles cleauynge on rocks: Yet these but few, and nothing woorthe. It
is also to be thought that the pearl fysshes or sea muscles which are found
in India, Arabie, the red sea, or Taprobana, are ruled in such order as the
before named famous autours have written. For their opinion herein is not
utterly to be rejected, forasmuch as they were learned men and trauayled
long in the searching of these things. But we have now spoken suffyciently
of these sea fysshes and of their eggs which the fond nysenes and wantonness
of men have made dearer then the eggs of hens or geese. Let us therefore
entreat sumwhat of other particular things which are coome to owre knowledge
of late. We have else where largely described the mouths of the goulfe of
Vraba, with sundry and variable regions divided with the manyfolde goulfes of
that sea. But asconcernynge the West coasts in the which owre men have
builded houses and planted their habitations on the banks of Dariena, I have
no new matter to write. Yet as touching the East parts of the goulfe, The
regions of the ^ast side of the goulfe of Uraba,
I have learned as follows. They say that the universal land of the East
region of the goulfe from the corner thereof far reachynge into the sea, and
from the extreme or utter most mouth of the same receauynge the waters of
the sea which faule into it, even unto Os Draconis and Paria, is by one
general name cauled Caribana, The region of Caribana.
of the Caribes or Canibales which are found in every regyon in this tracte.
But from whense they had their particular original, The original of the
Canibales.
and how leaving their native soil, they have spredde their generation so
far like a pestiferous contagion, we will now declare. Therefore from the
first front reachynge forth into the sea (in whose tracte we said that
Fogeda fastened his foot) toward the corner, about nine miles distant, there
lies a vyllage of Caribana named Fu^craca. The vylages of Caribana.
Three miles distant from this, is the vyllage of Vraba, of the which it is
thought that the hole goulfe took his name, because this vyllage was once the
head of the kyngedome. About six miles from this, is Fe^i. Nine miles from
Feti^, is Zerema: Manhun^ers.
And about twelve miles from this, Sorache. Owre men found all these vyllages
full of people, all the which give them selves only to manhuntynge. In so
much that if they lack enemies against whom they may keep war, they
exercise cruelty against them selves, and either sleye the one the other, or
else drive the vanquysshed to flyghte.

Whereby it is apparante that by these their continual wars, and dryuynge
the one the other owte of their countries, this infection has gonne so far
not only on the fyrme land, but also into the Islands. I was also advertised
of an other thing the which to my judgment, seems woorthye to be put in
memory.

One Corrales a judge in causes of law among the Spanyardes of Dariena, says
that on a time walkyng abroad with his book in his hand, he met by the way
with a fugityue which had stedde from the great lands lyinge far toward the
weste, and remained here with a King with whom he was enterteyned. When this
man perceived the lawier lookynge on his book, marueylynge thereat, he came
runninge unto him, and by interpretours of the king whom he served, spoke thus
unto him: Have you also books wherein you may reserve things in perpetual
memory? Books.
Look in the beginning of the book of the lands lately found.
And letters whereby you may declare yowre mind to such as are absent? And
herewith desired that the book might be opened unto him, supposyng that he
should therein have found the letters of his own country. But when he saw
them unlike, he said further that in his country there were cities fortified
with waules and governed by laws: and that the people also used apparel. But
of what religion they were, I did not learn. Yet had owre men knowleage both
by the words and signs of this fugitive, that they were circumcised.
Circumcised people.
What now think you hereby (most holy father) Or what do you divine may
come hereof when time shall subdue al these under yowre throne? what chanced
to the Capitaines which the governor sent diverse ways,
Let us now entermyngle certain smaule things among these great matters. I
have not thought good to pretermitte that which chanced to Johannes Solysius,
who, to search the South side of the supposed continent, departed with three
ships from port Ioppa (not far distante from the Islands of Gades or Cales
in the Ocean) the fourth day of the Ides of September in the year. M D. xv. Or
what success Johannes Pontius had, whom the new governor Petrus Arias
appointed to vanquishe and destroy the Caribes or Canibales, deuourers of man's
flesh. Look decade iii. liber.vi.
Also to what end the vyages of the other capitaynes came, which were sent
forth diverse ways at the same time: As Gonzalus Bada^ocius, Franciscus
Bezerra, and Valleius, Johannes Solicius took the matter in hand in an evil
hour. The vyage of Johannes Solisius.
He sailed beyond the point of saint Augustine, (which they caul Cabo. S.
Augustini) toward the South side of the supposed continent beyond the
Equinoctial line. Cap. S. Augusti^i*
For (as we have said before) that point reaches Southwarde to the seventh
degree of the South poole cauled the pole Antartike. He proceaded in that viage
six hundredth leagues: And found the land from the point to extend so far
toward the South beyond the Equinoctial, that he came to the thirty degree
of the South pole. As he sailed thus forward, having now on his back half
the stars named Caput Draconis, (that is, the dragons head) and the regions
of Paria lyinge northwarde from him, and prospectynge toward the pole Artyke,
he chanced to faule into the hands of the filthy Canibales. John Solysius is
slain of the Canibales.
For these crafty foxes seemed to make signs of peace, when in their minds
they conceived a hope of a dainty banquet: The fiercenes of the Canibale^.
And espying their enemies a far of, began to swalowe their spettle as
their mouths watered for greedines of their pray. As unhappy Solys^us
descended with as many of his coompanie as could enter into the boat of the
byggest ship, soodenly a great multitude of thinhabitantes bruste forth
upon them, and slew them every man with clubbes, even in the sight of their
fellows. They carried away the boat, and in a moment broke it all to fytters.
Not one man escaped. Their fury not thus satisfied, they cut the slain men
in pieces even upon the shore where their fellows might behold this horrible
spectacle from the sea. But they being stryken with fear through this exemple,
durst not coome forth of their ships, or divise how to revenge the death of
their Captain and coompanyons. They departed therefore from these unfortunate
coasts: And by the way ladynge their ships with brasell returned home
again with loss and heavy chere. Brasell.
Of these things I was aduertysed of late by their own letters.

What they have else done, I shall have more particular knowleage hereafter,
Johannes Pontius was also repulsed by the Canibales in the Island of Guadalupea
being one of the chief Islands of their habitacion. Johannes Po^^ius is
repulsed by the Canibales.
For when they saw owre men a far of on the sea, they ley in ambushe
soodenly to invade them when they should coome alande. Owre men sent forth a
few foot men and with them their laundresses to wasshe their shertes and
sheets. For from the Island of Ferrea being one of the Islands of Canarie
(even unto this Island, for the space of four thousand and two hundredth
miles) they had seen no land where they might find any fresshe water: for as
much as in all this large space, the Ocean is without Islands. At their
coming therefore to land, the Canibales assailed them, carried away the
women, and put the men to such distress that few of them escaped. By reason
whereof, Pontius being greatly discomfited, durst not invade the Canibales,
fearing their venemed arrows which these naked manhunters can direct most
certainly. Thus good Pontius faylyng of his purpose, was feign to give over the
Canibales, whom (being safe and under the house roufe) he threatened to
vanquyshe and destroy. Whether he went from thense, or what new things he
found, I have as yet no further knowleage. By these mysfortunes, Solysius
lost his life, and Pontius his honor. Let us now speak of an other whose
enterprise came to like purpose the same year. Johannes Aiora borne in the
city of Corduba, The vyage of Io^annes Aior^.
a man of noble parentage, sent in stead of the Lieuetenaunt (as we have
said) more covetous of gold then careful of his charge or desirous of praise
for well deseruynge, Lock decade iii. liber, v^.
sought occasions of querelynge against the kings and spoiled many, violently
extortynge gold of them against right and equity: And further handeled them
so extremely, that of friends they became most cruel enemies: The lewd
behau^ur of John Aiora.
In so much that they ceased not with desperate minds by all means they could
to sley owre men openly or priuilye. By reason whereof it is coome to pass,
that where before they bartered quyetly exchanginge ware for ware, they are
now feign to do all things by force of arms. When he had thus exacted a
great quantity of gold of them (as it is said) he fled privily and took
away a ship with him by stelth as the common rumoure goes: Nor yet hitherto
have we hard whyther he went or where he is arrived. Sum suspect that Petrus
Arias the governor should consent to his departure because this Johannes
Aiora is brother to Gonsalus Aiora the kings historiographer, a man booth
learned, and expert in the discipline of war: and so much the governors
friend, that these two among a few, may be counted exemples of rare amity. I
my self also am greatly bound unto them both and have long enjoyed their
frendeshippe. Yet shall I desire them both to pardone me in declarynge my
fantasy herein, that in all the turmoyles and tragical affairs of the
Ocean, nothing has so much displeased me as the covetousness of this man who
has so disturbed the pacified minds of the kings. Now emonge these
troubelous chances, let us rehearse the variable fortune of Gonsalus
Badaiccius, and his fellows, The variable fortune of Go^^alus Bada^ocius.
whose prosperous begynnynges, ended with unfortunate success. Gonsalus
therefore in the month of May in the year of Christ M. D. xv. departed from
Dariena with fourscore armed men, directing his vyage toward the Southe, and
resting in no place until he came to the region of Cerabaro which owre men
named Gratia Dei, Ce^abaro. Decade.iii.li.iii.
distant from Dariena about a hundredth and fourscore miles: for they caul it
threescore leaques. He spente certain days here in Idelnesse: for he could
neither by fair means nor by foul, allure the king of the regyon to coome
to him. While he lay thus idelly, there came to him other fyftie men sent
from Dariena under the governance of capytayne Lodouicus Mercado who departed
from Dariena in the calendes of May, to the intent to search thinner parts of
those regyons. When they met together, they determined after consultation, to
pass over the montaynes lyinge toward the Southe, even unto the Southe sea
latelye found. Behold now a wonderful thing: That in a land of such
marvelous longitude in other places, they found it here to be only about
fyftie miles distant to the Southe sea: The South sea.
for they count it.xvii. leaques, A leaque conteyneth four miles by sea and
but three by land.
as the manner of the Spanyardes is to reken, and not by miles. Yet say they
that a leaque consysteth of three miles by land and four by sea as we have
noted before. In the tops of the mountains and turnynge of the waters, they
found a king named Iuana* whose kyngedome is also named Coiba as is the
regyon of king Careta, of whom we have made mention else where. But for as
much as the regyon of this Iuana, is rycher in gold, they named it Coiba
Dites, The golden region of Coi^a Dytes.
that is, Coiba the rych. For, whersoeuer they dygged the ground, whether it
were on the dry land or in the weate chanelles of the ryuers, they found the
sand which they cast forth, myxte with gold. Iuana fled at the
coommynge of owre men, Sand myxte with gold. how their slaves are marked in
the face.
and could never be brought again. They spoiled all the country near
about his palayce. Yet had they but little gold: for he had carried all his
stuff with him. Here they found certain slaves marked in the faces after a
strange sort. For with a sharp prycke made either of bone, or else with a
thorn, they make holes in their faces: and forthwith sprinkelynge a powder
thereon, they moiste the pounced place with a certain black of read iuise,
whose substance is of such tenacitie and claniminesse, that it will never
wear away. They brought these slaves away with them. They say that this
iuise is of such sharpness and puts them to such pain, that for extreme
doloure they have no stomach to their meat certain days after. The kings
which take these slaves in their wars, use their help in seekynge for gold
and in tyllage of the ground, even as do owre men. From the pallaice of Iuana.
following the course of the water about ten miles toward the Southe, they
entered into the dominion of an other king, whom owre men named the oulde
man, because he was oulde, not passing of his other name. In the regyon of
this king also, they found gold in all places both on the land and in the
ryuers. Gold.
This region is very fair and fruitful: and has in it many famous ryuers.
Departing from hense, in five days iorneye they came to a land left
desolate. They suppose that this was destroyed by civil discord for as much
as it is for the most part fruiteful, A fruteful region left desolate by
civil discord.
and yet not inhabited. The fyfth day, they saw two men coming a far of.
These were laden with bread of Maizium, which they carried on their shulders
in sackes. Owre men took them: and understood by them that there were two
kings in that tracte: The one was named Periqu^te, king Per^quete.
who dwelte near unto the sea. The others name was Totonoga. This Totonoga,
was blind and dwelte in the continent. The two men which they met, were
the fysshers of Totonoga, whom he had sent with certain fardelles of fyshe
to Periquete, and had again received bread of him for exchange. For thus do
they communicate their commodities one with an other by exchange, without
^huse of wicked money.

By the conductinge of these two men, they came to king Totonoga dwelling on
the Weste side of sayncte Michaelles goulfe in the Southe sea. S. Mi^hael,
king Totonoga.
They had of this king, the sum of six thousand Castellans of gold both
rude and artifycially wrought. Emonge those groumes of rude or natyue gold,
there was one found of the weyghte of two Castellans, Six thousand Cas^ellan^
of gold.
which argued the plentiful rychenesse of the ground. Following the same
coasts by the sea side toward the West, they came to a king whose name was
Taracuru, king Taracuru.
of whom they had gold amountynge to the weight of eight thousand Pesos.
viii. thou^and pesos of gold
We have said before that Pesus is the weyghte of a Castelane not coined.
From hense they went to the dominion of this kings broother named Pananome,
king Pananome.
who fled at their coming, and appeared no more afterward. They say that
his kingdom is rich in gold. They spoiled his pallaice in his absence. Six
leaques from hense, they came to an other king named Tabor. king Tabor.
From thense they came to the king of Cheru. king Cheru.
He friendly enterteyned owre men, and gave them four thousand Pesos of gold.
^iii. thousand pesos of gold Salt.
He has in his dominion many goodly salt days: the region also abounds
with gold. About twelve miles from hense, they came to an other king cauled
Anata, king Anata.
of whom they had.xv. thousand Pesos of gold which he had gotten of the
kings his bortherers whom he had vanquisshed by war. xv. thousand pesos of
gold
A great part of this gold was in rude form because it was molten when he set
the kings houses on fire whom he spoiled. Their manner of war.
For they rob and sley the one the other, sackynge and fyryng their villages,
and wastinge their countries. They keep war barbarously and to utter
destruction, executing extreme cruelty against them that have the overthrow.
Gonsalus Badaiocius with his fellows, wandered at liberty until they came to
this king: And had gathered great heaps of gold of other kings. For, what in
braslettes, collers, earinges, breast plates, helmettes, and certain bars
wherewith women bear up their breasts, they had gathered together in gold the
sum of fourscore thousand Castellans, Fourscore thousand Castellans o^ gold.
which they had obtained partly by exchange for owre things where they
found the kings their friends, and otherwise by forceible means where they
found the contrary. They had gotten also forty slaves whose help they used
both for carriage of their vitailes and bagagies in the stead of moiles or
other beasts of burden, and also to relieve such as were sick and forweried
by reason of their long journeys and hunger. After these prosperous viages,
they came by the dominion of king Scoria, king Scoria.
to the palaice of a king named Pariza: king Pariza.
where (fearyng no such thing) Pariza enclosed them with a great army, Gasalus
Badaiocius has the overthrow and is spoiled of great riches of gold,
and assailed them straggelyng and unawares, in such sort that they had no
leisure to put on their armure. He slew and wounded about fyftie, and put the
resydue to flight. They made such^ have, that they had no respect either to the
gold they had gathered, or to their slaves: but left all behind them. Those
few that escaped, came to Dariena. The opinion of all wise men as concerning
the varyable and inconstant chances of fortune in humane things, The
Inconstancy of fortune.
were false, if al things should have happened unto them prosperously. For such
is the nature of this blind goddess, that she oftentimes delyteth in the
overthrow of them whom she has exalted: and takes pleasure in confounding
high things with low, and the contrary. We see this order to be
impermutable, that who so will apply him self to gather roots, shall
sumtymes meet with sweet lyqueresse, and other whiles with sour cockle. Yet
woe unto Pariza: for he shall not long sleep in rest. The governor him self
was of late determined with three hundredth and fyftie choice soldiers to
revenge the death of owr men: But where as he by chance fell sick, his pour
went forward under the conducting of his Lieuetenant Gaspar Spinosa, a Judge in
cases of law in Dariena. At the same time other were sent forth to the Island
of Dites to exact the portion of pearls lymited to the king for his tribute.
What shall succeed, time will bring to owre knowleage. The other two, attempted
thinhabitantes beyond the goulfe Franciscus Bezerra passing over by the corner
of the goulfe and the mouths of the river of Dabaiba, The expedi^ion of
Fraunces Be^arra ^geynst the Canibales.
with two other capitaines and a hundredth and fyftie soldiers well appointed,
went to make war upon the Canibales even in Caribana their own chiefest
dominion, toward the vyllage of Turusy, whereof we have made mention before in
the coming of Fogeda. They brought also with them diverse engens of war:
Gun^e^*
as ^hree pieces of ordinanunce whose shot were bygger then eggs: Likewise
forty archers, and.xxv. hagbutters to the intent to reach the Caniballes a far
of, and to prevent their venemed arrows. But what became of him and his
company, or where they arrived, we have yet no parfecte knowleage. Certain
which came of late from Dariena to Spain, reported that at their departure,
they of Dariena stood in great fear least they also were tossed with sum
misfortune. The other captain Valleius, Ualeius ^epulsed of the Canibales.
obtained the fore part of the goulfe. But he passed over by an other way
then did Bezerra. For he took the beginning of Caribana, and Bezerra the end.
Valleius returned ageine. But of the three score and ten men which he
conueighed over with him, he left fortye and eight slain emonge the
Canibales. These are the news which they bring that came last from Da^iena.
There came to me the day before the Ides of October in this year M.D.xvi.
Rodericus Colmenares (of whom we have made mention before) and one Franciscus
Delapuente. This Franciscus, was one of the under capitaines of this band,
whose chief captain was Gonsalus Badaiocius who hardly escaped the hand^s of
king Pariza. These two capitaines therefore, Rodericus and Franciscus who
departed from Dariena immediately after the misfortune which befell to
Badaiocius and his company, The Islands of the south s^a.
do both affirm, the one that he has hard, and the other that he has seen,
that in the Southe sea there are diverse Islands lying westwarde from the Island
of Dites and saint Michaels goulfe, In this sea (...) Il^ndes of Molucca.
most fruitful of ^pices.
in many of the which are trees engendered and nourisshed which bring forth the
same aromaticall fruits, as does the region of Collocutea, Collocutea.
This land of Collocutea, with the regions of Cochinus and Camemorus, Cochinus
and Camemorus, from whense the Portugales have their spyces.
are the chief mart places from whense the Portugales have their spices. And
hereby do they conjecture that the land where the frutfulnesse of spyce
begins, should not be far from thense. In so much that many of them which
have ouerrunne those coasts, do only desire that leave may be granted them
to search further, and that they will of their own charges frame and furnishe
ships and adventure the viage to seek those Islands and regions. They think
it best that these ships should be made and prepared, he means by the
straight of Magellanus.
even in saint Michaels goulfe: And not to attempt this vyage by saint
Augustines point, which way were both long and di^fyculte, and full of a
thousand dangers, and is said to reach beyond the forty degree of the pole
Antartike. The same Franciscus, being partener of the travails and daungiers
of Gonsalus, says that in over runninge those lands, he found great heardes
of hearts and wild bores: how they take hearts and wild bores.
and that he took many of them by an art which thinhabitauntes taught him:
which was to make pittes or tre^ches in their walks, and to cover the same
with bouwes. By this means also they deceive al other kinds of wild and four
footed beasts. But they take fowls after the same manner that we do: As stock
doves with an other tame stock done brought up in their houses. Stock d^ue^
These they tie by a string, and suffer them to fly a little among the trees.
To the which as other birds of their kind resort, they kill the^ with their
arrows. Their manner of foulynge.
Otherwise they take the^ with nets in a bare place pourged from trees and
bushes: and scateryng certain seeds round about that place, in the myddeste
whereof they tie a tame foul or bird of the kind of them which they desire
to take. In like manner do they take popingiayes and other fowls. But they say
that popingiayes are so simple, Po^ingiayes ar^ ea^ely taken.
that a great multitude of them will fly even into the tree in whose bouwes
the fouler sytteth: and swarm about the tame chatterynge popingiaye,
sufferynge them selves to be easily taken. For they are so without fear of
the sight of the fouler, that they tarry while he cast the snare about their
necks, the other being nothing feared hereby, though they see him draw
them to him with the snare, and put them in the bag which he has about him
for the same purpose. There is an other kind of foulynge, A strange kind of
foulynge.
heretofore never hard of, and pleasant to consider. We have declared before
how that in certain of the Islands, and especially in Hispaniola, there are
diverse lakes or standing pooles. In sum of these (being no deaper then men
may wade over them) are seen great multytudes of water fowls: as well for that
in the bottom of these lakes, there grow many herbs and weeds, as also that
by reason of the heat of the son pearceinge to the natural place of
generation and corruption, Fysshes and wo^mes enge^dered of sum
where being doubled in force by reflection and preserved by moyster, there
are engendered of the stymines of the earth and water, and by the providence of
the universal creator, innumerable little fys^hes, with a thousand sundry
kinds of frogs, worms, knattes, flies and such other. The fowls which use
these lakes, Fowls.
are of diverse kinds: As duckes, geese, swannes, seemewes, gulles, and such
other. We have said also that in their orchardes they noryshe a tree which
bears a kind of great gourdes. Of these gourdes therefore well stopped
least any water should enter in at their ryftes and cause them to sink,
Gourdes of the tree.
they cast many in the shalowe pooles: where, by their continual wandering
and wauerynge with the motions of the wind and water, they put the fowls out
of suspection and fear. The fouler in the mean time, disguysinge him self as
it were with a visour, puts a great gourde on his head much like to a
helmet, with two holes near about his eyes, his face and hole head beside
being covered therewith. And thus enters he into the poole even unto the
chynne. For being from their infancy exercised in swymmynge and accustomed to
the waters, they refuse not to continue therein a long space. The fowls
thinking this gourde to be one of the other that swymme upon the water, the
fouler goes softly to the place where he sees the greatest flock of fowls:
And with waggynge his head, counterfectinge the moving of the wauerynge
gourdes, drawethe near to the fowls: where softely putting forth his right
hand, he soodenly snatcheth one by the legs and plungeth her into the water
where he puts her into a bag which he has with him of purpose The other
fowls supposinge that this dyued into the water of her own motion to seek for
food (as is their manner) are nothing moved hereby, but go forward on their
way as before, until they also faule into the same snare. I have here for
this cause entered into the declaration of their manner of hunting and
foulynge, that by these more pleasant narrations I may sumwhat mytigate and
assuage the horror conceived in yowre stomach by the former rehearsal of
their bluddy acts and cruel manners. Let us now therefore speak sumwhat
again of the new and later opinions as concerning the swyfte course of the
sea toward the west about the coasts of Paria: L^^er opinions of the swift
course of the Ocean toward the west.
also of the manner of gathering of gold in the gold mine of Dariena, as I was
advertised of late. And with these two quiet and peaceable things, we will make
an end of the tragical affairs of the Ocean: and therewith bid yowre holiness
fare well. So it is therefore, that Andreas Moralis the pylot, and Ouiedus (of
whom we have made mention before) repaired to me, at my house in the town of
Matrite, As we met thus together, there arose a contention between them two, as
concerning this course of the Ocean. They both agree that these lands and
regions perteynynge to the dominion of Castile, do with one continual tract
and perpetual bond, embrase as one hole firm land or continent all the main
land lyinge on the north side of Cuba and the other Islands, The contine^t or
firm land.
being also northwest both from Cuba and Hispaniola. Yet as touching the
course of the water, they varrie in opinion. For Andreas, will that this
vyolent course of water be received in the lap of the supposed continente
which bends so much and extends so far toward the North, as we have
said: And that by the object or resistance of the land so bendynge and
crookynge, the water should as it were rebounde in coompasse, and by force
thereof be driven about the north side of Cuba and the other Islands excluded
without the circle cauled Tropicus Caneri, where the largenes of the sea may
receive the waters faulynge from the narowe streams, and thereby repress that
inordinate course, by reason that the sea is there very large and great. I can
compare his meaning to nothing more aptely then to the swyfte stream coming
forth of a mylle and faulyng into the myl poole. For in all such places where
waters run with a vyolent faule through narowe channels, and are then received
in large pooles, they are soodenly disparcled and their violence broken: So
that whereas before they seemed of such force as to overthrow all things
being in their way, it can not then be perceived which way they run. The
Admiral him self Diegus Colonus, The vyages of Diegus Colonus.
son and heir to Christophorus Colonus the first fynder of these lands (who
had now in coming and goinge, four times passed through these seas) being
demanded of me what he found or perceived in saylynge too and fro, The vyage
from the new lands to Spain.
answered that there was much difficulty in returning the same way by the
which they go. But whereas they first take the way by the main sea toward the
North before they direct their course to Spain, he says that in that tract,
he felt the ship sumtymes a little driven back by the contrary course of the
water. Yet supposes that this chances only by the ordinary flowynge and
reflowynge of the sea: And the same not to be enforced by the circumflection or
course of the water reboundynge in compass as we have said. But thinks
rather, that this main land or supposed continent, should sumwhere be open:
And that the said open place, should be as it were a gate, enterie, or
straight, diuydyng the North parts of that land from the South: by the which
also, the Ocean runnynge toward the West, may by the rotation or impulsion of
the heavens, be driven about the hole earth. Ouiedus agrees with Andreas
Motralis as touching the continual adherence and closenes of the said
continente. Yet neither that the waters should so beat against the bendynge
back of the West land, or be in such sort repulsed and driven into the
main sea. But says that he has diligently considered, that the waters run
from the deepest and myddest of the maine sea, toward the West. Also that
saylinge nere unto the shore with smaule vessels, he found the same waters
to return ageine toward the East. The contrary course of waters.
So that in the same place, they run together with contrary course, as we
oftentimes see the like to chance in rivers whereby the obiecte of the banks,
diverse whirlepooles and turnynges arise in the water. By reason whereof, if any
chafe, straw, woodde, or any other thing of light substance be cast in any
such places in ryuers, it follows that al such as run with the water in the
myddest of the channel, proceed well forward: But such as faule into the
bendynge goulfes and indented margentes of the crooked banks, are carried
ouerthwarte the channel, and so wander about until they meet with the full and
direct course of the river. Thus have we made you partener of such things
as they have given us, and written their diverse opinions. We will then give more
certain reason, when more certain truth shall be known. We must in the mean
time, lean to opinions until the day coome appointed of god to reveal this
secreate of nature, with the perfect knowleage of the point of the pole
star. The point of the pole star,
Having said thus much of the course of the Ocean, a brief declaration of the
gold mines of Dariena, The gold mines of Dariena and the manner of gatherynge
gold.
shall close up owre Decades and make an end of owre trauayles. We have
said, that nine miles distante from Dariena, are the sides of the hills and
the dry playnes in the which gold is gathered both on the dry land, and
also on the banks and in the chanelles of ryuers. Therefore to al such as are
willing to gather gold, there is of ordinary custom appointed to every man
by the suruoiers of the mines, a square plotte of ground containing twelve
pases, at the arbitriment of the chooser, so that it be not ground already
occupied, or left of other. The portion of ground being thus chosen (as it
were assygned of the augures to build a temple) they enclose their slaves
within the same, whose help the Christians use in tyllynge of their ground
and gatherynge of gold, as we have said. These places appointed unto them,
they keep as long as them live. And if they perceive tookens of little gold,
they require an other plotte of ground of twelve pases to be assigned them,
leauyng the first in commen. Owre inclosiers woolde leave no such commens.
And this is thorder which the Spaniardes inhabitinge Dariena observe in
gatheryng of gold. I suppose also that they use the like order in other
places: How be it, I have not yet enquired so far. It has been proved that
these twelve pases of ground, have yielded to their choosers, the sum of
fourscore Castellans of gold. Aurisacra Fam^e
And thus lead they their lives in fulfyllynge the holy hunger of gold. But
the more they fill their hands with finding, The broosie of covetousness.
the more increases their covetous desire. The more woodde is laid to the
fire, the more furiously rages the flame. Unsaciable covetousness is no more
diminisshed with increase of richesse, then is the dryness of the dropsye
satisfied with drink. I let pass many things whereof I intend to write
more largely in time convenient, if I shall in the mean season understand
these to be acceptable unto yowre holiness: my dewtie and obseruaunce to whose
authority; has caused me the gladlier to take this labor in hand. The
providence of the eternal creator of all things, grant yowre holiness many
prosperous years.

The last book of Peter Martyr of Angleria, of the Lands and Islands lately
found: and of the manners of the inhabitauntes of the same.
I Have partli declared before in mi decades how certain fugit^ues which came
out of the large West lands arrived in the confynes of Dariena: Look Decade
^ii. Liber. x.
And how that marueylinge at the books of owre men, they declared that they
sumtyme dwelte in regions whose inhabitauntes used such instruments and were
ruled by politic laws. Also that they had cities fortified with waules,
Cities fortifyed with waules.
and fair palaces with streates well paued, and common places whyther
merchants resort as to the burse or streate. These lands, owre men have now
found. Therefore who were thautours hereof, or what success they had herein,
who so desires to know with the conditions of strange regions and the manners
of the people, let him give diligent attendance to such things as follow. Of
the Island of Cuba (now cauled Fernandina, The Island of Cuba or Fernand^na.
lyynge next unto Hispaniola on the west side, and yet sumwhat so bendynge
toward the North that the circle cauled Tropicus Caneri deuideth it in the
myddeste, where as Hispaniola is distante from the Tropike and declinynge certain
degrees toward the Equinoctial line) we have spoken sumwhat before. In this
Island of Fernandina, there are now six towns ^rected. Whereof, the chief is
named Sanctiago of saint James the patron of the Spanyardes. In this, there is
native gold, found both in the mountains and ryuers: By reason whereof they
are daily occupied in gathering and digging the same. But shortly after that
I had finished my said books, three Spanyardes that were the most ancient
citizens of Cuba, The Spaniards of Cuba attempt new vyages.
as Franc^scus Fernandes of Corduba Lupus Ocho, and Christophorus Morantes,
determined to seek new lands, as the minds of the Spanyardes are ever
unquiet and given to attempt great enterprises. They furnyshed at their own
charges, three of those ships which they caul Carauels. And having first
license of Diegus Velasquen the governor of the Island, they departed with a
hundredth and ten men from the West angle of Cuba. The west angle of ^uba.
For this angle is most commodious to relieve ships and to make provision
for fresh water and fuel. Thus they sailed continually six days and a
half, between the West and the South, contented only with the sight of the
heaven and the water: during which time, they suppose that they sailed not
past threescore and six miles. Note.
For they ley at anchor all night where so ever the faulynge of the soonne took
the day light from them, least by wandering in unknown seas, they might
chance to be cast upon rocks or sands. But at the length they chanced
upon a great Island named Iucatana, The Island of Iucatana.
whose beginning thinhabitauntes caul Eccampi. A great city well builded.
Owre men went to the city stondynge on the sea side, the which for the
bygnes thereof, they named E^yrus or Alcair. Thinhabitauntes enterteined them
very friendly. When they were entered into the city, they marueyled to behold
the houses builded like towers, magnifycall temples, Temples.
streates well paued, and great exercise of bying and sellyng by exchange of
ware for ware. humane people.
Their houses are either bylte of stone, or of brick and lyme, and
artifycially wrought. To the first porches of their houses and first
habitations, they ascend by ten or twelve steares. They are covered either with
tyles, Cunnyng artifycers.
slates, reads, or stalks of certain herbs. They gratified the one the
other with mutual gifts. The barbarians gave owre men many brooches and
iewelles of gold, very fair and of cunnyng woorkmanshyppe. Owre men
recompensed them with vestures of sylke and woolle, counterfecte stones, of
colored glass and crystal, hawks belles of laton, and such other rewards
which they greatly esteemed for the straungenes of the same. They set nowght
by lookynge glasses, because they have certain stoones much brighter.
Appareled people.
This nation is appareled after a thousand fasshyons with vestures made of
gossampyne cotton or bombage of diverse colors. The women are covered from the
girdle to the heel having diverse fasshions of veles about their heads and
breasts, with great cautele least any part of their legs or feet be seen.
They resort much to their temples: unto the which the chief rulers have the
ways paued from their own houses. They are Idolatours and circumcised.
Circumci^ed Id^laters.
They occupy their manner of exchaunginge, with much fydelitie. They use to
adourne the hears of their heads, being demanded by thinterpretours of whom
they received their circumcisyon, they answered that there once passed an
exceadynge fair man by their costs, who left them that in tooken to remember
him. Other say that a man brighter th^n the soon, went emonge them and
executed that office. But there is no certentie hereof. When owre men had
remained there certain days, they seemed to be molestous to thinhabitantes
according to the common saying. The longer a geste tarieth, the worse is his
enterteynement. The which thing owre men perceauyng, they made the more h^st
away. Being therefore provided of all things nece^sary, they took their
vyage directly toward the west by the providence wh^che thinhabitauntes caul
Comi and M^i^m. Comi.
Mai^m.
They over passed these regions taking only fresh water and fuel in the same.
The barbarians both men, women, and ch^ldren flocked to the sea side,
astonysshed greatly to behold the huge bygnesse of the ships. Owre men
marueyled in manner no le^se to view their buyldynges and especially their
temples sytuate near unto the sea, and erected after the manner of towers. Thus
at the length having sailed about a hundredth and ten miles, they thought it
good to ley anchor in a province named Campechium, Campechium.
whose chief town consysteth of three thousand houses. A town of three
thousand howses.
Thinhabitauntes came swymmynge to the ships: marueylyng excedyngly at the
manner of saylinge, and at the sails and other tackelynges But when they hard
the thunder of the gunnes, saw the smoke, and smelte the savor of brimstone
and fire, they supposed that thunderboultes and lyghtnynges had been sent from
god. The king received owre men honorably and brought them into his pallayce:
where he feasted them well after his manner. They are accustomed to eat flesh,
and have great plenty of beasts and fowls: Plenty of beasts and fowls.
as peacockes, and other which they francke and feed in their houses: Also
diverse kinds of wild fowls of the mountains, wooddes, and waters: Likewise
partriches, quails, turtle dooues, duckes, and geese. Of beasts, they have
connies, woolues, lions, tigers, foxes, wild boores, hearts, and hares. After
this banquet, the king with his train and famylie brought owre men into a
broad cross way where many streates do meet. Their Idols and Idolatry.
In this, they showed them as it were a great and high altar builded four
square of marble compacte together partly with the toughe cleye of Babylon
cauled Bitumem, and partly with smaule stoones. It had on every side four
steares. Upon the altar was an Image of a man made of marble: and fast by it
the Images of two beasts of unknown shape, which seemed as though they
would with yanynge mouths have torn in sunder the bealy of the man's Image.
On the other side stood a great serpent compacte of the said toughe cleye and
smaule stoones. This serpent being in length.xlvii. foot, and of the bygnesse
of a large ox, seemed to devour a lion of marble, and was al by sparcled with
fresh bludde. Hard by the altar, were three posts fastened in the ground, the
which three other trauersed and were sustained with stones. In this place
offenders were put to death: In token whereof they saw innumerable arrows
steined with bludde, sum scatered, sum lyinge on heaps, and sum broken: Also a
great number of men's bones lying in a court or yard nere unto this funestal
place. Their houses are here also builded of lime and stone. houses of lyme and
stone.
They named this king, Lazarus, because they arrived at this land on saint
Lazarus day. Departing from hense and directing their course still toward the
West for the space of.xv. miles, they came to a province named Aquanil, The
province Aquinall.
whose chief town is cauled Moseo, Moseo.
and the king thereof, Cupoton. He beheld owre men with a froward
countenance, and fought occasion to do them sum privy mischief while they
sought for fresshe water. For he made signs unto them that on the further side
of the next hill, they should find sprynges of water, intendyng to have
assailed them in that narowe passage. But by the coloring of their forheades
(as they are accustomed in their wars) and by the bearing of their bows and
other weapons, owr men perceived their wylynes, and refused to go any further.
Yet a thousand of the Barbarians assailed them unawares and unprepared. By
reason whereof, they were put to flight, and diverse of them slain in the chase.
The Spanyardes are put to flight and many slain.
Many that fled to ward the ships, were entangeled in the mudde and
maryshes nere unto the shore. Twenty and two, were slain with arrows, and
the resydewe for the most part, wounded. Franciscus Fernandes the governor of
the navy, received in this conflicte three and thirty wounds. And in manner
none escaped without hurt. If they had gonne to the hills which were
appointed them, they had been slain every man. They therefore that escaped,
returned to the Island of Fernardina from whense they came, where they were
received of their felows with heavy chere. But when Diegus Velasquen the
gouernoure of the Island, had intelligence hereof, An other expedition.
he immediately furnyshed a new navy of four Caraueles with three hundredth
men. Of this navy he appointed John Grisalua his neuie, to be the governor:
And assigned for under capitaynes, Alphons Auila, Frances Montegio, and Peter
Aluarado. For the pylot he assigned Antonie Alamino who had the regiment of the
first navy. They attempted the same vyage again, but declyned sumwhat more
toward the South about threscore and ten miles. Before they saw any land,
they espied a tower a far of, by the view whereof, they came to an Island
named Cozumella, The Island of Cozumella.
from the which they smelte sweet savors proceadynge with the wind, Sweet
savors.
before they approached to the land by the space of three miles. They found
the Island to be forty and five miles in circuit. It is plain and of
marvelous fruitful s^yle. A fruitful Island,
There is also gold in it, but it is not engendered there, but brought thither
from other regions. It abounds with honey, fruits, and herbs: And has also
great plenty of fowls and four footed beasts. Their order and manner of
living, is in all things like unto theyrs of Iucatana. Towers and ^emples.
Likewise their howses, temples, streates, and apparel. In many of their
houses, are great posts of marble after the manner of owre building. They
found there, the fou^dations of certain owlde towers ruinate: And one
especially with.xviii. steares ascendynge to it, after the manner of solemn
temples. They marueyled greatly at owre ships and manner of saylynge. At the
first, they would admyt no strangers: but shortly after, received them
gentelly. Their chief ruler (whom owre men supposed to be a preeste) led them
up to the top of the tower, where they erected a banner and addicted the
Island to the dominion of the king of Castyle, namynge it Sancta Crux,
Cozumella named Sancta Crux.
because they entered into the same in the nones of May being then the feast
of the holy cross. They say that it was cauled Cozumella of king
Cozumellaus, whose ancestors were the first that inhabited the Island. Idols
like bears.
In the tower, they found many chambers furnyshed with Images, made both of
earth and marble to the similytude of bears. These they caul upon with a
houlynge and lamentable song, Idolatry.
perfumyng them with sweet odours, and other wise honourynge them as their
domestical gods They are also circumcised. The king was in fair apparel
made of gossampine cotton curiously wrought. He was lame on the one foot by
reason that as he once exercysed him self in swymmynge, a devouring fyshe
cauled Tuberon, byt of all the toes, Gentell people.
of one of his feet. He entreated owre men very friendly and made them great
chiere. After they had been here three days, they departed. And saylynge still
toward the Weste, they espied great mountains a far of. But as they drew
near, they perceived it to be the Island of Iucatana being distant from
Cozumella only five miles. Iucatana but five miles from Cozume^la.
Directing therefore their course toward the south side of Iucatana, they
compased it on that side which lies nearest to the supposed continent: Yet
could they not sail round about it by reason of the multitude of rocks,
shalowe places, and shelfes of sand. Then Alaminus the pylot turned his sails
to the North side whereof he had better knowleage. Thus at the length, they came
to the town Campeebium and king Lazarus with whom they had bin that attempted
the first vyage the year before. At the first, they were gentelly received,
and required to resort to the town. But shortly after, The Barbarians make
resistaunce.
they repented that they had bydden them: and there upon wylled them to stay
about a stones cast from the town, and to proceade no further.

When owre men desired that they might make provision for fresh water before
their departure, they assigned them to a certain well which they had left
behind them. Declaringe further, that it should be lawful for them to take
water there or else no wheare. Owre men rested that night in the fyelde
adioynynge to the well. The which thing the Barbarians suspectinge, assembled
an army of three thousand men, and encamped not far from them. Both parts
passed away the night without sleep. They fearing least owre men should
break into the town: And owre men, least the Barbarians should invade them
soodenly, on the one part with trumpettes, and on the other side with the
noise of timbrels kept them still waking that were disposed to sleep, At the
spring of the day, the Barbarians approached to owre men's camp and cauled for
thinterpretours of Cuba, whose language is much agreeable unto theyrs. They had
divised to light a torche of frankensence and to place the same between both
tharmies to the intent that if owre men did not depart before the torche were
consumed, to stand to their perell. A conflicte,
The torch was wasted and the matter came to hand strokes. They slew only one
of owre men with an arrowe because his target failed him. But many were
wounded. After this conflicte, owre men resorted to their ordinance which they
had planted near unto the well. When they had discharged certain pecces, the
Barbarians fled back into the town. Owre men were of fierce and greedy
courage to have pursued them, but that Grisalua the governor would not suffer
the^. From thense they proceaded to the last end of Iucatana, The length of
Iuca^ana.
which they found to reach more then two hundredth miles from the East to the
West. Here they found a comodious haven and named it Portus desideratus. From
hense they sailed to other lands, and came to the region next to Iucatana
Westwarde, which they doubt whether it be an Island or part of the firm
land: but think it rather to be annexed to the continent In this there is a
goulfe which they suppose to be incoompased with both the lands. But of this,
there is no certentie. Thinhabitantes caul this region Caluacam or otherwise
Oloan. The region of Caluacam, or Oloan.
They found here also a great river which by his violente course and faule,
drives fresh water two miles into the sea. This they cauled Grisalua after
the name of the gouernoure. The river Grisalua.
The barbarians marueilyng at the huge greatness and mouynge of owre ships,
came swarmyng the banks on both sides the river, to the number of six
thousand men armed with targettes and breast plates of gold, Targets and breast
plates of gold.
bows and arrows, broad swoordes of heavy woodde, and long iauelens hardened
at the ends with fire: Thus stondynge in battle raye to defend their
coostes, and with proud countenaunces forbyddinge owre men to coome alande.
Both parties watched all that night in arms. In the dawne of the day, owr men
espied about a hundredth Canoas (which we have said to be their boats) full
of armed men. Here also the language of thinterpretours of Cuba agreed well
enowghe with there is. When they had admitted the peace proffered them by
thinterpretours, all the Canoas stayed except one which approached toward the
ships. A certain ruler that was in this Canoa, demanded of owre men what
they sought in other men's lands. They answered, gold. And that, for
permutation of other ware, and not of gift or vyolently. The Canoa returned and
the ruler certified the king hereof, who came gladlye to the ships. When he
had saluted the governor, he cauled his chamberlen unto him, commaundynge him
to bring his armure and other ornaments of gold wherewith he armed Crisalua
from the top of the head to the soul of the foot: Armure of gold.
In so much that, what so ever any man of arms armed at all parts, is among
us accustomed to wear of Iren or steel when he comes in to the field,
Expert artificers.
all such kind of furnitures made of gold and wrought with wonderful art,
the king gave to the governor. He recompensed him with vestures of sick,
clothe, lynen, and other of owre things* In the beginning of this Iucatana,
when they sailed to Cozumella, they chanced upon a Canoa of fyssher men to
the number of nine, fysshyng with hooks of gold. Fysshe hokes of gold.
They took them all prisoners. One of them was known to this king, who
promised the day following to send the governor as much gold for his
ransom as the man him self waied. But the governor denied that he could
release him withowte the consent of his fellows: And therefore kept him still to
prove what he could further know of him. Departing from hense and saylynge
still westwarde, they found a great goulfe in the which three smaule Islands
were sytuate. Of these, The Islands of Sacrifice.
they went to the byggest. But oh abominable cruelty: oh most corrupted
minds of men, and deuelyshe impiety? Let every godly man close the mouth of
his stomach lest he be desturbed. Children sacrified to Idols.
They offer young children of both kinds to their Idols of marble and
earth. Emonge their Idols of marble, Their Idols of marble.
there stands a lion having a hole throwgh the neck, into the which they
pour the bludde of the miserable sacrifyce, that it may from thense run
down into a syncke of marble. Let us now declare with what ceremonies they
sacryfyce the bludde of these pore wretches. They cut not their throtes, but
open the very breasts of these selye souls and take owte their hearts yet
pantynge, with the hot bludde whereof, they anoynte the lyppes of their
Idols, and suffer the resydue to faule into the synke. This done, they burn
the heart and bowels, supposing the smoke thereof to be acceptable to their
gods. Of their Idols, one is made to the shape of a man, bowynge down his
head and lookynge toward the synke of bludde, as it were acceptyng the
offeringe of the slain sacrifyce. They eat the flesh of the arms, thighs,
and legs, especially when they sacrifyce an enemy taken in the wars. They
found a stream of congeled blud as though it had run from a bouchery. For
this my (...) purpose, they bring these wretches from the next Islands. They
saw also innumerable heads, and trunkes of bodies thus mangeled, beside many
other yet remaining hole and covered with certain mattes. All the trackes of
these regions abound with gold and precious stones. Gold and precious stones*
One of owre men wandering in the Island, chanced to find two water pottes
of alabaster artifycially wrought and full of little stones of diverse colors.
They say also that they found a stone of the value of two thousand Castilans
of gold, A stone of great price.
which they sent to the governor. This Island they named the Island of
sacrifyce. Thinhabitauntes are circumcised. There are also other Islands
sytuate about this Coluacana, or Caluacam, the which are inhabited only with
women living without the coompanye of men after the manner of the Amazones.
Islands of women.
But they that ponder the matter more wisely, think them rather to be certain
women which have vowed chastity and professed a solytarie life as the nuns
do with us, or as the virgins cauled Vestales or Bonae Deae, were accustomed
to do among the gentiles in oulde time. At certain times of the year, men of
the other Islands resort unto them. But not for the intent of generation, but
moved with pity to help them to dress their gardens and till their ground.
The report goes likewise that there are other Islands of corrupt women to
whom men resort for carnal copulation: And that they cut of one of the
pappes of their women children least it should hinder their shootyng. Also that
they keep only the women children and send away the men children. Owr men
therefore drew nere to the shore of Colluacana where they quyetly exercised
marchaundies with thinhabitauntes. The king gave them a great pot of gold:
Gold.
Also braslettes, chains, brouches, with many other iewelles, and al of gold.
Owre men again on the other part satisfied him with such stuff as they had
done other before. Here would they gladly have planted a new colonie or
habitation, but that the governor would not permytte them, whereat they gruged
not a little. The houses and other edifyes of this prouynce, are builded like
unto towers. houses like towers.
It has also.xv. great towns in it. xv. great towns in the prou^nce of
Col^ua^ana.
Of these they affirm that they have seen sum consisting of more then.xx.
thousand houses, Towns of x^. thousand hou^es.
not joining together, but deseuered with courts and gardens. They have also
certain large market places encompased with waules, and streates well paued.
Likewise fornaces and ouens made of lyme and brick. Furthermore al sorts of
handy crafts men and very cunning artificers. This kings name was
Potanchanus: and the region is cauled Palmaria. The region of Palmaria.
The town where the king keeps his court, co^teineth.xv. thousand houses.
When they receive any straungiers and make a leage of frendshyppe with them,
they are accustomed with a knife made of a sharp stone, to let them selves
bludde in the toonge, A token of friendship.
hand, arm, or sum other part of the body: And this even in the sight of
them whom they admit to frendshyp, in token that they are ready to shed
their bludde in their fryndes causes. Their priests profess a virtuous life,
Priests.
and live unmarried. What it is to have to do with women, no man knows before
he be married. Fornication and adultery (which selde chance emonge the^) they
count abomination. The women are of marvelous chastity. Chastity.
Eurey noble man after that he have had one wife, may have as many concubines
as him lysteth. But a married woman taken in adultery, The puny^hement of
adultery.
is soulde of her husband. But this only to the prince: at whose hands it
shall be lawful for her kynsefolkes to redeem her. It is not lawful for such
as are not married, Marriage is honored.
to sytte at the same table with them that are married, or to eat of the same
dyshe or drink of the same cup. In the month of August and September, they
abstain.xxxv. days not only from flesh whereof they have great plenty,
Fasting.
but also from fyshe and al other things that live by bludde: And during
these days, live only with herbs and fruits. They reken twenty days to the
month, and twenty months to the year. Owre men consumed certain days
here very pleasauntly. When they departed, coastynge still by the same shore,
they came to an other king whom they named Ouandus. king Ouandus.
When he had intellygence that owre men desired gold, he brought forth
certain plates of molten gold. But when the governor signified unto him by
thinterpretors that he desired great plenty of that metal, the day following he
brought him a man's Image of gold being a cubette in length: Also a fan of
gold, Idols, jewels, and ouches of gold.
and an Idol of one of his domestical gods of curious woorkemanshyppe.
Likewise garlandes of stones of sundry colors, with many breast plattes,
brooches, and other kinds of ornaments, and all of gold. He gave him
furthermore abundance of delycate meats well salted and poudred with spices.
When he had required owre men to coome alande, he commanded his servants
with all speed to prepare a great multitude of branches of trees and to wait
upon owre men to his pallayce. As they went thus in order, sum behind and sum
before on both sides, they seemed so to shadow owre men with the bouwes as
though they had gonne in a continual arbor. The king him self having a
septer in his hand, did set them in their arraye, and sumtyme strike such as
were negligent in bearyng their bouwes. They showed them selves obedient in all
things, and with grave countenance, humbled them selves to receive his
stripes. When he was demanded where he had such plenty of gold, Gold in
mountains and ryuers
he pointed with his finger to the next mountains, and to the ryuers
descen^yng from the same. They are so accustomed to the rivers and exercised in
swymming, Their manner of gatheryng gold.
that it is al one to them to li^e in the water and on the land. When they
desire to gather gold, they plunge them selves in the ryuers and bring from
the bottom thereof, both their hands full of sand, which syftynge from
hand to hand, they gather owte the graynes of gold. And by this means in
the space of two hours, they fill a reed as bygge as a man's finger. Of the
sweet savors of these lands, Sweet savors.
many things might be spoken, the which because they make rather to
theffeminatynge of the minds of men, then for any necessary purpose, I have
thought best to omytte them. The king also gave the governor a young virgin
of twelve years of age, adourned with rich and fair iewelles. A stone of
great price.
Of the stones which he had of this king, one was valued at two thousand
Castellans of gold. Thus at the length they departed from this king, laden
with gold and precious stoones. Crisalua the governor, sent one of the
Carauelles to his uncle Diego Velasquen governor of the Island of Cuba, with
messengers to deliver him the gold, iewelles, and other ornaments. The
resydue in the mean time still followed the tracte toward the West. One of
them in the which Frauncis Montegius the under governor was carried, sailed
hard by the shore: and the other two kept aloof within prospecte of the
land. Thinhabitauntes of these coasts also, no less marueylynge at the
ships then did the other, came with twelve Canoas to Montegius, desyringe him
by thinterpretours to coome alande, promising in the name of their king, that
he should be honorably entertained. But Montegious answered that he could
not assente to their request because his coompanions were so far from him.
Yet did he give them certain of owre things strange unto them, and thanks
for their gentylnesse. Shortly after espyinge a great town they directed their
course thither. Thinhabitauntes prohibyted them to coome alande, and came
forth against them with bows and quyuers full of arrows, broad swoordes made
of heavy wood, and Iauelens hardened at the end with fire. They shot at owre
men a far of: And owre men discharged certain pieces of ordinance against
them. The Barbarians astonysshed at the noise of the gunnes, fled amayne, and
desired peace. Here owre men's vytayles began to fail them, and their ships
were broosed with long vyages. Having therefore found and done these
things whereof we have spoken, Crisalua returned to the Island of Fernandina
well contented, Other viages from Cuba or Fernandina.
but so were not his companions. We must now diuerte sumwhat from this
matter, and speak of an other navigations. And from thense will we return to
these lands which owre men have found. So it is therefore, that Diegus
Velasquen the governor of the Island of Fernandina, about the same time that he
had sent forth this navy of four Caraueles, he prepared an other navigations
of only one Carauell and one brygantine with forty and five men. These
exercised vyolent hands against thinhabitauntes of those regions where they
arrived, thinking that they might forceably draw them to the dyggynge of
gold because they were Caffranite Idolaters and circumcised.

There are at the sea side not far from the supposed continent, Many Iland^
between Cuba and the firm land.
many little Islands of most fortunate and fruitful soil, whereof three are
thus named: Guanapan, Guanguan, and Quitilla. Owte of one of these (which they
named Sancta Marina) they violentely carried away three hundredth men and women
which they thrust into the Carauell and returned immediately to Fernardina,
leaving the brigantine with.xxv. of their fellows to the intent to hunt for more
men. The haven where the Carauell first arrived, is cauled Carenas, being
distante from the angle of Cuba and the chief city of Sanctiago, Sanctiago
the chief city of Cuba.
two hundredth and fyftie miles. For this Island of Cuba, is very long,
reachyng in length from the East to the West, and situate directly under the
circle cauled Tropicus Cancri as we have said before. Now shall you hear how
fortune sought the revenge of these pore wretches. Therefore as their kepers
went aland and few remained in the Carauel, they perceuing occasion ministered
where by they might recover their liberty, soodeynely snatched up out men's
weapons and slew six of them which yet remained in the Carauel, while the
residue lepte into the sea. The Barba^ians sley the Spaniardes with their own
weapons.
And by this means the Barbarians possessed the Carauell which they had soon
learned to rule, and thus returned to their own countries. But they sailed
first to the next Island where they burnte the Carauel and carried away the
weapons with them. From hense they conveyed them selves to their own countries
with the Canoas of this Island. Hear in like manner they pryuilie assailed them
that were left with the brigantyne, and slew many of them also. The residue
that escaped, fled to the brigantine where they bewailed their fellows
deaths and counted their own escape a victory. On the shore not far from
the place where they suffered this misfortune, there is a tree, in the top
whereof they set up a cross, and graued this inscription in the bark of the
tree: Vannuis Aldarieci. There is a river named Darien, on the bank whereof
stands the chief city of the supposed continent. The chief city of the
supposed continent.
The governor therefore having intelligence hereof, sent with all speed two
ships of war well furnyshed, to the aid of them that were left. But they
were wise to late. Yet following the view of the cross, they came to the
shore and read the letters graven on the tree, but durst not attempt
fortune. Thus with all their hardy soldiers departinge from hense with
despair, they sailed to the next Island, out of the which they carried away by
violence five hundredth men and women, supposing likewise that they might
lawfully so do because they were Idolaters and circumcised. But the like
chance happened unto them when they landed at Fernandina. For the Barbarians
espyinge opportunity, set upon the Spaniardes in one of the ships with
their own weapons and slew their keepers. The Spanyardes are s^ayne again
with their own wepo^s.
The residue that escaped, casting them selves into the sea, swamme to the
next carauell, and with their fellows assailed the carauell that was taken
from them. This conflicte was so sharp, that for the space of four hours, it
was doubtful whether part should obtain the victory. The Barbarians both
men and women fought very fiercely, as well to recover their liberty, as also
to hold fast the pray which they had gotten. But in fine, the Spanyardes
had the upper hand by reason they were more expert in handelynge of their
weapons and rulyng of their Carauell. The Barbarians being thus ouercoome, The
barbarians are slain and pu^ to flight.
lepte into the sea: but the Spanyardes took them again with the ship
boats. About a hundredth of the Barbarians peryshed, being partly drowned and
partly slain with the swoorde: And but few of the Spanyardes. These things
thus pacified, the resydue of the Barbarians were carried to the town of
Sanctiago and condemned to labor in the gold mines. Shortly after they made
owte a new vyage to an other of the Islands, An other vyage.
which lie there about so thick, that they commonly caul the number of them
Archipelagus, Archipelagus.
as they in owre sea of Ionicum are cauled Symplegades. A multitude of Islands.
Here owre men were cruelly handeled: and as many of them as came alande either
slain or wounded. This Island they named Florida, because they arrived there
on Easter day which the Spanyardes caul the floryshynge day of the
resurrection. They say also that in this tracte they saw.xxvi. Islands which
Colonus had ouerpassed: xxvi. Islands about hispaniola and Cuba.
And the same so to lie about Hispaniola and Cuba, as though they warded them
from the fury of the Ocean. In many of these they found native gold of like
goodness to that which is found in Granatum. Thinhabitantes also wear many
jewels, and have many Images of their domestical gods made both of gold
artificially wrought and also of woodde gylted. Images of gold.
Francis Cheregatus browght one of their Idols with him, whereby may be
considered of what wit and aptenes they are. It is a marvelous thing to see
what manner of rasers they have, Rasers of stone.
made of certain yelowe stones clear and transparent like unto Crystal. With
these they shave and carue as though they were made of fine steel. When the
edges are blunte with long exercise, they sharpen them not with a whetstone,
or powder, or any other stone, but temper them only with water. They have also
a thousand kinds of instruments or tools and such other things of fine
devise, Instruments and tools.
which were to long to rehearse. Let us therefore return from whense we have
digressed, as to Cozumella, Iucatana, Colluacana or Olloa, being al lands
lately found, and so rich fruteful and pleasant, that they may in manner be
compared to the earthly Paradyse. Lands like unto the earthly Paradyse.
Therefore, after that it was known to owre men of how great momente these
trattes were, the Spanyardes which inhabited the Island of Cuba Anunctus being
the governor of the Island furnyshed a new navy of ten Carauelles and five
hundredth men, An other vyage of.x. Carauels and a. hundredth me^.
with two smaule brigantines, as it wear in the stead of light horsemen or
forerunners whose aid they might use as scoutes to search the ways for
danger of rocks and shalow sands or shelfes. They shipte also certain
horses, horses and mares.
as five stoned horses and.xvi. mares apt for the wars. For their general
governor and Admiral of the navy, they elected Fernando Cortesius who at that
time was the chief ruler of the city of Sanctiago. Fernando Cortesius.
For under capitaines, they appointed Alfons Portucarerius, Francis Montegius,
Alfons Auila, Aluerado Spatense John Velasquen, and Diegus Ordassus. They still
followed the same wind from the last angle of Cuba toward the west. As soon as
Frauncis Fernandes of Corduba, and then John Grisalua came within prospecte of
the Island of Sacrifyces (whereof we have made mention before) soodenly a
tempest of contrary wind prohibited them to take land and drowe them
backewarde to Cozumella lyinge on the East side of Iucatana. The Island of
Cozumella.
This Island has only one haven named saint John's port. And has in it,
only six towns. Also none other water then in wells and cesterns, because
it lacks rivers and springes by reason it is plain, containing only.xlv.
miles in circuit. At the coommynge of owre men, thinhabitauntes fled to the
thick woods, and forsook their towns for fear. Owre men entered into their
houses where they found plenty of vyttayles and many ornaments perteynynge
to the furnyshynge of their houses, as hanginges and carpettes of diverse
colors, sheets also of gossampine cotton (which they caul Amaccas) and
much apparel. Carpets and sheets.
They have furthermore innumerable books, Innumerable books.
of the which with many other things sent to owre new Emperor, we will
speak more largely hereafter. The soldiers wandered about the Island and view
althynges diligently, keeping them selves still in battle raye least they might
be suddenly invaded. They found but a few of thinhabitauntes and only one
woman in their coompanie. By thinterpretours of Cuba and other which the
Spaniardes took first from Iucatana, they persuaded the woman to caul the
kings that were absente. They came gladly and made a leage of frendshyp with
owre men, whereby they were restored to their houses and a great part of their
stuff. They are circumcised Idolatours, Circumcised Idolaters.
and sacrifyce children of both kinds to their Zemes, which are the Images of
their familiar and domestical spirits which they honor as gods. When I
enquired of Alaminus the pilote, also of Frances Montegius and Portucarerius,
from whense they had the children they offered in sacrifyce, They Sacrifice
Children
they answered that they bowght them in the Islands theraboute by exchange for
gold and other of their trafycke. For in all this so large a space of land, the
deuelyshe anxietie for the desire of wicked money, has not yet oppressed
thinhabitantes. They say the same also of the Islands lately found, whereof
two are named Destam and Sestam, The Islands of Dis^am and Sestam.
whose inhabitauntes go naked: and for scarenesse of children, sacrifice dogs
which they nourishe as well for that purpose as also to eat as we do connies.
These dogs are dumme and can not bark, Sacrifice of dogs.
having snowtes like unto foxes. Such as they destinate to eat, they geld
while they are whelps, whereby they wax very fat in the space of four
months. They reserve all the bytches for increase, and but few dogs. Owre
men dissuaded them from these superstitions, declarynge how they were
abominable and detested of god. They were soon persuaded and desired a law
which they might follow. They are soon persuaded to owre religion.
Owre men therefore declared unto them that there was only one god which made
heaven and earth, the geuer of al good things, being of one incomprehensyble
substance under triplicitie of person. As soon as they hard these words,
they broke their Zemes, and pared, scraped, and washed the pauementes and
waules of their temples. Owre men gave them a painted picture of the blessed
vyrgine which they placed reverently in their temple, The picture of the
blessed virgin
and above it a cross to be honored in the remembrance of god and man and the
salvation of mankind. They erected also an other great cross of wod in the
top of the temple, why^her they oftentimes resort together to honor the
Image of the vyrgine. Thinhabitantes signified by thinterpretours that in the
Island of Iucatana not far from them, there were seven Christians captives which
in time past were driven thither by tempeste. The Island of Cozumella, is only
five miles distant from Iucatana. The governor Cort^si^s being advertised
hereof, An other vyage
furnyshed ii. Carauels with fyftie me^, wyllyng the^ incontinent to direct
their viage thither and to make search for these me^. They took with the^ three
interpretours of Cozumella (whose language agrees with theirs with let^ers to
the Christians if any might be found. He further declared unto them how
goodly a matter they should bring to pass if they could bring away any of
them. For he no ways doubted but that by their information, he should be fully
certified of the commodities of all those tractes, and the manners of
thinhabitauntes. Thus they departed with commandment to return within the
space of six days. But when they had remained there now.viii. days, and hard
no word of their Cozumellane interpretours whom they had sent alande with
the message and letters, owre men returned to Cozumella without them,
suspectyng that they were other slain or deteyned. And where as the hole nauye
was now determined to depart from Cozumella but that they were hyndered by
contrary wind, they suddenly espied toward the weste a Canoa coommynge from
Iucatana, and in it, one of the Christian captives (named Hieronimus
Aquillaris) who had lived seven years in that Island. Aquillaris.vii. years
captive in the Island of Iucatana.
With what joy they embrased the one the other, the chance may declare. They
were no less desirous to hear, then he to tell of the mysfortune wh^che
befell to him and his coompanions. And here it shall not be greatly from my
purpose breefely to rehearse how the thing chanced. In my Decades I have made
mention of a certain noble man named Valdiuia, Valdiuia.
whom the Spanyardes which inhabited Dariena in the supposed continente of
the goulf of Vraba, sent to the Island of Hispaniola to Colonus the Admiral and
viceroy with the residue of the Senate and counsel there (to whom perteyneth
the redress and ordering of all things in these new lands) to sygnifye
unto them in what extreme necessity and penury they lived. Unhappy Valdiuia
therefore, The shipwreck of Ualdiuis.
taking this matter in hand in an evil hour, was with a sudden and vyolent
whirlewinde, driven upon certain quickesandes in the prospecte of the Island
of Iamaica, lyinge on the South side of Hispaniola and Cuba. These blind and
swalowyng sands, the Spaniardes caul vypers: The quick sands cauled vypers.
And that by good reason, because in them many ships are entangled, as the
lycertes are implycate in the tails of the vipers. While the Carauell thus
wresteled with the water, it was so bruste in sunder, that Valdiuia with
thirty of his fellows, could scarsely with much difficulty descend into
the ship boat: where, without ^ers, and without sails, they were carried
away by the vyolence of the water. For (as we have said before in owre
Decades) the seas do run there continually with a vyolent course toward the
West. The course of the sea toward the west.
They wandered thus.xiii. days not knowing whyther they went nor yet finding
any thing to eat. Famen consumed seven of them which were cast in the sea to
feed the fyshes. The resydue likewise in manner consumed by famen and faulynge
from one calamity into an other, were driven to Iucatana and fell into the
hands of a cruel king who slew Valdiuia the governor with certain of his
fellows. Ualdiuia is sacrificed to Idols.
And when he had first sacrifyced them to his Zemes, shortly after he eat
them with his frindes of that conspiracy. For they eat only their enemies
and straungiers: And do otherwise absteyne from man's flesh. In this mean
time, while Hieronimus Aqullraris with six of his fellows were reserved to be
sacrifyced the third day, how Aquillaris escaped
they brook their bands, escaped the hands of that cruel tyranne, and
fled to an other king being his enemy, who received them, yet only as
bondemen. It is a strange thing to hear of the moother of this Aquillaris.
For as soon as she hard that her soonne was faulen into the hands of the
nations that eat man's flesh, she fell mad incontinent: So that when so
ever after, she saw any meat rostyng at the fire, or only ready spytted to
lay to the fire, she ceased not to cry out in this manner. O me most
wretched moother: Behold the members of my son. But to return to owre purpose.
When Aquillaris had now received the governors letter sent by the Cozumellane
messengers, he declared to the king his master (whose name was Taxmarus)
what was their erraunt thither, king Taxmarus.
and wherefore they were sent: vsyng in the mean time many large discourses in
expressing the great pour and magnifycence of their king who had of late
arrived in those coasts. Also of their humanity and gentilnesse toward their
frindes and such as submytted them selves to them, and again their rygour and
fierceness against such as stoobernly either contemned them or denied their
requests. With these words he brought Taxmarus into such fear, that the
master was now feign to desire his servant so to handell the matter that they
might quyetly enter into his dominion as his friends and not as his enemies.
Aquillaris promised in their behalf that they should not only coome in peace,
but also to aid him against his enemies if need should so require. Whervppon
he dismissed Aquillaris and with him three of his fam^liers and coompanions.
Thus they sailed together from Cozumella to Iueatana to the river which they
had found before in the first vyage thither by the governance of Alaminus the
pilot. They found the mouth of the river stopped with sand, The mouth of a
river sto^ped with sand.
as we read of the river of Nilus in Egipte when the wyndes (cauled Etesu^)
blow in summer and especially in the canicular days. Therefore where as they
could not enter into the^ river with the biggeste vessels (although it be
otherwise apt to receive great ships) the governor caused two hundredth men
to be set alande with the brigantynes and ship boats: willing Aquillaris
to offer peace to thinhabitauntes. They demanded what owre men required.
Aquillaris answered, vyttayles. There was a long space of sand by the side of
the town, whither they wylled them to resort, promising to bring them
vyttayles thither the day following. Turkey hens.
Owre men went and they came according to their promise and brought with
them eight of their hens being as bygge as peacockes, of brownyshe color,
and not inferior to peacockes in pleasant taste. They brought also as much
bread made of Maizium (which is a grain not much unlike unto panyke) as
would scarcely serve ten hungry men: And here with desired them to depart.
But when they perceived that owre men made no have away, immediately there came
a great coompanye of armed men toward them demaundyng what they had to do
thus to wander in other men's lands. Owr men made answer by Aquillaris, that
they desired peace, vyttayles, and gold for exchange of other things. They
answered again, that they would another peace nor war with them. But
threatened them to avoid the land except they woolde be distroyed every
manne. Owre men said that they would not depart withowte suffyciente
vyttayles to maintain their souldyers.

They appointed the day following to bring them more vytayles: but they brook
promise. Yet perceauing the second day that owre men were encamped on the
sand and had reposed there that night, they brought them as much more
vytayles, and commanded them in the name of their king to depart. Owre men
said that they were desirous to see the town, and to have yet more store of
vytayles. The Barbarians denied their request, and therewith departed
whisperynge and mutterynge among them selves. In the mean time owre men were
still so oppressed with hunger that they were enforced to seek for meat. The
gouernoure therefore sent his under capitaynes to land with a hundredth and
fyftie men. A confl^cte.
As they went dispersed in diverse companyes about the vyllages of the country,
the Barbarians met with one of their bands, and put them to great distress.
But when their fellows being not far from them, hard the noise of their
alarome, they came with all possible haste to their rescue. The governor on
the other side, placinge his ordinance in the brygantines and ship boats,
approached to the shore with the residue of his soldiers. The Barbarians
likewise, being ready furnyshed to the battle, came runnynge to the sea side
to disturb them that they should not coome alande: And with their arrows,
wounded many a far of unprepared. The gouernoure discharged about.xx.
pieces of ordinance ageynste them: The Barbarians are put to flight.
With the slaughter and terrible thunder whereof, and with the flame of fire and
smell of brimstone, they were so astonished and put to such fear, that they
fled and disparcled like wild beasts: whom owre men persuinge, entered into
the town which thinhabitantes forfooke in manner for fear of their own men
whom they saw so dismayde. On the bank of this river there is a town of such
portentous byggenes as I dare not speak. The great town of Postanchana or
Uictoria.
But Alaminus the pylot, says that it conteyneth in circuit five hundredth
miles, and that it consists of.xxv. thousand houses. A town of xxv.
thou^a^d houses.
Sum make it sumwhat less: But they all agree that it is exceadynge great and
notable. The houses are divided with gardens, and are builded of lyme and stone
very artificially and of cunning woorkemanshippe. To their haules, chambers,
parlers, or other places of habitation, they ascend by ten or twelve
steares: And have certain spaces between every house: so that it is not lawful
for any to lade his neighbors waules with rafters or beams. Their houses are
sep^rate one from an other by the space of three houses: And are for the more
part covered with reed and thetche: And many also with slate or other stone.
The barbarians them selves confessed that they were that day forty thousand
men at the battle, which were vanquished of a few by reason of the new and
unknown kind of feyght with gunnes and horses. Gunnes and horses.
For the governor had vnbarked.xvi. horses which were also at the battle,
and so fiercely assailed the Barbarians on the backehalfe, that they brake
their array and scattered them as it had been flocks of sheep, overthrowing,
woundynge, and killing them on every side. Which thing the seely wretches so
imputed to a miracle, that they had not the pour to occupy their wepons. For
whereas before they had never seen any horses, they thought that the man on
horseback and the horse, had been all one beast, The man and the horse.
thought to be one beast.
as the antiquity did fable of the monster Centaurus. Centaurus.
Owr men possessed the town.xxii. days where they made good chere under
covert, while the owners of the houses lay under the firmament and durst not
assail owre men who had placed them selves in the strongest part of the
town, where sum kept continual watch (least the Barbarians should soodenly
invade them) while other gave them selves to rest and sleep. Thinhabitantes
caul this town Potanchana: But owre men for the victory which they obtained
here, named it Victoria. It is a marvelous thing to consider the greatenes,
magnifi^ence and finenes of the buyldinge of certain palaices they have in the
country to the which they resort sumtymes for their solace and pastyme.
^alaices of marvelous bygnes and ^el builded.
These are curiously builded with many pleasant diuises, as galeries, solars,
t^rrettes, portals, gutters with chambers boorded after the manner of owre
waynscotte and well flowred. Four of owr Spanyardes went into one of them of
such greatness, that they wandered in the same for the space of four hours
before they could find the way out. At the length by thinterpretours and
certain captives owre men sent for the king and such rulers as were next
under him in authority, wyllyng them to submyt them selves and to coome into
the town unarmed. Gyuinge the messengers further in commandment to certify
them that in their so doing, they would commen with them as concerning
conditions of peace, and restore them their town. They came gladly, and
entered every man into his own house upon condition that they should ever
thereafter absteyne from such ceremonies and horrible sacrifices of man's flesh
to devils the mortal enemies to mankind, whose Images they honored. And to
direct the eyes of their minds to Christ owre god the maker of heaven and
earth, They receue owre religion.
who was borne into this world of a virgin, and suffered death on the cross
for the redemption of mankind. And finally to profess them selves subjects
to the great Christian king of Spain. They promised both, and were instructed
as far as the shortenes of time would permit. Being thus restored, they
recompensed owre men with many rewards: Supposing such men to be sent from
heaven, which being so few in number, durst attempt battle against so great
a multitude. They gave owre men also certain gold and twenty slaves.
Departing therefore from hense, and coastynge still alonge by the same shore,
they came again to the goulfe which Alaminus the pylot found before under
Grisalua. This they named Bian Sancti Iohannis, that is, Saint John's goulfe:
For Bian in the Spanyshe tongue signifies a goulfe. Here thinhabitantes
resorted to them peaceably. About a mile from the shore, was a town of a
thousand and five hundredth houses situate upon a hill. A town of a thousand
and five hundred houses,
They proffered owre men half the town if they would dwell with them for ever.
This perhaps they did the rather either fearing thexemple of thinhabitantes of
Potan^hana, the fame whereof might have coome to their ears, or else hoping
that under the shadow of such valiant men, they might obtain aid and
succor against their enemies and bortherers. For (as I have said before) they
dystroye one an other with continual war for the desire to enlarge their
dominions. Owre men refused perpetual habitacion, and accepted their frendely
profer for a time. As they came alande, the people followed them on every side
with bouwes in their hands which they held over owre men's heads to defend
them from the rain as though they had walked in a continual arbor. Here they
encamped. And least the residue left in the ships, should in the mean time
wax slothefull with Idleness, the governor gave commandment to Alaminus the
pylot and Francis Montegius to search the west parts of that land, while he
relieved the weried soldiers and healed such as were wounded. To them that
went forward on this vyage, he assigned two brigantines with fifty men. An
other v^age of two brygantines and fifty men.
Unto this goulfe, the course of the water was gentyl enough and moderate.
where the sea runs swyftly from the East to the West.
But when they had sailed a little further toward the Weste, they found the
sea runnynge with so swift a course as if it were a great river faulynge from
the tops of high mountains: In so much that in a short space of time it
carried them fifty miles from their fellows. When they were now entered into
this violent stream of the water, A conflict between the waters coming from
the west and from the south.
they saw on their left hand a large plain sea which met with the course of
the other waters faulynge from the weste. And like as two great ryuers that
run contrary ways, make a vehement conflycte where they meet, so seemed the
waters coming from the Southe to resyst these waters as enemies that had
entered into the right or possessyon of an other. On the contrary part, they
saw the land reachynge far both on the left hand and on the right. In
this strife between the waters, they were so tossed on both sides and
entangled with whirlepooles, A dangerous and peinefull vyage.
that they long wrestled with owte hope of life. At the length with much
difficulty, turnynge the stemmes or forpartes of their ships against the
stream from whense they came, and labourynge all that they might with their
oers and sails, they could scarsely ouercoome the rage of the water: In so
much that where as they thought that they had in one night sailed two miles,
they found that they were driven back four miles. Yet at the length with
gods help, they overcame this daungerours conflycte. They spente.xxii. days
in this little space of sea: And when they were now returned to their fellows,
declared unto them that that end was the land of Colluacana which they
adjudged to be part of the supposed continent. The land of Colluacana.
The land which they saw a far of before their fase, they suppose either
to be annexed to owre continent, or to be joined to the large North regions
cauled Baccalaos, The land of Baccaleos or Baccal^arum
whereof we have made mention in owr Decades in the vyage of Sebastian Cabote.
This matter is yet doubtefull. But we trust it shall once be better known.
While Alaminus and Montegius searched these secreates, the king of the
province (whose name was Multoxumam) sent owre men by one of his chief
officers (being also his Lieuetenaunt of the said town) many rich and
goodly presents of gold, silver, and precious stoones, Rych presen^es of
gold and precious sle^es.
set and wroughte after a marvelous strange deuyse and with no less
cunning woorkemanshyp. Here they determined to send messengiers to owre new
Emperor to know his pleasure that they might in this province plan^ a new
colonie or habitation. And this did they withowte thaduise of Diegus Velasquen
the governor of the Island of Cuba or Fernandina, who first sent them forth
with commandment to return again after they had searched these regions and
obtained plenty of gold. While they consulted hereof, they were of diverse
opinions. But the most part alleged that in this case it was not requisyte to
make the governor of their counsel. Forasmuch as the matter should be
referred to a higher Judge, as to the king of Spain him self. When they were
thus agreed, they received vyttayles of the gentle king of the province, and
assigned the place of their colonie twelve miles from the said town, in a
fruteful and wholesome soil. A new colonie.
For their general governor, they elected Cortesius the governor of the
nauye, against his will as sum say. For other magistrates to govern the city
which they intended to build he choose Portu^arerius and Montegius of whom we
have made mention before. This Cortesius has written a book of these things
They chose also certain messengiers to send to the king by the conduction of
Alaminus the pylot. Furthermore, four of the princes of this province offered
the^ selves wyllyngly to go with owre men into Spain to the intent to see owre
lands and that king whose pour is so great and whose authority reaches so
far. They brought likewise two women with them, which served and obeyed the^
in all things after the manner of their country. The people of this nation is
of broune or yelowyshe color. Both the men and the women have pendauntes of
gold and precious stones hanginge at their ears. The men also, boore their
nether lyppes full of holes from the vppermoste part of the lyppe even unto
the nethermoste part of the gum. They wear rings and plates at there lyppes.
At these they hang certain rings and plates of gold and silver fastened to
a smaule and thynne plate lyinge within between the lip and the gum. At the
byggest hole in the myddest of the lip, there hangs a round plate of silver
as broad as the coin cauled a Corolyne, and as thick as a man's finger. I do
not remember that ever I saw any thing that seemed more fylthy in mine eye.
The diverse fantasies of men.
Yet do they think that there is nothing more cumly under the circle of the
moon. Whereby we may see how vainly mankind wandereth in his own
blyndnesse. The Ethiopian thincketh the black color to be fayrer then the
white: And the white man thinks otherwise. They that are pouled, think that
more decent then to wear a bush and they that wear beardes, judge it a
deformity to be shaven. As appetite therefore moves, and not as reason
persuades, men run after vanities: And every prouynce is rul^d by their
ownesense, as writes saint Jerome. From whense they have their gold, we have
spoken sufficiently before. But as owre men marueyled where they had their
silver, Silver.
they showed them certain high mountains which are continually covered with
snow saving that at certain ^ymes of the year, the only tops are seen
hate because the snow is there molten by reason of the thick and warm
^loudes. The playnes therefore, or mylde, soft, and pleasant mountains seem
to bring forth gold: And the rough craggye mountains with their could
valleys, are the places wh^re silver is engendered. Note where go^d and sylue^
are enge^dered.
They have also laton, whereof they make such maces and hammers as are used in
the wars. I think this l^ton to ^e sum ky^de of pure copper* or else copper
that holde^h gold. For laton is an artificial me^a^, and has no natu^all mine
Their books
Dyggynge mattockes also, and spades: for they have another Iren nor steel. But
let us now speak of the presents sent into Spain to the king: and first
of the books. These procuratours therefore of the new colonie of the prouynce
of Colluacana, among other their presents, brought also a great number of
books, the leaves whereof are made of the inner ryndes or barks of trees,
thinner then either that of the elm or of the salowe. These they smere or
anoint with the pytche of molten Bitumen, and while they be soft, extend them
to what form them lysteth. When they be could and hard, they rub them over
with a certain plaster. It is to be thought that they beat the plaster
into fine flower, and so temperynge it with sum byndynge moister, to make a
cruste therewith upon the leaves, whereon they write with any sharp instrument,
and blotte the same again with a ^punge or sum such other thing, as
merchant men and noble men's stewardes are accustomed to do with their writing
tables made of the woodde of fygge trees. The leaves of their books are not set
in order after the manner of owres, but are extended many cubettes in length.
The matters which they write, are contained in square table: Not loose, but so
bound together with the toughe and flexible cley cauled Bitumen, that they
seem like wooden tables which had been under the hands of cunnyng
bokebynders. Which way so ever the book lies open, there are two leaves seen
and two sides written, with as many lyinge hyd under them, ex^epte the book be
unfolded in length. For under one leaf there are many leaves joined together.
The forms of their letters are nothing like unto owres. Their letters
But are much more crooked and entangeled, like unto fyshehookes, knottes,
snares, stars, dise, fyles, and such other much like unto the Egiptian
letters, and written in lines like unto owres. Here and there between the
lines, are pictured the shapes of men and diverse beasts: And especially the
Images of kings and other noble men. what is contained in their books.
Whereby it is to be thought tha^ in such books, the factes of their kings
are conceived, as we see the like emonge us how owre printers express the
sum of histories in pictures, that men may thereby be the more allured to bye
such books. The couerynges of their books are also artifycially wrought and
painted. When they are shut, they seem to differ nothing from owres in
form. In these books are furthermore comprehended their laws, rytes of
ceremonies and sacrifyces, annotations of Astronomy, accomptes, computations
of times, with the manner of graffynge, sowyng, and other things perteinyng to
husbandry. They begin the year from the going down of the seven stars
cauled Vergiliae or Pleiades: And count their months according to the
moons. They name a month, Tona, of the moon. For in their language, they
caul the moon Tona, they reken the days by the soonnes. Therefore as many
days as they name, they say, so many soonnes. The soonne in their tongue, is
cauled Tonati^o. They destribute the year (without any reason why) into
twenty months: And the month into as many days. The temples which they
frequent, Temple^ rychly adourned.
they adourne with golden hangynges and other ornaments of gold and silver
with precious stones intermixte. At the spring of the day, Prayer.
they perfume their temples with frankensence and make their prayers before
they take in hand any other business. But oh horrible cruelty. For
thinhabitauntes of all these tractes also, do sacrifyce children to their
Idols in like manner as we have said before. They sacryfice children and
captyues.
At such time as the seeds lie in the ground, and when the corn begins to
show forth the ear, they destinate to their Zemes such bondmen as they have
bought, or such captives as they have taken in the wars, which they
sacrifyce after that they have made them great chiere and decked them in
precious apparel. Also before they sacrifyce these poor wretches, A wrong
way to heaven
they lead them about the town while all the people salute them humbly and
reverently, affyrmyng that in short space, they shall be received into the
coompanye of the gods. They honor their Zemes with an other sharp kind of
devotion: For they let them selves bludde, either in the tongue, Bluddy gods
lyps, ears legs, thyghes, or breast, which they take in their hands and
hurl it up toward heaven, so that with the faule thereof the pauement of
the temple is all s^arcled with bludde, whereby they think that their gods
are well pleased. From the new colonie (cauled Villa Ricca) nine miles
distante, Villa Ricca.
there is a town of.xv. thousand houses, which thinhabitauntes caul
Cemobal, but owre men named it Sybilla. Siuilla Noua.
The king of this town had five men which he reserved to be sacrifyced. Whom
when owre men would have delivered, the king made humble request to them,
saying that if they took away such men as he had consecrated to be offered
to the gods, they should bring utter destruction to him and all his
kingdom. The force of an owlde error.
For if owre sacrifyces (said he) do cease, owre Zemes will take such
displeasure with us that they will suffer owre corn, graffes, and fruits, to
be consumed of woormes, scortched with drowth, destroyed with fluddes, or
blasted with lyghtnynge. Owre men perceiving his ernestnesse herein, thought
it best to chose the least euel, perceiving that it was yet no time to
disquyes their minds, and therefore suffered them to exercise their accustomed
ceremonies. And although their priests promysse them immortal glory,
eternal felicytie, and perpetual conversation with the gods after the
stormye days of this life, Their priests live chaste.
yet do they with heavy countenaunces give ear to their promises, and had
rather be set at liberty. Their priests are named Quines in the plurell
number, and Quin in the syngular. They lead a pure and chaste life: And are
honored of the people with fear and reverence. They make fagots of the bones
of their enemies which they have taken in the wars, Faggots of bones.
and hang up the same at the feet of their Zemes, as tokens of the
victories obtained by their favor. To these they add certain titles and
superscriptions as testimonies of the same. This is strange and worthy to be
noted, that when their children are a year oulde, the priests in their
temples with devout ceremonies and murmuring words, pour water in form of
a cross upon their heads with a cruet, whereby they seem to baptize them. A
figure of baptism.
Neither do they as the Jews and Turks, think their temples polluted if any
of a strange relygion be present at their sacrifyces and other solemnities.
We have now spoken suffycientely of their books, temples, and superstitions.
Let us now therefore coome to the other presents which were brought to the
king. The presents sent into Spain to the king.
Emonge these, there were two brood and round plates (which sum have
named the Images of the soonne and moon) the one of silver and the other of
gold in largeness and roundnesse much like to the stones of hand mylles: Two
Images of gold and silver.
yet but thynne, and in manner both of one circumference, that is xxviii.
spannes in circuit.

That of gold is of the weight of three thousand and.viii. hundredth
Castellans, where as we have said before that a Castellane is a coin of
gold which weyeth more then a Ducate by a trient, that is the third part of
a pound. In the center of this, was the Image of a king of half a cubette
long, syttinge in a trone and appareled to the knee, like unto a maumette,
with such countenance as owre paynters are wont to paynte fayries or sprites.
About the Image, were the ^hapes of trees and flowers, so that it seemed to
sytte as though it had been in a field. The other of silver, was made to the
same similitude, being also in manner of the same weight, and both of pure
metal. They brought likewise certain graynes of rude gold (that is, such as
was never molten) about the byggenes of fytches or the pulse cauled lintels in
token of plenty of native gold. Also two cheynes of gold, Two cheine^ of
gold maruelou^ly byset with precious stones and jewels.
whereof the one contained.viii. lynkes in the which were set two hundredth
threescore and two fair and clear read stones, and yet no rubyes:
furthermore, a hundrethe fourscore and three green stones, and yet no
emerodes. Nevertheless, these are in like estimation with them as the other
are with us. At the edge of this cheine, there hang.xxvii golden belles,
having between every of them, four jewels of precious stones enclosed in
gold, at every of the which in like manner hang certain spangels of gold.
The other cheyne consists only of four golden lynkes, beset round about
with a hundredth and two read stones, and a hundredth threescore and twelve
green stones, with.xxvi. golden belles curiously wrought and placed in comely
order. In the very^ myddest of the cheyne, are ten great precious stones
enclosed in gold, at the which also hang a hundrethe golden pendauntes of
cunning woorkemanshippe. Buskyns.
They brought furthermore twelve pair of lether huskynnes of diverse colors,
sum imbrothered with gold and sum with silver, with plates and iewelles of
gold and precious stones enclosed, and at every of them certain golden
belles. Also certain myters besette with precious stoones of diverse colors,
Myters.
emonge the which sum are blewe like unto saphires. Of crestes, gerdles, and
fannes made of feathers, I wotte not what I should say. how can we then ca^l
the^ beastly or Barbarous.
But suerly if ever the wits and inventions of men have deserved honor or
co^mendacion in such^ arts, these seem most worthy to be had in
admiracion. I do not marvel at gold and precious stones. But am in manner
astony^hed to see the woorkemanshyppe excel the substance. For I have with
woonderynge eyes beheld a thousand forms and similitudes, of the which I am
not able to write. If they had changed their gold for owre Ire^, they had not
so soon been subdued. Quylles.
And in my judgment, I never saw any thing whose beauty might so allure the
eyes of men. As they marueyled at the natural beauty of the feathers of owre
peacockes and pheasantes, so did we no less marvel at the artifycial beauty of
such things as they make of fe^hers and quilles impaled with gold. For I
saw in many of their works, all manner of native colors even in the quilles
whereof they make such instruments. They brought also two helmettes garnysshed
with precious stones of a whiteshe blewe color. ^elmets.
One of these is edged with belles and plates of gold, and under every bell
two knobbes of gold. The other, beside the stones wherewith it is covered, ^
bird.
is likewise edged with.xxv. golden belles and knobbes: and has on the crest,
a green bird with the feet, bylle, and eyes, of gold. Also four spears
much like unto troute spears or yele spears, Spears.
the woodde whereof is all covered with quilles of diverse colors marueilously
wrethed with golden wyers and plates intermyxte. Every of these spears have
three pikes, whose edges or teeth are all of precious stones made fast with
wyers of gold. Of like workmanship they brought a great scepter byset with
precious stoones and belles of gold, A sce^ter.
also a braslet of gold, A braselet.
and shows made of a hearts skin, Shoes.
sowed bimbrothered with golden wyers, with a white sole beneth. Furthermore a
glass of a bright blewe stone, Glasses.
and an other of white, both enclosed in gold. Likewise a precious stone of
the kind of them that are cauled Sphinges, enclosed in gold. Furthermore the
head of a great lysarde, two great shelles, two duckes, the shapes of diverse
other birds, fowls, and fysshes, and all of massy gold. Birds. fowls, and
fysshes of gold.
Furthermore.xxiiii. round and souare targettes, Targets. etc. of gold.
shieldes, and buckelers of gold, and five of ^yluer. Also a triple crown of
plates and wyers of gold marueyleuslye wreathed with quilles and feathers of
diverse colors, A crown of gold.
having on the front a plate of gold on the which is graven the Image of the
Idol Zemes. About this Image, hang four other plates like crosses of gold in
the which are graven the heads of diverse beasts, Crosses.
as lions, tigers, woulues, and such other. They brought also the symilitudes
of certain beasts made sum of rods or twigs, and sum of woodde with the
beasts own skynnes thereon, Images of baest^s.
and garnysshed with collers of laton belles. Likewise diverse shietes weaued of
gossampyne cotton of sundry colors, Shi^tes.
whereof two are rychely frynged with gold and precious stones, and three other
with euilles and feathers intermyxte with gossampine cotton of sundry colors
and chekered like the panes of a cheste board. Sum are on the one side, of
black, white, and read colors: and on the other side, plain without any
variety. Other sum, are wrought in like manner with variable colors wi^h a
wheel or circle of black in the myddest intermyxt^ with shyning feathers and
sparks of gold like stars. They brought also cloth of Aras or Uerdure of
marvelous wo^kmanshyppe. Cloth of arras.
Lekewise a soldiers cl^ke such as their prync^s wear in the wars, A
souldyers cl^cke.
with certain priuye coats of sense, and sundry tirementes perteynyng to
their heads, with also many such other things more bewtifull to the eye then
rich or precious, whereof to entreat particularly, it should be more tedious
then profitable. I let pass here also to speak of many particular
nauigations and of the traua^les and dangers which they sustained in the
sam^, with the monsters and secreates of nature they saw: ^hiche are all
contained in the regesters of owre Se^^te of th^ffayres of India, Reg^stere of
thaff^yres of India.
owte of the which I have select^d the^e fe^^ a^^^tations, such as seemed to
me most meet to be ^u^lis^^^d. Notwithstanding these rich and goodly
presents, yet were they that brought them, and also Cortesius the governor of
the nauye and autour of erectinge their new colonie in those remote regions,
Tha^toritie of the Lieuetenaunt.
adjudged by the Senate to have done against right and equity, in that they
attempted the same withowte thaduice of the governor of the Island of Cuba who
sent them forth by the kings authority, where as they did other things
beside their commyssyon, ye although they went to the king, not first
knowing his pleasure whom the king had substitute his Lieuetenaunt in that
Island. In so much that by his procuratour, he accused them before the Senate
as fugitive thieves and traitors. They on the other part alleged that they
had dooen the king better service then he: And that they had showed suffycient
obedience in appealyng to the king as the higher Judge. But the governor
required by the virtue of his commission and the kings letters pattentes that
they might be headed for their disobedience against him whom they knew to be
autorised by the king. They ageine replied that they had not offended the
king, but rather deserved reward for their great dangiers and travails. Both
the reward and punishment were deferred, and a day appointed when both
parties should be hard. Leete us now therefore coome to the Spaniardes of
Dariena, The Spanyardes of Dariena.
thinhabitours of the goulfe of Vraba in the supposed Continent. We have said
before that Dariena is a river runnynge toward the Weste side of the goulfe of
Vraba. On the bank of this river, the Spaniardes planted their first colonie
or habitation after they had vanquisshed king Chemaccus. This colonie they
named Sancta Maria Antiqua, Sancta Maria Antiqua.
by reason of a vow which they made to the virgin Marie in the time of the
battle against Chemaccus. To these (as we have mad^ mention in the end of
owre decades) was Petrus Arias sent with a thousand and two hundredth men at
the request of Vaschus Nunnez Balboa, Petrus Arias whom the Spanyardes name
Pedia^ias.
who was then the governor of Dariena, and the first that found and discovered
the large South sea heretofore unknown. This sea the spanyardes ^aule ^ardel
(...).
We have also declared how at the arriual of Petrus Arias the new governor,
he divided his army into Centurions, that is, capitaines over hundrethes, whom
he sent forth diverse ways. What tragedies followed hereof, I will absolve in
few words, because all are horrible and unpleasant. For sense we fynyshed
owre Decades, Contention between Uaschus and Petrus Arias.
there has been none other then killing, sleyinge, murtherynge and accusinge.
The king made Vaschus gouernoure but during his pleasure. His courage was
such, and his factes so notorious, that he could not long abide the hautynes
of Petrus Arias. To be brief, their faulynge owte and discord confounded al
things. John Cacedus the pulpitte friar of the order of saint Frances, did his
vttermoste endeavor to make them friends, promising unto Vaschus the dowghter
of Petrus Arias to wife. But no means could be found how these two which
bore the chief rule, might be brought to agreement. At the length the matter
grew to such extremity, that Petrus Arias finding occasion of querelynge
ageynste Vaschus, Petrus Arias commands that Uaschus be put to death.
sent process to the maiestrates of the town, whereby he commanded them to
strangle Vaschus, and five other which were chief capitaynes under him:
Alleagynge that they and their confetherates conspired to rebel in the South
sea: And that Vaschus him self for that intent, had builded and furnished
four ships to search the south coasts of the supposed continent: Also that
to his three hundredth soldiers and companions which he had with him, he should
speak words of this effect as follows. My friends, and fellows of my long
peynes and trauayles: Uaschus is accused.
How long shall we be subject to the commandment of other, sithe we have
bydden the brunt and ouercumme thenterprise for the which this new governor
was sent with so great a multitude? Who can any longer abide his pride and
insolentie? Let us therefore follow these coasts whyther so ever fortune
shall drive us: And among these so many pleasant and fruteful provinces of
this large land, let us chose one in the which we may with liberty spend
that portion of owre lives which yet remains. Who can find us, or shall be
able to profer us vyolence? When these or the like words were declared to
Petrus Arias, he sent to the Southe parts for Vaschus, willing him by the
virtue of his commission to repair to him forth with. Vaschus obeyed, and at
his coming was cast in prison: yet constantly denyinge that ever he intended
any such thing. Witnesses were brought against him, and his words rehearsed
from the beginning. Uaschus is put to death.
To conclude, he was judged worthy death, and was put to execution. And this
is the reward wherewith the blind goddess oftentimes recompenseth such as
have sustained great trauayles and daungiours to be hyghly in her favor.
Petrus Arias leaving his wife in Dariena, Petrus Arias.
embarked him self in the ships left of Vaschus, to the intent to search
those coasts. But whether he be returned or not, we have yet no certain
knoweleage. He has also his fortune. Yet is there an other governor assigned,
whose name is Lupus Sosa, Lupus Sosa.
the viceroye of the Islands of Canarie. What stomach Petrus Arias may have if
he return, let good men judge. There was nothing done under him worthy
glory. Sum think that he was at the beginning to slack and negligent in his
office, and not severe in correctynge errors and misorders. But we will leave
him and rehearse sumwhat whereof we have been lately informed as touching the
great and diepe river of Dabaiba, The great river of Dabaiba or Grandis
the which for the greatness and largenes thereof, owre men named Grandis, that
is, great, as we have noted in owre Decades. This river fauleth into the
furthest corner of the goulfe of Vraba by seven ports or mowthes as does the
river of Nilus into the Egyptian sea, The goulfe of Uraba.
whose large description you may also read in owre Decades. That the
mountains on every side about this river, The rich mountains of Dabaiba.
are rych in gold, we have learned by thinformation of thinhabitauntes, of
whom we made diligent inquisition. Vaschus, and beside him other gouernoures
and Lieu^tenauntes, have fouretymes entered into this river with their armies
in battle array, and with diverse kinds of ships first for the space of
forty miles, then fyftie, and at the last fourscore, at an other time also
ouerthwarte the river. Oh shameful chance and detestable couwardenes of owre
men. Fierce and war like people.
A naked nation encounterynge with them that had apparel, the armed ageynste
the unarmed, had the overthrow in manner in all conflictes, and were other all
slain or wounded. They use inuenemed arrows, and are such expert archers,
that if they espy any place of their enemy bare or unarmed, they will not
lightly fail to stryke him there They use also many darts, Darts.
which in the time of the battle they hurl so thick a far of, that they
take the light of the son from their enemies as it were with a cloud. They
have likewise broad and long swoordes made of a heavy and hard kind of
woodde, Swoordes of heavy wood.
wherewith they feyght fiercely near at hand. Vaschus him self received many
wounds in encounterynge with them. And thus by reason of the fiercenes of
these barbarians, the river of Dabaiba is yet left unsearched. We will now
speak sumwhat more of the Island of Hispaniola (which the Spanyardes caul
Spagnuola) the moother and chief of al other lands or Islands whereof we
intended to write. hispan^ola Ouiedus writes that there are now.v. monasteries.
In it the Senate is now restored, and five Judges assigned to give laws to
all thinhabitauntes of those tractes. But in short time, they shall cease
gatherynge of gold although there be grea^e plenty: by reason they shall
lack laborers and myners, forasmuch as thinhabitauntes whose help they used
herein, are brought to a smaule number, consum^d partly by war, and many more
by famen that year that they dygged up the roots whereof they made their best
bread, and left of sowynge their grain of Maizium which is their common
food, supposinge hereby to have driven owre men owte of the Island, who had
vytayles sent them from Spain. A great number of them also, dyed of new and
strange diseases which in the year of Christ a thousand five hundredth
and.xviii. consumed them like rotton sheep. New and strange diseases.


And (to say the truth) owre men's insatiable desire of gold, so oppressed
these poor wretches with extreme labor and ^oyle, where as before they lived
pleasauntly and at liberty, given only to plays and pastymes as daunsynge,
fysshinge, foulynge, and huntyng of little connies, that many of them peri^shed
even for very anguy^he of mind, the which (with their unaccustomed labor)
are things of them selves suffycient to engender many new diseases. But the
king and the Senate have now determined that they be reduced to a people, and
to give them selves only to increase, and tyllage of the gound: And that only
such as are bought or taken owte of other regions, be appointed to labor in
the gold mines. The sugar of hispaniola.
But it shall suffyce to have said thus much of the pestiferous hunger of
gold. Therefore to speak of other matters: It is a marvelous thing to
consider how all things increase and prosper in this Island. There are
now.xxviii sugar presses wherewith great plenty of sugar is made. Sugar of
Ualeutia.
The canes or reeds wherein the sugar grows, are bygger and higher then in
any other place: And are as bygge as a man's arm in the brawne, and higher then
the stature of a man, by the half. This is more wonderful, that where as in
Ualentia in Spain (where a great quantitye of sugar is made yearly) where so
ever they apply them selves to the great increase thereof, A token of marvelous
fruitfulnes.
yet does every root bring forth not paste five, or six, or at the most
seven of those reeds: whereas in Hisponiola one root bears twenty, and
oftentimes thirty. Four footed beasts and cattayle, Cattayle.
are marvelously increased in this Island. And albeit that the rauenynge
hunger of gold has hitherto greatly hyndered owre men from tyllage of the
ground, yet is there great plentye of wheat, wheat.
which prospers so well that it yealdeth sumtyme a hundreeh foulde: And this
especially on the hills or rydges of the mountains prospectynge toward the
North. Uines do also increase here with no less frutefulnesse. Uines.
What should I speak of the trees that bear Cassia fistula, Cassia Fistula.
brought first into this Island from the other Islands near unto the supposed
Continent, as we have noted in owr decades? There is now such plenty hereof,
that after a few years we shall have a pound of the price that we pay now
for an ounce. Of the bresyle and mirobalane trees, Brasyle.
Myrobalanes
with other innumerable prerogatives and benefits which nature has
plentifully given to this blessed Island, we have spoken suffyciently in owr
decades. Yet have I thought good to repeat part of the same, because I think
that the wits of many readers have diuerted from the weight of great
affairs, to the recordation of such pleasant things. And yet do not such
things as are sauery, engender tedyousnesse, so that a precious matter be
adourned with a precious vesture.

FINIS.
EXEMPLAR BVLLAE SEV DONATIONIS, AVTORITATE CVIVS, EPISCOPVS ROMANVS ALEXANder
eius nominis sextus, concessit et donauit Castellae regibus and suis
successoribus, regiones and Insulas noui orbis in Oceano occidentali Hispanorum
nauigationibus repertas
ALEXANDER EPISCOPVS, seruus seruorum Dei, Charissimo in Christo filio
Ferdinando Regi, et Charissimae in Christo tiliae Elizabeth Reginae Castellae,
Legionis, Aragonum, Siciliae, et Granatae, illustribus, salutem et Apostolicam
benedictionem.

Inter caetera Diuinae maiestati beneplacita opera et cordis nostri
desiderabilia, illud profecto potisimu^ existit vt fides catholica and
Christiana religio nostris praesertim temporibus exaltetur ac vbilibet
amplietur ac dilatetur, animarumque salus procuretur, ac barbarae nationes
deprimantur et ad fide^ ipsam reducantur. Vnde cum ad hanc sacram Petri sedem
Diuinafauente clementia (meritis lic^t imparibus) euocati fueremus,
cognoscentes vos tanquam veros catholicos reges et principes: quales semper
fuisse nouimus, and a vobis praeclare gesta, toti pene orbi notissima
demonstrant, nedum id exoptare, sed omni conatu, studio, et diligentia, nullis
laboribus, nullis impensis, nullisque parcendo periculis, etiam proprium
sanguinem effundendo efficere, ac omnem animum vestrum, omnesque, conatus ad
hoc iam dudum dedicasse, quemadmodum recuperato regni Granatae a tyrannis de
Sarracenorum hodiernis tem poribus per vos, cum tanta Diuini nominis gloria
facta, testatur. Digne ducimur non immerito, et debemus illa vobis etiam
sponte, ac fauorabiliter con cedere, per quae huiusmodi sanctum ac laudabile ab
immortali deo acceptum propositum, indies feruentiori animo ad ipsius dei
honorem et Imperij Christiani propagationem, prosequi valeatis. Sane accepimus
quod vos qui dudum animum proposueratis aliquas insulas et terras firmas
remotas et incognitas, ac per alios hactenus non repertas, quaerere et
inuenire, vt illarum incolas et habitatores ad colendum redemptorem nostrum et
fidem catholicam profitendum reduceretis, hactenus in expugnatione et
recuperatione ipsius regni Granatae plurimum occupati, huiusmodi sanctum et
laudabile propositum vestrum ad optatum finem perducere nequiuistis: Sed tamen
sicut Domino placuit, regno predicto recuperato, volentes desiderium vestrum
adimplere, dilectum filium Christophorum Colonum virum vtique dignum et
plurimum commendatum ac tanto negotio aptum, cum nauigijs et hominibus ^d
similia instructis, non sine maximis laboribus, acpericulis, et expensis
destinastis vt terras firmas et Insulas remotas et incognitas, huiusmodi per
mare vbi hactenus nauigatum non fuerat, diligenter inquireret. Qui tandem
(Diuino auxilio facta extrema diligentia in mari Oceano nauigantes) certas
insulas remotissimas et etiam terras firmas quae per alios hactenus repertae
non fuerant, inuenerunt. In quibus plurimae gentes pacifice viuentes, et (vt
asseritur) nudi incedentes, nec carnibus vescentes, inhabitant: Et vt praefati
nuncij vestri possunt opinari, gen tes ipsae in Insulis et terris praedictis
habitantes, credunt vnum deum creatorem in Coelis esse, ac ad fidem catholicam
amplexandum et bonis moribus imbuendum, satis apti videntur: Spesque habetur,
quod si erudirentur, nomen Saluatoris Domini nostri Jesus Christi in terris et
insulis praedictis facile indu^ere tur. Ac prefatus Christophorus in vna ex
principalibus Insulis praedictis, ^am vnam turrim satis munitam, in qua certos
Christianos qui secum iuerant, in custodiam et vt alias Insulas ac terras
firmas remotas et incognitas inquirerent posuit, constru^et aedificari fecit.
In quibus quidem Insulis et terris iam repertis, aurum, aromata, et aliae
quamplurimae res praeciosae diuersi generis et diuersae qualitatis reperiuntur.
Vnde omnibus diligenter, et praesertim fidei catholicae exaltatione et
dilatatione (prout decet Catholicos Reges et Principes) consideratis, more
progenitorum vestrorum clarae memoriae Regum, terras firmas et insulas
praedictas, illarumque incolas et habitatores, vobis diuina fauente clementia
subiicere et ad fidem Catholicam reducere proposuistis.

Nos itaque huiusmodi vestrum sanctum et laudabile propositum plurimum in
domino commendantes, ac cupientes vt illud ad debitum finem perducatur, et
ipsum nomen saluatoris nostri in partibus illis inducatur, hortamus vos
quamplurimum in domino, et per sacri lauacri susceptionem, qua mandatis
Aposto^icis obligati estis, et per viscera misericordiae Domini nostri Jesus
Christi attente requirimus, vt cum expeditionem huiusmodi omnino prosequi et
assumere prona mente orthodoxae fidei zelo intendatis, populos in huiusmodi
Insulis et terris degentes, ad Christianam religione^ suscipiendum inducere
velitis et debeatis, nec pericula nec labores vllo vnquam tempore vos
deterreant, firma spe fiduciaque conceptis quod Deus omnipotens conatus vestros
foeliciter prosequetur. Et vt tanti negocij prouintiam Apostolicae gratiae
largitate donati, liberius et audacius assumatis, motu proprio non ad vestram
vel alterius pro vobis super hoc nobis oblatae petitionis instantiam* sed de
nostra mera liberalitate, et ex certa scientia, ac de Apostolicae potestatis
plenitudine, omnes Insulas et terras firmas inuentas et inueniendas, detectas
et detegendas versus Occidentem et Meridiem, fabricando et construendo vnam
lineam a polo Arctico, scilicet Septemtrione, ad polum Antarcticum, scilicet
Meridiem, sieve terrae firmae et insulae inuentae et inueniendae sint versus
Indiam aut versus aliam quamcunque parte^ quae linea distet a qualibet
Insularum quae vulgariter nuncupantur de los Azores er Cabo verde centum leucis
versus Occidentem et Meridiem. Itaque omnes Insulae et terrae firmae repertae
et reperiendae, detectae et detegendae a praefata linea versis Occedentem et
Meridiem, quae per alium Regem aut Principem Christianum non fuerint actualiter
possessae vsque ad diem natiuitatis Domini nostri Jesus Christi proxime
praeteritum, a quo incipit annus praesens Millessimus Quadringen tessimus
Nonogessimus tercius, quando fuerunt per nuncios et capitaneos vestros inuentae
aliquae praedictarum Insularum, Autoritate omnipotentis Dei nobis in beato
Petro concessa, ac vicariatus Jesus Christi qua fungimur in terris, cum omnibus
illatum dominijs, ciuitatibus, castris, locis, et villis, iutibusque et
iurisdictionibus ac partinentijs vniuersis, vobis heredibusque et successoribus
vestris (Castellae et Legionis regibus) in perpetuum tenore praesentium
donamus, concedimus, et assignamus: Vosque et haeredes ac successores praefatos
illarum Dominos, cum plena, libera, et omnimoda potestate, autoritate, et
jurisdiction, facimus, constituimus, et deputamus. Decernentes nihilo minus
per huiusmodi donationem, concessionem, et assignationem nostram, nullo
Christiano Principi qui actualiter praefatas Insulas et terras firmas
possederit vsque ad praedictum diem natiuitatis Domini nostri Jesus Christi ius
quaesitum, sublatum intelligi posse aut auferri debere.

Et insuper mandamus vobis in virtutae sanctae obedientiae (vt sicut
pollicemini et non dubitamus pro vestra maxima deuotione et regia magnanimitate
vos esse facturos) ad terras firmas et Insulas praedictas, viros probos et Deum
timentes, doctos, peritos, et expertos ad instruendum incolas et habitatores
praefatos in fide Chatholica et bonis moribus imbuendum, destinare debeatis,
omnem debitam diligentiam in praemissis adhibentes. A quibuscumque personis,
cuiuscunque dignitatis, etiam imperialis et regalis stratus, gradus, ordinis
vel conditionis, sub excommunicationis latae sententiae poena quam eo ipso si
contra fecerint incurrant, districtius inhibemus ne ad insulas et terras firmas
inuentas et inueniendas, detectas et detegendas versus Occidentem et Meridiem,
fabricando et construendo lineam a polo Arctico ad polum Antarcticum, siuae
terrae firmae et Insulae inuentae et inueniendae sint versus Indiam aut versus
aliam quamcunque partem quae linea distet a qualibet Insularum quae vulgariter
nun cupantur de los Azores et Cabo verde centum leucis versus Occidentem et
Meridiem vt praefertur, pro mercibus habendis vel quauis alia causa accedere
praesumat absque vestra ac haeredum et successorum vestrorum praedictorum
licentia speciali: Non obstantibus constitutionibus et ordinationibus
Apostolicis, caeterisque quibuscunque, in illo in quo imperia et dominationes
et bona cuncta procedunt: Confidentes quod dirigente Domino actus vestros, si
huiusmodi sanctum ac laudabile propositum prosequamini, breui tempore cum
foelicitate et gloria totius populi Christiani, vestri labores et conatus
exitum foelicissimum consequentur. Verum quia difficile foret praesentes
literas ad singula quaeque loca in quibus expediens fuerit deferri, volumus ac
motu et scientia similibus decernimus, quod illarum transsumptis manu publici
notarij inderogati subscriptis, et sigillo alicuius personae in ecclesiastica
dignitate constitutae, seu curiae ecclesiasticae munitis, ea prorsus fides in
iudicio et extra ac alias vbilibet adhibeatur, quae praesentibus adhiberetur si
essent adhibitae vel ostensae.

Nulli ergo omnino hominum liceat hanc paginam nostrae commendationis,
hortationis, requisitionis, donationis, concessionis, assignationis,
constitutionis, deputationis, decreti, mandati, inhibitionis, et voluntatis
infringere vel ei ausu temerario contraire. Si quis autem hoc attentare
praesumpserit, indignationem omnipotentis Dei, ac beatorum Petri et Pauli
Apostolorum eius, se nouerit incursurum

Datum Romae apud sanctum Petrum: Anno incarnationis Dominicae.1593. quarto
nonas Maij: Pontificatus nostri anno primo
The coppie of the Bull or donation, by thautoritie whereof, Pope Alexander the
syxte of that name, gave and granted to the kings of Castyle and their
successors the Regions and Islands found in the Weste Ocean sea by the
nauigations of the Spanyardes.
ALexander bishop, the servant of the servants of God: To owre most
dear beloved son in Christ King Ferdinande, And to owre dear beloved
daughter in Christ Elyzabeth Queen of Castyle, Legion, Aragon, Sicilie, and
Granata, most noble Princes, Gretynge and Apostolical benediction.

Among other works acceptable to the divine ma^estie and according to owre
hearts desire, this certeinely is the chief, that the Catholyke faith and
Christian religion, specially in this owre time may in all places be exalted,
amplified, and enlarged, whereby the health of souls may be procured, and the
Barbarous nations subdued and brought to the faith. And therefore whereas by the
favor of gods clementie (although not without equal deserts) we are cauled
to this holy seat of Peter, and understanding you to be true Catholyke
Princes as we have ever known you, and as your noble and worthy factes have
declared in manner to the hole world in that with all your study, diligence,
and industrye, you have spared no trauayles, charges, or perels, aduenturynge
even the shedynge of your own bludde, with applyinge yowre hole minds and
endeavors here unto, as your noble expeditions achyued in recoueryng the
kingdom of Granata from the tyranny of the Sarracens in these our days, do
plainly declare your factes with so great glory of the divine name. For the
which as we think you worthy, so owght we of owre own free will favorably to
grant you all things whereby you may daily with more fervent minds to the
honor of god and enlargynge the Christian empire, prosecute your devout and
laudable purpose most acceptable to the immortal God. We are credably informed
that whereas of late you were determined to seek and find certain Islands and
firm lands far remote and unknown (and not heretofore found by any other)
to the intent to bring thinhabitauntes of the same to honor owre redemer and
to profess the catholyke faith, you have hitherto been much occupied in
thexpugnation and recovery of the kyngedome of Granata, by reason whereof you
could not bring yowre said laudable purpose to the end desired. Nevertheless
as it has pleased almighty god, the foresaid kyngedome being recovered,
wyllyng taccomplyshe your said desire, you have, not without great labor,
perelles, and charges, appointed owre well-beloved son Christopher Colonus (a
man certes well commended as most worthy and apt for so great a matter) well
furnyshed with men and ships and other necessaries, to seek (by the sea
where hitherto no man has sailed) such firm lands and Islands far
remote and hitherto unknown. Who (by gods help) making diligente search in
the Ocean sea, have found certain remote Islands and firm lands which were
not heretofore found by any other. In the which (as is said) many nations
inhabit lyuinge peaceably and goinge naked, not accustomed to eat flesh. And
as far as yowre messengers can conjecture, the nations inhabitynge the
foresaid lands and Islands, believe that there is one god creatoure in heaven:
and seem apt to be brought to thimbrasinge of the catholyke faith and to be
imbued with good manners: by reason whereof, we may hope that if they be well
instructed, they may easily be induced to receive the name of owre savior
Jesus Christ. We are further advertised that the forenamed Christopher has
now builded and erected a fortress with good munition in one of the foresaid
principal Islands in the which he has placed a garrison of certain of the
Christian men that went thither with him: as well to the intent to defend the
same, as also to search other Islands and firm lands far remote and yet
unknown. We also understand, that in these lands and Islands lately found,
is great plenty of gold and spices, with diverse and many other precious
things of sundry kinds and qualities. Therefore al things diligently
ocnsidered (especially thamplifyinge and enlargyng of the catholic faith, as
it behooves catholic Princes following thexemples of yowre noble progenitors
ol famous memory) whereas you are determined by the favor of almighty god to
subdue and bring to the catholyke faith thinhabitauntes of the foresaid
lands and Islands.

We greatly commending this yowre godly and lau^able purpose in owr lord,
and desirous to have the same brought to a dew end, and the name of owre
savior to be known in those parts, do exhort you in owre Lord and by
the receauynge of yowre holy baptism whereby you are bound to Apostolical
obedience, and ernestely require you by the bowels of mercy of owre Lord Jesus
Christ, that when you intend for the zeal of the Catholyke faith to
prosecute the said expedition to reduce the people of the foresaid lands and
Islands to the Christian religion, you shall spare no labors at any time, or
be deterred with any perels, conceauynge firm hope and confidence that the
omnipotent godde will give good success to yowre godly attemptes. And that
being autorysed by the privilege of the Apostolycall grace, you may the more
freely and bouldly take upon you thenterpryse of so great a matter, we of
owre own motion, and not either at yowre request or at the instant peticion of
any other person, but of owre own mere liberality and certain science, and
by the fullness of Apostolycall power, do give, grant, and assign to you,
yowre heirs and successors, all the firm lands and Islands found or to be
found discovered or to be discovered toward the West and South, drawyng a line
from the pole Artike to the pole Antartike (that is) from the north to the
Southe: Containing in this donation, what so ever firm lands or Islands are
found or to be found toward India, or toward any other part what so ever
it be, being distant from, or without the foresaid line drawn a hundreh
leaques toward the Weste and South from any of the Islands which are commonly
cauled De los Azor^s and Cabo Verde.

All the Islands therefore and firm lands, found and to be found, discovered
and to be discovered from the said lyn^ toward the West and South, such as
have not actually bin heretofore possessed by any other Christian king or
prince until the day of the nativity of owre Lord Ie^u Christ last paste,
from the which begins this present year being the year of owre
Lord.M.CCCC.lxxxxiii. when so ever any such shall be found by your messingers
and capytaines,

We by the authority of almyghtie God gr^unted unto us in saint Peter, and by
the office which we bear on the earth in the steed of Jesus Christ, do for
ever by the tenoure of these presents, give, grant, assign, unto you,
yowre heirs, and successoures (the kings of Castyle and Legion) all those
lands and Islands, with their dominions, territories, cities, castles, towers,
places, and vyllages, with all the right, and jurisdictions thereunto
perteynynge: constitutynge, assignynge, and deputynge, you, yowre heirs, and
successors the lords thereof, with full and free pour, autotoritie, and
jurisdiction. Decreeinge nevertheless by this owre donation, grant, and
assignation, that from no Christian Prince which actually has possessed the
foresaid Islands and firm lands unto the day of the nativity of owre lord
before said their right obtained to be understood hereby to be taken away,
or that it owght to be taken away.

Furthermore we command you in the virtue of holy obedience (as you have
promised, and as we doubt not you will do upon mere devotion and princely
magnanimity) to send to the said firm lands and Islands, honest,
virtuous, and learned men, such as fear God, and are able to instruct
thinhabitauntes in the Catholyke faith and good manners, applyinge all their
possible diligence in the premises.

We furthermore straightly inhibite all manner of persons, of what state,
degree, order, or condition so ever they be, although of Imperial and regal
dignity, under the pain of the sentence of excommunication which they shall
incur if they do to the contrary, that they in no case presume without
special license of you, yowre heirs, and successors, to travail for
marchaundies or for any other cause, to the said lands or Islands, found or
to be found, discovered, or to be discovered, toward the west and south,
drawing a line from the pole Artyke to the pole Antartike, whether the firm
lands and Islands found and to be found, be situate toward India or toward any
other part being distant from the line drawn a hundredth leagues toward the
west from any of the Islands commonly cauled De los Azores and Cabo Verde:
Notwithstanding constitu^ions, decrees, and Apostolycall ordinances what so
ever they are to the contrary: In him from whom Empyres, dominions, and all
good things do proceed: Trusting that almyghtie god directing yowre
enterprises, if you follow yowre godly and laudable attemptes, yowre labors
and trauayles herein, shall in short time obtain a happy end with felicity
and glory of all Christian people. But forasmuch as it should be a thing of
great difficulty these letters to be carried to all such places as should be
expedient, we will, and of like motion and knowleage do decree that whyther so
ever the same shall be sent, or where so ever they shall be received with the
subscription of a common notarie thereunto required, with the seal of any
person constitute in ecclesiastical dignity, or such as are autorysed by the
ecclesiastical court, the same faith and credit to be given thereunto in
judgment or else where, as should be exhibyted to these presents.

It shall therefore be lawefull for no man to infringe or rashely to contrary
this letter of owre commendation, exhortacion, request, donation, grant,
assignation, constitution, deputation, decree, commandment, inhibition, and
determination. And if any shall presume to attempt the same, he owght to know
that he shall thereby incur the indignation of almyghtie God and his holy
Apostles Peter and Paul.

Given at Rome at saint Peter's: In the year of thincarnation of owre Lord M.
CCCC. LXXXXIII. The fourth day of the nones of May, the first year of owre
seat.
To the reader.
ALthough among diverse which have written of the Ocean and Weste Indies, there
is none to be compared to Peter Martyr of Angleria, in declarynge by
philosophical discourses the secreate causes of natural affectes both as
touching the land, the sea, the stars, and other strange works of
nature, yet forasmuch as of later days those countries have been better known
and searched, and diverse such particular and notable things found as are
contained in the hystories of later writers, emonge the number of whom,
Gonzalus Ferdinandus Ouiedus, (whom learned Cardanus compares to the ancient
writers) is doubtless the chief, I have therefore thought good to join to the
Decades of Peter Martyr certain notable things which I have gathered owte of
his book intiteled the Summarie or abbrigement of his general history of the
west Indies written in the firm land of the same in the city of Sancta Maria
Antiqua in Dariena (where he dwelte and was gouernoure many years) And
dedicated to Themperous majesty, as may appear by the epistle following.

To the most high and myghtie prince Charles the fyfte of that name: Emperor
of Rome, King of Spain, and of the two Sicilies, of both the sides of the
straight of Faro, King of Jerusalem and Hungary, Duke of Burgonie and Earl
of Flaunders, Lord and inheritoure of the firm land and Islands of the Weste
Ocean. etc. Gonzalus Ferdinandus Ouiedus his most humble servant wysheth health
and perpetual felicity.
THe things which principally preserve and maintain the works of nature in
the memories of men, are hystories and books composed of the same. Among the
which certes those are esteemed most true and autentyke which have been
written by wyttie and expert men well trauayled in the world, as faithful
witnesses of such things as they have partly seen and been partly informed
by credible persons. Of this mind and opinion was Pliny, who better then any
other autoure has written in xxxvii. books all that perteyneth to the
natural history, contained al in one volume dedicated to Uespasian
The Emperor. Wherein, as a prudente historiographer, he declares such things
as he had hard: Attributynge the second authority to such as he had read in
autoures that wrote before him: And thyrdely joined to the same history, such
things as he him self had seen as most certain testimony. Whose exemple I
following, will in this my brief summarie reduce and represent to yowr
majesty's memory such things as I have seen in yowre Empire of the West
Indies as well in the Islands as in the firm land of the Ocean sea, where I
have served now more then twelve years in the place of suruoyer of the gold
mines by the commandment of the Catholyke king Don Fernando the fyfte of
that name and graundfather unto yowre majesty, to whom god gave great fame and
glory. Sense whose death also I have lykewies served and trust while the rest
of my life yet remains, to serve yowre majesty as shall please you to
command. As touching which things and such other like, I have more largely
written in a history begun as soon as my age was ripe to take such matters
in hand. Wherein furthermore I have made mention of such things as have
chanced in Spain, from the year.1494. unto this time. Adding also thereunto
such things worthy memory as I have observed in other realms and provinces
where I have trauayled. And have likewise particulerly written the lives and
worthy acts of the catholyke Princes of famous memory Don Ferdinando and
lady Elizabeth his wife to their last days. After whose fruition of heavenly
Paradyse, I have noted such things as have chanced in yowre most fortunate
succession. Not omittynge particularly to write a large book of such things
as have seemed most worthy to be noted as touching yowre majesty's Indies.
But for as much as that volume remains in the city of San. Dominico in the
Island of Hispaniola where I dwell and am placed in household with wife,
children, and famelie, I have brought no more with me of that my writynge then
I bear in memory. Determining notwithstanding for yowre majesty's
recreation to make a brief rehearsal of certain notable things whereof I
have more largely entreated in my said general history, and such as may seem
most worthy to be read of yowre majesty. Of the which, although a great
part have been written by other who have also seen the same, yet perhaps
they are not so exactly and particularly described as of me, forasmuch as in
manner all that travail into these Indies have greater respect to luker and
gaynes then diligently to search the works of nature whereunto I have been
ever naturally inclyned, and have therefore with all possible endeavor applied
mine eyes and intelligence to find the same. And this present Summarie shall
not be contrary or diverse from my larger history wherein (as I have said) I
have more amplye declared these things: but shall only more breefely express
theffect thereof until such time as Godde shall restore me to mine own house,
where I may accomplish and fynishe my said general history. Where unto to
give the first principle, I say that Don Christopher Colonus (as it is well
known) being the first Admyrall of this India, discovered the same in the
days of the Catholyke king Don Ferdinando and the lady Elyzabeth his wife,
graundfather and graundmother unto yowre majesty: In the year.1491. And came
to Barzalona in the year 1492. with the first Indians and other shows and
profes of the great riches and notice of this west Empire. The which gift and
benefyte was such, that it is unto this day, one of the greatest that ever
any subject or servant has done for his prince or country, as is manifest to
the hole world. And to say the truth, this shall doubtless be so
commodious and profitable unto the hole realm of Spain, that I repute him no
good Castilian or Spanyarde that doothe not recognize the same. And (as I have
said before) forasmuch as in my said general history I have more largely
entreated of these things, I intend at this present only briefly to rehearse
certain especial things, the which suerly are very few in respect of the
thousands that might be said in this behalf. First therefore I will speak
sumwhat of the navigations into these parties. Then of the generation of the
nations which are found in the same, with their rytes, customs, and
ceremonies. Also of beasts, fowls, birds, woormes, fysshes, seas, ryuers,
sprynges, trees, plants, herbs, and diverse other things which are engendered
boothe on the land and in the water. And forasmuch as I am one of thorder and
company of them that are appointed to return into these regions to serve yowre
majesty, if therefore the things contained in this book shall not be
distinct in such order as I promised to perform in my greater work. I
desire yowre majesty to have no respect hereunto, but rather to consider the
novelty of such strange things as I have herein declared, which is the
chief end that moved me to write. Protestyng that in this Summarie I have
written the truth of such things as coome to my remembrance: whereof not
only I my self can testifye, but also diverse other worthy and credible men
which have bin in those regions, and are now present in yowre majesty's
court. And thus it shall suffyce to have said thus much unto yowre majesty in
manner of a proheme unto this present work which I most humbly desire yowre
maiesticas thankfully taccept, as I have written it faithfully.

Of the ordinary nauygation from Spain to the Weste Indies.
THe nauygation which is commonly made from Spain to the Weste India, is from
Siuile, where yowre majesty have yowre house of contractation for those
parts, with also yowre officers thereunto perteynynge, of whom the capitaines
take their passeporte and license. The patrones of such ships as are
appointed to these vyages, imbarke them selves at san Luca di Barameda, where
the river Cuadalchiber enters into the Ocean sea. And from hense they follow
their course toward the Islands of Canarie. Of these seven Islands, they
commonly touch two, that is, either Grancanaria or Gomera* And here the
ships are furnysshed with fresh water, fuel, cheese, biefe, and such other
things which may seem requisyte to be added to such as they bring with
them owte of Spain. From Spain to these Islands, is coommonly eight days
saylinge, or little more or less. And when they are arrived there, they have
sailed two hundereth and fyftie leaques, which make a thousand miles,
accomptyng four miles to a leaque as is their manner to reckon by sea.
Departing from the said Islands to follow their course, the ships tarry.xxv.
days, or a little more or less, before they see the first land of the
Islands that lie before that which they caul La Spagnuola or Hispaniola. And
the land that is commonly first scene, is one of these Islands which they
caul Ogni sancti Marigalante (or Galanta) La Desseada (otherwise cauled
Desyderata) Matanino, Dominica, Guadalupe, San. Christoual, or sum other of
the Islands whereof there are a great multitude lyinge about these aforesaid.
Yet it sumtymes so chances that the ships pass withowte the sight of any
of the said Islands, or any other that are within that course until they
coome to the Island of Sancti Iohannis or Hispaniola, or Iamaica, or Cuba,
which are before the other. It may also chance that they over pass all these
likewise, until they faule upon the coasts of the fyrme land. But this
chances when the pylote is not well practiced in this navigations or not
perfect in the true card. But making this viage with expert maryners
(whereof there is now great plenty) one of the said first Islands shall ever
be known. And from the Islands of Canarie to one of the first of these, the
distaunce is nine hundredth leaques by saylynge, or more. And from hense to the
city of saint Dominike which is in the Island of Hispaniola, is a hundredth
and fyftie leaques: So that from Spain hitherto, is a thousand and three
hundredth leaques. Yet for as much as sumtimes the navigations proceeds not so
directly, but that it chances to wander ever on the one side or on the other,
we may well say that they have now sailed a thousand and five hundredth
leaques and more. And if the navigations be slow by reason of sum
hynderaunce, it commonly chances to be fynisshed in.xxxv. or.xl. days. And
this happens for the most part, not accomptynge the extremes: that is,
either of them that have slow passage, or of them that arryue in very short
time. For we owghte to consider that which chances most commonly. The
return from those parts to Spain, is not fynysshed without longer time, as
in the space of.l. days, or a little more or less. Nevertheless in this
present year of.1525. there came four shyps from the Island of San Dominico to
saint Luca in Spain, in.xxv. days. But (as I have said) we ought not to judge
of that which chances seldom, but of that which happens most ordinarily.
This navigations is very safe and much used, even unto the said Island. And from
this to the firm land, the ships trauerse diverse ways for the space of
five, six, or seven days saylynge, or more, according to the parts or
coasts whither they direct their vyages, forasmuch as the said fyrme land
is very great and large, and many nauigations and vyages are directed to
diverse parts of the same. Yet to the fyrme land which is nearest to this
Island, and lies directly against San Dominico, the passage is fynisshed in the
time aforesaid. But it shall be much better to remytte all this to the card of
these nauigations and the new Cosmographie, of the which no part was known
to Ptolomie or any other of the owlde wrytters.

Of two notable things as touching the West Indies: And of the great richesse
brought from thense into Spain
AFter my universal description of the history of the Indies, there comes
to my rememberaunce two things chiefly to be noted as touching thempire of
this West Indies perteynynge to the dominion of yowre majesty. And these
beside the other particulars whereof I have suffyciently spoken, are to be
considered as things of great importance. Whereof, the one is the shortenesse
of the way and with what expedition yowr majesty's ships may pass beyond
the main fyrme land of these Indies into the new Southe sea cauled Mare del
Sur lyynge beyond the same. And this to the intent to coome to the Islands where
the spices grow, beside the other innumerable richesse of the kingedomes and
signiories which confin^ with the said sea where are so many people and
nations of diverse toonges and manners. The other thing, is to consider how
innumerable treasures are entered into Spain by these Indies, as well that
which comes daily from thense as also that is continually to be looked for,
both of gold and perle and other marchaunties which are first brought into
this yowre realm of Spain before they are seen of other nations or traded
into other realms. Whereby not only this yowre realm is greatly enriched, but
also the benefyte thereof redoundeth to the great profit of other countries
which are near thereunto. A testimonye of this, are the double ducades which
yowre majesty have caused to be coined, and are disparsed throughowte the
hole world. But after they are once pa^sed out of this yowre realm, they
never return agein because they are the best curraunt money of the world. And
therefore if after they have been in the hands of strangers they chance to be
returned again into Spain, they coome disguised in an other habit, and are
diminisshed of the goodness of their gold, with the stamp of yowre majesty
changed: So that if it were not for their such defacynges in other realms
for the cause aforesaid, there should not be found so great quantity of
fine gold of the coin of any prince in the world as of power majesty's. And
the cause of all this, are yowre Indies.

Of the mines of gold, and the manner of woorkynge in them.
THis particular of the mines of gold, is a thing greatly to be noted: And I
may much better speak hereof then any other man, forasmuch as there are
now twelve years paste sense I served in the place of the surueier of the
meltynge shoppes perteynynge to the gold mines of the firm land, and was the
governor of the mines of the Catholyke king Don Ferdinando, after whose
departure from this life, I served long in the same room in the name of yowr
majesty: By reason whereof, I have had great occasion to know how gold is
found and wrought owte of the mines: And do know right well that this land
is exceadynge rich: having by my account and by the labor of my Indians and
slaves, gathered and fined a great portion of the same: and may therefore the
better affirm this by testimony of sight. For I am well assured that in no
part of Cas^ilia del oro, that is, golden Castile (otherwise cauled Boragua) no
man could ask me of the mines of gold, but that I durst have bound my
self to have discovered them in the space of ten leagues of the country where
it should have been demanded me, and the same to be very rich. For I was
allowed all manner of charges to make search for the same. And although gold be
found in manner every where in these regions of golden Castile, yet owght we
not in every place to bestow the travel, and charge to get it owte, because
it is of less quantity and goodness in sum place then in sum. And the mine
or beyne which owghte to be followed, ought to be in a place which may stand
to save much of the charges of the laborers, and for the administration of
other necessary things that the charges may be recompensed with gaynes. For
there is no doubt but that gold shall be found more or less in every place.
And the gold which is found in golden Castile, is very good, and of.xxii.
caractes or better in fynesse. Furthermore, beside this great quantity of
gold which I have said to be found in the mines, there is also from day to
day found or otherwise gotten, great treasure of such wrought gold as has been
in the custody of the subdued Indians and their kings, as well of such as
they have given for their fine and ransom, or otherwise as friends to the
Christians, beside that which has been vpolently taken from the rebels. But
the greatest part of the wrought gold which the Indians have, is base and
holds sumwhat of copper. Of this they make braslettes and chains and in the
same they close their jewels which their women are accustomed to wear and
esteem more then all the richesse of the world. The manner how gold is
gathered, is this, either of such as is found in Za^ana, that is to say in
the plains and rivers of the champian country being withowt trees, whether
the earth be with gra^se or without. Or of such as is sumtymes found on the
land without the rivers in places where trees grow, so that to coome by the
same, it shall be requisite to cut down many and great trees. But after which
so ever of these two manners it be found, either in the rivers or ruptures or
breaches of waters, or else in the earth, I will show how it is found in
both these places, and how it is separate and pourged. Therefore when the mine
or vein is discovered, this chances by serchyng and prouyng in such places
as by certain signs and tooken do appear to skylfull men apt for the
generation of gold and to hold gold. And when they have found it, they
follow the mine and labor it, whether it be in the river or in the plain as I
have said. And if it be found on the plain, first they make the place very
clean where they intend to dygge. Then they dygge eight or ten foot in
length and as much in breadth: but they goo no deeper then a spanne or two, or
more as shall seem best to the master of the mine, dyggynge equally. Then
they wa^he all the earth which they have taken owte of the said space. And
if herein they find any gold, they follow it. And if not, they dygge a spanne
deeper, and wash the earth as they did before. And if then also, they find
nothing, they continue in dyggyng and wasshyng the earth as before until they
come to the hard rock or stone. And if in fine they find no gold there, they
follow no further to seek gold in that place, but go to an other part. And
it is to be understood, that when they have found the mine, they follow it in
digginge in the same measure in level and deapth until they have made an end
of all the mine which that place conteyneth, if it appear to be rich. This mine
ought to consyst of certain feet or pases in length or breadth according to
certain orders determined. And within that compass of earth, it is not
lawful for any other to dygge for gold. And where as ends the mine of him
that first found the gold, immediately it is lawful for any other man that
will, with a staff to assygne him self a place by the side of the same,
inclosynge it with stakes or pales as his own. These mines of Zauana (that is
such as are found in the playnes) owght ever to be sought near to sum river
or brook or spring of water, or dyke, or standing poole, to the end that the
gold may be washed, for the which purpose they use the labor of certain
Indians as they do other in dygginge of the mine. And when they have dygged
owte the mine, they fyl certain traies with that earth, which other Indians
have the charge immediately to receive at their hands, and to carye those
treyes of earth to the water where it may be washed. Yet do not they that
bring it, wash it, but deliver it to other, putting it owte of their own
trayes into theirs which they have ready in their hands to receive it. These
wasshers for the most part, are the Indian women, because this work is of
less pain and travail then any other. These women when they wash, are
accustomed to sytte by the waters side, with their legs in the water even
up to the knees or less as the place serves their purpose. And thus
holding the trays with earth in their hands by the handles thereof, and
putting the same into the water, they move them rownde about after the manner
of syftynge, with a certain aptenesse in such sort that there enters no
more water into the trais then serves their turn: And with the self same
apt mouynge of their trais in the water, they ever avoid the foul water with
the earth owte of the one side of the vessel, and receive in clean water on
the other side thereof. So that by this means by little and little, the water
wassheth the earth as the lyghter substance owte of the trais, and the gold
as the heavier matter rests in the bottom of the same, being round and
holowe in the myddest like unto a barbars basen. And when all the earth is
avoided, and the gold gathered together in the bottom of the traye, they
put it aparte, and return to take more earth, which they wash continually
as before. And thus they that labor in this work, do gather daily such
portion of gold as shall please god to grant to the patrones of these Indians
and such other as travail in the same. Furthermore, it is to be noted that
for every two Indians that wash, it is requisite that two other serve them to
bring earth from the mine, and other two to break the same smaule and fylle
their trais therewith. Also beside these laborers, it is necessary that there
be other people in the place where they work and rest in the night. These
are such as make their bread, and provide for vyttayles and other
necessaryes. So that to conclude, there are in all, five persons ordinarily
assigned to every traye of wasshers.

There is an other manner of woorkyng the mines in rivers or brooks of runnynge
waters. And this is, that in avoiding the water of his course, after that the
beds of the ryuers are dry and utterly emptied, they find gold emonge the
breaches, cliftes, and ryftes of stones, and among all that is in the bottom
of the channel, and where naturally the river runs of greatest force. So
that it chances sum time, that when the bed of the river is good and rich,
they find in it great quantity of gold. And therefore you majesty ought to
understand for a general rule, as it appears in fact, that all gold is
engendered in the tops and highest places of the montaines: And in
continuance of time is by little and little browght down to the vales and
plains by showers of rain, and the faules of sprynges, ryuers, and brooks
having their original in the mountains and descendynge from the same,
notwithstanding it be oftentimes found in the plains far from the
mountains.

But when it chances to be found in great quantity, it is for the most
part among the mountains and in the rivers, or their branches, more then in
any other part of the plain. And in these two manners is it commonly found
most abundauntly. And for the better proof that gold is engendered on high,
and is brought down into the low places, I have one great tooken thereof
which causes me to believe it for certain. And this is to consider that coals
never putrify nor corrupt under the ground, if they be made of strong woodde.
Whereby it chances that diggyng the earth by the fouldes or indented places of
the mountains, or on the sides, and breaking a mine in the earth where it
had not been broken before, and having now dygged one or two or three poles in
measure, the myners found certain coals of wood vnde^ the same leuel where
they found gold. And this I say in the earth which was taken for a vyrgine:
that is to say, such as had not before been opened for any mine. The which
coals could not naturally be engendered there, or enter in by any means. But
when the superficial part of the earth was equal with the leuel where the coals
were found, it is like that the coals were left there by sum occasion of fire,
and that they fastened there in time, and that afterward in long continuance
of time, they were by little and little covered with the earth which the often
showers of rain washed from the mountains, so that by the course of years
the earth ouergrewe the coals unto the said level and measure which had
before time been the superficial part of the earth where the coals and gold
were found together: whereby it may appear that the gold was no more
engendered there then were the coals, but brought thither from the mountains
by the faules of waters as we have fayde: forasmuch as the mountains are the
matrices and bowels of all rich metals. Further and beside this, I say that in
how much more the gold is gonne far from the natural place of his generation
to the place where it is found, it is so much the more puryfied and fined and
of a better carracte. And the nearer that it is found to his proper mine or
vain where it is engendered, it is so much the baser, fouler, and more crude,
and of a baser alay and caracte, and does wast so much the more in meltynge,
and remains more brickle. Sumetyme there are found graynes of gold of
great quantity and of great weight above the earth and sumtymes also under
the earth. And the greateste of all other that was found to this day in the
Indies, was that which was lost in the sea about the Island Beata, which
weyed three thousand and two hundredth Castellans of gold, which are in value
four thousand a hundredth, thirty and eight ducades of gold, which way one
Arroua and seven pound, or.xxxii. pound after.xii. ounces to the pound, A
mark, is ^ pound of viii. ounces summa.xl^i.li. weight.viii. ounces, after
xii. ounces to the.li.
which make threescore and four marks of gold. And I saw in the
year.1515. in the hands of Mychel Passamonte treasurer to yowre majesty, two
grains of the which one wayde seven pounds, which are.xiiii. marks, and are
in the value about threescore and five ducades of gold every mark. The other
was of.x. marks, which are live pounds of like value, and of very good gold
of.xxii. taractes and better. There are also found many other great graynes,
although not equal unto these in byggenes. And forasmuch as I have spoken of
gold, I have thought good to declare sumewhat how the Indians can very
excellently gylte such vessels of copper and base gold as they make. For
they can give them so fair and f^oryshynge a color, that all the mass
which they gylte, appearethe as though it were gold of.xxii. caractes and
better. This color they give with a certain herb as though it were wrought
by the art of any goldesmyth of Spain or Italy, and would of them be
esteemed as a thing of great riches, and a secreate manner of gyldynge. And
for as much as I have spoken sufficiently of the mine of gold, I will now
speak sumwhat of copper because I have made mention thereof. This metal is
found in many of the Islands of the Indies and also in the firm land: And is
found daily in great quantity holding sumwhat of gold. But for the desire
that owre men have to gold, they nothing esteem the copper, although there
might great commodity and profi^te he had thereby, and also by other metals
which they nothing regard except silver which is found abundantly in that
part of the firm land which is cauled new Spain. But of this it shall
suffice to have said thus much, because I have more particularly entreated of
these things in my general history of India.

Of the manner of fyshynge for perles.
THe Indians exercise this kind of fysshynge for the most part in the
coasts of the North in Cubagua and Cumana. And many of them which dwell in
the houses of certain particular lords in the Islands of San Dominico and
Sancti Iohannis, resort to the Island of Cubagua for this purpose. Their
custom is to go five, six, or seven, or more in one of their Canoas or barks
erly in the morning to sum place in the sea there about where it appears
unto the^ that there should be great plenty of those shell fyshes (which
sum caul muscles and sum oysters) wherein perles are engendered. And there
they plonge them selves under the water, even unto the bottom, saving one
that remaynethe in the Canoa or boat which he keeps still in one place as
near as he can, lookynge for their return owte of the water. And when one of
them has been a good while under the water, he cyseth up and comes swymmynge
to the boat, entering into the same, and leaving there all the oysters
which he has taken and brought with him. For in these, are the perles found.
And when he has there rested him self a while, and eaten part of the
oysters, he returns again to the water, where he remaynethe as long as he
can endure, and then ryseth again, and swimmeth to the boat with his pray,
where he restethe him as before, and thus continues course by course, as do
all the other in like manner, being all most expert swymmers and diverse. And
when the night draws near, they return to the Island to their houses, and
present all the oysters to the master or steward of the house of their lord
who has the charge of the said Indians. And when he has given them sumwhat
to eat, he lays up the oysters in safe custody until he have a great
quantity thereof. Then he causes the same fyssher men to open them. And they
find in every of them pearls other great or smaul, two or three or four,
and sumtymes five and six, and many smaule grains according to the
lyberalitie of nature. They save the pearls both smaule and great which they
have founde^: And either eat the oysters if they will, or cast them away,
having so great quantity thereof that they in manner abhor them. These
oysters are of hard flesh, and not so plesaunt in eating as are owres of
Spain. This Island of Cubagua where this manner of fysshing is exercised, is in
the North coaste, and is no bygger then the Island of Zelande. Oftentimes the
sea increases greatly, and much more then the fyshers for pearls would,
because where as the place is very deep, a man can not naturally rest at the
bottom by reason of the abundance of aerie substance which is in him, as I
have oftentimes proved. For although he may by vyolence and force descend to
the bottom, yet are his feet lyfted up again so that he can continue no time
there. And therefore where the sea is very deep, these Indian fysshers use to
tie two great stoones about them with a cord, on every side one, by the
weight whereof they descend to the bottom and remain there until them lysteth
to rise ageine: At which time they unloose the stones, and rise up at their
pleasure. But this their aptenesse and agilitie in swimming, is not the thing
that causes men most to marvel: But rather to consider how many of them
can stand in the bottom of the water for the space of one hole hour, and
sum more or less, according as one is more apt hereunto then an other. An
other thing there is which seems to me very strange. And this is, that
where as I have oftentimes demanded of sum of these lords of the Indians,
if the place where they are accustomed to fy^^e for pearls being but little
and narrow, will not in short time be utterly withowt oysters if they
consume them so fast, they al answered me, that although they be consumed in
one part, yet if they go a fysshynge in an other part or an other coaste of
the Island, or at an other contrary wynd, and continue fysshing there also
until the oysters be likewise consumed, and then return again to the first
place, or any other place where they fysshed before and emptied the same in
like manner, they find the^ ageine as full of oysters as though they had never
bin fysshed. Of this read more largely in the decades.
Whereby we may judge that these oysters either remove from one place to an
other as do other fysshers, or else that they are engendered and increase in
certain ordinary places. This Island of Cumana and Cubagua where they fyshe
for these perles, is in the twelfe degree of the part of the said coaste which
incline^h toward the North. Likewise pearls are found and gathered in the
South sea cauled Mare del Sur. And the pearls of this sea are very bygge. Yet
not so big as they of the Island of pearls cauled de las perlas, or
Margaritea, which the Indians caul Terarequi, lyinge in the goulfe of saint
Michael, where greatter pearls are found and of greater price then in any
other coaste of the North sea, in Cumana, or any other part. I speak this as
a true testimony of sight, having been long in that South sea, and making
curious inquisition to be certainly informed of all that perteyneth to the
fysshynge of pearls. From this Island of Tararequi, By the computation of
venice.iiii. gra^nes make a carette.
there was brought a pearl of the fasshyon of a peace, wayinge.xxxi. carattes,
which Petrus Arias had among a thousand and so many pounds weight of other
pearls which he had when captain Gaspar Morales (before Petrus Arias)
passed to the said Island in the year.1515. which pearl was of great prise.
From the said Island also, came a great and very round pearl, which I
brought owte of that sea. This was as bygge as a smaule pellet of a stone bow,
and of the weight of.xxvi. cacattes. I bought it in the city of Panama in the
sea of Sur: And paid for it six hundredth and fyftie times the weight thereof
of good gold, and had it three years in my custody: and after my return into
Spain, soulde it to therle of Nansao Marquess of Zenete, great chamberleyne
to yowre majesty, who gave it to the Marquess his wife, the lady Mentia of
Mendozza. I thyncke verily that this pearl was the greatest, fairest, and
roundest that has been seen in those parts. For yowre majesty owght to
understand that in the coaste of the sea of Sur, there are found a hundredth
great pearls round after the fasshyon of a pear, to one that is perfectely
round and great. This Island of Terarequi, which the Christians caul the
Island of pearls, and other caul it the Island of floutes, is found in the
eight degree on the southe side of the firm land in the province of golden
Castyle or Beragua. And these are the coasts of the firm land where pearls
are found even unto this day. I understand also that there are pooles found
in the province and Islands of Cartageni^. And ^ence yowr majesty appointed me
a governor and capytayne, I have made further search, and am advertised that
peatles are found in diverse other places as about the Island of Godego which
lies against the mouth of that port of the Island of Carta^enia which the
Indians caul Coro. The which Island and port, are on the North side in the
tenthe degree of the coasts of the firm land.

Of the familiarity which certain of the Indians have with the devil, and
how they receive answer of him of things to coome.
WHen the Indians begin their batrayle, or go to any combat or attempt any
other great matter, they have certain elect men whom they reuerendely
esteem and caul them Tequ^nas, which in their tongue is as much to say as
masters. Notwithstanding that they caul every man that is cunning in any
science, by the same name, as fysshers, foulers, hunters, or makers of nets.
These Tequinas therefore, they caul the masters of their aun^weres because they
speak with Tuyra, that is the devil, and bring them answer what he says,
either as touching such things as they have to do or shall chance to them
the day following, or many days to coome. For the devil being so ancient an
Astronomer, knowethe the times of things and sees how they are naturally
directed and inclin^d. And makethe them believe that they come so to pass by
his ordinance, as though he were the lord and mouer of all that is and
shall be: And that he gives the day light and ^ayne: causes tempest and rules
the stations of times, gyuyng life or taking away life at his pleasure. By
reason whereof, the Indians being deceived of him, and seeing also such effects
to coome certeynely to pass as he has told them before, believe him in all
other things and honor him in many places with sacrifyces of the bludde and
lives of men and odoriferous spices. And when god disposes the contrary to
that which the deuell has spoken in oracle whereby he is proved a liar, he
causes the Taquin^s to persuade the people that he has changed his mind and
sentence for sum of their sins, or deuiseth sum such lie as lyketh him
best, being a skylfull master in such subtle and crafty devises to
deceive the simple and ignorant people which has smaule defense against so
mighty and crafty an adversary. And as they caul the deuell Tuyra, so do
they in many places caul the Christians by the same name, thynkyng that they
greatly honor them thereby, as in deed it is a name very feet and agreeable
to many of them, having laid aparte all honesty and virtue, living more
like dragons then men among these simple people.

Before thinhabitauntes of the Island of Hispaniola had received the Christian
faith there was among them a sect of men which lived solytarily in the
deserts and wooddes and led their life in silence and abstinence more
straightly then ever did the philosophers of Pythagoras sect, absteinyng in
like manner from the eating of al things that live by bludde contented only
with such fruits, herbs, and roots as the deserts and wooddes mynistred
unto them to eat. The professors of this sect were cauled Piaces. They gave
them selves to the knowleage of natural things, and used certain secreate
magical operations and superstitions whereby they had familiarity with
spirits which they allured into their own bodies at such times as they
would take upon them to tell of things to coome, which they did in manner as
follows. When any of the k^nges had occasyon to caul any of them owte of the
deserts for this purpose, their custom was to send them a portion of their
fine bread of Caxabbi or M^azium, and with humble request and suit to desire
them to tell them of such things as they would demand. After the request
granted and the place and day appointed, the Plari coometh with two of his
disciples waiting on him, whereof the one brings with him a vessel of a
secreate water, and the other a little silver bell. When he coommeth to the
place, he sytteth down on a round seat made for him of purpose. Where
having his disciples the one standing on the one hand and the other on the
other even in the presence of the king and certain of his nobles (for the
common people are not admytted to these mysteries) and turnynge his face toward
the deserte, he begins his inchauntment and cauleth the spirit with loud
voice by certain names which no man understands but he and his disciples.
After he has dooen thus a while, if the spirit yet defer his coommyng, he
drynketh of the said water, and therewith waxes hot and furious, and
inuerteth and turns his inchauntement, and lets him self bludde with a
thorn, marueilously turmoylyng him self as we read of the furious Sybilles
not ceasynge until the spirit be coome: who at his coommyng enters into him
and overthrows him as it wear a grehounde should ouerturne a squerell. Then
for a space, he seems to lie as though he were in great pain or in a rapte,
wonderfully tormentynge him self, during which agony, the other disciple
shakes the silver bell contynually. Thus when the agony is paste and he lies
quietly (yet withowte any sense or feelyng) the king or sum other in his
stead, demands of him what he desires to know, and the spirit answers
by the mouth of the rapte Piaces with a direct and perfect answer to all
points. In so much that on a time certain Spanyardes being present at
these mysteries with one of the kings, and in the Spanyshe tongue demanding
the Piaces of their ships which they looked for owte of Spain, the spirit
answered in the Indian toonge, and toulde them what day and hour the sh^ppes
departed from Spain, how many they were, and what they brought withowt
faylynge in any point. If he be also demanded of the eclypse of the soonne or
moon (which they greatly fear and abhor) he gives a perfect answer, and
the like of tempests, famen, plenty, war or peace, and such other things.
When all the demaundes are fynysshed, his disciples caul him aloude, rynging
the silver bell at his ear and blowynge a certain powder into his
nosethrilles whereby he is raised as it we^e from a deadesscape being yet
sumewhat heavy headed and faint a good while afect. Thus being again
r^w^^^ded of t^^cky^ge with more bread, he departs again to the desert is
with his disciples. But sense the Christian faith has been disparsed throwghe
owte the Island, these devil (...) pr^ouses have ceased, and they of the
members of the devil, are made the members of Christ by baptism, forsakynge
the devil and his works, with the vain curiosity o^ desire of knowleage of
things to coome, whereof for the most part it is better to be ignorant then
with vexation to know that which can not be avoided.

Furthermore; in many places of the firm land, when any of the kings dye,
all his household servants, as well women as men which have continually served
him, kyl them selves, beleauynge as they are taught by the devil Tuyra, that
they which kill them selves when the king dies, go with him to heaven and
seen him in the same place and office as they did before on the earth while he
lived. And that all that refuse so to do, when after they dye by their
natural death or otherwise, their souls to dye with their bodies and to be
dissolved into air and become nothing us do the souls of hogs, birds, or
fysshes or other brute beasts. And that only the other may enjoy the
priuileage of immortality for ever to serve the king in heaven. And of this
false opinion comes it that they which sow corn or set roots for the
kings bread, and gather the same, are accustomed to kill them selves that
they may enjoy this priuileage in heaven. And for the same purpose, cause a
portion of the grain of Maizium and a bundle of Iucca (whereof their bread is
made) to be buried with them in their graves that the same may serve them in
heaven if perhaps there should lack seeds to sow. And therefore they take
this with them to begin with all, until Tuyra (who makes them all these fair
promises) provide them of greater quantity. This have I my self seen in the
top of the mountains of Guaturo, where having in prison the king of that
province (who rebelled from thobedience of yowre majesty) and demanding of
him to whom perteyned those sepultures or graves which I saw in his hou^e, he
answered that they were of certain Indians which ^^ewe them selves at the
death of his father. And because they are oftentimes accustomed to burye great
quantities of wrought gold with them, I caused two graves to be opened,
wherein was nothing found but a vessel full of the grain of Maizium, and a
bundell of Iucca as I have said. And demaundyng the cause hereof of the king
and the other Indians, they answered that they that were buried there, were
the laborers of the ground, and men skillful in sowynge of seeds and making
of bread, and servants to the kings father. And to the end that their souls
should not dye with their bodies, they slew them selves at the death of the
king their master to live with him in heaven. And to the intent that they might
seen him there in the same office they reserved that Maizium and Iucca to sow
it in heaven.

Whereunto I answered them in this manner. Behold how your Tuyra deceaueth
you? And how all that he teaches you is false? You see how in so long a
time sense they are dead, they have not yet taken away this Maizium and Iucca
which is now putrified and worth nothing, and not like to be sown in
heaven. To this the king replied, saying. In that they have not taken it away
nor sown it in heaven, the cause is that they chanced to find enowgh there,
by reason whereof they had no neade of this. To this error many things were
said which seemed of little force to remove him from his false opinion, and
especially any such as at that age are occupied of the devil, whom they paynt
of the self same form and color as he appears unto them in diverse shapes
and forms. They make also Images of gold, copper and woodde, to the same
similitudes in terrible shapes and so variable as the paynters are accustomed
to paynt them at the feet of saint Mychaell tharchangell or in any other
place where they paynt them of most horrible portiture. Likewise when the
devil greatly intends to fear them, he threteneth to send them great
tempests which they caul Fu^acanas or Haurachanas, and are so vehement that
they overthrow many howses and great trees. And I have seen in montaynes full
of many and great trees, that for the space of three quarters of a league the
m^untayne has been subverted and the trees ouer^hrowen and plucked owte of the
earth with the roots: a thing doubtelesse so fearful and terryble to
behold, that it may verily appear to be done by the hand of the devil. And in
this case the Christian men ought to consider with good reason, that in all
places where the holy sacrament is reserved, the said tempests are no more so
owtragious, or so perelous as they were wont to be.

Of the temperature of the regions under or near to the burnt live cauled
Torrida zona or the Equinoctial: and of the diverse seasons of the year.
THe lands and regions that are near about the clymes of the Equinoctial
line, are naturally hot, althowghe they be otherwise temperate by the divine
providence. And therefore such flesh or fyshe as is taken and killed in these
regions, can not be preserved from putrefaction except it be tosted, sodden,
or perboylde, the same day that it is kylde. And whereas I have said that such
regions are naturally hot, and yet temperate by the providence of god, it is so
in deed. And therefore not without cause the ancient autours were of opinion
that the burnte line or Torrida zona where passes the line of the
Equinoctial, should be uninhabitable by reason the soonne has greater dominion
in that place then in any other of the sphere, remaining continually between
the two tropykes of Cancer and Capricorn. For when in these regions the earth
is opened or dygged from the superficial part thereof to the depth of a man's
heyght, it is found temperate. And within this space, the trees and plants
fasten and spread their roots, and no dieper. Extendynge the same as far in
breadth in the ground as do the^r branches in the air: And enter no dieper
into the ground then I have said, because that beneth the depth of the said
space of a man's heyght, the earth is very hot, the vpp^r part being
temperate and very moist as well by reason of thaboundaunce of water which
fauleth from heaven upon that earth at certain ordinary seasons of the
year, as also for the multitude of great ryuers, brokes, sprynges and
marysshes, whereby the myghtie and supreme lord which made the^e lands, has
most prudently provided for the preservation of the same.

R. E. As touching this point which was unknown to the owlde writers, and
withowt consideration whereof reason can not perfectly conceive how temperate
regione should be under the Equinoctial line. I have thought good for the
better manifestynge of this ^ecreate work of nature, to note owte of Cardanus
his book de Elementis, how all waters have their cour^e toward the South as
to the lowest part of the earth. he wayteth therefore as follows. The water
was made of less quantity then the earth and only in manner in the
superficial part thereof, that place might be left for the habitation of
beasts, and that water by his couldnesse might temperate and not destroy the
life of beasts. And because this generation of living creatures, was only
necessary on the superficial parts of the earth in comparison to the hole,
therefore was the water made to occupy only the superficial part, in the
which, metals, plants, beasts, and fysshes should be nuryshed. And because
there was great perell least it should be to much con^umed by the air and
heat of the soonne, continual mouinge was joined to it, whereby it gathers
cou^denes and is preserved from sodeyne resolution. For such waters as do not
move* do soon putrify, and are easily resolved into air. By reason whereof
nature provided for the generation of water in cou^de places, as under the
coals and mountains. And whereas the earth under the Equinoctial shu^de
otherwi^e for lack of moyster have bin to much burned and scorched* nature
also provided that that part of the earth should be lowest, by reason wh^reof
all waters have their course toward the South to mitigate with moyster
thextremitie of heat which otherwise should have been intolerable in that
c^yme. And by this reason, the famous river of Nilus in Egypt, albeit it have
his original and ^prynge, out of the mountains of the moon cauled Montes
Lunae nere unto the cyrcle of Caprico^ne, yet runnynge with all his branches
under and beyond the Equinoctial cyrcle, ^t di^parseth throwgh out the burnt
line of Torrida ^ona, and by the same vyolent course fauleth into owre sea nere
unto the city of Alexandria. It was necessary therefore that the greatest part
of the could and moist element should have recourse thither and consyst there,
whereas was the gr^atest necessity thereof to temper the heat of the soonne by
moystynge and coolyn^e the earth and the air, as under the Equinoctial. And
herewith also has most prudent nature provided for the security and
preservation of the places lyinge between both thextremities of heat and
cold, as between the poles and the Equinoctial. For the waters flowynge ever
one ways and k^pynge one course, no regions can be drowned by studdes: which
thing they well observe that deliver fields from inundations or
ou^rflowynges, and that take in hand to dry up marysshes It therefore waters
had not their cour^e and faul toward places low^ or declynynge, the hole casth
should be overflowed as a marrysshe And that the most declynynge part should
be toward the South, and sumwhat higher about the poles, the cause is as well
the consumynge dear of the soonne in the South^ parts, as the preserving
could of the high mountains nere to the poles. For we have else where proved
that heat consumes and wastes as could gathers and preserves. And for
this cause that part of the earth that is nearest the poles, is, was, and
ever shall be highest, and likewise lowest in the midst furthest from the
poles. And therefore it was not convenient that the son should ^aue his course
on every side, neither to the poles. For if it wear ^^ryed alyke to every
part throughowt the world, it is necessary that the earth be equal: and by
that reason should it either be altogether dried, or else all ouerflowed with
water. But where as this could not suffyce to the free course of ryuers for
the often intercourse of higher places lyinge in the way, whereby
ouerflowynges and stays of wat^rs and their corruption might ensue, most
prouydent nature has given this priuileage to water that it may so much
ascend as it has descended: that by his means passing over mountains and
hills, it may at the length be carried into the sea. etc. hitherto Cardanus,
let us now return to the history.

There are also many roughe and high mountains with temperate air and
pleasant, clear, and moderate nights. Of the which particularitie the
ancient writers having no certain knowleage, affyrmed the said burnte line or
Torrida zona, or Equinoctial to be naturally uninhabitable. As touching which
thing I am able to witness the contrary by testimony of sight and feelyng as
by most certain senses, having lived many years in this regions, by reason
whereof better credit ought to be given to me then to such as have grounded
their opinion only upon conjectures. And to speak further of the sytuation of
these regyons, you shall understand that the coaste of the North sea, being
in the goulfe of Vraba and in the port of Dariena, where the ships arryue
which coome owte of Spain, is in the syxte degree and a half, and in the
seventh, and from six and a half unto eight, except a smaule point which
enters into the sea toward the North That point which of this land and new
part of the world lies most toward the East, is the cape of saint
Augustine which is in the eight degree. So that the said goulfe of Vraba is
distant from the Equinoctial line, from a hundredth and twenty to a hundredth
and thirty leaques and three quarters of a leaque after thaccompte of.xvii.
leaques and a h^lfe for every degree from pole to pole. And thus for a little
more or less, goes all the coaste. By reason whereof, in the city of Sancta
Maria Antiqua in Dariena, and in all that course of the forsayde goulfe of
Vraba, at all times of the yea^e the days and nyghtes are in manner of equal
length. And if there be any dyfference between them by reason of this smaule
distance from the Equinoctial, it is so little, that in.xxiiii. hours making
a natural day, it can not be perceived but by the judgment of speculatiue
men and such as understand the sphere. From hense the North star is seen
very low And when the stars which are cauled the wardens of the north
star, are under the chariotte, it can not be seen, because it is under the
horisontal. And whereas I have said before that it rayneth in these regions
at certain ordinary times, it is so in deed. For it is winter and summer
there at contrary times to that which is in Spain, where the greateste could
of froste and rain is in December and January: And the greatest heat of
summer about saint Johannes day at mydsommer or in the month of July. But in
golden Castile or Beragua, it is contrary. For the summer and time of greatest
drowght and withowt rain, is at Chrystmas and a month before and a month
after. And the time when it rayneth most, is about midsommer and a month
before and a month after. And this season which they caul winter, is not for
that it is any coulder then, then at any other time of the year, or hotter at
Christmas then at other seasons, the time in these regions being ever after one
manner, but for that that in this time which they caul winter, the soonne is
hyd from their syghtes by reason of clouds and rain more then at other times.
Yet forasmuch as for the most part of the year they live in a clear, open,
and temperate air, they sumwhat shrynke and feel a little could during the
time of the said moist and cloudy air, althowgh it be not could in deed, or
at the least such could as has any sensible sharpenes.

Of diverse particular things, as woormes, serpents, beasts, fowls, trees,
etc.
MAny other things might be said, and much differyng from these whereof I have
spoken. But to let pass the multitude of things which are as variable as
the power of nature is infinite, and to speak of such things as coome
chiefly to my rememberaunce as most worthy to be noted, I will first
speak of terteyne little and troubelous beasts which may^ seem to be
engendered of nature to molest and vex men, to show them and give them to
understand how smaul and vile a thing may offend and disquiete them, to
the end that they may remember the pryncipall end for the which they were
created, that is, to know their maker and procurer of their salvation by the
way which is open to all Christian men and all other which will open the
eyes of their understanding. And although the things whereof we entende now
to speak may seem vile and little to be esteemed, yet are they worthy to
be noted and considered to understand the difference and variable works of
nature. So it is therefore, that whereas in many parts of the firm land by
the which as well the Christians as Indians do travel, there are such marysshes
and waters in the way that they are feign to go withowt breeches among the
herbs and weeds, by reason whereof, certain smaule beasts or woormes (which
they caul Garapates) much like unto tykes, cleave fast to their legs. These
worms are as little as the powder of beaten salt: And cleave so fast that they
can by no means be taken away except the place be noynted with oil. And
after that the legs be noynted awhyle with oil, or the other parts where
these little tykes are fastened, they scrape the place with a knyfe and so take
them away. But the Indi^ns which have no oil, smoke them and burn them with
fire, and abide great peynes in taking them away by this means. Of other
little beasts which trouble men and are engendein their heads or other p^rtes
of their bodies, I say that the Christian men which travel into these parts,
have them but seldom times, and that not past one or two, and this also very
seldom. For passing by the line of the Diameter where the compass makethe
difference of saylynge by the wind cauled Greco, (that is North East) and
Magistral, (that is south west) which is in the course of the Islands of Azori,
they sail but a little way following owre vyage by the west, but that all the
ly^e which the Christians carry with them, or are engendered in their heads or
other places of their bodies, dye and utterly consume by little and little, and
are not engendered in India except in the heads of little children in those
parts as well among the children of the Christians which are borne there, as
also among the natural Indians who have them commonly in their heads and
sumetymes in other parts of their bodies, and especially they of the province
of Cueua, which is a region containing more then a hundredth leaques in length,
and embraseth the one and the other coast of the North sea and of the East.
When these Indians are infected with this fylthynesse, they dress and cleanse
one an other. And they that exercise this, are for the most part women who
eat all that they take: And have herein such dexterity by reason of their
exercise, that owre men can not lightly atteyne th^runto. There is also another
thing greatly to be considered. And this is how the Christian men being
there clean from this fylthynes of India, as well in their heads as the rest
of their bodies, yet when they return to coomme again into Europe and begin
to arryue in that place of the Ocean sea where we said before that the lyse
dyed and forsook them, suddenly in their repassynge by the same clyme (as
though the lyse had tarried for them in that place) they can by no means
avoid them for the ^pace of certain days although they change their shertes
two or three times in a day. These lyse are at the first as little as nyttes,
and grow by little and little until they be of the byggenesse that they are
in Spain. This have I often times proved, having now four times pa^^ed the
Ocean sea by this vyage.

Beside these woormes and vermyn whereof we have spoken, there is another little
mischeuous woorme, which we may number among the kinds of f^eas, This
pestilence the Indians caul Nigua: Nigua.
And is much less then a flea. It perse^h the flesh of a man, and so launseth
or cutteth the same (while in the mean time it can another be seen nor taken)
that from sum it has cut of their hands, and from other their fiete until
the remedy was found to annoint the place with oil and scrape it with a
rasoure.

In the firm land in golden Castyle or Beragua, there are many vypers like
unto them of Spain. Uypers,
They that a^e bytten of them, dye in short space. For few live to the fourth
day except present remedy. Of these, sum are of a le^^e k^nd then other: And
have their tail sumwhat round, and leap in the air to assail men. And for
this cause, sum caul this kind of vypers Tyro. Their bytyng is most
venomous, and for the most part incurable. One of them chanced to byte an
Indian maid which served me in my house, to whom I caused the surgians to
mynister their ordinarye cure, but they could do her no good, nor yet get one
drop of bludde out of her, but only a yelowe water, so that she died the
third day for lack of remedy as the like has chanced to diverse other. This
maid was of thage of.xiiii. years and spoke the Spanysshe toonge as if she
had been borne in Castyle. She said that the vyper which bytte her on the
foot, was two spannes long or little le^se. And that to byte her she lepte
in the air for the space of more then six pases, as I have hard the like of
other credible persons.

I have also seen in the firm land, a kind of adders very smaule and of
seven or eight foot long. Adders.
These are so read that in the night they appear like burning cooles, and in
the day seem as red as bludde. These are also venomous, but not so much as
the vypers. There are other much less and shorter and blacker. These coome out
of the ryuers and wander sumtymes far on the land, and are likewise
venomous. There are also other adders of a russet color. These are sumwhat
bygger then the vypers, and are hurtful and venomous. There are likewise an
other sort of many colors and very long. Of these I saw one in the year
of Christ 1515. in the Island of Hispaniola nere unto the sea costs at the
foot of the mountains cauled Pedernales. When this adder was slain, I
measured her and found her to be more then.xx. foot long, and sumwhat more
then a man's fyst in byggenes. And although she had three or four deadely
wounds with a swoorde, yet dyed she not nor stoonke the same day, in so much
that her bludde continued warm all that time. There are also in the marysshes
and deserts of the firm land many other kinds of lysertes, dragons, Dragons,
and other diverse kinds of serpents whereof I entende not here to speak much,
because I have more particulerly entreated of these things in my general
history of the Weste Indyes.

There are also spiders of marvelous bygnessse. Spyders,
And I have seen sum with the body and legs, bygger then a man's hand
extended every way, And I ones saw one of such bygnesse, that only her
body was as bygge as a sparowe, and full of that laune whereof they make their
webbes. This was of a dark russette color, with eyes greates then the eyes
of a sparow. They are venomous and of terrible shape to behold. There are also
scorpions and diverse other such venomous worms. Whereby we may see, that
where as natural causes and influence of the planettes are of strongest
actiuitie, they cease not to engender and bring forth both good and badde
according to the disposytion of the matter, which they also do partly
dispose as the philosophers affirm.

Furthermore in the fyrme land, there are many toades being very noyous and
hurteful by reason of their great multitude. They are not venomous. They are
seen in great abundance in Dariena where they are so bygge that when they
dye in the time of drouth, the bones of sum of them (and especially the rybbes)
are of such greatness that they appear too be the bones of cattes or of
sum other beasts of the same byggenesse. But as the waters dyminishe and the
moisture ^onsumeth in the time of drouth (as I have said) they also consume
therewith until the year next following when the rain and moisture increase,
at which time they are seen again. Nevertheless, at this present, there is
no such quantity of them as was wont to be, by reason that as the land is
better cultured by the Christians, as well by the fellynge of wooddes and
shrubb^s as also by the pasture of kine, horses, and other beasts, so is it
apparent that this poison diminishes daily, whereby that regyon becomes more
wholesome and pleasant. These toades sing after three or four sorts. For
sum of them sing pleasauntly: other, like owres of Spain. Sum also
whistle: and other sum make an other manner of noise. They are likewise of
diverse colors: as sum green, sum russette or gray, and sum almost
black. But of all sorts, they are great, and filthy, and noyous by reason of
their great multitude: yet are they not venomous as I have said.

There are also a strange kind of crabbes, Crabbe^*
which coome forth of certain holes of the earth that they them selves
make. The head and body of these, make one round thing much like unto the
hoode of a fawkon: having four feet coming out of the one side and as many
out of the other. They have also two mouths like unto a pair of smaule
pinsers, the one bygger then the other, wherewith they byte, but do no great
hurt because they are not venomous. Their skyn and body is smoothe and thynne
as is the skin of a man, saving that it is sumwhat harder. Their color is
russette or white, or blewe, and walk sydelonge. They are very good to be
eaten: In so much that the Christians trauayling by the fyrme land, have been
greatly nurysshed by them because they are found in manner every where. In
shape and form, they are much like unto the crabbe which we paynte for the
sign Cancer, and like unto those which are found in Spain in Andalusia in the
river Guadalchiber where it enters into the sea, and in the sea coasts
therabout, saving that these are of the water and the other of the land. They
are sumtymes hurtefull, so that they that eat of them dye. But this chances
only when they have eaten any venomous thing, or of the venomous apples
wherewith the Canibale archers poison their arrows whereof I will speak
hereafter. And for this cause the Christians take heed how they eat of these
crabbes if they find them near unto the said apple trees.

Furthermore in these Indies, as well in the fyrme land as in the Islands,
there is found a kind of serpents, which they caul Y. V. anas, which sum
caul Iuannas. Serpents cauled Iuan^i.
These are terrible and fearful to sight, and yet not hurtefull. They are
very delicate to be eaten, and it is not yet known whether they be beasts of
the land or fyshes, because they live in the water, and wander in the woddes
and on the land. They have four feet, and are commonly bigger then connies
and in sum places bygger then otters, with tails like lisartes or eutes.
Their skin is spotted, and of the same kind of smothnesse or bareness,
although of diverse colors. Upon the ridge of their backs, they have many long
pricks. Their teeth^ are very sharp, and especially their fanges or dog
teeth. Their throtes are long and large, reachynge from their bea^des to their
breasts, of the like skin to the resydewe of their bodies. They are dumme,
and have no voice or make any noise or cry although they be kept tide to the
foot of a cheste or any other thing for the space of.xx. or.xxv. days
withowt any thing to eat or drink, except they give them now and then a
little of the bread of Cazabbi, or sum such other thing. They have four
feet, and their fore feet as long as a man's finger with claws like the
claws of a bird, but weaker, and such as can not grasple or take hold of
any thing. They are much better to be eaten then to behold. For few that
see them, will have desire to eat of them, by reason of their horrible shape
except such as have been accustomed to the beasts of these regyons, which
are more horrible and fearful, as this is not but only in appearance. Their
flesh is of much better taste then the flesh of connyes and more wholesome. For
it hurts none but only such as have had the frenshe pox. In so much that if
they have only been touched of that infyrmitie, although they have been hole of
long time, nevertheless they feel hurt and complain of the eating of
these Iuannas, as has been often times proved by experience.

There are found in the fyrme land certain birds so little that the hole
body of one of them is no bygger then the top of the byggest finger of a
man's hand: Birds.
and yet is the hare body withowt the feathers not paste half so bygge. This
bird, beside her lyttlenes, A very little bird.
is of such velocitie and swyftnes in flying that who so sees her sleing in
the air, ca^ not se her flap or beat her wings after any other sort then do
the dorres or humble bees or betels: so that there is no man that see^h her
fly, that would think her to be any other the^ a dorre. They make their nestes
according to the proportion of their b^gnes. And I have scene that one of these
birds with her nest put in a pair of gold weights, altogether has ward no
more the^ ii. Tomini, which are in poise.24. grams, with the feathers with out
the which she should have wayed sumwhat le^se. And do^bt less when I consider
the fynenesse of the claws and feet of these birds, I know not whereunto I
may better liken them then to the little birds which the lymmers of books
are accustomed to paynte on the margentes of church books and other books of
divine service. Their feathers are of many fair colors as golden yelowe and
green beside other variable colors. Their beak is very long for the
proportion of their bodies: and as fine and subtle as a sowyng nedle. They are
very hardye: so that when they see a man clyme the tree where they have their
nestes, they ^lye at his face and stryke him in the eyes, coming, going, and
retournynge with such swyftnes, that no man would lightly believe it that has
not seen it. And certainly these birds are so little, that I durst not have
made mention hereof if it were not that diverse other which have seen them as
well as I, can bear witness of my saying. They make their nestes of flocks and
hear of cotton whereof there is great plenty in these regions, and serves well
for their purpose. But as touching the birds, fowls, and beasts of these
Indies, because they are innumerable both little and great, I intend not to
speak much hear, because I have spoken more largely hereof in my general
hystorye of the Indyes.

There is an other kind of beasts seen in the firm land which seemed very
strange and marvelous to the Chrystian men to behold, Beasts.
and much differynge from all other beasts which have been seen in other
parts of the world. These beasts are cauled Bardati: Bardati.
And are four footed, having their rail and all the rest of their bodies
covered only with a skyn like the coperture of a barbed horse or the chekered
skin of a lysarte or Crocodyle, of color between white and russet,
inclynynge sumwhat more to white. This beast, is of form and shape much like
to a barbed horse with his barbes and flankettes in all points. And from under
that which is the barbe and coperture, the tail comes forth, and the feet
in their place, the neck also and the ears in their parts, and in fine all
things in like sort as in a barbed courser. They are of the bygnes of one of
these common dogs. They are not hurtful. They are fylthy, and have their
habitation in certain hillockes of earth where digginge with there feet they
make their dens very deep and the holes thereof in like manner as do connyes.
They are very excellent to be eaten, and are taken with nets and sum also
killed with crosbowes. They are likewise taken often times when the husband men
bury the stubble in sowyng time, or to renew the herbage for kyne and other
beasts. I have often times eaten of their flesh which seems to me of better
taste then kyddes flesh, and wholesome to be eaten. And if these beasts had ever
been seen in these parts of the woorlde where the first barbed horses had
their original, no man would judge but that the form and fasshion of the
coperture of horses furnished for the wars was first devised by the sight of
these beasts.

There is also in the firm land an other beast cauled Orso Formigaro that
is, the Ante bear. Bears.
This beast in hear and color, is much like to the bear of Spain, and in
manner of the same making save that he has a much longer snowt and is of evil
sight. They are often times taken only with slaves without any other weapon,
and are not hurtful. They are also taken with dogs because they are not
naturally armed althowgh they byte sumwhat. They are found for the most part
about and near to the hyllockes where are great abundaunce of antes. Antes.
For in these regions is engendered a certain kind of antes very little and
black, in the fyeldes and playnes where as grow no trees, where by thinstinct
of nature these antes separate them selves to engender far from the wooddes for
fear of these bears: The which because they are fearful, vile, and unarmed
(as I have said) they keep ever in places full of trees until very famen and
necessity, or the great desire that they have to fiede of these antes, cause
them to coomme out of the wooddes to hunte for them. These antes make a
hyllocke of earth to the heyght of a man, or sumwhat more or less, and as
bygge as a great chest, and sumtymes as bygge as a butte or a hogs head, and
as hard as a stone: So that they seem as though they were stones set up to
lymytte thendes and confines of certain lands.

Within these hyllockes made of most hard earth, are innumerable and infinite
little antes, the which may be gathered by busshelles when the hyllocke is
broken. The which when it is sumtymes moysted by rain and then dried again by
the heat of the soon, it breaks and has certain smaul ryftes as little
and subtyle as the edge of a knyfe. And it seems that nature has given sense
to these Antes to find such a matter of earth wherewith they may make the said
hillocke of such hardenes that it may seem a strong pauement made of lyme
and stone. And whereas I have proved and caused sum of them to be broken, I
have found them of such hardenes as if I had not seen I could not have
beleaued: In so much that they could scarsely be broken with pykes of Iren:
So strong fortresses do these little beasts make for their sauegarde against
their adversary the bear, who is chiefly nurysshed by them, and given them
as an enemy, according to the common proverb which says, Non ^alcun^
persona filibera, a chim^nchi il suo Bargello: That is, there is no man so fre
that has not his persecutour or pryuie enemy. And here when I consider the
marvelous providence which nature has given to these little boddies, I caul
to remembrance the witty sentence of Pliny, where speaking of such little
beasts, he says thus. Why do we maruayle at the towrebearynge shoulders of
Elephantes, and not rather where nature has placed so many senses and such
industry in such little boddies? where is hearing, smelling, seeinge, and
feelynge, ye, where are the veins and arteries (without which no beast can
live or move) in these so little boddies whereof sum are so smaule that their
hole boddies can scarsely be seen of owr eyes, what shall we then say of the
parts of the same? Yet even among these are there many of such sagacitie and
industrye as the like is not seen in beasts of greater quantity, no nor yet
in man. etc. But to return to the history. This enemy which nature has
given to these little beasts, uses this manner to assail them. When he
resortethe to the hyllocke where the antes lie hid as in their fortress, he
puts his toonge to one of the ryftes whereof we have spoken being as subtyle
as the edge of a swoorde, and there with continual lyckynge, makes the place
moist, the foam and froth of his mouth being of such property that by
continual lycking the place, it enlarges the ryfte in such sort by little and
little, that at the length he easily puts in his toonge which he has very
long and thynne, and much disproportionate to his body. And when he has thus
made free passage for his toonge into the hyllocke to put it easily in and out
at his pleasure, then he thrusts it into the hole as far as he can reach,
and so lets it rest a good space until a great quantity of the antes
(whose nature reioyseth in heat and moyster) have laden his tongue and as many
as he can conteyne in the holownesse thereof: at which time he suddeynly draws
it into his mouth and eats them, and returns again to the same practice
immediately until he have eaten as many as him lysteth, or as long as he can
reach any with his tongue. The flesh of this beast, is fylthy and unsavory.
But by reason of thextreme shyftes and necessity that the Christian men were
put to at their first coming into these parts, they were enforced to prove
al things and so fell to theatyng of these beasts. But when they had found
more delycate meats, they fell into hatred with this. These antes have
thapperaunce of the place of their enteraunce into the hyllocke, under the
ground. And this at so little a hole that it could hardely be found if
certain of them were not seen to pass in and out. But by this way the bears
could have no such pour to hurt them as above at the said ryftes as I have
said. There is an other strange beast which by a name of contrary effect, A
strange beast which seems a kind of Chameleon.
the Spanyardes caul Cagnuolo leggiero, that is the light dog, whereas it is
one of the sloweste beasts in the world, and so heavy and dull in mouynge
that it can scarsely go fyftie pases in a hole day. These beasts are in the
firm land, and are very strange to behold for the disproportion that they
have to all other beasts. They are abowte two spannes in length when they are
grown to their full byggenesse. But when they are very young, they are
sumewhat more gross then long. They have four subtyle fiete, and in every of
them four claws like unto birds, and joined together. Yet are another their
claws or their fiete able to sustain their bodies from the ground. By reason
whereof and by the heaviness of their boddies, they draw their bellyes on the
ground. Their necks are high and straight and all equal like the pestle of a
mortar, which is altogyther equal even unto the top withowt making any
proportion or similitude of a headde, or any dyfference except in the noddle.
And in the tops of their necks, they have very round faces much like unto
owls: And have a mark of their own hear after the manner of a cyrcle which
makethe their faces seem sumwhat more long then large. They have smaule eyes
and round: And nostrylles like unto munkeys. They have little mouths, and
move their necks from one side to an other as though they were astonysshed.
Their chief desire and delight is to cleave and stycke fast unto trees or sum
other thing whereby they may clyme alofte. And therefore for the most part,
these beasts are found upon trees whereunto cleauynge fast, they mount up by
little and little, steyinge them selves by their long claws. The color of
their hear, is between russet and white, and of the proper color of the
hear of a wesell. They have no tails, and their voice is much dyfferynge
from other beasts: for they sing only in the night: And that continually
from time to time singing ever six notes one higher then an other, so
faulynge with the same that the first note is the highest and the other in a
baser tewne as if a man should say La, sol, fa, mi, re, vt. So this beast says,
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha ha. And doubtelesse, it seems unto me, that as I have
said in the chapter of the beast cauled Bardari, that those beasts might
be thoriginall and document to imbarbe horses, even so the first inuenture of
musycke might seem by the hearing of this beast to have the first principles
of that science rather then by any other thing in the world. But now to
return to the history: I say that in a short space after this beast has
soonge and has paused a while, she returns again to the self same song,
and does this only in the night and not in the day. By reason whereof and also
because of her evil sight, I think her to be a night beast and the friend
of darkness. Sumtymes the Christian men find these beasts and bring
them home to their howses, where also they creep all abowte with their
natural slowenesse, in so much that another for threatenynge or pryckynge they
will move any faster then their natural and accustomed pase. And if they find
any trees, they creep thither immediately, and mount to the top of the
highest branch thereof, where they remain continually for the space of
eight, or ten, or twenty days without eating of any thing as far as any
man can judge. And whereas I my self have kept them in my house, I could
never perceive other but that they live only of air. And of the same opinion
are in manner all men of those regions, because they have never scene them eat
any thing, but ever turn their heads and mouths toward that part where
the wind b^oweth most: whereby may be considered that they take most
pleasure in the air. They byte not, nor yet can byte, having very little
mouths. They are not venomous or noyous any way: but altogyther brutishe and
utterly unprofitable and without commodity yet known to men, saving only to
move their minds to contemplate thinfinite pour of god, who delyteth in the
variety of creatures, whereby appears the pour of his incomprehensible
wisdom and majesty so far to excede the capacity of man's understanding.

In these regions there are likewise found certain fowls or birds which the
Indians caul Alcatraz. Fowls, and birds,
Alcatraz,
These are much bygger then geese. The greatest part of their feathers are of
russet color, and in sum parts yelowe. Their bylles or beakes are of two
spannes in length and very large near to the head, and growing smaule
toward the point. They have great and large throtes: And are much like to a
foul which I saw in Flaunders in Brusselles in yowre majesty's pallaice which
the Flemynges caul Haina. And I remember that when yowr majesty dyned one day
in yowre great haule there was brought to yowre majesty's presence a chauderne
of water with certain fysshes alive, which the said foul did eat up hole.
And I think verily that that foul was a foul of the sea because she had
fiete like fowls of the water as have also these Alcatrazi, which are likewise
fowls of the sea: and of such greatness that I have seen a hole cote of a
man put into the throats of one of them in Panama in the year 1521. And
forasmuch as in that coaste of Panama, Panama*
there passes and flies a great multitude of these Alcatrazi being a thing
very notable, I will declare the manner hereof as not only I, but also diverse
other now present in yowre majesty's court have often times seen. Yowre
majesty shall therefore understand that in this place (as I have said before)
the sea or Sur ryseth and fauleth two leagues and more from six hours to six
hours: so that when it increases, the water of the sea arryueth so near to
the houses of Panama as does owre sea (cauled Mare Mediteraneum) in Barzalona
or in Naples. And when the said increasyng of the sea comes, there comes
also therewith such a multitude of the smaule fysshes cauled sardynes, that it
is so marvelous a thing to behold, that no man would believe it that has not
seen it. In so much that the Cacique, (that is) the king of that land at such
time as I dwelt there, was bound daily as he was commanded by yowre majesty's
governor, to bring ordynaryly three canoas or barks full of the said
sardynes and to unlade the same in the markette place, which were afterward
by the ruler of the city diuyded among the Christian men without any cost or
charge to any of them. In so much that if the people had bin a much greater
multitude then they were, and as many as are at this present in Toledo or
more, and had none other thing to live by, they might have been sufficiently
sustained by these sardynes, bysyde thouerplus which should have remained. But
to return to the fowls whereof we have spoken. As the sea comes, and the
sardynes with the same, even so likewise coome the said Alcatrazzi therewith:
and fly continually over it in such a multitude, that they appear to cover
thupper part or flower of the water. And thus continue in mountynge and
faulynge from the air to the water, and from the water to the air during all
the time of their fysshynge. And as soon as they have taken any of these
sardynes, they fly above the water and eat them incontinently, and suddeynly
return again to the water for more, continuing thus course by course with out
ceasynge. In like manner when the sea fauleth, they follow there fysshynge as I
have said. There goethe also in the company of these fowls, an other kind of
fowls cauled Coda inforcata, (that is) the forked tail, whereof I have made
mention before. And as soon as the Alcatraz mounteth from the water with her
pray of the sardynes, suddeynly this Coda inforcata gives her so many strokes,
and so persecuteth her, that she causes her to let faule the sardynes which
she has in her mouth. The which as soon as they are faulne, and before they
yet touch the water, the Coda inforcata catches them even in the faule, in
such sort that it is a great pleasure to behold the combatte between them
all the day long. The number of these Alcatrazzi is such, that the Chrystian
menn^ are accustomed to send to certain Islands and rocks which are near
abowte Panama, with their boats or barks to tak^ these Alcatrazzi while they
are yet young and can not fly: and kill as many of them with staves as they
will, until they have therewith laden their barks or canoas. These young ones
are so fat and well fed that they can not be eaten. And are taken for none
other intent but only to make grease for candels to burn in the night, for the
which purpose it serves very well: and gives a clear light, and burns
easily. After this manner and for this purpose, innumerable of them are kylde.
And yet it seems that the number of them that fysshe for sardynes do daily
increase

There are other fowls cauled Passere sempie: P^ssere sempie.
that is, simple sparowes. These are sumwhat less then semewes: and have their
fiete like unto great malardes: And stand in the water sumtymes. And when the
ships sail fyftie or a hundredth leaques abowte the Islands, these fowls
beholdynge the ships coming toward them, break their flight and faule
down upon the sail yardes, mastes, and cables thereof. And are so simple and
folyshe that they tarry until they may easily be taken with men's hands, and
were therefore cauled of the maryners simple sparowes. They are black, and
upon their black, have their headde and shoulders of feathers of a dark
russet color. They are not good to be eaten, althowgh the mariners have
sumtimes bin enforced to eat the^.

There is an other kind of birds in the fyrme land, which the Christians
caul Picuti, Picuti.
because they have very great beakes in respect of the lyttlenesse of their
boddies: For their beakes are very heavy and way more then their hole boddyes
bysyde. These birds are no bygger then quayles, but have a much greater
bushement of feathers, in so much that their feathers are more then their
boddies. Their feathers are very fair and of many variable colors. Their
beakes are a quarter of a yard in length or more, and bendynge down toward
the earth, and three fyngers broad near unto the head. Their tongues are very
quilles, wherewith they make a great hyssynge. They make holes in trees with
their beakes, in the which they make their nestes. And surely these birds are
marvelous to behold for the great difference which they have from all other
birds that I have seen, as well for their toonges (which are quylles as I have
said) as also for the strangeness of their sight and disproportion of their
great beakes in respect of the rest of their boddies. There are no birds
found that provide better for the safegarde of their young in the time of
their breedynge to be withowte danger of wild cattes that they enter not
into their nestes to destroy their eggs or young. And this as well by the
strange manner of buyldyng their nestes, as also by their own defense. And
therefore when they perceive that the cattes approach toward them, they ente^
into their nestes: and holding their beakes toward thenteraunce of the same,
stand at their defense, and so vex the cattes that they cause them to leave
their enterprise.

There are also other birds of sparowes, which the Christians by contrary
effect caul Matti, that is fools. Whereas nevertheless there is no bird that
shows more wit and craft in defending her young from perell. Folysshe
sparowes.
These birds are little and in manner black, and sumewhat bygger then owre
thrusshes. They have certain white feathers in their necks, and the like
sagacitie or sharpenes of sense as have the birds or pyes cauled Gazzuole.
They seldom times light upon the earth. They make their nestes in trees
separated from other, because the wild cattes (cauled Mammoni) are accustomed
to leap from tree to tree, not descendynge to the ground for fear of other
beasts, except when they are enforced by thyrste to coomme down to drink at
such times as they are sure not to be molested. And for this cause do not
these birds make their nestes but in trees far diuyded from other. They make
them of a cubette in length or more, after the manner of bags or little
sackes, large at the bottom, and growing narower and narower toward the
mouth whereby they are fastened: having the hole whereat they enter into the
sack, of such byggenes as may only suffice to re^eaue them. And to the end
that the cattes may not devour their young if they chance to mount upon
the trees where they have their nestes, they use an other craft, which is, to
make their nestes in thycke branches of trees, and to defend the same with
sharp and strong thorns implycate and set in such order that no man is able
to make the like. So that the cattes can by no means put their legs into the
hole of the neste to take owte the young birds, as well for the sharpenes of
the thorns as also for the depth of the nestes, in the bottom whereof, the
young birds rest with out danger of their enemy. For sum of their nestes
being three or four spannes in length, the leg of the catte can not reach
to the bottom thereof. They use also an other policy: which is, to make many
of their nestes in one tree. The which they do for one of these two causes:
that is, that either of their own natural disposition they are accustomed to
go in great multitudes, and rejoice in the company of their own generation as
do the birds which we caul stares, or else to the intent that if it should so
chance that the cattes should clyme the trees where they make their nestes,
they might be a greater company to resyste and molest the cattes, at whose
approach they make a fearful and terrible cry, whereby the cattes are put to
flight.

Furthermore, in the firm land, and in the Islands, there are certain birds
cauled Piche or Gazzuole, Gazz^ole.
sumewhat like unto those which we caul woodwaules, or woodpeckes, being
less then owrs of Spain. These are altogether black, and go hoppynge and
leapyng. Their beakes are also black and of the same fasshyon as are the
popingiays beakes. They have long tails, and are sumwhat bygger then s^ares.

There are other birds cauled Pintadelli, Pintadelli.
which are like unto certain green birds which the Italyans caul
Fringuelli: and are of seven colors. These birds for fear of the cattes,
are ever woonte to make their nestes over the banks of ryuers or the sea,
where the branches of trees so reach over the water that with a little weight
they may bow down to the water. Their nestes are made so near the tops of
the branches that when the cattes coome thereon, the branches bend toward
the water, and the cattes turn back again for fear of faulynge. For
although no beast in the world be more malicious then this, yet whereas the
most part of beasts are naturally inclyned to swymme, this catte has no
manner of aptenesse thereunto, and is therefore soon drowned or strangeled in
the water, and by a pryuie sense of nature fears the danger which he can not
escape. These birds make their nestes in such sort, that althowgh they be
weete and filled with water, yet do they so suddenly rise up again, that the
young birds are not thereby hurt or drowned.

There are also many nyghtyngales and other birds which sing maruelously
with great melody and dyfference in singing. These birds are of marvelous
diverse colors the one from the other. Sum are altogether yelowe, and sum
other of so excellent, delectable, and high a color as it wear a rubye.
Other are also of diverse and variable colors: sum of few colors, and other
sum all of one color: being all so fair and bewtifull, that in bryghtnesse
and shynynge they excel all that are seen in Spain, or Italy or other
provinces of Europe. Many of these are taken with nets, lyme twigs, and
sprynges of diverse sorts.

Diverse other sorts of great fowls like unto Eagles, Great fowls
and such other as live of pray, are found in the firm land of such
diversity, that it is in manner impossible to descrybe them all particularly.
And forasmuch as I have more largely entreated hereof in my general history
of the Indies, I think it not requysite here to make any further mention of
the same.

Of trees, fruits, and plants.
THere is both in the firm land and the Islands a certain tree cauled
Cocus, Cocus.
being a kind of date trees and having their leaves of the self same
greatenesse as have the date trees which bear dates, but dyffer much in their
growing. For the leanes of this Cocus grow owte of the trunkes of the tree as
do the fyngers out of the hand, wreathynge them selves one within an other
and so spreadynge abroad. These trees are high: and are found in great plenty
in the coaste of the sea of Sur, in the province of Cacique Chiman. These date
trees bring forth a fruit after this sort. Being altogyther unite as it
grows on the tree, it is of greater circumference then the head of a man.
And from the superficial part to the myddest which is the fruit, it is
inuolued and covered with many webs much like unto those hyrdes of towe which
they use in Andalusia. Of this towe or web, the East Indians make a certain
kind of clothe of three or four sorts, and cords for the sails of ships.

But in these Indies of yowr majesty, they pass not for these cords or this
clothe that may be made of the fruit of Cocus, by reason of the great plenty
that they have of the bombage or cotton of the gossampine trees. The fruit
which is in the myddest of the said towe, is (as I have said) as bygge as a
man's fyfte, and sumtymes twyse as bygge and more. It is in form, like unto a
walnutte, or sum other round thing sumwhat more long then large, and very
hard. The rynde or bark hereof, is as thycke as the cyrcle of letters of a
riale of plate. And within, there cleaves fast to the rynde of the nutte a
carnositie or substance of coornel, of the thyckenesse of half a finger or of
the least finger of the hand: And is very white, like unto a fair Almonde,
and of better taste and more pleasant. When this fruit is ch^wed, there
remain certain crummes as do the like of almondes. Yet if it be swalowed
down, it is not unpleasant. For al^howgh that after the iewse or moisture be
gonne down the throat before the said crummes be swalowed, the rest which
is eaten seem sumwhat sharp or sower, yet ^oth it not so greatly offend the
taste as to be cast away. While this Cocus is yet fresh and newly taken from
the tree, they use not to eat of the said carnositie and fruit: But first
beatynge it very much, and then straynynge it, they draw a milk thereof, much
better and sweeter then is the milk of beasts, and of much substance: The
which the Christian men of those regions put in the ^ortes or cakes which they
make of the grain of Maizium whereof they make their bread, or in other bread
as we put bread in porrage: So that by reason of the said milk of Cocus, the
cortes are more excellent to be eaten with out offense to the stomach. They are
so pleasant to the taste, and leave it as well satisfied as thowghe it had been
delyted with many delycate dysshes. But to proceade further, yowre majesty
shall understand, that in the place of the stone or coornell, there is in the
myddest of the said carnositie, a void place, which nevertheless is full of
a most clear and excellent water, in such quantity as may fill a great
egg shell, I have seen one of these fruits opened the which when it was
ho^e, if it were ^hake^ the water was hard shogge therein as it were in a
bottle, but in time it consumed and was pa^tly congeled into a salt substance,
or more or less according to the byggenesse of the Cocus. The which water
suerly, is the most substantial, excellent and precious to be droonke, that
may be found in the world. In so much that in the momente when it passes
the palate of the mouth and begins to goo down the throat it seemethe that
from the sole of the foot to the crown of the headde, there is no part of
the boddye but that feelethe great comfort thereby: as it is doutlesse one of
the most excellent things that may be tast^d upon the earth, and such as I
am not able by writing or toonge to express. And to proceade yet further, I
say that when the meat of this fruit is taken from the vessel thereof, the
vessel remains as fair and net as though is were pullyshed: and is
without, of color inclynynge toward black, and shyneth or glystereth very
fair. And is within of no less dilicatenesse. Such as have accustomed to
drink in these vessels, and have bynne trowbeled with the disease cauled the
fretinge of the guts, say that they have by experience found it a marvelous
remedy against that disease: And that it breakethe the stone and provoke
urine. This fruit was cauled Cocus for this cause, that when it is taken from
the place where it cleaves fast to the tree, there are seen two holes, and
above them two other natural holes, which altogyther, do represent the
giesture and figure of the cattes cauled Mammone, that is, munkeys, when they
cry: which cry the Indians caul Coca: But in very deed, this tree is a
kind of date trees: and has the same effect to heal fretynge of the guts,
that Pliny descrybeth all kinds of date trees to have.

Great trees.
There are furthermore in the firm land, trees of such byggenesse that I dare
not speak thereof but in place where I have so many witnesses which have seen
the same as well as I. I say therefore, that a leaque from Dariena or the city
of Sancta Maria Antiqua, there passes a river very large and diepe, which is
cauled Cuti: over the which the Indians had laid a great tree so trauersinge
the same that it was in the stead of a bridge, the which I my self with
diverse other that are at this present in yowre majesty's court, have often
times passed over. And forasmuch as the said tree had line long there, and by
the great weight thereof was so shronke downewarde and partly covered with
water that none could pass over it but were weete to the knee, I being then in
the year 1522. thofficial of Justice in that city at yowre majesty's
appoyntemente, caused an other great tree to be laid in that place which in
like manner trauersed the river and reached more the^ fyftie foot over the
further side. This tree was exceadynge great, and rested above the water more
then two cubytes. In the faule, it cast down all such other trees as were
within the reach thereof: And discovered certain vynes which were so laden
with black grapes of pleasant taste, that they satisfied more then fifty
persons which eat their fylle thereof. This tree in the thyckest part thereof,
was more then syxtene spannes thick: And was nevertheless but little in
respect of many other trees which are found in this province. For the Indians
of the coaste and province of Car^agenia, make barks or boats thereof (which
they caul Canoas,) of such byggenesse, being all of one hole tree, that sum
conteyne a hundredth men, sum a hundredth and thirty, and sum more, having
nevertheless such void space within the same, that there is left
sufficient room to pass to and fro through owte all the Canoa. Sum of these
are so large bysyde the length, that they conteyne more then ten or twelve
spannes in breadth, and sail with two sails as with the master sail and the
trinkette which they make of very good cotton. The greatest trees that I have
seen in these parts or in any other regions, was in the province of Guaturo,
the king whereof rebellynge from thobedience of yowre majesty, was persued by
me and taken prisoner: At which time I with my company, passed over a very
high mountain full of great trees, in the top whereof we found one tree
which had three roots or rather divisions of the root above the earth in
form of a tryangle or triuette: A maruelo^-tree.
so that between every foot of this triangle or three feet, there was a space
of twenty foot between every foot. And this of such heyght above the earth,
that a laden carte of those wherewith they are accustomed to bring home corn
in the time of harvest in the kyngedome of Toledo in Spain, might easily have
passed throwgh every of those particions or wyndowes which were between the
three feet of the said tree. From the earth upward to the trunk of the tree,
the open places of the dyuisions between these three feet, were of such
heyght from the ground, that a footeman with a iauelyn was not able to reach
to the place where the said feet joined together in the trunk or body of the
tree which grew of great height in one piece and one hole body, or ever it
spredde in branches, which it did not before it exceaded in heyhht the tower
of saint Roman in the city of Toledo: from which heyght and upward, it
spread very great and strong branches. Among certain Spanyardes which
clymed this tree, I my self was one. And when I was ascended to the place
where it begun to spread the branches, it was a marvelous thing to behold a
great country of such trees toward the province of Abrayme. This tree was
easy to clyme, by reason of certain Besuchi (whereof I have spoken before)
which grew wreathed about the tree in such sort that they seemed to make a
scalynge ladder. Every of the foresaid three feet which bore the boddie of
the tree, was twenty spannes in thyckenesse. And where they joined al together
above in the trunk or boddye of the tree, the principal trunk was more then
forty and five spannes in circuit. I named the mountain where these trees
grow, the mountain of three footed trees. And this which I have now declared,
was seen of all the company that was there with me when (as I have said
before) I took king Guaturo prisoner in the year 1522. Many things more
might here be spoken as touching this matter, as also how there are many
other excellent trees found of diverse sorts and dyfference, as sweet Ceder
trees, black date trees, and many other: of the which sum are so heavy that
they can not flote above the water but synke immediately to the bottom. And
other again as light as a cork. As touching all which things I have
written more largely in my general history of the Indies. And forasmuch as at
this present I have entered to entreat of trees, before I pass any further to
other things, I will declare the manner how the Indians kyndle fire, only wi^h
woodde and without fire, ^yndlynge of fire withowt fire.
the manner whereof is this. They take a piece of woodde of two spannes in
length, as bygge as the least finger of a man's hand, or as an arrowe well
pullysshed, and of a strong kind of woodde which they keep only for this
purpose. And where they intend to kyndle any fire, they take two other pieces
of woodde of the dryest and lyghtest that they can find, and bind them fast
together one with an other as close as two fyngers joined. In the myddest or
between these, they put the point of the first little staff made of hard and
strong wood which they hold in their hands by the top thereof, and turn or
rub it round about continually in one place between the two pieces of
woodde which lie bound together upon the earth, which by that incessant
rubbing and chafynge, are in short space kyndeled and take fire. Purrified
woodde shynyng in the night.


I have also thought good here to speak sumwhat of such things as coomme to
my rememberaunce of certain trees which are found in this land, and sumetyme
also the like have bynne seen in Spain. These are certain putrifyed troonkes
which have ^yne so long rottyng on the ^arth that they are very white and
shine in the night like burning fire brandes. And when the Spanyardes find
any of this woodde, and intend privily in the night to make war and invade
any province when case so requires that it shall be necessary to go in the night
in such places where they know not the way, the foremost Christian man which
guydethe the way, associate with an Indian to direct him therein, takes a
little star of the said woodde, which he put^eth in his cappe hanging
behind on h^s shoulders, by the light whereof he that follows next to him,
directs his journey, who also in like manner bears an other star behind
him, by the shynynge whereof the third follows the same way, and in like
manner do all the rest, so that by this means none are lost or stragle owte of
the way. And forasmuch as this light is not seen very far, it is the better
policy for the Chrystians because they are not thereby disclosed before they
invade their enemies.

Furthermore as touching the natures of trees, one particular thing seems
worthy to be noted, whereof Pliny makes mention in his natural hystorye
where he says that there are certain trees which contynewe ^uer green and
never lose their leaves, Pliny.
as the baye tree, the Ceder, Trees which continue ever green.
the orange tree, and the olyue tree with such other, of the which in all
together he names not paste five or six. To this purpose, I say, that in the
Islands of these Indies, and also in the firm land, it is a thing of much
difficulty to find two trees that lose or cast their leaves at any time. For
althowgh I have diligentely searched to know the trewthe hereof, yet have I
not seen any that lose their leaves, either of them which we have browght out
of Spain into these regions, as Orange trees, Linions, Ceders, Palms, or date
trees and Pomegranate trees, or of any other in these regions ex^epte only
Cassia, Cassia,
which loses his leaves and has a greater thing appropriate to it self
only: which is, that whereas all other trees and plants of India spread
their roo^^s no d^eper in the earth then the depth of a man's heyght or
sumewhat more, A secreat^ thing.
not descendyng any further into the ground by reason of the great heat which
is found beneth that depth, yet does Cassia pearce further into the ground
until it find water: which by the Philosophers opinion should be the cause of
a thynne and watery radycall moyster to such things as draw their
nuryshement thereof, Radycall moisture*
as ^at and v^ctuous grounds with temperate heat, yield a fast and firm
moisture to such things as grow in them, which is the cause that such
trees lose not their leaves, as the said thynne and waterysshe moisture is
cause of the contrary, as appearethe by the said effect which is seen only
in Cassia, and none other tree or plant in all these parties.

Of Reeds or Canes.
I Have not thought it convenient in the chapiture before to speak of that
whereof I intend now to entreat of reeds or canes to thintente that I
woolde not mengle them with plants or trees, being things of the^ selves
worthy to be particularly observed. So it is therefore, that in the firm land
there are many sorts of reeds, so that in many places they make their howses
thereof, covering them with the tops of the same, and making their waules of
them in like manner, as I have said before. And among these kinds of reeds,
there is one so great, that the canes thereof are as bygge as a man's leg in
the knee, and three spannes in length from joint to joint or more: in so much
that every of them is of capacity to conteyne a little bucket of water. In
this kind, here are found sum greater and sum less, of the which sum they
use to make quyuers for arrows. There is found an other kind which suerly is
marvelous, being little bygger then a Iauelen, the canes whereof are longer
then two spannes. These reeds grow one far from an other, as sumtymes
twenty or thirty pases, and sumetymes also two or three leaques. They grow
in manner in all prouynces in the Indies: And grow nere to very high trees
whereunto they lean, and creep up to the tops of their branches, which
they imbrase and descend again down to the earth. Their canes are full of
most clear water without any manner of taste or sauoure either of the canes or
of any other thing: And such as if it were taken owte of the fressheste
spring in the world. Nor yet is it known that ever it hurt any that droonke
thereof. For it has oftentimes so chanced that as the Christen men have
trauayled in these regions in desolate ways where for lack of water they have
been in great danger to dye for thyrste, they have escaped that perell by
reason that they found the said reeds, of the water of whose canes they have
droonke a great quantity withowt any hurt thereof ensewynge. Therefore when
they find these in any place, they make water vessels of the canes thereof,
and carry as many of them full of water as may suffice for one days iornay. And
sumtyme they carry so many, that they take for every man two or three quartes of
water which may serve them for many days because it does not corrupt, but
remaynethe still fresshe and good.

There are also certain plants which the Christians caul Platani. Platani.
These are as high as trees, and become as bygge in the trunk as the knee of a
man or more. From the foot to the top, they bear certain long and large
leaves, being more then three spannes in largenes, and about ten or twelve in
length: The which when they are broken of the wind, the stalk remains hole
in the myddest. In the myddeste of this plant in the highest part thereof,
there grows a cluster with forty or fyftie Platans about it, every of them
being a spanne and a half in length, and as bygge as a man's arm in the
smau^e, or more or less according to the goodness of the soil where they
grow. They have a rynde not very thycke, and easy to be broken: being within
altogether full of a substance like unto the marye of the bone of an ox as it
appears when the rynde or bark is taken from the same. This cluster owght
to be taken from the plant, when any one of the Platans begin to appear
yelowe. At which time they take it and hang it in their houses where all the
cluster waxes ripe with all his Platans. This cluster is a very good fruit:
And when it is opened and the rynde taken of, there are found within it many
good dry fygges which being roasted or stewed in an oven in a close pot or sum
such other thing, Figs.
are of pleasant taste much like the conserve of honey. They putrify not on
the sea so soon as sum other fruits do: but continue fyfteene days and more
if they be gathered sumwhat green. They seem more delycate on the sea then
on the land, not for that they any thing increase in goodness on the sea,
but because that whereas on the sea other things are lackyng whereof is plenty
on the land, those meats seem of best taste which satisfy present
necessity. This troonke or sprygge which brings forth the said cluster is
a hole year in growyng and brynging forth fruit. In which time it has put
forth round abowte it ten or twelve sprygges as bygge as the first or
principal, and multiplieth no less then the pryncipall in bringing forth
of clusters with fruits likewise at their time, and also in bringing forth
other and many sprygges as is said before. From the which sprygges or
trunkes, as soon as the cluster of the fruit is taken away, the plant
begins to dry and wyther, which then they take out of the ground because
it does none other then occupy it in vain and without profyt. They are so
many and do so maruelously increase and multiply, that it is a thing in
manner incredible. They are exceadynge moist. In so much that when they are
plucked up from the place where they gro^^, there issheweth forth a great
quan^^tie of water as well owte of the plant as owte of the place where it
grew: In such sort that all the moisture of the earth far abowte, might
seem to be gathered to gyther abowte the trunk or block of the said
plant: with the fruits whereof, the antes are so far in love, that they are
seen in great multitudes in the branches of the plants. So that for the
multitude thereof it sumetyme so chances that men are enforced to take away
the Platans from their possession. These fruits are found at all times of the
year.

There is also an other kind of wyld plants that grows in the fyeldes: which
I have not seen but in the Island of Hispaniola, althowgh they be found in
other Islands of the Indies. These they caul Tunas. ^unas.
They grow of a thistle full of thorns, and bring forth a fruit much like
unto great fygges, which have a crown like medlers, and are within of a high
color, with graynes and the rynde like unto a fygge. They are of good taste:
And grow abundantly in the fyeldes in many places. They work a strange
effect in such as eat them. For if a man eat two or three or more, they
cause his urine to be of the very color of bludde, which thing chanced
once to my self. At which time as I made water and saw the color of my
urine, I entered into a great suspicion of my life, being so astonysshed for
fear, that I thought the same had chanced to me upon sum other cause. In so
much that surely my imagination might have done me hurt, but that they
which were with me did conforte me immediately, declarynge the cause thereof as
they knew by experience being ancient inhabitours in those regions.

There grows also an other plant which the people of the country caul
Bihaos. Bihaos.
This puts forth certain straight branches and very broad leaves which the
Indians use for diverse purposes. For in sum places they cover their houses with
the leaves thereof cowched and laid after the manner of thetche, whereunto it
serves very well. Sumtymes also when it rayneth, they cast these over their
heads to defend them from the water. They make also certain chestes which
they caul Hauas, Hauas,
weaued after a strange sort and intermixed with the leaves of this Bihaos.
These chestes are wrought in such sort, that although it rain upon them, or
they chance to faule into the water, yet are not such things wette as are
within them. They are made of the branches of the said Bihaos with the leaves
weaued together therewith. In these they keep salt and other subtyle things.
They use them also for an other purpose, which is this: That findyng them in
the fields at such time as they have scarsenesse of vyttayles, they dygge up
the roots of these plants while they are yet young, or eat the plant it
self in that part where it is most tender, which is from a foot under the
ground, where it is as tender and white as a reed or bulrusshe.

And forasmuch as we are now coomme to thend of this narration, Dying of
cotton.
it comes to my rememberaunce to make mention of an other thing which is not
far from my purpose. And this is how the Indians do stayne or dye cloth of
bombage cotton, or any other thing which they intend to dye of diverse
colors: as black, tawny, green, blewe, yelowe, and read, which they do
with the barks or ryndes, and leaves of certain trees, which they know by
experience to be good for this practice. And by this art they make colors in
such perfection and excellency that no better can be diuysed. But this
seems a strange thing, A strange thing.
that they do all this in one self same vessel: So that when they have
caused the said ryndes and leaves to boil together, they make in the same
vessel without any change (as I have said) as many colors as them lysteth.
Which thing I suppose to coomme to pass by the disposition of the color
which they have first given to the thing that they intend to dye or color,
whether it be threede, web, or clothe, or any thing that they intend to
color.

Of venomous apples wherewith they poison their arrows.
THe apples wherewith the Indian Canibales inueneme their arrows, grow on
certain trees covered with many branches and leaves being very green and
growyng thick. They are laden with abundaunce of these evil fruits, and have
their leaves like the leaves of a pear tree, but that they are less and
rounder. The fruit is much like the muscadell pears of the Island of Sicilie
or Naples in form and byggenesse: And are in sum parts steyned with read
spots, and of very sweet savors. These trees for the most part, grow
ever by the sea coasts and near unto the water: And are so fair and of
pleasant savor, that there is no man that seethe them but will desire to
eat thereof.

In so much that if it may be spoken of any fruit yet growing on the earth,
Note.
I would say that this was the unhappy fruit whereof owre first parents Adam
and Eve tasted, whereby they both lost their felicity and procured death to
them and their posterity. Of these fruits, and of the great antes whose
bytynge causes swellynge (whereof I have spoken else where) and of the eutes or
lysartes, and vypers, and such other venomous things, the Canibales which are
the chyefe archers among the Indians, Canibales archiers.
are accustomed to poison their arrows wherewith they kill all that they wound.

wherewith they inuenymther arrows
These venemes they mengle together and make thereof a black mass or
composition which appears like unto very black pytche. Of this poison I
caused a great quantity to be burnt in Sancta Maria Antiqua in a place two
leaques and more within the land, with a great multitude of their inuenemed
arrows and other munition, with also the house wherein they were reserved.
This was in the year.1514. at such time P^trus Arias.
as tharmy arrived there with captain Pedrarias da villa at the
commandment of the Catholyke king Don Ferdinando. But to return to the
hystory. These apples (as I have said) grow near unto the sea. And whereas the
Christians which serve yowr majesty in these parties, suppose that there is no
remedy so profitable for such as are wounded with these arrows, as is the
water of the sea if the wound be much wassted therewith, The water of the sea.
by which means sum have escaped although but few, yet to say the trewthe,
albeit the water of the sea have a certain caustike quality agenyst poison,
it is not a sufficient remedy in this case: nor yet to this day have the
Christian perceived that of fifty that have been wounded, three have recovered.
But that yowr majesty may the better consider the force of the veneme of these
trees, you shall further understand that if a man do but repose him self to
sleep a little while under the shadow of the same, he has his head and eyes
so swollen when he ryseth, that the eye lyddes are joined with the chekes. And
if it chance one drop or more of the dew of the said tree to faule into
the eye, it utterly destroys the sight. The pestilent nature of this tree is
such that it can not be declared in few words. Of these there grows
great plenty in the goulfe of Vraba toward the North coast on the Weste and
East side. The goulf of vraba.
The wood of these trees when it burns, makes so great a stynke that no
man is able to abide it, by reason it causes so great a pain in the headde.

Among other trees which are in these Indies as well in the Islands as in the
firm land, there is an other kind which they caul Xagua, Xagua.
whereof there is great plenty. They are very high and straight, and fair to
behold. Of these they use to make pykes and iauelyns of diverse lengthes and
byggenesse. They are of a fair color between russette and white. This tree
brings forth a great fruit as bygge as Papauer or poppie and much like
thereunto. It is very good to be eaten when it is ^ype. Owte of this they get
a very clear water wherewith they wasshe their legs and sumetymes all their
boddyes when they feel their flesh werye, faint, or loose. The which water,
bysyd^ that it has a been dynge quality, it has also th^s property, that
what so ever it touches, it steyneth it black by ly^tle and little until it
be as black as giete, which color can not be taken away in less space then
ten or twelve days. And if the nail be but touched therewith, it is so
steined that it can by no means be taken away until it either faule of, or
grow owte and be clypped away by little and little, as I my self have
oftentimes seen by experience.

There is an other kind of trees whith they caul Hobi. Hobi.
These are very great and fair, Sum think these to be mi^obalanes.
and cause wholesome air where they grow and a pleasant shadow, and are found
in great abundaunce. Their fruit is very good, and of good taste and sauoure,
and much like unto certain damsons or prunes being little and yelowe. But
their stone is very great: by reason whereof they have but little meat. Their
bark or rynde boiled in water, makes a wholesome bathe for the legs, because
it binds and steyeth the looseness of the flesh so sencibly that it is a
marueyle to consider. It is suerly a wholesome and excellent bathe against such
faintness: And is the best tree that may be found in those parties to
sleep under. For it causes no heaviness of the headde as do diverse other
trees. Which thing I speak because the Christians are much accustomed in
those regions to lie in the fyeldes. It is therefore a common practice among
them, that where so ever they find these trees, there they spread their
mattresses and beds wherein they sleep.

There are also a kind of high date trees and full of thorns. Date trees,
The woodde of these is most excellent: being very black, and shynynge, and
so heavy that no part thereof can swymme above the water, but synketh
immediately to the bottom. Of this woodde they make their arrows and darts:
Also iauelyns, spears, and pykes. And I say pykes, because that in the
coasts of the sea of Sur, Thinhabitan^es of the sea of Sur.
beyond Esquegus and Vracha, the Indians use great and long pykes made of the
woodde of these date trees. Of the same likewise they make clubbes and swoordes
and diverse other weapons. Also vessels and household stuff of diverse sorts
very fair and commodious. Furthermore of this woodde the Christians use to
make diverse musical instruments, as clarisimbals, lutes, gyterns, and such
other, the which bysyde their fair shydynge color like unto giete, are also
of a good sound and very durable by reason of the hardenesse of the woodde.

After that I have said thus much of trees and plants, I have thought good
also to speak sumwhat of herbs. An herb that bearethe cords.
You shall therefore understand that in these Indies there is an herb much
like unto a yelowe lyllie, abowte whose leaves there grow and creep certain
cords or laces, as the like is partly seen in the herb which we caul lased
sauery. But these of the Indies are much bygger, and longer: and so strong
that they tie their hanging beds thereby which they caul Hamacas whereof we
have spoken elsewhere. These cords, they caul Cabuia and Henequen, Cabuia and
he^^quen.
which are al one thing saving that Henequen is less and of a fyner
substance as it were line: And the other is grosser like the wycke or twyste
of hemp, and is imperfecte in comparison to the other. They are of color
between white and yelowe like unto abarne, and sum also white. With Henequen
which is the most subtyle and fine threede, the Indians saw in sunder
fetters, A strau^g thing.
cheynes, or bars of Iren in this manner. They move the threede of Henequen
upon the iren which they intend to saw or cut, drawing the one hand after
the other as do they that saw, putting ever now and then a portion of fine
sand upon the threede, or on the place or part of the Iren where they
continue rubbing the said threede. So that if the threede be worn, they take
an other, and continewe in their work as before until they have cut in
sunder the iren although it be never so bygge: and cut it as if it were a
tender thing and easy to be sawne.

And for as much as the leaves of trees may be counted among herbs, Leaves,
I will here speak sumewhat of the quality of the leaves of certain trees
which are found in the Island of Hispaniola. These trees are so full of
thorns, that there is no tree or plant that seems more wild and deformed:
so that I can not well determyne whether they be trees or plants. They have
certain branches full of large and deformed leaves, which branches were
first leaves like unto the other. As the branches made of these leaves grow
forth inlength, there comes other leaves of them. So that ^n fine it is a
dyfficult thing to descrybe the form of these trees except the same should be
done by a paynter whereby the eye might conceive that wherein the toonge
fails in this behalf. The leaves of this tree are of such virtue, A leaf of
great virtue.
that being well beaten and spreadde upon a cloth after the manner of a
plaster, and so laid to a leg or arm that is broken in many pieces, it
heals it in fyftene days, and makes it as hole as though it had never been
broken. During the time of this operation, it cleaves so fast to the flesh
that it can not without much difficulty be taken away. But as soon as it
has healed the sore and wrought his operation, it loses it self from the
place where it was laid, as I my self and diverse other which have proved it,
know by experience

Of fysshes and of the manner of fysshynge.
IN the sea coasts of the firm land, there are diverse and sundry kinds of
fysshes much differynge in shape and form. And although it be impossible to
speak of all, yet will I make mention of sum. And first to begin at
sardynes, you shall understand that there is found a kind of these fysshes
very large and with read tails, being a very delicate fysshe. The best
kinds of other fysshes are these: Moxarre, Diabace, Brettes, Dahaos, Thorn
backs, and Salmons. All these and diverse other which I donot now remember, are
taken in great quantity in ryuers. There are likewise taken very good
creuysshes. There are also found in the sea, certain other fysshes: as soles,
mackerelles, turbuttes, Palamite, Lizze, Polpi, Chieppe, Xaibas, Locustes,
Oysters, exceadynge great Tortoyses, and Tiburoni of marvelous byggenesse:
Tiburons.
Also Manates, Manates
and Murene, and many other fysshes which have no names in our language. And
these of such diversity and quantity as can not be expressed without large
writing and long time. But to let pass to entreat particulerly of the
multitude of fysshes, I intend to speak chiefly and sumwhat largely of three
sorts of most notable fysshes: whereof the first is, the great Tortoyses,
Great Tortoy^es.
the second is cauled Tiburon, and the third Manate. And to begin at the
first, I say that in the Island of Cuba, are found great Tortoyses (which
are certain shell fysshes) of such byggenesse that ten or fyfteene men are
scarsely able to lift one of them out of the water, as I have been informed of
credible persons dwelling in the same Island. But of that which I my self
have seen, I can testify that in the firm land in the vyllage of Acla there
are of this sort sum taken and killed of such byggenes that six men with
much difficulty could scarsely draw them out of the water. And commonly the
least sort of them are as much as two men may carry at a burden. That which I
saw lifted up by six men, had her shell a yard and a quarter in length, and
in breadth more then five yardes. The manner of taking them, is this. It
sumtymes chances that in their great nets (which they caul shoot
ne^tes) there are found certain Tortoyses of the common sort in great
quantities. And when they coomme out of the sea and bring forth their eggs
and go together by coompanies from the sea to feade on the land, the
Christians or Indians follow their steps which they find in the sand, and
soon overtake them because they are very heavy and slow in going, although
they make all the haste they can to return^ to the sea as soon as they epsy
any boddie. When they that pursewe them have overtaken them, they put a stake
or staff under their legs and ouerturne the^ on their backs as they are yet
runnynge, so that they can go no further nor yet rise again or turn. And thus
they suffer them to lie still while they follow after the rest which they
ouerturne in like manner: And by this means take very many at such times as
they coome forth of the sea as I have said. This fysshe is very excellent and
wholesome to be eaten, and of good taste. The second of the three fysshes whereof
I have spoken, is the Tiburon. Tiburons.
This is a very great fysshe and very quick and swyfte in the water, and a
cruel deuourer. These are often times taken, as well when the ships are
under sail in the Ocean, as also when they lie at anchor, or at any other time,
and especially the least kind of these fisshes. When the ships are under
sail, the biggest sort are taken after this manner. When the Tiburon sees the
ship sailinge he follows it swymmynge behind. The which things the
mariners seeinge, cast furthe all the fylthe of the ship into the sea for
the fysshe to eat, who nevertheless follows the^ with equal pase although
they make never such haste with full wynd and sails, and waloweth on every
side and about the ship: And thus follows it sumetyme for the space of a
hundredth and fyftie leaques and more. And when the mariners are disposed to
take them, they cast down by the stern of the ship, a hoke of yren as big
as the biggest finger of a man's hand of three spannes in length and crooked
like a fysshehooke with beardes according to the bigness thereof, and
fastened to an iren chain of five or six linkes near unto the end, and from
thense tied with a great rope, fastening also on the hook for a bayte, a
piece of sum fisshe, or hogs flessh, or sum other flesh, or the bouwelles
and intralles of an other Tiburon wh^che they have taken before, which may
easily be done, for I have seen nine taken in one day. And if they would have
taken more, they might also. Thus when the Tiburon has pleasauntly followed the
ship a long viage, at the length he swaloweth the bait with the hook. And
a^well by his stryuinge to fly or escape, as also by the swyfte passage of the
s^yppe, the hook ouerthwarteth and catches hold of his chappes. The which
fisshe when it is taken, it is of such huge b^ggenesse that twelve or
fyfeteene men are scarsely able to draw it out of the water and lift it into
the ship: Where one of the mariners gives it many knockes on the headde with
a clubbe or beetle until he have slain it. They are sumtymes found of ten
or twelve foot long, and of five, six, or seven spannes in breadth where they
are brodest. They have very great and wide mouths to the proportion of the
rest of their boddies, and have two rows of teethe the one sumewhat separate
from the other, of cruel shape and standing very thick. When they have slain
this fysshe, they cut the boddy thereof in smaule pieses, and put it to dry,
hanging it three or four days at the cords of the sail clothes to dry in
the wind, and then eat it. It is doubtless a good fysshe and of great
commodity to serve the ships for vitalles for many days. The least of
these fysshes are most wholesome and tender. It has a skin much like to the
skin of a sole, whereunto the said Tuberon is like in shape. Which I say
because Pliny has made mention of none of these three fisshes among the
number of them whereof he writes in his natural history. Pliny.
These Tiburons coomme forth of the sea and enter into the ryuers, where they
are no less perelous then great lisartes or Crocodiles whereof I have spoken
largely before. Crocodyles.
For they devour men, kine, and horses, even as do the Crocodiles. They are
very dangerous in certain washing places or pooles by the ryuers sides, and
where they have devoured at other times. Diverse other fysshes both great and
smaule, of sundry sorts and kinds are accustomed to follow the ships going
under sail, of the which I will speak sumwhat when I have written of Manate
which is the third of the three whereof I have promised to entreat. Manates.
Manate therefore, is a fysshe of the sea, of the byggest sort, and much
greater then the Tiburon in length and breadth: And is very brutysshe and vile,
so that it appears in form like unto one of those great vessels made of
goats skynnes wherein they use to carry new wine in Medina de Campo or in
Areualo. The headde of this beast is like the head of an ox, with also like
eyes. And has in the place of arms, two great stumpes wherewith he swymmeth.
It is a very gentle and tame beast: And comes ofte^tymes out of the water to
the next shore where if he find ny herbs or grass, he feeds thereof. Owre
men are accustomed to kyl many of these and diverse other good fysshes with
their crossebowes, pursuinge them in barks or Canoas, because they swymme in
manner above the water. The which thing when they see, they draw them with a
hook tide at a smaule cord, but sumwhat strong. As the fysshe flies away,
the archer lets go and prolongeth the cord by little and little until he
have let it go many fathams. At the end of the cord, there is tide a cork
or a piece of light woodde. And when the fysshe is goone a little way, and
has colored the water with his bludde, and feels him self to faint and
draw toward the end of his life, he resortethe to the shore, and the archer
follows gatherynge up his cord: whereof while there yet remain six or eight
fathams or sumwhat more or less, he draws it toward the land, and draws
the fysshe therewith by little and little as the waves of the sea help him to
do it the more easily. Then with the help of the rest of his company he
lyftethe th^s great beast out of the water to the land, being of such
hygnesse that to convey it from thense to the city, it shall be requ^site to
have a carte with a good yoke of oxen, and sumtymes more, according as these
fysshes are of byggenesse, sum being much greater then other sum in the same
kind as is seen of other beasts. Sumtymes they lift these fysshes into the
Canoa or bark, withowt drawing them to the land as before. For as soon as
they are slain, they flote above the water. And I believe verily that this
fysshe is one of the best in the world to the taste, and the lykest unto
flesh. E^pecially so like unto biefe, that who so has not seen it hole, can
judge it to be none other when he seethe it in pieces then very biefe or
veale. And is certeynly so like unto flesh, that all the men in the world
may herein be deceived. The taste likewise, is like unto the taste of very good
veale, and lasts long if it be poudered. So that in fine, the base of these
parties, is by no means like unto this. This Manate, The fysshe Manate.
has a c^rteine stone or rather bone in his headde within the brain, which is
of quality greatly appropriate ageynste the disease of the stone, A remedy
against the stone.
if it be burnte and ground into smaule powder, and taken fasting in the
morning when the pain is felt, in such quantity as may lie upon a penye
with a drawght of good white wine. For being th^s taken three or four
mornings, it a^quieteth the grefe as diverse have toulde me which have proved
it true. And I my self by testimony of sight, do witness that I have seen
this stone sought of diverse for this effect.

There are also diverse other fysshes as bygge as this Manate: The swoorde
fysshe.
Emonge the which there is one caule^ Vihuella. This fy^he bears in the top
of his headde, a swoorde being on every side full of many sharp teeth. This
swoorde is naturally very hard and strong, of four or five spannes in length
and of proportion according to the same byggenes. And for this cause is this
fyshe cauled Spada: that is the sword fyshe. Of this kind sum are found as
little as sardines: and other so great, th^^ two yokes of oxen are scarsely
able to draw them on a carte. But whereas before, I have promised to speak of
other fysshes which are taken in these seas while the ships are under sail,
I will not forget to speak of the Tunnye which is a great and good fysshe,
Tunnye.
and is oftentimes taken and kylde with troute spears and hooks cast in the
water when they play and swymme about the ships. In like manner also are
taken many turbuts which are very good fysshes as are lightly in all the sea.
Turbut,


And here is to be noted, that in the great Ocean sea, there is a strange
thing to be considered, which all that have been in the Indies affirm to be
true. And this is, that like as on the land there are sum provinces fertile
and frutfull, Note,
and sum barren, even so does the like chance in the sea: So that at sum
wyndes the ships sail fifty or a hundredth, or two hundredth leaques and
more, withowt taking or saying of one fysshe. And again in the self same
Ocean, in sum places, all the water is seen tremble by the mouynge of the
fysshes, where they are taken abundauntly.

It comes further to my rememberaunce to speak sumwhat of the flyinge of
fysshes, Flyinge fysshes.
which is doubtless a strange thing to behold, and is after this manner.
When the ships sail by the great Ocean following their vyage, there ryseth
sumtymes on the one side or on the other, many coompanies of certain little
fysshes, of the which the byggest is no greater then a sardyne: and so
diminisshe less and less from that quantity that sum of them are very
little. These are cauled Volatori: that is, flyinge fysshes. They rise by great
coompanies and flocks in such multitudes that it is an astonysshement to
behold them. Sumtymes they rise but little from the water: and (as it
chances) continue one flight for the space of a hundredth pases and sumtymes
more or less before they faule again into the sea. Sumtymes also they faule
into the ships. And I remember that on an euenyng when all the company in the
ship were on their knees singing Salve regina in the highest part of the
Castle of the poope, and sailed with a full wind, there passed by us a flock
of these flyinge fysshes: and came so near us that many of them fell into the
ship, among the which, two or three fell hard by me which I took alive in
my hand: so that I might well perceive that they were as big as sardynes and
of the same quantity, having two wings or quylles growyng out of their
fynnes, like unto those wherewith all fysshes swymme in ryuers. These wings are
as long as the fysshes them selves. As long as their wings are moist, they
bear them up in the air. But as soon as they are dry, they can continewe
their flight no further then as I have said before, but faule immediately into
the sea, and so rise again, and fly as before from place to place.

In the year. A thousand five hundredth fiftene. when I came first to inform
your majesty of the state of the things Indya, and was the year following in
Flaunders in the time of your most fortunate success in these your
kyngedomes of Aragonie and Castyle, whereas at that vyage I sailed above the
Island Bermuda otherwise cauled Garza, The Island of Bermuda.
being the furtheste of all the Islands that are found at this day in the
world, and arryuynge there at the deapthe of eight yeardes of water, and
dystant from the land as far as the shot of a piece of ordinance, I
determined to send sum of the ship to land as well to make search of
such things as were there, as also to leave in the Island certain hogs for
increase. But the time not seruyng my purpose by reason of contrary wind, I
could bring my ships no nearer the Island being twelve leaques in length
and six in breadth and about thyrty in circuit, lying in the thyrtie three and
degree of the north side. While I remained here, I saw a strife and combatte
between these flyinge fyshes and the fyshes named gylte heads, and the fowls
cauled seamewes and cormorauntes, which suerlye seemed unto me a thing of as
great pleasure and solace as could be devised, while the gylte heads swamme
on the brymme of the water and sumtymes lyfted their shulders above the same to
raise the swymmynge fysshes out of the water to drive them to flight, and
follow them swymming to the place where they faule to take and eat them
sodaynlye. Again on the other side, the seamewes and cormorantes, take many
of these flying fysshes: so that by this means theye are another safe in the
air nor in the water. Not to hie for the pie nor to low fro: the crow.
In the self same perrell and danger do men live in this mortal life wherein
is no certain securytye nether in high estate nor in low. Which thing
suerlye ought to put us in rememberaunce of that blessed and safe resting
place which god has prepared for such as love him, who shall acquyete and
fynyshe the trauayles of this troubelous world wherein are so many daungyours,
and bring them to that eternal life where they shall find eternal securytye
and rest. But to return to the hystorye: these birds and fowls which I
saw, were of the Island of Bermuda nere unto the which I saw these flyinge
fysshes. For they could be of no other land, forasmuch as they are not
accustomed to wander far from the coasts where they are bredde.

Of thincrease and decrease, (that is) rysynge and faullynge of our Ocean sea
and Southe sea caulled the sea of Sur.
I Will now speak of certeayne things which are seen in the Prouynce, or
at the least in the city of golden Castyle otherwise cauled Beragua, Beragua.
and in the coasts of the North sea and of the South sea caulled the sea of
Sur. Not omittyng to note one synguler and marvelous thing which I have
considered of the Ocean sea. whereof hitherto no cosmographer, pylote or maryner
or any other have satisfied me.

I say therefore as it is well known to your majesty and all such as have
knowledge of the Ocean sea, that this great Ocean casts from it self the sea
Mediterraneum by the mouth of the straight of Gibilterra: in the which the
water from thend and furtheste part of that sea, The West Ocean.
even unto the mouth of the said straight, either in the East toward the
coaste commonly cauled Leuante, or in any other part of the said sea
Mediterraneum, The s^a Mediteraneum.
the sea doothe not so faule nor increase as reason would judge for so great a
sea. But incresethe very little and a smaule space. Nevertheless, without
the mouth of the straight in the main Ocean, it increases and fauleth very
much and a great space of ground from six hours to six hours, as in all
the coasts of Spain, Britannye, Flanders, Germanye and England. The self
same Ocean sea in the fyrme land newly found, in the coasts of the same
lyynge toward the North, does neither rise nor faule, nor likewise in the
Islands of Hispaniola and Cuba and all the other Islands of the same sea lyinge
toward the north, Hispaniola.
Cuba.
for the space of three thousand leaques, but only in like manner as doothe
the sea Mediterr^neum in Italye: which is in manner nothing in respect to
that increase and decrease which the said Ocean has in the coasts of Spain
and Flaunders. But this is yet a greater thing, that also the self same Ocean
in the coasts of the said fyrme land lyinge toward the Southe in the city
of Panama, and also in the coaste of that land which lyethe toward the East
and Weste from that city, as in the Island of pearls or Margaritea which
the Indians caul Tarrarequi, and also in Taboga and Otoque, and in all other
Islands of the southe sea of Sur, the water ryseth and fauleth so much, that
when it fauleth it goth in manner out of syghte, which thing I my self have
seen oftentimes.

And here your majesty may note an other thing, that from the north sea to
the southe sea being of such dyffer^nce the one from the other in rysynge and
faulynge, The South sea.
yet is the land that deuydeth them not paste eyghteene or twentye leaques in
breadthe from coaste to coaste. So that both the said seas being all one
Ocean this strange effect is a thing worthy greatly to be considered of al
such as have inclination and desire to know the secreate works of nature
wherein the infinite power and wisdom of god is seen to be such as may
allure all good natures to reverence and love so divine a majesty. The power
and w^sdome of god is seen in his creatures.
And whereas by the demonstrations of learned men I am not satisfied of the
natural cause hereof, I content my self to know and believe that he which
has made these things, does know this and many other which he has not
granted to the reason of man to comprehend, much less to so base a wit as mine
is. They therefore that are of greater understanding, shall search the cause
hereof, for them and for me, forasmuch as I have only put the matter in
question as a witness that have seen thexperience of the thing.

Of the straight or narowe passage of the land lyinge between the North and
South sea, by the which spyces way much sooner and easlyer be brought from the
Islands of Molucca into Spain by the West Ocean then by that way whereby the
Portugales sail into East India.
IT has been an opinion among the Cosmographers and Pylottes of late time, and
other which have had practice in things touching the sea, that there should
be a straygh^ of water passing from the North sea of the firm, in to the
South sea of Sur, which nevertheless has not been seen nor found to this
day. And suerlye if there be any such straight* we that inhabit those parts
do think the same should be rather of land the^ of water. For the fyrme
land in sum parts thereof is so straight and narrow that the Indyans say
that from the mountains of the prouynce of Esquegua or Vrraca, Esquegua and
vrrace.
(which are between the one sea and the other) If a man assend to the top of
the mountains and look toward the North, he may see the water of the North
sea of the Prouynce of Beragua. And again lookynge the contrary way, may on
the other side toward the Southe, see the sea of Sur and the prouynces which
confyne with it, as do the territoryes of the two Lords or kings of the
said provinces of Vrraca and Esquegua. And I believe that if it be as the
Indyans say, of all that is hitherto known, this is the narowest straight of
the fyrme land, which sum affirm to be full of rough mountains. Yet do I
not take it for a better way, or so short as is that which is made from the
port cauled Nomen dei (which is in the North sea) unto the new city of
Panama being in the coaste and on the bank of the sea of Sur. Nomen De^.
Panama.
Which way is likewise very rough full of thick wods, mountains, ryuers,
valleys, and very diffyculte to pass through, and can not be done withowt
great labor and travail. Sum measure this way in this part, to be from
sea to sea.xviii. leaques, which I suppose to be rather.xx. not for that it is
any more by measure, but because it is rough and dyffyculte as I have said,
and as I have found it by experyence having now twyse passed that way by
foot: countyng from the port and vyllage of Nomen Dei unto the dominion of
the Cacique of Iuanaga otherwise cauled Capira.viii. leaques: And from thense
to the river of Chagre, The river of Chagre.
other.viii. leaques. So that at this river being.xvi. leaques from the said
port, ends the roughness of the way. Then from hense to the marvelous
bridge are two leaques: And beyond that, other two unto the port of Panama:
So that all together in my judgment, make.xx. leaques. And if therefore this
navigations may be found in the South sea for the trade of spices (as we trust
in God) to be brought from thense to the said port of Panama (as is possible
enough) they may afterward easly pass to the North sea notwithstaddynge the
difficulty of the way of the.xx. leaques aforesaid. Which thing I affirm
as a man well trauayled in these regions, having twyse on my feet passed over
this straight in the year.1521. as I have said. It is furthermore to be
understood, that it is a marvelous facility to bring spices by this way which
I will now declare. From Panama to the river of Chagre, are four leaques of
good and fair way by the which carts may pass at pleasure by reason that the
mountains are but few and little, and that the greateste part of these four
leaques is a plain ground void of trees. And when the carts are coomme to
the said river, the spices may be carried in barks and pinnesses. For this
river enters into the North sea five or.vi leaques lower then the port of
Nomen dei, and emptieth it self in the sea nere unto an Island cauled
Bastimento, The Island Bastimento.
where is a very good and safe port. Yowr majesty may now therefore consider
how great a thing and what commodity it may be to convey spices this way,
forasmuch as the river of Chagre having his original only two leaques from the
South sea, contineweth his course and emptieth it self into the other North
sea. This river runs fast and is very great, and so commodious for this
purpose as may be thowght or desired. The marvelous bridge made by the work
of nature, The marvelous bridge.
being two leaques beyond the said river, and other two leaques on this side
the port of Panama, so lyinge in the mydde way between them both, is framed
naturally in such sort that none which pass by this viage see any such bridge
or think that there is any such buyldyng in that place until they be in the
top thereof in the way toward Panama. But as soon as they are on the bridge,
lookynge toward the right hand, they see a little river under them which has
his channel distante from the feet of them that walk over it, the space of
two spears length or more. The water of this river is very shalowe, not
passing the depth of a man's leg to the knee: and is in breadth be^wene
thyrtie and forty pases: and faulethe into the river of Chagre. Toward the
right hand standing on this bridge, there is nothing seen but great trees. The
largeness of the bridge, conteyneth.xv. pases: and the l^ngth ^herof about
threescore or fourscore pases. The arche is so made of most hard stone, that
no man can behold it without admiration, being made by the high and
omnipotent creator of all things. But to return to speak sumwhat more of
the conueying of spices, I say that when it shall please almighty god that this
navigations aforesaid shall be found by the good fortune of yowre majesty,
and that the spices of the Islands of the South sea (which may also be
otherwise cauled the Ocean of the East India in the which are the Islands of
Molucca) shall be browght to the said coaste and the port of Panama, The Islands
of Molucca.
and be conveyed from thense (as we have said) by the firm land with carts
unto the river of Chagre, and from thense into this owr other sea of the North,
from whense they may afterward be browght into Spain, I say that by this
means the vyage shall be shortened more then seven thousand leaques, The
commodity of this viage.
with much less danger then is by the viage now used by the way of
Commendator of Aysa captain under yowre majesty, who this present year
attempted a vyage to the place of the said spyces. And not only the way is
thus much shortened, but also a third part of the time is abbreuiate. To
conclude therefore, if any had hitherto attempted this vyage by the sea of Sur,
to seek the Islands of spyces, I am of firm opinion that they should have been
found long sense, as doubtelesse they may be by the reasons of Cosmographie.

How things that are of one kind, dyffer in form and quality, according
to the nature of the place where they are engendered or grow. And of the
beasts cauled Tigers.
IN the firm land are fownde many terryble beasts which sum think to be
Tigers. Tigers.
Which thing nevertheless, I dare not affirm, considering what auctoures
do write of the lyghtnes and agilitie of the Tiger, whereas this beast being
other wise in shape very like unto a Tiger, is notwithstanding very slow. Yet
true it is, that according to the maruayles of the world and differences
which natural things have in diverse regions under heaven and diverse
constellations of the same under the which they are created, we see that sum
such plants and herbs as are hurtful in one country, Plants and herbs.
are harmless and wholesome in other regions. And birds which in one province
are of good taste, Birds.
are in other so unsavory that they may not be eaten. Men likewise which in
sum countries are black, are in other places white: and yet are both these and
they men. Men.


Even so may it be that Tigers are light in sum region as they write, and may
nevertheless be slow and heavy in these Indies of yowr majesty whereof we
speak. The sheep of Arabie draw their tails long and big on the ground,
Sheep.
and the bulls of Egypt have their hear growing toward their headdes: yet
are those sheep and these bulls. Bulls.
Men in sum countries are hardy and of good courage, and in other naturally
fearful and brutyshe. All these things and many more which may be said to
this purpose, are easy to be proved and worthy to be believed of such as
have read of the like in autours or trauayled the world, whereby their own
sight may teach them thexperience of these things whereof I speak. It is
also manifest, that Iucea whereof they make their bread in the Island of
Hispaniola, Iucea.
is deadely poison if it be eaten green with the iuse: And yet has it no
such property in the firm land where I have eaten it many times and found
it to be a good fruit. The bats of Spain although they bite, Battes.
yet are they not venomous. But in the firm land many dye that are bytten of
them. And in this form may so many things be said that time shall not
suffice to write, whereas my intent is only to prove that this beast may be a
Tiger or of the kind of Tigers although it be not of such lyghtnesse and
swiftnes as are they whereof Pliny and other autours speak, Pliny.
discrybynge it to be one of the swyftesse beasts of the land, and that the
river of Tigris for the swift course thereof was cauled by that name. The first
Spaniardes which saw this Tiger in the firm land, did so name it. Of the
kind of these was that which Don Diego Columbo the Admiral sent yowre
majesty owte of new Spain to Toledo. the Tiger.
Their heads are like to the heads of Lions or Lionesses, but greater. The
rest of all their boddies and their legs, are full of black spots one
nere unto an other and divided with a circumference or frynge of read color
shewinge as it were a fair work and correspondent picture. About their
croopes or hinder parts, they have these spots bydgest: and less and less
toward their bellies, legs, and headdes. That which was brought to Toledo,
was young and but little, and by my estimation, of thage of three years But
in the firm land there are many found of greater quantity. For I have seen
sum of three spannes in heyght, and more then five in length. They are beasts
of great force, with strong legs, and well armed with nails and fanges
which we caul dog teeth. They are so fierce that in my judgment no real
lion of the byggest sort is so strong or fierce. Of these, there are many
found in the firm land which devour many of the Indians and do much hurt
otherwise. But syns the coming of the Christians, many have been kyld with
Crossebowes after this manner. As soon as the archer has knowledge of the haunt
of any of these Tigers, The huntyng of tigers.
he gothe searchynge their trase with his crossebowe and with a little hounde
or bewgle and not with a greehounde, because this beast would soon kill any
dog that would venture on him. When the hounde has found the Tiger, he
runs about him bayinge continually, and approaches so near him snappynge
and grynnynge with so quick flyinge and returnyng, that he hereby so molesteth
this fierce beast that he dryuethe him to take the next tree, at the foot
whereof he remains still baying and the Tiger grynnyng and showing his teeth,
while in the mean time the archer comes near, and.xii. or.xiiii. pases of,
stryketh him with the querel of his crossebowe in the breast, and flies
incontinent, leaving the Tiger in his travail for life and death, bytynge the
tree and eating earth for fi^rcenesse. Then within the space of two or three
hours or the day following, the archer returns thither, and with his dog
fyndeth the place where he lyethe dead.

In the year, 1522. I with the other rulers and magistrates of the city of
Sancta Maria Antiqua in Dariena, took order in owr counsel, A reward of
four or five pieces of gold to be given to every man that kylde any of these
Tigers: A reward for kyllinge of ^igers.
by reason whereof many were kylde in short space both with crossebowes and
also with diverse snares and ingens. But to conclude, I will not obstynately
stand in opinyon whether these beasts be Tigers or Panthers, or of the number
of any other such beasts of spotted hear, or also peradventure sum other new
beast unknown to the owlde writers as were many other whereof I have spoken in
this book. Of which thing, I do not greatly marvel, For as much as unto
owre time this great part of the world was unknown to the antiquity: In so
much that none of the writers of that age, nor yet Ptolomie in his
Cosmographie, or any other sense him, have made any mention hereof, until the
first Admyrall Don Chrystopher Colonus discovered the same.

A thing doutelesse without comparyson much greater then that which is said
of Hercules, Colocus compared to Hercules.
that he first gave thenterance of the sea Mediterraneum into the O^ean, The
pillars of hercules.
which the Greeks could never do before him. And hereof rysethe the fable
that the mountains of Calpe and Abila (which are directly one against an other
in the straight of Gibilterra, the straightes of Gibilterra.
the one being in Spain and the other in Affryke) were joined together before
they were opened by Hercules, Note.
who erected those his pyllers which your majesty give in token of
prehemynence and like enterpryses with likewise these his words PLUS VLTRA:
PLUS VLTRA.
words doutelesse worthy for so great an universal an Emperor, and not
conuenyent for any other Prince. how far Themperou^ majesty excels
hercules.
Forasmuch as your holy Catholyke Majesty have spredde them in so strange
and remote regyons, so many thousand leaques further than ever did Hercules.
And certeynlye sir, If there had been an Image of gold made in the praise and
fame of Colonus, He had as well deserved it as any of those men to whom for
their noble enterprise the antiquytie gave deuyne honor, if he had been in
their time. But to return to the matter whereof I began to speak: I need say
no more of the form of this beast, for as much as your Majesty have seen
that which is yet alive in Tolledo. And suerly the keeper of your Majesty's
lions, who has taken upon him the charge to tame this beast, might better
have bestowed his pains in an other thing that might have bynne more
profitable for the safegarde of his life because this Tiger being yet but
young, will daily be stronger and fiercer and increase in malice. The Indians
(and especially they of the firm land in the province which the Catholyke
King Don Ferdinando commanded to be cauled golden Castyle) caul this beast
Oobi. This thing is strange that chanced of late: that whereas the Tiger
whereof we have made mention before, A tiger made ^ame.
would have kylde his kee^^^ that then kept him in a cage, was in few days
after made so tame that he led her tied only with a smaule cord and playde
with her so familyarly that I maruayled greatly to see it, yet not without
certain belefe that this frendshyp will not last long without danger of
life to the keeper, forasmuch as suerly these beasts are not meet to be
among men for their fiercenes and cruel nature that can not be tamed.

Of the manners and customs of the Indians of the firm land, and of their
women.
THe manners and customs of these Indians, are diverse in diverse provinces. Sum
of them take as many wives as them list, and other live with one wife whom
they forsake not without consent of both parties, which chauncethe especially
when they have no children. The Indian women.
The nobility as well men as women, repute it infamous to join with any of base
parentage or strangers, except Christians, whom they count noble men by reason
of their valientnes, although they put a difference between the common sort
and the other to whom they show obedience, countynge it for a great matter and
an honorable thing if they be beloved of any of the^. In so much that if they
know any Christian man carna^ly, they keep their faith to him, so that he be
not long absent far from them. For their intent is not to be widows or to
live chaste like religious women. Many of them have this custom, that when
they perceive that they are with child, they take an herb wherewith they
destroy that is conceived. For they say that only well aged women should bear
children, and that they will not forbear their pleasures and deforme their
boddies with bearing of children, whereby their teates becoome loose and
hanging which thing they greatly disprayse. When they are delivered of their
children they go to the river and wash them. Which done, their bludde and
purgation cease immediately. And when after this they have a few days
absteyned from the company of men, they becomme so straight as they say which
have had carnal familiarity with them, that such as use them, can not without
much difficulty satis^ie their appetite, They also which never had children,
are ever as byrgins. The men of India.
In sum parts they wear certain little apernes round about them before and
behy^de as low as to their knees and hammes, wherewith they cover their privy
parts, and are naked all their boddie bysyde. The principal men bear their
priuities in a holowe pype of gold: but the common sort have them enclosed
in the shelles of certain great welkes, and are bysyde utterly naked. For they
think it no more shame to have their cods seen then any other part of their
boddies. And in many provinces both the men and women go utterly naked without
any such couerture at al. In the province of Cueua they caul a man Chuy, and a
woman Ira: which name is not greatly disagreeable to many both of their women
and of owres.

These Indians give great honor and reverence to their Cacique (that is) their
kings and rulers. The principal Cacique, The king is borne on men's b^ckes.
has twelve of his most strong Indians appointed to bear him when he
remoueth to any place, or gothe abrod for his pleasure. Two of them carry him
syttyng upon a long piece of woodde which is naturally as light as they can
find The other ten follow next unto him as foot men. They keep continually
a trottynge pase with him on their shulders. When the two that carry him are
weary, other two coomme in their places without any disturbance or stey. And
thus if the way be plain, they carry him in this manner for the space of.xv.
or.xx. leaques in one day. The Indians that are assigned to this office, are
for the most part slaves or Naboriti, that is, such as are bound to
continual service.

I have also noted that when the Indians perceive them selves to be troubled
with to much bludde, Lettinge of bludde.
they let them selves blud in the calfes of their legs and brawnes of
their arms, This do they with a very sharp stone, and sumtymes with the
smaule toothe of a vyper, or with a sharp reed or thorn

All the Indians are commonly without beardes: They have no beardes.
In so much that it is in manner a maruayle to see any of them either men or
women to have any down or hear on their faces or other parts of their
boddies. Albeit, I saw the Cacique of the province of Catarapa who had hear
on his face and other parts of his boddie, as had also his wife in such
places as women are accustomed to have. They paynte their bodies.
This Cacique had a great part of his body painted with a black color which
never fades: And is much like unto that wherewith the Mores paynt them selves
in Barberie in token of nobility. But the Moors are painted specially on
their vysage and throat and certain other parts. Likewise the principal
Indians use these payntynges on their arms and breasts, but not on their
vysages, because among them the slaves are so marked. When the Indians of
certain provinces go to the battle (especially the Caniball archers) they
carry certain shelles of great welkes of the sea which they blow and make
therewith great sound much like the noise of horns. The Canibales.
They carye also certain tymbrels which they use in the stead of drums.
Also very fair plumes of feathers, and certain armure of gold: Armure of
gold.
especially great and round pieces on their ^restes, and splintes on there
arms. Likewise other pieces which they put on their heads and other parts
of their bodies. Their galantnes in the wars.
For they esteem nothing so much as to appear galante in the wars, and to go
in most coomely order that they can deuyse, glysterynge with precious stones,
iewelles, gold, and feathers. Of the least of these welkes or perewincles,
they make certain little beads of diverse sorts and colors. They make also
little brass^lets which they mengle with gaud^es of gold. Their Iuell^
These they roll about there arms from the elbowe to the wreste of the
hand. The like also do they on their legs from the knee to the soles of
their feet in token of nobility. Especially their noble women in diverse
provinces are accustomed to wear such Iewelles, and have their necks in manner
laden therewith. These beads and Jewels and such other trynkettes, they caul
Caqu^ras. Bisyde these also, they wear certain rings of gold at their cares
and nostrelles which they bore full of holes on both sides, so that the ringes
hang upon their lyppes. Sum of these Indians, are poulde and rounded. Albe^t,
commonly both the men and women take it for a decent thing to wear long
hear, which the women wear to the myddest of their shulders and cut it
equally, especially above their brows. This do they with certain hard
stones which they keep for the same purpose. The principal women when their
teates faule or becoome loose, bear them up with hearts of gold of the length
of a^spanne and a half, how the women bear up their s^a^es, wy^h bars of
gold.
well wrought, and of such byggenesse that sum of them way more then two
hundredth Castilians or ducades of gold. These bars have holes at both
thendes, whereat they tie two smaul cords made of cotton at every end of the
bars. One of these cords goth over the shulder, and the other under the arm
holes where they tie both together, so that by th^s means the bar bears up
their teates. Sum of these chief women go to the battle with their
husbands, or when they themselves are regentes in any provinces, in the which
they have all things a^ commandment and execute thoffice of general
capitaynes, and cause them selves to be carried on men's backs in like manner as
do the Caciques of whom I have spoken before.

These Indians of the firm land are much of the same stature and color as
are they of the Islands. The stature and color of the Indians.
They are for the most part of the color of an olyue. If there be any other
difference, it is more in byggenesse then otherwise. And especially they that
are cauled Coronati are stronger and bygger then any other that I have seen in
these parties, The Indians cauled Coronati.
except those of the Island of giantes which are on the south side of the
Island of Hispaniola: The Island of giantes.
nere unto the coasts of the firm land: And likewise certain other which
they caul Yucatos which are on the north side. Iucato^.
All which chiefly, although they be no giantes, yet are they doubtelesse the
byggeste of the Indyans that are known to this day, and commonly bygger then
the Flemynges: and especially many of them as well women as men, are of very
high stature, and are all archiers both men and women. These Coronati
inhabit thirty leaques in length by these coasts from the point of Canoa to
the great river which they caul Guadalchibir nere unto Sancta Maria de
gratia. As I trauersed by those coasts, I filled a butte of fresh water of
that river six leaques in the sea from the mouth thereof where it fauleth
into the sea. They are cauled Coronati (that is crowned) because their hear is
cut round by their rares, and poulde lower a great compase abowte the crown
much like the friars of saint Augustines order. And because I have spoken of
their manner of wearynge their hear, here comes to my rememberaunce a thing
which I have oftentimes noted in these Indians. And this is, that they have the
bones of the sculles of their heads four times thycker and much stronger then
owres. The sculles of the India^s heads.
So that in comm^ng to hand strokes with them, it shall be requisite not to
strike them on the heads with swoordes. For so have many swoordes bynne broken
on their heads with little hurt done. And to have said thus much of their
customs and manners, it shall suffice for this time, because I have more largely
entreated hereof in my general history of the Indies. Yet have I another there
nor here spoken much of that part of the firm land which is cauled Noua
Hispania (that is, new Spain whereof the Island of Iucatana is part)
forasmuch as Ferdinando Cortese has written a large book thereof. New Spain.


Of the houses of these Indians, The house^ of the Christians in India
I have spoken sufficiently elsewhere. Yet have I thought good to inform yowr
majesty of the building and houses which the Christians have made in diverse
places in the firm land. They build them now therefore with two solars or
loftes, and with loopes and wyndowes to open and shut. Also with strong
timber and very fair bordes. In such sort that any noble man may well and
pleasauntly be lodged in sum of them. And among other, I my self caused one
to be builded in the city of Sancta Maria Antiqua in Dariena which cost me
more then a thousand and five hundredth Castelians: Darien^.
being of such sort that I may well interteyne and commodiously lodge, any
Lord or noble man, reserving also a part for my self and my famelie. For in
this may many householdes be kept both above and benethe. It has also a
fair garden with many orange trees both sweet and sour: Ceders also, and
Lemondes, Garde^^.
of the which there is now great plenty in the houses of the Chrystians. On
one side of the gardeyne, there runs a fair river. The situation is very
pleasant, with a good and wholesome air, and a fair prospecte abowte the
river. In fine, owre trust is that in few years al things in these regions
shall grow to a better state according to the holy intention of yowre
majesty.

Of the chief Islands Hispaniola and Cuba.
THe Indians which at this present inhabit the Island of Hispaniola, are but
few in number, and the Chrystyans not so many as they ought to be forasmuch
as many of them that were in this Island, are gonne to other Islands and to the
fyrme land. For being for the most part young men unmarried, and desirous
daily to see new things wherein man's nature deliteth, Men are desirous of new
things.
they were not willinge to continewe long in on place: especially seeing
daily other new lands discovered where they thowght theye might sooner fylle
there purses by being present at the first spoil. Wherein nevertheless their
hope deceived many of them, and especially such as bad houses and habitations
in ^hys Island, For I certeynly believe, confyrmynge my self herein with the
Judgment of many other, that if any one Prince had no more signiores then only
this Island, it should in short time be such as not to give place either to
Sicilie or England: The commodities of hispaniola-Englande and Sicilie.
whereas even at this present there is nothing wherefore it should malice their
prosperity not being inferioure to them in any filicite that in manner the
heavens can grant to any land: being furthermore such as may inriche many
provinces and k^ngedomes by reason of many rich gold mines that are in it of
the best gold that is found to this day in the world, Gold mines.
and in greatest quantity. In this Island, nature of her self brings furthe
such abundance of cotton that if it were wrought and maynteyned there should
be more and better then in any part of the world. Cotton.
There, is so great plenty of excellent Cassia that a gr^ate quantity is
brought from thense into Spain: Cassia.
from whense it is carried to diverse parts of the world. In increases so
much that it is a marvelous thing to consider. In this are many rich shoppes
where sugar is wrought: Sugar.
and that of such perfectenes and goodness, and in such quantity that ships
come laden therewith yearly into Spain. Plants and Herbs.
All such seeds, sertes, or plants, as are brought out of Spain and planted
in this Island, becoomme much better, bygger, and of greater increase then
they are in any part of owre Europe. And if it chance otherwise that
sumetymes they prosper nor so well, the cause is that they which should till
and husband the ground, Great things hindered by respect of present gaynes.
and sow and plant in dew seasons, have no respect hereunto, being impacient
while the wheat and vynes wax ripe, being given to wandering and other
affairs of present gaynes (as I have said) as searchynge the gold mines,
fyshynge for pearls, and occupyinge marchaundies, with such other trades, for
the greedy following whereof, they neglecte and contempne both sowynge and
plantynge. Such fruits as are brought out of Spain, into this Island, prosper
maruelously and wax ripe all times of the year: as herbs of all sorts very
good and pleasant to be eaten. Also many pomegranates of the best kind, and
oranges both sweet and sower. Orangies. Pomegranates.
Likewise many fair Lymones and ceders: and a great quantity of all such as
are of sharp, sour, and bitter taste. There are also many fygge trees which
bring forth their fruit all the hole year. Figs all the year.
Likewise those kind of date trees that bear dates: Dates.
and diverse other trees and plants which were brought out of Spain thither.

Beasts do also increase in like abundaunce: Beasts.
and especially the heardes of kyne are so augmented both in quantity and
number, that there are now many patrones of cattayle that have more then two
thousand heads of neat: Great heardes of catta^l.
and sum three or four thousand, and sum more. Bysyde these, there are very
many that have heardes of four or five hundrethe. And truth it is, that this
Island has better pasture for such cattayle then any other country in the
world: good pasture.
also wholesome and clear water and temperate air, by reason whereof the
heardes of such beasts are much bygger, fatter, and also of better taste then
owres in Spain because of the rank pasture whose moisture is better digested
in the herb or grass by the continual and temperate heat of the soonne, The
effect of continual and moderate heat.
whereby being made more fat and unctuous, it is of better and more steadfast
nuryshement. The cause of fat nurisshemente.
For continual and temperate heat, does not only draw much moisture out of
the earth to the nuryshement of such things as grow and are engendered in
that clyme, but does also by moderation preserve the same from resolution and
putrefaction, digestynge also and condensatynge or thyckenynge the said moist
nuryshemente into a gummie and vactuous substance as is seen in all such
things as grow in those regions. And this is the only natural cause as well
that certain great beasts and of long life (as the Elephante and Rhinoceros
with such other) are engendered only in regions nere unto the Equinoctial,
Beasts of long life ^n regions abowte the Equinoctial line
as also that the leaves of such trees as grow there, do not wyther or faule,
Trees whose leaves do not wither
until they be thruste out by other, according to the verse of the poet
which says: Et nata pira piris, et ficus in ficubus extant. That is in
effect: pears growing upon pears, and fygges upon fygges. Pliny also
writes, that such trees are never infected with the disease of trees that the
Latins caul Caries, which we may caul the worm or canker, The cancar of the
tree
being but a certain putrefaction by reason of a wateryshe nuryshement not
well consolidate. The same thing has bynne the cause that certain
Philosophers considering as well that man is the hottest and moystest beast
that is (which is the best complexion) as also that men live longeste in
certain parts of India nere the Equinoctial (where yet to this day sum
live to thage of a hundredth and fifty years) were of opinion that if mankind
had any beginning on the earth, Long lyu^de men in India.
that place owght by good reason to be under or not far from the Equinoctial
line for the causes aforesaid. Paradise bear the equinoctial line
Sum of the divines also upon like consideration have thought it agreeable that
their Paradyse should be about the same within the precinct of those ryuers
which are named in the book of Genesis. But to let pass these things and
to return to the history.

In this Island furthermore, are many sheep and a great number of hogs:
Shepee and hogs
of the which (as also of the kyne) many are becoome wyld: And likewise many
dogs and cattes of those which were brought out of Spain. Dogs and cattes
become wild
These (and especially the dogs) do much hurt among the cattayle by reason
of the negligence of the heard men.

There are also many horses, mares, and mules, and such other beasts as serve
thuse of men in Spain, and are much greater then they of the first broad
brought thither out of Spain. The situation of hispaniola.
Sum places of the Island are inhabyted, although not so many as were
requisite: Of the which I will say no more but that all the regions of the
Island are so well situate that in the course of time all things shall coomme
to greater perfection by reason of the rychnesse and pleasantness of the
country and fertility of the soil.

But now to speak sumwhat of the principal and chief place of the Island,
which is the city of San Domenico: The city of sandomenico
I say that as touching the buildings, there is no city in Spain so much
for so much (no not Barsalona which I have oftentimes seen) that is to be
preferred before this generallye. For the houses of San Domenico, are for the
most part of stone as are they of Barsalona: or of so strong and well
wrought earth that it makes a singular and strong byndyng. The situacion is
much better the^ that of Barsalona by reason that the are much larger and
playner* and without comparyson more direct and straight forth. For being
builded now in owr time, bysyde the commodity of the place of the foundation,
the streates were also directed with cord, compase and measure, wherein it
excels all the cities that I have seen. It has the sea so nere, that of one
side there is no more space between the sea and the city then the waules. And
this is about fyftie pases where it is furthest of. On this side, the waters of
the sea beat upon the natural stones and fair coaste. On the other part,
hard by the side and at the foot of the houses, passes the river Ozama
which is a marvelous port wherein laden ships rise very nere to the land
and in manner under the house wynd^wes, The river ^zama
and no further from the mouth of the river where it enters into the sea,
then is from the foot of the hill of Monyuye to the monastery of saint
Frances or to the lodge of Barsalona. In the myddest of this space in the
city, is the fortress and castle, under the which and twenty pases distant
from the same, pass the ships to arise sum what further in the same river.
From the enteraunce of the ships until they cast anchor, they sail no
further from the houses of the city then thyrtie or forty pases, because of
this side of the city the habitacion is nere to the river. The port or haven
also, The haven
is so fair and commodious to defraight or unlade ships, as the like is
found but in few places of the world. The chymmeis that are in this city,
are about six hundredth in number, and such houses as I have spoken of before:
Of the which sum are so fair and large that they may well receive and lodge
any lord or noble manne of Spain with his train and famelie. And especially
that which Don Diego Colon viceroy under your majesty has in this city, is
such that I know no man in Spain that has the like by a quarter in
goodness considering all the commodities of the same. Likewise the situation
thereof, as being above the said port and altogyther of stone and having
many fair and large rooms with as goodly a prospect of the land and sea as
may be devised, seems unto me so magnificall and princelyke that yowr
majesty may be as well lodged therein as in any of the most exquisite
builded houses of Spain. There is also a Cathedral church builded of late
where as well the bishop according to his ^ignitie, A cathedral church and
monastery in hispaniola.
as also the canones are well endued. This church is well builded of stone and
lyme, and of good woorkemanshyppe. There are furthermore three monasteries
bearyng the name of saint Dominike, saint Frances, and saint Marie of Mercedes:
The which are all well builded although not so curiouslye as they of Spain.
But speaking without prejudice of any other religious monastery, yowre
majesty may be well assured that in these three monasteries, god is as well
served as in any other religious house with men of holy living and virtuous
exemple. There is also a very good hospital for the aid and succor of pore
people, An hospitale.
which was found by Michaell Passament threasurer to yowr majesty. To
conclude, this city from day to day increases in wealth and good order, as well
for that the said Admyrall and viceroy with the lord Chaunceloure and
counsel appointed there by yowr majesty, have their continual abiding
here, as also that the rychest men of the Island resort hither for their most
commodious habitation and trade of such marchaundies as are either brought out
of Spain or sent thither from this Island which now so abundeth in many
things that it serves Spain with many commodities, as it were with usury
requityng such benefits as it first received from thense.

The people of this Island are commonly of sumewhat less stature then are the
Spanyardes, and of a shynynge or clear brown color. They have wives of
their own, and absteyne from their dowghters, systers, and mothers. They have
large forheades, long black hear, and no beardes or hear in any other parts
of their bodies as well me^ as women, The people
except very few as perhaps scarsely one among a thousand. They go as naked
as they were borne, except that on the parts which may not with honesty be
seen, they wear a certain leaf as broad as a man's hand, which
nevertheless is not kept close with such diligence but that sumtymes a man
may see that they think sufficiently hid.

In this Island are certain glo woormes that shine in the night as do owres.
Glo worms
But are much bygger and give a greater light: In so much that when the men of
the Island goo any journeys in the night, they bear sum of these woormes made
fast about their fiete and head, in such sort that he that should see them a
far and ignorant of the thing, would be greatly astonyshed thereat. By the
light of these also, the women work in their houses in the night. These
woormes they caul Cleuas. Their light lasts for the space of three days,
and diminissheth as they begin to dry up.

There is also a kind of crows whose breath stynketh in the morning and is
sweet at after noone. Crows sty^kynge and sweet.
The excremente which they avoid, is a living worm.

As touching other things of this Island whereof Peter Martyr has more
largely entreated in his Decades, I have thought it superfluous to repeat the
same again owte of this history of Gonzalus Ferdinandus: but have here
gathered only such things as either are not touched of Peter Martyr or not so
largely declared: as I have done the like in all other notable things which I
have collected out of this Summarie of Gonzalus.

Of the Island of Cuba and other.
OF the Island of Cuba and the other, as the Islands, of Sancti Iohannis and
Iamaica, Saint John his Island.
Iamaica.
the same may be said in manner in all things as before of Hispaniola
although not so largely. Yet in less quantity do they bring forth the like
things: as gold, copper, cattayle, trees plants, fysshes, and such other of
the which we have spoken there.

In Cuba, is a certain kind of Partyches being very little, with their
feathers much of the color of turtle dooues: Partriches.
but are of much better taste to be eaten. They are taken in great number.
And being brought wild into the houses, they becoome as tame within the space
of three or four days as though they had been hatched there. They becoomme
exceadynge fat in short space, and are doubtelesse the most delicate and
pleasant meat that ever I have eaten. But to let pass many other things
that might here be said, and to speak of two marvelous things which are in
this Island of Cuba: whereof the one is, Pellettes for gunnes wrought by nature.
that a valley containing two or three leaques in length between two
mountains, is full of a kind of very hard stones of such perfect
roundenesse and like unto pellettes of gunnes that no art can make better or
more exactly polysshed. Of these, sum are as smaule as pellettes for
handegunnes: and other so increasynge bygger and bygger from that quantity,
that they may serve for all sorts of artyllerie although they be of
byggenesse to receive one or two or more quintales of powder, every quintale
conteynyng one hundredth weight: or of what other quantity so ever they be.
These pelletes are found through owte all the valley within the earth as in a
mine, which they dig and take ow^e such as they need of all sorts.

The other marvelous thing of this Island is this: That far from the sea,
there issheweth out of a mountain a certain lycour much like the cley of
Babylon cauled Bitumen or like unto pytche in great quantity and such as is
very commodious for the calkynge of ships. A fountain of the pytche of
Bitumen.
This fauleth continually from the rock and runs into the sea in such
abundaunce that it is seen flotynge above the water on every side of the sea
there about as it is driven from place to place by the wind or course of the
water.

Quintus Cursius writes in his history, Quintus Cu^sius
that great Alexander came to the city of Memi where is a great cave or den
in the which is a spring or fountain that continually auoydethe a great
quantity of Bitumen in such sort that it is an easy thing to believe that the
stones of the walls of Babylon might be laid therewith according as the
said auctoure writes. Bitumen of Babi^on.
I have seen this mine of Bitumen, not only in the Island of Cuba, but also
such an other in new Spain, which was found of late in the province of Panuco
where it is much better then the other of Cuba, Panuco.
as I have seen by experience in calkynge of ships.

Of the land of Baccaleos cauled Terra Baccalearum, situate on the North side
of the firm land.
SHortly after that yowr Majesty came to the city of Toledo, there arrived in
the month of November, Steven Gomes the pylot who the year before of 1524. by
the commandment of yowre majesty sailed to the North parts and found a
great part of land continuate from that which is cauled Baccaleos
discoursynge toward the West to the.xl. and.xli. degree, Baccaleos.
from whense he broughe certain Indians (for so caul we all the nations of
the new found lands) of the which he brought sum with him from thense who
are yet in Toledo at this present, Indians.
and of greater stature then other of the firm land as they are commonly.
Their color is much like the other of the firm land. They are great archers,
and go covered with the skins of diverse beasts both wild and tame. Rich
furs and silver.
In this land are many excellent furs, as marterns, sables, and such other
rych furs of the which the said pilote brought sum with him into Spain.
They have silver and copper, and certain other metalles. They are Idolaters
and honor the soonne and moon, Idolaters.
and are seduced with such superstitions and errors as are they of the firm.

And to have written thus much, it may suffice of such things as have seemed
to me most worthy to be noted in the Su^marie of Gonzalus Ferdinandus written
to The^perours majesty

Of other notable things gathered owte of diverse autours: And first of the
universal card and new world.
THe hole globe or compase of the earth was dyuyded by the ancient writers
into three parts, as Europa, Africa, and Asia: which parts conteyne in
longitude.180. degrees, beginning the first degree at the Islands of Canarie.
And conteyne in latitude toward the North.63. degrees, beginning the first
degree from the Equinoctial: And.10. degrees toward the South. All the rest
of the longitude which conteyneth other.180. degrees, is discovered of late
time, as the West India cauled the new world, west India the new world.
because none of the owlde autoures had any knowelege or made any mention
thereof. All that therefore is cauled new which is Westwarde from the Islands of
Canarie. And thus accomptynge these.180. degrees toward the East discovered in
owlde time, with the other.180. degrees discovered of late days, they make,
360. degrees, which is all the circle of the Equinoctial in the sphere. The
circumference of the Equinoctial line.
Also the part above the.63. degrees of the North latitude, The North regions.
was found by men of late time, as Norway and Grutlande with many other
provinces. Likewise the part more south then.10. degrees of latitude, The South
regions.
was discovered of late days, although Ariane and Pliny say that it was
known in owlde time: which if it were, yet had they no such particular
description thereof as we have in these days.

A discourse of the vyage made by the Spanyardes round abowte the world.
THe vyage made by the Spanyardes rownde about the world, is one of the
greatest and most marvelous things that has bynne known to owre time. And
although in many things we excel owre aunciente predicessours, in this
especially we so far exceade all their inventions, that the like has not
heretofore been known to this day. This viage was written particularly by Don
Peter Martyr of Angleria being one of the counsel of Themperours Indies, Don
Peter Martyr.
to whom also was committed the writing of the history and examination of al
such as returned from thense into Spain to the city of Siuile, in the
year.M. D. xxii. But sendynge it to Rome to be prynted in that miserable time
when the city was sacked it was lost and not found to this day or any memory
remaining thereof, Rome sacked
saving such as sum that read the same have borne in mind. And among other
notable things by him written as touching that vyage, this is one, that the
Spanyardes having sailed about three years and one month, A day lost in
three years and one month.
and the most of them notynge the days, day by day (as is the manner of all
them that sail by the Ocean) they found when they were returned to Spain,
that they had lost one day: So that at their arryuall at the port of Siuile
being the seventh day of September, was by their account but the sixth day.
And where as Don Peter Martyr declared the strange effect of this thing to a
certain excellent man who for his singular learning was greatly advanced to
honor in his common welthe and made Themperours ambassadoure, this worthy
gentelman who was also a great Philosopher and Astronomer, answered that it
could not otherwise chance unto them having sailed three years continually,
ever following the soonne toward the West. And said furthermore that they of
owlde time observed that all such as sailed behind the soonne toward the
West, did greatly lengthen the day. And albeit that the said book of Peter
Martyr is perysshed, yet has not fortune permitted that the memory of so
worthy and marvelous an enterprise should utterly be extincte: forasmuch as
a certain noble gentleman of the city of Uincenza in Italy, cauled master
Antonie Pigafetta (who being one of the coompanie of that vyage and after his
return into Spain in the ship Uictoria, Antonie Pigafetta.
was made knight of the Rhodes) wrote a particular and large book thereof which
he gave to Themperours Majesty, and sent a coppie of the same into France to
the lady Regente moo^her unto the french king, who committed it to an
excellent philosopher cauled master Iacobus Faber, Iacobus Faber.
having long studied in Italy, willing him to translate it into the French
toonge. This book therefore was printed first in the french toonge and then
in the Italien, with also an epistle to the Cardinal of Salsepurge as
touching the same viage, written by Maximiliane Transiluane secretary to
Themperours Majesty, Maximilian Transiluane
in the year.1522. And doubtelesse among all the cities of Italy, the city
of Uicenza may herein much glory, that beside the ancient nobility and many
excellent and rare wits which it has browght forth as well in learning as
discipline of war, it has also had so worthy and valiant a gentleman as
was the said master Antonie Pigafetta, who having compased abowte the ball or
globe of the world, has likewise described that vyage particularly. For the
which his so noble and wonderful an enterprise so happily atchiued, The
reward of noble enterpryse^.
if the same had been done in the owlde time when thempyre of the Greeks and
Romans florysshed, he should doubtelesse have been rewarded with an Image of
marble or gold erected in a place of honor in perpetual memory and for a
singular exemple of his virtue to the posterity. In fine, this may we bouldly
affirm, that the antiquity had never such knowledge of the world which the
soonne coompaseth abowte in xxiiii. hours, The antiquity had no such
knowledge of the world as we have.
as we have at this present by thindustrye of men of this owre age. But before
I speak any thing of the viage, I have thought it good first to add
hereunto, the Epistle of Maximilian Transiluane which he wrote to the Cardinal
of Salsepurge as a preface to his said book.

The Epistle of Maximilian Transiluane, secretary to The Emperors majesty:
written to the right honorable and reverend lord, the lord Cardinal of
Salsepurge, of the marvelous and wonderful navigations made by the Spanyardes
round about the world in the year of Christ. M. D. xix.
IN these days my most honorable and reverend lord, returned one of those
five ships which the year before Themperours being at Saragosa in Spain,
were at his majesty's commandment sent to the new world heretofore unknown
unto us, to seek the Islands of spices. The Islands of Molucca.
For albeit the Portugales bring us great quantity of spyces from that part
of East India which in owlde time was cauled Aurea Chersonesus (where is now
thought to be the great and rich city of Malaccha) yet in East India grow
none of those spices except pepper. Aurea Chersonesus.
Malaccha.
Spyces.
For other spices, as Sinamome, cloves, nutmegges, and mase, (which is the
husk that covers the shell of the nutte) are brought from other far
contreys and from Islands scarsely known by their names. From the which
Islands they are brought in shyps or barks made withowt any iren tools, and
tied together with cords of date trees: with round sails likewise made of
the smaule twigges of the branches of date trees weaued together. These barks
they caul Giun^he: with the which barks and sails, they make their vyages
with only one wind in the stearne or contrarywyse.

Neither yet is it a thing greatly to be marueyled at that these Islands
where the spyces grow have been unknown so many worlds past unto owre time,
The Islands of Spyces unknown in owlde time.
forasmuch as all such things as unto this day have been written of owld
autours of the places where spices grow, are all fabulous and false: In so
much that the countries where they affirm them to grow, are now certeynely
found to be further from the place where they grow in deed, then we are
from them. For lettynge pass many other things that are written, I will
speak onl^ of this which Herodotus (otherwise a famous auctou^) aff^^meth that
Sinamome, Herodutus.
Sinamome,
is found in the tops of the nestes of certain birds and fowls that
bring it from far countries, and especially the Phenyx, The Phenyx.
the which I know no man that ever has seen. But Pliny who might more
certeynely affirm things by reason that before his time many things were
known and discovered by the nauigations of great Alexander and other, Pliny.
The nauigations of great Alexander.
says that Sinamome grows in that part of Ethiope which the people inhabit
cauled Trogloditi. Ethiope.
Trogloditi.
Nevertheless it is now found that Sinamome grows very far from all
Ethiope and much further from the Trogloditi which dwell in caves under the
ground. But to owre men which are now returned from those parts and the
Islands of spices, having also good knowledge of Ethiope, it was necessary to
pass far beyond Ethiope before they coome to these Islands, The nauigat^on
abowte the world.
and to coompasse abowte the whole world, and many times under the greatest
circumference of heaven. The which navigations made by them, being the most
marvelous thing that ever was done by man upon the earth sense the first
creation of the world, and never found before, or known, or attempted by any
other, I have deliberated faithfully to write to yowre honorable lordshippe and
to declare the hole success thereof. As touching which matter, I have with all
diligence made inquisition to know the truth as well by relation of the
Captain of that ship as also by conference with every of the maryners that
returned with him. All which, gave the self same information both to
Themperours majesty and diverse other: And this with such faythfulnesse and
sincerity, that not only they are judged of all men to have declared the
truth in all things, but have thereby also given us certain knowledge that
all that has hitherto been said or written of owlde autours as touching these
things, The owld^ autours reproved.
are false and fabulous. For who will believe that men are found with only one
leg. Or with such fiete whose shadow covers their bodies? Or men of a
cubite heyght, and other such like, being rather monsters then men? Monsters.
Of the which, neither the Spanyardes who in owre time saylyng by the Ocean
sea, The vyages of the Spanyardes and Po^tugales,
have discovered all the coasts of the land toward the West both under and
above the Equinoctial, nor the Portugales who compassynge about al Affryke
have passed by all the East and likewise discovered all those coasts unto the
great goulfe cauled Sinus Magnus, Sinus Magnus.
nor yet the Spanyardes in this their last navigations, in the which they
compased about the hole earth, did never in any of their vyages write of such
monsters: which doubtelesse they would not have omytted if they might have had
certain knowelege thereof. But now intending to speak of the whole world, I
will not be long in my preface, but begin my narration as follows.

A brief declaration of the vyage or navigations made abowte the world.
Gathered out of a large book written hereof by master Antonie Pygafetta
Uincentine, knight of the Rhodes and one of the coomp^nye of that vyage in the
which, Ferdinando Magalianes a Portugale (whom sum caul Magellanus) was
general Captain of the navy.
ALthowgh Sebastian Munster in his universal Cosmographie in the fyfthe book
of the lands of the greater Asia (which I translated into English abowte two
years sen^e) has written of the vyage of Magellanus, Sebastian Munster.
declarynge therein how the Spanyardes by the West, and the Portugales by the
East, saylyng to the Islands of Molucca, The Islands of Molucca.
compased the hole globe of the world between them, yet have I here thought it
good to make a brief repeticion of this vyage, adding hereunto diverse notable
things which were not touched of Munster, as I have gathered them out of the
books of Antonie Pigafetta and Transiluanus written of the same vyage. For
albeit in deed it was a strange and woonderful thing that the Spanyardes and
Portugales compased the hole circumference of the world between them, yet is
it more marvelous that the same was done with one ship and one coompanie of
men as did the Spanyardes in this vyage, who keepynge their continual cours^
by the Weste, returned into Spain by the East. A thing doubtless so much
more wonderful and strange then if they had returned from the half
circumference by the same way they went. In how much they were ignorante in
the vyage never attempted before, beside the thousand daungiours and perils
which they were daily like to faule into, as well by wandering in unknown
coasts as also by faulynge into the hands of the Portugales by whose
dominions in the East, Controuer^ie betw^ne the Spanyardes and Portugales.
they should needs pass of necessity, not trusting to their gentelnesse for
the controversy which had been long between them for the Islands of Molucca. I
will therefore (as I have said) make a brief rehearsal of this vyage from
the beginning to the ending: Omyttynge nevertheless many notable things
which are more largely described in the books of Maximilianus Transiluanus
and Antonius Pigafetta.

The tenthe day of August, in the year of owre lord M. D. xix. Ferdinando
Magalianes departed from the port of Siuile in Spain with a navy of five
ships and two hundredth thirty and seven men, Ferdinando Magalianes.
well furnysshed with all things necessary. And saylynge first down by the
river of Guadalehiber which runs from the said port into the sea, they
came first to a place named Giouan Dulfarax where are many vyllages of the
Moors: And from thense arrived at a castle of the Duke of Medina Sidonia,
where is the port from which they enter into the sea and to the cape saint
Uincent being distant from the Equinoctial.xxxvii. degrees, The Cape of saint
Uincent
and from the said port.x. leaques, and is from thense to Siuile between
xvii. and.xx. leaques. Here they remained certain days to make new provision
of such things as they lacked.

Departing from hense the.xx. day of September, they arrived the.xxvi. day of
the same month at one of the Islands of Canarie cauled T^nerife, The Islands
of Canarie.
being.xxv. degrees about the Equinoctial. In one of these Islands is none
other water but that is continually engendered of a cloud which appears
daily at noone tide as though it descended from heaven and compaseth about a
certain great tree from whose branches distilleth great abundaunce of water,
water engendered of a cloud.
and faulethe in streams from the root of the same into certain trenches and
cestarnes made and placed to receive it. This water serves sufficiently all
thinhabitauntes and cattayle of the Island. The like thing is also seen in
the Island of saint Thomas, The Island of saint Thoma^.
lyinge directly under the Equinoctial line.

The third day of October about mydnyght, the capytayne commanded them to
light fyrebrandes and to hoyse up their sails directing their course toward
the South, saylynge between Capo Verde of Affryke and the Islands lyinge about
the same, Capo verde.
being from the Equinoctial.xiiii. degrees and a half. They failed thus,
many days in the sight of the coaste of Guinea, of Ethio^e, Ginnea in Ethyope
where is the mountain cauled Serra Liona being.viii. degrees above the
Equinoctial. Serraliona.
In this coast they had no manner of contrary wind but a great calm and fair
wether for the space of threescore and ten days, in the which they came
under the Equinoctial line. In this vyage they saw many strange fysshes and
monsters of the sea beside an other strange thing which appeared unto them.
Fysshes and monsters of the sea.
For there appeared in their ships certain flames of fire burning very
clear, which they caul saint Helen and saint Nicolas. The fyers of saints
helene and S. Nicolas. A tempest.
These appeared as thought they had been upon the mast of the ships, in such
clearenesse that they took away their sight for the space of a quarter of an
hour: by reason whereof, they so wandered owte of their course and were
disparsed in sunder, that they in manner dispayred to meet again. But as God
would, the sea and tempest being quieted, they came safely to their determined
course. And before I speak any further of the vyage, I have here thought good
to say sumewhat of these strange fyers, The natural cause of such ^iers as
faule in the ^hyps
which sum ignorant folks think to be spirits or such other fantasies
whereas they are but natural things proceadynge of natural causes and
engendered of certain exhalations. Of these therefore, the great Philosopher
of owre time Hieronimus Cardanus in his second book de Subtilitate, Cardanus.
writes in this manner.

There are two manner of fyers engendered of exhalations whereof the one is
hurtful and the other without hurt. Two kinds of fyers enge^dered of
exhalations.
That which is hurtful, is fire in deed, engendered of malicious and venomous
vapors which in success of time take fire as apt matters to be kyndeled. The
other kind, is no true fy^e, but like the matter that is in such owlde
putrified wod as gives the shynynge of fire without the substance or quality
thereof. Of the kind of true fire, True fire and false fire.
is the fire baule or star commonly cauled saint Helen which is sumtyme seen
about the mastes of ships, being of such fy^ry nature that it sumetyme
melts brazen vessels, and is a token of drownyng, forasmuch as this
chances only in great tempests. For the vapoure or exhalation whereof this
fire is engendered, can not be driven together or compacte in form of fire,
but of a gross vapoure and by a great pour of wind, and is therefore a token
of imminent perell: As on the contrary part, the like fyers cauled in owlde
time Castor and Pollux and now named the two lyghtes of saint Peter and saint
Nycolas which for the most part faule on the cables of the ships, Casto^
and Pollux.
The lyghtes of saint Peter and saint Nycolas.
leaping from one to an other with a certain flutterynge noise like birds,
are a token of security and of the tempeste ouerpassed. For they are but
vapoures cleauynge to the cables: which in success of time, the fire passing
from one to an other, appear in the similitude of a light candell. They are a
token of security because they are little, not slow or gross, whereby they
might have joined altogyther in one, and been thereby more malicious and lasted
longer, whereas being many and but little, they are the sooner consumed.
Hitherto Cardanus. But let us now return to the vyage.

When they had sailed paste the Equinoctial line, they lost the sight of the
north star, They lost the sight of the North star.
and sailed by southweste until they came to a land named the land of
Bressil which sum caul Brasilia, The land* of Bresile.
being.xxii. degrees and a half toward the south pole or pole Antartyke. The
South pole.
This land is continuate and one firm land with the cape of saint Augustine
which is viii. degrees from the Equinoctial. In this land they were
refresshed with many good fruits of innumerable kinds, and found here also
very good sugar canes and diverse kinds of beasts and other things which I
omit for brevity. Sugar.
They entered into this haven on saint Lucies day: where the son being there
Zenith (that is the point of heaven directly over their heads) they felt
greater heat that day then when they were under the Equinoctial line. This
land of Brasile is very large and great: The greatenesse of the land of
Brasile.
and bygger then all Spain, Portugale, France, and Italy: and is most
abundaunte in all things. The people of this country pray to no manner of
thing: but live by thinstincte of nature, and to thage of.C.xx and.C. xl.
years. Both the men and women go naked, and dwell in certain long houses.
They are very docible, and soon allured to the Chrystian faith.

Therteene days after that they arrived at the said port, they departed from
this land and sailed to the.xxxiiii. degree and a half toward the pole
Antartike where they found a great river of fre^she water and certain
Canibales. C^ni^ales.
Of these they saw one out of their ships, of stature as big as a giante,
Giantes.
having a voice like a bull. Owre men pursued them, but they were so swyfte of
foot that they could not overtake them. About the mouth of this river, are
seven Islands, Insula^ gemmarum.
in the byggest whereof, they found certain precious stones, and cauled it the
cape of saint Marie. Cap. S. Marie.
The Spanyardes thought that by this river they might have passed into the
south sea. But they were deceived in their opinion. For there was none other
passage then by the river which is.xvii leaques large in the mouth.

Thus following this coaste by the tracte of the land toward the pole
Antartyke, The pole ^nartike.
they came to a place where were two Islands replenysshed with giese and
woolues of the sea which sum think to be those fysshes that we caul pikes.
Geese-Sea woolues
These were in such number that in an hour all the five ships might have been
lade with giese being all of black color, and such as can not fly. They
live of fysshe and are so fat that they could scarsely fle them. They have
no feathers but a certain down: and their byls like ravens byls. These
woolues of the sea are of diverse colors, and of the byggenesse of calves,
with their heads of golden color. Here were they in great daungiour by
tempest. But as soon as the three fyers cauled saint Helen, saint Nycolas,
and saint Clare, appeared upon the cabels of the ships, suddeynely the
tempeste and furye of the wyndes ceased.

Departing from hense, they sailed to the.49. degree and a half under the
pole Antartyke: The.xlix. degree of the south pole.
where being wyntered, they were enforced to remain there for the space of
two months, all which time they saw no man except that one day by chance
they espied a man of the stature of a giante, Giantes.
who came to the haven daunsyng and singing, and shortly after seemed to cast
dust over his head. The captain sent one of his men to the shore with the
ship boat, who made the like sign of peace. The which thing the giante
saying, was out of fear and came with the capitaynes servant to his presence
into a little Island. When he saw the captain with certain of his coompany
abowte him, he was greatly amassed and made signs heldynge up his hand to
heaven, signifyinge thereby that owre men came from thense. This giante was so
bygge, The bygnes of the giants.
that the head of one of owr men of a mean stature, came but to his waste. He
was of good corporature and well made in all parts of his body, with a large
vysage painted with diverse colors, but for the most part yelowe. Upon his
cheeks were painted two hearts, and read circles about his eyes. The hear of
his headde was colored white, and his apparel was the skin of a beast
sowde together. This beast (as seemed unto us) had a large head and great
ears like unto a mule, with the body of a camel and tail of a horse. The
feet of the g^ant were foulded in the said skin after the manner of shoos.
He had in his hand, a bygge and short bow, the string whereof was made of a
synewe of that beast. He had also a bundell of long arrows made of reeds
fethered after the manner of owrs, typte with sharp stones in the stead of
iren heads. The Captain caused him to eat and drink, and gave him many
things, and among other a great lookynge glass: In the which as soon as he
saw his own likeness, was suddeynely afraid and started back with such
violence that he ouerthrewe two that stood nearest abowte him. When the
Captain had thus given him certain hawks belles and other great belles,
with also a lookynge glass, a comb, and a pair of beads of glass, he sent
him to land with four of his own men well armed.

Shortly after, they saw an other giaunte of sumewhat greater stature, An
other giante.
with his bow and arrows in his hand, As he drew near unto owre men, he
laid his hand on his head and poynted up toward heaven, and owr men did the
like. The Captain sent his ship boat to bring him to a little Island
being in the haven. This giante was very tractable and pleasant. He soonge
and daunsed: and in his daunsynge left the printe of his feet on the grownde.
Here mayned long with owre men who named him Johan. He could well speak and
plainly pronounce these words: Jesus: Aue Maria, Johannes, even as we do,
but with a bygger voice.

The captain gave him a shert of lynnen clothe, and a coat of white woollen
clothe: Also a cappe, a comb, a lookynge glass, with diverse such other
things, and so sent him to his coompany. The day following, he resorted again
to the ships, and brought with him one of those great beasts* which he gave
the captain. But after that day they never saw him more, supposing him to
be slain of his own coompany for the conversation he had with owre men.

After other.xv. days were paste, there came four other giantes without any
weapons, Four other giantes.
but had hid their bows and arrows in certain busshes. The captain
retained two of these which were youngest and best made. He took them by a
deceyte in this manner, that gyuynge them knyues, sheares, Two giantes are taken
by a po^licie.
lookynge glasses, belles, beads of crystal, and such other ^ryfels, he so
filled their hands that they could hold no more. Then caused two pair of
shackels of iren to be put on their legs, making signs that he would also
give them those chains: which they lyked very well because they were made of
bright and shynynge metal. And whereas they could not carry them because their
hands were full, the other gyantes would have carried them: but the Captain
would not suffer them. When they felt the shakels fast abowte their legs,
they begun to doubt: but the Captain did put them in comfort and badde
them stand still. In fine when they saw how they were deceived they rored
like bulls and cried upon their great devil Setebo^ to help them. The
devil Setebos.
Being thus taken, they were immediately separate and put in sundry ships.
They could never bind the hands of the other two, Yet was one of them with
much difficulty overthrown by nine of owre men, and his hands bownde: but he
suddeynely loosed him self and fled, as did also the other that came with
them. In their f^ying, they shot of their arrows and slew one of owre men.
They say that when any of them dye, Deuyls app^r^ to the gyant^^ when they dye.
there appear.x. or.xii. deuyls leaping and daunsynge about the body of the
dead. and seem to have their boddyes painted with diverse colors. And that
among other, there is one seen bygger then the residue, who makes great
mirth and reioysynge. This grea^e devil they caul Setebos, and caul the
less Chel^ule. One of these giantes which they took, declared by signs that
he had seen deuyls with two horns above their heads, with long hear down
to their feet: And that they cast forth fire at their throtes both before and
behind. The Captain named these people Patagoni. Patagoni.
The most part of them wear the skynnes of such beasts whereof I have spoken
before: And have no houses of continuance but make certain cotages which
they cover with the said skynnes, and carry them from place to place. They live
of raw flesh and a c^rteyne sweet root which they caul Capar. One of
these which they had in their ships, did eat at one meal a basket of
byskette, The gyantes feeding.
and drunk a bowl of water at a draught.

They remained five months in this port of saint Iuli^n, where certain of
the under capitaynes conspirynge the death of their general, They cospire
against their Captain.
were hanged and quartered: Among whom the treasurer Luigo of Mendozza was
one. Certain of the other conspiratours, he left in the said land of Patogoni

Departing from hense to the.52. degree toward the pole Antartike lacking a
third part, where they found a river of fresshe water and good fysshe. Their
ships were here in great daungiour. They remained two months in this port
where they made new provision of fresshe water, fuel, and fysshe. Here the
Captain caused all his men to be confessed. Confession.


Approchynge to the.52. degrees, they found the straight now cauled the
straight of Magellanus, The straight of Magellanus.
being in sum place L. x. leaques in length: and in breadth sumwhere very
large and in other places little more then half a leaque in bred^h. On both
the sides of this straight, are great and high mountains covered with snow,
beyond the which is the enteraunce into the sea of Sur. The South sea.
This enteraunce the Captain named Mare Pacificum. Mare pacificu^.
Here one of the ships stole away punilie and returned into Spain. In this
was one of the giantes who dyed as soon as he felt the heat that is abowte
the Equinoctial line.

When the Captain Magalianes was past the straight and saw the way open to
the other main sea, The giantes di^d for heat.
he was so glad thereof that for joy the tears fell from his eyes, and named
the point of the land from whense he first saw that sea, Capo D^siderato.
Capo Deside^ato


Supposing that the ship which stole away had been lost, they erected a cro^^e
upon the top of a high hill to direct their course in the straight if it
were their chance to coome that way. They found that in this straight in the
month of October the night was not past four hours long. Short nights in
the month of October.
They found in this straight at every three miles, a safe haven and excellent
water to drink: woodde also and fysshe, and great plenty of goodherbes. They
think that there is not a fayrer straight in the world. Here also they saw
certain ^^yinge fysshes. F^ying fy^^hes


The other giante which remained with them in the ship, named bread Capar:
water, Ol^: read clothe, Chereca^red color, The gyantes language.
Cheiche: black color, Amel: And spoke al his words in the throat. On a
time, as one made a cross before him and kyssed it, showing it unto ^ym, he
suddeynely cried Setebos, and declared by signs that if they made any more
crosses, Setebos would enter into his body and make him brust. But when in fine
he saw no hurt coome thereof, he took the cross and imbrased and kyssed it
oftentimes, desyringe that he might be a Chrystian before his death. He was
therefore baptized and named Paul. The giant is baptized.


Departing out of this straight into the sea cauled Mare Pacificum the.xxviii.
day of November in the year.1520. they sailed three moonethes and.xx. days
before they saw any land. Three months sayt lyng without the sight of land.
And having in this time consumed all their bysket and other vyttayles, they
fell into such necessity that they were enforced to eat the powder that
remained thereof being now full of woormes and stynkynge like pysse by reason
of the salt water. Extreme f^m^n.
Their fresshe water was also putrifyed and become yelowe. They did eat
skynnes and pieces of lether which were foulded about certain great ropes of
the shyps. But these skynnes being made very hard by reason of the soonne,
rain and wind, they hunge them by a cord in the sea for the space of four
or five days to mollify them, and sodde them and eat them. By reason of this
famen and unclean feeding, sum of their gummes grew so over their teethe,
Di^ease^ of famen.
that they dyed miserably for hunger. And by this occasion dyed.xix. men, and
also the giante with an Indian of the land of Brasile otherwise cauled Terra
de papagalli, that is the land of popingiayes. Beside these that dyed.xxv.
or.xxx were so sick that they were not able to do any service with their
hands or arms for feebleness: So that there was in manner none without sum
disease. In these three months and xx. days, they sailed four thousand
leaques in one goulfe by the said sea cauled Pacific^m (that is) peaceable,
which may well be so cauled forasmuch as in all this time having no sight of
any land, they had no misfortune of wind o^ any other tempest. During this
time also, they discovered only two little Islands uninhabited, where they saw
nothing but birds and trees, and therefore named them unfortunate Islands,
Unfortunate Islands.
being one from the other abowte two hundredth leaques distante. The first of
these Islands is from the Equinoctial toward the pole Antartike.xv. degrees,
and the other five. Their sailinge was in such sort that they sailed daily
between.l.lx. to.lxx. leaques. what they sailed dayl^
So that in fine, if god of his mercy had not given them good wether, it was
necessary that in this so great a sea they should all have dred for hunger.
Which nevertheless they escaped so hardely, that it may be doubted whether
ever the like viage may be attempted with so good success.

They considered in this navigations that the pole Antartike has no notable
star after the sort of the pole Artike. But they saw many stars gathered
together, The ^tarre^ abow^ the south pole.
which are like two clouds one separate a l^ttle from an other, and sum what
dark in the myddest. Between these, are two stars not very big, nor much
shynninge, which move a little: And these two are the pole Antartike. The
needell of their compass varyed sumwhat, The needle of the coompase.
and turned ever toward the pole Artike. Nevertheless, had no such force as
when it is in these parts of the pole Artike. In so much that it was
nece^sarie to help the needle with the lode stone (commonly cauled the
adamant) before they could sail therewith, The lode stone.
because it mou^d not as it doothe when it is in these owre parts. When they
were in the myddest of the goulfe, they saw a cross of five clear stars
directly toward the West, eand of equal distance the one from the other.

The order of the stars about the pole Antartike, sum have figured in this
manner.
A. The pole Antartike. B. The Cross.



In these days they sailed between the West and South so far that they
approached to the Equinoctial line, The Equinoctial line.
and were in longitude from the place from whense they first departed, a
hundredth and twenty degrees. In this course they sailed by two Islands of
exceadynge height, whereof the one named Cipanghu, is.xx. degrees from the pole
Antartike: And the other named Sumbdit.xv. degrees. The Islands of Cipanghu and
Sumbdit
When they were past the Equinoctial line, they sailed between the West and
Southwest at the quarter of the West toward the Southwest more then a hundredth
leaques, changinge their sails to the quarter of the Southwest until they
came to the.xiii. degrees above the Equinoctial toward the pole Artyke,
intendyng as much as were possible, to approach to the cape cauled of the owlde
writers Cartigara: The which is not found as the owlde Cosmographers have
discribed it, but is toward the north about.xii. degrees as they afterward
understood.

When they had thus sailed.lxx. leaques of this vyage in the.xii. degree above
the Equinoctial, and.C.xlvi. degrees of longitude (as I have said) the syxte
day of March they discovered a little Island toward the northweste, and two
other toward the southweste: but the one was higher and bygger then the two
other. In the byggest of these, the general captain would have rested him
self a while: but he could ^ot by reason the people of these Islands resorted
continually to the ships with their canoas, and stole now one thing and
now an other, in such sort that owr men could take no rest, and therefore
demanded of the captain that they might stryke their sails to bring the
ships to land. But the Captain being provoked to anger, went alande with
forty armed men, and burnte about fifty of their houses with many of their
Can^as: And slew also about seven men, and recovered a ship boat which the
Barbarians had stolen, and so departed following his vyage. The Captain named
these Islands Insulae Latronum, that is, Insule Latronu^.
the Islands of thieves. When owr men had so wounded sum of th^ym with arrows
that they were stryken through both syd^s, they pulled forth the arrows not
cea^yng to marueyle at the^ till they ^ell down dead: And yet could not the
other ^o depart, but still followed ^he ships with more then two hund^eth of
their boats, approchynge as nere to the ships as they could, and prof^rynge
owre men certain fysshee. As the s^yppes passed with full sail in ^he
myddeste of their b^ates, they saw in sum of them certain wom^n lam^n^ing and
tearing their hear, which ^wre men thought they did for the death of their
husbands. As far as they could perceive, these people live at their own
liberty without any ruler or governor. They go naked and have black beardes
and black heat on their heads which they wear long down to their wastes.
People with long hear
They are of the same sta^ure that we are, and well made, of color like unto
an olyue. Their women are well favored with black and thick hear on their
heads reachynge to the grownde. The men color their teeth read and
black, They color their teethe.
which they esteem a coomely thing. They annoint their bodies and hear with
the oil of Cocus. Their boats are sum all black, sum white, and sum read,
and have sails made of the broad leaves of date trees sowd together. In the
stead of a rudder, they use a certain broad boo, d^ with a staff in the
top, and may when they will, make the st^rne the forecastell, or the
forecastell the stern.

They sail to swyftely that they seem a far of, like Delphyns swymmynge
above the water.

The tenth day of ^arch, in the year.1521. they went alande upon a little
Island named Zamal.xxx. leaques dystant from the Island of the^ues. The Island
of zamail.
Because this Island was not inhabyted, they rested here a while, where the
captain caused a pauilion to be pytched for the sick and crased men, and a
hog to be kylde.

The.xviii. day of March, they saw a boat with nine men coming toward
them, showing them selves joyful and reioysynge of their coming. They
brought many presents with them, and seemed to be people of much humanity.
They gave the cap^tayne a great fyshe, and a great vessel of the wine of those
date trees which bear the fruit Cocus. wine of date trees.
They made also signs that within the space of four days, they would bring
rysse and diverse fowls and beasts as they did in deed.

This Cocu^ is a fruit of certain date trees whereof they make bread, The
marvelous fruit. Cocus.
wine, oil, and vinegar. They make wine in this manner. They cut a bygge
branch of the tree, and hang thereat a reed as big as a man's leg, into
the which droppeth a sweet li^^ur from the tree like unto new white wine
sumwhat ^ar^, and let the reed continewe there from morning till evening,
and from evening to morning. The fruit of this tree cauled Cocus, is as bygge
as the head of a ^an or more. The first rynde of this, is green and of the
thyckenesse of two fyngers, having in it certain threedes whereof they make
cords with the which they tie their boats. Under this rynde, there is a
thick shell which they burn and make powder thereof and use it as a remedy
for certain diseases. Under this shell, is a white substance like the carnell
of a nutte being a finger in thickenesse, which they eat with flesh and
fysshe as we do bread. It has the taste of an almonde, and is used in the
stead of bread when it is dried. In the myddest of this carnell, is a clear
and sweet water, being very wholesome and cordiale. This water sumtyme
congeleth and lies within the shell like an egg. When they intend to make
oil hereof, they ley it to putrify in water, and boil it until it be like
oil or liquide butter. When they intend to make vinegar, they suffer only the
water to putrify, and then set it to the soonne where it becomes vinegar
like unto that which is made of white wine. And when they mengle the carnell
with the water which is in the myddest of the fruit, and strain it through a
cloth, they make a milk thereof like unto goats milk. These date trees are
like unto them that bear dates, but are not so full of knottes. With the iuise
of two of these date trees, a hole famelie of ten persons may be maynteyned
with wine using one viii. days, and the other, other.viii. days: for they
should else be dried and wythered. These trees continue for the space of a
hundredth years. This Island where they found this humane and gentell people,
is cauled Zuluan, The Island of zuluan
and is not very bygge. About this Island they found many other Islands, and
therefore named this sea Archipelago di San Lazaro, The sea caul^d Arch^pelago
d^^an La^aro.
that is, the great sea of saint Lazarus, being ten degrees above the
Equinoctial toward owre pole, and.C.lxi. from the place from whense they
departed. The people of this Island are Caphranitae (that is gentyles. Gentyles.
They go naked saving that they cover their privy parts with a clothe made
of the rynde of a certain tree. The chiefest men, have abowte their heads a
sylken cloth of needle work. They are gross and broad set and of the color
of an olive. They annoynte their bodies with the oil of Cocus to defend them
against the heat of the soonne and dryness of the wind. The.xxv. day of
March, they departed from hense and directed their course between the Weste
and southwest, and sailed between four Islands named Cenalo, Huinanghan,
Hibusson, and Abarien, Four Islands
etc.

The xxviii. day of March, they came to the Island of Buthuan where they were
honorably interteyned of the King and the Prince his soonne who gave them
much gold and spices. The Island of Buthuan.
The captain gave the king a vesture of red clothe and an other of yelowe
made after the Turaysshe fasshyon, and also a red cappe. And gave li^ewi^e to
other that came with him, certain knyues, glasses, and beads of cristalle.

After that, the captain had showed the King the secreates of his ship and
such marchaundies as he had therein, he caused a piece of ordinance suddenly
to be shore of, whereat the king was greatly amassed until the captain
comforted him. Then the Captain commanded one of his men to be armed from
the head to the foot, and caused three other to strike him with their
swoordes, whereat the King maruayled greatly, and said to thinterpretoure
(who was a slave borne in Malacha) that one of those armed men was able to
encounter with a hundredth of his men. But he maruayled much more when the
captain told him by thinterpretoure how he found the straight by the
compass and lode stone, and how many days they were without sight of any
land. Then asking license to depart, the captain sent two of his men with
him, of the which Antonie Pigafetta was one. When the king saw Antonie
Pigafetta write the names of many things, and afterward rehearse them again,
he maruayled yet more, making signs that such men descended from heaven. The
King brought them first to his pallaice where he interteyned them honorably
and gave them many gifts, as did also the Prince in his pallaice being in an
other Island named Caleghan. The Island of Cal^ghan.


As they syfted a certain mine of earth in the Kings Island, they found
pieces of gold, su^ as big as nuttes and other as big as eggs. All the
kings ve^selles were of gold, Plent^e of gold.
and his house well furnysshed. In all the hole nation there was no man of
coomlier personage then the king. He had his hear long down to his shulders,
and very blake, with a veil of silk rolled abowte his head, The king of
Buthuan.
and two great ringes of gold hanginge at his ears. He had abowte his
myddle, a clothe wroughte of cotton and silk impaled with gold, and
reacheinge down to his knees. On his one side, he had a long dager with a
hafte of gold, and the shethe of a fair kind of carved woodde. He had on
every finger, three ringes of gold, and had his body anointed with oil of
storax and Benjamin. The natural color of his face was like unto the color
of an olive: And all his body bysyde painted with diverse colors. The kings
name was Raia Colambu, and the Prince was cauled Raia Siagu.

The last day of March near unto Easter, the captain caused his preeste to
say mass, Mass.
and sent to the king by thinterpretoure, that his coming a land at that
time was not to dyne with him, but only to hear mass. The Captain came
alande with fyftie of his men in their best apparel with owte weapons or
harness, and all the resydue well armed. Before the boats came to land, he
caused six pieces of ordinance to be shot of in token of peace, and so came
aland, where the two kings embrased him, and accompanied him to the place
appointed for mass to be said not far from the sea side. Sumwhat before
the beginnynge of mass, the Captain sprinkeled the Kings with damask water.

When the preeste was at mid mass at the offitorie, the kings proffered them
selves to go to kiss the cross with the capytayne, but offered nothing. At
the time of sacringe when the preeste lifted up the body of Christ, and the
Christians kneeled down and held up their hands joined together, the
kings did the like also with great reverence. In the mean time, while
certain of the Christians were at the communion, a handegunne was shot of to
signify unto them that were in the ships, to discharge all their ordinance.

When mass was fynysshed, the Captain caused certain of his men to put on
their harness and to make a combat with their naked swoordes, A combatte.
whereat the kings took great pleasure. This done, the Captain caused a
cross to be brought forth, with nails and a crown of thorns, The Cross and
crown of thorns.
gyuynge commandment to all his men to give reverence thereunto, and
signifyinge to the kings by thinterpretour that that banner was given him by
Themperoure his lord and master, with commandment t^ l^aue the same in all
places where he came to the great commodity and profit of all such as would
reuerendly receive it as an assured token of friendship: And that he would
ther^ore leave it there as well to accomplish his lords commandment, as also
that if at any time any ships of Christians should chance to coome that way,
should by seeing that cross perceive that owre men had been well enterteyned
there. and would therefore not only absteyne from doing them any hurt or
displeasure, but also help to aid them ageynste their enemies. And that
therefore it should be requisite to erecte that cross v^pon the top of the
hygheste mountain that might be seen from the sea on every side. Also to
pray unto it reverently. And that in so doing, they should not be hurt with
thunder, lyghtnynge, or tempests. When the kings hard these words, they
gave the Captain great thanks, promysinge gladly to observe and fulfill all
such things as he required. Then the Captain demanded whether they were
Moors or gentyles. Moors and gentyles.
They answered that they had none other kind of religion, but that lyftyng^
up their hands joined together and their faces toward heaven, they cauled
upon their god Abba. which answer lyked the Captain ver^ well, because the
gentyles are sooner persuaded to owre faith then the Moors. etc.

Many Islands
D^partynge from hense, they came to the Islands of Zeilon, Zubuth, Messana,
and Calaghan, by the conducte of certain pylottes of the said kings. Of
these, Zubuth is the best, and has the trade of best trafique. In the Island
of M^ssana, The Island of Messana.
they found dogs, cattes, hogs, heunes, goats, ry^e, ginger, Cocus,
mylle, panyke, barlye, fygges, oranges ware* and gold in great quantity.
This Island is above the Equinoctial toward owre pole.ix. degrees two third
parts: and.162. degrees from the place from whense they depar^ed. They
remained in this Island for the space of.viii days, and then directed their
vyage toward the northwest, and passed between these five Islands, Zeilon,
Bohol, Cangbu, Barbai, and Catighan. In this Island of Catighan, are certain
great battes as bygge as Eagles, Battes as bygge as Eagles.
of the which they took one. They are good to be eaten, and of taste much
like a hen. There are also stock dooues, Fowls with horns.
turtle dooues, popingiayes, and certain fowls as bygge as hens. These
fowls have little horns, and lay great eggs, which they cover a cubet depthe
in the sand, Eggs hatched in sand.
by the heat whereof and virtue of the soonne, they are hatch^d, and the
young birds creep owte of the sand by them selves. From the Island of
Messana to Catighan* are.xx. leaques saylynge toward the West. And because the
king of Messana could not follow the ships, they tarried for him about the
Islands of Polo, Ticobon, and Pozon, where the Captain took him into his
ship with certain of his principal men, and so followed their vyage toward
the Island of Zubut, The Island of zubut.
which is abowte fifty leagues distante from Catighan.

The.vii. day of Apryll abowte no one, they entered into the port of Zubut:
And passing by many vyllages and habitacions in trees, they came to the city,
where the Captain gave commandment to the maryners to stryke their sails
and to set them selves in order in manner of battle ray, causing all the
ordinance to be short of, wherewith all the people were put in great fear.
After this, the Captain sent an ambassadoure with thinterpretoure to the
king of Zabut. The king of zubut.
When they approached nere to the city, they found the king with a great
company of men sore astonyshed at the noise of the gunnes, But thinterpretour
advertised them that it was the custom of owre men in all suck places where
^hey coome, to discharge their ordinance in token of frendeshyppe and to
honor the lord of the city. With which words the king and his coompany,
were well quieted. After this, thinterpretour declared that his master was the
Captain of the ships of the greatest Prince in the world, and that they
went to discover the Islands of Molucca: And further, that hearing of his good
name and fame by the report of the king of Messana, they determined to visit
him and to have vyttayles for exchange of their marchaundies. The king
answered that he was well contented therewith, and that they were heartily
welcoome. Neuertheles^e, that it was a custom in that place* that all (...)
ships as cutered into that haven, should pay tribute: And that there were not
many days paste, sense a ship laden with gold and slaves did so pay. A
ship laden with gold and slaves.
In token whereof, he caused to coome before him certain marchaunces of that
coompany which yet remained with him. To this thinter^recour answered, that
forasmuch as his lord was the Captain o^ so myghtie a Prince, he never paid
tribute to any king in the world, and would not now begin. Willing him to
take this for a resolute answer, that if he would accept the peace that was
proffered him, he should enjoy it, And if he rather desired war, he should
have his hands full. When thinterpretour had said these words, one of the
said merchants (who was a Moore) spoke to the king in this manner. CATACAIA
Chitae: that is. Take heed sir. For these men are they that have conquered
Calicut, Calicut.
Malaca, Malacha.
and all the greater India: and are of such pour that if you entreat them
otherwise then well, you may to late know what they are able to do more then
they have done at Calicut and Malaca. When thinterpretoure hard these
words, he said that the king his lord was of much greater puissaunce and
more dominions, and lord of more ships then was the king of Portugale:
declarynge further that he was king of Spain and Emperor of all Christendom
Adding hereunto that if he would not be his friend, he would hereafter send
thither such a pour of armed men as should destroy his country. The Moore
conferred all these words with the king, who said that he would further
deliberate with his counsel, and give them a full answer the day
following. In the mean time he sent them certain vyttayles and wine. When
all these things were declared to the king of M^ssana who was the chiefest
there about next unto him, and lord of many Islands, he went alande and
repaired to the king of Zubut and declared unto him the great humanity and
courtesy of the general Captain. Shortly after, the Captain sent
certain of his men with thinterpretour to the king of Zubut to know his
pleasure and what answer he would make them. As they went toward the
court, they met the king coming in the street accompanied with many of
his chief men. He caused owr men to sit down by him, and demanded of them if
there were any more then one Captain in their coompanie: And whether it were
their request that he should pay tribute to The Emperor. They answered that
they desired none other thing but that they might exercise marchaundies with
them, Sheadyng of bludde is a token of frendshyppe
and to barter ware for ware. The king made answer that he was well content
therewith: willing the Captain in token of frendshippe to send him a little
of the blud of his right arm, affirmyng that he would do the like. etc

After this the king of Messana with the king of Zubu^ his neuie (who was the
prince) and certain other of his gentylmen, came to the ships and brought
the Captain many goodly presents. They entered into great amity, and had
large communication of many things. The Captain persuaded them to the
Christian faith, which they gladly embrased, and took such pleasure in
hearing the articles of owre belief, that the tears fell from their eyes for
joy. They were baptized, The king of zibut is baptized.
and shortly after all the people of the Island. They esteem nothing more
precious then drynking glasses of Uenice work.

When they came to the city, they found the king in his pallaice sittynge
upon a flower or stuorie made of the leaves of date trees wrought after a
curious divise like a certain kind of mattes. He had upon his body, none
other apparel but only a cloth of bombasine cotton hangyng before his privy
parts. The king of zubut his apparel.
On his head, he had a veil of needle work: and abowte his neck a chain of
great price. At his ears, hunge two rings of gold wherein were enclosed
many precious stones. He was but of smaule stature, but sumewhat gross, and
had the residue of his body painted with diverse colors whereof sum were like
unto flamynge fire. Before him, he had two vessels made of the fine earth
cauled Porcellana, with sodden eggs. Also four vessels of Porcellana full of
wine made of date trees, and covered with many odoriferous herbs. The prince
brought them to his house, where he had four daughters very well favored and
white like owres. well favored women.
He caused them to dance all naked, and therewith to sing, and play on
certain tymbrelles made of metal.

At this time it so chanced that one of the Spanyardes dyed in one of the
ships. And when certain of their coompanye desired the king to give them
leave to bury him on the land, he answered that forasmuch as he and all his,
were at the commandment of their king and master, how much more ought the
ground so to be.

They greatly marueyled at the ceremonies perteynyng to the manner of owre
funeralles, and honored the crosses which were set at both thendes the grave.

They live with justice, and use waightes and measures. Their houses are made
of Timber and sawne boordes: and are so builded above the grownde upon proppes
and pyles, that they ascend to the same by certain stayers. Under their
houses, they keep their hogs and hens.

When they came to barterynge, Barterynge
they gave gold, rysse, hogs, hens, and diverse other things for sum of
owre tryfels of smaule value. They gave ten Pesos of gold for xvi. pounds
weight of men. Pesus what.
One pesus is in value a ducate and a half. The sunday following, the king
was baptized with great solemnity. At which time, the Captain admonysshed
him before not to be afraid at the shootyng of of the ordinance, because it
was their custom so to do at such solemn feasts. After this, the Captain
caused them to break all their Idols, They break their Idols and erecte
the cross.
and to set up the cross in diverse places, prayinge to the same both
morning and evening kneelynge on their knees and holding up their hands
joined together. The king in his baptism, was named Charles after the
Emperors name, and the Prince, Ferdinando after the name of his majesty's
brother. The king of Messana was named John, and the Moore Christopher. To all
other they gave such names as are commonly used in Christendom. And thus
before mass was begun, were five hundredth men baptized. Five hundredth men
baptized.
When mass was fynysshed, the Captain invited the king to dyne with him in
his ship, and at his coming, caused the ordinance to be discharged.

The queen of zubut.
The queen was also baptized with forty of her gentlewomen, and her daughter
the Princes wife. The queen was very young and fair, having her body
covered with a white cloth. Her lyppes were read, and she had on her head a
hat, on the top whereof was a triple crown much like the papes This crown
and the hat, were made of the leaves of dates trees.

Within the space of.viii. days, thinhabitauntes of the Island were baptized
except one vyllage of Idolaters who would not herein obey the kings
commandment. Wheruppon the Captain sent certain of his men thither, who
burnt the town and erected a cross in that place because the people of the
vyllage were gentyles (that is) Idolaters. But if they had been Moors (that is
Machumetistes) they would have erected a pyller of stone, because the Moors are
more stooberne and harder to be converted then are the gentyles.

When the queen came to the place where she should hear mass, she came
surth with great pomp and solemnity, having goinge before her three young
damoselles and three men with their cappes in their hands, The queens
apparel.
whom she followed apparelled in white and black, with a great veil of sylke
upon her head fringed abowte with gold, which covered her hatte and hunge
down to her shoulders. She had also a great train of women following her,
being all barefooted and naked, except that upon their heads and privy
parts, they wore certain vayles of silk, and had their hear spredde.

Before the king of Zubut was baptized, he was named Raia Humabuon. When the
Captain demanded of him why all the Idols in the Island were not burnt
according to his promise, he answered that they esteemed the^ no more as
gods, but only made sacrifice to them for the Princes brother who was very
sick, and as noble and wyttie a man as was in the Island. The Captain
answered that if he would burn a^ his Idols and believe faithfully in Christ,
and be baptized, he should be immediately restored to health, and that he would
else give them leave to stryke of his head. By these words and persuasions of
the Captain, he conceived such hope of health, that after he was baptized he
felt no more grief of his disease. And this was a manifest miracle wrought in
owre time whereby diverse infidels were converted to owre faith, A miracle.
and their Idols destroyed, and also their altares overthrown on the which
they were accustomed to eat the sacrifyced flesh. The people of the Island
pay the king a portion of vittayles for their tribute by all their cities and
vyllages.

Not far from this Island of Zubut, is the Island of Mathan, The Island of
Mathan.
whose inhabitauntes use marvelous ceremonies in their sacrifices to the soonne
and burying the dead. They wear rings of gold about their privy members.
The Island is governed by two Princes whereof the one is named Zula, and the
other Cilapulapu. And whereas this Cilapulapu refused to pay tribute to the
king of Spain, the Captain went against him in his own person with.lx. of
his men armed with coats of mayle and helmettes. Cilapulapu divided his army
into three battayles, having in every battle two thousand and fifty men
armed with bows, arrows, darts and iauelins hardened at the points with
fire. This continued long and sharp. But the Captain being a valient man
and presynge him self in the brunte of the battle, was sore wounded and
slain, The captain Magellanus is slain.
forasmuch as the most of the Barbarians directed all their force against him.
Beside the Captain, were slain of owre men about.viii. or.ix. Of the
Barbarians, were.xv. slain and many sore wounded. After the death of the
Captain, they chose two other in his place, of the which one was Odoardo
Barbessa a Portugale, and the other John Serrano who was shortly after
betrayde by thinterpretour and taken prisoner with diverse other.

Certain days before the Capitaynes death, they had knowleage of the
Islands of Molucca which they chiefly sought. Departing therefore from the
Island of Mathan, they sailed far and came to the cape of an other Island
named Bohol. The Island of Bohol.
In the myddest of this main sea (which they named Archipelagus) they
consulted to burn the ship named Conception, They burnte one of their
ships.
because they were now few in number, and to furnyshe the other two ships
with thartillerie thereof. Thus directing their course toward Southewest, they
came to an other Island named pauiloghon, where they found black men like
unto the Sarasins. Shortly after, they arrived at an other great Island, Black
men.
whose king named Raia Calauar, entreated them very frendely in all things as
did the king of Messana. This Island is rich in gold, and has plenty of
rysse, gynger, hogs, goats, hens, and diverse other things. It is named
Chippit, The Island of Chippit.
and is.viii. degrees above the Equinoctial line toward owr pole: And in
longitude from the place from whense they first departed.170. degrees: And
about.50. leaques from Zubut.

Departinge from hense they came to an other Island named Caghaian being 40.
leaques from Chippit as they sailed between the weste and Southe weste. The
Island of Caghaian.
This Island is very great, and in manner uninhabited. The people are moors, and
were banyssshed out of the Island of Burnei which sum caul Porne.

From this Island about xxv. leaques between the west and north weste, they
found a marvelous fruitful Island named Pulaoan, The Island of Pulaoan.
being toward owre pole above the Equinoctial ix. degrees and a third
part: And C.lxxix. degrees and a third part in longitude from the place of
their departing.

From this Island.x. leaques toward the South weste, they saw an other
Island which seemed to them sumtymes to mount as they sailed by the coasts
thereof. The Island Burne^ or Pone.
As they were enteringe into the port, there arose a boystious and dark
te^peste which ceased as soon as the fires of the three saints (whereof we
have spoken before) appeared upon the cabells. From the beginning of this
Island to the port, are five leaques. This Island is great and rich: and the
chief city thereof conteyneth.xxv. thousand houses. A great city.
The king interteyned owre men very frendlye, and sent them bysyde many other
presents, two elephantes trapped with silk to bring them to his pallaice that
brought the presents which the Capytaynes sent him. Elephantes.
He has a magnyfycalle court and a great guard. Also a multitude of
concubynes. He is a moore, and is named Raia Siripada. He is a king of great
pour, and has under him many other kings, Islands, and cities. This Island
of Burnei is above the Equinoctial toward owre pole five degrees and a
quarter. And in longitude from the place of their departing.C.lxxvi. degrees
and two third parts.

Departinge from Burnei, they came to an Island cauled Cimbubon, The Island of
Cimbulon.
being.viii. degrees above the Equinoctial line Hete they remained.xl. days
to calke their ships and furnysshe them with fresshe water and fuel which
was to them great pain and travail because they were in manner all bare
footed, their shoes and in manner their other apparel being worn by reason of
the long vyage. In the wooddes of this Island, they found a tree whose leaves
as soon as they faule on the ground, do slurre and remove from place to
place as though they were alive. Leaves of trees which seem to live
They are much like the leaves of a mulbery tree: And have on every side as it
were two short and blunt fiete. When they are cut or broken, there is no bludde
seen come forth of them. Yet when any of them are touched, they suddeynely
move and starte away. Antonie Pigafetta k^pte one of them in a platter for the
space of.viii. days. And ever when he touched it, it rannt, round about the
platter. He supposes that they live only by air.

Departing from hense, they directed their course by the Weste quarter toward
the South east, to find the Islands of Molucca. and sailed not far from
certain mountains where they found the sea full of great weeds and herbs.
A sea full of weeds.


From hense, they came to the Islands of Zolo and Taghima, in the which are
found perles of exceadyng biggenesse. Perles.


Following their course toward the north East, they came to a great city named
Mangdando, lyinge above the Islands of Buthuan and Calaghan, where they took a
canoa of certain of thinhabitaunts: by whom being informed of the Islands of
Molucca, they left their course toward the north East, and followed the South
east nere unto a cape of the Island of Buthuan, they were advertised for
certentie that on the banks of a certain river, there dwelte men ouergrowen
with hear, Men ouergrowen with hear.
and of high stature.

Following still their course by the south east, and passing by many smaule
Islands, they came to the Islands of Molucca the syxte day of November and
the.xxvii. monethe after their departure out of Spain. The Islands of Molucca.
Being therefore joyful and gyuyng thanks unto god, they discharged all their
ordinance. In the coaste of all these Islands, even unto the Islands of
Molucca, soundyng with their plummet, they found the deapthe of the sea to be
no less then a hundredth and two yardes, which is contrary to the saying of the
Portugales who affirm that no ship can pass that way with out great
daungioure by reason of the shalownes and rocks or shelues: The Portugales are
reproved.
and for the darkness which the clouds cause in the heaven. All which things
they feigned to the intent that none other should have knoweleage of their vyagies.

The.viii. day of November in the year.1521. before the rysinge of the soonne,
they entered into the port of the Island of Tidore, Tidode one of the Islands
of Molucca.
being one of the chief Islands of Molucca, where they were honorably
interteyned of the king who declared that he had long before seen a sign in
heaven that certain ships should comme from a far country to the Islands of
Molucca: And that whereas for the better certificat thereof he considered the
starious of the moon, A vision in the planettes
he saw therein the coming of owre ships, and that we were the men whom he
seemed to see in the same. Whereupon he proffered him self to enter into leaque
of frendshyppe with the king of Spain, and to accept owre men as his
brotherne and children wyllyng them to come alande as into their own houses.
Also that for their coming, that Island should no more be cauled Tidore, but
Castile for the great love which he bore to their king whom he reputed as
his lord and master. This king is a Moore, and is named Raia Sultan Mauzor.

The Islands of Molucca are five in number, and are thus named: Tarenate,
Tidore, Mutir, Macebian, and Bacchian. The five Islands of molucca.
Of these, Tarenate is the chiefest. Tarenate.


Directly ageynste the Island of Tidore, there is an other great Island named
Gilolo, The Island of Gilolo.
inhabited of Moors and Gentyles. Moors and gentyles.
The Moors have two kings, of the which one has six hundredth children, and
the other six hundredth and fifty. The Gentyles keep not so many women as do
the Moors nor yet live in such superstitions. They pray to the first thing
that they meet in the morning when they go forth of their houses, and honor
that as their god for that day. The king of the gentyles is very rich in
gold. Gold.
In the said Island of Gilolo, are reeds as bygge as a man's leg, and full
of clear water wholesome to be drunk. water in reeds.


The.xii. day of November, the king of Tidore appointed owre men a ware house
in the city where they might sell their marchaundies. Their manner of exchange
was in this sort. Their manner of barteringe.
For ten yardes of good read cloth, they had one Bahar of cloves, which
amounts to four Cantari and six pound weight: And one Cantar is a hundredth
pound weight. For.xv. yardes of cloth sumwhat worse then the other, they
received in Cambie, one Bahar. For.xxxv. drinking cups of glass, they had
one Bahar. For.xvii. Cathyls of quick silver, one Bahar. They came daily to
the ships with many of their barks full of goats, hens, fygges of a
spanne long, also the fruit cauled Cocus, with diverse other kinds of
vyttayles in such quantity that it was a marvelous thing to behold. water
of A strange quality.
They furnyshed also their ships with fresshe water which is hot as it
issheweth out of the spring, but is very could when it has stood a while in
an other place. It spryngeth from the mountains on the which the cloue trees
grow. They saw a cloud rise in manner daily, which compaseth about the said
mountains.

The king of the Island of Bacchian, sent the king of Spain two dead
birds of strange form. Birds of a strange form,
They were of the bygg^nes of turtle dooues, with little heads and long
vylles: also long and smaule legs and no wings, but in the st^ade thereof
certain long feathers of diverse colors, and tails like turtle dooues. All
the other feathers are of one color much like unto tawny, except those of the
wings.

They fly not but when the wind blows. These Moors are of opinion that
these birds coomme from the heavenly Paradyse, and therefore caul them
Manuccodiata, that is the birds of god.

When they were determined to depart from the Islands of Molucca, certain
kings of the Islands accompanied the^ with their canoas, and conducted them to
an Island cauled Mare where they refresshed their ships with fresh water and
fuel. The kings sent Themperours majesty many presents: and embrasynge owre
men, departed with the tears in their eyes: And owre men for their last
farewell, shot of all their ordinance. When in the Island of Mare, they
perceived that one of their ships leaked and took water very sore: They lea^e
one of their ships behynd them.
whereby they were enforced to tarry there three days. But saying that they
could find no remedy for the same but in long time, they determined to
leave it, gyuynge order that if afterward it could be repaired, they should
return into Spain as well as they could.

In all the Islands of Molucca is found cloves, The Islands of Molucca.
ginger, bread of the root of Sagu, rise, goats, sheep, hens, fygges,
almondes, sweet pomegranates and sour, oranges, lemondes, and honey which is
made of certain flies l^sse then antes: honey of flies.
Also canes of sugar, oil of Cocus, mellons, geurdes, and a marvelous could
fruit which they name Camulicai and diverse other fruits. Furthermore white and
read popingiayes, Popingiayes.
and other of variable colors. It is not paste fifty years sense the moors
first inhabited any of these Islands, which were before inhabited only with
ge^tyles.

The Island of Tidere, The Island of Tidore.
is above the Equinoctial line toward owre pole, about.27. minutes: And in
longitude from the place from whense they departed.171. degrees. And from the
Archipelagus in the which is the Island of Zamal which our men named the Island
of thieves, ix. degrees and a half, and runs to the quarter of south
southwest, and north northeast. Terenate, Terenate.
is under the Equinoctial line four minutes under the pole Antartike. Mutir,
Mutir.
is directly under the Equinoctial line, Macchian is.xv. minutes toward the
pole Antartike, Macchian.
and Bac^hian one degree. These Islands are like four sharp mountains,
except, Macchian which is not sharp. The byggest of all these, is Bacchian.
Bacchian.


Departing from the Island of Mare and directyng these courle toward the
southwest, with only.xlvi. men in their ship and.xiii. Indians, they passed
by the Islands of Chacouan, Lagoma, Sico, Gioghi, Caphi, Sulacho, Lumatola,
Many Island.
Tenetum, Buru, Ambon, Budia, Celaruri, Benaia, Ambalao, Bandan, Zorobua,
Zolot, Noceuamor, Galian, and Mallua, with diverse other Islands both great and
smaule, of Moors, Gentyles, and Canibales. Owre men remained xv. days in the
Island of Mallua to repair their ship in certain places where it took
water. The Island of Mallua.
All the fields of this Island is full of long and round pepper, Pepper.
and is situate toward the pole Antartike under the Equinoctial line.viii.
degrees and a half, and is in the longitude of.169. degrees and 40. minutes.

The pilote which owre men brought out of the Islands of Molucca, toulde them
that not far from thense, was an Island named Arucetto in the which are men
and women not past a cubite in height, having ears of such byggenesse that
they lie upon one and cover them with the other. Little men with long ears.
But owr men would not sail thither, both because the wind and course of the
sea was ageynste them, and also for that they gave no credit to his report.

The.xxv. day of January in the year.1522. they departed from Mallua, and the
day following, arrived at a great Island named Timor, The Island of Timor.
being five leaques distante from Mallua between the south and southwest. In
this Island is found the woodde of white sanders and ginger, white sanders and
ginger.
and diverse kinds of fruits. Also sundry kinds of beasts, and plenty of
vyttayle and gold. They of the Islands of Giaua, Molucca, and Lozon, resort to
this Island for sanders. Thinhabitauntes are gentyles. They say that when they
go to cut the woodde of saunders, the devil appears to them in diverse forms
and asks them what they have need of: The devil appears.
And that after this vision, many of them are long sick. In all the Islands of
this Archipelagus, rayneth the disease of saint Job (which we caul the
french pox) more then in any other place in the world. Saint Job his disease.


Far from this Island between the west and northwest they came to an Island
named Eude, in the which growethe great plenty of Sinamome. Cinamome
In this tracte are found many Islands lying in order as it were one directly
behind an other, even unto the Island of the greater Giaua, The Islands of
Giaua.
named Giaua mayor, and unto the cape of Malaccha, Malaccha.
being in East India. Giaua the less, is as bygge as the Island of Madera,
and is but half a leaque distante from Giaua mayor. Here they were informed
that above Giaua mayor toward the north, is a great goulfe cauled the goulfe of
China, The great goulfe of China.
in the which are trees of exceadyng byggenesse, inhabyted with fowls of such
greatenes that they carry great beasts in the air. The fruits of these trees
are as bygge as cucummers.

The cape of Malaccha is one degree and a half above the Equinoctial line
toward the pole Artike. The cape of Malaccha.
On the East side of this cape, runs a very long coaste in the which are
many regions and cities whereof sum are cauled by these names, Cingaporla which
is the cape. The names of many regions.
Also Pahan, Calantan, Patani, Braalin, Beneu, Longon, and Odia wherein is the
city in the which dwells the king of Sian named Zacabedera. Their cities
are builded as owres are, and subject to the king of Sian. After the realm
of Sian, are the regions of Iamgoma and Campaa where Reubarbe grows, Reubarbe.
of the which are diverse opinions, sum supposing it to be a root, and other
a putrifyed tree, affirmyng that if it were not putrified, it should not have
so great a savor. They caul it Calama. Next unto this, is found the great
China, The great king of China.
whose king is thought to be the greatest prince in the world, and is named
Santoa Raia. Furthermore, all that is written hereafter of this king and these
regions, they learned by thinformation of a Moore that was in the Island of
Timor. He affirmed that the said king has threescore and ten crowned
kings under his empire, and has a port in the sea named Canthan: And two
principal cities named Nauchin and Connulaha where he remains him self, and
has ever four of his chief princes lying about his pallaice on every side,
toward the East, Weste, North, and South giuinge dylygente attendaunce what
is done in every of their quarters. All the princes of the greater India
(cauled India Mayor, The greater India.
) and of that whereof I have spoken before, are obedient to this king. And in
token that they are true subjects, they keep in their pallaices which are in
the midst of their cities, the beast cauled Linx, The beast cauled linx.
being fayrer then a lion, And is the great kings signette, which all such
as intend to go to China, bear with them sealed in wax or on a piece of
Iuerye for their safe conducte, withowt the which they may not enter into the
haven.

When any of his kings rebel or are disobedient, he causes them to be f^ene,
and salted and dried at the soonne: Then to be stuffed with chafe, The
punishment of rebels.
and set up on sum high thing in the myddest of the chief streate of the
city where all the people may see it. He never suffers his own person to be
openly seen to any man. But when his noble men of the court are desirous to
see him, The king is not seen but at a glass.
he comes down from his pallaice into a rich pauylyon accompanied with
six of his principal concubynes appareyled with like vestures as is he him
self. All this way he is not seen by reason of the pauylyon. When he has
passed through the pauylyon, he enters into a serpent named Nagha, A thing of
strange workmanshyppe.
being the most marvelous and rich work of the world, and placed in the
grea^est court of the pallaice. When the king enters in to this with the
women, to the intent that he may not be known among them, he causes the said
noble men only to look in at a glass which is in the breast of the serpente,
where they see the king among the women, but can not dicerne which is he. He
joins in marriage with his sister that the blud royal be not myxte with any
other. The king maryeth his sister.
His pallaice is environed with seven large walls, hispallaice.
the one being far dystante from the other: And has in every such circuit
ten thowsande men for the garryson of his pallaice, A marvelous guard.
who have their waytinge days appointed them course by course with fresshe me^
in their places, and thus keep their watch continually both day and night. In
this pallaice are.lxxix. haules, in the which is an infinite number of women
that serve the king having ever light torches in their hands for the greater
magnyfycence^. women serve the king.
He that would see all the pallaice, should spend a hole day therein. Among
other, there are four principal haules where sumtymes the king gives
audience to his noble men. Four marvelous haules
Of these, one is covered both above and beneth with metal, an other all over
with silver, the third with gold, and the fourth with pearls and precious
stones. These people of China, The people of China.
are white men, appareled as we are, and eat their meat on tables as we
do. They have the cross in sum estimation, but know not the cause why.
Beyond the coaste of China, The Cross.
are diverse other nations and people as Chenchii where pearls and cynamon are
found. Also the people named Lichii, where reyneth the great king of M^en,
The great king of m^en
having under him.xxii. kings, and is subject to the king of China. Here is
also found the great city of CATHAY in the East, CATHAY.
and diverse other nations in the said firm land, of the which sum are
brutysshe and bestiall which use to kill and eat their parents when they are
owld, thinking thereby that they shall reuyue in them. All these people are
gentyles.

The.xi. day of February in the year.1522, they departed from the Island of
Timor and were ingulfed by chance in the great sea cauled Lantchidol, The sea
of Lantchidol.
and took their course between the weste and south weste, leaving the north
coasts on their right hand, fearyng least if they should sail toward the firm
land, they might be seen of the portugales who are of great power in
Malaccha: Malaccha.
and therefore dyrected their course withowt the Island of Sumatra cauled in owld
time Taprobana: The Island of Sumetra.
Leauyng also on their right hand upon the fyrm land, the provinces and regions
of Pegu, Pegu,
Bengala, Bengala.
Calicut, Calicut.
Canonor, Canonor.
Coa, Coa.
Cambaia, Cambaia.
the goulfe of the Island of Ormus, Ormus.
and all the coasts of the greater India. East India.
And more safely to pass the cape of Buona Speranza being about Affrike, Cap.
de Buona. Speranza.
they sailed about.xlii. degrees toward the pole Antartike, and remained seven
weeks abowte that cape with many fetches compassyng the wynd with their sails
contynually alofte, because they had a west and north weste wynd in the proos
of their ship which would not suffer them to pass. The cape of Buona
Speranza, is toward the pole Antartik beneth the Equinoctial line.xxxiiii.
degrees and a half: and.1600. leaques from the cape of Malaccha: And is the
greateste and most daungyerous cape that is found at this day in all the
world.

When they had by these perels ouerpassed this cape, certain of them as well
for lack of vytayles as also by reason of syckenesse, were minded to sail to
a haven of the Portugales named Monzambique above Affryke. The port of
M^nzambiq^^*
But the other answered that they would rather dye then go to any other place
then directly to Spain. They followed their course therefore saylynge toward
the Southwest two months continually without touching at any port: In
which time there dyed abowte.xxi. of their coompany, whom they cast into the
sea. And suerly if god of his infinite mercy had not preserved the residue in
time, they had all dyed of famen. Famen.


In fine, being enforced of necessity, and half of their company dead,
they sailed to one of the Islands of Capo verde cauled Insula Sancti Iacobi,
Capo Verde.
that is, saint James Island, S. James Island.
parteyning to the king of Portugale. Where, as soon as they ariyued, they
sent certain alande in the ship boat for vyttayles, declarynge to the
Portugales with all love and favor what necessity they were driven to and
what miseries and trauayles they had sustained, informynge them further of
their marvelous viage and such things as they had seen in both the East
and West India, with such other gentel words whereby they obtained certain
measures of rise. The ingrat^tude of the Portugales.
But when afterward.xiii. of them returned for more rise, they were deteyned:
Whereupon the rest which remained in the ship, fearing the like chance,
departed with full sails, and the.vii. day of September with the help of god
entered into the haven of San Lucar nere unto Siuile, The port of saint Lucar
nere unto Siuile.
where dischargynge all their ordinance for joy, they went immediately to the
great church in their shertes and barefooted with a torche before them to
give thanks to almyghtie god who had brought them safe to their own country,
and restored them to their wives and children.

As touching the end of this viage, Transiluanus writes sumwhat more largely
as follows.

The other ship which they left behind them to be repaired, what became of
the other ship.
returned afterward by the Archipelagus aforesaid and by the great sea to the
coasts of the firm of the west India, and arrived at a region of the same
being against Dariena, Dariena
where the South sea of Sur is separate but by a little space of land from the
Weste Ocean in the which are the Islands of Hispaniola and Cuba, and other
Islands of the Spanyardes. The other ship which returned into Spain by
compasing about the hole bowl of the world by the coasts of East India and
Affrike, departing from the Island of Tidore, and saylynge ever on this side
the Equinoctial, did not find the cape of Cattigara being above Asia, The
cape of Cattigara.
and (by the description of Ptolome) rechynge many degrees beyond the
Equinoctial. Ptolome.
But having sailed many days by the main sea, they came to the cape of Buona
Speranza and from thense to the Islands of Capo verde, where their ship
being soore broosed by reason of the long viage, leaked and took water, in
such sort that the mariners being now but few in number, and those also
weak and feeble by reason of long sickness and hunger, The vyage hardly
performed.
were not able both to dry the poompe continually and otherwise govern the
ship: and were therefore of necessity enforced to goo alande at the Island of
saint James to bye them certain slaves to help them. They bye slaves for
lack of help
But being destitute of money, according to the custom of the mariners, they
proffered them cloves for their slaves. The which thing when it came to the
ears of the Portugale that was Captain of that Island, he cast.xiii. of them
in prison. Whereby the residue that remained in the ship (being now
but.xviii. in number) were put in such fear that they departed immediately
without rescuing their fellows, and sailed continually both by day and by
night by the coasts of Affrike, and came in fine to Spain the.vi. day of
September in the year.1522. and arrived at the port nere unto Siuile the.xvi.
month after they departed from the Island of Tidore. Mariners doubtless more
worthy to be celebrate with eternal memory then they which in owlde time
were cauled Argonauti that sailed with Jason to win the golden fleese in the
region of Cholehic and the river of Phasis in the great sea of Pontus.
Maryners worthy immortal fame.
Argonauti.
The viage of Jason to win the golden fleese.
And the ship it self, more woorthye to be placed among the stars then
that owlde Argo which departing out of Grecia, sailed to the end of that great
sea. For this owre marvelous ship, taking her vyage from the straightes of
Gibilterra and saylynge by the great Ocean toward the South and pole
Antartike, The ship more worthy fame then owlde Argo of Grecia.
and turnynge from thense to the Weste, followed that course so far that
passing under the great circumference of the world, The vyage
she came into the East, and from thense again into the Weste, not by
returning backewarde, but still faylynge forward, so compasynge about the
vaule of the world under the hole circumference of heaven until she were
myraculously restored to her native region of Spain and house of Siuile.

Of the prices of precious stones and Spices, with their weightes and measures
as they are accustomed to be soulde both of the Moors and the gentyles: And
of the places where they grow.
FOrasmuch as in diverse places of this history, mention is made of precious
stones, I have thought good to declare sumewhat as well of their prices as of
the places of their generation, that we may not utterly be ignorant of the
things which we so greatly esteem and bye so dear.

Of the Rubie.
THe Rubies grow in India: and are found for the most part in a river named
Pegu. These are of the best kind and fineste, which they of the land of
Malabor caul Nunpuclo, and are well soulde if they be fair and clean
without spots. The Indians to know their finenesse, put them upon their
toonges, coumptynge that to be best that is could and most hard. And to
see their finenesse, they take them up with a piece of wax by the sharpest
point: and lookynge against the light, epsy in them every smaule spot or
flake. They are also found in certain diepe fosses or pittes which are made
in mountains that are beyond the said river. They are scoured and made clean
in the country of Pegu. Yet can they not square and polyshe them. But for this
purpose send them to diverse other contreys, and especially to Paleatate,
Narsinga, Calicut, and the region of Malabar, where are many cunning
Lapidaries.

And to give you intelligence of the value of these stones, ye shall
understand that this word Fanan, signifiethe a weight sumwhat more then two
of owre carattes: And.xi. Fanans and a quarter, is one Mitigal: And.vi.
Mitigales and a half, make one ounce. This Fanan, One caratte is iiii. grains
is also a kind of money which is in value, one ryale of silver. And therefore
after this account I say that Eight five rubies of the weight of one Fanan
(which are in all, about two carat^es) are in value. which is one crown of gold
Fanan x. Four Rubies that wey one fanan, are worth Fanan xx. Two that wey one
fanan Fanan xl. One that weyth three quarters of one fanan Fanan xxx. One that
weyth one fanan Fanan l. One that weyth one fanan and a quarter. Fanan lxv. One
that weyth one fanan and a half Fanan C. One that weyth one fanan and three
quarters Fanan Cl. One that weyth two fanans. Fanan CC. One that weyth two
fanans and a quarter Fanan CCl. One that weyth two fanans and a half
Fanan.ccc. One that weyth two fanans and three quarters Fanan cccl. Of three
fanans Fanan cccc. Of three and a quarter Fanan D. Of three and a half Fanan
Dl. Nf three and three quarters. Fanan Dc. Of three and three quarters and a
half Fanan Dcxxx. Of four fanans Fanan Dclx. Of four and a quarter Fanan
Dcc. Of four and a half Fanan Dcccc Of five fanans Fanan M. Of five and a
half Fanan Mcc. Of six fanans, which are about.xii. carattes. Fanan.MD. which
make.150. crowns of gold.

And these are commonly the prices of perfect Rubies. But such as are not
perfect, and have any spots in them, or are not of good color, are of
less prise according to the arbitriment and estimation of the byer.

Of the Rubies which grow in the Island of Zeilam.
IN the Island of Zeilam, being in the second India, are found many Rubies
which the Indians name Manecas, the greatest part whereof do not arrive to the
perfection of the other aforesaid in color, because they are red as though
they were washed, and of a fleshye color. Yet are they very could and hard.
The perfectesse of them are greatly esteemed among the people of the Island,
and reserved only for the king him self if they be of any great quantity.
When his iewelers find any bygge piece of this rock of the best kind, they
put it in fire for the space of certain hours. Which if it coomme out of the
fire incorrupt, it becomes of the color of a burning cole, and was
therefore cauled of the Greeks, Anthrax, which signifies a burning cole. The
same that the Greeks caul Anthrax, the Latins caul Carbunculus. These they
greatly esteem. When the king of Narsinga can get any of them, he causes a
fine hole to be boored in the undermost part of them to the myddest: And
suffers none of the^ to pass out of his realm: especially if they have been
tried by the said proof. These are of greater value then the other of Pegu, if
they be in their natural perfect^on and cleanenesse.

Of these, one that weith a carratte (which is half a fanan) is woorthe in
Calecut. Fanan xxx. which are iii. crows of gold
One of two carattes Fanan.lxv. Of three carattes. Fanan cl. Of three carattes
and a half Fanan cc. Of four carattes Fanan ccc. Of four carattes and a
half Fanan cccl. Of five carattes Fanan cccc. Of five carattes and a half
Fanan ccccl. Of six carattes Fanan Dxxx Of six carattes and a half Fanan
Dlx. Of seven carattes Fanan Dcxxx Of seven carattes and a half Fanan Dclx.
One of.viii. carattes that has bynne well proved in the fire, is woorthe Fanan
Dccc Of.viii. carattes and a half Fanan Dcccc. One such of ten carattes
Fanan M ccc One of.x. carattes and a half Fanan M d c Of.xii. carattes Fanan
MM Of.xiiii. carattes Fanan MMM Of.xvi. carattes Fanan 6000.

Of the kind of Rubies. cauled Spinelle.
THere is also found an other kind of Rubies which we caul Spinelle and the
Indians, Caropus. They grow in the self same country of Pegu where as are
the fine Rubies. And are found in the mountains in the upper crust or flower
of the earth. These are not so fine nor of so good color is are the true
Rubies: But have sumwhat the color of a granate which we commonly caul a
garnet. Yet of these such as are parfecte in their color, are of value half
less then true Rubies.

Of the Rubies cauled Balassi.
BAlassi, are of the kinds of Rubies, but are not so hard. Their color is
sumwhat like a rose, and sum are in manner white. They grow in Balassia, which
is a region within the firm land above Pegu and Bengala: And are browght from
thense by merchants of the Moors to Cal^cut where they are wrought and
polysshed: And are sold of the same price that are Spinelle.

Of the Diamundes of the owlde mine.
THese Diamundes are found in the first India in a kingdom of the Moors
named Decan, from whense they are brought to other regions. There are also
found other Diamundes which are not so good, but sumewhat white, and are
cauled Diamundes of the new mine which is in the kyngedome of Narsinga. They
of the owlde mine, are not polyshed in India, but in other places. There are
made likewise in India, other false Diamundes of Rubies, Topases, and white
Saphires, which appear to be fine: and are also found in the Island of
Zeilam. These stones differ in none other, saving that they have lost their
natural color. Of these, sum are found that have half the color of
Rubies, and other of Saphires: other also of the color of a Topase. Other
have all these colors mengeled together. They bore a fine hole in these
through the myddest, whereby they appear like the eyes of a catte. Of the
whytest, they make many smaule diamundes which can not be known from the
true, saving by touching of such as are skylfull in that practice. They are
soulde by a poyse or weight which they caul Mangiar, which wayeth two Tar,
and two thyrdes, which amount to two thyrdes or third parts of one caratte.
For four Tarres, wey one fanan which is about two carattes.

Viii. Diamundes that wey one mangiar (which is two third parts of a caratte
are in value. which are three crowns of gold. Fanan xxx. vi. Diamundes that
wey one mangiar Fanan xl. Four that wey one mangiar Fanan lx. Two that wey one
mangiar Fanan lxxx. One that weith one mangiar Fanan C. One of one mangiar and
a quarter Fanan clxv. One of one mangiar and a half Fanan clxxx. Of one
mangiar and three quarters Fanan ccxx. Of two mangiars Fanan cccxx. Of two
mangiars and a quarter Fanan ccclx. Of two mangiars and a half Fanan ccclxxx
Of two mangiars and three quarters full perfect Fanan. 420 Of three mangiars of
like perfection Fanan ccccl. Of three mangiars and a half Fanan cccclxxx. Of
four mangiars Fanan Dl. Of five mangiars Fanan Dccl. Of six mangiars Fanan
Dccc. Of seven mangiars. Fanan Mcc. Of eight mangiars Fanan Mcccc. And thus
they proceade, increasynge the price as they increase in weight.

Of Saphires.
IN the Island of Zeilam are found the best and most true Saphires, being
very hard and five, and of the color of azure. They are of price as
follows. A marcell, is a silver coin of Uenice, of xi. ounces.iii. d. with
fine, whereof ten make an vne.


One that weith one caratte is of value which are about two marcels of silver.
Fanan ii. One of the weight of two carattes Fanan v. Of three carattes Fanan x.
Of four carattes Fanan xv. Of five carattes Fanan xviii Of six carattes Fanan
xxviii Of seven carattes Fanan xxxv. Of eight carattes Fanan l. Of nine
carattes Fanan lxv. Of ten carattes Fanan l. Of.xi. carattes Fanan lxv.
Of.xii. carrates Fanan lxxv. Of.xiii. carattes in all perfection of color
Fanan Cxv. Of.xiiii. carattes. Fanan Clx. Of.xv. carattes Fanan Clxxx. Of.xvi.
carattes Fanan CC. Of.xviii* carattes Fanan CCl. One that weith a mitigal,
which is.xi. fanans and a quarter that is about xxiii. carattes. Fanan CCCl.

Likewise in the Island of Zeilam, is found an other sort of Saphires which
they caul Quinigelinam. These are not so strong, or darker color and of much
less value th^n are the other of the best kind, whereof one is worth.xiii. of
these of equal poise. Also in the kyngedome of Narsinga, in a mountain above
Bacanor and Mangalor, is found an other sort of Saphires more tender and of
worse color, which they caul Cinganolam. These are sumwhat white and of
smaule value: So that the most perfect of this kind, weyinge.xx. carattes, is
not worth one ducate. Their color is inclynynge sumwhat to yelowe. There is
likewise found an other kind of Saphires upon the sea coasts of the
kyngedome of Calicut, in a place named Capucar. These the Indians caul
Carahatonilam. They are of a ^arke asure color not shynynge but in the clear
air. They are also tender and brickle, and of smaule estimation among the
Indians. They seem on the one side like glass.

Of Topasies.
THe natural Topasies, grow in the Island of Zeilam, and are named of the
Indians Purceragua. It is a hard and fine stone: and of equal estimation with
the Rubie and the Sapphire, because all these three are of one kind. The
perfect color of this, is yelowe like unto fine beaten gold. And if it be
perfect and clean, whether it be great or little, it is worth in Calicut as
much fine gold as it weyeth. But if it be not perfect, it is worth the weight
of gold the fanan, which is less by the half. And if it be in manner white,
it is worth much less. And of these, are smaule diamundes counterfecte.

Of Turquesses.
TUrquesses are found in Erer a place of Siech Ismael. Their mine is a dry
eacth that is found upon a black stone, which the Moors take of in smaule
pieces, and carye them to the Island of Ormus, from whense they are brought to
diverse parts of the world by sea and by land. The Indians caul them Perose.
They are soft stones, of smaule weight and not much could. And to know that
they are good and true, in the day they shall appear of the very color of
the Turquesse: and in the night by the light, they shall appear green. They
that are not so perfect, do not so change there color to the sight. If these
stones be clean and of fine color, they have underneath in the bottom, a
black stone, upon the which they grow. And if any little vain rise upon
the said stone, it shall be the better. And to know more certeynely that they
are true Turquesses, they put on the tops of them a little quick lime
tempered with water after the manner of an ointment. So that if the quick lime
appear colored, they are judged perfect, and are of value as follows.

One that weith one caratte, is worth in Malabar. Fanan.xv. One of two carattes
Fanan xl. Of four carattes Fanan xc. Of.v^. carattes Fanan Cl. Of.viii.
carattes Fanan CC Of.x* carattes Fanan CCC Of.xii. carattes Fanan CCCCl
Of.xiiii. carattes Fanan Dl.

Of greater then these they make none account byc^use they are lyghter pieces
and of greater circuit. These of the byggest sort the Moors carry into the
kyngedome of Guzerath.

Of Iacinthes.
IAcinthes grow in the Island of Zeilam. They are tender stones and yelowe.
They are best that are of d^^peste color. The greatest part of these, have in
them certain pimples or burbuls, which diminishe their fayrenesse. And they
that are in their persection clean from this deformity, are nevertheless of
smaule value. For in Calicut where they are polysshed, they that wey one fanan
are worth no more then half a fanan. And they of.xviii. fanans, are not worth
xvi. fanans.

There are also found other stones like unto carts eyes, as Chrisolites, and
Amethistes, which they do not much esteem because they are of smaule value,
as also the stones cauled Giagonze.

Of Smaragdes or Emeraldes.
SMaragdes grow in the country of Babylon, where the Indians caul the sea
Dieguan. They grow also in other parts of India. They are stones of fair
green color, and are light and tender. Of these stones, many are conterfecte.
But lookyng on them curiously toward the light, the conterfectes show
certain burbuls, as doot^ glass. But in the true, there is no such seen.
But rather there appears to the eye a certain verdour shynynge like the
beams of the soonne. And being rubbed upon the touch stone, they leave the
color of copper. And the Smaragde of this sort is the best and most true:
And is in value in Calicut, as much as a diamunde and sumwhat more: And this
not by weight, but by greateness, because the diamunde quantity for quantity,
is of greater weight then the Smaragde. There is likewise found an other kind
of Smaragdes, which are green stones, but not so much esteemed.
Nevertheless, the Indians reserve these to set them forth with other precious
stones. They leave not any green color upon the touch.

Of diverse kinds of Spices, where they grow, what they are worth in Calicut,
and whither they are carried from thense.
Of Pepper.
First in all the kyngedome of Malabor and Calicut pepper grows: and is
sold in Calicut by every.CC. Bahars, fine, for.CCxxx fanans, every fanan (as I
have said) being in value, one ryall of plate of Spain: which is as much as
one marcell of silver in Uenice. Bahar, weith four cantares of the owld weight
of Portugale, by the which they sell all spices in Lisbona. Cantar, is in
Uenece.C.xii. pound weight of the gros^ pound (being.xviii. ounces) and of
the subtyle pound.C.lxxviii. So that the said.712. pounds of Uenece subtle,
will cost about.xx. french crowns of gold: which amount to about two
Marchetti (which make one penny) the pound. They pay also to the king of
Calicut for custom.xii. fanans every Bahar by the lode. They that bye them,
are accustomed to bring them to Cambaia, Persia, Aden, and Mecha, and from
thense to Alcayre and Alexandria. Now they pay custom to the king of
Portugale after the rate of.6562. Maruedies the Bahar, which are.193. fanans.
Maruedies are Spanyshe coins whereof.vi. go to a penny. This do they partly
because there arryueth no more so great diversity of marchantes to bye them,
and partly by the agreement which the said king of Portugale made with those
kings, and the Moors, and merchants of the country of Malabar.

Much pepper grows likewise in the Island of Sumatra nere unto Malaca, which
is fayrer and bygger then that of Malabar, but not so good and strong. This is
brought from Bengala to China, and sum part to Mecha, privily and by
stelth, unawares to the Portugales which would not otherwise suffer them to
pass. It is worth in Sumatra, from.iiii. C. unto.vii. C. marau^dis the cantar
of Portugale, of the new weight. And from the new to the owlde weight in
Portugale, the difference is, two ounces in the pound weight. For the owlde
pound consists of.xiiii. ounces: and the new pound of.xvi. vnc^s.

Of Cloves.
Cloves grow in the Islands of Molucca, from whense they are brought to
Malacha, and then to Calicut and the country of Malabar. They are worth in
Calicut every bahar (which is.712. pounds of the subtyle pound of Uenece)
from.500. to.600. fanans (which are abowte fyftie french crowns, which are in
value abowte.xii. marchatti the pound weight. And being clean from stalks
and h^^kes are in value 700. fanans. To carry them from then^e into other
regions, they pay for pasporte.xviii. fanans the bahar, which is worth in
Malacca from.x. to.xiiii. ducades according to the rate and custom of the
merchants.

Of Cinamome.
CInamome of the best sort, grows in the Island of Zeilam: and in the
country of Malabar, growethe the woorst. That of the best kind, is of smaule
price in Zeilam. But in Calicut (if it be choice and fresh, it is worth CCC.
fanans the bahar, which are abowte five march^tti the pound.

Of Ginger cauled Beledi.
GInger Beledi, grows on every side abowte Calicut from six to nine miles:
And is worth the bahar.^l. fanans, and sumtymes fifty, which is less then
one marchetto the pound.

They bring it from the mountains and out of the country to the city, where
they sell it by retayle to the Indian merchants, who ga^^er it together in
great quantity and keep it to such ty^e as the Moors ships arryue the^e, to
whom they sell it, by the price of.xc. fanans, to.Cx. which is less then ^wo
mar^h^tti the pound, because the weight is greater.

Of Ginger Mechino.
GInger Mechino grows, beginning from the mounta^ne of Deli, unto Canonor.
It is smaule, and not so white nor so good as the other. It is woorthe the
bahar in Cananor, about.lx. fanans which is abowte one marchetto the pound.
They pay for the bahar six fanans in money for the custom. It is sold
vnclensed or unpurged.

Of green Ginger in conserues.
IN Bengala is found great plenty of Ginger Beledi, of the which they make
much Ginger in conserues with sugar, and carry it in stone pots from Martabani
to be sold in the cauntrey of Malabar. And is worth the farazuola (which
is.xxii. pounds and six ounces) after the rate of.xiiii xv. or.xvi. fanans.

That that is fresh and made in conserues, is worth in Calicut.xxv. fanans
the farazuola, because sugar is dear there. Green ginger to put in conserues,
is worth in Calicut three quarters of one fanan the farazuola, which is abowte
two pounds for one marchetto.

Of the Apothecaries drugges: And of what price they are in Calicut and Malabar.
LAcca of Martabani, if it be of the best, is worth the farazuola, which
is.xxii. pound weight and six ounces of Portugale after.xvi. ounces the pound
(which is abowte.xl. pound weight of the subtyle pound of Uenece) And is in
value.xviii. fanans: which are.xviii. marcels of silver. For one fanan, is in
value abowte one marcell of silver.

Lacca of the country, is worth the farazuola Fanan xii. Borace that is good
and in great pieces is woorthe the farazuola. Fanan.xxx. to.xl. and.l. Camphire
that is gross in cakes, is worth the farazuola Fanan.lxx. to.lxxx. Camphire
to annoint Idols, *** Camphire for their children to eat, is worth the
mytigal. Fanan iii. Aguila is worth the farazuola Fanan.ccc. to.cccc. Lignum
aloe, black, heavy, and fine, is worth Fanan.M. Musk of the best is worth
the ounce Fanan xxxvi. Benjamin of the best, is worth the farazuola Fanan lxv.
Tamarindi being new, are worth the farazuola Fanan.iiii Calamus aromaticus,
the farazuola Fanan xii. Endego to dye silk, true and good, the farazuola
Fanan.xxx Mirre, the farazuola. Fanan.xviii. to.xx. Frankensence good and in
graynes, is worth the farazuola Fanan xv. Frankensence in paste of the basest
sort, the faraz. Fanan.iii Ambracan or amber greese that is good, is woorthe
the metical Fanan ii. to.iii. Mirabolanes in co^serue of sugar, the faraz.
Fanan.xvi. to.xxv Cassia, fresh and good, and farazuola. Fanan one and a half
Read Sanders, the farazuola Fanan.v. to.vi. White Sanders and citrine, which
grow in the Island of Timor, the farazuola Fanan.xl. to.lx Spikenarde, fresh
and good, the faraz. Fanan.xxx. to.xl. Nutte megges, which coome from the
Island of Bandan where the bahar is worth from.viii. to.x. fanans, (which
importe.vi. pounds weight to the marchetto) are woorthe in Calicut, the faraz.
Fanan x. to xii. Mace which is brought from the Island of Bandan where the
Bahar is worth fifty fanans (which import about one marchetto the pound a^e
worth in Calicut the farazuola. Fanan xxv. to.xxx. Turbithes, are worth the
farazuola Fanan xiii. Woorme seed of the best kind, cauled Semenzina, is
woorthe the farazuola. Seeds kill lyse.
Fanan xv. Zerumba, the farazuola Fanan ii. Zedoarta, the farazuola Fanan i.
Gum Serapine, the farazuola Fanan xx. Aloe cicotrine, the farazuola Fanan
xviii Cardamome in graynes, the farazuola Fanan xx. Reubarbe grows abundantly
in the country of Malabar: And that which comes from China by Malacha, is
worth the farazuola Fanan xl. to.l. Mirabolani emblici, the farazuola Fanan ii.
Mirabolani belirici, the farazuola Fanan one and a half. Mirabolani citrini
and chebuli, which are al of one sort. Fa.ii. Mirabolani Indi, which are of the
same citrine trees Fa.iii. Tutia, the farazuola Fanan xxx. Cububes which grow
in the Island of Iaua or Giaua, are there of smaule price, and sold by measure
withowt weight. Opium which is browght from the city of Aden where it is made,
is worth in Calicut the faraz. Fanan.cclxxx. to.cccxx. Opium of an other sort
which is made in Cambaia is worth the farazuola, Fanan cc. to.ccl.

Of the Weyghtes of Portugale and India: And how they agree.
THe pound of the owld weight, conteyneth.xiiii. ounces.

The pound of the new weight conteyneth.xvi. ounces. viii. cantares of the
owlde weight, make.vii. of the new.

And every new cantare, is of.C.xxviii, pounds after.xvi. ounces to the pound

Every owlde cantare, conteyneth three quarters and a half of the new cantar:
And is of.C.xxviii. pounds, after.xiiii ounces the pound.

One farazuola, is: xxii. pounds of.xiiii. ounces, and.vi. ounces more, with two
fifte parts.

Twenty farazuoles, are one Bahar.

One bahar is.iiii. cantares of the owld weight of Portugale. All the Spices
and drugges, and all such other things as coome from India, are sold in
Portugale by the owld weight and all the rest by the new weight.

Hereby may we well consider that as we owght to rejoice and give god thanks
for the abundaunce of al these things which he causes the earth so
plentifully to bring forth to owre use, so may we lament thabuse of men whose
covetousness causes great dearth and searsenesse in the myddest of abundance:
herein no less offendyng the law of nature then do such as by wychcrafte
intermingle poison with things created for the health of man, or by
inchauntment corrupt the seeds in the ground: ye rather as the unnatural
mother who destroys the child whom she has long nuryshed.

Of the Dooues of the Island of Madera.
CAdamustus writes, that before the Portugales came to this Island, it was
ouergrowen with trees and uninhabited. Yet were there many beasts, and great
plenty of dooues which were utterly without fear of me^ because they had
never seen any men before, nor yet were accustomed to be put in fear. In so
much that they stood still while snares were put abowte their necks with long
rods and poles: The which thing he says he has also seen in other Islands.
There are many rich men in this Island, and great abundaunce of flesh,
because the hole Island is in manner one gardeyne.

Of the Island of saint Thomas under the Equinoctial line.
THe chiefest occupacion and living of thinhabitauntes of this Island, is the
making of sugar, which they sell yearly to the ships that coomme for it out
of Spain and Portugale laden with buttes of meal and flower, also wine, oil,
cheese, lether, swoordes, cups of glass, beads, certain scaruels of the
fine white earth cauled Porcellana, of the which are made the earthen dysshes
of the work of Maiolica. And if it were not that such vyttayles and
provisions were brought them out of Spain and Portugale, the white merchants
which dwell in that Island (perteynynge to the dominion of the king of
Portugale) should not be able to live there, forasmuch as they are not
accustomed to eat such meats as do the Ethiopians or Negros. And therefore
the Portugales which inhabit this Island, have certain black slaves of
Guinea, Benin, and Manicongo, which they set to till and labor the ground
and make sugar. Among these white inhabitauntes, there are many rich men
which have.150. or.200. and sum.300. black slaves of men and women to till the
ground and do other laborious works. This Island was discovered four score
years sense by the nauigations of the Portugales and was unknown to the owlde
writers. It lies in the great goulfe of Affrike in the.30. degree of
longitude from the West to the East, and is in manner round. It is of
largeness from side to side.lx. Italia^ miles, (that is to say) one degree.
The horizontal line of the Island, passes by the two poles, Artike and
Antartyke: and has ever the day equal with the night without any sensible
difference, whether the son be in Cancer or in Capricorn. The star of the
pole Artike, is there invisible: But the wardens are seen sumwhat to move
about: And the stars cauled the Cross, are seen very high. Of this Island
with the other lands and Islands lyinge between Portugale and the same, a
certain pylotte of Portugale has written a goodly vyage to Conte Rimondo.

The debate and strife between the Spanyardes and Portugales, for the division
of the Indies and the trade of Spices: and also for the Islands of Molucca,
which sum caul Malucas. Written in the Spanyshe toonge by Francisco Lopez de
Gomara.
THemperours majesty was very glad that the Malucas and Islands of the
spicery were discovered: and that he might pass unto them through his own
countries withowt any prejudice or hurt to the Portugales: And because also
that Almanzor, Luztu, and Corala which were the lords of the spicerie, showed
them selves to be his friends and became tributaries to him He also gave
certain gifts and rewa^d^s ^o John Sebastian for his great pains and good
service, John Sebastian.
fora^much as he craved a reward for the good news that the Islands of the
Malucas and other Islands rycher and great^r then they, we^e found to be in
his part of those countries which perteyned unto him according to the popes
bull. The cause of contention.
And hereby it came to pass that there was great contention and stri^e between
the Spanyardes and the Portugales abowte the spicerie and the division of the
Indies by reason of the return of John Sebastian and thinformation which he
gave thereof. Who also affirmed that the Portugales had never any enteraunce
before that time into those Islands. Here upon, the counsel for the Indies,
advertised Themperoure to maynteine his fleet for those parts, The trade of
^pice perteyneth to Themperoure.
and to take the trade of spices into his own hand, forasmuch as it was his
own of dewtie, as well for that those Islands fell on his part, as also that
he had now found passage and way through his west Indies into those regions.
And finally to consider that he should thereby obtain and get to him self
great revenues beside thinrychynge of his subjects and realms, and that with
smaule coaste and charge. Themperoure being thus aduer^i^ed of the truth,
took it for good counsel, and commanded all things hereunto apperteynynge
to be furnysshed accordyngely. In this mean time, when king John of
Portugale had knowleage what the emperor determined John king of Portugale.
to do, and the speedy have his counsel made for the performance hereof, and
of the coming home of John Sebastian of Cane, with thinformation he made,
what of stoutnesse of mind and what for grief, was puffed up with anger as
were also the rest of the Portugales, stormynge as thowgh they would have
plucked down the sky with their hands, not a little fearing least they
should lose the trade of spices, if the Spanyardes should once put in their
foot. Wheruppon the king immediately made supplication to Themperoure, not to
set forward any ships until it were determined to whether of them those
Islands should belong: And that he would not so much endomage him as to cause
him to liese the trade of spices which was so commodious and profitable to him.
The trade of Spices.
And finally to avoid thoccasion of murder and bludshed which were like to
ensue thereof, if the Spanyardes and Portugales ships should meet together.
Themperoure althowghe he knew that all this was but to make delays and
prolongynge of time, yet was he glad to have it tried by justice for the
better justification of his cause and right. In fine, both parties were agreed
to appoint learned men, Cosmographers and Pylots which should determine the
controversy between them: The controversy determined by Cosmographers and
Pylots.
promising on both parties to abide and stand to the sentence and
determination made by those persons appointed and sworn to judge
indifferentely.

The reparticion and division of the Indies and new world between the
Spanyardes and the Portugales.
THis matter concerning the trade of spices and the new world of the Indies,
by reason of the great riches thereof was of great importance and very
difficulty to be limited and drawn forth by l^nes. By reason whereof, it
was necessary and convenient to seek wise and woorshypful men expert in
nauigations, The arby^rers on the Empiour^ side.
in Cosmographie, and the mathematical sciences. Themproure for his side,
chose and named for judges of the possession, the licentiate Acuna, one of the
kings consayle. Also the licentiate Barrientos of the counsel of the orders:
The licentiate Petro Manuel auditour of the court of the Chauncerie in
Ualladol^th. For judges of the property, he chose Don Fernando Colonuo the
soonne of Christopher Colonus: Also doctor Sancho Salaya, Peter Ruiz of
Uillegas, fryre Thomas Duran, Simon of Alcazaua, and John Sebastian of Cano.
His advocate and attorney, he made the licentiate John Rodriguez of Pisa: and
for his fyscal doctor Ribera, and his secretary, Barthalome Ruiz of Castaneda.
He also appointed that Sebastian Cabote, Sebastian Cabote.
Steue^ Gomes, Nunnio Garcia, Diego Riuero, being al expert pilots and cunning
in making cards for the sea, should be present, Instruments of Cosmographic.
and bring forth their globes and mappes with other instruments necessary
to declare the situation of the Islands of the Malucas about the which was all the contention and strife. The Islands of Maluca.
But order was taken that they should show their minds on neither side, nor
enter into the coompany of the other but when they were cauled. Al these and
diverse other, went together to a town cauled Badaioz: Thearbitrers on the
Portugales side.
and as many Portugales came to Elbes, or rather more. For they browght with
them two fiscals and two advocates. The principal of them, was the licentiate
Antonie de Asseuedo, Diego Lopes of Sequeyra the clarke of the weightes and
receptes, who had before been governor in India. Also Peralfonso of Melo,
clerk: Simon of Tauira, with diverse other whose names I know not. Before they
met together, the one part remaining at Badaioz and the other in Elbes,
there was much a do among them before they could agree upon the place
where they should mete and who should speak fy^ste. The place where they met.
For the Portugales do greatly weight such circumstances. At the last, they
concluded to meet together at Caya a little river which divides Castile from
Portugale, standing in the mydde way between Badaioz and Elbes. And when they
were a^^embled together one day at Badaioz and an other day at Elbes and
saluted the one the other, Tho^der of their p^oces.
both parties were sworn that they should proceade and speak according to
truth, justice, and ^quitie. The Portugales refused Simon de Alcazaua because
he was a Portugale: and friar Thomas Duran because he had sumetyme been preacher
to their king. So that Simon was by consent put owte of the coompany, in whose
room was placed master Antonie of Alcaraz. Yet fell they not to reasonynge the
matter until the friar was put out. They were many days in beholdynge
globes, mappes, and cards of the sea, and hearing what might be said, both
sides all^agynge for the right which they pretended. But the Portugales
standing in vain contention, The Portugales.
said very angerly the Islands of Malaca whereupon their meetynge and
resonynge was at that presence, fell of their part and was of their conquest.
And that they both had been there, and had them in their possession before John
Sebastian had ever seen them. Likewise that the line should be drawn from
the Island of Bonauista, Contention for drawing the line of the division.
or the Island cauled de la Sal, which are the most Easterly Islands from
Cabouerde, and not from the Island of Santanton or saint Antonie, which lies
toward the West, and are.lxxxx. leaques the one from the other. All this was no
more but to contend: and the other of the Malucas, is untrue. But they that
have a nawghtie matter must set it forth with words and brabelynge. how the
portuga^es were deceived.
Here they found how greatly they were deceived in that they demanded that
the line should be drawn three hundredth.lxx. leaques more to the West from
the Islands of Cabouerde (as appears hereafter) and not one hundredth
according to thassignement of the popes bull. The Spanyardes on the contrary
part affirmed and made demonstration, The Spanya^des allegations.
that not only the Islands of Burney, Gilolo, Zubut, and Tidore, with the other
Islands of the Malucas. But as well Samatra, Samatra.
Malacha, Malacha.
and a great parts of China, China.
should belong to the Cast^lians: and that those countries fell on their side
and on the part of their conquest: Also that Magallanes and John Sebastian
were the first Christian men that found them and obtained them for
The Emperor, Magallanes.
as the letters and presents of Almanzor do testify. And although the
Portugales had been there first, yet went they thither after the donation of
the pope: neither got they any right or just title thereby. For althowgh they
should draw the line by Buena Uista, Buena Uista.
what inconvenience should follow thereof, since as well by the one way as the
other, the Islands of the Malucas must perteyne to the Castilians: yea and
moreover, the Islands of Cabo verde should also perteine to the Castilians, The
Islands of C^bo Uerde.
for so much as drawing the line by Buena Uista, the Islands of the Malucas do
remain within the line on the Emperors side. They continued in these
controversies for the space of two moonethes without any resolution or end
made. For the Portugales prolonged and put of the matter, flying from the
sentence with cauillations and could reasons to the end that they might dissolve
that assemble without any conclusion or determination: The Portugales
cauillations.
for so it stood them upon. The Castilians which were the Judges of the
property, drew a line in the great globe three hundredth and.lxx. leaques from
saint Antonies Island, The line of division.
lyinge by Weste Cabo Uerde according to the entreaty and determination
which was agreed upon between the Catholic princes and the king of
Portugale. These judges gave sentence upon this matter, The sentence.
caulynge the contrary part before them upon the bridge of Caya in the year.
^524. The Portugales could neither disturb or defer the sentence, nor yet
would they allow it to be just and according to right: Saying that there was
not sufficient process made that they should pass to the gyuynge of sentence.
And so departed threatenyng to sley the Castilians as many as they should find
in the Islands of the Malucas. The Portugales threaten death to the Castilians
For they knew right well that their contreymen the Portugales had already
taken the ship cauled the Trinity and had also taken the Castilians in
Tidore. Then also departed owre men, taking their journey to the court gyuynge
up to The Emperor all their wrytynges and declaration what they had done. And
according to this declaration must be signed and marked all globes and mappes
which good Cosmographers and masters do make. The line also of the reparticion
and last division of the new world of the Indies, The line of the last
division.
ought to pass (little more or less) by the points of Humos and Buen Abrigo,
as I have said in an other place. And thus shall it appear evidently that the
Islands of Spices, and also the great Island of Zamotra, The great Island of
Samotra.
do perteyne to Castile. But the land of Brasile perteyneth to the king of
Portugale where the cape of saint Augustine is, The land of Bra^ile,
perte^neth to the portugales.
being.viii. degrees beneth the Equinoctial. This land reaches from the
point of Humos to the point of Buen Abrigo: and is in length North and
South.viii. hundredth leaques. Being also sum way two hundredth leaques East and
West.

And hereafter these serious matters, we will rehearse ^ne merry thing, A merry
tale.
which was this. It so chanced that as Frances de Melo, Diego Lopes of
S^queyra, and other of those Portugales of this assemble, walked by the river
side of Guadiana, a little boy who stood keepynge his mothers clothes which
she had washed, demanded of them whether they were those men that parted the
world with The Emperor And as they answered, yea: he took up his shert and
showed them his bare arse, saying: Coomme and draw yowre line here through
the myddest. Which saying was afterward in every man's mouth and laughed at in
the town of Badaioz: yea even among the commissioners them selves, of who^
sum were angry, and sum maruayled at the saying of the child.

The cause and authority whereby they divided the Indies.
THe Castilians and Portugales had long debated and reasoned about the gold
mine of Guinea which was found in the year of owre lord 1471, The gold mine
of Guinea.
in the time of the reign of Don Alonso King of Portugale the first of that
name. Alonso king of Portugale.


This was a matter of great importance. For the negros or black Moors, Gold
for things of smaul value.
for things of no value, gave gold by hole handefuls which was at that time
when the said King of Portugale pretended title and claim to the kingedome
of Castile in the right of his wife Queen John (cauled the excellent) ageynste
the Catholic princes Isabel and Don Fernando whose it was in deed. Contention
for the kingdom of Cast^le.
But that strife was ended as soon as Don Fernando had vanquisshed Don Alonso
at a place cauled Temulos not far from Toro, which place Don Fernando chose
rather to make war against the Moors of Granada, war agenst the Moors of
Granada.
then to bye and sell with the black Moors of Guinea. And thus the Portugales
remained with the conquest of Affryke from the streightes forward: The
conquestes of the Portugales in Affrike.
which began where the infant of Portugale Don Henrique (son to king John
the bastard and master of Auis) did bebynne to enlarge it. When pope Alexander
the.vi. (being a valentinian borne) had knowleage hereof, Pope Alexander.
he minded to give the Indies to the kings of Castile withowt any prejudice to
the Portugales who had conquered the sea coasts of Affryke. These Indies, the
pope gave of his own mind withowte the motion of any other, with this burden
and charge that they should convert the Idolatours to the faith of Christ:
And commanded a line or meridian to be drawn North and south from one
hundredth leaques Westwarde beyond one of the Islands of Cabo Uerde toward the
Weste, The pope makes the division.
because the Spanyardes should not meddle in Affryke perteynynge to the
conquest of the Portugales, to thauoydynge of all strife betw^ne them. King
John of Portugale, The king of Portugale refuses to stand to the Popes bull.
the second of that name, was greatly offended when he read the bull and
donation of the pope, althowgh his own ambassadors had made the self same
request unto his holiness. He also found him self agreeued with the Catholyke
princes Isabell and Fernando, that they had shortened the course of the lands
he had discovered, depriuynge him of the richesse which belonged to him. And
therefore refused to stand to the popes bull in this case: desiring the
Catholyke princes Isabell and Fernando to grant him three hundredth leaques
more to the Weste, beside the one hundredth which they had granted before: and
therewith sent his ships to keep the coasts of Affryke. The princes Catholyke
were content to satisfy his mind and to please him according to their gentle
nature and for the aliance that was between them: And in fine, with the
consent and agreement of the pope, The agreement of the last division
granted two hundrech.lxx. leaques more then the bull made mention of: At
Tordefillas the.vii. day of June, in the year of owr lord 1494. And whereas owr
kings thought that they should have lost ground in granting so many leaques
that way, they woonne by that means the Islands of the Malucas with many other
rich Islands. The king of Portugale also, herein deceived him self or was
deceived of his whom he put in trust, wherein the Portugales were deceived.
having no certain knowleage of the situation of the Islands of the rich
Spicery in demaundyng that which the king did demand. For it had been
better for him to have requested the three hundredth and.lxx. leaques rather
Eastwarde from the Islands of Cabo Uerde then toward the west. And yet for all
that, I doubt whether the Malucas should have faulen within his conquest
according to the ordinary accoumpte and dimension which the pylotes and
Cosmographers do make. And after this manner they divided the Indies between
them by thautoritie of the pope for the avoiding of further strife and
contention.

How and by what occasion Themperoure laid the Islands of the Malucas to
pledge to the king of Portugale.
WHen the king of Portugale Don Iuan the third of that name, had knowleage
that the Cosmographers and pylottes of Castile had drawn the line from the
place before named, and that he could not deny the truth, fearing also thereby
to liese the trade of Spices, made suit and request to Themperoure that he
should not send forth Loaisa nor Sebastian Cabote to the Malucas, Sebastian
Cabote.
and that the Castilians should not attempt the trade of spices nor see such
euyls and miseries as his capitaynes had showed in those Islands to them that
adventured that viage with Magalanes. Which thing he greatly covered, although
he paid all the charges of those two fleetes, and made other great bargens. In
the mean time, Themperoure married the Lady Isabell sister to king John: and
king John married the lady Catharine sister to The Emperor: The Emperor and the
king of portugale joined i^ aliance by marriage.
whereby this matter waxed could although the king ceased not to speak
hereof, ever mouynge the particion. The Emperor by the means of a certain
Biscaine that was with Magallanes in the governors ship, had knowleage what
the Portugales had done to the Castilians in the Island of Tidore, The
portugales rob the Castilians
whereof he took great displeasure, and brought the said maryner face to face
before thambassadours of Portugale, who denied all that he said, one of them
being the chief captain and governor of India when the Portugales took
the Castilians in Tidore and robbed them of their Cloves and Cinamome and such
other things as they had in the ship named the Trinity. But as the king of
Portugales trade was great, and owre necessity greater, in the mean time
Themperoure (who was now goinge into Italy to be crowned in the year.1529)
gagied the Malucas and the spicerie to the king of Portugale The coronation of
The Emperor.
for three hundredth and fifty thousand ducades withowt any time determined
otherwise then the controversy was defined upon the bridge of the river of
Caya: The gageing of the Islands of Malucas. zamatra and Malaca.
for the which thing, king John punyshed the licentiate Azeuedo because he
paid the money withowt declaration of the time. The covenant of the pledge
was blyndely made and greatly against the minds of the Castilians, as men that
well understood the profit, commodity, and richesse of that trade: Affirmynge
that the trade of spices might have been rented for one year or for two, for
six times as much as the king gave for it. Peter Ruiz of Uillegas who was
twyse cauled to the bargeyne, as once at Granada and an other time at Madrid,
said that it had been much better to have pledged Estremadura or Serena, or
other greater lands and cities, rather then the Malucas, Zamatra, or Malaca,
or other rich lands and ryuers in the East not yet well known: forasmuch
as it may so chance, that either by continuance of time, or aliance, the
pledge might be forgotten as thowgh it perteyned to the right of Portugale. In
fine, The Emperor considered not the jewel that he pledged, nor the king what he
received. The Emperor was often times counsayled to release the pledge of those
Islands in consideration of the great vantage he might have thereby in few
years. Furthermore, in the year.1548. the procuratoures of Cortes being in
Ualladolid, made peticion to The Emperor to surrender the spice^ie to the
kyngedoome of Castile for.vi. years, and that they would repay to the king of
Portugale his.350. thousand crowns, and after those years, restore the trade
to the crown, that his majesty might inioye the same as was agreed at the
beginning. But The Emperor being then in Flaunders, sent word to the
counsel that they should not asse^t to Cortes his request, nor speak any
more hereof. Whereat, sum marueyled, other were sorry, and all held their peace.

Of the Pole Antartike and the stars about the same And of the quality of
the regions and disposition of the Elements about the Equinoctial line. Also
certain secreates touching the art of saylynge.
AMericus Uesputius in the Summarie of his vyages, writes in this manner as
follows.

Departing from Lisbona (commonly cauled Lusheburne) the.viii. day of May,
in the year.1501. we sailed first to the Islands of Canarie and from thense to
Capouerde which the Ethiopians or black Moors caul Bisineghe, Cabouerde
Besenegha.
being.xiiii. degrees on this side the Equinoctial line. From whense
directing owre course toward the South pole by the Southwest, we saw no more
land for the space of three moonethes and three days. Of which time
during.xl. days, we had cruel fortune: In so much that for that space, A
tempest.
the heaven in manner never ceased thunderyng rorynge, and lightening with
terrible noise, and fearful syghtes of fyery exhalations flyinge about in the
air, and in manner continual showers of rain with dark clouds covering the
heaven in such sort that as well in the day as in the night we could see none
otherwise but as when the moon gives no light by reason of thick and dark
clouds The sea was in like case unquieted with surgies and monsters. After
these grievous and cruel days, it plesed god to have compassion on owr lives.
For we suddenly espied land whereby we recovered owr spirits and strength.
This land which we found, is from Capo Uerde.700. leaques, although Isuppose
that we sailed more then.800. by reason of the cruel tempest and ignorance of
the Pylottes and mariners whereby we were like to have been cast away. The
ignorance of Pylots and mariners.
For we were in such dangerous places wandering in unknown coasts, that
if I had not been skylfull in the science of Cosmographie we had suerly
peryshed, The use of Cosmographie.
forasmuch as there was not one pylot that knew where we were by the space of
fifty leaques. In so much that if I had not in time provided for the safegarde
of mine own life and them that were with me, with my quadrant and Astrolabie
instruments of Astronomy, The use of the ^uadrant and Astrolabie.
we had still wandered like blind men. But when in fine I had persuaded the
pylots by demonstrations perteynynge to that art, they gave me great honor
and confessed that the ordinary pilottes and mariners ignorant in Cosmographi,
are not to be compared to men of speculatiue knowleage. etc.

We sailed by the coaste of the said land.600. leaques And went oftentimes
alande where we were frendely and honorably interteyned of thinhabitauntes: In
so much that considering their innocent nature, we sumtymes remained with
them.xv. or.xx. days. This firm land begins beyond the Equinoctial
line.viii. degrees toward the pole Antartike. We sailed so far by the said
coaste that we passed the winter Tropyke toward the pole Antartike by xvii.
degrees and a half, The pole Antartike.
where we had the Horizontal line eleuate fifty degrees. Such things as I
saw there, are not yet known to men of owre time: as the people, their
customs and manners, the fertility of the land, the goodness of the air, the
favorable influence of heaven and the planettes, and especially the order of
the stars of the eight sphere in the inferioure hemispherie or lower half
circle of heaven toward and about the South pole, The starre^ about the south
pole.
whereof neither the owlde or new writers have made any mention to this day.

To write particularly of the commodities and felicities of these regions, it
would require rather a hole volume then a book: And that such, as if Pliny
had had knowleage of these things, Most pleasant and frutfull regions.
he might greatly have increased his books of natural histories. The trees
give from them continually such sweet savors as can scarsely be imagined:
And on every part put forth such gummes, liquours, and iuses, that if we knew
their virtues, I suppose we might find in them marvelous medicines against
diseases and to mainteyne health. And suerly in my opinion, if there be any
earthely Paradyse in the world, The earthlye Paradyse.
it can not be far from these regions of the south, where the heaven is so
beneficial and the elements so temperate that they are neither bytten with
could in winter, nor molested with heat in summer. Continual te^peratnesse.
The air also and the heaven is seldom darkened with clouds, so that the
days and nyghtes are ever clear. Yet have they sumtymes moist dewes in the
morning and euenyng for the Moist dewes
space of three hours, whereby the ground is marvelously refresshed.
Likewise the firmament is marvelously adourned with certain stars which are
not known to us, whereof I noted about.xx. to be of such clearenesse as are
the stars of Uenus and Jupiter when they are nere unto us. Stars unknown
to us


And whereas having the knowleage of Geometry, The use of Geometri.
I considered their circuit and diverse motions, and also measured their
circumference and diameter, I am well assured that they are much greater then
men think them to be. Among other, I saw three stars cauled Canopi,
whereof two were exceadynge clear, and the third sumwhat dark. The pole
Antartike has another the great bear nor the little as is seen abowte owre
pole. Notable stars in the inferior hemispherie.
But has four stars which compass it about in form of a quadrangle.



When these are hydden, there is seen on the left side a bright Canopus of
three stars of notable greatness, which being in the myddest of heaven,
represents this figure. After these, succeade three other shynynge stars,
whereof that which is in the myddest, is of measure.xii. degrees and a half in
circumference. Most bright and shynynge stars.
And in the myddest of these, is seen an other bright Canopus. After this,
follow.vi. other shynynge stars which in bryghtnesse pass al other that are
in the eight sphere. Of these, that that is in the midst in the superficial
part of the said sphere, has the measure of his circumference.xxxii. degrees.
After these follows an other great Canopus, but sumwhat dark. All these are
seen in the part of heaven cauled Via Lactea, Lactea via.
that is the milk way: And being joined to the meridiane line, show this
figure here following.



I saw also there many other stars, the diverse motions whereof diligently
observed, I made a particular book of the same, wherein I made mention of al
such notable things as I saw and had knoweleage of, in this navigations. The
which book I delivered to the kings majesty, trusting that he will shortly
restore it me again. In this hemispherie or half coompasse of the heaven, The
inferior hemisph^rie.
I diligently considered many things which are contrary to thoppinions of
philosophers. And among other things, I saw a white raynebowe about
mydnyght, The raynebowe.
whereas other affirm that it has four colors of the four elements, as
read of the fire, green of the earth, white of the air, and blewe of the
water. But Aristotle in his book intiteled Meteora, Aristotle his opinion of
the raynebowe.
is of an other opinion For he says that the raynebowe is a reflection of the
beams of the soonne in the vapoure of a cloud directly ageynste the soonne,
as the shynyng of the same on the water, is reflected on a waule: And that the
said cloud or vapoure tempereth the heat of the soonne: and being resolved
into rain, makes the ground fertyle, and pourgeth the air. Also that is a
token of abundaunt moisture. By reason whereof, A stran^e opinion.
sum are of opinion that it shall not appear.xl. years before the end of the
world, which shall be a token of the dryness of the elements approchynge to
the time of their conf^agration or consumyng by fire. It is a pledge of peace
between god and men, and is ever directly over against the soonne. It is
therefore never seen in the South, because the soonne is never in the North.
Nevertheless, Pliny says, that after the Equinoctial in Autumn, it is seen
at al hours. And thus much have I gathered owte of the commentaries of
Land^nus upon the fourth book of Uirgyl his Eneades, because I would defraude
no man of his travail. I saw the said raynebowe two or three times. And not
I only, but also many other which were in my coompany. Likewise we saw the
new moon the self same day that she joined with the soonne. The new moan.


We saw furthermore vapors and burning flames flyinge about heaven every
night. Fyery exhalations.
A little before, I cauled this country by the name of Hemispherium (that is)
the half sphere. hemispheriu^.
Which nevertheless can not be so named but by speaking improperlie in
comparyson of owres. Yet forasmuch as it seems to represent such a form, I
have improperlye so named it.

Departing therefore from Lisbona (as I have said) being from the
Equinoctial line toward the North about.xl degrees, Lisbona.
we sailed to this country which is beyond the Equinoctial.l. degrees: The
fou^th part of the world.
All which sum, makes the number of.lxxxx. being the fourth part of the
greatest circle according to the true reason of the number tawght by the
owlde autours. And by this demonstration it is manifest that we measured the
fourth part of the world: Forasmuch as we that dwell in Lisbona on this side
the Equinoctial line about.xl. degrees toward the North, sailed from thense
lxxxx. degrees in length meridionale angularly by an overthwart line, to
thinhabitantes.l. degrees beyond the Equinoctial. And that the thing may be
more plainly understood, imagine a parpendicular line to faule from the
points of heaven which are Zenith (that is the prick over the head) to us
both standing vpryght in the places of owre own habitacions: and an other
right line to be drawn from owre Zenith to theyrs: Z^nith.
Then granting us to be in the right line in comparyson to them, it must of
necessity follow that they are in the overthwart line as half Antipodes in
comparyson to us: In such sort that the figure of the said lines make a
triangle which is the quarter or fourth part of the hole circle, as appears
more plainly by the figure here following.



As touching the stars and reasons of Cosmographie, I have gathered thus much
out of the vyage of Americus Uesputius. And have thought good to join hereunto
that which Andreas de Corsali writes in his vyage to East India as
concerning the same matter. The vyage of Andreas de Corsali.


After that we departed from Lisbona, we sailed ever with prosperous wind,
not passing out of the Southeast and Southwest. And passing beyond the
Equinoctial line, The Equinoctial line.
we were in the heyght of.37. degrees of the other half circle of the earth.
And trauersynge the cape of Bona Speranza a could and wyndy clime because at
that time the soonne was in the north signs, Cap. de Speranza.
we found the night of.xiiii. hours. Here we saw a marvelous order of
stars, so that in the part of heaven contrary to owre north pole, The
stars of the under hemispherie.
to know in what place and degree the south pole was, we took the day with
the soonne, and observed the night with the Astrolabie, and saw manifestly
two clouds of reasonable bygnesse mouynge about the place of the pole
continually now rysynge and now faulynge, Clouds about the south pole.
so keepynge their continual course in circular mouynge, with a star ever in
the myddest which is turned about with them abowte.xi. degrees from the pole.
Above these appears a marvelous cross in the mydddest of five notable
stars which compass it about (as does charles wayne the north pole) with
other stars which move with them about.xxx. degrees distant from the pole, A
cross of five stars.
and make their course in.xxiiii. hours. This cross is so fair and bewtiful,
that none other heavenly sign may be compared to it as may appear by this
figure.

A. The pole Antartike. B. The Cross. Hitherto Andreas de Corsali.


OF the like matters, and of the strange rysynge of the soonne in the
morning, and of the diverse seasons of the year and motions of the Elements
in the coaste of Ethiope about the river of Senega, The coasts of Ethiope.
and the rich region of Gambra where plenty of gold is found, Gold ^n
Eth^ope.
sumewhat beyond Capo Uerde, Aloisius Cadamustus writes in this effect.

During the time that we remained upon the mouth of the river, The vyage of
Aloisius Cadamustus.
we saw the north star but once: which appeared very low above the sea the
height of a iauelen. We saw also six clear, bright, and great stars very
low above the sea. And considering their stations with owre coompasse, The
chariote of the south pole.
we found them to stand right south, fygured in this manner.



WE judged them to be the chariotte or wayne of the south: But we saw not the
principal star, as we could not by good reason, except we should first lose
the sight of the north pole. In this place we found the night of the length
of a.xi. hours and a half: And the day of.xii. hours and a half at the
beginning of July. This country is ever hot al times of the year. Yet is
there a certain variety which they caul winter. The winter about the
Equinoctial.
For from the month of July to October, it rayneth continually in manner daily
about none after this sort. There rise continually certain clouds above the
land between the northeast and the south east, Rain and clouds.
or from the east and southeast with great thunderynge and lyghtnynge and
exceadynge great showers of rain At this time the Eth^opians begin to sow
their seeds. Thunder and lyghtnynge.
They live commonly with honey, herbs, roots, flesh, and milk. I had also
intelligence that in this region by reason of the great heat of the air, the
water that raineth in hot: hot showers of rain.
And that the soonne rysynge in the morning, makethe no clear daylyght as it
does with us: But that half an hour after the rysyn^e, it appears
troubeled, dymme and smoky. The which thing, The day, and rysynge of the
so^^ne.
I know not to proceade of any other cause then of the lowenesse of the
ground in this country being without mountains.

A discourse of diverse vyages and ways by the which Spices, Precious stones,
and gold were brought in owlde time from India into Europe and other parts of
the world. Also of the vyage to CATHAY and East India by the north sea: And of
certain secreates touching the same vyage, declared by the duke of Moscouie
his ambassadoure to an excellent learned gentelman of Italy, named Galeatius
Butrigarius. Likewise of the vyages of that worthy owlde man Sebastian Cabote,
yet living in England, and at this present the governor of the coompany of
the marchantes of Cathay in the city of London.
IT is doubtless a marvelous thing to consider what chaunges and alterations
were caused in all the Roman Empire by the Goths and Uandales, The roman
empire.
and other Barbarians into Italy. For by their invasions were extinguyshed all
arts and sciences, and all trades of Marchaundies that were used in diverse
parts of the world. The desolation and ignorance which insued hereof,
continued as it were a cloud of perpetual darkness among men for the space
of four hundredth years and more, iiii. hundredth years of ignorance.
in so much that none durst adventure to go any whyther out of their own
native countries: whereas before thincursions of the said Barbarians when the
Roman Empire florysshed, they might safly pass the seas to al parts of East
India which was at that time as well known and frequented as it is now by the
nauigations of the Portugales. East India well known in owld time.
And that this is true, it is manifest by that which Strabo writes, Strabo.
who was in the time of Augustus and Tiberius. For speaking of the greatness
and riches of the city of Alexandria in Egypt (governed then as a province of
the Romans) he writes thus. This only place of Egypt, The great richesse of
Egipte.
is apt to receive all things that coome by sea, by reason of the commodity
of the haven: And likewise all such things as are brought by land, by reason
of the river of Nilus whereby they may be easily conueyde to Alexandria, The
city of A^exandria.
being by these commodities the rychest city of merchants that is in the
world.

The revenues of Egypt are so great, that Marcus Tullius says in one of his
oracions, Marvelous richesse.
that king Tolomeus surnamed Auleta, the father of queen Cleopatra, had of
revenues twelve thousand and five hundredth talentes, which are seven millions
and a half of gold. If therefore this king had so great revenues when Egypt
was governed of so few and so negligently, The governance and revenues of the
Romans.
what might it then be worth to the Romans by whom it was governed with
great diligence, and their trade of marchandies greatly increased by the
traffike of Trogloditica and India? Trogloditica and India.
whereas in time paste there could hardly be found.xx. ships together that
durst enter into the goulfe of Arabie, The goulfe of Arabie.
or show their proos withowt the mouth of the same. But at this present, great
nauies sail together into India and to the furthest parts of Ethiope from
whense are brought many rych and precious marchandies into Egypt and are carried
from thense into other countries. Ethiope.
And by this means are the customs redoubeled as well by such things as are
brought thither, Rich customs
as also by such as are carried from thense, forasmuch as great customs
arryse of things of great value. And that by this vyage, infinite and precious
marchaundies were brought from the red sea and India, The richesse which were
brought in owlde time from India. and the red sea.
and those of diverse other sorts then are known in owre time, it appears by
the fourth volume of the civil law wherein is described the commission of
Themperours Marcus and Commodus, The commission of Themperours Marcus and
Commodus.
with the rehearsal of all such stuff and marchandies whereof custom should
be paid in the red sea by such as had the same in fee ferme, as were paid
the customs of all other provinces perteynynge to the Roman Empire: and they
are these following. Cinamome. Long pepper. White pepper. Cloves. Costus.
Cancamo. Spikenarde. Cassia. Sweet perfumes. Xilocassia. Mir. Amome. Ginger.
Malabatrum. Ammoniac. Galbane. Lasser. Agarike. Gum of Arabie. Cardamome.
Xilocinamome. Carpesio. Sylkes of diverse sorts. Linen cloth. Skynnes and
furs of Parthia and Babylon. Iuery. Woodde of Heben. Precious stones. Perles.
Jewels of Sardonica. Ceraunia. Calamus Aromaticus. Berille. Cilindro. Slaves.
Cloth of Sarmatia. The sylke cauled Metaxa. Uestures of sylke. Dyed cloth and
sylke. Carbasei. Sylke threede. Gelded men. Popingiayes. Lions of India.
Leopardes. Panthers. Purple.
Also that iuise or liquour which is gathered of wolle and of the hear of the
Indians.

By these words it does appear that in owld time the said navigations by
the way of the red sea, was well known and much f^^^uented, and perhaps
more then it is at this present. In so much that the ancient kings of Egypt
considering the great profit of the customs they had by the viages of the red
sea, The great riches the kings of E^ipte had by customs.
and wyllyng to make the same more easy and commodious, attempted to make a
fosse or chanel which should begin in the last part of the said sea, where
was a city named Arsinoe (which perhaps is that that is now cauled Sues)
and should have reached to a branche of the river of Nilus named Pelusio, The
noble enterprises of the kings of Egypt. Ar^^noe. Damiata. Pelu^io.
which emptieth it self in owre sea toward the East about the city of
Damiata. They determined also to make three causeis or high ways by land,
which should pass from the said branch to the city of Arsinoe: but they
found this to difficulte to bring to pass.

In fine, king Tolomeus surnamed Ph^ladelphus, ordained an other way: as to
sail upon Nilus against the course of the river unto the city of Copto,
Nilus.
Copt^.
and from thense to pass by a deserte country until they coome above the red sea to a city named Berenice or Miosormo, ^erenice,
where they embarked all their marchaundies and wares for India, E^hiope, and
Arabie, as appears by the writing first of Strabo (who writes that he was
in Egypt) and then by Pliny who was in the time of Domitian. Strabo also
speaking of the said fo^^e or trench which was made toward the red sea, A
nauigable tren^h made from Egypt to the red sea
writes thus

There is a trenche that goth toward the red sea and the goulfe of Arabie, and
to the city of Arsinoe, which sum caul Cleopatrida: and passes by the lakes
named Amari (that is) bitter, Lacus Amari.
because in deed they were first bitter. But after that this trenche was made
and the river entered in, they became sweet, and are at this present full of
fowls of the water by reason of their pleasantness. This trenche was first
begun by king Sesostre, King Sesostre.
before the battle of Troy. Sum say that it was begun by king Psammiticus
while he was a child: King Psammiticus.
And that by reason of his death, it was left imperfect: Also that afterward,
king Darius succeeded in the same enterprise, king Darius
who would have finisshed it, but yet brought it not to the end because he was
informed that the red sea was higher then Egypt: And that if this land
diuydynge both the seas, were opened, all Egypt should be drowned thereby.
King Tolomeus would in deed have finyshed it: king Ptolomeus.
but yet left it shut at the head that he might when he would, sail to the
other sea and return withowt perell. Here is the city of Arsinoe: And nere
unto that, the city cauled Heroum in the uttermost part of the goulfe of
Arabie toward Egypt with many ports and habitacions. The city herou^.
Pliny likewise speaking of this trench, What Plynye w^tt^h of the nauigable
trenche.
says. In the furthest part of the goulfe of Arabie, is a port cauled Daneo,
from whense they determined to bring a nauigable trench unto the river of
Nilus, where as is the first Delta. Between the said sea and Nilus, there is a
straight of land of the length of.lxii. miles. The first that attempted this
thing, was Sesostre king of Egypt: and after him Darius king of the
Persians, whom Tolomeus followed, The largeness and length of the trenche.
who made a trenche a hundredth foot large, and.xxx. foot diepe, being three
hundredth miles in length unto the lakes named Amari, and durst proceade no
further for fear of inundation, having knoweleage that the red sea was
higher by three cubits then all the country of Egypt. Other say that this was
not the cause: but that he doubted that if he should have let the sea coome any
further, all the water of Nilus should have been thereby corrupted, which only
mynystreth drink to all Egypt. But notwithstanding all these things
aforesaid, all this vyage is frequented by land from Egypt to the red sea,
The viage bilande from Egypt to the red sea.
in which passage are three causeis or high ways. The first begins at the
mouth of Nilus named Pelusio. All which way is by the sands: In so much that
if there were not certain high reeds fyxt in the earth to show the right
way, the causei could not be found by reason the wind ever covers it with
sand. The second causei is two miles from the mountain Cassius. And this also
in the end of.lx. miles, comes upon the way or causey of Pelusius, inhabited
with certain Arabians cauled Antei. The third begins at Gerro, named
Adipson: and passes by the same Arabians, for the space of.lx. miles sumwhat
shorter, but full of rowgh mountains and great scarsenesse of water. All these
causeis, What king ptolomeus discovered.
lead the way to the city of Arsinoe, builded by Tolomeus Philadelphus in the
goulfe Carandra by the red sea. This Ptolomeus was the first that searched all that part of the red sea which is cauled Trogloditica. Of this trenche
described of Strabo and Pliny, there are seen certain tokens remaining at
this present as they affirm which have been at Sues beyond the city of Alcayr
otherwise cauled Babylon in Egypt. But the merchants that of later days
travail this viage by land, ride through the dry and baren deserts on camels
both by day and by night: directing their way by the stars and compase as do
maryners on the sea, and caryinge with them water sufficient for many days
journeys. Alcayre.
The places of Arabie and India named of Strabo and Pliny, The viage to East
Indya frequented in owlde time.
are the self same where the Portugales practice their trade at this day, as
the manners and customs of the Indians do yet declare. The custo^es and manners
of the Indyans.
For even at this present their women use to burn them selves alive with the
dead bodies of their husbands. Which thing (as writes Strabo in his.xv.
book) they did in owlde time by a law, for this consideration that sumtyme
being in love with other they forsook or poisoned their husbands. And
forasmuch as according to this custom, the owlde poet Propertius (who lived
about a hundredth years before thincarnation of Christ) has in his book made
mention of the contention that was among the Indian women which of them should
be burned alive with their husbands, I have thought good to subscribe his
verses, which are these.

Foelix Pois lex funeris vna maritis,
Quos aurora suis rubra colorat equis.
Mamque vbi mortifero iacta est fax vltima lecto,
Vxorum suis stat pia turba comis,
Et certamen habent lethi, quae viua sequatur
Coniugium, pudor est non licuisse mori.
Ardent victrices, and flammae pectora praebent,
Imponuntque suis ora perusta viris.
As touthynge these vyages both by sea and by land to East India and Cathay,
many things are written very largely by diverse autours which I omytte because
they perteyne not so much unto us as does the viage attempted to CATHAY by the
north seas and the coasts of Moscouia discovered in owre time by the viage of
that excellent young man Rychard Chaunceler no less learned in all
mathematical sciences then an expert pylotte, The vyage to Cathay.
Richard Chaunceler.
in the year of owre lord.1554.

As concerning this vyage, I have thought good to declare the communication
which was between the said learned man Galeatius Butrigarius, and that great
philosopher and noble gentelman of Italy named Hieronimus Fracastor as I find
written in the Italian hystories of nauigations. As they were therefore
conferring in matters of learning, and reasonynge of the science of
Cosmographi, A learned discourse of diverse vyages.
the said learned man having in his hand an instrument of Astronomy,
declared with a large oration how much the world was bound to the kings of
Portugale, rehearsynge the noble factes done by them in India, The vigages of
the Portugales.
and what lands and Islands they had discovered* and how by their nauigations
they made the whole world hang in the air. The world hanging on the ^yer.
He further declared what parts of the baul of the earth remained yet
undiscovered. And said that of the lands of the inferior hemispherie or half
compase of the baule toward the pole Antartike, what is known of the lower
hemispherie.
there was nothing known but that little of the coaste of Brasilia unto the
straight of Magellanus. The land of Brasile.
Also a part of Peru: Peru.
And a little above Affrike toward the cape of Bona Speranza. Also that he
marueyled withowte measure that this thing was no better considered of
Christian Princes to who^ god has deputed this charge, The charge and dewtie
of Christian princes.
having ever on their counsailmen of great learning which may inform them of
this thing being Note.
so marvelous and noble whereby they may obtain glory and fame by virtue,
and be impuled among men as gods, by better demerites then ever were
Hercules and great Alexander who trauayled only into India: hercules and
Alexander.
and that by making the men of this owre hemispherie known to them of the
other half compase of the baule beneth us, they might by the title of this
enterprise, withowt comparyson far excel all the noble factes that ever were
done by Julius Caesar or any other of the Roman Emperors. Which thing they
might easily bring to pass by assignynge colonies to inhabit diverse places
of that hemispherie, in like manner as did the Romans in provinces newely
subdued. The colonies of the Romans in regions subdued.
Whereby they might not only obtain great riches, but also enlarge the
Christian faith and Empire to the glory of god and confusion of infidels. After
this, he spoke of the Island of saint Laurence, cauled in owlde time
Madagascar, The great Island of saint Laurence or Madagasca^.
which is greater then the realm of Castile and Portugale, and reachethe from
the.xii. degree toward the pole Antartike, unto the xxvi. degree and a half,
lyinge Northeaste from the cape of Bona Speranza and partly under the line of
Tropicus Capricorni: being well inhabited and of temperate air, with
abundaunce of all things necessary for the life of man, and one of the most
excellent Islands that is found this day in the world: And that
nevertheless there is nothing known thereof, except only a few smaule havens
by the sea side, as the like ignorance remains of the greatest part of the
Islands of Taprobana, Giaua the more and the less, The Islands of Tap^^bana or
Giaua.
and infinite other. Then beginning to speak of the parts of owre pole, he
raused the books of pliny to be brought him where diligentely ponderynge
the.lxvii. chapiture of the second book, Pliny.
he found where he reherseth the history of Cornelius Nepos, The history of
Cornelius Nepos.
by these words: That in his time, one Eudoxus escapynge the hands of king
Lathyro, departed from the goulfe of Arabie and came by sea to the Island of
Calese. Declarynge further, that whereas this narration was many years reputed
for a fable, was now in owre time by the virtue of the Portugales, kdow^n to
be true: And that likewise the same Cornelius Nepos recitethe that at the
time when Quintus Met^llus Celer was proconsul or lieuetenant for the Romans in
France, Shypes of India driu^n into the sea of Germany.
the king of Sueuia gave him certain Indians which saylinge out of India for
marchandies, were by tempest driven to the coasts of Germany. When he had
read these words, he proceaded, saying that the same thing might be
verified now in owr time if the princes which confine upon that sea would
endeavor their industry and diligence to bring it to pass. An enterprise
whereby princes may obtain true fame and glory.
And that there could not any navigations be imagined so commodious and
profitable to all Christendoome as this might be if by this way tke vyage
should be found open to India to come to the rych country of CATHAY which was
discovered now two hundredth years sense by Marcus Paulus. Cathay discovered ^i
Marcus Paulus.
Then taking the globe in his hand, he made demonstration that this vyage
should be very short in respect of that which the Portugales now follow, and
also of that which the Spanyardes may attempt to the Islands of Moluca. He
declared further more that the city of Lubyke being rych and of great pour,
The city of Lubyke.
and situate upon the sea of Germany, and also accustomed with continual
nauigations to travail the sea of Norwaye and Gothlande, and likewise the
right noble king of Polonie whose dominions with his realm of Lituania, The
king of Polanie.
extend to the said sea, should be apt to discover this secreate: But that
above all other, the duke of Moscouia, The duke of Moscouia.
should perform the same with greater commodity and more facility then any
other Prince. And here steyinge a while, he began to speak again and said.
Now forasmuch as we are coome to this pass, me think it should seem a
great discurtesie if I should not show you all that I know as touching this
vyage, whereof I greatly mused with my self many years by occasion of the
words of Pliny. Whereas therefore being a young man, I was in Germany in
the city of Augusta, it so chaunsed that in those days there came thither an
ambasadour of the duke of Moscouia, An ambassador from the duke of Moscouia.
a man singularly learned both in the Greek toonge and the Latin, and of good
experience in worldely things, having been sent to diverse places by the said
Prince, and one of his counsel. Of whose learning being advertised, I sought
his acquayntaunce. And talking with him one day of these Indians driven by
fortune to the coasts of Germany, and of the vyage that might be discovered
by the North sea to the Islands of spices, I perceived that at the first he
marueyled exceadyngely, as at a thing that he could never have imagined. But
resting a while in manner astonysshed in his secreate fantasy, he took great
pleasure therein, and said. The words of thambassadour of Moscouia
Forasmuch as the Portugales have now compased about all the south parts
supposed in owlde time to be inaccessable by reason of great heat, why should
we not certeinely think that the like may be done about this part of the
north withowt fear of could, especially to men borne and brought up in that
clime? Yet procedyng further, he said, that if his Prince and master, had men
that would animate him to discover this vyage, there was no Prince in
Christendom that might do it with more facility. Then caulynge for a map in
which was the description of Moscouia and the provinces subject to the same,
The way from Moscouia to the north Ocean and Cathay.
he declared that from the city of Moscouia or Mosca going toward the
northeast for the space of.lx. miles, they come to the river of Uolochda,
Uolochda.
and afterward by that, and following the course thereof, to the city of
Usting, Ustiug.
so cauled because the river of Iug fauleth into the river of Succana, Succana.
where they lose their own names and make the great river Duina: Duina.
And by that, leauyng on the right hand the city of Colmogor, Coimogor.
they sail unto the north Ocean. The north Ocean.
The which way, although it be a long tracte, as more then.800. miles,
nevertheless he said that in summer it might commodiously be sailed: And
that whereas it fauleth into the sea, there are infinite woods of goodly trees
apt to make ships. Great wooddes.
And the place so convenient for this purpose, that shipwryghtes and other
skillful workmen for all things hereunto apperteynynge, may easily coome out
of Germany. Also that the men which are used to travail the sea of Germany
abowte the coasts of Gothlande, Gothlande.
should be best and most apt to attempt this enterprise, because they are
indurate to abide could, hunger, and labor. He said furthermore, that in
the court of his Prince, they have much knowleage of the great cane of Cathay,
The Moscouites have knowleage of the great cane of Cathay.
by reason of the continual wars they have with the Tartars, of who^ the
greatest part give obedience to the said great Cane as to their chief
Emperor. He made also demonstration in the said card by the northeaste,
that being paste the province of Permia and the river Pescora (which fauleth
into the north sea) and certain mountains named Catena Mundi, Permis.
Plescora.
Catena mu^di.
there is thenteraunce into the province of obdora, Obdora.
whereas is Uecchiadoro and the river Obo, Ucchiadoro.
Obo.
which also fauleth into the said sea, and is the furthest borther of Thempire
of the Prince of Moscouia. The said river has his original in a great lake
cauled Chethai, ^he lake Chethay.
which is the first habitacion of the Tartars that pay tribute to the great
Cane. The Tartars
And from this lake for the space of two months vyage (as they were credably
informed by certain Tartares taken in the wars) is the most noble city of
Cambalu, The city of Cambolu.
being one of the chiefest in the dominion of the great Cane, whom sum caul
the great Cham. Note this secreate.
He also affirmed, that if ships should be made on the coasts of the said
sea, and sail on the back half of the coast thereof (which he knew by many
relations made to his Prince, to reach infinitely toward the northeast) they
stulde doubtelesse in following the same, easily discover that country. Unto
these words he added, that although there were great difficulty in
Moscouia, Difficult trauaylynge in Moscoula.
by reason that the way to the said sea is full of thick wooddes and waters
which in the summer make great marysshes and impossible to be trauayled,
as well for lack of vyttayles which can not there be found, not for certain
days, but for the space of certain months, the place being desolate
withowt inhabitauntes, nevertheless he said that if there were with his
Prince, only two Spanyardes or Portugales to whom the charge of this vyage
should be committed, Commendation of the Spania^des and Portugales.
he no ways doubted but that they would follow it and find it, forasmuch as
with great ingeniousnesse and inestimable patience, these nations have overcome
much greater difficulties then are these which are but lytele in comparison to
those that they have ouerpassed and do ouerpasse in all their viages to India.
^he history of Paulus Centur^o.
He proceaded declarynge that not many years sense, there came to the court
of his Prince, Of this read more at large in the book of Paulus Iomus.
an ambassador from pope Leo, named master Paulo Centurione a Genuese under
diverse pretenses. But the principal occasion of his coming, was, because he
had conceived great indignation and hatred against the Portugales: Malice
may do more with sum then Virtue.
And therefore intended to prove if he could open any vyage by land whereby
spiers might be brought from India by the land of Tartaria, or by the sea
Caspium (otherwise cauled Hircanum) to Moscouia: The Cospien sea.
And from thense to be brought in ships by the river Riga, Riga.
which runnynge by the country of Liuonia, Liuonia.
fauleth into the sea of Germany. And that his Prince gave ear unto him: and
caused the said viage to be attempted by certain noble men of Lordo, of the
Tartars confininge next unto him. The Tartar^ of Lordo.
But the wars which were then between them, and the great deserts which
they should of necessity ouerpasse, Deserts.
made them leave of their enterprise: which if it had bin purposed by the
coasts of this owre north sea, The viage by the north se^.
it might have been easily fynyshed. The said Ambassador continued his
narration, saying that no man ought to doubt of that sea but that it may be
sailed six months in the year, forasmuch as the days are then very long in
that clime, and hot by reason of contynuall reuerberation of the beams of the
soonne and short nyghtes. The woorth^nesse of this vyage.
And that this thing were as well worthy to be proved, as any other
navigations whereby many parts of the world heretofore unknown, have been
discovered and brought to civility. And here making an end of this talk, he
said: Let us now omytte this part of Moscouia with his could, and speak
sumwhat of that part of the new world in which is the land of Brytons
cauled Terra Britonum, and Baccaleos or Terra Baccalearum, The viage^ of the
Frenchmen to the land of Baccalaos.
where in the year.1534. and.1535. Jacques Cartiar in two vyages made with
three great French galleys, found the great and large countries named Canada,
Ochelaga, and Sanguenai: which reach from the.xlv. to the li. degree, being
well inhabited and pleasant countries, Pleasant countries.
and named by him Noua Francia. New France.
And here steyinge a while and lyftynge up his hands, he said: Oh what do
the Christian Princes mean that in such lands discovered they do not assign
certain colonies to inhabit the same to bring those people (whom god has so
blessed with natural gifts) to better civility and to embrase owre religion,
Apostrophe to the Christian Princes.
then the which, nothing can be more acceptable to god? The said regions
also, being so fair and fruitful, with plenty of all sorts of corn,
herbs, fruits, woodde, fysshes, beasts, metals, and ryuers of such
greatness that ships may sail more then.180. miles upon one of them,
Great ryuer^.
being on both sides infinitely inhabited: And to cause the gouernoures of
the said colonies to search whether that land toward the north named Terra
de Laborador, A thing worthy to be searched.
do join as one firm land with Norwaye: Or whether there be any straight
or open place of sea as is most like there should be, forasmuch as it is to
be thought that the said Indians driven by fortune abowte the coasts of
Norway, came by that straight or sea, to the coasts of Germany: And by the
said straight to sail northwest to discover the lands and countries of
CATHAY, and from thense to sail to the Islands of Molucca. The way to Cathay
and the Islands of Maluca by the northwest A notable enterprise.
And these surely should be enterprises able to make men immortal. The which
thing, that right worthy gentelman master Antony di Mendoza considering by
the singular virtue and magnanimity that is in him, The noble enterprise of
Antoni di Mendoza, viceroy of Mexico.
attempted to put this thing in practice. For being viceroy of the country
of Mexico (so named of the great city Mexico otherwise cauled Temistitan, now
cauled new Spain, being in the.xx. degree above the Equinoctial, and part
of the said firm land, he sent certain of his capitaynes by land, and also
a navy of ships by sea, to search this secreate. And I remember that when I
was in Flaunders in Themperours court, The discovering of the northwest
parts.
I saw his letter written in the year.1541. and dated from Mexico: wherein was
declared how toward the northwest, he had fownd the kyngedome of Set Citta
(that is) Seven Cities, whereas is that cauled Ciuola by the reverend father
Marco da Riza: and how beyond the said kyngedome yet further toward the
Northwest, Captain Francesco Uasques of Coronado, having ouerpassed great
deserts, Shyps saylynge from Cathay by the north hyperborea^ sea to the
coasts of the northwest part of the land of Baccaleos.
came to the sea side where he found certain ships which sailed by that sea
with marchaundies, and had in their baner upon the proos of their ships,
certain fowls made of gold and silver which they of Mexico caul Alcatrazzi:
And that their mariners showed by signs that they were.xxx. days saylynge in
coming to that haven: whereby he understood that these ships could be of
none other country then of Cathay, Cathay.
forasmuch as it is situate on the contrary part of the said land
discovered. The said master Antonie wrote furthermore, that by the opinion of
men well practiced, there was discovered so great a space of that country
unto the said sea, that it passed.950. leaques, The sea from new France or
Terra Britonum to Cathay.
which make.2850. miles. And doubtless if the French men in this their new
France, would have passed by land toward the said northwest and by north,
they should also have found the sea whereby they might have sailed to Cathay.
But above all things, this seemed unto me most worthy of commendation, A
notable book.
that the said master Antonie wrote in his letter that he had made a book of
all the natural and marvelous things which they found in searchynge those
countries, with also the measures of lands and altytudes of degrees: A work
doubtless which shows a princely and magnificall mind, whereby we may
conceive that if god had given him the charge of the other hemispherie, he
would or now have made it better known to us. The which thing, I suppose no
man does greatly esteem at this time: being nevertheless the greatest and
most glorious enterprise that may be imagined. A great and glorious enterprise.


And here making a certain pause, and turnynge him self toward us, he
said: Do you not understand to this purpose how to pass to India toward
the northwest wind, as did of late a citizen of Uenese, so valiente a man, and
so well practysed in all things perteynynge to nauigations and the science of
Cosmographie, that at this present he has not his like in Spain, in so much
that for his virtues he is preferred above all other pylottes that sail to the
west Indies, Sebastian Cabote the grand pylot of the west Indies.
who may not pass thither withowt his license, and is therefore cauled Piloto
Maggiore (that is) the graunde pylote. And when we said that we knew him
not, he proceaded, saying, that being certain years in the city of Siuile,
Commendation of Sebastian Cabote.
and desirous to have sum knowleage of the nauigations of the Spanyardes, it
was toulde him that there was in the city a valient man, a Uenecian borne,
named Sebastian Cabote, Sebastian Cabote told me that he was borne in
Brystowe, and that at.iiii. year owld he was carried with his father to Uenice
and so returned again into England with his father after certain years: Where
by he was thought to have bin born in Uenice.
who had the charge of those things, being an expert man in that science, and
one that could make cards for the sea with his own hand. And that by this
report, seekynge his acquaintance, he found him a very gentell person, who
enterteyned him friendly and showed him many things, and among other a large
map of the world with certain particular nauigations as well of the
Portugales as of the Spanyardes. And that he spoke further unto him, in this
effect. When my father departed from Uenese many years sense to dwell in
England to follow the trade of marchaundies, he took me with him to the city
of London while I was very young, yet having nevertheless sum knowleage of
letters of humanity and of the sphere. And when my father dyed in that time
when news were browght that Don Christopher Colonus Genuese, had discovered
the coasts of India, whereof was great talk in all the court of king Henry
the seventh who then reigned: In so much that all men with great admiration
affirmed it to be a thing more divine then humane, to sail by the Weste into
the East where spices grow, by a way that was never known before. By which
fame and report, there increased in my heart a great flame of desire to
attempt sum notable thing. And understanding by reason of the sphere, that if
I should sail by the way of the northwest wind, I should by a shorter tracte
coomme to India, I thereuppon caused the king to be advertised of my divise,
who immediately commanded two carauels to be furnysshed with all things
apperteynynge to the vyage, The first vyage of Sebastian Cabote.
which was as far as I remember, in the year.1496. in the beginning of
summer. Beginning therefore to sail toward Northwest, not thynkyng to find
any other land then that of CATHAY, and from thense to turn toward India.
But after certain days, I found that the land ran toward the North,
which was to me a great displeasure. Nevertheless, sailing alonge by the coast
to see if I could find any goulfe that turned, I found the land still
continent to the.56. degree under owre pole. And saying that there the coast
turned toward the East, dispayringe to find the passage, I turned back again,
and sailed down by the coast of that land toward the Equinoctial (ever with
intent to find the said passage to India) and came to that part of this
firm land which is now cauled FLORIDA. The land^ of Florid^.
Where, my vyttayles failing, I departed from thense and returned into England,
where I found great tumultes among the people, and preparaunce for wars in
Scotland: by reason whereof, there was no more consideration had to this
vyage: Wheruppon I went into Spain to the Catholyke king, The second vyage
of Cabote to the land of Brasile, and Rio ^ella Plata.
and queen Elizabeth: who being advertised what I had done, interteyned me,
and at their charges furnysshed certain ships wherewith they caused me to
sail to discover the coasts of Brasile, where I found an exceadynge great
and large river, named at this present Rio della Plata (that is) the river of
silver, into the which I sailed, Cabote told me that in a region within this
river ^e sowed l. ^raynes of weate in September, and gathered thereof. l.
thousand in December as writes also Francisco Lopes.
and followed it into the firm land more then six hundrethe leaques, finding
it every where very^ fair and inhabited with infinite people, which with
admyration came runnynge daily to owre ships. Into this river, run so many
other rivers, that it is in manner incredible. After this, I made many other
vyages which I now pretermitte. And wexynge owlde, I give my self to rest from
such trauayles because there are now many young and lusty pylotes and
mariners of good experience, by whose forwardenesse I do rejoice in the fruits
of my labors, and rest with the charge of this office as you see. And this is
as much as I have understood of master Sebastian Cabote, as I have gathered
owte of diverse nauigations written in the Italian toonge.

And whereas I have before made mention how Moscouia was in owr time
discovered by Richard Chanceler in his viage toward Cathai by the direction and
information of the said master Sebastian who long before had this secreate in
his mind, The vyage to Moscouia.
I shall not need here to describe that viage, forasmuch as the same is
largely and faithfully written in the Laten tongue by that learned young man
Clement Adams scole master to the Queens henshemen, as he received it at the
moutht of the said Richard Chanceler. Nevertheless I have thought good here
to speak sumwhat of Moscouia as I have read in the book of John Faber
written in the Latin toonge to the right noble Prince Ferdinando Archeduke of
Austria and Infant of Spain, The hystory^ of Moscouia
of the manners and religion of the Moscouites, as he was partly instructed by
the ambasadours of the duke of Moscouie sent into Spain to Themperours
majesty in the year.M.D.XX.V. He writes therefore as follows.

I think it first conueniente to speak sumewhat of the name of this region
whereby it is cauled at this day, The dyuer^ names of Moscouia.
and how it was cauled in owlde time. Conferring therefore the most ancient of
the Greek and latin monumentes with the histories of later time, I perceive
it to be a thing which requires no smaule judgment of wit and learning.
For we see in how short time the names of things are changed, as are also
the manners of men. I find therefore that those people whom at this day we
commonly caul Moscouites, were in time past (as witnesses Pliny) cauled
Roxolani, Roxolani.
whom nevertheless by chaungynge one letter, Ptolomie in his ^yght table of
Europe, cauleth Rosolanos as does also Strabo. Rosolani,


They were also many years cauled Rutheni: Rutheni.
And are that people which sumtyme fought manfully against the Capitaynes of
Methridates as Strabo writes. They were cauled Moscouites of the chief city
of all the province named Moscouia or Mosca: or (as Uolaterane says) of the
river Mosco. The river Mosco.
They were sumtyme governed by duke Johan, whose wife was Helena of the lynage
of Themperours of Constanstinople of the noble famelie of the Paleologi.
Beyond these Roxolanos, Strabo says there is no land inhabited. These
Ruthenians therefore or Moscouites, are people of the northeaste part of the
world from us: And are determined with the limettes of the great river
Boristhenes of Scithia, The river Boristhenes.
on the one side with the Lituanians and Polonians, and on the other side with
the Tartars who cease not to vex them with continual wars and incursions.
Especially the great Emperor Cham of Cathay the chief Prince of the Tartars,
The Emperor of Cathay.
residente by the sea side in Taurito Chersoneso, molesteth them with sore
wars. They are toward the north side enclosed with the frosen sea, The
frose^ sea
the land of whose coasts being very large, perteyneth in manner all to the
dominion of the duke of Moscouie. This sea is it which the owlde writers caul
Lacus Cronicus, Lacus Cronicus.
so named of the Greek word Cronos, which the Latins caul Saturnus whom
they feign to be an owlde man, Saturnus.
of complexion could and slow, and thereby name all such things as are
could and slow, Cronica, as by like reason they did this north sea which
being in manner ever frosen, is slow and could and in manner immouable. And
for like consideration (as says Pliny) Hethens names it in the Scythian
toonge, Amaltheum, Amaltheum.
which word signifies as much as congeled or frosen. But that I wander not
far from my purpose: Thempire and dominion of the duke of Moscouie recheth
so far that it comprehends certain parts of Asia and also of Europe. The
dominion of the duke of Moscouia.
The city of Moscouia or Mosca, The city of Moscouia.
is counted twyse as bygge as Colonia Agrippina as they faithfully report
which know both. Unto this they have also an other not unequal in byggenesse
cauled Fladimer. The chief cities of Moscouia.
Also Blescouia, Nouogradia, Smolne, and Otifer, al which, their ambassadors
affirm to be of princely and magnificall buyldynges, and strongely defended
with waules both of brycke and square stone. Of these, Blescouia is strongest
and environed with three waules. Other which they have innumerable are not so
famous as are these whereof this duke of Moscouie and Emperor of Russia takes
thinscription of his little. The (...) Moscouia and Emperor of Russia.


For even at this present, when so ever either by his ambassadors or his
letters, he does signify him self to be Emperor of Moscouie, his is
accustomed to use this little. The duke of Moscouia his title.
Basilius by the grace of god Emperor of all Russia and great Duke of
Fladamer, Moscouie, Nouigrade, Blescouia, Smolne, and Otifer. etc. And this is
the title whereby the said ambassadors saluted yowre majesty in the name of
great Basilius when they began their oration. Duke Basilius.
This prince of Moscouie has under him princes of many provinces and those of
great pour: Of the which, that owlde white bearded man whom this Emperor of
the Ruthians sent for his ambassadoure to Themperours majesty into Spain,
Their pour.
is not one of the least. For even he when necessity of war requires, is
accustomed to make for his Emperor a band of.xxx thousand horsemen. But this
is to their singular commendation that they are so obedient to their prince in all things, Their obedience to their prince.
that being sommoned by him by never so mean an hearald, they obey
incontinent as if it were to god, Their wars and conquestes.
thinking nothing more glorious then to dye in the quarrel of their prince. By
reason of which obedience, they are able in short time, to assemble an army of
two or three hundredth thousand men against their enemies either the Tartars or
the great Cham: And have hereby obtained great victories and triumphs as well
against the Turks as the Tartars by the exceadyng multitude of their horsemen
and continual experience in wars. At such time as The Emperor Maximilian made
a league with them, they kept war against the king of Polonie. Gunnes.
They use not only bows and darts after the manner of the Parthians, but have
also the use of gunnes as we have. And to be brief, only the Moscouites may
seem that nation which has not felt the commodities of peace: On^y the
moscouites have not felt the commodities of peace.
In so much that if their region were not strongely defended by the nature of
the place being impreignable, it had or now been often times conquered. Their
language agrees much with the toonge of the Bohemians, Croatians, and
Sclauons: so that the Sclauon does plainly understand the Moscouite, Their
language.
although the Moscouian toonge be a more rude and hard phrase of speech. The
historiographers write that the Sclauons toonge took the name of the confusion
which was in Babell in the time of that stowt hunter Nemroth of whom mention
is made in the Genesis. But I can not enowgh marueyle at this thing, that
whereas between Dalmatia (now cauled Sclauonia) and Moscouia, Dalmatia.
both the Pannonies are situate, Pannonia.
yet this notwithstanding, the Hungarians toonge nothing agrees with the
Mosc^uites. hungary.
Whereby we may coniec^ure that the e^at^ons were sumtymes divided by legions,
Their original.
and that they came out of Dalmatia thither: which thing also Uolateranus
affirms, saying that the language of the Ruthenians (which are the
Moscouites) is Semid^lmatic^ (that is) half Sclauone. The Sclauo^ t^^nge
reaches far.
How so ever it be, this is certain that the ohemians, Croatians, Sclau^ns,
and Mo^couites, agree in language as we perceived by thinterpretours which
yowre majesty had then in yowre court. For whereas the said interpretours
were borne among the Croatians and Sclauons and none of them had ever been in
Moscouia, or before that time had any conversation with them, yet did they
well vnd^rstande the ambassadors words.

There are in Moscouia, wooddes of exceadynge byggenesse, in the which black
woolues and white bears are hunted. Great woods white bears and black
woo^ues.
The cause whereof may be thextreme could of the north, which does greatly
alter the complexions of beasts, and is the mother of whytenesse as the
Philosophers affirm. They have also great plenty of bees, whereby they have
such abundaunce of honey and wax that it is with them of smaul price. Abundance
of honey and wax.
When the commodity of their country is neglected by reason of long wars,
their chief advantage whereby they have all things necessary toward their
living, is the gains which they have by their rych furs, Rych furs.
as Sables, Marternes, Their manner of bargenyng
Luzernes, most white armyns, and such other which they sell to merchants of
diverse countries. They bye and sell with simple faith of words exchaungynge
ware for ware withowt any curious bonds or cautels. And albeit they have the
use of both gold and silver monyes, yet do they for the most part exchange
their furs for fruits and other things necessary to manteine their life.
Rude and wild people.
There are also sum people under the dominion of this Emperor, which have
neither wine nor wheat, but live onl^ by flesh and milk as do the wild
Tartars their bortherers which dwell in wods by the coasts of the frosen sea.
Tartares.
These people are brutysshe, and live in manner like wild beasts. But they of
the city of Mosca and Nouigrade, and other cities, are civil people: Civil
people in cities.
and agree with us in eating of fysshe and flesh althowgh their manner of
coquerie is in many things differynge from owres. Uolaterane writes that the
Ruthenians use money uncoined. Their money
And inquirynge further, I was informed that the money of Hungary is much
current with them. But this is chiefly to be considered, They e^brase the
Christian faith which they received of the Apostles.
that they imbrase the Christian faith which they affirm to have been preached
to them first by saint Andrewe thappostle and broother to Simon Peter. Such
doctrine also as under Constanstine the great, in the year.CCC.xviii. was
concluded in the first general counsel holden in the city of Nicene in
Bithynia, The counsel of Nicene.
and there determined by.CCC.xviii. bysshoppes, and also such as has been
written and tawght by the Greek doctoures Basilius Magnus and Chrisostomus,
Basilius Magnus.
Chrisostomus
they believe to be so holy, firm and sincere, that they think it no more
lawful one hear to transgress or go back from the same, then from the
gospel of Christ. For their constancy and modesty is such, Their consta^cie
in their religion.
that no man dare caul those things into question which have once been decised
by holy fathers in their general counsels. They do therefore with a more
constante mind persevere in their first faith which they received of saint
Andrewe thappostle and his successors and holy fathers, that do many of us
being divided into scismes and sects which thing never chances among
them. The bysshoppes define controversies in religion.
But if any difficulty chance to rise as touching the faith or custom of
religion, all is referred to the archbyshoppe and other bishops as to be
defined by their spirit. Their bishops.
not permyttinge any judgment to the inconstant and ignorant people. Their
archebyshoppe is residente in the city of Mosca, where also Themperoure
keepethe his court. They have likewise diverse other bishops: as one in
Nouigradia, where also Isodorus was bishop under pope Eugenius. They have an
other in Rosciuia, an other in Sus^ali, an other in Otileri: also in Smolne, in
Resan, in Colmum, and in Uolut, all which have their dioces. They acknowleage
their Archebyshop as the chief. The Archebysshoppe.
Before the patriarche of Constantinople was oppressed by the Tiranni of the
Turks, The patriarch of Constantinople.
this Archebysshoppe recognized him as his superioure. In so much that this
duke of Moscouia and Emperor of Russia, not vnmyndefull hereof but a diligente
obseruer of his accustomed religion, does at this day yearly send a
certain stypende in manner of alms to the patriarche of Constantinople, A
notable exemple of a Christian prince.
that he may with more quiet mind look for the end of this his Egiptian
servitude until it shall please almighty god to restore him to his former
church and authority. For he judges it much impiety, if he should now
forsake him whose predicessoures have ruled and governed so many churches, and
of whom the faith and religion of so many regions and provinces have depended.

But to speak briefly of their religion, Their religion.
they agree in many things with us, and in sum things follow the Greeks. They
have munkes and religious men. Not far from the city of Mosca, they have a
great monastery in the which are three hundredth munkes living under the rule
of Basilius Magnus in the which is also the sepulcher of S. Sergius the abbot.
A monastery of.ccc. munkes
They observe their vow of chastity which none may break that have once
professed. Yet such as have married virgins of good fame, may be admitted to
thorder of presthod, but may never be a munke. The prestes and bishops which
are admitted to orders unmarried, Priests.
may never after be married: nor yet such as have wives, mary ageine when they
are dead, but live in perpetual chastity. Such as commit adultery or
fornication, are grievously punysshed by the bysshoppes and deprived of the
benefices. Mass.
They celebrate mass after the manner of the Greeks which differs from owres
in diverse things, A mystery.
as in fermented bread after the manner of the Greeks. They put in the
chalesse as much water as red wine, which water they use to heat, because
(not withowt a great mystery) there isshewed forth of the side of owre lord,
both blud and water, which we ought by good reason to think was not withowt
heat: for else should it scarsely have been judged for a miracle. The primative
church.
In fine, they affirm that all their customs and rytes are according to
thinstitutions of the primatyue church and the doctrine of Basilius Magnus, and
Chrisostomus. A strange custom.
In this thing they dyffer greatly from us, that they minister the communion
to young children of three years of age, which they do with fermented bread
dipte in a sponefull of wine, and give it them for the body and bludde of
Christ.

A brief description of Moscouia after the later writers, as Sebastian Munster
and Iacobus Bastaldus.
THe province of Moscouia, is so named by the river Mosco which passes by the
metrapolitane city of Moscouia cauled Mosca by the name of the river Mosco.
This province was cauled of the owlde writers, Sarmatia Asiatica. Sarmatia
asiatica.
The bortherers or confines to the Moscouians on the one side toward the East,
are the Tartars cauled Nogai, and the Scianbanians, with the Zagatians. Toward
the West, the provinces of Liuonia and Lituania. Toward the South, the river
of Tanais and the people confinyng with the river Uolga, cauled of the owld
writers Rha. And toward the North, the Ocean sea cauled the Scythian sea, The
Scythian Ocean.
and the region of Lapponia. Moscouia is in manner all plain and full of
marysshes, wooddes, and many very great ryuers whereof the river of Uolga is the
principal. The river or Uolga.
Sum caul this Ledyl, as the owld autours named it Rha. It begins at the
great lake cauled Lacus Albus (that is) the white lake and runs into the sea
of Bachau, Lacus albus.
named of the aunciente writers, the sea Caspium or Hircanum. The Caspian sea.
Under the dominion of Moscouia, are certain regions and dukedoomes: as Alba
Russia (that is white Russia. Also Colmogora, Plesconia, Basrida, Nouogardia,
with also many places of the Tartars which are subject to the duke of
Moscouia. The chief cities of Moscouia, Their chief cities.
are Mosca, Plesconia, Nouogardia, Colmogora, Otogeria, Uiatra, Smolenser,
Percassauia, Cologna, Uolodemaria, Roslauia, and Cassam. The people of Moscouia
are Christians, and have great abundaunce of honey and wax: also rich furs,
as Sabels, Marternes, Foynes, Calaber, and diverse other. All the Tartars which
inhabit toward the East beyond the river of Uolga, The wild T^rtars.
have no dwelling places, nor yet cities or castles. But carry about with them
certain carts or wagens covered with beasts hydes, under the which they
rest, as we do in owre houses.

They remove together in great companies which they caul Hordas. hordas.
They are warlike people and good horsemen, and are all Macometistes.

Sebastian Munster in his book of Uniuersall Cosmographie, writes that the
city of Mosca or Moscouia contains in circuit.xiiii. miles, The bygnes of
the city of Moscouia.
and that it is twyse as bygge as the city of Praga in Bohemie. Of the
country of Moscouia, bisyde other provinces subject to the same, he writes
thus. It extends in largeness four hundredth miles, and is rich in silver.
Silver.
It is lawful for no man to go out of the realm or coome in withowt the dukes
letters. The region of Moscouia.
It is plain without mountains, and full of wooddes and marysshes. The beasts
there by reason of the could, Beasts.
are less then in other countries more southwarde. In the myddest of the city
of Mosca being situate in a plain, there is a castle with.xvii. towers and
three bulwarks so strong and fair, A fair and strong castle in the city
of Mo^ca.
that the like are scarsely seen in any other place. There are also in the
castle xvi. churches, and three very large courts in the which the noble men
of the court have their lodgings. The dukes pallaice is builded after the
manner of the Italian buyldyng, The dukes pallaice.
and very fair, but not great. Their drink is mede and beer as is the manner
of the most part of the people that inhabit the North parts of the woorlde.
Their drink
They are exceadyngely given to droonkennesse. They are given to drunkenness.
Yet (as sum say) the princes of the land are prohibit in peine of death to
abstain from such strong drinks as are of force to inebriate, except at
certain times when license is granted them, as twyse or thryse in the year.
They plowe the grownde with horses and plowes of woodde. Their corn and other
grain by reason of long could, Corn and grain.
do seldom wax ripe on the ground by reason whereof they are sumtimes
enforced to ripe and dry them in their stooues and hot houses, Stoues.
and then grynd the^. They lack wine and oil. Moscouia is extended unto
Iurham and Corelia which are in Scythia. The famous river of Tanais, The famous
river of Tanais.
the Moscouites caul Don, having his sprynges and original in Moscouia in the
dukedom of Rezense. It ryseth out of a grownde that is plain, baren, muddy,
full of marysshes and wooddes. And where it proceadeth toward the East to the
mountains of Scithia and Tartarie, it bends to the south: and coming to the
marysshes of Meotis it fauleth into them. The marysshes of Meotis.
The river of Uolga (sumetyme cauled Rha, Uolga.
and now cauled of the Tartars Edel) runs toward the north certain miles,
to whom is joined the river Occa or Ocha, Ocha.
flowynge out of Moscouia, and then bendynge into the South and increa^ed with
many other ryuers, fauleth into the sea Euxinum, The sea Euxinum.
which divides Europe and Asia.

The woodde or forest cauled Hircania sylua, occupie^h a small portion o^
Moscouia. Yet is it sumwhere inhabited, The forest of hircania.
and by the long labor of men made thinner and barer of trees. In that part
that lies toward Prussia, is a kind of great and fierce bulls cauled Uri
or Bisontes, Uri.
as writes Paulus Iouius. There are also Alces much like unto har^es, Alces.
with long snoutes of flesh and long legs withowt any bowinge of their
houx or pasternes. These beasts, the Moscouites caul Lozzi, and the Almaynes
Helenes. The iornaye that is between Ulna of Lituania by Smolense to Mosca, is
trauayled in winter on sleades by the snow congeled by long froste, They
trauayl in winter on sleades.
and made very slypperye and compacte like Ise by reason of much wearynge and
treading, by means whereof this vyage is performed with incredible celeritie.
But in the summer, the plain countries can not be overcome with out
difficulte labor. For when the snow begins to be dissolved by continual
heat, Causeys of timber.
it cause^h marysshes and quamyres inextricable and dangerous both for horse
and man, were it not for certain causeyes made of timber with in manner
infinite labor. Trees and fruits.
The region of Moscouia (as I have said) bears neither vynes nor olyue trees,
nor yet any other trees that bear any apples or fruits of very pleasant or sw^te
savor or taste exc^pt chery trees, for as much as al ^ender fruits and trees
are burnte of the could blastes of the North wind.

Yet do the fields bear all kinds of corn, as wheat and the grain cauled
Siligo, Corn and grain.
whereof the fynest kind of bread is made: also mylle and panyke, which the
Italians caul Melica: Likewise all kinds of pulse, as beans, peason, tares,
and such other. honey in wods and trees.
But their chife harvest consists of honey and wax, forasmuch as the hole
region is replenysshed with fru^e^ull bees which make most sweet honey, not in
the husband men's hyues, but even in holowe trees. And hereby comes it to
pass that both in the wooddes and shalowed launes, are seen many swarms of
bees hanging on the bows of trees, so that it shall not be necessary to
caul them together or charm them with the sound of basens. There are
oftentimes found great masses of honey combs, conserved in trees of the owlde
honey forsaken of bees, forasmuch as the husband men can not seek every tree in
so great and large wooddes: In so much that in the stocks or bodies of
exceadynge great and holowe trees, are sumtymes found great pooles or lakes of
honey. Demetrius thambassadour of the duke of Moscouia whom he sent to the
bishop of Rome not many years sense, Lakes or pooles of honey.
made relation that a husband man of the country not far from the place
where he remained, seekynge in the wooddes for honey, descended into a great
hollow tree full of honey into the which he slypte up to the breast, A man
almost drowned in honey.
and lived there only with honey for the space of two days, caulynge in vain
for help in that deserte of wooddes. And that in fine dispayrynge of help, he
escaped by a marvelous chance, A marvelous chance.
being drawn out by a great bear that descended into the tree, with her
loins downewarde after the manner of men. For when the man (as present
necessity and opportunity served) perceived the bear to be within his
reach, he suddeinly clasped her about the loins with his arms, and with a
terrible cry provoked the beast to enforce her strength to leap out of the
tree, and therewith to draw him out, as it chanced in deed.

These regions abound with bears which every where seek both honey and bees,
Bears feed of honey and bees.
not only herewith to fyl their bellies, but also to help their sight. For
their eyes are oftentimes dulled, and their mouths wounded of the bees: both
which greefes are eased by eating of honey. They have weakest heads, as lions
have strongest. In so much that when (being thereto enforced) they cast them
selves down headelonge from any rocks, they cover their heads with their
fiete, and lie for a time astoonysshed and half dead with knockes. They walk
sumtyme on two fiete, and spoil trees backewarde. Sumtyme also they invade
bulls, Bears invade bulls.
and so hang on them with all their fiete, that they weary the^ with weight. The
bear (as says Pliny) brings forth her birth the.xxx day and oftentimes
two. The ^eares birth.
Their birth is a certain white mass of flesh withowt form and little
bigger then a mouse withowt eyes, and withowt hear, with only the nails or
claws coming forth. But the damme with continual lyckynge, by little and
little figurethe the inform birth. When she enters into the den which
she has chosen, she creeps thither with her belly upward less the place
should be found by the steps of her fiete. The bears den.
And being there delivered of her birth, remaynethe in the same place for the
space of.xiiii. days immovable as writes Aristoteles. They live withowt
meat forty days, and for that time sustain them selves only by lyckynge and
suckyng their right foot. Bears live withowt meat.xl. days.
At the length chaunsynge to find meat, they fill them selves so full, that
they remedy that surfecte by vomyte which they provoke by eating of antes.
Their birth is oppressed with so heavy a sleep for the space of.xiiii. days,
that it can not be raised either with prickinge or wounds, The sleep of
bears.
and in the mean time grow exceadynge fat. After.xiiii. days they wake from
sleep, and begin to lick and suck the soles of their fore fiete and live
thereby for a space: Nor yet is it apparent that they live by any other meat
until the spring time of the year. At which time beginning to run
abroad, they feed of the tender buds and young sprigges or branches of
trees, and other herbs correspondent to their lyppes.

Before five hundredth years, the Moscouites honored the gods of the
gentyles: The religion of the Moscouites.
And then first received the Christian faith when the bysshoppes of Grecia
began to descent from the church of the Latins: and therefore received the
rites of the Greeks. They minister the sacrament with fermented bread under
both kinds: And think that the souls of dead men are not helped with the
suffragies of priests, nor yet by the devotion of their friends or kinsfolks:
Also that the place of Purgatory is a fable. In the time of the divine
service, the history of the miracles of Christ and the Epistels of saint
Paul are rehearsed out of the pulpitte. Beyond Moscouia, are many people
which they caul Scythians, and are partly subject to the Prince of
Moscouia. The Scythians subject to the duke of Moscouia.
These are they which duke Iuan subdued, as are the people of Perm, Baskird,
Czriremissa, Iuhra, Corela, and Permska. These people were Idolatours before
the duke compelled them to baptism, and appointed a bishop over them named
Steven, whom the Barbarians after the departure of the duke, fleyde alive and
slew. But the duke returnyng shortly after, afflicted them sore and assigned
them a new bishop.

It is here also to be noted that the owlde Cosmographers feigned that in these
regions toward the North pole, there should be certain great mountains
which they cauled Ripheos and Hyperboreos, which nevertheless are not found
in nature. It is also a fable that the ryuers of Tanais and Uolham do spring
out of high mountains, It was then an opinion that al rivers spronge owte of
montaines
whereas it is apparent that both these ryuers and many other, have their
original in the playnes.

Next to Moscouia, is the fruitful region of Colmogora throwgh the which
runs the river of Diuidna being the greatest that is known in the north
parts of the world. The fruteful region of Colmogora.
The great river Diuidna.
This river increases at certain times of the year as does the river of
Nilus in Egypt, ouerfloweth the fyeldes round about, and with abundaunce of
fat moisture, resists the couldenesse of the air. Wheat sown in the
ground, grows abundauntly withowt plowynge: wheat withowt plowing
and fearing the new injury of the proud river, spryngeth, grows, and
rypeth with wonderful celeritie of hastynge nature.

Into the river of Diuidna runnethe the river of Iuga: The river of Iuga.
And in the very angle or corner where they meet, is a famous mart town
named Ustiuga, Ustiuga.
being a hundredth and fyftie miles distant from the chief city of Mosca. To
this mart town from the higher countries, are sent the precious furs of
marternes, Furrea.
sables, woolues and such other which are exchaunged for diverse other kinds
of wares and marchaundies. Hitherto Munsterus.

The natural cause of much honey in could regio^s* Gummes and spices in hot
countries.
And forasmuch as many do marvel that such plenty of honey should be in so
cool a country, I have thought good to declare the reason and natural cause
hereof. It is therefore to be considered that like as spices, gums, and
odoriferous fruits are engendered in hot regions by continual heat during all the hole year withowt impression of the mortifying quality of could whereby al
things are constrained as they are dilated by heat, Flowers in could regio^s
even so in could and moist regions (whose moisture is thinner and more
waterysshe then in hot regions) are dowres engendered more abundantly as caused
by impression of less and faynter heat woorkynge in thynne matter of
waterysshe moisture less concocte then the matter of gummes and spices and
other unctuous fruits and trees growing in hot regions. For although (as
Munster says here before) the region of Moscouia bears another vines or
olives, or any other fruits of sweet sauoure by reason of the couldenesse
thereof, nevertheless forasmuch as flowers (whereof honey is chiefly gathered)
may in summer season grow abundantly in the playnes, Flowers of trees.
marysshes, and wooddes, not only on the grownde but also on trees in could
regions, it is agreeable to good reason that great plenty of honye should be
in such regions as abound with flowers, which are brought furthe with the
first degree of heat and first approach of the son, as appears in the
spring time not only by the springinge of flowers in fyeldes and gardeynes,
but also of blossoms of trees spryngynge before the leaves or fruit,
Blossoomes of trees.
as the lyghter and thynner matter first drawn owte with the loweste and
least degree of heat, An exemple of the degrees of heat.
as the like is seen in the art of styllynge whereby all thin and light
moystures are lyfted up by the first degree of the fire: and the heuyest and
thickest moystures are drawn out with more vehement fire. As we may therefore
in this case compare the generation of flowers to the heat of May, The
generation of flowers by moderate heat.
the generation of gummes to the heat of June and spices to the heat of July.
Even so in such could regions whose soommer agrees rather with the temperate
heat and moisture of May then with thextreeme heat of the other months,
that heat is more apt to bring forth abundance of flowers as things caused
by moderate heat, as plainly appears by their taste and sauoure in which is
no sharp quality of heat either bytynge the toonge or offendyng the head as
is in spices, gummes, and fruits of hot regions. And as in could and plain
regions, moderate heat with abundance of moisture, are causes of the
generation of flowers (as I have said) so likewise the length of the days and
shortness and warmenesse of the nyghtes in summer season in such could
reg^ons, Long days and short nyghtes.
is a great help herunto. Cardanus writes in his book De Plantis, that
bramble and fearne grow not but in could regions, Bramble and fern.
as does wheat in temperate regions. And that spices and hot seeds, Spices.
can not grow in could regions, forasmuch as being of thin substance,
they should soon be mortified and extinct by excessive could. For (as he
says) nothing can concocte, ripe, and attenuate the substance of fruits with
out the help of air agreeable to the natures of such things as are brought
forth in the same, althowgh it may do this in roots. But in manner all
flowers are of sweet savor, The sauoure o^ flowers.
forasmuch as the moisture that is in them, being thin and but little, is by
mean heat soon and easily concocte or made ripe. Such also as are soon
ripe, are soon rotten according to the proverb.

Pliny, althowgh in the.xi. book of his natural history. Cap. viii. he
writes that honey is gathered of the flowers of all trees and settes or
plants, what pliny writes of honey.
except sorell and the herb cauled Chenopode (which sum caul goose foot)
yet he affirms that it descends from the air: for in the.xii. chapyture of
the same book, he writes thus.

Thus coommeth from the air at the rysynge of certain stars, and especially
at the rysynge of Sirius, Serius is otherwise cauled Canicula, this is the
dog, of whom the canicular days have their name.
and not before the rysyng of Vergiliae (which are the seven stars cauled
Pleiades) in the spring of the day. For then at the morning spring, the
leaves of trees are found moist with a fat dew: In so much that such as have
bynne abroad under the firmamente at that time, have their apparel anointed
with lyquoure and the hear of their headde clammy. And whether this be the
swette of heaven, what is honey
or as it were a certain spettyl of the star^es, either the iuise of the air
pourgynge it self, I would it were pure, how honey is corrupted.
liquide, and simple of his own nature as it first fauleth from above. ^ut
now descendyng so far, and infected not only with such unclean vapoures and
exhalations, as it meteth with by the way, but afterward also corrupted by the
leaves of trees, herbs, and flowers of sundry tastes and qualities, and
likewise as well in stomachs of the bees (for they vomit it at their mouths)
as also by long reserving the same in hiues, it nevertheless reteyneth a
great part of the heavenly nature. etc. Again in the.xiiii. chapiture of the
same book, he wrytethe that in certain regions toward the north, honey of
great quantity in North regio^s
as in sum places of Germany, honey is found in such quantity that there have
bynne seen honey combs of eight foot long, and black in the holowe part.
By the which words of Pliny, and by the principles of natural philosophy,
it does appear that abundaunce of honey should chiefly be engendered in such
regions where the heat of soommer is temperate and continual as well by night
as by day as it is not in hot regions where the nyghtes be long and could
as is declared in the Decades. hot nyghtes in could regions.
For like as such things as are fined by continual heat, mouynge, and
circulation, A similitude.
are hyndered by refrigeration or could (as appears in the art of styllynge
and hatchynge of eggs) even so by the action of temperate and continual heat
withowt interposition of contrary and mortifyinge quality, crude things are
in short time made ripe, sower made sweet, thick made thin, heavy made
light, gross made subtyle, hard made soft, dead made living, and in fine
bodies made spirits, Natural heat does subtyle and digest all things.
as manifestly appears in the marvelous work of dygestion of living
beasts, whereby the finest part of their nurisshement is turned into bludde,
and the finest of that bludde converted into spirits, as the like is also
seen in the nurysshement of trees, plants, and herbs, and all other things
that grow on the ground, all which are moved, digested, subtiliate,
attenuate, ryped, and made sweet by the action of this continual heat whereof
I have spoken. To conclude therefore, if honey be either the sweet of the
stars, or the iuise of the air pourginge it self (as pliny writes) or
other wise engendered of subtyle and fine vapoures rysinge from the earth, and
concocte or digested in the air by the said continual and moderate heat,
Subtyle vapors digested by heat
it may seem by good reason that the same s^ulde be engendered in soommer
season more abundantly in could regions then in hot, for the causes
aforesaid. And that it may by authority and reason more manifestlye appear
both that the heat of soommer in could regions is continual (as I have said)
and also that the could in winter is not there so intolerable to
thinhabitauntes of those regions as other do think, Could regio^s
I have though^ good for the better declaration hereof to add hereunto what I
have gathered out of the book of Ziglerus written of the north regions.
Ziglerus.


Of the North regions and of the moderate and continual heat in could
regions as well in the night as in the day in soommer season: Also how those
regions are habitable to thinhabitauntes of the same, contrary to thoppinion of
the owlde writers.
OF this matter, Ziglerus in his book of the North regions in the description
of Scondia writes as follows. Ziglerus.


We will entreat of this matter, not as putting the same in question as did
the owld writers, nor gatherynge judgment deducted of reasons in way of
argument, forasmuch as we are already more certain by history that these
could regions are inhabited. We will first therefore show by natural reason
and by consideration of the sphere, declare how by the help of man and art,
could regions are inhabited withowt damage or destruction of living beasts:
And will first speak of the quality of summer, The quality of soomer in
could regio^s.
declarynge how it is there augmented Yet intend I not to comprehend all
that may be said in this matter, but only rehearse such reasons and
similitudes as are most apparent and easy to be understood.

In such regions therefore, as are extended from the burnt line or Equinoctial
toward the north, as much as the son rysethe higher over them, The course
of the son.
so much are they the more burnte with heat, as Africa, because it ryseth
highest over them as they are nearest to the Equinoctial: and taryinge with
them so much the shorter time causes shorter days, with longer and coulder
nyghtes to restore the damage of the day past by reason of the moisture
consumed by vapor. Uapours.
But in such regions over the which the son ryseth lower (as in Sarmatia) it
remains there the longer in the day, and causes so much the shorter and
warmer nyghtes, Short and Warm nyghtes.
as reteynynge warm vapoures of the day past, which vapors help the work
of the day. I speak as I have found by experience, says Upsaliensis. For I
have felt the summer nyghtes scarsely tolerable for heat in Gothlande,
Gothlande
whereas I felt them could in Rome.

This benefit of thincrease of the day, does augment so much the more in
could regions as they are nearer the poles: and ceaceth not until it coome
directly over the center or point of the ares or axceltree of the world,
where the son being at the highest in summer, One day of.vi months.
is eleuate about.xxiiii. degrees: In which regions, one continual day
consists of.vi. months from the spring time by the standing of the soonne
(cauled Solstitium) in the sign of Cancer to Autumn. The soonne therefore,
withowt any offense of the night, gives his influence upon those lands with
heat that never ceasethe during that time, which makes to the great increase
of soommer by reason of continuance. how the summer is increased in could
regio^s.
We have now therefore thought good to gather by a certain conjecture how
greatly we think the soommer to be increased hereby.

We have before declared how high the soonne is eleuate over the regions
that are under the poles at the stay of the soonne: And so many parts is it
eleuate in Rome at the stay of the soonne in winter (that is) at the shortest
day in the year. Rome.
But here, in the mydde winter, the soonne at noone tide is beneficial, and
brings forth flowers, roses, and ielefloures. I have gathered sum in winter
in the month of December, not procured at home by humane art, but growinge ^n
open gardenes in manner in every bed under the bare heaven, browght forth
only by the soonne. But this benignity of the soonne, Could nights in hot
regio^s.
continues not past five hours in the natural day, forasmuch as thoperation
thereof is extinct by the couldenesse of the night following. But if this
benefit might be received withowt hinderaunce of the night, as it is under
the poles, and so continue many months in hot regions unto winter, it should
suerlye bring forth many wonderful things, if moisture failed not. And
by this condition thus propounded, we may well conceive that the Roman
winter, The Roman^ winter.
althowgh it be not hot, yet to be equal in heat to the full spring time in
the same city during the time of the said five hours. And thus by a
similitude of the height of the soonne under both places, and of the known
quality of the Roman heaven, and by thaccesse of the soonne to such places
where the longest day continues certain months, we may gather that
soommer in places under the pole, is like unto and equal with the full Roman
spring.

But the more difficulte question, is of the time of the.vi moonethes in the
which the soonne leaves those regions, One night of vi. months
and goth by the contrary or ouerthwarte circle toward the south in winter.
Objections.
For they say that at that time, those regions are deformed with horrible
darkness and nyghtes not increased, which may be the cause that beasts can
not seek their food. And that also the could should then be in^ollerable: by
which double euyls all things constrained should dye, so that no beast were
able to abide thiniuries of winter and famen insuinge thereof: but that all
beasts should perysshe before the summer following, when they should bring
forth their brood or succession: And that for these causes, the said could
clime should be perpetually desolate and uninhabitable. To al which objections,
we answer in this manner

As touching the nyghtes not increased, I say, that it was not convenient to
assume that for any reason. For not as the soonne fauleth, so suddeynly comes
the dark night but that the evening does substitute and prolonge the day
long after, The twylyghtes.
as also the day spring or dawning of the day gives a certain light before
the rysinge of the soonne: After the which, the residue of the night that
receaueth no light by the said evening and morning twilightes, is
accomplysshed by the light of the moon, The light of the moon.
so that the nyghtes are seldom vnaugmented. Let this be an exemple proved by
owre temperate regions, whereby we may understand the condition of the night
under the pole. ^he might under the pole.
Therefore even there also the twilightes help the night a long time, as we
will more presently demonstrate. It is approved by the Astronomers, that the
soonne descendynge from the highest half sphere by xviii. paralels of the
under horizon, makethe an end of the twylight, A demonstration.
so that at the length the dark night succedeth: And that the soonne
approchynge, and rysynge above the highest half sphere by as many paralels,
does diminysshe the night and increase the twylyght. Again, by the position
or placeinge of the sphere under the pole, the same is the horizontall that is
the Equinoctial. Those paralelles therefore that are paralels to the
horizontal line, are also paralels to the Equinoctial. So that the soonne
descendynge there under the horizon, does not bring dark nyghtes to those
regions until it coomme to the paralele distant.xviii. parts from the
Equinoctial.

Other demonstrations hereof are made by certain fygures of Astronomy, which
I would have added hereunto but that I could not get the same graven or
cut.

During the time of these said six moonethes of darkness under the pole,
the night is destitute of the benefit of the soonne and the said twylyghtes,
only for the space of three moonethes, in the which the soonne goes and
returns by the portion of the overthwart circle. But yet neither this time of
three moonethes is withowt remedy from heaven. For the moon with her full
globe increased in light, The Moon.
has access at that time, and illuminateth the moonethes lacking light,
every one by them selves, half the course of the moonethe: by whose benefit
it coommeth to pass that the night, named as vnaugment^d, possesses those
regions no longer then one mooneth and a half, neither that continually or al
at one time: but this also divided into three sorts of shorter nyghtes, of the
which every one endures for the space of two weeks, and are illuminate of
the moon accordyngly. And this is the reason conceived of the pour of the
sphere whereby we testify that the summers and nyghtes under the pole, are
tolerable to living beasts.

But we will now declare by other remedies of nature and art, Remedies of
nature and art.
that this could so greatly feared, is more remiss and tolerable then owre
opinion: so that compared to the nature of such beasts as live there, it may
be abydden. And there is no doubt but there are autours of more antiquity
then that age in the which any thing was exactly known or discovered of the
north regions. The owlde writers therefore persuaded only by naked conjecture,
did gather what they might determine of those places: Or rather by the
estimation of heaven, the which, because they felt it to be hardely
tolerable to them selves, and less to men borne in the clyme of Egypt and
Grecia, took thereby an argument of the hole habitable earth. The history of
Strabo is known, that a pot of brass which was broken in sunder with frosen
water, A brazen pot broken with frost.
was brought from Pontus and showed in Delphis in token of a grievous winter.
Here therefore, they that so greatly feared the winter (such as chances to the
earth under the xlviii. paralele) and therefore consecrated that broken pot to
the temple of Apollo, what could such men trewly define upon regions so far
withowt that paralele, whether they were inhabited or not? But such as followed
these, being contented with thinuentions of the owlde autours, and borne in
manner under the same quality of heaven, persisted wyllyngly in the same
opinion, with more confidence then consideration of the things whereof we
now entreat: so lightly was that opinion received as touching the uninhabitable
clime under the poles. But we with better confidence and faith (forasmuch as
we are not instructed with conjectures) intend to stand against the sentence
of the owld autours: Affirming the north regions within the could clime to be
inhabyted with hearynges, Fysshes of the North seas.
coddes, haddockes, and brettes, tunnyes, and other great fysshes, with
thinfinite number whereof, tables are furnysshed through a great part of
Europe: Al which are taken in the north sea extended beyond owr knoweleage.
The North sea.
This sea at certain times of the year, pours forth his plentifulnesse, or
rather dryueth forth his increase to seek new mansions, and are here taken in
their passage. Furthermore also, even the mouths of the river of Tyber receive
a fysshe as a new gest sent from the north sea. This swamme twyse through
France and twice through Spain: Ouer-passed the Ligurian and Tuscan sea to
communicate her self to the city of Rome. The lakes also and ryuers of those
regions are replenysshed with fysshe: In so much that no pour of could is
able to extinguy^she thincrease of the year folowinge, and the succession
reparable so many hundredth years. And I plainly think, that if it should of
necessity follow, that one of these two elements, The quality of water.
the earth and the water, shuld^ be destructive to living creatures, the
water should chiefly have wrought this effect. But this is found so
tractable, that in the diepe winter, both that increase is brought forth, and
fysshynge is also exercised. The land is likewise inhabited with like
plentifulnesse. The land
But that we wander not to far: Let the faith hereof rest in thexposition
following, wherein we intend to declare how by the pour of nature and industry
of man, this commodity may coomme to pass. Therefore as touching nature, we
suppose that the divine providence has made nothing uncommunicable, The
divine providence in moderatynge the elements
but to have given such order to all things whereby every thing may be
tolerable to the next. The extremeties of the elements consent with their
next. The air is gross about the earth and water: But thin and botte about
the fire. By this providence of nature, the uttermost sea is very salt. The
nature of the sea.
And salt (as witnesses Pliny) yeldeth the farnesse of oil. But oil, by a
certain native heat, is of property agreeable to fire. The sea then, being
all of such quality, Salt.
pours forth it self far upon thextreme lands, whereby by reason of the
saltenesse thereof, it moves and stereth up generatiue heat, Generatiue heat.
as by fatness it noryssheth the fecunditie of things generate. It gives
this frutfulnes to the earth at certain fluds, although the earth also it
self, have in his inner bowels the same lively and nurysshynge heat, whereby
not only the dens, caves and holowe places, Owtwarde could is cause of
inward heat.
but also sprynges of water are made warm: And this so much the more, in how
much the winter is more vehement. This thing does more appear by this
exemple, that the mountains of Norway and Suethlande are fruteful of metals,
in the which, silver and copper are concocte and molten into veins, which can
scarsely be doonne in fornaces. By this reason also, the vapors and hot
exhalations perceinge the earth and the waters, Uapours and exhalations.
and throwghe both those natures breathynge forth into the air, tempereth the
quality of heaven and makes it tolerable to beasts, as witnesses the huge
byggenesse of the whales in those seas, whales.
with the strength of body and long life of such beasts as live on the
land: Beasts.
which thing could not be, except all things were there commodiously
nurysshed by the benefit of the heaven and the air. For nothing that in the
time of increase is hyndered by any injury, or that is evil fed all the
time it lives, can prosper well. hereby may be considered the cause of the
death of owr men that sail dir^ctly to Guinea.
Neither are such things as live there, offended with their natural winter as
thowgh an Egiptian or Ethiopian were suddeynly conveyed into those could
regions. For they were in long time by little and little browght first
acquaynted with the nature of that heaven, as may be proved both by the life of
man and by the history of holy scripture. They that were led from Mesopotania,
and that famous tower of Babylon toward the north parts of the world in the
first dispertion of nations, did not immediately pass to thextreme bounds, No
passage from one extremity to another but by a mean.
but planted their habitations first under a myddle heaven between both, as in
Thracia and Pontus, where their posterity was accustomed the better to
sustain the rygoure of Scythia and Lanais, as he (...) at comes from winter
to soommer, may the better after abide Ise and snow being first hardened
thereto by the frostes of Autumn. In like manner mortal men, accustomed to
bear the hardenesse of places next unto them, were thereby at the length more
confirmed to sustain the extremes. And here also, if any sharpness remain
that may seem intolerable, nature has provided for the same with other
remedies. For the land and sea, has given unto beasts, diepe and large
caves, dens, Caves and dens.
and other holowe places and secreate corners in mountains and rocks both on
the land and by the sea banks, in the which are ever contained warm vapoures
so much the more intent and vehement, in how much they are the more
constrained by extreme could Nature has also given valleys diuerted and
defended from the north wyndes. Ualleys.
She has likewise covered beasts with hear so much the thicker in how
much the vehemency of could is greater: by reason whereof the best and rychest
furs are browght from those regions, The best furs.
as Sables whose price is grown to great excess next unto gold and precious
stones, Sables.
and are esteemed princely ornaments. The beasts that bear these furs, are
hunted chiefly in winter (which thing is more strange) because their hear
is then thicker and cleaves faster to the skyn. How greauous then shall we
think the winter to be there where this little beast lives so well, and
where the hunters may search the dens and hauntes of such beasts throwghe
the wooddes and snow? Beasts that lie hyd in winter.
But such beasts the condition of whose bodies is so tender that they are not
able to abide thiniurie of could, either lie hid in winter, or change their
habitation, as do certain beasts also in owre clime. Nature has furthermore
given remedy to man both by art and industry to defend him self both a
broad and at home. Abroad, with a thick vesture, and the same well dowbeled.
At home, with large fyers on harthes, chymyneys, and in stooues for the day,
with close chambers, and couches, soft and warm beds for the night: by
which remedies they mirigate the winters which seem rigorous to strangers,
All beasts have the nature of the place where they are engendere^
althowghe they are to thinhabitauntes more tolerable then owre opinion, as in
deed by the first natural mixture or composition of their bodies, such things
are agreeable to them as seem very hard to other. The lion in Affrike and the
bear in Sarmatia, are fierce as in their present strength and vigoure: but
translated into a contrary heaven, are of less strength and courage. The foul
cauled Ciconia (which sum think to be the storke) does not tarry the winter:
yet do the cranes coomme at that time. The Scythian will accuse the Roman
heaven as induccinge fevers, whereas nevertheless there is none more holsoome.
what exercise may do.
Such as have been tenderly browght up, if they coomme suddenly in to the camp,
can not away with hunger, watchynge, heat, passages throwgh ryuers, ba^tayles,
sieges, and assaults. But the owld soldier exercised in the wars, uses
these as meditations of the field, as hardened thereto by long experience. He
that has been accustomed to the shadow of the city, and will attempt the
saying of the poet Uirgil, Nudus ara, sere nudus, that is, naked and bare
withowt house and home, shall to his perell make an end of the verse, Use
makes masteries.
H^bebis frigora febrem (that is) he shall have the could ague. Such things
therefore as seem hard unto us, being accustomed by little and little,
becomme more tolerable: In so much that this exercise of su^feraunce by such
degrees, does oftentimes grow to prodigious effects fact beyond owre
expectation. And thus we seem to have made sufficient demonstration, by
heaven, nature, and art, whereby it may appear that no part of the land or sea
is denied to living creatures. The reader may also perceive how large matter
of reasons and exemples may be opened for the declarynge of owre opinion
wherein we rest. Let the^fore thautoritie of the ancient autours give place,
and the consent of the new writers agree to this hystory, not as now at the
length comprehend^d (whereas before many hundredth years Germany and Scondia
had intercourse of, Scondia.
marchaund^es not severed by the large goulfe of Bothia* but as now by owr
commentaries brought to light. And hau^ng said has much in manner of a preface,
we w^ll now proceed to write of the north regions.

Schondia.
SChondia, S^hondama, or Schondenmarchia, is as much to say as fair Dania or
fair Denmark. Scone. is fair in the duch toonge.
Pliny in one place, names it Scandia, and in an other, Scandinaui^ if there
be no fauce in the templers.

It was named Schondia, by reason of the fayrenesse and true fullness thereof.
And this as well for that in beneficial heaven, fertility of gronnde, The
fertility of ^condia.
commodite of havens and mart towns, abundaunce of ryuers and fysshe, plenty
of beasts, great quantity of metal, as gold, silver, copper, and lead,
diligent culturynge the ground, with towns and cities well inhabited and
governed by civil laws, it gyuethe place to none other fortunate region. This
was in manner unknown to the owlde Greeks and Latins as may appear by this
argomente that with one consent they affirmed that in these north regions the
could zon^ or clime, was condemned to perpetual snow intolerable to all
living creatures. For few of the^ have made mention hereof as to be inhabited.
Among whom Pliny as one of the chief, says in his fourth book, that
Schondania is of unknown byggenesse: and only that portion thereof to be known
which is inhabited with the nation of the Hilleui^nes in fifty vyllages.
Neither yet is Eningia less in opinion. he means Diodorus Siculus.
Other more ancient then Pliny, have placed most fortunate regions, with men
of long life (which the Greeks caul Macrobios) and of most innocente
behauour under the tracte of those lands: and that there came from thence to
Delphos, certain religious virginnes with vows and gifts consecrated to
Apollo: And furthermore that that nation observed this institution until the
said virgins were violated of them of whom they were received as strangers.
These are most clear testimonies of Antiquity, both of the greatness of
Schondia, and the people that inhabit the same, althowgh they were sense
unknown, as likewise the Goths departing from these north lands althowghe
they obtained Thempire of the regions abowte the marisshes of Meotis and the
coasts of the sea Euxinus, ^hinuasions of the Goths
with the realm of Denmark (whereof that is thought to be a portion which is
now cauled Transiluania) and the banks of the river of Danubius, ^ransiluania
and in fine invaded the Roman Empire, yet were not the regions well known
from whense they took their original. Therefore like as part of the owlde
writers are insufficient witnesses to testify of owre narrations as touching
these lands unknown to them, Even so the other part which excluded the same
as uninhabitable, are to be convinced least their authority being admitted,
should engender opinions not agreeable or convenient to the nature of places.
Sigismundus Liberus, in his commentaries of Moscouia, writes thus. Scandia or
Scondia, is no Island (as sum have thought) but part of the continente or
firm land of Suetia, which by a long tracte reaches to Gothlande: And that
now the king of Denmark possesses a great part thereof. But whereas the
writers of these things have made Scondia greater then Suetia, and that the
Goths and Lumbardes came from thense, The Goths and Lumbardes.
they seem in my opinion to comprehend these three kyngedomes as it were in
one body, only under the name of Scondia, forasmuch as then, that part of
land that lies between the sea Balthrum (which flows by the coasts of
Finlandia) and the frosen sea, was unknown: And that by reason of so many
marisshes, innumerable ryuers, and intemperatnesse of heaven, it is yet rude
vncultured, and little known. Which thing has been the cause that sum
judged all that was cauled by the name of Scondia, to be one great Island.

Gronlande.
GRonlande is interpreted green land: so cauled for the great increase and
frutefulnesse of pasture. Fruitful pasture.
By reason whereof, what great plenty of cattayle there is, it may hereby
appear that at such time as ships may pass thither they set forth great
heaps of cheese and butter to be sold, whereby we conjecture that the land
is not rowgh with barren mountains. It has two Cathedral Churches under
thordina^ion of Nidrosia. To one of these, was of late years a bishop
appointed only by the title of a suffragane in consideration that while the
metropolitan does neglect the direction of religion for the distance of the
place and difficult navigations, the people is in manner faulne to gentilitie,
Religion neglected.
being of them self of mouable wits and given to magical arts. For it is
said that they (as also the people of Laponia) do raise tempests on the sea
with magical inchauntmentes, Inchaunters
and bring such ships into daungeour as they int^^de to spoil. They use
little ships made of lether, and safe ageynste the brusynge of the sea and
rocks, and with them assail other ships. Peter Martyr of Angletia, writes
in his Decades of the Spanisshe nauigations, that Sebastian Cabote sailing from
England continually toward the north, The vyage of Sebastian Cabote to the
frosen sea
followed that course so far that he chaunsed upon great flakes of Ise in
the mooneth of July: and that diuertynge from thense, he followed the coaste by
the shore bendynge toward the South until he came to the clime of the Island
of Hispaniola above Cuba, an Island of the Canibales. Which narration has given
me occasion to extend Gronlande beyond the promontory or cape of Huitsarch to
the continente or firm land of Lapponia above the castle of Wardhus:
Gronlande.
wardhus.
which thing I did the rather for that the reverend Archebysshoppe of
Nidrosia, constantely affirmed that the sea bendethe there into the form of a
crooked elbowe. It agrees herewith also, that the Lapones consent with them in
the like magical practices and do neither imbrase the Christian religion nor
refuse it: whereby I have thowght this likeness of customs to be between them
because they join together in one continent. Lapponia and Gronlande.
The distance likewise, seems not to disagree. For between both these people,
Schoeni.
the distance is not full two hundredth Sch^ni, every one being a space of
ground conteinyng.lx. furlonges, which make.vii. miles and a half. It
furthermore agrees with this conjecture that Cabote chaunsed into such Ise.
And albeit as touching the mooneth of July, Cabote told me that this Ise is
of fresshe water, and not of the sea.
I will contend it is not well rehearsed, no althowghe he had sailed under the
pole, for such reasons as we have declared before to the contrary,
nevertheless, that at sum time he sailed by Ise, this testifies in that he
sailed not by the main sea, but in places nere unto the land comprehendyng
and imbrasyng the sea in form of a goulfe, A commixtio^ of salt water and
fresshe.
whereas for the same cause, the goulfe of Gothland is frosen because it is
straight and narow, in the which also the little quantity of salt water is
ouercoome by the abundance of fresshe water of many and great ryuers that
faule into the goulfe. But between Norwaye and Islande, The sea between Norway
and Islande.
the sea is not frosen for the contrary cause, forasmuch as the pour of
fresshe water is there ouercomme of thabundance of the salt water. There is a
fame (but of uncertain authority) that the Spanyardes sail at this present
to Gronlande, and to an other land which they caul Terra viridis, Terra
Viridis.
that is, the green land, bringynge from thense such wares as are found in
Gronlande. Toward the north, it reaches to the unknown land under the pole,
from whense also the thieves and robbers of the Pigmei coomme into this land.
Pigme.
Which is an argument that the regions under the pole are inhabited and almost
environed with the sea, as are they which the Cosmographers caul Chersonnesi
or Peninsula (that is) almost Islands.

The description of Gronlande. The description of the East side which lies
toward Norway.
Wardhus castle. 54. 70. 50. Toward the North. 53. 30. 71. 30. The first
extention. 40. 71. 40. The second extention. 28. 72. Huitsarch. promont. 22.
67. The extention. 5. 61. 45.

It is continued from thense by the coasts of the land of Baccallaos.
Baccalaos.
356. 60.

Toward the west and north, it is termined with an unknown end of lands and
seas.

Islande.
ISlande is interpreted the land of Ise, and is cauled of the owlde writers
T^yle. Island cauled Thyle.
It is extended between the south and the north almost two hundredth schoenes in
longitude. Schoeni is lx. furlonges.
It is for the most part full of mountains and vncultured. But in the playnes
it has such fruitful pastures, that they are feign sumtymes to drive the
beasts from their feeding least they should be suffocate with to much
fa^nes. Miracles of nature in Islande.
This Island is famous by the strange miracles of nature, of the which Saxo
Grammaticus in his history of Denmark, and Olanus Gothus in his description
of the n^r^h lands, do make mention. There are in it three mountains of
marvelous height the tops where of are covered with perpetual snow. Three
marvelous mountains.
But the nether parts of them, are of like nature to the mountain Etna in the
Island of Sicilie boiling with continual flames of fire and casting forth
brymstone. One of these is named Helga, helgate.
and the other Mons Cruci^ (that le) the mount of the cross. The third is
named Hecla: hecla.
whose flames neither consume flare or row, matters most apt to take sire,
nor yet are quenched with water. And with like force as the shot of great
artillery is driven forth by violence of fire, even so by the commixtion and
repugnaunce of fire, could, and brymstome, great stones are here thrown into
the air. Nere unto these mostraynes are three chynkes or open places in the
earth of houge byggenesse and such depth (e^pecially at the mount Hecla)
that no sight can attain thereto. Strange vilions.
But to such as look into them, there first appear men as thowgh they were
drowned and yet breathyng forth their sowles: who being exhorted by their
friends to resort to their own, they answer with moornynge voice and
grievous syghes, that they must depart from thense to the mount Hecla, and
therewith suddeynly vanysshe owte of sight. Ise flows about the Island for the
space of seven or eight moonethes, Ise.
making by runnynge together a certain miserable waylinge and gronynge noise
not unlike the voice of man. Purgatory.
Thinhabitauntes think, that in this Ise and the mount Hecla, A strange
thing.
are the places where the evil souls of their people are tormented. If any
man take a great portion of this Ise, and keep it as diligently as may be in
a close vessel or cofer, the same does so vanysshe at the time when the other
Ise about the Island dissolueth, that not so much as one drop of water or Ise
can thereof be found.

Not far from these mountains reachynge toward the sea coasts, are four
sprynges of water of most diverse and contrary nature. Four springs of contrary
nature.
The first, by reason of his perpetual and feruente heat, suddeynely turns
all bodies that are cast therein, into stones, reserving nevertheless their
first form and shape. The second, is of intolerable couldenesse. The third
is sweeter then honey, and most pleasant to quench thyrst. The fourth is
plain poison, pestilent, and deadely. There is furthermore in these sprynges
such abundaunce of brymstone, Abundaunce of brimstone.
that a thousand pound weight thereof is bought for little, as for the tenth
part of a ducate. Their chief wares, are dried fysshe, Dried fysshe
as soles, maidens, playces, salpas stockefysshes, and such other which they
exchange for wheat and such other things as are browght thither from Lubeck
Hamborowe, and Amsterdam. For they have oftentimes such scarsenesse of corn,
Scarsenes of corn.
that they use dried fysshe in the stead of bread, althowgh in soommer the
Island so floryssheth with green and fruitful meadows, that they are feign
sumtimes to drive their beasts from pasture least they should suffocate for
to much fattenesse, as I have said before. They make very good butter, and
apt to be used in matters of physic. There are found diverse kinds of good
hawks, hawks.
as faulcons gerfalcons, lanners, and sperhaukes. Also ravens, crows, bears,
hares, and foxes, both white and black. white raue^s.
They have most swyfte horses: and such as run.xxx. miles continually withowt
rest or bayte. They have many churches: and houses builded of the bones of
whales and other great fysshes. houses of whales bones.
The navigations is not open to this Island but in summer season: and that only
for the space of four moonethes, The navigations to Island
by reason of the could and Ise whereby the passage is stopped. If any strife
or debate arise on the sea among the mariners for the commodity of the haven,
the governor of the place althowgh he have knowleage thereof, yet does he not
punysshe them, forasmuch as it apperteyneth not to his office to decerne such
things as are doonne on the sea, but only on the land. Ships are there
often times in great perell by reason of whales and such other monsters of the
sea, whales.
except the mariners take good heed and keep them far from the ships
with the noise of droommes, and empty barrels cast into the sea. There are
many mynstrels and other that play on instruments, with the sweet noise
whereof, they use to allure fowls and fisshes to their nets and snares. One
thing seruyng for contrary uses
Many also, lie lurkynge in caves and dens to avoid the sharpness of
could, as the Affricanes do the like to defend them selves from the heat. On
the top of a certain mountain cauled Weyszarch, (lyinge between Islande and
Gruntland or Gronlande) is erected a shypmans quadrant of marvelous
byggenesse, A shipmans quadran^.
made by two pirates named Pinnigt and Pothorst in favor of such as sail by
those coasts that they may thereby avoid the dangerous places lyinge toward
Gronland.

The myddest of the Island. 7 0 65 30. The city Harsol. etc. 7 40 60 42.

Laponia.
THe region of Laponia; was so named of the people that inhab^te it. For the
Germayns, caul all such Lapones, as are simple or unapt to things. This
people is of smaule stature, and of such agilitie of body, that having their
quyuers of arrows gerte to them and their bows in their hands, People of
great agilitie.
they can with a leap, cast th^ym selves throwgh a circle or hope of the
diameter of a cubite. They seyght on foot, armed with bows and arrows and
after the manner of the Tartars. They are exercised in hurlynge the darte and
shootynge from their youth: in so much that they give their children no meat
until they hit the mark they shoot at, as did in owlde time thinhabitauntes
of the Islands cauled Bal^ares. They use to make their apparel straight and
close to their boddies that it hinder not their work. A strange apparel.
Their winter vestures are made of the hole skins of seals or bears
artificially wrought and made supple. These they tie with a knotte above their
heads, leaving only two holes open to look through, and have all the
residue of their bodies covered as though they were sowed in sackes, but that
this being adapted to all parts of their bodies, is so made for commodity
and not for a punisshement as the Romans were accustomed to sow paricides in
sackes of lether with a cock, The cause of an owlde error.
an ape, and a serpent, and so to hurl them alive all together into the river
of Tyber. And hereby I think it came to pass that in owlde time it was
rasshely believed that in these regio^s there were men with rowgh and hery
bodies wild beasts, as part made relation throwghe ignorance, part also
taking pleasure in rehearsal of such things as are strange to the hearers.
The Lapones defended by this art and industry, go abroad and withstand the
sharpenes of winter and the north wyndes, with all the injuries of heaven. They
have no houses, but certain tabernacles like tents or hales wherewith they
pa^se from place to place and change their mansions. So do the Tartars.
Sum of them liu^ after the manner of the people of Sarmaria cauled in owlde
time Amaxobii, which used waynes in the stead of houses. They are much given
to hunting: and have such plenty of wild beasts that they kill them in
manner in every place. Plenty of wyld beasts
It is not lawful for a woman to go forth of the tente at that door by the
which her husband went owte on hunting the same day: nor yet to touch
with her hand any part of the beast that is taken until her husband reach
her on the spitte such a portion of flesh as he thinks good. They till not
the ground. The region nuryssheth no kind of serpents: No serpents.
yet are there great and noysoome gnattes. Great gnats,
They take fysshe in great plentie^ by the commodity whereof, they live after
the manner of the Ethiopians cauled Ichthiophagi. For as these dry their fisshe
with fervent heat, so do they dry them with could, and grynde or stamp
them to powder as smaule as meal or flower They have such abundaunce of these
fysshes, Abun^aunce of fysshe.
that they h^ued great plenty thereof in certain store houses to carry them
unto other lands nere about them, as Northbothnia and white Russia. Their
ships are not made with nails, but are tide together and made fast with
cords and wyththes. Ships withowt nails.
With these they sail by the swyft ryuers between the mountains of Laponia,
being naked in summer that they may the better swymme in the time of perell,
and gather together such wares as are in danger to be lost by shipwreck.
Part of them crereise handiecraftes, as imbrotherynge and weauynge of cloth
interlaced with gold and silver. Science honored.
Such as have divised any necessary art, or do increase and amend
thinuentions of other, are openly honored, and rewarded with a vesture, in
the which is imbrothered an argument or token of the thing they devised. And
this remains to the posterity of their famelie in token of their deserts.
They frame ships, build houses, and make diverse sorts of household stuff
artificially, and transporte them to other places near abowte. They bye and
sell both for exchange of wares and for mon^y. Bargeinynge withowt words.
And this only by consent of both parties withowt communicacion: yet not for
lack of wit or for rudeness of manners, but because they have a peculiar
language unknown to their bortherers. It is a valiant nation, and lived long
free, and sustained the wars of Norwaye and Suecia until at the length they
submitted them selves, and paid rich furs for their tribute. They chose
them selves a governor whom they caul a king: But the king of Suetia gives
him authority and administration. Nevertheless, the people in their suits and
doubtful causes, resort to Suecia to have their matters decised.

In their journeys, they go not to any Inn, nor yet enter into any house, but
lie all night under the firmament. They have no horses: No horses.
but in the s^eade of them, they tame certain wyld beasts which they caul
Keen, being of the just byggenesse of a mule, A beast of marvelous strength
and swyftnesse.
wi^lyrowgh hear like an Ass, cloven feet, and bra^nthed hor^es like a
heart, but lower and with fewer antlettes. They will not abide to be rydden.
But when their pestrels or drawing collers are put on them, and they so joined
to the chariotre or sleade, they run in the space of.xxiiii. h^^res, a
hundredth and fifty miles, or.xxx. sch^nos: shat Schoenus is look (...)
Gronland.
The which spare they affirm to change the horizon thryse: The change of the
horizo^.
that is theyse to coome to the furthest sign or mark that they see a far
of. Which doubtless is a token both of the marvelous swiftness and great
strength of these beasts being able to continewe runnynge for so great a
space, in the mean while also spending sumtyme in feeding. I suppose that
this thing was sumewhat known to the owlde writers, although received in
manner by an obscure and doubtful fame. For they also write that certain
Scythians do ride on hearts. The owld autours cauled all the north people
Scythyans.


They neither follow the Christian religion, nor yet refuse it or are offended
therewith as are the Iuwes: but do sum times receive it favorably to gratify
the princes to whom they^ obey. Erasmus lamenteth this in his first book de
ratine conciona^di, where he speaks of the people. cauled pilap^^
And that no more of them imbrase the Christian faith, the fault is sumwhat to
be imputed to the by shoppes and prelates that have either rejected this cure
and charge of instructynge the nation, or su^fered the faith of Christ to be
suffocate even in the first spring. For under the pretense of religion, they
would have advanced their own revenues and ouerburthened the people by an
intolerable exemple, none otherwise here then in all Christendom, which
thing is doubtless the cause of most greuons defections. I hard John a
bishop of Gothlande say thus: We that govern the church of Up^alia, and
have under owre dioce^se a great part of that nation, like as it is not
conueniente to declare many things of owre vigilance and attendaunce over the
flock committed to owre charge, even so absteynynge from myscheuous
covetousness whereby religion is abused for luker, we do in all places owre
diligent endeavor that we minister none occasion whereby this nation as
o^fended by owre ^innes, may be the less willing to embrase the Christian
^ayth. This is the state of the religion among the Lapones: Althowgh of their
own institution and custom received of their predicessours, they are
Idolatours, Idolatry.
honourynge that living thing that they meet first in the morning, for the
god of that day, and diuinynge thereby their good luck or evil. They also
erecte images of stone upon the mountains which they esteem as gods,
attributing to them divine honor. They solemn marriages, and begin the same
with fire and flynte, A mystery of marriage in fire and f^int.
as with a mystery so aptely applied to the image of stone as if it had been
received from the mydde^^e of Grecia. For in that they adhibite a mystery of
fire, as they do not this alone (forasmuch as the Romans observed the same
custom) even so are they herein partly to be commended in that they use the
ceremonies of so noble a people. The mystery of the flinte is no less to be
praised, both forasmuch as this is domestical philosophy, and has also a
nere affinity and signification to these sonemnities. For as the flynt has in
it fire lyinge hid which appears not but by mouynge and force, so is there
a secreate life in both kinds of man and woman which by mutual conjunction
coommethe forth to a living birth. They are furthermore expert inchaunters.
Expert inchauncers.
They tie three knottes on a string hanging at a whippe. When they lose one
of these, they raise tolerable wyndes, When they lose an other, the wind is
more vehement. But by losyng the third, they raise plain tempests as in
owlde time they were accustomed to raise thunder and lyghtnynge. This art do
they use against such as sail by their coasts, and stay or move the ryuers
and seas more or less as they list to show favor or displeasure. They make
also of lead certain short magical darts of the quantity and length of a
finger. Magical darts.
These they throw ageynste such of whom they desire to be revenged, The
canker.
to places never so far distant. They are sumtimes so vexed with the canker
on their arms or legs that in the space of three days they dye throwgh the
vehemency of the pain. The son fauleth very low in these regions: and
prolongeth one continual night for the space of three moonethes in winter, One
night of three moonethes.
during which time they have none other light but like unto the twylyght of
evenings and mornings. This is very clear, but continues but few honres,
and is like the bright shynynge of the moon. Therefore that day that the son
returns to the hemispherie, they keep holy day and make great mirth with
solemn festiuitie. And these are the manners of this nation, not so brutysshe
or saluage as worthy therefore to be cauled Lapones for their unaptness or
simplicity as when they lyned under their own Empire and used no familiarity
or intercourse with other nations and knew not the commodity of their own
things, Rich furs.
neither the price and estimation of their furs in owre regions, by reason
whereof they soulde great plenty of them for sum of owre wares of smaule v^lue.

The hounds or limittes of Laponia (being thextreme land of Scondia known
toward the north pole) are extended toward this part of the North, to the
world yet unknown to us: And furthermore toward the same part of the
uttermost sea, according to this description.

The first coaste, 70 72. The coaste following. 80 7. That that yet follows,
90 70.

From the fysshynge places and store houses of this sea, Plenty of sea fysshe.
they carry forth to Nordbothnia and white Russia, lands confinynge to them,
great plenty of fysshe. Whereby we may conjecture that this sea is extended on
every side toward the North. Toward the weste, it is limited with the most
inward goulfe of at the Castle of Wardhus at the degree. wardhus.
54 70 30.

Toward the Southe, it is lymitted by a line drawn from thense unto the
degree.90 69.

Norwegia or Norway.
NOrdway, is as much to say as the Northwaye. This was sumtyme a florysshynge
kyngedome, whose dominion comprehended Denmark, Friselande and the Islands
far about, until the domestical E^pire wa^ governed by the succession of
inheritance. In the mean time while this gou^rnaunce ceased for lack of dew
issue, it was instituted by consent of the nobility that the kings should be
admitted by election: supposinge that they would with more equity execute that
office forasmuch as they were placed in the same by such authority, and not by
obteynynge the kyngedome by fortune and new advancement. But it came so to
pass, that as every of them excelled in richesse, ambition and favor by
consangiuitie, so were they in greater hope to obtain the kyngedome: And were
by this means divided into factions, kingdoms destroyed by factions.
attemtyng also occasions tinuade foraigne realms whereby they might strengthen
their parties. It is therefore at this present under the dominion of the Danes:
The Dane^
who do not only exact intolerable tributes, but also bring all their riches
and commodities into Denmark, constitutynge the continuance of their
governance in thinfirmitie and poverty of the subjects: which exemple, sum
other princes do follow at this day in the Christian Empire. For after that
the princes had forsaken such virtues as should have shyned in them, as to be
Patres patriae (that is) the fathers of their countries, and that in the place
hereof, only the proud countenance of dominion remained, which opened
licentiousness to thiniuxie of the subjects, this followed thereof, that whereas
the Danes by this occasion had no further trust or aid in the love of the
people, An exemple of tyranni.
they provided for thindempnitie of their own est^te by forcible extenuatinge
the gooddes and pour of them whom they desired to keep in subi^ction. This is
the fortune of Norway, whose edefies, towns, and cities cannot defend their
ancient amplitude and dignity: neither is there any hope of repayrynge their
state. For there are no consultations admitted for the redress of the commonwealth: No man dare show his advice or attempt any thing, uncertain of the
minds and consent of other. To this difficulty, is added the quality of the
place. For the Danes have in their pour all the nauigations of Norway, whereby
it may exercise no trade by sea, neither carry furthe wares to other places. So
that in fine it may seem most unfortunate, The myser^ble state of Norway.
as lacking the favor of heaven, the sea, and the land. From hen^e is
brought into all Europe a fysske of the kinds of them which we caul
haddockes or hakes indurate and dried with could, and beaten with clubbes or
stocks, by reason whereof the Germayns caul them stockefysshe. Stockfysse.
The tak^nge of these, is most commended in January that they may be
sufficiently dried and hardened with could. For such as are taken in the more
temperate months, do corrupt and putrify: And are not meet to be carried
forth.

The description of the west coaste, with the part thereof lyinge most toward
the north.

Wardhus (that is) the watch house, or watch tower.54 70 30. It is a strong
castle or fortress appointed to the Lapones. The coaste following, 48 50 70.
Matthkur. etc.

All the coast from hense, and the places near about unto the degree.45 69.
being sumtyme left desolate by the seditions and destruction of Norway, the
Lapones chose for their habitations, The Lapone^.
as coming to a more beneficial heaven.

From the Castle of Wardhus, unto the degree.40 30 64 10 all the coaste in the
spring time is dangerous to pass, by reason of whales of such huge
byggenesse that sum of them grow to a hundredth cubits. Ships in daung^our
by reason of whales.
For these fysshes at that time of the year resort together for generation.
Such ships as chance to faule either upon their bodies, or into such
whyrlepooles as they make by their vehemen^ motions, are in great perell. The
remedy to avoid this daungiour, is to pour into the sea Castoreum (that is)
oil made of the stones of the beast cauled the Beuer, Castoreum.
mengeled with water. For with this, the hole heard of whales vanyssheth
suddeynely to the bottom of the sea: They make a terrible rorynge: The rorynge
of whales.
and have two breathynge places in the highest part of their forheades,
standing forth right a cubite in length, and are as broad at the ends, being
covered with a skin, through the which they blow waters like showers or
storms of rain. The pricks of their backs, are found containing three else
in circuit, whales salted and reserved.
and every knotte between them, of one elle. They are at the least of.lx.
cubits in length: And are salted and kept in store houses. The greatest are
unprofitable to be eaten by reason of their rank and unsavory taste which can
not be qualified.

Nidrosia standing upon the south side of the sea bank, The city of Nidrosia.
was the chief city and metropolitan church throwgh out all Norway,
Iselande, Gronlande, and the Islands there about. This city was noble at the
first under the ^lorysshing Empire of Norway, conteinynge in circuit.xxiiii.
parysshes, but it is now browght in manner to a village and is cauled in the
Germayne toonge Truthaim, as the house of the Dryides. There remains at this
day a Cathedral church in token of the ancient felicity, A magnificall
church.
being such that in byggenesse and workmanship of wrought stone, the like is
not in all Christendom. The greeses or compass about the altar, was
destroyde by fire, and was repared at the same time that we write this
history. The charge of the reparasion, was esteemed to be seven thousand
crowns: by which smaule portion, an estimate may be made of the excellency
of the hole Church.

The tracte of all the sea coasts Norwaye, is very quyete and meek. The sea
is not frosen. The snowes endure not long. This land has also a peculiar
pestilence which they caul Leem or Lemmer. This is a little four footed
beast abowte the byggenesse of a ra^te with a spotted skin. Noisome beasts
of unknown generation.
These faule upon the ground at certain tempests and suddeyne showers, not
yet known from whense they comme, as whyther they are browght by the wyndes
from remote Islands, or otherwise engendered of thick and feculent clouds.
But this is well known, that as soon as they faule down, green grass and
herbs are found in their bowels not yet digested. They confume all green
things as do locustes: And such as they only byte, wyther and dye. This
pestilence lives as long as it does not taste of the grass newelye
sproonge. They coome together by flocks as do swalowes: And at an ordinary
time, either dye by heaps with great infection of the land (as by whose
corruption the air is made pestiferous and molesteth the Noruegians with
swymmynge in the headde and the iaundies) or are consumed of other beasts
named Lefrat. Toward the East, it is included with in the l^ne that is drawn
by the mountains whose ends or uttermost bounds they are that lie toward
the south above the mouths of the river Trolhetta. But that par^e that lies
toward the north, passes by the castle of Wardhus, wardhus.
and is extended to the unknown land of the Lapones. The unknown land of
the Lapon^s.


The lake cauled Mos, and the Island of Hossuen in the myddest thereof, is in
the degree.45 30 61.

In this lake appears a strange monster: which is, a ^erpent of houge
byggenesse. A ^erpent of houge biggenesse.
And as to all other places of the world, blasynge stars do portende
thalteration and change of things, so does this to Norway. It was see^e of
late (in the year of Christ: M. D. xxii. apperynge far ^boue the water
rowlynge like a great pyller: And was by conjecture far of, esteemed to be
of fifty cubits in length. Shortly after followed the reiectynge of
Christiernus king of Denmark. God warns us by signs of things to coome.
Such other monstrous things are said to be seen in diverse places of the
world. And doubtless except we should think that the divine providence
having mercy upon mortal men, and hereby warning them of their offenses,
does send such strange things (as also blasing stars and armies
feyghtynge in the air, with such other portentous monsters whereof no causes
can be found by natural things) we might else suspecte that such syghtes
were but imaginations of the sense of man deceived.

On the East side, are exceading rowgh montaynes which admit no passage to
Suecia. The sea between Norway and the Islands, is cauled Tialleslund, Euripus,
or the streightes. The Island of Lofoth. whose myddest.42 67 10. Langanas,
whose myddest, 41 67 Uastral, The streightes or boiling sea.
whose myddest.41 30 67 30.

The sea between these three Islands, is cauled Muscostrom (that is) boylynge.
At the flowynge of the sea, it is swalowed into the caves, and is blown out
again at the reflowynge, with no less violence then the streams of ryuers
faule from mountains. This sea is nauigable until it be lower then the
mouths of the rocks. Such as chance into it out of dew time, are carried
headlonge into whyrlepooles The fragmentes of the lost ships, are seldom call
up again. But when they are cast up, they are so bruised and freted ageynste
the rocks, Dangerous places in the sea.
that they seem to be ouergrowne with hoar. This is the pour of nature,
passing the fabulous Simplegades and the fearful Malea, with the dangerous
places of Silla and Caribdis, and all other miracles that nature has wrought
in any other sea hitherto known to man.

The Islands about Norway, are of such frutfull pasture, Frutfull Islands about
Norway.
that they bring not their beasts into the stables before the month of
Noue^ber: And do many places winter the^ abroad.

Suecia, or Suethlande.
Suecia, is a kyngedome rich in gold, silver, Gold and silver.
copper, lead, Iren, fruit, cattayle, and exceadynge increase of fysshe of
the ryuers, lakes, and the sea. And has no less plenty of such wild beasts
as are taken with huntinge.

Toward the West, it is ended with the mountains of Norway from the Castle of
Wardhus unto thend. wardhus castle.
51 63 40 Toward the South, with the line from this end unto the degrees.53.
30. 61. And from thense unto the degrees.61. 60. 30. Above the goulfe of
Suecia, The goulfe of Suecia.
toward the north, with the south end of Lapponia from the castle of Wardhus
unto the end.62. 70. Toward the East, it is ended with the line from this
end unto the degree.63. 69. etc. Stokholme the chief city. The city of
Stockholme.
64. 61. This is the chief mart town of Suecia, and is strongely defended by
art and nature. It is situate in marisshes after the manner of Uenece: and was
therefore cauled Stokholme, forasmuch as being placed in the water, the
fundation is fortified with stocks or piles. The sea enters into it with two
arms or branches of such largenes and depth that ships of great burden and
with main sails may enter by the same with their full freight. This suffered
of late years grievous spoil and destruction to the singular exemple of cruel
hostility: And such, as the like has not bin lightly showed to any other
city received by league and composition.

In all the tract from Scokholme to the lake above the river of Dalekarle, which
is in the degree. Gold in could reg^ons.
56. 30. 63. 50. are mountains frutful of good silver, copper, and lead. They
get great riches by the salmons and plenty of other fysshes which they take
in certain great lakes. Fysshe.


The dukedom of Agermannia, occupies the north side to the consines of
Laponia. This tract is full of wods in the w^iche they hunt the beasts cauled
Uros or Bisontes, which in their toonge they caul Elg, The beast cauled Uro^
or Elg.
(that is) wild asses. These are of such height, that the highest part of
their backs are equal with the measure of a man holding up his arms as high
as he may reach. etc. Upsalia the chief city. Upsalia.
62. 62. 30. here is buried the body of saint Hericus king and martyr.

Copperdalia (that is) the copper valley, Copperdali^.
is a dukedom southwarde from the dukedom of Iemptia. Under this, is the
valient nation of the people cauled Dalekarly.

Oplandia, is a dukedom and the nauil or midst of Scondia. Oplandia,


The city of Pircho, on the north side of the lake of Meler, was once a great
city and able to arm.xiiii. thousand men to the wars: but is now browght
to a vyllage.

All the tracte of Oplandia, has mines of silver, copper, and steel.

Of the Islands and rocks that lie abowte Suecia, the myddest is.67 30 61 30.
These were cauled of the owlde writers Done, the reason of which name remains
to this day. For there are in these innumerable multitudes of birds: Birds.
In so much that thinhabitauntes of the next coaste, sail thither in the
mooneth of May while the birds sit on their eggs: which they steal and
reserve them in salt for a long time. Eggs reserved in salt.


Bothnia.
BOthnia is so named of the precious furs of all sorts that are carried from
thense into foraigne regions. Precious furs.
For by these and their fysshynge, they have great commodity. Fysshe.
Salmons of the best sort are taken in these seas and are great riches among
these nations. Bothnia is divided into two parts, as Nordbothnia, and South
Bothnia, cauled Ostrobothnia. Nordbothnia, is termined with the south end of
the Lapones unto the end.78 30 69. Toward the East, it is termined with this
end and unto the degree.78 30 68 20. Toward the West, with the line terminynge
the East side of Suecia: And toward the Southe, with the residue of the goulfe
of Suecia from the end that has degrees.63 69.

Ostrobothnia, toward the East is termined from the said end of the most East
coaste. And toward the South, with a line extended by the mountains from
this end unto the degree.71 66

Toward the north and weste, with part of the goulfe of Suecia. etc.

Gothia or Gothlande.
GOTHIA, is by interpretacion good. For the holy name of God, is in the
Germayne toonge Goth (that is) Good. At what time the Goths upon a general
consent, sent forth their ofsrpyng or succession to seek new seats or
countries to inhabit, Thinuasions of the Goths
and when they possessed the coasts of Meotis and Asia, none of the owlde
writers have made mention as far as I know. But they have been known sense
the time that the Romans dilated their Empire by Illirium (now cauled
Slauonie) unto the river of Danubius. And were also famous from the time of
Caesar Dictator and Octauianus Augustus by reason of their great wars at
Danubius being thuttermost bound of Thempire. The war of the gothe^ against
the Romans.
Nevertheless, in that renoume, what Gothia was, under what part of heaven it
was situate, or of whom the Goths took their original, it has been unknown
almost to this age. This is termined toward the north, with the south end of
Suecia: And toward the weste, The bounds of Gothland.
with the other mountains of Norway, which continewe from the bounds of
Suecia to the mouths of the ryuers of Trolheta. etc.

It has many goodly towns, cities, castles, mines. etc. The city of Uisba,
The city of Ui^ba.
being in the degree.61 30 54 15. was an ancient and famous mart town as is
Genua in Italy at this day. But afterward being afflicted by thincursions of
the pirates of the Danes and Moscouites, Danes and Moscouites.
it was left desolate. There remain to this day certain ruins which
testify the ancient nobility In this place were the first stacions of the
Goths that possessed Meotis. It is at this day of frutfull soil, and famous
by many goodly and strong castles and monasteries. There is among other, a
monastery of thorder of saint Benedicte, in the which is a library of about
two thousand books of owlde autours. A library of two thousand ^ookes.


About the year of Christ fourscore and.viii. the Goths, unto whom resorted a
great multitude of other people of these north par^es of the world, as from
Liuonia, Prusia, Russia and Tartaria with diverse other contreys, making them
diverse Kings and capitaynes, did depopulate and bring in subjection the more
part of Europe, invaded Italy, destroyed Rome, The Goths invaded Europe and
destroyed Rome.
inhabited that part of Italy now cauled Lumbardie* and likewise subdued the
roialmes of Castile and Aragonie. Their wars contynewed above three hundredth
years.

Finland, and Eningia.
FInlandia, is as much to say as a fair land or fine land, so named for the
fertility of the grownde, Pliny seems to caul it Finnonia. For he says
that abowte the coasts of Finlande, are many Islands withowt names. Of the
which there lies one before Scithia cauled Pannonia. The goulfe cauled Sinus
Finnonicus, is so named at this day of the land of Finnonia. Pannonia falsely
taken for Finnonia.
Finnonia confineth with Scithia, and runs withowt all Tanais (that is to
say) withowte the limetes of Europe to the confines or Asia. But that the name
of Finlande seems not to agree hereunto, the cause is that this place of
Pliny is corrupted as are many other in this autour: So that from the name of
Finnonia, or Phinnonia, it was a likely error to caul it Pannonia forasmuch
as these words do not greatly differ in writing and found: so that the
counterfecte name was soon put in the place of the true name by him that knew
Pannonia and read that name before, being also ignorant of Phinnonia.

Eningia had in owlde time the title of a kingedome, Eningia.
it is of such largeness. But has now only the title of an inferior
gouernoure, being under the dominion of the Slauons and vsyng the same tongue.
In religion, it observed the rites of the Greeks of late years, when it was
under the governance of the Moscouites. But it is at this present under the
king of Suecia and observes thinstitucions of the Occidentall church.
Spanysshe wynes are browght thither in great plenty which the people use
merely and cherefully. Spanysshe wyne^.
It is termined on the north side, by the southe line of Ostrobothnia, and is
extended by the mountains. Toward the west, it is termined with the sea of
Finnonia according to this description: and has degrees.71. 66. etc.

Of the difference of regions and causes of great cities, after the
description of Hieronimus Cardanus. Liber.xi. de Subtilitate.
THere is an other difference of regions caused of could and heat. For such
as are near unto the poles, are vexed with to much could: And such as are
under the line where the soonne is of greateste force, are oppressed with
heat. Such as are in the myddest between both, are nearest unto temperatnesse.
Under the pole, it is impossible that there should be populous cities because
the land is baren, and the carriage or conueyaunce of fruits, vyttayles, and
other necessaries, is incommodious. By reason whereof, it is necessary that
thinhabitauntes of such regions live ever in continual wandering from place
to place, or else in smaule vyllages. Such as inhabit temperate regions, have
mean cities, as well for that they have more commodious conueyaunce for
necessaries, as also that they may dwell better and more safely together then
in vyllages by, reason of fortifying their towns with walls, and exercisynge
of arts and occupations whereby the one may the he^ter help the other. Yet
that owlde Rome (being in a t^mperate region) was of such incredible
byggenesse, the (...) was that it obtained Thempire of the world, by reason
whereof, all nations had cons^uence thither, and not the greatness of the
walls. But it is necessary that the greatest cities be in hot regions:
first, for that in such regions, part of the soil is either barren if it
lack water, or else most fruitful if it abound with water. And for this
inequality, when they find any place meet to sustain a multitude, it
follows of necessity that great cities be builded in such places by reason
of great concourse of people resorting to the same. An other great cause is,
that whereas in such regions, merchants come very far to such commodious
places, they pass through many deserte and perelous regions: So that it shall be
necessary for their better security, to coome in great companies as it were
great armies. And therefore whereas such a society is once knytte together in a
commodious place, it should be great hinderance as well to thinhabitantes as to
merchants if they should wander in incommodious places. And by this
confluence, both of such as dwell near to such places, and also of
strangers and such as dwell far of, it is necessary that in continuance of
time, smaule towns becoome great c^ties, as are these: Quinsai, Singui,
Cambalu, Memphis, Cairus, or Alcair, otherwise cauled Babylon in Egipte. But if
here any will obiecte Constan^inople (in owlde time cauled Bizantium) being in
a temperate r^gion, althowgh it be not to be compared to such cities as are
more then.lx. miles in ^ircuite, yet do we answer hereunto, that the Turks
Empire is the cause of the greatness hereof, as we said before of Rome.

The history written in the latin toonge by Paulus Iouius bishop of Nuceria
in Italy, of the legation or ambassade of great Basilius Prince of Moscouia,
to pope Clement the.vii. of that name: In which is contained the description of
Moscouia with the regions confininge abowte the same even unto the great and
rich Empire of Cathay.
I (...) first briefly to desc^ribe the situation of the region which we
plainly see to have bin little know^^ to Strabo and Ptolome, and then to
proceed in rehearsinge the manners, customs and religion of the people. And
this in manner in the like simple style and phrase of speech as the same was
declared unto us by Demetrius the ambassadoure, Demetrius the ambassador of
Moscouia.
a man not ignorant in the Latin toonge, as from his youth browght up in
Liuonia, where he learned the first rudimentes of letters. And being grown to
man's age, executed thoffice of an ambassador into diverse Christian provinces.
For whereas by reason of his approved faithfulness and industry, he had before
been sent as oratoure to the kings of Suecia and Denmark, and the great master
of Prussia, he was at the last sent to Themperoure Maximilian, in whose court
(being replenysshed with all sorts of men) while he was conversant, if any
thing of barbarous manners yet remained in so docible and quiet a nature, the
same was put away by framynge him self to better civility. The cause of his
legacy or ambassade, was given by Paulus Centurio a Genuese, Paulus Centurio.
who when he had received letters commendatori of pope Leo the tenth, and came
to Moscouia for the trade of marchaundies, of his own mind conferred with the
familiers of Duke Basilius as touching the conformation of the rites of both
churches. He furthermore of great magnanimity and in manner owtragious desire,
sowght how by a new and incredible viage, spices might be browght from
India. Spice^ browght from India to Moscouia.
For while before he had exercised the trade of merchaundies in Syria, Egypt,
and Pontus, he knew by fame that spices might be conueighed from the further
India up the river Indus against the course of the same, The river Indus.
and from thence by a small vyage by land passinge over the mountains of
Paropanisus, to be carried to the river Oxus in Bactria, Oxus or hexina a river
of Asia. runs through the deserts of Sythia.
which having his original almost from the same mountains from whense Indus
does spring, and violently caryinge with it many other ryuers, fauleth into
the sea Hircanum or Caspium at the port cauled Straua. The sea hircanum, is
now cauled mare Abacuk or mare de Sala.
And he ernestly affirmed that from Straua, is an easy and safe navigations
unto the mart town of Citrachan or Astrachan and the mouth of the river Uolga
and from thense ever against the co^rse of the ryuers, Citrachan or Astracan.
as Uolga, Occha, and Moscho, unto the city Moscha, and from thence by land
to Riga and into the sea of Sarmatia and all the west regions. For he was
vehemently and more then of equity accensed and provoked by the injuries of
the Portugales, Sarmartia is that great country wherein (...) contained Russia
Liuonia and Tartaria, and the north and East part of Polonia.
who having by force of arms subdued a great part of India, and possessed
all the mart towns, taking holy into their hands all the trade of spices to
bring the same into Spain, and nevertheless to sell them at a more grievous
and intolerable price to the people of Europe then ever was hard of before:
And furthermore kept the coasts of the Indian sea so straightly with
continual nauies, that those trades are thereby left of, which were before
exercised by the goulfe of Persia and toward the river of Euphrates, Against
the Portugales.
and also by the streightes of the sea of Arabia and the river Nilus, and in
fine by owre sea: The trade of spices inowld time.
by which trade all Asia and Europe was abundantly satisfied and better cheap
then has been sense the Portugales had the trade in their hands with so many
incommodities of such long viages whereby the spices are so corrupted by
thinfection of the poompe and other fylthynesse of the ships, that their
natural savor, taste, Spices corrupted.
and quality as well hereby as by their long reseruyng in the shoppes,
sellers, and warehouses in Lussheburne, vanyssheth and resolves, so that
reserving ever the fresshest and neweste, they sell only the woorst and most
corrupted. But Paulus, although in all places he ernestly and vehemently argued
of these things, and styrred great malice and hatred against the Portugales,
affirmynge that not only thereby the customs and revenues of princes should
be much greater if that vyage might be discovered, but also that spices might
be better cheepe bowght at the hands of the Moscouites, yet could he
nothing avail in this suit, forasmuch as Duke Basilius thowght it not good
to make open or disclose unto a stranger and unknown man, those regions which
give entrance to the sea Caspium and the kyngedomes of Persia. The Caspian sea.
Paulus therefore excludynge all hope of further travail, and become now of a
marchaunte an Ambassadoure, browght Basilius letters (pope Leo being now
departed) to Adriane his successoure, Basilius wrote to Pope Ad^^ane.
in the which he declared with honorable and reuerened words his good will
and favorable mind toward the bishop of Rome. For a few years before,
Basilius (then keepynge wars ageynste the Polones at such time as the
general counsel was celebrate at Laterane) required by John, king of
Denmark (the father of Christierne who was of late expulsed from his
kyngedome) that safe passage might be granted to thambassadours of Moscouia
to go to Rome. But whereas it so chanced, that king John and pope Julius dyed
both in one day, whereby he lacked a convenient sequester or solicitoure, he
omittted his consulation as touching that legacy. After this, the war waxed
hot between him and Sigismunde the king of Polonie: who obteinynge the
victory against the Moscouites at Boristhene, war between the Polones and
Moscouites.
supplications were decreed in Rome for the overthrow and vanquyssynge the
enemies of the Christian faith, which thing greatly alienated both king
Basilius him self and all that nation from the bishop of Rome. But when
Adriane the.vi. departed from this life, and left Paulus now ready to his
second vyage, his successor Clemente the.vii. perceiving that Paulus still
furiously reuolued and tossed in his unquiet mind that vyage toward the
East, sent him again with letters to Moscouia, The second viage of Paulus
to Moscoui^.
by the which with propense and friendly persuasions, he exhorted Basilius to
acknowleage the majesty of the Roman church, The Pope persuadeth Basilius to
acknowledge the Roman church.
and to make a perpetual leage and agreement in matters of religion, which
thing should be not only for the health of his soul, but also greatly to
thincrease of his honor: And further promised, that by the holy authority of
his office he would make him a king and give him kyngely ornaments, if
reiectyng the doctrine of the Greeks, he would conform him self to
thautoritie of the Roman church. For Basilius desired the name and title of a
king by thassignation of the bishop of Rome, forasm^ch as the judged that
to apperteyne to the catholyke right and the bysshoppes majesty, of whom (as
he knew right well) even Themperours them selves by an ancient custom have
received there insignes of honor with the Diadem and scepter of the Roman
Empire: The Emperoures receive there diadem of the bysshoppes of Rome.
althowghe it is said that he required the same of The Emperor Maximiliane by
many ambassades. Paulus therefore who with more prosperous journeys then great
vantage, had from his youth trauayled a great part of the world, althowgh he
were now aged and sore vexed with the strangurie, came with a prosperous and
spedy iornay to Moscouia, where he was gentely received of Basilius, and
remained in his court for the space of two months. But in fine,
mistrustynge his own strength, and deterred by the difficulty of so great a
iorneye, when he had utterly put away all his imaginations and hope of this
trade to India, returned to Rome with Demetrius ^hambassadour of Basilius,
before we yet thowght that he had been in Moscouia. Demetrius interteynement at
Rome.
The bishop commanded that Demetrius should be lodged in the most
magnifice^t and princely part of the houses of Uaticane, the rouffes of whose
edifies are gylted and embowed, and the chambers richly furnysshed with sylken
beds and cloth of Arresse. Willing furthermore that he should be honorably
received and ves^ured with silk^. He also assigned Franciscus Cheregatus the
bishop of Aprutium (a man that had often times been ambassadoure to diverse
regyons) to accompany him and show him thorder and rites of owre religion
with the monumentes and manners of the city. Furthermore, when Demetrius had
certain days rested and recreate him self, wasshyng away the fylth he had
gathered by reason of the long vyage, then apparelled with a fair vesture
after the manner of his country, he was browght to the bysshoppes presence,
whom he honored kneelynge with great humility and reverence (as is the manner)
and therewith presented unto his holiness certain furs of Sables in his own
name and in the name of his prince, Demetrius is brought to the popes presence.
and also delivered the letters of Basilius, which they before, and then the
Illyrian or Slauon interpretoure Nicolaus Siccensis translated into the Latin
toonge in this effect as follows.

To pope Clemente sheparde and teacher of the Roman church, Basi^ius letters
to pope Clement.
great Basilius by the grace of God, lord, Emperor and dominatour of al
Ru^sia, and great duke Uolodemaria, Moscouia, Nouogrodia, Plescouia, S^nolenia,
Ifferia Iugoria, Periunia, Uetcha, Bolgaria. etc. Dominator and great prince of
Nouogrodia in the lower co^trei: Also of Cern^gouia, Razania, Uolotchia,
Rezeuia, Belchia, Rostouia, Iaroslauia, Belozeria, Udoria, Obdoria, and
Condinia. etc. You sent unto us Paulus Centurio a c^tize^ of Genua with letters
whereby you do exhort us to join in pour and counsel withyowe and other
Princes of Christendom against the enemies of the christian faith: and that a
free passage and ready way may be opened for both yowre ambassadors and owres
to coome and go to and fro, whereby by mutual dewtie and endeavor on both
parties, we may have knowleage of the state of things perteynynge to the wealth
of us both. We certes as we have hitherto happily by the aid and help of
almighty god constantly and ernestly resisted the cruel and wicked enemies of
the Christian faith, so are we determined to do hereafter. And are likewise
ready to consent with other Christian Princes, and to grant free passage into
owte dominions. In consideration whereof, we have sent unto you owre faithful
servant Demetrius Erasmus with these owre letters: and with him have remitted
Paulus Centurio: desyringe you also shortly to dismiss Demetrius with
safegarde and indemnitie unto the borthers of owre dominions. And we will
likewise do the same if you send yowre ambassadoure with Demetrius, whereby
both by communication and letters, we may be better cert^fied of thorder and
administration of such things as you require: so that being advertised of
the minds and intent of al other Christian princes, we may also consult what
is best to be done herein. Thus fare ye well. Given in owr dominion in owr city
of Moscouia, in the year from the creation of the world, seven thousand and
three hundredth, the third day of Aprell.

But Demetrius, as he is expert in divine and humane things, and esp^cially
of holy scripture, seemed to have secreate commandment of greater matters
which we think he will shortly declare to the se^ate in private
consultations. For he is now delivered of the fever into the which he fell by
change of air, and has so recovered his strength and native color, that
being a man of threescore years of age, he was not only present at the popes
mass celebrated with great solemnity in the honor of saint Cosmus and Damian
but came also into the Senate at such time as Cardinal Campegius coming ^yrst
from the legacy of Pannonia, Cardinal Campegius.
was received of the pope and all the nobility of the court: And furthermore
also vewed the temples of the holy city with the ruins of the Roman
magnificence, The ^uines of Rome.
and with woonderynge eyes beheld the lamentable decay of the ancient
buildinges So that we think that shortly after he has declared his message,
he shall return to Moscouia with the bishop of Scarense the popes legate, not
vnrecompensed with just rewards at the hands of his holiness.

The name of the Moscouites is now new, The description of Moscouia.
althowgh the poet Lucane makes mention of the Moschos confinynge with the
Sarmatians, and Pliny also places the Moschos at the sprynges of the great
river of Phasis in the region of Colcho^ above the sea Euxinus toward the
East. Their region has very large bounds, and is extended from the altars of
great Alexander about the springes of Tanais, The altares of great alexander.
to the extreme lands and north Ocean in manner under the North stars cauled
charles wayne or the great bear, being for the most part plain and of
frutfull pasture, but in summer in many places full of marisshes. For whereas
all that land is replenysshed with many and great ryuers which are greatly
increased by the winter snow and ise resolved by the heat of the soonne, the
playnes and fyeldes are thereby overflowed with marisshes, Marisshes in summer.
and all journeys incumbered with continual waters and myrie slabbynesse until
by the benefit of the new winter the ryuers and marisshes be frosen again,
and give safe passage to the sleades that are accustomed to journey by the same.
The woodde or forest of Hercynia (and not Hyrcania as is read in sum false
copies) occupies a great part of Moscouia, The forest of hercynia.
and is here and there inhabited, with houses builded therein and so made
thinner by the long labor of men that it does not now show that horror
of thick and impenetrable woods and laundes as many think it ^o have. But
being replenysshed with many wild beasts, wyld beasts
is so far extended through Moscouia with a continual tracte between. the
East and the North toward the Scythian Ocean, The Scythian Ocean.
that by the infinite greatness thereof it has deluded the hope of such as
have curiously searched the end of the same. In that part that reaches toward
Prussia, are found the great and fierce beasts cauled Uri, or Bisontes, The
beasts cauled Uri or Bisontes.
of the kind of bulls: Also Alces like unto hearts, which the Moscouites
caul Lozzi, and are cauled of the Germaynes Helenes. helenes.


On the East side of Moscouia, are the Scythyans which are at this day cauled
Tartars, Of the Scythyans and Tartars.
a wanderinge nation, and at all ages famous in wars. In the stead of houses
they use wagons covered with beasts hydes, whereby they were in owlde time
cauled Amaxouii. Amaxouii.
For cities and towns, they use great tents and pauilions, not defended with
trenches or waules of timber or stone, but enclosed with an innumerable
multitude of archers on horseback. The Tartares are divided by companies which
they caul Hordas, hord^.
which word in their toonge signifies a consenting company of people
gathered together in form of a city. Every Horda is governed by an Emperor
whom either his parentage or warlyke prowes has promoted to that dignity. For
they oftentimes keep war with their bortherers and contend ambiciously and
fiercely for dominion. The large dominion of the Tartars.
It does hereby appear that they consiste of innumerable Hordas, in that the
Tartars possess the most large deserts even unto the famous city of Cathay
in the furthest Ocean in the East They also that are neareste to the
Moscouites, Cathay.
are known by their trade of marchaundies and often incursions. The Tartars of
Europe.
In Europe nere unto the place cauled Dromon Achillis in Taurica Chersoneso,
are the Tartars cauled Precopites, the dowghter of whose prince, Selymus
The Emperor of the Turks took to wife. These are most infest to the Polones,
and wast the regions on every side between the ryuers of Boristhenes and
Tanais. They that in the same Taurica possess Caffam a colonie of the
Liguria^s (cauled in owlde time Theodosia) do both in religion and al other
things agree with the Turks. But the Tartars that inhabit the regions of
Asia between Tanais and Uolga, are subject to Basilius the king of the
Moscouites, The Tartars of Asia. are subject to the Du^e of Moscouia.
and thuse them a ^ouernour at his assignement. Among these, the Cremii
afflicted with civil seditions, where as heretofore they were rich and of
great pour, have of late years lost their dominion and dignity. The Tartars
that are beyond the river of volga, The Tartars beyond the river of Uolga.
do religiously observe the friendship of the Moscouites and profess them
selves to be their subjects. Beyond the Cassanites toward the North, are the
Sciambani, rich in heardes of catta^lle and consistynge of a great multitude of
men. After these, ar^ Nogai, Nogai. Sigismundu^ cauleth them Nogaysri.
which obtain at this day the chief fame of riches and warly affairs.
Their Horda, althowgh it be most ample, yet has it no emperor, but is
governed by the wisdom and virtue of the most ancient and valient men after
the manner of the common wealth of Uenece. Beyond the Nogais sumwhat toward
the south and the Caspian sea, the nobelest nation of the Tartars cauled
Zagathai, The nobeles^ nation of the Tartars.
inhabit towns builded of stone, and have an exceadynge great and fair
city cauled Samarcanda, which Iaxartes the great river of Sogdiana runs
through, The river Iaxartes.
and passinge from thense about a hundredth miles, fauleth into the Caspian sea.
With these people in owre days, Ismael the Sophi and king of Persia has
often times kept war with doubtful success: Ismael the Soph^, kyng^ of
Persia.
In so much that fearing the greatenesse of their pour which heresysted with
all that he might, he left Armenia and Taurisium the chief city of the
kyngedome, for a pray to Selinius the vyctourer of one wynge of the battle.
From the city of Samarcanda, The city of Samarca^da.
descended Tamburlanes the mighty Emperor of the Tartars whom sum caul
Tanberlanis. Ta^burlanes, the myghtie Emperor of the Tartars. The conquestes
of Tamburlanes.
But Demetrius says that he should be cauled Themircuthlu. This is he that
abowte the year of Christ.M.CCC.lxxxxviii. subdued almost all the East
parts of the world: And lastly with an innumerable multitude of men invaded
the Turks dominions, with whom Baiasetes Ottomanus their king, (and father to
the great grandefather of this Solomon that now lives) metinge at Ancyra in
the confines or marches of Galatia and Bythinia, gave him a sore battle, in
the which self on the Turaes part.20000. men, and Baiasetes him self was
taken prisoner, Baiasetes.
whom Tamburlanes caused to be locked in an iren^cage and so carried him abowte
with him throwgh all Asia which he also conquered with a terrible army. He
conquered all the lands between Tanais and Nilus, and in fine vanquisshed in
battle the great Soltane of Egypt, whom he chased beyond Nilus, and took
also the city of Damascus.

From the region of these Tartars cauled Zagathei, is browght great plenty of
silken apparel to the Moscouites. This ap^arel they have of the Per^ians.
But the Tartars that inhabit the midland or inner regions, b^inge none other
wares then truckes or droues of swyft^ runnynge horses and clokes made of white
feltes: also hales or tents to withstonde thiniuries of could and rain.
These they make very artificially and apt for the purpose. They receive again
of the Moscouites, coa^es of cloth, and silver monye, The Tartars traffi^ke
with the Moscouites.
containing all other bodily ornaments, and the furnyture of superfluous
housolde stuff. For being defended against the violence of wether and
te^pestes only with such apparel and couerture whereof we have spoken, they
trust only to their arrows which they shoot as well backwarde flyinge as when
they assail their enemies face to face: Albeit, when they determined to inuad
Europ, their princes and capitaynes had helmetts coats of fense, and hooked
swoordes which they bought of the Persians. Toward the southe, The tartars of
the South side of Mo^couia.
the hounds of Moscouia are termined by the same Tartars which possess the
plain regyons nere unto the Caspian sea: above the marysshes of Meotis in Asia,
and about^ the ^yuers of Borysthenes and Tanais in part of Europe. The people
cauled Roxolani, Get and Bastarne, Get and Roxolani.
inhabited these regions in oulde time, of whom I think the name of Russia
took original. Russia.
For they caul part of Lituania, Russia the lower, whereas Moscouia it self,
is cauled white Russia. Lituania therefore, lies on the Northwest side of
Moscouia: Moscouia cauled white Russia. Lituania. Pruissa. Liuonis. Denmark.
Norway. Tuecia. The people of Laponia.
But toward the full west the main lands of Prussia and Liuonia are joined
to the confines or marches of Moscouia, where the Sarmatian sea breaking forth
of the streightes of Cimbrica Chersonesus (now cauled Denmark) is be^ded with
a crooked goulfe toward the north. But in the furthest banks of that Ocean
where the large kyngedomes of Norwaye and Suecia are joined to the continent
and almost environed with the sea, are the people cauled Lapones, A nation
exceadynge rude, suspicyous, and fearful, flyinge and astonysshed at the
sight of al straungiers and ships. They know neither fruits nor apples, nor
yet any benignity either of heaven or earth. They provide them meat only
with shootynge, and are ^p^areled with the skynnes of wild beasts. They dwell
in caves filled with dry leaves, and in holow trees consumed within either by
fire or rotten for age Such as dwell near the sea side, fysshe more luckyly
then cunnyngly, and in the stead of fruits, reserve in store fysshes dried with
smoke, They are of smaule stature of body, with star visagies, pale and
wannye color, and very swyfte of foot. Their wits or dispositions, are not
known to the Moscouites their bortherers, who think it therefore a madness to
assail them with a smaule pour, Armeline furs.
and judge it neither profitable nor glorious, with great armies to invade a
poor and beggarly nation. They exch^unge the most white furs which we caul
Armelines for other wares of diverse sorts: Bargeninge withowt words.
Yet so, that they fly the sight and coompanie of all merchants. For
comparynge and layinge their wares together, and leaving their furs in a
mydde place, they bargeyne with simple faith, with absente and unknown men.
The dark region by th^s dark region and the Pigme^ts the way to Cathay by the
North sea.
Sum men of great credit and authority, do testify that in a region beyond
the Lappones, between the west and the north oppressed with perpetual
darkness, is the nation of the people cauled Pig^ei, who being grown to their
full grought, do scarsely excede the stature of owre children of ten years of
age. It is a fearful kind of men, and express their words in such
chatteryng sort that they seem to be so much the more like unto apes, in how
much they dyffer in sense and sta^ure from men of just heyght.

Toward the North, innumerable people are subject to thempire of the
Moscouites. Their regions extend to the Scythian Ocean for the space of
almost three moonethes journey. The ^cythia^ Ocean.


N^x^ unto Moscouia, is the region of Colmogora aboundyng with fruits. The
region of co^mogora.
Through this runs the river of Diuidna being one of the greateste that is
known in the North parts, and gave the name to an other le^^e river which
breaks furthe in^o the sea Baltheum. She river of diuidna.
This increasynge a^ c^rteyne times of the year as does the river Nilus, ou^r
loweth the f^eldes and playnes, and with his fat and nurishinge moisture, does
maruelously re^ist the injuries of heaven and the sharp b^astes of the North
wind. When it ryseth by reason of molten snow and great shoures of rain, it
faul^th into the Ocean by unknown nations, and with so large a trenche like
unto a great sea, that it can not be sailed over in one day with a prosperous
wind. But when the waters are faulen, they leave here and there large and
frutful Iland^s. For corn there cast on the ground, grows without any help
of the plowe, and with marvelous celeritie of hastynge nature fearing the new
injury of the proud river, does both spring and ripe in short space.

Into the river Diuidna, runs the river Iuga: The river of Iuga or Iug.
And in the corner where they join together, is the famous mart town cauled
Ustiuga distant from the chief city Mosca.vi. hundredth miles. Ustiuga.


Note that whereas Paulus Iouius writes here that the river of Diuidna,
otherwise cauled Dwina, The river of Diuidna or Dwina.
runs through the region of Colmogor, it is to be understood that there
are two ryuers of that name, the one on the Northeast side of Moscouia toward
the frosen sea, and the other on the southwest side faulyng into the sea
Beltheum, or the goulfe of Finnonia by the city of Riga in Liuonia. And
forasmuch as the true knowleage of these and certain other i^ very necessary
for all such as shall trade into Moscouia or other regions in those coasts by
the north sea, I have thought good to make further declaration hereof as I
have found in the history of Moscauia, most faithfully and largely written by
Sigismundus Liberus who was twyse sent ambassador into Moscouia, as first by
Maximilian The Emperor, and then again by Ferdinando king of Hungary and
Boheme. This have I done the rather, for that in all the mappes that I have
seen of Moscouia, there is no mention made of the river of Dwina that runs
through the region of Colmogor and by the city of the same name, although the
prouynce of Dwina be in all cards placed Northewarde from the river of
Ustiug or Succana, The river Suchana.
which is the same Dwina whereof we now speak, and whereof Paulus Iouius
writes, although it be not so named but from the angle or corner where
ioynynge with the river of Iug and Suchana, it runs Northewarde toward the
city of Colmogor, and from thence fauleth into the north or frosen sea, The
frosen sea.
as shall hereafter more playn^y appear by the words of Sigismundus, that
the one of these be not taken for the other being so far distant that great
error might ensue by mistakynge the same, especially because this whereof
Paulus Iouius writes is not by name expressed in the cards, but only the
other, whereby is the error might be the greater. Of that therefore that
runs by the conf^nes of Liuonia and the city of Riga, Sigismundus writes
in this manner.

The lake of Dwina, is distante from the sprynges of Bousthenes, almost ten
miles, and as many from the marysshe of Fronowo. From it, a river of the ^ame
name toward the west, distante from Uuilua.xx. miles, runs from thence
toward the North, where by Riga the chief city of Liuonia, it faulethe into
the Germayne sea which the Mo^couites caul Uuareczk^^e move. It runs by
Uuitepsko, Polotzko, and Dunenburg, and not by Plescouia as one has written.
This river being for the most part nauigable, the Lyuons caul Duna.

Of the other Dwina whereof Paulus Iouius speaks, he writes as follows.

The province of Dwina and the river of the same name, is so named from the
place where the ryuers of Suchana and Iug meatynge together, make one river so
cauled. Dwina and Suchana.
For Dwina in the Moscouites tongue, signifies two. This river by the course
of a hundred miles, enters into the North Ocean on that part where the said
sea runs by the coasts of Swecia and Norwaye, and diuidethe Engronlande
from the unknown land. This province situate in the full north, perteined in
time cast to the segniorie of Nouegorede. Gronland or Engronland.
From Moscouia to the mouths of Dwina, are numbered.CCC. miles: Albeit as I
have said, in the regions that are beyond Uolga, the account of the journey
can not be well observed by reason of many marysshes, ryuers, and very great
wooddes that lie in the way. Yet are we led by conjecture to think it to be
scarsely two hundredth miles: Understand miles of Germany, that is leaques.
forasmuch as from Moscouia to Uuolochda, from Uuolochda to Ustyug sumwhat into
the East: and last of all from Ustyug by the river Dwina, is the right
passage to the north sea. This region, beside the castle of Colmogor and the
city of Dwina, situate almost in the mydde way between the spryngs and mouths
of the river, and the castle of Pienega standing in the very mouths of
Dwina, is utterly withowt towns and castles: yet has it many vyllages which
are far in sunder by reason of the barennesse of the soil. etc.

In an other place he writes, that Suchana and Iug, after they are joined
together in one, loose their first names and make the river Dwina. etc. But
let us now return to the hystone of Paulus Iouius.

Unto Ustiuga, from the Permians, Pecerrians, Inugrians, Rych furs.
Ugolicans, and Pinnegians, people inhabytynge the north and northeast
provinces, are brought the precious furs of Marterns and Sables: Also the
cases of woulfes and foxes both white and black: And likewise the skynnes of
the beasts cauled Ceruarii Lupi (that is) heart woolfes, Lupi Ceruarii
being engendered either of a woolfe and a hynde, or a heart and a bytch
woolfe. These furs and skyns. they exchange for diverse other wares. The best
kind of sables and of the finest hear wherewith now the vestures of princes
are lyned, Sables.
and the tender necks of delicate dames are covered with the express
similitude of the living beast, are brought by the Permians and Pecerrians,
which they them selves also receive at the hands of other that inhab^te the
regions near unto the north Ocean. The Permians and Pecerrians, a little
before owre time, did sacrifice to Idols after the manner of the Gentyles: The
mountains cauled hiperbore^.
but do now acknowleage Christ their God. The passage to the Inugrians, and
Ugolicans, is by certain rowgh (...), which perhaps are they that in owlde
time we^e c^uled Hyperborei. In the tops of these, are found the be^^e
kinds of Falcons: whereof one kind (cauled Herodiu^) is white with spotted
feathers. hawks of diverse kinds.


There are also ierfalcons, sakers, and peregrines, which were unknown to the
ancient princes in their excessive and nise plea^ures.

Beyo^de those people whom I last named (being all tributar^es to the kings
of Moscouia) are other nations the last of men, not known by any viages of the
Moscouites, forasmuch as none of them have passed to the Ocean, The passage
from Mo^couia to cathay.
and are therefore known only by the fabulous narrations of merchants. Yet
is it ap^arente that the river of Diuidna or Dwina, drawing with it
innumerable other ryuers, runs with a vehement course toward the north:
and that the sea is there exceadyng large: so that saylyng by the coast of the
right hand, ships may have passage from thense to Cathay as is thought by
most lykely conjecture, Cathay.
except there lie sum land in the way. For the region of Cathay per^eyneth
to thextreme and furtheste parts of the East, situate almost in the parallel
of Thracia, Master Eliot cauleth Cathay the region of siuaru^.
and known to the Portugales in India when they sailed near thereunto by the
regions of Sinara and Malacha to Aurea Chersonesus, and brought from thense
certain vestures made of Sables skynnes, by which only argument it is
apparente that the city of Cathay is not far from the coasts of Scythia.

The Goths subverted the Roman Empire.
But when Demetrius was demanded whether either by the monumentes of letters or
by fame left them of their predicessours, they had any knowleage of the
goths who now more then a thousand years sense subverted Thempire of the
Roman Emperors, and defaced the city of Rome, he answered, The north regions
con^pired against the Romans.
that both the nation of the Goths of the name of king Totilas their chief
captain, was of famous memory among them: And that diverse nations of the
north regions conspired to that expedition, and especially the Moscouites:
Also that that army increased of the confluence of the Barbarous Liuons and
wandering Tartars: But that they were all cauled Goths forasmuch as the
Goths that inhabited Scondania and Iselande, were the auctoures of that
invasion. Moscouia


And with these bounds are the Moscouites enclosed on every side, whom we
think to be those people that Ptolome cauled Modocas: but have doubtelesse at
this day their name of the river Mosco which runs through the chief city
Mosca named also after the same. The city of Mosca.
This is the most famous city in Moscouia, as well for the situation thereof
being in manner in the myddest of the region, as also for the commodious
opportunity of ryuers, multitude of houses, and strong fense of so fair and
goodly a castle. For the city is extended with a long tracte of buyldynges
by the banks of the river for the space of five miles. The houses are made all
of timber, and are divided into parlers, chambers, and kichins of large rooms:
yet neither of unseemly height or to low, but of decent measure and
proportion. Richard chaste celer toulde me that these mastes are sumwhat holowe
on the one side, and that the hole side of the next enters into the same
whereby they lie very close
For they have great trees apt for the purpose browght from the foreste of
Hercinia? of the which, made perfectly round like the mastes of ships, and
so laid one upon an other that they join at the ends in right angles, where
being made very fast and sure, they frame their houses thereof of marvelous
strength with smaule charges and in very short time. In manner all the houses
have private gardens as well for pleasure as commodity of herbs, whereby the
circuit of the dispersed city appears very great. All the wards or
quarters of the city, have their peculiar chappells. But in the chiefest and
highest place thereof, is the Church of owre ladi of ample and goodly
workemanshyppe, which Aristoteles of Bononie, a man of singular knowleadge and
experience in architecture, builded more then.lx. years sense. At the very
head of the city, The castle of Mo^ca.
a little river cauled Neglina which dryueth many corn mylles, enteryth into
the river Moscus, and makes almost an Island, in whose end is the castle with
many strong towrs and bullwarkes, builded very fair by the divise of Italien
architecturs that are the masters of the kings works. In the fields about
the city, is an incredible multitud o^ hares and roe buckes, whitehares and
roe bu^kes.
the which it is lawefull for no man to chase or pursue with dogs or nets
except only certain of the kings familiars and strange ambassadors to whom
he gives license by special commandment. Almost three parts of the city
is environed with two ryuers, and the resytus with a large mote that receaueth
plenty of water from the said ryuers. The city is also defended on the
other side with an other river named Iausa, which fauleth also into Moscus a
little beneath the city. Furthermore Moscus runnyng toward the South, fauleth
into the river Ocha or Occa much greater then it self at the town Columna,
The river Ocha.
and not very far from thense Ocha it self increased with other rivers,
vnladeth his streams in the famous river Uolga, Uolga.
where at the place where they join, is situate the city of Nouogrodia the
less, Nouogrodia.
so named in respect of the greater city of that name from whense was browght
the first colonie of the less city. Uolga cauled in owlde time Rha, Rha.
has his original of the great marysshes named the white lakes. The white
lakes.
These are above Moscouia between the North and the West, and send furthe
from them almost all the ryuers that are dispersed into diverse regions on every
side, as we see of the Alps from whose tops and sprynges descend the waters
of whose concourse the ryuers of Rhene, Po, and Rodanum, have their increase.
For these marysshes in the stead of mountains full of sprynges, minister
abundant moisture, forasmuch as no mountains are yet found in that region by
the long trauayles of men, in so much that many that have been studious of the
owlde Cosmographie, suppose the Ryphean and Hyperborean mountains so often
mentioned of the ancient writers, The Ryphean and hyperborean mountains.
to be fabulous. From these marysshes therefore, the ryuers of Dwina, Ocha,
Moschus, Uolga, Tanais, and Borysthenes, have their original. The Tartars
caul Uolga Edel: Tanais they caul Don: And Borysthenes is at this day cauled
Neper. Tanais and Boristhenes.
This, a little beneathe Taurica, runs into the sea Euxinus. The sea Euxinus.
Tanais is received of the marysshes of Meotis at the noble mart town Azou^.
But Uolga leaving the city of Moscha toward the south, and runnynge with a
large circuit and great wyndynges and creekes first toward the East, then
to the West, and lastly to the south, fauleth with a full stream into the
Caspian or Hyrcan sea. The Caspian sea.
Above the mouth of this, is a city of the Tartars cauled Cytrachan, which sum
caul Astrachan, Astrachan.
where martes are kept by the merchants of Media, Media.
Armenia, Armenia.
and Persia. Persia.
On the further bank of Uolga, there is a town of the Tartars cauled Casan,
Casan.
of the which the Horda of the Casanite Tartars took their name. It is
distante from the mouth of Uolga and the Caspian sea five hundredth miles. Above
Casan.Cl. miles at the enteraunce of the river Sura, Sura.
Basilius that now reigns, builded a town cauled Surcium, Surcium.
to thintente that in those deserts, the merchants and trauailers which
certify the governors of the marches of the doings of the Tartars and the
manners of that unquiet nation, may have a safe mansion among their customers.

Themperours of Moscouia at diverse times, either moved thereto by occasion of
things present, or for the desire they had to nobilitate new and obscure
places, have kept the seat of their court and Empire in diverse cities. For
Nouogrodia which lies toward the Weste and the Lyuon sea, Nouogrodi^.
not many years past, was the headde city of Moscouia, and obtained ever the
chief dignity by reason of the incredible number of houses and edifies, with
the opportunity of the large lake replenysshed with fysshe, and also for the
fame of the most ancient and venerable temple which more then four hundredth
years sense was dedicated to Sancta Sophia Christ the soonne of God, The
temple of Sancta Sophia.
according to the custom of the Emprours of Bizantium now cauled
Constantinople. Nouogrodia is oppressed in manner with continual winter and
darkness of long nyghtes. The eleuatio^ of the pole at Nouogrodia, and
Moscouia.
For it has the pole Artike eleuate above the Horizon threescore and four
degrees: and is further from the Equinoctial then Moscouia by almost.vi.
degrees. By which dyfference of heaven, it is said that at the soommer steye
of the soonne, it is burnte with continual heat by reason of the short
nyghtes. heat by reason of short nyghtes.


The city also of Uolodemaria, The city of Uolodemaria
being more then two hundredth miles distant from Mosca toward the East, had
the name of the chief city and kings town, whyther the seat of Thempire
was translated by the valiant Emperors for necessary considerations, that
such aid, furniture, and requisites as appperteyne to the wars might be
near at hand at such time as they kept continual war ageynste the
Tartars their bortherers. For it is situate withowt Uolga, on the banks of the
river Clesma, which fauleth into Uolga. But Moscha, The city of Moscha.
as well for those gifts and commodities whereof we have spoken, as also that
it is situate in the myddest of the most frequented place of all the region and
Empire, and defended with the river and Castle, has in comparyson to other
cities been thowght most worthy to be esteemed for the chief. Mo^cha is
distant from Nouogrodia five hundredth miles: and almost in the mydde way is the
city of Ottoferia (otherwise cauled Otwer or Tuwer) upon the river of Uolga.
Otteferis.
Uolga.
This river near unto the fountaynes and springes of the same, not yet
increased by receauyng so many other ryuers, runs but slowely and gentelly:
And passes from thense to Nouogrodia through many wooddes and desolate
playnes. Furthermore from Nouogrodia to Riga the next port of the Sarmatian
^ea, Riga.
is the iornay of a thousand miles little more or less. This tracte is thought
to be more commodious then the other, because it has many towns and the
city of Plescouia in the way, The city of Plescouia.
being imbrased with two ryuers. From Riga (perteynynge to the dominion of the
great master of the wars of the Liuons) to the city of Lubecke a port of
Germany in the goulfe of Cymbrica Chersonesus (now cauled Denmark) are
numbered about a thousand miles of dangerous saylynge. The city of Lubeke.


From Rome to the city of Moscha, From Rome to Moscouia.
the distance is known to be two thousand and six hundredth miles by the
nearest way passing by Rauenna, Taruisium, the Alps of Carnica: Also
Uillacum, Noricum, and Uienna of Pannonie: and from thense (passing over the
river of Danubius) to Olmutium of the Marouians and to Craconia the chief
city of Polonie, are coumpted.xi. hundredth miles. From Cracouia to Uilna the
headde city of Lithuania, are coumpted five hundredth miles: and as many from
that city to Smolenzko situate beyond Borysthenes, from whense to Moscha are
coumpted six hundredth miles. The journey from Uilna by Smolenzko to Moscha,
winter travail by ise and sn^we.
is trauayled in winter with expedite sleades and incredible celeritie upon
the snowes hard^ned with long froste and compacte like Ise by reason of much
wearynge. But in soommer, the playnes can not be ouerpassed but by difficulte
and laborious travail. For when the snowes by the continual heat of the
soonne begin to melte and dissolve, they cause great marysshes and quamyres
able to entangle both horse and man, Marysshes in summer.
were it not that ways are made throwgh the same with brydges and causeys of
wood, and almost infinite labor. Other writers deny this.


In all the region of Moscouia, there is no vain or mine of gold or silver,
or any other common metal except iren: neither yet is there any token of
precious stones. And therefore they bye all those things of strangers.
Nevertheless, this injury of nature is recompensed with abundaunce of rich
furs, Rich furs.
whose price by the wanton nisenesse of men is grown to such excess that the
furs perteynynge to one sort of apparel, The price of furs,
are now soulde for a thousand crowns. But the time has been that hese have
been bought better chepe when the furthest nations of the north being ignorant
of owr nyse finenesse and breathyng desire toward effeminate and superfluous
pleasures, exchanged the same with much simplicity often times for tryfles
and things of smaule value: In so much that commonly the Permians and
Pecerrians, were accustomed to give so many skynnes of Sables for an Iren axe
or hatchet as being tied hard together, how many s^bles skynnes for an axe.
the merchants of Moscouia could draw through the hole where the hafte or
handyll enters into the same. But the Moscou^tes send into all parts of
Europe the best kind of flax to make lynnen clothe, Flax.
and hemp for ropes: Also many ox hydes, O^e hydes.
and exceadynge great masses of wax. wax.


They proudely deny that the Roman church obteyneth the principate and
preeminent authority of all other.

They so abhor the nation of the Jews, They abhor the Jews.
that they detest the memory of them, and will in no condition admit them to
dwell within their dominions: esteemyng them as wicked and mischeuous people
that have of late tawght the Turks to make gunnes. Beside the books that they
have of the ancient Greek doctors, Their books and religion.
they have also the commentaries and homelies of saint Ambrose, Augustine,
Jerome, and Gregory, translated into the Illirian or Slauon tongue which
agrees with theyrs. For they use both the Slauon tongue and letters, as do
also the Sclauons, Dalmates, Bohemes, Pollones, and Lithuanes. This tongue is
spredde further then any other at this day. The Sclauon tongue spread further
then any other.
For it is familyar at Constantinople in the court of the Emperors of the
Turks: and was of late hard in Egypt among the Mamalukes in the court of
the Soltane of Alcayre otherwise cauled Memphis or Babylon in Egipte. A great
number of books of holy scripture a^e translated into this tongue by
thindustrie of saint Jerome and Cyrillus. Furthermore, beside the hystories of
their own countries, ^^^nte Jerome was borne in ^alman^ now c^uled Sclauonia.
they have also books conteynyng the factes of great Alexander and the Roman
Emperors, and lyk^wyse of Marcus Antonius and Cleopatra. They have no manner of
knowleage of philosophy, Astronomy, or sp^culatiue physic with other
liberal sciences: But such are taken for physicians as profess that they have
often times observed the virtue and quality of sum unknown herb.

They number the years, not from the birth of Christ, but from the beginning
of the world. how they number the years.
And this they begin to accoumpte, not from the monethe of January, but from
September.

They have few and simple laws throwghe owte all the kyngedome, Few and
simple laws
made by the equity and conscience of their princes, and approved by the
consent of wise and good men: and are therefore greatly for the welthe and
quietness of the people forasmuch as it is not lawful to peruerte them with
any interpretations or cauillations of lawyers or atturneys. They punyshe
thieves, rouers, privy pyckers, and murderers.

When they examine malefactors, they pour a great quantity of could water
upon such as they suspecte, which they say to be an intolerable kind of
tormente. But sumtymes they manacle such as are stoborne, and will not
confess apparent crimes.

Their youth is exercised in diverse kinds of games and plays resembelyng the
wars, The exercise of youth.
whereby they both practice policy and increase their strength. They use
runnynge both on horseback and afoote. Also runnynge at the tylte,
wrestelynge, and especially shootynge. Shootynge.
For they give rewards to such as excel therein.

The Moscouites are universally of mean stature, The corporature of the
Moscouites.
yet very square set and myghtyly brawned. They have al gray eyes long
beardes, short legs, and bygge bellyes. They ride very short, and shoot
backewarde very cunnyngely even as they fly. At home in their houses, their
fare is rather plentiful then deyntie. For their tables are furnysshed for a
smaule price with all such kinds of meats as may be desired of such as are
given to most excessive gluttony. Their fare.
Hens and duckes are bought for little silver pense the piece. There is
incredible plenty of beasts and cattayle both great and smaule. The flesh
of biefe that is killed in the myddeste of winter, is so congeled and frosen,
that it putrifiethe not for the space of two moonethes. Flesh preserved long
by reason of could.
Their best and most delicate dysshes, are gotten by hunting and haukynge as
with us. haukyng and hunting.
For they take all sorts of wild beasts with hounds and diverse kinds of
nets. And with falcons and erens or eagles of a marvelous kind which the
region of Pecerra brings forth unto them, they take not only fesantes and
wild duckes, but also cranes and wild swannes. They take also a foul of
dark color abowte the byggenes of a goose with read ouerbrowes, whose
flesh in taste passes the pleasantness of Pheasauntes. These in the
Moscouites tongue are cauled Tetrao, which I suppose to be the same that
Pliny cauleth Erythratao, known to the people of the Alps, and especially to
the Rhetians which inhabit the laundes abowte the sprynges of the river Abdua.
The river of Uolga ministers unto them great fysshes and of pleasant taste:
Plenty of fysshe.
especially sturgions or rather a kind of fysshe like unto sturgions: which
in the winter season being enclosed in Ise, are long reserved fresshe and
incorrupt. Fysshe long reserved in Ise.
Of other kinds of fysshes, they take in manner an incredible multitude in the
white lakes whereof we have spoken before. And whereas they utterly lack
native wynes, wine.
they use such as are browght from other places. And this only in certain
feasts and holy mysteries. Especially the pleasant Maluasies of the Island of
Creta now cauled Candy, Maluasie.
are had in most honor: and used either as medicens or for a show of
excessive abundance, forasmuch as it is in manner a miracle that wynes
browght from Candy by the streyghtes of Hercules pillars and the Islands of
Gades, All the north part of the firm land was cauled Scythia and the people
Scythyans.
and tossed with such fluddes of the enclosed Ocean, should be droonke among
the Scythyan snowes in their native purity and pleasantness.

The common people drink mede made of honey and hoppes sodden together, which
they keep long in pytched barrells where the goodness increases with age.
They use also beer and ale as do the Germans and Polones. They are acustomed
for delycatenes n^ summer to cool their beer and mede with putting Ise
therein, Drink cooled with Ise.
which the noble men reserve in their sellars in great quantite for the same
purpose. Sum there are that delight greatly in the iuse that is pressed owte
of cherries before they be full ripe: wine of cherryes.
which they affirm to have the color of clear and ruddy wine with a very
pleasant taste.

Their wives and women, Their women.
are not with them in such honor as they are in other nations. For they use
them in manner in the place of servants. The noble men and gentelmen, do
diligently observe their walks and have an eye to their chastity. They are
seldom bydden forth to any feasts: nether are permytted to resort to churches
far of, or to walk abroad withowt sum grea^e consyderation. But the common
sort of women, are easily and for a smaule price allured to lecherye even of
strangers: by reason whereof, the gentelmen do little or nothing esteem them.

John the father of king Basilius dyed more then.xx. years sense. He married
Sophia the daughter of Thomas Paleologus who reigned far in P^loponnesus (now
cauled Morea) and was brother to Themperoure of constantinople. Thomas
Paleologus.
She was then at Rome when Thomas her father was driven owte of Grecia by the
Turckes. The conquest of the turks in Grecia.
Of her were five children borne, as Basilius him self, George, Demetrius,
Symeon, and Andreas. Basilius took to wife Salomonia the daughter of George
Soborouius a man of synguler fideli^ie and wisdom and one of his counsel.
The excellent virtues of which woman, only barennesse ob^cured.

When the princes of Moscouia delyberat to marie, their custom is to have
choice of the vyrgynes in the realm, how the Princes chu^e their wives.
and to cause such as are of most fair and bewtyfull vysage and personage
with manners and virtues according, to be browght before them. Which afterward
they commit to certain faithful men and grave matrones to be further vewed,
in so much that they leave no part of them vnserched. Of these, she whom
the prince most lyketh, is pronounced worthy to be his wife, not withowt
great and careful expectation of their parents, living for that time
between hope and fear. The other vyrgyns also which stood in election and
contended in bewty and integrity of manners, are often times the same day to
gratyfye the prince, married to his noble me^, gentellmen, and capytaynes:
whereby it sumtymes comes to pass that while the princes contemn the lynage
of royal descente, such as are borne of humble parentage, are exalted to the
degree of princely estate, In like manner as Themperours of the turckes were
accustomed to be chosen by cumlynesse of personage and warly prowes.

Basilius was under thage of forty and seven years, Duke Basilius.
of cu^ly personage, singular virtue, and princely qualities, by all means
studyous for the prosperity and commodities of his subjects. Furthermore in
benevolence, lyberalytie and good success in his doings, to be preferred
before his progenitors. For when he had.vi. years kept war with the
Lyuons that moved.lxxii. confetherate cities to the cause of that war, he
obtained the victory and departed with few conditions of peace rather given
then accepted. war between the Polones and Mo^chouites.
Also at the beginning of his reign, he put the Polones to flight and took
prisoner Constantine the captain of the Ruthens whom he brought to Moscouia
tied in chains. But shortly after at the river Boristhenes above the city of
Orsa, he him self was ouercomne in a great battle by the same Constantine
whom he had dismissed: Yet so, that the town of Smolenzko which the
Moscouites possessed before and was now woonne by the Polons, s^ulde still
perteyne to the dominions of Basilius. But ageynste the Tartars, war between
the Moschouites and Tartars.
and especially the Tartars of Europe cauled the Precopites, the Moscouites
have often times kept war with good success, in revenge of thiniuries done
to them by their incursions.

Basilius is accustomed to bring to the field more then a hundredth and fifty
thousand horsemen divided into three bands and following the banners or
enseignes of their capitaynes in order of battle. The Moscouit^s army. Their
ba^ner.
On the banner of the kings wynge, is figured the image of Iosue the captain
of the Hebrews at whose prayer the soonne prolonged the day and steyde his
course as witness the hystories of holy scripture. Armies of footmen are in
manner to no use in those great wyldernesses, as well for their apparel being
loose and long, as also for the custom of their enemies, who in their wars
trust rather to the swyftenesse of their light horses then to try the matter
in a pyght fyelde.

Their horses are of less then mean stature: Their horses and horsemen.
but very strong and ^wyfte. Their horsemen are armed with pykes, ryuettes,
mases of Iren and arrows. Few have hooked swoordes. Their armure.
Their bodies are defended with round Targets after the manner of the Turks of
Asia: or with bendyng and cornarde targettes after the manner of the Greeks:
Also with coats of mayle, brygantynes, and sharp helmettes. Basilius did
furthermore instytute a band of hargabusiers on horsbacke: hargabusiers.
and caused many great brazen pieces to be made by the woorkemanshype of
certain Italyans: Gunnes.
and the same with their stocks and wheels to be placed in the castle of
Mosca.

The king him self with pryncely magnyfycence and synguler familiarity
(wherewith nevertheless no part of the majesty of a king is vyolate) is
accustomed to dyne openly with his noble men and strange ambassadors in his
own chamber of presence where is seen A marvelous quantitye of silver and
gylte plate standing upon two great and high cubbardes in the same chamber.
The Prince dines openly.
Sigismundus says that much of this is gold.
He has not abowte him any other guard for the custody of his person saving
only his accustomed famylye. For watch and ward is dylygently kept of the
faithful multitude of the citisens: In so much that every ward or quarter of
the city is enclosed with gates rayles, The custody of the city.
and bars: neither is it lawful for any man rasshely to walk in the city
in the night, or withowt light. All the court consysteth of noble men, The
dukes court.
gentelmen, and choice souldyers which are cauled owte of every regyon by
their towns and vyllagies, and commanded to wait course by course at
certain moonethes appointed. Furthermore when war is proclaimed, all the
army is collected both of the owlde soldiers and by musterynge of new in
all prouynces. For the lieuetenauntes and capytaynes of the army, are
accustomed in all cities to muster the youth, and to admytte to thorder of
souldyers such as they think able to serve the turn. Their wages is paid
them of the common treasurye of every prouynce which is gathered and partly
paid also in the time of peace although it be but little. Souldyers wages of
the common treasury.
But such as are assigned to the wars, are free from all tributes, and
inioye certain other priuilegies whereby they may the more gladly and cherfully
serve their king and defend their country. For in the time of war, occacyon
is mynystred to show true virtue and manhodde, where in so great and
necessary an institituon, every man according to his approved actiuitie and
ingenyous forwardness, may obtain the fortune either of perpetual honor or
ignominy.

Vix olim vlla fides referentibus horrida regna
Moschorum, and Ponti, res glacialis erat.
Nunc Iouio autore, ill^ oculis lustramus, et vrbes.
Et nemora, et mon^es cernimus et fluuios.
Moschouia^, monumenta Ioui, tua culta reuoluen^.
Coepi alios mund^s credere Democriti.
Other notable things as concerning Moscouia: gathered out of the books of
Sigismundus Liberus. Note that when he says miles, he means leaques.
FRom whense Russia had the name, Russia.
there are diverse opinions. Sum think that it was so named of one Russus the
soonne or neuie of Lech the king of the Polons. Other affirm that it was so
cauled of a certain owlde town named Russus not far from Nouogoroda or
Nouogardia the more.

Sum also think that it was so cauled of the brown color of the nation. The
brown color of the Russes.
But the Moscouians confute al these opinions as untrue: Affirmynge that this
nation was in owlde time cauled Rosseia as a nation dispersed, as the name it
self does declare. For Rosseia in the Ruthens tongue, Rossei^.
doothe signify dispersed or scattered. The which thing to be true, diverse
other people commyxt with thinhabitauntes, and diverse provinces lyinge here and
there between diverse parts of Russia do plainly declare. But whense so ever
they took their name, doubtless all the people that use the Slauon tongue,
The Slauon tongue spre^d^th far.
and profess the faith of Christ after the manner of the Greeks, (cauled in
their common language Russi, and in the Latin tongue Rutheni) are increased to
such a multitude that they have either expulsed all the nations that lie
beewene them, or drawn them to their manner of living, in somuche that they
are now cauled all Rutheni by one common name.

Furthermore the Slauon tongue (which at this day is sumwhat corruptly cauled
Sclauon) runne^h exceadyng fa^, as used of the Dalmates, Bossuenser, Croatians,
Istri^ns, and by a long tracte of the sea Adriatike unto Forum Iulii: Of the
Caruians also whom the Uenetians caul Charsos: and likewise of the Carniolans
and Carinthians unto the river Drauus: Furthermore of the Stirians within
Gretzium and by Muera unto Danubius and from thense of the Mysians, Seruians,
Bulgarians, and other inhabitynge even unto Constantinople: Furthermore of the
Bohemians, Lusacians, Silesians, Moranians, and thinhabitauntes near unto the
river Uagus in the kyngedome of Hungary: The Polons also and the Ruthenians
whose Empire reaches very far: likewise the Circasians and Quinquemontanians
unto Pontus: and is from thense used in the north parts of Germany among the
remanent of the Uandales inhabityng here and there. Uandales.
All which nations althowgh they acknowleage them selves to be Sclauons, yet
the Germayns taking the denomination only of the Uandales, caul al the^ that
use the Slauon tongue, Uuenden, Uuinden, or Uuindysh.

Of the Princes that now reign in Russia, The P^inces of Russia.
the chief is the great Duke of Moscouia who possesses the greatest part
thereof. The second is the great duke of Lithuania: and the third the king of
Polonie, who now obteyneth the dominion of Polonie and Lithuania.

In authority and dominion over his subjects, the prince of Moscouie passes
all the monarkes of the world. The duke of Moscouia.
For he depriueth all his noble men and gentelmen of al their holds and
munitions at his pleasure. He trusts not his own brotherne, but oppresses
all with like servitude. In so much that whom so ever he commands either
to remain with him in the court, or to goo to the wars, or sends on
embassage, they are compelled to be at their own charges, except the young
gentelmen the soonnes of the Boiarons, that is, the noble men of the lowest
degree. He usurps this authority as well over the spirituality as the
temporaltie: constitutynge what him lysteth of the goods and life of al men. Of
his counsilers there is not one that dare dissente from him in any thing. They
openly confess that the will of the prince is the will of god: and therefore
caul him the key bearer and chamberlen of god, and believe him to be the
executor of gods will. By reason whereof, the prince him self when any peticion
is made to him for the delivery of any captive, is accustomed accustomed to
answer: When god commands he shall be delivered. Likewise when any asks a
question of an uncertain or doubtefull thing, their custom is to answer
thus: God knows and the great prince. It is uncertain whether the cruelty
and fiercenes of the nation do require so tyrannous a prince, or whether by
the tyranny of the prince, the nation is made so fierce and cruel.

Basilius the soonne of John, was the first that took upon him the name and
title of a king in this manner: The great lord Basilius, by the grace of god
king and lord of all Russia and the great duke of Uuolodimaria, Moscouia,
Nouogardia. etc.

Furthermore, whereas now this prince is cauled an Emperor, why the duke of
Mo^couia was cauled an Emperor
I have thought good to show the title and cause of this error. Note therefore
that Czar in the Ruthens tongue signifies a king, whereas in the language of
the Slauons, Pollons, Bohemes, and other, the same word Czar, signifies
Caesar by which name Themperours have been commonly cauled. For both they and
the Slauons that are under the kingdom of Hungary, caul a king by an other
name: as sum Crall, other Kyrall, and sum Koroll: but think that only an
Emperor is cauled Czar. Whereby it came to pass that the Ruthene or
Moscouite interpretours hearing their prince to be so cauled of strange
nations, began them selves also to name him an Emperor, and think the name of
Czar to be more worthy then the name of a king, althowgh they signify all
one thing. But who so will read all their hystories and books of holy
scripture, The great Turk.
shall find that a king is cauled Czar, and an Emperor Kessar. By the like
error The Emperor of the Turks is cauled Czar, who nevertheless of
antiquity used no higher title then the name of a king, expressed by this
word Czar. And hereof the Turks of Europe that use the Slauon tongue, caul
the city of Constantinople Czargead, (that is) the kings city.

Sum caul the prince of Moscouie the white king, The white king.
which I think to proceade of the white cappes, or other tyrementes they
wear on their heads, like as they caul the king of Percia Kisilpassa (that
is) read headde. The duke of Mo^couia his ty^le.
He uses the title of a king when he writes or sends to Rome, the
Emperor, the pope, the king of Suetia and Denmacke, the great master of
Prussia and Liuonia, and also to the great Turk as I have been credably
informed: but he is not cauled king of any of them, except perhaps of the
Liuons. Yet by reason of his later conquestes, sum have thought him worthy the
name of a king or rather of an Emperor because he has kings under his
Empire.

To the king of Polone, he uses this title: The great lord Basilius by the
grace of god, lord of all Russia, and great duke of Uuolodimeria, Moscouia,
Nouogardia. etc. leaving out the title of a king. For none of them
vouchesafeth to receive the letters of the other augmented with any new title,
as I knew by experience at my being in Moscouia, at which time Sigismundus the
king of Polone sent him his letters augmented with the title of the duke of
Masouia, wherewith he was not a little offended.

They glory in their hystories that before Uuolodimeria and Olha, the land of
Ru^sia was baptized and blessed of saint Andrewe thappostle of Christ, Russia
baptized by saint Andrewe the Apostle.
affirmynge that he came from Grecia to the mouths of the river Borysthenes:
and that he sailed up the river to the mountains where as is now Chiouia;
and that there he blessed all the land and placed his cross, prophesyinge
also that the grace of god should be great there, and that there should be
many churches of Chrystian men: Likewise that he afterward came to the
sprynges of Borysthenes unto the great lake Uuolok, and by the river Louat
descended into the lake Ilmer: from whense by the river Uuolcon which runs
owte of the same lake, he came to Nouogardia: and passed from thense by the
same river to the lake Ladoga and the river Heua, and so unto the sea which
they caul Uuaretzkoia, being the same that we caul the Germayne sea, between
Uuinlandia or Finlandia and Liu^nia, by the which he sailed to Rome, and was
at the last crucified for Christ his gospel in Peloponnesus by the tyranny
of Agus Antipater, as their crownacles make mention.

The prince every second or third year, causes a muster to be taken of the
soonnes of the Boiarons, The Moscouites wars
and takethe an accoumpt^ both of their number and how many horses and men
every of them is able to make: and then appoynteth a certain stypende to such
as are able further to bear their own charges in the wars. They have
seldom any rest or quietness. For they either keep war with the
Lithuanians. Liuonians, Suetians, or Tartars of Casan. Or if it so chance that
the prince keep no war, yet does he yearly appoynte garrysons of.xx.
thousand men in places about Tanais and Occa to repress the incursions and
robberyes of the European Tartars cauled Precopites.

As in other matters, Diverse manners of diverse people in the ware.
even so in thorder of warrefare there is great diversity among men. For the
Moscouian as soon as he begins to fly, thinks of none other succoure but
puts all his confidence therein. Being pursued or taken of his enemy, he
neither defends him self nor desirethe perdon.

The Tartar cast of from his horse, spoiled of al his armure and weapons, and
also sore wounded, defends him self with hands, feet, and teethe, and by
all means he may, until his strength and spirit fail him.

The Turk, when he sees him self destitute of all help and hope to escape,
does humbly desire pardon, casting away his weapons and armure, and reching
forth to the victourer his hands joined together to be bound, hoping by
captivity to save his life.

The Moscouites in placeinge their army choose them a large plain where the
best of them pytch their tents and the other make the^ certain arbours of
bouwes fyxt in the ground, The Moscouytes army.
bendyng together the tops thereof, which they cover with their clokes to
defend them selves, their bows, arrows, saddyles, and other their
necessaries from rain. They put forth their horses to pasture, and for that
cause have their tents so far in sunder, which they fortifye neither with
carts or trenches or any other impedyment, except perhaps the place be
defended by nature as with wooddes, ryuers and marysshes.

It may perhaps seem strange how he maynteyneth him and his so long with
so smaule an army as I have said. how he maynteyneth his army.
I will now therefore brefely declare their sparynge and frugalitie. He that
has six or sumtymes more horses, uses one of them as A pack horse to bear
all their necessaryes, eyes. He has also in a bag of two or three spanes
long, the flower or meal of the grain cauled mylle: and.viii. or x. pounds
weyghte of swynes flesh poudered. He has likewise A bag of salt, myxte
with pepper if he be rich. Furthermore every man caryeth with him A hatchet,
A fire box, and a brazen pot: so that if they chance to coomme to any place
where they can find no fruits, garlyke, onyons or flesh, they kyndle a fire
and fylle their pottes with water whereunto they put a spoonefull of meal with
a quantity of salt, and make pottage thereof, wherewith the master and all his
servants live contented. But if the master be very hungary he eats all
alone, and the servants are sumtymes inforsed to fast for the space of two or
three days. And if the master intend to fare sumwhat more delycately, then he
adds thereto a little portion of swynes flesh. I speak not this of the best
of them, but of such as are of the mean sort. The governors and capytaynes
of tharmye, do sumtymes bydde the poorer sort to their tables: where theye
feed them selves so well, that they fast two or three days after. When they
have fruits, garlyke, and onyons, theye can well forbear all other meats.
Procedynge forward to the battle, they put more confydence in their
multitude, and with what great armies they assail their enemies, the^ either
in the strength and valyantenesse of their souldyers, or in well instructynge
their army: and fight better afar of, then at hand: and therefore study how
to circumuent or enclose their enemies and to assail them on the back half.

Instruments of war.
They have many trumpiters: The which while they blow all at once after their
manner, make A marvelous strange noise. They have also an other kind of
instruments which they caul Szurna. These they blow withowte ceasing for
the space of an hour together, so temperyng the same and holdyng in the wynd
while they draw more, that the noise seems continual without intermyssion.
The Moscouites and Tartars apparel.


They use all one manner of appareyle: as long coats withowte pleyghtes and
with narrow sleaues after the manner of the Hungaryans. These the Christians
use to butten on the right side: and the Tartars (vsinge the like) butten them
on the left side. They wear read and short buskyns that reach not to their
knees: and have the souls thereof defended with plates of Iren. In manner all
their shyrtes are wroughte with diverse colors about the neck: and have the
collars and ruffes bysette with little round baules like beads, of silver or
gylted copper, and sumtyme perles also. They gyrde them selves beneth the
bellye even as low as their privy members, that they may seem more boorely
which they greatly esteem, as do at this day the Spanyardes, Italyans, and
Almaynes.

The province of Moscouia is neither very large nor frutfull, The province of
Moscouia.
forasmuch as the fertylytye is hyndered with sandye ground which either with
to much dryness or moyster kylleth the corn. Furthermore the immoderate and
sharp vntemperatenesse of the air while the could of the winter ouercommethe
the heat of the soonne, Extreme could.
sumtymes does not suffer the corn to ripe. For the could is there sumtyme
so extreme, that like as with us in summer by reason of heat, even so there
by extreme could the earth has many great chynkes or breaches. Water also
cast into the air, and spettle faulyng from ons mouth, are frosen before they
touch the ground. I my self, when I came thither in the year 1526. saw the
branches of fruitful trees wythyred by the could of the winter before, which
was so extreme that many of their wagoners or caries (whom they caul Gonecz)
were found frosen to death in their sleades. There were sum that at the same
time leadyng and dryuyng their cattayle from the next villagies to Moscouia,
dyed by the way with their beasts through thextremytie of the could.
Furthermore, the same year many players that were accustomed to wander about
the country with daunsyng bears, were found dead in the high ways. Wild
bears also enforced thereto by famyn, left the wooddes and ran here and
there into diverse villagies and houses: At whose coming while the men of the
country forsook their houses and fledd into the fields, many of them
perysshed through the vehemency of the could. Again, it sumtymes so
chances that in summer the heat is as extreme: Extreme heat in cold
regions.
as in the year.1525. in the which almost al kynds of pulse and grain were
scorched and burnte: and such a derth of corn followed that drought, that that
which before was bowght for three dengas, was afterward soulde for.xx, or.xxx.
Furthermore also, many villagies, wooddes, and stackes of corn, were set on
fire by thextreame heat: The smoke whereof so filled the regyon, that the eyes
of many were sore hurt thereby. There arose also as it were a dark and thycke
mist without smoke which so molested the eyes, that many lost their sight
thereby.

They sow and narysshe the seades of melons with great diligence in certain
raised beds myxte with doonge: whereby they find a remedy both against
extreme could and heat. For if the heat exceade, they make certain ryftes in
the beds as it were breathyng places least the seades should be suffocate
with to much heat. And if the could be extreme it is tempered with the
heat of the mucke or dunge.

Little beasts.
Their beasts are much less then owres: yet not all withowt horns as one
has written. For I have there seen oxen, kyne, goats, and rams all with
horns.

Not far from the city of Moscha, are certain monasteries which a far of,
seem like unto a city. They say that in this city is an incredible number
of houses: The city of Mo^couia or Mosca.
And that the syxte year before my coming thither, the prince caused them to
be numbered, and found them to be more then one and fortye thousand and
five hundredth houses. The city is very large and wide: and also very slabby
and myrie. By reason whereof it has many brydges and causeys.

The air of the regyon is so wholesome, wholesome air.
that beyond the sprynges of Tanais, especially toward the north and a great
part also toward the East, the pestylence has not byne hard of sense the
memory of man. Yet have they sumtimes a disease in their bowels and headdes
not much unlike the pestylence. This disease they caul a heat: wherewith such
as are taken, dye within few days.

A rich spoil.
Sum write that John the duke of Moscouia and son of Basilius, under the
pretense of religion sacked and spoiled, the city of Nouogardia: and carried
with him from thense to Moscouia three hundredth sleades laden with gold,
silver, and precious stones of the gooddes of the Archebysshoppe, the
merchants, citisins, and straungiers.

Solowki is an Island situate in the north sea.viii. leaques from the continent
between: The ^land of Solowki.
Dwina and the province of Corela. How far it is dystant from Moscouia, can
not be well known by reason of many sennes, marysshes, Wooddes, and desolate
places lyinge in the way. Albeit, su^ say that it is not three hundredth leaques
from Moscouia, and two hundredth from Bieloiesero. Bieloiesero.
In this Island is made great plenty of salt: and it has in it a monastery
into the which it is not lawful for any woman or virgyn to enter.

There is also great fysshyng for hearing. They say that here the soonne at the
summer Equinoctial, The length of the day.
shyneth continually except two hours.

Demetriowe, is a city with a castle, distante from Moscouia xii. leaques
declining from the west sumwhat toward the north. By this runs the river
Lachroma that runs in to the river of Sest. Sest also receaueth the river
Dubna which vnladeth it self in Uolga. And by the commodity of thus many
ryuers, many rich marchaundies are browght without great labor or
difficulty from the caspian sea by the river Uolga to Moscouia and diverse
other prouynces and cities abowte the same. The trade from Moscocouia to the
Caspian sea.


Bieloiesero, a city with a castle, is situat at a lake of the same name. For
Bieloiesero in the Moscouites tongue, signifies a white lake. Bieloiesero or
the white lakes.
The city stands not in the lake as sum have said. Yet is it so environed
with marysshes that it may seem to be inexpugnable: In consideration whereof,
the princes of Moscouia are accustomed to keep their treasure there.
Bieloiesero is from Moscouia, a hundredth leaques, and as much from Nouogardia
the great. The lake it self, is.xii. leaques in length and as much in breadth:
and has (as they say) three hundredth ryuers faulynge into it. Thinhabitauntes
of this place, have a peculyar language, although now in manner all speak the
Moscouites tongue. The longest day here in the soommer Equinoctial, Diversity
of temperament in smaul dystance.
is said to consyste of.xix. hours. A man of great name and credit toulde
me, that at the beginning of the spring when the trees began now to be
green, he went in post from Moscouia to Bieloiesero: And passing over the
river Uolga, found the region there so covered with Ise and snow, that he was
feign to dispatch the residue of his journey on fleades. And although the winter
be longer there, yet do the fruits wax ripe and are gathered even at the
same time that they are in Moscouia. With in an arrowe shot of the lake, A
lake of brymstone.
there is an other lake that brings forth brymstone. which a certain river
running out of the same, caryeth with it in great quantity flotyng above the
water like a scoomme. Yet through the ignorance of the people, they have no
commodity thereby.

The people that inhabit the regions lyinge far north and east from
Moscouia, exchange their furs for apparel, knyues, needles, spoones,
hatchets, and such at her necessary wares. Exchange of furs for other ware.
For they have not the use of gold and silver.

The description of the regions, people, and ryuers, lyinge North and East
from Moscouia: As the way from Moscouia to the river Petzora, and the province
of Iugaria, or Iuhra: And from thense to the river Obi. Likewise the
description of other countries and regions, even unto Thempire of the great
Cham of Cathay.
THe dominion of the Prince of Moscouia reaches far toward the East and
north unto the places which we will now descrybe. As concerning which
thing, The dominion of the duke of Moscouia.
I translated a book that was presented unto me in the Moscouites tongue, and
have hear made a brief rehearsal of the same. I will first therefore describe
the journey from Moscouia to Petzora, and so to Iugaria and Obi.

From Moscouia to the city of Uuolochda, Uuolochda.
are numbered fyftie Werstes, werste.
one Werst containing almost the space of an Italyan mile. From Uuolochda to
Ustiug toward the right hand descendinge with the course of the river of
Uuolochda and Suchana with whom it joins, Ustiug.
are coumpted five hundredth Werstes: where within two Werstes of the town
cauled Strelze and hard by the city of Ustiug Suchana joins. Iug which
runs from the south: from whose mouth unto the sprynges of the same, are
numbered five hundrethe Werstles.

Note that whereas here before the autour numbereth but fyftie werstes from
Moscouia to Uuolochda, it seems that the place is corrupted by the Printers
mistaking one word for an other, as Quinquaginta, which is fyftie, for
Quingenta, which is five hundredth. For the distance is no less from Moscouia
to Uuolochda, then is from Uuolochda to Ustiug, which is five hundreh werstes.

But Suchana and Iug after they join together, Suchana.
Iug.
lose their first names and make both one river named Dwina, Dwina.
by the which the passage to the city of Colmogor conteyneth five hundredth
Werstes: Colmogor.
from whense in the space of six days journey, Dwina enters into the north
Ocean at.vi. mouths, And the greateste part of this journey consysteth by
navigations. For by land, from Uuolochda unto Colmogor, passing over the river
Uuaga, are a thousand Werstes. Not far from Colmogor, the river Pienega
runnynge from the East on the right hand for the space of seven hundredth
Werstes, fauleth into Dwina. From Dwina by the river Pienega by the space of
two hundredth Werstes, Pieneg^.
they coome to a place cauled Nicolsi: Nicolai.
from whense within half a werst, ships have passage into the river Kuluio,
Kuluio.
which has his original from a lake of the same name toward the north, from
whose springes is.viii. days vyage to the mouth of the same where it enters
into the Ocean.

Saylynge by the coasts of the right hand the sea, The regions by the North
sea.
they pass by the regions of Stanuwische, Calunczscho, and Apnu. And saylynge
about the promontorie or cape of Chorogoski Nosz, Stanuwische, Camenckh, and
Tolstickh, they come at the length into the river Mezen, and from thense in
the space of six days to a vyllage of the same name, standing in the mouth of
the river Pieza: Pieza.
by the which ageine ascendyng toward the left hand and soommer East, they
come to the river Piescoya. Piescoia.
From whense saylynge for the space of five Werstes, they coomme into two lakes
in the which are seen two ways: whereof one on the right side, goes to the
river Rubicho, Rubicho.
by the which they pass to the river Czircho. Other by an other and shorter
way, bring their ships from the lake directly into Czircho: Czircho.
From whense, except they be hyndered by tempest, they coomme in the space of
three weeks to the river and mouth of Czilma, C^ilma.
flowynge into the great river Petzora, Petzora.
which in that place is two Werstes in breadthe. Saylyng from hense, they
coomme in the space of six days to the town and castle of Pustoosero,
Pustoosero.
near unto the which, Petzora enters into the north Ocean at six mouths.
The inhabitauntes of this place, are men of simple wit. They received the
faith of Christ, and were baptized in the year M.D.xviii.

From the mouth of Czilma unto the mouth of the river Ussa, Ussa.
goinge by Petzora, is one months vyage. Ussa has his sprynges in the
mountain Poyas Semnoi, being on the left hand toward the soommer East,
Cingulus mundi.
and springs owte of a great stone of the same mountain, cauled Camen
Bolschoi. From the sprynges of Ussa to the mouths of the same, are numbered
more then a thousand Werstes. Furthermore Petzora runs from this south
winter part, from whense ascendynge from the mouths of Ussa unto the mouths
of the river Stzuchogora, Stzuchogora.
is three weeks vyage. They that described this vyage, said that they rested
between the mouths of the ryuers of Stzuchogora and Potzscheriema:
Potzscheriema.
and left their vyttayles there which they browght with them from Russia.
Beyond the ryuers of Petzora and Stzuchogora toward the mountain Camenipoias
and the sea with the Islands there abowte and the castle of Pustoosero,
Camenipoias.
are diverse and innumerable nations which by one common name are cauled
Samoged (that is) such as eat them selves. Samoged.
They have great increase of fowls, birds, and diverse kinds of beasts:
Fowls and beasts.
as Sables, Marternes, Beuers, Otters, Hermelines, Squyrels: and in the Ocean
the beast cauled Mors: Also Uess, white bears, woolfes, hares, Equiwoduani,
great whales, and a fysshe cauled Semfi, with diverse other. The people of these
nations, come not to Moscouia. For they are wild, wyld people.
and fly the company and society of other men.

From the mouths of Stzuchogora saylynge up the river unto Poiassa, Poiassa.
Artawische, Cameni, and Poiassa the greater, is three weeks vyage.
Furthermore the ascendynge to the mount Camen, Camen.
is three days journey: from the which, descendyng, they come to the river
Artawischa, Artawischa.
and from thense to the river Sibut, Sibut.
from whence they pass to the castle of Lepin, Lepin.
and from Lepin to the river Sossa. The people that inhabit the region by this
river, are cauled Uuogolici. Leaving Sossa on the right hand,, So^sa.
they come to the great river Oby, Ob^.
that spryngeth out of the lake Kitaisko Kitaisko.
the which with all the haste they could make, they could scarsely pass
over in one day, the river being of such breadth that it reaches fourscore
Werstes. The people also that dwell about this river, are cauled Uuogoli^i and
Ugritzschi. Uuogolici.
From the castle of Ohea ascendynge by the river of Oby, unto the river
Irtische into the which Sossa enters, Irtische.
is three moonethes journey. In these places are two castles named Ierom and
Lumen, Ieron.
^umem.
kept by certain lords cauled Knesi Iuhorski. being tributaries to the
great duke of Moscouia as they say. Here are diverse kinds of beasts and
furs.

From the mouth of the river Irtische to the Castle of Grustina, Grustina.
is two months journey: from whense to the lake Kitai by the river Oby (which
I said to have his sprynges in this lake) is more then three months journey.
Kitai.
From this lake come many black men, lackyng thuse of common spech. Black men
withowt speech.
They bring with them diverse wares, and especially pearls and precious
stones, which they sell to the people cauled Grustintzi and Serponowtzi. These
have their name of the castle Serponow, Serponowe.
situate in the mountains of Lucomorya beyond the river Obi. Lucomoria.
They say that to the men of Lucomorya, chances a marvelous thing and
incredible. Men that yearly dye and reuyue.
For they affirm, that they dye yearly at the.xxvii. day of November, being
the feast of saint George among the Moscouytes: and that at the next spring
abowte the.xxiiii. day of Apryll, they reuyue again as do frogs.

With these also, the people of Grustintzi and Serponowtzi, A strange trade of
marchaundies.
exercise a new and strange kind of trade. For when the accustomed time of
their dyinge, or rather of sleapynge, aprocheth, they leave their wares in
certain places appointed, which the Grustintzi and Serponowtzi carye away
leaving other wares of equal valewe in their places: which if the dead men
at the time of their reuyuyne perceive to be of unequal price, they require
their own again: by reason whereof much strife and fighting is between them.

From the river of Obi descending toward the left hand, Obi.
are the people cauled Calami, Calami.
which came thither from Obiowa and Pogosa. Beneth Obi, abowte Aurea Anus (that
is the golden owlde wife) are the ryuers Sossa, Beres, Uua, Ryuers.
and Danadim, al which spring out of the montayne Came^, Bolschega, Poiassa,
and the rocks ioynynge to the same.

All the nations that inhabit from these ryuers of Aurea Anus, are subject to
the prince of Moscouia,

Aurea Anus cauled in the Moscouites toonge Slata Baba, Aurea Anus.
is an Idol at the mouths of Obi in the province of Obdora, Obdora.
standing on the furthest bank toward the sea. Alonge by the banks of
Obrand the ryuers near there about, are here and there many castells and
fortresses, all the lords whereof are subject to the prince of Moscouia, as
they say.

They say also, or rather fable, that the Idol cauled Aurea Anus, is an Image
like unto an owlde wife having a child in ^er lap: and that there is now
seen an other infant which they say to be her neuie: Also that there are
certain instruments that make a continual sound like the noise of
trumpettes. The which if it so be, I think it to be by reason of the wind
blowynge continually into the holowe places of those instruments.

The river Cossin, Cossin.
fauleth out of the mountains into Lucomoria. In the mouth of this, is a
castle. Whyther from the sprynges of the great river Cossin, is two moonethes
by age. Furthermore from the sprynges of the same river, the river Cassima has
his original: Cassima.
which runnynge throwgh Lucomoria, fauleth into the great river Tachnin,
Tachnin.
beyond the which (as is said) dwell men of prodigious ^hape, of whom sum are
ouergrowne which hear like wild beasts: other have heads like dogs, People
of Monstrous shape.
and other their faces in their breasts withowt necks, and with long hands
also and withowte feet. A fysshe like a man.
There is likewise in the river Tachnin, a certain fysshe with headde, eyes,
nose, mouth, hands, fiete, Pliny writes of the like fysshe.
and other members utterly of humane shape, and yet withowt any voice, and
pleasante to be eaten as are other fysshes.

All that I have hitherto rehearsed, I have translated out of the said ioyney
which was delivered me in the Moscouites tongue. In the which perhaps sum
things may seem fabulous and in manner incredible, as of the doomme men and
the dead reuyuynge, the Aurea Anus also, and the monstrous shapes of men, with
the fysshe of human form: whereof althowgh I have made dylyge^t inquisicion,
yet could I know nothing certain of any that had seen the same with their
eyes, nevertheless to give further occasion to other to search the truth of
these things, I have thowght good to make mention hereof.

Noss in the Moscouites tongue signifies a nose: and therefore they caul all
capes or points of land that reach into the sea, by the same name.

The mountains about the river of Petzora, Mountains.
are cauled Semnoi Poyas, or Lingulus mundi: (that is) the gyrdle of the
world, or of the earth.

Kithay, is a lake of whom the great Chan of CATHAY whom the Moscouia^s caul
Czar Kythaiski, The great Chan of Cathay.
has his name. For Chan in the Tartars language signifies a king.

The places of Lucomorya nere unto the sea, Lucomoria.
are saluage, full of wooddes, and inhabited withowt any houses. And albeit
that the autour of this journey, said that many nations of Lucomorya are
subject to the prince of Moscouia, yet for as much as the kingdom of Tumen is
near thereunto, Tumen.
whose prince is a Tartar and named in their tongue Tumenski Czar (that is) a
king in Tumen, and has of late done great damage to the prince of Moscouia,
it is most like that these nations should rather be subject unto him.

Near unto the river Petzora, Petzora.
(whereof mention is made in this journey) is the city and castle of Papin or
Papinowgorod, Papin.
whose inhabytauntes are named Papini, and have a private language differyng
from the Moscouites. Beyond this river, are exceadynge high mountains, high
mountains, supposed to be hyperborei, and Rhiphei*
reachyng even unto the banks: whose ridgies or tops by reason of continual
wyndes, are in manner utterly barrayne withowt grass or fruits. And although in
diverse places they have diverse names, yet are they commonly cauled Cingulus
Mundi, (that is) the world. In these mountains do ierfalcons breed, whereof
I have spoken before. There grow also Ced^r trees, among the which are found
the best and blackest kind of sables. And only these mountains are seen in
all the domynyons of the prince of Moscouia, which perhaps are the same that
the owld writers caul Rhipheos or Hyperboreos, so named of the Greek word
Hiper, (that is) under: and Boreas (that is) the north. For by reason they are
covered with continual snow and froste, they can not withowt great difficulty
be trauayled and reach so far into the north, that they make the unknown
land of Engroneland. Engronland.
The duke of Moscouia Basilius the soonne of John, sent on a time two of his
capitaynes named Simeon Pheodorowitz Kurbski, and Knes Peter Uschatoi, to
search the places beyond these mountains and to subdewe the nations
therabowte. Kurbiki was yet alive at my being in Moscouia: and declared unto me
that he spent xvii. days in ascendyng the mountayn, and yet could not coome to
the ^oppe thereof, which in they^ tongue is cauled Stolp (that is) a pyller.
Stolp.
This mountain is extended into the Ocean unto the mouths of the ryuers of
Dwina and Pe^zora. But now having spoken thus much of the said journey, I
will return to the domynyons of Moscouia with other regyons lyinge eastwarde
and southe from the same toward the mighty Empire of CATHAY. Cathay.
But I will first speak sumwhat brefely of the prouynce of Rezan and the
famous river of Tanais.

The prouynce of Rezan situate between the ryuers of Occa and Tanais, The
frutfull province of Re^an.
has a city builded of woodd not far from the bank of Occa. There was in
it a castle named Iaroslaw, Iaroslaw.
whereof there now remains nothing but tokens of the olwd ruin. Not far
from that city, the river Occa makes an Island named Strub which was sumtym a
great dukedom, whose prince was subject to none other. This province of Rezan
is more frutfull then any other of the prouynces of Moscouia: In so much that
in this (as they say) every grain of wheat bryngethe furthe two and sumtymes
more ears: whose stalks or strawes grow so thycke that horses can scarsely
go throwgh them, or quayles fly out of them. There is great plenty of honnye,
honny.
fysshes, fowls, birds, and wild beasts. The fruits also do far exceade
the fruits of Moscouia. The people are bold and warlyk men.

Of the famous river of Tanais.
From Moscouia unto the castle of Iaroslaw, and beyond for the space of
almost xxiiii. leaques, runs the river of Tanais, at a place cauled Donco,
Donco.
where the merchants that trade to Asoph, Asoph.
Capha, Capha.
and Constantynople, Constantinople.
freight their ships: and this for the most part in autumn being a rayney
time of the year. For Tanais here at other times of the year does not so
abound with water as to hear ships of any burden: This famous river of
Tanais, dyuydeth Europe from Asia: Tanais divides Europe from Asia.
and has his orygynal or springes almost.viii. leaques from the city of Tulla
toward the south inclynyng sumwhat toward the East: The springes of Tanais.
and not owte of the Riphean mountains as some have written: But owte of a
great lake named Iwanowosero (that is) the lake of John: A great lake*
being in length and breadth about.1500. Werstes in a wood which sum caul
Okonitzkilies, and other name it Iepiphanowlies. And out of this lake, spring
the two great ryuers of Schat and Tanais. The river Schat.
Schat toward the Weste receauynge into it the river of Uppa, runs into the
river of Occa between the West and the north. But Tanais at the first runs
directly East: and continues his course between the kingdoms of Casan and
Astrachan within six or seven leaques of Uolga: Casan.
Astrachan.
And from thense bendynge toward the south, makes the fennes or marysshes of
Meotis. Meotis.
Furthermore, next unto his sprynges, is the city of Tulla: Tulla.
and upon the bank of the river almost three leaques above the mouths of
the same, is the city of Asoph, which was first cauled Tanas. Four days
journey above this, is a town cauled Achas, Achas.
situate hard by the same river: Fruitful regions about Tanais.
which the Moscouites caul Don. I can not sufficiently praise this river for
the exceadynge abundaunce of good fysshes, and fairness of the regions on
both sides and banks, with plenty of holsoome herbs and sweet roots,
beside diverse and many fruitful trees growing in ^uche coomly order as though
they had been set of purpose in gardens or archardes. There is also in manner
every where such plenty of wild beasts, Plenty of wild beasts.
that they may easily be slain with arrows* In so much that such as travail
by those regions, shall stand in need of none other thing to maintain their
life but only fire and salt. Fire and salt.
In these parts, is no observation of miles, but of days journeys. But as
far as I could conjecture, from the fountaynes or sprynges of Tanais unto
the mouths of the same iorneyinge by land, are almost fourscore leaques. And
saylynge from Donco (from whense I said that Tanais was first nauigable) in
scarsely.xx. days vyage, where Tanais is first nauygable.
they come to the city of Asoph tributarie to the Turks: Asoph.
which is (as they say) five days journey from the straight of Taurica,
otherwise cauled Precop. In this c^tie is a famous mart town, unto the which
resort many merchants of diverse nations, and from diverse parts of the
world. The mart of Asoph.
For, that all nations may the gladlyer have recourse thither, free liberty of
bying and selling is granted unto all: Liberty a^sureth strangers.
and that withowt the city every man may freely use his own and accustomed
manner of living withowt punysshement.

Of the altares of great Alexander and Julius Caesar which many writers make
mention of in this place, The altars of Alexander and Caesar.
or of their ruins, I could have no certain knowleage of thinhabitauntes or
any other that had oftentimes trauayled these places. Furthermore the souldyers
which the prince of Moscouia maynteyneth there yearly to oppress thincursion
of the Tartars, being of me demanded hereof, answered that they never saw or
hard of any such thing. Nevertheless, they said that about the mouths of
Tanais the less, four days journey from Asoph nere unto a place cauled
Sewerski, by the holy mountains, The holy mountains.
they saw certain images of stone and marble. Tanais the less, Tanais the
less.
has his sprynges in the dukedom of Sewerski: whereof it is cauled Donetz
Sewerski: and fauleth into Tanais three days journey above Asoph. But such as
journey from Moscouia to Asoph by land, From Moscouia to Asoph.
they, passing over Tanais about the owlde and ruinate town of Donco, do
sumwhat turn from the south to the East: In the which place, if a right line
be drawn from the mouths of Tanais to the spirnges of the same, Moscouia
shall be found to be in Asia and not in Europe. Moscouia in Asia and not in
Europe.


More directly from Moscouia. to Cathay.
THe great and large province of Permia, The province of Permia.
is dystante from Moscouia two hundredth and fyftie or (as sum say) three
hundredth leaques directly between the East and North: And has a city of the
same name by the river Uischora which runs.x. leaques beneth Kamam. The
journey by land can scarcely be trauayled thither but in winter by reason of
many ryuers, marysshes, Marysshes in summer.
and fennes. But in summer, this journey is dispatched with more facility in
boats or smaule ships by Uuolochda, Ustiug, and the river Uitzechda which
runs into Dwina.xii. leaques from Ustiug. Dwina.
Ustiug.
But they that go from Permia to Ustiug, must sail up the river Uischora
against the course of the stream: and passing over certain ryuers, sumtymes
also conueyinge their boats into other ryuers by land, they come at the
length to Ustiug three hundredth leaques distant from the city of Permia.
There is smaule use of bread in this province. For their yearly tribute,
Tribute.
they pay to the prince furs and horses. Furs and horses.
They have a private language, and letters of their own, which one Steven a
bishop (who confirmed them yet waueryng in the faith) did inuente. For before
being yet infantes in the faith of Christ, they slew and fleyde an other
bishop that was appointed to instruct them. This Steven afterward when
Demetrius the son of John reigned, was taken for a saint among the Ruthens.
Of these people there yet remain many Idolatours here and there in the woods,
whom the moonkes and heremites that go thither, Monks and heremites.
do not cease to convert from their vain error. In the winter they journey in
Artach as they do in many places of Russia. Artach, are certain long
patentes of woodde of almost six handfuls in length, Patentes.
which they make fast to their fiete with latchettes, and therewith perform
their journeys with great celeritie. Marcus Paulus writes that these dogs are
almost as byg as Asses: and that they v^e six to one stead.
They use for this purpose great dogs in the stead of other beasts, with
the which they carry their farthels on sleades, as other do with hearts in
other places, as we will further declare hereafter. They say that that province
toward the East confineth with the province cauled Tumen, perteynynge to the
Tartars.

The situation of the province of Iugaria, Iugaria.
is apparente by that which we have said before. The Moscouites caul it Iuhra
with an aspiration: and caul the people Iuhrici. This is that Iugaria from
whense the Hungarians came in time paste, hungaria.
possessed Pannonia, Pannonia.
and under the conduct of Attila, Attila.
subdued many provinces of Europe: wherein the Moscouites do greatly glory,
that a nation subject to them, invaded and wasted a great part of Europe.
Georgius Paruns a greek borne, and a man of reputation with the Prince of
Moscouia, willing to ascribe to the right of his prince the great dukedom of
Lithuania, and the kyngedome of Polonie with certain other dominions, toulde
me that the Iuharici or Iuhgary, being subjects to the great duke of
Moscouia, came forth of their own country, and first inhabited the regions
about the fennes of Meoris, and then Pannonie which was afterward cauled
Hungary, The higher or superyor Hungarye, is cauled Austria.
by the river of Danubius: Also that in fine they possessed the region of
Morauia so named of the river: and likewise Pollonie, Polonie.
so cauled of Polle, which signifies a plain. Furthermore that Buda was so
cauled after the name of the brother of Attila. Buda.
They say also that the Iuhgari use the same tongue that do the Hungarians.
The which whether it be true or not, I do not know. For althowgh I have made
diligent inquisition to know the truth hereof, yet could I find no man of
that region with whom my servant being expert in the Hungarian tongue might
speak. They also pay furs for their tributes to the prince of Moscouia.
Furs.
And albeit that pearls and precious stones are brought from thense to
Moscouia, Pearls and Precious stones.
yet are they not gathered in their Ocean, but in other places: especially
about the coast of the Ocean nere unto the mouths of Dwina.

The province of Sibier, Sibi^r.
confineth with Permia and Uuiathka: The which, whether it have any castles or
cities, I do not yet certeynly know. In this the river Iaick has his
original, and fauleth into the Caspian sea. They say that this region is
deser^e because it lies so near the Tartars: Aspreolos, I thynk to be
marterns: yet sum think the^ to be squerels Ge^nerus writes that the kings of
the Tartars, have their ten^e^ covered withowt with the skynnes of lions: and
within* with the skynnes of ^sbles and Ermynes.
Or that if it be in any part inhabited, the same to be possessed of the
Tartar Schichmamai. Thinhabitantes have a peculiar language: and have their
chief gaynes by the furs of marterns, which in fayrenes and greatness,
excel all the furs of that kind that are found in any other provinces. Yet
could I have no great plenty of them in Moscouia at my being there. Note
that long after the writing of this history, at Richard Chaunceler his first
being in Moscouia, Duke John Uasilivich that now raygneth, subdued all the
Tartars with their regions and provinces even unto the great city and mart
town of Astrachan and the Caspian ^ea. At the same time also, there was in the
dukes court an ambassador that came from this province of Sibier: who
declared that his father had been sent ambassador to the great Chan of Cathay.
And that the great city of Cambalu where the great Chan keeps his court in
winter, was in manner destroyed by Necromancie and magical arts wherein the
Cathaynes are very expert as writes Marcus Paulus Uenctus. There was also at
the same time thambassadour of the king of Persia cauled the great Sophic.
This ambassador was appareled all inscarlet, and spoke much to the duke in the
behalf of owre men, of whose kingdom and trade he was not ignorant.

The people cauled Czeremisse, Czeremisse.
dwell in the wooddes beneth Nouogardia the lower. They have a peculiar
language and are of the sect of Machumet. They were sumtyme subject to the
king of Casan: but the greater part of them are now subject to the prince of
Moscouia. Many of them at my being there, were brought to Moscouia, as
suspected of rebellion. This nation does inhabit a large region withowt houses
from Uuiathka and Uuolochda, h^bitacion withowt houses.
to the river of Kama All the nation as well women as men, are very swyft of
foot, and expert archers: wherein they so delight, that their bows are in manner
never out of their hands: and give their children no meat until they hit the
mark they shoot at.

Two leaques distante from Nouogardia the lower, were many houses to the
similitude of a city or town, where they were accustomed to make salt. Salt.
These a few years sense being burnt of the Tartars, were restored by the
commandment of the prince.

Mordwa, are people inhabytynge by the river of Uolga on the south bank beneth
Nouogardia the lower: And are in all things like unto the Czeremisses but that
they have more houses. And here ends Thempire of the Moscouites.

Note here that Matthias of Michou, in his book of Sarmatia Asiatica, writes
that the dominion of the duke of Moscouia recheth from the northwest to the
southeast five hundredth miles of Germany, which are more then leaques. For
they affirm that a Germane mile is more then three English miles.

Of the Tartars.
We will now add hereunto sumwhat of the people confinynge with ^he
Moscouites toward the East: of the which the Tartars of Casan are the first.
The Tartars of Casan.
But before we speak of them particularly, we will first rehearse sumwhat of
their manners and customs in general.

The Tartars are divided into companies which they caul Hordas, of the which
the Horda of the Sawolhenses is the chief in fame and multitude. horda.
For it is said that the other Hordas had their ofsprynge and original of
this. And albeit that every Horda has his peculiar name, as the Sawolhenses,
Precropenses, and Nahays with diverse other being all Machumetans, yet do they
take it evil and count it reproach to be cauled Turks: but will them selves
to be cauled Besermani, Besermani.
by the which name also the Turks desire to be cauled. And as the Tartars
inhabyte many prouynces reachynge far on every side, even so in manners and
order of living do they not agree in all things. They are men of mean
stature, The stature of the Tartars.
with broad and fat faces, holowe eyde, with roughe and thyck beardes, and
poulde heads. Only the noble men have long hear, and that exceadyng black,
which they wreath on both sides their ears. They are strong of body and
stout of mind: prone to leacherye, and that unnatural. They eat the
fleasshe of horses, camells, and other b^astes except hogs, They abste^ne
from hogs flesh.
Abstinence.
from which they absteyne by a law. They can so abide fasting and hunger, that
they su^time forbear meat and sleep for the space of four days, occupied
neuerthele^se about their necessary affairs. Again when they get any thing
to devour, Uoracitie.
they ingorge them selves beyond measure: and with that surfecte in manner
recompense their former abstynence. And being thus oppressed with labor and
meat, they sleep contynually for the space of three or four days withowt
doing any manner of work or labor: during which time the Lyuons and
Moscouites into whose domynyons they are accustomed to make their incursions,
assail them unawares thus oppressed with meat and sleep, lyinge scatered here
and there out of order withowte watch or ward. Also if when they ride, they
be molested with hunger and thyrste, So do the Turks.
they use to let their horses blud, and with drynkyng the same, satysfye
their present necessytie, and affirm their horses to be the better thereby.
And because they all wander in unknown places, they use to dyrect their
journeys by thaspecte of the stars, Iorneying by the pole star.
and especyally of the pole star, which in their tongue they caul
Selesnikoll, (that is) an iren nail. They greatly delight in mares milk, Mares
milk
and believe that it makes men strong and fat. They eat herbs very much:
and especyally such as grow about Tanais. Few of them use salt. horse
flesh eaten.
When their kings dystrybute any vytayles among them, they are accustomed to
give one horse or cow to fortye men. Of the slain beast, the bowels and
trypes are reserved for the chief men and capytaynes. Clenly.
These they heat at the fire until they may shake out the doonge, and then
devour them gredely. They suck and lycke, not only their fyngers imbrued with
fat, but also their knyues and styckes wherewith they scrape the doong from
the guts. The heads of horses are counted delycate disshes with them as are
bores heads with us: horse heads, deintie meat
and are reserved only for the chyefe men. The Tartars horses.
Their horses (whereof they have great abundance) are but smaule, and with
short necks: but very strong and such as can well away with labor and hunger.
These they feed with the branches and barks or ryndes of trees and the rotes
of herbs and weeds, whereby they accustom them to hard feeding, and
exercise them to contynuall labor: by reason whereof (as say the Moscouytes)
their horses are swyfter and more durable then any other. These kind of
horses, they caul Pachmat. They have none other saddells and steroppes then of
woodd, Saddels and styrrops of woodde.
except such as they either bye of the Chrystians, or take from them by
vyolence. Least their horse backs should be hurt with their saddells, they
vnderlaye them with grass and leaves of trees. They also pass over ryuers on
horsbacke. But if when they fly, they fear the pursuynge of their enemies,
then casting away their saddells, apparelle, and all other impedymentes,
reseruyng only their armoure and weapons they fly amayne and with great
ceelrytye. Their women use the same kind of apparel that do the men withowt
any dyfference except that they cover their heads with lynnen vayles, The
Tartars women.
and use lynnen hose much like unto maryners sloppes. When their queens coome
abrod, they are accustomed to cover their faces. The other multitude of the
common sort that lives here and there in the feeldes, have their apparel made
of sheep skynnes, which they chaung not until they be worn and torn to
fytters. They tarry not long in one place, iudgyng it a great mysery so to
do: The Tartars curse.
In so much that when they are angry with their children, the greatest curse
that they can give them, is that they may remain perpetually in one place,
and draw the stynshe of their own fylthynesse as do the Chrystyans. When
they have consumed the pasture in one place, they go to an other with their
droues of cattayle and their wives and children whom they ever carry about with
them in Wagons: albeit the Tartars that dwell in cities and towns, use an
other order of living. If they be enclosed with any dangerous warr^, they
place their wives, children, and owld folks, in the sauest places. There is no
justice among them. No justice among the Tartars.
For if any man stand in neade of any thing, he may withowt punnysshemente
take it away from an other. If any complain to the Judge of the vyolence and
wrong doonne unto him, the offender denies not the crime, but says that he
could not lack that thing. Then the Judge is wont to give this sentence: If
thowe also shalt have need of any thing do the like to other. Sum say they
do not steal: But whether they steal or not, let other judge. They are
surely a thee^^sshe kind of men and very poor, The Tartars are thieves and
poor.
living only by robbyng of other, and stealyng away other men's cattayle, and
vyolently also caryynge away the men them selves whom either they selle to the
Turks or proffer them to be redeemed by ransom, reserving only the young
wenches. They seldom assault cities or castells, They rejoice in spoylynge
but burn and waste towns and vyllagyes: In so much that they so please them
selves herin, that they think they have so much the more enlarged their
empire, in how much they have wasted and made desolate many prouynces. And
althowgh they be most impacyent of rest and quietness, yet do they not
kill or destroy one an other, except their kings ^ee at dessention between
them selves. If any man be slain in any fraye or quarrel, and the autours of
the myschefe be taken, only their horse, harness, weapons, and app^rell, are
taken from them, and they dismissed. So that the murderer by the loss of a
vile horse or a bow, is dyscharged of the Judge with these words: get the
hense and goo abowte thy business. They have no use of gold and silver,
except only a few merchants: But exersyse exchange of ware for ware. And
if it so chance that by sellyng of such things as they have stolen, they
get any monye of their bortherers, they bye therewith certain apparel and
other nece^saryes of the Moscouites. The regyons of their habytations (the
feelde Tartars I mean) are not lymytted with any bounds or borthers. The
feelde Tartars.
A merry tale.
There was on a time a certain fat Tartar taken prisoner of the Moscouites:
to whom when the prince said, How art thou so fat thowe dog, sithe thowe
haste not to eat, the Tartar answered, Why should not I have to eat sithe I
possess so large a land from the East to the west, whereby I may be
abundauntely nury^shed? But thowe may rather seem to lack, sith thowe
inhabytest so smaule a portion of the world, and duste daily strive for the
same.

Casan, Ca^an.
is a kyngedome, also a city, and a castle of the same name, situate by the
river Uolga on the further b^nke, almost threscore and ten^e leaques beneath
Nouogar^ia the lower. Alonge by the cour^e of Uolga toward the East an^ South,
it is termined with deserte fyeldes. Toward the summer East, it confineth with
the ^artars cauled Schiba^^^i, and Kosatzki. The king of this province, The
king of Ca^an.
is able to make an army of.xxx. thousand men, especially foot men, of the
which the Czeremi^se and Czubas^hi are most expert a^chers. Archers.
The Czubaschi are also cunning maryners, Maryners.
The city of Casan, is threscore leaques distant from the princip^l castle
Uuiathka. Furthermore, Casan in the Tartars language, The town Tartars.
signifies a bra^en pot boylynge. These Tartars are more civil then the
other. For they dwell in houses, till the grownde, and exercise the trade of
marchaundies. They were of late subdued by Basilius the great duke of
Moscouia, and had their king assigned them at his arbitriment. But shortly
after, Mo^cou^a inu^ded by the Tartars.
they rebelled ageine: and associate with other Tartars, invaded the region of
Moscouia, spoiled and wasted many cities and towns, and led away innumerable
captives, even from the city Moscouia which they possessed for a time, and had
utterly destroyed the same if it had not been for the valyantnesse of the
Almayne gunners which kept the castle with great or^inaunce. The prince of
moscouia tributary to the Tartars.
They also put duke Basilius to flight, and caused him to make a letter of
his own hand to Machmetgirei their king to acknowleage him self for a
perpetual tributarie to them, wheruppon they di^solued the siege, and gave the
Moscou^tes free liber^ie to redeem their captives and gooddes, and so
departed. But Basilius not long able to abide this contumely and dishonor,
Duke Basilius arm^ against the Tartars.
after that he had put to death such as flyinge at the fy^st encounterynge
were the cause of this overthrow, assembled an army of a hundredth and
fourscore thousand men shortly after in the year.1523. And sent forward
his army under the conducte of his Lieuetenaunte: and therewith an heralde at
arms to bydde battle to Machmetgirei the king of Casan, with words in
this e^^ecte: The last year like a thief and robber withowt byddyng of
battle, thou dyddeste pryuilie oppress me. Wherefore I now challenge the,
once again to prove the fortune of war if thou mystruste not thine own
pour. To this the king answered, that there were many ways open for him to
invade Moscouia: And that the wars have no less respect to the commodity of
time and place the^ of armure or strength: And that he would take thaduantage
thereof when and where it should seem best to him and not to other. With which
words Basilius b^inge greatly accensed and burning with desire of revenge,
invaded the kingdom of Casan: whose king being stryken with suddeyne fear
at thapproche of so terrible an army, assigned the governance of his kingdom
to the young king of Taurica his neuie, while he him self went to require
aid of the Emperor of the Turks. But in fine the king of Casan submytted
him self upon certain conditions of peace which the Moscouites did the
gladlyer except for that time because their vittayles failed them to maynteyne
so great a multitude. The king of Casan ^ubmitteth him self.
But whereas duke Basilius him self was not present at this last expedition, he
greatly suspected Palitzki the Lieuetenaunte of tharmy to be corrupted with
brybes to proceade no further. In this mean time, the king of Casan sent
ambassadors to Basilius to entreat of peace: whom I saw in the dukes court
at my being there: but I could perceive no hope of peace to be between them.
For even then, Basilius to endomage the Casans, translated the mart to
Nouogardia, which before was accustomed to be kept in the Island of
merchants nere unto the city of Casan: The Island of merchants
Commaundyng also under pain of grievous punysshemente that none of his
subjects should resort to the Island of merchants: thynkyng^ that this
translation of the mart should greatly have endomaged the Casans: and that
only by taking away their trade of salt (which they were accustomed to bye of
the Moscouites at that mart) they should have been compelled to submission. But
the Moscouites them selves felt no less inconvenience hereby then did the
Casans, by reason of the dearth and ^earesenesse that followed hereof of al such
things as the Tartars were accustomed to bring thither by the river of Uolga
from the Caspian sea, The Ca^pi^n ^ea.
the kyngedomes of Persia and Armenia, P^r^ia.
^^menia.
and the mart town of Astrachan: ^str^c^an.
especially the great number of most excellent fysshes that are taken in Uolga
both on the hither and further side of Casan.

But having said thus much of the wars between the prince of Moscouia and
the Tartars of Casan, we will now proceed to speak sumwhat of the other
Tartars inhabytyng the regions toward the southeast and the Caspian sea.

Next beyond the Tartars of Casan, The Tartars near to the Caspian ^ea.
are the Tartars cauled Nagai or Nogai, Nog^i.
which inhab^te the regions beyond Uolga about the Caspian sea at the river
Iaick, runnyng out of the province of Sibier. These have no kings but dukes In
owre time, three brethren diuydynge the provinces equally between them,
possessed those dukedomes. The po^se^sion of three brytherne.
The first of them named Schidack, possesses the city of Scharaitzick, beyond
the river of Rha or Uolga toward the East, with the region confinynge with
the river Iaick. The second cauled Cossum, enjoys all the land that lyethe
between the ryuers of Kaman Iaick and Uolga. The thryde brother named
Schichmamai, possesses part of the province of Sibier and all the region
about the same. Schichmamai, is as much to say by interpretacion, as holy or
mighty. And in manner al these regions are full of wooddes, except that that
lies toward Scharaitz, which consysteth of playnes and fyeldes.

Between the ryuers of Uolga and Iaick, about the Caspian sea, there sumtymes
inhabyted the kings cauled Sawolhenses. The kings cauled Sawolhenses.
Demetrius Danielis (a man among these barbarians, of singular faith and
gravity) toulde us of a marvelous and in manner incredible thing that is seen
among And that his father being sent by the prince of Moscouia to the king
of Sawolhense, saw while he was in that legacy, a certain seed in that
Island sumwhat less and rounder then the seeds of Melones: Of the which
being hid in the ground, there grows a fruit or plant very like a lamb,
A marvelous fruit like a lamb.
of the heyght of five spannes: And is therefore cauled in their tongue
Boranetz, which signifies a little lamb. For it has the headde, eyes,
ears, an all other parts like unto a lamb newly cyned: with also a very
thynne skin wherewith diverse of thinhabitauntes of those regions are
accustomed to line their cappes and hattes and other tyrementes for their
heads. Many also confirmed in owre presence that they had seen these skynnes.
He said furthermore that that plant (if it may be cauled a plant has bludde,
and no flesh: but has in the stead of flesh a certain substance like
unto the flesh of creuysshes. The hoofes also are not of horn a^ are the
lambs, but covered with hear in the same form. The root cleaves to the
navel or myddest of the belly. The plant or fruit lives until all the
grass and herbs growyn^e abowte it being eaten, the root wythereth for
lack of nurysshement. They say that it is very sweet to be eaten, and is
therefore greatly desired and sought for of the woolues and other rauenynge
beasts. And albeit I extreme all that is said of this plant to be fabulous,
yet forasmuch as it has been toulde me of credible persons, I have thought good
to make mention hereof.

Of this strange fruit, Mandeuell makes m^ntion, Mandeuell.
where in the.ixxxiiii. chapiture of his book he writes thus: Now shall I
say of sum lands, countries, and Isles that are beyond the land of Cathay.
Therefore who so goes from Cathay to India the high and the low* he shall go
through a kyngedome that men caul Cadissen, and is a great land. There
grows a manner of fruit as it were gourdes. And when it is ripe, men cut it a
sunder: and find therein a beast as it were of fle^she, bone, and bludde, as it
were a little lamb withowt woolle. Barnacles o^ the O^ke^eys.
And men eat that beast and the fruit also, which is a great maruayle
Nevertheless, I said unto them that I held that for no maruayle. For I said
that in my coun^rey are tres that bear fruit that become birds flying which
are good to be eaten. And that that fauleth into the water, lives: And that
that fauleth on the earth dies. And they had great maruayle of this* etc.

From the prince of Schidack, proceadyng.xx. days journey toward the East, are
the people which the Moscouites caul Iurgenci, whose prince is Barack Soltan,
Barack Soltan.
brother to the great Chan of Cathay. Cathay.
In ten days journey from Barack Soltan, they coomme to Bebe^d Chan. And this
is that great Chan of Cathay.

Names of dignities among the Tartars, Names of dignities among the Tartars.
are these, Chan, signifies a king. Soltan, the soonne of a king. Bii, a
Duke. Mursa, the soonne of a duke. Olboud, a noble man or counsiler. Olboadulu,
the soonne of a noble man. Seid, the high priest. Ksi, a private person.

The names of offices are these: Names of offices.
Ulan, the second dignity to the king. For the kings of the Tartars have
four principal men whose counsel they use in all their weyghty affairs. Of
these the first is cauled Schirni: the second Barni. the third, Gargni: The
fourth, Tziptzan. And to have said thus much of the Tartars, it shall suffice.
Marcus Pau^us writes that the great Chan, is cauled ^han Cubl^i that is, the
great king of kings: Chan Cublai
as the great turcke writes him self in like manner, as I ^awe in a letter
written by him of late to the city of Raguls, in the which he v^eth this
^ub^cr^ption: Soltan Soliman deselun Chain Signore de Signo^ in ^empiterno. As
concerning Mo^couia and Cathay, I was minded to have added hereunto diverse
other things, but that for certain considerations I was persuaded to proceade
no further. Unto who^e request, herein satisfyinge rather other then my self,
willing otherwise to have accomplysshed this book to further perfection, I
was content to agree for two causes especaially mouynge me: whereof the one is,
that as touching these trades and vyages* as in manner in all other sciences,
there are certain secreates not to be publysshed and made common to all men.
The other cause is, that the parteners at whose charge this book is prynted,
although the c^ppy whereof they have wrought a long space have cest them naught
do not nevertheless cease daily to caul upon me to make an end and proceade
no further: affirmynge that the book will be of to great a price and not
every man's money: fearyng rather their own loss and hynderaunce, then
careful to be beneficial to other, as is now in manner the trade of all men.
which ordinary respect of private commodity has at this time so little
m^ued me, I take god to witness, that for my pains and trauayles taken herein
such as they be, I may upon just occasion think my self a looser many
ways, except such men of good inclination as shall take pleasure and feel sum
commonditie in the knowleage of these things, shall think me worthy their
good woor^e, wherewith I shall repute my self and my trauayles so abundantly
satysfyed, that I shall repute other men's gaynes a recompense for my losses, as
they may be in deed, if men be not unthankful, which only vice of
ingratitude has hyndered the world of many benefits.

The navigations by the frosen sea.
AT my being in Moscouia when I was sent thither by king Ferdinando my lord
and master, it so chanced that Georgius Istoma the duke of Moscouia his
interpretour, a man of great experience who had before learned the latin
tongue in the court of John king of Denmark, was there present at the same
time. He in the year of Christ.1496. being sent of his prince with master
David a scotte borne and them ambassador for the king of Denmark, (where
also I knows there at my first legacy) made me a brief information of all
thorder of his journey. The which, forasmuch as it may seem difficult and
laborious as well for the distaunce as dangerous places, I have thought good to
describe the same as I received it at his mouth.

First he said that being sent of his prince with the said David, they came
first to Nouogardia the great. Nouogardia.
And whereas at the time the kyngedome of Suecia revolted from the king of
Denmark, and also the duke of Moscouia was at discention with the Suctians,
Suecia under the king of Denmark.
by reason whereof they could not pass by the most accustomed way for the
tumultes of war they attempted their journey by an other way longer by safer And
came first from Nouogardia to the mouths of the river of Dwina and Potiwlo,
Dwina.
Potiwlo.
by a very dyfficult and paynefull journey. For he said that this journey which
can not be to much de^ested for such labors and trauayles, continues for
the space of three hundredth leaques. In fine, taking four smaul ships or
barks at the mouths of Dwina, they sailed by the coaste on the right hand of
the Ocean, where they saw certain high and rowgh mountains: high mountayn^s
near the north Ocean.
and at the length saylynge.xvi. leaques, and passing a great goulfe, followed
the coaste on the left hand: And leauyng on the right hand the large sea
which has the name of the river Petzora (as have also the mountains adjacent
to the same) they came to the people of Finlappia: Finlappia.
who, although they dwell here and there in low cottagies by the sea side, and
lead in manner a beastly life, yet are they more meek and tractable then the
wild Lappians. The wild Lappians.
He said that these also are tributaries to the prince of Moscouia. Then
leaving the land of the Lappians, and saylynge fourscore leaques, they came
to the region of Nortpoden under the dominion of the king of Suecia This the
Moscouites caul Katenska Semla, The region of Nortpoden
and the people Kayeni. Departing from hense, and saylynge alonge by the
coaste of a wyndynge and bendynge shore reachyng toward the right hand, they
came to a promontorie or cape cauled the Holy nose, The cape cauled the holy
nose.
being a great stone reachynge far into the sea to the similitude of a
nose: under the which is seen a cave with a whyrlepoole which swalowth the
sea every six hours: A whyrl^oole or swalowing goulfe.
and casting forth the same again with terryble rorynge and violence, causes
the said whyrlepoole. Sum caul this the navel of the sea: and other name it
Charybdis. He affirms that the violence of this swalowynge goulfe is such,
that it draws into it, inuolueth, ^uch whyrle pooles, are cauled vipers
and swaloweth up ships and al other things that comme near it: and that
they were never in greater daungioure. For the whyrlepoole so suddeynely and
violentely drew unto it the ship or bark wherein they were carried, that with
the help of ores and great labor they hardly escaped. When they had thus
ouerpassed the holy nose, they came to a certain stonye mountain which they
should needs compass abowte. But being there stayed with contrary wyndes for
the space of certain days, the pylotte of the ship spoke unto them in this
effect: This stone (says he) that you see, is cauled Semes: The stone cauled
S^mes.
The which except we please with sum gift, we shall not pass by withowt
great daungiour. But the pylot being reproved of Istoma for his vain
superstition, Superstition
held his peace. And when they had been detained there by tempest for the space
of four days, at the length the tempest ceased and they went forward on
their vyage with a prosperous wynd. Then the pilotte spoke unto them again,
saying: You despised my admonicion of pleasynge the Semes, and scorned the
same as vain and superstitions. But if I had not privily in the night
ascended a rock and pleased the Semes, we should surely have had no passage.
Being demaund^d what he offered to the Semes, Sacrifice to the stone Semes
he said that he poured butter myxt with otemele upon the stone which we saw
reach forth into the sea. As they sailed further, they came to an other cape
named Motka, The cape Motka.
which was almost environed with the sea like an Island: in whose extreme
point, is situate the castle of Barthus, which sum caul Wardhus, The Castle
of Wardhus.
(that is) a house of defense or fortress. For the kings of Norway have there
a garryson of men to defend their marches. He said furthermore that that cape
reaches so far into the sea, that they could scarcely compass it in eight
days. By which tarying least they should be hyndered, they carried on their
shulders with great labor, their barks and fardelles over a straight of
land conteynyng half a leaque in breadth. From hense they sailed to the
region of the wyld Lappones, The region of the Wild Lappones.
cauled Dikilappones to a place named Dront, D^ont.
being.CC. leaques distant from Dwina toward the North. And thus far as he
says, does the prince of Moscouia exact tribute. Furthermore leauyng their
barks here, they fynysshed the residue of their journey on sleades. Iorneyinge
on sleades.
He further declared that there were heardes of hearts as are with us of oxen,
which in the Noruegians tongue are cauled Rhen, being sumwhat bygger then
owre hearts. how the baits draw sleades.
These the Lappones use in this manner. They join them to sleades made like
fyssher botes, as we put horses to the carte. The man in the sleade, is tied
fast by the feet least he fall owte by the swyfte course of the hearts. In his
left hand, he holds a collar or rain wherewith he moderateth the course of
the hearts: and in the right hand, a py^^ed staff wherewith he may sustain the
sleade from faulyng if it chance to decline to much on any part. And he toulde
me that by this means he trauayled twenty leaques in one day, ^^. leaques in
one day.
and then dismysses the heart, who by him self returned to his own master and
accustomed stable. This journey thus fynysshed, they came to Berges a city of
Norduegia or Norway, The city of Berges in Norway.
situate d^rectly toward the north between the mountains: and went from
thense to Denmark on horseback. At Dront and Berges, the day is said to
be.xxii. hours long in the summer Equinoctial. Blasius an other of the
prince of Moscouia his interpretours, who a few years before, was sent of his
prince into Spain to The Emperor, declared unto us an other and shorter way of
his journey. A shorter journey.
For he said that when he was sent from Moscouia to John the king of Denmark,
he came first on foot unto Rostowe: Rostow.
And taking ship there, came to Pereaslaw: Pereaslaw.
and from Pereaslaw by the river Uolga to Castromow: Castromow.
and that from thense going seven Werstes by land, he came to a little river:
saylynge by the which, when first he came to Uuolochda, Uuolochda.
then to Suchana, Suchana.
and Dwina, Dwina.
and in fine to the city of Berges in Norway, ouerpassynge in this vyage all
the perelles and labors that Istoma rehearsed before, he came at the length
to Hafnia the ch^efe city of Denmark, hafnia.
which the Germaynes caul Koppenhagen. Koppenhage^.
But in their returning home, they both confess that they came to Moscouia by
Liuonia: Liuonia.
and that they were a year in this vyage: Albeit Georgius Istoma, said that
half the part of that time, he was hyndered by tempests, and enforced to
tarry long in many places by the way. Yet they both likewise constantely
affirm that in this journey either of them trauayled a thousand threescore and
ten Werstes werste is almost an Italian mile.
(that is) three hundredth and forty leaques. Furthermore also Demetrius who of
late was sent ambassador from the prince of Moscouia to the bishop of Rome,
(by whose relation also Paulus Iouius wrote his description of Moscouia)
confirmed all these things to be true. Paulus Iouius.
All they being demanded of me of the congeled or frosen sea, made none other
answer but that in places nere unto that sea, Ryuers faulyng into the fro^en
sea.
they saw many and great rivers by whose vehemente course and abundaunt
flowynge, the seas are driven far from the shore: and that the said water of
the ryuers is frosen with the sea a good space from the land, as in Liuonia
and other parts of Suecia. For althowgh by the vehemency of the wyndes, wind.
the Ise is broken in the sea, Ise.
yet does this chance seldom or never in ryuers, except by sum inundation
or flud the Ise gathered together be lyfted up and broken. For the flakes or
pieses of Ise carried into the sea by force of the ryuers, do flote above the
water in manner all the hole year, and are again so vehemently frosen
together, that a man may there sumtymes see great heaps of the Ise of many
years, Ise of many years.
as does appear by such pieses as are driven to the shore by the wind. I have
also been credebly informed by faithful men that the sea Baltheum (otherwise
cauled the goulfe of Liuonia) is often times frosen in many places. The sea
Baltheum.
They say furthermore, that in that region which is inhabyted of the wild
Lappones, the soonne in the summer Equinoctial does not faule for the space
of.xl. days: where the son fauleth not in.xl. day^.
yet that the body thereof is so hydden with a dark myste or cloud three
hours, that the beams do not appear: Nevertheless to give such light
during that time, that the darkness hyndereth not their work. The
Moscouites make their boste that these wild Lappones are tributaries to their
prince. The Wild Lappones are tributaries to the Moscouites
Whereat I do not greatly maruayle, forasmuch as they have none other near unto
them, that may demand tribute of them. Their trybute is only furs and
fysshe, Furs and fysshe.
having in manner none other thing greatly commodious. And albeit they lack
bread, salt, and other intysementes and glutteny, and live only with fysshe
and wild beasts, yet are they exceadyng prone to lechery. They are such
expert archers, Expert archers.
that if in their hunting they espy any beasts whose skynnes they desire to
save vnperysshed, they will not lightly mysse to hytte them in the
nosethrylles. ^hen they go forth on hunting, they are accustomed to leave at
home with their wives such merchants or strangers as they have received
into their houses. Good fellowship.
So that if at their return, they perceive their wives throwgh the company of
the strangers to be myrier and more iocunde then they were wont to be, they
give the strangers sum present. But if they find it otherwise, they thrust
them forth of the doors with words of reproach. But now by the company they
have with strangers that resort thither for gaynes, they begin to leave their
native barbarousnesse. They gladly admit merchants, because they bring
them apparel of gross cloth: also hatchettes, needels, spones, knyues,
drinking cups, earthen and brazen pottes, with such other necessary wares:
Necessary wars.
So that they use now to eat sodden and roasted meat, and do embrase more
civil manners. Their own apparel is made of the skynnes of diverse beasts
sowed together. And in this apparel they sumtymes comme to Moscouia. Yet few
of them have cappes or hosen, which they use to make of hearts skynnes. They
have not the use of gold or silver money: No v^e of money.
but use only barteryng of ware for ware. And being ignorant of other
languages beside their own, they seem among strangers to be in manner
domme. Their cotages are covered only with the barks of trees. Their cotages.
They have no certain resting habitacion. But when they have consumed the
fysshe and wild beasts in one place, they remove to an other. Furthermore
also the said ambassadors of the prince of Moscouia, declared that in the
same parts they saw certain high mountains continually casting forth
flames of fire as does the mountain of Etna in the Island of Sicilia:
Mountains continually bu^nyng.
and that even in Norway, many mountains are faulen down and burnte in manner
to ashes with such continual flames. Which thing sum consyderyng, feign the
fire of Purgatory to be there. Purgatory.
And as concerning these mountains of Norway, when I was sent ambassador to
Christierne king of Denmark, I was informed the like by the governors of
Norwaye who chanced at that time to be present there.

About the mouths of the river Petzora that are toward the right hand from
the mouths of Dwina, The river Pet^ora,
are said to be diverse and great beasts in the Ocean: and among other, a
certain great beast as bygge as an ox, which thinhabitauntes caul Mors. The
beast cauled Mors.
This beast has short feet like a beuer or an Otter, with a breast sumwhat
high and broad for the proportion of the residue of his body: and two long and
great teeth growing owte of the upper iawe. These beasts for rest and
increase, do sumtymes leave the Ocean, and by great heardes ascend the
mountains: where before they give the^ selves to profounde sleep (whereunto
they are naturally inclined) they appoint one of their number as it were a
watcheman as do cranes for the security of the rest. ^he providence of
nature.
Which if he chance to sleep, or to be slain of the hunters, the residue
may easily be taken. But if the watchman give warning with torynge (as the
manner is) immediately the hole heard a wakened thereby, suddeynly put their
hinder feet to their teeth: And so faulynge from the mountain with great
celeritie as it were on a s^eade. they cast the^ selves headlong into the
Ocean: where also they rest and sleep for a while upon the heaps of I Will. The
hunters pursue these beasts only for th^yr teethe: Of the which the
Moscouites, Tartars, and especially the Turks, make haftes for swoordes and
dagges very artificially. And use these rather for ornamente, then to give the
greater stroke for the weight or heaviness thereof as sum fable. Also among
the Turks, Moscouites, and Tartars, these teethe are soulde by weight, and are
cauled the teethe of fysshes.

The frosen sea reaches far and wide beyond Dwina to Petzcora and unto the
mouths of the great river Obi: The frosen sea.
beyond the which they say to be the region of Engroneland, Engronland or
Groneland
unknown and separate from the trade and conversation of owre men, by reason
of high mountains covered and could with perpetual snow, and the sea no
less incumbered with contynually Ise which hyndereth nauigations and makes
them dangerous, as they say.

EXEMPLAR EPISTOLAE SEV LI TERARVM MISSIVARVM QVAS illustrissimus Princeps
Edvvardus eius nominis Sextus, Angliae, Franciae, et Hiberniae Rex, misit ad
Principes Septemtrionalem ac Orientalem mundi plagam inhabitants iuxta mare
glaciale, nec non Indiam Orientalem. Anno Dn^i. 1553. Regni sui Anno septimo et
vltimo.
EDvvardus sextus, Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Rex. etc. Omnibus, Regibus
et Principibus ac Dominis, et cunctis Iudicibus terrae, and Ducibus eius qui
buscunque est excellens aliqua dignitas in ea cunctis in locis quae sunt sub
vniuerso coelo: Pax, tranquillitas, and honor vobis, terris, et regionibus
vestris quae imp^rio vestro subiacent, cuique vestrum quemadmodu^ conuenit ei,
Propterea quod indidit Deus Opt. Max. hominibus prae cunstis alijs viuentibus
cor and desiderium tale, vt appetat quisque cum alijs societate^ mire, amare,
et vicissim amari, beneficijs afficere, et mutua accipere beneficia studeat,
ideo cuique pro facultate sua hoc desiderium in omnibus quidem hominibus
beneficijs fouere et conseruare conuenit, in illis autem maxim, qui hoc
desiderio adducti, a remotis etiam regionibus ad eos veniunt. Quo enim longius
iter, eius rei gratia ingressi sunt, eo ardentius in eis hoc desiderium fuiste
declararunt. Insuper etiam ad hoc, nos patrum maiorumque nostrorum exempla
inuitant, qui semper humanissime susceperunt et benignissime tractauerunt illos
qui tum a locis propinquis tum a remotis, eos amice adibant, eorum se
protectioni commendantes. Quod si omnibus id prestare aequum est, certe
mercatoribus impri mis praestari debet, qui per vniuersum orbem discurrunt,
mare circu^lustrantes et aridam, vt res bonas et vtiles quae Dei beneficio in
regione eorum inueniuntur, ad remotissimas regiones et regna adferant, atque
inde viuissim referant quod suae regioni vtile ibi repererint: vt et populi ad
quos eunt, non destituantur commodis quae non profert illis terra eorum, and
ipsi sint participes rerum quibus illi abundant. Nam Deus coeli et terrae,
humano generi maxim consulens, noluit vt omnia in quauis regione inuenirentur,
quo regio open alterius regionis indigeret, et gens ab alia gente commodum
aliquod expectaret, ac ita sta biliretur amicitia inter omnes, singulique
omnibus be nefacere quererent, Hoc itaque ineundae ac stabilie^dae ^micitiae
desiderio moti viri quidam regni nostri, iter in remo^^ matitimas regiones
instituerunt, vt inter nostros e^^llos populos viam mercibus inferendis et
eferendi^ aperirent: Nosque rogauerunt vt id illis con cederemus. Qui peticioni
illorum annuentes, concessimus viro honorabili et forti Hugoni Wilibeo et alijs
qui cum eo sunt seruis nostris fidis et charis, vt pro sua voluntate, in
regiones eis prius incognitas eant, quesituri ea quibus nos caremus, et
adducantillis ex nostris terris, id quo illi carent. Atque ita illis et nobis
commodum inde accedat, sitque amicitia perpetua et foedus indissolubile inter
illos et nos, dum per mittent illi nos accipere de rebus quibus superabundant
in regnis suis, et nos concedemus illis ex regnis nostris res, quibus
destituuntur. Rogamus itaque vos Reges et Principes and omnes quibus aliqua est
potestas in terra, vt viris istis nostris transitum permittatis per regiones
vestras. Non enim tangent quicqua^ ex rebus vestris inuitis vobis. Cogitate
quod homines et ipsi sunt. Et si quare caruerint, oramus pro vestra
beneficentia, eam vos illis tribuatis, accipientes vicissim ab eis quod
poterunt rependere vobis. Ita vos gerite erga eos quemadmodum cuperetis vt nos
et subditi nostri nos gereremus erga seruos vestros si quando transierint per
regiones nostras. Atque promittimus vobis per Deum omnium quae coelo, terra et
mari continentur, perque vitam nostram et tranquil litatem regnorum nostrorum,
nos pari benignitate seruos vestros accepturos si ad regna nostra aliquando
venerint. Atque a nobis et subditis nostris, ac sinati fuissent in regnis
nostris, ita benign tractabuntu^ vt rependamus vobis benignitatem quam nostris
ex hibueritis. Postqua^ vos Reges, Principes, etc. roga uimus vt humanitate et
beneficentia omniprosequamini seruos nostros nobis charos, oramus omnipotentem
Deum nostrum, vt vobis diuturnam vitam largiatur, et pacem quae nullam habeat
finem. Scrip tum Londini, quae ciuitas est regni nostri. Anno. 5515. a creato
mundo, mense Iiar. xiiii. die mensis, anno septimo regni nostri.

The copy of the letters missiue which the right noble princ^ Edward the.vi.
sent to the Kings, Princes, and other potentates inhabytynge the Northeast
parts of the world toward the mighty Empire of Cathay, at such time as sir
Hugh Willoby knight and Rychard Chaunceler with their company attempted their
vyage thither in the year of Christ.1553. and the.vii. and last year of his
reign.
Edward the syxte by the grace of God, kyng^ of England, France, and
Ierlande* etc. To all Kings, Princes, Rulers, Judges, and governors of the
earth, and all other having any excellent dignity on the same in all places
under the universal heau^n: Peace, tranquillity, and honor, be unto you,
and your lands and regions which are under yowr dominions, and to every of
you as is convenient.

Forasmuch as the great and almighty god has given unto mankind above al
other living creatours, such a heart and desire, that every man desires to
join frendeshyppe with other, to love and be loved, also to give and receive
mutual benefits, it is therefore the dewtie of all men, according to their
pour to maintain and increase this desire in every man with well deseruynge
to all men, and especially to show this good affection to such as being moved
with this desire, coomme unto them from far countries. For in how much the
longer viage they have attempted for this intent, so much the more do they
thereby declare that this desire has been ardent in them. Furthermore also
thexemples of owre fathers and predicessours do inuit us hereunto, forasmuch
as they have ever gentelly and louyngly entreated such as of frendely mind
came to them as well from countries nere hand as far remote, commending them
selves to their protection. And if it be right and equity to show such
humanity toward all men, doubtless the same owght chiefly to be showed to
merchants, who wandering about the world, search both the land and sea to
carry such good and profitable things as are found in their countries, to
remote regions and kyngedomes: and again to bring from the same, such
things as they find there commodious for their own countries: Both, as well
that the people to whom they go, may not be destitute of such commodities as
their countries bring not forth to them, as that also they may be partetakers
of such things whereof they abound. For god of heaven and earth, greatly
prouydynge for mankind, would not that al things should be found in one
region, to the end that one should have need of an other, that by this means
frendshippe might be establysshed among all men, and every one seek to
gratify all. For thestablysshynge and furtherance of which universal amity,
certain men of owre realm moved hereunto by the said desire, have institute
and taken upon them a vyage by sea into far countries to the intent that
between owre people and them, a way be opened to bring in and carry out
marchaundies, desyryng us to further their enterprise. Who assenting to their
peticion, have licenced the right valiante and worthy sir Hughe Wylloby
knight, and other owre trusty and faithful servants which are with him
according to their desire to go to countries to them heretofore unknown,
as well to seek such things as we lack, as also to carry unto them from owre
regions, such things as they lack. So that hereby not only commodity may
ensewe both to the^ and to us, but also an indissoluble and perpetual league
of frendshippe be establysshed between us both, while they permit us to take
of their things such whereof they have abundaunce in their regions, and we
ageine grant them such things of owrs whereof they are destitute. We therefore
desire you kings and princes, and all other to whom there is any pour on the
earth, to permit unto these owr servants, free passage by yowr regions and
dominions. For they shall not touch any thing of yowres unwilling unto you.
Consider you that they also are men. If therefore they shall stand in need of
any thing, we desire you of all humanity, and for the nobility which is in
you, to aid and help them with such things as they lack, receauynge
again of them such things as they shall be able to give you in recompense.
Show yowre selves so toward them, as you would that we and owr subjects
should show owr selves toward yowr servants, if at any time they shall pass
by owre regions. Thus doing, we promise you by the God of all things that
are contained in heaven, earth, and the sea, and by ^he life and tranquillity
of owre kyngedomes, that we will with like humanity accept yowre servants if
at any time they shall coomme to owre kingdoms, where they shall as friendly and
gentelly be inte^teyned as if they were borne in owr dominions, that we may
hereby recompense the favor and benignity which you have showed to owr men.
Thus after we have desired you kings and princes. etc. With all humani^^e and
favor to interteyne owr well-beloved servants, we pray owre almighty god to
grant you long life and peace which never shall have end. Written in London
which is the chief city of owre kyngedome: In the year from the creation
of the world.5515. in the month of I^ar, the.xiiii. day of the month, and
seventh year of owre reign.

This letter was written also in Greek and diverse other languages.

Other notable things as touching the Indies: and first of the foreknowleage
that the poet Seneca had of the finding this new world and other regions not
then known. Francisco Lopes.
TO speak of things that shall be, long before they are, is a kind of
divination if the truth thereof follow effectually. Divination.
Nevertheless althowgh such things as are spoken either by conjecture,
Conjecture.
or by thinstincte of nature, or by natural reason, do oftentimes take place
and succeed accordyngely, yet are not such conjectures to be accoumpted as
certain as prophesies reveled by the spirit of god, Prophecy.
which we ought entierly to believe: but not so the other gathered only by
certain apparences, similitudes, reasons, and demonstrations: althowghe it be
greatly to be maruailed to consider how they hytt e the truth sumtyme: which
perhaps they do according to the proverb that says: He that speaks much
shall sumtimes stumble on the truth. So do the Egiptians.
All this I speak considering the saying of the poet Seneca in his tragedy
of Medea, where his words seem in all points to agree with the discovering
of the Indies found of late by Chrystofer Colon and the Spanyardes. The
words of Seneca, The words of Seneca.
are these. Venient annis
Saecula seris, quibus Oceanus
Vincula rerum laxet, et ingens
Pateat tellus, Tiphisque nouos
Detegat orbs,
Nec sit terris vltima Thyle.
That is to say: There shall coomme worlds in late years, in the which the
Ocean shall unloose the bonds of things, and a great land shall appear. Also
Typhis (that is navigations) shall discover new worlds: And Thyle shall not
be the furthest land. Islande was in owlde time cauled Thyle as sum think.


The coppie of the duke of Moscouie and Emperor of Russia his letters, sent
to king Edward the syxte.
The almighty pour of god and the incomprehensible holy Trinity, rightful
Christian belief, we greatest Duke Ivan Uasileuich by the grace of god
Emperor of all Russia and great duke of Uflademerskii, Iuan Uasiliuich (that
is) John the soon of Basilius. He conquered Casan, and therefore writes
Lazanskii.
Moskouskii, Nougorodskii, Cazanskii, Pskouskii, Smolenskii, Tuerskii,
Yougorskii, Permskii, Ueatsskii, Bolgarskii, with diverse other lands.
Emperor also and great duke of Nouagoroda, and in the low countries of
Chermgouskii, Rezanskii, Uolotsskii, Rzefskii, Belskii, Rostouskii,
Yaroslauskii, Bclocherskii, Oodorskii, Obdorskii, Condinskii, and many other
countries, Lord over all the north coaste, Greetinge.
BEfore all right great and of honor worthy Edward king of England our
most hearty and of good zeal with good intent and friendly desire, and of owre
holy Christian faith and of great governance, and in the light of great
understanding: Owre answer by this our honorable writing unto yowre kyngly
governance at the request of yowre faithful servant Richard with his
company as they shall let you wisely know, is thus.

In the strength of the twenty year of owre governance, be it known that
at owre sea coasts, arrived a ship with one Richard and his company: and
said that he was desirous to comme into owre dominions: and according to his
request, has seen owre lordshyppes and owre eyes: Seen owre eyes (that is)
coomme to owr presence.
and has declared unto us yowre majesty's desire as that we should grant
unto yowre subjects to go and comme: And in our dominions and among owre
subjects to frequente free mart^s with all sorts of marchandies; and upon the
same to have wares for their return. And they have also delivered us yowre
letters which declare the same request. And here upon we have given order,
that where soever your faithful servant Hugh Wyllobie land or touch in
owre dominions, to be well interteyned, who as yet is not arrived as yowre
servant Richard can declare.

And we with Christian belief and faythfulnesse, and according to your
honorable request and my honorable commandment, will not leave it undone:
And am furthermore willing that you send unto us with your ships and
vessels when and as often as they may have passage, with good assurance on owre
party to see them harmless. And if you send one of yowre majesty's
counsel to treat with us where by your country merchants may with all
kinds of wares and where they will, make their market in our dominions, and
there to have their free mart with all free liberties thorough my whole
dominions with all kinds of wares to come and goo at their pleasure without any
let, damage, or impediment according to this our letter, our word, and our
seal which we have commanded to be under sealed. Written in our dominion,
in our town and our palesse in the Castle of Moscouia, in the year.vii.
thousand and syxtie, the second month Febriarie.


This letter was written in the Moscouian tongue, in letters much like unto the
Greek letters very fair written in paper with a broad seal hanging at the
same, sealed in paper upon wex. This seal was much like unto the broad seal
of England, having in it on the one side, the Image of a man on horseback in
complete harnes fighting with a dragon. Under this letter, was an other paper
written in the duche tongue, which was thinterpretation of the other written in
the Moscouite Letters.

These letters were sent the next year after the data of King Edwardes
Letters.

Of the great Island which Plato cauled Atlantica or Atlantide.
THe Philosopher Plato wrytethe in his Dialoges of Timeus and Cricia, that in
the owlde time there was in the sea Atlanticke over agenst Africa, an Island
cauled Atlantide greater then Africa and Asia: Plato says that these kings
were the sons of Neptunus.
affirmynge that those lands a^e from thense continent and great: And that
the kings of that Island governed a great part of Africa and Europe. But
that in a certain great earthequake and tempest of rain, An earthquake.
this Island soonke and the people were drowned: Also that there remained so
much mudde of the drownynge or synkynge of that Island, that that sea Atlantike
could not be sailed. Sum take this for a fable: and many for a true
history, as doothe Marcilius Ficinus inducinge Proclus alleagynge certain
hystories of the Ethiopians written by one Marcellus, Marcilius Ficinus.
Proclus.
who corfirmeth the same to be true. But there is now no cause why we
should any longer doubt or dispute of the Island Antlantide, forasmuch as the
discovering and conquest of the west Indies do plainly declare what Plato has
written of the said lands. In Mexico also at this day they caul that water
Atl. by the half name of Atlant, Mexico or new Spain.
as by a word remaining of the name of the Island that is not. We may
likewise say that the Indies are either the Island and firm land of Plato or
the remanent of the same: and not the Islands of Hesperides or Ophir, or
Tharsis, as sum have thought of late days. For the Hesperides, are the Islands
of Cabo Uerde and the Gorgonas from whense Hanon browght apes: Albeit in
conferring it with Solinus, hesperides. Capo Uerde Ophir. Tharsis. Gorgonas.
Solinus.
there is sum doubt by reason of the navigations of forty days whereof he
speaks. As Well may it be, that Cuba or Hayti, Lands found by the
Carthaginenses.
or any other Island of the Indies, should be those which the Carthaginenses
found and forbodde their citisens to make any vyages thither or to inhabit
the same as Aristotle and Theophraste do rehearse where they write of the
marvelous and unknown works of nature. Aristotell.
Theophrast.
As concerning Ophir and Tharsis, it is not known what or where they be,
althowgh many learned men as saint Augustine and other have searched what city
or land Tharsis might be. Saint Jerome who was expert in the Hebrewe tongue,
says in many places upon the prophets that Tharsis is as much to say as the
sea: and that whereas it is written that Jonas fled to Tharsis, Jonas fled
to Thar^is.
he went to the sea by a long journey. Furthermore as concerning the
nauigations of Solomon, it is not to be thowght that his nauies sailed to the
west Indies, The nauigations of Solomon.
forasmuch as to pass thither, it was requisite for them to sail Westwarde
departy^ge from the sea of Bermeio: and not Eastward as they sailed. Ageine,
the west Indies have no unicorns, elephantes, diamondes, and such other
things as they browght in the trade of their nauigations. Bermeio^is the
^rabian sea.


Of the color of the Indians.
ONe of the marvelous things that god uses in the composition of man, is
color: which doubtless can not be considered withowte great admiration in
beholding one to be white and an other black, being colors utterly
contrary. Sum likewise to be yelowe which is between black and white: and
other of other colors as it were of diverse liueres. And as these colors are
to be marueyled at, even so is it to be considered how they dyffer one from an
other as it were by degrees, forasmuch as sum men are white after diverse
sorts of whytenesse: how colour^ dyffer by degrees.
yelowe after diverse manners of yelowe: and black after diverse sorts of
blackenesse: and how from white they go to yelowe after discolourynge to
brown and read: and to black by asshe color, The color of the west
Indians.
and murrey sumwhat lyghter then black: and tawnye like unto the west Indians
which are all together in general either purple, or tawny like unto sodde
quynses, or of the color of chestnuttes or olyues: which color is to them
natural and not by their going naked as many have thought: albeit their
nakedness have sumwhat helped thereunto. Therefore in like manner and with such
diversity as men are commonly white in Europe and black in Affrike, Dyues
sorts of white and black.
even with like variety are they tawny in these Indies, with diverse degrees
diversely inclynynge more or less to black or white. No less maruayle is it
to consider that men are white in Siuile and black at the cape of Buena
Speranza, and of chestnutte color at the river of Plata, Difference of color
in the same clyme.
bring all in equal degrees from the Equinoctial line. Likewise that the
men of Affryke and Asia that live under the bu^nte line (cauled Zona Terrida)
are black: Rio de la plata.
and not they that live beneathe or on this side the same line as in Mexico,
Yucatan, Quauhtema, Lian, Nicaragua, Panama, Santo Domingo, Paria, Cape, saint
Augustine, Lima, Quito, and other lands of Peru which touch in the same
Equinoctial. Peru.
For in all the ^racte of these coasts certain black men were found only in
Quarequa when Uaschus Nunnez of Balboa discovered the sea of Sur. Black men in
the west Indies.
By reason whereof it may seem that such variety of colors proceadeth of
man, From whe^^e proceadeth the variety of colors.
and not of the earth: which may well be althowgh we be all borne of Adam
and Eve, and know not the cause why god has so ordained it, otherwise then to
consider that his divine majesty has doonne this as infinite other to declare
his omnipotency and wisdom in such diversities of colors as appear not only
in the nature of man, Gods wisdom and pour is seen in his works.
but the like also in beasts, birds, and flowers, where diverse and contrary
colors are seen in one little fether, or the leaves growing out of one
little stalk. An other thing is also greatly to be noted as touching these
Indians. And this is, Curld hear and baldnes.
that their hear is not curlde as is the Moors and Ethiopians that inhabit
the same clime: neither are they balde except very seldom, and that buy
little. All which things may give further occasion to philosophers to search
the secreates of nature and complexions of men with the novelties of the new
world.

Why they were cauled Indians.
SUm think that the people of the new world were cauled Indians because they
are of the color of the East Indians. The color of the East Indians.
And althowghe (as it seems to me) they dyffer much in color and fasshions,
yet is it true that of India they were cauled Indians. East India.
India is properly cauled that great province of Asia in the which great
Alexander kept his wars: and was so named of the river Indus: and is diuyded
into many kyngedomes confynynge with the same. From this great India (cauled
the East India) came great companyes of men as writes Herodotus: and inhabited
that part of Ethiopia that lies between the sea Bermeia (otherwise cauled the red sea or the goulfe of Arabia) and the river of Nilus: al which regions
that great Christian prince Prester John does now possess. Prester John came
out of India to Ethiope.
The said Indians prevailed so much, that they utterly changed the customs
and name of that land, and cauled it India: Ethyopia cauled India.
by reason whereof, Ethiopia also has of long time been cauled India. And
hereuppon came it that Arystotell, Seneca, and certain other oulde autours
said that India was not far from Spain. India not far from Spain
After this also, of later days owre West India was so cauled of the said
India of Prester John where the Portugales had their trade. For the pylot of
the caruell that was first driven by forcyble wind to an unknown land in
the Weste Ocean, Prester John known to the Portugales.
cauled the same India because the Portugales so cauled such lands as they had
lately discovered Eastwarde. Chrystopher Colon also after the said pylot,
cauled the west lands by the same name. Albeit, sum that take Colonus for an
expert Cosmographer, think that he so named them of the East India, as to be
the furthest and unknown end thereof reachynge into the Weste under the other
hemispherie or half globe of the earth beneathe us: At the furthest East,
begins the west.
affirmynge that when he first attempted to dicouer the Indies, he went
chiefly to seek the rich Island of Cipango, The Island of Cipango.
which fauleth on the part of great China or Cathay as writes Marcus Paulus
Uenetus and other: China.
Cathay.
And that he should sooner come thither by following the course of the soonne
Westwarde then against the same: To the East by the west.
Albeit many think that there is no such Island, or at the least not yet
known by that name: whereas also Marcus Paulus observed no exact description
of the place either of this Island or of Cathay. Marcus Paulus Uenetus.


The first discovering of the Weste Indies.
A Certain caruell saylynge in the weste Ocean about the coasts of Spain,
had a forcyble and continual wind from the East whereby it was driven to a
land unknown and not descrybed in any map or card of the sea: A hard
beginning.
and was driven still alonge by the coaste of the same for the space of many
days until it came to a haven: where in a short time the most part of the
maryners being long before very weak and feeble by reason of hunger and
travail, dyed: So that only the pylot with three or four other remained alive.
And not only they that dyed did not enjoy the Indies which they first
discovered to their mysfortune, but the resydue also that lived had in manner as
little fruition of the same: not leaving or at the least not openly
publyshynge any memory thereof, neither of the place, or what it was cauled, or
in what year it was found. Albeit, the fault was not theyrs, but rather the
malice of other, or the envy of that which we caul fortune. I do not
therefore marueyle that the ancient hystories affirm that great things
proceade and increase of smaul and obscure begynnynges, Great things
proceadyng of smaule and obscure begynnynges.
sith we have seen the same verefyed in this fyndyng of the Indies, being so
notable and new a thing. We need not be curious to seek the name of the
pylot sith death made a short end of his doings. Sum will that he came from
Andaluzia, and traded to the Islands of Canaria and the Island of Madera when
this large and mortal navigations chanced unto him. The pylotte that first
found the Indies.
Other say that he was a Byscayne, and traded into England and France. Other
also, that he was a Portugale: and that either he went or came from Mina or
India: Mina.
which agrees well with the name of these new lands as I have said before.
Again, sum there be that say that he browght the carauel to Portugale: or to
the Island of Madera, or to sum other of the Islands cauled delos Azores. Yet
do none of them affirm any thing, althowgh they all affirm that the pylotte
dyed in the house of Chrystopher Colon, with whom remained al such wrytynges
and annotacions as he had made of his vyage in the said carauell, as well of
such things as he observed both by land and sea, as also of the elevation of
the pole in those lands which he had discovered.

What manner of man Chrystopher Colon was: and how he Came first to the
knowleage of the Indies.
CHristopher Colon was borne in Cugureo, or (as sum say) in Nerui, a vyllage in
the territory of Genua in Italy. He descended as sum think, of the house of
the Pelestreles of Placentia in Lumbardie. He began of a child to be a
maryner: of whose art they have great exercise on the river of Genua. Thus
also began Rychard chaunceler.
He traded many years into Suria and other parts of the East. After this, he
became a master in making cards for the sea, whereby he had great vantage. He
came to Portugale to know the reason and descr^ption of the south coaste of
Africa and the nauigations of the Portugales, thereby to make his cards more
perfect to be sold. He married in Portugale as sum say: or as many say, in
the Island of Madera, where he dwelt at such time as the said caruell arrived
there, whose pylot suiorned in his house, and dyed also there, bequethynge to
Colon his card of the description of such new lands as he had found,
whereby Colon had the first knowleage of the Indyes. Sum have thowght that Colon
was well learned in the Latin tongue and the science of Cosmographie: Colon was
not much learned.
and that he was thereby first moved to seek the lands of the Antipodes and
the rich Island of Cipango whereof Marcus Paulus writes. Also that he had
read what Plato in his dialoges of Timeus and Cricias, writes of the great
Island Atlantide, The Island ^tlantide.
and of a great land in the West Ocean undiscovered being bygger then Asia
and Africa. Furthermore that he had knowleage what Aristotell and Theophrastus
say in their books of maruayles, where they write that certain merchants
of Carthage saylyng from the streyghtes of Gibraltar toward the west and
south, The land found by the Carthaginenses.
found after many days a great Island not inhabited: yet replenyshed with all
things requisite, and having many nauigable ryuers. In deed Colon was not
greatly learned: yet of good understanding. And when he had knowleage of the
said new lands by the information of the dead pylot, Colon conferred with
learned men.
made relation thereof to certain learned men with whom he conferred as
touching the like things mentioned of owlde autours. He communicated this
secreate and conferred chiefly with a friar, named John Perez of Marchena that
dwelt in the monastery of Rabida. So that I verily believe, that in manner all
that he declared, and many things more that he left unspoken, were written by
the said Spanyshe pylot that dyed in his house. For I am persuaded, that if
Colon by science atteyned to the knowleage of the Indies, he would long before
have communicate this secreate to his own country men the Genueses, that
travail all the world for gaynes, and not have comme into Spain for this
purpose. But doubtelesse he never thought of any such thing before he chanced
to be acquainted with the said pylot who found those lands by fortune,
Chance and art.
according to the saying of Pliny: Quod ars docere non potuit, casus
inuenit. That is: That art could not teach, chance found. Albeit, the more
Chrystian opinion is, A Christian opinion.
to think that god of his singular providence and infinite goodness, at the
length with eyes of compassion as it were lookynge down from heaven upon the
sons of Adam so long kept under Satan's captivity, intended even then (for
causes to him only known) to raise those wyndes of mercy whereby that caruell
(herein most like unto the ship of Noe whereby the remanent of the hole world
was saved as by this caruel this new world received the first hope of their
salvation) was driven to these lands. The caruel compared to the ship of Noye.
But we will now declare what great things followed of this smaule
beginning, and how Colon followed this matter reveled unto him not withowte
gods providence.

What labor and travail Colon took in attemptyng his first vyage to the
Indies.
AFter the death of the pilot and mariners of the Spanyshe caruell that
discovered the Indies, Chrystopher Colon purposed to seek the same. But in how
much more he desired this, the less was his pour to accomplish his desire.
For, beside that of him self he was not able to furnysshe one ship, he
lacked also the favor of a king under whose protection he might so enjoy the
riches he hoped to find, that none other might take the same from him or
defeat him thereof. And saying the king of Portugale occupied in the conquest
of Africa and the nauigations of the East which were then first attempted, The
king of Portugale.
the king of Castyle likewise no less busyed in the wars of Granada, The
king of Castile.
he sent to his brother Bartholomewe Colon (who was also privy to this
secreate) to practice with the king of England Henry the seventh being very
rich and withowt wars: King Henry the seventh.
promising to bring him great riches in short time if he would show him
favor and furnysshe him with ships to discover the new Indies whereof he had
certain knowleage. But neither here being able to bring his suit to pass,
he caused the matter to be moved to the king of Portugale Don Alonso the
fyfte of that name: at whose hands he found neither favor nor money,
forasmuch as the licenciate Calzadilla the bishop of Uiseo, Barnarde knew not
all things.
and one master Rodrigo men of credit in the science of Cosmographie,
withstoode him and contended that there neither was nor could any gold or
other riches be found in the west as Colon affirmed. By reason whereof he was
very sad and pensive: but yet was not discouraged or despaired of the hope of
his good adventure which he afterward found This done, he took shippinge at
Lisburne, and came to Palos of Moguer where he co^muned with Martin Alo^so
Pinzo^ an expert pylot, who offered him self unto him. After this disclosynge
the hole secreates of his mind to John Perez of Marchena (a friar of thorder
of saint Frances in Rabida, and well learned in Cosmographie) and declarying unto
him how by following the course of the son by a temperate usage, rich and great
lands might be found, the friar greatly commended his enterprise, and gave
him counsel to break the matter to the duke of Medina Sidonia Don Enrique of
Guzman a great lord and very rich: The duke of Medina Sidonia.
And also to Don Luys of Cerda the duke of Medina Celi, The duke of Medina Celi.
who at that times had great provision of ships well furnyshed in his haven
of Santa Maria. But whereas both these dukes took the matter for a dream and
as a thing divised of an Italian deceauer who (as they thought) had before
with like pretense deluded the kings of England and Portugale, the friar gave
him courage to go to the court of the Catholyke princes Don Ferdinando and
lady Isabell princes of Castile: affirmynge that they would be joyful of such
news. And for his better furtherance herin, wrote letters by him to friar
Ferdinando of Talauera the queens confessor. Chrystopher Colon therefore,
repaired to the court of the Cathollike princes, in the year.M.CCCC.lxxxvi.
and delivered unto their hands the peticion of his request as concerning the
discovering of the new Indies. But they being more careful, and applyinge
all their mind how they might drive the Moors out of the kingdom of
Granade, The conquest of Granada.
which great enterprise they had already taken in hand, did little or nothing
esteem the matter. But Colon not thus discouraged, found the means to declare
his suit to such as had sumtymes private communication with the king. what men
know not they count funtasticall.
Yet because he was a stranger and went but in simple apparel, nor otherwise
credited then by the letter of a gray friar, they believed him not, neither gave
ear to his words: whereby he was greatly tormented in his imagination. Colon
his interteinmente.
Only Alonso of Quintanilia the kings chief auditour gave him meat and
drink at his own charges, and hard gladly such things as he declared of the
lands not then found: desiring him in the mean time to be content with
that poor enterteynemente, and not to despair of his enterprise: putting him
also in good conforte that he should at one time or other, coome to the speech
of the Catholyke princes. And thus shortly after by the means of Alonso of
Quintanilia, Colon was browght to the presence and audience of the Cardinal
Don Pero Gonzales of Mendoza, archbysshop of Toledo, The archbysshop of Toledo.
a man of great revenues and authority with the king and queen, who brought
him before them after that he well perceived and examyned his intent. Colon is
brought to the kings presence.
And by this means was his suit hard of the Catholyke princes, who also read
the book of his memorials which he presented unto them. And although at the
first they took it for vain and false that he promised, nevertheless they
put him in good hope that he should be well dispatched when they had fynyshed
the wars of Granada which they had now in hand. With which answer, Colon
began to reuyue his spirits, with hope to be better esteemed and more
favorably to be hard among the gentelmen and noble men of the court, who
before took him only for a crafty fellow and deceauer: and was nothing
dismayde or discouraged when so ever he debated the matter with them, althowghe
many judged him fantastical, The judgment of ignorant folks.
as is the manner of ignorant men to caul all such as attempt any thing
beyond their reach and the compa^se of their knowleage: thinkyng the world to
be no bigger then the cagies wherein they are brought up and live. But to
return to Colon: So hot and vrgente was the siege of Granada, that they
presentely granted him his demand to seek the new lands, Colon is
dispatched.
and to bring from thense gold, silver, perles, precious stones, spices, and
such other rych things. They gave him also the tenth part of all the
revenues and customs dew unto the king of al such lands as he should
discover, Colon his reward.
not doing prejudice in any thing to the king of Portugale. The particulars
of this agreement were made in the town caused Sanera Fe: and the privilege of
the reward, in Granada the.xxx. day of Aprell the same year that the city
was woonne. And whereas the said Catholyke princes had not money presently to
dispatch Colon, Luys of s. Angel the kings secretary of accomptes, lent
them six quentes of marauedes, which in a gross sum make.xvi. thousand
ducades. Two things are herein chiefly to be noted: One quent is.x hundredth
thousand^.
whereof the one is, that for so smaule charges they have increased the revenues
of the crown of Castyle as much as the Indies are in value. The other is, that
ending the conquest of the Moors who possessed the kingdom of Granada eight
hundredth years, they immediately began the conquest of the Indies, as though
the nation of the Spanyardes were ever appointed to feyght against infidels and
enemies of the faith of Jesus Christ.

By this travail of Colonus in so noble an enterprise and so hard success,
does the saying of Pliny appear to be most true, where in the preface of his
natural hystory written to the^prour Uespasia^ he writes i^ this manner. Res
ardus vetustis novitatem dare: Nouis, autori tatem: absoletis, nitorem,
obseuris, lucem: sastiditis, gratiam: dubiis, fidem: omnibus vero naturam, et
naturae fuatl omnia, Itaque etiam non assecutis, voluisse abund^ pulchrum atque
magnificum est. That is to say: It is a dyfficulte thing to give newenes to
owlde things, authority to new things: beauty to things out of use: fame to
the obscure: favor to the hateful: credit to the doubtefull: nature to all,
and all to nature. To such nevertheless as can not attain to all these, it is
greatly commendable and magnificall to have attempted the same.

In the scuchen of arms given to Colon by Don Ferdinando and queen Elizabeth
Catholic princes (so cauled for their wars against the infidels) these
verses were written.

Por Castilla y por Leon,
Nueuo mundo hallo Colon.
That is; For Castile and for Leon,
The new world found Colon.
Of new Spain cauled Noua Hispania, or Mexico.
New Spain is that part of the continent or firm land that lies West and
South from the land of Floryda. This was subdued to thempire of Castile by
the right noble gentelman Ferdinando Cortese the marquess of the vale of
Quaxaca. In this land are many provinces co^teynyng in the^ in manner
innumerable cities, among whichthat is the chief which the India^s caul
Mexico or Temixtitan, The city of Mexico or Temixtitan
co^systyng of more the^ five hundredth thousand inhabitauntes. It stands in
the myddest of a lake of salt water as does Uenece in the sea. The lake
conteyneth forty Persian miles cauled Parasange, every one consystynge of.xxx.
furlons, and more as sum say. In these regions is found great plenty of
gold, silver, Gold and silver.
and precious stones, with innumerable other things both necessary for the
life of man and pleasant: as sylke, Sylke.
bombasine cotton, Cotton.
alame, Alam.
Safferne, Woade, woade.
with diverse other things wherewith clothe and sylke is dyed. There is also
such abundance of sugar, Sugar.
that certain Spanysshe ships are yearly fraighted therewith and bring the
same into Siuile from whense it is carried in manner to all parts of
Chrystendome. Thinhabitauntes of Mexico are subtyle people, and use much craft
in their bargening They have not the use of gold and silver monye: Shelles for
money.
but use in the stead thereof the half shelles of almonds, which kind of
Barbarous money they caul Cacao or Cacanguate. In manner al kinds of corn are
there very good cheap: Corn Beasts.
especially barley and wheat. They have great plenty of hearts, wild bores,
Lions, Leopardes, and Tigers, which beasts wander in manner in every place. The
region is most commodious for haukynge and hunting for the great abundaunce
it has of beasts and fowls. haukyng and hunting.
But the people exercise all their cunning in making the images of their
Idolatry, and in paintyng. Paintynge.
Their women are valiant: and sumptuous in their apparel and other tyrementes.
For they so vychely frynge and byset the same with perles, women sumptuously
appareled.
precious stones, and gold, that nothing can be more excellent. They have a
kind of paper greatly differyng from owrs. In this they express their minds
by certain figures. For they have nor otherwise thuse ofletters. The nation is
desirous of war: and does not long keep the conditions of peace
unviolated: A warlike nation.
But delyteth rather in civil and most cruel battle among them selves then
to live in peace and quietness. Such as in the wars faule by any means
into the hands of their enemies, either by submission or otherwise, are
partly sacrificed to the Idols, Captives sacrificed to Idols.
and the residue given to the soldiers to be eaten, in like manner as we
reward dogs and hawks with part of their pray. They have innumerable
Idols which every one makes for his particular god after the fantasy of his
own brain, and gives thereto divine honor. Albeit at this day they do by
little and little leave of their barbarous fierceness: and with owre religion
embrase better manners. For they now profess the faith of Christ, and in his
name pray unto God the father.

Understand here that as touching these regions cauled new Spain, you may
read at large in the book here before entiteled of the lands and Islands
lately found. This book follows immediately after the Decades, althowgh the
printer have also written the third decade over the head of that book which
entreats principally of the regions now cauld new Spain. Of the conquest
of this Mexico, Francisco Lopez has written a large book in the Spanysshe
tongue.

Of Peru.
The province cauled Peru, was also named noua Cathilia by them that first
found it. This region is the west part of America: and is situate in the
longitude of.290. degrees, proceadynge from the West to the East. And
southwarde begins five degrees beyond the Equinoctial line, and is extended
very far into the south. This is taken to be the rychest land in gold,
silver, Peru is the rychest land that is known
perles precious stones, and spyces, that ever was found yet to this day. For
gold is there in such plenty that they make pyspots thereof, and other vessels
applied to fylthy uses. But this is more to be marueyled at, that in a city
cauled Collao was found a house all covered with massy plates of gold. A
house covered withgold
In their wars also their harness was of gold and silver. harnes of gold.
Their weapons are bows, arrows, flynges, darts, and pikes. Thinhabitantes
are warlyke people and of great agilitie. They have cities defended with laws
and arms. The region is exceadyng fruitful, A frutful region.
and yeldeth corn twyse in the year. It is so florysshynge with many fayze
wooddes, mountains, ryuers, and other both pleasant and necessary
commodities, that it seems in manner an earthly Paradyse. It has diverse
kinds of beasts, and yet none hurtful or of rauenynge kind. There are
sheep of such heyght that they use them in the stead of horses. Great sheep
Sum write that they are as bygge as the young foles of camels: and that
their woolle is very soft and fine. Also that the ewes bring forth lambs
twyse a year. The people are wytty and of gentyl behauoure. Cunning also in
arts, faithful of promise, The beauty of Chrystian Princes.
and of manners not greatly to be discommended, save that they are ignorant of
Christ: who neuertheless is now known unto them in many places, as our hope
is he shall be daily more and more if all princes will herein put their
helping hands to the plowe of owre lord, and send laborers into his
vyneyarde.

Of the great river cauled Rio de la Plata (that is) the river of silver.
This is river reaches very far in length and breadth: and is cauled Uruai in
the Indian tongue. Into this fauleth an other river named Paraue. Paraue.
The first that sailed into the river of Plata, was John Dias Solis, John Dias
Solis.
whom the right noble king of Spain Ferdinandus made Admyral of these seas.
In the river lies an Island which John Dias named Martinus Gratias because a
pylot of his so cauled, The Island Martinus Gratias.
was buried there. This Island is situate in the myddest of the river: and is
dystant from the mouth of the same about forty leaques. As the said Admiral
attempted to expugne the Island, he was suddeynly oppressed and slain of the
Indians that privily assailed him. Wherewith nevertheless their barbarous
cruelty was not satisfied until they had torn him in pieses and devoured
him. But many years after, Themperoures majesty and king of Spain Charles
the fyfte, sent forth Sebastian Cabot (a man of great courage and skylfull in
Cosmographi, The viage of Sebastian Cabote to the river of Plata.
and of no less experience as concerning the stars and the sea) with
commandment to discover and subdue the Islands of Tharsis, Thar^is.
Ophir, Ophir.
Cipango, Cipango.
and Coi Cathay. Cathay.
Receauynge therefore his commission and proceadynge forward on his usage, he
arrived by chance at this Island: The cause whereof was that the principal
vessel was lost by shipwreck, and the men that saved their lives by swymmynge
were received into other ships. Perceiving therefore that by reason of this
chance he could by no means perform his vyage attempted, he intended to
expugne the said Island, and theruppon to conueygh his vytayles to land, to
prepare his soldiers to thinuasion, to plant colonyes, and to erect for tresses
by the ryuers side whereby the Spanyardes might be defended from the violence
of the barbarians. But before he attempted this, he was advertised that the
Island was rich in gold and silver. Which thing did so encorage him, that
withowt respect of perel he thought best to expugne it by one means or other,
wherein his bouldenes took good effect as often times chances in great
affairs. Furthermore as touching the river, The river of Plata.
Sebastian Cabote made relation that he never saw any co^parable unto this in
breadth and depth. For whereas it fauleth into the sea, it conteyneth.xxv.
leaques in breath. From the mouth of the river, Cabot sailed up the same into
the land for the space of three hundredth and fifty leaques as he writes in
his own card. That it is of great depth, may hereby be considered that many
great ryuers faule into it: so that the channel can not be shalowe that
conteyneth such abundance of water, and such plenty of good and great
fysshes. For there in is manner no fysshe in the sea, that is not found in this
river. As soon as the Spaniards were set alande, they made a proof if the
soil were frutfull to bear corn. Taking therefore fifty graynes of wheat
and committing the same to the earth in the month of September, Marvelous
fru^fu^nes.
they gathered thereof two thousand and fifty at December next following:
wherein sum being deceived and mistakynge the thing, have written in the
stead of two thousand and fifty, fyftie thousand and two. The like
fertility is there of all other grain and pulse. Furthermore thinhabitauntes
declared that not far from that place, there are great and high mountains in
the which is found great plenty of gold. And no great distance from the
same, to be other mountains no less fruitful of silver, Mountains
containing gold and silver.
and many other things long to rehearse. Thinhabitauntes are paynefull men,
and till the ground diligently, wherein they take great pleasure: and have
therefore great plenty of bread of Maizium. There are sheep of such
byggenesse that they compare them to young camels or asses as sum say. Great
sheep
Their woolle is very fine: and nearest unto the fyennesse of sylke. There are
also beasts of diverse kinds. Among men there is dyfference, that such as
live in the mountains, are white, Men with deformed legs.
and for the most part like unto the men of owre regions. But they that dwell
about the river (as though they took their color thereof) are blackysshe or
purple of the color of fine Iren or steel. Their colou^.
This also chances to many of them, that their fiete and legs are like the
legs and fiete of the foul cauled the oystreche.

Of the higher East India cauled India Tercera or Trecera.
IN this India which the Portugales caul Tercera, are very great kyngedomes:
as the kingdoms of Bengala, Pegu, Berma, Era^cangui, Dausian, Copelam, and the
great kingdom of Malacha, Malacha.
cauled of the owlde writers Aurea Chersonesus: whose chief city isalso
cauled Malacha, and was in owlde time named Tachola. Tachola.
Under this kyngedgme are infinite Islands cauled Maluche, The Island of
^alucha.
whereof the principal are these: Iaua the greater, Iaua the less, Polagua,
Mendana Cubu, Cailon, Huban, Bur, Tenado, Anbon, and Gilolo. With infinite
other. On the Southwest part from Malacha, is the great Island of Samotra
cauled in owlde time Laprobana, The Island of Samotra.
in the which are the kyngedomes of Pe^ir, Biraen, Pazer, Ardagni, and Ham.
This Island and all the other caule^ Maluche, Spyces.
bring forth great quantity of cloves, cinamome, nuttemegges, maces, and all
other kinds of spyces exe. p^o pepper, which grows in the province of
Calecut and the Island of Ceilam. Calocut.
Ceilam.
All these sorts of spices are carried to Malacha to be soulde. But the
greatest part of them is carried to Cathay and China: and from thense to the
north parts of Tartarie. Cathay.
China.
This kingdom of China, is very great: and was in owlde time cauled Sina. Here
is found great plenty o^ precious stones. Precious stones.
The people are very subtyle and rich. They are all appareled either in sylke
or cloth, Sylke.
or vestures of other woorkemanshippe: and are of good civility. They do not
gladly permit the Portugales or other strangers to trafike in their
kyngedome: whose most famous place upon the sea side, is named Cautan, Cautan.
and the sea Machiam, cauled of the owlde writers the sea of Sina.

Of the lands of Laborador and Baccalaos, lyinge west and northwest from
England, and being part of the firm land of the West Indies.
MAny have trauayled to search the coast of the land of Laborador, as well to
thintente to know how far or whyther it reachethe, as also whether there
be any passage by sea through the same into the sea of Surand the Islands of
Maluca which are under the Equinoctial line: The way to the Islands of Maluca
by the north sea.
thinking that the way^ thither should greatly be shortened by this vyage.
The Spanyardes as to whose right the said Islands of spices perteyne, The
Spany^^des.
did first seek to find the same by this way The Portug^les also having the
trade of spices in their hands, did travail to find the same: although
hitherto neither any such pa^sage is found or the end of that land. In the
year a thousand and five hundredth. Basper Cortesreales, Ba^per Corte^reales.
made a vyage thither with two carauelles: but found not the ^^reyght or
passage he sought. At his being there, he named the Islands that lie in the
mouth of the goulfe Quadrado, after his name Cortesreales, (...).
lyinge in the.L. degrees and more: and browght from that land about three
score men for slaves. He greatly maruayled to behold the houge quantity of
snow and Ise. Snow and Ise.
For the sea is there frosen excedyngly. Thinhabitauntes are men of good
corporature, although tawny like the Indies, and laborious. They paynte their
bodies, and wear braselettes and hoopes of silver and copper. Furre^.
Their apparel is made of the skynnes of marternes and diverse other beasts,
which they wear with the hear inward in winter, and owtwarde in soommer.
This apparel they gyrde to their bodies with gyrdels made of cotton, or the
synewes of fysshes and beasts. They eat fysshe more then any other thing,
and especially salmons, Fysshe.
although they have fowls and fruit. They make their houses of timber whereof
they have great plentie^ and in the stead of tyles, cover them with the
skynnes of fysshes and beasts. It is said also that there are grifes in this
land: Gryfes.
and that the bears and many other beasts and fowls are white. Bears.
To this and the Islands about the same, the Britons are accustomed to resort:
The britons.
as men of nature agreeable unto them and borne under the same altitude and
temperature. The Norwayes also sailed thither with the pylot cauled John
Scoluo: And the English men with Sebastian Cabot. Sebastian Cabot.


The coaste of the land of Baccallaos, The land of Baccall^os.
is a great tracte: and the greatest altitude thereof, is.xiviii. degrees and a
half Sebastian Cabot was the first that browght any knowleage of this land.
For being in England in the days of king Henry the seventh, The vyage of
Cabot in the days of king henry the seventh.
he furnysshed two ships at his own charges or (as sum say) at the kings,
whom he persuaded that a passage might be found to Cathay by the north seas,
and that spices might be brought from thense sooner by that way, then by the
vyage the Portugales use by the sea of Sur He went also to know what manner of
lands those Indies were to inhabit. He had with him three hundredth men, and
directed his course by the tracte of Islande upon the cape of Laborador
at.lviii. degrees: Ise in July.
affirmynge that in the monethe of July there was such could and heaps of Ise
that he durst pass no further: also that the days were very long and in
manner withowt might, and the nyghtes very clear. Certain it is, that at the.
lx. degrees, the longest day is of.xviii. hours. But considering the could
and the straungenes of the unknown land, he turned his course from thense to
the West, following the coast of the land of Baccalaos unto the xxxviii.
degrees, Baccallaos.
from whense he returned to England. To conclude, the Brytons and Danes have
sailed to the Baccalaos: Bry^ons.
^anes.
and Jacques Cartier a french man was there twyse with three galeons: Jacques
Cartyer.
as one in the year.xxxiiii. and the other in the.xxxv. and chose the land to
inhabit from the.xlv. degrees to the. li. being as good a land as France,
and al things therein commune to such as first possess the same.

Of these lands, Iacobus Gastaldus writes thus: The new land of Baccalaos,
The people of Baccallaos
is a could region, whose inhabytauntes are Idolatours and pray to the soonne
and moon^ and diverse Idols. They are white people and very rustical. For they
eat flesh and fysshe and all other things raw. Sumtymes also they eat
man's flesh priuilye so that their Laciqui have no knowleage thereof. The
apparel of both the men and women, is made of bears skynnes, althowgh they
have sables and marternes, not greatly esteemed because they are little. Sum of
them go naked in soommer, and wear apparel only in winter. The Brytous and
French men are accustomed to take fysshe in the coaste of these lands where
is found great plenty of Tunnyes which thinhabitauntes caul Baccalaos whereof
the land was so named. Fysshynge for tunnyes.
Northwarde from the region of Baccalaos, is the land of Laborador, Laborador.
all full of mountains and great wooddes in which are many bears and wild
bores. Thinhabitauntes are Idolatoures and warlike people, appareled as are
they of Baccallaos. In all this new land, is neither city or castle: but
they live in companies like heardes of beasts.

The discovering of the land of Floryda.
THe governor of the Island of Boriquena John Ponce of Leon being discharged
of his office and very rich, John Ponce.
water of great virtue, of this read in the De^ades.
furnysshed and sent forth two caruels to seek the Islands of Boyuca in the
which the Indians affirmed to be a fontayne or spring Whose water is of virtue
to make owlde men young. While he trauayled six months with owtragious
desire among many Islands to find that he sought, and coul^e find no token
of any such fountain, he entered into Bimini and discovered the land of
Florida in the year.1512. on Easter day which the Spanyardes caul the
florysshyng day of Pascha, Bemmin^.
whereby they named that land Florida. And supposyng that great rych^s might be
browght from thense, he returned into Spain and conuenaunted with king
Ferdinando as touching the trade: and by thintercession of Nicolas de Quando
and Peter Nunez de Guzman, the king did not only make him gouernoure of
Bemini and Florida, but also sent furthe with him three ships from Siuile
toward his second vyage in the year.1515. He touched in the Island of Guacana
otherwise cauled Guadalupe, Guacana.
and sent to land certain of his men with the landresses of the ships: whom
the Canibales lyinge in ambusshe, The Canibales.
assailed with their inuenemed arrows: and slaying the most part, carried away
the women. With this evil beginning, John Ponce departed from hense to
Boriquen and from thense to Florida where he went alaude with his souldyers to
epsy a place most commodious to inhabit and plant a colonie. Boriquena.
But the Indians coming forth against him to defend the entrance, assailed
the Spanyardes fiercely and slew and wounded many of them. At which conflicte
also he him self being wounded with an arrowe, dyed shortly after in the
Island of Cuba: The dea^^ of John Ponce.
and so ending his life, consumed a great part of the richesse he had before
begotten at saint Johannes of Boriquen. This John Ponce had before sailed with
Chrystopher Colon to the Island of Hispaniola in the year.1493. He was a
gentel soldier in the wars of this Island, and captain of the province of
Niguei for Nycolas de Quando that conquested the same. The region of Floryda is
a point or cape of land reachynge into the sea like unto a tongue: The land of
Floryda.
being a famous and notorious place among the Indians by reason of many
Spanyardes that have bin slain there. But whereas by same this Floryda was
esteemed a rich land, many valient and noble men desired the conquest thereof,
among whom Ferdinando de Soto (who had before been a captain in Peru and
greatly inryched by thimprisonment of king Atabaliba) attempted Ferdinando de
Soto.
a vyage thither with a good band of men, and spente five year in seekynge of
gold mines, supposing that this land had been like unto Peru.

In fine, he dyed there and was the destruction and undoing of all that went
with him withowt inhabytynge that land. The valiente minds of the Spanyardes.
in the which the conquestours had hitherto never good success, forasmuch as
these Indians are valiente archers and strong and hardy men. But the valiant
minds of the Spanyardes not discouraged by these mysaduentures, after the
death of Ferdinando Soto, The third attempt of the conqueste of Florida.
many worthy gentelmen desired this conquest in the year.1544. among whom
was Iulyan Samano, and Peter de Ahumada being brotherne and men of sufficient
ability for such an enterprise. But neither themprour being then in Germany,
neither the prince Don Phylippe his son who governed all the kyngedomes of
Castile and Aragonie, neither yet the counsel of the Indies would in any case
agree to the conqueste. ^erteine friars attempt the conquest only with
words, but with evil success.
Nevertheless not utterly contemnynge the matter which they were partly
persuaded might otherwise be browght to pass, they sent thither friar Luys
Cancel of Baluastro with other friars of the order of saint Dominike who
offered them selves to convert the nations of that land from their gentilitie
to the faith of Christ and obedience to Themperoure, only with words. The
friar therefore goinge forward on his vyage at the kings charges in the
year.1549. went aland with four other friars which he took with him and
certain maryners with out harness or weapons: unto whom as he began his
preaching, The friars are slain and eaten.
many of the Indians of the said Florida resorted to the sea side, where
withowt gyuynge audience to his words, they carried him away with three other
of his companyons and did eat them, whereby they suffered martyrdom^ for the
faith of Christ. The resydue that escaped, made have to the ship and kept
them selves for confessors as sum say Many that favor thintente of the
friars, do now consider that by that means the Indians could not be browght
to owre frendeshippe and religion. Nevertheless, that if it could so have been
browght to pass, A new kind of disgrading
it had been better. There came of late from that ship, one that had been the
page of Ferdinando de Sodo, who declared that the Indians hanged up the skynnes
with the heads and crowns of the said friars in one of their temples.

An opinion that Europa, Africa, and Asia, are Islands: and of certain
nauigations about the same.
THe anciente writers divided this owre world into Asia, Africa, and Europa,
by the river Tanais as Isocrates declares in his Panegyrico. Afterward they
divided Asia and Africa by the ^urnynges and course of the river Nilus, thowghe
the same had been better by the sea Bermeto (that is) the red sea, which
almost trauerseth and passes throwgh the land from the Ocean to the sea
Mediterraneum which divides Europa and Asia. But Berosus the Caldean, says
that Noe gave names to Africa, Asia, and Europa: Noe gave names to Africa,
A^ia, and Europa.
and gave them to his sons, Cham, Sem, and Iafet: also that he sailed by the
sea Mediterraneum ten years. In fine we now conclude that the three said
provinces occupy this mydlande of the world. All in gene^all say that Asia is
greater then any of the other, A^ia.
and in manner as bygge as they both. Albeit Herodotus in his Melpomene,
scorneth them that make Europe and Asia equal: Europe.
affirmynge that Europe in longitude is equal to Asia and Afrike: and that it
passeeh them in latitude, wherein he speaks not greatly out of square. But to
speak more of this elsewhere, not perteynynge to the matter we have in hand,
The hole earth is an Island.
I say that Homerus one of the most ancient writers, says that the world which
is divided into Asia, Africa, and Europa, is an Island as reherseth Pomponius
Mela in his third book. Strabo in the first book of his Geographie, says
that the earth which is inhabited, is an Island environed with the Ocean.
H^ginius also, and Solinus, confirmed this sentence, Althowghe Solinus do err
in mystakinge the names of the seas, supposing that the Caspian sea was part
of the Ocean, The Caspian sea.
being rather like unto the sea Mediterraneum so named because it is in the
mydlande as is the Caspian sea withowt participacion of the great Ocean. Caliz
is a river.
Strabo writes that in the time of Tolomeus Euergetes, one Eudoxus sailed
three or four times from Caliz to India: ^auigations from the red sea to East
India.
And that the guides of the red sea (cauled the goulfe of Arabie or Bermeio)
presented to the same king Tolomeus, an Indian whom he brought from thense.
King Iuba also proved this navigations from Caliz to India as writes Solinus.
Whereby it appears that the navigations to India by the Ocean was then well
known and frequented, althowgh not so much as at this present, the same being
neither then or now a thing of great difficulty or travail by the coasts of
hot regions. The vyage to India by the no^th seas.
But to sail from India to Caliz by the other part of the north by a clyme
and regions of extreme could, should be doubtless a difficult and dangerous
thing, whereof is no memory among the owlde autours saving only of one
ship as Pliny and Mela do write, rehersynge the testimony of Cornelius
Nepos who affirmed that the king of Suema presented to Quintus Metelus Cele^
Lieuetenaunt of France, The hystorye of Comelius Nepos.
certain Indians driven by tempest into the sea of Germany: if the same were
not of the land of Laborador or Bacallaos, and they deceived in their color.
Note this.
For sum say that likewise in the days of the Emperor Fredericus Barbarossa,
certain Indians were browght in a Canoa from the city of Lubec in Germany.
Indians in Lubec.
Furthermore pope Eneas Syluius writes that the Sarmation sea, is as certain
as the Scythian, Germanian, or Indian sea. Now also there is great knowleage
and experience how the nauigations and passage may be attempted by Norway^ and
other north regions under the same north, The Sarma^^an sea.
and to follow that coaste to the sou^h sea of Sur and keep that course by the
tracte of China. Olanus Gothus the archbysshop of Upsalia and borne in
Gothlande, has written much of these north regions and nauigations by the
north sea. In the trace of this vyage by the north sea, ^lande.
are the Islands of Islande and Gruntlande, Gruntlande.
althowgh there is doubt whether Gruntlande be an Island or part of the firm
land. It is, xl. leaques, from Lapponia, Lapponia.
and sumwhat more from Finmarchia a land of Scandinauia in Europe. Finmarchia.
The people of Gruntland are strong men and of coomly stature. They sail with
smaul ships or barks covered close above with lether or beasts hydes for
fear of the could and fysshes. Gruntlande.
Gruntlande as sum say, is fyftie leaques from the north part of the firm
land of the West Indies by the land of Laborador. The distance from Gruntland
to the land of Laborador.
But it is not yet known whether this land be continent or adherent with
Gruntlande, or if there be any straight of sea between the^. If all be one
firm land adioynynge by any part, then the two great parts of the world
seem to join together about the north pole or under it, or beneth it, of the
straight if it be.
forasmuch as it is not past forty or fifty leaques from Finmarche to
Grun^lan^^ whereby it may appear that althowgh there be any suchstraight of
^idynge them, yet are they neighbors and not far in sunder. Furthermore from
the land of Laborador by thaccompt of the pilottes, is abowte four hundredth
leaques to ^aial, one of the Islands of Azores, The Ilande^ of Soua, or Azores.
otherwise cauled the Islands of Soria lyinge in the West Ocean over against
Spain. Also by their account the land of Laborador is abowte five hundredth
leaques from Irland, From laborador to Irland.
and six hundredth from Spain.

That the Spanyardes have sailed to the Antipodes (that is) such as go fiete
to fiete against us, and inhabit the inferior hemispherie or half globe of
the earth, contrary to thoppinion of the owlde writers.
ALL the ancient philosophers of the gen^iles do deny that there may be any
passage from owre hemispherie or half compass of the earth to the Antopides
by reason of the burnt line (cauled Zona Torrida) and the Ocean sea lyinge in
the mydde way, whereby this vyage should be hyndered and impossible, as
Macrobius writes, Macrobius.
at large in his commentaries upon the dream of Scipio. Of the Chrystyan
philosophers, Clemente writes that it is not possible for any man to pass the
Ocean: Clement.
and other writers of later time, seem to confirm the same. In deed I verily
believe that this way was never known to them, as well for that ever
presupposynge the thing to be impossible they never attempted it, as also
that the Indians (whom we caul Antipodes) have no ships sufficient for so
long and difficulte a navigations to bring them knowleage hereof, The Indians
are Antipodes.
as have the Spaniardes to pass the Ocean unto the^: In so much that at this
present this vyage is by daily experience so well known unto the Spanyardes
and Portugales, that they can in manner go thither blyndfielde, contrary to
thoppinion of those philosophers. I will here omytte to speak of many ships
that have sailed ordynaryly from Spain to India, and speak only of the
ship Uictoria which compass^d about the hole globe of the world and touched
in the lands of two or three Antipodes, The ship (...)
and in fine returned to Spain by a contrary way, whereby is declared the
ignorance of the sage antiquity. In this navigations, they found many
secrea^es, A str^unge thing.
among the which this is strange and worthy memory, that al such dead
Christians as were cast into the sea, lay on their backs and turned their
faces upward: but the gentyles lay all groouelyn on their bellyes. They also
p^rceaued the soonne and moon to keep a contrary course from that they do
here, and ever to cast the shadows of all things toward the south: Shadows
to (...) the so^th
which thing also was known to sum of the owlde writers. For this is
manifest that the son ryseth on the right hand to them that live in the
thyrtie degrees on the other side the Equinoctial: The son rysynge on the
right ^ande.
so that lookynge toward the son, they turn their faces to the north:
whereby it appears to be true that they affirm. They consumed three years
lacking.xiiii. days in goyn^e and coming, The vyage of Magellanus.
and lost a day in their account, whereby they did eat flesh on frydayes,
and celebrated the feast of Easter on Mundayes: so that they ouerleaped a day
(not faylynge in the calender) and kept no just reckoning of the bisertile. The
cause whereof while some have searched by phylosophie, they have erred more then
the maryners. They sailed x. thousand leaques and.xiiii. miles by their
account, albeit they should have gonne less, if their way had live right
forth. But as they were enforced partly of necessity, and partly to find
that they sowght, they made many wyndynges and turnynges. They trauersed the
Equinoctial line six times withowt burning, contrary to thoppinion of the
owlde autours. They remained five months in the Island of Tidore, whose
inhabitauntes are Antipodes to them of Guinea, Antipodes.
Guinea.
whereby it is apparente that we may communicate with them. And althowgh they
lost the sight of the north star, yet did they ever dyrecte their course
thereby. For being in the.xl. degrees of the south, The north star.
they saw the needle of the compa^se stand as directly toward the north as
it does in the sea Mediterraneum: althowgh sum say that it loses his force
sumwhat. The needle and compass.
About the point of the Southe or pole Antartike, they saw a little white
cloud and four stars like unto to cross with three other ioyay^ge
thereunto, which resemble owre Septentrion, and are indeed to be the signs or
tokens of the south exeltre of heaven. (...)
Great was the nau^gation of the f^eete of Salamon, bu^ greater was this of
Themprours majesty Don Charles king of Spain. The Argos of Jason which the
an^^quitie plac^d among the stars, sailed but a little way and a short
vyage in comp^rason of the sh^ppe Uictoria which owght woorthely to be kept
in the Arsenall of Siuile in perpetual memory of so famous an enterprise. The
daungiours, payn^s, trauayles and labors of Uly^ses were nothing in respect
of such as John Sebastian sustained: (...) John S^^^stian.
whereby in the scuchion of his arms in the stead of a monstrous or invincible
beast, he woorthely gave the woorlde with this circumscription: PRIMVS
CIRCVNDEDISTI ME. (that is) Thou art the first that has compassed me about.

As touching the need^e of owr compass* I have read in the Portugales
nauigations that say^ynge as far so^th as Cap. de ^^na Speranza, the point of
the needle sty'd res^ected ^h^ north as it did on th^s side the Equinoctial.
^a^ynge that it ^um what trembeled and ^eciyned a ^^t^e, whereby the fo^ce
^eemed sumwhat to be ^iminisshed, so that they were feign to help it with the
led stone.

Who first found the needle of the compass, and the use thereof.
Speaking much of nauigations, it might s^^e a thing indecent to omyt to say
sumwhat of the ne^dle of the compass* withowt the which as all nauigations are
but blind and wandering conjectures, even so should the Ind^es never have
bynne found but by help of the same, forasmuch as the ships should have been
lost in the Ocean, The chiefest (...) the shypp^.
were it not that their courses were directed by the ne^d^e and compass, which
owght therefore to be compled the ch^efe parts of the ship and principal
instruments of (...). The first that found the needle and the use thereof
(...) and Mapheus Girarours do wryt^ was one (...) of Malpha a city in the
kingdom of Naples, of (...) Neopolitans glory to this day: and that by goo^
(...) as much as a citisen and neyghbour^s (...) the first fynder of so
commodious and profitable a thing, to the secreate whereof so many excellent
wits as were before him could not attain, althowgh they had both iren and
the lode stone (caule^ M^gnes) which are the materials of the needle. Magnes.
F^ert unto Flautus, the chief commendation is dew to the Spanyardes and
Portugales by whose daily experience, The Spanyardes and Portugales.
the same is browght to further perfection, and the use thereof better kwowen:
althowghe hitherto no man knows the cause why the iren touched with the lode
stone, turns ever toward the north star, as plainly appears in every
common dyall. why the needle turns to the north.
In manner all writers attribute this to a secreate and hyd property, sum of
the north, and other of the mixture or natural temperature of elements that
is between iren and the said stone. If it be the property of the north or
north star, then (as the pylots make their reckoning) neither should the
needle make any change or dy^fer innorthestinge, as in saylynge northeaste
withowt the Island of Tercera being one of the Islands of Azores or Soria and
two hundredth leaques from Spain toward the West Eastwest) neither yet should
it lose his office (as says Olanus) in pa^synge from the Island of Magnete,
The Island of Tercera.
The Il^nd of Magnete.
that is, the Island of the lode stone, which is under or near abowte the
north pole. But how so ever it be, or what so ever be the cause, truth it
is that the nedle turns ever to the north although we sail about the south.
We owght therefore to understand that the lode s^one (which we falsely caul
the adamant) has head, Note the quarters of the lode stone.
fiete, and also arms as sum say. The iren that is rubbed with the head,
never cease to turn dyrectly toward the north, as is to see in the dyals
that are made to the soonne. The rubbing of the fiete seruethe for the south:
as do likewise the other parts, for other quarters and points of heaven.

Note here that if a piece of this stone, of the byggene^se of an egg or a
walnutte, or more or less, be broken into many sma^le pieces as bygge as
^yce or le^se, yet every of those smaule pieses, has headde, foot, and arms,
as is said here before.

The Situacion and byggenes of the earth.
IT may to sum seem a vain thing to seek the situacion and byggenes of the
earth, although it be easy to know, forasmuch as it is situate in the
myddeste of the world as the center of the same, The sea.
being environed and as it were borne up of the sea which co^pa^seth it about.
Mela says that the pyllers that sustain it, are East, West, North, and
South: which saying Dauyd confirms in the C.vi. psalm. The wyndes
These four are the most notable pyllers or sustentacions that the earth has
in heaven, according to the motions whereof, all vyages are ruled on the
earth, from whense they have their original, as engendered of the diverse
qualities of vapoures and exhalations raised by the son and otherwy^e.
Eratosthenes put none other sustentacions then the north and south poles, The
poles.
and parts the earth by the course of the soonne: which particion Marcus
Uarro does greatly commend as agreeable to reason. The poles are firm and
immouable as an exeltre about the which the heaven month and is th^rby
sustained. They furthermore declare unto us under what part of heaven we be,
how far, and which way we go, with also the largenes of heaven and
co^mensuration of the earth. As for exemple: the straight of Gibraltar
(accomptynge from Spain) is from the north, The measurynge the circumference
of the earth
or to speak more plainly from the point of the earth that is or may be
directly vnde^ the north ^ole, about.liiii. degrees which make.ix. hundredth
and.lxxx. leaques according to the common computacio^ of the Cosmographers and
Astronomers: And is from the Equinoctial line.xxxvi. degrees* which added to
the other.liiii make.xxx. degrees, being the hole distance from the north
poyn^e to the Equinoc^iall l^ne diuydynge the earth by the myddeste, and the
quarter or fourth part of the hole circumference of the earth: the which how
great it is in compass and how many le^ques or miles it conteynethe, is easy
to perceive accomptyng^ every degree.lx. miles. But that you may the better
perceive wh^t degrees are, I have thowght good to speak sumwhat more hereof.

What degrees are.
IN the owlde time their manner was to measure the earth and the woorlde by
furlonges, pa^es, and fiete, as is to read in Pliny, Strabo, and ^ther
writers. But after that P^olome found degrees a hundredth and fifty years
after the death of C^ryst, that manner of account was received as the best.
(...)
Ptolomie divided all the hole body and face of the land and sea into three
hundredth and sixty degrees of length o^ lo^gitude: and other as many degrees
of breadth or latitude: so that the hole globe of the baule being round,
conteyneth as much ^n latitude as longitude. (...)
He assigned likewise to every degree three score miles, which make.xvii.
Spany^she lea^ues and a half: In such sort that the globe or baule of the
earth mea^ured directly by any of the four parts of the same, (...).
cont^yne^h ^n circuit sy^e thou^and and two hundredth leaques. This
computacion and measurynge, is so certain, that as it is approved of all men
and found ^rewe by experience, so much the (...) is it to be commended and
had in admiration for (...) ^ereof was judged so dyfficult by Job and (...),
that no ^^an had found the measure of (...) of the ^ame. They name those
degrees of long^tude, Degrees of Long^^ude.
that they account from soonne to soonne by the Equinoc^iall line which
reaches from the East to the Weste by the myddle of the globe or baule of the
earth. These can not well be obseru^d, forasmuch as in this ^ract of heaven,
there is no fyxe or permanent sign whereunto the pylots may direct their
eyes or instruments. For the soonne, althowghe i^ be a most clear sign, yet
doothe it daily change the place of rysynge and faulynge, The de^rees of
(...) are (...) k^ow^n.
and keepethe not the same course the day following as the Astronomers a^firme.
And althowgh there is no number of the^ that in trauaylyng strange lands and
seas have spent their gooddes and almost their wits to find the degrees of
longitude withowt error as are found the degrees of latitude and heyght, The
degrees of latitude.
yet is there none that hitherto has any true knowleage thereof. The degrees
of latitude or altitude, are they that are accounted from the north point to
the sout^, the commen^uration or mea^uring whe^by, is most certain by reason
that the north star is permane The nor^h st^^^e.
and remains still in one place, or at the least moves about the pole which
is their firm and steadfast sign whereby they account their degrees and
direct their vyages. By the degrees therefore accounted by these most certain
signs, is vnfaylably measured the hole circumference of the land and sea, The
circuit of the earth.
diuydynge the same into four equal parts in this manner. From the north
point to the Equinoctial, are.lxxxx. degrees: and from the Equinoctial to the
south point, other lxxxx. Again on the contrary side, from the south point to
the Equinoctial, are other.lxxxx. degrees: and from the Equinoctial again to
the north point, are as many. This may we conjecture by good reason as well of
thinferioure hemisphery whereof a great part is known unto us by the
nauigations of such as have passed the streyghets of Magellanus and the cape of
Bona Speranza, The inferior hemi^pherie.
althowgh we have no such clear and manifest relation as we ought to have of
the land under the southe pole being the other exel^ree of the world whose
sight we lack. For (as Herodotus says) if there be any land of the
Hype^boreans (that is such as are under the north) there is also of the
hypernorios, hyp^rbore^.
that is such as are under the south: (...)
which perh^ppes are they that live in the land of the streygh^es of
Magellanus as nere unto the other pole. But what these l^ndes are, (...) of
what (...) we can have no certain knowleage until sum man shall have compassed
about the lands under the south pole as did John Sebastian the circumference of
the Equinocti^ll line.

These last annotacions of the Indies, have I tran^^^ted out of the books of
Franciscus Lopes, written in the (...) Themperours majesty: and partly also
(...) of the card ma^se by Sebastian Cabot.

A demonstrat^on of the roundenesse of the Earth.
MAny ignoran^ men think that the earth is not round only by judgment of
the eye which is deceived in many things not only of the works of nature,
T^^ eye is de^ea^ed.
but also of ^athe as are doonne b^ the (...) and art of man. For they say:
How can it be round forasmuch as thowgh a man travail never so far either
by land or sea, he seems ever to pass as it were by a right line with out
any such circuit or compassynge, ascendynge or discendynge, as perteyneth to
all the parts of a round form. The which objection, as it is gross and
simple, proceadyng of the narownesse of the understanding of such as can not
conceive the large circumference of the land and sea, even so may it be
answered with this simple demonstration. In a ring that serves for the finger
of a man's hand, A ring. A circle.
the space of half an ynche or little more, is half a cyrcle. But in a ring
or cyrcle of bygger circumference, as in the hoope of a tubbe, half an ynche
appears in manner a right line, althowghe it be not so in deed, forasmuch as
it is not possible for any part of a circle to consist of a right line,
neither any part of a line to consyst of a cyrcle, sith the parts must
needs be conformable to the hole, consystynge of such uniform parts as are
in mathematicals. But not to wander to far in these subtylties, the greater
that you can imagen the circle to be, so shall a greater part thereof seem a
right line or plain form: As for exemple, imagining a circle whose diameter
(that is measure from side to side) consysteth of a mile: in this circle a pole
length or more, may seem a right line, as you may otherwise multiply of the
like infinitely: whereby it shall appear that the large circumference of the
earth well considered, a much greater part of the circle thereof then the eye
of man conceaueth, may seem to be a right line, and he contynually to walk
upon a plain form forasmuch as every part of a circle is like unto other as
I have said. This may suffice for a simple and brief demonstration and
induction for such as are desirous to seek forth to know the truth hereof.

What credit owght to be given to writers as touching the works of nature.
THe most ancient writer Diodorus, Siculus, in the fourth book of his
Bibliotheca, writes in this manner. If any man for the marvelous straungenes
and novelty of such things as are descrybed in owre books, will not perhaps
give credyt to owre history, let him with right judgment consider the
difference that is between the air of the Scythians and the Troglodytes
compared to owres, The diversity of air in diverse regions.
and he shall the easelyer perceive the works of nature and approve owre
wrytynges. For owre air dyffereth so much from theyrs, that it might seem
incredible if experience were not more certain then doubtful reason. In sum
regions the could is so extreme that great ryuers are so frosen, Extreme
cold.
that laden carts and armies of men pass over the immouable ise. Wine also
and other moist things are so conieled that they may be cut with knyues.
But this is more marvelous, that thextreeme parts of such apparel as men
wear, are so bytten with could that they faule of. Men's eyes are also dymmed:
the fire gives not his natural bryghtnesse: and brazen vessels and images
are broken. Sumtime by reason of thick clouds, thunders and lyghtnynges are
neither seen or hard in such regions. Many other things more marvelous the^
these has nature wrought, which may seem incredible to the ignorant: but easy
to such as have experience. In the furthest parts of Egypt and Trogloditica,
the heat of the soonne is so extreme about noone, Extreme heat.
that no man can se him that stands by him, by reason of the thick air
caused by the vapoures and exhalations raised by the heat. None can go withowt
shoos but have their fiete suddeynly blystered and exulcerate. Such as are a
thyrst, dye immediately except they have drink at hand, the heat so fast
consumes the moisture of their bodies. Meat put in brazen vessels, is sodde
in short space by the heat of the soonne withowt other fire. The force of
education.
Yet they that are borne and browght up in such regions, had rather wyllyngely
sustain these incommodities then be enforced to live otherwise: such a love
of their native country has nature given to all men: custom of continuance
from young years being also of force to over comme the maliciousness of the
air. Neuerehelesse, Extreme heat and cold in A small distance.
these places of such contrary natures whereby such strange effects are
caused, are not far in sunder or divided by any great distance. For, from the
marysshes of Meotis or Meotides where certain Scythians dwell in extreme
could, From Scythia to Ethiopia.
many have sailed with shyps of burden to Rodes in the space of ten days: and
from thense to Alexandria in four days. From whense passing throwgh Egypt
by the river of Nilus, they have arrived in Ethiopia in other ten days: So
that the navigations from the could parts of the world to the hottest
r^gions, is no more then.xxiiii. continual days. Where as therefore the
variety of the air is such in places of so smaul distance, it is no marueyle
that the customs and manners of living of the people of those regions, with
the complexions of their bodies and such things as are engendered there, do
greatly dyffer from owres.

The preface to the book^ of Metals.
TO this book of the Indies and nauigations I have thowght good to add the
book of metals, for three causes especially me mouynge: whereo^ the first is,
that it seems to me a thing indecent to read so much of gold and silver,
and to know little or nothing of the natural generation thereof, being
nevertheless things not only most desired, but also such withowt the which
at this age the life of man can not be passed over withowt many adversities,
forasmuch as poverty is hateful to all men, and virtue no further esteemed
then it is supported by riches, sith now that lady that reigned in Saturns
days, is becomme the slave to him that was then her bondeman in that golden
world, so named, not for the desire that men had to gold, but for
thinnocencie of living in those days, when Mars was of no pour, and men
thought it cruelty by breaking the bones of owre mother the earth, to open a
way to the court of infernal Pluto from thence to get gold and silver the
seeds of al mischiefs and angels of such a god, whom the antiquity (not
without good consyderation) painted blind, affirmynge also that of him gold
and silver have received the property to blind the eyes of men. But sith it
is now so that we shall be enforced to seek aid by that which was sumtymes a
myschefe, it rests to use the matter as do cunning physicians that can
mynister poison in proportion with other things in such sort qualyfyinge the
maliciousness thereof, that none shall thereby be intoxicate. Forasmuch
therefore as gold and silver have obtained this prerogative that they are such
necessary euyls which the life of man can not lack withowt detriment, not
only they but other metals also perhaps more necessary althowgh not so
precious, are things worthy to be better known then only by name, sith they
are thinstrumentes of ^ll arts, the prices of all things, the ornaments of
al dignities, and not the least portion of nature, whereby the conte^plation of
them is no less pleasant then necessary. But forasmuch as it is not here my
intent to entreat much of metals, I will speak of the second cause: which
is, that if in trauaylyng strange and unknown countries any man's chance shall be
to arryue in such regions where he may know by thinformation of
thinhabitauntes or otherwise, that such regions are fruitful of rich metals,
he may not be without sum judgment to make further search for the same. The
third cause is, that althowgh this owre realm of England be full of metals
not to be contemned and much rycher then men suppose, yet is there few or
none in England that have any great skyll thereof, or any thing written in
owr tongue, whereby men may be well instructed of the generation and fyndyng
of the same: as the like ignorance has been among us as touching Cosmographie
and nauigations until I attempted according to the portion of my talent and
simple learning to open the ^yrst door to the enteraunce of this knoweleage
into owre language, wherein I would wyshe that other of greater learning would
take sum peynes to accomplysshe and bring to further perfection that I have
rudely begun, not as an autour but a translatoure, least I be injurious to
any man in ascrybyng to my self the trauayles of other. And whereas as
concerning the knowleage of metals, I was once minded to have translated into
English the hole work of Pyrotechnia whereof I fynysshed.xxii. chapitures
now more then three years sense, and left the copy thereof in the hands of
one of whom I could never get it again (omyttynge to speak of other
ingratitudes) I was thereby discouraged to proceade any further in that work.
Nevertheless, sithe this hystory of the Indies has ministered occasion to
entreat sumwhat of metals, I have again translated three of the first
chapitures of that book, which seem most necessary to be known in this
case. And hereof to have said thus much in manner of a preface it may suffice.

Of the generation of metalles and their mines with the manner of fyndinge the
same: written in the Italien tongue by Vannuccius Biringuczius in his book
cauled Pyrotechnia. To his loving friend Master Bernardino Moncellese,
greeting.
WHereas I promised you to write of the natures of metalles in particular, I
am now enforced to declare every thing in generale, and especially of the
places of their generation and their order, with the form and manner of
woorkynge in the same, and the instruments thereto perteyninge. You shall
therefore understand, that mines of metalles are found in the most parts of
the world, more or less according to the diligence of witti searchers: and
show them selves standinge in the ground in manner in such sort as the veins
of bludde are disparsed in the bodies of living beasts, The mineral tree.
or like unto the branches of trees spredde forth diverse ways. Wherefore, the
diligent searchers of mines, willing by a certain similitude declare how the
mines are placed in the mountains, have figured a great tree full of branches
planted in the myddeste of the base of a mountain, from the which are
diriued diverse and many bouwes and branches, sum great and sum smaule, much
like unto very trees that are in owlde woddes. The mines do grow.
They will also that in growing, they ever ingrose them selves and reach
toward the heaven, converting into their nature the most disposed and near
matter, until the tops of their branches extend to the highest part of the
mountain, and there show furthe their selves with manifest apperaunce,
puttinge furthe in the stead of bouwes and flowers, certain fumosites of
blewe or green color, or marchasites with smaule veins of ponderous matter,
Marchasites.
or such other compositions of tinctures. And when by this means they show
the^ selves unto us, we may make firm conjecture that such mountains are
mineral, and that according to the demonstrations they show more or less,
they are richer or porer of mine. Therefore the searchers, according to
thapperaunces which they find, Signs of metals.
take good courage unto them: and with hope and security of profecte, apply al
their possible diligence with wit and expenses to dig or get owte such
ethynges as the signs and owtewarde apperaunces declare unto them. And by this
manner of fynd^nge of mines, it has often times chanced that many have been
exalted to the highest degree of riches. Whereas therefore by this means men
enter into the mountains with the eyes of consideration and right Judgment,
and see the places where the mineralles are ingendered and comprehend in manner
their quantity, they adapte their caves or fosses according thereunto,
whereas they should otherwise wander by chance, because no man can by any other
means know where the mines are in the mountains, although he were of never
so good judgment, and should make search for the same never so curyously by
little and little. It shall therefore in this case be necessary to follow the
certificat and aperau^ces of signs, Signs and tokens of metals.
and to encou^tre the same as nere as may be, with eyes and ears ever attentive
where they may hope to find any tokens of metalles, especially by enquyringe
of shepardes and other anciente inhabitauntes of such regions in the which
mineralls are engendered. And this I speak the rather for that I am persuaded
that at the first sight of a mountain, Mountains in the which metals are
engendered.
by reason of the great barrenness and roug^nes thereof, and also by reason of
the great abundance of waters that are engendered in the same, a right good
judgment shall not suffice to coomme to certain knoweleage that metal is
contained in such mountains, until the searchers have with charges and
trauail caused miners in sundry places to discover the same. And therefore I
also believe that one man althowgh he be never so strong, wyttie, and far
castinge, shall not be able in a new and strange contreye, to search by
smaule portions not only all the mountains of one or moo provinces which may
bring forth minerals, but shall with much difficulty scarsely suffice to
search the secreates of only one mountain: Against seeky^ge metals w^^h the
rod which they caul v^rgula diuina.
In so muc^e that sum consyderinge the difficulty hereof, are of opinion that
in this effect, it should be requysite to work by the art of Negromancie,
which I think to be a fable withowt further knoweleage. But I would that these
necromancers should tell me why this their art helps them no further in
the work after that they have once found the mine, if it be true that they
say. Negroma^cie,
Why (I say) does it not help them furthe as at the beginning to find the
mine, so consequently in the myddest and the end to bring the ^ame to further
perfection, as to gett^ it owte, to bring it to fusion or meltynge, and to
purify or pourge it from dross, which doubtless it should have pour^ to do
if it may be beleaued that it can do the other. But forasmuch as such
effects are so fearful and terrible, that they owght not or can not be
practiced of al men, and also perhaps because such manner of woorkynge is not
known, I think it not good to be used: but think rather by good reason that
this art is so much the more to be omytted and contemned, in how much we are
accustomed in the begynnyng^ of dyggynge of mines, especially to caul for the
grace of god that it may please him to be present with his aid to owre
doubtful and traualious work. Lettynge pass therefore this deuylysshe
divise of such beastly and fearful men, I exhort you to follow the practice
by the foresaid signs minystred unto you by the benignity of nature, both
grounded upon the foundation of truth and approved by thexperience of many
practicionars, not consystynge in words or promysses of things vain and
inco^prehensible. With these signs therefore shall you search the banks and
sides of the valleys, with the clyffes and ryftes of the stones, and the
backs, tops, or ridges of the Montaynes: Also the beds, channels, and
courses of ryuers, lookynge diligently among their sands, The manner of
searchyng for mines.
and the ruins of their fosses, among the which you shall often times epsy
marchasites or smaule sparks of mines, or other diverse tinctures of metals,
whereby you may be certified that certain mines are in such places, which you
shall exactly find by diligent and curious searchyng the clyffes of their
ryftes and dry places. After these aduertisementes, take this for a general
sign, A general sign.
that all such places and mountains are mineral, out of the which many
springes and great abundaunce of crude water does isshewe, having with their
clearenes a certain mineral taste, and such as at variable seasons of the
year change their quality, being warm in the spring time and could in
summer. And this thing owght you to believe the more when you shall see the
aspecte of such mountains to be rough, Rowgh and barren moun^aynes*
sharp, and saluage withowt earth or trees. Or so that if there be a little
earth found upon the same with a smaule vein of herbs or grass you shall
perceive the grenenes thereof to be faint and in manner wythered and dried. And
albeit that sumtymes also, mines are found in mountains having earth and
fruitful trees in the tops thereof, yet are they for the most part found in
such whereof we have spoken. Of these other, there may few signs be given,
except to go by little and little to seek the banks of their sides. But among
all these, the best and most certain sign that may be given, The best sign.
is whereas on the superficial part of the earth either on high or below,
the mine does show it self apparente to sight. Sum there are that for a good
sign do greatly commend the residences which certain waters make where they
have rested for a time and being dried up of the heat of the son, The
reside^ce of waters.
do often times show in certain parts of their residencies diverse tinctures
of mynerall substance. Sum other are accustomed to take such waters, and in
a vessel of earth or glass or other matter, cause them to boil and vapoure
away until the dregs or residence remain in the bottom well dried in the
likeness of a gross earth, of the which they make an assaye either by the
ordinary trial of fire, or after sum other manner as lyketh them best. And by
this means (althowgh they attain not to thexacte knowleage of the truth) yet
do they approach to a certain knowleage of the thing whereby they have sum
intelligence of what sufficiency and goodness the mine is which they seek,
before they be at any great charges in following the same: Prouydynge always
that with all diligent advertisement the places near unto the roots of the
confine mountains be curiously searched, with also the banks and sides of the
self same mountain, and all such superficial parts thereof, where any stones
are found discovered either of their own proper nature or by the course of
water: presupposynge ever that it is in manner impossible but that if such
mountains contain any mines, they must needs show forth sum flowers,
tinctures, or colors of their exhalations. Marchasit^s are the tinctures of
myneral exha^^tions.
Yet if it should so chance that they do not this, the goodness of the mine may
be the cause hereof forasmuch as either it is not of vaporable nature, or to
be of smaule quantity, or else perhaps because the mountain is great and
the mine very low or so far with in, that it is not sufficient to put forth
any signs of fumosities. The cause also hereof may be that sum stone like
unto that cauled Albasano (which I think to be of that kind which we caul
the greet stone) or black and white marble of thycke and resystynge nature,
may be found to lie between and so to stop the passages, Metals in frutful
mountains.
that the said fumosities may thereby be hyndered to arryue to the vppermoste
part of the earth: by reason whereof, it is possible that such mountains may
bring forth trees and herbs forasmuch as the earth thereof does reteyne his
virtue and may nuryshe their roots not being incinerate or burnte with hot
and venomous vapors of the mines: so that the shoures of rain or fluds with
their courses can not carry away the earth as in such places where the same is
found sore dried. And therefore upon such mountains I have seen great wooddes
of chestnutte trees, beeches also and oaks, with well cultured and frutfull
fields. So that to conclude, by the signs of the rowghnesse or barennesse of
the mountain, is not taken away but that other places may also have plenty of
mines which ought to be searched and followed. But forasmuch as these signs
are of the natures of minerals, I will speak more determinately of them in
the places where I entreat of their proper mines: Not intending here to say
much of these things in general, but only to induce you to sum clearness of
the first light. And therefore that you may give the more diligent aduertisment,
I say unto you that all the mines which you shall find by such signs, by
what means so ever they shall coome to yowre hands, whether they be found in
stones, how the signs are to be considered.
earth, or sand, after that at the first sight they have showed them selves
to be mines of metals, you owght to consider of what ponderositie or weight
they are: The which the greater that it is, so much the more does it show
both the perfection and goodness of the substance, and also the more
quantity of the mine. And thus presupposyng that by the signs or other means
you have found the mine, not yet fully perceiving of what kind of metal it
might be, to certify you hereof and also of what quantity it is, or how it
is accompanied or myxt with other, or likewise of what purity it is of it
self, or of what evil disposition or malice it is found to be, it shall
herein be necessary before you be at any further charges therewith, to prove the
same by two or three assayes or mo, The assay of the mines.
as I will further declare in the particular place of assayes. Being therefore
certifyed of the mine, and of what metal it is, and also what quantity it
conteyneth, finding it by account to be so profitable as to bear the
charges, I exhort you bouldely to give the first attempt to faule to
mynynge, and with all possible diligence to follow yowr enterprise: assuring
yowre self, that of what so ever mynerall matter you shall take assay
according to the proportion of that pice which you took of the uppermost or
owtmost part of the mine for that purpose, you shall find that to be much
better and rycher which is further within the mountain. The richer mine
further within the montayne.
And thus being certified by the assay of what quantity the thing is that
appeared by the signs, and of all other reasonable consyderations apperteynyng
to the work, you shall with all celeritie dispose yowr self to faule to
dyggynge, to the intent that you may shortly either here enjoy the fruit of
yowre travel, or else where with better success prove yowre good fortune. But
in thattempte of this enterprise, you owght principally to have respect to the
situation of the place where you intend to make the beginning of yowr cave
or fosse: Consyderacions how the cave ought to be made.
Taking good advertisement that it be commodious for the laborers that shall
work therein: prouydynge above all things that it have an easy enteraunce
into the mountain, with less charges and in shorter time to arryue under the
signs which you have taken: encounterynge the same as much as is possible as
it were by a right line, first with judgment and then with workman ship,
until you stryke on the gross mass or body of the mine, The body of the
mine.
breaking in the course of the cave al matters of hard compositions, as
quarreys and stones ouerthwartynge the same: having ever respect to the
owtwarde signs which you follow, forecastynge in yowre mind how you may
directly arryue to the same, even as the maryners direct their course by their
compass and sight of the north star. Also bysyde that place where you have
determined to make the enteraunce and beginning of the cave, howses of office
for the myners.
you must take choice of an other place, either on the front of the mountain
or on the side that it may be near and commodious to make one or two or mo
cotages for the commodity and necessity of the woorkemen. One of these must
be appointed for their dormitorie where sum may rest and sleep while other
work, and that you may the more commodiously be present and assystaunt to
their doings, diligently to behold all things and to conforte them in their
labors: also to dispense and bestow their vyttayles as shall be needful,
and to reseru^ the same in safe custody, with daily provision of al things
apperteynynge. The other must be as it were a smythes forg^ wherein their worn
and broken tools must be renewed, and other new made, to the intent that the
work be not hyndered for lack of store of necessary instruments. When
these things are thus fynysshed, with good provision of vyttayles and a
sufficient number of expert myners, then in the name of God and good adventure,
causynge a priest to bless the mos^ tayne with all the shoppes, and to baptize
the cave, dedicatynge it (as the manner is) to the holy Trinity or to owr Lady
or to the name of sum other saint which you have in deuot^on, Baptisinge and
dedication of the cave.
with invocation to them to prosper yowre attemptes, you shall with good
courage and hope begin to dygge the cave, with intent to follow the same
withowte ceasynge as far as yowre ability shall reach, or until you have
passed over the lymettes signified by the signs before named: Taking ever
diligent head that you begin yowre cave as low as you may at the foot of
the mountain, in such order that yowr myners so continue and follow the same by
a right line, The maki^ge of the cave.
that they encounter the vein of the mine by the shortest and safest way that
may be devised. For it often times chances, that althowgh the cave have been
well begun, yet has it not been well followed, Causes of hi^deraunce.
for that the myners being withdrawn from the right course by the hope of
such branches of mines as have appeared unto them in the way, do often times
decline from their attempted course, and from the signs which they owght to
have followed. And bysyde other precepts, see that you bear in memory to
procure that in dyggynge, you eschew as much as you may, the cuttynge of
soft or brykell stones, Soft stones.
as well for that it may be dangerous for ruin of the cave, as also that it
seldom chances that any mines are found in such stones. But if you shall
chaunc^ so to find them that you can by no means avoid them, A confort you
that where such cause of fear shows it self, both that you lose not the
charges of the cave and for the be^ter safegarde of yowre woorkemen, it shall be
necessary that you use all possible diligence in well vpholdynge and
fortyfying^ the cave with arches of waules trauersed with strong posts of
timber after the manner of framed beams, The fortef^i^^ of the cave.
sustained with gross and strong pyles made of good and strong timber of oak
or other great trees. And in this manner owght you to proceade in dyggyng yowre
mine that you may with more security enjoy the fruit of yowr travail. how
the caue^ were made in old time.
But in the owlde time they that dygged mines (as is yet to see) in the caves
left of them) followed an other manner: so that in the stead of beginning the
cave below at the foot of the mountain (as do the later myners) they
begun to dygge their cave in the upper or highest part where the day
discovered the mine, dyggynge downewarde after the manner of a pytte or a well,
following the same sumtyme on the one side, and sumtyme on the other even unto
the depth, as the vein showed it self to their sight: whereof I have thought
good to make mention, for that in thoppinion of many men, this way does seem
much better and of more security to find that they seek, then to dygge by
the sides: because that by this means they have ever the mine before their
eyes either more or less as a line to lead them to the gross mass. Yet who
so consydereth the thing well, shall understand that the later myners have
better conceived the reason of this work, in respect (as is to see) of many
more commodities and securities which ensue rather of this manner of woorkynge
then of the other: as the difficulty to descend and ascend the cave, and the
daungiour lest it be stopped up by many ruins, bysyde the traualyous labor
to draw out the mine with the rocks and fragmentes of stones: And above al
things, that they shall not be able to draw out the waters which are often
times so abundaunt that they greatly increase the charges and trauayles of the
patrones of the mines by reason of the great aid and help which shall be
requisite to have in that case and also for the making of wheels, troughes,
pypes, and pumpes, Abundanu^^ of water in the mines.
with such other instruments serving for the purpose to draw out the
waters. And yet with all this, it often times chau^ceth that although they
labor hereat continually, yet shall they be i^forced to forsake their
profitable and laudable e^terpryse So that to conclude, The best manner of
making the cave.
I say (as you may well under stand) that it is a much better way and of
more security to begin the diggyng of the cave rather at the root or foot
of the mountain and to enter into the same by little and little a slope upward,
then to begin at the top or the highest back thereof. And this both for the
more commodious passinge furthe of the water, and also for the easier travail
of the laborers. Observing ever diligently the change of the signs which
appear unto you owtwardly, The change of the signs.
using the rudder and compass as do they that sail on the sea. For hereby
the myners shall be instructed ever to follow the right way in the cave until by
the conductinge of wit and art, The rudder and compass.
they be browght to the place of the gross mass or body of the tree, which
is the cause, fontayne, and original from whense the said tinctures fumosites,
and mineral signs, are diriued and sent forth to the superficial parts. And
as concerning this pu^pose, I think it good to declare unto you how in the
Dukedom of Austria, Austria.
between Isprue and Alla where I continued many years, I saw a large vale
environed with a great number of mountains, Mines of copper and lead holdi^g
silver.
by the midst whereof a river passed through of great abundance of water:
and in manner in all the montaynes that are there about, is dug great plenty
of mine, whereof the most part are of copper or lead, although also in manner
every of them is found to hold sum portion of silver. Among these
mountains, I saw one in the which thinhabitauntes of the country dwelling
there about, allured by the sight of many signs, began to dig a cave after
the manner whereof we have spoken: In so much that (as it appeared unto me) from
the place where they begane the cave, they had dug little less then two
miles before they saw any spark or shadow of any mine And being arrived
with the cave in manner perpendicularly under the signs they followed, A cave of
two miles.
they were encountered with a vein of the hard stone cauled Albazano, of a
yard and a half thick, which they passed through with great travail and
long time, and with the help of commodious instruments of iren hardened to
work in such stones. And when they had thus passed through this quarrey of
stone, A large cave of the mine of copper holdinge silver.
they chanced upon a very great vein of the mine of copper of such sort
that when I was there, lookinge between the one and the other, I saw on every
side as it were a waule of the hard stone of Albazano, and therein a void place
of such largenes from the one side to the other that more then two hundredth
men al at one time, had sufficient room to stand labouringe from the
hygheste part to the lowest, having non other light then of candells, Candle
light.
and making certain marks in every place where they saw the ure or mine
show it self: and thus ceased not to work continually both day and night,
course by course, a thing suerly marvelous to be hold. Without the mouth of
the cave, I saw great abundaunce of mine partly mixed with the stone of the
ure, and partly chosen and separated. Among these pieces, there was one
consistynge of a hole mass of pure mine of such biggnes and weight, A great
mass of pure mine.
that two good horses with a light carre could scarsely draw it away. This
mine was of copper as I have said. But to magnify it, they cauled it silver,
because it held such plenty thereof that it surmounted the charges, whereas
they had also the copper for advantage. You shall further understand that in
the myddest of the cave, there was a channel or gutter which gathered together
the waters that fell into it continually on every side from the ruptures or
broken places and cliffes. Abundaunce of water in the mines.
These waters ran through the chanel with so vehemente a streme, that I
suerly believe that it might well suffice to drive and great mylle. In so much
that in going in and coming out of the cave, I remember that by the contynual
faule and sprinkeling of the waters from above and beneth, I was as wet as
though I had passed through a ^^eate shoure of rain. Whereat I marvel the less
when I consider that water is the first and nearest principle of the which the
substance of minerals is engendered. water is the nearest principle of
minerales.
By reason whereof, such men of understanding as have searched the natures of
these things, argue hereby and take it for a general rule, A general rule.
that all those mountains out of the which spryngeth great abundaunce of
water, do also abound with mine. The which thing well considering, and
weyinge the greatness hereof, I faule into this account with my self, that if
to the patrones of the said cave, the charges of the same had been a
hynderaunce or grief, either for the length thereof, or for despair that they
should not have found that they sought, they would surely have forsaken it. And
being now comme to this hard stone after they had sustained so great charges
bysyde the travail both of mind and body, if they should then have left of
their enterprise, Great rich is obtained by searchinge of mines.
they should not have come to such riches whereby they have obtained many
commodities as well profitable for them selves a^ also for their lords and
princes, their country, their kinsfolks and famelie. Neither yet should they
have been so well able to help their poor neighbors as they have done by the
means of the valientnesse of their constant minds and persistynge in so good
and commendable an enterprise. Wherefore to conclude, you that will begin to
attempt any such thing, Magnanimity and patience.
must be of good courage and much patience to follow that you have begun, at
the least until you know by the signs what the thing is: hopinge ever that
in going forward, the day following (as it is possible) shall discover the
thing that you seek and content your desire: Whereof you may be the better
assured, if you well consider that the moothers and matrices of most esteemed
riches, and the myntes of al treasures, are the mountains: The mounta^nes are
the matrices of riches.
To the which (with the help of fortune and yowr ingenious endeavor) you
shall open the way, not only to find the mine and arryue to the belly of the
mountains where such things lie hyd, but shall also be exalted by riches to
high honor and dignity as they of whom we have made mention before;
forasmuch as most beningne and liberal nature, doothe open her lap and
promise good success to such as seek riches by such honest means. The
which way surely is much rather to be followed, then either the wars full of
trowbles and misery, or the careful trade of marchaundies with wandering
about the world, or such other fastidious cares perhaps unlawful for a
good man. And albeit (as sum men use to speak) the finding of mines be an
especial grace of God, nevertheless, forasmuch as we are borne to labor, i^
shall be necessary that we seek the same in such places where they are brought
forth by the work of nature, The grace of God is received by owre endeavor.
and by searchynge to find them, and being found to dygge for them. and by
this means to receive the grace of God with applyinge owre own diligence
thereto, with help of the disposition of fortune and natural judgment. Monye
begets riches.
And yet shall not this only suffice withowt sufficiency of money able to
sustain the charges and continue the work: to the end that if you can not
fynysshe it with yowr own expenses, you may supplye the same by the aid of
other, either patrones or parteners. But let us now cease to reason any
further of these things. Presupposyng therefore that you have already passed the
charges, and have not only found the mine you sought, but also have brought
forth to light a great quantity thereof, it shall then be needeful (as a thing
chiefly to be considered before you begin to dygge) well to ponder and examen
both the commodities of such things as shall occur, Necessary
aduertisme^tes.
and also of such whereof you shall have need: as timber and woodde of all
sorts, with water and vyttayles: of all the which, you must have great
plenty: and especially of woodde, Plentye o^ wood.
whereof you must have great quantity, as well to serve to the proportion of
the mine, as also to make coals to the use of meltynge, fynynge, dryinge,
garboylyng, and such other broylynges, bysyde that which must serve to fortify
cave and to buyld shoppes and cotages with such other edifies. Cotages and
edifies.
Diligent consideration must likewise be had to the situacion of the place
where the buyldynges shall be erected: The situacio^ of the place.
as that the plotte thereof be commodious with abundaunce of water having a
good faule. Also not only of plenty of woodde and cole nere unto the mine,
but of such as may serve the turn. And of all other incommodities, you must
chiefly avoid the lack of water, The use of water,
as a thing of greatest importance and most necessary in this effect. For
by the force and weight of the course hereof, wheels and diverse other
ingenious instruments are adapted with ease to lift up great bellows to
make fyers of great pour, to beat with hammers of great weight, and to turn
myghtie and strong eugens, by the force whereof the trauayles of men are so
much furthered, that withowt such help, it were in manner impossible to
overcome such tedious trauayles or to arryue to the end of the work,
forasmuch as the force of one wheel may lift more, and that more safely then
the paynefull labor of a hundredth men. It shall therefore be needful to have
great consyderation hereof, not only to make these edifies or houses of office,
but also to make them commodious for the purpose, as for the carriage of mine
and cole with other necessaries. For if any of these effects should be
wantynge, the cost, time and travail, should be cast away: forasmuch as
these things do so much the more relieve the one the other as they are joined
together, Necessary considerat^ons.
and hinder the work not a little if any be separate. But because these
commodities can not ever be had all together, you owght to wey with yowr
self which of the two serves for mo necessary uses, as either to have the
cole or the mine most commodious to the houses, and according there unto to
place the houses nere unto the same if the commodity of water will so permytte.

Albeit, if it were possible, it should be much better if al these necessary
commodities were joined together, whereas otherwise you must content yowre
self as occasion serves. Now therefore to conclude, bysyde that which I
have declared unto you of the findinge of the mine and the digging thereof with
other considerations, I exhort you further to faule to practyse with sum mine
of your own, that you may thereby take occasion to rise to the degree of riches
which you desire. And therefore I advertise you that after you have found the
mountain and begun to dig, you shall ever go forward with a boulde mind and
stout courage, woorkyng with wit and Judgment, forasmuch as in this effect
the one serves the other in the steed of eyes to enter where they can not.
Give no credit to that which many ignorante folks do say and believe, A false
opinion
affirminge that in digging for metals, they are found rather by chance then
by art. The which although it were true, yet owght we to trust more to art
and practyse then to chance. And when you are now entered into the mountain,
bear well in memory that you have presently with you the tallie or ruler of
the cave, whereby you may trauerse the vein of the mine when you are coomne to
it. The trauersinge of the vein.
For if you should follow it by the course as it lies, it is possible that
you mighe follow it a great way not paste the biggnesse of a man's finger and
perhaps less: By reason whereof, it might happen that you should lose it and
never find it again. The like should chance unto you if after that you have
begun to dig a cave, it should repent you of the charges, and that for the
basnes thereof you should forsake it, as many have done who because they
could not find the mine at the first stroke, Continuance in the work.
despayringe that they should never find it, have forsaken it as a thing
unprofitable, thynking that they have woonne enough in that they were not at
further charges with that which they account loss and damage: And thus
furiously leave of their enterprise, not regardinge that they may leave the
fruit of their expenses and travail to an other that may follow their
begynninges, and perhaps find the mine within the distance of a cubet, a
spanne, or a finger. We may say therefore that such men do willinglye forsake
their good fortune as many have done. He therefore that has begune to dig a
cave, let him determine to follow it, puttinge away thestimation of the baseness
thereof, and not to fear the streyghtnesse of the way, but rather to apply all
his possible diligence withowt remorse, hoping thereby no less to obtain
honor and riches, then to avoid shame and infamy for omyttynge so profitable
an enterprise. And that you may the more circumspectly behave yowr self in all
things, beside the former instructions, I further advertise you to set ever
fresshe men a work by course in such order, Fresshe me^.
that in every sixte or eight hours (according to the number of the myners)
you appoint such to the work as have reposed or taken their rest, that you
may by this means the sooner come to the end you desire, whereunto (after you
have laid so sure a fundation) I exhort you to run withowt a bridle. And
whereas to these effects it shall be necessary to have many instruments adapted
for the purpose, I can none otherwise speak of them then in general,
considering that according to the nature of the place and the mine, it shall be
necessary to use instruments and iren tools of diverse forms, Instruments.
as there ought to be difference in such wherewith you shall dygge in mines
engendered in marble, greet stone, and hard freese stone, or such other. For
the dyggynge of such as are found in dead and tender stones, as Alabaster and
marle, it is requisite to have apt and strong instruments, as great
beetels, mattockes and spades of iren, also great and long crows of iren to
lift great burdens: likewise great and smaule pick axes sum of iren and sum
of steel: furthermore great maules with handels and withowt handels, and such
other both of iren and fine steel hardened, if the hardenes of stone shall so
require. But as for such as shall serve to dygge the mines which are engendered
in tender and soft stones, I need make no mention of them, forasmuch as the
tools of the common sort may suffice, and necessity shall daily furthe
instruct you to divise such as shall serve for yowre purpose. Albeit, for the
most part, they are beetels, maules, mattockes, pikes, shouels, spades, and
such like. But as well for the soft stones as for the hard, it shall be
necessary to have great plenty of al sorts, to the end that the myners may
lose no time, and that the work may go the better forward to the comfort of
the patrones of the mine. Bysyde these before named, it shall also be requisite
to have plenty of great baskettes, spades, sh^uels, sleades, and
handbarrowes, both with wheels and without wheels: also sackes made of raw
or vntande hydes to carye the fragmentes out of the cave. It shall furthermore
be requisite to have great quantity of unctuous liquours to mai^tayne fire:
Fire in the cave.
as are the oiles of olives, of nuttes, of line seed and hemp seed: Likewise
the roots of putrified trees, or talowe of beasts, or fat and oil of
fysshes. For withowt the light of fire, it is not possible for the laborers to
work: The co^ueyance of eyer.
Nor yet can any fire be mayntayned in the cave except it receive the air by
sum respiracle or breathynge place by the means of a funnell or trunk of
woodde or such other open instrument whereby the air may be conveyed into the
cave.

Of the mine of gold and the quality thereof in particular.
Forasmuch as gold is a compounde mynerall which of the philosophers and all
men of understanding, The excellency of gold.
is found to be of greatest perfection among all other myxt minerals, it is
judged by the universal opinion of such men, that for the beauty and excellent
quality thereof, it should be of excessive virtue to help and confort men.
And therefore among all things that are in this world (except living
creatures) it is ch^efely esteemed. By reason whereof, I also the more to honor
it, will first speak of this before I entreat of any other metal, and
declare in particular the conception with the most appare^t qualities thereof.
The which although it be a metal most known, desired also and sought for of
all kinds of men, yet are there not many that do care to know of what
substance or natural mixtion it consists. But that you should not be one of
them that know it only by name or by superficial appearance, The orginall
and substance of gold.
I certify you that the original and proper matter thereof, is none other then
elementall substaunces with equal quantity and quality proportionate the one
with the other, most perfectly purified by the subtyle work of nature. For of
these being thus joined together (and of equal force) is engendered an
am^able and most perfect mixtion by the help of fermentacion and decoction of
the mineral heat, Mineral heat.
whereby is caused such a permanent union between the said elements, that they
are in manner inseparable: So that by the virtue of heavenly influence or of
time, or by thorder of most prudent nature, or by all these causes concurrant,
such substance is converted into this metalline body that we caul gold. The
te^perature and pureness of gold.
The which (as I have said) by his much temperatenes, pureness, and perfect
mixtion, is condensate and made thick, in such sort that the elements thereof
can not be unbound or loosed, so that it remains in manner incorruptible: The
cause whereof is, that it either conteyneth in it no manner of super^lui^ie, or
the same to be but very little. And hereof comes it, that although it lie
many years in the earth or in the water, it is not infected with rust or
canker for that neither of them are able to corrupt it, Gold is incorruptible.
nor yet the fire whose force does incinerate or bring to ashes and resolve
in manner all creatures: And yet is the pour hereof so far unable to destroy
or corrupt this metal, that it is thereby the more purified and made better.
Likewise the said perfect union or mixtion, causes it to be a body withowt
steame, and withowt unctuous or fat superfluity: The beauty of gold.
which is the cause that it ever remains in the native bryghtnes and fayrenes
of color, in so much that when it is rubbed upon any thing, it leaves not
behind it the tincture of any black or yelowe color, as do in manner all
other metals: Nor yet has it any taste or savor that may be perceived to the
sense. Furthermore, if it be eaten either wyllyngly or by chance, it is not
venomous to the life of man, as are sum of the other metals: but is rather a
medicine curing diverse diseases. Gold is medicinable.
In so much that nature has given unto it of peculiar property, a virtue and
priuileage to conforte the weakness of the heart, and to give ioyfulnes and
mirth to the spirits, disposynge thereby the mind to magnanimity and
attemptes of great enterpryses. Gold is confortable.
Which singular qualities, sum wise men affirm that it has received by
thinfluence of the son, and that it is therefore of such grace and pour to
help men: especially such as have many great bags and chesses full thereof.
To conclude therefore, this metal is a body tractable and bright, of color
like unto the soonne: And has in it inwardely such a natural attractiue or
allurynge virtue, that being seen, it greatly disposes the minds of men to
desire it and esteem it as a thing most precious: The attractiue quality of
gold.
although many there are which cry out against it and accuse it as the root
and sede of most pestiferous and monstrous covetousness, and the cause of many
other myscheues. But whether it be the cause of more good or evil, we entende
to let pass this disputation as a thing unprofitable. To proceade therefore
as I have begun I say (as before) that the woorthynesse which is found in it,
has caused me to entreat of it before any other metal. And this the rather
for that thorder of this present work meth so to require, that I may the
better descend to the degrees of other metals, to the end that in these owre
parts of Italy, you may have sum instruction of practice, which may redounde
from you to other, whereby the minds of all men may receive sum light: being
well assured that new informations, will be the seeds of other new witty
diuises in the understandings of such men as with these keys shall open their
wits to arryue to such places whyther they can not else coomme or by any
means approach. And now therefore, bysyde that which I have said unto you in
general, I will further in particular declare the nature hereof and the
generation of the same, with also the signs which it shows forth, that I do
not omytte any thing. Last of all, I will show you how it owght to be
pourged from superfluous earthynes of the mine, after that I shall have
expressed the manner how it is found. But forasmuch as I have not with mine
eyes seen the mountains which conteyne the mines of gold, or the places
where this thing is put in practice, I will only show you (having made
diligente inquisition for the same) what has been toulde me of credible
persons, or what I have gathered in reading of diverse autoures, where most
plenty of gold is found.
by whom I am certified for a truth that the greatest plenty of this metal,
Cathay.
is found in Scithia, in those provinces which we commonly caul the East
parts, where the soonne extends his chief force and vigor. Of these places
India is thought to be the chief, and especially those Islands which the ships
of Themperours majesty and the king of Portugale have found of late: Gold
in the I^nde of the weste ^ndies.
as the Islands about Peru and Paria with the firm land of the same which
extends it selves very far on both sides the Equinoctial. In Europe also,
gold is found in many places: as in Astesia, and in many places in Boheme.
Also in Hungary, in Rhene, and in Apsa. Pliny says that it is likewise
found in Austria and in Portugale: Gold in Europe.
and that the Romans had from thense yearly.xxiiii. pounds weight. And thus
speaking of this precious metal, The influen^ of heaven.
I believe certeynly, that it is and may be engendered in all such places where
the influence of the heuens disposes the elementall causes to bring forth an
apt substance for this purpose. But now intending more particularly to
speak of the places of the conception hereof, The mountains and stones in the
which gold is enge^dered.
you shall understand that it is engendered in diverse kinds of stones in
great and rowgh mountains, and such as are utterly bare of earth, trees,
grass, or herbs. And among all the stones of this mine, that is best which
is of a blewe or asurine color like unto a sapphire, and is commonly cauled
Lapis Lazuli. Lapis Lazuli.
But it is not bright and hard as is the sapphire. It is also found in
orpemente cauled Auripigmentum: Orpemente.
but more often in the mines of other metals. Gold i^ other metals.
It is likewise found in many provinces in the sands of ryuers. gold in the
^andes of ryuers.
That which is found in the mountains lies in order veins between quarrey
and quarrey joined with the said Azurine stone and mixte therewith. They say
that this mine is so much the better in how much it is the heuyer and of high
color, showing in it many sparks of gold They say furthermore that it is
engendered in an other stone like unto salt marble: but it is of a dead
color. And also in an other whose color is yelowe with certain read spots
within it. They affirm likewise that it is found in certain black stones,
whose veins sprede diverse ways much like the courses of ryuers. They further
declare that it is found in a certain bituminous earth, Gold i^ earth.
of color like unto cley and very heavy, having in it a great savor of
brymstone: And that the gold which is found in this, is very good, and in
manner all together fine, yet very hard to be gotten owte, because it
consysteth of so smaule sparks like unto invisible atoms of such lytelnesse
that they can hardely be perceived with the eye. Golden duste.
And herein may you not do as in Lapis Laxuli, or other stones, or as the manner
is to do with that which is found in the sa^ds of ryuers: the which the more it
is washed, the more it fauleth to the bottom: and in meltynge with the mother
of his earthines, does incorporat it self therewith in a brickle substance But
in fine, Ryuers in the which gold is found.
with much patience and by one means or an other, or by the help of
quickesyluer, it is drawn out. Again (as I have said before) it is found ia
the sands of diverse ryuers, as in Spain in the river Tago: in Tracia, in
Ebro: In Asia, in Patolo and Ganges. In Hungary and Boheme, it is found in
Lasiesia in diverse ryuers: And in Italy, in the sands of Tesino, Adda, and Po.
But not every where in the beds of their channels, but in certain particular
places where in certain cloddes the sand is discovered in the time of the
ouerflowynge of the ryuers when the water leaves behind it a fine sand
wherewith the said gold is myxte in the form of certain smaule scales, The
wasshi^g and pourgeing^ of gold.
and shynynge graynes. Then in the summer season, with patience and ingenious
practice, the searchers to pourge it from the gross earthinesse of the mine,
and wasshe it diligently: preparynge for that effect, certain tables made
either of the timber of plane trees, how gold is divided from sand.
of elm, or white nuttes, or such other woodde apt to be sawen, having their
playnes made full of hackes, and notches, with the help of the saw or such
other instruments of ir^n. Upon these tables standing sumwhat a slope or
declynynge, with a holowe shouel they cast a great quantity of water myxt with
the said sand, which they cast so, that the water run down directly alonge
the tables. The Spany^rdes make these disshes with ha^dels.
And by this means the gold, as a matter most heavy, fauleth to the bottom of
the sawne hackes, and there resting and cl^auynge fast, is so divided from the
sand. When therefore they perceive a sufficient quantity of gold thus
remaining on the tables, they gather it with diligence and put it in a trey or
great shallowe dysshe of wod like unto those which the gold finers use: The
drawe^nge out of gold with ^uicke silver.
And in these they wasshe it more exactly again and again from al fylth or
vnclenlynesse. This done, they beat or mixte (or amalgame it as they caul
it) with Mercury or quicksyluer, which afterward they separate again from
the same either by straynyng and pressynge it through a bag of lether, or by
styllynge or ^uaporatynge the quickesyluer from it in a styllatory of glass
and so find they the gold remaining in the bottom of the vessel in the
lykenes of fine sand, which they bring into a metalline body by meltynge it
with a little borage, or salt petre or black soap, and so cast it either in
the form of a wedge or a rod, or otherwise as lyketh them best. And this is
the exact manner of drawing gold out of the sands of rivers, which many have
used to their great commodity: And that the rather because that in following
this order of work in the pourgynge and diuydynge of gold, it shall not be
requisite as in other manner of practices, to be at great charges by reason of
many men which shall be needful, From whe^se gold is derived into the sands
of ryuers.
with many murals, fornaces, fires, and diverse artificers: whereas in woorkyng
after this sort, one man may suffice with one table and one holowe shoouell,
with a little quickesyluer and sufficient abundaunce of water. But lettyng
pass to speak any further of these things: perhaps sum man would here
demand from whense this gold is deryued into the sands of the said ryuers,
and whether it be browght thither by the water, or engendered there. As
touching which question, I have often times deliberated with my self not
withowt great marueyle: and especially of that which is found in the sands of
the ryuers of Tesino, Adda, and Po, because (whereas I have said before that it
is browght thither by the course of the water) I can not perceive from whense
it should be browght, forasmuch as there is no mine of gold, or of any other
metal that is known, nere to any of those places. By reason whereof, my
judgment is in manner confounded, saying also that it is thoppinion of
certain writers, that it is engendered even where it is found: The which, if
it so be, it is not true that it is browght thither by the water. Again, if
it be engendered there, it seems to me a dyfficult thing to comprehend
whether it be brought furthe there by the virtue of the water or the earth, or
the heaven. That gold is not engendered in the ^andes of rivers.
If furthermore any of these should be the cause of the generation hereof, it
seemethe agreeable to reason that it should be both found and engendered
through out all the beds of such rivers, and at al times. And if the
influence of heaven be the most prepotent cause of this effect, then it
seems to me that it should work immediately, because it can not otherwise
observe thorder which nature uses in the generation of metals: first
brynginge it forth to the open show, in the place where abounds the
continual isshewe of water, which owght also to be of such force as to remove
the earthy substance thereof from place to place, and not to intermixte such
great inequality of couldenesse and moistnes. And albeit that this composition
begun in this order, should not be disseuered or broken by the waters of the
ryuers, yet it appears to me that the showers of rain and increase of
fiuddes, should be of sufficient pour to distemper, break, and utterly
destroy all such compositions as should be engendered in such places, forasmuch
as al things are conceived by rest and quietness after the commixtion of the
first elements. And therefore if this gold of the ryuers, be there
engendered where it is found, I would it were declared unto me why it is
engendered only in these places and not in other: and why in like manner,
silver, copper, lead, or any other metals are not also engendered there as
well as gold, being matters of an easyer composition of nature then it is, by
reason of the perfect unity and concordaunce with purity of substance and
perfect concoction which is in gold above all other metals: whereas also in
many places in the territories of Rome, there are found many sparks of the
mine of ^ren of black color among the sands of certain smaule ryuers: And
yet these only in certain particular places of the said rivers: whereby it
appears that these also, should not be engendered where they are found. By
all which reasons and apparent effects, it seems most agreeable to truth that
the gold which is found in such sands, This matter is apparent i^ the gold
found in the ryuers in the Indies.
is rather brought thither by the water, then engendered there. And therefore
to declare my mind more plainly herein, I suppose that this chances only in
great ryuers which receive abundaunce of waters of diverse springes, fosses, and
other ryuers, engendered partly of the meltynge of snow and partly of great
showers of rain, which faulyng in certain channels from the tops and sides
of mineral mountains, wasshe away part of the earth of their banks and the
ouerchanginge and holowe rocks which may conteyne the substance of gold: The
^aule of waters from montaynes.
Or otherwise, that in such places, there are ordinary mines in the high
mountains or other superficial out places, perhaps incessable, and either
such whyther men can not come for extreme heat or cold or other hynderaunces,
or else such as they have contemned to search. And yet the same to be so
consumed by the force of water as we have said, and by the course thereof to
be carried into the ryuers. It may also chance that such mynerall earthes be
far within the mountains near unto such ryuers: Springes of water in
mountains.
And that in the space of many years, the sprynges isshewynge out of the same,
may either be dried up (which thing has been seen) or else turn their course
an other way So that it is no maruayle if in such a multitude of years, the
true original of these things be unknown even unto the^ that dwell nere
such places. But in fine, how so ever it be, true it is that gold is found
^n the sands of many rivers: And particularly (as I have noted) in the
forenamed ryuers. And if therefore I have maruayled at this ^hynge, I owght
worthily to be excused, forasmuch as where judgment can not be certified by
reason or effectual appearance, there aris^ many doubtful conjectures and new
causes of admiration. But yet do I marvel much more of an other thing the which
I am informed to be most true by the report of many credible persons: That
is, Uegetable gold growinge out of the earth.
that in sum places of Hungary at certey^e tym^s of the year, pure, gold
spryngeth owte of the earth in the likeness of smaule herbs, w^ethed and
twyned like smaule stalks of hoppes, about the byggenesse of a pack threde,
and four fyngers in length or sum a handful. As concerning which thing, Of
this, read Alexander ab Alexandro. lib. 4 Genialium dierum. Cap. 9.
Pliny also in the.xxxiii. book of his natural history, writes the like to
have chauncet in Dalm^tia in his time. The which (if it be true) suerly the
hus^ande men of these fields shall ^^ape heavenly and not earthly fruits, sent
them of god from heaven, and browght forth of nature withowt their travail or
a^te. A grade doubtle^se most especial, sith that in so great a quantity of
earth granted to the possession of men, in mande only this is thought worthy
so high a priuileage But what shall I say of that whereof Albertus Magnu^
writes in his boo^e of minerals, affirmynge that he has seen gold
engendered in a d^ade man's head: Gold found in A dead man's head.
And that the same being found by chance in dyggynge, and perceived by the
weight and color to conteyne sum mineral substance, was proved by
experience to hold a portion of fine gold mixte with smaule sand. And
indeed his words seem to sound to none other sense but only that this
precious metal was engendend there by the great disposition of the place and
strong influence of heaven: The which suerlie is a thing hardely to be
believed. Yet considering thautoritie of so great a clerk, with the force of
the superior causes and the marvelous pour of nature, I had rather give faith
hereto then rasshely to contemn the judgment of so great a clarke. And
forasmuch as I have begun to tell you of these effects, I will not omytte to
show you of a strange thing which chanced also in a part of Hungary,
where a mine of gold was so found by chance and unsought for, A mine of gold
found by chance.
that it may nevertheless be an advertisement to other to search diligently.
So it is therefore, that a woman of the country being accustomed to resorre
with her bucke of clothes to wasshe them in a certain fosse or dike where
ran a little water, and using to beat and rub them upon a ^^one which
seemed commodious for her purpose, chanced at the length by her good fortune
to epsy on the stone, a vein of gold trauersyng or ouerthwartinge the same
abowte the byggenesse of a gross pack threede, A vain of gold in a stone.
showing fair and bright by reason of her much rubbing. Whereat marueylynge
daily more and more, at the length opened the matter of her familiers: who
conferring with such as had better skyll of the thing, found it in fine to
be a vein of pure gold: And that the quarrie of that stone, trauersed the
course of the water of the fosse. Remouynge therefore the water, and turning the
course thereof an other way, they began to dygge and follow the mine which
has now continued certain. C. years fence it was first found: And has not
only greatly enriched that country, But also all Christendom has had great
commodity by the same. This have I rehearsed unto you the rather that you
should not be negligent in any point of omit and sign or token wherebye
you may be certified of great things. No signs to be omitted.
not con^emnynge the shadow of any smaule tokens: but as well to give attentyue
care and eye unto them, as to fear and foresee all such things as may hinder:
For (as you may hereby well perceive) if credit had not first been given to the
words of the simple wooman, and the thing afterward well followed, perhaps
they should neither now nor ever hereafter have enjoyed the fruit of so great a
commodity. Men therefore of good courage folowinge such rich signs, did
nether fear the smaulenesse of the vein or hardness of the stone:
presupposynge by good reason that gold and silver can not lightly be found
in so smaule quantity, but that the same shall be able to surmounte the charges.
And this the more, in how much the further you shall enter into the stone, as
chances commonly in all other mines. Albeit, the practiced searchers, say
that the mine of gold is not found in such great quantity as are the mines
of other metals. Gold is not found in like quantity as are other metals.
Wherein although perhaps they say trewly, yet does it not follow but that
gold also may be found in great quantity. And suerly it seems to me,
that the benignity of nature has granted large quantities thereof to the
world, and that much has ever been and is found among men, considering in
how many places it is daily gathered as well in mountains as in sands of
ryuers, Arguments of plentye of gold.
bysyde that which is found accompanied and joined with other metals. A
further proof hereof may that be, which is consumed and hid by the diverse
inventions of men: As that which the paynters bestow in adournynge their
works: And goldesmythes both in gyltynge other metals and also in making
diverse works of massy gold: how diverse ways gold is consumed.
bysyde that which the woorker of clothe of gold and arras do consume: with
such as imbrotherers and sylke woomen spend about the vanities of men and
women's apparel and tyrementes. Also such as is consumed upon trappers and
furnimentes for horses, with gylted harness and such other sumptuousness as
perteyneth to the wars and magnifical buyldinges of noble men's houses and
temples: Bysyde that also which the covetousness of men has hid in strong
waules, and buried in the ground, enclosed in chayned cofers locked with
triple keys: And that which serves to the daily uses of men and wandereth
about the world through the hands of merchants. The which things well
considered, who so thinks that nature brings forth but little gold, shall
perceive that there is great quantity thereof in the world, Ma^^^ have to
much, but few have enowgh.
although there be but few that have so much as may satisfy the thirst of
their couetou^nesse. And to speak particularly of I^alie, Italy wasted byt
the barbar^ans.
although there be no mine of gold known in it, yet by the virtue and
diligence of good wits, it has ever and at all ages been more rich then many
other provinces. Notwithstanding it has often times been spoiled and ouerrunne
of diverse nations, as now of late in owre time by the cruel hands of the
Barbarians which entered into it about.xl. years paste. But who knows as
has chanced in the days of owre valient predicessours) whether Godde will
again give us occasion to chastise them and so to invade their regions that
we may woonne owre own again with increase of dowble usury. Or if he will
not permit this, perhaps he will grant us to find sum rich mine of
gold. Co^mendacio^ of Italy
For, considering and seeing that this owre region of Italy is replenysshed
with as many excellent things as in manner heaven can give to any habitable
place, it is not to be thought that this benefit of gold should be
wantynge, whereas it brings forth such plenty of al other mines except this
of gold and tynne. Gold and tynne.
And yet do I verily believe that it is not withowt the mines of these also,
although they be not yet discovered to the knowleage of men: As I am persuaded
both by the gold that is found in the said ryuers, and also by the diverse
and sundry mean minerals which are found in many places and adjudged of the
practicionars to be certain clear tokens of their proper and natural
agentes. Mean minerals.
But for that they are not found, felt, or seen, we owght not thereby to
affirm that they are not. To conclude therefore, I think that in owr parts of
Italy, The gold of Italy.
pure gold is none other ways found (except that which is current among
the merchants) then after two sorts, whereof the one is that which is found
in the sands of ryuers: And the other, that which is gotten by the
industrious and subtyle art of partyng gold from new silver, or from giltyng
silver, or other metals which hold gold, Gold contained in other metals.
as there are in manner but few which hold not su^ smaul portion thereof, more
or less according to the mixtio^ and permanencie of their substances, or
according to the quality and force of the planettes which express their
influence in the generation of them. And in fine, this is the gold that which
is found in owre parts of Italy. Now therefore to return to the matter
whereof is owre chief intent to entreat, having before spoken sufficiently
of the generation and invention of the mine of gold, I will further declare
unto you how it owght to be pourged from earthly superfluity, The manner of
pourginge of gold.
and especially that which is found lyinge in the form of veins, And
although I have not seen the edifies and engens wherewith the myners are
accustomed to get it out, yet will I show you how ^y other practices I have
learned to pourge it, that you may not be without sum knowleage if your
fortune shall be so good as to find any in Italy. When you have therefore dygged
out the mine and placed it in order, you owght to consider in what kind of
stone it is engendered. And if it be in that which is cauled Lapis Lazuli,
Lapis lazuli.
then must you so draw owte the gold that you also save the stone, because
perfect Asure is made thereof, Asure.
and such as the paynters caul Azu^ro Oltramarino, that is, Asure of beyond
the sea, which they greatly esteem and bye it dear. And to do this, it is
necessary that you first beat it into fine powder, and then put it in a trey
or broad treene dysshe, and wasshe it fair and clean with water. This done
amalgame or rub it well with quickesy^uer until it have lycked up and
drawn all the gold into it and left the stone pure of it self. how gold is
drawn from Lapis lazuli. with quick silver.
Then strain the quickesyluer from the gold through a bag of lether, or
vapor it away in a styllatorie of glass: And thus shall you find the gold
in the bottom of the vessel in manner pure without quickesyluer, as I have
said before. And if you have no respect to save the stone, it shall suffice
to use the common experience, meltynge it in a furnace in a bayne or test of
lead. The baine or test of lead.
But in my opinion, the best manner to bring it to pureness, is first to burn
the mine with a gentell fire in an open furnace, and to suffer it to euaporate
well if it be not in such stone as you desire to save. Then grynde it in a
mylle or beat it with pestelles adapted with a wheel until it be browght to
fine powder. And when you have well washed it and so much wasted the
superfluous earthynesse thereof, then put it in a test made according to the
quantity of the same, and melt it therein with lead which you shall consume
partly by vapoure and partly with drawing it out by the side of the test
(as is the manner) until you come to the pure gold which you shall in fine
bring to perfect pureness in utterly consumynge the remanent of the lead
with vehement fire increased by the help of strong bellows. And this is the
universal manner which you may use not only in pourgynge the mine of gold, The
manner of pourginge gol^e with lead.
but also the mines of all other metals.

Of the mine of silver and the quality thereof.
THere are (as I understand) diverse opinions emonge the practitionars of the
mines, whether silver have a proper mine by it self or no. whether sylver have
A mine by hi^ self or no.
The reasons of such as writ of the naturs of mineralles, and thautoritie of
the most, persuade me to assent to the affirmative: Not only to see the
natural matter distinct, as is to perceive in the mines of gold, copper,
lead and other metals which in their mines are found pure by them selves
without mixtion, but also that I understand that there has bin found likewise
certain pieces as well of this metal of silver, as of gold and copper,
browght to his last fynesse by thonly work of nature. And this does Georgius
Agricola a learned man of Germany confirm in his book of minerals where he
writteth that in Saxony there was found in a cave a piece of mineral silver of
such bigness, Georgius Agricola.
A table of mi^eral silver*
that the duke the prince and pa^rone of that place, caused a chair and square
dyninge table after the manner of Almanye to be made thereof withowte any further
work of man's hand: Gloryinge often times that in this thing he surmounted
the greatness and magnificence of the Emperor. But in deed (except copper)
I have seen no metal taken owte of the cave pure withowt his ure. Yet do I
believe it a thing possible, consydering the great force and pour of nature,
The works of nature.
the end of whose woorkynge ever intends to bring all things to perfection
as far as it is not otherwise hyndered. Yet (as I have said) of the most
part of those mines which I have seen, none of them have been withowt
mixture, Mixte metales.
not only of the earth of their own proper mine, but have been also mixte with
other metals: And especially this of silver more then any other, except only
that which was dug in Schio in Vicentina. And therefore not withowt sum
sh^dow of apparent reason, have such doubts risin among the practitionars of
the mines. And yet (as I have said I believe that silver may have and has his
proper mine, forasmuch as every substance that may be converted into metal,
may as well stand by it self pure in his own kind, as either separate or
mixte with other, as is often times seen in one mass in the which diverse
metals are contained and engendered by nature. Diverse metals in one mass.
And by this means it often chances that he that speaks of the mine of
silver, may with the same brethe and withowt distinction, speak also of all
other metales, forasmuch as there are but few mines which are not mixte with
other. But because the most noble and rich metals have obtained the
prerogative to be esteemed above other, therefore the name of the mine is given
to them where they are mixte with other: as the mines which hold copper, lead,
or iren, In the indies gold found in great quantity, pure and vnmixte.
(as do the most part) yet if they hold also gold or silver, they are
cauled gold mines or silver mines, according unto that which is found in them
to be of most value. But to let pass this matter, you shall further
understand that when such mines are mixte of diverse metals, they show forth
so much the more diverse and variable fumosites of tinctures and marchasites, as
signs where they be and of what pureness: forasmuch as every of them
according to their natures, exalte their colors which they show furthe to the
eye, The colors of mineral fumosites.
sum in the similitude of asurine or blewe stones, sum green, sum yelowe, and
sum of vndistinct colors according to the compositions and mixtures of the
first matters of metals, which is also the cause that they are found more or
less in quantity. Now to speak more particularly of this metal of silver,
The generacio^ and quality of silver.
the philosophers speculatours of natural things, say that it is engendered
of substance more watery then fyerie, of complexion f^minine and flegmatike in
co^parason to gold: receauynge more of thinfluence of the moon then of the
son, The influe^s of the moon.
and therefore engendered more in could regions nerer unto the moon, then in
hot regions under the soonne: consisting also of pure elements, although
sumwhat crude and vndygested in respect of the elements of gold as may be
plainly perceived by their colors, weight, and fixation. Stones in the which
s^lu^r is engend^red.
The practicionars affirm that it is engendered in a stone like unto Albazano,
and also in an other ^^one of a russet, dead, and dark color: And is often
times found in an other stone like unto Treuertino or in Treuertino it self.
The mine hereof, is very ponderous, and has in it often times certain
shynynge graynes: The mine of ^ylu^r.
The which how much the less they are like to the point of a needle so much
is the mine found to be the perfecter, because this is a token of pureness
and fixion. And when it is found in a white stone, or lead stone, it is so
much the better, because it may be the easyer pourged from the stone and
earthynesse. When also it is found lyinge as it were loose among certain
frales or cloddes of earth, they say that it is perfect, although it have not
to the eye such resplendence as other are wont to have. The^ say also that it
is engen^ered in an earth of dark ru^set color: And that when it is found in
this, it is of great quantity and perfection, and that there is great plenty
thereof within the mountain: The mountain.
This also to be so much the better in how much more it is shynynge of the
color of iren or red^e. And that you may the better comprehend the signs of
the mine of the foresaid metal, you shall understand that even together with
the mine, either where it is first found, or nere unto the same, you shall
see certain marchasites of yelowe color like unto gold. Marchasites of
silver.
The which, the more they hold of such high color, so much the more do they
show adust or burnt ma^ter and heat, as things contrary to the nature of
their metals. And therefore according to the degrees of such colors, you may
in manner judge of what fatnes or leanenesse the mine is like to be. Such
marcha^ites therefore as ^hew^ the best signs of the goodness of their mines,
what marchasites are the best signs.
owght in color to approach to whytenesse as much as may be, and to consyst
of smaule graynes, and not in great quantity. And this is a general rule of
all marchasites, that how much the narower and less they are, the more do
they show the goodness of their mine. This mine of silver is also often times
found in a vein of great quant^tie, and yet so lean in quality that it will
not bear the charge of the dyggyng, because it is found in a hard stone like
unto Al^azano, Silver myns in hard stones.
being very hard to be dygged or broken. Sum times also, it is found in the
company of copper or lead: Silver with copper or lead.
The which likewise if it do not surmount the value of the charges, it is not
to be followed. Otherwhyles also, it so chuanceth that these three metals are
found accompanied together in one mine: In which case it shall be ^ecessarie to
use advertisement of art. And presupposynge that you desy^e to se^arate the
silver from the other metal, it is necessary that you increase the lead.
But if you pass not to save neither the syl^er nor the lead, The deuydi^g ^t
silver from other metals.
but ^nly the copper, it shal^e requi^ite to proceade wi^h l^^g^ and great
fyers until the weakest marters be consumed. But this owght to be done
especially in such mines as hold iren. Iren.
Yet neither for this or those, can there any general rule be given, but that
according unto their quality and nature, so owght they to be divided: And
this so much the more in that they are often times mixte with sum dry earth,
or with a quantity of antimonie or arsenike, Metals mixte with Antimonie or
Arsnike
which are matters al together euaporable and burnte, or of hard substance to
be reduced to fusion or meltynge: In so much that the artificers sumtymes
being ouercumme of them, leave them as things unprofitable. Whereof there can
none other cause often times be given, then their own ignorance by reason of
extraordinary and long fyers which they give them. And therefore they work
inordinately in such kind of mines, except they accompany them in the fusion
or meltynge with such things as may defend them from the fire. how metals
are preserved in fusion.
For whereas is such abundaunce either of burnte matter, or of super^^uous
waterynesse, whereof the one is cauled Sulphur or brymstone, and the other
Mercury or quicksyluer not fixed, Sulphur and mercurye.
or arsenike, it is necessary that the one burn and silver, and the other
carry it a way, so that of the mine there rests none other then an ear thye
sub^taunce infusible and not able to be molten. To save the said mine
therefore it shall be requisite to use discretion with much patience and
conueniente means, Grinding and wasshinge of mines.
first after the common manner of woorkynge to euaporate the mine (as we have
said) or withowt euaporation to grind it smaule: then to wasshe it often, and
in fine, if not by great fyers, at the least by great baynes or testes of
lead to pourge it. And to bring this effect the more easily to pass as much
as may be, after that it is ground you owght to prove in the same grindynge or
in an other, if it may be amalgamed with Mercury which is the best manner of
proof, The amalgamynge of mines with Mercury.
if the mine be of a dry nature: And I know that it has bynne used of many
to their great profit: And especially in those sort of mines which I said
before to be dygged in Vigentina in Schio, being very rich and good. Prove
it therefore. For all kinds of mines do not receive it. And of this whereof I
have spoken, I have intelligence that there has bynne pieces found holding a
fourth part of silver, Mines holding the fourth part of silver.
and sum more then half. And this was found lyinge in manner in the
superficia^l part of the earth: and sum times in paths and high ways. It
has also bin found under the roots of such trees as have been overthrown by
tempeste: and this very perfect. So that emong^ all the mines which I have
seen in the dominions of Uenice, as in Carnia and in mnay other places, I can
not say that I have seen any better: Although there be many caves whereof the
most part are of coppe^ holdinge silver: Copper holdinge silver.
and emonge other, that in the mountain of Auanzo, where I in the company of
certain other gentlemen caused a cave to be dug. And because the hole
charge was committed to me, I went by occasion twyse into high Almanye to see
the mines of that country, whereby I might have the better experience to faule
to practyse at my return. In so much that I found the mine which we had taken
in hand to follow, to be very good and rich: holding more then three ounces
and a half of silver in every hundredth of the mine. Th^e ounces di^ of silver
in every hundredth of mine
And doubtless we should have obtained great commodity hereby if fortune at
that time had not raised war between Maximilian Themperoure and the signorie
of Uenece: war between Maximilian ^hemperour and the Uenecians.
which was the cause that those places of Frioli and Carnia, could not be
quietly inhabited: whereby w^ were enforced to forsake owre enterprise, and to
raze and destroy thorder which we had begun. And by reason that the wars
continued long, we were constrained to divide owr company, where I also
departed an other way, having ever in mind to follow owre attempted enterprise
when better opportunity should serve. In the mean time returnyng agein^ into
high Almanie, The mines of Almanye.
I made more diligent search to know^ the mines then before: and went to
Sbozzo, Plaiper, Ispruch, Alla, and Arotrinbergh: from whense I went into
diverse places of Italy. So that to conclude, the most and best mines which I
have seen to hold most of silver, are those that are found^ in Vice^tina in
certain stones of a dark gray, or russet color, as I have said before. And
now for a general advertisement, I will not omyt to tell you, that when you
have attempted to dygge any mines, and have found the marchasi^e and the mine
myxt together, The m^rchasite mixed with the mine.
you shall leave of yowre work, because it signifies that the mine is near
to the superficial part of the earth, and that it is of but little quantity.
And thus as touching this mine of silver, I can say no more saving that I have
not yet showed you the manner of pourgynge it from earthly grosenes and to
bring it to perfect metal. But because I have determined to speak largely
hereof in the proper place of the fusion or meltynge of all metals, I have
thowght good to speak no further of this matter at this present.

The manner of workynge in gold mines of Egipte in owld time, after the
description of Diodorus Siculus, who wrotte his history cauled Bibliotheca,
sumwhat before the days of themperoure O^tauianus Augustus, and before
thincarnatio^ of Christ about.xl. years. He writes therefore in his fourth
book as follows.
WE have not thowght good to pretermit how gold is found, dug, and
wrought among the Egiptians. In the confines therefore of Egipte where it
borthereth with Ethiopia and Arabia, there are certain places fruitful of
metalles, out of the which, gold is dug with great labor and expenses.
For a black earth of minerale nature, has certain veins of most white
marble exceadinge bright and shyninge. Gold i^ a black earth^, and white marble
The surueyours of this work, have assigned them a great company of men to
work and coin gold. For the kings of Egipte are accustomed to appoynte to
these paynefull travails, Then damned to the metales as now to the galleys.
all such as have been convicte for certain crimes and condemned by laws, or
taken prisoners in the wars, or such as have been committed to prison through
the indignation of princes who by this means have both great vantage by their
labor, and punyshe them sufficiently for their offenses. For barbarous and
strange soldiers of diverse languagies, bare ruleouer them and keep them to
their work, in such sort that thuse of speech being taken from thyem, they
can not be corrupted by love or entreaty. They draw gold out of the hardest
earth decocte with much fire. The softest stone which is broken with mean
labor, is dug with instruments of iren by the travail of many thousa^ds
of men. The scrier which decerneth the veins of the mine, The scrier of the
vain.
goth before the workmen, appoynting them the places where they shall dig.
The marble stone which he shows them, they break and cleave with wedgies
of iren by the mere strength of their bodies withowte art. They make their
fosse or cave, not right furthe, but as the bright nature of the golden marble
leads them, Golden marble.
being otherwise dark and obscure by reason of their sundry turns and
bendinges diverse ways. The laborers caryinge light before their forheades,
dig great stones out of the mine, whych^ they let faule on the ground. From
this labor they never rest, enforced to contynual work with strokes and
contumelious words. The work of children.
Children of thage of.xii. or.xiii. years or vppewarde, are divided into two
companyes, whereof the one break the stones into smaule pieces, and the other
carry forth that which is broken. They that are past thage of.xxx. years,
receive the said broken stones at their hands and beat them in vessels of
stone with maules of iren, to the quantity of tares or fytches which afterward
they cast into many milles, Mylles.
where by the labor of two or three women or owlde men to every mylle, The
mi^ery of the miners
they are ground as smaule as meal. The fylthinesse of the bodies of these
laborers, is apparent to all men. For not so much as their privy members are
covered with any thing: And their bodies bysyde so fylthy, that no man can
behold them withowt compassion of their misery. But no pity, no rest, no
remission is granted them, whether they be men or women, young or owlde,
sick or feeble: But are all with strokes enforced to continual labor until
the poor wretches faint and often times dye for extreme debilitie: In so much
that many of them for fear of their life to coomme (which they think worse
then the present pain) prefer death before life. The pourgeinge of the
metal from the ure.
When they have thus ground the stones very smaule, they cast that substance
upon broad tables inclynynge sumwhat stiepe or standing a slope, and cast
wate^ thereon, sterynge continually the said powder of marble: by the means
whereof the earth and ure of the mine is washed away, and the gold as the
heavier matter remains on the tables. When they have doonne thus often times,
they ouerturne the gold continually with t^eyr hands and rub it with thynne
spoonges, out of the which they press a soft earth, and thus continewe until
the pure metal remain like unto golden sand. The melting of gold.
After that this preparation is fynysshed, other woorkemen receauynge it at
their hands by measure and weight, cast it into earthen pottes, putting
thereto a certain portion of lead, with branne of barley, and weeds of the
sea cauled reites or ouse. These things proportioned accordyngly, they close
the pottes diligently with cley, Alg^*
and so let them stand in a furnesse with fire for the space of five continual
days and nyghtes. In which space, al other things of contrary mixture being
consumed, only the gold is found in the vessels, sumwhat diminysshed of the
first weight. And by this labor and diligence is gold possessed in the
furthest part of Egypt. Whereby, even nature her self teaches us how
laborious it is in finding, tedious in pursuinge, dangerous in keepynge, and
in use constitute between pleasure and sorrow.

The description of the two viages made out of England into Guinea in Affrike
at the charges of certain merchants adventurers of the city of London, in
the year of owre Lord.M.D.LIII.
THat these vyages to Guinea are placed after the book of Metals as separate
from other vyages, the cause hereof is, that after I had delivered the said
book of metalles to the hands of the printers, I was desired by certain my
friends to make sum mention of these viages, that sum memory thereof might
remain to owr posterity if either iniquity of time consumynge all things,
or ignorance creepynge in by barbarousnesse and contempt of knoweleage,
should hereafter bury in oblivion so worthy attemptes, so much the greatlyer
to be esteemed as before never enterprysed by English men, or at the least
so frequented as at this present they are and may be to the great commodity
of owre merchants, if the same be not hyndered by thambision of such as for
the conquestynge of forty or fyftie miles here and there, and erectynge of
certain fortresses or rather blockhouses among naked people, Ambition*
think the^ selves worthy to be lords of half the world, envying that
other should enjoy the commodities which they them selves can not holy
possess. And although such as have been at charges in the discovering and
conquestynge of such lands, owght by good reason to have certain pr^uilegies,
preeminencies, and tributes for the same, yet (to speak under correction) it
may seem sumwhat rigorous and against good reason and conscience, or rather
against the charity that owght to be among Christen men, that such as
violentely invade the dominions of other, should not permit other frendely to
use the trade of marchandies in places never or seldom frequented of them,
whereby their trade is not hindered in such places where they them selves have
at their own election appointed the martes of their trafike. But forasmuch as
at this present it is not my intent to accuse or defend, approve or improve, I
will cease to speak any further hereof, and proceade to the descrip^io^ of the
first viage as briefly and faithfully as I was advertised of the same by
thinformation of such credible persons as made diligent inquisition to know
the truth hereof as much as shall be requisite, omyttynge to speak of many
particular things not greatly necessary to be known: which nevertheless
with also thexact course of the navigations, shall be more fully declared in the
second vyage. And if herein favor or frendshyppe shall perhaps cause sum to
think that sum have been sharply touched, let them lay a part favor and
frendshippe and give place to truth, that honest men may receive praise for
well doing, and lewd persons reproach as the just stipende of their evil
deserts, whereby other may be deterred to do the like, and virtuous men
encouraged to proceade in honest attemptes.

But that these vyages may be more plainly understood of al men, I have
thowght good for this purpose before I entreat hereof, to make a brief
description of Africa being that great part of the world, Africa.
on whose Weste side begins the coast of Guinea at Cabo Uerde abowte
the.xii. degrees in latitude on this side the Equinoctial line, The coast of
Guinea.
and two degrees in longitude from the measurynge line, so runnynge from the
north to the south and by east in sum places within v.iiii. and.iii. degrees
and a half within the Equinoctial, and so forth in manner directly east and by
north for the space of.xxxvi. degrees or there about in longitude from the West
to the East, as shall more plainly appear in the descryption of the second
vyage.

A brief description of Affrike.
IN Africa the less are these kyngedomes: The kyngedome of Tunes and
Constantina which is at this day under Tunes, Tons.
and also the region of Bugia, Bugia.
Tripoli, Tri^oli.
and ^zzab. This part of Afrike is very baren by reason of the great deserts,
as the deserts of Numidia and Barcha. Numidia.
The principal ports of the kyngedome of Tunes are these: Goletta, Bizerta,
Portofarnia, Boua, and Stora. The chief cities of Tunes, are Constantia and
Boua with diverse other. Islands of Tons.
Under this kyngedome are many Islands, as Zerbi, Lampadola, Pantalarea,
Limoso, Beit, Gamelaro, and Malta where at this present is the great master
of the Rodes. Malta.
Under the southe of this of kingdom, are the great deserts of Libia. The
disertes of Libia.
All the nations this Africa the less, are of the sect of Machomet and a
rusticall people living scattered in vyllages. The best of this part of
Afrike, is Barbaria lyinge on the coaste of the sea Mediterraneum. Barbary.


Mauritania (now cauled Barbaria) is divided into two parts, Mauritania.
as Mauritania Tingitania, and Cesariensis. Mauritania Tingitania, is now
cauled the kingdom of Fes and the kyngedome of Marrocko. The principal city
of Fes, is cauled Fessa: and the chief city of Marrocko, The kingdo^s of Fes
and ma^rock.
is named Marrocko. Mauritania Cesariensis is at this day cauled the kyngedome
of Tremisen, Tremesin.
with also the city cauled Tremisen or Telensin. This region is full of
deserts, and reaches to the sea Mediterraneum to the city of Oram with the
port of Massaquiber. Oram.
Nassaquiber
The kyngedome of Fes reachethe unto the Ocean sea from the West to the city
of Argilla: and the port of the said kyngedome is cauled Salla. Sa^la.


The kyngedome of Marrocko is also extended above the Ocean sea unto the city
of Azamor and Azafi which are above the Ocean sea toward the West of the
said kingdom. Azamor.
In Mauritania Tingitanea (that is to say in the two kyngedomes of Fes and
Marrocko) are in the sea, the Islands of Canarie cauled in owlde time the
fortunate Islands. The Islands of Canarie.
Toward the south of this region, is the kyngedome of Guinea, Guinea.
with Senega, Iaiofo, Gambra, and many other regions of the black Moors
cauled Ethiopians or Negros, Ethiopians.
all which are watered with the river Negro cauled in owlde time Niger. In the
said regions are no cities: but only certain low cotages made of bouwes of
trees plastered with chauke and covered with straw: In these regions are also
very great deserts.

The kyngedome of Marrocko has under it these seven kyngedomes: Hea, Sus,
Guzula, the territory of Marrocko, Marrocko.
Duchala, Hazchora, and Telde. The kyngedome of Fes has as many: as Fes, Fes.
Temesne, Azgar, Elabath, Errifi, Garet, and Eicauz. The kyngedome of Tremisen
has these regions: Tremesin.
Tremisen, Tenez, and Elgazaet, all which are Machometistes. But all the
regions of Guinea are pure Gentyles and Idolatours withowt profession of any
religion or other knowleage of god then by the law of nature. Guinea.


Africa the great, Africa the great.
is one of the three parts of the world known in owlde time and severed from
Asia, on the East by the river Nilus: On the West, from Europe by the pillars
of Hercules. The hither part is now cauled Barbary, and the people Moors.
The inner part is cauled Libia and Ethiopia. Afrike the less is in this wise
bounded: Affrike the less.
On the west it has Numidia: On the east Cyrenaica: On the north, the sea
cauled Mediterraneum. In this country was the noble city of Carthage.
Carthage.


In the East side of Afrike beneth the red sea, dwells the great and
mighty Emperor and Chrystian king Prester Johan, Prester John.
well known to the Portugales in their vyages to Calicut. His dominions reach
very far on every side: and has under him many other kings both Chrystian
and hethen that pay him trybute. This mighty prince is cauled David The Emperor
of Ethiopia. Sum write that the king of Portugale sends him yearly.viii.
ships laden with marchaundies. His kyngedome confineth with the red sea,
and reaches far into Afrike toward Egypt and Barbary. Southwarde it
confineth with the sea toward the cape de Buona Speranza: Cape de Buona
Speranza.
and on the other side with the sea of sand cauled Mare de Sabione, The sea of
sand.
a very dangerous sea, lyinge between the great city of Alcaer or Cairo in
Egypt and the country of Ethiopia: Alcair.
In the which way are many unable deserts continuinge for the space of five
days journey. And they affirm that if the said Chrystian Emperor were not
hyndered by those deserts (in the which is great lack of vittayles and
especially of water) he would or now have invaded the kyngedome of Egypt and
the city of Alcayer. The chief city of Ethiope where this great Emperor is
resydent, is cauled Amacaiz being a fair city, whose inhabitauntes are of
the color of an olyue. There are also many other cities, as the city of Saua
upon the river of Nilus where Themperoure is accustomed to remain in the
soommer season. There is likewise a great city named Barbaregaf: And Ascon
from whense it is said that the queen of Saba came to Jerusalem to hear the
wisdom of Solomon. From whe^se the queen of Saba came.
This city is but little, yet very fair and one of the chief cities in
Ethiope. In the said kingdom is a province cauled Manicongni, Manicongni.
whose king is a Moore and tributarie to The Emperor of Ethiope. In this
province are many exceeding high mountains upon the which is said to be the
earthly Paradyse: The earthly Paradyse.
And sum say that there are the trees of the soonne and moon whereof the
antiquity makes mention: The trees of the soonne and moon.
Yet that none can pass thither by reason of great deserts of a hundredth
days journey. Also beyond these mountains, is the cape of Buona Speranza. And
to have said thus much of Afrike it may suffice.

The first vyage of Guinea.
IN the year of owre Lord.M.D.LIII. the xii. day of August, sailed from
Porchemouth two goodly ships, the Primrose and the Lion, The prymrose
The Lion.
with a pynnesse cauled the moon: The Moon
being all well furnysshed as well with men of the lustiest sort to the number
of seven score, as also with ordinance and vyttayles requisite to such a
vyage: Having also two capitaynes, the one a stranger cauled Antoniades
Pinteado a Portugale, Pinteado.
borne in a town named the port of Portugale, a wise, discrete, and sober
man, who for his cunning in saylynge being as well an expert pylot as polytyke
captain, was sumtyme in great favor with the king of Portugale, and to
whom the coasts of Brasile and Guinea were committed to be kept from the
Frenchemen to whom he was a terroure on the sea in those parts: Brasile.
Guinea.
and was furthermore a gentleman of the king his masters house. But as fortune
in manner never favors but flattereth, The flatteryng of fortune.
never promyseth but deceaueth, never rayseth but casts down again, and as
great wealth and favor has always companions emulation and envy, he was
after many aduersites and quarrels made against him, enforced to come into
England: where in this golden vyage he was evil matched with an unequal
coompanion and unlike match of most sundry qualities and conditions with
virtues few or none adourned, with vices diverse and many fowly spotted, The
euel conditions of Wyndam.
known of many with out profit, and desired of few or none for his
wyckednes: whose smaule acquayntaunce was profitable to all men, and his
familiar conversation an undoing, that happy was the man or woman that knew
him not, he for his gooddes and she for her name. In fine, unfortunate was the
coompany that had owght to do with him: in so much that it was no maruayle
that so goodly an enterprise with so noble a furniture of men, ships, and
ordina^^ce of all sorts, with all kind of vyttayles and that of so ^reat
abundaunce, had so smaul success: which could be none otherwise where so foul
a spotte did blemysshe, ye rather deface the rest. Thus departed these noble
ships under sail on their vyage. But first this captain Wyndam, puttyng
forth of his ship at Porchmouth, a kynseman of one of the headde merchants,
and showing herein a muster of the tragical parts he had conceived in his
brain, and with such smaule begynninges nurysshed so monstrous a birth, that
more happy, yea and blessed was that young man being left behind then if he
had been taken with them, as sum do wysshe he had doonne the like by theyrs.
Thus sailed they on their vyage until they came to the Islands of Madera where
they took in certain wynes for the store of their ships, The Islands of
Madera.
and paid for them as they agreed of the price. At these Islands they met with
a great galion of the king of Portugale full of men and ordinance: A galeon
of the king of Portugale.
yet such as could not have prevailed if it had attempted to withstand or
resyst owre ships, for the which cause it was set forth, not only to let
and interrupte these owre ships of their purposed vyage, but all other that
should attempt the like. Yet chiefly to frustrate owre vyage. For the king of
Portugale was sinisterly informed that owre ships were armed to his castle of
Mina in these parties, The castle of Mina.
whereas nothing less was meant.

After that owr ships departed from the Islands of Madera forward on their
vyage, began this worthy captain Pinteados sorrow as a man tormented with
the company of a terrible hydra who hitherto flattered with him and made him a
fair countenance and show of love. how Wynda^ abused Pinteado.
Then did he take upon him to command all alone, setting nowght both by
captain Pinteado with the rest of the marchaunte factours: sumtymes with
opprobrious words and sumtymes with threatenynges most shamefully abusing
them, taking from Pinteado the service of the boys and certain mariners that
were assigned him by thorder and direction of the woorshypfull merchants, and
leaving him as a common maryner, which is the greatest despite and grief that
can be to a Portugale or Spanyarde to be diminysshte their honor which they
esteem above all richesse. Thus saylyng forward on their vyage, they came to
the Islands of Canarie, The Islands of Canarie.
continuynge their course from thense until they arrived at the Island of
saint Nicolas where they vyttayled them selves with fresshe meat of the
flesh of wild goats whereof is great plenty in that Island and in manner of
nothing else. The Island of. s. Nico^as.
From hense following on their course, and taryinge here and there at the
deserte Islands in the way, because they would not coome to tymely to the
country of Guinea for the heat, Guinea.
and taryinge sumwhat to long (for what can be well mynystred in a common
wealth where inequality with tyranny will rule alone) they came at the length
to the first land of the country of Guinea where they fell with the great
river of Sesto where they might for their marchaundies have laden their ships
with the graynes of that country, The river of ^esto.
Graynes.
which is a very hot fruit, and much like unto a fygge as it grows on the
tree. For as the fygges are full of smaule seeds, so is the said fruit full of
graynes which are lose within the codde, having in the myddest thereof a hole
on every side. This kind of spice is much used in could countries, and may
there be sold for great advantage for thexchaunge of other wares. The thrist
of gold.
But owr men by the persuasion or rather inforcement of this tragical
captain, not regarding and setting light by that commodity in comparason to
the fine gold they thristed, The castle of mena.
sailed an hundredth leaques further until they came to the golden land: where
not attemptinge to come nere the castle perteynynge to the king of Portugale,
which was within the river of Mina, The quantite of gold.
made sale of their ware only on this side and beyond it for the gold of
that country to the quantity of an hundredth and fifty pounds weight, there
being in case that they might have dispatched al their ware for gold, if the
vntame brain of Wyndam had or could have given ear to the counsel and
experience of Pinteado. For when that Wyndam not satisfied with the gold
which he had (and more might have had if he had tarried about the Mina)
commaundynge the said Pinteado (for so he took upon him) to lead the ships
to Benin being under the Equinoctial line and a hundredth and fifty leaques
beyond the Mina where he looked to have thyer ships laden with pepper: Benin.
Pepper.
And being counsayled of the said Pinteado considering the late time of the
year for that time to go no further but to make sale of their wares such as
they had for gold whereby they might have been great gayners. But Wyndam not
assenting hereunto, fell into a suddeyne rage, reuilynge the said Pinteado,
Fury admits no counsel.
caulynge him Jew with other opprobrious words, saying. This horson Jew
has promised to bring us to such places as are not, or as he can not bring us
unto. But if he do not, I will cut of his ears and nail them to the mast.
Pinteado gave the forsayde counsel to goo no further for the safeguard of the
men and their lives, which they should put in daungioure if they came to late
for the rossia which is their winter, The Rossia.
not for could but for smotherynge heat with close and cloudy air and
storminge wether of such putrifyinge quality that it rotted the cotes of their
backs. Rottinge heat.
Or else for coommynge to soonne for the scorchynge heat of the son which
caused them to linger in the way. Scorchinge heat.
But of force and not of will, browght he the ships before the river of
Benin: Benin.
where riding at an anchor, sent their pinnesse up into the river fifty or
threscore leaques, from whense certain of the merchants with captain
Pinteado, Francisco a Portugale, Francisco.
Nicolas Lambert gentleman, Nicolas Lambert.
and other merchants were conducted to the court where the king remained.x.
leaques from the river side: whyther when they came, The king of Benin his
court.
they were browght with a great company to the presence of the king who
being a black moore (although not so black as the rest) sat in a great
houge haule long and wide, the walls made of earth withowte wyndowes, the
the roof of thynne boordes open in sundry places like unto lovers to let in
the air.

And here to speak of the great reverence they give to their king, Reverence
toward the king.
being such that if we would give as much to owr savior Christ, we should
remove from owr heads many plages which w^e daily deserve for owre contempt
and impiety.

So it is therefore, that when his noble men are in his presence, they never
look him in the face, but sit courynge, as we upon owre knees so they upon
their buttockes with their elbowes upon their knees and their hands before
their faces, not lookynge up until the king command them. And when they
are coming toward the king as far as they do see him, do they show such
reverence sytting on the ground with their faces covered as before. Likewise
when they depart from him they turn not their backs toward him, but go
creepynge backewarde with like reverence.

And now to speak sumwhat of the communication that was between the king and
owre men, The communication between the king of Benin and owr men.
you shall first understand that he him self could speak the Portugale
tongue which he had learned of a child. Therefore after that he had commanded
owre men to stand up, and demanded of them the cause of their coming into
that country, they answered by Pinteado that they were merchants trauaylynge
into those parties for the commodities of his country for exchange of wares
which they had browght from their countries, being such as should be no less
commodious for him and his people. The king then having of owlde lyinge in a
certain store house thirty or forty kyntals of pepper (every kyntall being
an hundredth weight) willing them to look upon the same, Pepper.
and again to bring him a sight of such marchaundies as they had browght
with them. And theruppon sent with the captain and the merchants certain
of his men to conducte them to the warers side, with other to bring the ware
from the pinnesse to the court. Who when they were returned and the wares
seen, the king grew to this end with the merchants, The kings
gentleness toward owr men.
to provide in thirty days the ladynge of all their ships with pepper.

And in case their marchaundies would not extend to the value of so much
pepper, he promised to credit them to their next return: and thereuppon
sent the country round about to gather pepper, causynge the same to be
browght to the court: So that within the space of.xxx. days they had gathered
four score toonne of pepper.

In the mean season owre men partly having no rule of them selves, The
disorder and death of owre men.
but eating withowt measure of the fruits of the country, and drynkyng the
wine of the palm trees that droppeth in the night from the cut branches of
the same, and in such extreme heat runnynge continually into the water, not
used before to such suddeyne and vehement alterations (then the which nothing
is more dangerous) were thereby browght into swellynges and agues. In so much
that the later time of the year coming on, caused the^ to dye su^^ymes iii.
and su^times.iiii. or.v. in a day. Then Wyndam perceauyng the time of the.xxx.
days to be expyred, and his men dying so fast, sent to the court in post to
captain Pinteado and the rest to come away and to tarry no longer. But
Pinteado with the rest, wrote back to him again, certifyinge him of the great
quantity of pepper they had already gathered and looked daily for much more:
Desiring him furthermore to remember the great praise and name they should
win if they came home prosperously, and what shame of the contrary. With
which answer Wyndam not satisfied, and many of their men dyinge daily, wylled
and commanded them ageine either to coomme away furthwith, or else thretened to
leave them behind. When Pinteado hard this answer, thinking to persuade him
with reason, took his way from the court toward the ships being conducted
thither with men by the kings commandment.

In the mean season Windam all rageinge, The fury of Wyndam.
brake up Pinteados Caben, broke open his chestes, spoiled such prouisyon of
could stilled waters and suckettes as he hade provided for his health, and
left him nothing neither of his instruments to sail by, nor yet of his
apparel. And in the mean time faulinge sick him self, dyed also. The death
of Wyndam.
Whose death Pinteado coming aborde, lamented as much as if he had been the
derest friend he had in the world. But certain of the maryners and other
officers did spette in his face, Pinteado evil used of the maryners.
sum caulynge him Jew, saying that he had browght them thither to kylle them:
And sum drawing their swords at him making A show to sley him. Then he
perceauinge that they would needs away, desired them to tarry that he might
fetch the rest of the merchants that were fefte at the court. But they would
not grant his request. Then desired he them to give him the ship boat with
as much of an owlde sail as might serve for the same, promisynge them
therewith to bring Nicolas Lamberte and the rest into England: But all was in
vain. Then wrotte he a letter to the court to the merchants informynge them
of all the matter, and promising the^ if god would lend him life to return
with all have to fetch them. And thus was Pinteado kept a bordeshippe ageynste
his will, thrust among the boys of the ship, not used like a man, nor yet
like an honest boy: But glad to find favor at the cokes hand. Then departed
they, leaving one of their ships behind them, which they soonke for lake of
men to carry her. After this within six or seven days saylinge, dyed also
Pinteado for very pensiveness and thowght that struck him to the heart: The
death of Pinteado.
A man worthy to serve any prince and most vilely used. And of seven score men
came home to Plymmuowth scarsely fortye, and of them many dyed. And that no man
should suspecte these words which I have said in commendation of Pinteado, to
be spoken upon favor otherwise then truth, I have thought good to add
hereunto the coppie of the letters which the king of Portugale and the infant
his brother wrote unto him to reconcyle him at such time as upon the king
his masters displeasure (and not for any other crime or offense as may appear
by the said letters) he was only for poverty enforced to coomme into
England where he first persuaded owre merchants to attempt the said vyages
to Guinea. But as the king of Portugale to late repented him that he had so
punysshed Pinteado upon malicious informations of such as envied the man's good
fortune, even so may it hereby appear, that in sum cases, even Lions them
selves, may either be hyndered by the contempt or aided by the help of the
pore myse according unto the fable of Isope.

The coppie of Antomanes Pinteado his letters parents whereby the king of
Portugale made him knight of his house after all his troubles and imprisonment,
which by wrong information made to the king, he had sustained of long time,
being at the last delivered, his cause known and manifested to the king by
a gray friar the kings confessoure.
I The king do give you to understand lord Frances Desseosa one of my
counsel and ouerseer of my house, that in consideration of the good service
which Antonie Anes Pinteado, the son of John Anes, dwelling in the town
cauled the port, has done unto me, my will and pleasure is, to make him
knight of my house, alowynge to him in pension seven hundredth reys monthly,
Seven hundredth reys are.x. s. Alcayr, is half a busshel.
and every day one alcayr of barley as long as he keeps a horse, and to be
paid according to the ordinance of my house. Prouydynge always that he shall
receive but one marriage gift: And this also in such condition that the time
which is excepted in owre ordinance forbyddynge such men to mary for getting
such children as might succeade them in this alowance, which is six years
after the making of this patente, shall be first expired before he do mary. I
therefore command you to cause this to be entered in the book cauled the
Matricola of owre household under the title of knights. And when it is so
entered, let the clerk of the Matricola for the certentie thereof, write on the
back side of this Aluala or patente, the number of the leaf wherein this owre
grant is entered. Which done, let him return this writing unto the said
Antonie Anes Pinteado for his warrant.

I Diego Henriques have written this in Almarin the xxii. day of September, in
the year of owre lord.1551. And this benevolence the king gave unto Antonie
Anes Pinteado the.xxv. day of July this present year.

Rey. --


The secretaries declaration written under the kings grant.
YOwre majesty has vouchsafed in respect and consyderation of the good
service of Antonie Anes Pinteado dwelling in the port, and soonne of John
Anes to make him knight of yowre house with ordinary alowance of seven
hundredth reys pension by the month and one Alcayr of barley by the day as
long as he keeps a horse: And to be paid according to the ordinance of
yowr house with condition that he shall have but one marriage gift: And that
not within the space of.vi. years after the making of these letters patentes.

The secretaries note. Entered in the book of the Matricola. Fol. 683.

Francisco de Siquera.


The coppie of the letter of Don Jews thinfant and brother to the king of
Portugale: sent into England to Antonianes Pinteado.
ANtonie Anes Pinteado, I the infant brother to the king, have me heartily
commended unto you. Peter Gonsalues is gone to seek you, desiring to bring
you home again into yowr country. And for that purpose, has with him a safe
conduct for you, granted by the king, that thereby you may freely and
withowt all fear come home. And although the wether be foul and stormy, yet
fail not to come. For in the time that his majesty has given you, you may
do many things to yowre contentacion and gratifying the king, whereof I would
be right glad: and to bring the same to pass will do all that lies in me
for yowre profit. But forasmuch as Peter Gonsalues will make further
declaration hereof unto you, I say no more at this present. Written in Luxburne
the.viii. day of December, Anno.M.D.LII.

The Infant don Lews.


AL these foresaid wrytynges I saw under sel^ in the house of my friend Nicolas
Lyese with whom Pinteado left them at his vnfortunat^ departing to Guinea. But
notwithstanding all these friendly letters and fair promyses, Pinteado durst
not attempt to go home, neither to keep^ company with the Portugales his
country men withowt the presence of other, forasmuch as he had secreate
admonition that they intended to sley him, if time and place might hau^ served
their wicked intent.

The second vyage to Guinea.
AS in the first vyage I have declared rathe^ the order of the hystory the^ the
course of the navigations, whereof at that time I could have no perfect
information, so in the description of this second vyage my chief intent has
been to show the course of the same according to the observation and ordinary
custom of them aryners, and as I received it at the hands of an expert pylot
being one of the chief in this viage, who also with his own hands wrote a
brief declaration of the same as he found and tried all things not by
conjecture, but by the art of saylynge and instruments perteynynge to the
mariners faculty. Not therefore assuminge to my self the commendations dew to
other, neither so boulde as in any part to change or otherwise dispose the
order of this vyag^ so well observed by art and experience, I have thowght good
to set forth the same in such sort and phrase of speech as is commonly used
among them, and as I received it of the said pylot as I have said. Take it
therefore as, follows.

In the year of owre lord.M.D.LIIII. the.xi. day of October, we d^parted the
river of Temmes with three goodly ships, the one cauled the Trinity, a ship
of the burden of seven score toonne: The Other cauled the Barthelmewe a ship of
the burden of.lxxxx. The third was the John Evangelist a ship of seven score
toonne. With the said ships and two pyunesses (whereof the one was drowned in
the coast of England) we went forward on owr vyage, and steyde at
Dover.xiiii. days. We steyde also at Rye three or four days. More over last
of all we touched at Darthmouth.

The first day of November at.ix. of the clock at night departing from the
coaste of England, we s^rte of the stert bearing southwest all that night in
the sea, and the next day all day, and the next night after until the third
day^ of the said mooneth about noone, making owr way good, did run.60.
leaques.

Item from.xii. of the clock the third day till.xii. of the clock the.iiii
day of the said mooneth, making owr way good southeast, did run every three
hours two leaques, which amounts to.xvi. leaques the hole.

Item from.xii. of the clock the.iiii. day to.xii. of the clock the.v. day,
runnynge southwest in the sea, did run.xii. leaques.

Item runnynge from.xii. of the clock the.v. day until.xii. of the clock
the.vi. day runnyng southeast, did run.xviii leaques.

And so from.xii. of the clock the.vi. day until.xii. of the clock the.vii.
day, runnynge southsouthwest, did run every hour.ii. leaques which amou^t
to.xlviii. leaques the hole. Item from.xii. of the clock the.vii. day till.iii.
of the clock the.viii. day, southsouthwest, runnyng in the sea. did run xxx.
leaques.

Item from three of the clock the.viii. day, until.iii. of the clock the.ix.
day, runnyng southsouthwest, did run.xxx. leaques.

Item from.iii. of the clock the.ix. day till.iii. of the clock the.x. day,
did southsouthaest in runnynge in the sea the sum of.xxiiii. leaques.

Also from.iii. of the clock thy.x. day until.xli. of the clock the.xi. day,
did run southsouthwest the sum of.xii. leaques, and from.xii. of the. clock
till.vi. of the said day, did run vi. leaques.

Runnynge south and by west in the sea from.vi. of the clock^ the.xi. day
till.vi. of the clock the.xii. day; did run.xxxvi leaques.

From.vi. of the clock at after none the.xii. day till.vi. of the clock
the.xiii. day at after none, did run.xiii. leaques Item from.vi. of the
clock the.xiii. day, till.vi of the clock the.xiiii. day at after none that we
were becalmed that w^^ could lie southwest with a sail. And the.xv. day in
the mormynge, the wind came to the East and east northeast. The.xvii. day in
the morning, we had sight of the I Will of Madera which does rise to him that
comes in the north northeast part vpryght land in the west part of it, and
very high: and to the south southeaste a low long land and a long point
with a saddle throwgh the myddeste of it, stands in the.xxxii. degrees: and
in the west part, many springes of water runnynge down from the mountain,
and many white fyeldes like unto corn fields, and sum white houses to the
southeast part of it: and the top of the mountain shows very ragged if
you may se it, and in the northeast part there is a byght or bay as thowgh it
were a harborowe. Also in the said part, there is a rock a little distance
from the shore: and over the said byght, you shall se a great gappe in the
mountain.

The.xix. day at.xii. of the clock, we had sight of the I Will of Palms and
Teneriffa and the Canaries. The I Will of pa^mes.
T^neriffa.
The Canarie^.
The I Will of Palm ryseth round and lies southeaste and northweste, and the
northwest part is lowest. In the south, is a round hill over the hedde land,
and an other round hill above that in the land.

There is between the southeast part of the I Will of Madera and the northwest
part of the I Will of Palm.lvii. leaques. From madera to the I Will of Palms.
This I Will of Palm lies in the.xxix. degrees. And owre course from Madera to
the I Will of Palm was south and south and by west, so that we had sight of
Teneriffa and of the Canaries. The southeast part of the I Will of Palm, and the
north northeast of Teneriffa, lies southeast and northweste. And between them
is.xx. leaques. Teneriffa and the great Canarie cauled Grancanaria,
Grancanaria.
and the west part of Fortisuentura stands in.xxvii. degrees and a half.
Fortes Uentura.
Gomera is a fair Island and very ragged and lies west southwest of
Teneriffa. The Island of Gomera.
And who so ever will come between them two Islands, must come south and by
east, and in the south part of Gomera, is a town and a good rode in the said
part of the Island: and it stands in.xxvii. degrees and three terces.
Teneriffa is a high land and a great high pick like a sugar lofe. Teneriffa.
And upon the said pick is snow throughowt a^l the hole year. Snow.
And by reason of that pick, it may be known above all other Islands, and
there we were becalmed the.xx. day of November from.vi. of the clock in the
morning until four of the clock at after none.

Between Gomera and Cape de las Barbas.
THe.xxii. day of November under the Tropike of Cancer, the soonne goes down
west and by south.

Upon the coast of Barberie xxv. leaques by north cape blanke at.iii. leaques
of the main, The coast of ^arbarye.
Cape blanke.
there is.xv. fadome and good shelly ground and sand among, and no stremes,
and two smaule Islands standing in the.xxii. degrees and a t^r^e.

From Gomera to cape de las Barbas is a hundredth leaques and owr course was
south and by east. The said cape stands in.xxii. and a half: and all that
coaste is starte.xvi. or xvii. fadome deep, vii. or.viii. leaques of from the
river de Oro to cape de las Barbas, The river of de Oro.
there use many Spanyardes and Portugales to trade for fysshynge during the
mooneth of November: and all that coast is very low lands. Also we went from
cape de las Barbas southsouthwest and southwest and by south ^yll we brought
owre selves in.xx. degrees and a half, reckoning owr selves.vii. leaques of:
and that was the least sholes of cape Blanke.

Then we went south until we browght owre selves in xiii. degrees, reckoning
owre selves.xxv. leaques of. And in xv. degrees, we did reere the crossiers:
The crosiers or cross stars.
and we might have rered them sooner if we had looked for them. They are not
right a cross in the moonethe of November by reason the nyghtes are short
there. Nevertheless we had the sight of them the.xxix. day of the said
mooneth at night.

The first of December owte.xiii. degrees, we set owre course south and by
East until the fourth day of December at.xii. of the clock the same day.
Then we were in.ix. degrees and a terce, reckoning owr selves.xxx. leaques of
the sholes of the river cauled Rio Grande being west southweste of them: Rio
Grande
The which sholes be.xxx. leaques long.

The fourth of December, we began to set owre cours^ southeaste, we being
in.vi. degrees and a half.

The ninth day of December we set owr course east southeast

The.xiiii. day of the said mooneth, we set owre cours^ east, we being in.v.
degrees and a half, reckoning owre selves.xxxvi. leaques from the coast of
Guinea.

The.xix. day of the said mooneth, we set owre course east and by north,
reckoning owr selves.xvii. leaques distan^ from cape Mensurado, Cape Mesurado.
the said cape being east northeast of us, and the river of Sesto being
east. The river of Sesto.


The.xxi. day of the said mooneth we fell with cape Mesurado to the southeast
about two leaques of. This ca^e may be easily known, by reason the rysynge of
it is like a porpose hedde. Also toward the southeast there are three trees,
whereof the eastermost tree is the highest, and the myddlemost is like a heye
stacke, and the southermost like unto a iebet: and upon the main, are four
or five high hills rysynge one after an other like round hoommockes or
hyllockes. And the southeast of the three trees, is three trees like a
brandierwyse: and all the coaste alonge is white sand. The sayd^ cape stands
within a little in.vi. degrees.

The.xxii. of. December, we came to the river of Sesto, and remained there
until the.xxix. day of the said month Here we thought it best to send
before us the pynne^^e to the river of Dulce cauled Rio Dulce, that they might
have the beginning of the market before the coming of the John.

At the river of Sesto, The river of Sesto.
we had a toonne of graynes. This river stands in.vi. degrees lacking a
terce. From the river of Sesto to Rio Dulce, Rio Dulce.
is.xxv. leaques. Rio Dulce stands in.v. degrees and a half. The river of
Sesto is easy to be known by reason there is a ledge of rocks on the
southeast part of the rode. And at the entering into the haven, are five or
six trees that bear no leaves. This is a good harborowe: but very narrow at
the enteraunce into the river. There is also a rock in the haven mouth right
as you enter. And all that coast between cape de Monte and cape de las Palmas,
Cape de Monte.
lies southeast and by east, northwest and by weste, being three leaques of
the shore. And you shall have in sum places rocks two leaques of: and that
between the river of Sesto and cape de las Palmas. Cape de las Palmas.


Between the river of Sesto and the river Dulce, is.xxv. leaques. And the high
land that is between them both, is cauled Cakeado, The land of Cakeado.
being.viii. leaques from the river of Sesto. And to the southeastwarde of
him, is a place cauled Shawgro and an other cauled Shyawe or Shauo, Shauo.
where you may get fresshe water. Of this Shyawe, lies a ledge of rocks: and
to the Southeastwarde, lies a head land cauled Croke. Croke*
Between Cakeado and Croke, is.ix. or.x. leaques. To the Southeastwarde of, is
a harborowe cauled saint Uincent. Right over against saint Uincent, is a rock
under the water, two leaques and a half of the shore. To the southeastwarde of
that rock, Saint Uincentes harborou*
you shall see an Island about three or four leaques of. This Island is not
paste a leaque of the shore. To the east southeast of the Island, is a rock
that lies above the water: and by that rock goes in the river of Dulce, The
river Dulce.
which you shall know by the said river and rock. The northwest side of the
haven, is flat sand: and the south east side thereof, is like an Island and a
bare plot^e without any trees, and so is it not many other place.

In the rode, you shall ride in.xiii. or.xiiii. fadomes, good owes and sand,
being the marks of the rode to bring the Island and the northwest land
together. And here we ankered the last of December.

The third day of January, we came from the river of Dulce.

Note that cape de las Palmas is a fair high land. Cape de las Palmas.
But sum low places thereof by the water side, look like read cliffes with
white strakes like ways a cable length a piece. And this is to the East part
of the cape. This cape is the southermost land in all the coast of Guinea: The
coast of Gu^nea.
And stands in four degrees and a terce.

The coast from cape de las Palmas to cape Trepoyntes or de tres Puntas, Cape
de tres Puntas.
is fair and clear without rock or other daungiour.

xxv. leaques from cape de las Palmas, the land is higher then in any place
until we came to cape Trepoyntes And about.x. leaques before you comme to cape
Trepointes, the land ryseth still higher and higher until you come to cap^
Trepoyntes. Also before you coomme to the said cape after other five leaques
to the northwest part of it, there is certain broken ground with two great
rocks: and within them in the byght of a bay, is a castle cauled Arra, The
castle of Arra.
perteyning to the king of Portugale. You shall know it by the said rocks
that lie of it: For there is none such from cape de las Palmas to cape
Trepoyntes. This coaste lies east and by north, west and by south. From cape
de las Palmas to the said castle, is four score and xv. leaques. And the
coaste lies from the said castle to the Westermoste point of the
Trepoyntes, southeast and by south, northwest and by north Also the Westermost
point of the Trepointes, is a low land lyinge half a mile out in the sea:
and upon the innermoste neck to the landwarde, is a tufte of trees, and there
we arrived the.xi. day of January

The.xii. day of January, we came to a town cauled Samma or Samua, The town
of Samma.
being.viii. leaques from cape Trepoyntes toward east northeast. Between cape
Trepointes and the town of Samua, is a great ledge of rocks a great way out
in the sea. We continued four days at that town: and the captain thereof
would needs have a pledge a shore. But when they received the pledge, The
plege was ^t John york his n^v. c.
they k^nte him still and would traffike no more, but shot of their ordinance
at us. They have two or three pieces of ordinance and no more.

The.xvi. day of the said mooneth, we made reckoning to come to a place cauled
cape Corea where captain Don John dw^lleth, Cape Corea.
whose men interteyned us friendly. This cape Corea is four leaques eastwarde
of the castle of Mina, The castle of mina pe^teykinge to the king of
Portugale.
otherwise cauled La Mina, or Castello de Mina, where we arrived the.xviii. day
of the mooneth. Here we made sale of al owr cloth saving two or three packes.

The.xxvi. day of the same mooneth, we weyd anchor and departed from thense to
the Trinity which was.vii. leaques eastwarde of us where she sold her wares.
Then they of the Trinity wylled us to go eastwarde of that.viii. or.ix.
leaques to sell part of their wares in a place caled Perecow, Perecowe.
and an other place named Perecowe grande, Perecowe grande.
being the eastermost place of both these, which you shall know by a great
round hyl nere unto it named Monte Rodondo lyinge westewarde from it. Monte
rodo^do.
And by the water side are many high palm trees. From hense did we set forth
homewarde the.xiii. day of February and plied up alongest till we came
within.vii, or, viii, leaques to cape Trepointes. About.viii. of the clock
the.xv day at after noone, we did cast about to seawarde. And beware of the
currantes, The currant^
for they will deceive you sore.

Who so ever shall coomme from the coast of Mina homewarde, From mina
homewarde.
let him be suer to make his way good west until he reken him self as far
as cape de las Palmas where the current sets always to the eastwarde. And
within.xx. leaques eastwarde of cape de las Palmas, is a ^yuer cauled Rio de
los Poros where you may have fresshe water and balasse enowgh, Rio de los Poros.
and plenty of Iuery or Elephantes teethe. Iverye.
This river stands in four degrees and almost two terces.

And when you reken yowre self as far shot as cape de las Palmas, Cape de
las Palmas,
being in a degree or a degree and a half, you may go west or west and by
north until you comme in three degrees: and then you may go weste
northwest, and northwest and by west until you comme in five degrees and then
northwest. And in the.vi. degrees, we met northerly wyndes and great
roos^ynge of tides. And as we could judge, the currantes went to the north
northwest. Furthermore between cape de Monte and cape Uerde, go great
currantes which deceive many men. Currantes.


The.xxii. day of Apryll, we were in.viii. degrees and two terces: and so we
ran to the northwest, having the wind at northeast and eastnortheast, and
sumtymes at east until we were at.xviii. deg^ees and a terce, which was on
May day. And so from.xviii. and two terces, we had the wind at east and
east northeast, and sumtymes at east southeast: and then we rekened the
Islands of cape Uerde east southeast of us, we iudg^^ge owre selves to
be.xlviii. leaques of. And in.xx. and.xxi. degrees, we had the wind more
easterly to the southwa^de then before. And so we ran to the northwest and
northnorthwest, and sumetymes north and by west and north vn^yll we came
into.xxxi. degrees, where we rekened owre ^elues a hundredth and four score
leaques southwest and by south of the Island de Flore or de los Flores. The I Will
de F^ore.
And there we met with the wind at south^outheast, and ^et owre course
north^ast.

In.xxxiii. degrees, we had the wind at the south and southwest: and then we
set owr course north northeast, and so we ran to xl. degrees: and then we set
our course northeast the wind being at the southwest and having the I Will de
Flore east of us, and.xvii. leagues of.

In.xli. degrees, we met with the wynd at northeast, and so we ran
northwestwarde. Then we met with the wind at the west northwest and at the
west within.vi. leaques runnynge toward the northwest: And then we cast about
and ley northeast until we came in.xlii. degrees, where we set owr course
east northeast, judging the I Will of Coruo south and by west of us and.xxxvi.
leaques distant from us. The I Will of Corvo.


A rememberaunce that the.xxi. day of May, we communed with John Rafe, and he
thought it best to go northeaste, and judged him self.xxv. leaques eastwarde
to the I Will de Flore, and in.xxxix. degrees and a half.

Note that in the fourth day of September under nine degrees, we lost the sight
of the north star. where they lost the light of the north star.


Note also, that in the.xlv. degrees the compass is varyed.viii. degrees to
the west. how the compass does vary.


Item, in.xl. degrees, the compass did vary.xv. degrees in the hole.

Item, in xxx. degrees and a half, the compass is varyed.v. degrees to the
west.

Be it also in memory, that two or three days before we came to cape
Trepointes, the pynnesse went alongest the shore th^nkynge to sell sum of owr
wares. And so we came to ank^r three or four leaques west and by south of the
cape Trepoyntes where we left the Trinity.

Then owre pynnesse came a boorde with all owr men. The pynnesse also took in
more wares. They toulde me more over that they would go to a place where the
Primrose was and had received much gold at the first vyage to these par^ies.
The prymrose.
And told me furthermore that it was a good place. But I fearing and
brigantine that was then upon the coast, did wey and follow them, and left
the Trinity abowte f^ure leaques of from us. And there we rode ageynste that
town four days: so that Martine by his own desire and assente of sum of the
commissioners that were in the pinnesse, went a shore to the town. And there
John Beryn went to trafike from us being three miles of traf^kynge at an other
town. The town is cauled Samma or Samua. The town of Samma.
For Samma and Sammaterra, Gold.
are the names of the two first towns wh^re we did traffic for gold, to
the northeast of cape Trepoints:

Hitherto continues the course of the vyage as it was described by the said
pylot. Now therefore to speak sumwhat of the country and people, and of such
things as are browght from thense.

They browght from thense at the last vyage, four hundredth pound weight and
odd of gold of.xxii. carrattes and one grain in finenesse. Gold four
hundredth weight.
Also.xxxvi. buttes of graynes: Graynes*
and about two hundredth and fifty elephantes teethe of all quantities. Iuery.
Elephante^ teethe.
Of these, I saw and measured sum of.ix. spannes in length as they were
crooked* Sum of them were as bygge as a man's thygh above the knee: and weyed
abowte four score and ten pound weight a piece. They say that sum one has
been seen of a hundredth and.xxv. poun^e weight. Other there were which they
caul the teeth of calves of one or two or three years, whereof sum were a
foot and a half, sum two foot, and sum three or more according to thage
of the beast. These great teeth or tuskes, grow in the upper iaw downewarde,
and not in the nether law upward, wherein the paynters and arras woorkers are
deceived. At this last viage was browght from Guinea the headde of an
elephante of such huge byggenesse, The head of an Elephant.
that only the bones or crauewe thereof beside the nether ^awe and great
tuskes, wayed abowte two hundredth weight, and was as much as I could well
lift from the ground. In so much that conside^ynge also herewith the weight
of.ii. such great teeth, the nether ^awes with the less teethe, the tongue,
the great hanging ears, the bygge and long snowte or troonke, wit^ all the
flesh, brains, and skin, with all other parts belonging to the hole
headde, in my judgment it could wey little less then five hundredth weight.
This headde diverse have seen in the house of the worthy merchant sir Andrewe
Iudde, where also I saw it, and beheld it not only with my bodily eyes, but
much more with the eyes of my mind and spirit considered by the work, The
contemplations of gods works
the cunning and wisdom of the work master: withowt which consyd^ration,
the sight of such strange and wonderful things may rather seem curiosities
then profitable contemplations.

The elephante (which sum caul an oliphant) is the biggest of all four footed
beasts. The description and propert^es of the Elephante.
His forelegges are longer then his hinder He has ankles in the lower part of
his hinder legs, and five toes on his fiete undivided. His snowte or troonke
is so long and in such form that it is to him in the steed of a hand. For
he neither eats nor drinks but by bringing his troonke to his mouth.
Therewith he helps up his master or keeper: therewith he overthrows trees.
Bysyde his two great tuskes, he has on every side of his mouth four teethe
wherewith he eats and gryndeth his meat. Either of these teeth, are almost a
span in length as they grow alonge in the law: and are about two inches in
height and almost as much in thickenesse. The tuskes of the male are greater
then of the female. His tongue is very little, and so far in his mouth that
it can not be seen. Of all beasts they are most gentle and tractable. For
by many sundry ways they are taught and do understand: In so much that they
learn to do due honor to a king, and are of quick sense and sharpenes of
wit. When the male has once seasoned the female, he never after touches her.
The male Elephante lives two hundredth years, or at the least one hundredth
and twenty. The female almost as long: but the flower of their age, is
but.lx. years as sum write. They can not suffer winter or could. They love
ryuers and will often go into them up to the snowte wherewith they blow and
snuff, and play in the water: but swymme they can not for the weight of
their bodies. Pliny and Soline write that they use none adultery. If they
happen to meet with a man in wilderness being out of the way, gentylly
they will go before him and bring him into the plain way. Joined in battle,
they have no smaule respect unto the^ that be wounded. For they bring them
that are hurt or weary into the middle of the army to be defended. They are made
tame by drinking the iuse of barley. They have continual war against
dragons which desire their bludde because it is very could. And therefore the
dragon lyinge awayte as the Elephant passes by, Debate between the Elephant
and the dragon.
wyndeth his tail (being of exceadynge length) about the hinder legs of the
elephant: and so steying him, thrusts his head into his tronke and
exhausteth his breath, or else byteth him in the ear whereunto he can not reach
with his troonke. And when the elephant waxes faint, he fauleth down on the
serpente being now full of bludde: and with the poyse of his body breaks
him: so that his own bludde with the bludde of the elephant, runs out of
him mengeled together: which being could, is congeled into that substance
which the apothecaries caul Sanguis Draconis, Sanguis Draconis.
(that is) dragons blud, otherwise cauled Cinnabaris, although there be an
other kind of Cinnaba^is, Cinnabaris.
commonly cauled cinoper or vermilion which the paynters use in certain
colors.

They are also of three kinds, Three kinds of elepha^tes.
as of the marysshes, the playnes, and the mountains, no lose differynge in
conditions. Philostratus writes, that as much as the elephant of Lybia in
byggenesse passes the horse of Ny^ea, so much does the elephantes of India
excede them of Lybia. For of the elephantes of India, sum have been seen of the
heyght of.ix. cubits. The other do so greatly fear these that they dare not
abide the sight of them. Of the Indian elephantes, only the males have tuskes.
But of them of Ethiopia and Lybia, both kinds are tusked. They are of diverse
heyghtes, as of.xii. xiii. and.xiiii. dodrantes, every dodrant being a measure
of ix. inches. Sum write that an elephant is bygger then three wild oxen or
buffes. They of India are black or of the color of a mouse. But they of
Ethiope or Guinea, are brown. The hyde or skin of them all, is very hard
and withowte hear or brystels. Their ears are two dodrantes broad, and their
eyes very little. Owr men saw one drynkyng at a river in Guinea as they sailed
into the land.

Of other properties and conditions of the elephant, as of their marvelous
docili^ie, of their feight and use in the wars, of their generation and
chastity, when they were first seen in the theaters and tryumphes of the
Romans, how they are taken and tamed, and when they cast their tuskes, with
thuse of the same in medicine, who so desires to know, let him read Pliny in
the.viii. book of his natural history. He also writes in his.xii. book,
that in oulde time they made many goodly works of Iuery or elephantes teeth:
works of Iuery.
as tables, tressels, posts of houses, rayles, lattesses for wyndowes, Images
of their gods, and diverse other things of Iuery both colored and vncoloured
and intermyxte with sundry kinds of precious wooddes, as at this day are made
certain chayres, lutes, and virginalles.

They had such plenty thereof in owlde time, that (as far as I remember)
Josephus writes that one of the gates of Jerusalem was cauled Porta Eburnea,
(that is) the Iuery gate. The whytenesse thereof was so much esteemed that it
was thought to represent the natural fayrenesse of man's skin: In so much
that such as went about to set forth (or rather corrupt) natural beauty with
colors and payntynge, were reproved by this proverb: Ebur atramento
candesacere. That is: To make Iuery white with ynke. The poettes also
describynge the fair necks of bewtifull virgins, caul them Eburnea colla:
That is: Iuery necks. And to have said thus much of elephantes and Iuery, it
may suffice.

The people of Africa.
Now therefore to speak sumwhat of the people and their manners and manner of
living, with also an other brief description of Africa. It is to understand
that the people which now inhabit the regions of the coast of Guinea and the
mydde parts of Africa, as Lybia the inner, and Nubia with diverse other great
and large regions about the same, were in oulde time cauled Ethiopes and
Nigrite, which we now caul Moors, Moorens, or Negros, a people of beastly
living, without a god, law, religion, or commonwealth, and so scorched and
vexed with the heat of the soonne, that in many places they curse it when it
ryseth. Of the regions and people about the inner Libia (cauled Libia Interior)
Gemma Phrysius writes thus. Libia Interior.


Lybia Interior, is very large and desolate, in the which are many horrible
wyldernesses and mountains replenisshed with diverse kinds of wild and
monstrous beasts and serpents. First from Mauritania or Barberie toward the
south is Getulia, Getul^a.
a rowgh and saluage region whose inhabitants are wild and wand^rynge people.
After these follow the people cauled Melanogetuli and Pharus^i which wander in
the wilderness caryinge with them great gourdes of water. The Ethiopians
cauled Nigrite, Ethiopes.
Nigrite.
occupy a great part of Aphrica, and are extended to the West Ocean.
Southwarde also they reach to the river Nigritis whose nature agrees with the
river of Nilus forasmuch as it is increased and di^inyssh^d at the same time,
The river Nigritis or Senega.
and brings forth the like beasts as the Crocodile. By reason whereof, I
think this to be the same river which the Portugales caul Senega. For this
river is also of the same nature. It is furthermore ma^uelous and very strange
that is said of this river. A strange thing.
And this is, that on the one side thereof, thinhabitauntes are of hygh^ stature
and black: and on the other side of brown or tawny color and low stature,
which thing also owre men confirm to be true.

There are also other people of Lybia cauled Garamantes, Garamantes.
whose women are common. For they contracte no matrimony, neither have respect
to chastity. After these ^re the nations of the people cauled Pyrei,
Sathiodaphnite, Odrangi, M^maces, Lynxamate, Dolopes, Agangine, Leuce Ethiopes,
People of Lybia.
Xilicei Ethiopes, Calcei Ethiopes, and Nubi. These have the same situation in
Ptolomie that they now give to the kingdom of Nub^a. Here are certain
Christians under the dominion of the great Emperor of Ethiopie cauled
Prester John. Prester John.
From these toward the west, is a great nation of people cauled Aphricerones:
whose region (as far as may be gathered by con^ecture) is the same that is
now cauled Regnum Orguene, Regnum Orguene.
confinynge upon the east parts of Guin^a. From hense westwarde and sumwhat
toward the north, are the kyngedomes of Gambra and Budomel not far from the
river of Senega. Gambra.
And from hense toward the inlande regions and alonge by the sea coast, are
the regions of Ginoia or Guinea which we commonly caul Gynne. Guinea or
Gino^a.
On the west side of these regions toward the Ocean, is the cape or point
cauled Cabouerde or Caput viride (that is) the green cape, Cap. Uerde.
to the wh^che the P^rtugales first direct their course when they sail to
America or the land of Brasile. The Portugales nauigat^ons to Brasi^e.
Then departing from hense, they t^r^e to the right hand toward the quarter
of the wind cauled Garbino which is between the west and the south. Bu^ to
speak sumwhat more of Ethiopia. Ethiopia.
Althowgh there are many nations of people so named, yet is Ethiopia chiefly
diuyded into two parts: whereof the one is cauled Ethiopia under Egypt, a
great and rich region. To this perteyneth the Island of Meroe, The Island of
Meroe.
imbrased round abowte with the stremes of the river Nilus. In this Island
women reigned in oulde time. Josephus writes that it was sumtyme cauled Sabea:
and that the queen of Saba came from thense to Jerusalem to hear the
wisdom of Solomon. The queen of Saba.
From hense toward the East, reigns the said Christian Emperor Prester
John whom sum caul Papa Johannes, and other say that he is cauled Pean Iuan
(that is great John, Prester John emperor of Ethiopia.
whose empire reaches far beyond Nilus, and is extended to the coasts of
the red sea and Indian sea. The myddle of the region is almost in the 66.
degrees of longitude, and.xii. degrees of latitude. Abowte th^s region inhabit
the people cauled Clodii, People of the east side of Africa.
Risophagi, Babilonii, Axiunite, Mosyli, and Molybe. After these is the region
cauled Trogloditica, whose inhabitauntes dwell in caves and dens. For these
are their houses, Ophiophagi.
and the flesh of serpents their meat, as writes Pliny and Diodorus
Siculus. They have no speech, but rather a grynnynge and chatterynge. There
are also people without heads cauled Blemines, People without heads.
having their eyes and mouth in their breast. Likewise S^rucophagi and naked
Ga^pha^antes. Satyrs also which have nothing of men but only shape. More over
Oripei great hunters. Mennones also, and the region of Smyrnophora which
brings forth myrre After these is the region of Azania in the which m^nye
elephantes are found. Myrre.
Azania.
A great part of the other regions of Afrike that are beyond the Equinoctial
line, are now ascrybed to the kingedome of Melinde, Regnum Melinde.
whose inhabitauntes are accustomed to tra^^ike with the nations of Arabie, and
their king is ioyded in friendship with the king of Portugale, and pays
tribute to Prester John.

The other Ethiope cauled ^^hiopia Interior (that is) the inner Ethiope,
Ethiopia Interior.
is not yet known for the greatness thereof but only by the sea coasts. Yet
is it described in this manner. First from the Equinoctial toward the south,
is a great^ region of Ethiopians which brings forth white elephantes, white
elephantes.
tigers, and the beasts cauled Rhinocerontes. Also a region that brings
forth plenty of Cinamome, lyinge between the branches of Nilus. Also the
kingdom of Habech or Habassia, habassia.
a region of Christen men, lying both on this side and beyond Nilus. Here are
also the Ethiopians cauled Ichthiophagi (that is) such as live only by fisshe:
Ichthiophagi
and were sumtime subdued by the wars of great Alexander. Furthermore the
Ethiopians cauled Rhansii, and Anthropoph^gi that are accustomed to eat man's
flesh, Anthropophagi.
inhabit the regions nere unto the mountains cauled Montes Lunae, Montes Luna.
(that is) the mountains of the moon. Gazatia, Gazatia.
is under the tropike of Capricorn. After this, follows the front of
affrike, the cape of Buena Speranza or Caput Bonae Spei, (that is) the cape of
good hope, Cap Bonae Spei.
by the which they pa^se that sail from Spain to Calicut. But by what names
the capes and goulfes are cauled, forasmuch as the same are in eu^ry globe and
card, it were here super^^uous to rehearse them.

Sum write that Aphrica was so named by the Grecians because it is withowt
could. Ephica withowt could.
For the Greek letter Alpha or, A, signifies pryuation, void, or withowt:
and phrice, signifies could. The winter of Africa.
For in d^ede althowgh in the steed of winter they have a cloudye and
tempestious season, yet is it not could, but rather smoothering hot with also
hot shoures of rain and sumwhere such scorchynge wyndes, that what by one
means and other they seem at certain times to live as it were in fornaces*
Flames of fire and noise in the air.
and in manner already half way in Purgatory or hell. Gemma Phrisius writes
that in certain parts of Aphrica, (as in Atlas the greater) the air in the
night season is seen shyninge with many strange fyers and flames rys^nge in
manner as high as the moon: And that in the element are sumtime hard as it
were the sound of pipes, trumpettes, and droomines. Which noyses may
perhaps be caused by the vehemente and sundry motions of such fyery
exhalations in the air, Uhe myddell region of the ^er is could.
as we se the like in many experiences wrought by fire, air, and wynd. The
holownesse also and diverse reflections and breaking of the clouds may be great
causes here of, bysyde the vehement cold of the myddle region of the air
whereby the said fyery exhalations ascending thither are suddenly stryken back
with great force. For even common and daily experience teaches us by the
whyssinge of a burninge torge what noise fire makes in the air, The strife of
clementes.
and much more where it strives when it is enclosed with aye as apereth in
gonns, and as the like is seen in only air enclosed, as in orgen pipes and
such other instruments that go by wind. For wind as say the philosophers is
none other then air vehemently moved, wind.
as we see in a payer of belowes and such other.

Sum of owre men of good credit that were in this last vyage to Guinea, affirm
ernestly that in the night season they felt a sensible heat to coomme from the
beams of the moon. The heat of the moon.
The which thing altho^ghe it be strange and insensible to us that inhabit
could regions, yet doothe it stand with good reason that it may so be,
forasmuch as the nature of the stars and planets (as writes Pliny)
consysteth of fire, The nature of ^he stars.
and con^eyneth in it a spirit of life, which cannot be without heat.

And that the moon gives heat upon the earth, the prophet Dauyd seems to
confirm in his.Cxx. Psalm, where speaking of such men as are defended from
euyls by gods protection, he says thus: Per diem sol non exuret te, necluna
per noctem. That is to say. In the day the soonne shall not burn the nor the
moon by night.

They say furthermore that in certain places of the sea, they saw certain
stremes of water which they caul spoutes faulynge out of the air into the
sea: Spoutes of water fauling out of the air.
And that sum of these are as bygge as the great pyllers of churches: In so
much that sumtymes they faule into ships and put them in great^ daungiour of
drownynge. Sum fantasy that these should be the ^arractes of heaven which
were all opened at Noes fludde. Cataracts of heaven.
But I think them rather to be such fluxions and eruptions as Aristotle in
his book de Mundo, says to chau^se in the sea. For speaking of such strange
things as are seen often times in the sea, Uehement motions in the sea.
he writes thus: Often times also even in the sea are seen euaporations of
fire, and such eruptions and breakyng forth of sprynges, that the mouths of
ryuers are opened, whyrlepooles, and fluxions are caused of such other vehement
motions not only in the midst of the sea, but also in creekes and streyghtes.
At certain times also, a great quantity of water is suddeynly lyfted up and
carried about with the moon. etc. By which words of Arystotle it does appear
that such waters may be lyfted up in one place at one time, and suddeynly
faule down in an other place at an other time. And hereunto perhaps
perteyneth it that Kycharde Chaunceler toulde me that he hard Sebastian Cabot
report, A strange. thing.
that (as far as I remember) either about the coasts of Brasile or Rio de
Plata, his ship or pinnes was suddeinly lyfted from the sea and cast upon the
land I wotte not how far. The which thing and such other like wonderful
and strange works of nature while I consider and caul to rememberaunce the
narownes of man's understanding and knowleage in comparyson of her mighty
pour, The pour of nature.
I can but cease to maruayle and confess with Pliny that nothing is to her
impossible, the least part of whose pour is not yet known to men.

Many things more owre men saw and considered in this vyage worthy to be
noted, whereof I have thought good to put sum in memory that the reader may
as well take pleasure in the variety of things as knowleage of the hystorye.
Among other things therefore touching the manners and nature of the people,
this may seem strange that their princes and noble men use to pounse and raze
their skynnes with pretty knottes in diverse forms as it were branched damask,
They ^ase their ^kinnes.
thinking that to be a decent ornament. And albeit they go in manner all naked,
yet are many of them and especially their women in manner laden with collars,
braslettes, hoopes, and chains either of gold, copper, or Iuery. Fine jewels.
I my self have one of their braselettes of Iuery wayinge two pound and vi.
ounces of Troy weight, which make.xxxviii. ounces. A braslet.
This, one of their women did wear upon her arm. It is made of one hole
piece of the byggest part of the toothe turned and sumwhat carved, with a hole
in the myddest wherein they put their hands to wear it on their arm. Sum have
of every arm one and as many on their legs, ^hackelles.
wherewith sum of them are so galded that although they are in manner made
lame thereby, yet will they by no means leave them of. sum wear also on their
legs great shackels of bright copper which they think to be no less cumly.
They wear also collars, braslets, garlandes and gyrdels of certain blewe
stones like beads. Likewise sum of their women wear on their bare arms
certain foresleeues made of the plates of beaten gold. ^inges.
On their fyngers also they wear rings made of golden wyres with a knotte or
wrethe like unto that which children make in a ring of a russhe. Among other
things of gold that owr men bowght of them for exchange of their wares, were
certain dogs chains and collers. Dogs chain^ of gold.


They are very ware people in their bargenynge, and will not lose one spark of
gold of any value. They use weyghtes and measures, and are very circumspecte
in occupyinge the same. They that shall have to do with them must use them
^entelly* for they will not trafike or bring in any wares if they be evil use.
At the first v^age that owr men had in^o the^e parties, it so chaunsed that at
their departure from the first place where they did trafike, one of them
either stole a musk^ catte or took her a way by force, A mu^ke cat.
not in^strustynge that that should have hyndered their bargenynge in an other
place whyther they intended to go. But for all the have they could make with
full sails, the fame of their mysusage so prevented the^ that the people of
that place also offended thereby, would bring in no wares: In so much that they
were enforced either to restore the catte or pay for her at their price before
they could trafike there.

Their houses are made of four posts or trees, Their hous^s.
and covered with bouwes.

Their common feeding is of roots and such fysshes as they take, Their feding.
whereof they have great plenty. There are also such flyinge fysshes as are
seen in the sea of the Weste Indies. Fleing fishes
Owre men salted of their fysshes hoping to provide store thereof. But they
would take no salt: And must therefore be eaten furthwith as sum say. How be
it, other affirm that if they be salted immediately after they be taken, they
will last uncorrupted.x. or.xii. days. But this is more strange, that part of
such flesh as they carried with them owte of England and putrifyed there, A
strange thing.
became sweet again at their return to the clime of temperate regions.

They use also a strange making of bread in this manner. Their bread.
They grynde between two stones with their hands as much c^rne as they think
may suffice their famelie. And when they have thus brought it to flower, they
put thereto a certain quantity of water and make thereof very thin dowgh which
they stycke upon sum post of their houses, where it is baked by the heat of
the son: So that when the master of the house or any of his famely will eat
thereof, they take it down and eat it.

They have very fair wheat, Their wheat.
the ere whereof is two handfulles in length and as bygge as a great
bulrusshe, and almost four inches about where it is byggest. The steme or
straw, seems to be almost as bygge as the little finger of a man's hand, or
little less. The graynes of this wheat are as bygge as owr peason: round
also, and very white and sumwhat shynynge like perles that have lost their
color. Almost all the substance of them turns into flower, and makes
little branne or none. I toulde in one ere two hundredth and three score
graynes. The ere is enclosed in three blades longer then it self, and of two
inches broad a piece. And by this frutefulnesse the soonne seems partly to
recompense such greefes and molestations as they otherwise receive by the
fervent heat thereof. It is doubtless a worthy contemplation to consider the
contrary effects of the soonne: The soonne.
or rather the contrary passions of such things as receive thinfluence of his
beams either to their hurt or benefit.

Their drink is either water or the iuise that droppeth from the cut branches
of the barren date trees cauled Palmites. Their drink.
For either they hang great gourdes at the said branches every evening and
let them so hang all night, or else they set them on the ground under the trees
that the drops may faule therein. They say that this kind of drink is in
taste much like unto whey, but sumwhat sweeter and more pleasant. They cut^^
the branches every evening because they are scred up in the day by the heat
of the soonne. They have also great beans as bygge as chestenuttes, and very
hard with a shell in the steed of a husk.

Many things more might be said of the manners of the people and of the
woonders and monstrous things that are engendered in Afrike. But it shall
suffice to have said thus much of such things as owre men partly saw and
partly browght with them.

And whereas before speaking of the fruit of graynes, Graynes.
I descrybed the same to have holes by the side (as in deed it is as it is
browght hither) yet was I afterward informed that those holes were made to put
strings or twigs through the fruit thereby to hang them up to dry at the
son. They grow not paste a foot and a half or two foot from the
grownde: and are as red as bludde when they are gathered. The graynes them
selu^s, are cauled of the physisians, Grana Paradysi.

At their coming home, the keles of their ships were maruelously ouergrowe^
with certain shells of.ii. inches length and more as thycke as they could
stand, Shelles that cleave to ships.
and of such byggenes that a man may put his thom in the mouths of the^. They
certeynly affirm that in these there grows a certain slymy substance which
at the length slypping out of the shel and fauling in the sea, becomes those
fowls which we call barnacles Barnacles.
The like shelles have been seen in ships returning from I^lande. But these
shelles were not past half an inch in length. Of the other that came from
Guinea, I saw the Prymrose lyinge in the docke, and in manner covered with the
said shelles, which in my iu^gemente should greatly hinder her saylynge. Their
ships were also in many places eaten with the woormes cauled Bromas or Bissas
whereof mention is made in the Decades. Bromas.
These creep between the plankes which they eat throwgh in many places. A
secreate.


Among other things that chanced to them in this vyage, this is worthy to
be noted, that whereas they sailed thither in seven weeks, they could return
in no less space then.xx. weeks. The cause whereof they say to be this: that
about the coast of Cabo Uerde, the wynd is ever at the East by reason whereof
they were info^ced to sail far owte of their course into the main Ocean to
find the wind at the west to bring them home. The death of owr men.
There dyed of owre men at this last vyage about.xxiiii. whereof many dyed at
their return into the clime of the could regions, as between the Islands of
Soria and England. They browght with them certain black slaves, whereof sum
were taule and strong men, and could well agree with owr meats and drynkes.
Could may be better abide^ then heat.
The could and moist air does sumwhat offend them. Yet doubtless men that
are borne in hot regions may better abide could, then men that are borne in
could regions may abide heat, forasmuch as vehement heat resolves the
radical moisture of men's bodies, as could co^streyneth and preserves the same

This is also to be considered as a secreate work of nature, that throughout
all Afryke under the Equinoctial line and near about the same on both sides,
the regions are extreme hot and the people very black. Whereas contraryly
such regions of the West Indies as are under the same line, The west In^ise.
are very temperate and the people neither black nor with curlde and short
woolle on their heads as have they of Affryke, but of the color of an olyue
with long and black hear on their heads: the cause of which variety is
declared in diverse places in the Decades.

It is also worthy to be noted that sum of them that were at this vyage
toulde me. That is, that they ouertooke the course of the soonne, so that they
had it north from them at noone the.xiiii. day of March. And to have said
thus much of these vyages it may suffice. For (as I have said before) Whereas
the parteners at whose charges this book is prynted, would long sense have me
proceaded no further, I had not thought to have written any thing of these
vyages but that the liberality of master Toy encoraged me to attempt the same.
Which I speak not to the reproach of other in whom I think there lacked no
good will, but that they thought the book would be to chargeable.

The manner of finding the Longitude of regions by diverse ways after the
description of Gemma Phrysius.
Perceiving what contention is and long has been not only among the pylottes
that by trauaylynge the sea have observed the stars, but also among sum men
that are skylfull in mathematical sciecens, whereof many affirm that the
longitude (that is to mean, the course from the East to the Weste) can not be
perfectely known, I have thowght good for the better satisfying of such as
desire to have sum knowleage hereof, to interpret such demonstrations as I
have read of the declarynge of the same in Gemma Phrysius, who as touching
this matter has added to thinuentions of other, a more certain way of his owr
divise whereby (as he says) he can find the longitude of regions although he
were driven out of the way a thousand miles into places unto him utterly
unknown and of unknown distance. He writes therefore as follows.

When you have found the place of the moon, By the moon.
you ought to consider the hour when she occupied that place. Then either by
the Ephimerides or by the tables of Alphonsus you owght to know in what hour
the moon enters into the same sign of the Zodiake in an other region or
town whose longitude is well known. Then reducynge the hours to xxiiii. the
less number of hours is to be deducted out of the greater number. Then the
remanent of the hours and mynutes is to be brought to degres in this manner.
Multiply the hours by.xv. and divide the minutes of the hours by four: so
shall appear the degrees of the Equinoctial contained between two meridians.
And if after this division there r^mayne any minutes, multiply them also
by.xv. and thereby shall be know^n the minutes of degrees. Add th^s di^ference of
longitu^e found to the longitude of the region known if the hours of that
place be more in number: or take away from the same longitude if they be
less: So shall you in fin^ gather the longitude of the place unknown from
the Islands of Canarie. The Islands of Canarie.
But the same is more easily and redely found geometrically by the globes by
this means. Set directly under the meridian, the place whose longitude is
known in the globe. how to find the longitude by the globe
Then direct the point or style that moves about the pole, to the hour in
the which the moon occupyeth the place assigned in that region. Then turn
the globe until the style that shows the hour, be coomme to the hour in
the which yowesowght the unknown place of the moon. And so shall the degrees
of the Equinoctial distaunte or diuyded from the moveable meridian, declare
the longitude of the region which you seek. Nevertheless, the more certain
way whereby the differences of longitudes may be found, is by sum one thing
that in one moment appears in all regions, as by the eclypses of the moon.
The Eclipses of the moon.
For the diverse hours being known in the which the said eclypses chance in
diverse regions, the longitudo may thus as well be known by geometry and
arithmetike, as it is found by the rule here before. But forasmuch as this
does neither appear at al times nor to all men, and the other way is sumwhat
difficult, neither at al times ready by reason of the co^iunctions of the moon
and furthermore also sumtymes uncertain and varying sum what from the truth
for the diverse aspectes and l^titud^s of the moon, it so chances hereby that
we have either no longitudes or the same very uncertain of many regions, and
especially of those which the Spanyardes have of late discovered. For no
certentie doubtless can be known by such commensurations as are made in the
wandering turnynges and wyndynges of such vyages, as Ptolome affirms in the
first book of his Cosmographie. I will therefore add hereunto sum thing of
mine own invention whereby by an easy way and at all times the longitudes of
regions may be found in all vyages and nauigations.

A new manner of finding the Longitudes of regions.
We see that in these owre days certain little clockes are very
artificially made the which for their smaule quantity are not comberous to be
carried about in all vyages. Little clocke^
These often times move continually for the space. of.xxiiii. hours: and may
with help continewe their mouynge in manner perpetually. By the help therefore
of these the longitude may be found after this manner. Before we enter into
any vyage, we must first foresee that the said clock exactly observe the
hours of the place from whense we depart: And again that in the way it never
cease. Accomplysshynge therefore.xv. or.xx. miles of the vyage, if we desire to
know how much in longitude we are dystant from the place of owre departure,
we must tarry until the point or style of the clock do exactly come to the
point of sum hour: and at the same moment by owr Astrolabie or globe, By the
Astrolabie and globe.
owght we to seek the hour of the place where we be: The which if it agree
in minute with the hours which the Horoscopium or ascendent does show,
horoscopus or the Ascendent.
then is it certain that we are yet under the same Meridian or the same
Longitude: and that owre course has been toward the south or north. But if it
dyffer one hour or any mynute, the^ are the same to be reduced to degrees or
minutes of degrees as we have tought in the chapiture here before.

And so shall the longitude be found. And by this art can I find the
longitude of regions althowgh I were a thousand miles out of my attempted
course and in an unknown distance, but the latitude must first be perfectely
known. The latitude.


FINIS.
A brief rehearsal of the contents of the books of the first Decade, and so
following of all the other Decades. Folio.i.
IN the first book is declared how Christophorus Colonus otherwise cauled
Columbus, persuaded Fernando and Elizabeth, princes of Spain, to foorther his
attempt in searching new and unknown lands in the West Ocean. Also of
the.vii. Islands of Canarie, by whom they were found and conquered. How
Colonus found the Islands of Hispaniola, and Cuba: And of the fierce people
cauled Canibales or Caribes, which are accustomed to eat man's flesh. Of the
roots cauled Ages, Iucca, and the grain Maizium, whereof the people of the
Islands make their bread. Of the gold found in the sands of ryuers, and of
the serpents which are without hurt. Also of turtle doves, duckes and
popyngiayes. Of Mastix, and Aloe, with diverse fruits and trees unknown to us:
and of the frutefulnes of the Island of Hispaniola which the Spanyardes caul
Spagnuola. Of the second vyage of Colonus into these regions, and how he was
furnysshed with.xvii. ships and a thousand and two hundredth souldyers, with
all kind of artiliarye, artificers, and grain to sow. And of the tree from
the which water droppeth continually into a trenche made by man's hand.
The contents of the second book. Fol. 4.
How Colonus departing from the Islands of Canarie, sailed.viii. hundredth
and.xx. leagues in.xxi. days, and came to Dominica an Island of the Canibales:
And of the fragrant savor of spices which proceeded from the Islands. Of the
Islands of Galanta or Galana and Guadalupea, and of the trees which bear that
kind of cotton which the Italians caul Bombasine, and the Spanyardes
Algadon. Of diverse kinds of popingiayes: And of the Island of Matinino or
Madanino, being inhabited only with women: Also of diverse other fruitful
Islands: And of a conflicte which the Spanyardes had with the Canibales. Of
certain Islands in the which are seen the mines of metals and precious
stones: and of the fruitful and peopulous Island cauled Burichena or Boriquen.
or Insula S. Iohanuis How all the Admirals men which at his first vyage he
left in Hispaniola, were slain in his absence by the rebellion of
Guaccanarillus, king of the Region of Xamana: and of the free kind of life
which they lead that have not the use of money. Of the.vii. maidens which
swamme.iii. miles in the sea: And of the manner of gatheryng of gold in the
sands of rivers
The Contents of the third book. Fol. 10.
A particular description of the Island of Hispaniola, which Colonus thinks
to be Ophir, from whense king Solomon had his great riches of gold. Of the
marvelous frutefulnes of Hispaniola, and of the sugar canes growing there. Of
the golden regions of Cipanga or Cibaua, and of the ryuers in whose sands is
found great plenty of gold. Of certain grains of gold of exceadyng great
quantity. Of wild vines of pleasant taste, and of grass which in four
days grows as high as wheat. Of the Island of Iohanna or Cuba, being the
end of the East and the West: And of the fruitful and peopulous Island of
Iamaica. How the Admiral thought that he had sailed abowte the lowest
hemispherie or half circle of the earth, and of a secreate of Astronomy
touching the same matter. How the Admiral gave names to.vii. hundredth
Islands, and passed by three thousand unnamed. Of certain serpents like unto
Crocodiles of.viii. foot long, whose flesh is delicate to be eaten: and of
certain trees which bear gourdes. Of the river whose water is very hot: and
of the hunting fysshe which takes other fysshes. Of great abundaunce of
Tortoyses as bygge as targets, and of a fruitful mountain well inhabited. Of
dogs of deformed shape and dum: And of white and thick water. Of wooddes of
date trees and pynepaple trees, and of certain people appareled like white
friars. Of certain trees which bear spices, and of cranes of exceadynge
bigness. Of stock doves of more pleasant taste then partriches. An oration of
a barbarous gouernoure as touching the immortality of the soul: Also of the
reward of virtue and punysshmente of vice. A similitude of the golden world,
and of provision with owte care. How the admiral fell sick by reason of to
much watchynge: And of a sedition which rose among the Spaniardes in the Island
of Hispaniola.
The Contents of the fourth book. Fol. 18.
How the Kings of the Island of Hispaniola, were by the Spaniardes
mysbehauoure provoked to Rebellion: And how the admiral sent for them. How
king Caunaboa the Lord of the house of gold, that is, of the mountains of
Cibaua, conspired the Admirals death, and how he with his family were taken
prisoners. Of a great famine that chanced in the Island of Hispaniola: and
how the Admiral builded certain fortresses. Of a piece of rude gold
waighinge.xx. ounces: and of the mine of the rich metal cauled Electrum. Of
the mountain in the which is found great plentye of Amber and orpemente:
And of the wooddes of brasile trees. How thinhabitauntes are put to their
tribute: And how the nature of the Region disposethe the manners of the people.
How the brother of king Caunaboa came ageynste the Admiral with an army of
five thousand naked men: and how he was taken and his amry put to flight. Of
the frutfull vale Magona, in the sands of whose ryuers is found great plenty
of gold: and of certain whirlewyndes and tempests. How the Admiral sent
forth his brother Bartholomeus Colonus with an army of me^ to search the gold
mines and of the fosses which he found to have bin dug in old time
The Contents of the.v. book. Fol. 22.
How the Lieuetenaunt builded a fortress in the gold mines: And prepared
instruments for the pourginge and fyninge of the gold. How certain ships
laden with vyttayles, came from Spain: And how the Lieuetenaunt sent the
kings which rebelled, with three hundredth captives into Spain. How the
Liefetenaunte removed his habytacion: And builded a fortress which he cauled
saint Dominickes tower Also how he passed over the river Naiba, and entered
into the wooddes of brasyle trees. How the great king Beuchius Anacauchoa,
frendely enterteyned the Lieuetenaunt, and browght him to his pallayce, where
the kings wives and concubines received him honorably with pompes and
triumphs. Of the fortresses which were erected in Hispaniola: And how the
Lieuetenaunt exacted tribute of the kings which rebelled again. How the
Lieuetenaunt set upon the kings unawares in the night season, and
took.xiiii. of them prisoners. How king Guarionexius, captain of the
conspiracy was pardoned, and how he persuaded the people to obedience. How
king Beuchius Anacauchoa, sent messingers to the Lieuetenaunt to repair to
his pallayce where he found xxxii. kings ready with their tributes: And how
the queen Anacaona entysed him to eat of the serpents flesh. How the
serpents flesh is prepared to be eaten: And how delicate meat their eggs
are if they be sodden. How queen Anacaona, sister to king Beuchius
A^acauchoa, enterteyned the Liefetenaunt, and gave him much household stuff
and many vessels of Hebene woodde artificially wrought and carved. How king
Anacauchoa and the queen his sister went aboorde the Liefetenaunt his ship,
and how greatly they were amassed to behold the furniture thereof. How
Roldanus Xeminus a Spaniarde, rebelled in the Lieuetenauntes absence: by whose
mysdemeanour also king Guarionexius was provoked to a new conspiracy, and
with him Maiobanexius the king of the mountains.
The contents of the syxte book. Foli. 28.
The thy^de vyage of Colonus, and how he diuerted from his accustomed raze by
the Islands of Canarie to the Island of Madera for fear of certain french
pirates and rouers. Of the.xiii. Islands which in old time were cauled
Hesperides, and are now cauled the Islands of Caput Uiride or Cabouerde. Also
of the Tortoyses of the Island of Bonauista, wherewith the leaper is healed.
How the Admiral found contagious air and extreme heat nere the Equinoctial
where the north pole was eleuate only five degrees: And how sailyng from
thence westward, he found the stars placed in other order, and the sea
rysynge as it were the back of a mountain. How the Admyrall saylynge
westwarde, and never passing owte of the clyme or paraleles of Ethiope, found
a temperate Region and people of goodly corporature: And what difference is
between the natures of Regions being under one paralele and one elevation of
the pole. Of the Islands of Puta and Margarita: and of the swift course or
faule of the Ocean from the East to the weste. Of the goulfes cauled Os
Draconis: And of the conflicte between the fresh water and the salt. Of a sea
of fresh water: And a mountain inhabited only with monkeys and marmasettes.
Of the fair, rich, and large region of Paria: And how friendly thinhabitantes
entreated the Admyrall and his men. Also of pleasant wine made of diverse
fruits: And of great abundaunce of perles and gold. Of the regions of
Cumana, Manacapana, and Curiana, being regions of the large prouynce of Paria:
And of the ^ea of herbs or weeds. A certain secreate as touching the pole
star and the elevation of the same: Also of the roundnesse of the earth. Of
the mountains of Paria in the tops whereof Colonus ernestly affirms the
earthly Paradise to be situate: And whether Paria be part of the firm land or
co^tinent of India.
The contents of the.vii. book. Fol. 33.
How Roldanus Xeminus with his confetherates, accused the Admiral to the
king: And how he pourged him self and accused them How king Guarionexius
rebelled again: And with him king Maiobanexius: Also how they with other
kings came against the Lieuetenaunte with an army of.viii. thousand naked
and painted Ciguauians. Also two rare exemples of frendshyppe and faythfulnes
in barbarous princes. How Colonus the Admiral and the Lieuetenaunte his
brother, were sent bound into Spain: And new officers appointed in their
places.
The contents of the.viii. book. Fol. 37,
The Navigations of Petrus Alphonsus from Spain to Paria, where in the region
of Curiana, he had in short space.xv. ounces of pearls and great plenty of
vytailes for hawks bellees, pynnes, lokinge glasses, and such other
tryfelles, Of certain conjectures whereby Paria is thought to be part of the
firm land: And of the golden region of Cauchieta, where in the month of
November the air is temperate and not could. How Alphonsus had a conflicte
with the Canibals: and how they are acustomed to invade other contreys. Of
great abundaunce of salt in the region of Haraia: and how the dead bodies of
their princes are dried, reserved, and relygiously honored. How Alphonsus at
his return to Spain from Curiana, brought with him threescore and.xvi.
pound weight of pearls which he bought for owre tryfells amountinge only to
the value of five shillyngs.
The contents of the.ix. book. Fol. 40.
The Navigations of Uincentius Pinzonus and Aries Pinzonus, and how they sailed
beyond the Equinoctial line, loss the sight of the north star, and found
the stars in other order. How Uincentius passing the equinoctial toward
the southe pole, found fierce and warlike people of great stature: And of the
sea of fresh water. How Uincentius directing his course toward the north
weste from the equinoctial, recovered the sight of the north pole, and by the
regions of Mariatamball, Camomorus, and Pericora, came to the fair and rich
province of Paria, and to the regyons of Os Draconis, Cumana, Manacapana,
Curiana. etc. A conjecture that Paria (whereby is meant that main land now
cauled America) should be part of the fyrme land or continent of India,
beyond the river of Ganges and no island: And of the exceeding great river
Maragnonus replenished with Islands. Of Boriostomea and Spiriostomea, the
mouths of the famous river of Danubius, cauled in old time Ister: And of the
commodities of the regions and Islands about Paria. Also of the woods of
brasile trees. Of many frutfull Islands wasted and left desolate by reason of
the Can^balles cruelty: And of the trees of Cassia Fistula. Also of other
trees of excedyng bygnesse. The description of a certain monstrous beast,
And how Uincentius lost two of his ships by tempeste. How Uincentius at his
return to Spain, brought with him cinamome, gynger, and certain precious
stoones cauled Topases And of the nauigations of certain other inhabitants of
the town of Palos. Of the precious medicine cauled Anime Album. And of the
diverse superstitions of the inhabitauntes of Hispaniola. Also of their
Idolatry, and how they honor the images of deuylles, which they caul Zemes.
The Contents of the.x. book. Fol. 48.
Of great glentie of gold, perles, and franken^ence found in the regions of
Paria. And of innumerable beasts in shape dyfferynge from owres. How the
Spaniardes proffered them selves to conquer the new found lands, being in
largeness thryse as great as Europe beside the southe lands parteynynge to
the Portugales. And how the nature of the place alters the forms and
qualities of things. Of the Island of Cuba, and of the gold mines of the
Island of Sancti Iohannis, otherwise cauled Burichena, or Buchena. Also of the
rich gold mines of Hispaniola, and of the order of workynge in the same. Of
the two chief gold mines of Hispaniola. And of a piece of gold weyinge three
thousand three hundredth and ten pound weight. How the gold is fined and
distrybuted: And how that only in the meltynge shops of the two golden mines
of Hispaniola, is molten yearly above three hundredth thousand pound weight
of gold. How thenterpryses of the Spanyardes are not inferior to thactes of
Saturnus or Hercules: And how the Admyrall discovered the land over against
the west corner of Cuba and the Island or Guanassa.
The Contents of the books of the second Decade.
The contents of the first book. Fol. 51.
How after the death of Colonus the Admiral, the kyng^ gave free license to
all such as would attempt any vyages: And of the nauigatio^s of Diego
Nicuesa, and Alpho^sus Fogeda Of the Island Codego and the region of Caramairi:
And of certain sweet apples which turn into woormes when they are eaten,
whose trees are also contagious. How Alfonsus Fogeda, the Lieuetenaunt of
Uraba, encounterynge with the barbarians had the overthrow. And how in this
conflicte, fyftie of his men were slain with Johannes de la Cossa their
capytayne. How Fogeda, and Nicuesa the Lieuetenaunte of Beragua, revenged the
death of their coompanyons. And how Fogeda came to the Island Fortis and the
region of Caribana where he was repulsed from the gold mines by the
fierceness of the barbarians vsyng arrows infected with poison. How Fogeda
was wounded in the thygh with a venomous arrowe, and his men almost consumed
with famyn. How a brigantine was drowned with the stroke of a fysshe: And of
the navigations of Ancisus from Hispaniola to Uraba. Of the Lamentable
shyppewracke of Ancisus: And of the date trees and wytde bores which he found.
Of the fruits or apples of the trees cauled Ceders of Libane which bear owlde
fruits and new all the year. How only three of the Canibales with their
bows and inuenemed arrows assailed Ancisus with a hundredth of his men: In
which conflicte they wounded and slew many. Also of their swyftnesse of foot.
Of the great river of Dariena: And how Ancisus encountered with five hundredth
of thinhabitauntes of the goulfe of Uraba and put them to flight. Also how he
found great plent^e of wrought gold and household stuff in a thycket of
reeds.
The contents of the second book. Fol. 58.
How Nicuesa lost his fellows in the dark night and went past the mouth of
the river Beragua which he sought: And how the capitaynes of the other ships
consulted how to find him. Also of the river Lagartos in the which great
Lysartes are found much like unto the Crocodiles of Nilus. How the capitaynes
forsook their ships that the souldyers might be without hope of departure:
And of the miserable chance of Petrus de Umbria and his fellows. By what
chance Nicuesa was found, and of the calamities which he and his coompany
sustained. Also of the region of Gracia Dei or Cerabaro, and of the river of
Sancti Matthei. How Nicuesa caused them to remove their habitacion from
Beragua to point Marmor where he bylded a fortress And how his men by war
and famyn, were consumed from seven hundredth and odd, to scarsely one
hundredth. How one Uaschus Nunnez usurped thautoritie of the Lieuetenaunte
ship of Uraba in thabsence of Fogeda: And of the navigations of Rodericus
Colmenatis from Hispaniola to Uraba. Of the river Gaira descendynge from the
top of a high mountain covered with snow: And how Rodericus Colm^naris in
a conflicte against the barbarians, lost.xlvii. of his men by reason of their
inuenemed arrows. Of the force of the poison wherewith the barbarians infecte
their arrows, and a remedy for the same. Also how Colmenaris by gunneshot
and kyndelynge fyers on the high tops of the rocks, came to the Spanyardes
left desolate in Dariena.
The contents of the third book. Fol. 61.
How Nicuesa was sought forth to acquiete the contentions of Uraba: And how
he was again rejected. How Uaschus Nunnez invaded, took prisoners, and
spoiled the kings bortherynge about the region of Uraba: And how Ancisus
Lieuetenaunt for Fogeda was cast in prison, and afterward set at liberty.
How Ancisus took his vyage from Uraba to Spain to accuse Uaschus: who also
at the same time sent Ualdiuia as well to speak in his defense, as also to
certify the king of their doings. How king Careta conspired with the
Spanyardes against king Poncha whom they put to flight and spoiled his
vyllage. How king Comogrus frendely enterteyned the Spanyardes and brought
them to his pallaice where he showed them the dried Carkases of his ancestors
reserved and sumptuously apparelled: And how the kings elder son gave
Uaschus and Colmenaris four thousand ounces of wrought gold and fifty slaves.
Also a wyttie oration which he made to the Spanyardes, wherein he certifyed
them of a country exceadynge rich in gold. etc.
The contents of the fourth book. Fol. 66.
Of horrible thunder and lyghtnynge in the mooneth of November, and of grain
which waxes ripe thryse a year Also how digestion is strengthened by owtwarde
could. How Ualdiuia is sent again into Hispaniola to mou^ the governor and
counsel there to send into Spain to the king for a supply of a thousand
souldyers to make way to the golden mountains: And how he carried with him the
kings portion, (that is) the fyfte part of gold and other things. How
Uaschus invaded the kings inhabytynge the regions about the goulfe of Uraba,
and how he put king Dabaiba to flight, in whose vyllage he found wrought
gold^ amountynge to the weight of seven thousand Castellans. Of battes as
bygge as turtle dooues which sumtyme byt^ men in the night in their sleep,
whose bytynge is also venomous: but is healed with water of the sea or by
cauterization as are also the wounds of venomous arrows. Of the Island of
Cannafistula, and a town of five hundredth houses, whose king Abenamachei was
taken and his arm cut of in the fight. Of trees of exceadynge bygnesse and
heyght: And how king Abibeiba had his pallaice in the top of a tree from
the which he was enforced to descend and entreat of peace.
The contents of the fyfth book. Fol. 69.
How king Abraiba slew a captain of the Spaniards and caused the kings to
rebel. Also how they were put to flight and many of their men slain. Of five
kings which attempted a new conspiracy with a hundredth great Canoas and five
thousand men: And how their intent was bewrayed by a woman, and prevented.
Also how Rodericus Colmenaris sacked the vyllage of Tichiri and honge the
king thereof with four of his chief rulers, and commanded them to be shot
through with arrows.
The contents of the syxte book. Fol. 72.
How Uaschus with his confetherates, sent Johannes Quicedus and Colmenaris
from Dariena to Hispaniola and from the^se to Spain to the king for a thousand
men to pass over the mountains to the golden regions: And what miseries they
sustained in that vyage. Also of the death of Ualuia, Zamudius, and Fogeda. Of
the prosperous vyage of Ancisus: And how godde wrought miracles by the simple
faith of a mariner. Also ho^ god respects thinfancie of faith for zeles sake:
And how one religion turned into another, holds still many things of the
first. How many of the barbarians were baptized by reason of the miracles:
And how they rewarded the prestes by whom they were baptized. How Ancisus
shortly after his arryuall in Spain, resorted to the court and made his
complaynt to the king of thinsolencie of Uaschus, wheruppon the king gave
sentence against him: And how apt the barbarous nations are to embrase the
Christian faith.
The contents of the seventh book. Fol. 79.
How Quicedus and Colmenaris the procuratours of Dariena, were honorably
enterteyned at the court and brought to the kings presence: And how their
complexion was changed by alteration of the air. How Petrus Arias a noble
man, was elected gouernou^ and Lieuetenaunt of Dariena: And how other of the
court labored for the same office. Also how the bishop of Burges spoke to
the king in his behalf. How Petrus Arias had a thousand and two hundrethe
souldyers appointed him at the kings charges: And of the kings custom hou^e
in the city of Civil, cauled the house of the contractes of India. How a
great number of Spanyardes proffered the^ selves to go at their own charges:
And of a restra^nt made that no stranger might pass without the kings
license. Also how the autour reproves Aloisius Cadamustus a writer of the
Portugales vyages. How Petrus Arias shortly after his departure from Civil,
lost two of his ships and was driven back ag^yne by tempest: And how being
newly furnysshed, he pa^sed the O^ean with more prosperous wyndes. The third
vyage of Uincentius Pinzonus, and how he came to the regions of Paria where
encounterynge with thinhabitauntes he put them first to flight: but after
faulyng to entreatie of peace, they gave him great plenty of gold and
abundaunce of masculine frankensence with diverse other princely presents. Of
the great multitude of popingiayes which are in the region of Paria, and how
thinhabitours are apparelled. Also of the five kings that made a league of
frendeshyppe with Uincentius. How Uincentius sailed Eastwarde by the tracte of
the regions of Paria until he came to the point of that long land which the
autour supposes to be the great Island Atlantike whereof the owlde writers
make mention. Cap. S. A^gustini.

The contents of the.viii. book. Fol. 80.
A contention between the Castilians and Portugales as concerning the division
of the new found lands: And how the controversy was fynysshed by the
bishop of Rome. How Don Chrystopher the gouernoure of the Island of Sancti
Iohannis, was slain by the Canibales and the bishop put to flight. Also of
the other bishops of the Islands. How the Canibales of the Island of Sancta
Crux, slew and eat a king with certain of his men being friends to the
Chrystians and made faggottes of their bones: And how querelynge with owre men,
they put them to silence.
The contents of the.ix. book. Fol. 81.
Of the marvelous frutefulnes of the regions of Beragua, Uraba, and Dariena:
And of the diverse kinds of trees and fruits. Also of the pleasant taste of
swynes flesh being fed with the fruits of Mirobalane trees. Of Lions and
Tigers and other wild beasts: And of a beast of strange form. Of the
ryuers of the goulfe of Uraba, as the river of Dariena and Rio Grandis: And
how the great serpents cauled Crocodiles, are found in other ryuers bysyde
Nilus in Egypt. Also how thautour of this book was sent Ambassador to the
Soldane of Alcayr in Egipte. Of the Portugales nauigations, and of the river
Senega found by them to be a chanel of Nilus. Also of the multitude of birds
and fowls being in the marysshes of Dariena. A phylosophicall discourse of
thoriginall and generation of sprynges and ryuers: And of the breadth of the
land diuydynge the north and south Ocean. Of the great river Maragnonus and of
the earthly Paradyse: And how sprynges are engendered by conuercion of air
into water. Of the often faule of rain under the Equinoctial line, and of the
pores of the sea opened by the South wyndes. Of the great ryuers of Tanais,
Ganges, Danubius, and Eridanus, famous to the owlde writers: And how certain
ryuers runnynge through the caves of the earth, break forth into sprynges
afar of.
The contents of the.x. book. Fol. 86.
How the new found lands discovered by the Spanyardes in the West Ocean,
are eight times bygger then Italy beside that which the Portugales possess:
And of the cards of the sea drawn by Colonus and Americus Uesputius. The
order of measurynge the land: And how a league conteyneth four miles by sea
and but three by land. The Nau^gation of Johannes Dias, and of the sundry
eleuations of the pole star. Of the Island of Boiuca or Agnaneo, and of the
spring whose water being drunk, causes owld men to look young. How Nicuesa
and his soldiers were so oppre^sed with famine, that they were driven to eat
mangie dogs, toades, and dead men: And how a brothe made of a dogs
skin, was soulde for many pieces of gold.
The contents of the books of the third Decade.
The contents of the first book. Fol. 88.
Of the desperate adventure and good fortune of Uaschus: And how with a
hundredth fourscore and ten men, he brought that to pass for the which Petrus
Arias was sent with a thousand and two hundredth fresshe souldyers. How iren
serves for more necessary uses then gold, and how superfluities hinder
liberty. How Uaschus in one conflicte, slew six hundredth barbaryans with
their kings: And how he found the house of king Quarequa infected with
unnatural lechery, commaundynge that the king and forty such as he kept for
that purpose, should be given for a pray to his dogs which he used to serve
in the wars against these naked people. Of a region of black Moors: And
how Uaschus came to the tops of the mountains, where geuynge thanks to
god, he beheld the new south Ocean never before seen nor known to men of
owre world. How Uaschus put king Chiapes to flight, and after made a league
of frendeshyppe with him: And how the king gave him.iiii. hundredth pounds
weight of wrought gold. How king Coquera was put to f^yght, who also
being received to frendeshyppe, gave Uaschus six hundredth and fifty pounds
weight of wrought gold. Of the goulfe cauled Sinus. S. Michaelis being full
of inhabited Islands: And of the manly courage and godly zeal of Uaschus. Also
of the rysynge and faulyng of the south sea. How king Tumaccus being driven
to flight and afterward reconciled, gave Uaschus.vi. hundredth and.xiiii. pesos
of gold, and two hundredth and forty of the greatest and fairest pearls: And
how the king caused his men to fyshe for pearls. Of the Island cauled
Margaritea Dives: And of the abundaunce of fair and great pearls found
therein. Of habitable regions under the Equinoctial line: And of the Portugales
nauigations to the Antipodes inhabytynge the five and fifty degree of the
south pole. Also a declaration of Antipodes, and of the stars about the south
pole.
The contents of the second book. Fol. 95.
Of the manner of fysshynge for pearls and of the three kinds thereof. Also
diverse other questions concerning perles. Of the multitude of the shell fysshes
wherein perles are ingendered and found in manner in all places in the south
sea: And of abundaunce of gold found almost in every house. Also how the
treasury of nature is in those coasts: And of the gold mines of Dariena.
How king Teaocha gave Uaschus.xx. pounds weight of wrought gold and two
hundredth perles. Also of deserts full of wild beasts, and how Uaschus was
troubled with great heat in the month of November. How a dog Tiger was
taken, and his whelps tied in cheynes and torn in pieces: Also how Uaschus
gave.iiii kings to his dogs to be devoured. Of the use of dogs in their
wars, and of the fierceness of the Canibales. How king Bononians favored
the Chrystians and gave Uaschus.xx. pound weight of wrought gold. Also his
oration to Uaschus. A similitude proving great plenty of gold in the
regions of the south sea, and of the trauayles which owlde souldyers are able
to sustain.
The contents of the third book. Fol. 99
How king Buchibuea submytted him self to Uaschus, and sent him certain
vessels of gold. Also how kyng^ Chiorisus sent him.xxx. dysshes of pure
gold. How iren serves for more necessary uses then gold. Also an exemple of
the life of owr first parents. How king Pocchorrosa submytted him self,
and gave Uaschus.xv. pound weight of wrought gold. Also how Tumanama the
great king of the golden regions toward the south sea, is taken prisoner.
Likewise how he gave Uaschus.xxx. pound weight of pure and wrought gold, and
his noble men.lx. pounds weight of gold. Of the cause of vehement wyndes nere
unto the Equinoctial line, and of the color of the earth of the golden
mines. Of the large and fruitful plain of zauana, and of the river Comogrus.
Also how king Comogrus baptized by the name of Charles, gave Uaschus.xx.
pound weight of wrought gold. Of the good fortune of Uaschus, and how he was
turned from Goliath to Eliseus, and from Anteus to Hercules: And with what
facility the Spanyardes shall hereafter obtain great plenty of gold and
pearls. Of the Spanyardes conquestes, and fi^rc^nesse of the Canibales. Also
an exhortacion to Chrystian princes to set forward Christ's religion.
The contents of the fourth book. Fol. 104*
The fourth vyage of Colonus the Admitall from Spain to Hispaniola, and to
the other Islands and coasts of the firm land: Also of the florysshynge
Island Guanassa. Of seven kinds of date trees, wild vyues, and Myrobalanes:
Also of birds and fowls. Of people of goodly stature which use to paynt their
bodies: And of the swyfte course of the sea from the east to the west. Also of
fresshe water in the sea. Of the large regions of Paria, Os Draconis, and
Quiriquetana: And of great Tortoyses and reeds. Also of the four fruitful
Islands cauled Quatuor Tempora, and.xii. Islands cauled Limonares. Of sweet
savors and wholesome air: And of the region Quicuri, and the haven Cariai or
Myrobalanus: Also of certain ciuyle people. Of trees groynge in the sea after
a strange sort, and of a strange kind of Moonkeys which invade men and
feight with wild bores. Of the great goulfe of Cerabaro replenisshed with
many fruitful Islands, and of the people which wear cheynes of gold made of
ouches wrought to the similitude of diverse wild beasts and fowls. Of five
vyllages whose inhabitauntes give them selves only to gatherynge of gold, and
are painted, using to wear garlandes of Lions and Tigers claws. Also of
seven ryuers in all the which is found great plenty of gold: And where the
plenty of gold cease. Of certain people which paynt their bodies, and
cover their privy members with shelles, having also plates of gold hanging
at their nosethrylles. Of certain woormes which being engendered in the seas
nere about the Equinoctial, eat holes in ships: And how the Admirals
ships were destroyde by them. How the king of Beragua enterteyned the
Lieuet^nant and of the great plenty of gold in the river of Duraba and in all
the regions there about: Also in roots of trees and siones and in manner in all
the ryuers. How the Lieuetenaunt and his coompany would have erect^d a colonie
beside the river of Beragua, and was repulsed by thinhabitauntes. How the
Admiral fell into the hands of the barbarians of the Island of Iamaica where
he lived miserably the space of ten moonethes: And by what chance he was
saved and came to the Island of Hispaniola. Of wholesome regions, temperate air,
and continual spring all the hole year: Also of certain people which honor
gold religiously during their golden harvest. Of the mountains of Beragua
being fifty miles in heyght and higher then the clouds: Also the description
of other mountains and regions there about, comparynge the same to Italy.
Colonus his opinion as touching the supposed continente, and ioynynge of the
no^th and south Ocean. Also of the breadth of the said continente or firm
land. Of the regions of Uraba and Beragua and the great riue^ Maragnonus and
the river of Dabaiba or Sancti Iohannis Also of certain marysshes and desolate
ways, and of dragons and Crocodiles engendered in the sa^e. Of.xx. golden
ryuers about Dariena and of certain precious stones, especially a diamunde of
marvelous byggenesse bought in the province of P^^ia. Of the heroical factes
of the Spanyardes and how they contemn effeminate pl^asures. Also a
similitude proving great plenty of gold and precious stones.
The contents of the fyfth book. Fol. 113.
The navigations of Petrus Arias from Spain to Hispaniola and Dariena, and of
the Islands of Canarie. Also of the Islands of Madanino, Guadalupea, and
Gatan^a. Of the sea of herbs and mountains covered with snow: Also of the
swyfte course of the sea toward the west. Of the river Gaira, the region
Caramairi, and the port Carthago and Sancta Martha: Also of Americus Uesputius
and his expert cunning in the knowledge of the card, compass and quadrant.
How the Canibales assailed Petrus Arias with his hole navy, and shot of their
venomous arrows even in the sea. Also of their houses and household stuff.
How Gonzalus Quiedus found a sapphire bygger then a goose egg: Also emerodes,
calcidonies, iaspers, and amber of the mountains. Of woddes of brasile trees,
plenty of gold, and marchasites of metals found in the regions of Caramairi,
Gaira, and Saturma. Also of a strange kind of marchaundies exercised among
the people of Zunu. That the region of Caramairi is like to an earthly
Paradise: And of the fruitful mountains and pleasant gardeynes of the same.
Of many goodly countries made desolate by the fiercenes of the Canibales, and
of diverse kinds of bread made of roots. Also of the manner of plantynge the
root of Iucca, whose iuise is deadely poison in the Islands, and without hurt
in the continent or firm land. Of certain golden ryuers, hearts, wild
bores, fowls, gossampine, white marble, and wholesome air. Also of the great
river Maragnonus descendynge from the mountains covered with snow, cauled
Serra Neuata. How Petrus Arias wasted certain Islands of the Canibales: Also
how by the swyfte course of the sea, his ships were carried in one night
forty leaques beyond thestimation of the best pylottes.
The contents of the syxte book. Fol. 118.
Of sundry opinions why the sea runs with so swyft a course from the East
to the west: and of the great goulfe of the north part of the firm land.
The vyage of Sebastian Cabote from England to the frosen sea, and how being
repulsed with Ise in the moonethe of July, he sailed far westwarde. Of people
apparelled with beasts skynnes: And how bears take fysshes in the sea and
eat them. How Sebastian Cabote after that he had discovered the land of
Baccallaos or Baccallearum, was cauled out of England into Spain, where he
was made one of thassistaunce of the counsel of thaffayres of India, and of
his second viage Of the Island Fortis: And how a great foul as bygge as a
storke lyghted in the governors ship. Also how he arrived at Dariena with
the kings navy. How Uaschus received the new governor: And of habitable
regions under the Equinoctial. How Petrus Aries the new governor distributed
his army to conquer the south regions rich in gold, and to erecte new
colonies in the same. Of the rich gold mines of Dabaiba, and of thexpedition
against the king of that region. Of the Uiolent course of the sea from the
east to the west: And of the difficulte saylynge against the same. Of the
pestiferous and unwholesome air of Sancta Maria Antiqua in Dariena: and how the
Spanyardes were of necessity enforced to plant their first colonie and
habitacion there. The cause of the variety of regions lyinge all under one
degree or paralelle, and by what means the soonne beams are cause of fervent
heat. Of toades and flees engendered of drops of water, and of a house set
on fire with lyghtnynge. Tanqua^m canis ^ Nilo.
Of a dog devoured of a Crocodyle, and of the venemus bytynge of great battes.
Also of Lions and Tigers and other wild beasts. How in these regions all
four footed beasts grow to a bygger quantity then they which were of the
first b^oode. Also of certain trees of whose planckes if ships be made, they
are safe from the woormes cauled Broma or Byssas. Of a tree whose wod is
present poison if it be only borne about: And of an herb that is a
preservative against the same. Of the rich Islands of the south sea, and of
certain expeditions against the Canibales.
The contents of the.vii. book. Fol. 124.
The particular description of the Island of Hispaniola, and of the rich
Island cauled Margaritea Dives lyinge in the South sea. Also of the great
abundaunce of big pearls found in the same. How the autoure compares
Hispaniola to the earthely Paradyse: And how it far excels Italy in
fertility and temperate air. Of the first inhabitours of Hispaniola and of
the Islands of Canarie. How the inhabitauntes of Hispaniola in their songs
and rhymes had certain prophesies that appareled men should coome to their
country and bring them into servitude: And of their familiarity with
spirits. Also how those spirits have no more appeared to them sense they were
baptized. Of their expertenesse in swymmynge: And of their delycate serpents,
birds, fowls, and popingiais. Of the form and situation of Hispaniola nere
the Equinoctial: And how could is in sum place thereof accidental and not
by the situation of the region. Of oxen and swyne of exceadinge bygnesse: And
of ears of wheat as bygge as a man's arm in the braun. Also how the swyne
are fed with myrobalanes. etc. Of plenty of gold, brasyle, mastix,
gossampyne, Electrum etc: And of thincommodities of intemperate regions. Of
diverse languages in the Island: And how the prouynces are divided into
regions. How Andreas Moralis sailed into a dangerous and dark cave within
the rock of a mountain: And of hole ryuers devoured of such caves. Also of
the conflycte of the waters. Of a standing poole in the tope of an high
mountain: And how fern and bramble busshes grow only in could regyons.
The contents of the.viii book. Fol. 130
Of a great lake or standing poole of sour and salt water, and of the sea
fysshes in the same in the myddelande of the Island. Also of devouring fysshes
cauled Tiburoni. Of the ryuers fauling into the lakes, and of.CC. springes in
the space of a furlonge. Ameruelous hystory of a king stryken dumme and lame
by a miracle: And of the Indian language. How such as are drowned in the
lake, are never cast up again: And of the Island Guarizacca in the myddeste
of a standing lake. Also of a lake of fresshe water, and an other of salt and
fresshe water. Of a large plain of two hundredth miles in length: And an other
of hundrethe and twenty. Of the marvelous fysshe or monster of the sea, cauled
Manati or Matum, fed with man's hand: and how she caryeth men over the lake.
Of the mountains, vales, hills, playnes, and ryuers of Hispaniola: And how
gold is found in all mountains and gold and fysshe in all ryuers. Of salt
bays, and how the ryuers have their increase from the caves of the
mountains. Also how there is no hurtefull beast in the Island. Of the
pleasures of Hispaniola: And of the region of Cotohi well inhabyted and situate
in a plain in the tops of mountains reachynge to the clouds. Of moderate
could in the mountains, and of fern of merueylous bygnesse. How pure and
massy gold is found in the region of Cotoy or Cotohy: And that the vein of
gold is a living tree. Also of the roots, branches, and flowers of the
same, and how certain caves are sustained with pyllers of gold. What gold
is brought yearly from Hispaniola into Spain: And of the salt of the
mountains, being as hard as stones and clear as crystal. Also sprynges of
salt, fressh and sower water. Of certain wild men living in caves and
deunes with out any certain language: And of their merueylous swiftness a
foot. Of pytche of the rock and two kinds of trees: And of the leaf of a
tree used in the steed of paper. Also how thinhabitantes think that the
Christians can make those leaves speak and disclose all secreates. Of a
strong color made of the iuse of a certain apple: And of the herb whose
smoke is poison.
The contents of the.ix. book. Fol. 136.
Of the kinds of fruits wherewith thinhabitauntes of Hispaniola lived first,
and how they came to the knoweledge of Iucca. Also how Ceres first found
wheat and barley in Egypt. Why their kings are cauled by diverse names, and
by what names they salute the kings children when they are borne. How they
make their testamentes, and how certain of the kings wives and concubines
are buried with them. Of the variable motions of the elements in Hispaniola:
And where it rayneth but little, and where much. Of the colonies and vyllages
that the Spanyardes have builded in Hispaniola: and of the other Islands about
the same Of a spring which runnyng under the sea from Hispaniola, breaks
forth in the Island of Arethusa: Also of habitable regions under the
Equinoctial, and of the rich gold mines of the Island of Cuba. Of the gum
cauled Animae Album: And of the Canibale Also whereby it was thought that there
were Islands of women. Of honey found in trees and rocks: And of the general
on of great Tortoyses and of their eggs.
The contents of the.x. book. Fol. 140.
Of the expedition ageynste the king of the Island Dites in the south sea: And
how after four conflictes, submyttynge him self, he gave our men a hundredth
and ten pound weight of great pearls. Also how he agreed to pay yearly a
hundredth pound weight of pearls for a tribute. How axes and hatchettes are
more esteemed then gold, or perles: And of great plenty of hearts and
cunnyes. Also how the king of Dites and his famelie were baptized. Of perles
of great price: And how Paul the bishop of Rome bowght a perle for four and
forty thousand ducades. Diverse opinions of the generation of perles: And of a
hundredth perles found in one shel fysshe. Also of the birth of pearls. Of the
regions of the East side of the goulfe of Uraba: And of the original of the
Canibales. Of certain circumcised people which have the knowledge ^f letters
and use ^ookes: And what chanced of the capitaynes which Petrus Arias sent
forth diverse ways. Also how John Solysius was slain of the Canibales, and of
their fierceness. How John Pontius was repulsed of the Canibales, and of the
lewd behauour of John Aiora. Of the variable fortune of Gonsalus Badaiocius:
And how after he had gathered great riches of gold, he had the overthrow,
and was spoiled of all. Of the golden region of Coiba Dites: And how their
slaue^ are ma^ked in the face. Of the Islandes of the souh sea: And of the
regions from whense the Portugales fetch their spices. Of a strange kind of
fowlynge: and of the trees that bear gourdes. Of the later opinions as
touching the swyfte course of the Ocean toward the weste: and of the
continente or firm^ land. Also of the vyage from the new lands to Spain. Of
the gold mines of Dariena, and the manner of gatherynge of gold in the same:
Also of the dropsy of couetous^es which is not satisfied with riches. For the
contents of the book of the Islands lately found ^ade the margente notes of
the same.
FINIS.
Thinterpretours excuse.
I have not in writing been very curious
To avoid the scorns of Rhinocetos nose,
Or the fyled judgment of severe Aristarchus
Not fearing thereby any thing to lose,
But have thought it sufficient to be open and playn^
Not lookynge for other commodity or grain.
I am not eloquent I know it right well,
I I be not barbarous I desire no more,
I have not for every word asked counsel
Of eloquent Eliot or sir Thomas Moore.
Take it therefore as I have intended,
The fantes with favor may soon be amended.
The poet Homere for all this eloquence,
Lacked not Zoilus to be his for
Wherefore I conclude this for a true sentence.
That no man lacks fuo bargello:
For as no beast lives without woorme or ^lye,
So no man lacks his privy enemy.
Rumpatur Zoilus.

Fautes escaped in the pryntynge. F. the leaf. L. the line. B. the back side
of the leaf.
F. 2. B. L. 36. helpen, read help^d.

F. 3. B. L. 25. three feathers, read their f^ther^.

F. 9. L. 28. form, read form.

F. 20. L. 37 owre, read yowre.

F. 22. B. L. 27. shure, read sure.

F. 30. L. 6. clooke, read cloak.

F. 34. L. 5. wodes, read wooddes.

F. 36. B. L. 2. put out and.

F. 36. the last line. put out, I do.

F. 36. B. L. 34. first part, read fyf^ part.

F. 38. B. L. 13. gardens, read guardens.

F. 52. L. 18. part, read port.

F. 62. B. L. 25. and, read then.

F. 68. the last line, put out trees.

F. 92. L. 18. Michaeld, read Michaels*

F. 92. L. 19. ans, read and.

Also there the last line, put out, arose*

F. 95. L. 12. cause, read sause.

F. 96. B. L. 15. gretheardes, read great hearde^*

F. 99. L. 17. filt hye, read fylthy.

F. 118. B. L. 35. langitude, read longitude.

F. 128. L. 4. eyres, read here is,

F. 129. L. 1. Antipu^* read Antiqu^.

F. 140. L. 17. counceled, read counsayled.

F. 150. L. 15. veles, read vayles. F. 150. L. 33. prouydence, read province.

F. 153. L. 32. trackes, read tractes.

F. 154. L. 2. selde, read seldom.

F. 157. L. 26. wod, read woodde.

F. 168. B. L. 13. bortamus, read hortamur.

F. 170. B. L. 17. for. 1593, read. 1493.

F. 171. L. 21. without, read with.

F. 188. B. L. 33. bury, read burn.

F. 193. B. L. 21. webs, read webbes.

F. 199. B. L. 37. shydinge, read shyninge.

F. 202. L. 17. ny, read any.

F. 206. B. L. 23. form, read form.

F. 208. B. L. 7. codes, read coddes.

F. 209. L. 15. wars, read wars.

F. 212. L. 40. ignitie, read dignity.

F. 219. L. 10. us, read them.

F. 228. L. 37. rant, read ran.

F. 241. L. 4. Colonuo, read Colono.

F. 249. L. 17. read by the coming of the Goths and Uandales* etc.

F. 262. B. L. 15. Thus, read this.

F. 296. L. 26. read Cingulus Mundi, that is the gerdle of the world,
otherwise cauled Ca^en^ Mundi, that is, the chain of the world.

F. 298. B. L. 3. sennes, read fennes.

F. 300. L. 20. ceelrytie read celeritie.

F. 317. L. 27. read Tercera or Terciera*

Also. L. 35. kyngedgme, read kingdom. F. 322. L. 17. owre compass; read
the compass.

Imprynted at London in Lumbard street at the sign of the Cradle by Edward
Sutton.

Anno. D^ni. M. D. LV.


