Spadacrene Anglica.

OR, THE ENGLISH SPAW-FOVNTAINE.

Being A BRIEF TREATISE of the acide, or tart Fountain in the Forest of
Knaresborow, in the West Riding of Yorkshire.

As also a Relation of other medicinal Waters in the said Forest.

BY Edmund Deane, Dr. in Physic, Oxon. dwelling in the City of YORK.

LONDON, Printed for John Grismand: and are to be sold by Richard Foster, near
the Minster gate in York. 1626.

TO THE PHYSICIANS OF YORK.
THough it was my fortune first of all to set a new edge on this business; yet
my iourneyes to this Fountain have not been made without your good companies
and association, nor the several trials had there, and at home, performed
without your worthy helps and assistance: nor this little Treatise begun
without your instigations and incitements. Therefore I find none so fit and
meet to patronize it, as your selves; being able out of your own knowledge and
observation to defend it against all malicious detractions. To extol it above
the German Spaw, may be thought in me either indiscretion, or too much
partiality; but why I may not parallele them (being in natures and qualities so
agreeable) nor I, nor you (I suppose) know any inducing, much less persuading
argument. Wherefore being thus confident, I thought it no part of our duties,
either to God, our King, or Country, to conceal so great a benefit, as may
thereby arise and accrue not only unto this whole Kingdom and his Majesty's
loving subjects, but also in time (after further notice taken of it) to other
foraigne nations and countries, who may perhaps with more benefit, less hazard
and danger of their lives, spoiling and robbing, better partake of this our
English Spaw Fountain, then of those in Germany.

It were to be wished, that those two famous Physicians, Dr. Hunton and Dr.
Bright had been yet living, to have given testimony of the great good hopes
and expectation they conceived of it. The former of which did oftentimes
request me to publish it to the world: and the other was resolved (in case he
had longer lived) to have done it himself. So careful were they both to
promote their countries good, and ^udious to procure the health of their
Countrymen.

I am as brief and plain, as possibly I may, to the end the Reader may not be
wearied, nor the patient deluded; and if for these causes I may seem to be
censured, yet I am well assured, that to your selves breuity and perspicuity
cannot, but be acceptable. So wishing you all happiness, I shall ever rest
and remain

From my house in York, this 20th of April. 1626. Your assured friend, Edm:
Deane.

THE ENGLISH SPAW.
CHAP. 1.
Of the situation of the Town of Knaresborow.
GNaresbrugh (commonly called Knaresborow) is a very ancient Market town in
the West Riding of Yorkshire, distant 14 miles from the City of York; where
the Pole is elevated 54 degrees, and 20 odd minutes. On the South-west part
thereof is that fair, and goodly Fort, so much renowned, both for the pleasant
situation, and remarkable strength, known by the name of Knaresborow Castle,
seated on a most ragged and rough Rock; whence (as learned Mr. Camden says) it
is so named.

Both the Castle and Town are fenced on the South and West parts with the
River Nid: which is beautified here with two fair Bridges of stone, which lead
from the Town into the Forest adjoining, as also unto a large empaled Park of
his Majesty's, called Bilton park, well stored with fallow Dear: part whereof
is bordered with the said river.

The Town it self stands on a hill, having almost on every side an ascent
to it; and about it are diverse fruitful valleys well replenished with grass,
corn, and wood. The waters there are wholesome and clear; the air dry and
pure. In brief, there is nothing wanting, that may fitly serve for a good and
commodious habitation, and the content and entertainment of strangers.

Many things are very obseruable in this place, which because they rather do
appertain to the volumes of Geographers, and Antiquaries, then to the purpose
intended in this little treatise, are here omitted.

CHAP. 2.
Of the several earths, stones, and mineralls, found near and about this
place.
ALthough there are in sundry places of this Kingdom as many, or more several
kinds, and sorts of earths, quarreyes of stone, minerals, and mines of
mettalls, then in any other Realm whatsoever; notwithstanding no one place
has been observed to have them either in such plenty, or variety in so small
a distance, as this. For here is found not only white and yellow marle,
plaster, oker, rudd, or rubricke, freestone, an hard greet-stone, a soft
reddish stone, iron-stone, brim-stone, vitreall, nitre, alum, lead, copper,
(and without doubt diverse mixtures of these) but also many other mineralls
might (perhaps) be found out by the diligent search, and skillful industry of
those, who would take pains to labor a little herein.

All which do manifestly demonstrate, that nature has stored this little
territory with a greater diversity of hidden benefits, then great and
spacious Countries otherwise abounding in outward native commodities, and that
the fountains, or springs of water hereabouts cannot otherwise then
participate of their several natures, and properties.

CHAP. 3.
Of the fountains, of pure and simple waters near, and about the Town.
AS generally most parts of the West Riding of Yorkshire (especially the hilly
and more mountaineous places thereof) are stored with fountains and springs of
clear, limpide, and pure simple waters; so likewise the territory here abouts
is not without plenty of them. Two whereof have gotten and purchased that
reputation, as to be saincted: The one called by the name of Saint Magnus, or
Mugnus-Well: the other, that of Saint Roberts.

These, formerly for a year, or two, have been in great request in these
parts amongst the common sort, much sought unto by many, and great concourse of
people have daily gathered and flocked to them both near, and a far off, as
is most commonly seen, when any new thing is first found out. Fama enim
crescit eundo, even unto incredible wonders and miracles, or rather fictions,
and lies. All which comes to pass as we may well suppose, through our
overmuch English credulity, or (as I may better say) rather superstition. For
to any such like Well, will swarm at first both young and old (especially the
female sex, as ever more apt to be deluded) halt, lame, blind, deaf, dumb,
yea, almost all, and that for all manner of maladies and diseases, both inward
and outward.

But for as much, as these are springs of pure, and simple waters merely,
without any mixture at all of minerals, to make them become medicinable, it is
verily thought, that the many and several cures, which have bin attributed
unto them in those times, when they were so frequented, were rather fained, and
imaginary, then true, and real; and that those, who then visited them, were
desirous (either to uphold, and maintain the credit, and reputation of their
Saints, or else, to avoid the scorn and derision of their own delusion) to
have others likewise deceived.

Time has quite worn all their strength, and consumed all their virtues; so
that nothing of worth now remains with them, saving only their bare names and
titles:

Sic magna sua mole ruunt. Wherefore to omit these, as scarce worthy the
mentioning; those are chiefly here to be described, which do participate of
mineral virtues, and faculties.

CHAP. 4.
Of five fountains near unto the town, which do participate of mineral
virtues.
OVt of the diverse Fountains springing hereabouts, five are worthy the
observation of Physicians. The first whereof is very near unto the river
bank, over against the Castle, called by the name of the Dropping-well, for
that it droppeth, distilleth, and trickleth down from the hanging rock above.
The water whereof has a certain quality or property to turn any thing, that
lies in it, into a stony substance in a very short space.

Three of the others (being all of them much of one, and the same nature) are
termed by the country people thereabouts the Stinking-wels, in regard they have
an ill, and fetide smell, consisting most of Sulphure-viue, or quick
brimstone. One of them, and that which has the greatest current, or stream of
water, is in Bilton park.

The other two are in the said Forest; one is near unto the town; the other
is further off, almost two miles from it, beyond a place called Haregate-head,
in a bottom on the right hand of it, as you go, and almost in the side of a
little brook.

The fifth, and last (for which I have principally undertaken to write this
short Discourse) is an acide, or tart fountain in the said Forest, commonly
named by the vulgar sort, Tuewhit well, and the English Spaw, by those of the
better rank, in imitation of those two most famous acide fountains at the Spaw
in Germany, to wit Sauuenir, and Pouhon: whereof the first (being the prime
one) is half a league from the Spa, or Spaw village; the other is in the
middle of the town.

CHAP. 5.
A more particular recital of the first four Wells.
I Purpose to speak somewhat more in this place of the first four Springs
mentioned in the former Chapter, in regard the consideration of them may
perhaps give some light to those, who shall hereafter search further into the
secrets, which nature may seem to afford in the Country hereabouts.

The first is the Dropping-well, known almost to all, who have traveled unto
this place. The water whereof distilleth and trickleth down from the hanging
Rock over it, not only dropping wise, but also falling in many pretty little
streams.

This water issues at first out of the earth, not far from the said hanging
rock, and running a while in one entire current, continues so, till it
comes almost to the brim of the cragg; where being opposed by a damme (as it
were artificial) of certain spongy stones, is afterward divided into many
smaller branches, and falls from on high in manner aforesaid.

It is therefore very likely, that Mr Camden in person did not see this
Fountain, but rather that he had it by relation from others; or at least wise
(if he did see it) that he did not mark, and duly observe the original
springing up of the water, when in his Britannia he says thus: The waters
thereof spring not up out of the veins of the earth, etc.

Concerning the properties and qualities thereof, I have nothing more to write
at this time (there being formerly little trial had of it) saving that diverse
inhabitants thereabouts say, and affirm, that it has been found to be very
effectual in staying any flux of the body: which thing I easily believe.

The other three are sulphurous fountains, and cast forth a stinking smell a
far off, especially in the winter season, and when the weather is coldest.
They are all noisome to smell to, and cold to touch, without any manifest, or
actual heat at all; by reason (as may most probably be thought) their mines,
and veins of brimstone, are not kindled under the earth; being (perhaps)
hindered by the mixture of salt therewith.

Those, who drink of their waters, relate, they verily think there is
gunpowder in them, and that now and then they vomit after drinking thereof.

The waters, as they run along the earth, do leave behind them on the grass
and leaves a gray slimy substance; which being set on fire, has the right
savor of common brimstone. They are much haunted with Pigeons, an argument of
much salt in them; of which in the euaporation of the water by fire, we found
a good quantity remaining in the bottom of the vessel.

One thing further was worth observation; that white metal (as silver) dipped
into them, presently seems to resemble copper: which we first noted by
putting a silver porrenger into one of these; unto which Sir Francis Trapps did
first bring us. Which tincture these waters give by reason of their sulphur.

Touching their virtues, and effects, there may in general the like properties
be ascribed unto them, as are attributed unto other sulphurous Bathes actually
cold, participating also of salt.

The vulgar sort drink these waters (as they say) to expel reefe, and fellon;
yea, many, who are much troubled with itches, scabs, morphewes, tetters,
ring-wormes, and the like, are soon helped, and cured by washing the parts ill
affected therewith. Which thing they might much more conveniently, and more
commodiously do, if at that in Bilton park were framed 2 capacious Bathes,
the one cold, the other to be made hot, or warm, by art, for certain known
hours a day.

CHAP. 6.
A more particular description of the fifth, or last fountain, called the
English Spaw.
THis, being the principal subject of this whole Treatise, is in the said
forest, about half a league, or a mile and a half west from the town; from
whence there is almost a continual rising to it, but nothing so great, as the
ascent is from the Spaw village to the Sauuenir. This here springs out of a
mountainous ground, and almost at the height of the ascent, at Haregate-head;
having a great descent on both sides the ridge thereof; and the Country
thereabouts somewhat resembles that at the Spaw in Germany.

The first discouerer of it to have any medicinal quality (so far forth as I
can learn) was one Mr. William Slingesby, a Gentleman of many good parts, of an
ancient, and worthy Family near thereby; who having traveled in his younger
time, was thoroughly acquainted with the taste, use, and faculties of the two
Spaw fountains.

In his latter time, about 55 years ago, it was his good fortune to live for
a little while at a grange house very near to this fountain, and afterward
in Bilton Park all his life long. Who drinking of this water, found it in all
things to agree with those at the Spaw. Whereupon (greatly rejoicing at so good
and fortunate an accident) he made some further tr all and assay: that done, he
caused the founta ne to be well, and ar^^^cially walled about, and paued at the
bottom (as it is now at this day) with two fair stone flags, with a sit hole
in the side thereof, for the free passage of the water through a little
guttered stone. It is open at the top, and walled somewhat higher, then the
earth, as well to keep out filth, as Cattle for coming and approaching to it.
It is fouresquare, three foot wide, and the water within is about three
quarters of a yard deep.

First we caused it to be laded dry, as well to scour it, as also to see the
rising up of the water, which we found to spring up only at the bottom at the
chinke, or cranny, between two stones, so left purposely for the springing up
of the water at the bottom: Which as Yliny observes in his 31 book of his
Natural History, and the third Chapter, is a sign above all of the goodness
of a fountain.

And about all (says he) one thing would be observed, and seen unto, that
the source, which feeds it, spring and boil up directly from the bottom,
and not ^ssue forth at the sides: which also is a maine point that concerns
the perpetuity thereof, and whereby we ^y collect, that it will hold still and
be never drawn dry.

The stream of water, which passes away by the hole in the side thereof, is
much one, and about the proportion of the current of Sauuenir.

The above named Gentleman did drink the water of this Fountain every year
after all his life time, for helping his infirmities, and maintaining of his
he^lth, and would oftentimes say and auerre, that it was much better, and did
excel the tart fountains beyond the seas, as being more quick and lively,
and fuller of mineral spirits; effecting his operation more speedily, and
sooner passing through the body.

Moreover, Doctor Timothy Bright of happy memory, a learned Physician, (while
he lived, my very kind friend, and familiar acquaintance) first gave the name
of the English Spaw unto this Fountain about thirty years since, or more. For
he also formerly had spent some time at the Spaw in Germany; so that he was
very able to compare those with this of ours. Nay, he had furthermore so good
an opinion, and so high a conceit of this, that he did not only direct, and
advise others to it, but himself also (for most part) would use it in the
Summer season.

Likewise Doctor Anthony Hunton lately of Newarke upon Trent, a Physician of no
less worth and happy memory, (to whom for his true love to me, and kind
respect of me, I was very much beholden) would often expostulate with me at
our meetings, and wi h other Gentlemen of Yorkshire, his patients, how it came
to pass, that I, and the Physicians of York, did not by publi^e writing make
the fame and worth thereof better known to the world?

CHAP. 7.
Of the difference of this Fountain from those at the Spaw, to wit, Sauuenir,
and Pouhon.
THis springs almost at the top of the ascent (as formerly has been said)
from a dry, and somewhat sandy earth: The water where of running South-East, is
very clear, pure, full of life, and mineral exhalations.

We find it chiefly to consist of a vitrioline nature and quality, with a
participation also of those other minerals, which are said to be in the
Sauuenir fountain; but in a more perfect, and exquisite mixture and temper (as
we deem) and therefore to be supposed better and nobler, then it. The
difference between them will be found to be only Secundum maius and minus,
that is, according to more, or less, which makes no difference in kind, but
in degrees. This partaketh in greater measure of the qualities, and lesser of
the substances of the minerals, then that does; and for that cause it is of a
more quick and speedy operation; as also for the same reason, his tenuity of
body, and fullness of mineral spirits therein contained, it cannot be so far
transported from its own source, and spring, without loss, and diminution of
his strength, and goodness. For being carried no further, then to the town it
self (though the glass or vessel be closely stopped) it becomes somewhat
weaker: if as far as to York, much more: but if 20 or 30 miles further, it
will then be found to be of small force, or validity, as we have often
observed.

Whereas contrariwise the water of the lower fountain at the Spaw, called
Pouhon, is frequently and usually carried and conveyed into other Countries
far off, and remote, as into France, England, Scotland, Ireland, diverse parts
of Germany, and some parts of Italy; yea, and that of Sauuenir, (which is the
better fountain, and whose water cannot be carried so far away, as the other
may) is oftentimes used now adays at Paris, the chief City of France.

But this of ours cannot be sent away any whit so far off without loss and
decay of his efficacy, and virtue: so ayrie, subtle, and piercing are its
spirits, and mineral exhalations, that they soon pass, vanish, and fly
away. Which thing we have esteemed to be a principal good sign of the worthy
properties of this rare Fountain. So that this water, being newly taken up at
the Well, and presently after drunk, cannot otherwise, but sooner pass by the
Hypochondries, and through the body, and cause a speedier effect, then those in
Germany can. Whereby any one may easily collect, and gather, that this gets
his soueraign faculties better in its passage by and through the variety of
minerals, included in the earth (which only afford unto it an halitious body)
then those do.

If then we be desirous to have this of ours become commodious either for
preserving of our healths, or for altering any distemper, or curing any
infirmity (for which it is proper and available) it ought chiefly to be taken
at the fountain it self, before the mineral spirits be dissipated.

CHAP. 8.
That Vitriol is here more predominant, then any other mineral.
WE have sufficiently been satisfied by experience and trialls, through what
minerals this water does pass: but to know in what proportion they are exactly
mixed therewith, it is beyond humane invention to find out; nature having
reserved this secret to her self alone. Nevertheless it may very well be
coniectured, that as in the frame, and composition of the most noble creature,
Man (the lesser world) there (...) of the four elements rather adjustitiam (as
Philosophers say) then ad pondus; so nature in the mixture of these minerals,
has likewise taken more of some, and less of others, as she thought to be
most fit, and expedient for the good and behoof of man's health, and the
recovery and restitution of it decayed; being indeed such a work, as no Art is
able to imitate.

That Vitriolum (otherwise called Chalcanthum) is here most predominant, there
needs no other proof, then from the assay of the water it self; which both in
the tart and inky smack thereof, joined with a piercing and a pricking quality,
and in the savor (which is somewhat a little vitrioline,) is altogether like
unto the ancient Spaw waters: which according to the consent of all those, who
have considered their natural compositions, do most of all, and chiefly
participate of vitrioll.

Notwithstanding, for a more manifest, and fuller try all hereof, put as much
powder of galls, as will lie on twopence, or threepence, into a glass full of
this water newly taken up at the fountain, you shall see it by and by turned
into the right and perfect color of Claret wine, that is fully ripe, clear,
and well fined, which may easily deceive the eye of the skilfullest Vintner.

This demonstration has been often made, not without the admiration of those,
who first did see it. For the same quantity of galls mingled with so much
common water, or any other fountain water thereabouts, will not alter it any
thing at all; unless to these you also add Vitrioll, and then the color will
appear to be of a bluish violet, somewhat inkish, not reddish, as in the
former, which has an exquisite and accurate conjunction of other mineral
exhalations, besides the vitrioline. But this probation will not hold, if so be
you make trial with the said water being carried far from the well; by reason
of the present dissipation of his spirits.

CHAP. 9.
Of the prop^rties, and effects of Vitrioll, according to the ancient and
modern Writers.
THe qualities of Vitrioll, according to Dioscorides, Galen, Aetius, Paulus
Aegineta, and Oribasius, are to heat and dry, to bind, to resist putrefaction,
to give strength and vigor to the interior parts, to kill the flat worms of
the belly, to remedy venomous mushromes, to preserve flesh over moist from
corruption, consuming the moisture thereof by its heat, and constipating by his
astriction the substance of it, and pressing forth the serous humidity.

And according to Matthiolus in his Commentaries upon Di^^orides, it is very
profitable against the plague and pestilence, and the chymicall oil thereof is
very available (as himself affirms to have sufficiently proved) against the
stone and stopping of urine, and many other outward maladies and diseases,
(Andernacus and Gesner add to these the Apoplexy) all which, for avoiding of
prolixity, I do here puposely omit.

Neither will I further trouble the Reader with the recital of diverse and
sundry excellent remedies, and medicines, found out and made of it in these
latter times, by the Spagyricke Physicians, and others: In so much that Joseph
Quercetanus, one of those, is verily of opinion, that out of this one
individual mineral, well and exquisitely prepared, there might be made all
manner of remedies and medicines sufficient for the storing and furnishing of a
whole Apothecaries shop.

But it will (perhaps) be objected by some one or other in this manner: If
vitrioll, which as most do hold, is hot and dry in the third degree, or
beginning of the fourth, nay, of a causticke quality, and nature (as Discorides
is of opinion) should here be predominant, then the water of this fountain
must needs be of great heat and acrimony; and so become not only
unprofitable, but also very hurtful for man's use to be drunk, or inwardly
taken.

To which objection (not to take any advantage of the answer, which many
learned Physicians do give, viz. that vitrioll is not hot, but cold) I say:
First, that although all medicinal waters do participate of those mineralls,
by which they do pass, yet they have them but weakly (viribus refractis)
especially when in their passages they touch, and meet with diverse other
minerals of opposite tempers and natures.

Secondly I answer, that in all such medicinal fountains, as this, simple
water does far surpass and exceed in quantity, whatsoever is therewith
intermixed; by whose coldness it comes to pass, that the contrary is
scarce, or hardly perceived. For example, take one proportion of any boiling
liquor to 100. or more, of the same cold, and you will hardly find in it any
heat at all. Suppose then vitrioll to be hot in the third degree, it does not
therefore follow, that the water, which has his virtue chiefly from it, should
heat in the same degree. This is plainly manifest not only in this fountain,
but also in all others, which have an acide taste, being indeed rather cold,
then hot, for the reasons above mentioned.

CHAP. 10.
Of the effects, which this fountain works, and produces in those, who
drink of it.
EXperience shows sufficiently, besides reason, that this water first, and in
the beginning cools such, as use it: But being continued, it heateth and
dries; and this for the most part it does in all, yet not always. For (as we
shall more fully declare afterward) it effects cures of opposite, and quite
contrary natures, by the second and third qualities, wherewith it is endowed;
curing diseases both hot, cold, dry, and moist.

Those waters (says- Renodaeus) which are replenished with a vitrioline
quality, as those at the Spaw, do presently heal, and (as it were)
miraculously cure diseases, which are without all hope of recovery; having that
notable power, and faculty from vitrioll; by the virtue and efficacy whereof,
they pass through the meanders, turnings, and windings of all parts of the
whole body. Whatsoever is hurtful, or endammageth it, that they sweep and
carry away: what is profitable and commodious, they touch not, nor hurt: that,
which is flaccid, and loose, they bind and fasten: that, which is fastened, and
strictly tied, they loose: what is too gross and thick, they incide,
dissolve, attenuate, and expel.

More particularly, the water of this fountain has an incisiue and abstersive
faculty to cut, and loosen the viscous and clammy humors of the body, and to
make meable the gross: as also by its piercing and penetrating power, subtilty
of parts, and by his deterging and desiccatiue qualities to open all the
obstructions, or oppilations of the mesentery (from whence the seeds of most
diseases do arise and spring) liver, splen, kidneis, and other interior
parts, and (which is more to be noted and observed) to cool, and contemperate
their unnatural heat, helping, and removing also all the griefs and
infirmities depending thereupon.

Besides all this, it comfort the stomach by the astriction it has from
other minerals, especially iron, so that (without doubt) of a thousand, who
shall use it discreetly and with good advice (their bodies first being well and
orderly prepared by some learned and skillful Physician, according to the
states thereof, and as their infirmities shall require) there will scarcely be
any one found who shall not receive great profit thereby.

Moreover, it cleanses, and purifieth the whole mass of blood contained in the
veins, by purging it from the seresity peccant, and from choleric,
phlegmatic, and melancholic humors; and that principally by urine, which
passes through the body very clear, and in great quantity, leaving behind it
the mineral forces, and virtues.

Their stools, who drink of it, are commonly of a blackish, or dark green
color, partly because it emptieth the liver and splen from adust humors, and
melancholy, or the sediment of blood; but more especially, because the
mineralls intermixed do produce and give such a tincture.

CHAP. 11.
In what diseases the water of this Fountain is most useful and beneficial.
OVer and besides the peculiar and specificall faculties, which this fountain
has, it shows diverse and sundry other manifest effects and qualities in
euacuating the noxious humors of the body, for most part by urine, especially
when there is any obstruction about the kidneyes, vreters and bladder: Or by
urine and stool both, if the mesentery, liver, or splen, chance to be
obstructed. But, if the affect or grief be in the matrix or womb, then it
cleanses that way according to the accustomed and usual manner of women.

In melancholicke people it purges by provoking the haemorrhoides, and in
choleric by siege, or stool. If it causes either vomit or sweat, it is very
seldom and rare.

See here a most admirable work guided by the omnipotency and wisdom of the
Almighty, that a natural, clear, and pure water, should produce so many and
several effects and operations, being all of them in a manner contrary one to
another, which few medicines composed by art can easily perform without hurt
and damage to the party. Wherefore being drunk with those cautions and
circumstances necessarily required thereunto, it is to be preferred before many
other remedies, as not only procuring these euacuations; but also (which is
more to be noted) staying them, when they grow to any excess. For seeing that
here are minerals contained both hot, cold, dry, aperitiue, astringent, etc.
there is none so simple but must needs think and grant, that it cannot
otherwise be but good and wholesome in grieuances, and diseases, which in
their own natures are opposite.

But I may instance in some few, for which it is good and profitable, and
therein observe some order and method; It dries the over moist brain, and
helps the evils proceeding therefrom, as rhumes, catarrhs, palsies, cramps,
etc.

It is also good and available against inueterate headaches, migrims,
turnings, and swimmings of the head and brain, dizzinesse, epilepsie, or
falling sickness, and the like cold and moist diseases of the head.

It cheereth and reuiueth the spirits, strengthens the stomach, causes a
good and quick appetite, and furthereth digestion.

It helps the black and yellow Iaundisse, and the evil, which is
accompanied with strange fear and excessive sadness without any evident
occasion, or necessary cause, called Melancholia Hypochondriaca. Likewise the
cachexy, or evil habit of the body, and the dropsy in the beginning thereof,
before it be too far gone. For besides that it opens obstructions, it
expels the redundant water contained in the belly, and contemperateth the
unnatural heat of the liver.

It cools the kidneyes or reins, and drives forth sand, gravel, and stones
out of them, and also hinders the increase or breeding of any new, by the
concretion, and saudering of gravel, bred of a viscous and clammy humor, or
substance. The same it performs to the bladder, for which it is also very
beneficial, if it chance to have any evil disposition either in the cauity
thereof, or in the neck of it, and shutting muscle called Sphincter, whereby
the whole part, or member is let and hindered in his office and function.

Moreover, if there chance to be any ulcer in the parts last specified, or any
sore, or fistula in perinaeo through an impostume ill cured, this water is a
good remedy for it, in regard of its clensing, cicatrizing and constringing
power, and virtue; and for that cause it is very proper and commodious for the
acrimony and sharpness of urine, and against the stopping and suppression of
urine, difficulty of making water, and the strangury.

Although it is very available against the stone in the kidneyes, and against
the breeding, and increase of any new there; yea, and against little ones, that
are loose in the bladder; yet notwithstanding it will afford little or small
benefit to those, in whom it is grown to be very great and big in the
bladder: Because nothing will then serve to break it, as Brassauolus says,
but a Smiths anuile and hammar. Nevertheless, if in this case incision be
used, it will be very commodious both for mundifying and consolidating the
wound, made for the extraction of it.

It shall not be needful to speak much of the profit, which will ensue by
the fit administration of it in the inveterat venereous Gonorrhaea, causing it
to cease and stay totally, and correcting the distemper, and the evil vlcerous
disposition of the seed vessels, and the vicine parts.

There are very few infirmities properly incident to women, which this water
may not seem to respect much. The use whereof, after the advice and council
had of the learned Physician, for the well and orderly preparing their bodies,
is singular good against the green sickness, and also very commodious and
behoouefull to procure their monthly euacuations, as also to stay their over
much flowing; as well to correct, as to stay their white floods; as well to dry
the womb being too moist, as to heat it being too cold, through which causes
and distempers conception (for the most part) is let and hindered in cold
Northern Countries, as England, and the like. For by the help of it these
distempers are changed and altered, the superfluous humidities and mucosities
are taken away, the part is corroborated, and the retentiue virtue is
strengthened.

This has been so much, and so often observed at the ancient Spaw, that it
cannot otherwise, but be also verified at this in after times, when it shall
be frequented (as those have been) with the company of Ladies, and
Gentlewomen: Diverse whereof, having been formerly barren for the space of ten,
twelve years, or more, and drinking of those waters for curing and helping some
other infirmities, then for want of fruitfulness, have shortly conceived after
their return home to their husbands, beyond their hopes and expectations.

Besides all this, it is good for those women, who, though otherwise apt enough
to conceive, yet by reason of the too much lubricity of their wombes, are prone
to miscarry and abort, if before conception they shall use it with those
cautions and directions requisite.

Also it respects very much the hard scirrhous and cancarous tumors, and the
grievous soars, and dangerous ulcers of the matrix All these excellent helps
and many more it performs to women with more speedy success, if it be also
received by iniection. But here by the way, all such women, who are with child,
are to be admonished, that they forbear to use it during that time.

In children it kills and expels the worms of the guts and belly, and
lets and hinders the breeding and new increase of any more.

I will here forbear to write any thing of the benefits which it affords
against old and inueterate itches, morphewes, leprosies, etc. in regard the
other three sulphurous fountains, before mentioned, do more properly respect
such like grieuances. Neither will I now spend any more time in showing what
virtues it has in the cure of the Indian, commonly called the French; or
rather Spanish disease: because experience has found out a more certain and
sure remedy against it.

CHAP. 12.
Of the necessity of preparing the body before the use of this water.
IT is not in most things the bare and naked knowledge or contemplation of
them, that makes them profitable to us; but rather their right use, and
opportune and fit administration. Medicines are not said to be Deorum manus,
that is, the hands of the Gods, (as Herophilus calls them) or Deorum dona;
that is, the gifts of the Gods (as Hippocrates believed) till they be fitly
applied and seasonably administered by the counsel and advice of the learned
and skillful Physician, according to the true rules, and method of Art.

Temporibus medicina valet, data tempore prosunt,
Et data non apto tempore vina nocent.
That is, Medicines avail in their due times,
And profit is got by drinking wines
In timely sort; but in all reason
They do offend, drunk out of season.


Therefore to know the original mineralls, faculties, and virtues of this
worthy acide fountain, will be to no end, or to small purpose for them, who
understand not the right and true use, nor the fit and orderly administration
of it. For not only Physic or medicines, but also meats, and drinks taken
disorderly, out of due time and without measure, brings oftentimes detriment
to the party; who otherwise might receive comfort and strength thereby: So
likewise this water, if it be not drunk at a convenient time and season, in
due fashion and proportion, yea, and that after preparatiues and requisite
purging and euacuation of the body, may easily (...) hurt those, whose
infirmities otherwise it does principally respect. For medicines ought not to
be taken rashly, and unadvisedly, as most do hand over head without any
consideration of time, place, and other circumstances; as that ignorant man
did, who getting the recipt of that medicine, wherewith formerly he had been
cured, made trial of it again long after for the same infirmity without any
help or good at all; whereat greatly maruailing, received this answer from his
Physician: I confess (said he) it was the self same medicine, but because I
did not give it, therefore it did you no good.

To the end therefore, that no occasion may hereafter be either given, or taken
by the misgouernement, or ouerrashnesse of any in using it to calumniate and
traduce the worth, and goodness of this fountain, I will briefly here show,
what course is chiefly to be followed and observed by those who shall stand in
need of it.

First then, because very few men are thoroughly and sufficiently informed
concerning the natures, and causes of their grieuances, it will be necessary
that every one should apply himself to some one, or other, who either out of
his judgment, or experience, or both, may truly be able to give him counsel
and good advice concerning the conueniency of this fountain. And if he shall
be auised to use it, then let the party (in the fear of God) address himself
for his way to it, against the fit season of it, without making any long and
tedious days iourneys, which cause lassitude, and weariness.

Then, being come to the place, he ought after a days rest, or two, to have
his body well prepared, and gently cleansed with easy lenitiues, or purgatiues,
both fit, and appropriate, as well to the habit and constitution thereof, as
also for the disease it self, and as occasion shall require, according to the
rule of method, which teaches that universal or general remedies ought ever
to precede and go before particula^^. Now what these are in special, to fit
every ones case in particular, is impossible either for me here, or any else to
define precisely. Ars non versatur circa indiuidua. We may see it true in
mechanical trades. No one shoemaker can fit all by one Last: nor any one
tailor can suite all by one, and the self same measure.

Yet in regard it may perhaps be expected that something should be said
herein, I say, that in the beginning (if occasion serve) some easy Clyster may
very fitly be given, as well for emptying the lower intestines from their
usual excrements, as for carrying away and clensing the mucose slimes contained
therein. After that, it will be convenient to prepare the body by some Iulep or
Apozeme, or to give some lenitiue medicine to free the first region of the body
from excrements. For otherwise the water might peradventure convey some part of
them, or other pecca^t matter, which it finds in his passage either into the
bladder, or to some other weak, and infirm member of the body, to the
increase of that evil disposition, which is to be removed, or else to the
breeding of some other new infirmity.

Object.
Some perhaps will here object and say, that the time of the year, in which
this fountain will be found to be most useful, will be the hottest season
thereof; or (if you list so to call it) the dog-daies, when it will be no fit
time to purge at all.

Answ. 1.
To this I answer and say: First, the purging medicines here required are not
strong, and generous, but gentle, mild and weak, such as are styled Benedicta
medicamenta: which may with great safety and profit be given either then or
at any other time of the year without any danger, or respect of any such like
like circumstance at all.

2.
Secondly I answer; Although this observation of the dog-dayes might perhaps be
of some moment in hotter countries, as Greece, where Hippocrates lived, who
first made mention of those days: Yet in colder climates, as England, and such
like Countries, they are of little or small force at all, and almost not to be
regarded any whit, either in using mild and temperate purgatiues, or almost in
any other; or in blood-letting: though very many, or most do erroniously say
and think the contrary. So that (if there be cause) they may as well and
safely then purge, as at any other time: Or, if occasion shall urge, as in
plethoricall bodies, and many other cases, a vein may safely (or rather most
commodiously) be then opened, and so much blood taken away, as the skillful
Physician shall think in his discretion and wisdom to be needful and
requisite.

Let no man here think, that this is any strange position, or a new paradoxe
(for the learned know the contrary) or that I am studious of innovation, but
rather desirous to root out an old and inueterate error, which in all
probability has cost more English men's lives, then would furnish a royal
army, in neglecting those two greater helps or remedies, to wit, Purging, and
Blood-letting in hot seasons of the year; which in all likelihood might have
saved many of their lives, while expecting more temperate weather, they have
been summoned in the mean time, or interim, by the messenger of pale death to
appear in an other world.

Wherefore let all those who are yet living, be admonished hereafter by their
examples, not obstinately and wilfully to eschew and shun these two remedies
in hot seasons, and in the time of the Dog-dayes, (much less all other manner
of physical helps) not once knowing so much as why, or wherefore, and without
any reason at all, following blind and superstitious tradition, and error,
happily first broched by some unworthy and ignorant Physician, not rightly
understanding Hippocrates his saying in all likelihood, or at least wise
misapplying it. Which has so prevailed in these times, that it has not only
worn out the use of purging, but also of all other physic for that season,
because most people by the name of physic understanding purging only, and
nothing else. As though the art and science of Physic was nothing else, but
to give a potion or purge. Then we rightly and truly might say, Filia deuorauit
matrem.

But for as much as most people are altogether ignorant of the true ground or
reason, from whence this so dangerous an error concerning the Dog-dayes did
first spring and arise, give me leave a little to go on with this my
digression, for their better instruction, and satisfaction; and I will briefly,
and in few lines show the case, and the mistake somewhat more plainly.

Hippocrates in his fourth book of Aphorisms, the fifth, has these words: Sub
canicula, and ante caniculam difficiles sunt purgationes. That is, under the
canicular, or dog star, and before the dog star, purgations are painful and
difficill. This is all that is there said of them, or brought against them for
that season, or time of the year. A great stumbling-blocke, against which many
have dashed their feet, and knocked their shinnes, and a fearful scar-crow,
whereat too many have nicely boggled. Here you do not find or see purging
medicines to be then prohibited, or forbidden to be given at all (much less
all other physic) but only said to be difficill in their working: partly
because (as all expositors agree) nature is then somewhat enfeebled by the
great heat of the weather; partly because the humors being then, as it were,
accended, are more chaffed by the heat of the purging medicines; partly, and
lastly, because two contrary motions seem then to be at one and the same time,
which may offend nature; as the great heat of the weather leading the humors
of the body outwardly to the circumference thereof, and the medicine drawing
them inwardly to the center. All which circumstances in our cold region are
little, or nothing at all (as formerly has been mentioned) to be regarded.
For as Iacobus Hollerius, a French Physician, much honored for his great
learning and judgment, has very well observed in his Comment upon this
Aphorism; Hippocrates speaks here only of those purging medicines, which
are strong, and vehement, or hot and fiery; and that this precept is to take
place in most hot Regions, but not in these cold Countries, as France, England,
and the like.

Over and beside all this, those churlish hot purging medicines, which were
then in frequent use in Hippocrates his time, and some hundred of years after,
are now for most part obsolete, and quite grown out of use, seldom brought in
practice by Physicians in these days; because we have within these last six
hundred years great choice and variety of more mild, benign, and gentle
purgatiues found out by the Arabian Physicians, which were altogether unknown
unto the ancients, to wit, Hippocrates, Dioscorides, Galen, etc. which have
little heat, and acrimony, many whereof are temperate, and diverse cooling, which
may most safely be given either in the hottest times and seasons of the year,
or in the hottest diseases. Let us add to these the like familiar and gentle
purging medicines more lately, yea, almost daily newly found out since the
better discoueries of the East and West Indies. So that henceforth let no man
fear to take either easy purgatiues, or other inward Physic, in the time of
the canicular, or dog-dayes.

The same Hollerius goes on in the exposition and interpretation of the said
Aphorism, and confidently says: Over and besides that we have benign
medicines, which we may then use, as Cassia, etc. We know and find by
experience no time here with us more wholesome and more temperat (especially
when the Etesian, or Easterly winds do blow) then the Canicular days: so that,
we find by observation, that those diseases which are bred in the months of
June and July, do end in August, and in the Canicular days. Wherefore, if a
disease happen in those days, we fear not to open a vein diverse times, and
often, as also to prescribe more strong purging medicines.

Wherefore away henceforth with the scrupulous conceit, and too nice fear of
the Dogge-dayes, and let their supposed danger be had no more in remembrance
among us. And if any will yet remain obstinate, and still refuse to have their
beams pulled out of their eyes, let them still be blind in the midst of the
clear Sunshine, and groape on after darkness: and let all learned Physicians
rather pity their follies, then envy their wits.

CHAP. 13.
At what time of the year, and at what hour of the day it is most fit and
meet to drink this water.
TO speak in general terms, it is a fit time to drink it, when the air is
pure, clear, hot and dry: for then the water is more tart, and more easily
digested, then at other times. On the contrary, it is best to forbear, when
the air is cold, moist, dark, dull and misty: for then it is more feeble, and
harder to be concocted.

But more specially, the most proper season to undertake this our English Spaw
diet, will be from the midst or latter end of June to the middle of
September, or longer, according as the season of the year shall fall out to be
hot and dry, or otherwise.

Not that in the Spring time, and in Winter it is not also good, but for that
the air being more pure in Summer, the water also must needs be of greater
force and power. Notwithstanding it may sometime so happen in Summer, that by
reason of some extraordinary falling of rain, there may be a cessation from it
for a day or two. Or if it chance to have rained over night, it will then be
fit and necessary to refrain from drinking of it, until the rain be passed
away again: or else (which I like better) the fountain laded dry, and filled
again, which may well be done in an hour, or two at most.

Touching the time of the day, when it is best to drink this water,
questionless the most convenient hour will be in the morning, when the party
is empty, and fasting, about seven aclocke: Nature having first discharged her
self of daily excrements both by stool and urine, and the concoctions
perfected. This time is likewise fittest for exercise, which is a great good
help, and furtherance for the better distribution of the water, whereby it does
produce its effects more speedily.

CHAP. 14.
Of the manner of drinking this water, and the quantity thereof.
THose who desire the benefit of this Fountain, ought to go to it some what
early in the morning, and, if they be able and strong of body, they may do
very well to walk to it on foot, or at least wise some part of the way. Such,
as have weak and feeble legs may ride on horseback, or be carried in coaches,
or borne in chaires. As for those, whose infirmities cause them to keep their
beds, or chambers, they may drink the water in their lodgings, it being
speedily brought to them in a vessel or glass well stopped.

It is not my meaning or purpose to describe here particularly, what quantity
of it is fit and meet for every one to drink: for this is part of the task
and office, which belongs to the Physician, who shall be of counsel with the
Patient in preparing and well ordering of him: who is to consider all the
several circumstances, as well of the malady or disease it self, as of his
habit and constitution, etc. Nevertheless I may advise, that at the first it
be moderately taken, increasing the quantity daily by degrees, until they
shall come at last to the full height of the proportion appointed, and thought
to be meet and necessary. There they are then to stay, and so to continue at
that quantity, so long as it shall be needful. For example, the first morning
may happily be 16 or 18 ounces, and so on by degrees to 20. 30. 40. 50. 60. or
more, in people, who are of good and strong constitutions. Toward the ending,
the abatement ought likewise to be made by degrees, as the increment was
formerly made by little and little.

Here by the way every one must be admonished to take notice, that it is not
always best to drink most, lest they chance to oppress and ouercharge
Nature, that would rather be content with less. It will therefore be more
safe, to take it rather somewhat sparingly, though for a longer time, then
liberally and for a short time. But, indeed, the truest and iustest proportion
of it, is ever to be made and esteemed, by the good and laudable concoction of
it, and by the due and orderly voiding of it again.

It will not be here amiss to add this one observation further: That it is
better to drink this water once a day, then twice, and that in the mornings,
after that the Sun has dried up and consumed the vapors retained through the
coldness of the night, etc. as is formerly declared. After drinking it, it
will be needful to abstain from meat and other drink for the space of three
or four days.

But if any one, who has a good stomach, shall be desirous to take it twice a
day; or if any shall be necessarily compelled so to do for some urgent cause,
by the approbation of his Physician, let him dine somewhat sparingly, and
drink it not again, until five hours after dinner be past, or not until
the concoction of meat and drink in the stomach be perfected: Observing
likewise, that he content himself in the afternoones with almost half the
quantity he uses to take in the mornings.

CHAP. 15.
Of the manner of dies to be observed by those, who shall use this water.
THe regiment of life in meats and drinks, ought chiefly to consist in the
right and moderate use of those, which are of light and easy digestion, and of
good and wholesome nourishment, breeding laudable juice. Therefore all those
are to be avoided, which beget crude and ill humors. There ought furthermore
special notice to be taken, that great diversity of meats and dishes at one
meal is very hurtful, as also much condiments, sauces, spice, fat, etc. in
their dressing and cookery.

I commend hens, capons, pullets, chickens, partridge, phesants, turkies, and
generally all such small birds, as live in woods, hedges, and mountains.
Likewise I do approve of veale, mutton, kid, lamb, rabbets young hare or
leuerits, etc. All which (for the most part) are rather to be roasted then
boiled. Nevertheless those, who are affected with any dry distemper, or those,
who otherwise are so accustomed to feed, may have their meats sodden; but the
plainer dressing, the better.

I discommend all salt meats, beef, bacon, porke, larde, and larded meats,
hare, venison, tripes, and the entrails of beasts, puddings made with blood,
pig, goose, swan, teale, mallard, and such like; and in general all
water-Fowle, as being of hard digestion and ill nutriment.

Amongst the several kinds of fishes, trouts, pearches, loaches, and for most
part, all scaly fish of brooks, and fresh rivers may well be permitted.
Moreover smelts, soales, dabs, whitings, sturbuts, gurnets, and all such other,
as are well known not to be ill, or unwholesome to feed on. All which may be
altered with mint, hyssope, anise, etc. Also cre-fishes, crab-fish, lobsters,
and the like, may be permitted.

Cunger, salmon, eeles, lampries, herrings, salt-ling, all salt-fish, sturgion,
anchouies, oysters, cockles, muscles, and the like shellfish are to be
disallowed.

White-meats, as milk, cruds, cream, old cheese, custards, white-pots,
pudding-pyes, and other like milkemeats, (except sweet butter, and new cream
cheese) are to be forbidden. Soft and rear eggs we do not prohibit.

Raisons with almonds, bisket-bread, marchpane-stuffe, suckets, and the like,
are not here forbidden to be eaten.

Let their bread be made of wheat, very well wrought, fermented or leauened;
and let their drink be beer well boiled and brewed; and let it be stale, or
old enough, but in no wise tart, sharp, or sower: And above all let them
forbear to mix the water of the fountain with their drink at meals; for
that may cause many inconveniences to follow, and ensue.

Let me advise them to eschew apples, pears, plumbs, codlings, gooseberries,
and all such like summer fruits, either raw, in tarts, or otherwise: Also
pease, and all other pulse; all cold sallets, and raw herbs; onions, leekes,
chiues, cabbage or coleworts, pompons, cucumbers, and the like.

In stead of cheese at the end of meals, it will not be amiss to eat
citron, or lemon pills condited, or else fenell, anise, coriander comfits, or
biskets and carawayes, as well for to discuss and expel wind, as to shut and
close the stomach, for the better furthering the digestion of meats, and
drinks. And for that purpose, it would be much better, if the Physician, who
is of counsel, should appoint and ordain some fit and proper Tragea in gross
powder mixed with sugar, or else made into little cakes or morsels. Likewise
marmalade of quinces, either simple or compound, (such as the Physicians do
often prescribe to their patients) may be used very commodiously.

After dinner they ought to use no violent exercise, neither ought they to sit
still, sadly, heavy, and musing, nor to slumber, and sleep; but rather to
stir a little, and to raise up the spirits for an hour or two, by some fit
recreation. After supper they may take a walk into the fields, or Castle yard.

CHAP. 16.
Of the Symptoms or accidents, which may now and then chance to happen to some
one or other in the use of this water.
ALthough those who are of good and strong constitutions, observing the
aforenamed direction, do seldom or never receive any hurme, or detriment by
drinking this water: notwithstanding it may sometime so fall forth, that some
of the weaker sort may perhaps observe some little, or small inconvenience
thereby, as retention of it in the body: inflation of the belly: costiuenesse,
and the like. Wherefore to gratify those, a word two of every one shall
suffice.

First then, for to cause a more ready and speedy passage of it by urine, it
will not be amiss to counsel the party after his return to his lodging to
go to his naked bed for an hour or two, that thereby warmness, and natural
heat may be brought into each part of the body, the passages more opened, and
nature by that means made more fit and apt for the expulsion of it. During
which time it will be very requisite to apply hot clothes to the stomach: but
not so as to provoke sweat. Or else, to cause it to void and evacuate either by
urine, stool, or sweat, exercise will be a good help and furtherance; if the
party be fit for it. But if neither of these will prevail, then a sharp
glyster ought to be administered.

The inflation or swelling of the belly happens principally to those, who have
feeble and weak stomachs; who may do very well to eat anise, fenell, or
coriander comfits at the fountain between every draught, and to walk a
little after; or else some carminatiue Lozenges, made with grossepowders,
spices and seeds for breaking of wind: or what other thing the learned
Physician shall deem to be most fit and proper in his wisdom, and judgment.
But if the inflation chance to be very great, then a carminatine glyster must
be ordained.

Such as shall be very costiue may do well to eat moistning meats, and to use
mollifying herbs, raisons stoned, corants, damascene prunes, butter, or the
yolks of eggs, and the like in their broths, or pottage. If these will not be
sufficient, then let a day be spared from drinking the water, and let the party
take some lenitiue medicine, as laxatiue corants, or some such like thing;
whereof the Physician has ever great choice and variety, wherewith he can fit
directly every one his case; to whom present recourse ever ought to be had,
when any of these, or the like accidents do happen, as likewise in all other
cases of weight and moment.

FINIS.

