A declaracion of the Seremonies a nexid, to the Sacrament of Baptyme, what
they sygnyffie and how we owght to understand them (:) 1537.

When a christian mannis child is born^ into this world it is brought to
church and.iii. witnesses comyth with, him that is God fader and godmother and
wha^ they be a greed what name shall be to ye child, tha^ ye pressed makyth a sign
of the cross i^ ye forhed of the child and seyth thus. A toke^ of the holy
cross of our lord. Jesus christ I set in thy forhed and so at ye breast in lyk
manner, and tha^ ye pressed seith many orisons over the child comaundynge the
deuel to knolech his sentense and give worshipe to the living god and true
and to Jesus christ and to the holy ghost and depart from this servant of god
and than he puttyth salt in to ye mouth of the child and seith thus ^a^^. Thou
salt of wysdom yt god be merciful to the in to everlasting life. Ame^. This
salt of wysdom understand gods word which should be learned in the mouth of
ye child when it begins to speak as the Apostel seith be our word sauord
with salt evermore in grace than ye pressed weetyth his tho^be i^ spotil and
touchith ye chyldes eere and seith. Be thou opened yt is understand in all
thy five wittys to here and speak ye word of god with love and dread and holy
devotion. For the Judgment of god shall touch in which we should yield
acount of every ydel word also the pressed touches ye nose thrylles of ye child
for it should smylle ye odor of swetnes of heavenly thyngis, more than every
ertly things. Sone after this the pressed biddith all the people yt there be, to
seye a. Pater noster and an. Aue and a. Credo bysekyng god that the child may
rightfully take his christendom, and well keep it to ye endyng of his life. And
thanne the pressed takyth the child by the right hand and callyth his name and
seyth come thou in to the temple of god that thou may have everlasting life and
live i^ to world of worldis. Amen. Thanne the child is brought to the font
and the pressed callyth it by name and seyth. Abranuucio satane and omnibus
operibus eius et omnibus pompis eius that is. I for sake satanas that is the
devil and all his werkis and all his pompis or prydes and ye godsibbis says.
Abranuncio that is I for sake Therefore where he is not a falls christen man that
kepith not the covenant of these wordis but after ward wrappyth him in the
fendis pride in heart and i^ clothyng and in wicked worckynge for if this
covenant should be trewly kept, all the tokenes of pride i^ man must be don a
way seeing each token of pride, is a pomp of the fend. After seyth the pressed
to the child by leuest thou in god the fader almyhgty maker of he uene and
earth The child is dombe and may not speak but and yt were of age and might
speak yt should a^swere for it self therefore ye godsibbis answer seeing. Credo.
that I believe. Efte axith ye pressed, and beleuest thou i^ Jesus christ his only
sone our lord born and sufferd and they say I believe. The thride time areth
the pressed. And beleuest thou in the holy ghost in holy church faith in
communion of saints for geuenes of sins the rysyng of flesh and after the
ever lasting life. And they say I believe tha^ says ye pressed. Quid petis what
axist thou they sey baptim would thou be baptized seth ye pressed and they say,
Volo I wole than the pressed takyth the child and says. I Baptize the in ye
name of the father and of the sone and of ye holy ghost Amen. And so he
plungyth it in the water and commaundyth the gossipis to ley ho^d on ye chyldes
heed for they ben witnesses of his Baptim and receue ye charge to teach it and
ye trewthe of his believe yt is ye co^mau^dementis and the domes of god, and to
flee the pompis and prydes of the fend, for the comen people and all men should
know and keep the co^maundementis of god. And prestis his holy counseyles. And
Lordis his just domes, and if they do not this: they be wrongfully called
christen men. And thus blind prestis bear falls witnesses of young children
christened, that after ward serve ye deuel whom they for look seying
Abronuncio After these thyngis the pressed a noyntyth ye child with oil and
lappyd in his crisome and takith yt a candele brinnyng in his hond, and seyth.
Accipe lampadem ardentem irriprehensibilem custodi Baptysmum tuum serua mandata
vt cu^venit dominus ad nuptias possis occurrere ei vna cum sanctis in aula
celestis vt habeas vita^ eternam et viuas in secula seculorum. Ame^. That is to
sey. Have thou a bre^nynge lamp unreprovable. Keep thou thy baptym and keep
thou ye co^mau^dementis that wha^ the Lord comes to the weddyngis thou may
run agenst him as one with seyntis in ye heavenly halle yt thou have ever
lasting life and live i^ to ye world of worlds. am^ Here endith ye reulys of
bapti^. But all christian folk should besily learn to know ye gretnes of charge
which they receue i^ there baptym. For with.iiii. thyngis we be chargyd in our
Bapti^ al though blind prestis know yt not, when they give to us iiii.
Elamentis in tokenyng of the^, that is salt, and water, and oil, and fire. The
first charge is that we take salt of wysdom of gods word and rewle our life
there after and salt our souls that they stynk not in sin. For and this
heavenly salt fail fro men they should be cast out as christ techyth in the
gospel. The.ii. charge is, that our eeris be opened ever more ready to here
christ's gospel and understand yt. For christ seyth. He that has eerys of
herynge, Let him here and he yt redyth let him understand. The iii. charge is
this that we keep our Baptym that is ye covenant of our Baptym and true believe
in the father and the sone and the holy ghost as the pressed apposith us when we
say. Credo. The.iiii. charge is this that we keep the commaundementis of god,
as the pressed commau^dith us at ye font puttyng a candel bre^nynge in our hand,
for as a candille brennynge is wastyd by fire: so sins in our soul should be
wastyd and destroyed with keeping of the commaundementis of god, having devout
love to him and to our even christen. And this is the second Baptym, that
saint John. techyth when he says I Baptyse in water but a another shall come
after me strongir than I and he shall Baptyse you in the holy ghost and fire
and with out this second. Baptym may no man be saved, as christ seyde to
Nichodeme truly I say to the: But a man be born a gen of water and of the holy
ghost he may not enter in to the Kingdom of god. Also Paul techyth that the
first Baptym in water only, makyth us not saef, But the axinge of a good
conscience i^ god and faith not feigned ye believe yt worckyth by charity for
christ says. He that beleuyth in me flodis of quyk water should flow fro his
womb that is the holy ghost that christ callyth the co^fortour, which flowyth
ever in to the hertis of meke men that make them ready to die, for that man that
shall dwell by fore the blessed face of god in heuene, shall receue ye ernest
of the holy ghost here in earth. And this is the second Baptym that fleshely
prestis and swynysh people knowyth not, for there hertis be stoppyd with fleshly
lust, that the flodis of the holy ghost may not enter in to them, and therefore
prestis be i^ perel that teach not the secounde Baptym. For yt sufficyth not to
salvation of man to wayshe his body in water of Baptym and suffer his soul to
stynk in sin through brekyng of the commau^deme^tis of god, for thus prestis
read in the holy Psalm. Increpasti superbos maledicti qui declinant a ma^datis
tuis, That is to seye thou blamest the proud they be a cursyd that bow a wey
fro thyn hestis. And thus god shall blame proud prestis for they pursewe power
men for the learning of the commaundementis the which they charge them to keep
in the our of there. Baptym and all that bear the name of christen men should
cry agenst this error For what error is more vile in ye sight of god than to
byende men to alawe and afterward pursue them for the same law and thus for
dread of euel prestis men dar not keep chrystis heestis and the ghostly birth
of our mother holy church is despised of proud men that know not the bond of
there Baptym. Ame^.

FINIS.



