PENNY-VVIS^ POVND FOOLISH* Or, a BRISTOVV Diamond, set in t^^ Rings, and both
Cracked.

Profitable for Married men, pleasant for young men, a(...) rare example for
all good Women.



At London Printed by A. M. for Edward Blackmore, and are to (...) sold in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Augell. 1631.

To the Reader.
THe Title of this Book is Printed in many a man's face. Some walk early into
the Fields to Gleane Ears of Corn, who before the Harvest of their Wit was
in, scattered abroad whole Sheaffes. Wealth is not regarded till we come to
Beggerie; Beauty an enticing Bauin-fire to warm fools, and not set by, when
it is out. Nay, life it self knows not her own precious value, till Sickness
lays it in the Balance.

How many Courtiers may here see their pictures? How many brave Soldiers? How
many Citizens? How many Contrymen? All which, were drunk^ with pleasures,
when they swumme in the full Sea of them; but now at a low ebb, count a glass
of cold water more wholesome, than Healthes in Canarie before. The lavish, and
sla^ish, spending of pounds, begets but sorrow; the True saving of a Penny,
buys Wisdom.

In these few papers is the Map of the whole world; London, Bristow, and
Venice, are (here) the Figures of all other Cities. In all other Cities are
Curtizans; and all Curtizans, have Idolatrous fools to Adore them. The
Discourse is hid, (like our Ladies heads in Taffatie purse-nets) under the
Masks of Ferdinand and Annabell. Their Lives and their Loves are enclosed in
this Nut-shell: Which, if you Crack, without hurting your Teeth, the Kernel is
sweet in the Chewing. The Apples plucked from this little Tree, may serve to
turn in the Fire, in your Christmasse Nights, and not much amiss all the
Winter after. So fall to, and farewell.

The Excellent worth of a Penny.
A Penny is a small piece of Silver, and therefore soonest spent: a Penny is a
very faithful Messenger, and the best errand it goes upon, is when a Rich man
sends his commendations by it to a Beggar. The Rich-man gives, and the
Poore-man takes; no, the Poore-man gives, and the Rich-man takes, for the
Prayers of the Poor, increase the blessings of the Rich. Poor Penny, how much
good therefore art thou able to do; nay, how much good do thou daily and
hourly, when those that are thy betters, and a thousand times beyond thee in
substance and estate, will not part from a far^^hing. A Penny is the Doale for
which a wretched creature cries, Good Master bestow a Penny upon me: he does
not beg Twopence, but a Penny, a single Penny. A Penny will content a Carier,
when a pound will not satisfy a Curmudgeon.

Land in old times no doubt was sold good cheap, for men used to say, They
bought it with their Penny: But in these days the case is altered (quoth
Ployden;) Law has raught Land-buyers (...) speak another Language. A Penny
had wont to pay for a Pot of happy Ale: but now a Pot of Al^ defies the company
of a Penny. And yet for all this, a Penny will be a brave companion still: old
men love it, and are therefore called Penny-Fathers: Tradesmen love it, for
they cry, Take it for a Pennymore. Watermen love it, for they ask but a Penny
to cross the Water, and when a man has not a Penny in his purse, then he
swears he has not one cross about him. So that as a Penny is the least
Cross that a man can carry, there can be no greater cross than for a man to
go without a Penny. A Black Wench, if she be Pennywhite, passes for current
money, where a Fair Wench that has no pence, shall be nailed up for a
counter^et.

A Penny then being in such extraordinary request, for the general good it
does to so many, how much more ought we to make of it, when for a Penny a man
may buy Wit? That Market does now begin; And how much Wit a Merchant had for so
small a piece of Silver, lend your Attention, and the History of that
Penny-bargain, shall be worth at lest twopence to any man that hears it.

Penny-wise, Pound-foolish: Or a Bristow Diamond set in two Rings, and both
cracked.
IN the City of Bristow, not much above two twelu^ months past, did live a
Merchant in the bra^ery of his youth, in the height of full fortunes, and in
the excellency of all perfection, both for a ^^mely proportion of body, and
unmatchable ornaments of mind. He had all those things, which in this world
make a man to be counted happy, and wanted none of those, the lack of which
teach men to believe they are miserable. One only Blessing was absent, whose
possession would have set a Crown upon all the other, And that was the marriage
of some delicate fair young woman, to so wealthy and hansome a young man.

This Gentleman's name will we call Ferdinand, (his true both Christian name
and surname for diverse rea^ons shall be concealed.) And albeit, he might have
had in (...) the choice of many Maidens, both answerable to himself in state
and beauty, (that City being as richly stored with fair and sweet
proportioned women as any be in the world: yet M. Ferdinand using often (by way
of Traffic in Merchandise) to repair to London, ha^pened to cast his eye on
the most beautiful face of a very worthy, and very wealthy Citizens daughter
of London, her name being Annabell, but how she was called otherwise, her
succeeding fortunes forbid me to discover.

The parents and friends of this beauteous Damozell (who was called the star
of this City, a^ well ^or her delicacie of body, as for modesty.) giving way
to a Match so suitable to their own desires, and their daughters liking,
little wooing needed, so that the marriage was not so joyfully on all sides
appointed, as it was with pompous ceremony of friends invited, Feastings,
Masks, Dancing, and Reuelling sole^^^zed. No couple through the whole City
of London, were held so happy as these beauteous pair: Ferdinand and Annabell
drew all eyes after them wheresoever they went. But it was not enough for
Ferdinand to be thus followed with praises in London; nor to have his delicate
young wife gazed at, and envied by the curious Dames of this City: No, there
was a fire of Uaine-glory in him, to have all the eyes of Bristow behold what
gallant Prize he had taken at London, nor was the beauty of his fair
Bedfellow behinde-hand with him, in the same pride and ambition. Her longings
that way were as great as his.

Their desires thus spreading the same wing, the parents and friends loath to
loose two ^uch Jewels, yet necessity snatching them from them. Away do they
hasten to Bristow. Wonder there looks upon them, Joy and ten thousand welcomes
embrace them: It was hard to tell whether the Merchants or that Town did think
him more happy in being Master of such a treasure, as so delicate a Wife, or
whether the brave Dames of that City did hold her more fortunate, in being
l^dged every night within the arms of so hansome a Husband. But Admiration
being never long-liu'd, let us after a quarter or half a years entertainment
of Mistress Annabell, amongst her Husbands friends in Bristow, leave her there,
attended upon with all those commendable glories which set forth excellent
Women, whilst we follow him back again from Bristow to London.

Whither being come and welcomed by his (...) father and kindred, Joys were
red^^bled to hear of her health, and to see his welfare. In a short time had
he^ dispatched the business, for which he came touching his Merchandise, to
finish which he made the more half, as thinking every day spent here, a
thousand years lost at home, until again he might rest in the bosom of his
beloved, but though the Sails of (...) desire and affection were spread fair,
yet the winds grew churlish, they blustred and conspired to part our two
new-married Lovers a ^under: For, the br^uery of this Bristow-Merchants mind
being observed by our Gallants here in the City, his con^linesse of person,
affability in language, and ioyalty in expenses, kindled a fire of good liking
in many, to be partners in his society. And he took as great a glory to enjoy
their appointments and meetings, as they did his.

^^uth led him on to these engagements of pleasure: New acqu^intance (which
still grew faster and faster upon hi^) begat new inuitations, those inuitations
br^ught forth new delighte, and those delights, seru^d as pull^es to draw on
fresher and larger expenses; All these serving together as ^o many h^^kes, nay
as ^o many cast Anchors, to fasten him from setting forward in his intended
voyage homeward.

In this multiplicity of acquaintance, Iollities and Ie^all meetings, Ferdinand
did often happen into the f^^miliarity of diverse Merchants Wives of Lond^^,
whose beauties (though they were excellent) and behauiours able to tempt any
man, to admire and dote upon them, yet to him they were but as colors to a
blind man the (...) of their enchanting tongues (...) to the deaf: he had (as
he thought) a brighter fearre of his own to ^ayle by: these p^inted ^^ree gave
to him n^ heat, the sunne-beames that lent wa^mth ^o him, were those which
were shot from the sparkling eyes of his most dearely-beloued Annabell.

The Fates had (...) good and even threeds for him, had they still continued
winding upon this white bottom, but then altered the Distaffe, and so drew out
his misery, and his Wives misfortune.

This constancy of his, was but a wa^ry s^nne shine; it seemed built upon a
rock, but the foundation was not sound; this Dake that stood up so high and
strong, in resolution never to be shaken with any allurements, is now in danger
to be riuen in sunder, and cleft even to the r^^e, by the lightning flying from
the eyes of a strange woman.

For one day chancing in a company of young Gallants like himself, to fall
into private discourse, with a delicate creature, rich in Attire, costly in
Jewels, ^are in the proportion both of face and body, sweet in voice, and of a
winning bewitching behavior, Ferdinane was on a ^uddaine taken prisoner by her
beauty. Her charms were strong, and he lay fast bound in them. He upon this
first com^^^ing into the field, made suite to be her servant, and she after a
few slight skirmishing words, yielded her self to be his Mistreise. The next
day, he wooed his young Mistress, that her s^ruant might be so happy, as to be
suffered to visit her at her own lodging: And she feeling what fish nibl^d at
her bayte, gave him line and leave enough to play, and told him, she was not so
unworthy as not to bid so new, and so noble a servant welcome.

The day wearing away, and the assembly in which Fer^^inand and his newfound
Lady had been merry together, being weary of their pleasures (as feasting,
dancing, drinking healthes, courting, and such like,) the Spell brake, and
dissolved those chains, which had almost a whole day bound them within this
circle. Night approached, and all parted.

Ferdinand being come home, and locking himself into his private Chamber, he
begins thus to contemplate upon the beauties, graces, and perfections of his
rare and most admired Mistress if ever man met an Angell-vpon earth, in the
shape of a woman, this is she: if ever woman was t^o worthy to be touched by
any man, this was she. Had she been borne when Idolatry was first committed,
to her only had the heathen given adoration. In fashioning her (...), or the
figure of her body in his phantacy, her eyes through the windows of his soul,
presented themselves to him like a pair of stars. Her face he called the
Masterpiece of all Art, sweetness, and proportion, to equ^ll which, nay to
come but near it in picture, it was not possible for any Painter in the world
to do it with his Pensill: Her hand he called his book of palmestry her foot
the first step to the stateliest Measure, that ever was prosecuted by Motion:
In brief, her whole body (to the eye of his imagination) appeared a Mine,
stored with treasures beyond all valuation. No Arithmetic could (...) up her
excellencies, no figures set down the hopes of that happiness which he
conceived in his unmatchable (...).

But after his cogitations had thus ^anne division on her praises, his
Understanding began to fall into another time, and his Memory to be set to this
Note, to call to mind his dear and di^consolated ^nnabell in Bristow:
presenting her therefore to his Remembrance, and the full volume of all her
Uertues, being printed in his soul, he thus brake forth into a passionate
reprehension of his new-conceiued ^olly.

And shall thy youth, thy beauty, thy integrity, modesty, and innocence (O my
dearest sweetheart) be by me forgotten? can I prove a traitor to thy pillow,
who (I ^are swear it) art most true to (...)? Must all my vows made to thee
when I w^^^d thee, all those Matrimonial obligations, which I sealed to thee
before Angels in the holy Temple, and all those protestations I left in kisses
upon thy lips, when I late and last parted from thee, must all this be
forgotten, all written in sand, and left floating on the water! O Uillaine that
I am, to fire mine eye on a Beade of worthless christ^ll, and prefer it
before the rarest Diamond in the world: this woman sure, who has made choice
of me to be her servant, is some Mermayde enticing me to run upon the
rocks of destruction: Stop then thine ears, and avoid the danger by not
listening to her enchantments. A Goddess is ready to receive thee into her
arms at home, and a painted Witch opens hers, to kill thee in her false
embraces abroad; I will not be caught by this forcerous woman, I must not, I
dare not.

At this he fetched a deep sigh, And then his soul and her entering into
conference together; Why (quoth he) though I have all the delicatest meats
standing on m^ne own table, may not I sit down at another man's (...). What
Wife is true to her Husband. Why then should any Husband be true to his Wife?
We are all borne free, why should marriage make us bondslaues? Shall the
ceremony only of a golden King, be a charm to bind me from enjoying my
pleasures? I am satisfied with a Wife, cloyed with her enioyments, my appetite
is young, and must taste varieties. The fishes in the sea are not married:
birds in the air ch^ose their U^lentines, and that is their wedding: All the
beasts upon earth have a liberty in desires to range how they will, and to take
whom they will, why then should man be made a captive to any wo^an? O my
sweetest, dearest, most delicious Mistress, I dye if I live not to do thee
service, I cannot be beaten from thee with frowns, with swords, with Death:
yes, Death only can force our separation, nothing else shall.

Having thus spent the night in these passionate perturbations, the morning
summoned him to appear before ^he Saint he so honored. Up in all have he
^^ses, and (...) to the lodging of his Mistress, who not willing to l^^^^ such
a golden Fly, as she ma^^ account this her new Bur^ing-s^ruant would (...),
was (...) her (...), with the best and surest Art she could. For ^he (...) her
(...), to make her face by painting show more excellent, which of it self was
ab^olute before: He came, and saluted, and kis^ her, and in that kiss, felt
all his blood put into a terrible burning: he saw her in bra^ery, rich as a
Que^ene, bright in Jewels as the morning-sunne, breathing from her apparel,
perfumes more precious than those which the Spring gives to the earth: he saw
her, and stood a^^onished to behold her: he saw her, and forgot that ever he
saw a Wife, to whom his eyes did owe that du^y and tribute which he paid to a
Curtizan. But she to put him out of this t^aunce, took her Lu^e, which she
touched sweetly, and sung to it more swe^tly, and by this st^iuing to awaken
him, she cast him into a deeper sleep: out of which again she startled him
by the Magic of her enticing lips, on which dwelling with a languishing
delightful pleasure, tasted, nay was so filled with sweets, that he thought
one Apple in this Garden, worth a whole Orchard of his Wifes at home.

Dalliance thus charming them into a liking one of another, (...) vows ever to
be hers, and none but hers, she swears ever to be his, and none but his.

Days, weeks, and months were con^umed between the^e two vnch (...) Lovers,
in all kinds of varied pleasures, that riot could invent. There was no new
fashions in apparel, but she had them; no Jewel (how costly (...)) but she
was Mistress of it. A Caroach and Coach-hor^es he b^ught for her, in which he
and she together were some^^mes whorried to Play Houses, sometimes to B^ainford,
to lie there, then to Barner, to lie there, then to (...) to be merry there,
then to Black-wall to see the Ships there, and hen to B^oomesbury to sola^e
themselves there. And so to all bawdy Bees lying near and about London.

His Wife seeing her Beloved stay beyond the time limited by himself for his
return, at first began to wonder, then to mistrust, then to lament for his
absence. But ill news being swifter of wing than any other bird, came flying
into Bristow, and alighting in Annabells ear, (that was open day and night
listening for some good tidings of her lost Husband) did there sing to her a sad
note of the lewd and lascivious courses of Ferdinand with a Courtizan. Hereupon
she tore her hair, beat her white breasts, cursed her hard fortunes, and
wish^d that either she had been borne deformed, that none might ever have
loved her, or that her face had been made as enticing as that Strumpets, on
whom her Husband doates, for then she had kept him to her self, where now in
this wandering she is in danger to loose him forever. To poast after him to
London, would but proclaim his faults, which she was willing to hide from the
world: to come and tear out those bewitching eyes of his Harlot, she had not a
heart to hurt, that which her Husband had chosen to love so dearly. Wavering
thus betwixt many doubts and fears, fed with hopes, that yet he would come
home, and fighted with despair, that she should never more see him, (for sin
is a lu^cious meat, and the more we taste it, the more we desire it: It is a
Sea, and being once got into it, (without a good Pilot) it is not so easy to
return again to shore:) upon these considerations, she writ many loving
Letters, to call and recall her dear Husband home. But he (as the papers came)
still she^i^g them to his Mi^tresse, the passions of a Wife, were commicall
Plays to a Strumpet: the tears which the one sent, dropping on the Letters as
she writ them, were pledg^d in kisses by the other, on her Husbands cheeks,
and in Claret Wine and Sugar. The young Woman's Father and friends likewise
hearing of these dissolute courses taken by Ferdinand, found him out, and both
by soft persuasions, (...) harsh threatenings did their best to win him to his
Wife, but he laughed to scorn their counsel.

At last, the bonefires of his prodigality being almost burnt out, his purse
shrinking, his money melting, his credit decaying, and his debts increasing to
such a mountain, it was not possible for him to climb well ^uer them, without
tumbling into one of the Co^mpters, he privately with many ostentations and
oaths to his Mistress, to return from Bristow so soon as he could furnish
himself there with moneys, took his leave of her, she distilling from her
eyes some few drops of hot waters, which her feigned sorrow drank off to him,
to comfort his heart, at the farewell: but she having other Sickles to cut
down her corn than his, the shower of tears which she rayned upon her
whorish cheeks being soon dried up, the storm was quickly blown over, and
she was to provide for another golden harvest.

But leave w^ her, plucking pleasure and diseases out of one and the same Well:
and let us follow him to Br^^ow: whither being secretly come, and with all
expressions of a noble, loving, and forgiving Wife, welco^^ed by the virtuous
Annabell: she weeped for joy, and as she weeped, mildly chid him, and as she
chid him, gave him a thousand kisses.

He ashamed to abuse such an excellent Goodness, shut up his wrongs to her in
as sweet language, as he could han^omly meet with; and told her, there was no
staying for him in safety either in Bristow or London: his estate (he said) was
weak, yet not so weak, but that he had a staff to hold it up from falling,
and that was certain b^gges of money, left in a trusty friends hands, when he
departed for London, which money he would closely, and instantly disburse in
M^rchandize, and in some g^od Ship (of which he himself would be Captain)
and with a Ging of good fellows, try his fortune at Sea: She unwillingly,
willing, yields to this, so into to the Straights he venture^.

^t Scauderoone he goes on short, and vents such Commodities as he had by
Carauans, up at Aleppo, amongst the Turks, and such Christian Merchants as
there were in Traffic: in so much, that by his industry and knowledge in
Commerce, he might have made a reasonable go^d voyage, if upon the ^ale of his
Wares brough^ thither, and lading his Ship with Commodities from thence, he
had returned home, without encountr^^g any second fortune. But Heaven smiling
upon him, appointed a ^urk^sh Pirate (richly furni^hed) to set upon (...)
Captain of Bristow, and his mad merry company: who were all Englishmen,
courageous, skillful, resolute, and fall (...), every one of them swearing to
live and dye with their noble Captain.

The Turk set upon them, they bravely returned an English defiance. The Turks
called upon Mahomer, the Christians cried St. George. but called upon Him whom
they knew could help them. The Fight was short, but cruel, the victory
doubtful, but speedy; for the Turkish Pirate being boarded, and as fast
thrown ouer-board, as the English could enter, a noble and rich spoil was
made, the true man robbed the thief: Captain ^erdinands Ship was doubly laden,
with trea^ure, and with acclamations of joy, the Turks went sneaking to their
holes, and the English put in at a hither part of Christendom, to refresh
their wounded men, and to give them g^^d victuals.

I must here put you in mind of one thing, which before when Ferdinand was to
come from Bristow, I should have remembered, and that was this: At the time when
he was ready to prepare for his Sea-voyage, he told his Wife, All that he could
get together, was little enough to furnish him forth for ^o weighty a
business, yet he would leave sufficient to maintain her in his ab^ence: And
then merrily asking her what she would venture with him, she answered, she
would adventure all that she had, and that was her body, and her poor life:
no, says her Husband, you shall not: I will not hazard all our substance in
one bottom: Why then, quoth (...) though my body must stay at home, my heart
shall go with you, and upon what shore so ever yo^ land, my good wishes for
your prosperity, and prayers for your health shall ever wait upon you as your
servants: And yet because it shall not be said, but that both by Sea and Land,
my fortunes shall still set their foot by yours, I will put in my share in
your Adventure: What (my g^^d sweetheart said her H^sband:) Sir, replied his
Wife, you have often laid out much money, which never brought home any profit,
I dare therefore not trust you with much: All that I put into your hands, is
only one single penny. He smiling upon her, a^ked what he should do with
that penny, marry (quoth she) only buy and bring home for that money a
pennyworth of ^it. He glad to see her so pleasantly conceited, protested he
would lay out her money, to the best advantage he could: and so took his leave
of her.

You heard before, that after the Fight was ended between ^erdin^n^ and the
(...) Captain went on sheare to (...) his men. During his absence in a
(...)-^owne of (...) (called Saint Luc^r de (...) in (...) for there h^ S^^p
put in,) one of the Mariners who stayed aboa^d, (being a merry conceipted
fellow, and one that knew all the (...) of (...) life, all his wild hu^ours,
and (...) fits playde between him, his Wife, and hi^ Currizan) intending to
p^^ some merriment upon his Capt^ines shoulder, di^gui^^ his face like to a
tann^d Gip^ey, and put himself into ^^thing but rags, like a beggar, and in
this manner (...) on the shore, till his Captain was to come (...) to take
shipping: Fer^inand being then passing by hi^, this supposed Rogue, setting
out a wide throat, cried out in a big voice, Noble Captain, brave honest
Captain, bestow one single penny upon a poor man, upon an English man, upon
your Countryman; that shall pray you may have a b^^tte voyage, g^od worthy
Captain, one penny, one p^^re single penny.

Ferdinan^ hearing the name of Engl^sh-man, and that word, single penny, cast
his eye back upon my counterfeit beggar, and the sound of single penny put him
in mind of his Wife, and her venture of a penny, and wh^t he was to buy with
it. So, turning to the Fellow, ^^oth honest Countryman (said he) for so I
perceive thou art by thy tongue; what thou begg^st for I have ab^ut me, and so
drew forth his Wif^s penny; look thou, here^s a new single penny, but I have
other employment for it, than to bestow it on a Beggar, for it is an adventure
put into my hands by my Wife, and I am to buy with it, for her, a pennyworth
of wit.

O Master, cries the Beggar, you were better give me the penny, than travail
so long, till you buy ^o ^uch a commodity as Wit, for so p^^re a sum of
money. Many come into this Country, and others on this side the Seas, and
spend they care not what, only to get wit, and knowledge, and experience, but
in the end return home as arrant Corrombes as I did, when I came from travel.
Many a thousand pound have I laid out to purchase Wit, but I could never reach
to so much as a farthings worth. Thou many a hundred pounds (said Ferdinan^,)
Yes Captain (answered the ^egger) no dispraise to your person, I once held
^yselfe as brave a Gallant as your self: my Silks and Sattins on my back,
men at my heels, roaring Boys at my be^k, my Comrades at a call. And how
(quoth the Captain) come thou to be so p^^re? I will tell you how (said
the other.) One part of my money ran away with Come on six, and Come on s^uen: I
could play at Novum, Passage, In and In, Mum Chance, at Tables, Itish, (...)
any thing, at Cards, Maw, Sant, Primero, Primauista, Gleeke, Poast and Pair,
Whiske, all Games, Noddy, and any Game where a knave was to be turn^d up. All
the money I either wooune or lost this way, went sure to the Devil, for I had
it with damnable swearing, and parted from it, with abomineble tearing of God,
blasphemy, and cursing. Another part of my money melted away in Sack and
Claret, but I lickd my lips prettily well at this Feast; for I met for my
money, Wine, g^^d Cheer, good Fires, g^^d Wenches, g^^d Music, and good
knocking Reckonings. A third part of my money I spent, nay, cast away upon a
Whore, a dainty one, a young one, a proud-one. So long as my silver lasted, her
brazen-face was always at my nose, kissing me: but when my cheeks grew l^ane,
and my Pockets empty, away ^^ies my Wag-tayle. Now my noble Captain, if (as I
know most of our English Gallants do) you have a liquorish tooth in your head,
and keep a Punk, hang her, dam her, trust her not, she will graze upon thy
n^eddow so long, as there^s a blade of grass, that gone, she leapes over
hedge and ditch in^o any Butchers Pa^ure. But if (my brave Captain and
Countryman) thou have a Wife, kiss her, tell her, trust her, try her, for
she will ^unne for Aqua-(...) to recover thy fortunes, when thy C^^katrice
shall cast them into a (...). Should (...) Ship lie here upon a sand, and
could not (...) for want of water to fetch thee off, thy St^mnpet would not
throw out the Ba^on in which she washes her hands (unless for her own
benefit) where thy ^ife (if thou have a good-one) would draw a sea out of her
eyes to ^^ue thee from s^nking.

The Captai^e hearing the Bigger-man talk thus, with a smiling ^^mitenance,
gave him his Wifes single penny, and told him, he did not think, but that the
^^ney was laid out as she de^^red: for that penny should peradventure send him
and his Ship home with a richer Lading, than five hundred pound could furnish
him with: And so thanking the poor Fellow for his Discourse, he gave him
besides at parting, four pieces of Eight for a farewell to drink his Health,
which (...) Beggar swore he would do. Ferdinand presently gets aboard to make
for England, and the mad Mariner as nimbly tears off his rags (unknown to
any man) and leapes into the Ship almost as soon as the Captain.

In this interim of Ferdinands being at Sea, his fair Mistress, wondering at
his long absence, considering his vehement oaths (with all speed possible to
return) and being loath to loo^e such a Gold-Finch, that sung so sweetly in
her ears: she (partly for a kind of love she bare him (he being a very
proper man) but chiefly for his estate, which she knew was great, and to catch
which she did angle) came in her thunde^ing Caroach like some great Lady to
Bristow, with this resolution, If Ferdinand were there, then to enjoy him as
before, if not there, yet the would repair her losses and charge of the
Journey upon any other whom she next lighted on, fit to be made a property, as
no doubt but B^^stow had s^ore of such fame foul, as well as any other City.
Her wishes and intentions hit the marks she shot at: for Tarsellgentle, in
abundance came to the fist of our sh^^-Faulkconer.

By this time, (wind and weather faueuring him) Ferdinand is as secretly
arrived at ^ristow: as he departed closely from thence: and slepping privately
to a dear friend, enquires what news in the Town, how all the man Girls
did, and what new Wenches were come to Bristow; so that in the end by way of
merry Discourse, and descanting upon other Women, he perceived (but concealed
it) that his Mistress had followed him thither, and his heart (leaning to his
old by as) began almost to leap for joy, to think that he found his noble
sweetheart so kind. But then remembering his Wifes single penny, and the
Beggars counsel, he meant to make trial what his Wifes Uenture would come
to; and so putting himself into rags like a Beggar, with a short Cudgel in
his hand, he found out her lodging, and knock^d to speak with her. One of her
servants being such a totterd^ Rascal, enquired scu^uily what he would have;
the other replied as scur^uly, I must speak with your Lady or Mistress: Away you
lowzie Slave, cried the Pandar, my Mistress a companion for such a
Nitty-breech as thou art, to talk to her! but my counterfeit Bristow-Maunderer,
in a very pitiful voice told him, that he had Letters from one Ferdinand a
Merchant, and somewhat else by word of mouth to deliver to her.

Upon this he was called up into her Chamber, and then requesting to del^uer
his message in private; all were commanded out of the ^^me, but him self and
her, and then asking, if she knew him not by his voice, (for by his tattred
attire and face she could not) he told her, he was that Ferdinand, whom eu^e
she loved so dearly, and she that Mistress of his that commanded both his
life and fortunes; all the happiness he had on earth, was to enjoy her
presence: tells her how he was taken Prisoner by the Turk, made a Gally-slaue,
tugged at the Door, had an hundred blows on the naked back with a Bulls
peezell, fed on course browne-bread and water, and hardly got away (but most
miraculously) with life; entreates her (what needs entreaties) he presumes
she is so noble, that she will lodge him in her bosom as she had wont;
prays her to send into the Town for clothes to make him ^raue, for good
cheer to fill his belly, for some clean linen, for he was lowzie, and that
he might have (...) fire to shift himself by: But she casting an eye of
sco^^^^ at his (...) reviled him, kick^d at him, bid him Auant, called for her
servants to thrust him out of doors: but he falling on his kn^^s, begg^d as
she was a Woman, to let him lie in some Hay-loft, in some Stable, upon a heap
of Hor^edung, for sin^^ his coming to shore, he had killed a man that
misu^^d him: and if she turned him out of dor^^, it was h^^ assured death and
confusion. Nay, you ba^e scum (cried she) and ^o tumbling him into the street,
shut the doors upon him.

H^ then (all ragged as he was) went in private home to his Wife; she for all
the misery round about him, knew his face, hung about his neck, wept for joy,
and enquired what mischance sent him to her in this pitiful estate. He told
her, his Ship was burnt by Pirates, his G^ods taken from him, his me^slaine,
and himself only escaped with life. And that is all (quoth his Wife) which I
desire: let Ship, G^ods, and all be lost, so I find thee: my Rings, Jewels,
Plate, nay, my own apparel I Will presently pawn, or sell outright, to furnish
my dear Husband fitting to his worth: but he ouer-ioyed at this her admirable
love, and unfeigned expressions of a noble Wife, plucked off his rags, and
under them discovered a fair habit; but entreating her, to pardon his absence
for an hour or two, for the dispatch of a most especial business, he leaves
her full of joy, both at his unexpected Arrival, and at his prosperous Uoyage,
of which in some few words, he gave her a firm assurance.

Ferdinand then richly attiring himself, and taking four or five of his
Mariners, neatly apparelled, passed by the Curtizans door once or twice; she
spying him, sent after him, the servant saying, his Mistress entreated him by
any means to come back, and speak with her. He did so, when she at his
entrance into her Chamber, ran and fell upon his cheeks, printing on them
and his lips an 100. kisses, and telling him that a base Rascal, in shape of a
Beggar, came to her, and took his name upon him. That very Beggar, sweetest
Mistress (quoth Ferdinand) was I my self, and came to you in that poverty, to
try if you would relieve me, but it was an easre matter for you to scorn me,
as not knowing me in that loath some appearance, I therefore pardon it; and to
show, how deeply (even in absence) you were printed in my memory, and that you
are to me the same beloved Mistress, that heretofore you have bin; behold, as a
part of my good Uoyage, I present to your white hands this rich Cabinet, full
of the most precious Jewels, that are to be found in this part of the world.
She was reaching out her hands to lay hold upon them. But (quoth he) my most
endeared Mistress, I remember I have given you many Rings, Bracelets of
Diamonds, Chains of Pearls and Gold, and many costly Jewels, I doubt in my
absence you have bestowed these upon some other sweethearts: show me these
therefore, and I shall be in the better hope, that for my sake you will
preserve these likewise.

Hereupon, she fetches all the braueries, and costly gifts that he ever
presented to her; which seen, he seized upon them, told her, he found her to
be a Bristow Diamond, she was a cunning, a cheating, and hard-hearted Curtizan;
and so giving her sufficient means and money (for his own reputation sake) to
rid her from Bristow, and ship her for London: on his Wife he bestowed all
those Jewels, and told her, that the Wit which he bought with the single
Penny, she ventured in his Ship, was worth all the Merchandise he brought home
besides.

The Bed where a Husband and Wife (...) is that Musicke-r^^me, where the souls
of them (...) lay in the most excellent Consort: All Discords (...) here put
into time, all Iarres so winded up, with (...) Strings of Concord, that no
Harmony can be sw^eter. Such a Bed is an Altar, where a pair of loving Hearts
are offered, and no gall mingled with the Sacrifice. Such a Bed is a Cradle,
where pleasure, content, and all earthly happiness rock man and wife a
sleep: kisses perfuming the pillowes, as if they were banks of Roses, and
warm tears of joy (there to be reconciled one to another) being the soft
showers, that make those Rosy kisses grow fairer, and in more abundance.

Ferdinand (our young and now rich Merchant of Bristow,) enjoying his beauteous
Annabell, a whole night together: the pleasure of their embraces, were
increased, by his relation of his wild courses, dalliances, and delights which
he took at London, in that bewitching Mistress of his (the Curtizan) but ten
times more doubled in her fr^e, and noble forgiuene^^e, of whatsoever had
passed between them. He (thereupon) promised to be to his Wife, a new man, a
new-molded Husband, and she vowed to him, to be an euer-loyall, and euer-louing
Wife.

Whilst thus they lay talking, the Sun casting his eye upon them in at the
window, told them, it was time to rise, and that the Mariners who ventured
their lives and fortunes with him in his Uoyage, were all attending for him.
Upon this summons of the Sun, they both forso^ke their Beds, made them ready,
and came down: Fer^inand delivering to every one of them, whatsoever in right
they could claim for wage^, or any thing else, and withal (because they
should not report they met with an unworthy or ungrateful person) he bestowed
upon them (as his bounteous gift) twenty pounds amongst them all, over and
above their due, to drink his Wifes Health and his, at a Dinner or Supper,
which they with merry countenances, swear to perform. And then Ferdinand (his
Wife the fair Annabell being by) relating how happily he met with a poor
Beggar, at his return to his Ship, when they went a shore in Spain, and that
bestowing his Wifes single Penny upon that pooreman; he found since, that the
pennyworth of Wit (which the Beggar gave him there, and served him well to for
so little money) had done him a great deal of good since his Arrival, and
that to the last day of his life, he would be a fair gayner by the Beggars
bargain. Annabell smiling, told him, He was as much or more beholding to
her, as to that p^^re man, for that her Uenture of a single Penny, was the
first and principal occasion of meeting so excellent and vn-valluable a
commodity as Wit. He confess it, and told his wife, before all those
witnesses, that he was de^epe in her debt.

But then the Mariner, who counterfaited the Beggar, not being able to glue up
his lips any longer, told them all, that he was that Rag-a-muffin, who begged
an Alms on the shore, only to put his Captain in mind of his Wife, and her
Penny, because he knew how the single Penny was delivered, and therefore in
his Beggarly Oration to him, he touched him to the quick, as knowing into how
many wild and crooked currents the stream of his Captains life had run;
yet if this bold attempt of his had succeeded well, he hoped his offense, was
the more easily pardoned. Pardoned (quoth Annabell!) yes, and rewarded too: and
thereupon, remembering and putting her Husband in mind of his own words in Bed
to her, which were, that but for the advice the supposed Beggar gave him for
his Penny, he had never put that trial upon his Curtizan, but doubtless
(coming home so rich) had both po^ored and rayned down golden showers into
her lapand his soul (as before) into her bo^ome: she therefore hung about her
Husbands neck, and for the content she her self enccuntred with, by this
Mariner (whose name was Theobald) as also for the blessing heaven crowned his
own life with, by the hands of that good Seaman, she entreated, nay,
importunately begged, nay by all the bonds of affection between them, coniured
him, to make up that single Penny he gave him, a full one hundred pounds, and
so set him a floate in the world.

Ferdinand being willing to win his Annabell to him by any means, sithence
he had given her just cause for ever to loose her: and considering, the
request, easy (in regard it was but a drop to the full-Sea his riches s^^um
in) and (...), in respect of the golden harvest, his Wifes Penny, and the
Mariners counsel brought him; He not only, very nobly, freely, and
cheerfully delivered an hundred pounds as his Wifes gift, but to show how much
he desired to make her joys full in all things, he lent one hundred pound
more to I heobald, without script or sorowle, to be paid him, when it should
please the heavens to command the winds and the waves, to send him home, a
merry, a prosperous, and a wealthy voyager.

Theobald with infinite thanks for these undeserved courtesies on her part,
and unexpected on his, acknowledges his life ever to be their debtor; and so in
a very short time (having so many golden stars to sail b^) away puts he to
Sea: where we will leave him carefully, in^ustriously, and like a toyling Ant,
providing suf^icient in the Summer of his youth, how to maintain him in the
winter of his age.

And now let us cast our eyes once more upon Ferdinand and Annabell, who grew
up in Bristow, (like two fair free^) l^ked at by all, admired by all, and
loved by all. That reputation of his, which ran-a-ground at London, is in
Bristow fetchd off safely from all shelfes, and sands: a harlot undid his
fortunes there, a wife restores them here. His former Riots, are no turned to
good h^sbandry, his feasting in ^auernes, to a civil entertainment in his
own house, his rearing-b^^^s companyes, to a brave society of Merchants, and
his roaging beggarly noyses of scraping Fiddlers, to the most excellent music
of sweet and harmless stories told between him and his wife, or else, to the
cunning touch of her hand upon the stringes of her Lute, guided by the echoes
of a rauishing voice, in both of which she exceeded even skillful Musicians.
What wounds he got in his estate by borrowing, he now cured by paying every
penny: so that upon his word he might either in Bristow or London, have taken
up more money, then many that carried their heads higher in the Air, and more
proudly ^et on the Stage of opinion, could procure upon their bonds.

Abundance filled his bags, rich Merchandise his Cellers and Warehouses,
Cupb^rds of Plate waited on his Table, and both Men-seruants, and Mayd-seruants
on him and his wife; superfluity of all wordly blessings, thus casting his
youthful mind into a surfeit: he began not only to be weary of Bristow, but
of his own natural country, burning with an immoderate and unquenchable
desire to travel beyond the Seas, to come acquainted with the manners,
fashions, and conditions of for^en nations. The bellows that kindled these
flames within him, were the praises given to him by young Merchants and
gallants that had traveled, of the delicate faces of other women abroad, of
their queint dressings, cu^ious attires, and most bewitching complements our
english Ladies, and Merchants wives of London being but course creatures,
dowdyes and doddipolls, either to the German Frow, the french pretty,
pailying Mademoiselle, or the cher^ylipd, wantoneyed, plu^^, Italian, Bona
(...), and besides these Spurs of longings clapd to his heels to set him
going; his wife (albeit a delicate creasure) began (after this frenzy of
dreaming after other women, though he never saw them) not to seem s^ hansome
in his eye as she was wont or if she did, let our own pasture be never so
fatt, never so full, never such wholesome feeding, we think our neighbors
better, though far worse. As in Tauernes, when fault is found in the wine,
though there be none in it, If the drawer goes but to change it, and brings the
same again O cries all the company, now drawer thou have gone right indeed: so
that the sick part about us is our opinion; it is our judgment is poisned.

Ferdinand therefore being thus (as it were) with child to see fashions
abroad, could find no ease in mind or body until he fell into Travel; and
for that purpose, he fraighted a Ship with rich and vendible commodities to be
sent to Venice, and himself to go as Chief in her.

His wife was much against his going, she feared her bi^d whom she had kept so
long, getting now out of the Cage, would fly she knew not whither, and grow
wild. But he showing many reasons for his venturing in person, as that it was
hard trusting Factors, his gains might be trebled by his being there; the eye
of the Master fatts the Horse: It would besides the double profit, return to
his mind an infinite pleasure to behold other Cities, other people, and
converse with other Merchants: his knowledge would hereby grow perfect, his
experience be con^^rmed, and that little knowledge he has in the Italian
tongue be much betterd, his ambition having ever be^ene to be cunning in that
language. These reasons and others, being put into the balance, weighed down
her fears, and so she yielded at length to let him go.

Ferdinand (having wind and water, as swift as his own wishes) in a short
time arrived at Venice (one of the wonders, for a City, in the world, as having
the foundation laid in, and the whole frame of the building raised out of the
Mediteranean Sea.) His commodities being excellent good, and exceeding rich,
dwelt not long in the ship, But on Silver pullies were drawn into
Uenetian-merchants h^uses, who paid him down for them presently: so that his
purse was soon full, but his eyes and longings empty, or inioying the Rarities
of that renowned City* Some few days made him Master of them all: The R^alta
was as familiar to him, as the Exchange ^n Cornehill is to Merchants, or the
new Bar^e in the Strand is to Courtiers, and Lawyers: Saint Marks Church, he
knew as well as Paul's St^^ple, and the Murano, where all the Ven^c^^ glasses
are made, he visited more often then Vintners do the glass (...) in
Broadst^^ete, to furnish then s^lues there with these brittle car ow^ing
bowls. The Arsenale, (which is a Store, house, to arm both men, and gallyes
with all warlike provision) by money and friendship, he went into with desire,
and came forth with admiration. The many thousands of bridges, which cr^sse
every street through the whole City, put him into as much wonder, as London
bridge did a Northren man, who at first gaping at it, swore he thought in his
con^^^ence it cost above vortie shillings.

His eyes could never have been bloodshotten had they only fed upon these
objects: as it was no hurt for him to l^^ke upon wood, and stone, and workmen:
nor to have been carried in one of their Uenetian G^ndeloes, rowing up and
down the river (that embraces the City) called the Grand Canale. None of
these enticing ^^wers carried po^son in their sent. No: As before in London he
was insnar^ by one English whore, so here found he ten thousand Uenetian
^^urtizan^, the worst of them all, h^u^ng ^^r^ery enough in her eyes and
beha^tor, to inchant him. With the butterfly he flew from herb to he^ be, and
from (...) to weed, but in the end alighted upon one, which he liked ab^ue all
the rest. Here he stayed, Here he set up his rest. It was a creature
sufficiently fair, ha^ she been indifferently good and resonably-good she
might have been, but that the custom of the country (which authorizeth
Brothelry) makes her believe, it is not sin in her, so to sell and prostitute
her body, and in her body her soul.

You talk of the p^ore Cat-a-mountaines in Turnebull, who venture upon the
pikes of damnation for singlemoney; and you wonder at the fethered Estridges in
Westmin^ter, Strand, Bloomsbury etc. how they can live; where these Venetian
Madonaes, carry the ports of Ladies, live in houses fair enough to entertain
Lords. Into such a lodging was Fer^^n^nd^ received, upon such a Curtizan did he
fasten his lus^full affection.

No gold was spared to warm her white hands with the fires of such sparckling
Sunne-beames: No music keep dumb by her whose voice she knew would entice
him to hear it. This Strumpets name was Liuia Ferramonti, well-descended, and
therefore taught by her education, how to win, and how to hold fast, when
once she had a man in her nets. Her behavior was pleasing, her complements
courtly, her appearance Stately, yet how strongly-guarded soever this Castle of
beauty, seemed by her eyes, (in show disdainefull) and a tongue proud in
parlies, yet Fernand mounting his silver Ordinance, chargde with golden
bullets, the Fort of womanish frailty, quickly yielded, but upon this
composition, that he should suffer no other Italian dame but herself share in
her embraces; ielozie is a book that all our Italian dames, and signiors
read, and if (quoth she) you ever give me cause to open that book (strung
with yellow ribbon) I shall give you cause to curse my acquaintance, and you will
teach me hereafter to hate for ever an Englishman. He told her, (nay most
v^hemently protested, by the faith of a gentleman, and by all those fires
burning in the breast of a Lover,) that she should have no cause to speak to
him that language. And so, she (being a Merchantesse for the flesh, and to
sell her ware, as de^re as she could-hold it up) agreed with Ferdinand, that
for 500 crowns a month, he should Enjoy her body, her bed, her house, and
all that belonged to her command. The greatest Magnific^ in Venice (she told
him) would be glad to be sharer with two more, and so enjoy her by tournes,
yet each of them to allow her so poor a Sum: nay the brauest Clarissimo, to
enjoy her, as now she comes to him, (alone) would into her Apron every month
cast a thousand cr^wnes, but he being an englishman, and gratio^s in her eye,
she would exa^^ but that ^lender hire: It being the custom of Venice, that
whatsoever a Courtizan, and a whoremaster bargaynes for, (be it for a day, a
night, a week, a month, or a year) she has law on her side to recover it,
and make him pay it, and she is his (for that time) as absolutely as a beast
bought in Smythfield, or a rotten joint of mutton sold at pye-corner: Her
Enauiorato being likewise (during the continuance of this agreement) more sure
of his Itlia^ hackney, tha^ many englishmen are of their wives, though a
household full of eyes be ^ixed upon them; for if she flies out from him to any
other, an action at the case here is nothing to that case, which the Bona roba,
shall be in there, if once she be found faulty: months, and months were
cons^ned in libidinous and adulterous embraces, by the^e two; Ferdinand, ever
and anon, sending into England some slight Italian toys to his wife with
letters, expressing his great care to increase his estate, kept him so long
from her, and that the delight he took in seeing those Cities, and noble
entertainment he found amongst those Merchante, had carried him up higher into
the country, but that he would shorten his journey and cut off much of his
employment, out of a desire to be again in the arms of his Annabell.

She good soul believed all this, upon receipt of her husbands letters; but
he intended no such matter. He was too fast entangled in the all^rements of a
Wa^^ton, and too far engaged in purse and reputation to get off without
exceeding loss, if not danger of life. For when an Italian Strumpet feels her
L^uer flying from her, and in disdain leaving her, a poisoned banquet, or a
stab from a Panderly Bra^o, soon ends her coffeehouse.

But our Bristow Merchant was too far plunged in affection, to fall off, or
grow ^oole in desires to her, upon whose beauties he did more than doat: And
therefore to show that he was a right Englishman, who will venture life and
living, and all that he has in the world, before he will loose his Wench,
he not only (more than his bargain, tied him, of 500. crowns a month) had
in banquets, costly Dinners and Suppers, and rich new Gowns and Tires for her,
spent a world of money upon her: but also, (the faster as he thought to tie her
to him, though he could not easily shake her off) he bestowed a company of
admirable fair Jewels upon his dearest Li^ia.

Fair were those Jewels in outward show (as the wearer of them was) but many
(or rather most) of the Stones were counterset. For Ferdinand, by means of
keeping company with many brave Italian Merchants, came acquainted with a
^enetian Jew, (who^e name was Caleb Mosolomon. This Jew was wondrous wealthy
and wondrous wary, and as wicked in his ways to get money (especially from
Christians) as any of his Hebrew tribes could be. ^erdinand came often to his
house, and was as often welcomed, but this feast of Jewish welcomes should be
paid for at last in the tale of the reckoning. Mo^olomo had abundance of as
costly, true, and preti^us Jewels of all fashions, as could be made, or bought
for gold and silver in the world, for it was his trade to deal with most
Princes in Christ's, dome by his Fact^urs for such Commodities; but as amongst
men and women some are good, some bad: So Caleb (our subtle Jew) perceiving
Ferdinand to be an unthrift, that his Ships rich lading was swallowed up, in a
Uenetian gulf, (a Uenetian Whore) and that to fill such a Barn, a fool cared
not, what corn field he reaped, nor from whose Sheafes he stole (were it but
a handful) he saw he would sink, and therefore to rid him out of his p^ine,
he would tie some of his Plummets to his heels. Hereupon, showing one day, to
our Bristow Lapidarie (that dealt in none but false Stones) a goodly heap of
counterfeit Jewels, (as fair to the eye, as any that were worn in Italy, and
the falsehood not easy to be found out, but by a very cunning workman) he
liked them so well, that being wondrous importunate to buy them, albeit the Jew
held them at an unreasonable rate, yet he had them for Time, a Bond being
drawn to pay to Mosolomon, double the value, if he had not his money just upon
the day. The match pleased them both, the Jew laughed in his sleeue, to see how
he had ^uerreached a leacherous Christian, and the other as proudly hastened to
his Italian Hen-Sparrow, to show what costly and glorious Feathers he had
bought to stick her with; the Jewels were with thousands of thanks received,
and as many kisses paid back to him on his lips, which he accepted as a
sufficient satisfaction.

The day of payment for these Jewels being come, the Jew (as busy as a Kite
over his prey) soars over Ferdinands lodging, still looking when the money
would be tendered: but a day or two being past over, and no Cash appearing,
Caleb leapes for joy, that now he shall have the double: the Forfaiture to him
would be as a feast: a Christian to lie in Prison at his Suite, was a brauer
triumph than when Turkish Galleys board English Pirates: he swears by his
Hebrew Tribe from whence he is de^cended: he will flea him alive with
miseries, if he has not his moneys: not a Christian Farthing of Copper, or
Brass, no, not an (...) Leaden Chandlers Token should be abated.

An Officer, (nay a whole kennell of Hounds are lef loose to seize upon him,
and to dragge him to Prison. But (...) being an Englishman, and understanding
by his experience of Lon^on and Bristow, what it was to fall into Catchpoles
hands, and how such Beagles where they fastened, did not only bite, but draw
bl^^^, kept hims^l^e out of the way, so that Been (...) was ready to run mad
with ange^: that Iewes-t^ump in his mou^h (his tongue) played nothing but
cur^es, his great nose^swell (...) so much as it (...) before, by his thumping
and plucking it, almost off from his face, in rage, to think he should be so
e^^soned by a wenching Rascal, a Christian Whoremaster, and yet he said to
himself, It was no wonder for him to be so gull^d, (...) was too well known
that Englishmen are as cunning as any Cheaters in the world.

In this interim of Ferdinand his wasting of his youth, his es^ate, and his
h^n^ur, and the hazarding both of life and soul upon (...) Strumpet; O^d one
Sign^or (...) from (...) he had before he went, made chief (amongst all the
(...) that (...)) of this (...) to be (...).

She perce^^ing by the Iew^ and others of whom (...) had taken up (...) of
money, how the winds blew, and that the breath of his for (...) colder and
^older, and being glad to hea^e that (...) was come home, writ a few wanton,
but witty (...), (for the Italian Women are excellent in those (...)) to
welcome him from Travel, and to (...) him so her lodging, unknown to her
(...) the wing, as being full of (...)

A stately Banquet (^^e appointed evening) was prepared at the Curtizans House,
to which Signior (...), attended upon with one man onely^ (...), with
resolution to renew his love to his (...) Mi stresse, and that night to pay
such tribute to her em braces, as was due to her by his so long absence.

Ferdinand not daring in the day to walk the streeter, came mufled in his
cloak in the dark, with a Rapier by his side, to (...) his Lady; and spying
every ^^^me so full of lights, as if all the Stars had forsa^ke the (...) and
shine in her lodging, and (withal) hearing admirable voices and ^stru ments
within, for she had provided all content, to please ^ouann^: Ferdinand boldly
knocked at door, presuming he had paid dear enough for the opening of her
Wicket.

A Brauo^ or ru^^ianly hee-Bawde, comes, and tells him, there was no Cushion for
him to sit upon to night; another was made (...) of his Italian Chair; the
(...) which he l^ud to cut up, was to be (...) up, and be (...) on a Uenetian
Gen tlemans Trencher (the Signior Iouann^ ^^^^anes, Son to (...) of the
chiefest (...) and so bidding him to be ^acking, or if he were so hot for a
Whore, there were enough in the City, and it he could not fall upon them, Stand
there still and (...) his (...), and (with that) shut the doors upon him.

(...) eve ry Italian, laid hold (upon this (...) out of the (...)) on
Ferdinand, the (...) of the people, and the inconstancy of the Woman, (...)
selves. Taking therefore this abuse ^ffered to him by the Brano, for an act of
the Mistress, as knowing he (...) not have done so without her consent, he
dowes to hill this ^ouanni, whatsoever he should be, leaving his body at her
very doors, as the monument of a Strumpets falseshood, and an englishmans noble
revenge upon a corriuall, and this done by the aid of darkness to escape, get a
gundelo, and so shifting from Venice to fly first into France, over the Alps,
and after that into England. For this purpose the Spleenefull Ferdinand, (...)
up and down, watching when this gallant should come forth; but he was too
fast lo^kd in his Mistresses arms, to take any danger from a naked rapier: yet
going to bed with his beloved Madona, he commanded his man to get him to his
lodging, and attend for him next morning.

The fellow being lighted out of doors, and Ferdinand, who stood watching, not
knowing the Master from the man, took this to be the gentleman that wrougd
him, and so running at him, the glimps^ of the candle made him spy the weapon,
which nimbly though he put by, yet was he wounded in two or three places,
murder then being cried, and more candles being held out at several windows,
the servant that was hurt, was carried off, and Ferdinand haled to prison.

The next morning, criminal Judges having the examination of this business,
the Brauo giving in evidence that he came to his Mistresses house, to quarrel,
and do some mischief, and Ferdinand being half mad that his revenge fell so
unluckily on a poor unworthy fellow, his aim being (as he confessed freely) to
have sped that (...) who lodged there that night, in the arms of a Strumpet,
whose flesh he had bought, and paid dearly for: the matter then grew more
foul in that besides the drawing-blood from one, his intent was to murder
another, yea and to murder such a gentleman so nobly descended as Guidanel was,
for the love, which all Venice bar^, both to father, and son, the whole
senate set a heavy ^ine on Ferdinands head, for his intent of murder, and
albert the fellows wounds were not mortal, yet was he (besides a doom of
imprisonment) adjudged to pay for the cure, and to satisfy the servant for his
(...).

The Jew (hearing of this imprisonment) laughed, and leaped for joy, that the
great fish was taken, which brake through his net, but ^ithence he was in, h^^
would wear (...) his fingers ends, with tying knots, but h^^ should be fast
enough, and ^o la^d a^^ Action upon him of 14000. crown^s.

He then hoping for all (...) find some (...) at his Mistrisses hands, writ in
Ita^^an to her, but she understood not his language: to him she (...) not
send, (without loosing an Italian-friend wor^h (...) English) and come to him
she would not.

Upon this, casting his eyes back at his fore-passed ^ortimes, and his now
present miseries, he began t^ think that heaven had justly laid this shame
and these crosses upon him, for not still making use of^ that counsel which
the Mariner in shape of a Beggar, gave to him for his wifes single Penny: had
h^^ followed it, coming to this Curtizan in Venice as he did when he tried
that other in England, he had never met such occasion to ^urse his folly, in
making himself a mo^kery to all his countrymen, especially to (...), but mou
e^pe^^ally to the Merchants in (...). To call to mind the wrongs done to his
wi^e, was to (...) more then a death to think what (...) of money (...), and
(...) had in (...) con^umed, every piece of silver fetchd drops of blood from
his heart. He that (...) away pounds, would now (...) himself in his own
(...) in some high way begging one (...) with no worse a (...) than those p^^re
(...), his countrymen do, that so live (...): would he (he cries out) had
lived so ^uer: he should not then answer for the (...) of that, which was
sufficient to maintain thou^^nd^ where now, the remembrance of those (...)
e^pences as much torment his soul, as the want of the money affli^ts his body,
happy, he protests, are those that begging a farthing-^oken, and making up,
four of them, peradventure (...) now in England by a good fire, with a (...)
drink in their hand, where I in this (...) and s^^^cking dungeon, would be glad
of clean water to que^^ch my thirst, and of a c^ale of fire to blow my nay^es
over.

Being driven almost to the very doors of despair, by these miseries, the last
refuge he had was to sens for his wi^e from Bristow, and to persuade her with
all possible speed to turn all the estate he left with her, all his plate,
all her chains, rings, and ^ewells, yea even to sell all his household stuff,
to turn it into money, and if ever she loved him, now to show it, by
red^eming him from a miserable capti^ty: That word, if ever she did leave him,
was a charm strong enough to make her fly over worlds of waters, and
wildernesses of land to find him out, and faund, to set him at liberty, and
being free from Jews, Harlots, hard-hearted Christians, to lay him in her
warm bosom, to forgive what is past, to upbraid him with nothing, and in his
wants to love him as dearly, as ever she did in his greatest abundance. And
all this did the virtuous woman (his wife.)

Suppose then you see them both come from be^yond seas, not so beaten with
winds and (...), as bitten by hunger. His di^^^lute courses causing all his
own friends to scorn to cast an eye of pity on him, and the constant love
she carried to her distressed husband, taking from her friends all desire to
help or comfort her, lest he should be a sharer in those be^efits. So that
not a Sunne-beame of compassion shining from any friends, kind^ed, or
acq^aintance upon either of them, in the end they both, (by the intercession,
and tears, and modest countenance of the woman, got to be trusted with a few
pipes, a little (...), and a small narrow (...), which was both their hal^,
bedchamber, (...) and ^eller.

This was but a poor living for him, that had w^nt to freight ships with rich
comm^dities, now to sit filling a pipe of tobacco; and f^r a penny, that single
penny comes oft^ to his mind, and vpbrayds him with his ill husbandry. The
world is changed with him, it runs not now upon wheels, as once it did: he
that was wont to make Tauernes roar with the noise of gallon pots, and drawers
to run up stayres, and down stayres, crying anon, anon, only at his call, is
now glad without any roaring or noyse-making, to be any man's drawer for a
penny-pot of ale: his brave fires in a Tavern chimney, are turn^d to alittle
pan of small coals, over which he sits blowing, to light his customers
pipes; his riotous dinners and Suppers are forgotten, and instead of them, a
poor dinner of sprats, now and then, for fish days, and ^ sheep Geather or
a sheep head on fl^shdayes, and very good cheer too: in former times,
neither he or his wife c^uld tell what a fasting day meant, but now they c^uld
hardly meet with any other; and albeit a man that has ever gone with full
pockets, c^ntinually fed at full tables, and never felt what want was, could
not without much repining, cursing, and disdain, undergo so low and wretche^
a course of life: yet with such a noble patience did his vertue^s wife, both
b^are her own sorrows, and councelle^ him not to sinck under his, that he by
her example was as Iouia^l, in this his poverty, as ever before he was in
plenty, and (how great soever their wants were known to themselves) yet would
she set a good^face vpont, and not once show a sad or heavy countenance, for
fear to displease, or disc^mfort her husband.

It was a wonder to see, and hear, how people would descant upon these two,
for their making shift to live in this order: Some laughed him to scorn, and
said, pride had now caught a fall, the Peacocks feathers were plucked, and such
like, others were glad to see him take any honest course to live, considering
in what high bravery he spread his ^ailes before, but all persons (both men
and women, d^^ mightily comm^n) the wife, who in all these misfortunes was
never seen to knit a brow, or heard to upbraid her husband with any of his
dissolute forme^ courses, by which they were both brought to this beggary. It
being then b^^nted up and down the City, that Ferdinand, the brave young
Merchant that came from Bri^^ow, was fallen to decay, and liude in that mean
manner as you have heard before, a gentleman who knew him when he was in his
Iollity, and had taken notice of the state he was in now, came to the
Courtizan vp^n whom he spent so much in London, when he called her Mistress,
and as a most strange now and told her, that her servant ^erdinand, (whom she
followed to ^ristow) was in London, but exceeding poor. A (...) on him quoth
she) so when I was in Bri^^ow, he put a trick upon me, and came like a
rogue to me in his plymouth^cloake, and cheated me of all the rings,
Jewels, bracelets, and any thing of any worth, that ever he gave me, sending
me home like a sheep new sh^rne with scarce any wool on my back: why then
said the gentleman, he is paid in the same crackd money, which he^ delivered to
you: He that shaued is now shaue^* and so close ^ut, that what wool, you
carried on your back, I know not, but I fear he has scarce wool, or skin on
his back, for he is so poor that his wife and he are glad to keep a
tobacco-shop: a tobacco-shop (cried his quondam Mistress) O strange. It shall
never be said, that I l^ued a man, in his bravery, and would not l^^ke upon him
in his necessity, the injury he did me at Bristow, I deserved it, and pardon
it: his wrongs I forget, but not him, the many iouiall days and nights he and
I have spent together, are so freshly, and deeply printed in my memory, that
if I should not with gladness call them to mind, I would count my self
ungrateful. It shall never be reported that a man, a gentleman, a noble-minded
young fellow, spent his money upon me, when he was full of golden pieces, and
let them fly, but now he wants those pieces, and is become poor, I will spend
part of what I have, upon him. This is not the common humor of mad wenches
(such as I am) about the City, that get their living by the labor of their
thighs, and care not so they such men's estates (like their bodies) to the bare
bones: I am altered from the creature, I was at Bristow* and so, entreating the
gentleman, to direct her to the shop which Ferdinand kept, she making
herself very gallant, went thither, whom he beholding, blushed, as red as
fire, for shame she came upon him so unawares, into so homely a room, his wife
and he being so meanly habited: But this Mistress of his, (being a wench of a
lusty spirit) stepd to his wife, and kissing her, told her, she was come to
beg pardon for a robbery she had committed, in stealing away her husband,
^ome days from her board, and some nights from her pillow* but protests he
shall never play the trewant more with her: is sorry for what was past* and
wishes he had laid out his riots at no worse a market in Venic^, then he met
with, in London, and that his Italian banquet had been no dearer then that
which she invited him to in England. Annabell in (...) voice, tells her
partner, that she has (...) the book of all former reckonings: the debt of
her anger (both at her, and her husband) is all paid, she forgiues them both,
so, they run no more upon a new score with her, which both of them vow never
to do, and then the (...) ^wearing likewi^e never again to break into her
orchard, to steal a way those apples, which are for her own eating, nor if
she can help it, never hereafter to come into the company of her husband, in
some part of satisfaction toward all expenses between them, she delivers to
his wife as a free gift, twenty Pieces, and so takes her leave in this
unexpected kindness, conquering all ill opinion conceived against her, and
that small su^me of money of twenty pieces, redee^^ng ^ll the lavish spendings
upon his (...), and making more amends to (...) wife, then all his riotous
lay^ngs out, did do her hurt before.

Misfortunes seldom walk alone, and so when ble^^ings do knock at a man's
door, they lightly are not without followers and fellows. For just upon this
golden visitation (not usually put in practice by creatures of her quality)
came home Theobald, the (...) from Sea, upon whom our Bristow Merchant at his
Wifes request, bestowed one hunded pound, for the good he received by the
single Penny; and trusted him with another hundred pound to be repayed, if ever
heavens should send him a ^oone voyage, that he ^^ight be able to spare it:
With those two hundred pounds this Mariner playing the good Husband beyond the
Seas, in ^arbary, and other places within the Straights, had so ^ncreased his
Stock, that he was esteemed a rich man, and his credit very good upon the
(...): He coming to this (...)-Shop, his face much sunne-burnt with travel,
and his cheeks grown over with hair, called for a Pipe of smoke, and was
not known. Ferdinand perceiving by his (...) compl^^ion, and habit, that he
was a Seaman, asked in what part of the world he had lately b^ene, and the
other replying, both in Barbary, and some other places within the Straights,
Ferdinand prays him to tell him, if he knows not one Theobald, and whether
he saw him not in Barbar^, yes (quoth Theobald) I both knew him, and saw him;
but n^w he is past either my knowledge or (...) in this world, for these very
hands helped to bury him in the bottom of the Sea, where he dyed. Ferdinand
started at this, and l^^king pa^e, with a deep sigh from his heart, expressed a
great deal of sorrow for the loss of so faithful and honest a friend; and
his Wi^e hearing the sad Story, clapping her hand on her knee (as she sat) O
sweet heart ((...) she) if ^heobald be gone, the best of our hopes lie a dying*
f^r it was likely, if ever heaven had prospered him, he would not have shown
himself unthankful to you or to me, for the cou^tesies you and I did him. No
remedy (quoth her Husband) we must all dye one day, and since one of our best
Cards is out of the bunch, let us (...) and cut in the world as well as we
can: one g^^d, true friend as he was, (reckoning the treachery amongst men in
these days) is worth a rock of Diamonds, and though we are cheated of him by
death, yet let us two be true to one another, for the love of man and wife is
the noblest friendship.

By this time, our Mariner, or rather now our Merchant, had whi^^'d off three
Pipes of Tobacco, for which he was to pay three pence. And drawing out a whol^
handful of gold, told them, he had no white money, and they could not change
any one piece; yet looking in another pocket, he asked if they would take
Tokens, yes (said Ferdinand) they are as welcome to me now, as Angels and
double Soue raines have been in diebusillis, in my mad days, (for I have
spent some.) The other then told him, he could make but eight Tokens, and that
was but two pence, a penny less than his due; no matte^ Sir (answered our new
Tobacco-man) for his sake whom you say you knew, and saw him bur^ed at Sea, let
it alone, you shall pay nothing, and if you please, drink as much more: nay,
cried the other, shall I go a^th score, or drink in forma pauperis, my Pockets
having such gay lynings in them.

See, see, I now can make up your money, for there is eight Tokens, and a single
penny in silver (look you) tied with a string through the hole in it, for
fear of running away, and I can tell you, I part very unwillingly with that
Penny: Ferdinand and his Wife seeing the silk string, and noting the Penny, O
(cried she) Husband, this is the single Penny you had of me, when you went to
Sea, and which afterward you tied about his arm that is dead. I did indeed
(said he) and he swore, it should never from his arm, so long as there was any
breath in his body.

He was as good as his word then (replied Theobald) for when he yielded up the
ghost, I (as before he bid me) took it from his arm: And because you shall
know I am no counterfeit Messenger, look upon me well, has my kissing the
sun so altered my face, I am that Theobald, this is the same Penny, for which
you gave me an hundred pound in gold, for the good it did you: that Penny has
done me good too, I am a made man by it, and shall not only my self ever love
a Penny, but counsel every man else to make much of a Penny when he has it*
It is a Beggars stock, and a rich man's stewardship. You my noble Captain, and
worthy Master, made one lucky Uoyage with it, and brought home Wit for it,
(though since I hear, by your traveling without it, you came home a (...):) I
have made another Uoyage with the same Penny, and praise be given to heaven, I
have brought home wealth by it: Much am I in your debt, but am come honestly to
pay you all: you bestowed this ^ingle Penny upon me, when you took me for a
Beggar, I return your own Penny back again upon you, whom I now take, not
to be very rich: the one hundred pound my good Mistress (...) you to give me,
behold I lay for them an hundred golden pictures in her lap, with the other
hundred pound you trusted me with, to be paid, when the Seas and I playing
together, I should get a lucky hand: that hours come, I now have it, and all
that I am owner of, coming to me by your means, not only every Penny that
is mine shall be yours, but every pound be sent of an errand to fetch in
profit. He was as good as his word, for he lent them so much money, as put him
again into his trade of Merchandise, and at this hour is he a very worthy
Merchant in London.

FINIS.

