THE WHORE OF BABYLON. (...) Written by ^OMAS D^

LONDON Printed for Nathaniel Butter. 1607.

DRAMMATIS personae.
Titania the Fairie Queen: under whom is figured our late Queen Elizabeth.
Counselors to Titania.
Fideli. Florimell. Parthenophil. Elfi^on.
Ladies attendant.
Castina. Aura. Philaema. Agathe.
Campeius a Scholar. Paridel a Doctor. Plaine-dealing.
Time. Truth.
Th'Empresse of Babylon: under whom is figured Rome. Kings 3. Cardinals 4.
Agents for th'Empresse.
Ragazzoni. Campeggio.
Ropus a Doctor of Physic. An Albanois. Palmio, a Jesuit. Milites. Ministri.
Lectori.
THe General scope of this Drammaticall Poem, is to set forth (in Tropicall
and shadowed colors) the Greatness, Magnanimity, Constancy, Clemency, and
other the incomparable Heroical virtues of our late Queen And (on the contrary
part) the inueterate malice, Treasons, Machinations Underminings, and continual
blody stratagems, of that Purple whore of Room, to the taking away of our
Princes lives, and utter extirpation of their Kingdoms. Wherein if according
to the dignity of the Subject, I have not given it Luster, and (to use the
Painters rhethorick) do so fail in my Depthes and Heightnings, that it is not
to the life, let this excuse me; that the Pyramides upon whose top the glorious
Reign of our deceased Sovereign was mounted, stands yet so high, and so
sharply pointed into the clouds, that the Art of no pen is able to reach it.
The stream of her Virtues is so imme^surable, that the farther they are waded
into, the farther is it to the bottom.

In sailing upon which two contrary Seas, you may observe, on how direct a line
I have steered my course: for of such a scantling are my words set down, that
neither the one party speaks too much, nor the other (in opposition) too
little in their own defense.

And whereas I may, (by some more curions in ^nsure, then sound in judgment)
be Critically taxed, that I falsify the account of time, and set not down
Occurrents, according to their true succession, let such (that are so nice of
stomach) know, that I write as a Poet, not as an Historian, and that these two
do not live under one law. How true Fortunes dyall has gone whose Players
(like so many clocks, have struck my lines, and told the world how I have spent
my hours) I am not certain, because mine ear stood not within reach of their
Larums. But of this my knowledge cannot fail, that in such Consorts, many of
the Instruments are for the most partout of tune, And no marvel; for let the
Poet set the note of his Nombers, even to Apolloes own Lyre, the Player will
have his own Crochets, and sing false notes, in dispite of all the rules of
Music. It fares with these two, as it does with good stuff and a badde
Tailor: It is not mard in the wearing, but in the cutting out. The labors
therefore of Writers are as unhappy as the children of a bewtifull woman, being
spoyld by ill nurses, within a month after they come into the world. What a
number of throws do we endure ear we be delivered? and yet even then (tho
that heavenly issue of our brain be never so fair and so well lymd,) is it
made lame by the bad handling of them to whom it is put to learn to go: if
this of mine be made a cripple by such means, yet despise him not for that
deformity which stuck not upon him at his birth; but fell upon him by
misfortune, and in recompense of such favor, you shall (if your Patience can
suffer so long) hear now how himself can speak.

PROLOGVE.
THe Charms of silence through this Square be thrown,
That an vn-vsde Attention (like a Jewel)
May hang at every ear, for we present
Matter above the vulgar Argument:
Yet drawn so lively, that the weakest eye,
(Through those thin vailes we hang between your sight,
And this our piece) may reach the mystery:
What in it is most grave, will most delight.
But as in Lantskip, Towns and Woods appear
Small a far off, yet to the Optic sense,
The mind shows them as great as those more near;
So, winged Time that long ago flew hence
You must fetch back, with all those golden years
He stole, and here imagine still he stands,
Thrusting his silver lock into your hands.
There hold it but two hours, It shall from Graves
Raize up the dead: upon this narrow floor
Swell up an Ocean, (with an Armed Fleet,)
And lay the Dragon at a Doves softfeete.
These Wonders sit and see, sending as guides
Your Judgment, not your passions: passion slides,
When Judgment goes upright: for tho the Muse
(That's thus inspir'de) a Novel path does tread,
She Is free from foolish boldness, or base dread.
Lo; scorn she scorns and Enuies ranckling tooth,
For this is all she does, she wakens Truth.
A Dumb show.
HE draws a Curtain, discovering Truth in sad abili^ts; vncrownd: her hair
disheueld, and sleeping on a Rock: Time (her father) attired likewise in black,
and al his properties (as Sith, H^wreglasse and Wings) of the same Cull^r,
using all means to waken Truth, but not being able to do it, he sits by her
and mourns. Then enter Friars, Bishops, Cardinals before the Hearse of a Queen,
after it Counselors, Pentioners and Ladies, al these last having scarses
before their eyes, the other singing in Latin. Truth suddenly awakens, and
beholding this sight, shows (with her father) arguments of Loy, and Exeunt,
returning presently: Time being shifted into light Colors, his properties
likewise altered into silver, and Truth Crowned, (being clothed in a
robespotted with Stars) meet the Hearfe, and pulling the veiles from the
Councellers eyes, they w^dring a while, and seeming astonished at her
brightness, at length embrace Truth and Time, and depart with them: leaving the
rest going on.

This being done, Enter Titania (the Farie Queen) attended with those
Counselors, and other persons fitting her estate: Time and Truth meet her,
presenting a Book to her, which (kissing it) she receives, and showing it to
those about her, they draw out their swords, (embracing Truth,) vowing to
defend her and that book: Truth then and Time are sent in, and return
presently, driving before them those Cardinals, Friars etc. (that came in
before) with Images, Croziar staves etc. They gone, certain grave learned men,
that had been banished, are brought in, and presented to Titania, who shows
to them the book, which they receive with great signs of gladness, and
Exeunt Omnes.

THE WHORE of Babylon.
Empress of Babylon: her Canopie supported by 4. (...): 2. persons in
Pontifical roabes on either hand, the one bearing a s^d, the other the keys:
before her 3. Kings crowned, behind her Friars, etc. Empr. THat we, in pomp^
peace, in god like splendour,
With adoration of (...) dazeled eyes*
Should breath thus long, and grow so full of days,
Be fruitful as the Vine* (...) sons and daughters,
(All Emperors, Kings, (...) Queens) that (like to Cedars
Vprising from the bre^ (...) Lyhanus,
Or Olives nursed up by Jerusalem)
Heightened our glories, whilst we held up them:
That this vast Globe Terrestrial should be cantled,
And almost three parts ours, and that the ^ons,
Who suspiration draw out of this air,
With universal Aues, show^s, and o^es,
Should us acknowledge to be head supreme
To this great body (for a world of years:)
Yet now, when we had made our Crown complete,
And closed it strongly with a triple arch,
And had enriched it with those precious jewels
Few Princes ^uer see (white hairs) even now
Our greatness hangs in balance, and the stamp
Of our true (...), (...) (...) (...).

1. King. By wh^ (...) (...)

Emp. Ask these holy Fathers:
Ask those our outcast sons: a throne usurped
Our chair is counted, all our titles stolen.

2. King. What blasphemy dare speak so?

Emp. All our roabes,
Your vestments, (reverend, yet pontifical:)
This sword, these keys, (that open kingdoms hearts
To let in sweet obedience) All, but borrowed.

3. King. What soul above the earth --

Emp. Our royal signet,
With which, we, (in a mothers holy love)
Have signed so many pardons, is now counterfeit:
From our mouth flow rivers of blasphemy
And lies; our Babylonian Sinagogues
Are counted Stews, where Fornications
And all uncleanness Sodomiticall,
(Whose leprosy touched us never) are now daily acted:
Our Image, which (like Roman Caesar's) stamped
In gold, through the whole earth did current pass;
Is now blanched copper, or but gilded brass.

3. King. Can yonder roof, that's naild so fast with
Cover a head so impious, and not crack? (stars,
That Sulphur boiling over celestial fires,
May drop in whizing flakes (with skalding ve^gea^ce)
On such a horrid sin!

1. King. No mortal bosom
Is so unsanctified.

2. King. Who is it bright Empress,
That feeds so vlcerous, and so rank a Spleen?

Emp. A woman.

Omn. Woman! who?

Emp. The Fairie Queen: (nights
Five Summers have scarce drawn their glimmering
Through the Moons silver bow, since the crowned
Of that adored beast, on which we ride, (heads
Were struck and wounded, but so healed again,
The very scarres were hid. But now, a mortal,
An unrecoverable blovv is taken,
And it must bleed to death.

3. King. Heaven cannot suffer it.

Empr. Heaven suffers it, and sees it, and gives aim,
Whilst even our Empires heart is cleft in sunder:
That strumpet, that inchantresse, (who, in robes
White as is innocence, and with an eye
Able to tempt stearne murder to her bed)
Calls her self Truth, has stolen fair Truths attire,
Her crown, her sweet songs, counterfets her voice,
And by prestigious tricks in sorcerie,
Has raiz'd a base impostor like Truths father:
This subtle Curtizan sets up again,
Whom we but late banished, to live in caves,
In rocks and desert mountains.

2. King. Fear her not, she is but a shadow.

Empr. O it is a cunning Spider,
And in her nets so wraps the Fairie Queen,
That she suckes even her breast: She Has writ a book,
Which she calls holy Spells.

3. King. We Will break those spells.

Empr. The poles of heaven must first in sunder break,
For from the Fairie shores this Witch has driven
All such as are like these (our Sooth-Saiers)
And called false Seers home, that of things past,
Sing wonders, and divine of things to come:
Through whose bewitching tongues run golden chains,
To which ten thousand ears so fast are bound,
As spirits are by spells; that all the Tones
Of harmony, that Babylon can sound,
Are charms to Adders, and no more regarded,
Than are by him that is deaf, the sick man's groans
She, they, Titania, and her Fairie Lords,
Yea even her vassaile elues, in public scorn
Defame me, call me Whore of Babylon.

Omn. O unheard of profanation!

Empr. Give out I am common: that for lust, and hire
I prostitute this body: that to Kings
I quaffe full bowls of strong enchanting wines,
To make them dote on me.

Omn. Lets hear no more.

Emp. And that all Potentates that tread on earth,
With our abominations should be drunk,
And be by us undone.

Omn. We Will hear no more.

3. King. You have thrust Furies whips into our hands.

1. King. Say but the word, and we will turn home your wro^gs,
In torn and bloody colors.

2. King. All her bowers,
Shall like burnt offerings purge away (in fire)
Her lands pollution.

Omn. Let Us to arms.

Empr. Stay: hear me:
Her kingdom wears a girdle wrought of waves,
Set thick with precious stones, that are so charmed,
No rocks are of more force: her Fairies hearts,
Lie in enchanted towers (impregnable)
No e^gine scales them. Therefore go you three,
Draw all your faces sweetly, let your brows
Be sleekd, your cheeks in dimples, give out smiles,
Your voices string with silver, woo (like lovers)
Swear you have hills of pearl: show her the world,
And say she shall have all, so she will kneel
And do us reverence: but if she grow nice,
Dissemble, flatter, stoop to lick the dust
She goes upon, and (like to serpents) creep
Upon your bellies, in humility;
And beg she would but with us join a league,
To wed her land to ours: our blessing, go.

3. King. When mines are to be blown up, men dig low.

All three. And so will we.

Emp. Prosper: till this sun set
The beams that from us shoot, seem tounte^fet.

Exeunt. Manent 4. Cardinals, and certain Priests. 1. Card. This physic
cures not me.

2. Card. Nor me.

3. Card. Nor us.

1. Card. It is not strong of poison, to fetch up
That's baked within: my gall is overflowed,
My blood grown rank and foul: An inflammation
Of rage, and madness so burns up my liver,
That even my heart strings crack (as in a furnace)
And all my nerves into my eye-balles shrink,
To shoot those bullets, and my brains at once
Against her soul that has half dambd us: falls
Fetched hie, and near to heaven, light on no ground,
But in hels bottom, take their first rebound.

2. Card. Such are our falls: we once had mountaine-growth,
With Pines and Cedars.

3. Card. Now with none of both.

1. Card. I could be glad to loose the divine office
Of my creation, to be turned into
A dog, so I might lick up but her blood,
That thrusts us from our vineyards.

Tres. So could all.

4. Card. Revenge were milk to us.

2. Card. Manna.

1. Card. And it shall.
But how? we will not (as the head supreme
Over all nations, counsels) lick the dust
The Faierie treads on, nor (like serpents) creep
Upon our bellies in humility:
This were (with Fencers) basely to give ground,
When the first bowt may speed: or to sound parley,
Whilst they within, get swords to cut our throats:
No, we will at one blow strike the heart through.

Tres. How?

2. Card. By ponyards.

1. Card. No.

3. Card. Poison.

1. Card. No.

4. Card. Treason.

1. Card. Neither.

2. Card. How (reverend Como) then?

1. Card. Thus -- let us consult -- nay you shall hear.
You know that all the springs in Fairie land
Ran once to one head: from that head, to us:
The mountain and the valley paid us fruit;
The field her corn, the country felt no heat
But from our fires: Plenty still spread our boards,
And Charity took away. We stepped not forth
But with a god-like adoration
All knees bowed low unto us: why was this?
Why were our gardens Eden? why our bowers
Built like to those in Paradise? I shall tell you,
It was because the Law most mystical,
Was not made common: therefore was not vile;
It was because in the great Prophets Phanes
And hallowed Temples, we were Choristers:
It was because (wise Pylots) we from rocks,
And gulfes infernal, safely set on shore
Men's souls at yonder haven: or (being shipwrackt)
Strong lines forth cast we, suffering none to sink
To that Abisse, which some hold bottomless.
But now our very graves
Cannot save dead men's bones from shame and bruzes.
The monumentall marble Vrnes of bodies
(Laid to rest long ago) irreverently
Are turned to troughes of water now for jades:
Vast Charnel-houses, where our fathers heads
Slept on the cold hard pillowes of the earth,
Are emptied now, and changed to drinking rooms,
Or vaults for baser office.

2. Card. What Is therefore to be done?

1. Card. This must be done:
This shall be done: They hunted us like wolves,
Out of their Fairie forests, whipped us away
(As vagabonds) mocked us, and said our fall
Could not be dangerous, because we bore
Our gods upon our backs: now must we whip them,
But wiselier.

Tres. How?

1. Card. Thus: those that fill our rooms,
Hold Beacons in their eyes (blazing with fire
Of a hot-seeming zeal) to watch our entrance,
And to arm all against us: these we must quench:
They are counted wels of knowledge, poison these wells:
They are the kingdoms music, they the Organs,
Unto whose sound her Anthems now are sung,
Set them but out of tune, alls out of square,
Pull down the Church, and none can it repair,
But he that builds it: this is the faggot band
That binds all fast: vndoo't, undo the land --

Card. omn. Most certain.

1. Card. You therefore (the best consort of the soul)
Shepherds (whose flocks are men, lambs, Angels,) you
That hold the roof of yon Star Chamber up,
From dropping down to grind the world to dust,
You shall to Fairie land.

Card. omnes. A joyful voyage.

1. Card. Those that sing there the holy Hymns, as yet
Have not their voices clear, the stream of ceremony
Is scarcely settled, trouble it more: bayte hooks
To take some, some to choke: cast out your net
At first, for all the fry: let us spread sails
To draw unto our shores the Fairie whales.
That Truth, whose standard bearer Babylon,
And all we are, is not clean driven from thence,
Whither we send you: there sheeliues, but lives
A widow; steps not forth, dares not be seen
During her month of mourning: here we write you
How, and with whom to find her: what she bids,
That do: your hire's above.

Card. omnes. We know it well.

1. Card. And when you see those Fairy fishermen
Row in your streams, when they grow cold in working,
And weary of their own waters, that the sails
(Which stiffly bear them up) flag and hang low,
And that (like reeds, playing with a pair of winds.)
They promise facill pliance, then, then shake
The trees by the root, then'le make the branches blow,
And drop their mellowed fruits, even at your feet,
Gather them they are our own, then is the hour,
To weane those sons of black Apostasi
From her. (their stepdame) and to make them take,
A blessing from our reverend mothers hands,
Be happy go.

Card. Omn. We shall remember you,
In all our kneelings.

1. Card. Stay: ere you shift Air,
Sprinkle your selves all ore with sacred drops,
Take Periapts, Pentacles, and potent Charms
To conjure down foul feinds, that will be rayzed
To vex you, tempt you, and betray your blood,
About your necks hang hallowed Amulets,
That may Conserve you from the plagues of Error
Which will strike at you.

Sacr. Omn. We obey most holy fathers.

1. Car. And hear you,
If clymbing up to this haught enterprise
The foot slip, and (ith'fal) with death you meet --

Sacr. Omn. O glorious ladder!

1. Car. A Saints winding sheet,
Farewell: Mount all the engines of your wit
Exeunt: Sacr. When darts are sent from all parts, some must hit.
There is a fellow to whom, because he dare
Not be a slave to greatness, nor is molded
Of Court dow (flattering) but (should it thunder)
To his father. doing ill, (would speak ill) our Empress,
Has given this name. (Plain Dealing): this plain dealing
Have I shipd hence, and is long since arrived
Upon the fairy strnod: from him I expect,
Intelligence of all Occurrences,
He for the names sake, shall perhaps be welcome,
Into that Harlots Company (whom the fairyes
Think honest, and swear deeply, she is Truth.
That Strumpet by inticement heel bring over,

2. Card. It came to me in letters (two days since.
That this plain dealing serves the fairy Queen,
And will no more be seen in Babylon.

1. Card. How no more seen in Babylon, it is but one lost,
If Babylon subscribe to our wise-doome,
She shall lodge Double-Dealing in his room.
Exeunt. Titania Fidely, Florimell, Elf^n, Pentioners,
Tita. We thought the fates would have closde up our eyes,
That we should nere have seen this day star rise:
How many plots were laid to bar us hence,
(Even from our Cradle?) but our Innocence
Your wisdom (fairy Peers) and above all,
That Arm) that cannot let a white soul fall,
Has held us up, and lifted us thus hie,
Even when the Arrows did most thickly fly:
Of that bad woman, (Babilons proud Queen,
Who yet (we hear) swells with Inuenomed Spleen.

Fid. Whose poison, shall (like Arrows shot upright)
When forth it bursts, to her own downfall light.

Tita. Truth be my witness (whom we have imployde,
To purge our Air that has with plagues destroyed
Great numbers, shutting them in darksome shades)
I seek no fall of hirs, my Spirit wades,
In Clearer streams; her blood I would not shed,
to gain that triple wreath that binds her head,
Tho mine she would let forth, I know not why,
Only through rank lust after Souereigntie.

Flor. Enough it is for me, if with a hand,
(Unstained and vn-ambitious) fairy Land
I Crown with Oliue-branches: all those wounds,
Whose goary mouths but lately staind our ^ounds,
Bleed yet in me: for when great Hen. 7.
Elfiline
(Our grandsire) filled this throne, your bowers did shine
With fire-red steel, and not with Fairies eyes,
You heard no music then, but shriekes and cries,
Then armed Vrchins, and stearne household Elues,
Their fatal pointed swords turned on themselves.
But when the royal Elfiline sat crowned,
These civil woes in their own depth lay drowned.
He to immortal shades being gone,
(Fames minion) great King Hen. 8.
Oberon
Titaniaes royal father, lively springs,
Whose Court was like a camp of none but Kings.
From this great conquering Monarchs glorious stem,
Three (in direct line) wore his Diadem:
Edw. 6.
A King first, then a pair of Q. Mar. and Q. Eliz.
Queens, of whom,
She that was held a downe-cast, by Fates doom,
Sits now above their hopes: her maiden hand,
Shall with a silken thread guide Fairie land.

Omn. And may she guide it,

Fid. Even till stooping time
Cut for her (down) long years that she may climb
(With ease) the highest hill old age goes over,
Or till her Fairie subjects (that adore
Her birthday as their being) shall complain,
They are weary of a peaceful, golden reign.

Titan. Which, that they never shall, your stately towers
Shall keep their ancient beauty: and your bowers
(Which late) like profaned Temples empty stood,
The tops defaced by fire, the sloores by blood,)
Shall be filled full of Choristers to sing
Sweet heavenly songs, like birds before the Spring:
The flowers we set, and the fruits by us sown,
Shall cheer as well the stranger as our own.
We may to strange shores once our selves be driven,
For who can tell under what point of heaven
His grave shall open? neither shall our oaks,
Trophies of reverend Age, fall by our strokes,
Nor shall the brier, or haw thorn (growing under)
Fear them, but fly to them, to get from thunder,
And to be safe from foreign wildfire balls,
We Will build about our waters wooden walls.

Omn. On which we will spend for you our latest lives.

Titan. Fairies I thank you all, Stay who comes here?

Enter Parthen. Flor. Parthenophill, a Fairie Peer.

Titan. Parthenophill.

Parth. Bright Empress, Queen of maids
To us your Lords, amidst your Fairie shades:
Three Princes (so themselves they style) are come,
From whence, they will us not learn, and do entreat
Fair, and a free access.

Titan. What is their business?

Parth. The splendour of your glories, which a far
Shines (as they say, and justly say) as brightly
As here at hand, hither them draws, protesting
All faith and service to you, and requesting
That they the tribute of their loves may pay,
At your most sacred feet.

Titan. Allow them entrance.

Parth. They in a Fairie mask, the argument
Of this their duty, gladly would present.

Titan. As best them please.

The Hault-b^yes sounding, Titania in dumb show sends her Lords to fetch them
in, who enter bare he aded the three Kings queintly attired like Masquers
following them, who doing honor to her, entreat to da^ with her maids, and
do so: This done they discover. Titan. Your painted cheeks being off, your
own discouers,
You are no Fairies.

All three. No: but wounded lovers.

Titan. How! lovers! what! would you deflower my bed,
And strike off a poor maidenhead?
We know you not: what are you? and from whence?

3. King. The Spain
land of whom the sun so enamored is,
He lends them his complexion, gives me birth,
The Indian and his gold are both my slaves,
Upon my sword (as on the Axell tree)
A world of kingdoms move: and yet I write
Non sufficit. that lusty son of Jove
That twelve times showed himself more then a man,
Reard up two pillars for me, on whose Capitals
I stand (Colossus-like) striding ore seas,
And with my head knock at the roof of Heaven:
Hence come I, this I am, (O most divine)
All that I am is yours, be you but mine.

2. King. The country France.
at whose breast, hundreds of Kings
Have royally bin fed, is nurce to me:
The god of grapes is mine, whose bounteous hand
In clusters deals his gifts to every land:
My Empire bears for greatness, policy,
State, skill in Arts and Arms, sole sovereignty
Of this Globe universal. All her Princes
Are warriors borne: whose battles to be told,
Would make the hearers soldiers: it is a land
Of breath so sweet, and of aspect so fair,
That to behold her, and to conquer her,
(In amorous combats,) great king Oberon,
Your awefull father, often has thither come,
Like to a bridegroom, or a Reueller,
And gone again in goodly triumphs home.
From hence I spring, (fairest and most divine)
All that this is, is yours, be you but mine.

3. King. Be you but mine, and doubly will I treble
Their glories, and their greatness: like to thunder
My voice far off, shakes kingdoms; whilst mine own
Stands on Seven (b) hills, whose towers, and pinnacles,
And ren^rend Monuments, hold in them such worth,
And are so sacred, Emperors and Kings
(Like barefoote pilgrims) at her feet do fall,
Bowing to her trible crown imperial.
The language which she speaks, goes through the world,
To prove that all the world should stoop to her,
And (save your self) they do; you think you leave
A rich inheritance, if to your sons,
Ou^ fluent tongue you leave, (nor need they more)
Who speak and spend it well, cannot be poor:
On many nations necks, a foot to ^t,
If it be glorious, then may you be great.

1. King. We are all pleased, so please you be the bride,
Of three, we care not which two be denied.

2. King. For we are brethren, and those sacred breasts
From whence we draw our nourishment, would run
Nectar to you (sweet as the food of life:)
Our aged mother twenty times an hour,
Would breath her wholesome kisses on your cheek,
And from her own cup you should drink that wine
Which none but Princes taste, to make you look
With cheerful countenance.

3. King. You have a The Irish.
son,
Rebellious, wild, ungrateful, poor, and yet
Apollo from's own head cuts golden locks,
To have them grow on his: his harp is his,
The darts he shoots are his: the winged messenger
That runs on all the errands of the gods,
Teaches him swiftnes^ he will outstrip the winds:
This child of yours is (by adoption)
Our mothers now, her blessing he receives;
And tho (as men did in the golden Age)
He live in the open fields, hiding his head
In dampish caves, and woods, (sometimes for fear,)
Yet do we succor him. This your lost sheep,
We home again will bring, to your own fold,
Humbly to graze upon your Faierie plains,
Provided, that you sow them with such seed,
On which your whole land wholesomely may feed.

Titan. We know you now: O what a deal of pains
Would you (as others of this wing have taken)
To be in Faierie land called Sovereigns?
Thanks for it: rashly nothing must we do:
When kingdoms marry, heaven it self stands by
To give the bride: Princes in tying such bands,
Should use a thousand heads, ten thousand hands:
For that one Act gives like an enginous wheel
Motion to all, sets all the State a going,
And winds it up to height, or hurles it down,
The least blast turns the scale, where lies a crown:
We Will therefore take advice. If these think fit
We should be yours, you ours, we sign to it:
Your counsel Fairie Lords: Fideli speak.

Fid. Would you (my royal mistres) have those crystal
Fair, double-leaued doors, where light comes forth
To cheer the world, never to open more?
Would you have all your slu^bers turned to dreams,
Frightfull and broken? would you see your Lords
(In stead of sitting at your Council boards)
Locking their grave, white, reverend heads in steel?
If so, you cannot for all Fairie land
Find men to fit you better.

Titan. Florimell,
Breathes there in you Fidelies spirit?

Flor. No Lady.

3. King. No nor in any breast that is sound: true Cou^celler,
Already you speak music: you are strung
With golden chords; Angels guide on your tongue.

Flor. These potent, politic, and twin-borne States,
Would to their mitred fortunes tie our fates:
Our Fairie groves are green, our temples stand
Like goodly watch-towers, wafting passengers
From rocks, t'arriue them in the Holy land:
Peace (here) eats fruits, which her own hand has sown,
Your lambs with lions play: about your throne,
The Palm, the Laurel, and the abundant Vine
Grow up, and with your roses do entwine.
But if these gripe your Scepter once,

Titan. What then?

Flor. Vultures are not more ravenous tha^ these men,
Confusion, tyranie, vproares will shake all,
Tygres, and wolves, and bears, will fill your seat,
In nothing (but in misery) you will be great:
Those black and poisonous waters that bore down
In their rough torrent, Fairie towns and towers,
And drowned our fields in Marian^es days,
Will (in a merciless inundation)
Cover all again: red Seas will flow again:
The Devil will roar again: if these you love,
Be (as the Serpent,) wise then, tho a Dove.

2. King This he that speaks in music?

Titan. Are you all,
Of this opinion Lords?

Omn. All, all.

All 3. Lets hence.

3. King When close plots fail, use open violence.

Titani. Stay: Princes are freeborn, and have free wills,
These are to us, as valleys are to hills,
We may, be counceld by them, not controld:
Our words our Law.

Elfyr. Bright Sovereign.

Titan. You Are too bold.

3. King I knew the fort would yield.

1. King Attend.

2. King She Is ours.

Titan. You would Combine a League, which these would break.


1. King A League!

2. King Holy.

3. King Honorable.

Titan. Nay hear me speak,
You court me for my love, you I embrace
As maids do Suitors, with a smiling face
as you do me: receive our answer then: --
I cannot love you: -- what! such hardy men
And fly for one repulse? I mean as yet;
As yet I'mnot at leisure: But I swear
Even by my birthday, by the crown I wear,
By those sweet waters, which into us power
Health, that no sickness taints, by that blessed flower
Upon whose roseal stalk our peace does grow,
I swear I will my love on you bestow,
When one day comes, which now to you I Will name.

1. King The time! O blessed time!

2. King Balm to our sorrow.

3. King Name that most happy hour.

Tita. May be tomorrow:
Mark else and judge whether it may or no:
When Lambs of ours, are killed by wolves of yours,
Yet no blood sucked: when Heaven two Suns endures:
When Souls that rest in vnder-groundes,
Hear Anthems sung, and praise the soundes:
When drops of water are so spilt,
That they can wash out murders guilt:
When Surgeons long since dead and gone,
Can cure our wounds, being called upon:
When from yon towers I hear one cry,
You may kill Princes lawfully:
When a Court has no Parasite,
When truth speaks false, and falsehood right:
When Conscience goes in cloth of gold,
When Offices are given; not sold:
When merchants wives hate costly clothes,
When there is no lies in tradsmens oaths:
When Farmers by dear years do leeze,
And Lawyers swear to take no fees:
(And that I hope will never, never be)
But then (and not till then) I swear,
Shall your bewitching Charms sleep in mine ear.
Away.

Exeunt Faires: Manent 3. Kings. 1. King Derided to our faces!

2. King Baffuld!

3. King Made fools!

1. King This must not be.

Omn. It shall not be.

3. King Revenge:
Fly to our Empres bosom, there suck treason,
Sedition, Herezies confederacies,
The violation of al sacred leagues.
The combination of all leagues unjust,
The dispensation for sacramental oaths,
And when ye'are swollen with these, return again,
And let their poison rain down here in showers:
Whole herds of bulls laden with hallowed curses,
With Interdictions, excommunications,
And with unbinding Subjects fealties,
And with large pattents to kill Kings and Queens
Drive roaring hither, that upon their horns
This Empire may be tossed.

2. King She shall be torn,
Even joint from joint: to have her baited well,
(If we cannot) we will vn-kennell hell:

1. King. Will not you home with us?

3. King. No: here I Will lurk,
And in a Doue-like shape raven upon Doves:
I Will suck allegiance from the common breast,
Poison the Courtier with ambitious drugs,
Throw bane into the cups where learning drinks,
I Will be a Saint, a Fury, Angel, Devil,
Over Seas, on this side Seas; Devils forreners,
With Devils within hell freedom^, Devils in Vaults.
And with Church Devil, be it your souls health,
To drink down Babylonian Stratagems.
And to forge three-forkt thunderbolts at home,
Whilst I melt Sulphur here: If the sweet bane
I lay be swallowed, oh! a Kingdom bursts,
But if the poisoned hook be spied, then leuy
Eighty eight Legions, and take open arms,
The Guidon shall be mine, I Will bear the Standard.

Omn. Twi'll be a glorious war.

1. King Farewell.

3. Kidg Be gone, then one.
Who cleanes a Realms head, needs more swords

Exeunt. Fideli, Florimell, Parthenophill, Elfiron, Flory. These evil Spirits
are vexed, and tho they vanished
Like hideous dreams, yet have they left behind them,
Throbs, and heart* akings, in the general boosome,
As omynous bodings. Fairy Lack eyes. --

4. Foo^men Here.

Flory. Fly Sir throug the Air and never rest
(On pain to be into an vrchin turned)
Till thou have fixed upon the highest gates,
Of our great'st Cities Thei's a warning piece. Away.

Exit. Fidel. These to the Spirits that our waters keep,
Charge the^ that none rowst there, but those whose nets,
Are cast out of our Fairy gundolets. Away.

Exit. 2. Elfyr. These to the keepers of those royal woods
Where Lions, Panthers, and the kingly heardes
Feed in one company; that if wild Boares,
Mad Bulls, or rauing Bears, break in for prey,
Hoping to make our groves their wilderness,
Ours may like soldiers bid the^ battle. Fly.

Exit. 3. Parth These to the Shepherds on our Fairie downs
To warn them not to sleep, but with sweet Lays
And Jolly pipings drive into fat pastures
Their goodly flocks: Wolves are abroad say, Fly.

Exit. 4. Fidel. Place Providence, (because she has quick eye:
And is the best at kenning) in our Navy,
Courage shall wait on her.

Flor. No: she is most fit ^itania and (...) maids ^anding alose.

To go with us.

Omn. Let her in Counsel ^it.

Fid. T is said: and least they break into our walks
And kill our fairie-dear, or change themselves
Into the shape of Fawnes, being indeed foxes,
Range all the forest danger to prevent,
Foresight, beats storms back, when most Imminent.

Omn. Away then.

Exeunt. Manent Titania, and her maids. Titani. Wise Pilots? firmest pillars?
how it agrees,
When Princes heads sleep on their counsels knees:
Deep rooted is a state, and grows up hie,
When Providence, Zeal, and Integrity
Husband it well: These fathers twill be said
(One day) make me a granda^e of a maid.
Mean time my farewell to such gaudy lures
As here, were thrown up to have me quite ore-thrown,
I charge you maids, entertain no desires,
So irreligious and unsanctified:
Oh, they ha snakes sleeky tongues, but hearts more rugged
Then i^ the Russian Bear: our Fairie bowres
Would turn to Arabian deserts, if such flowers,
(Mortal as killing Hemlocke) here should grow,
Which to prevent, I Will have you vow.

Aur. We vow
By the white balls in bright Titaniaes eyes,
We their enchantments skorne.

Titan. It does suffice:
To bind it sure, Strew all your meades with charms,
Which if they do no good, shall do no harm.

Aur. Here comes your new sworn servant.

Enter Plain dealing. Titan. Now Sir, where have you bin?

Plain. Where have I bin? I have bin in the brauest prison --

Titan. What prison? a brave prison? Can there be a brave prison?

Plain. All your fine men live and die there, it is the Knights ward, and
therefore mustneeds be brave: some call it an Ordinary, but I say it is a
prison, for most of our gallants that are served every day with woodcockes
there, lie there in a manner upon Execution: they dare not peep out of doors
for fear of Serieants.


Titan. What are those Serieants?

Plain. Do not you know (mistress) what Serieants are? a number of your
courtiers are dear in their acquaintance: why they are certain men-mid wives,
that never bring people to bed, but when they are sore in labor, that no body
else can deliver them.


Titan. Are there such places in our kingdom, as Ordinaries,
what is the true fashion of them, what is their order?

Plain. They are out of all true fashion: they keep no order.

Ttian. Where about in Fairie land stand they?

Plain. In your great city: and here is the picture of your Ordinary.


Titan. When Master Painter please we shall have it: come Sir.

Plain. Your gallants drink here right worshipfully, eat most impudently, dice
most swearingly, swear most damnably, quarrel most desperately, and put up
most cowardly. Suppose I were a young country gentleman, and that I were to
come in (like an ass) among 'em, new cast into the bonds of satin.


Titan. What then?

Plain. Mary then do all the gyltrapiers turn their Tobacco faces in the
room upon me, and they puff, they gape on a fresh man like so many stale
Oysters at a full tide: then is there no salt to throw upon them, and to make
them leave gaping, but this; to cast off his cloak, having good clothes
underneath, single out some in the room worse accoustred then himself, with
him to walk boldly up and down strutting, laugh alowd at any thing, talk
alowde of nothing, so they make a noise, it is no matter.


Titan. You are grown sir an obseruer since you came out of Babylon.


Plain. Troth mistress, I left villains and knaves there, and find knaves and
fools here: for your Ordinary is your Isle of Gulles, your ship of fools,
your hospital of incurable madmen: it is the field where your captain and
brave man is called to the lastreckoning, and is ouerthrown horse and foot: it
is the only school to make an honest man a knave: for Intelligencers may
hear enough there, to set twenty a begging oflands: it is the strangest
Chesse-board in the world.


Titan. Why?

Plain. Because in some games at Chesse, knights are better then pawnes, but
here a good pawn is better then a knight.


Titan. Affoard our shores such wonders?

Plain. Wonders? why this one little Cocke-pit, (for none come into it, but
those that have spurs) is able to show all the follies of your kingdom, in a
few Apes of the kingdom.


Titan. Have we not in our Land Physicians
To purge these red impostumes?

Plain. Troth yes mistress; but I am Plain dealing, and must speak truth,
thou have many Physicians, some of the^ sound men, but a number of them more
sick at heart, then a whole parish full of Patients: let them cure themselves
first, and then they may better know how to heal others: then have you other
fellows that take upon them to be Surgeons, and by letting out the corruption
of a State, and they let it out I Will be sworn; for some of them in places as
big as this, and before a thousand people, rip up the bowels of vice in such a
beastly manner, that (like women at an Execution, that can endure to see men
quartred alive) the beholders learn more villainy then they knew before: others
likewise there be of this consort last named, that are like Beadles bribed,
they whip, but draw no blood, and of these I have made a Rhyme.


Titan. Let Us hear it.

Plain. Those that do jerke these times, are butlike fleas;
They bite the skin, but leap from the disease.

Titan. I Will have you Sir (because you have an eye so sharply pointed) to look
through and through that our great City, and like death, to spare the lives of
none, whose conscience you find sickly and going.


Plain. If I give you the copy of the Cities countenance, I Will not flatter the
face, as painters do; but show all the wrinckles of it.


Titan. Do so, you shall no more to Babylon,
But live with us, and be our Officer.

Plain. Have I any kindred in your Court? is there any one of my name an
officer? if there be, part us; because it will not be good, to have two of
the Plain-dealings in one office, they will be beggars if they do.


Titan. No Sir, we will provide you shall not want
Whilst us you serve. Go learn where Truth does lie.

Plain. Nay, nay, I have heard of her, she dwelles (they say) at the sign of
the Holy Lamb.


Titan. We built her up a lodging at our cost,
To have her labor in our Vineyards:
For till she came, no Vines could please our taste,
But of her fining Set your hand to hers,
Live with her in one house, fetch from our Court
Maintenance to serve you all: it will be to her
A comfort to have you stilby her sides,
She has such pretty and delightful songs,
That you will count your forestlabour light,
And time well spent only to hear her sing.
A way loose no more minutes.

Pl. Not a minute: I Will set more watches then a clockmaker.

Exit. Elfiron. Paridel.
Titan. What Is yonder man that kneeles?

Elfi. It Is Doctor Parry.
Paridel

Titan. Our doctor?

Par. The most wretched in your land.
the most in soul dejected; the most base,
And most unserviceable weed, unless
You by your heavenly Influence change his vileness
Into a vertuall habit fit for use.

Tita. Oh: we remember it; you are condemnd?

Elf. To Death.

Pari. Deservedly.

Tita. You had your hand
Not coulored with his blood.

Elf. No dearest Lady
Upon my vowed Loyalty.

Pari. The law, has fastened on me only for attempt,
It was no actual nor commenced violence
That brought death with it, but intent of ill.

Tita. We would not save them, that delight to kill,
For so we wound our selves: blood wrongly spilt
Who pardons, has a share in half the guilt.
You struck, our laws not hard, yet what the edge
Of Justice could take from you, mercy gives you
(Yourlife.) You have it signed, rize.

Pari. May yon Clouds
Muster themselves in Armies, to confound
Him that shall wish you dead, hurt, or vncrownd.

Pathenophill with Campeius. Par. To run in debt thus basely for a life,
To spend which, had been glory! O most vile!
The good I reap from this superfluous grace,
Is but to make my self like Casars horse,
To kneel whilst he gets up: my back must bear
Till the chine crack, yet still a servile fear
Must lay more loades on me, and press me down.
When Princes give life, they so bind men to'em,
That trusting them with too much, they vndo'em.
Who then but I, from steps so low would rise?
Great fortunes (eanrd thus) are great Slaueries:
Snatched from the common hangmans hands for this?
To have my mind feel torture! now I see,
When good days come, (the Gods so seldom give them;)
That tho we have them, yet we scarce believe them.
Heart how art thou confinde? and bard of room,
Thart quick enough, yet live within a tomb.

Tita. His name.

Parth. Ed. Campion.
Campeius: Deeply learnd.

Tit. We hear so:
But with it hear (from some whom we have weied
For judgment and experience) that he caries:
A soul within him framde of a thousand wheeles'
Yet not one steady.

Parthe. It may be the rumor
That thus spreades over him, flows out of hate.

Tita. Believe us no: of his, and tothers fate,
The threedes are too unlike, to have that wouen.

Camp. To gain her crown I Will not kneel thus.

Tita. Besides
The harvest which he seeks is reapde already:
We have bestowed it.

Parth. Here then dies our suit.

Tita. Now shall you try with what impatience
That bay tree will endure a little fire,
My Lord, my Lord,
Such swelling spirits hid with humble looks,
Are kingdoms poisons, hung on golden hooks,

Parth. I hope heel prove none such.

Tita. Such men often prove.
Valleys that let in rivers to confound
The hills above them, tho themselves lie drounde,
My Lord, I like not calm and cunning seas
That to have great ships taken or distressed,
Suffer base gallyes to creep ore their breast,
Let course hearts wear course skins: you know our will.

Parth. Which (as a doom divine) I shall fulfill.

Camp. Thrown down, or raizd?

Parth. All hopes (for this) are gone,
ome planet stands in opposition.

Exeunt Parth. and Camp. Camp. Vmh: So.

Tita. Now Doctor Paridell.

Pari. An humble suite,
I am grown bold finding so free a giver,
Where beggars once take alms, they look for it ever.

Tita. You ha been sworn our servant long.

Pary. Ten years. (uing)

Tita. And we should wrong you; since you take us gi-
To let you go with life, that should want living,
What is it we can grant you.

Pary. I ha been by two great Fayries in your land,
(Oppressed I dare not say) but so beaten down,
And suncke so low now with my last disgrace,
That all my happy thoughts lie in the dust,
Ashamed to look up yet: most humbly therefore
Beg I your gracious leave that I may vary,
This native Air for Foreign.

Tita. Oh you would travel,
You may, you have our leave: Challenge our hand.

Pary. Storms are at Sea, when it is calm at land.

Exit. Fideli Florimell. Fidel. The Sea-God has upon your maiden shoares,
(On Dolphins backs that pity men distressed)
In safety setta people that implores,
The Sovereign mercy flowing from your breast.

Tita. What people are they?

Fidel. Neighbors: it is the nation,
The Netherlanders. With whom our Faries enterchange commerce,
And by negotiation grown so like us,
That half of them are Fayries: the other half
Are hurtful Spirits, that with sulphurous breath
Blast their corn feilds, deface their temples, cloth
their towns in mourning, poison hallowed founts,
And make their goodliest Cities stand (like tombs)
Full of dead bodies, or (like palaces,
From whence the Lords are gone) all desolate.
They have but 17. danghters young and fair,
Vowed to live vestalls, and to know the touch
Of any forced or irreverent hand.
Yet Lust and Avarice (to get their dowers)
Lay barbarous seidge against their chastity,
Threaten to ravish them, to make their bodies
The temp^es of polution, or their bedds,
Graves where their honors shall lie buried,
They pray to have their virgins wait on you,
That you would be their mother, and their nurse,
Their Guardian and their Governor; when Princes
Have their lives giuen'em, fine and golden threads
Are drawn and spun (for them) by the good fates,
That they may lift up others in low states.

Tit. Else let our self decline; give them our presence:
In mysery all nations should be kin,
And lend a brothers hand, usher them in.
Exeunt. Stood here my foes (distressed) thus would I grieve them*
Not how they ha bin, but how I might relieve them.
Parthenophill.
Path. Your good deeds (matchless Fayrie) like the Sun,
(Rising but only in this poyn^ of heaven,
Spread through the world, So that a Prince (made wretched,
By his unhappy father, that lies slain
By barbarous swords, and in his goary wounds,
Drownes all the hopes of his posterity)
Hither, is like an orphan come (from far)
To get relief and remedy against those,
That would defeat him of his portion.

Tita. Pity and we had talk before you came,
She has not taken yet her hand from ours,
Nor shall she part, until those higher powers
Behold that Prince: good works are theirs, not ou'rs;
Go: bid him trust his misery in our hands,
Great trees I see do fall, when the shrub stands.

Exeunt. Fideli Florimell the states of the countries, Parthenophill Elfyron,
the Prince of Portugal. To the States. Auxilio tutos di^ittam, opibusque
Iu^abo. Non ignara mali, miseris succurr^ disco. Exeunt. The third King to the
King of Portugal. 3. King* Stands my beard right? the gown I must look grave,
White hairs like silver clouds a privilege have,
Not to be searched, or be suspected foul:
Make away those 2. turn coats. Suite me next
Like to a Satin devil (bravely) fly
Your sails shape: be here immediately.
Enter So: excellent: a subtle masque: alls fit,
This very cap makes my head swell with wit.
Among soldiers, I have played the soldier,
Bin mutinous, raild at the State, cursd peace:
They walk with crosse-armes, gaping for a day,
Have vnder-shorde their eie-lids (like trap windows.)
To keep them open, and with yawning ears,
Lie listening on flock bolsters, till rebellion
Beat up her drum: this lards me fat with laughter,
Their swords are drawn half way, and all those throats
That are to bleed are marked: and all those doors,
Where civil Massacres, murders (di'd in grain)
Spoil, riflings, and sweet rauishments shall enter,
Have tokens stamped on them (to make 'em known)
More dreadful then the Bills that preach the plague*
From them, with oiled hammes (lap'd in servile blew)
I stole, and filled out wine of Babylon,
To live things (made of clods) poor country sots,
And drunk they are: whole shires with it do reele,
Poisons run smooth, because men sweetness feel.
Now to my schoolmen, Learnings fort is strong,
But poorly manned, and cannot hold outlong
When golden bullets batter. -- Yonder Is one --
You Are a poor scholar?

Camp^ius. Yes.

3. King. What read you?

Camp. A book.

3. King. So learned, yet so young?

Camp. Ye may see Sir.

3. King. You feed some discontent?

Camp. Perhaps I ha cause.

3. King. What troubles you?

Camp. You trouble me: pray leave me.

3. Kin. Put your self, and your grief into my hands.

Camp. Say ye?

3. King Put your self and your grief into my hands.

Camp. Are you a Doctor? your hands Sir, pray why?

3. King. You know me no^.

Camp. Do you know your self? your business*
Are you a scholar?

3. King Judge of that by these. (^ool*

Camp. Oh Sir, I have seen many heads under such
That scarce had brains to line it: if you are a scholar,
Me thinks you should know manners, by your leave

3. Ring. Pray lea^e your name behind you. Sir.

Camp. Name, Campeius.

3. King: Campeius! vmh: Campeius? a lucky plannet
strikes out this hour: Campeius Babylon,
His name has in her tables: on his forehead,
Our Queen has set her mark: it is a mould
Fit to cast mischeife in none sooner rent
A Church in two, then Scholars discontent.
I must not loose this Martines nest, -- once more
You Are happily met.

C^mp. This bur still hang on me!
And you Sir.

3. King Tell me pray, did you never tast-I'me bold-did you
Those clear and redolent fountains that do norish, never taste
In viue and fresh humiditie those plants
That grow on the other side (our opposites)
Those that to us here, are the Antipodes,
Clean against us in grounds-you feel me-say
Never drunk you of that nectar.

Camp. Never.

3. King Never!
I wish you had, I gather from your eyes,
What your disease is, I h^ bin your self,
This was Campeius once (tho^ not so learned)
For I was bred (as you) in Fairy Land,
A Country! well* but it is our country: and so,
Good to breed beggars: She starues Arts* fa^ts fools,
She sets up drinking rooms, and pulls down schools.

Camp. So Sir.

3. King No more but so Sir? this discourse
Not to be searched, or be suspected foul:
Make away those 2. turn coats. Suite me next
Like to a Satin devil (bravely) fly
Your sails shape: be here immediately.
Enter So: excellent: a subtle masque: alls fit,
This very cap makes my head swell with wit.
Among soldiers, I have played the soldier,
Bin mutinous, raild at the State, cursd peace:
They walk with crosse-armes, gaping for a day,
Have vnder-shorde their eie-lids (like trap windows.)
To keep them open, and with yawning ears,
Lie listening on flock bolsters, till rebellion
Beat up her drum: this lards me fat with laughter,
Their swords are drawn half way, and all those throats
That are to bleed are marked: and all those doors,
Where civil Massacres, murders (di'd in grain)
Spoil, riflings, and sweet rauishments shall enter,
Have tokens stamped on them (to make'em known)
More dreadful then the Bills that preach the plague*
From them, with oiled hammes (lap'd in servile blew)
I stole, and filled out wine of Babylon,
To live things (made of clods) poor country sots,
And drunk they are: whole shires with it do reele,
Poisons run smooth, because men sweetness feel.
Now to my schoolmen, Learnings fort is strong,
But poorly manned, and cannot hold out long
When golden bullets batter. -- Yonder Is one --
You Are a poor scholar?

Campcius. Yes.

3. King. What read you?

Camp. A book.

3. King. So learned, yet so young?

Camp. Ye may see Sir.

3. King. You feed some discontent?

Camp. Perhaps I ha cause.

3. King. What troubles you?

Camp. You trouble me: pray leave me.

3. Kin. Put your self, and your grief into my hands.

Camp. Say ye?

3. King Put your self and your grief into my hands.

Camp. Are you a Doctor? your hands Sir, pray why?

3. King. You know me not.

Camp. Do you know your self? your business*
Are you a scholar?

3. King Judge of that by these. (^ool*

Camp. Oh Sir, I have seen many heads under such
That scarce had brains to line it: if you are a scholar,
Me thinks you should know manners, by your leave

3. Ring. Pray lea^e your name behind you. Sir.

Camp. Name, Campeius.

3. King Campeius* vmh: Campeius? a lucky plannet
strikes out this hour: Campeius Babyl^,
His name has in her tables: on his forehead,
Our Queen has set her mark: it is a mould
Fit to cast mischeife in* none sooner rent
A Church in two, then Scholars discontent.
I must not loose this Martines nest, -- once more
You Are happily met.

C^mp. This bur still hang on m^*
And you Sir.

3. King Tell me pray, did you never tast-I'me bold-did you
Those clear and redolent fountains that do norish, never taste
In viue and fresh humiditie those p^ants
That grow on the other side (our opposites).
Those that to us here, are th'Antipodes,
Clean against us in grounds-you feel me-say
Never drunk you of that (...).

Camp. Never.

3. King Never!
I wish you had, I gather from your eyes,
What your disease is* I ^a bin your self,
This was Campeius once (tho not so learned)
For I was bred (as you) in Fairy Land,
A Country! well, but it is our country: and so,
Good to breed beggars* She starues Arts: ^arts fools,
She sets up drinking rooms, and pulls down schools.

Camp. So Sir.

3. King No more but lo Si^ this discoure
Pallats not you.

Camp. Yes.

3. King. Nothing has passed me
Ihope, against my country, or the State,
That any you can take hold of.

Camp. If they could,
It Is but mine I, to your no.

3. King. You Are to sour:
Vnmellowed: you stand here in the shade,
Out of the warmth of those blessed ripening beams, --
Go to -- I grieve that such a blossom -- (raiz'd,

Camp. Sir, I know you not this thing which you have
Affrights me: scholars of weak temper need
To fear (as they on Sunbankes lie to read)
Adders in the highest grass: these leaves but turned,
Like willow sticks hard rubbed may kindle fire,
Cities with sparks as small have often been burned.

3. King. Do you take me for a hangman?

Camp. I would be loath,
For any harsh tune that my tongue may warble,
To have the instrument vnstrung.

3. King. You shall not:
Welfare unto you.

Camp. And to you. A word Sir:
Bred in this country?

3. King. Yes.

Camp. I am no bird
To break mine own neast down: what ^ight soever
Your words make through this air (tho it be trobled)
Mine ear Sir, is no reaching Fowling piece
What passes through it, kills: you may proceed,
Perhaps you would wound that, I wish should bleed.
You have the advantage now,
I put the longest weapon into your hands*

3. King. It shall guard you:
You draw me by this line: let us private walk.

Camp. This paths vnbruz'd: go on Sir.

3. King. Sir I love you.
The Dragons that keep learnings golden tree*
As you now have, I fought with, conquered them,
Got to the highest bough, eat of the fruit,
And gathered of the seauen-sold le^ues of Art,
What I desir^'d; and yet for all the Moon^s
That I have seen wax old, and pi^for anger,
I had outwatched them: and for all the candles
I wasted out on long, and frozen nights,
To thaw them into day; I filled my head
With books, butscarcecould filmy mouth with ^read,
I had the Muses smile, but moneys frown,
And never could get out of such a gown.

Camp. How did you change your star 3

3. King. By changing Air:
The god of waves washed of my poverty,
I sought out a new sun beyond the seas,
Whose beams begat me gold.

Camp. O me dull ass*
I am nailed down by wilfullbeggerie,
Yet feel not where it enters: like a horse
My hoofes are pared to 'th quick) even til they ble^
To make me run from hence, yet this Tortois shell,
(My country) lies so heavy on my back^,
Pressing my worth down, that I slowly creep*
Through base and slimie ways.

3. King. Country*

Camp. She hangs
Her own brats at her back, to teach them beg,
And in her lap sets strangers.

3. King. Yet your country.

Camp. I was not borne to this, not schooled to this,
My parents spent not wealth on meto this,
I will not stay here long.

3. King. Do not.

Camp. Being hence,
I Will write in gall and poison against my ^rce
This Fairie land, for (...) rewarding merit:
If ever I come back I Will be a Cal^rop
To prick my countries feet, that tread on me.

3. King. O she is unkind, hard hearted*

Camp. In disputation
I dare for latin, hebrew, and the greek,
Challenge an university; yet, (O evil hap!)
Three learned languages cannot set a nap.
Upon this threadbare gown: how is Art cursed?
She has the sweetest lymbes, and goes the worst:
Like common Fiddlers, drawing down others meat
With lickorish tunes, whilst they on scraps do eat.

3. King. Shake then these servile fetters off.

Camp. But how?

3. King. Play the mules part, now thou have sucked a dam
Dry and unwholesome, kick her sides.

Camp. Her heart -- her very heart --
Would it were dried to dust, to strew upon
Th'inuenomed paper upon which I Will write.

3. King. Know you the Court of Babylon?

Camp. I have read,
How great it is, how glorious, and would venture
A soul to get but thither.

3. King. Get then thither; you venture none, but save a soul going thither:

The Queen of Babylon rides on a beast,
That carries up seven heads.

Camp. Rare.

3. King. Each head crow'nd.

Enter his man like a sayler with rich attires under his arm. Camp. O
admirable!

3. King. She with her own hand
Will fill thee wine out of a golden bowl.
There Is Angels to conduct thee. Get to sea,
Steal over, behold, here is one to waft thee hence,
Take leave of none, tell none, thou art made, farewell.

Camp. Thus to meet heaven, who would not wade through hell?

Exeunt Campeius and Sayler, manet 3. King, enter Sayler presently. 3. King. To
flea off this hypocrisy, it is time,
Least worn too long, the Foxes skin be known:
In our dissembling now we must be brave,
Make me a courtier come; Asses I see,
In nothing but in trappings, different be
From foote-cloth nags, on which gay fellows ride,
Save that such gallants gallop in more pride.
Away. Stow under hatches that light stuff:
It Is to be worn in Babylon.
(...). At this grove,
And much about this hour, a slave well molded,
In profound, learned villainy, gave oath
Enter Coui^r. To meet me: Art thou come! Can thy black Art
This wonder bring to pass?

Con. See, it is done.

3. King. Ti^s. picture right.

Con. This virgin wax,
Bury I will in slimie putred ground,
Where it may peece-meale rot: As this consumes,
So shall she pine, and (after languor) die.
These pinnes shall stick like daggers to her heart,
And eating through her breast, turnethere to gripings
Cramp-like Conv^ns, ^g up her nerves,
As into this they eat.

3. King. Thou art famed for even,
If these thy holy labors well succeed,
Statues of molten brass shall rear thy name,
The Babylonian Empress shall thee honor.
And (for this) each day shall thou go in chains.
Where will thou bury it?

Coniur. On this d^ghill.

3. King. Good:
And bind it down with most effectual charms,
That whosoever with unhallowed hands,
Shall dare to take it hence, may rave and die.

Con. Leave me.

3. King. Farewell and prosper: be blind you skies,
You look on things unlawful with sore eyes.

Exit. Dumb show. The H^lt-boyes sound, and whi^ is b^ying the picture, Truth
and Time enter, Fideli, Parthenophil, ^on, and a Guard following aloose. They
discover the follow, ^ee is taken, the picture found, he kneeles for mercy,
but they making signer of refusal, be snatcheth at some weapon to kill
himself, is prevented, and led away. The Empres, Cardinals etc. Emp. Who sets
those tunes to mock^ us? Stay them.

Omn. Peace.

1. King Peace there.

1. Card. No more: your music must be dombe.

Emp. When those Caelestiall bodies that do move,
Within the sacred Spheres of Princes bosoms
Go out of order, it is as if you Regiment,
Wear all in vp-roare: heaven should then be vexed,
Me thinks such indignation should resemble,
Dreadful eclypses, that portend dire plagues
To nations, fall to Empires, death to Kings,
To Cities deuastation, to the world,
That universal hot calamity
Of the last horror. But our royal blood,
Beats in our veins like seas struggling for bounds,
A^tna, burns in us: bearded Comets shoot
Their vengeance through our eyes: our breath is lightning,
Thunder our voice; yet, as the idle Cannon,
Strikes at the Aires Invulnerable breast)
Our darts are phillip'd back in mockery,
Wanting the points to wound.

1. King Too near the heart,
(Most royal Empress) these distempers fit,
So please you, we will again assail her beauty
In varied shapes, and work on sutler Charms,
Again loves poisoned arrows we will let she.

Emp. No: proud spirits once denying, still deny.

1. Car. Then be your self, (a woman) change those over tur^s
You made to her of an unusual peace,
To an vnusde defiance: give your revenge,
A full and swelling sail, as from your greatness
You took, in ^yling to her: you have been
Too cold in punishment, too soft in ^hyding,
And like a mother (cause her years are green)
Have winck't at Errors, hoping time, or council,
Other own guilt (seeing how she goes awry,)
Would streigtenall. -- you find the contrary.

Empe. What follows*

1 Card. Sharp chastizment, leave the Mother
And be the steptdame; wanton her no more
On your Indulgent knee, sign no more pardons
To her Off-fallings and her flyings out,
But let it be a meritorious Act:
Make it a ladder for the soul to climb,
Lift from the hindges all the gates of heaven;
To make way for him that shall kill her.

Omnes Good.

1 Card. Give him an office in you Star^-chamber,
Or else a Saints place and Canonize him;
So Sanctify the arm that takes her life,
That sylly souls may go on pilgrimage,
Only to kiss the Instrument (that strikes)
As a most reverent relic.

Empe. Be it so.

1 King. In that one word she expires

Empe. Her fayrie Lords
(That play the Pilots now, and steer her kingdom
In fowlest weather) as white bearded corn
Bows his proud head before the imperial winds,
Shall soly groueling (here) when that day comes.

1 Ki. And that it shall come fates themselves prepare.

Emp. True, but old Lions hardly fall into the snare.

1 King. Is not the good and politic Satyran
(Our leagued brother, and your vassaile sworn)
Even now (this very minute) sucking close
Their fairest bosoms* if his trayn^ take well:
They have strange workings (down-wards) into hell.

Emp. That Satiran is this hand: his brains a forge
Still working for us, he is the true set clock
By which we go, and of our hours does keep
The numbered strokes, when welye bound in sleep.

1 Card. Besides such voluntaries as will serve
Under your holy colors and forsake
The Fairie standard, all such fugitives
Whose hearts are Babyloni^ed: all the Mu^ers
All the damb'd Crew, that would for gold tear off
The devils beard: All scholars that do eat
The bread of sorrow, want, and discontent,
Wise Satryan takes up, presses, apparrels, (woues,
Their backs like Innocent Lambs, their minds like
Rubs over their tongues with poison, which they spot
Against their own anointed; their own Country,
Their very parent. And thus shippes'em hither.
To make em yours.

Emp. To use.

1. Card. Only to employ them
As Bees whilst they have stings, and bring thighs laden
With honey, hiue them, when they are droanes, destroy them.

1. King The earnest which he gives you (adored Empress,)
Are three fit engines for us.

Empr. Are they wrought?

2. King They are: and wait in Court your utmost pleasure,
Out of your Cup made we them drunk with wines,
To sound their hearts, which they with such devotion
Received down, that even whilst Bacchus, swom
From lip to lip, in mid^st of taking healths,
They took their own damnation, if their blood
(As those grapes) streamed not forth, to effect your good.

Emp. Let us behold these fire-workes, that must run
Upon shortlines of life: yet will We use them,
Like instruments of music play on them,
A while for pleasure, and then hang them by,
Who Princes can upbraid, it is good they die.
For as in building sumptuous palaces,
We climb by base and slender scaffoldings,
Till we have raized the Frame: and that being done,
(To grace the work) we take the Scaffolds down,
So must we these: we know they love us not,
But Swallow-like when their own summers past,
Here seek for heat: or like flight Traualers,
(Swollen with vainglory, or with lust to see,)
They come to observe fashions and not me.

1. King As Traualers use them then, till they be gone,
Look Cheerfully; backs turn^d, no more thought upon.

Emp. What are they that fly hither (to our bosom)
But such as hang the wing, such as want neasts;
Such as have no sound feathers; birds: so poor,
They scarce are worth the killing: with the Lark
(The morning's fawlkner) so they may mount hie,
Care not how base and low their risings be?
What are they but lean hungry Crows that tire
Upon the mangled quarters of a Realm?
And on the house-tops of Nobility
(If there they can but sit) like fatal Ravens,
Or Skrich-Owles croake their falls and hoarsely bode,
Nothing but scaffolds and unhallowed graves?

1. King. Fitter for us: yet sit they here like doves.

Emp. True: like corrupted Churchme^ they are doves,
That have eat carrion: home we will therefore send
These busie-working Spiders to the walls
Of their own country, when their venomous bags
(Which they shall stuff with scandales, libels, treasons)
Are full and upon bursting: let them there
Weaue in their politic loomes nets to catch flies;
To us they are but Pothecary drugs,
Which we will take as Physical pills, not food:
Use them as lancets to let others blood,
That have foul bodies, care not whom you wound,
Nor what parts you cut off, to keep this sound.

Omn. Here come they.

Campeius, Parydell, and Lopes.
Lupus.
Emp. Welcome: rise, and rise up high
In honors and our favor: you have thrust
Your arms into our cofers, have you not?

All 3. Yes sacred Empress.

Camp. And into our own,
Have rayned down showers of gold.

Emp. You shall deserve it:
You see what Ocean can replenish you,
Be you but duteous tributarie streams:
But is your temper right? are not the edges
Of your sharp spirits rebated? are you ours?
Do not your hearts sink down yet? will you on?

All 3. Stood deathith' way.

Lup. Stood hell.

Emp. Nobly resolu'de:
But listen to us, and observe our counsel:
Back must we send you to the Fairie Land,
Danger goes with you; here is your-safetie: listen.
Choose winds to sail by; if the way ward seas
Grow stormy, houer, keep aloof: if fears,
Shipwracks, and death lie tumbling on the waves,
And will not off, then on: be venturous,
Conquests hard got are sweet and glorious.
Being landed, if suspicion cast on you
Her narrow eyes, turn your selves then to Moles,
Work under ground, and undermine your country,
Tho you cast earth up but a hand full high,
To make her stumble: if that bloud-hound hunt you,
(That long-ear'd Inquisition) take the thickets,
Climb up to Hay-mowes, live like birds, and eat
The vndeflowred corn: in hollow trees
Take such provision as the Ant can make:
Fly with the Batt under the eeues of night,
And shift your neasts: or like to Ancresses,
Close up your selves in artificial walls:
Or if you walk abroad, be wrapped in clouds,
Have change of hairs, of cie-brows, halt with soldiers,
Be shaven and be old women, take all shapes
To escape taking: But if the air be clear,
Fly to the Court, and underneath the wings
Of the Eagle, Faulcon, or some great bird houer,
Oaks and large Beech-trees many beasts do cover.
He that first sings a Dirge tun de to the death
Of that my only foe the Fairie Queen,
Shall Be my love, and (clad in purple) ride
Upon that scarlet-colored beast that bears
Seven Kingdoms on seven heads.

Camp. If all the Spells.
That wit, or eloquenee, or arts can set:
If all the sleights that bookemen use in schools
Be pow^efull in such happiness, it is mine.

Rop. What physic can I dare only to grow
(But as I merit shall) up in your eye.

Emp. We Will erect ladders for you strong and high,
That you shall climb to starrie dignity.

Both. We take our leave dread Empress.

Exeunt. Emp. Fare you well:
Our benediction go along with you --
Our malediction and your souls confusion
Like shiuer'd towers fall on your hickelesse heads,
And wedge you into earth low as the deep
Where are the damned, if our world you fire,
Since desperately you will ride and dare aspire.

1. King. But is this all? shall we thus bend our sinews
Only to empty quiuers, and to shoot
Whole sheafes of forked arrows at the Sun,
Yet never hit him?

2. Car. And the mark so fair!

Com. Nay, which is more, suppose that al these torre^ts
Which from your sea of Greatness, you (for your part)
And all those straggling floods which we have driven
With full and stiff winds to the Fairie Stronds,
Should all break in at once, and in a deluge
Of Innovation, rough rebellion, factions,
Of massacres, and pale destruction
Swallow the kingdom up, and that the blood
Even of Titania's heart should in deep crimson
Dye all these waters: what of this? what share
Is yours? what land shall you recover?

1. King. All.

Com. All!

1. King. I, all:
Between the Transuersaries that do run
Upon this cross staff, a dull eye may find
In what degree we are, and of what height
Your self (our brightest Ariad^e) is,
Being underneath that Tropicke: as those jewels
Of night and day are by alternate course
Worn in Heavens forehead,
So when Deaths VVinter comes,
And shortens all those beams of Majesty,
Which in this oblique and Zodiacall Sphere
Move with Titania now, shall loose their heat,
Where must the next Sun rise but here? from whence
Shall Fairie land get warmth? merely from hence.
Let but the taper of her life burn out,
We have such torches ready in her land
To catch fire from each other, that the flames
Shall make the frighted people think earth burns,
And being dazzled with our Copes of Stars,
We shall their temples hallow with such ease,
As 'twere in solemn gay procession.

Com Some line sea cards, that know not the seas taste,
Nor scarce the color: by your charms I gather
You have seen Fairie land -- but in a Map:
Can tell how't stands: but if you giue't a fall,
You must get bigger bones: for let me whisper
This to your ear; though you bait hooks with gold,
Ten thousand may be nibbling, when none bites,
And those you take for Angels, you will find Sprites.
Say that Titania were now drawing short breath,
(As that is the Cone and Button that together
Claspes all our hopes) out of her ashes may
A second K. James.
Phoenix rise, of larger wing,
Of stronger talent, of more dreadful beak,
Who swooping through the air, may with his beating
So well command the winds, that all those trees
Where sit birds of our hatching (now fled thither)
Will tremble, and (through fear struck dead) to earth,
Throw those that sit and sing there, or in flocks
Drive them from thence, yea and perhaps his talent
May be so bonie and so large of gripe,
That it may shake all Babylon.

Emp. All Babylon!

Com. Your pardon: but who will swear this may not be?

Emp. How the prevention?

Com. Thus; to fell down their Q. is but one stroke;
Our axe must cleave the kingdom, that is the Oak.

Emp. The manner.

Com. Easy: whilst our thunderbolts
Are anuiling abroad, call Satyran home,
He in his fadome metes vast Argoziet,
Huge Galeasses, and such wodden Castles,
As by enchantment of the waters move:
To his, marry yours and ours; and of them all
Create a brave Armado, such a Fleet,
That may break Neptunes back to carry it:
Such for variety, number, puissance,
As may fetch all the Fairie Land in turfes,
To make a green for you to walk upon
In Babylon.

1. King. Invincible! go on.

Com. Now when the volley of those murdring shot
That are to play first on Titaniaes breast,
And (yet) lean on their rests, go off and kill her,
So that the very Aluerado given,
Sounds the least hope of conquest; then, then show
Your warlike Pageants dancing on the waves,
Yours is the Land, the Nation are your slaves.

Omn. Counsel from Heaven!

Emp. None this shall ouer-whelme:
Brave voyage! Rig out ships, and fetch a Realm.

Exeunt. Parydell and Palmio.
Pal. You ariue on a blessed shore. The freight you bring
Is good: it will be bought up of us all
With our dear bloods: be constant, do not warpe
In this your zeal to Babylon.

Paryd. Grave Palmio,
To you I have unladen even my soul,
The wings from home that brought me had sick feathers,
Some you have pulled off: my own country grass
Was to my feet sharp needels (stuck upright)
I tread on downe-beds now.

Pal. But are your countrymen
(I mean those that in thought with us feast richly)
Fed with the course bread of affliction still?

Paryd. Still father Palmio still, and to relieve them
I dare do what I told you.

Pal. Noble valor!

Pary. So that I might but read on yonder scrolls,
A warrant writ under the seal of Heaven,
To justify the Act.

Palm. You have my hand,
And shall have more. You Are reconcil'de (Son?)

Pary. Yes.

Pal. Who did confess you?

Pary. Father Anniball.

Pal. But did the Nuntio Campeggio
Present your letters, and your vowed service
At Babylon.

Pary. He did: I sued out warrant
For passage safely thither: and from grave Com^
(One of the capital Columns of the state)
This I received.

Palm. He sends you here good welcome;
It Is strong; why went you not?

Pary. I like it not:
There wants a conuoy of some better words,
Which hourly I expect: upon a Sea
So dangerous, so full of rocks, so narrow,
(Albeit the venture holy and of honor)
I would not gladly sail, without direction
Of noble Pilots, home I would not come
Basely, but like a glorious voyager.

Enter Ragazzoni. Palm. Yea, you do well; the Nuntio Raggazoni!
Not know him?

Pary. Certes no.

Palm. Come, you shall meet:
Monsignor, here is a Gentleman desires
To have your arms about him. --

Rag. Willingly.

Palm. He undertakes an action full of merit,
Sans promise or reward, to cure all those
Through Fairie land, that are diseased within,
And he will do it, by letting one vein blood.

Ragaz. Shootes he at highest?

Palm. Yes.

Rag. Draw home, and give
Your arrows compass, that until they fall
Full on the head, none see them: you do well:
My hands are yours: good speed. --

Exit Ragazoni. Campeggio. Pal. Campeggio?
Now shall you hear some news.

Camp. I do assure you,
The Mistress of us all, has on this paper
Breathed you a blessing: your devotion
Is recommended highly, and to nourish
The flames new kindled in you, here is more fuel,

Pary. License to go and come, in verbo imperatrieis per omnes Iuris-dictiones
Babilonicas absque impedimento.

Good: would it had come sooner.

Camp. Why?

Palm. It Is general,
Exceeding absolute and peremptory.

Pary. It gives me my full sail: but by deep vows,
I am to travel lower, yet if season
Beat me not back, I will to Babylon,
What rubs soever I meet in letters still,
I Will kiss her sacred hand.

Camp. You change not byas.

Pary. Oh good sir, yonder is the goal I run for!

Raggazoni at one door, a Gentleman at another. Rag. Lend me your speeches both.

Pal. Yonder comes one of your own country.

Pary. Oh I know him Sir.

Pal. Walk in this college class but some few minutes,
I Will send or bring to you a Gentleman,
Next neighbor to your country: an Albanois --
The man I told you of.

Exeunt. Pary. Thanks Sir.

Gent. Met happily, I looked for you.

Pary. Dear countryman the parley we late held
About the land that bred us, as how order
Was robbed of ceremony (the rich robe of order)
How Truth was freckled, spotted, nay made leaprous:
How Justice --

Gent. Come, no more.

Pary. Even now (as then)
You ward blows off from her, that at all weapons
Strikes at your head: but I repent we drew not
That dialogue out to length, it was so sweet. (man

Gent. At hours more opportune we shall: but country-
I heard of late the music of my soul,
And you the instrument are made that sounds it:
It Is given me, that your self has sealed to heaven
A bond of your devotion, to go forth
As champion of us all, in that good quarrel,
That has cost many lives.

Pary. What need we use
Circumgyrations, and such wheelings? Sir,
Believe it, to recover our sick Nurse
I Would kill the noblest foster-child she keeps.

Gent. I know what bird you mean, and who^ you hate,
But let him stand to fall: no sir, the Dear
Which we all hope you will strike, is even the pride
And glory of the Forest: So, or not?

Pary. My vows are flowne up, and it must be done,
So this may be but settled.

Gent. Do you stagger?

Pary. All winds are not yet laid.

Gent. Have you looked out
^or skillful coasters, that know all the sounds,
The flats, and quick sands, and can safely land you
Out of all touch of danger?

Pary. I have met many,
And like a consort they hold several tunes --

Gent. But make they music?

Pary. Faith a little jarring:
Sometimes a string or so: yet reverend Palmio,
And Anniball a Codreto keep the stream
In which I swim: the Nuntio Ragazzoni
Plies me with wholesome physic; so the Nuntio,
My honored Friend Campeggio makes it clear,
That it is lawful.

Gent* Where at stick you then?

Pary. At a small rock, (a dispensation.)

Raggazzoni, Palmio, Campeggio, and the (...).
Gent. You cannot want for hands to help you for*
In such a noble work your friends are near; (ward:
Dear Countriman, my sword, my state, and honor,
Are for your use, go on; and let no heat
thaw your strong resolution, I shall see you,
Before you take to Sea.

Pary. You shall.

Genesis My dewtie.

Pai. This is the worthy Gentleman, to whom
I wish your love endeer'de: we have some conference.

Pary. Borne Sir in Fairy Land?

Alba. No marry Sir-An Albanois,

Pary. Then for proximitie
Of Countries, let us enterchange acquaintance,
I wished for your embracements, for your name
Is crowned with titles of integrity,
Judgment and Learning: let me upon their Bases
Erect a pillar, by which Babylon,
And all we may be strengthened.

Alba. I pray be apert and plain.

Pary. Then thus Sir; by the way of Argument
I would a question put, to taste your censure,
Because I do not soundly relish it.

Alba. Propone it Sir, I Will solue it as I can.

Pary. Suppose that in the field there were an Army,
Commixt of half your kinsfolk, friends, and lovers,
The other half sworn foes, (all countrymen;)
And that the leader of them were your father,
And that this leading father were so partial,
That to preserve that half which loves you not,
Ye would loose that which loves you: and that to take
This Captains life away, might bring this good,
Of two sides to make one, and save much blood:
Would not you do it.

Alba. Vmh: ya're full of Ambage:
I answer as my spirits lead me, thus,
I would not do it.

Pary. Why Sir.

Alba. Because I hold, Quod non omnino Licet.

Par. Come, Come, I know (without al commenting)
This text you understand: wey the utility,
That goes with it: the health it gives to thousands;
The sap it spreads through branches which now wither:
The restoration --

Alba. Sir I see to the bottom,
Of this deep well you diue in: I do arm you,
In this strong fight, just with the self same weapons
Which I would wear to guard me, and those are
My readings and belief settled by reading,
And this I find- Quod non sunt facie^da mala, vt ve^iant (...)
For good; (how great soever) must be don,
no ill how small soever.

Pary. It Is no evil.
To bar out so great ill, with so great good.

Alba. All good must not be done, but only that- Quod been and legitime fieri
potest: For Sir I know, that Deus magis amat aduerbia quam nomina. Quia in
actionibus magis et Placent Been and legitime quam bonum. Ita vt nullum bonum
Liceat sacere, nisi ben^ and legi^ime fieri potest. Quod in hoc Casu fieri non
potest.


Pary. Yet (with your favor) several learned men,
Are clean from your opinion and do hold, Quod licet.

Alba. Those learned men perhaps may hold it fit,
That to save many, they to one man's danger,
(Referring all to the depth inscrutable)
May allow of a particular; on no warrant
That they can show me written, but being stird,
With a human compassion to men's lives:
And less you revelation have divine,
That bids you do, do not; Thus you have mine.

Omn. What so hard at it.

Pary. We have done: the time,
Does pull me from your sweet society,

Pal. You will to Babylon.

Pary. I cannot tell;
Whether I do or no, you shall have notice,
How this great work goes forward; strengthen me,
With all your comforts, and commend my service
To the most glorious throne: if I get over,
There lands black vengeance on the Fairy shore.

Omn. If prayers can do it shall.

Exeunt. Plain dealing and Truth. Pay. But how shall I know, thou art the
right truth;

True. Because I am not painted.

Play. Nay if thou have no better color then that, there is no truth in thee,
for Im'e sure your fairest wenches are free of the painters.


True. Besides I am not gorgious in attire,
But simple, plain and homely; in mine eyes,
Doves sit, not Sparrowes: on my modest cheeks,
No witching smiles do dwell: upon my tongue
No unchaste language lies: my Skins not spotted
With foul disease, as is that common harlot,
That baseborne truth, that lives in Babylon.

Pla. Why? is she spotted?

True. All over, with strange vglines, all over,

Pla. Then she has got the pox, and lying at my host Gryncums, since I left her
company: how soever it be thou and I will live honest together in one house,
because my court mistress will have it so: I have been a Trauailer a great
while, plain dealing has lept from country to country, till he had scarce a
pair of soales to carry him.


True. Why? in what Countries have you been?

Pla. In more then I had mind to stay in; I have been amongst the Turks too,
the Turks made as much of poor plain dealing, as those whom we call
Christians.


True. What man is that great Turk? I never saw him:

Par. Nor ever shall: why the great Turk is a very little fellow; I have seen
a scuruy little bad paltry Christian, has been taken for the greatest Turk
there.


True. Where had you bin, when now you met with me.

Plain. Looking up and down for thy self: and yet I lie too, now I remember,
I was in the city: our mistress would needs have me go thither, to see
fashions: I could make an excellent Tailor for Ladies and gentlemen, and
fools, for I have seen more fashions there, then a picture drawer makes
skuruy faces, the first two years of his trade: its the maddest circle to
conjure in, that ever raiz'd spirit.


Truth. Tell me good kinsman, what in the city saw you?

Plain. What did I see? why I Will tell the cozen; I saw no more conscience in
most of your rich men, then in Tavern faggots: nor no more sobernes in poor
men, then in Tavern spiggots: I see that citizens fine wives undo their
husbands (by their pride) within a year after they are married; and within
half a year after they be widows, knights undo them: they will give a 100.
pound to be dubd ladies, and to ride in a coach, when they have scarce another
hundred pound left to keep the horses. But coze^ Truth, I met in one street a
number of men in gowns, with papers in their hands, what are all those?


Truth. Oh! they are the sons of Justice; they are those.
That beat the kingdom level, keep it smooth
And without rubs: they are the poor man's captain,
The rich man's soldier, and called Lawiers.

Plain. Lawiers? do know any of them?

Truth. A few.

Plain. I wondered what they were, I asked one of them if they were going to
football, yes said he, do you not see those country fellows, we are against
them; and who do you think shall win, said I, oh said he, the gowns, the
gowns.


Enter Time. Time. Follow me Truth; Plain dealing follow me.

Exit Plain. He charges like a Constable; come, we are his watch: follow me?
Is our Time mad?

O brave mad Time.

Exeunt. Dumbshew. A cave suddenly break^s open, and out of it comes Falsehood,
(attired as Truth is) her face spotted, she sticks up her banner on the top
of the Cau^; then with her foot in several places strikes the earth, and up
rises Campeius; a Friar with a box: a gentleman with a drawn sword, another
with rich gloves in a box, another with a bridle, Time, Truth with her banner,
and Plain dealing enter and stand alo^fe beholding all.

Time. See there is the Cave, where that Hy^na lurkes,
That counterfets thy voice, and calls forth men
To their destruction.

Plain. How full of the small pox she is, what ails she to stamp thus? is
the whore mad? how now? Yea do you rise before Doomes day; father Time, what
conduit-pipes are these, that break out of the earth thus?


Time. The conduit-heads of treason, which convey
Conspiracies, scandals, and civil discord,
Massacres, poysonings, wrackes of faith and fealty
Through Fairies hearts, to turn them into elues:
See Truth, see son, the snake slips off his skin,
A scholar makes a ruffian.

Plain. Now must that ruffian cuffe the scholar, if I were as he.

Time. And see, that shape which erst showed reverend,
And wo^e, the outward badge of sanctity,
Is clothed in garments of hypocrisy.

Plain. See, see, father, he has a jack in a box: what is that?

Time. A wild beast, a mad bull, a bull that roares,
To fright allegiance from true subjects bosoms;
That Bull must bellow, at the Flamins gate:
His gate, that tends the flocks of all those sheep,
That graze in the fatst pasture of the land,
Being all enclosed: that bull will on his back
Bear all.

Plain. Whither? whither?

Time. To hell: it is said to heaven
That will but sit him, till with hoof or horn,
He goare the anointed Fairie.

Plain. Such Bulls have I seen sent out of Babylon, to run at people: I
should once have rid upon one of the^, but he that begged my office, broke his
neck by the bargain, and saved me a labor: what is he with the sword, a master
of the noble Science?


Truth. A noble villain: see, he pulls down heaven
With imprecations, if that blade he sheath not,
In our sweet mistress breast. (villain?

Plain. O rogue! what good clothes he wears, and yet is a

Time. I, do: clap hands upon it, that poisoned glove,
Shall strike thee dead to death, with the strong sent
Of thy discovered treason.

Plain. What Is that horse-courser with the bridle?

Time. A slave, that since he dares not touch her head,
Would work upon her hand: -- laugh and conspire;
The higher villains climb, they fall the higher.

Plain. Stay father, now the Army comes forward: she takes down the flagge,
belike their play is done; what will she bear the colors? thou have color
enough in thy face already, thou needst no more: did ye ever see a more lousy
band? there is but two rapiers in the whole regiment: now they muster, now they
double their files: mark how their hands juggle, and lay about; this is the
maine battle: O well florisht Ancient! the day is their's; see, now they sound
retrait: whither march they now?


Exeu^t Tim. To death; their falls, thus Time and Truth proclaim,
They shall like leaues-drop from the Tree of shame.
Lets follow them.

Plain. To the gallows? not I; what do we know, but this freckled face
queen, may be a witch.


Time. She is so; she is that damned sorceresse,
That keeps the enchanted towers of Babylon.
This is the Truth, that did bewitch thee once.

Plain. Is this speckled toade she? She was then in mine eye,
The goodliest woman that ever wore fore part of Satin:
To see what these female creatures are, when they deal with 2. or 3. Nations;
how quickly they were carbu^les and rich stones? now she is more ugly then a
bawd.


Yruth. She looked so then; fairenes it self does cloth her
In men's eyes, till they see me, and then they loath her.

Time. Loose no more minutes, come, lets follow them.

Plain. With hue and cry, now I know her: this villainous drab is bawd, now I
remember, to the Whore of Babylon; and we will never leave her, till she be
carted: her face is full of those red pimples with drinking Aquauite, the
common drink of all bawdes: come.


Exeunt. Titania, Elfiron, Florimel, a gentleman standing aloof, and Ropus.
Titan. What comes this paper for?

Fid. Your hand.

Titan. The cause?

Fidel. The Moon that from your beams did borrow light,
Has from her silver bow shot pitchy clouds
T'ecclipse your brightness: heaven took your part,
And her surpised; A jurie of bright stars,
Have her unworthy found to shine again:
Your Fairies therefore on their knees entreat,
She may be pulled out from the firmament,
Where she was placed to glitter.

Titan. Must we then,
Strike those whom we have loved? albeit the children,
Whom we have nourisht at our princely breast,
Set daggers to it, we could be content
To chide, not beat them (might we use our will,)
Our hand was made to save, but not to kill.

Flor. You must not (cause he is noble) spare his blood.

Titan. We should not, for he is noble that is good.

Fid. The fall of one, like multitudes on ye,
Makes all the rest, (of footing) be more nyce:
But if by ventring on that glassie floor
Too far, he sinks, and yet rise with no more harm,
Ten thousand to like danger it does arm:
All mercy in a Prince, makes vile the state,
All justice makes even cowards desperate.

Titan. In neither of these seas, spread we our sails,
But are the impartial beam between both scales;
Yet if we needs must bow, we would incline
To that where mercy lies, that scale's divine:
But so to save were our own breast to wound,
Nay (which is more) our peoples: for their good,
We must the Surgeon play, and let out blood.
Every Peers birth sticks a new star in heaven,
But falling by Luciseran insolence,
With him a Constellation drops from thence.
Give me his Axe -- how soon the blow is given? writes
Witness: so little we in blood delight,
That doing this work, we wish we could not write.
Let Us walk my Lords. Florimel?

Flor. Madame.

Titan. Stay:
Not one armed man amongst us? you might now
Be all old-beaten soldiers: truth I thank ye;
If I were now a jewel worth the stealing,
Two thieves might bind you all.

Omn. With much ado.

Tita. I marry I commend yon gentleman.
Pray Sir come near, look you he is well provided
For all rough wethers: Sir, you way be proud,
That you can give arms better than these Lords,
I thank you yet, that if a storm should fall,
We could make you our shelter. A good sword?
This would go through stich; had I heart to kill
I Would wish no better weapon; but our days
Of quarreling are past; Shall we put up Sir,
We ha put up wrongs ere now, but this is right,
Nay we are not falling yet,

Flor. It did us good
To see how your Maiestick presence dawnted
The silly gentleman.

Tita. The silly gentleman!

F^d. He knew not how to stand, nor what to speak,

Tita. The silly gentleman? know you him Lords?
Where is he?

Flor. Gotten hence poor wretch with shame.

Tita. That wretch has sworn to kill me with that

Omn. How? (sword,

Fid. The traitor.

Flor. Lock the Court gates.

Omn. Guard her person.

Exeunt omnes. Tita. You guard it well. Alack! when lovers woo,
An extreme joy and fear, them so apall,
That over much love, shows no love at all.
Zeal sometimes-ouer-does her part-It's right --
When the frais done, Cowards cry whers the Flight. Pention^s. Florimell

Flor. The wolfes in his own snare: O damned slave!
I had like to ha made his heart my ponyards grave.
How got you to this knowledge? -- blessed heaven!

Tita. It came unto me strangely: from a window,
Mine eyes took mark of him; that he would shoot
Twa's told me, and I tried if he durst do it.
Is Ropus here, our Doctor?

Rop. Gracious Lady.
You have a lucky hand since you were ours,
It quickens our taste well; fill us of that
You last did minister: a draught, no more,
And give it fire, even Doctor how thou will.

Rop: I made a new extraction, you shall never
Relish the like.

Tyta: Why, shall that be my last?

To: Oh my dear Mistres!

Exit Ropus. Enter Parthenophill. Tyta. Go, go, I dare swear thou love my
very heart.

Parth: This scaly Serpent
Is thrown (as he deserves) upon the Sword
Of Justice; and to make these tidings twins,
I bring this happy news, Campeius,
(A Snake that in my bosom once I warmed:)
The man for whom --.

Tyta: Oh, we remember him.

Parth: This Owl, that did not love your sacred light,
Stole over the Seas by darkness, and was held
In Babylon a bird of noble flight:
They tourn'd him to a Goshawke, fether'd him
Armed him with tallents, and then gave him bells,
And hither charged him fly, he did: and soared
Over all your goodlyest woods, and thickest groves,
Enticing birds that had the skill in song,
To learn harsh notes: and those that failed in voice,
He taught to pecke the tender blossoms off,
To spoil the leauy trees, and with sharp bills
To mangle all the Golden ears of corn.
But now he is tan'e.

Tyta: Good sheapheards ought not care,
How many foxes fall into the Snare.

Enter Elfyron. Elf: Your civil Doctor, Doctor Part
Casts Anchor on your shores again, being freighted
With a good venture, which he says, your self
Must only have the sight of.

Exit. Tyta: Bring him hither:
Lord Florimell, pray call Fideli to us.

Florimell, Fideli, Ropus.
Tyta: Sure it is too hot.

Fid: On rogue!

Tyta: Set it to cool,

Fid. Hell and damnation, Devils,

Flor: What Is that?

Fid: The damned'st treason! Dog: you whorsen dog;
O blessed maid: let not the toad come near her:
What Is this? If It be his brewing, touch it not --
For it is a drench to kill the strongest Devil,
That Is Druncke all day with brimstone: come suck, Weezell,
Suck your own teat, you -- pray;
Thou art preserved.

Tyta: From what? From whom?

Fid: Look to that Glister-pipe:
One crown does serve thy turn, but here is a thief,
That must have 50000. crowns to steal
Thy life: Here it is in black and white -- thy life,
Sir thou Vrinall, Tynoco, Gama,
Andrada, and Ibarra, names of Devils,
Or names to fetch up Devils: thou know these Scar-crowes.

Rop: Oh me! O mercy, mercy! I confess.

Fid: Well said, thou shall be hanged then.

Tyta: Have we for this
She reads the letter, Heaped favors on thee.

Enter Guard. Fid: Heap halters on him: call the Guard: out polecat:
He smells, thy conscience stincks Doctor go purge
Thy soul, for it is diseased. Away with Ropus.

Omu* Away with him: foh.

Rop: Here my tale but out.

Fid: There Is too muchout already.

Fid: Oh me accursed! and most miserable.

Exit with Guard. Tyta: Goodness (...)! is my blood so sweet,
That they would pay so dear for it

Fid: To suck Lambs,
What would not Wolves do, he that this paper writ,
Had never meaning we should finger it.

Tyta: Our a mercy makes them cruel, hunt out these Leopards:
Their own spots will betray them: they build caves
Even in our parkes: to them, him; and the rest,
Let death be sent, but sent in such a shape,
As may not be too frightfull. Alack! what glory
Is it to buffet wretches bound in gives?
The debt is derely paid that is paid with lives
Oh! leave us all.

Enter Elfiron and Paridell. Fid: More Doctors! if this do
As well as the other, best to hang him too.

Exeunt Tytani^, Paridell.
Tyta: Florimell! Stay,
But give us liberty.

Pari: This is the blessed day for which (through want
Of those bright rays that sparkle from your eyes)
My frozen soul has languish'd Goddess complete,
If you, a wretch so mean, will bid to speak,
I shall unclasp a book whose very first line,
(Being not well pointed) is my doom to death:
But if your sacred judgment (on the Margin,)
Controwle all wresting comments, All your subjects
Will fold me in their bosoms.

Tyta: Give your mind.

Par: A Pilgrim have I been on foreign shores,
(Your gracious hand allowed it) in my wandering,
With Monsters I encountered of strange shape,
Some that sucked poison up, and spet it forth,
Upon your land: some, that shot forked stinges,
At your most God-like person: all were Giants,
Fighting against the heaven of your blessed reign:
With these (oh pardon me!) with these I held
A polliticke league, the lines of all their treasons,
(Drawn from one damned circle) met in me,
My heart became the Center, and the point
Was this -- I dare not tell it.

Tyta: Speak?

Peri: To kill you.

Tyta: How durst you (being our subject) wade so far?

Par: Your ear of mercy. I became a sponge
To drink up all their mischief, and lay drowned
In their infected waters, (with much loathing,)
Only that I before you might wring out
This their corruption, and my self make clear.
And now (immortal maid) i am not unlike
A casket wherein papers stuffed with danger,
Have close been locked, but those taken out, the chest
Serves to good use, so may my loyal breast:
For from their flintie hearts what sparks I got,
Were but to fire themselves.

Tyta. I praise your plotte,
You make us now your debtor, but a day
Will come, when we shall pay. My Lord, we want your Arm.

Pary: Vmh! I fear --

Tyta: Doctor, we will have (Sir) other Dialogues.

Exeunt. Pary: O shallow fool, thou have thy self undone,
She Is hardened and thou melted at one sun.

Exit. Enter Como, and the three Kings: Como. Our eyes have lusted for you, and
your presence
Comes as the light to day, showers to the spring,
Or health to sick men.

3. King. Thanks most reverend Fathers.

1. King. Our blood ran all to water, yea our souls
Strove all (at once) t'expire, (when it was blown
Hither from Faiery land, that all the darts
Which ours here, and your arm delivered there,
Fell either short, or lighted upon ice)
Lest you had lost blood in the enterprise.

3. King. No, I wear stronger Armor: gamester-like
I saw the dogs brought forth; and set them on,
Till the Devil parted them; but plucked off none,
I kept aloose out of the reach of paws:
Better to fight with Lions then with laws.
What drums are these?

2. King. Music of heaven.

Como. The dancers revel in steel.

1. King. These march to fill our Fleet.

3. King. From whence we will match with proud victorious feet,
And walk on Fayeries hearts, their beaten ways
With their own heads we will paue, whilst ours with bays,
And oak (the conquering soldiers wreath) we crown:
These hooks, or none, must pull their Cities down,
Invasion is the fire: See, See, in the Air
Angels hang beckoning us to make more haste,
Vengeance deferd grows weak, and runs to waste.
What Is this? --

Enter a Herrald before one: sounds once, and stays. Como. Ere we take ship,
we must to Court.

Omn. A ^ay.

3. King. In thunder: it is the soldiers sport.

Exeunt. The Herrald reads. Herald. It is the Imperial pleasure, decree,
peremptory edict, and dreadful command (upon pain of a curse to be denounced
upon him that is disobedient) from her who has power given her to make the
backs of stubborn Kings her foote-stooles, and Emperors her vassales: the
mother of Nations; the triple-crowned head of the world; the purple-rider of
the glorious beast; the most high, most supreme, and most adored Empress of
Babylon; that no Captain Generals of Armies, Generals of Squadrons, Admirals,
Colonels, Captains, or any other Officers of her magnificent, incomparable,
formidable, and invincible Armada, which is ordained to swallow up the kingdom
of Faiery, shall presume to set one foot on ship-bo^d, till her sacred hand
has blessed the enterprise by sealing them all on the forhead, and by bowing
their knees before the Beast. Sound, go on.


Exeunt. Dumb show: Empress on the Beast. Emp. Feels the base earth our
weight? is it common Air
We suck in and respire? do servile clouds,
(Whose azu^e wings spread over graves and tombs)
Our glorious body circumvolue? ^are night
Cast her black nets into days cristall streams,
To draw up darkness on our golden beams:
And us t'ecclipse, why is not Babylon
In a contorted chair made all of stars,
Wound up by wheels as high, nay boue the thrones
Supernall, which with Jove's own seat stand even,
That we might ride here as the Queen of heaven.
And with a spurn from our controwling foot,
That should like thunder shake th'etheriall floor,
Of life and heaven them both ot once bereave,
That thither up dare clime vithout our leave.

Com. You do: you ride there now this is your Sphere,
Earth is all one with heaven when you are here.

3. King. Yet there is a hell on earth or if nothell,
Devils there are or worse then Devils, that roar only at you.

Emp. At us? what, dare they roar?

3. King. Your pardon, and i will tell it.

Emp. Tell: We fear, no spots, the orb we shine in is so clear.

3. King. Thus then: the Faiery Adders hiss: they call you
The superstitious Harlot: purple whore:
The whore that rides on the rose-coloured beast:
The great whore, that on many waters sits,
Which they call many Nations: whilst their Kings,
Are slaves to sat your lust, and that their blood,
(When with them you have done) serves as a flood,
For you to drink or swim in.

Omn. O profane!

Emp. Go on: the searching small wounds is no pain.

3. King. These cowards thus when your back's turned (that strike)
Follow theirblowe and swear, that where you claim,
Supremacy monarchall over Kings,
It Is but your tiranous pride, and not your due.

Emp. But what your selves give, what have we from you?
You say we are your mother, and if so,
Must not sons kneel? they pay but what they owe.

3. King. They say the robes of purple which you wear,
Your scarlet veiles, and mantles are not given you
As types of honor and regality,
But dyed so deep with blood upon them spilt,
And that (all over) you are with red murder gilt:
The drink even in that golden cup, they swear
Is wine sophisticated, that does run
Low on the lees of error, which in taste,
Is sweet and like the neat and wholesome juice
Of the true grape, but it is rank poison down.

Omn. Have we not all it tasted?

Emp. Nay, utter all.
Out of their lips you see flows naught but gall.

3. King. What can my breath do more, to blast your cheeks,
And leave them glowing as red gads of steel?
My tongue's already blistred sounding this,
Yet must I whisper to your sacred ear:
That on your brow (they say) is writ a name
In letters mystical, which they interpret
Confusion, by great Babylon they mean.
The City of Confusion.

Emp. View our forhead?
Where are we printed with such Characters?
Point out these marks: Which of you all can lay
A finger on that Moale that marks our face?

^ King. They say you can throw mists before our eyes,
To make us think you fair.

Omn. Damnd blasphemies.

Com. You shall with rods of iron scourge these treasons.

1. King. The Mace is in your hand, grind them to dust.

2. King. And let your blows be sound.

3. King. For they are just.

Emp. Lets hear with what loud throats our thunder speaks,
Repeat our vengeance over, which to beat Kings
Must now fly over the seas with linen wings.

Com. Our Galeons, Galeasses, Zabraes, Galleys,
Ships, Pynaces, Pataches, huge Caruiles,
For number, rib and belly are so great,
That should they want a Sea near Faiery land
Of depth to bear them up, they in their wombs
Might swim with a sea thither: here are breifes
Of your imperial Armies.

Emp. Read them loud:
Thunder never speaks, but the voice crackes a cloud.

Com. In the first Squadron twelve great Galeons:
Floate like twelve moving Castles: Zabraes two.
Habilimented gloriously for war,
With Soldiers, Seamen, shot, and ordinance:
This Squadron stout Medyna does command:
Who of the maine is Captain General.
The second Squadron brave Ricalde leads,
Being Admiral to fouretene Galleons.
Flores de Ualdes guides, the third, the fourth
Follows the silken streamers of the haughty
Pedro de Valdes that* tried warrior.
Oquendo in the fifth front cries a Charge.
Bretandona bringes up the Leuantines
With his sixth Squadron: Gomes de Medyna
Waftes up the seventh like the God of war,
The eighth obayes Mendoza: and the ninth
Fierce Vgo de Montada: all these Squadrons,
For vessel, numbered are one hundred thirty,
The sight of Soldiers, Mariners, and Slaves
Twenty nine thousand, eight hundred thirty three.
Pieces of brass for battery these,
Six hundred thirty: add to these Gallions
Twenty Caruiles, and Saluees ten: which make
The whole Armada, eightscore lusty sail.
Add to all these your Generals of Armies,
Your Captains, Ensign bearers, (which in role,
Are eightscore and eleauen) the Voluntaries,
With officers and servants, then the Regiments
That are in pay: to these, all men of orders,
All ministers of justice: and to these
Supplies of forces that must second us,
And last that host of stars which from the Moon
Will fall to guide us on: these totald up,
You shall a hundred thousand swords behold
Brandish't at once, whose -- stands
Men will seem borne with weapons in their hands.

Emp. Go: cut the falt some with your mooned keeles,
And let our Galeons feel even childbirth panges,
Till their great bellies be delivered
On the soft Faiery shoares: captive their Queen,
That we may thus take often her crown, whilst she
Kneeles to these glorious wonders, or be trampled
To death for her contempt: burn, b^tter, kill,
Blow up, pull down, ruin all, let not white hairs,
Nor red cheeks blunt your wrath, snatch babes from breasts,
And when they cry for milk, let them suck blood,
Turn all their fields to lakes of gellyed goare,
That Seamen one day sailing by the land
May say, there Faiery kingdom once did stand.

Omn. They shall.

3. King: Ti^ done already.

Emp: To be sure
You all are ours, bow and adore the beast;
On whom we ride.

Omn. We fall beneath his feet.

Emp: Be blessed, obedience is in sons most sweet,
O strange, to you he stoopes as you before him,
Humility, he bows whilst you adore him:
To kindle lusty fires in all your blood,
A health to all, and as our cup goes rownd,
Draw near, we will mark you for our chosen flock,
Who buildes on hearts confirmd, buildes on a rock:
The seal of heaven! who on their foreheads wear it,
We choose for counsel: on their hands who bear it,
We mark for Action: Here, a health to all.

Omn. Brave health! to pledge it, see Kings prostrate fall*

Kneel. Emp: On: All: On*

3. King. Sing war thy loud and loftiest notes.
We win; our ships meet none but fisher-boates.

Exeunt. Enter Paridell and his kinsman. Pari: What if I show you a foundation,
Firm as earthes fixed Center? a strong warrant,
To strike the head off, an In unction
That bids me do it: A dispensation
For what I do: A pardon signed, that gives
Indulgence (...), and full remission
(For any criminal breach of the highest Law)
After it is done: nay more, a voice as clear
As that of Angels, which proclaims the act,
Good, honorable, meritorious,
Lawful, and pyous, what if I show you this?

Cox: Come, come, you cannot, then let riotous heirs
beg pattents to kill fathers: grant but this
Murder may be a fair Monopoly,
And Princes stabbed by Acts of parliament:
Who is it dare that thing meritorious call,
Which feindes themselves count diabolical?

Pari: Your coldness makes me wonder: why should you
run up to the neck, from drowning to save her,
That treades upon your head; your throat, to sincke you?

Coz: Say you should wound me; should I (in revenge)
Murder my self? for what can be the close
But death, dishonor; yea, damnation
To an act so base* nay so impossible.

Pari: Impossible; the parting of the air,
Is not more easy: look upon the Court,
Through narrow sights, and she is the fairest ma^ke,
And soonest hit of any: like the Turk
She walks not with a Ianisarie -- Guard,
Nor (as the Russia^ with fowle-big-boand slaves,
Strutting on each side with the slicing Axe,
Like to a pair of hangmen: no, alas:
Her Courts of Guard are Ladies, and sometimes)
She Is in the garden with as small a train,
As is the Sun in heaven: and our Access,
May then as easy be as that of Clyents,
To Lawyers out of term -- time.

Coz: Grant all this:
Nay, say the blow were given: how would you escape?

Pari: Oh sir, by water. --

Coz: I but. --

Pari: Nay, good cozen. --

Crz: You leap as short at safety, as at star: s
By water: why the gates will all be locked,
Wayters you must haue-none.

Pari: Hear me.

Coz: Hear me,
You must not have a man, and if you kill
With powder, air betrays you.

Pari: Powder! no sir, my dagge shall be my dagger^
Good sweet Cozen mark but how smooth
My paths are: look you sir.

Cox: I have thought upon a course.

Pari: Nay, nay, hear mine,
You are my mark, suppose you are my mark,
My level is thus low, but er'e I rise,
My hand's got up thus hie: the dear being struck,
The heard that stand about so frighted are,
I shall have leave to escape, as does a pirate,
Who having made a shot through one more strong,
All in that ship run to make good the breach,
Whilst the other sails away. How like you this?

Cox: As I like paper harness.

Pari: Ha, well, pawse then:
This bow shall stand unbent, and not an arrow
Be shot at her until we take our aim
In S. Iagoes park; a rare, rare Altar!
The fitt'st to sacrifize her blood upon:
It shall be there: in S. Iagoes park:
Ha coz! it shall be there: in the mean time,
We may keep followers (nine or ten a piece)
Without suspicion: numbers may work wonders;
The storm being sudden too: for were the guard
A hundred strong about her, look you sir,
All of us well appointed -- Case of dags
To each man, see you? you shoot there, we here,
Unless some spirits put the bullets by,
There Is no escape for her: say the dags fail,
Then to our swords. -- Come, there is no mettle in you.

Cox: No mettle in me? would your wars were honest,
I quickly would find Armor: what is the goade
So sharp, that makes you wildely thus to run
Upon your certain ruin?

Pari: Goad? sharp ponyards,
Why should I spare her blood?

Coz: She gave you yours.

Pari: To ha tan'e it had bin tyrany, her own lips
Confessed I struck her laws not hard: I ha spent
My youth, and means in serving her: what reap I?
Wounds (discontents) what gives she me? good words
(Sweet meats that rotte the eater:) why, last day
I did but beg of her the maistership
Of Santa Cataryna, it was denied me.

Coz: She keeps you to a better.

Pari: I tush, that's not all:
My bonds are yonder sealed; And she must fall.

Coz: Well coz, i will hence.

Pari: When shall I see you?

Coz: Hah.
Soon: very soon: sooner than you expect,
Let me but breath, and what I mean to do,
I shall resolve you.

Pari: Fare you well,

Coz: Ad^e. --

Exit. Tytania, Elfyron, Parthenophil, Parydel, Florimell.
Flor. News; thundering news sweet Lady: Envy, Ambition,
Theft sactilegious, and base treason, lay
Their heads and hands together, at one pull
To heave you from your throne: that mannish woman-Diuell,
That lustful bloody Queen of Babylon,
Has (as we gather ripe intelligence)
Rigd an And fleet, which even now beats the waves,
Boasting to make their wombes our Cities graves.

Tyta. Let it come on: our General leads above them,
Earthquakes may kingdoms move, but not remove them, Fideli.

Fid. He yonder, he that plays the fiend at sea,
The little Captain that is made all of fire,
Swears (Flemming-like) by twenty thousand Devils,
If our tongues walk thus, and our feet stand still,
So many huge ships near our coasts are come,
An Oyster-boate of ours will scarce find room.
He swears the winds have got the sails with child,
With such big bellies, all the linnen's gone,
To find them linen and in Babylon,
That there is not one ragge left,

Tyta. Why swells this fleet?

Fid. Thus they give out, that you sent forth a Drake,
Which from their rivers beat their water-fowle,
Tore silver feathers from their fairest Swannes,
And plucked the Halcions wings that roue at sea,
And made their wilde-duckes vnder-water diue,
So long, that some never came up alive.
This Sea-pie Babylon, her bug Bear calls,
For when her bastards cry, let the nurse cry
But this, the Drake comes, they hush presently,
For him thei'le cudgel us: will you ha the troth?
That scarlet-whore is thirsty and no blood,
But yours, and ours (sweet maid) can do her good.

Tyta. That drake shall out again: to counsel Lords.

Fid. Come, come, short counsel: better get long swords.

Flor. Good Lady dread not you, what ere befall.

Fid. Weel'e die first, yours is the last funeral: away, away, away.

Omn. Posts, posts, call messengers, posts with all speed.

Exeunt. Tyta. How? fear? why should white bosoms.
Fear a Tyrants Arm?
Tyrants may kill us, but not do us harm.
Are we your prisoners that you guard us thus?
Exeunt. Stay, And you too, we are alone: when last
Manet Paridell. We entertaynd your speech (as we remember)
Close trains and dangerous you did discover
To fire which you were praid.

Pari. I was.

Tyta. And yielded.
Albeit it were against our life.

Pari. Most true: -- my reasons. --

Tyta. We forget them not: at that time
Here was but one, (true) but one counceller,
Who stood aloof, heard nothing; and though abloud
Of courser veins then ours, would have been stird
Into a sea tempestuous to boil up,
And drown the Pilate that durst sail so far,
Yet of our princely grace (tho it was not sit,
Nor stood with wisdom) did we silence it.
These heaped favors, notwithstanding (Doctor)
It Is in our ear: the hammers lie not still,
But that new clubs of iron are forging now,
To bruise our bones, and that your self do know,
The very Anuile where they work.

Pari. I.

Tyta. Hear us, because it is thought some of those worser spirits,
And most malignant that at midnight rise
To blast our Faiery circles by the Moon,
Are your Familiars.

Pari: Madam.

Tyta: Sir anon.
Thee therefore I conjure (if not by faith,
Oathed allegiance, nor thy conscience,
Perhaps this ranckling vlcerateth them)
Yet by thy hopes of bliss, tell, and tell true,
Who is it must let us blood?

Pary: O unhappy man;
That thou should breathe thus long: mirror of women,
I open now my breast even to the heart,
My very soul pants on my lips: none, none,
I know of none.

Tyta. Well; none: rise and take heed,
They are no common drops when Princes bleed.
What hour is this? does not my larum strike?
This watch goes false.

Pari: This watch goes true.

Tyta: All Is naught. -- what hour is this?

Pari. Thy last hour, O heavens, further
The work you have begun: where art thou heart?

Tyta: Oh we see it: Doctor wind up the wheel, it is down,

Pari: It Is down.

Tita: How no^ what struck ^hee down? thy looks are wilds
Why was thine armed hand reard to his height?
What black work art thou doing?

Pari. Of damnation upon my self;

Tita* How?

Pari: Your words have split my heart in thousand shiners,
Here, here that sticks which I fear will not out
Better to die than live suspected. Had not your bright eyes
Turned back upon me, I had long ere this
Layen at your feet a bloody sacrifice.

Tyta. Staind Altars please not us: why do thou weep?
Thou make my good thoughts of thee now declyne,
Who loves not his own blood, will never spare mine,
Why do thou weep?

Pari. When on your face I look,
Me thinks I see those Virtues drawn alive
Which did in Elfilyne the seventh survive,
(Your fathers father, and your grandfather,)
And then that you should take me for a serpent
Gnawing the branches of that glorious tree,
The grief melts even my soul, O pardon me.

Tita. Contract thy spirits together, be composed;
Take a full man into thee, for behold
All these black clouds we clear: look up, it is day,
The sun shines on thee still: weel'e read: away --

Pari. O machlesse; im'e all poison, and yet she.
Tutnes all to goodness by wise tempering me.

Goes off. Tita. If thou prou'st copper -- well; this makes us strong
As towers of slint, All traitors are but waves,
That beat at rocks, their own blows dig their graves.

Paridell manet. Pari. For not doing am I damde: how are my spirits
Halde, tortured, and grown wild? on leaves eternal
Vows have I writ so deep, so bound them up,
So texted them in characters capital,
I cannot race them but I blot my name
Out of the book of sense: mine oath stands filde
On your court-roles, Then keep it, up to heave (...)
Thy ladder's but thus hie: courage, to kill
Ten men I should not freeze thus: yet her murder
Cannot be named bloodshed, for her Faieries
Are all of faith, and fealty assoyled
The balm that her anointed is washed off,
Her crown is now not hers; upon the pain
Of a black c^se, no more must I obey her,
I climb to heaven by this, climb then and slay her.

Tyta. Atyrants strange, but just end!
-- Reads. Ran mad for sloepe, and died Princes that plunge
Their souls in rank and godless appetites
Must seek no rest but in the arms of Sprites.

Pa. Nothing to read? that (if my nerves should shrink
And make mine arm revolt) I might have color
To vsurp this walk of hers: what is this? see, see
An Angel th^sts this iron into my hand,
My warrant signd from Babylon to kill her,
Endorsed, the last will of Paridell.
-- Read. The very words of Cardinal Co^ bi^ letter sent to parry.
Le concede sua Benedictione, plenaria indulgenza,
E^ remissione dit^tti li peccati -- tutti li peccati --
All, all my sins are paid off, paying this,
It Is done, it is done, All you blessed powers I charm,
Now, now, knit all your sinews to this arm.
As he offers to stop to her, he stays suddenly, upon the approach of Fidely,
Florimel, Parthenophil, Elfiron, the Ladies, a Guard, and the Doctors Cozen.
Omn. You haproou'd your self a loyal gentleman.

Fid. The hand of Angels guide us: She Is not here,
The Queen's killed; treason: Wenches, raise the Court.

Omn. Walk several ways first.

Fid. Ways; she is murdered: treason.

Tyt. Treason; asword. What traitor dare? who? where?

Flo. A guard the damned serpent, see, lurkes here.

Fid. Sure heeres some nest they breed in paw him fast,
This Woolfe, this Yeade (mark, he swelles red with poison,)
This learned knave is swome to murder thee.

Pari. I defy any man that speaks it.

Fid. Hah: -- defy this (...), ^est ge^,
Defy him, he shall spit^ (...),
Thy beard scald (...),

Pari. And do thou be^y (...) Sui^ thou so?

Cex. And will sea^ (...) with blood.

Pari. My no against (...); My (...) (...) good.

Fid. Better, his yeas go ^ked, (...) noes
Very well elo^ off, (...), t^h (...)
And here is his naked tru^.

S^ his (...) dagg^. Tyta. Again.

Pari. Oh me; -- new nothing l^ your mercy me can save.

Tita. It must not: pri^ that would safely live,
May grieve at traytor^ falls but not fo^me.
Let him be so^nniond to the b^re of sh^e.

Pari. It Is welcome, a black life, (...) bla^ fame,

Exit. Omn. Away with him.

Parth. Now to the business,
We have one foot.

Fid. I, I, look to the head.
The hangman cures those members.

Tita. What is done?

Flor. This (sacred Lady:) we ^ll either hand
Have raisde an Army both by ^a and land.
Your goodly ships bear the most royal freight,
That the world owes (true hearts) their wo^bes are full,
Of noble spirits, each man in his face
Shows a Kings daun^ing look, the soldiers stand
So thickly on the deck, so braue^ ^sim'd,
(The Silken streamers wa^lng or^ their heads)
That (seeing them) you would^dge tw^e pentecost,
And that the iollie youngsters of your towns,
Had flockt together in gay multitudes,
For May-games, and for summer merriments,
They look so ^ely: in such ^de mome
So many Faieries never dwelt at once,
Never so many men wea^ borne so soon,
The drum that gave the call, could not be heard
For iustling armours: er'e the call was done,
It was so ri^gd about with groves of pikes,
That when they brake on both sides to give way,
The beating of the drum was thunder^ noise,
Whilst coats of steel clasht so on coats of steel,
Helmets on helmets that they struck out fire,
Which showed like lightning, or those flames that fly
From the huge Cyclops-hammer, when they sweat
To forge Jove's thunder: And in such a heat
With quicknes rush they armed forth, captains swore,
Harness was sure the clothes they daily wore.
Men faster came to fight then to a feast.

Fid. Nay, women sued to us they might be pressed.

Parth: Old grandams that on crutches bear up age,
Full nimbly buckled Armours on their sons,
And when it was on, she clapped him on his back,
And spoke thus, run my boy, fight till thou art dead,
Thy blood can never be more bravely shed.

Tita: How are the numbers you have levied?

Fid: What your sea-forces are, this brief does speak.

Elf. We have raised double walls to fence your land.
The one the body of a standing Camp,
Whose tents by this are pitched in Beria,
On the shores point* to bar the foe from footing.

Tita: Over that Camp at Beria Tilbury.
we create
Your Florimell Lieuetenant General;

Elf: The other is to guarde your royal person.

Tita: Whose charge is yours: the sea Fideli, yours.

Elf: The standing camp of horsemen and of foot,
These numbers fill* Lances 253. Horsemen 769.
Footmen 22000. The moving Army, which attends on you,
Is thus made up: of horsemen and of foot, Launcers 481.
Light horsemen 1421. Footmen 34050.

Tita: We do not raise our hopes on points of spears,
A handful is an host, in a good fight,
Lambs may beat Lions in a war not right.
The General of all armies be our leader,
Be full of courage Lord (...) ^'re in year^.
For this be sure we will not out-liue our peers.

Fid. We Will al live, but will first have them b^'th ca^s.

Tyta. Go on, your conduct be the prosperous hand,
Make you the sea good, we will not loose the land.
Your Queen will to the field, It shall be said,
Once soldiers to their Captain had a Maid.

Exeunt. Truth and Plaine-dealing leading soldiers wi^ dr^ and colors, Time
^eting them. Time: You sweat well in this harvest.

Plai. Nay, when we come to bind up the who^e of Babilon^
Punckes and Pynaces in sheaues, we will sweat worse.

Time, Have you bestowed the other hands?

Tr^: I have.

Time, Incorporate this to you then ^is the mandate
Of your Liefetenant General. You fight
In your great Faieries quarrel, and Truths right,
Stand therefore ^oo't.

Uolu: I will have no wounds on my shoulders, I scorn to run,
Or to cry out of warlike kybes in the heel.

Time, Go (thou most God-like maid) and buckle on
The brest-plates fetched from thine own Armoury,
Let every soldier wear one, on each leader
Bestow a guiding-staffe, and a strong shield
That may as faithful be to his good sword
As thou art to his heart: head all the spears
With gold of Angell-proofe. Sit like a dove
Upon the Horsmans helm, and on his face
Fan with thy silver wings sweet victory,
Go, beat thy drum, that men may know thy ma^ch,
Spread thine own colors (Truth) so let them shine,
Soldiers may swear thei'le follow none but thine.

Away. True. I fly, swift as the winged wings.

Exit. Play. Today is workiday with me for all I have my best clothes
On, what do you set me to?

Time, Go thou and sweep the buses from the camp. (clean,

Plai. Conscience has left no b^mes big enough to do that

Time: Then purge the ^ents of all infectious aires.

Plai. Yonder Is one infection new broke out, if it be not (...)
From running, will choke us all.

Time, Name it, i will minister the remedy.

Plai. Time may do it, this it is: A Broker and his wife that dropped out of the
Hangmans budget but last day; are now eating in^ (...) Camp, and are victual^rs
to it: their very Cannes have hoop^s of gold lace now, that bangd Captains
Ierkins all over but yesterday: 15. Liefe tenants have eaten up their buffe
Ierkins with cheese and mustard: Nay this vil aine of fourscore ith hundred
has set up three Armourers shops with ha^nesse caps, and pewter coats, that
are ^de clean out with Ale: the Rogue lies every night upon as many feathers
which grew in soldiers ha^s, as will vndooe four hundred Schoolemasters to
hire them for their boys to go a feasting,


Time, Breed such disorders among the soldiers?

Play. They swarm like ^lyce: nay his wife tickels it too, for three
Muskateeres came but to drink Tobacco in her cabin, and she fired their
flaskes and tuch-boxes.


Time, Go (...) the Camp of these, and al like these.

Play. If any soldier swear i will casheere him too.

Time, You will scarce leave two in the Army then.

Play. What shall I do with those Pyoners yonder?

Ti. You know the ground, lead them to cast up trenches. Away.

Play. They are by this time leading one another, for when I left them, I left
them all casting, i will now go see what it comes to.


Exit. Time, I Will fly hence to the fleet of Babylon.
And from their tacklings and their maine-m^st tons*
Time shall shoot vengeance through his bo^ of steel,
Wedge like to split their Navy to the keele.
I Will cut their Princes down as blades of grass,
As this glass, so the Babilonian power,
The higher shall run out to fill the lower.

Exit. The Sea fight, 3. Ki. The sulphurous (...) belch^th on our ships,
Cut Cables, or the whole fleet drownes in (...)

1. King. Holla.

2 Ki. Of Babylon.

1. Ki. What (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) fire?

3 Ki. The Diuels^ (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)

1. King. Where Is (...)

2. King. Close under hat^ dr^ no^ she^ his head.

3. King. Da^ation on ^ch (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) Ricalde?

2. King. Who?

3. King. Our Ad^iral the Adm^all of (...) Navy* (...) (...)

2. King. Our stowte and brave ^alde keeps ^bed.

3. King. All po^os fire him out; P^dro de Vald^
Having about him 50. Canon^ thro^es,
Stretch wide to bark is boarded, taken.

2. King. Taken?

3. King. Without resistance: (...) sunk,
Oquendo burnt, Monca^a drowned, or (...),

1. King. The ship of all our medica^ents is lost.

3. King. Dogs eat our medicaments, such are our wounde^
We more shall Sextons need than Surgeons.

2. King. What course is best?

3. King. The best to get the day*
Is to ^oise sails up, and away.

Omn. Away, away, hoise sails up and away.

3. King. A world of men and wealth lost in one day.

Exeunt. Florimell followed by Captains, Ma^riners and (...) with Linst^ckes.
Flor. Shoot, shoot, they answer* brau^ m^re Linstocks: shoot:
This stratage^ dropped down from (...) in fi^.

Om. Board, board, hoyse more saile^ up* they fly, shoot, Shoot.

Exeunt. Titania in the C^p. Tita. We never held a royal Court till now:
(Warriors) would (...) no^ (...) ^st glorious,
To have Embassado^ to (...) (...) (...)
Our (...) of state* a dru^ for (...) (...)
Ruffling about us, heads (...) (...) in glo^
Of bright reflecting st^le: for (...)
(Treading soft (...)) (...) (...)
Trust me, I like the ^all life (...) w^ll,
I could change Cou^ (...) (...), (...) (...) (...) (...)
It Is a brave life: Me thinks it best beco^
A Prince to (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
My fellow soldier: I dare swear youl'e fight,
To the last man, your Captain being in fight.

They (...). Uolu: To the last least man's little finger.

A peale goes off, Fid. What (...) through all your blood your bre^th inspir^

Tita: For that we come not: no breast here wants fires.
It Was kin^ed in their cradles, strength, courage, zeal,
Meet in each bosom like a threefold flood,
We come with yours to venture our own blood.
For you and we are fellows; thus appears it,
The soldier keeps the crown on, the prince wears it.
Of all men you we hold the most most dear,
But for a soldier I had not been here.

Fid: Do not their gunnes offend you?

Tita: How? we are tried,
wh'im'e borne a soldier by the fathers side.
The Cannon (thunders Zany) plays to us,
Soft musikes tunes, and more mellodious:
And me more rarely like, because all these,
That now can speak the language of stern war,
Could not speak swords, or guns, nay scarce could go,
Nay were not borne, but like to new sown grain
Lay hid in the mold, when we went to be crowned,
Tho now they are tall corn fields, covering the ground.

Plain Dealing. Plai. Room, room, news, news, the youngest news that ever
was brought forth amonst men at Arms: a woman (sweet mistress) is brought to
bed of a man child in the Camp: a boy that looks as if he would shoot off
already: the bed they have swadled him in, is the piece of an old torn
Ancient: his blankets are two soldiers Mandilions: his cradle is the hollow
backe-peece of a rustie Armor: his head lies in a Murren that's quilted to
keep him warm, the first thing that ever he laid hold on, was a truncheon, on
which a Captain leand to look upon him, he will be a warrior I warrant. A
Can of beer is set to his mouth already, yet I doubt he will prove but a
victualer to the Camp: A notable fat double-chind bulchin.


Tyta: A child borne in ou^ Camp! go give him fame,
Let him be Beria called, by the Camps name.

Plai. That's his name then: Beria, in steed of a Mid^* Captain shall bear
him to the Po^nt, and if there (...) (...) to follow it, they shall (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) who would sweat thus to get (...) for another (...)
child? (...) fathers themselves are gu^ so sometimes, farewell (...).


Exit. Time, Florimell, Captains, Soldiers.
Tita: With roses us you crown, your self with palm,

Flor: Had we al wounds, your words are sovereign balm.

Tyta: Are those clouds sperst that strove to dim our light?

Flor. And driven into the (...) caves of night.

Tyta: Our hands be hea^'d up for it.

Time, Therers good cause,
We'are bown'd to do so by the higher laws,
Those roaring Whales came with devouring wombes*
To swallow up your kingdoms: foolish he^*
When half of them scarce knew where it did stand,
Under what Zenith, did they share your land.
At dice they played for (...), at each cast*
A Knight at least was lost: what do you set?
This Knight cries one (and names him) no, a Lord
Or none, it is done, he throws and sweepes the board,
His hatte is fall of Lords vpto the brimme,
The sea threw next at all, won all and him,
Would you these Gamesters see now?

Fid: See now? where?
Thei'le scarce see us, the last sight cost so dear,

Ti. Bid you me do it, it is done, Time takes such pride,
To wait on ^ou, heel lackie by your-side.
Those days of their Arrival, battle, flight,
And ignominious shipwrackes (like let Arrows,)
Are out of reach: of them the world receaues
But what Times book shows turning back the leaves,
But if you will see this Concubine of Kings,
In her maiesticke madness with her sons,
That hour is now but numbering out in sand,
These minutes are not yet run through Times hand,
For you and for your (...) (...) delight
^,

Tyta: I (...) be a glori^ (...),

Time, Unseen you shall (...) see and hear these (...)
On the green Mount of Truth (...) the Army move,
And meet you in the vale of (...),
Your captives are sent thither: quick (...) thought
You shall (...): (...) upon my active wings,
Time at one inst^t sees all Courts of King^.

Ex^ Time descending: Enter the Empress, (...) King^, and four Cardinals.
Emp. Hence: sting me not: you are Scorpions to my breast,
Diseases to my blood: he dies that speaks.

3. King. You Are mad.

(...). You Are mad.

4. Card. o falls not heaven!

Emp. Be silent:
Be damned for your speech: as you are for Act,
You are all black and close conspirators
In our disgrace.

3. King. You lie*

4. Card: O horrible?

3. King. You Rave yet know not why,

Emp. Thou say all is lost.

3. King: Drowned, burnt, split upon rocks, cast over board,
Throats cut by K^nes, whose hairs like else-loekes hang,

2 King. One of those sha^ock-eaters at one break fast,
Slit fourscore wezand pipes of ours,

1. King. Of yours:
Oquendo burnt, Pieme^telli Slain,
Pedro de Valdes taken,

1. Card. Could dwarfes beat Giants?

3. King. In one day fell (...): Galleous 15.
Drowned at the same time; or which was worser taken,
The same day made 1000. prisoners.
Yet not a cherry stone of theirs was sunk.
(...)


