A Rod for Run-awayes. Gods Tokens, Of his fearful Judgments, sundry ways
pronounced upon this City, and on several persons, both flying from it, and
staying in it. Expressed in many dreadful Examples of sudden Death, fallen upon
both young and old, within this City, and the Suburbs, in the Fields, and open
Streets, to the terror of all those who live, and to the warning of those who
are to dye, to be ready when God Almighty shall be pleased to call them. By
THO. D.

Lord, have mercy on London.



(...) London for John Trundle and are to be sold (...)

TO THE NOBLE Gentleman, Mr. Thomas Gilham, CHIRVRGIAN.
SIR,
IN this Universal sickness, give me leave (in a few Leaves) to salute your
Health, and I am glad I can do so. To whom, in an Epidemiall confusion of
Wounds, should a man fly, but to Physic and Surgery? In both which you
have skill. In the last, the World crowns your Fame (as being a great
Master.) Many of your excellent Pieces have been (and are to be) seen in
this City. No Painter can show the like, no Limner come near such curious
Workmanship. What you set out, is truly to the life; theirs but counterfeit.
I honor your Name, your Art, your Practice, your profound Experience: And, to
testify I do so, let this poor Monument of my love be looked upon, and you
shall find it. The Sender being sorry, it is not worth your acceptance: But
if you think otherwise, he shall be glad,

And ever rest, at your service, THO. Dekker.

To the Reader.
REader, how far soever thou art, thou may here see (as through a
Perspectiue-Glasse) the miserable estate of London, in this heavy time of
contagion. It is a picture not drawn to the life, but to the death of above
twelve thousand, in less then six weeks. If thou art in the Country, cast
thine eye toward us here at home, and behold what we endure. If (as thou
can not choose) thou art glad thou art out of this Tempest, have a care to
man thy Ship well, and do not ouer-lade it with bad merchandise (foul Sins)
when thou art bound for this place: for all the danger will be at thy putting
in. The Rocks of insection lie hid in our deep Seas, and therefore it behoues
thy soul to take heed what sails she hoyses, and thy body, what Pylote it
carries aboard. We do not think, but numbers of you wish your selves here
again: for your entertainment a far off cannot be courteous, when even not
two miles from us, there is nothing but churlishness. But it is to be feared,
some of you will get such falls in the Corne-Fields of the Country, that you
will hardly be able (without halting) to walk up and down London. But take
good hearts, and keep good legs under you, and be sure, you have hung strong
Pad-lo^es upon your doors; for in many Streets, there are none to guard your
goods, but the Houses themselves. If one Shop be open, sixteen in a row stand
shut up together, and those that are open, were as good to be shut; for they
take no Money.

None thrive but Apothecaries, Butchers, Cooks, and Coffin-makers. Coach-men
ride a cock-horse, and are so full of Iadish tricks, that you cannot be iolted
six miles from London, under thirty or forty shillings. Never was
Hackney-flesh so dear. Few woollen Drapers sell any Cloth, but every
Churchyard is every day full of linen Drapers: and the Earth is the great
Warehouse, which is piled up with winding-sheetes. To see a Rapier or Feather
worn in London now, is as strange, as to meet a Low Country Soldier with
Money in his Purse: The walks in Paul's are empty: the walks in London too
wide, (here is no lustling;) but the best is, Cheape-side is a com fortable
Garden, where all Phisicke-Herbes grow. We wish that you (the Run-awayes)
would suffer the Market-Folkes to come to us, (or that they had hearts to come)
for the Statute of fore-stalling is sued upon you. We have lost your
companies, and not content with that, you rob us of our victuals: but when
you come back, keep open house (to let in air) and set good cheer on your
Tables, that we may bid you welcome.

Yours, T. D.

Gods Tokens, Of His fearful Judgments.
WE are now in a set Battle; the Field is Great Britain, the Vantguard
(which first stands the brunt of the Fight) is London: the Shires, Counties and
Countries round about, are in danger to be pressed, and to come up in the Rear:
the King of Heaven and Earth is the General of the Army; revenging Angels, his
Officers; his Indignation, the Trumpet summoning and sounding the Alarm; our
innumerable sins, his enemies; and our Nation, the Legions which he threatens
to smite with Correction.

Sin then being the quarrel and ground of this war, Sin, the cause of
the Plague.
there is no standing against so invincible a Monarch (as God is) no defending
a matter so foul, as our sins are.

Would you know how many Nations (for sin) have been rooted up, and swept
from the face of the earth, that All Nations upon earth punished for sin.
no memory of them is left but their name, no glories of their Kings or great
Cities remaining but only this, Here they lived, Here they stood? Read the
Scriptures, and every Book is full of such Histories, every Prophet sings
songs of such lamentable desolations.

For, Jehovah, when he is angry, holds three Whips in Gods three whips.
his hand, and never draws blood with them, but when our Faults are heavy, our
Crimes heinous: and those three Whips are, the Sword, Pestilence and Famine.

What Country for sin has not smarted under these? Jerusalem felt them all.
Let us not travel so far as Jerusalem, but come home, look upon
Christendom, and behold Hungaria made desolate by sword and fire, Poland
beaten down by battles, Russia by bloody invasions: Hungary. Poland. Russia.
the Turk and Tartar have here their insolent triumphs.

Look upon Denmark, Sweden, and those Eastern Countries: How often has the
voice of the Drum called Denmark. Sweden. Norway, etc.
them up? Even now, at this hour, the Marches are there beating. How has the
Sword mowed down the goodly Fields of Italy? What Massacres has in our memory
been in France? Oh Germany! what foundations It^y.
of blood have thy Cities been drowned in? what horrors, France. The miseries
of ^ermany.
what terrors, what hellish inventions have not war found out to destroy thy
buildings, demollish thy Free States, and utterly to confound thy 17.
Provinces? Gods three whips have printed deep marks on thy shoulders; the
Sword for many years together has cut thy people in pieces; Famine has been
wearied with eating up thy children, and is not yet satisfied; the Pestitence
has in many of thy Towns, in many of thy Sieges and Leagers; played the
terrible Tyrant. In all these thy miseries, the (...) for them.
Spaniard has had his triumphs; his Firebrarnds have been flung about to
kindle and feed all thy burnings; his furies have for almost four score
years stood, and still stand beating at the Anuils, and forging Thunderbolts
to batter thee, and all thy neighboring Kingdoms in pieces.

Whilst these dreadful Earthquakes have shaken all Englands security.
Countries round about us, we have felt nothing: England has stood and given
aim, when Arrows were shot into all our bosoms. But (alas!) has this
Happiness fallen upon her because of her goodness? Is she better then others,
because of her purity and innocence? Is she not as ugly as others? Yes, yes,
the Sword is how Gods three whips ready to scourge England.
whetting; Dearth and Famine threaten our Cornefields, and the rauing
Pestilence in every part of our Kingdom is digging up Graves. The three Rods
of Vengeance are now held over us.

And shall I tell you why these Fears are come amongst us? Look upon the
Weapon which has struck other Nations; and the same Arm that wounded them,
smites now at us, and for the same quarrel (Sin.) Sin, the offense.


The Gospel (and Gods Heralds, Preachers) have a long time cried out against
our iniquities, but we are deaf, sleepy and sluggish; and now there is a
Thunder speaks from Heaven to wake us.

We flatter our selves, that the Pestilence serves but as a Broom, to sweep
Kingdoms of people, when they It is not the numerous multitude of people
causes the Plague.
grow rank and too full: when the Trees of Cities are ouer-laden, then only
the Plague is sent to shake the Boughs, and for no cause else: As in Turkey and
Barbary; where when a mortality happens, they fall sometimes ten thousand in a
day by the Pestilence. But we that are Christians, and deal in the merchandise
of our souls, have other books of account to turn over, then to reckon that
we dye in great numbers, only because we are so populous, that we are ready
(as the Fishes of the Sea) to eat up one another.

Our eyes have been witnesses, that for two whole Reigns together of two most
excellent Princes, and now at the beginning of a third (as excellent as they)
we have lived in all fullness: yet at the end of Queen Elizabeth's four and
forty years, when she dyed, she went not alone, but had in a train which
followed her, in a dead The number that dyed When Queen Elizabeth dyed.
march of a twelue-moneth long, only within London and the Liberties, the
numbers of 38244. those, who then dyed of the Plague, being 35578. the greatest
total in one week being 3385. of all diseases, and of the Plague 3035.

Thus she went attended from her earthly Kingdom, to a more glorious one in
Heaven, it being held fit in the vpper-House of the Celestial Parliament, that
so great a Princess should have an Army of her subjects with her, agreeing to
such a Majesty. But what numbers God will muster up to follow our Peacemaker
(King James of blessed memory) none knows: by the beginning of this Pressed
which Death makes amongst the people, it is to be feared, they shall be a
greater multitude.

To Queen Elizabeth and to King James; we were an unthankful and murmuring
Nation, and therefore God took them from us; they were too good for us; we too
bad for them and were therefore then, at the decease of the one, and now, of
the other, are deservedly punished: our sins increasing with our years, and
like the Bells, never lying still. Sins like the Bells, never lie still. The
Plague dreadful for three causes.


We are punished with a Sickness, which is dreadful three manner of ways: In
the general spreading; in the quickness of the stroke; and in the terror
which waits upon it. It is general: for the spotted wings of it cover all the
face of the Kingdom. It is quick: for it kills suddenly; it is full of
terror, for the Father dares not come near the infected Son, nor the Son come
to take a blessing from the Father, lest he be poisoned by it: the Mother
abhors to kiss her own Children, or to touch the sides of her own Husband:
no friend in this battle will relieve his wounded friend, no Brother shake his
brother by the hand at a farewell.

This is something, yet this is nothing: many Physicians of our souls fly the
City, and their sick Patients want those heavenly medicines which they ear
tied to give them, and those that stay by it, stand aloof.

The rich man, when he is dead, is followed by a How the rich are buried.
troop of Neighbors: a troop of Neighbors, not a troop of Mourners. But
the poor man is hurried to How the poor ^.
his Grave by nasty and slouenly Bearers, in the night, without followers,
without friends, without rites of burial due to our Church, due to our
Religion, to our Nation, to the Majesty of our Kingdom; nay, to the decency of
a Christian. O lamentable! more honor is given to a poor Soldier dying in
the field, more regard to many a Fellon, after he is cut down from the
Gallows.

I need not write this to you, my fellow Sufferers in London; for you know this
to be too true, you behold this, you bewail this. But I send this news to
you, News for Run-awayes.
the great Masters of Riches, who have for saken your Habitations, left your
disconsolate Mother (the City) in the midst of her sorrows, in the height of
her distress, in the heaviness of her lamentations. To you that are merry in
your Country houses, and fit safe (as you think) from the Gunshot of this
Contagion, in your Orchards and pleasant Gardens; into your hands do I deliver
this sad Discourse, to put you in mind of our miseries, whom you have left
behind you. To you that are fled, and to you to whom they fly, let me tell
thus much, That there were never so many burials, yet never such little
weeping. A tear is scarce to be taken of from the cheek of a whole Family
(nay, of a Much wayling, ^ttle weeping.
whole Parish:) for they that should shead them, are so accustomed, and so
hardened to dismal accidents, that weeping is almost grown out of fashion.
Why, says a Mother, do I shower tears down for my Husband or Child, when
I, before to morrow morning, shall go to them, and never have occasion to
weep any more?

Whilst I am setting these things down, word is Thursday the ^1. of July.
brought me, that this week have departed 3000. souls (within 200.) and that
the Plague is much increased. O dismal tidings! O discomfortable Relation!
Three thousand men would do good service in desending a City: but when in
every week so many thousands and more shall drop down of our great Armies,
what poor handfuls will be left?

To see three thousand men together in Armor in a Coffins and corslcts.
field; is a goodly sight: but if we should behold three thousand Coffins
piled (in heaps) one upon another, or three thousand Coarses in winding
sheets, laid in some open place, one on the top of each other, what a sight
were this? Whose heart would not throb with horror at such a frightfull object?
What soul, but would wish to be out of her body, rather then to dwell one day
in such a Charnell house?

O London! (thou Mother of my life, Nurse of my being) a hard-hearted son
might I be counted, if here I should not dissolve all into tears, to hear
thee pouring forth thy passionate condolements. Thy Rampires and warlike
provision might happily keep out an Enemy: but no Gares, none of thy
Percullises; no, nor all thy Inhabitants can beat back the miseries which No
gates keep out Thunder.
come rushing in upon thee. Who can choose but break his heart with sighings,
to see thee (O London) the Grandame of Cities, sit mourning in thy Widdowhood?
Thy rich Children are run away from thee, The rich fly. the poor dye.
and thy poor ones are left in sorrow, in sickness, in penury, in unpitied
disconsolations.

The most populous City of Great Britain is almost London grows leaves. The
Country too f^.
desolate; and the Country repines to have a Harvest before her due season, of
Men, Women, and Children, who fill their Houses, Stables, Fields and Barnes,
with their enforced and vnwelcommed multitudes. Yet still Both sick of (...)
disease.
they fly from hence, and still are they more and more feared and abhorred in
the Country.

How many goodly streets, full of beautiful and costly houses, have now few
people or none at all (sometimes) walking in the one, and not so much as any
living rational creature abiding in the other? Infection has shut up, from
the beginning of June, to the middle of July, almost (or rather altogether)
four thousand Four thousand doors shut up. Four thousand cro^es set (...).
doors. Four thousand Red-Crosses have frighted the Inhabitants in a very
little time: but greater is their number who have been frighted, and fled out
of the City at the setting up of those Crosses.

For every thousand dead here, five times as many are Now to the Runawayes.
gotten hence: with them must I have about; to them only do I now bend my
Discourse.

To the Run-awaies from London.
WE are warranted by holy Scriptures to fly from Persecution, from the Plague,
and We may fly: and, we may not fly.
from the Sword that pursues us: but you fly to save your selves, and in that
flight undo others.

In Gods Name fly, if you fly like Soldiers, not to discomfort the whole
Army, but to retire, thereby to cut off the Enemy, which is, Famine, amongst
the poor (your fellow Soldiers) and discomfort amongst your brethren and
fellow-Citizens, who in the plain field are left to abide the brunt of the day.

Fly, so you leave behind you your Armor for others to wear (some pieces of
your Money for others to spend) for others to defend themselves by.

Live not (as Captains do in the Low Countries) Londoners must not live upon
dead pay.
upon dead pay; you live by dead pay, if you suffer the poor to dye, for want
of that means which you had wont to give them, for Christ Jesus sake, putting
the Money up into your fugitive purses.

How shall the lame, and blind, and half starued be The poor perish.
fed? They had wont to come to your Gates: Alas! they are barred against them:
to your doors, (woe unto misery!) you have left no Key behind you to open
them; These must perish.

Where shall the wretched prisoners have their Baskets The Prisoners pine:
filled every night and morning with your broken meat? These must pine and
perish.

The distressed in Ludgate, the miserable souls in the Holes of the two
Counters, the afflicted in the Marshallseas, the Cryers-out for Bread in the
Kings Bench, and White Lion, how shall these be sustained? These must languish
and dye. You are fled that are to feed them, And (Run-awaies) all in long of
you.
and if they famish, their complaints will fly up to heaven, and be exhibited
in the open Court of God and Angels, against you. For, you be but Gods
Almoners; and if you ride away, not giving that silver to the needy, which the
King of Heaven and Earth puts into your hands to bestow as he inioynes you, you
rob the poor, and their curse falls heavy where it once lights. This is not
good, it is not charitable, it is not Christianlike.

In London, when Citizens (being chosen to be Aldermen) will not hold, they pay
Fines; why are they not fined now, when such numbers will not hold, but give
them the slip every day?

It were a worthy act in the Lord Mayor, and honorable Magistrates in this
City, if, as in the Towns to which our Merchants, and rich Tradesmen fly, the
Countrey-people stand there, with Halberds and Pitchforkes to keep the^ out;
so, our Constables and Officers, A new policy, good for the City.
might stand with Bills to keep the rich in their own houses (when they offer
to go away) until they leave such a charitable piece of Money behind them,
toward the maintenance of the poor, which else must perish in their absence.
They that depart hence, would then (no doubt) prosper the better; they that
stay, fare the better, and the general City (nay the universal Kingdom)
prosper in blessings from Heaven, the better.

To forsake London, as one worthy Citizen did, were noble; it would deserve a
Crown of commendations: for he, being determined to retire into the Country,
sent for some of the better sort of his Neighbors, asked A Phoenix in London.
their good wills to leave them, and because (the poison of Pestilence so hotly
reigning) he knew not whether they and he should ever meet again, he
therefore delivered to their hands, in trust, (as faithful Stewards)
fourscore pounds to be distributed amongst the poor. I could name the
Gentleman, and the Parish, but his charity loves no Trumpet. Was not this a
rare example? but, I fear, not one amongst a thousand that go after him, will
follow him.

But you are gone from us, and we heartily pray, that God may go along in all
your companies. Your doors are shut up, and your Shops shut up; all our great
Shops shut up.
Schools of learning (in London) are shut up; and Schools shut up.
would to Heaven, that, as our numbers (by your departing) are lessened, so our
sins might be shut up, and lessened too. But I fear it is otherwise: For all
the Kings Iniunction of Prayer and Fasting, yet on those very days (acceptable
to God, were they truly kept, and comfortable to our souls) in some Churches
you shall see empty Pewes, not filled as at first, not crowding, but sitting
aloof one from another, as if, whilst they cry, Lord, have mercy upon us, the
Plague were in the holy Temple amongst them. Where, if you look Our s^es stand
open.
into the Fields, look into the Streets, look into Tauernes, look into
Alehouses; they are all merry, all A Festival Fasting*
iocund; no Plague frights them, no Prayers stir up them, no Fast ties the^
to obedience. In the Fields they are (in the time of that divine celebration)
walking, talking, laughing, toying, and sporting together. In the Streets,
blaspheming, selling, buying, swearing. In Tauernes, and Alehouses, drinking,
roaring, and surfeiting: In these, and many other places, Gods Holy Day is
their Worke-day; the Kings Fasting-day, their day of Riot. I wash an Aethiope,
who will never be the whiter for all this water I spend upon him, and therefore
let me save any further labor.

And now to you, who, to save your houses from Red No (...) with (...).
Crosses, shift your poor servants away to odd nookes in Gardens: O take heed
what you do; in warding off one blow, you receive sometimes three or four. I
have known some, who having had a Child or Servant dead, and full of the
TOKENS, it has been no such matter, a little bribe to the Searchers, or the
conniuence of Officers, or the private departure and close burial of such a
party, has hushed all; but within a day or two after, three, four, or five
have in the same House deceased, and then the badge of Gods anger has been
worn by them, as openly as by other Neighbors.

For, God will not have his Strokes hidden: his G^ must have fair p^ay.
marks must be seen: He strikes not one at once, (when he is vexed indeed)
but many* one may be covered, many cannot. As his mercy will be exalted in
our weekly Bills (when the total sums fall) so will he have his justice
and indignation exemplified, in the increasing of those Bills: and therefore
let no man go about to abare the number: His Arithmerick brooks no crossing.

To arm you therefore with patience (in this great day of Battle, where so
many thousands fall) take a strong heart, a strong faith unto you; receive your
A wound well cared for, is balse cured.
wounds gladly, bear them constantly, be not ashamed to carry them about you,
considering under what Commander you receive them, and that is, The great
Omnipotent General of Heaven.

Why should any man, (nay, how dare any man) presume to escape this Rod of
Pestilence, when at his back, before him, round about him, houses are shut up,
Coarses borne forth, and Coffins brought in? or what poor opinion, what
madness fastneth that man, who goes about to conceal it, when the smiting
Angel goes from door to door, to discover it? He makes choice in what
Rooms, and what Chambers such a Angels are Heavens Harbingers, and appoint our
Lodgings.
disease shall lie, such a sickness be lodged in, and where Death must (as
Gods Ambassador) be entertained. There is no resisting this authority, such
Purseuants as these cannot be bribed.

Stay therefore still where you are, (sick or in health) and stand your
ground: for whither will you fly? Into the Country? Alas! there you find
worse enemies then those of Breda had in Spinola's Camp. A Spaniard is not so
hateful to a Dutchman, as a Londoner A Londoner, a Bugbeare.
to a Countryman. In Terme-time, a Sergeant cannot more fright a Gentleman
going muffled by Chancery Lane end, than a Citizen frights one of your
Lobcocks, though he spies him five Acres off.

In midst of my former compassionate complaynings (over the misery of these
times) let me a little A digression a little merrily, taxing the inciuility of
the common people.
quicken my own and your spirits, with telling you, how the rural Coridons
do now begin to use our Run-awayes; neither do I this out of an idle or
indecent merriment (for jests are no fruit for this season) but only to lay
open what foolery, infidelity, inhumanity, nay, villainy, irreligion, and
distrust in God (with a defiance to his power) dwell in the bosoms of these
unmannerly Oasts in these our own Netherlandish Dorpes.

When the Britains here in England were oppressed The old Britains oppressed
by the Pictes, call in the Saxons.
by Pictes and Scots, they were glad to call in the Saxons, to aid them, and
beat away the other: The Saxons came, and did so, but in the end, tasting the
sweetness of the Land, the Britains were feign to get some other Nation to
come and drive out the Saxons. So, The Country people the bold Britains, W^
of Moneys are the Pictes, and Londoners the Saxons, at first called in, but now
they care not if the Devil fetched them.
the Country people, being of late invaded by the Pictes, (beaten with wants
of Money to pay their rackt Rents to their greedy Landlords) with open arms,
and well-comming throats, called to them, and received a pretty Army of our
Saxon-Citizens; but now they perceive they swarm; now they perceive the Bells
of London toll forty miles off in their ears; now that Bills come down to them
every Week, that there dye so many thousands; they would with all their hearts
call in very Devils (if they were but a little better acquainted with them) to
banish our brisk Londoners out of their grassy Territories.

And for that cause, they stand (within thirty and forty miles from London) at
their Towns ends, forbidding any Horse, carrying a London load on his back,
Ouerthr^ horse and foot.
to pass that way, but to go about, on pain of having his brains beaten
out: and, if they spy but a footman (not having a Russet Suit on, their own
Country livery) they cry, Arm, charge their Pike-Staues, before he comes near
them the length of a furlong; and, stopping their noses, make signs that he
must be gone, there is no room for him, if the open Fields be not good enough
for him to reuell-in, let him pack. O you that are to travel to your friends
into the Country, take heed what Clothes you wear, for a man in black, The
foolish fear of the Corydons.
is as terrible there to be looked upon, as a Beadle in blue is (on Court-dayes
at Bridewell) being called to whip a Whore-master for his Letchery. A treble
Ruff makes them look as pale, as if, in a dark night, they should meet a
Ghost in a white Sheet in the middle of a Churchyard. They are verily
persuaded, no Plagues, no Botches, Blaynes, nor Carbuncles can stick upon any
of their innocent bodies, unless a Londoner (be he never so fine, never so
perfumed, never so sound) brings it to them. A Bill printed, called, The Red
Cross, or, Englands Lord have mercy upon us, being read to a Farmers Son in
Essex, he fell into a swound, and the Calfe had much a do to be recovered. An
Essex Calfe, killed without a Butcher.
In a Town not far from Barnet (in Hartfordshire) a Citizen and his Wife
riding down to see their Child at Nurse, the doors were shut upon them, the
poor Child was in the Cradle carried three Fields off, to show it was living:
the Mother took the Sparrowblastings.
Child home, and the Nurses valiant Husband (being one of the
Traind-Souldiers of the Country) set fire of the Cradle, and all the Clothes
in it.

A Broker in Houndes-ditch having a Brother in Hamshire, A Hounds-ditch Broker
entertained like a brother.
whom he had not seen in five years, put good store of money in his Purse,
and rode down to visit his beloved Brother, being a Tanner; to whose House
when he came, the Tanner-clapped to his doors, and from an upper wooden
window (much like those in a Prison) coming to a Parlee, he out-faced the
Broker to be no Brother of his, he knew not his face, his favor, his voice:
such a Brother he once had, and if this were he, yet his Trade (in being a
Broker) was enough to cut off the kindred, his Clothes smelt of infection, his
red Beard (for he has one) was poison to him; and therefore, if he would not
depart to the place from whence he came, he would either set his Dogs upon
him, or cause his Servants to throw him This was above threescore in the
hundred.
into a Tan-Fat; and if (quoth he) thou art any Brother of mine, bring a
Certificate from some honest Brokers dwelling by thee (when the Plague is
ceast) that thou art the man, and, it may be, mine eyes shall be then opened
to behold thee: So, farewell. -- With a vengeance (replied the Broker) and so
came home, a little wiser then he went.

No further from London then Pancridge, two or three Londoners, on a Sunday
(being the seventeenth of this last past July) walking to the Village there-by,
called Kentish-Towne, and spying Pancridge-Church doors open (a Sermon being
then preached) a company of Hobnayle-fellowes, with Staves, kept them out; and
four or five Hay-makers, (who out of their Countries came hither to get work)
offering likewise to go in, to hear the Preacher, they were threatened by the
worshipful wisdom of the Parish, to be set in The wisdom of
Pancridge-Parish.
the Stocks, if they put but a foot within the Church-doores.

Has not God therefore just cause to be angry with this distrust, this
infidelity of our Nation? How can we expect mercy from him, when we express
such cruelty one toward another? When the Brother defies the Brother, what
hope is there for a Londoner to to receive comfort from Strangers?

Who then would fly from his own Nest, which he may command, to be lodged
amongst Crows and Ravens, that are ready to pick out our Eyes, if we offer to
come amongst them? The brave Parlors, stately The world is altered with
Londoners.
dining-Roomes, and rich Chambers to lie in, which many of our Citizens had
here in London, are now turned to Hay-lofts, Apple-lofts, Hen-roosts, and
Back-houses, no better then to keep Hogs in: I do not say in all places,
but a number that are gone down, and were lodged daintily here, wish
themselves at home, (as complaining Letters testify) but that the heat of
Contagion frights them from returning, and it were a shame (they think) to
come so soon back to that City, from whence with such greedy desire, they
were on the wings of fear hurryed hence.

Flock not therefore to those, who make more account of Dogs then of
Christians. The smelling to your Iuory Boxes does not so much comfort your
Nosthrils, as the Sent of your perfumed bravery, stinkes in the Noses (now) of
Countrey-people. It may be perceived, by the coming back of many Carts laden
with goods, which in scorn are returned to London, A Retreat founded.
and cannot for any Gold or Silver be received. What talk I of Cart-loades of
Stuff? If some more tenderhearted amongst the rest, give welcome to his
brother, There be Iuries enough to swear bis.
kinseman, or friend; a Bear is not so woorried by Mastiffes, as he shall be
by uncharitable Neighbors, when the Stranger is departed. They love your
Money, but not your persons; yet love not your money so well, but that if a
Carrier brings it to them from London, they will not touch a penny of it, till
it be twice or To wash money, is against the Statute.
thrice washed in a Pale or two of water.

But leaving these Creatures to be tormented by their own folly and ignorance;
yet praying that God would open their eyes, and inlighten their souls with a
true understanding of his divine Judgments; I will now shut up my Discourse
with that which is first promised in the Title Page of the Book, and those
are, Gods Tokens, etc.

Gods Tokens.
ANd now, O you Citizens of LONDON, abroad or at home, be you rich, be you
poor, tremble at the repetition of these horrors which here I set down: and
of which ten thousand are earewitnesses, great numbers of you that are in the
City, having likewise beheld some of these, or their like, with your eyes.
Neither are these warnings to you of London only, but to you (who-euer you
be) dwelling in the farthest parts of the Kingdom.

Shall I tell you how many thousands have been Burials still passing.
borne on men's shoulders within the compass of five or six weeks? Bills sent
up and down both Town and Country, have given you already too fearful
informations.

Shall I tell you, that the Bells call out night and day Bells still going.
for more Burials, and have them, yet are not satisfied? Every street in London
is too much frighted with these terrors.

Shall I tell you, that Churchyards have letten their Churchyards still
receiving.
ground to so many poor Tenants, that there is scarce room left for any more
to dwell there, they are so pestred? The Statute against Inmates cannot sue
these, for having taken once possession; no Law can remove them.

Or shall I tell you, that in many Churchyards (for Graves still gaping for
more.
want of room, they are compelled to dig Graves like little Cellers, piling up
forty or fifty in a Pit? And that in one place of burial, the Mattocke and
Shouell have ventured so far, that the very Common-shore breaks into these
ghastly and gloomy Warehouses, washing the bodies all over with foul water,
because when they lay down to rest, not one eye was so tender to wet the
ground with a tear? No, I will not tell you of these things, but of These,
which are true (as the other) and The horrors of the tune.
fuller of horror.

A woman (with a Child in her arms) passing through A woman and her child.
Fleet Street, was struck sick upon a sudden; the Child leaning to her
cheek, immediately departed: the Mother perceiving no such matter, but finding
her own heart wounded to the death, she sat down near to a shop where hot
Waters were sold; the charitable woman of that shop, perceiving by the poor
wretches countenance how ill she was, ran in all haste to fetch her some
comfort; but before she could come, the Woman was quite dead: and so her child
and she went lovingly together to one Grave.

A Gentleman (known to many in this Town) having A Soldier.
spent his time in the Wars, and coming but lately over in health, and lusty
state of body, going along the streets, fell suddenly down and dyed, never
uttering more words then these, Lord, have mercy upon me. Another dropped down
dead by All gate, at the Bell-Tauerne door.

A Flax-man in Turnebull street, being about to send A Flax-man.
his Wife to market, on a sudden felt a pricking in his arm, near the place
where once he had a sore, and upon this, plucking up his sleeue, he called to
his Wife to stay; there was no need to fetch any thing for him from Market:
for, see (quoth he) I am marked: and so showing Gods Tokens, dyed in a few
minutes after.

A man was in his Coffin, to be put into a Grave, in A country fellow.
Cripple-gate Churchyard, and the Bearers offering to take him out, he opened
his eyes, and breathed; but they running to fetch Aqua vita for him, before it
came, he was full dead.

A lusty country fellow, that came to town to get Another.
Haruest-worke, having sixteen or eighteen shillings in his Purse, fell sick
in some lodging he had, in Old-street; was in the night time thrust out of
doors, and none else receiving him, he lay upon Straw, under Suttons Hospital
wall, near the high way, and there miserably dyed.

A woman going along Barbican, in the month of A woman in Barbican.
July, on a Wednesday, the first of the Dog-daies, went not far, but suddenly
fell sick, and sat down; the gaping multitude perceiving it, stood round
about her, afar off; she making signs for a little drink, money was given
by a stander by, to fetch her some: but the uncharitable Woman of the Alehouse
denied to lend Whosoever, in my Name, given a cup of cold water, etc.
her Pot to any infected companion; the poor soul dyed suddenly: and yet,
albeit all fled from her when she lived, yet being dead, some (like Ravens)
seized upon her body (having good clothes about her) stripped her, It Is the Prey
makes the Thief.
and buried her, none knowing what she was, or from whence she came.

Let us remove out of Barbican, into one of the Churches A Gentleman in Thames
street.
in Thames Street, where a Gentleman passing by, who on a sudden felt himself
exceeding ill, and spying a Sexton digging a Grave, stepped to him, asked many
strange questions of the fellow, touching Burials, and what he would take to
make a Grave for him: but the Sexton amazed at it, and seeing (by his face) he
was not well, persuaded him to get into some house, and to take something to
do him good. No (said he) help me to a Minister, who coming to him, and
conferring together about the state of his soul, he delivered a sum of
Money to the Minister, to see him well buried, and gave ten shillings to the
Sexton to make his Grave, and departed not till he dyed.

Now, suppose you are in Kent, where you shall see a A Kentish tale, but truer
then those of Changers.
young handsome Maid, in very good apparel, ready to go into the Town, to a
Sister, which dwelt there: but then as you cast an eye on her (coming into the
City) so behold a company of unmerciful, heathenish, and churlish Townsmen,
with Bills and Glaues, driving her by force back again; enter there she must
not (it being feared she came from London) neither could her Sister be suffered
to go forth to her. Whereupon, all comfort being denied her, all doors bard
against her, no lodging being to be had for her; she, full of tears in her
eyes, full of sorrow in her heart, sighing, wailing, and wringing her hands,
went into the open fields, there sickned, there languished, there cracked her
heart strings with grief, and there dyed, none being by her: When she was
dead, the Den of a Serpent was not more shunned then the place she lay in. It
was death (in any Townesmans thinking) but to stand in the wind of it: there
the body lay two or three days, none daring to approach it; till at the last,
an old woman of Kent, stealing out of the Town, ventured upon the danger,
rifled her Purse and Pockets, found good store of Money, stripped her out of her
apparel, which was very good, dug a homely Grave (with the best shift she
could make) and there in the field buried her.

The Kentish Synagogue hearing of this, presently laid their heads together,
and fearing lest the breath of an old woman might poison the whole Town,
pronounced the doom of everlasting banishment upon her. And so was she driven
from thence, with vpbraidings and hard language, and must never come to live
more amongst them.

Into another part of this Kingdom (not full forty Thirty pound (...) lost,
well recovered.
miles from London) did a Citizen send his man for thirty pound, to a country
Customer, which was honestly paid to him; the young man departed merry, and in
good health from him: and, albeit he had so much money about him, yet in his
return to London, he could get no loging in any place; at which, being much
afflcted in his mind, and offering an extraordinary rate to be entertained,
neither Money, nor Charity, nor common Humanity, could get a door opened to
receive The like was done three and twenty years ago.
him. Patient he was to endure this cruelty, and comforted himself, that
carrying health about him, he should make shift to get to the City: but God had
otherways bestowed him, his time was come, the Glass of his life almost run
out, and his journey must be shortened. For taking up his lodging (by
compulsion) in the open field, there he fell sick, and wanting all humane
help and comfort, there dyed. It was soon known by those that walked out of
the Town, into their grounds, that there he lay dead, and as soon did they
consult together what to do with his body. None was so valiant as to come
near it: It was an eminent danger, to suffer the Carcass lie above ground,
and a greater danger for any one (as they thought) to remove it from thence. In
the end, one more courageous then the other, was hired (for money) to rid the
Town of this mortal fear; who (whatsoever should become of them) purposing
to save himself, muffled his mouth, went into the same field where the dead
body lay, a far off dug a Pit (a Grave he knew not how to make) and then,
with a long Pole, having a hook to it, taking hold of the young man's clothes,
he dragged him along, threw him in, and buried him.

The Master of this servant, musing at his long staying, and being loath to lose
both man and money, rode down to see how both of them were bestowed; and
understanding, that the Money was paid, and which way his man went for London,
came to the same town, where (by guess) he thought he must needs put in for
lodging; and upon strict inquiry, if such a young fellow had not been seen
amongst them; it was confessed, Yes, with all the former Relations of his death,
and where he lay buried. The much-perplexed Londoner hearing this, did, by
fair means and money, get his Grave opened, had his body in the clothes taken
up, and found all his Money about him, and then in the Town bestowed upon him,
a friendly, loving, and decent burial.

It fell out better with a company of merry Companions, Madness in merriment.
who went not above ten miles from London; for they, getting with much ado,
into a country Victualing-house, were very iouiall, and full of sport, though
not full of money. Beer and Ale they called for roundly, down it went
merrily, and the Cakes were as merrily broken. When the round O's began to
increase to four or six shillings, quoth one mad fellow amongst the rest, What
will you say, my Masters, if I fetch you off from the Reckoning, and never pay
a penny? A brave Boy, cried all the company, if thou can do this. Hereupon,
the Oastesse being called up for the other Pot, and whilst it was drinking, some
speech being made of purpose, about the dangerous time, and the sickness, it
fortuned that the Tokens were named. Upon which, the Woman wondering what kind
of things they were, and protesting she never saw any, nor knew what they were
like; this daring companion (who undertook the shot) clapping his hand on his
breast; How (quoth he) never saw any? Why then I fear, I can now show you some
about me; and with that, hastily vnbuttoning his Doublet, opened his bosom,
which was full of little blue Marks, received by Haile-shot out of a
Birding-piece through a mischance. At sight of these, his Comrades seemed to
be struck into a fear; but the innocent Oastesse was ready to drop down
dead. They offered to fly, and leave him there. She fell on her knees, crying
out, She was undone. A reckoning then being called for, because they would be
honest to the house; the poor woman cared for no reckoning, let them call for
as much more (so they drank it quickly) and there was not a penny to pay;
provided, that they would take the spotted man away with them. They did so, and
being gotten some little distance from the house, the counterfeit si^ke
Companion danced and skipped up and down, to show he was well: She cursing
them for cheating Raskalls, that so had gulled her. This was a trick of
merriment, but few men, I think, would fill their bellies with drink so
gotten. It is not safe to kiss Lightning, mock at Thunder, or dally with
divine Judgments.

The Bells, even now toll, and ring out in mine ears, so that here again and
again I could terrify you with sad Relations. An ample Volume might be sent
down to you in the Country, of dismal and dreadful Accidents; not only here
within London, but more in the Towns round about us. Death walks in every
street: How many step out of their Beds into their Coffins? And albeit, no man
at any time is assured of life, yet no man (within the memory of man) was ever
so near death as now: because he that breaks his fast, is dead before dinner;
and many that dine, never eat supper more. Let these then (as terrifying
Scourges) serve to admonish the proudest of us all, to have a care to our
footing, lest we fall suddenly.

How many every day drop down staggering (being ^iserable objects
struck with infection) in the open Streets? What numbers breathe their last
upon Stalles? How many creep into Eatries, and Stables, and there dye? How
many lie languishing in the common Highways, and in the open Fields, on Pads
of Straw, end their miserable lives, vnpittyed, vnrelieued, unknown?

The great God of mercy defend us all from sudden death: and so defend you (the
rich Run-awayes) at your coming back to this desolate and forsaken City,
that, as you fled hence to escape the Stroke of Contagion, you bring not, nor
lay heavier strokes of mortality and misery upon us, when you return to your
Houses. It so fell out in the last great time of Pestilence, at the death of
the Queen, and coming in of the King: The Weeks did rize in their numbers of
dead, as the numbers of the living did increase, who then came flocking to
Town: As the fresh houses were filled with their old Owners, so new Graves
were opened for the fresh comers.

A heavy and sad welcome they had at home, after Merry mornings go before sad
euenings.
their peaceable being in the Country: and how could it happen otherwise? They
went out in haste, in hope to prevent death; in iollity, to preserve life; But
when they came back, then began their terrors, then their torments: The first
foot they sit out of their Countrey-Habitations, was to them a first step to
their Graves: the nearer to London, the nearer to death. As condemned persons,
going to execution, have oftentimes good color in their faces, cheerful
contenances, and manly looks all the way that they are going: but the nearer
and nearer they approach the place where they are to leave the World, the
greater are their fears, the paler they look, the more their hearts tremble;
so did it fare with Londoners in those days; but we that are here, pray that
you may speed better: that you may return full of health, full of wealth, full
of prosperity; that your Houses may be as Temples to you. your Chambers as
Sanctuaries; that your Neighbors, Kindred, Friends, and acquaintance may give
you joyful and hearty welcomes; that the City may not mourn then for your
thronging in upon it, as she lamented to behold you (in shoales) forsaking her
in her tribulation; but that God would be pleased to nail our sins upon the
Cross of his Son Christ Jesus, restore us to his mercy, render us a Nation
worthy of his infinite blessings, and plucking in his reuengefull Arm from
striking us down continually into Graves, we all (abroad and at home, in
Country and City) may meet and embrace one another, and sing an Allelniah to
his Name.

FINIS.

