THE Honest Whore, With, The Humors of the Patient Man, and the Longing Wife.
Tho: Dekker.

LONDON* (...)

The Honest Whore
ACTVS PRIMVS.
SCAENA PRIMA.
Enter at one door a Funeral, a Coronet lying on the Hearse, Scutchins and
Garlands hanging on the sides, attended by Gasparo Trebatzi, Duke of Millan,
Castruchio, Sinezi. Pioratto Fluello, and others at an other door. Enter
Hipolito in discontented appearance: Matheo a Gentleman his friend, laboring to
hold him back. Duke BEhold, yon Commet shows his head again;
Twice has he thus at crosse-turnes thrown on us
Prodigious looks: Twice has he troubled
The waters of our eyes. See, he is turnde wild;
Go on in Gods name.

All On before there ho.

Duke Kinsmen and friends, take from your manly sides
Your weapons to keep back the desprate boy
From doing violence to the innocent dead.

Hipolito I pry thee dear Matheo.

Matheo Come, you are mad.

Hip: I do arest thee murderer: set down.
Villains set down that sorrow, it is all mine.

Duke I do beseech you all, for my bloods sake
Send hence your milder spirits, and let wrath
Join in confederacy with your weapons points;
If he proceed^ ^o vex us, let your swords
Seek out his bowels: funeral grief loathes words.

All Set on.

Hip. Set down the body.

Mat: O my Lord?
You Are wrong: in the open street? you see she is dead.

Hip: I know she is not dead.

Duke Frantic young man,
Will thou believe these gentlemen? pray speak:
Thou do abuse my child, and mockst the tears
That here are shed for her: If to behold
Those roses withered, that set out her cheeks:
That pair of stars that gave her body light,
Darkened and dim for ever: All those rivers
That fed her veins with warm and crimson streams,
Frozen and dried up: If these be signs of death,
Then is she dead. Thou vnreligious youth,
Art not ashamde to empty all these eyes
Of funeral tears, (a debt due to the dead,)
As mirth is to the living: Sham'st thou not
To have them stare on thee? hark, thou art cursed
Even to thy face, by those that scarce can speak.

Hip. My Lord.

Duke What would thou have? is she not dead?

Hip. Oh, you ha killd her by your cruelty.

Duke Admit I had, thou killst her now again;
And art more savage then a barbarous Moore.

Hip. Let me but kiss her pale and bloodlesse lip.

Duke O fie, fie, fie.

Hip. Or if not touch her, let me look on her.

Math. As you regard your honor.

Hip. Honor! smoke.

Math. Or if you lov'de her living, spare her now.

Duke I, well done sir, you play the gentleman:
Steal hence: it is nobly done: away: I Will join
My force to yours, to stop this violent torment:
Pass on. Exeunt with funeral.

Hip. Matheo, thou do wound me more.

Math. I give you physic noble friend, not wounds,

Duke Oh well said, well done, a true gentleman:
Alack, I know the sea of lovers rage
Comes rushing with so strong a tide: it beats
And bears down all respects of life, of honor,
Of friends, of foes, forget her gallant youth.

Hip. Forget her?

Duke Na, na, be but patient:
For why deaths hand has sued a strict divorse
Twixt her and thee: what is beauty but a coarse?
What but fair sand-dust are earths purest forms:
Queens bodies are but trunckes to put in worms.

Matthew Speak no more sentences, my good lord, but slip hence; you see they
are but fits, i will rule him I warrant ye. I, so, tread gingerly, your Grace is
here somewhat too long already. God's Blood the jest were now, if having taken some
knockes o'th pate already, he should get loose again, and like a mad Ox,
toss my new black cloakes into the kennell. I must humor his lordship: my
lord Hipolito, is it in your stomach to go to dinner?


Hipolito Where is the body?


Matheo The body, as the Duke spoke very wisely, is gone to be wormd.


Hipolito I cannot rest, i will meet it at next turn,
I Will see how my love looks, Mathaeo holds him ins arms

Mathaeo How your love looks? worse than a scarre-crowe, wrestle not with me:
the great fellow gives the fall for a duckat.


Hipolito I shall forget my self.


Mathaeo Pray do so, leave your self behind your self, and go whither you
will. Sfoote, do you long to have base roags that maintain a saint Anthonies
fire in their noses (by nothing but two penny Ale) make ballads of you? if the
Duke had but so much mettle in him, as is in a cobblers awle, he would ha been
a vexed thing: he and his train had blown you up, but that their powlder haz
taken the wet of cowards: you will bleed three pottles of Aligant, by this light,
if you follow em, and then we shall have a hole made in a wrong place, to have
Surgeons roll thee up like a babie in swaddling clowts.


Hipolito What day is to day, Mathaeo?


Mathaeo Yea mary, this is an easy question: why to day is, let me see,
thurseday.


Hipolito Oh, thurseday.


Mathaeo Heeres a coile for a dead commodity, sfoote women when they are alive
are but dead commodities, for you shall have one woman lie upon many men's hands.


Hipolito She died on monday then.


Mathaeo And that's the most villainous day of all the week to die in: and she
was well, and eat a mess of water-grewel on monday morning.


Hipolito I, it cannot be,
Such a bright taper should burn out so soon.

Mathaeo O yes my Lord, so soon: why I ha known them, that at dinner have bin
as well, and had so much health, that they were glad to pledge it, yet before
three a clock have bin found dead drunk.


Hipolito On thurseday buried! and on monday died,
Quick haste birlady: sure her winding sheet
Was laid out fore her body, and the worms
That now must feast with her, were even bespoke,
And solemnly invited like strange guests.

Mathaeo Strange feeders they are indeed my lord, and like your jeaster or
young Courtier, will enter upon any man's trencher without bidding.


Hipolito Cursed be that day for ever that robbed her
Of breath, and me of bliss, henceforth let it stand
Within the Wizardes book (the calendar)
Marked with a marginall finger, to be chosen
By thieves, by villains, and black murderers,
As the best day for them to labor in.
If henceforth this adulterous bawdy world
Be got with child with treason, sacrilege,
Atheism, rapes, treacherous friendship, perjury,
Slander, (the beggars sin) lies, (sin of fools)
Or any other damnd impieties,
On Monday let em be delivered:
I swear to thee Mathaeo, by my soul.
Hereafter weekly on that day i will glue
Mine eie-lids down, because they shall not gaze
On any female cheek. And being locked up
In my close chamber, there i will meditate
On nothing but my Infaelices end,
Or on a dead man's scull draw out mine own.

Mathaeo You Will do all these good works now every monday, because it is so
bad: but I hope upon tuesday morning I shall take you with a wench.


Hipolito If ever whilst frail blood through my veins run,
On woman's beams I throw affection,
Save her that's dead: or that I loosely fly
To The shore of any other wafting eye,
Let me not prosper heaven. I will be true,
Even to her dust and ashes: could her tomb
Stand whilst I livde so long, that it might rot,
That should fall down, but she be never forgot.

Mathaeo If you have this strange monster, Honesty, in your belly, why so
Iig-makers and chroniclers shall pick something out of you: but and I smell not
you and a bawdy house out within these ten days, let my nose be as big as
an English bag-pudding: I Will follow your lordship, though it be to the place
aforenamed. Exeunt.


Enter Fustigo in some fantastike Sea-suite at one door, a Porter meets him at
another. Fust. How now porter, will she come?


Porter If I may trust a woman sir, she will come.


Fust. There Is for thy pains, godamercy, if ever I stand in need of a wench
that will come with a wet finger, Porter, thou shall earne my money before any
Clarissimo in Millane; yet so god sa me she is mine own sister body and soul,
as I am a christian Gentleman; farewell, i will ponder till she come: thou have
bin no bawd in fetching this woman, I assure thee.


Porter No matter if I had sir, better men than Porters are bawdes.


Fust. O God sir, many that have borne offices. But Porter, art sure thou
wentst into a true house?


Porter I think so, for I met with no thieves.


Fust. Nay but art sure it was my sister Viola.


Porter I am sure by all superscriptions it was the party you ciphered.


Fust. Not very tall.


Porter Nor very low, a midling woman.


Fust. It Was she faith, it was she, a pretty plumpe cheek like mine.


Porter At a blush, alittle very much like you.


Fust. Gods so, I would not for a duckat she had kicked up her heels, for I ha
spent an abomination this voyage, ma^ie I did it amongst sailers and gentlemen:
there is alittle modicum more porter for making thee stay, farewell honest porter.


Porter I am in your debt sir, God preserve you. Exit.


Enter Viola. Fu. Not so neither, good porter, gods lid, yonder she coms.
Sister Viola, I am glad to see you stirring: its news to have me here, i^t
not sister?


Viola Yes trust me: I wondered who should be so bold to send for me, you are
welcome to Millan brother.


Fust. Troth sister I heard you were married to a very rich chuffe, and I was
very sorry for it, that I had no better clothes, and that made me send: for you
know we Millaners love to strut upon Spanish leather. And how does all our
friends?


Viola Very well; you ha traveled enough now, I trow, to sow your wild
oats.


Fust. A pox on em; wild oats, I ha not an oate to throw at a horse, troth
sister I ha sowde my oats, and reapt 200. ducats if I had em, here, mary I
must entreat you to lend me some thirty or forty till the ship come, by this
hand i will discharge at my day, by this hand.


Viola These are your old oaths.


Fust. Why sister, do you think i will forswear my hand?


Viola Well, well, you shall have them: put your self into better fashion,
because I must employ you in a serious matter.


Fust. I Will swear like a horse if I like the matter.


Viola You ha cast off all your old swaggering humors.


Fust. I had not sailde a league in that great fish pond (the sea) but I cast
up my very gall.


Viola I am the more sorry, for I must employ a true swaggerer.


Fust. Nay by this iron sister, they shall find I am powlder and touch-box, if
they put fire once into me.


Viola Then lend me your ears.


Fust. Mine ears are yours dear sister.


Viola I am married to a man that haz wealth enough, and wit enough.


Fust. A linen Draper I was told sister.


Viola Very true, a grave Citizen; I want nothing that a wife can wish from a
husband: but heeres the spite, he haz not all things belonging to a man.


Fust. Gods my life, he is a very mandrake, or else (God bless us) one a
these whiblins, and that's worse, and then all the children that he gets
lawfully of your body sister, are bastards by a statute.


Vio: O you run over me too fast brother, I have heard it often said, that
he who cannot be angry, is no man. I am sure my husband is a man in pri^t, for
all things else, save only in this, no tempest can move him.


Fist. Slid, would he had been at sea with us, he should ha been movde and
movde again, for I Will be sworn la, our drunken ship reelde like a Dutchman.


Viola No loss of goods can increase in him a wrinckle, no crabbed language
make his countenance sour, the stubburnnes of no servant shake him, he haz no
more gall in him than a Dove, no more sting than an Ant: Musician will he never
be, (yet I find much music in him,) but he loves no frets, and is so free
from anger, that many times I am ready to bite off my tongue, because it wants
that virtue which all women's tongues have (to anger their husbands:) Brother,
mine can by no thunder: turn him into a sharpenes.


Fust. Belike his blood sister, is well brewd then.


Viola I protest to thee Fustigo, I love him most affectionately, but I know
not -- I ha such a tickling within me -- such a strange longing; nay, verily I
do long.


Fustigo Then you are with child sister, by all signs and tokens; nay, I am
partly a Physician, and partly something else. I ha read Albertus Magnus, and
Aristotle's emblemes.


Viola You Are wide ath bow hand still brother: my longings are not wanton, but
wayward: I long to have my patient husband eat up a whole Porcupine, to the
intent, the bristling quills may stick about his lips like a flemmish,
mustacho, and be shot at me: I shall be leaner than the new Moon, unless I
can make him borne mad.


Fust: Sfoote half a quarter of an hour does that: make him a cuckold.


Viola Puh, he would count such a cut no unkindness.


Fust. The honester Citizen he, then make him drunk and cut off his beard.


Viola Fie, fie, idle, idle, he is no Frenchman, to fret at the loss of a
little scalde hair. No brother, thus it shall be, you must be secret.


Fu. As your Midwife I protest sister, or a Barber-surgeon.


Viola Repair to the Tortoys here in S. Christophers street, I will send you
money, turn your self into a brave man: instead of the arms of your mistress,
let your sword and your military scarf hang about your neck.


Fust: I must have a great Horse-mans French feather too sister.


Viola O, by any means, to show your light head, else your hat will sit like a
coxcombe: to be brief, you must be in all points a most terrible wide-mouthed
swaggerer.


Fust. Nay, for swaggering points let me alone.


Viola Resort then to our shop, and (in my husbands presence) kiss me, snatch
rings, jewels, or any things so you give it back again brother in secret.


Fust: By this hand sister.


Viola Swear as if you came but new from knighting.


Fust. Nay, I Will swear after 400. a year.


Viola Swagger worse then a Lieutenant among fresh water soldiers, call me
your love, your yngle, your coosen, or so; but sister at no hand.


Fust. No, no, It shall be coosen, or rather cuz, that's the gulling word
between the Citizens wives and their old dames, that man em to the garden;
to call you one a mine aunts, sister, were as good as call you arrant whoores
no, no, let me alone to cosen you rarely.


Viola Haz heard I have a brother, but never saw him, therefore put on a good
face.


Fust. The best in M^^lan I warrant.


Viola Take up wares, but pay nothing, rifle my bosom, my pocket, my purse,
the boxes for money to dice with all; but brother, you must give all back again
in secret.


Fustigo By this welkin that he^re roares? I will, (...) else let me never know
what a secret is: why sister do you think I Will cunni-catch you, when you are my
coosen? Gods my life, then I were a stark Ass, if I fret not his guts, beg me
for a fool.


Viola Be circumspect, and do so then, farewell.


Fust. The Tortoys sister? I Will stay there; forty ducats. Exit.


Viola Thither I Will send: this law can none deny,
Women must have their longings, or they die. Exit.

Gasparo the Duke, Doctor Benedicke, two ser^^nts. Duke Give charge that none
do enter, lock the doors;
And fellows, what your eyes and ears receave,
Upon your lives trust not the gadding air
To carry the least part of it: the glass, the houre-glasse.

Doctor Here my Lord.

Duke. Ah, it is mere spent.
But Doctor Benedick, does your Art speak truth?
Art sure the soporiferous stream will ebb,
And leave the Crystal banks of her white body
(Pure as they were at first) just at the hour*

Doctor Just at the hour my Lord.

Duke Vncurtaine her.
Softly sweet Doctor: what a coldish heat
Spreads over all her body.

Doctor Now it works:
The vital spirits that by a sleepie charm
Were bound up fast, and threw an icie rust
On her exterior parts, now gin to break:
Trouble her not my Lord.

Duke Some stools, you called
For music, did you not? Oh ho, it speaks,
It speaks, watch sirs her waking, note those sands,
Doctor sit down: A Dukedom that should wey mine
Own down twice, being put into onestale:
And that fond desperate boy Hipolito,
Making the weight up* should not (at my hands)
Buy her in the the other, were her (...)
Than hers, who makes a dowry up (...)
Doctor I Will starve her on the Appenine
Ere he shall marry her: I must confess,
Hipolito is nobly bo^ne, a man;
Did not mine enemies blood boil in his veins,
Whom I would court to be my son in law?
But Princes whose high spleenes for empery swell,
Are not with easy art made parallel.

2 Ser. She wakes my Lord.

Duke Look Doctor Benedick.
I charge you on your lives maintain for truth,
What ere the Doctor or my self aver
For you shall bear hes hence to Bergaine

Inf. Oh God, what fearful dreams?

Doctor Lady.

Inf. Ha.

Duke Girl.
Why Infaelisha, how is it now, ha, speak?

Inf. I Am well, what makes this Doctor here? I Am well.

Duke Thou were not so even now, sickness pale hand
Laid hold on thee even in the deadst offeasting,
And when a cap crownde with thy lovers health
Had touched thy lips, a sencible cold dew
Stood on thy cheeks, as if that death had wept
To see such beauty alterd.

Inf. I remember
I sat at banquet, but felt no such change.

Duke Thou have forgot then how a messenger
Came wildely in with this unsavory news
That he was dead.

Inf. What messenger? whoes dead?

Duke Hipolito, alack, wring not thy hands.

Inf. I saw no messenger, heard no such news,

Doctor Trust me you did sweet Lady.

Duke La you now.

2 Servants Yes indeed Madam.

Duke La you now, it is well God knows.

Inf. You ha slain him, and now you will murder me.

Duke Good Infaelishae vex not thus thy self,
Of this the bad rep^^^ before did strike
So coldly to the heart* that the swift currents
Of life were all frozen up.

Inf. It is untrue,
It Is most untrue, O most unnatural father*

Duke And we had much to do by Ar^ best cunning,
To fetch life back again.

Doctor Most certain Lady.

Duke Why la you now, you will not believe me, friends,
Sweat we not all; had we not much to do?

2 Ser. Yes indeed my Lord, much*

Duke Death drew such fearful pictures in thy face,
That were Hipolito alive again,
I Will kneel and woo the noble gentleman
To be thy husband* now I (...) repent
My sharpenes to him* and his family*
Nay, do not weep for him, we all must die:
Doctor, this place where she so often has seen
H^^ lively presence, haunts her, does it not?

Doctor Doubtless my Lord it does*

Duke It does, it does.
Therefore sweet girl thou shall to Berg^n^*

Inf. Even where you will, in any place there is woe.

Duke A Coach is ready, Berg^^^ does stand
In a most wholesome air, sweet walks, there is diere,
I, thou shall hunt and send us venison.
Which like some gods in the (...) groves*
Thine own fair hand shall strike; sirs, you shall teach he^
To stand, and how to shoot, I, she shall hunt:
Cast off this sorrow* In girl, and prepare
This night to ride away to Berg^^^.

Inf. O most unhappy maid. Exit.

Duke Follow it close.
No words that she was buried on your lives*
Or that her ghost walks now after she is dead;
I Will hang you if you name^ funerall^

1 Ser. He speaks (...) Lord* (...) I speak (...) deadly word. Exeunt.

2 Ser. And I Will speak (...) Greek.

Duke Away* look to (...)
Did you observe how (...)
Upon his name and death, O would it were true.

Doctor It may my Lord.

Duke May? how? I wish his death.

Doctor And you may have your wish* say but the word,
And it is a strong Spell to rip up his grave:
I have good knowledge with Hipolito,
He calls me friend, I Will creep into his bosom,
And sting him there to death^poison can do it.

Duke Perform it; I Will create thee half mine heir.

Doctor It shall be done, although the fact be foul.

Duke Greatness hides sin, the guilt upon my soul. Exeunt

Enter Castruchio, (...), and Flu^lo. Cast: Signior Pioratto, signior (...),
shall^ be merry? shall^ play the wags now?


Flu: I, any thing that may beget the child of laughter.


Cast: Truth I have a pretty sportive conceit new crept into my brain, will
moove excellent mirth.


Pio: Lets have it, lets have it, and where shall the scene of mirth lie?


Cast. At signior Candido^s house, the patient man, nay the monstrous patient
man; they say his blood is immovable, that he haz taken all patience from a
man, and all constancy from a woman.


Flu. That makes so many whoores nowadayes.


Cast. I, and so many knaves too.


Pio. Well sir.


Cast. To conclude, the report goes, he is so mild, so affable, so suffering,
that nothing indeed can moove him: now do but think what sport it will be to
make this fellow (the mirror of patience) as angry, as vexed, and as mad as an
English cuckolde.


Flu. O, twere admirable mirth, that: but how wilt be done signior?


Cast. Let me alone, I have a wicke, a conceit, a thing, a device will st^^g
him in faith, if he have but a thi^blefull of blood i^^ belly, or a spleen not
so big as a tavern token.


Pio. Thou (...) him? thou moove him* thou anger him? alas, I know his
approoved temper^ thou (...) him? why he ha^ a patience above (...) sooner
raise a spleen in an Angel* than rough humor in him: why i will give you
instance for it. This wonderfully temperd signior Candido upon a time invited
home to his house certain Ne^politane lords of curious taste, and no mean
palate, conjuring his wife of all loves, to prepare cheer fitting for such
honorable trencher-men. She (just of a woman's nature, covetous to try the
uttermost of vexation, and thinking at last to get the starte of his humor)
willingly neglected the preparation, and became unfurnished, not only of
dainty, but of ordinary dishes. He (according to the mildness of his breast)
entertained the lords, and with courtly discourse beguiled the time (as much
as a Citizen might do:) to conclude, they were hungry lords, for there came
no meat in; their stomachs were plainly g^^ld, and their teeth deluded, and
(if anger could have (...) a man) there was matter enough in faith to vex any
citizen in the world, if he were not too much made a fool by his wife.


Flu. I, I Will swear for it: sfoote, had it been my case, I should ha playde mad
tricks with my wife and family: first I would ha spitted the men, stewd the
maids* and baked the mistress, and so served them in.


Pio. Why twould ha tempred any blood but his,
And thou to vex him th^^ to anger him
With some poor^ shallow jest*

Cast. God's Blood signior Pioratto, (you that disparage my conceit) i will wage a
hundred ducats upon the head on it, that it mooves him, fretts him, and galle^
him.


Pio. Done, it is a lay, join golls on it: wit^ us signior Fl^^llo.


Cast. Witness: it is do^e*
Come, follow me: the house is not far off*
I Will thrust him from his humor, vex his breast,
And win a hundred ducats by one ^east. Exeunt.

Enter Candidoes wife, George, and two p^^^tices in the shop. Wife Come, you
put up your wares in good order here, do you not think you, one (...) cast
this way, another that way? you had need have a patient master indeed.


George I, i will besworne, for we have a (...).


Wife You mumble, do you mumble? I would your (...) or I could be a no^e more
angry: for two patient folks in a house spoil all the servants that ever
shall come under them.


1. prentise You patient* I, so is the devil when he is horn mad.


Enter Castruchio, Fluello, and Pioratto. All three Gentlemen, what do you
lack? what is it you buy? See fine hollands, fine cambrickes, fine lawnes.


George What is it you lack?


2. prentise What is it you buy?


Cast. Where Is signior Candido thy master?


George Faith signior, he is a little negotiated, he will appear presently.


Cast. Fellow, lets see a lawne, a choice one sitra.


George The best in all Mill^n, Gentlemen, and this is the piece. I can ^it you
Gentlemen with fine callicoes too for dublets, the only sweet fashion now,
most delicate and courtly, a meek gentle calico, cut upon two double affable
taffataes, ah, most neat, feate, and (...).


Flu. A notable-voluble tongde villain.


Pio. I warrant this fellow was never begot without much Pr^ting.


Cast. What, and is this she say thou?


George I, and the purest she that ever you fingerd since you were a
gentleman: look how even she is, look how clean she is, ha, as even as the
browe of Cinthia, and as clean as your sons and heirs when they ha spent
all.


Cast. Puh, thou talkst, pox on it it is rough.


George How? is she rough? but if you bid pox on it sir, twill take away the
roughness presently.


Flu. Ha signior; haz he fitted your French curse?


George Look you Gentleman, heeres an other, compare them I pray, compara
Virgilium cum Flomero, compare virgins with harlot^.


Cast. Puh, I ha seen better, and as you term them, evener and cleaner.


Geor. You may see further for your mind, but trust me you shall not find
better for your body. Enter Candido.


Cast. O here he comes, lets make as tho we pass,
Come, come, we will try in some other shop.

Cand. How now? what is the matter?


Geor. The gentlemen find fault with this lawne, fall out with it, and without
a cause too.


Cand. Without a cause!
And that makes you to let them pass away,
Ah, may I crave a word with you gentlemen?

Flu. He calls us.


Cast. Makes the better for the jest.


Cand. I pray come near,-you are very welcome gallants,
Pray pardon my man's rudeness, for I fear me
Has talked above a prentice with you,-Lawnes!
Look you kind gentlemen-this! no: I this:
Take this upon my honest-dealing faith,
To be a true weaue, not too hard, nor slack,
But eene as far from falsehood, as from black.

Cast. Well, how do you rate it?


Cand. Very conscionably, 18. s^a yard.


Cast. That Is too dear: how many yards does the whole piece contain think
you?


Cand. Why, some 17. yardes I think, or there abouts,
How much would serve your turn? I pray.

Cast. Why let me see-would it were better too.


Cand. Truth, it is the best in Millan at few words.


Cast. Well: let me have then-a whole pennyworth.


Cand. Ha, ha: you are a merry gentleman.


Cast. A pennorth I say.


Cand. Of lawne!


Cast. Of lawne? I of lawne, a pennorth, sblood do not hear? a whole
pennorth, are you deaffe?


Cand. Deaffe? no Sir: but I must tell you,
Our wares do seldom meet such customers.

Cast. Nay, and you and your lawnes be so squemish,
Fare you well.

Cand. Pray stay, a word, pray Signior: for what purpose is it I beseech you?


Cast. Sblood, what is that to you: I Will have a penny worth.


Can. A pennyworth! why you shall: I Will serve you presently.


2. Pren. Sfoot, a pennyworth mistress!


Mist. A pennyworth! call you these Gentlemen?


Cast. No, no: not there.


Can. What then kind Gentleman? what at this corner here?


Cast. No nor there neither.
I Will have it just in the middle, or else not.

Can. Just in the middle: -ha-you shall too: what?
Have you a single penny?

Cast. Yes, heeres one.


Can. Lend it me I pray.


Flu. An exlent followed jest.


Wife. What will he spoil the Lawne now?


Can. Patience, good wife.


Wife. I, that patience makes a fool of you: Gentlemen, you might ha found
some other Citizen to have made a kind gull on, besides my husband.


Can. Pray Gentlemen take her to be a woman,
Do not regard her language. -- O kind soul:
Such words will drive away my customers,

Wife. Customers with a murre^: call you these customers?


Can. Patience, good wife.


Wife. Pax, a your patience.


Geor. Sfoot mistress, I warrant these are some cheating companions.


Can. Look you Gentleman, there is your ware, I thank you, I have your money;
hear, pray know my shop, pray let me have your custom.


Wife. Custom quoth a.


Can. Let me take more of your money.


Wife. You had need so.


Pio. Hark in thine ear, thast lost an hundred ducats.


Cast. Well, well, I knowt: is it possible that Homo,
Should be nor man, nor woman: not once mooud;
No not at such an injury, not at all!
Sure he is a pigeon, for he has no gall.

Flu. Come, come, you are angry tho you smother it:
Yare vexed in faith,-confess.

Can. Why Gentlemen
Should you conceit me to be vexed or moved?
He has my ware, I have his money fort,
And that's no Argument I am angry: no,
The best Logitian can not prove me so.

Flu. oh, but the hateful name of a pennyworth of lawne,
And then cut out, ith middle of the piece:
Pah, I guess it by my self, would move a Lamb
Were he a Lynnen-draper -twould in faith.

Can. Well, give me leave to answer you for that,
Were set here to please all customers,
Their humors and their fancies: -^ffend none:
We get by many, if we leese by one.
May be his mind stood to no more then that,
A penworth serves him, and among trades it is found,
Deny a pennorth, it may cross a pound.
Oh, he that means to thrive with patient eye,
Must please the devil, if he come to buy.

Flu. O wondrous man, patient boue wrong or woe,
How blessed were men, if women could be so.

Can. And to express how well my breast is pleasd^,
And satisfied in all: - George fill a beaker. Exit George.
I Will drink unto that Gentleman, who lately
Bestowed his money with me.

Wife. Gods my life,
We shall have all our gains drunk out in beakers,
To make amends for pennyworths of lawne. Enter Georg.

Can. Here wife, begin you to the Gentleman.

Wife. I begin to him.

Can. George, filt up again:
It Was my fault, my hand shook. Exit George.

Pio. How strangely this does show?
A patient man linkt with a waspish shrowe.

Flu. A silver and gilt beaker! I have a trick to work upon that beaker, sure
it will fret him, it cannot choose but vex him. Seig* Castrachio, in pity to
thee, I have a conceit, will save thy 100. Ducats yet, it will doot, and work him
to impatience.


Cast. Sw^et Fluello, I should be bountiful to that conceit.


Flu. Well it is enough. Enter George.


Can. He^e Gentleman to you,
I wish your custom, yare exceeding welcome.

Cast. I pledge you Seig. Candido, -here you, that must receive a 100. Duccats.


Pior. I Will pledge them deep in faith Castruchio,
Signior Fluello?

Flu. Come: play't off: to me,
I am your last man.

Cand. George, supply the cup.

Flu. So, so, good honest George,
Here Signior Candido, all this to you.

Cand. Oh you must pardon me, I use it not.

Flu. Will you not pledge me then?

Cand. Yes, but not that:
Great love is shown in little.

Flu. Blurt on your sentences, -Sfoot you shall pledge me all.


Cand. Indeed I shall not.

Flu. Not pledge me? Sblood, I Will carry away the beaker then.

Cand. The beaker! Oh! that at your pleasure sir.

Flu. Now by this drink I will.

Cast. Pledge him, heel do it else.

Flu. So: I ha done you right, on my thumble nail,
What will you pledge me now?

Cand. You know me sir, I am not of that sin.

Flu. Why then farewell:
I Will bear away the beaker by this light.

Cand. That's as you please, it is very good.

Flu. Nay it does please me, and as you say, it is a very good one:
Farewell Signior Candido.

Pio. Farewell Candido.

Cand. You Are welcome gentlemen.

Cast. Heart not moved yet?
I think his patience is above our wit, Exeunt.

Geor. I told you before mistress, they were all cheaters.

Wife Why fool, why husband, why madman, I hope you will not let them sneake
away so with a silver and gilt beaker, the best in the house too: go fellows
make hue and cry after them.


Cand. Pray let your tongue lie still, all will be well:
Come hither George, hye to the Constable,
And in calm order wish him to attach them,
Make no great stir, because they are gentlemen,
And a thing partly done in meriment.
It Is but a size above a jest thou know,
Therefore pursue it mildly, go be gone,
The Constabl's hard by, bring him along, -make have again.

Wife. O you are a goodly patient Woodcocke, are you not now? Exit George. See
what your patience comes too: every one sadles you, and rydes you, you will be
shortly the common stone-horse of Myllan: a woman's well holp't up with such a
meacocke, I had rather have a husband that would swaddle me thrice a day, then
such a one, that will be guld twice in half an hour, Oh I could burn all the
wares in my shop for anger.


Cand. Pray wear a peaceful temper, be my wife,
That is, be patient: for a wife and husband
Share but one soul between them: this being known,
Why should not one soul then agree in one? Exit.

Wife Hang your agreements: But if my beaker be gone.

Enter Castruchio, Fluello, Pioratto, and George. Cand. Oh, hear they come.

Geor. The Constable sir, let them come along with me, because there should be no
wondering, he stays at door.


Cast. Constable goodman Abram.

Flu. Now Signior Candido, Sblood why do you attach us?

Cast. Sheart! attach us!

Cand. Nay swear not gallants,
Your oaths may move your souls, but not move me,
You have a silver beaker of my wives.

Flu. You say not true: it is gilt.

Cand. Then you say true.
And being gilt, the guilt lies more on you.

Cast. I hope you are not angry sir.

Cand. Then you hope right, for I am not angry.

Pio. No, but a little mou'de.

Cand. I moved! it was you were moved, you were brough^ hither.

Cast. But you (out of your anger and impatience,)
Caused us to be attacht.

Cand. Nay you misplace it.
Out of my quiet sufferaence I did that,
And not of any wrath, had I shown anger,
I should have then pursude you with the law,
And hunted you to shame, as many worldlings
Do build their anger upon feebler grounds,
The mores the pity, many loose their lives
For scarce so much coin as will hide their palm:
Which is most cruel, those have vexed spirits
That pursue lives, in this opinion rest,
The loss of Millions could not move my breast.

Flu. Thou art a blessed man, and with peace do deal,
Such a meek spirit can bless a common weal.

Cand. Gentlemen, now it is upon eating time,
Pray part not hence, but dyne with me to day.

Cast. I never heard a carter yet say nay
To such a motion. I Will not be the first.

Pio. Nor I,

F^u. Nor I,

Cand. The constable shall bear you company,
George call him in, let the world say what it can,
Nothing can drive me from a patient man. Exeunt.

Enter Roger with a stool, cushin, looking-glass and chasing-dish, Those
being set down, he pulls out of his pocket, a violl with white cullor in it.
And 2. boxes, one with white, another red painting, he places all things in
order and a candle by the^ singing with the ends of old Ballads as he does it.
At last Bellafront ( as he rubs his cheek with the colors, whistles within.
To. A non forsooth.


Bell What are you playing the rogue about?


To. About you forsooth: I me drawing up a hole in your white silk stocking.


Bell. Is my glass there? and my boxes of complexion?


To. Yes forsooth: your boxes of complexion are here I think: yes it is here:
here is your twe complexions, and if I had all the four complexions. I should
nere set a good face vpont, some men I see are borne under hard-fauourd planets
as well as women: zounds I look worse now then I did before, and it makes her
face glister most damnably, there is knavery in dawbing I hold my life, or else
this is only female Pomatum.


Enter Bellafronte not full ready, without a gown, she sits down, with her
bodkin curles her hair, cullers her lips. Bell. Where Is my ruff and poker you
block-head?


To. Your ruff, your pocker, are ingendring together upon the cup-bord of the
Court, or the Court-cup-bord.


Bell. Fetch them: Is the pox in your hames, you can go no faster?


To. Wood the pox were in your fingers, unless you could leave flinging;
catch. Exit.


Bell. I Will catch you, you dog by and by: do you grumble?
Cupid is a God, as naked as my nail She sings.
I Will whip him with a rod, if he my true love fail.

To. There Is your ruff, shall I poke it?


Bell. Yes honest


To no stay: pry thee good boy, hold here,
Down, down, down, down, I fall down and arise, down, I never shall arise.

To. Troth M. then leave the trade if you shall never rise.


Bell. What trade? good man Abram.


To. Why that, if down and arise or the falling trade.


Bell. I Will fall with you by and by.


To. If you do I know who shall smart fort:
Troth Mistress, what do I look like now?

Bell. Like as you are: a panderly Sixpenny Rascal.


To. I may thank you for that: infaith I look like an old Proverb, Hold the
Candle before the devil.


Bell. Vds life, I Will stick my knife in your Guts and you prate to me so: What?
She sings.

Well met, pug, the pearl of beauty: vmh, vmh.
How now sir knave, you forget your duty, vmh, vmh.
Marry muffe Sir, are you grown so dainty; fa, la, la, etc.
Is it you Sir? the worst of twenty, fa la, la, leera la.
Pox on you, how do thou hold my glass?


To. Why, as I hold your door: with my ^ingers.


Hell. Nay pray thee sweet honey


To. hold up handsomely
Sing pretty Wantons warble, etc. We shall ha guests to day.
I lay my little meadenhead, my nose itches so.

To. I said so too last night, when our Fleas twing'd me.


Bell. So Poke my ruff now, my gown, my gown, have I my fall?
Where Is my fall Roger? One knocks.

To. Your fall forsooth is behind.


Bell. Gods my pittikins, some fool or other knocks.


To. Shall I open to the fool mistress?


Bell. And all these bables lying thus? away with it quickly, I, I, knock and
be dambde, whosoever you be. So: give the fresh Salmon line now: let him come a
shore, he shall serve for my breakefast, tho he go against my stomach.


Roger Fetch in Fluello, Castruchio, and Pioratto. Flu. Morrow coz.


Cast. How does my sweet acquaintance?


Pio. Save thee little Marmoset: how do thou good pretty rogue?


Bell. Well, Godamercy good pretty rascal.


Flu. Roger some light I pry thee.


To. You shall Signior, for we that live here in this vale of misery, are as
dark as hell. Exit* for a candle.


Cast. Good Tobacco, Fluello?


Flu. Smell? Enter Roger.


Pio. It may be tickling geere: for it plays with my nose already.


To. Here Is another light Angel, Signior.


Bell. What? yon pyed curtal, what is that you are neighi^g?


To. I say God send us the light of heaven, or some more Angels.


Bell. Go fetch some wine, and drink half of it.


To. I must fetch some wine gentlemen and drink half of it.


Flu. Here Roger*


Cast. No let me send pry thee.


Flu. Hold you canker worm.


To. You shall send both, if you please Signiors.


Pio. Stay, what is best to drink a mornings?


To. Hypocras sir, for my mistres, if I fetch it, is most dear to her.


Flu. Hypocras! there then, here is a teston for you, you snake


To. Right sir, here is iij.s.vi.d. for a pottle and a manchet- Ex.


Cast. Here Is most herculania^ Tobacco, ha some acquaintance?


Bell. Fah, not I, makes your breath stink, like the piss of a Fox.
Acquaintance, where supt you last night?


Cast. At a place sweet acquaintance where your health danc'de the Canaries
in faith: you should ha ben there.


Bell. I there among your Punkes, marry fah, hang-em: scorn't: will you never
leave sucking of eggs in other folks hens neasts.


Cast. Why in good troth, if you will trust me acquaintance, there was not one hen
at the board, ask Fluello.


Flu. No faith Coz; none but Cocks, signior Malauella drunk to thee.


Bell. O, a pure beagle; that horse-leach there?


Flu. And the knight, S. Oliver Lollilo, swore he would bestow a taffata
petticoate on thee, but to break his fast with thee.


Bell. With me! I Will choke him then, hang him Mole-catcher, its the dreamingst
snotty-nose.


Pio. Well, many took that Lollio for a fool, but he is a subtle fool.


Bell. I, and he has fellows: of all filthy dry-fisted knights, I cannot abide
that he should touch me.


Cast. Why wench, is he scabbed?


Bell. Hang him, heel not live to be so honest, nor to the credit to have
scabbes about him, his betters have em: but I hate to wear out any of his
course knighthood, because he is made like an Aldermans night-gowne, facst all
with conny before, and within nothing but Fox: this sweet Oliver, will eat
Mutton till he be ready to burst, but the lean iawde-slaue will not pay for the
scraping of his tre^cher.


Pio. Plague him, set him beneath the sault, and let him not touch a bit, till
every one has had his full cut.


Flu. Lord Ello, the Gentleman-usher came into us too, marry it was in our
cheese, for he had been to borrow money for his Lord, of a Citizen.


Cast. What an ass is that Lord, to borrow money of a Citizen.


Bell. Nay, Gods my pity, what an ass is that Citizen to lend money of a Lord.


Enter Matheo and Hypolito, who saluting the Company, as a stranger walks off.
Roger comes in sadly behind them, with a potle-pot, and stands aloof off.
Matheo. Save you Gallants, signior Fluello, exceedingly well met, as I may say.


Flu. Signior Matheo, exceedingly well met too, as I may say.


Ma. And how fares my little pretty Mistress?


Bell. Eene as my little pretty servant; sees three court dishes before her,
and not one good bit in them: how now? why the devil standst thou so? Art in a
trance?


To. Yes forsooth.


Bell. Why do not fill out their wine?


To. Forsooth it is filled out already: all the wine that the signior has bestowde
upon you is cast away, a Porter ran a little at me, and so fac'st me down
that I had not a drop.


Bell. ^me a cursed to let such a withered Artichocke faced-Rascall g^ow under my
nose: now you look like an old ^e ca^, going to the gallows: I Will be hangde if
he ha not put up the money to cony-catch us all.


To. No truel^ forsooth, it is not put up yet.


Bell How many Gentlemen have thou served thus?


To. None but five hundred, besides prentices and seruingmen.


Be^. Do think ^^e pocket it up at thy hands?


To. Yes forsooth, I fear you will pocket it up.


^el Fie, fie, cut my lace good servant, I shall ha the mother presently Im^e
so vexed at this horse-pl^mme.


Flu. Plague, not for a scald pottle of wine.


Ma. Nay, sweet Bellafronte, for a little Pigs wash.


Cast. Here Roger, fetch more, a mischance. In Faith Acquantance.


Bell Out of my sight, thou ungodly puritanical creature.


To. For the the other pottle? yes forsooth. Exit.


Bell. Spill that too: what Gentleman is that servant? your Friend?


Ma. Gods so a stool* a stool, if you love me Mistress entertain this
Gentleman respectively, and bid him welcome.


Bell. He Is very welcome, pray Sir sit.


Hip Thanks Lady.


Flu. Count Hypolito, is it not? cry you mercy signior, you walk here all this
while, and we not heard you? let me bestow a stool upon you beseech you, you
are a stranger here, we know the fashions ath house.


Cast. Please you be here my Lord. Tobacco.


Hipo. No good Castruchio.


Flu. You have abandoned the Court I see my lord since the death of your
mistress, well she was a delicate piece-beseech you sweet, come let us serve
under the colors of your acquaintance still: for all that, please you to meet
here at my lodging of my cuz, I shall bestow a banquet upon you.


Hipo. I never can deserve this kindness sir.
What may this Lady be, whom you call cuz?

Flu. Faith sir a poor gentlewoman, of passing good carriage, one that has some
suits in law, and lies here in an Atturnies house.


Hipo. Is she married?


Flu. Hah, as all your punks are, a captens wife, or so? never saw her before,
my Lord.


Hipo. Never trust me a goodly creature.


Flu. By gad when you know her as we do, you will swear she is the prettiest,
kindest, sweetest, most bewitching honest ape under the pole. A skin, your
satin is not more soft, nor lawne whiter.


Hipo. Belike then she is some sale curtizan.


Flu. Troth as all your best faces are, a good wench.


Hipo. Great pity that she is a good wench:


Ma. Thou shall ha in faith mistress: how now signiors? what? whispering? did
not I lay a wager I should take you within seven days in a house of vanity.


Hipo. You did, and I beshrew your heart, you have won.


Ma. How do you like my mistress?


Hipo. Well, for such a mistress: better, if your mistress be not you master.

I must break manners gentlemen, fare you well.


Ma. Sfoote you shall not leave us.


Bell. The gentleman likes not the taste of our company,


Omni. Beseech you stay.


Hipo. Trust me my affairs becken for me, pardon me.


Ma. Will you call for me half an hour hence here?


Hip. Perhaps I shall.


Ma. Perhaps? fah! I know you can swear to me you will,


Hip. Since you will press me on my word, I will. Exit.


Bell. What sullen picture is this servant?


Ma. Its Count Hipolito, the brave Count.


Pio. As gallant a spirit, as any in Millan you sweet Jew,


Flu. Oh he is a most essential gentleman, coz.


Cast. Did you never hear of Count Hipolitos acquaintance?


Bell. Marymuffe a your counts, and be no more life in'em.


Ma. He Is so malcontent! sir Bellafronta, and you be honest gallants, lets
sup together, and have the count with us: thou shall sit at the upper end
puncke.


Bell. Puncke, you sowcde gurnet?


Ma. Kings truce: come, i will bestow the supper to have him but laugh.


Cast. He betraies his youth too grossly to that tyrant malancholy.


Ma. All this is for a woman.


Bell. A woman! some whore! what sweet Jewel is it?


Pio. Wod she heard you.


Flu. Troth so wud I.


Cast. And I by heaven.


Bell. Nay good servant, what woman?


Ma. Pah.


Bell. Pry thee tell me, abusse and tell me: I warrant he is an honest fellow,
if he take on thus for a we^ch: good rogue who:


Ma. Byth Lord I will not, must not faith mistress: is it a match sirs? his
night, at Th'antilop: I, for there is best wine, and good boys.


Omni. Its done at Th'antilop.


Bell. I cannot be there to night.


Ma. Cannot? bith lord you shall.


Bell. By the Lady I will not: shaall!


Flu. Why then put it off till friday: wut come then cuz?


Bell. Well. Enter Roger.


Ma. You Are the waspishest Ape. Roger, put your mistress in mind to sup with us
on friday next: you are best come like a madwoman without a band in your
wastcoate, and the lynings of your kirtle outward, like every common hackney
that steals out at the back gate of her sweet knights lodging


Bell. Go, go, hang your self.


Cast. Its dinner time Matheo, shalls hence?


Omni. Yes, yes, farewell wench. Exeunt.


Bell. Farewell boys: Roger what wine sent they for?


To. Bastard wine, for if it had bin truly begotten, it wud not ha bin ashamde
to come in, here is vi. s. to pay for nursing the bastard.


Bell. A company of rookes! O good sweet Roger, run to the Poulters and buy me
some fine Larkes.


To. No woodcocks?


Bell. Yes faith a couple, if they be not dear.


To. I Will buy but one, there is one already here. Exit.


Enter Hipolito. Hipo. Is the gentleman (my friend) departed mistress?

Bell. His back is but new-turnd sir.

Hipo. Fare you well.

Bell. I can direct you to him.

Hipo. Can you? pray.

Bell. If you please stay, heel not be absent long.

Hipo. I care not much.

Bell. Pray sit forsooth.

Hipo. I Am hot.

Hipo. If may use your room, i will rather walk.

Bell. At your best pleasure-whew-some rubbers there.

Hipo. Indeed i will non: -Indeed I will not: thanks.
Pretty-fine-lodging. I perceive my friend
Is old in your acquaintance.

Bell. Troth sir, he comes
As other gentlemen, to spend spare hours;
If your self like our roof^ (such as it is)
Your own acquaintance may be as old as his.

Hipo. Say I did like; what welcome should I find?

Bell. Such as my present fortunes can afford.

Hipo. But would you let me play Mathaeos part?

Bell. What part?

Hipo. Why embrace you: dally with you, kiss:
Faith tell me, will you leave him, and love me?

Bell. I am in bonds to no man sir.

Hipo. Why then,
You Are free for any man: if any, me.
But I must tell you Lady, were you mine,
You should be all mine: I could brook no sharers,
I should be covetous, and sweep up all.
I should be pleasures usurer: faith I should.

Bell. O fate!

Hipo. Why sigh you Lady? may I know?

Bell. T'has never bin my fortune yet to single
Out that one man, whose love could fellow mine.
As I have ever wished it: o my Stars!
Had I but met with one kind gentleman,
That would have purchacde sin alone, to himself,
For his own private use, although sc^rce proper:
Indifferent hansome: meetly legd and thyed:
And my allowance reasonable-yfaith,
According to my body-by my troth,
I would have bin as true unto his pleasures,
Yea, and as loyal to his afternoones,
As ever a poor gentlewoman could be.

Hipo. This were well now, to one but newly ^ledg'd^
And scarce a day old in this subtle world:
Twere pretty Art, good bird-lime, cunning net:
But come, come, faith-confesse: how many men
Have drunk this selfsame protestation,
From that red tycing lip?

Bell. Indeed not any.

Hipo. Indeed? and blush not!

Bell. No, in truth not any.

Hipo. Indeed! in truth!-how warily you swear?
It Is well: if ill it be not: yet had I
The ruffian in me, and were drawn before you
But in light colors, I do know indeed,
You could not swear indeed, But thunder oaths
That should shake heaven, drown the harmonious sphers,
And pierce a soul (that loved her makers honor)
With horror and amazement.

Bell. Shall I swear?
Will you believe me then?

Hipo. Worst then of all,
Our sins by custom, seem (at last) but small.
Were I but over your threshold, a next man,
And after him a next, and then a fourth,
Should have this golden hook, and lascivious bait,
Thrown out to the full length, why let me tell you:
I ha seen letters sent from that white hand,
Tuning such musi^ke to Matheos ear.

Bell. Mathaeo! that's true, but believe it, I
No sooner had laid hold upon your presence,
But straight mine eye conueid you to my heart.

Hipo. Oh, you cannot feign with me, why, I know Lady,
This is the common passion of you all,
To hook in a kind gentleman, and then
Abuse his coin, conueying it to your lover,
And in the end you show him a french trick,
And so you leave him, that a coach may run
Between his legs for breadth.

Bell O by my soul!
Not I: therein i will prove an honest whore,
In being true to one, and to no more.

Hipo. If any be disposde to trust your oath,
Let him: i will not be he* I know you feine
All that you speak, I: for a mingled harlot,
Is true in nothing but in being false.
What! shall I teach you how to loath your self?
And mildly to^: not without sense or reason.

Bell. I am content, I would feign loath my self,
If you not love me.

Hipo. Then if your gracious blood be not all wasted,
I shall assay to do it.
Lend me your silence, and attention,-you have no soul,
That makes you wey so light: heavens treasure bought it,
And half a crown has sold it: for your body
Is like the common shore, that still receives
All the towns filth. The sin of many men
Is within you, and thus much I suppose,
That if all your committers stood in rank,
Theide make a lane, (in which your shame might dwell)
And with their spaces reach from hence to hell.
Nay, shall I urge it more, there has been known,
As many by one harlot, maym'd and dismembered,
As would ha stuffed an Hospital: this I might
Apply to you, and perhaps do you right:
O you are as base as any beast that bears,
Your body is ee'ne hirde, and so are theirs.
For gold and sparkling jewels, (if he can)
You Will let a Jew get you with christian:
Be he a Moore, a Tartar, tho his face
Look vglier then a dead man's scull,
Could the devil put on a humane shape,
If his purse shake out crowns, up then he gets,
Whores will be rid to hell with golden bits:
So that you are crueller then Turks, for they
Sell Christians only, you sell your selves away.
Why those that love you, hate you: and will term you
Lickerish damnation: wish themselves half sunk
After the sin is laid out, and ee'ne curse
Their fruitless riot, (for what one begets
Another poisons) lust and murder hit,
A tree being often shook, what fruit can knit?

Bell. O me unhappy!

Hip. I can vex you more;
A harlot is like Dunkirke, true to none,
Swallows both English, Spanish, fulsome Dutch,
Blacke-doord Italian last of all the French,
And he sticks to you faith: gives you your diet,
Brings you acquainted, first with monsier Doctor,
And then you know what follows.

Bell. Misery.
Rank, s^nking, and most loathsome misery.

Hip. Me thinks a toad is happier then a whore,
That with one poison swells, with thousands more
The other stocks her veins: harlot: fie! fie,
You are the miserablest Creatures breathing,
The very slaves of nature: mark me else,
You put on rich attires, others eyes wear them,
You eat, but to supply your blood with sin,
And this strange curse ee'ne haunts you to your graves.
From fools you get, and spend it upon slaves:
Like Bears and Apes, you are bayted and show tricks
For money; but your Bawd the sweetness licks.
Indeed you are their Iourney-women, and do
All base and damnd works they list set you to:
So that you n'ere are rich; for do but show me,
In present memory, or in ages past,
The fairest and most famous Courtezan,
Whose flesh was dear'st; that raisd the price of sin,
And held it up; to whose intemperate bosom,
Princes, Earls, Lords, the worst has bin a knight,
The mean a Gentleman, have offered up
Whole Hecatombs of sighs, and raind in showers
Handfuls of gold, yet for all this, at last
Diseases sucked her marrow, then grew so poor,
That she has begd, e'ene at a beggars door.
And (wherein heaven has a singer) when this Idol,
From coast to coast, has leapt on forrayne shores,
And had more worship, the^ th'outlandish whores:
When several Nations have gone over her,
When for each several City she has seen,
Her Maydenhead has bin new, and bin sold dear:
Did live well there, and might have did unknown,
And vndefam'd; back comes she to her own,
And there both miserably lives and dies,
Scornd even of those, that once adored her eyes,
As if her fatall-circled life, thus ran,
Her pride should end there, where it first began.
What do you weep to hear your Story read?
Nay, if you spoil your cheeks, I Will read no more.

Bell. O yes, I pray proceed:
Indeed 'twill do me good to weep indeed.

Hip. To give those tears a relish, this I add,
You Are like the Jews, scatterd, in no place certain,
Your days are tedious, your hours burdensome:
And were not for full suppers, midnight Revels,
Dancing, wine, ryotous meetings, which do drown,
And bury quite in you all virtuous thoughts,
And on your eyelids hang so heavily,
They have no power to look so high as heaven,
Youde sit and muse on nothing but despair,
Curse that devil Lust, that so burns up your blood,
And in ten thousand shiuers break your glass
For his temptation. Say you taste delight,
To have a golden Gull from ^ize to See,
To meat you in his hot luxurious arms,
Yet your nights pay for all: I know you dream
Of warrants, whips, and Beadles, and then start
At a doors windy creake: think every Weezle
To be a Constable: and every Rat
A long tayld Officer: Are you now not slaves?
Oh you have damnation without pleasure for it!
Such is the state of Harlots. To conclude,
When you are old, and can well paynt no more,
You turn Bawd, and are then worse then before:
Make use of this: farewell.

Bell* Oh, I pray stay.

Hip. See Matheo comes not: time has bard me,
Would all the Harlots in the town had heard me. Exit.

Bell. Stay yet a little longer. no: quite gone!
Cursed be that minute (for it was no more.
So soon a maid is changed into a Whore)
Wherein I first fell, be it for ever black;
Yet why should sweet Hipolito shun mine eyes;
For whose true love I would become pure-honest,
Hate the worlds mixtures, and the smiles of gold:
Am I not fair? Why should he fly me then?
Fair creatures are desired, not scornd of men.
How many Gallants have drunk healthes to me,
Out of their daggerd arms, and thought the^ blessed,
Enjoying but mine eyes at prodigal feasts!
And does Hipolito detest my love?
Oh, sure their heedlesse lusts but flattred me,
I am not pleasing, beautiful nor young,
Hipolito has spyed some ugly blemish,
Eclipsing all my beauties: I am foul:
Harlot! I, that is the spot that taynts my soul:
What! has he left his weapon here behind him,
And gone forgetful? O fit instrument
To let forth all the poison of my flesh!
Thy M. hates me, cause my blood has ranged:
But when it is forth, then heel believe I Am cha^g'd.

Hip. Mad woman, what art doing? Enter Hipo.

Bell. Either love me,
Or split my heart upon thy Rapiers point:
Yet do not neither; for thou then destroyst
That which I love thee for (thy virtues) here, here,
Thou Art crueller, and kilst me with disdain:
To die so, sheds no blood, yet it is worse pain. Exit Hipol.
Not speak to me! not bid farewell! a scorn!
Hated! this must not be, some means I Will try.
Would all Whores were as honest now, as I. Exeunt.

SCENA 7.
Enter Candido, his wife, George, and two Prentices in the shop: Fustigo
enters, walking by. Geor. See Gentlemen, what you lack? a fine Holland, a fine
Cambrick, see what you buy.


1. Pr. Holland for shirts, Cambrick for bands, what is it you lack?


Fust. Sfoot, I lack em all, nay more, I lack money to buy em: let me see, let
me look again: mass this is the shop; What Coz! sweet Coz! how do ifayth,
since last night after candlelight? we had good sport ifayth, had we not? and
when shals laugh again?


Wi. When you will, Cozen.


Fust. Spoke like a kind Lacedemonia^: I see yonder is thy husband.


Wi. ^ ^her's the sweet youth, God bless him.


Fust. And how is it Cozen? and how? how is it thou squall?


Wi. Well, Cozen, how fare you?


Fust. How fare I? troth, for sixpence a meal, wench, as well as heart can
wish, with Calves chaldron^ and chitterlings, besides I have a Punch after
supper, as good as a roasted Apple.


Cand. Are you my wives Cozen?


Fust. A am, sir, what have thou to do with that?


Cand. O, nothing but you are welcome.


Fust. The Devils dung in thy teeth: I Will be welcome whether thou will or no, I:
What Ring's this Coz? very pretty and fantastical ifayth, lets see it.


Wife Puh! nay you wrench my finger.


Fust. I ha sworn I Will have it, and I hope you will not let my oaths be cracktin
the ring, will you? I hope, sir, you are not mallicolly at this for all your
great looks: are you angry?


Cand. Angry? not I sir, nay, if she can part
So easily with her Ring, it is with my heart.

Geo. Suffer this, sir, and suffer all, a whoreson Gull, to --,


Can. Peace, George, when she has reapt what I have sown,
She Will say, one grain tastes better of her own,
Then whole sheaues gatherd from another land:
Wit's never good, till bought at a dear hand.

Geo. But in the mean time she makes an Ass of some body.


2. Pren. See, see, see, sir, as you turn your back, they do nothing but
kiss.


Cand. No matter, let 'em: when I touch her lip,
I shall not feel his kisses, no nor miss
Any of her lip: no harm in kissing is.
Look to your business, pray, make up your wares.

Fust. Troth Coz, and well remembered, I would thou would give me five yards
of Lawne, to make my Punke some falling bands a the fashion, three falling one
upon another: for that is the new editio^ now: she is out of linen horribly too,
troth, sha's never a good smock to her back neither, but one that has a great
many patches in it, and that I Am feign to wear my self for want of shift to:
prithee put me into holesom napery, and bestow some clean commodities upon us.


Wife. Reach me those Cambricks, and the Lawnes hither.


Cand. What to do wife? to lavish out my goods upon a fool?


Fust. Fool! Sneales eat the fool, or I Will so batter your crown, that it
shall scarce go for five shillings.


2. Pr. Do you hear sir? you are best be quiet, and say a fool tells you so.


Fust. Nails, I think so, for thou telst me.


Can. Are you angry sir, because I namde the fool?
Trust me, you are not wife, in mine own house;
And to my face to play the Anticke thus:
If you will needs play the madman, choose a stage
Of lesser compass, where few eyes may note
Your actions error; but if still you miss,
As here you do, for one clap, ten will hiss.

Fust. Zwounds Cozen, he talks to me, as if I were a scuruy Tragedian.


2. pren. Sir George, I ha thought upon a device, how to break his pate,
beat him soundly, and ship him away.


Geor. Do It.


2. Pre. I Will go in, pass through the house, give some of our fellow Prentices
the watchword when they shall enter, then come and fetch my master in by a
wile, and place one in the hall to hold him in conference, whilst we cudgel
the Gull out of his coxcombe.


Geor. Do It: away, do it.


Wife. Must I call twice for these Cambricks and lawnes?


Cand. Nay see, you anger her, George, prithee dispatch.


2. pr. Two of the choicest pieces are in the warehouse sir.


Cand. Go fetch them presently. Exit 1. prentice.


Fust. I, do, make haste, sir.


Cand. Why were you such a stranger all this while, being my wives Cozen?


Fust. Stranger? no sir, I me a natural Millaner borne.


Can. I perceive still it is your natural guize to mistake me, but you are
welcome sir, I much wish your acquaintance.


Fust. My acquaintance? I scorn that ifayth; I hope my acquaintance goes in
chains of gold three and fifty times double: you know who I mean, Coz, the
posts of his gate are a paynting to. Enter the 2. Prentice.


2. Pren. Signior Pandulfo the Marcha^t desires conference with you.


Can. Signior Pandulfo? I Will be with him straight. Attend your mistress and the
Gentleman. Exit.


Wife. When do you show those pieces?


Fust. I, when do you show those pieces?


Omn. Presently sir, presently, we are but charging the^.


Fust. Come sir, you Flat-cap, where be these whites?


Geo. Flat-cap^ hark in your ear sir, yare a flat fool, an Ass, a gull, and
I Will thrum you: do you see this cambrick sir?


Fust. Sfoot Coz, a good jest, did you hear him? he told me in my ear, I was
a flat fool, an Ass, a Gull, and I Will thrumb you: do you see this Cambrick
sir?


Wi. What, not my men, I hope?


Fust. No, not your men, but one of your men isayth.


1. Pr. I pray sir, come hither, what say you to this? here an excellent good
one.


Fust. I marry, this likes me well, cut me off some half score yards.


2. Pr. Let your whores cut, yare an impudent cox comb, you get none, and yet
I Will thrum you.-A very good Cambrick sir.


Fust. Again, again, as God judge me: Sfoot, Coz, they stand thru^ming here with
me all day, and yet I get nothing.


1. Pr. A word I pray sir, you must not be angry, prentices have hot bloods,
young fellows,-What say you to this piece? look you, it is so delicate, so
soft, so even, so fine a third, that a Lady may wear it.


Fust. Sfoot I think so, if a Knight marry my Punck, a Lady shall wear it:
cut me off 20. yards: thou art an honest lad.


1. Pr. Not without money, gull, and i will thru^ you to.


Omn. Gull, we will thrum you.


Fust. O Lord, sister, did you not hear something cry thrum? zounds your men
here make a plain Asle of me.


Wi. What, to my face so impudent?


Geor. I, in a cause so honest, we will not suffer
Our masters goods to vanish money less.

Wife. You will not suffer them.


2. Pr. No, and you may blush,
In going about to vex so mild a breast,
As is our masters.

Wi. Take away those pieces.
Cozen, I give them freely.

Fust. Mass, and I Will take em as freely.


Om. We Will make you lay em down again more freely.


Wi. Help, help, my brother will be murdered. Enter Can.


Cand. How now, what coil is here? forbear, I say.


Geor. He calls us Flatcaps, and abuses us.


Can. Why, sirs? do such examples flow from me?


Wi. They are of your keeping sir, alas poor brother.


Fust. I faith they hapepperd me, sister: look, do not spin? call you these
Prentices? I Will nere play at cards more when clubs is trump: I have a goodly
coxcomb, sister, have I not?


Cand. Sister and brother, brother to my wife.


Fust. If you have any skill in Heraldry, you may soon know that, break but
her pate, and you shall see her blood and mine is all one.


Can. A Surgeon, run, a Surgeon: Why then wore you that forged name of Cozen?


Fust. Because its a common thing to call Coz, and mingle now adays all the
world over.


Cand. Cozen! A name of much deceyt, folly and sin,
For under that common abused word,
Many an honest tempred Cityzen
Is made a monster, and his wife traynd out
To foul adulterous action, full of fraud.
I may well call that word, A Cities Bawd.

Fust. ^roth, brother, my sister would needs ha me take upon me to gull your
patience a little: but it has made double Gules on my coxcomb.


Wife. What, playing the woman? blabbing now you fool?


Cand. O, my wife did but exercise a jest upon your wit.


Fust. Sfoot, my wit bleeds for it, me thinks.


Cand. Then let this warning more of sense afford.
The name of Cozen is a bloody word.

Fnst. I Will nere call Coz again whilst I live; to have such a coil about it:
this should be a Coronation day; for my head runs Claret lustily. Exit Enter
an Officer.


Can. Go with the Surgeon to have great respect.
How now, my friend, what, do they sit to day?

Off. Yes sir, they expect you at the Senate House.

Can. I tha^k your pains, I Will not be last man there. Exit Off.
My gown, George, go, my gown. A happy land,
Where grave men meet each cause to understand,
Whose consciences are not cut out in brybes,
To gull the poor man's right: but in even scales,
Peize rich and poor, without corruptions veyles.
Come, where is the gown?

Ge. I cannot find the key sir.

Cand. Request it of your mistress.

Wife. Come not to me for any key.
I Will not be troubled to deliver it.

Cand. Good wife, kind wife, it is a needful trouble, but for my gown.


Wife. Mothes swallow down your gown:
you set my teeth an edge with talking on it.

Cand. Nay pry thee, sweet, I cannot meet without it,
I should have a great fine set on my head.

Wife. Set on your coxcomb: tush, fine me no fi^es.

Can. Believe me (sweet) none greets the Senate House, without his Robe of
reverence, that is his Gown.


Wife. Well, then you are like to cross that custom once,
You get nor key, nor gown, and so depart:
This trick will vex him sure, and fret his heart. Exit.

Cand. Stay, let me see, I must have some device,
My cloke's too short: fie, fie, no cloak will do it:
It must be something fashioned like a gown,
With my arms out: oh George, come hither George,
I pry thee lend me thine advice.

Geor. Troth sir, were it any but you, they would break open chest.

Cand. O no, break open chest! that's a Thieves office:
Therein you counsel me against my blood:
'Twould show impatience that, any meek means
I would be glad to embrace. Mass I have got it:
Go, step up, fetch me down one of the Carpets,
The saddest colored Carpet, honest George,
Cut thou a hole ith middle for my neck,
Two for mine arms, nay prithee look not strange.

Geor. I hope you do not think sir, as you mean.


Cand. Prithee about it quickly, the hour chides me:
Warily George, softly, take heed of eyes, Exit George.
Out of two evils he is accounted wise,
That can pick out the least; the Fine imposde
For an vn-gowned Senator, is about
Forty Cruzadoes, the Carpet not'boue four.
Thus have I chosen the lesser evil yet,
Preserved my patience, foyld her desperate wit.

Geor. Here, sir, here is the Carpet. Enter George.


Cand. O well done, George, we will cut it just ith midst:
It Is very well I thank thee, help it on.

Ge. It must come over your head, sir, like a wenches peticoate.

Cand. Thou Art in the right, good George, it must indeed.
Fetch me a nightcap: for I Will gyrd it close,
As if my health were queazy: 'twill show well
For a rude careless night-gowne, will it not think?

Ge. Indifferent well, sir, for a night-gowne, being girt and pleated.

Cand. I, and a nightcap on my head.

Ge. That's true sir, I Will run and fetch one, and a staff. Exit Ge.

Cand. For thus they cannot choose but conster it,
One that is out of health, takes no delight,
Wears his apparel without appetite,
And puts on heedles raiment without form. Enter Geo.
So so, kind George, be secret now: and prithee do not laugh at me till I me
out of sight.


Geo. I laugh? not I sir.

Cand. Now to the Senate House:
Methinks, I Would rather wear, without a frown,
A patient Carpet, then an angry Gown. Exit.

Ge. Now looks my M. just like one of our carpet knights, only he is somewhat
the honester of the two. Enter Candidoes wife.


Wi. What, is your master gone?

Geo. Yes forsooth, his back is but new turned.

Wi. And in his cloak? did he not vex and swear?

Geor. No, but heel make you swear anon: no indeed, he went away like a
lamb.


Wife. Key sink to hell: still patient, patient still!
I am with child to vex him: prithee George,
If ere thou lookst for favor at my hands,
Uphold one Jest for me.

Geor. Against my master?

Wi. It Is a mere iestin faith: say, will thou do it?

Geor. Well, what is it?

Wi. Here, take this key, thou know where all things lie,
Put on thy masters best apparel, Gown,
Chain, Cap, Ruff, every thing, be like himself,
And against his coming home, walk in the shop,
Feign the same carriage, and his patient look,
'Twill breed but a jest thou know, speak, will thou?

Geor. 'Twill wrong my masters patience.

Wi. Prithee George.

Geor. Well, if you will save me harmless, and put me under covert barn, I am
content to please you provided it may breed no wrong against him.


Wi. No wrong at all: here take the Key, be gone:
If any vex him, this: if not this, none Exeunt.

SCENA 8.
Enter a Bawd and Roger. Bawd. O Roger, Roger, where is your mistress, where is
your mistress? there is the finest, neatest Gentleman at my house, but newly come
over: O where is she, where is she, where is she?


Rog. My mistress is abroad, but not amongst em: my mistress is not the whore now
that you take her for.


Baw. How? is she not a whore? do you go about to take away her good name,
Roger? you are a fine Pandar indeed.


Rog. I tell you* Madona Finger-locke, I am not sad for nothing, I ha not eaten
one good meal this three and thirty days: I had wont to get sixteen pence by
fetching a pottle of Hypocras: but now those days are past: we had as good
doings, Madona Finger-locke, she within doors and I without, as any poor young
couple in Millain.


Baw. Gods my life, and is she changed now?


Rog. I ha lost by her squeamishness, more then would have builded 12. bawdy
houses.

And had she no time to turn honest but now? what a vile woman is this? twenty
pound a night, I Will be sworn, Roger, in good gold and no silver: why here was a
time, if she should ha picked out a time, it could not be better! gold enough
stirring; choice of men, choice of hair, choice of beards, choice of legs, and
choice of every, every, every thing: it cannot sink into my head, that she
should be such an Ass. Roger, I never believe it.


Rog. Here she comes now. Enter Bellafronte.


Baw. O sweet Madona, on with your loose gown, your felt and your feather,
there is the sweetest, proprest, gallantest Gentleman at my house, he smells all
of Musk and Amber greece, his pocket full of Crowns, flame-colourd dublet,
red satin hose, Carnation silk stockins, and a leg and a body, oh!


Bell. Hence, thou our sexes monster, poisonous Bawd,
Lusts Factor, and damnations Orator,
Gossip of hell, were all the Harlots sins
Which the whole world conteynes, numbered together,
Thine far exceeds them all; of all the creatures
That ever were created, thou art basest:
What serpent would beguile thee of thy Office?
It is detestable: for thou live
Upon the dregs of Harlots, guard'st the door,
Whilst couples go to dancing: O course devil!
Thou art the bastards curse, thou brandst his birth,
The lechers French disease; for thou dry-suckst him:
The Harlots poison, and thine own confusion.

Baw. Mary come up with a pox, have you no body to rail against, but your Bawd
now?


Bell. And you, Knave Pandar, kinsman to a Bawd.


Rog. You and I Madona, are Cozens.


Bell. Of the same blood and making, near allied,
Thou, that slave to sixpence, base-mettald villayne.

Rog, Sixpence? nay that is not so; I never took under two shillings four
pence, I hope I know my fee.


Bell. I know not against which most to inueigh:
For both of you are damnd so equally.
Thou never spar'st for oaths: swearst any thing,
As if thy soul were made of shoe-leather.
God dam me, Gentleman, if she be within,
When in the next room she is found dallying.

Rog. If it be my vocation to swear, every man in his vocation: I hope my
betters swear and dam themselves, and why should not I?


Bell. Roger, you cheat kind gentlemen*


Rog. The more gulls they.


Bell. Slave, I casheere thee.


Baw. And you do casheere him, he shall be entertaynd.


Rog. Shall I? then blurt a your service.


Bell. As hell would have it, entertaynd by you!
I dare the devil himself to match those two. Exit.

Baw. Ma^y gup, are you grown so holy, so pure, so honest with a pox?


Rog. Scuruy honest Punck! But stay Madona, how must our agreement be now? for
you know I am to have all the commings in at the hall door, and you at the
chamber door.


Ba. True Rog. except my vailes.


Rog. Vailes, what vailes?


Ba. Why as thus, if a couple come in a Coach, and light to lie down a little,
then Roger, that's my fee, and you may walk abroad; for the Coach man himself
is their Pandar.


To. Is a so? in truth I have almost forgot, for want of exercise: But how if I
fetch this Citizens wife to that Gull, and that Madona to that Gallant, how
then?


Ba. Why then, Roger, you are to have sixpence a lane, so many lanes, so many
sixpences.


To. Is It so? the^ I see we two shall agree and live together.


Ba. I Roger, so long as there be any Tauernes and bawdy houses in Millain.
Exeunt.


SCENA 9.
Enter Bellafronte with a Lute, pen, ink and paper being placde before her.
Song. THe Courtiers flattring Jewels,
(Temptations only fewels)
The Lawyers ill-got monyes,
That suck up poor Bees Honyes:
The Citizens sonne's riot,
The gallant costly diet:
Silks and Veluets, Pearls and Ambers,
Shall not draw me to their Chambers. She writes.
Silks and Veluets, etc.
Oh, it is in vain to write: it will not please,
Ink on this paper would ha but presented
The foul black spots that stick upon my soul,
And rather make me lothsomer, then wrought
My loves impression in Hipolitoes thought.
No, I must turn the chaste leaves of my breast,
And pick out some sweet means to breed my rest.
Hipolito, believe me I will be
As true unto thy heart, as thy heart to thee,
And hate all men, their gifts and company.
Enter Matheo, Castruchio, Fluello, Pioratto. Mat. You, goody Punck, subandi
Cockatrice, O yare a sweet whore of your promise, are you not think you? how
well you came to supper to us last night: mew, a whore and break her word! nay
you may blush, and hold down your head at it well enough: Sfoot, ask these
gallants if we staid not till we were as hungry as Seriants.


Flu. I, and their Yeoman too.


Cast. Nay faith Acquaintance, let me tell you, you forgot your self too much:
we had excellent cheer, rare vintage, and were drunk after supper.


Pior. And when we were in our Woodcocks (sweet Rogue) a brace of Gulles,
dwelling here in the City, came in and paid all the shot.


Mat. Pox on her, let her alone.


Bell. O, I pray do, if you be Gentlemen:
I pray depart the house; beshrew the door
For being so easily entreated: faith,
I lent but little ear unto your talk,
My mind was busied otherwise in troth,
And so your words did unregarded pass:
Let this suffice, I am not as I was.

Flu. I am not what I was! no I Will be sworn thou art not: for thou were honest
at five, and now thou art a Puncke at fifteen: thou were yesterday a simple
whore, and now thou art a cunning Conny-catching Baggage to day.


Bell. I Will say I me worse, I pray forsake me then,
I do desire you leave me, Gentlemen,
And leave your selves: O be not what you are,
(Spendthrifts of soul and body)
Let me persuade you to forsake all Harlots,
Worse the^ the deadliest poisons, they are worse:
For over their souls hangs an eternal curse,
In being slaves to slaves, their labors perish,
They Are seldom blessed with fruit; for ere it blossoms,
Many a worm confounds it.
They have no issue but foul ugly ones,
That run along with them, e'ene to their graves:
For stead of children, they breed rank diseases,
And all, you Gallants, can bestow on them,
Is that French Infant, which n'ere acts but speaks:
What shallow son and heir then, foolish galla^t,
Would waste all his inheritance, to purchase
A filthy loathd disease? and pawn his body
To a dry evil: that vsurie's worst of all,
When th'interest will eat out the principal.

Mat. Sfoot, she guls em the best: this is always her fashion, when she would
be rid of any company that she cares not for, to enjoy mine alone.


Flu. What Is here? instructions, Admonitions, and Caueats? come out, you
scabberd of vengeance.


Mat. Fluello, spurn your hounds when they fyste, you shall not spurn my
Punk, I can tell you my blood is vexed.


Flu. Pox a your blood: make it a quarrel.


Mat. You Are a Slave, will that serve turn?


Omn. God's Blood, hold, hold.


Cast. Matheo, Fluello, for shame put up.


Mat. Spurn my sweet Varlet!


Bell. O how many thus
Moved with a little folly, have let out
Their souls in Brothell houses, fell down and dyed
Just at their Harlots foot, as 'twere in pride.

Flu. Matheo, we shall meet.


Mat. I, I, any where, saving at Church: pray take heed we meet not there.


Flu. Adue, Damnation.


Cast. Cockatrice, farewell.


Pi. There Is more deceit in women, then in hell. Exeunt*


Mat. Ha, ha, thou do gull em so rarely, so naturally: if I did not think
thou had bin in earnest: thou art a sweet Rogue for it ifayth.


Bell. Why are not you gone to, Signior Matheo?
I pray depart my house: you may believe me,
In troth I have no part of Harlot in me.

Mat. How Is this?


Bell. Indeed I love you not: but hate you worse
Then any man, because you were the first
Gave money for my soul; you brake the Ice,
Which after turned a puddle: I was led
By your temptation to be miserable:
I pray seek out some other that will fall,
Or rather (I pray) seek out none at all.

Mat. Is It possible, to be impossible, an honest whore! I have heard many honest
wenches turn Stru^npets with a wet finger; but for a Harlot to turn honest,
is one of Hercules labors: It was more easy for him in one night to make
fifty queanes, then to make one of them honest again in fifty years: come, I
hope thou do but jest.


Bell. It Is time to leave off jesting, I had almost
Iested away Salvation: I shall love you,
If you will soon forsake me.

Mat. God buy thee.

Bell. Oh, tempt no more women: shun their weighty curse,
Women (at best) are bad, make them not worse,
You gladly seek our sexes overthrow:
But not to raise our states for all your wrongs.
Will you vouchsafe me but due recompense,
To mar^y with me?

Mat. How, marry with a Punck, a Cockatrice, a Harlot? mary foh, I Will be burnt
through the nose first.


Bell. Why la? these are your oaths you love to undo us,
To put heaven from us, whilst our best hours waste:
You love to make us lewd, but never chaste.

Mat. I Will hear no more of this: this ground upon,
Thou Art damned for altring thy Religion. Exit.

Bell. Thy lust and sin speak so much: go thou my ruin,
The first fall my soul took; by my example
I hope few maidens now will put their heads
Under men's girdels: who least trusts, is most wise:
Men's oaths do cast a mist before our eyes.
My best of wit be ready: now I go,
By some device to greet Hipolito.

SCENA 10.
Enter a servant setting out a Table, on which be places a scull, a picture, a
book and a Taper. Ser. So, this is Monday morning, and now must I to my
huswifry: would I had bin created a Shoemaker; for all the gentle craft are
gentlemen every Monday by their Copy, and scorn (then) to work one true
stitch. My M. means sure to turn me into a student; for here is my book, here
my deske, here my light; this my close chamber, and here my Punck: so that
this dull drowzy first day of the week, makes me half a Priest, half a
Chandler, half a paynter, half a Sexton, I and half a Bawd: for (all this
day) my office is to do nothing but keep the door. To prove it, look you, this
good-face and yonder gentleman (so soon as ever my back's turned) will be naught
together. Enter Hipolito.


Hip. Are all the windows shut?


Ser. Close sir, as the fist of a Courtier that has stood in three reigns.


Hip. Thou art a faithful servant, and obseru'st
The Calender, both of my solemn vows,
And ceremonious sorrow: Get thee gone,
I charge thee on thy life, let not the sound
Of any woman's voice pierce through that door.

Ser. If they do, my Lord, I Will pearce some of them.
What will your Lordship have to breakfast?

Hip. Sighs.


Ser. What to dinner?


Hip. Tears.


Ser. The one of them, my Lord, will fill you too full of wind, the other wet
you too much. What to supper?


Hip. That which (now) thou can not get me, the constancy of a woman.


Ser. Indeed that's harder to come by then ever was Ostend.


Hip. Prithee away.


Ser. I Will make away my self presently, which few Servants will do for their
Lords; but rather help to make them away: Now to my dore-keeping, I hope to
pick something out of it. Exit.


Hip. My Infelices face: her brow, her eye,
The dimple on her cheek: and such sweet skill,
Has from the cunning workemans pencill flowne,
These lips look fresh and lively as her own,
Seeming to move and speak. Las^ now I see,
The reason why fond women love to buy
Adulterate complexion: here it is read,
False colors last after the true be dead.
Of all the Roses grafted on her cheeks,
Of all the graces dancing in her eyes,
Of all the Music set upon her tongue,
Of all that was past woman's excellence,
In her white bosom, look! a painted board,
Circumscribes all: Earth can no bliss afford.
Nothing of her, but this? this cannot speak,
It has no lap for me to rest upon,
No lip worth tasting: here the worms will feed,
As in her coffin: hence then idle Art,
True love's best picturde in a true-loues heart.
Here art thou drawn sweet maid, till this be dead,
So that thou live twice, twice art buried.
Thou figure of my friend, lie there. What Is here?
Perhaps this shrewd pate was mine enemies:
Las! say it were: I need not fear him now:
For all his braues, his contumelious breath,
His frowns (tho dagger-pointed) all his plot,
(Tho 'nere so mischievous) his Italian pills,
His quarrels, and (that common fence) his law,
See, see, they are all eaten out; here is not left one?
How clean they are picked away! to the bare bone!
How mad are mortals then to rear great names
On tops of swelling houses? or to wear out
Their fingers ends (in dirt,) to scrape up gould!
Not caring so (that Sumpter-horse) the back
Be hung with gaudy trappings, with what course,
Yea rags most beggarly, they cloth the soul:
Yet (after all) their Gay-nes looks thus foul.
What fools are men to build a garish tomb,
Only to save the carcass whilst it rots,
To maintein't long in stinking, make good carrion,
But leave no good deeds to preserve them sound,
For good deeds keep men sweet, long above ground,
And must all come to this; fools; wise, all hither,
Must all heads thus at last be laid together:
Draw me my picture then, thou grave neat workman,
After this fashion, not like this; these colors
In time kissing but air, will be kissed off,
But here is a fellow; that which he lays on,
Till doomes day, alters not complexion.
Deaths' the best Painter then: They that draw shapes,
And live by wicked faces, are but Gods Apes,
They come but near the life, and there they stay,
This fellow draws life to: his Art is fuller,
The pictures which he makes are without color.

Enter his servant. Ser. Here Is a person would speak with you Sir.


Hip. Hah!


Ser. A parson sir would speak with you.


Hip. Vicar?


Ser. Vicar? no sir, has too good a face to be a Vicar yet, a youth, a very
youth.


Hip. What youth? of man or woman? lock the doors.


Ser. If it be a woman, mary-bones and Potato pies keep me for meddling with
her, for the thing has got the breeches, it is a male-varlet sure my Lord, for a
woman's tailor nore measurd him.


Hip. Let him give thee his message and be gone.


Ser. He says he is signior Mathaeos man, but I know he lies.


Hip. How do thou know it?


Ser. Cause has nere a beard: it is his boy I think sir, whosoere paid for his
nursing.


Hip. Send him and keep the door. Reads.
Fata si liceat mihi,
Fingere arbitrio meo,
Temperem Zephyro leuivela.
I Would sail were I to choose, not in the Ocean,
Cedars are shaken, when shrubs do feel no bruize*
Enter Bellafronte like a Page. How? from Mathaeo.

Bell. Yes my Lord.

Hip. Art sick?

Bell. Not all in health my Lord.

Hip. Keep off.

Belle. I do:
Hard fate when women are compeld to woo.

Hip. This paper does speak nothing.

Bell. Yes my Lord,
Matter of life it speaks, and therefore writ
In hidden Caracter; to me iustruction
My master gives, And (less you please to stay
Till you both meet) I can the text display.

Hip. Do so: read out.

Bell. I am already out:
Look on my face, and read the strangest story!

Hip. What villain, ho? Enter his servant.

Ser. Call you my Lord?

Hip. Thou slave, thou have let in the devil.

Ser. Lord bless us, where? he is not cloven my Lord that I can see: besides
the devil goes more like a Gentleman than a Page: good my Lord Boon couragio.


Hip. Thou have let in a woman in man's shape.
And thou art dambd for it.

Ser. Not dambd I hope for putting in a woman to a Lord.

Hip. Fetch me my Rapier, -- do not: I shall kill thee.
Purge this infected chamber of that plague,
That runs upon me thus: Slave, thrust her hence.

Ser. Alas my Lord, I shall never be able to thrust her hence without help:
come Mermaid you must to Sea again.


Bell. Here me but speak, my words shall be all Music:
Here me but speak.

Hip. Another beats the door,
The Other Shee-diuell, look.

Ser. Why then hell's broke loose. Exit.

Hip. Hence, guard the chamber: let no more come on,
One woman serves for man's damnation.
Beshrew thee, thou do make me violate,
The chastest and most sanctimonious vow,
That ere was entered in the court of heaven:
I was on meditations spottles wings,
upon my journey thither; like a storm
Thou beats my ripened cogitations,
flat to the ground: and like a theife do stand,
To steal devotion from the holy land.

Bell. If woman were thy mother; if thy heart,
Be not all Marble, (or ift Marble be)
Let my tears soften it, to pity me,
I do beseech the do not thus with scorn,
Destroy a woman.

Hip. Woman I beseech thee,
Get thee some other suite, this fits thee not,
I would not grant it to a kneeling Queen,
I cannot love thee, nor I must not: See,
The copy of that obligation,
Where my soul's bound in heavy penalties.

Bell. She Is dead you told me, shele let fall her suite.

Hip. My vows to her, fled after her to heaven,
Were thine eyes clear as mine, thou might behold her,
Watching upon yon battlements of stars,
How I observe them: should I break my bond,
This board would riue in twain, these wooden lips
Call me most periurde villain, let it suffice,
I ha set thee in the path; Is It not a sign,
I love thee, when with one so most most dear,
I Will have thee fellows? All are fellows there.

Bell. Be greater then a king, save not a body,
But from eternal shipwreck keep a soul,
If not, and that again, sins path I tread,
The grief be mine, the guilt fall on thy head.

Hip. Stay and take Physic for it, read this book,
Ask counsel of this head what is to be done,
Hele strike it dead that it is damnation,
If you turn turk again, oh do it not,
The heaven cannot allure you to do well
From doing ill let hell fright you: and learn this,
The soul whose bosom lust did never touch,
Is Gods fair bride, and maidens souls are such:
The soul that leaving chastities white shore,
Swims in hot sensual streams, is the devils whore,
How now: who comes. Enter his servant.

Ser. No more knaves my Lord that wear smocks: here is a letter from doctor
Benedict; I would not enter his man, tho he had hairs at his mouth, for fear
he should be a woman, for some women have beardes, mary they are half witches,
Slid you are a sweet youth to wear a codpeece, and have no pinnes to stick
vpont.


Hip. I Will meet the doctor, tell him, yet to night
I cannot: but at morrow rising Sun
I will not fail: go: woman fare thee well. Exeunt.

Bell. The lowest fall can be but into hell,
It does not move him. I must therefore fly,
From this undoing City, and with tears,
Wash off all anger from my fathers brow,
He cannot sure but joy seeing me newborn,
A woman honest first and then turn whore,
Is (as with me) common to thousands more,
But from a trumphet to turn chaste: that sound,
Has often bin heard, that woman hardly found. Exit.

11. SCE.
Enter Fustigo, Crambo and Poli. Fus. Hold up your hands gentlemen: here is one,
two, three, (nay I warrant they are sound pistols, and without flawes, I had
them (of my sister, and I know she uses to put nothing that's cracked,) three,
four, five, six, seven, eight and nine, by this hand bring me but a piece of
his blood. and you shall have 9. more. I Will lurk in a tavern not far off, and
provide supper to close up the end of the Tragedy, the linen drapers
reme^ber-stand toot I beseech you, and play your parts perfectly.


Cram. Look you Signior, it is not your gold that we way.


Fust. Nay, nay, way it and spare not, if it lack one grain of corn;
I Will give you a bushel of wheat to make it up.

Cram. But by your favor Signior, which of the servants is it, because well
punish justly.


Fust. Mary it is the head man; you shall rast him by his tongue a pretty tall
prating fellow, with a Tuscalonian beard.


Po. Tuscalonian: very good.


Fust. Cods life I was near so thrumbd since I was a gentleman: my coxcombe
was dry beaten as if my hair had been hemp.


Cram. Well dry beat some of them.


Fust. Nay it grew so high, that my sister cried murder out very manfully: I
have her consent in a manner to have him pepperd, else i will not doot to win more
then ten cheaters do at a rifling: break but his pate or so, only his mazer,
because i will have his head in a cloth as well as mine, he is a linen draper and
may take enough. I could enter mine action of battery against him, but we may
haps be both dead and rotten before the lawyers would end it.


Cram. No more to do, but insconce your self in the taueren; provide no great
cheat, couple of Capons, some Phesants, Plouers, an Oringeado-pie or so: but
how bloody so ere the day be, sally you not forth.


Fust. No, no, nay if I stir, some body shall stink: i will not budge: i will lie
like a dog in a manger.


Cram. Well, well, to the tavern, let not our supper be raw, for you shall
have blood enough-your belly full.


Fust. That's all so god same, I thirst after, blood for blood, bump for bump,
nose for nose, head for head, plaster for plaster, and so farewell: what shall
I call your names because i will leave word, if any such come to the bar.


Cram. My name is Corporal Crambo.


Poh. and mine, Lieutenant Poh. Exeunt.


Cram. Poli. Is as tall a man as ever opened Oyster: I would not be the devil
to meet Poh, farewell.


Fust. Nor I by this light, if Poh be such a Poh. Exeunt.


Enter Condidoes wife, in her shop, and the two Premises. Wife. What Is a clock
now.


2. Pren. It Is almost 12.


Wife. That's well.
The Senate will leave wording presently:
But is George ready,

2. Pre. Yes forsooth, he is surbusht.


Wife. Now as you ever hope to win my favor,
Throw both your duties and respects on him,
With the like awe as if he were your master,
Let not your looks betray it with a smile,
Or ieering glaunce to any customer,
Keep a true Settled countenance, and beware,
You laugh not whatsoever you hear or see.

2. Pren. I warrant you mistress, let us alone for keeping our countenance: for
if I list, there is never a fool in all Myllan shall make me laugh, let him play
the fool never so like an Ass, whether it be the fat Court fool, or the
lean City fool.


Wife. enough then, call down George.


2. Pren. I hear him coming.

Enter George. Wife. Be ready with your legs then let me see,
How curtzy would become him: gallantly!
Beshrew my blood a proper seemly man,
Of a choice carriage walks with a good port,

Geo. I thank you mistress, my back's broad enough, now my Masters gown's on.


Wif. Sure I should think it were the least of sin,
To mistake the master, and to let him in.

Geo. Twere a good Comedy of errors that in faith.


2. Pre. whist, whist, my master.


Enter Candido, and Exit presently. Wif. You all know your taskes: gods my
life, what is that he has got vpon's back? who can tell?


Geo. That can I, but I will not.


Wife. Girt about him like a madman: what: has he lost his cloak too: this is
the maddest fashion that ere I saw.

What said he George when he pasde by thee?

Geo. Troth Mistress nothing: not so much as a Be, he did not hum: not so much
as a bawd he did not hem: not so much as a Cuekold he did not ha: neither hum,
hem, nor ha, only starde me in the face, past along, and made have in, as if
my looks had workt with him, to give him a stool.


Wi. Sure he is vexed now, this trick has moved his Spleen,
He Is angered now, because he vttred nothing:
And wordlesse wrath breaks out more violent,
May be heel strive for place, when he comes down,
But if thou love me George, afford him none.

Geo. Nay let me alone to play my masters prize, as long as my Mistrisse
warrants me: I Am sure I have his best clothes on, and I scorn to give place to
any that is inferior in apparel to me, that's an Axiom, a principle, and is
observed as much as the fashion; let that persuade you then, that lie shoulder
with him for the upper hand in the shop, as long as this chain will maintain
it.


Wi. Spoke with the spirit of a Master, tho with the tongue of a Prentise.
Enter Candido like a Prentise. Why how now madman? what in your tricksicoates!

Cand. O peace good Mistrisse: Enter Crambo and Poli. See what you lack, what
is it you buy? pure Callicoes, fine Hollands, choice Cambrickes, neat Lawnes:
see what you buy? pray come near, my Master will use you well, he can
afford you a pennyworth.


Wi. I that he can, out of a whole piece of Lawne in faith.


Cand. Pray see your choice here Gentlemen.


Wi. O fine fool? what a madman? a patient madman? who ever heard of the
like? well sir I Will fit you and your humor presently: what? crosse-points, I Will
untie em all in a trice, I Will vex you faith: Boy take your cloak, quick, come.
Exit.


Cand. Be covered George, this chain, and welted gown, Bare to this coat:
then the worlds vpside down*


Geo. Vmh, vmh, hum.


Cram. That's the shop, and there is the fellow.


Poli. I but the Master is walking in there.


Cram. No matter, we will in.


Poh. God's Blood do long to lie in Limbo?


Cram. And Limbo be in hell, I care not.


Cand. Look you Gentlemen, your choice: Cambricks?


Cramb. No sir, some shirting.


Cand. You shall.


Cram. Have you none of this stripped Canuas for doublets.


Cand. None stripped sir, but plain.


2. Pren. I think there be one piece stripped within.


Geo. Step sir and fetch it, hum, hum hum.


Cand. Look you Gentlemen, I Will make but one spredding, here is a piece of cloth,
fine, yet shall wear like Iron, it is without fault, take this upon my word, it is
without fault.


Cram. Then it is better than you sir.


Cand. I, and a number more, o that each soul
Were but as spotless as this Innocent white,
And had as few brakes in it.

Cram. Twould have some then: there was a fray here last day in this shop.


Cand. There was indeed a little flea-biting.


Poh. A Gentleman had his pate broake, call you that but a flea-biting.


Cand. He had so.


Cram. Zownes do you stand in it? He strikes him.


Geo. Sfoot clubs, clubs, prentices, down with em, ah you roagues, strike a
Citizen in's shop.


Cand. None of you stir I pray, forbear good George.


Cram. I beseech you sir, we mistook our marks, deli^er us our weapons.


Geo. Your head bleeds sir, cry clubs.


Cand. I say you shall not, pray be patient,
Give them their weapons, sirs you're best be gone,
I tell you here are boys more tough then Bears:
Hence, least more fists do walk about your ears.

Both. We thank you sir. Exeunt,


Began. You shall not follow them.
Let them alone pray, this did me no harm,
Troth I was cold, and the blow made me warm,
I thank em for it: besides I had decreed
To have a vain pricked, I did mean to bleed,
So that there is money saved: they are honest men,
Pray use em well, when they appear again.

Geo. Yes sir, we will use em like honest men.


Cand. I well said George, like honest men, tho they be arrant knaves, for
that's the praise of the city; help to lay up these wares


Enter his wife, with Officers. Wife. Yonder he stands.


Off What in a Prentise-coate?


Wif. I, I, mad, mad, pray take heed.


Cand. How now? what news with them? what make they with my wife? officers is
she attachd? look to your wares.


Wif. He talks to himself, oh he is much gone indeed.


Off. Pray pluck up a good heart, be not so fearful,
Sirs hark, we will gather to him by degrees.

Wi. I, I, by degrees I pray: oh me! what makes he with the Lawne in his hand,
heel tear all the ware in my shop.


Off. Fear not we will catch him on a sudden.


Wi. O you had need do so, pray take heed of your warrant


Off. I warrant mistress. -- Now Signior Candido?


Cand. Now sir, what news with you sir?


Wi. What news with you he says: oh he is far gone.


Off. I pray fear nothing, lets alone with him,
Signior, you look not like your self me thinks,
(Steal you a the other side) you are changde, you are altered.

Cand. Changde sir, why true sir, is change strange, it is not the fashion
unless it alter: Monarkes turn to beggars; beggars creep into the nests of
Princes, Masters serve their prentises: Ladies their Seruingmen, men turn to
women.


Off And women turn to men.

Cand. I, and women turn to men, you say true, ha ha, a mad world, a mad world.


Off. Have we caught you sir?


Cand. Caught me: well, well: you have caught: me.


Wi. He laughes in your faces.


Geo A rescue Prentises, my maister's catch-pold.


Off. I charge you keep the peace, or have your legs gartered with Yrons, we
have from the Duke a warrant strong enough for what we do.


Cand. I pray rest quiet, I desire no rescue.


Wi. La: he desires no rescue, I as poor heart,
He talks against himself.

Cand. Well, what is the matter?

Off. Look to that arm,
Pray make sure work, double the cord.

Cand. Why, why?

Wi. Look how his head goes! should he get but loose,
Oh twere as much as all our lives were worth.

Off. Fear not, we will make all sure for our own safety.

Cand. Are you at leisure now? well, what is the matter?
Why do I enter into bonds thus? ha?

Off. Because you are mad, put fear upon your wife.

Wi. Oh I, I went in danger of my life, every minute.

Cand. What? am I mad say you, and I not know it?

Off. That proves you mad, because you know it not.

Wif Pray talk as little to him as you can,
You see he is too far spent.

Cand. Bound with strong cord,
A Cisters thread in faith had been enough,
To lead me any where: Wife do you long?
You are mad too, or else you do me wrong.

Geo. But are you mad indeed Master?

Cand. My Wife says so,
And what she says; George, is all truth you know:
And whether now? to Bethlem Monastery? -- ha! whether?

Off. Faith eene to the mad-mens pound.

Cand. A Gods name, still I feel my patience sound. Exe.

Geo. Come we will see whether he goes, if the master be mad, we are his
servants, and must follow his steps, we will be mad caps too; Farewell mistrisse,
you shall have us all in Bedlam. Exeunt.


Wi. I think, I ha fitted now, you and your clothes,
If this move not his patience, nothing can,
I Will swear then I have a saint, and not a man Exit.

13. SCE.
Enter Duke: Doctor: Fluello, Castruchio, Pioratto. Duk. give us a little
leave. Doctor your news.

Doc. I sent for him my Lord: at last he came,
And did receive all speech that went from me,
As gilded pills made to prolong his health:
My credit with him wrought it: for, some men.
Swallow even empty hooks, like fools. that fear
No drowning where it is deepest, Cause it is clear:
In the end we sat and eat: a health I drank
To Infaelices sweet departed soul,
(This train I knew would take.)

Duk. It Was excellent.

Doc. He fell with such devotion on his knees,
To pledge the same.

Duk. Fond superstitious fool?

Doc. That had he been inflamed with zeal of prayer,
He could not power't out with more reverence.
About my neck he hung, wept on my cheek,
Kissed it, and swore, he would adore my lips,
Because they brought forth Infaelices name.

Duk. Ha, ha, alack, alack.

Doc. The cup he lifs up high, and thus he said,
Here noble maid: drinks, and was poisoned.

Duk. and died?

Doc. And died my Lord.

Duk. Thou in that word,
Have pei^d mine aged hours out with more years,
Than thou have taken from Hipolito,
A noble youth he was, but lesser branches
Hindering the greaters growth, must be lopt off,
And feed the fire: Doctor we are now all thine,
And use us so: be bold.

Doc. Thanks gracious Lord:
My honored Lord:

Duk. hmh.

Doc. I do beseech your grace to bury deep,
This bloody act of mine.

Duk. Nay, nay, for that,
Doctor look you toot: me it shall not move,
Their cursed that ill do, not that ill do love,

Doc. You throw an angry forehead on my face,
But be you pleased, backward thus for to look,
That for your good, this evil I undertook,

Duk. I, I, we conster so:

Doc. And only for your love.

Duk. Confessed: it is true.

Doc. Nor let it stand against me as a bar,
To thrust me from your presence: nor believe
(As Princes have quick thoughts,) that now my finger
Being deept in blood, I will not spare the hand,
But that for gold (as what can gold not do?)
I may be hi'rde to work the like on you,

Duk. Which to prevent.

Doc. It Is from my heart as far.

Duk. No matter Doctor, cause i will feareles sleep,
And that you shall stand clear of that suspicion
I banish thee for ever from my court.
This principle is old but true as fate,
Kings may love treason, but the traitor hate, Exit.

Do^. Is It so: nay then Duke, your stale principle
With one as stale, the Doctor thus shall quit,
He falls himself that digs another pit,
How now: where is he? will he meet me:

Enter the Doctors man. Doc. man, meet you sir, he might have met with three
fencers in this time and have received less hurt then by meeting one Doctor of
Physic: why sir has walked under the old Abbey wall yonder this hour, till
he is more cold then a Citizens country house in Ianiuere, you may smell him
behind sir; la you: yonder he comes.


Doc. leave me. Enter Hipolito.

Doc. man. Itch lurch if you will. Exit.

Do. O my most noble friend.

Hip. Few but your self,
Could have intied me thus, to trust the Air,
With my close sighs, you send for me: what news?

Doc. Come you must doff this black: die that pale cheek,
Into his own color; go: Attire your self
Fresh as a bridegroom, when he meets his bride,
The Duke has done much treason to thy love,
It Is now revealed, it is now to be reuengde,
Be merry honored friend, thy Lady lives.

Hip. What Lady?

Doc. Infaelice, She Is reuiude;
Reuiude: alack! death never had the heart,
To take breath from her.

Hip. Vmh: I thank you sir,
Physic prolongs life, when it cannot save,
This helps not my hopes. mine are in their grave:
You do some wrong to mock me.

Doc. By that love,
Which I have ever borne you, what I speak
Is truth: the maiden lives: that funeral,
Dukes tears, the morning, was all counterfeit,
A sleepy draught cozend the world and you,
I was his minister and then chambred up,
To stop discovery.

Hip. O treacherous Duke:

Doc. He cannot hope so certainly for bliss:
As he believes that I have poysond you,
He wode me toot, I yielded, and confirmed him,
In his most bloody thoughts.

Hip. A very devil!

Doc. Her did he closely coach to Bergamo,
And thither?

Hip. Will I ride, stood Bergamo,
In the low countries of black hell, i will to her.

Doc. You shall to her, but not to Bergamo,
How passion makes you fly beyond your self.
Much of that weary journey I'ha cut off,
For she by letters has intelligence,
Of your supposed death, her own interment,
And all those plots, which that false Duke, (her father)
Has wrought against you: And she will meet you.

Hip. O when:

Doc. Nay see: how covetous are your desires,
Ea^ely to morrow morn.

Hip. O where good father.

Doc. At Bethlem monastery: are you pleased now?

Hip, At Bethlem monastery: the place well fits,
It is the scoole where those that loose their wits,
Practice again to get them: I am sick
Of that disease, all love is lunaticke.

Doc. We Will steal away, this night in some disguise,
Father Anselmo, a most ^euerend Friar,
Expects our coming, before whom we will lay,
Reasons so strong, that he shall yield, in bonds,
Oh holy wedlock, to tie both your hands.

Hip. This is such happiness:
That to believe it* it is impossible.

Doc. Let all your joys then die in misbeliefe,
I will reveal no more.

Hip. O yes good father,
I am so well acquainted with despair,
I know not how to hope: I believe all.

Doc. We Will hence this night, much must be done, much said
But if the Doctor fail not in his charms,
Your Lady shall ere morning fill these arms.

Hip. heavenly Physician: far thy fame shall sprede,
That make two lovers speak when they be dead.

Exeunt. Candido's wife, and George: Pioratto meets them. Wi. O watch good
George, watch which way the Duke comes.


Geo. Here comes one of the butter flies, ask him.


Wi. Pray sir, comes the duke this way.


Pio. He Is upon coming mistress. Exit.


Wi. I thank you sir: Geroge are there many madfolkes, where thy Master lies.


Geo. O yes, of all countries some, but especially mad greeks they swarm:
troth mistress, the world is altered with you, you had not wont to stand thus
with a paper humbly complaining: but you're well enough served: prouander
pricked you, as it does many of our Cittie-wiues besides.


Wif. Do think George we shall get him forth.


Ge. Truly mistress I cannot tell, I think you will hardly get him forth: why it is
strange* Sfoot I have known many women that have had mad rascals to their
husbands, whom they would belabour by all means possible to keep em in their
right wits, but of a woman to long to turn a tame man into a madman, why the
devil himself was never used so by his dam.


Wif. How does he talk George! ha! good George tell me.


Geo. Why your best go see.


Wif. Alas I am afraid.


Geo. Afraid! you had more need be ashamd: he may rather be afraid of you.


Wif. But George he is not stark mad, is he? he does not rave, he is not
horne-mad George is he?


Geo. Nay I know not that, but he talks like a Justice of peace, of a thousand
matters and to no purpose.


Wif. I Will to the monastery: I shall be mad till I enjoy him, I shall be sick till
I see him, yet when I do see him, I shall weep out mine eyes.


Geo. I, i would feign see a woman weep out her eyes; that's as true, as to say, a
man's cloak burns; when it hangs in the water: I know you will weep mistrisse,
but what says the painted cloth.

Trust not a woman when she cries,
For she will pump water from her eyes,
With a wet finger, and in faster showers,
Then April when he raines down flowers.

Wif. I but George, that painted cloth is worthy to be hanged up for lying, all
women have not tears at will, unless they have good cause.


Geo. I but mistrisse how easily will they find a cause, and as one of our
Cheese-trenchers says very learnedly:

As out of Wormwood Bees suck Honey,
As from poor clients Lawyers firke money,
As Parsley from a roasted cunny.
So tho the day be nere so sunny,
If wives will have it rain, down then it drives,
The calmest husbands make the stormest wives,

Wif. Tame George, but I had on storming now.


Geo. Why that's well done, good mistress throw aside this fashion of your humor,
be not so fantastical in wearing it, storm no more, long no more. -- This
longing has made you come short of many a good thing that you might have had
from my Master: Here comes the Duke.


Enter Duke, Fluello, Pioratto, Sinere. Wife. Oh I beseech you pardon my
offense,
In that I durst abuse your Graces warrant,
Deliver forth my husband good my Lord.

Duke. Who is her husband?

Flu. Candido my Lord,

Duke. Where is he?

Wif. He Is among the lunaticks,
He was a man made up without a gall,
Nothing could move him, nothing could convert
His meek blood into fury, yet like a monster,
I often beat at the most constant rock
Of his unshaken patience, and did long
To vex him.

Duk. Did you so?

Wife. And for that purpose,
Had warrant from your Grace, to carry him
To Bethlem Monastery, whence they will not free him,
Without your Graces hand that sent him in.

Duke. You have longd fair; it is you are mad I fear,
Its fit to fetch him thence, and keep you there:
If he be mad* why would you have him forth?

Geo. And please your grace, he is not stark mad, but only talks like a young
Gentleman, somewhat phantastically, that's all: there is a thousand about your
court, city and country madder then he.


Duk. Provide a warrant, you shall have our hand.


Geo. Here Is a warrant ready drawn my Lord.


Cast. Get pen and Inck, get pen and inck: Enter Castruchio.


Cast Where is my Lord the Duke?


Duke. How now? more mad men.


Cast. I have strange news my Lord.


Duk. Of what? of whom?


Cast. Of Infaelice, and a marriage.


Du. Ha! where? with whom.


Cast. Hipolito.


Geo. Here my Lord.


Du. Hence with that woman, void the room.


Flu. Away, the Duke's vexed.


Geo. Whoop, come mistress the Duke's mad too. Exeunt.


Du. Who told me that Hipolito was dead?


Cast. He that can make any man dead, the Doctor: but my Lord, he is as full of
life as wilde-fire, and as quick: Hipolito, the Doctor, and one more rid hence
this evening; the Inn at which they light is Bethlem Monastarie: Infaeliche
comes from Bergamo, and meets them there: Hipolito is mad, for he means this
day to be married, the afternoon is the hour, and Friar Anselmo is the
knitter.


Du. From Bergamo? is it possible? it cannot be,
It cannot be.

Cast. I will not swear my Lord,
But this intelligence I took from one,
Whose brains works in the plot.

Du. What Is he?

Cast. Mathaeo.

Flu. Mathaeo knows all.

Pio. He Is Hipolitoes bosom.

Duke. How far stands Bethlem hence?

Omn. Six or seven miles.

Duke. Is It even so, not married till the afternoon you say?
Stay, stay, lets work out some prevention: how:
This is most strange, can none but madmen serve
To dress their wedding dinner? All of you,
Get presently to horse; disguise your selves
Like Countrie-Gentlemen,
Or riding citizens, or so: and take
Each man a several path, but let us meet,
At Bethlem Monastery, some space of time
Being spent between the arrival each of other,
As if we came to see the Lunaticks.
To horse, away, be secret on your lives,
Love must be punished that unjustly thriues. Exeunt.

Flu. Be secret on your lives! Castruchio
You Are but a scuruy Spaniell; honest Lord,
Good Lady: Zounds their love is just, it is good,
And I Will prevent you, tho I swim in blood. Exit.

Enter Friar Anselmo, Hipolito, Mathaeo, Infaeliche. Hip. Nay, nay, resolve
good father, or deny.

Ans. You press me to an act, both full of danger,
And full of happiness, for I behold.
Your fathers frowns, his threats, nay perhaps death,
To him that dare do this, yet noble Lord,
Such comfortable beams break through these clouds,
By this blessed marriage, that your honored word
Being pawnd in my defense) I will tie fast,
The holy wedding Knot.

Hip. Tush fear not the Duke.

Ans. O son, wisely to fear: Is to be free from fear.

Hip. You have our words, and you shall have our lives,
To guard you safe from all ensuing danger.

Ma. I, I, chop em up and away.

Ans. Stay, when is it fit for me, safest for you,
To entertain this business.

Hip. Not till the evening.

Ans. Be It so, there is a chapel stands hard by,
Upon the West end of the Abbey wall,
Thither convey your selves, and when the sun
Has turned his back upon this upper world,
I Will mary you, that done, no th^ndring voice,
Can break the sacred bond, yet Lady here you are most safe.

Infae. Father your lou's most dear.

Mat. I well said lock us into some little room by our selves that we may be
mad for an hour or two.


Hip. O good Mathaeo no, lets make no noise.


Mat. How! no noise! do you know where you are: sfoot amonst all the mad-caps
in Millan: so that to throw the house out at window will be the better, and no
man will suspect that we lurk here to steal mutton: the more sober we are,
the more scuruy it is. And tho the Friar tell us, that here we are safest, ^'me
not of his mind, for if those lay here that had lost there money, none would
ever look after them, but hear are none but those that have lost their wits,
o that if hue and cry be made, hither they will come, and my reason is, because
none goes to be married till he be stark mad.


Hip. Muffle your selves yonder is Fluello. Enter Fluello.

Ma. Zounds!

Flu. O my Lord these cloakes are not for this rain, the tempest is too great:
I come sweating to tell you of it, that you may get out of it.


Mat. Why what is the matter.

Flu. What Is the matter! you have matterd it fair: the Duk's at hand.

Onm. The Duke?

Flu. The very Duke.

Hip. Then all our plots are turned upon our heads; and we are blown up with our
own underminings. Sfoot how comes he, what villain durst betray our being here.


Flu: Castruchio, Castruchio told the Duke, and Mathaeo here told Castruchio.


Hip. Would you betray me to Chastruchio,


Ma. Sfoot he dambd himself to the pit of hell if he spoke ont again.


Hip. So did you swear to me, so were you dambd.


Mat. Pox on em, and there be no faith in men, if a man shall not believe
oaths: he took bread and salt by this light, that he would never open his
lips.


Hip. Oh God, oh God.


Ans. Son be not desperate have patience, you shall trip your enemy down, by
his own slights, how far is the Duke hence.


Flu. He Is but new set out: Castruchio, Pioratto and Sinezi come along with
him: you have time enough yet to prevent them if you have but courage.


Ans. You shall steal secretly into the Chapel,
And presently be married; if the duke
Abide here still, spite of ten thousand eyes,
You shall escape hence like Friars.

Hip. O blessed disguisde: O happy man.

Ans. Talk not of happiness till your closde hand,
Have her bit^' forhead, like the lock of time,
Be not too slow, nor hasty, now you clime,
Up to the tower of bliss, only be wary
And patient, that's all, if you like my plot
Build and dispatch, if not farewell, then not.

Hip. O Yes, we do applaud it, wee^e dispute,
No longer, but will hence and execute.
Fluello you will ^tay here, let us be gone,
The ground that fraighted lovers tread upon,
Is stuke with thorns.

Ans. Come then, away: it is meet,
To escape those thorns, to put on winged feet. Exeunt.

Mat. No words I pray Fluello, for it stands us upon.

Flu. Oh sir, let that be your lesson.
Alas poor lovers, on what hopes and fears,
Men toss themselves for women. when she is got
The best has in her that which pleases not.

Enter to Fluello, the Duke, Castruchio, Pioratto and Sinezi from several
doors muffled. Duk. whose there!

Cast. My Lord.

Duk. Peace, send that Lord away,
A Lordship will spoil all, lets be all fellows.
What Is he.

Cast. Fluello, or else Sinezi by his little legs.

Omn. All friends, all friends.

Duk. What! met upon the very point of time,
Is this the place.

Pio. This is the place my Lord.

Duke. Dream you on Lordshps! come no more Lords: pray
You have not seen these lovers yet.

Omn. Not yet.

Duk. Castruchio art thou sure this wedding feate,
Is not till afternoon?

Castr. So it is given out my Lord.

Duk. Nay, nay, it is like, thieves must observe their hours,
Lovers watch minutes like Astronomers,
How shall the Interim hours by us be spent,

Flu. Lets all go see the madmen.

Omn. Mas content. Enter Town like a sweeper.

Duk. Oh here comes one, question him, question him.

Flu. How now honest fellow do thou belong to the house.

Tow. yes forsooth, I am one of the implements; I swepe the madmens rooms, and
fetch straw for em, and buy chains to tie em, and rods to whip em, I was a mad
wag my self here once, but I thank father Anselm he lasht me into my right
mind again.


Duk. Anselmo is the Friar must marry them,
Question him where he is,

Cast. And where is father Anselmo now?


Tow. Mary he is gone but eene now.


Duk. I, well done, tell me, whether is he gone?


Tow. Why to God a mighty.


Flu. Ha, ha, this fellow is a fool, talks idlelie.


Pio. Sir are all the mad folks in Millan brought hither?


Tow. How all, there is a wise question indeed: why if all the mad folks in
Millan should come hither, there would not be left ten men in the City.


Duk. Few gentlemen or Courtiers here, ha.


Tow. Oh yes? abundance, abundance, lands no sooner fall into their hands, but
straight they run out a their wits: Citizens sons and heirs are free of the
house by their fathers copy: Farmers sons come hither like geese (in flocks)
and when they ha sold all their corn fields, here they sit and pick the
straws.


Sin. Me thinks you should have women here as well as men.


Tow. Oh, I: a plague on em, there is no ho with them, they are madder then march
hairs.


Flu. Are there no lawyers here amongst you?


Tow. Oh no, not one: never any lawyer, we dare not let a lawyer come in, for
heel make em mad faster than we can recover em.


Du. And how long is it er'e you recover any of these.


Tow. Why according to the quantity of the Moon that's got into em, an
Aldermans son will be mad a great while a very great while, especially if his
friends left him well, a whore will hardly come to her wits again: a puritan
there is no hope of him, unless he may pull down the steeple and hang himself
in the bell-ropes.


Flu. I perceive all sorts of fish come to your net.


Tow. Yes intruth, we have blocks for all heads, we have good store of wild
oats here: for the Courtier is mad at the Citizen, the Citizen is mad at
the Country men, the shoemaker is mad at the cobbler, the cobbler at the carman
the punke is mad that the Merchants wife is no whore, the Merchants wife is mad
that the puncke is so common a whore: gods so, here is father Anselmo. pray say
nothing that I tell tales out of the school. Exit.


Omn. God bless you father. Enter Anselmo.


Ans. Thank you gentlemen.

Cast. Pray may we see some of those wretched Souls,
That here are in your keeping?

Ans. Yes: you shall,
But gentlemen I must disarme you then,
There are of mad men, as there are of tame,
All humored not alike: we have here some,
So apish and phantastike, play with a fether,
And tho twould grieve a soul, to see Gods image,
So blemished and defaced, yet do they act
Such anticke and such pretty lunacies,
That spite of sorrow they will make you smile:
Others again we have like hungry Lions,
Fierce as wild Bulls, untameable as flies,
And these have oftentimes from strangers sides
Snatched rapiers suddenly, and done much harm,
Whom if you will see, you must be weaponlesse.

Omn. With all our hearts.

Ans. Here: take these weapons in,
Stand of a little pray, so, so, it is well:
I Will show you here a man that was sometimes,
A very grave and wealthy Citizen,
Has serud a prentiship to this misfortune,
Bin here seven years, and dwelt in Bergamo.

Duke. How fell he from his wits?

Ans. By loss at Sea:
I Will stand aside, question him you alone,
For if he spy me, heel not speak a word,
Unless he is thoroughly vexed. Discouers an old man, wrapped in a Net.

Flu. Alas poor soul.

Cast. A very old man.

Duk. God speed father.

1. Mad. God speed the plough: thou shall not speed me.

Pio. We see you old man, for all you dance in a net.

1. Mad. True, but thou will dance in a halter, and I shall not see thee.

Ans. O, do not vex him pray.

Cast. Are you a Fisherman father?

1. Mad. No, i am neither fish nor flesh.

Flu. What do you with that net then?

1. Mad. Do not see fool! there is a fresh Salmon in it: if you step one foot
further, you will be over shoes, for you see i am over head and ear in the
salt water: and if you fall into this whirlpoole where I am, you are drowned: you are
a drowned rat. -- I am fishing here for five ships, but I cannot have a good
draught, for my net breaks still, and breaks, but I Will break some of your
necks and I catch you in my clutches. Stay, stay, stay, stay -- where is the
wind, where is the wind, where is the wind: where is the wind: out you guls, you
goose-caps, you gudgeon eaters! do you look for the wind in the heavens? ha ha
ha ha, no no, look there, look there, look there, the wind is always at
that door: hark how it blows, pooff pooff, pooff.


Omn. Ha ha ha.


1. Mad. Do you laugh at Gods creatures? do you mock old age you roagues? is
this gray beard and head counterfeit, that you cry ha ha ha? -- Sir, art not
thou my eldest son?


Pior. Yes indeed father.


1. Mad. Then thou art a fool, for my eldest son had a pol^ foot, crooked
legs, a vergis face, and a peare-coullourd beard; I made him a scholar, and he
made himself a fool. -- Sir! thou there? hold out thy hand.


Du. My hand, well, here it is.


1. Mad. Look, look, look, look: has he not long nails, and short hair?


Flu. Yes monstrous short hair, and abominable long nails.


1. Ma. Ten-peny naile's are they not?


Flu. Yes ten penny nails.


1. Mad. Such nails had my second boy: kneel down thou varlet, and ask thy
father blessing. Such nails had my midlemost son and I made him a Promoter:
and he scrapt, and scrapt, and scrapt, till he got the devil and all: but he
scrapt thus and thus, and thus, and it went under his legs, till at length a
company of Kites taking him for carrion, swept up all, all, all all, all, all,
all. -- If you love your lives, look to your selves, see, see, see, see, the
Turks galleys are fighting with my ships, Bownce goes the guns. -- oooh! cry
the men: romble romble go the waters -- Alas! there! it is sunk -- it is sunck: I
am undone, I am undone, you are the dambd Pirates have undone me, -- you are bith
Lord, you are, you are, stop em, you are.


Ans. Why how now Syrra, must I fall to tame you?


1. Mad. Tame me? no: i will be madder than a roasted Cat: see, see, I am burnt
with gu^powder, these are our close fights.


Ans. I Will whip you, if you grow unruly thus.


1. Mad. Whip me? out you toad: -- whip me? what justice is this, to whip me
because I Am a beggar? -- Alas? I am a poor man: a very poor man: I am starud,
and have had no meat by this light, ever since the great sloud, I am a poor
man.


Ans. Well, well; be quiet and you shall have meat.


1. Mad. I, I, pray do, for look you, here be my guts: these are my ribs, --
you may look through my ribs, -- see how my guts come out -- these are my red
guts, my very guts, oh, oh!


Ansel. Take him in there.


Omn. A very pitious sight.


Cast. Father I see you have a busy charge.


Ans. They must be used like children, pleased with toys,
And anon whipped for their unruliness:
I Will show you now a pair quite different
From him that's gone; he was all words: and these
Unless you urge em, seldom spend their speech,
But save their tongues-la you-this hithermost
Fell from the happy quietness of mind,
About a maiden that he loud, and dyed:
He followed her to church, being full of tears,
And as her body went into the ground,
He fell stark mad. That is a married man,
Was jealous of a fair, but (as some say)
A very virtuous wife, and that spoild him.

2. Mad. All these are whoremongers and lay with my wife: whore, whore, whore,
whore, whore.


Flu. Observe him.


2. Mad. Gaffer shoemaker, you pulled on my wives pumps, and then crept into her
pantofles: lie there, lie there, -- this was her Tailer,-you cut out her
loose-bodied gown, and put in a yard more then I allowed her, lie there by the
shomaker: o, master Doctor! are you here: you gave me a purgation, and then
crept into my wives chamber, to feel her pulses, and you said, and she said,
and her maid said, that they went pit a pat-pit a pat-pit a pat,-Doctor I Will put
you anon into my wives vrinall: -heigh, come a loft Jack? this was her
school-maister, and taught her to play upon the Virginals, and still his Iacks
leapt up, up: you pricked her out nothing but bawdy lessons, but I Will prick you
all, -Fidler-Doctor-Tayler-Shoomaker,-Shoomaker-Fidler-Doctor-Tayler-so! lie
with my wife again now.


Castr. See how he notes the other now he feeds.


2. Mad. Give me some porridge.


3. Mad. I Will give thee none.


2. Mad. Give me some porridge.


3. Mad. I Will not give thee a bit,


2. Mad. Give me that flap-dragon.


3. Mad. I Will not give thee a spoonefull: thou lie, its no Dragon it is a
Parrat, that I bought for my sweet heart, and i will keep it.


2. Mad. Here Is an Almond for Parrat.


3. Mad. Hang thy self.


2. Mad. Here Is a roape for Parrat.


3. Mad. Eat it, for i will eat this.


2. Mad. I Will shoot at thee and thow't give me none.


3. Mad. Wut thou?


2. Mad. I Will run a tilt at thee and thow't give me none.


3. Mad. Wut thou? do and thou dare.


2. Mad. Bownce.


3. Mad. Ooh! I am slaine-murder, murder, murder, I am slain, my brains are
beaten out.


Ans. How now you villains, bring me whips: i will whip you


3. Mad. I am dead, I am slain, ring out the bell, for I am dead,


Duk. How will you do now sir? you ha killed him.


2. Mad. I Will answer't at Sessions: he was eating of Almond Butter, and I longd
for it: the child had never bin delivered out of my belly, if I had not killed him
I Will answer't at sessions, so my wife may be burnt ith hand too.


Ans. Take em in both: bury him, for he is dead.


3. Mad. I indeed, I am dead, put me I pray into a good pit hole.


2. Mad. I Will answer't at Sessions. Exeunt.


Enter Bellafronte mad. Ans. How now huswife, whether gad you?


Bell. A nutting forsooth: how do you gaffer? how do you gaffer? there is a
French cursie for you too.


Flu. It Is Bellafronte.


Pio. It Is the puncke bith Lord.


Duk. Father what is she I pray?


Ans. As yet I know not,
She came but in this day, talks little idly
And therefore has the freedom of the house,

Bell. Do not you know me? nor you? nor you, nor you?


Omn. No indeed.


Bell. Then you are an Ass, and you are an Ass, and you are an Ass, for I
know you.


Ans. Why, what are they? come: tell me, what are they?


Bell. The're fish-wiues: will you buy any gudgeons, gods santy yonder come
Friars, I know them too, how do you Friar?


Enter Hipolito, Mathae^, and Infaeliche disguisde in the Habets of Friars.
Ans. Nay, nay, away, you must not trouble Friars.
The duke is here speak nothing.

Bell. Nay indeed you shall not go: we will run at barlibreak first, and you
shall be in hell.


Mat. My puncke turned mad whore, as all her fellows are?


Hip. Speak nothing, but steal hence, when you spy time.


Ans. I Will lock you up if you are unruly fie


Bell. fie! mary ^o: they shall not go indeed till I ha told^ em their
fortunes.


Duk. Good Father give her leave.


Bell. I pray, good father, and I Will give you my blessing.


Ans. Well then be brief, but if you are thus unruly,
I Will have you locked up fast.

Pio. come, to their fortunes.


Bell. Let me see 1.2.3. and 4. i will begin with the little Friar first, here is a
fine hand indeed, I never saw Friar have such a dainty hand: here is a hand for a
Lady, here is your fortune,

You love a Friar better then a Nun,
Yet long you will love no Friar, nor no Friars son.
Bow a little, the line of life is out, yet i am afraid,
For all your holy, you will not die a maid, God give you joy.
Now to you Friar Tucke.

Mat, God send me good luck.


Bell. You love one, and one loves you.
You are a false knave, and she is a Jew,
Here is a Dial that false ever goes.

Mat. O your wit drops.

Bell. Troth so does your nose, nay lets shake hands with you too:
Pray open, here is a fine hand,
Ho Friar ho, God be here,
So he had need: you will keep good cheer,
Here Is a free table, but a frozen breast,
For you will starve those that love you best.
Yet you have good fortune, for if I am no liar,
Then you are no Friar, nor you, nor you no Friar discouers them
Haha haha.

Duk. Are holy habits cloakes for villainy?
Draw all your weapons.

Hip. do, draw all your weapons.

Duk. Where are your weapons, draw.

Omn. The Friar has guld us of em.

Mat. O rare trick:
You ha learnt one mad point of Arithmaticke.

Hip. Why swells your spleen so hie? against what bosom,
Would you your weapons draw? hers! it is your daughters:
Mine! it is your sons.

Duk: Son?

Mat. Son, by yonder Sun.

Hip. You cannot shed blould here, but it is your own,
To spill your own blood were damnation,
Lay smooth that wrinckled brow, and I will throw
My self beneath your feet,
Let it be rugged still and flinted over,
What can come forth but sparkles, that will burn,
Your self and us? She Is mine; my claymes most good,
She Is mine by marriage, tho she is yours by blood.
I have a hand dear Lord, deep in this act,
For I foresaw this storm, yet willingly
Put fourth to meet it? Often have I seen a father
Washing the wounds of his dear son in tears,
A son to curse the sword that struck his father,
Both slain ith quarrel of your families,
Those scars are now taken off: And I beseech you,
To seal our pardon, all was to this end
To turn the ancient hates of your two houses
To fresh green friendship, that your Loves might look:
Like the springs forehead, comfortably sweet,
And your vexed souls in peaceful union meet,
Their blood will now be yours, yours will be theirs,
And happiness shall crown your silver hairs.

Flu. You see my Lord there is now no remedy.

Omn. Beseech your Lordship.

Duk. You beseech fair, you have me in place fit
To bridle me, rise Friar. you may be glad
You can make madmen tame, and tame men mad,
Since fate has conquered, I must rest content,
To strive now would but ad new punishment:
I yield unto your happiness, be blessed,
Our families shall henceforth breath in rest.

Omn. O happy change.

Duk. Yours now is my consent,
I throw upon your joys my full consent.

Bell. Am not I a good girl, for finding the Friar in the well? gods so you are
a brave man: will not you buy me some Sugar plums because I am so good a
fortune teller.


Duk. Would thou had wit thou pretty soul to ask,
As I have will to give.

Bell. Pretty soul, a pretty soul is better than a pretty body: do not you know
my pretty soul? I know you: Is not your name Mathaeo.


Mat. Yes lamb.


Bell. Baa, lamb! there you lie for I am mutton; look fine man, he was mad for
me once, and I was mad for him once, and he was mad for her once, and were
you never mad? yes I warrant, I had a fine jewel once, a very fine jewel and
that naughty man stoale it away from me, a very fine jewel.


Duk. What jewel pretty maid.


Bell. Maid nay that's a lie, O it was a very rich jewel, calde a Maidenhead,
and had not you it leerer.


Mat. Out you mad Ass away.


Duk. Had he thy Maidenhead? he shall make thee amends, and marry thee.


Bell. Shall he? o brave Arthur of Bradly then?


Duk. And if he bear the mind of a Gentleman,
I know he will.

Mat. I think I rifled her of some such paltry Jewel.


Duk. Did you? then mary her, you see the wrong
Has led her spirits into a lunacie.

Mat. How, marry her my Lord? sfoot marry a mad-woman: let a man get the tamest
wife he can come by, she will be mad enough afterward, do what he can.


Duk. Nay then, father Anselmo here shall do his best,
To bring her to her wits, and will you then?

Mat. I cannot tell, I may choose.

Duk. Nay then law shall compel: I tell you sir,
So much her hard fate moves me: you should not breath i will mary her.
Under this air, unless you married her.

Mat. Well then, when her wits stand in their right place,

Bell. I thank your grace, Mathaeo thou art mine,
I am not mad, but put on this disguise,
Only for you my Lord, for you can tell
Much wonder of me, but you are gone: farewell.
Mathaeo thou did first turn my soul black,
Now make it white again* I do protest,
I Am pure as fire now, chaste as Cynthias breast.

Hip. I durst be sworn Mathaeo she is indeed.

Mat. Cony-catcht, guld, must I sail in your flie-boate,
Because I helped to rear your maine-mast first:
Plague found you fort, - it is well.
The Cuckolds stamp goes current in all Nations,
Some men have horns given them at their creations,
If I be one of those, why so: its better
To take a common wench, and make her good,
Than one that simpers and at first, will scarce
Be tempted forth over the threshold door,
Yet in one sennight ^ounds, turns arrant whore,
Come wench, thou shall be mine, give me thy gols,
We Will talk of legs hereafter: see my Lord,
God give us joy.

Omn. God give you joy.

Enter Candidoes wife and George. Geo. Come mistress we are in Bedlam now, mas
and see, we come in pudding-time, for here is the Duke.


Wif. My husband good my Lord.


Duk. Have I thy husband?


Ca^^. Its Candido my Lord, he is here among the lunaticks: father Anselmo, pray
fetch him forth: this mad woman is his wife, and tho she were not with child,
yet did she long most spitefully to have her husband mad, and because she
would be sure, he should turn Jew, she placde him here in Bethlem, youder he
comes.


Enter Candido with Anselmo. Duke. Come hither Signior -- Are you mad.

Cand. You are not mad.

Duke. Why I know that.

Cand. Then may you know, I am not mad, that know
You are not mad, and that you are the duke:
None is mad here but one -- How do you wife:
What do you long for now? -- pardon my Lord,
She had lost her childs nose else: I did cut out
Penniworths of Lawne, the Lawne was yet mine own:
A carpet was yet my gown, yet it was mine own,
I wore my man's coat* yet the cloth mine own,
Had a cracked crown the crown was yet mine own,
She says for this I Am mad, were her words true,
I should be mad indeed -- o foolish skill,
Is patience madness? I Will be a madman still.

Wife. Forgive me, and i will vex your spirit no more.

Duk. Come, come, we will have you friends, join hearts, join hands.

Cand. See my Lord, we are even,
Nay rise, for ill-deeds kneel unto none but heaven.

Duk. Signior, me thinks, patience has laid on you
Such heavy weight, that you should loath it.

Cand. Loath it.

Duk. For he whose breast is tender blood so cool,
That no wrongs heat it, is a patient fool,
What comfort do you find in being so calm.

Cand. That which green wounds receive from sovereign balm,
Patience my Lord; why it is the soul of peace:
Of all the virtues it is neerst kin to heaven.
It makes men look like Gods; the best of men
That ere wore earth about him, was a sufferer,
A soft, meek, patient, humble, tranquil spirit,
The first true Gentleman that ever breathd;
The stock of Patience then cannot be poor,
All it desires, it has; what Monarch more?
It is the greatest enemy to law
That can be, for it does embrace all wrongs,
And so chains up, lawyers and women's tongues.
It Is the perpetual prisoners liberty:
His walks and Orchards: it is the bond-slaues freedom,
And makes him seem proud of each iron chain.
As tho he wore it more for state then pain:
It is the beggars Music, and thus sings,
Although their bodies beg, their souls are kings:
O my dread liege! It is the sap of bliss,
Reares us aloft; makes men and Angels kiss,
And (last of all) to end a household strife,
It is the hunny against a waspish wife.

Duke. Thou giu'ft it lively colors: who dare say
he is mad, whose words march in so good array?
Twere sin all women should such husbands have.
For every man must then be his wives slave.
Come therefore you shall teach o^^ court to shine,
So calm a spirit is worth a golden Mine,
Wives (with meek husbands) that to vex them long,
In Bedlam must they dwell, else dwell they wrong.

Exeunt. FINIS.

