THE Double PP. A Papist in Arms. Bearing Ten several Sheilds. ENCOVNTRED By
the Protestant. At Ten several Weapons. A Jesuit Marching before them.

Cominus and Eminus. LONDON, Imprinted by T. C. and are to be sold by John
Hodgets, at his shop in Paul's Churchyard, 1606.

TO ALL THE Nobility, Clergy, and Gentry Of Great Britain, True Subjects to
King James.
you that (like the sollid wheels of Fate)
Give sweet or troubled Motion to a State:
you that bath our souls in Sacred streams,
(In which they thrive as you grow Hot or Colder:)

(All, strong Collumnes that uphold her.)
O let me not seem bolder
Than my country zeal requires,
If these weak (but hallowed) fires
Offer up This Sacrifize,
Which upon the Altar lies
Of my hearts Devotion.
Since so strange Commotion.
(Now) with giddy base Alarmes
Puffes the Romist up in Arms,
That he dares his Colors vant
Against th'vnme^ling Protestant:
O You, that our Chieftaines are,
Give not over this holy war,
Fight it out. You cannot fall,
God being sworn your General.
That your Triple darts may hit,
All your Nerves together knit,
And shoote'em with an English hand,
So shall your Heirs and Houses stand
(Like Pillars) on f^^me Bases. So
Great Britain shall grow greater, and her Land
Enlarge as We these Lines: your Peace shall flow
Clear: High: and smooth: So The Seven Hills shall fall,
(...)
THE DOUBLE PP.
A Riddle on the double* PP.
Upon the double PP. badder fruits grow
Tha^ on al letters in the Christ-Crosse-Row;
It sets (by reason of the Badge it wears)
The Christ-Crosse-Row, together by the ears:
The reason is, this haughty double PP.
Would clyme above both A. B. C. and D.
And trample on the necks of E. F. G.
H. I. (Royal K.) L. M. N. O. and Q.
Threatening the fall of R. S. T. and V.
The Resolution.
PP.-PaPa.- the PoPe. Christ-Crosse-Row,^Christendome. A. B. C. D. E. etc. the
States of the land: As Archbishos, Bishops, Counselors, Dukes, Earls, etc. K.
the King. Q. the Queen. R. Religion. S. State. T. Truth. V. You all.
THE PICTVRE of a Jesuit.
A Harpye face; a Foxes head:
(In Lamb-Skins closely covered)
A Mandrakes voice, whose tunes are cries,
So peircing, that the Hearer dies;
Mouthed like an Ape, his innate spite
Being to mock Those he cannot bite:
Neckt like a Crane, he chawes a Crown,
But choakes before he gets it down:
A Camel^s back, (that Slaue-like) bears
Castles, that Rome upon him reares:
Goate-bellied: rather then heel leeze
His Lust, heel browze upon his knees.
For Legs, two Engines he does use,
Which turn (to any coast) on Skrewes,
Or, like the vaulting horses legs
His, are made long (by Iron pegs)
Or shoter, as his mind best fits him,
To cast, or carry him that sits him;
At the worst hand, he buys in Rome
His heart: his Hands from Turkey come.
Which in Their Blood he is sworn to bath,
That are Defenders of the Faith.
All the Garments that he wears
Are the Turned Skins of Wolves and Bears:
And yet (yet then he bloodiest proves)
He Is sometimes fetherd like to Doves.
When he is a Gallant, then he vailes
His Bonnet, plumed with Peacocks tails:
And those he wears, because their eyes
(Stuck in his front) may serve as Spies:
Nor does his Shape keep still these Fashions,
But puts on several Transmutations
When Church or Churchmen he misvses,
A Rookes or Martins nest he chooses:
Else he is that prating bird that ^owles,
The (now Vn-tri^d) bald head of Powles.
And is so bold that he dare press
To The Ea^es of Bishops Palaces:
Where, harsh and vn-religious notes
He singes against their Reverend Coats.
When fair Court-flowers he does espy,
He turns into a Butter-flye,
And strives to beat his filmy wings
Against th'Annointed heads of Kings.
Yet when the searching winter comes
With the Drone-Bee away he hums;
For he is a Swallow, and is seen,
Never, but when the woods are green;
Or if the Maine-land he forsakes,
A Sea-pies body then he takes,
And goes a fishing; All his feeding
Being where the Fry has fattest breeding*
Or (if he spy a lusty Sail,)
He turns to a Deuowring Whale,
Yet at the least blow given does roar
And beats his boistrous self on shore:
Sometimes he is neither beast, nor man,
Nor Bird, nor a Leuiat^an,
But an Essential devil, and varies
More colors than the Rainbowe caries,
He Is Brown, he is Gray, he is Black, he is white,
He Is Any thing. A Jesuit.
If you desire to behold him in more shapes, I will bestow upon you the picture
of Him, drawn like a Trauailer, by the hands of a foreign Painter (in these
colors.)

Iesuita.
Seductor S^eco* Gallo Si^arius; Anglo
Proditor; Imperio Explorator; Da^us ^bero;
Ital^ adulator; Dixi teres or^ suitam.
Hanc Iesuitae effigiem decerp^imus Ex quodam Libello De
Fratribus Iesuitis, Eorumque discipulis. Nuper edit: per Car^^u^
Molin^um etc. Impress: Typis Rostochensibus. 1605.
Altered by us into these proportions.

Sweden.
Of Him, that subtle threads does weaue, Seductor Sueco.

To catch the Polack and the Swe^e:
And of such wydenes would build Rome,
That it should hold, All Christendom.
France.
Of Him, that is a Guizian Leaguer, ^allo Sicarius.

And (for the Church) does Massacre
The church it self, whilst France does flame,
And then cuts Throats to quench the same.
England.
Of Him, Anglo Pr^ditor.
that (whereso'ere he is bred)
Is Enuies heart, and Treasons head,
For, England bout the neck he clips,
And kisses. But with Judas lips.
Germany.
Of Him, Imperi^ Explorator.
that under Zeales pretense,
From Belgia sucks Intelligence,
And posts it over, yet lies in wait,
To cleave the Seauenteene-Headed State.
Spain.
Of Him, Da^^s. Iber^.
that to the Spanish strond
Creeping but like a Vagabond,
P^^ues a Court-card, is painted brave,
And wins strange tricks by being the Knave.
Italy.
Of Him, Ita^^ (...).
that drinks Italian healthes
On servile knees, and (by base Stelthes)
Gets into'a Pope, and waits upon
(As Bawd) the Whore of Babylon.
Behold, I write:
Of all these Hims, no Hymns I write,
Can any praise the Jesuit.
Non Cum Iesuitis, Qui itis cum Iesuitis.

But because you shall have him don to the life, here be other Pieces wrought
with the same Pencill.

Seductor Sueco.
A Sed^cer of the S^euian. It is fresh in the memory of Time, that Sigismond
King of Polonia and Suecia, coming to receive his Right there, after the
decease of his father; the Jesuits swarmd about him like Locu^ts, working
(privately) in his ear, and (by public Sermons) in the ears of the Commons,
for the Undermining and blowing up of that Religion which there they termed
Lutheran Heresy: and so far durst they venture, that they persuaded Sigismond
to be hot in ^he utter Extirpation thereof, albeit it should cost the
destruction of his Kingdom, because (as they told him) He^^en was laid down
to be won by him at that cast.

Gallo Sicarius.
A Cutthroat to the Frenchman. If you look upon that Truculent, Barbarous and
Di^ellish torturing of Frenchmen (by those that spoke no other language than
French) in that Their Universal Guizian Massacre, setabroach by Jesuitical
Instruments, and executed by The Holy League, the Jesuit, cannot be angry, to
have that name of Sicarius bestowed upon him. To shut up which French Tragedy,
what black Art did they practice to conjure up a devil in the likeness of a
Friar (Jacques Clement) whom these Exorcists armde to kill Henry the third, the
last of Valoys; and now since what Fencing Tricks have they not devised to
draw blood of this present French King: for playing of which parts, they have
bin so exploded, that they are (Renouato Edicto proscripti) banished out of the
Kingdom, are h^ld to be, and so proclaimed Parricides, and live in such base
reputation, that even their Grand Signior (the Pope) is half ashamde to
acknowledge them for his children.

Anglo Proditor.
A Traitor to the Englishman. The Chronicle of Tiburne can witness it: A
Catalogue of all those Iesuited English, that shot their Roman darts at the
Head of the late Queen of England, would fill a Muster-book. How often did
they labor to sow Sedition in her Dominions, and to sell her Crown to the
Spaniard? To prevent which and the like mischiefs, they have bin likewise
Proscribed, by our Sovereign King James.

Imperio Explorator.
A Spy to Germany. We need'no more'examples than of those Fugitive English,
that for many years together have liu'de in the Low Countries, practizing by
themselves, and (by reason of the short passage between them and us) giving
quick and dangerous Intelligence to their own Faction here) of any Roman
Plots against the state of their native Country: None being more bloody, nor
more thirsting for her overthrow, than They. In this German Nest was this
Diabolical, horrid, and most impious late Conspiracy hatched; damnably
begotten, miraculously prevented.

Dauus Ibero.
A crafty Knave to the Spaniard. Phillip the late King of Spain might call him
so, upon good experience. For the Jesuit so infeoffd himself (by subtle
Insinuation) into those Territories, that (under cullor that all his Actions,
and practices were only bent to amplify the Spanish Kings Greatness,) he
seemde rather to be a Sovereign then a Subiest. Their chief cunning being
(out of diverse Nations) to allure discontented young Gentlemen and others, to
fly to them (from their own countries) with hopes of golden mountains, whom
afterward they send abroad, and abuse to their own destruction.

Italo adulator.
A Sicophant to the Italian. In the Sea of Rome do these Italian Pirates hope
to get the richest prizes: Needs therefore must the Pope, and his Co^ledge of
Cardinals, be much pestred with them: and by reason that Omnia V^enalia Romae,
(no penie, no paternoster there) they must of necessity flatter and fawn
upon their Italian Masters, that by the warmth of their wings they may be
fledgde, and get store of feathers on their backs, to fly up and down, and
(like Grasshoppers) to devour and spoil the fruits and fields of
Christendom. Or if they return home, (which seldom happens) that then for
their good service, they may be entertained as poor vassailes, to wait upon
their Great Italian Madona (Antichrists daughter) that rides upon the Beast
with se^uen Heads.

THE Romish Army.
A Papist Couchant, -- or the Fawner. A Papist Passant, -- or the Plodder. A
Papist Passant-Gardant, -- or the Spy. A Papist Variant, -- or the Ch^ngeling.
A Papist Volant, -- or the Runaway. A Papist Seminant, -- or the Popes
Husbandman. A Papist Saliant, -- or the Ambusher. A Papist Rampant, -- or the
Cutthroat. A Papist Vmbreant, -- or the Underminer. A Papist Pendant, -- or the
Hanger-on.
A PAPIST IN ARMS, bearing ten several Sheildes.
The First, A Papist Couchant. OR The Fawner.
A Papist Couchant is thus shap'de: A man
Whose brow does kiss his knee at every beck,
He weyes his Hours, Words, Looks, and closely can
Creep into credit, and eschew the Check:
And (by his Spaniell-fawning) save his neck,
He sleeps with open eyes; his Arms thus part,
One to embrace, the other to Stab your heart.
He will not argue of Religion,
Nor State: (for on his lip his finger lies)
When treason is vnmaskde he will be One
Shall first spit in her face. To Temporize
Is all his Art: close villainy he buys,
And lays it up for a ^eere year: Mean time,
He frets: would pull down Stars, but fears to clime.
A Papist passant, OR The Plodder.
A Papist Passant is of other cullor,
For he is not nice to let his zeal be shown,
And that his works may make his glory fuller,
Through ecchoing Mouths (like trumpets) are they blown:
He keeps the laws, and twice a year is known
To sit it'^ Church, why? for Religion! No:
But that g^owing safe, he may be let to grow.
He texts will cite, and wrest: to Church and State
Heel give by-blowes, but su^e to give no bruize;
And of the Kings proceedings wildely prate,
But warily, that none shall him accuse;
Or (if he fall ith Snare) he will abuse
Even his own Conscience to get forth: forswear
The Pope; his coat heel change 1^. times a year.
A Papist passant Gardant. OR The Spy.
THe Passant Gardant Papist, thus I lym,
He comes to Court, then to the Presence goes,
And (by the warrant of good clothes) does swim
In greatest streams; and where State-matter flows,
There lays he close his ear, yet dreading blows
Ties up his tongue, and getting safe from thence,
To Rhemes or Rome sails his Intelligence.
His guilt (at each step) back does skrew his head*
He ^tarts to see a Pursuiuant: and curses
The earth that bears a church which does not sp^ed
The Romaine-ensigne. At his breast he nurses
A brood of Vipers: and sends out the forces
Of all his Wishes, against his Prince and State,
And shifts often, hating to Communicate.
A Papist Variant. OR The Changeling.
PArty perpale, a Papist Variant,
Goes in pide coats, (for, as the Moon^ he varies)
He Is Papist, Puritan, and Protestant,
In one Kings reign. Under that wing he taries
That best him couers, and that least miscaries.
He Is like an Instrument of sundry strings,
Not one in tune, yet any note he sings.
When Mary rules, he blows the Martirs fire,
And when her Sister, against the Mass he railes,
But when your Royal self, was to aspire,
To that which was your own, he flagd his Sails,
Watching what wind turned next, to which he vailes
His Surly top. But playing many parts,
He cannot but have many dangerous hearts.
A Papist Volant, OR The Runaway.
A Papist Volant is that Fugitive,
That flies the Realm, and swears his conscience sends him,
When it is gross Treason: Better does he thrive
At Lo^ayne then in London, for Rome lends him
A free tongue there, and for his voice co^mends him,
Tho Hell roares through it: after he has flowne
All Kingdoms over, only he files his own.
Like to a ball of wilde-fire does he run
From land to land, his countries same down burning,
And So^ereignes honor: yet the flames being don,
He Is trod out like a Snuff: he is never mourning
But at the death of mischief: Kingdoms turning
Is the maine-tyde he follows; and if war
Wast his own feildes, than he none bloodier are.
A Papist Seminant, OR The Popes Husbandman.
A Papist Seminant, springs from the brood,
Of th'arrogant Jesuit, and Sowes
Sedition in men's hearts* dreynes from their blood
All pure Alleg^ance; and where Gentry grows
Most pliant to be wrought, his Char^es he throws:
He deals with Willowes rather than with Oaks,
Bending (with words) the subject, not with strokes.
A Fencer, yet a coward: for he teaches
Others to kill their Sovereigns, yet he dares not
Venture upon a King himself: he preaches
Close in your ear* To cleave a State* he cares not
To make his head the wedge: and therefore spares not
His own blood, more to shed; proud of this doom,
A ^yburne Traitor is a Saint in Rome.
A Papist Salliant. OR, The Ambusher.
A Papist Salliant thus creepes up: he is sick
Of Sloth and selfe-opinion, and (being poor)
Turns to a male-contented Catholic;
Railes at the State, cause it regards no more
Men of his rank, and vows he will steal over
And do! oh! yet stays still: he sets upon
The Court with Libells: Stabbing it, he is gone.
^ee loves the Lee^shore well, for there he lies
And houers (all vnrigd in Sight) to stay
Till civil, or uncivil tempests rize,
For then sallies he forth, then is his day:
Rapes, robberies, and sacked Cities are his prey;
To feed his own lust, he will his father choke,
Yet laps all this within Religions Cloak.
A Papist Rampant. OR The Cutthroat.
A Papist Rampant is a furious beast*
He sets upon a King: and holds heaven won
To suck the Annointeds blood: the Rampants nest
Hatches In^asion: bred at home, they run,
To dambd Conspiracies, In which are spun
Kings, Queens, and Princes deaths; and (as with Thunder)
Whole Empires at one blow they ride in ^under.
This Beast has many heads, and hands and feet,
Some short, some long (all armde to execute)
Upwards it is like a man, in countenance sweet,
The lower parts wear such a civil suit,
It seems Man too, But (pulled off) some dispute
That it is a Devil: how-ere this they tell,
Where ere it lives, It was begot in Hell.
A Papist Vmbreant. OR The Moldwarp.
A Papist Vmbreant (like a Skreech-owle) sits
All days unseen: but when the sorcerous night
Spreds her deep Spells, he coniures up his wits,
Giving his soul to Treason* he is a Sprite
That deals in Fire-workes* Vaults are his delight,
Where for his close Traynes, hell does him prefer
To be Arch^Enginist to Lucifer.
His walks are shades and mines: his thoughts still beating
Upon a Kingdoms ruin, which he ventures
Staking his soul: And whilst the Irons are heating,
Damnation draws twixt him and her Indentures,
To which he seals: But ere this hel-hound enters
Upon the Land he couets, See! Gods arm
With a weak blow in sunder breaks the Charm.
A Papist Pendant. OR, The Hanger-on.
OF those Nine several Coats, when none can ^it,
(For some mislike the making, some the fashion)
This Tenth (both for the stuff and for his wit,
That cutts it forth) is pleasing to our Nation,
And that's the Pendant Papis^. His vocation
Is not to meddle; up he well is bred,
^or when he has don ill, he hangs the Head.
1 2 3
He neither Fawnes nor Prates, nor is a Spy,
4 5 6
Changeling, nor Fugitive, nor Seminary,
7 8 9
Nor Wolf, nor Lion, nor Mold-warp: to clime hye
And to be proud (for on no ground heel tarry)
Are all his faults. And though he often miscary,
Yet this good turn he is sure off, when the Rest
Are all held Bad, the Pendant is the best.
Summa.
Of Couchant, Passant, and of Passant-Gardant,
Of Variant, Volant, and of Seminant,
Of Saliant, Rampant: Vmbreant and Pendant,
Sum up the Account, the Tota^l thus will fall,
Not one good Subject breathes amongst them All.
The Encounter.
AS these Ten Monsters (with the Antique Race
Of Gigants) claim a breeding in this Isle,
In Laws, Language, and State, to leave it base;
To turn out Form: to make Religion vile:
To have Kings Names no more hung on the Fyle
Of blessed succession: But with fires (from Rome)
To raked up quite at the General Doom.
So, Second Brute, with ten stout Combatants,
Encounters Those, and (with most god-like Charms)
Vncurles their Snaky K^ots, their Eyes so inchants
They turn to Stones with wonder: false Alarmes
These know and laugh at; and from Lightnings harms
So guard the Tree of Peace, that in her Sunny
And silent Shades, We feed on milk and honey.
THE SINGLE, P.
A Riddle on the single P.
THe single P. makes all the Letters grow
In goodly Ranks upon the Christ-crosse-Row:
And (by the reverend, holy Badge it wears,)
The Christ-crosse-Row, from giddy Faction cleares,
The reason is, this (Honest single) P.
Lowly submits to A. B. C. and D.
Yet fights in the defense of E. F. G.
H. I. (Roial K.) L. M. N. O. and Q.
And runs through Fire Marterdome.
for R. S. T. and V.
The Resolution.
Single P.-Protestantisme. Christ-crosse-Row-Christendome. A. B. C. and D.- the
states of the land as Archbishops, Bishops, Counselors, Dukes, etc. K. --
King. Q. -- Queen. R. -- Religion. S. -- State. T. -- Truth. V. -- You all.
THE PROTESTANT Army.
The Nobility. The Council of Estate. The Clergy. The Judges of the Land.
The Universities. The Martialists. The Merchants. The Mariners. The Husbandmen.
The Artificers.
THE PAPIST Encountered.
THE PROTESTANT Combatants.
The First. Dynastes. OR The Nobleman.
THe first goes armde from head to foot in ^^iles
O^ glorious A^cestry* he is the CourtIe^^*
The Princes, He, all others are his Fo^les,
He Is a rich stone stuck in the Diadem:
A graft so wrought into the Royal Stem*
Alike both suffer: thunder smi^ing Him,
(For naught else can) the Weal does loose a limb.
Since ^he Rep^blick therefore is his blood,
His office is to save it: to have eyes
Quick, piercing: not to be more great than good:
For of that norishing flame (In whose heat lies
A Kingdoms life) He Is soul: It lives or dies
In him: of that free light when he is be reauen,
o pity! then a Star drops out of heaven.
Apolectos. OR Councellor of Estate.
THe second Champion, thus abilimented
Enters the Lists, her Gorgon-shield, her Spear,
And Pallas-Helme, A^^ three being Emblems of Providence, Wisdom, Fortitude.
are his* his Arm is extensed
Over Seas and Land: the Kingdom with His ear,
And His oraculous voice does speak and hear:
He holds her up from sinking, and beats down
All tempests: Counsel best does steer a Crown.
His eyes are (like the Watches of the night)
Set to all hours: His thoughts are searching streams,
Laboring to cut the shores (uneven) right*
And Romish Conspirations, slight as dreams,
(Like Moa^es discovered by the heavenly beams,)
The Colledg'de Cardinal hates Him* and (...),
For This as soon breaks, as He weaues the ^reason.
Antistes. OR, The Bishop.
THe third that in Romes face throws brave defi^ce
Carries Christ's Standard; and to Peter's ^word
Draws Peter's word: Angels are his Alliance*
Kings his nurse-children: at heavens counsell-board
He tunes his voice unto so sweet a Chord,
He winnes men's very souls: and is therefore sent
To be the Speaker in Gods Parliament.
He Is the Lands gardner, and does Schisms supplant
To make Religion grow: nor plucks he hearts
Up by the roots (as doe^ the Jesuit.
(...).)
But ( Champion like) throws his Spirit^all da^t^
A^ Miterd Heads, and those that are their parts*
The Gospel. ^. Go^s-spell.
Holy-spells by Him to Subjects spread,
Fasten the Kings Crown closer to his head.
Dycastes. OR, The Iudg^.
THe fourth that stands this Quarrel, is more strong
In Scarlet then in St^ele: look how the Moon
Between the day, So He twixt Right and Wrong
Sits Equal Empire: like the orbed Moon
Empires by him swell hye, or fall as soon,
For when (...) ^ights, (...) on foot-clothes ^ide,
Al and so left, is like a ravished Bride.
The Regal Chair would down be thrown: Religion
Take S^nctuary: No man durst be go^d,
Nor could be safe being bad: Confusion
Would be held (...): and (as in the (...)
The world was couerd) so would all in blood
If Justice eyes were closde: No man sleeps, speaks,
Nor ^ates but by Her: Traitors nets, she breaks.
Academicos. OR The Scholar.
Our Academick Warri^r next does tread
This Civil March: with Art^ strong Arguments
Fighting where those Ten Squadrons gather head,
Whose Ranks he breaks; cuts off, and circumuents
Their Ambushes: yea drives them to their Tents:
Till Learnings seauen-fold shield does Truth advance,
And beats down Ro^es usurping ignorance.
He Is, Honors beauty, and the Statists honor:
The Churches pillar, and the Laws expo^nder:
He serves (A lack the while^) under Wants banner,
Yet Crozier-s^^^es ^triue to be his (...):
(Sick parts must fail, when we cu^ ^ff the ^ounder)
At Him, They therefore strike: Take (...) away*
Men are but painted loame, and gilded clay.
Stratiotes. OR The Soldier.
THe Drums and Clarions sound, and now behold
Our Soldier; Rampant like, no^ V^^brea^t like
Bloodily tearing Princes throats for Gold,
Or playing the Moale: His sword does fairly strike.
He talks with Canons mouths, and by his pike
Measures out Peace (peace is wouen out of war)
He Is paralelled with Kings; kings, soldiers are.
Upon his head grow Bays (proof against Lightning
And thundering terrors:) on his heart, a Rock,
Which gives to his own Nation, strength, and Heightning,
To others, Shipwreck. He Is the waking Cock:
The D^lphick Oracle, to which we flock
When Hard Things happen: He Is when (dangers call)
The Courts Guard: Countries ^ulwark: Cities wall.
Emporos. OR The Merchant.
THe Seventh (in our Decem^ virate,) one Nation
Colleagues with the other: for the Merchant marry,
Kingdom to Kingdom by Negotiation:
And as great volummes shrink to Come^taries,
So in a small Ship, He a Country carries,
Transporting hence, his Own, to foreign Climes,
And bringing al things from Them, (but their Crimes.)
This is that Husb^nd Oe^on^micall
Tha^ gives a City, order, Wealth, and State,
And (like a Cedar) grows so fair and Tall,
That from Him* springs The (...) Magistrate.
"So, little br^^kes (going on) incorporate
"Themselves with ^iuers, And (So) Rivers can
"In time do ser^ice to the Oc^an.
Nautes. OR The Seaman.
NOw spread we all our Sails: this Champion rides
On the Four Winds. Terror to proud Invasion:
And (from but wodden ba^tlements) de^ides
The braues, the bullets, of the bloodiest Nation,
For being at mortal few'd (in deadliest fashion)
With Air and Water, it is no humane charm,
Can break his courage, or his faith disarme.
A progress does He take from Realm to Realm,
With goodly water-pageants borne before him,
The safety of the Land sits at his He^me,
No danger ( Here) can touch, but what runs ore him:
But being in heau'ens eye still, It does restore him
To liuelier Spirits; to meet death with ease,
" If thou would know thy maker, search the Seas.
Arotes. OR The Plough-man.
THe Earthes hard-ha^ded Heir comes next to the field
And claims a Kegime^t: He treads on F^^res
And yet receives all darts on his tough Shield,
(Shot from Winter. Summer. Autumn. Spring.
Four Quarters at him,) Blunt he appears
But what he wants in Tong^e, he pays in Corn.
Ears:
The ox and He are fellows; and have sense
Of equal pain, with equal patience.
All feeds upon the labor of his brow,
Whilst He his own sweat drinks: ^is all his glory
To see gay Harvest (like as great Lords bow
To Thrones) to bend to Him: he is never sorry
But when his (...) The Eearth.
^ells a fruitles story:
Yet (underneath his yoke) this note he sings,
He Is Natures Iourny-man, but works for Kings.
Technytes. OR, The Artificer.
THe Reare-ward last aduances up, being led
By the industrious, thriuing Artizan,
The ways of Science needs he well must tread,
For seven years go to make Him up a man,
And ( Then) by all the lawful steps he can,
Climes he to wealth: Enough is His he vaunts,
If tho he hoard not much, he feel not wants.
He Is th'Arme unto a City: to a Realm
The Nervous strings that fortefie the heart:
No ^ough beyond-sea-stormes can ouer-whelme
His Loialtie, or make his bosom part
To let in Roman Bands, tho all their Art
Be drawn to cleave his faith with forked Shafts,
Yet he is not subtle, (But in Handi-crafts.)
The Battle, AND Retrayte.
COnfronted are both Armies (breathing quick
And hostile Flames,) The One is puissant,
But wild, and Headles, the false Catholic:
Fairly Arrainged comes the Protestant,
Squar^d: Military: Few, but valiant:
Led bravely, bravely followed, All Lion^ like,
And yet so spare of blood, They (First) never strike.
For Mercy bears their Guydon, and does grieve
At Fall of any: Should not Justice stand
Close by her, (with The Sword Vindicatiue,)
The haught Invader would or'e-run the Land:
But (now) Battalions against Battalions band:
The Aluerado sounds, they Fight, and Fly,
Ours is the Field, Gods is the Victory.
FINIS.

