A DEFENSE OF TOBACCO: WITH A FRIENDLY ANSWER TO THE late printed Book called
Work for Chimny-Sweepers, etc.

Si iudicas, cognosce: si Rex es, iube

LONDON, Printed by Richard Field for Thomas Man. 1602.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL SIR HENRY COCK knight, Cofferer to her Majesty: and
Master Richard Brown Esquire, Clarke of the Green cloth.
MVch here is said, Tobacco to defend,
And much was said, ^abacco to disgrace:
Read, mark, and scan: then censure in the end:
Both you are men, most fit to judge the case.
Esteem of me, as you in me shall find:
Crave pardon first I do: and that obtaind,
Know this, that no man shall with better mind,
Each where declare to you his love vnfaind.
Come what shall come, to this poor Indian toy:
Unto you both, I wish immortal joy.
A DEFENSE OF TOBACCO: WITH A FRIENDLY ANSWER TO THE late printed Book called
Work for Chimny-sweepers, etc. Si iudicas, cognose: si Rex es, iube.
THere was published of late, a certain brief Discourse of Tobacco. By whom
it was penned, I know not, I protest: no more then I know his name, that did
lay the first stone at the building of London bridge. But in my judgment, he
seems to be a man, well read, and of sufficient learning, and understanding.
I am requested by some of my friends, (who rather may command me,) thoroughly
to peruse it, and that being done, to give my censure, and opinion, and
therewithal, to give such defense as I can, to that poor simple, if the truth
of the matter, will any manner of way, seem to bear it.

Loath I am, I confess, to entermeddle in any such matters: nevertheless,
for so much, as modest, and scholerly disputations are to be allowed, and
conference between such, as have been ciuilly brought up in schools, are not
to be disliked: for that oftentimes they do much good, and give great
contentment to the Reader, if they be done with due regard, of time, place, and
person: I have thought it not amiss to yield unto my friends request: and to
say something ^o the matter: more I assure you, to satisfy their desire
herein, then otherwise, to seek to offend any. For I do protest, and that
truly, that I am no way high minded: or do challenge any whit so much unto my
self, as some perchance, rather of good will, no doubt, then of my desert do
yield unto me. And among that number of men I do account my self, that rather
desires to learn of others, then to be a teacher, and an instructor of any.
But every thing is, as it is taken: and my hope is, that nothing shall be ill
taken there, where all is well meant.

And before I enter into the matter it self, I hold it not amiss to put down
the maine point of the Discourse, or the true state of the question, as they
call it, and so much the rather, for that the Author seems somewhat
uncertain herein: sometime inueighing against Tobacco it self, and his
manifest qualities: sometime speaking but only against the great abuse
thereof. If his meaning be, only to condemn the abuse of Tobacco: in that, I
am ready to take his part, and will most willingly join with him hand in
hand: but yet so, as I do think, that a good thing should be no more misliked,
for the abuse thereof: then I do think: that fire, is therefore utterly to be
condemned, because sometime either a town or house, is set a fire therewith,
be it by negligence or malice of others: or that good drink is therefore to be
dispraised, because some that exceed therein, and lie tippling, and quaffing at
it all day long, sometime do lose, both their wealth, and wits and all thereby.
Leaving therefore, the abuse of Tobacco: or at the least, touching it, as
occasion shall be offered: my meaning is only to deal with Tobacco it self:
and therein to show: that, neither of it self, or for it self, it is to be so
mightily misliked: or at the least wise, not so much to be misliked for those
causes, and reasons, which are by the Author alleged.

The order that I will observe shall be thus: the eight chief, and capital
arguments, which him self has set down, I will allege verbatim, and in the
same order, as he has placed them. And that being done, I will collect and
gather, as briefly as I can, the pith, sum, or substance, of his principal
proofs, which he brings for the farther strengthening, and confirmation of
his said arguments, but yet not rehearsing all the Authors words, for that
would be too long, and over tedious: but, in that behalf, I will refer the
Reader over to the book that is published in print, for his better
satisfaction. And having answered his arguments, then will I briefly deal with
such pretty by-points, and questions of learning, which shall be worth the
noting, and shall be found here and there sprinkled, and scattered, in all the
Chapters of his book following, in order as they lie.

Touching mine own particular fantacie and affection to Tobacco: I protest, it
is no manner of way, tied unto it. For in all my life, either I did never take
it at all: or else very seldom: so that, even in that respect also, I may be
held* as a most indifferent judge for the matter. Not making indeed, any
great reckening or account, on which side the judgment, or sentence shall go:
not much unlike to a friends saying of mine, of late: and it was thus: This
friend of mine, being not many years ago, a great Courtier, and pleasant
conceited Gentleman: but now altogether retired into the country, and a man of
very good worth, and quality; had at that time a suit unto his Lord and
master, whom he then served: for the saving of a man, that was then condemned
to be hanged: and but for a trifle neither, quoth he: What is that, said his
Lord? Only said he, for mistaking of a word or two: for whereas he should have
bid an honest man, good morrow: he chanced to bid him Deliver his purse. Well
said his Lord, smiling, I will do what I can to get his pardon of her Majesty:
but yet in good faith tell me, what shall thou have, for thy pains? if his
pardon be gotten. By my troth, quoth he: and I will not lie unto your Lordship,
the troth is, I am promised forty pound. But if it please your Honor to make
it up ten pound more, and to give me fifty, as God judge me, I care not if he
be hanged by and by. And even so in a manner it fares with me, touching the
case of Tobacco now in question. For if upon the matter, he shall be found meet
to remain still in request, in some sort, I shall be glad thereof: if
otherwise, I shall not greatly be aggrieued.

But yet, for that this Tobacco, is a poor gentleman, and a stranger; and, as
it should seem, of some good account in his country, with the high Priests,
and Rulers of the Sinagogues there, and can speak no word of our language to
defend himself, being so mightily accused as he is: and now stands upon his
trial, at the Bar, I could wish, that for the honor of our country he might
be both honorably, and favorably dealt withal, and to be permitted to
entertain some one man or other to plead his cause, and to speak for him:
were it but in forma pauperis: or rather as my neighbors of P^ticoate-lane,
Scold, Chider, and Spend-all, are wont to call it, in form of Papers. And for
that it is a deed of charity to succor and help the needy: and for that I
am naturally inclined to pity, and to favor poor strangers, I pray you give
me leave to say something in his behalf, and to speak that which I have to
say, franckly, and freely, without any offense.

The first Argument, is: That in the use, or custom of Tobacco, no method, or
order is observed: diversity, and distinction of persons, times, and seasons
considered: no varieties of accidents, and diseases pondered, etc.
The first reason depends wholly upon this point: Because there is no order,
or method kept therein: therefore either it, or rather the daily use of it, is
to be discommended. And for proof thereof, there is mentioned, the decay of a
Commonwealth, for lack of order, and right government: and beside that, a long
discourse is brought in, out of Hippocrates, Galen, and other good writers, as
also grounded upon good experience: That there must regard be had, of the age,
of the time, of the disease, of the sex, of the region and place, of the
complexion, etc. or else all is marred: and there can come no good either of
it, or of any thing else that is disorderly taken, etc.

All this is yielded unto, so that there needs no longer speech at al* where
th^re is no contradictio^. So that briefly to conclude: This Argument seems,
altogether to drive against the immoderat, and disorderly abuse of Tobacco: and
not much against the thing it self: and every artificer and mean trades man,
can both see it, and also say as much: that where no order is kept, there the
work cannot prosper, or come to good effect. As for example: He were a simple
Cook, that thought all meats should be dressed alike: or that a Chine of
Beef, should have no greater a fire, nor no longer a time of rosting, then a
dousin of Larkes. And he has small knowledge in baked meat, that supposes
that a good fat pastie of Venison, must have no longer a time, either of
baking, or of soaking, then an apple Tart. Neither is he to be accounted to
have any skill in baking of bread, I trow, that will first thrust in the batch
of bread into the Oven, and then make the fire afterward.

So that to conclude, where all circumstances are not considered, that ought to
be regarded: and where any action is to be performed, and where method, order,
and proportion is not kept and observed, there all the labor is lost, and
whatsoever is taken in hand, is mard for lack of discretion. So fares it with
Tobacco: that where it is immoderately and disorderly used, there I confess
some offense perchance, may well enough grow by the abuse thereof: and yet for
all that, the poor Simple of it self, and the right use thereof, may justly
deserve great commendation. Hitherto then, it seems we agree well enough.

But here in your farther discourse you say: That we see by experience, that
some diseased of the Dropsy, and mois^ complexions, and maladies growing of
superfluities of humors, have received great help by the frequent use of this
Tobacco, etc.

Tobacco is very much beholding to you for this, I assure you, that your self
has here confessed by the way: and it is almost as much, as is either to be
wished, or looked for, for the great good of Tobacco. For if it be well
weighed, it mightily confuteth, all the rest in a manner of your bitter
inueighing against it; in other places: namely: that it hinders digestion, it
depriueth nature of nourishment, it destroys natural heat, it marreth
propagation, it is a dangerous poison: and the like.

For now in the mean while, ex confessis: Tobacco in this place is held for a
thing very good for dropsies you say and moist complexions, and waterish
diseases: and in some other placeshereafter, as you affirm, it is good for the
scuruy, for weak cold stomachs, for rheumaticke fluxes, for gross and foggy
bodies, yea: and for expelling of poison in some sort, etc. All which sayings
of yours, are in my opinion marvelous great praises for Tobacco: and so great,
as no greater praise can well be devised, to be attributed, or given, to any
one simple in the garden. What? To be good to cure dropsies, and waterish
diseases, and rheumes, and scuruies, and cold, and weak stomachs, etc. Why?
what would you more? would you have it good for all things? Nay: the honest
stranger that praised butter so much, could never bring that to pass in his
butter as good as it was: for when that he had said all the good that he could
of it, saying, it was good to eat at all times, both morning and evening, and
good for all sorts of people both early and late, and good for pies, cakes, and
spice-bread, and many other iunketing knackes; and in the end praised it so
excessiuely, that at the last he confirmed it with an oath, that it was the
only thing in the world, for it was good for all things: Nay, ho there, said a
good fellow, and a stander by, That's not so: for it is not good to stop ouens.
Although Tobacco be not good for all things: no, nor for so many things
neither, as butter is perchance, yet by my fay: it is well, if it be good for
so many things, and so great matters, as dropsies and the like, as you have
said: and you shall hardly match him again I warrant you, with his like in all
points.

Marry if your meaning be by this reason, only to reprehend the abuse and
disorder thereof: Then this controversy is at an end. But yet as I have
already said: The lack of discretion of the party that uses it: is no
dispraise to the thing that is abused.

You still go on, and at the last you find fault with Tobacco, For that by the
use of Tobacco, the natuall offices and functions of the body are perverted, as
namely the mouth, throat, and stomach, are made emunctory cleansing places,
and sinkes for the filth, and superfluous excrements of the whole body, etc.

But this objection is very weak, and to little purpose. For who sees not,
that those parts which you have named, are in some sort appointed by nature, to
serve for the self same purposes, which you have here mentioned: as the mouth
to avoid superfluous spittle, by hawking, reaching, and spitting: the nose, by
uttering such filth, as descends from the brain, and forepart of the head:
the throat, by coughing, to rid, and make passage for tough fleame, from the
lungs, and also to cast up and discharge ill matters from the stomach, by the
way of vomiting, either pr^cured by art, or otherwise coming voluntarily by
natures motion, when she finds her self surcharged with an overplus. So that
by these doings it should seem, here is either no offense at all done unto
nature, neither yet her course perverted: or at the least, nothing so much
wronged, and perverted, as is by you supposed. Marry if these excrements which
are wont to be brought thither, and to be conveyed away by those places, were
left there to remain, it we^e another matter, and there were somewhat to be
said* but daily experience makes it manifest, and your self also confesses
it, that it brings no more thi^her, then it carries away from thence. And so
upon the reckening, it should seem it is so far from causing any annoyance
or offense, that it rather cleanses and preserves those places, by keeping
them much better, and sweeter, then otherwise.

The second reason is, for that It is in quality and complexion, more hot and
dry, then may be conveniently used daily of any man: much less of the hot,
and choleric constitution.
True it is that the good temperament, and constitution of our bodies depends
upon the inst, and due proportion and mixture of the four Elements: not that
each body has a like quantity, or proportion of the said Elements in them, by
weight and measure: but according to the rules of justice, and sufficiency for
every particular body to have, they be so orderly mingled and proportioned, as
is best for the health and strength of that particular body, to make him able
to do, and perform, all those functions and actions, which are fittest for the
body to do, and perform. For example sake, as that horse is said to have his
health best, and to be of a good constitution, which is best able in running,
and other actions, to perform those things best, which appertain to a horse,
for to do: and as that dog likewise is said, to be best, and soundest, which in
hunting, and smelling, etc. with best strength and agility performs his
functions: so is that man said to be in best plight of body and perfect health,
which finds himself best able to perform, and discharge all those actions
which are agreeable for his body, and incident to the nature of man: so that,
they and we consist of the like elements: but not of the like proportion and
mixture of the same elements; but yet of such a sufficient and convenient
temperature, as shall be most befitting for the health and good estate of each
creature in his degree. And of this due commixtion of these elements, rises
those four compound temperaments, or complexions that are so famous: The
Sanguine: the Choleric: the Melancholy: and the Flegmaticke: all agreeing, in
having all the Elements in them: yet all disagreeing, in having them
proportioned a like in them; and yet every one well pleased in that quantity
and proportion, which he has, and enjoys in himself.

Now, whether these foresaid Elements be in our bodies substantially, and
materially, as they be in nature, and essence: or only but the qualities,
powers and properties of the same: so placed and conveyed, into the mould of
our temperature, as they are able to work, and be get their like effects in
us, and our bodies: that is a dark and a tedious question, and has bred great
contention among the learned: but yet, not much material to the purpose of
that thing which we have now in hand.

But this one thing is to be noted by the way, that none of these temperatures,
or complexions, are so narrowly scantled, or pent up into such a straight, but
that each one of them may in some sort, admit a certain kind either of
increase, or decrease, of his principal humor, whereof he carries his
denomination, and yet retain his natural and perfect constitution still. As
for example: The sanguine man may leese some blood, or else alter some part of
the same: the choleric man likewise, may either increase, or decrease some
part of his choler; and so of the rest: and yet retain his health: and remain
of a sanguine, or a choleric constitution still. For as the Base, and Treble
in Music have diverse alterations of rising and falling in them, which I
think* they call keys, and ^treines, all differing in proportion, yet in
sound, and noise, making all a pleasing musical concord: so in like manner have
these constitutions, or complexions of ours, a certain decent scope, or
latitude (as we call it) to walk in: and yet for all that, each one of them,
may be said to keep his first strength, and constitution, with a sweet
pleasing proportion and harmony. Thus much being generally spoken: now let us
weigh your argument, and the material notes, and proofs, annexed to the same.

In this place it is said by you: that, the daily use of Tobacco, is not good
for any man: much less for the choleric constitution.

If you mean, by these words, daily use: too much, or immoderate use; I yield
unto it: and in that sense, it is not good, for any other complexion: be it
never so cold, and Phlegmatic. No more is any thing else, that I do k^ow. But
if you mean by daily use, the often and frequent use thereof, and then mean
that the frequent and often use is not good for any, as here you say that it is
not: then you contradict your self. For but even now, in a few lines going
before in your first Chapter, you said: many moist complexions, have received
great help, by the frequent use of Tobacco, etc. which is flat against that,
which you do now here affirm.

But it had been well done of you, here to have put down, which way of taking
of Tobacco you do mean, when you thus condemn, the daily use thereof. If you
mean the daily taking of it in substance, as a food, etc. I know none, for my
part, that uses it so; if you mean, by infusion, or decoction, or otherwise,
as a medicine to purge withal, etc. I think likewise none so mad, or so
foolish, as to offend that way. But if you mean, by fume, and Pipe, as I
think you do: how comes it then to pass, that you stand so greatly in fear
of it now, when you confess in another place: that* the fume of it is not any
matter, of any great importance, or able to make any great impression, too or
fro, to do any great good, or ill at all. Me think (as the poor old man said
by his patcht torn cloak) this geere hardly hange^h well together.

And whereas this misliking of yours, seems to rise of his two manifest
qualities that be in him: that is to say, ^or his great heat, and dryness:
why, you know, and I know, that hotter things then this is* and drier too, are
daily taken of all sorts, yea and of all complexions; as Ginger, Pepper,
Clo^es, ^raines, and Mace, and other good spices, as well with meat, as also in
their daily drink, suppinses, and cawdels: and yet for any thing, that either
you, or I can see; God be thanked, there comes no hurt at all in the world
thereby.

But why it should destroy, and consume natura^^ heat and moisture, as you
affirm, which are the principals of our life; in truth I understand not,
unless, as I said, the takers thereof, should make whole meals thereof, which
I am sure no man does. For then indeed it may be, it would work that effect:
and so would all your cordial spices do also: if men should in that disorderly
manner feed on them: as to make whole meals thereof. Whereas now being
moderately taken: and yet daily too: they be great preseruers of health, in
most sort of men, or rather in all kind of complexions: as a^l men I am sure,
will confess.

That which is added out of Aristotle; O^ne simile, additum simili, reddit
ipsum simile magis simile: makes lit^e for your purpose. For as your self
confesses, that; Contraria contrarijs curantur: so I think you are as willing
to confess also: that, similia similibus nutriuntur. Now ^ir; if Tobacco be
hot and dry, as you put down that it is, and the choleric man hot
likewise; and then if ^^ke be increased with like: as Aristotle says: or if
like be nourished, maintained, and preserved with like, as Ph^sitions affirm:
then like enough it is, that the choleric^e man's complexion, is rather
preserved by Tobacco, then destroyed: presupposed always, if it be moderately
taken. It may be, you will here have a kind of evasion, and a certain starting
hole: and I guess well enough what it is, yet nevertheless I will not name
it. But for anything that is yet said of you to the contrary, this argument
holds; and so it shall rest for me.

Moreover, that Principle of Aristotle: Omne simile, additum simili, etc. must
have a nice interpretation, and must be rightly understood: or else it is like
enough, I tell you, to breed an error. Like increases like, you say. It is
true: but yet in quantity it increases it, and not in quality: unless that
same like, be in a higher, and stronger degree, of quality and likeness. And
yet, how it should then rightly be called like, being by reason of a higher
degree unlike, for my part, I see not. As for example: hot water, being put to
as hot water, makes not that hot wa^er, hotter then it was, unto the which
it is put. It may well increase the substance, and quantity of that hot
water: but yet not the heat, and quality thereof. Then, unless Tobacco, be
hotter then choler, (which will be very hard to prove) it cannot increase
choler in heat, and quality. But if it be colder in power and quality, (as I
think it will fall out, that it is) then does it rather abate, and suppress
the heat of choler, then increase it. For warm water, yea though it be good
and warm water: yet because it is not so hot, as scalding hot water is,
being put to scalding hot water; it does not increase his heat a whit: but
rather cools it, I warrant you, try it when you will.

Touching the great store, of undigested, and crude humors, which are the
effects of immoderate heates in us, as you affirm; and so consequently are
cause and occasion of hot fevers; I see no cause of any such fear by Tobacco.
For if daily experience may serve for a sufficient proof of the contrary: I
for my part, have seen none at all: neither has any man else I am sure known
any; or at the least, very few, among so many thousands, that daily take it,
that have fallen into agues directly upon the taking of Tobacco: and therefore,
even by that experiment also it does seem unto me, that the taking thereof,
especially in fume, (which as your self grants, has very, small force to
work any great matter upon our bodies) can cause no such fiery, and extreme
heat in the body, as is by you supposed, but rather, if it do give any heat,
yet that heat is rather a familiar, and a pleasing heat, then an immoderate,
extraordinary, and an aguish distemperature.

And as for them that affirm, Agues to be cured by Tobacco, as you say; if any
unlearned so say: in my judgment, it is an unsavory speech, and without sense
or method, and I leave it to them that so say, to defend it as they can. But
it may be, you mistake them. Possible it is, that their saying, yea, and their
meaning too, is thus: that in the curing of Agues, Tobacco, may have his good
use, if he be rightly used: as well as other purgatiues have. And that opinion
well understood, is not greatly amiss. For if Purgations, being done in good
order, and conveniently given in their due times, and seasons, be one of the
especial helps, to rid and cure rotten Agues, as you know it is: then it is
like enough* that Tobacco, by his purging faculty, may do much good, by taking
away the cause of the Ague, as other Purgations do. For if you think it can do
no good that way, because it is hot and dry: then by that reason likewise, no
Purgatiues in a manner, that the old ancient writers did use, can do any good
that way. For that they were all, or most of them of the same nature, hot and
dry: as for example: Elleborus, Colocinth, Elatery, Esulus, Scammony: which was
not only used by them in a manner altogether: but at this day also, is one of
the most common, and vsuallest things that we have; especially, in our great,
and magistrall compositions.

As for the danger that you presuppose* is in the often use of Tobacco, to
them that be in health, for dissipating, and consuming that wholesome humor, by
often vomits, seeges, sweatings, spittings, and coughings, which otherwise
would be turned to good blood, and nourishment: and all this to be done to by
the fume of Tobacco, (which by and by vanishes away, as all smokes do.) In my
fancy, all this is but a mere imagination: and directly against that which
your self has said already: affirming that the fume has no great force to
work, any matter of moment in our bodies, as also flat against common and
daily experience. For neither I, nor you, nor any man else, in my opinion, ever
did see, that the fume (for of that your talk must be, or else you talk to no
purpose) which is the thing only that is in daily use, did ever work, any
great purgings, or vomits, or sweates: or if it did at any time: yet it was by
a mere accident and chance; which is nothing to purpose. As for the other
humidities, which as you say, it provoke, from the brain, and other parts of
the head: a man may think, that those things may as conveniently be done, and
with as little hurt or danger with Tobacco, as we see them daily done by your
Errhinaes, and Nasaliaes, and Sternutatories, which are usually given in
Physic by the nose, to procure sneesing, and clammy filth to come down that
way: or by your Mastichatories, which you use to chew and to provoke the
passing away of offensive humors by the mouth: or by your expertorating
medicines, and procurers of Phleagme to be discharged, and avoided by coughings.

But if your meaning be, that it consumes only that humidity, which is laid
up in the stomach, as in a storehouse, to serve to good purpose hereafter;
even in that point also, you are deceived, considering the great waterishn^sse,
and overmuch moisture, of our country, and the people thereof: as shall be more
at large spoken of hereafter: in so much that there is a great deal more fear
and care to be had, of the offenses, that may grow by too much humiditie in the
stomach; then any whit, to stand in fear, of any great matter, or harm that
may ensue, upon the abating of the abundance, of that humiditie and moisture.

And now: whereas you affirm, it makes, the gross, and foggy, to be lean,
etc. If this be certain, which by you is put down and avouched, you have
given Tobacco, one of the greatest praises, that can be devised. And if there
were no other matter, why it should be had in good regard: yet for this only
point it deserves immortal praise. You are not ignorant I am sure, how many
learned men, have of long time labored, and do daily busy themselves from
time, to time, how to de^ise remedies, to make the gross, and foggy man,
lean, in some reasonable measure, and yet notwithstanding, you see, how few
have, or can effect the same. For my part, I would I were indebted to you, in a
good round sum of money, that I might be assured, Tobacco, could work that
feate. Do you but assure me, that it can do it indeed: and I will be bound to
assure you, that no Consumption, or decay, either of natural heat, or radical
and substantial moisture, shall follow upon the taking of Tobacco. But to come
something close to the point. If Physic have any direct, and ordinary means
to pull down a gross and foggy body, as you call it: in my conceit, it must
be, by convenient competent euacuations, and drying diets, fit, and agreeable
for the purpose. Now sir: if those ordinary remedies which are usual in the
common course of Physic, for the abating of overmuch foggy fatness, are, and
ought to be of the same quality and condition that Tobacco is: that is to say,
hot, and dry: and notwithstanding the daily use of them, yet for all that, we
stand no whit in fear, that either consumptions, or decay of natural heat
and moisture, will ensue upon the use thereof, when they are ministered: what is
the reason then, why we should be so much afeard, of the using of Tobacco, in
the like case, having the self same properties, that other medicines either
have, or should have, being used to the same effect, and purpose?

And whereas you imagine it is very unapt, to breed good nourishment (and upon
that hangs the greatest weight, and moment of your reasons:) I see not well,
how that can be: except it be, by one of these two means following: that is to
say, either because Tobacco it self makes not good nourishment, if it be
taken into the body: or else because Tobacco decays and destroys, the
chiefest instrument, that makes good nourishment for our bodies, which is the
stomach. If we mean, it breeds no good nourishment of it self, as other
good meats do: I yield thereunto, as I said before: and confe^^e as much now:
neither did I ever take Tobacco, to be any good meat at all: neither does any
man use it for food, that I know. But if your meaning be, that therefore it
hinders good nourishment, because it hinders, and destroys the chiefest
instrument of good nourishment, I mean our stomach: in my judgment, you are
far deceived: for it is rather a principal help in that respect, then any
hinderer at all. For if overmuch moisture be a great hinderer of the stomach,
by relaxing of it: and by dulling the desire, and appetite of meat: and if
great cold be another great enemy, to the same; for that it hinders, and
decays good concoction: then Tobacco, as Tobacco having the contrary
qualities, that is to say, being hot, and dry, is no such ill means to amend
those foresaid defects, and infirmities of the stomach, as you presupposed that
it is. I say, Tobacco, as Tobacco: that is, as Tobacco I mean rightly, and
moderatly used: for too much wood, suddenly, and out of order heaped on,
choaketh, and puts out the fire: and too much good wine, being immoderatly
and excessiuely swilled in, though of his own nature it be warm, and
comfortable, yet, so taken, it kills and extinguisheth natural heat: and so
in this, as in other things, the common saying is fulfilled: Too much of any
thing, is good for nothing.

Your discourse of smells, is for the most part true and pretty, and very well
to be liked: but yet in all parts, but weak, and faint, to prove the matter in
hand. The Aristotelians, and the Galenists, are at a jar about the nature of
smells: and some of the old writer^; as also some of the latter to, yea, and
those of the best sort, and greatest fame: have much a do about this point: to
prove that sweet swells do nourish, and are mightily puzzled in it. But yet to
be brief, in this point, for my part, I do ^ssen^ unto you, and am of opinion,
as you are, that sweet smells do nourish. But yet the principal point in
question remains still in doubt: which is this: whether Tobacco stink, or
no? Then, whether it do stink in that high degree, that it does breed such
great offense to nature, as it must needs be abhorred so much, as you do bear
us in hand it must. And by the way: if it do stink: is it therefore to be
thought utterly unprofitable, to be used, in Physic? For the deciding of this
question, whether it stink, or no: I know no better way, or directer course,
then to appeal to the multitude of indifferent voices.

True it is, that as all noses are not alike in shape, and making but some are
long noses, some short: some thin, and sharp, as they say shrewes be: some
great and botteld, as I know whose is: so is there great variety of judgment
in their smells, and that which pleases one much displeases another: as
appeared by the merry tale of the Collier, that passing through Bucklersbury,
fell into a kind of trance, with the sweet smells of that street, and was
revived again with the smell of, you wot what, if all Caunterbury tales be
true. But yet thus much I do know, and I think your self also will not deny;
That men of great learning and judgment, men of right good bringing up, men of
fine, and deinty diet, men of good worth, and worship, yea men, of right
honorable estate, and calling; do like of the smell of Tobacco well enough. Why
then should it be so mightily condemned by you, for such an horrible stinker?
If it were possible to have, so great an assembly, of so indifferent, and
worthy Judges for this matter, as there is now, a most honorable meeting, at
this very instant in the high Parliament for other greater matters, and if it
might be put to their indgement, assure your self, it would go against you,
and you would quite be overthrown: and for one voice of your side, there would
be twenty, at the least on the other; and all for Tobacco. For I can tell you,
that this is held for an infallible rule, and to be one of the most perfectest
signs of good Tobacco; that it be sweet, and yield a kind of pleasing,
fragrant, aromaticall smell. But by the way of admittance, let it be said, that
it has a kind of rank, or unpleasant savor. What then? shall it therefore be
banished out of the use of Physic? or if it bring, a greater commodity with
it, shall it therefore, for a little rank smell, be rejected? Smell me to the
simple, called Vuluaria: or to your Castoreum: or to your Assa foetida, called
of some Stercus Diaboli, or to your great composition of Mithridat, the glory
of Physic, and the wonder of the world: and such other, which are no small
fools in the course of Physic: and I believe, when you have but once handled
some of them; you would thank him, that would bring you a little good Tobacco,
to help to put away those smells, and to sweeten your self again. If men did
commend Tobacco, to make Pomanders withal: or for lipsalue, or for fine
perfumes, and sweet smells, for Ladies chambers, it were another matter: and
might perchance have been instly misliked.

Your story of Ambrose Pary, is far fetched, and to no purpose in all the
world. What needed you to have fetched your proofs out of France, to persuade
that ill smells do offend? Every du^ghil in England, and something else too, can
testify that well enough.

And here I must needs tell you by the way, that your speeches, be a little too
much exceeding, and as I might term them, too far transcendent, and your
comparisons too unequal, when you inueigh against poor Tobacco. For when you
talk of his manifest qualities, which are hot, and dry, and yet that to not
excessive: but in some measurable manner, yet you term him to be, fi^ry,
hellish, burning, scorching, out of Plutoes forge, and the like: whereas
indeed, there is no such matter: and ye^ upon that hyperbolicall ground, as I
may say, are most (...) your arguments builded. As if a man should reason thus:
Because too great a fire, and therewithal standing too near unto it, does
burn a man: therefore, a moderate fire, with a reasonable distance standing
from it, were not fit to warm a man pleasingly, and with delight. Or because
scalding hot water, is fitter to scald a pig, then to trim a man's beard:
therefore lukewarm water* is not good to be used in Barbors basins: for even
much a like hang these your arguments together*

And now, in like manner, what a comparison have you picked out* be^weene
Tobacco, and that most hateful thing, the plag^^^ He that knows not of what
a monsterous deep, filthy, corrupt, stinking putrefaction, the plague
proceeds, being able not only to infect another: but also to beget in a
second person, in a third, yea and in a fourth man, another monsterous,
stinking, contagious seminary as he calls it (a Seminary Priest if ye will)
like to himself; let him but read that learned Fracastorius upon that point
in his books De morbis contagiosis; and he shall be satisfied. And now alas,
what comparison is there between the smell of such a monster, and poor
Tobacco: whose smell is deemed no worse of such as love him, and are men of
good account, and of a dainty sense, then to have a certain, drying,
odoriferous, aromaticall savor: and of such as hate him, yet if they do him
right, and be not too partial, can be thought to be but something hot in
smell, and as it were a little rank at the most.

Touching the story of D. T. it dies of it self: and is to as little purpose,
as the other of Ambrose Pary. Yea, and if it be well scand, it is directly
against your self. For you confess, he would not for a hundredth pounds, but
that he had used it: and why? himself answers: for thereby says: he found
great ease, of his cold, and rheumaticke stomach. So that upon this man's
confession: Tobacco is nothing so ill a thing, or such a terrible bugge, as you
have made him, to hinder nourishment, or to destroy and overthrow concoction.
For, as you see, it mended his stomach, which was weak, and feeble before. And
whereas he says, he cannot, now leave it: even in that also, he seems by
implication as it were, to confess: That there is no such horrible ill smell
in it, as you preten^ there is. For if D. T. be he, whom I do think, you
mean: then do I know the man well, and know him also to be a very learned
gentleman: and of a fine grain, as also to be a moderate, sweet, civil
gentleman, in all his whole carriage of his life: and if the stink were so
offensive, as you would make it to be, assure your self, a man of his
gentlemanly course of life, and dainty nature, would have the discretion in
common sense, to shun, and abhor it. As for the saying of the Noble man; it
must be taken, and regarded, as a particular speech, of an honorable person,
that could not abide Tobacco, and as the testimony only of one; and for that
one, you shall have a dozen, of the same order, and degree, to think, and to
say the contrary.

The third reason, is, for that It is experimented and tried, to be a most
strong, and violent purgation: and for proof of this: you appeal: To the
often scourings, vomits, sweats, and other immoderate euacuations incident into
this simple.
Tobacco to be a purgative, or to have a purging faculty, is no dispraise in
all the world, that I know. No, nor yet to be a strong, and violent purgative,
deserves any whit more discommendation, then other purgatiues do, being of the
same nature and degree, and which for all that, are held in such high price,
and great estimation in Physic, as your self knows. For what is more
violent, then Elleborus, Colocinth, Elatery, Euphorb, Scammony: and such like;
and yet what daily use there is of them, and with what good effect, and safety
also, being carefully, and artificially handled, and prepared, who sees not? A
good rider had rather have, a strong, hot, stirring, ready running horse, then
a weak, lame, sluggish jade, as I take it. And give me a sharp fine edged,
cutting knife, to eat my meat withal, rather then a dull penny whittle, fit
to cut butter withal, when it is warm, as the common Proverb is. But here
perchance you will say, a mean between both, is best; and so perchance say I,
to. But yet for all that, the strength of your argument is broken. For, as
neither a strong, stirring horse, nor a sharp knife, is to be misliked, in
themselves, or for themselves; but if any offense grow by them, it is either by
the unskillfulness, or by the negligence of the one or the other: so fares it
with the secrets, and mysteries of Physic.

Again, your self confesses, and I likewise do confess, that this is true,
that you have said: that is to say: If a Purgation do not purge, that humor
which should be purged, but lies drowned in the body without any working: then
the Purgation increases that humor which should have been purged, and thereby
does rather much harm, then any good at all. So that hereby it is to be
gathered, that the danger is rather in weak, and sluggish Purgations, then in
such, as are quick, nimble, and active; if they be handled skilfully, and
according to art. Let the Physician be learned, and know how to direct,
correct, and bridle him, and you may turn him loose. So that even in this
respect also, Tobacco deserves great commendation, if it be well, and
skilfully used. I would no^ have any man to mistake me here, and to think,
that my meaning is, in these speeches, to condemn, or dispraise, our mild, and
gentle Purgatiues, which are now so much in use, and are called: Benedicta
medicament^: most holy, and blessed medicines. For that is no part of my
meaning, neither does any man more use them, in all his practice, then my self
does. But all my speech tends to this end: that whereas it is most manifest,
that there is, and may be good use, and profit made of both medicines, as well
of that which is strong, and violent, as of that which is a gentle, and a mild
Purgative, if they be rightly used: therefore I think it great pity, and
against reason too, that where both I say, may be well used, there any one of
them, should be condemned, or misliked.

But this fault, that you do find by his purging property, touches nothing
the taking of him, by Pipe, or fume: for it is well known, that, by that way,
it works none of those effects, that you talk of. And yet it should ^eeme
that the chiefest thing, that you shoot at, to condemn Tobacco for: is only
for the great harms and discommodities, that use to come by the smoke, or fume
thereof, as your self terms it. And for that cause, it should appear, you
have entitled your Book: Work for the Chimny-sweepers, etc. And as for this
smoke, which is the usual thing, that is so much inueighed against: upon my
credit, there is no such dangerous purgings or euacuations to be feared to
come that way, as you talk of. Some little deal of waterish, cold,
superfluous, Phlegmatic matter perchance, is avoided that way by Tobacco, as
is well known: not much otherwise, then is avoided by chewing of Masticke, and
Mastichatories, by the mouth; but yet Tobacco does it much better then they: or
else is discharged, and avoided by sneezing medicines, and cleansings,
s^uffings up into the nose: but yet Tobacco performs that also, much more
plentifully, and much more easily, then all they: and yet as safely too, as
every man does see.

And whereas you conclude, that hereby it is apparent, that: (in regard of the
harms, that do depend upon his violent quality in purging) it can therefore
neither in health, nor sickness, be so vulgarly, and commonly used: all this
is to be granted, so farfoorth, as you mean to condemn thereby, the over
rash, and inconsiderate use thereof; which, I do think, your self does mean,
by those words which you have put down, when you say: So vulgarly and commonly
used. And in this point, I do agree with you. But yet for all that, I say it
proves no more against Tobacco, then it does against all other Purgatiues used
in Physic. For if they likewise, be daily, and rashly used: and out of
season: then are they also, in like manner, for the self same reasons, and for
the great mischiefs, that may come thereby, to be as well rejected, and
condemned, as Tobacco. And as for all those authorities, which you have cited
out of Hippocrates: they are good rules, and good sayings I grant: but yet
they tend to no other end, but only to put us in mind what we have to do: and
to give us a friendly Caveat, as it were, to take heed that we abuse them not.
And therefore your self said very well, a little before: that no Purge, be he
familiar, and gentle: or otherwise strong and violent, ought to be familiarly,
or daily used. This position is most true, being spoken of all Purgatiues; and
reaches to Tobacco also, if Tobacco be used daily as a Purgative. But for my
part, I know no man, that uses it as a Purgative daily, be it, either in
in^usion, or decoction, or in a Sirupe, or Electuarie made for that purpose, or
in the way o^ an extract, or any other way else, to that use and service. If
any man do it, let him do it, at his own peril. For he that will have the
Pigge, or Goose roasted, after his own fashion, as they are wont to say in my
country, and will not use the help, and advice of the skillful Cook therein,
then if any thing chance to be amiss in the rosting, yet let the poor Pigge,
and the poor Goose go scot-free. For the Goose you know, may be a good Goose,
(as the goodwife said to her goodman: (goose) let him do as he will:) but yet
let the blame light, a Gods name, where it is; that is, upon the oversight, and
indiscretion of the party, that would needs have it so dressed, according to
his own mind, and fashion. So, if they will be busy, and fall a purging,
without the advice, of the honest, and learned Physician, let them take their
pleasure, in the name of God: but if they chance to catch copper, by the way,
let them thank themselves.

The fourth Reason is; for that It withers, and dries natural moisture in
our bodies: thereby causing sterilitie, and barrenness: in which respect, it
seems an enemy to the propagation of mankind, etc.
For better strengthening of this assertion: you affirm, that it depriueth the
body of nourishment, and food. And to prove this last point, you affirm,
that it spends and euacuateth, out of us by spitting, and sweates, and
otherwise, much of that matter, that in time would prove in us, good blood, and
good food for our bodies.

I grant, that there is in every man's body for the most part a certain kind
of superfluous Phlegmatic humor: as also one other excrement, which shall be
namelesse, which though it be an excrement, yet, it is called by the name of a
Profitable excrement, and may serve, and does serve sometime, to supply the
place of nourishment, and food: and therefore may well bear the name, of
Nutrimentum futurum, as some do term it. Albeit, there is another use also of
that said humiditie, which is laid up in the storehouse of our body: as that
learned Huernius, has well noted, comparing the body of man to the frame of
the world; having the great Ocean sea so placed in it as it is, that by his
sufficient moisture, and humiditie, he might still temper the great excessive
heat of the Sun, which otherwise, if that were not, would go near happily,
with his continual hot beams, to set the whole world a fire. The like use,
says he, has that same moisture, and humiditie in our bodies, etc. But that
this good matter for nourishment, should be exhausted, and consumed, in that
excessive manner, by the use of poor Tobacco, being taken in smoke, (for so you
mean I think, or else, you say nothing to the purpose) there need no fear
at all in all the world to be had of any such matter. Nay, rather in my
opinion, if it be well examined, it will be found a great helper, and
maintainer, of that true natural good humiditie, which in time would become
good nourishment, as you say; rather then a hinderer of the same: as has
already partly been showed before in your second Chapter, and shall hereafter
more at large be declared. And for proof thereof let this reason be something
regarded, which follows. This our country, and native soil of England, is
an Island, and the most famous Island in Christendom, as all the world
knows. And be it, but for that we are Islanders, yet, even in that respect,
for the very situation of our country, we are by nature subject, to overmuch
moisture, and rheumaticke matter. Now, add unto this, that English men
commonly are great eaters, nay rather great surfetters, and do delight much,
and a great deal more, then any Nation else, in variety, and number of
sundry meats, and dishes, whereof the Proverb came, Tam satur, quam Anglus.
And yet go farther. Englishmen, are now become excessive great ^rinkers, not
only of Beer, and Ale, but also, of all kind of wine, no Nation in the world,
more. And moreover beside all this: we English men, offend as much in
idleness, in careless sittings up, and watchings, and distempering of our
bodies, in royotous sports and pastimes, and in looseness of living, as any
people under the Sun, whatsoever. By all which inordinate means: that same
good and necessary moisture, which nature provides, and lays up in store to
do us good withal, is commonly so far surcharged, and choked, with another
unprofitable crude humiditie, that she seems daily to make her moan, and to
call for help, to have that superfluous and combersom enemy removed, and
consumed: which otherwise would be an impediment, to the remainder of that other
good, and natural moisture, which nature would willingly provide, for the
supply of nourishment, and other good uses. For as Conduits, if they had not
vents for to spend their wast water, would in time, either break, or else
become unprofitable: so in our bodies, this unnatural, and over great increase
of unnecessary humidities and moistures, being made by those means which I
mentioned before, would breed great annoyances, if they were not lessened and
wasted, by some device, or other.

Now, here perchance, you will say unto me: Why? How did men in times past,
before Tobacco was known? what helps had they then? or how lived they in those
days? All this is nothing to the purpose: and is as soon answered by me, as
objected by you. For admit they lived more orderly then, then we do now, and so
perchance, had no need at all, of other helps: (which for all that I hardly
believe) or rather ^ay thus: (which indeed is the liker of the two) that they
had other helps, and devices, to serve their turns; which in their opinion,
was as good as Tobacco: yet all this does not prove, that Tobacco is not good
for the same purpose now; as well as those former things were then, whatsoever
they were. Well it may prove, that Tobacco, is a thing later devised and found
out: but yet it proves nothing at all, that because it was found out and
devised but of late to speak of, therefore it has no force, and virtue at all
to do good, but rather to hurt, as you would have it. Let Tobacco, be a later
device then the rest; if ye will: but at my request: I pray you let it be a
better: for any thing that I see.

For farther strengthening of this argument of yours, you allege, that the
great heat, and unmeasurable dryness of Tobacco, dissipateth natural heat,
whereby concoction is hindered, and by that means, many raw humors increased,
etc.

In which saying in my opinion, you do far miss the cushion. And this is the
very point, that in all your discourse, is the chiefest cause and occasion of
all your errors, as I have said already before. For you do reason still, as
though there were such a fiery heat in Tabacc^, and such an exceeding extreme
dryness, as nothing might well be devised hotter, or drier. You know the old
schoole-saying: Vno impossibili dato, sequitur quodlibet. Grant you but that
false Principle once, and then any thing indeed will follow. It is not unknown
to you, and the learned, that superexcelling objects, weaken and destroy the
senses, be they never so perfect: for example sake; the exceeding brightness,
and the clear shining of the Sun, overcomes our sight, insomuch, that the
more firmly and attentively, you do gaze upon it (as many tried it but even
this last day, when it was eclipsed) the ^linder you are. What then? and shall
it therefore follow, that his moderat, and comfortable shining, shall put out our
eyesight? Who sees not, that the extreme hot burning fire, presently kills,
and destroys that body, that is cast into it? and yet for all that, I hope
the moderat, and pleasing warmth of the same fire, when we stand by it,
yields no offense at all: but rather is a great comfort unto us: if Tobacco
had that superexcelling heat, or such an exceeding dryness, as you seem to
attribute unto it; it were another matter. But it is neither so, nor so. I
never yet heard in all my life, that moderat heat, or things that be hot in
some measurable mean and degree as Tobacco is, either did, or could dissipate,
or decay natural heat. If that were so, the^ are they, in a good pickle, that
cherish their stomachs with spices, and warm drinks. Vsquabah, and D. Steeuens
water, Rosa solis, and Aqua vitae, green Ginger, preserved Nutmegs, and the
three Peppers, and the like, might go a begging. What stronger men have you or
more active, then our Irish people? I hope they never came to that strength at
the first, or maintained it, now they have it, with drinking of snow water. And
if Tobacco be not by many ods, and degrees beneath all these things that I have
talked of, in heat, and dryness, then let me lose my credit.

And yet for farther proof of your argument, you allege that by the same
extreme heat of Tobacco: blood being undigested and crude, becomes unfit for
the sperme and seed of man, and thereby is hindered the propagation of mankind by
this hellish smoke, out of Plutoes forge. This reason wholly depends upon the
same foundation that the other did, and therefore may well receive the same
answer, that the other had. So that in a matter unnecessary, there needs not
any necessary speech to be had.

But whereas you do confidently affirm: that Tobacco cures the disease called
Gonorrhaea: and there upon would seem to infer, that therefore it hinders
propagation: good Lord, how are you deceived therein? and yet in so saying,
what an excellent gift, and virtue have you found out in Tobacco? and what a
si^gular praise, have you put down, on Tabaccoes side? I for my part, have as
much labored, in the curing of that disease, as perchance, most men have, of
our profession: and I hope to, with as good success. But if I had thought, in
all the time of my practice, that Tobacco, had been such a fellow, and had had
any such prerogative, in the cure of that disease; assure your self, I would
have been better acquainted with him then I am; and I would have given him
right good entertainment. I will not use many words in this matter for diverse
good, and honest respects: neither enter into any discourse, to rip up, the
diverse kinds, natures, and differences, of that loathsome disease; or once
seem to mention the causes, and occasions thereof, or to deal with any part
of his remedies. But let this only suffice, for an infallible principle, and a
thing to be maintained, against all gain sayers: That whatsoever is good to
cure that sickness: that self same thing is singular good, to help and
farther propagation; if it be orderly administered, and rightly understood. For
what thing in the world is there, that is a greater enemy to generation, then
that disease is? Tum quia corrumpi^ totum nostrum corpus, and reddit ipsum
semen languidum, and effoetum: tum quia ipsa generandi etiam instrumenta, nimis
flaccida facit, and ad cocundum prorsus inepta. Sed hoc in loco, parce,
timideque loquendum est. Noui enim quam sint male morata haec nostra tempora,
and in quam audax oeuum, a^ dissolutam aetatem inciderimus: Quocirca, vt and
decentiae, and pudoris, ac verecundiae iusta, and honesta ratio habeatur,
arbitramur multo melius esse, hic consistere, quam longius progredi.

The fifth reason is: for that It decaieth, and dissipateth natural heat,
that kindly warmth in us; and thereby is cause of crudities, and rheumes,
occasion of infinite maladies, etc.
These objections, are much like unto those that went before: and are already
sufficiently answered. But yet for farther satisfaction: let this yet, be
remembered by the way: That in another place before; your self has confessed:
That in cold, rheumaticke, hydropicall bodies, etc. Tobacco may do much good.
And now is it become, the cause of increase, of these rheumes, and cold
waterish humors in our bodies? here is a great alteration indeed, upon a sudden.

Likewise in another place, you said, it cured D. T. ofhis cold rheumaticke
stomach. And as I take it, that was done: by giving of it some increase of good
heat, with a sufficient dryness: for otherwise I know, he could not have been
cured. For this is flat, and plain, that contraria, contrarijs curantur. And I
am sure, your self also, is of that opinion. And is Tobacco, now found out to
be a decayer, and dissipator, of that natural kindly heat, which heretofore,
it did give, and procure to others? by your own confession? By my fay: the
reconciling of these, and the like speeches (whereof, there be diverse in your
book) will put a wiser man then I am, or your self either, to cast about, and
to seek the bottom of his wits, how it may be brought to pass. But for that
the proof of this your fifth reason, hangs upon the proof of your fourth
argument, as your self says, and for that cause, your self also is willing
to refer us over, to that fourth part of your Discourse: even so will I do
to: and so here rest a while.

And in the mean time, if it will please you to give me leave to enter into
the consideration, of some of your pretty odd conceits, which you have here
set down in this chapter, I will thank you. The troth is, I fear me, I am
not very well able to conceive your meaning thoroughly, by reason, that, to my
thinking, in the delivering of them, you do use, diverse kinds of windings, in,
and out, and as it were certain turnings to, and fro; that are not altogether
void of obscurity: but it may be, it is my weakness in understanding, and
not your darkness in penning. And therefore in truth, I crave pardon, if I
chance to make an offense in mistaking, etc.

One of your conceits is this: That much hardness, and dryness is the
occasion, that moisture, cannot enter. If you mean by these words: hard, and
dry: an excessive, and an extreme hardness, and dryness in the highest
degree: then it may be yielded unto. As, for example: A hard flint, or a marble
stone: or a hot, hard, dry gad of steel, will admit no moisture into it, I
confess: though you power never so much water upon them. But what is this to
Tobacco? or what analogy, or proportion, is there between our bodies, and
these things? though old bodies be dry, and hard too: yet are they never so
dry, and hard, but they can admit moisture well enough: like as when the earth
is very dry, in so much, that it is thereby full of chaps, and chinkes,
because it is a porous body, as we call it, and in some sort spongious, it is
therefore apt, and able to receive great moisture, and to drink in mighty
showers of rain, as daily experience shows: albeit, as it should seem, you
are of a contrary opinion. And even so, fares it with our bodies.

Another conceit of yours is this: That dryness, does not only hinder the
receiving of moisture: but also by that means, it is an enemy to nourishment,
as you infer upon it. First, to answer you merrily: and so I pray you to take
it; all the suckgrouts in London, and all the whole company of tiplers, of
which society, I tell you, there is not the least number, will be all upon you
with open voice, and come all against you in this: to testify: That dryness
never hindered as yet, the receiving, and imbibing in of any good liquor. But
in good sadness, I think you speak and mean this, of an exceeding great
dryness, and in the highest degree, and such as cannot be found in our bodies:
for so it must needs be that you mean, and no otherwise. And in that sense, I
assure you overmuch wet also, is as great an enemy to nourishment; as by this
familiar example may soon appear. Admit a very good meddow, be overmuch
glutted with water: and altogether overwhelmed as it were, with continual
rain: and you shall see, what wise hay, and what trim grass, you shall have
of that meddow. So that upon the reckening, lay but the hare-worts, against the
goose-giblets, as we are wont to say: and for my part, I see not, but that
Tobacco, may work as much good to us, in the avoiding of too much moisture, as
it is like to bring harm, in the procuring of too much dryness.

Touching your painting out of old age, with his stiff, and dry sinews, and
with many other of his infirmities, and imperfections; I confess them all to
be true, and wish with all my heart, that I were able to remedy them: were it
but to amend, some crooked conditions in my self* and some thing else. But yet
I see no reason, why that great cold, should not be as great an occasion of the
increase of all these harms, and imperfections in old age, as any thing else
that can be named. For he that thinks not, that cold has a mighty strength,
to work a wonderful hardness, and dryness: let him but remember this last
great frost in November last past, or if he has been in some of these great
cold countries, such as Russia, (where in very deed I never was, although not
very far from it, when it was) he can then tell, that the ground is so hard
and dry, and all by the reason of cold only, for one half year, or
thereabout, that they are enforced to leave their dead bodies unburied during
all that time, being not able with any instrument in the world, to enter into
the earth, and to break it up; until the Sun be come about again to
relent, and mollify the same. So that thus I conclude: whether we take
Tobacco: or take no Tobacco: yet seeing all those infirmities, and
imperfections, which you have reckened up, do follow old age even by the course
of nature, much like as the shadow waits upon our bodies: and seeing that
great cold, either is, or may be, as great, an increaser, and hastiner of those
infirmities, as any one thing else is, that can be named in all the world: and
seeing our poor friend Tobacco, has a good and a special property, to
resist, that professed great enemy, the cold: me ^hinke, it were a reasonable
suit, to entreat, that Tobacco, might rather be esteemed as a friend, then a
foe, even to old age also: whose heat in this case no doubt, is rather a
pleasure, then any offense at all unto old men.

And yet you have one other conceit more, which maintains one of the
strangest opinions, that ever I heard of in all my life, as old as I am: and
that is this: That by reason of hot and dry Summers in harvest time, the
greatest waters, and land floods are most wont to appear, etc. This in very
truth, is a point beyond Eela: and I am not able to reach unto it, or to
understand it. It was my chance to stand by, when it was; when that a Noble man
in this land, was in an exceeding great rage, with a certain gentleman, an
acquaintance of mine, a very proper man, and a stout. The Noble man grew into
such choler with him, that at the length, he all to be knaued the gentleman:
and often times repeated these words: I tell thee, thou art a knave: nay I tell
thee troth, thou art a very knave. The gentleman, stood long mute, and said
never a word, but at the length, he could hold no longer, but burst out into
these words: As God judge me, my Lord: If your Lordship, should tell me never
so often, that I am a knave, yet you shall pardon me: for, by God, I will never
believe it, and said not one word more. The like answer I must be bold to make
unto you: for if you tell me never so often, that dry Summers, make great water
floods: yet in very truth, I will never believe it. And what your meaning is in
so saying, I protest I know not: but this I wot well, and I am sure of: that
upon this last great drought that we had, as well in the Summer time, as also
in the fall this year, the river of the Thamis, was become so shallow, and dry
as it were: that the poor Western barges complained much of their hard
passages down the river, to serve her Majesty, and her Majesty's city of
London, while she lay at Richmond: and now since her Majesty i^ come to
White Hall, to: I know, diverse good farmers, that are enforced to drive their
cattle two miles, and more, to water them: who were wont to have great store
and plenty of water, even at their own doors, before this hot, and dry
weather came to dry up their springs. And therefore to think that dry
Summers, is cause of great waters, in my opinion, is nothing else, but to
dream of a dry Summer.

The sixth reason is, for that This herb, or rather weed: seems not void of
venom, and thereby seems an enemy, to the life of man, etc.
I marry, this is a matter of some importance indeed, and would be well looked
unto. But by the way, this discourse, of venomes or poisons, would rather be
tripped over, then much dwelt upon, for diverse good respects. The times being
so dangerous, as they are; I think^ it not convenient to meddle with any such
matters, and such gaps as these be, would not, so rashly, and unadvisedly be
opened, to the common people. I knew a Preacher once, and a very honest
learned man, who meant no harm, I dare swear for him, yet inueighing in his
Sermon earnestly, against the wickedness of this age, and telling of the bad
dealing, that lewd Ostlers used, about the greasing of their horse teeth, and
the like dishonest tricks, that Bailifes used, about the altering, and
changing, of cowes horns, that were missing, and strayed abroad: did more
harm in repeating these deceitful sleights, then all the rest of his Sermon
could do good to his auditorie. And you also in this place, by your leave,
might, in my opinion, have been something better advised, then to have used, so
liberal, or rather so lauishing a kind of talk, both of poisons, and of
purgative medicines: still coupling of them together, in such an odious
hateful manner, as you do. Whereas, in very deed, there is no such matter, if
things be rightly understood, as hereafter shall better appear.

In the mean time, yet happy it is, that God himself, has pronounced by
himself, that he is the author of Physic, and has therefore commanded, the
Physician, to be had in some good regard and reverence for his knowledge sake.
Otherwise, if such tales as you have told of poisons, and of purgatiues, should
be believed: (as indeed, God be thanked, they are not to be credited)
Physicians might say they have spun a fine thread, and brought their hogs to a
fair market: and Physic her self might have great cause to rejoice, for
bringing up, so dutiful, and so good a child, as you are. What? has Physic,
hitherto been counted the most excellent gift of the Highest, and been called
by the ancient writers, the hand, and finger of God, for his wonderful
effects, and operations: and is it now in your judgment nothing else but a
hodge podge, and a mingle mangle of poisons? If this be so: then it is more
then high time, for her Majesty and this most honorable Parliament, to take
some order for Physic, and Physicians too. For albeit you have brought in
Tobacco, as a Rowland, upon the stage, to make sport withal, and to be laughed
at: yet, as far as I see, poor Oliver, which is Physic it self, bears
away all the blows, unto whom you have given the longest part, and the worst
part in all the Play. But now, to come to the purpose: I will not meddle, as I
said, with any curious, or solemn discourse of poisons, for such reasons as I
have partly alleged: neither will I stand upon the strict points of his
definition, or enter into his manifold parts, and branches by the way of
division, neither unfold the diverse ways, means, and fashions, of his
hateful operations. But bluntly, and briefly, to answer to so much as you have
laid down: Then thus I say: touching your tripartite division: (you might have
added the fourth branch too, if it had pleased you,) I leave it to your self;
as a good matter, or argument, for a man to show, his wit, learning, and
reading upon: but I esteem of it as no direct proof at all: neither yet to be
any whit in the world more able to blemish, and hurt Tobacco, then it is to
disgrace other parts of Physic, which have deserved better, at your hands,
then this comes unto.

And as for those particular places, and authorities which you have cited out
of Galen, and others: either they do answer themselves, if they be well marked,
and rightly understood: or else this one general answer, may be sufficient for
them all: and that is this: wheresoever you do read, or hear in Physic:
purging medicines, or purging remedies, to be termed, or rather mistearmed by
the name of Venena, or Deleteria: or the like, in Galen: or any other good
writer: there is always added one word, or other, to mollify, and mitigate
the harshnesse of that speech withal. Or if any such word, chance to be left
out, as perchance sometime it is: yet the circumstances of that place being
well weighed and considered, it will evidently fall out, that some one such
mild word or other ought there to be understood. As for example: they commonly
use to call them: quasi Delet^ria* or, ^anquam venena: or else more mild then
that, they will say: that they have in them, quiddam venenosum: or else yet
more mild then that too: as to say they have in them; quiddam noxium; or,
quiddam inimicum humane n^tur^: or the like. In so much that the great Lawyer
Ca^^s himself, who was much bent against Physic: yet when he called
Pharmacum: venenum: yet he added and concluded, it ought not so to be called
absol^tely, but that you should always add this word, ( bonum) unto it: and
so still with that addition, it must be called; bonum venenum said he. Now sir,
think you, that there is no difference, or odds in these speeches? I know not
sir: whether you be married, or no: but if you be, and have a shrew to your
wife: (as if you have not, I would you had, for now indeed, I am angry with
you) is there no difference, think you, in calling your wife, shrew: and
calling of her; good shrew: or profitable shrew: or pretty shrew: or the like?
Yes I warrant you, try it when ye will.

But Galen, the only man for Physic that ever wrote: at the very first iumpe,
puts down, a very learned, and a notable difference; between Medicamentum,
and Alimentum: The one (says he) increases Molem and substantiam corporis:
and vincitur, or alteratur a natura: the other, minuit eam, and vincit. The one
agit in corpus: the other patitur a corpore, etc. These, and the like speeches
are used of him, and are pretty speeches, and good speeches, and true speeches.
But all these speeches import no more but thus much: that purging medicines,
are not fit for nourishments: and because they are not fit, to nourish, and
feed a man: therefore in that respect, that they do yield no food, or
nourishment unto us, the^ may be termed after a sort things hurtful to man,
or enemy to man, or things against man's nature, and therefore, in a kind of
large signification, as a man would say, they may be called as it were, in a
certain manner, a poison to man: because they nourish not the nature of man.
And after this manner, and sort of speaking, and in this large signification,
calling all those things, as it were poisons that do not nourish us: you may
well call a stone a poison, as that learned Fallopius notes: and as I say too,
so may you call, a lump of gold, a poison also, because there is small
nourishment in it: but yet such a kind of poison: I think, as I do know a
great sort of good fellows, that would not stick to venture the poisoning of
themselves, in swallowing down their throats, great gobbets of it, so they
might have them for their labor.

But, how ever it is: These medicines, are far from the nature of that
poison, which is so hateful a thing, and called venenum indeed. For of that
sort of Venoms, a very little quantity, being taken into the body, overthrows
us, and corrupts nature, because it is enemy to nature, tota substantia, as
we term it, and therefore can never be turned to good: but as a little
rottenness in an apple, can never become sound, and good again, but will
corrupt and perish the rest, unless it be ^eparated from the rest, and cut
away; even so it fares with venims in our bodies, passing through, the whole
body, and mass of our temperature, in like manner, as a little Saffron, mingled
in a quantity of liquor, gives a tincture to all the water, or as a little
Garlic being eaten, makes both the urine and the spittle, and the breath of
the eater to smell thereof: even such a kind, of infection, and working in our
body, is procured by venimes, unless with all speed, they be either by
vomit, avoided: or otherwise miraculously mastered. But now good sir, if you
were but examined upon your knowledge, how many you have known in all your
life, to have been poisoned with Tobacco: I think you would be put very much
unto your shifts, to find out but so many as poor one, notwithstanding it is
so commonly, and so daily taken, as it is: and yet nothing taken against it
neither, either to avoid it, or else to correct it. Then I hope it stands
clear, that poor Tobacco, is none of those dangerous poisons: unless you
call him so, in that large signification, which we have spoken of, calling all
those things, which do not nourish, or feed us, after a sort venimes, or
poisons: for that they are in some manner, contrary to man's narure, for that
they are not apt, either to increase, or preserve the substance of man: and in
that sort, as I have told you, a stone, or a piece of gold is a goodly poison
too.

The rest of your speech: as that it is a violent Purgation, and therefore
needs good correctiues, etc. proves no more Tobacco, to be ill, and
dangerous, then other things to be even so too, that are used in Physic. But
yet it proves very well indeed, all the^ to be fools, that will use it, or any
thing else unadvisedly, to purge withal. And thereto I agree with you, as I
have already, at large signified, and declared before.

You build much upon the accidents, and symptoms, that sometime do follow the
large taking thereof: namely, as violent vomits, many, and infinite stools,
great gnawings, and torments of the guts, defect of feeling, and understanding,
loss of sight, and giddiness of head, profound, and deep sleeps, etc. And
hereupon you think you have a great hand of the matter, and have said much to
prove Tobacco, to be a great, and a dangerous poison, etc. If you may make
your own account, it were hard I perceive, if you did leese by the reckening.
But if you were but friendly examined, but upon this point: how many you had
ever seen, or known, to be in this pickle, upon the taking of Tobacco: I
think (to speak within my compass) it will be very hard for you, to give the
instance of five thousand in all your life: and yet I think too, that, even
that were as easy for you to do: as to give the instance but of five. And
farther, admit that it has wrought any of these effects, upon any some, at any
time, as upon some great, and some unreasonable disorder perchance it has:
yet what of that? I am sure, that I have seen for your one, that you can name
that way, an hundred at the least, upon immoderate taking and pouring in of
good wine, that have been in the same pickle, and worse too: and yet I hope, it
shall not follow thereof, that good wine, is no otherwis^ to be accounted of
then a poison: if it were, it were high time to look to our Vinteners I can
tell you.

But yet you still go on: and urge farther: and say that it is the more
dangerous poison: because that it has contrary qualities in it: for it has
also, say you, a stupefying, and a benumming property, or quality, which is
in the extremest degree of cold, as your self affirms.

Here is good stuff indeed. What? has Tobacco hitherto been accounted so
dangerous a thing, and all for his extreme heat, and therefore called by
you, the fiery, hellish, scorchingfume, out of Plutoes forge, and has it now
such a great cooler joined with it? I hope you know, and will confess, that
two extremes, cannot consist, and dwell together, in one, and the self same
substance, in equal degrees, and at one time: no more then dark midnight, and
clear shining noone day, can be at one instant, in one and the self same
place: or that any one thing can be as hot as fire, and the self same to be
as cold as ice, at one instant. Here you attribute unto Tobacco, a cold quality
in the highest degree: and heretofore you have ascribed unto him, a heat more
then ordinary, nay, almost rather in the like extremity, if your words be
thoroughly scanned: which is impossible to hang together. But upon this error
depends the greatest force of your former arguments. And this principle being
once overthrown* which is this: That the heat of Tobacco is so exceeding hot,
that it is able to inflame, and destroy natural heat, etc. (which is nothing
so indeed, as I perceive by your own confession here that it is not, having
such a cooling card joined with him, as you say it has: and as also partly
has been well proved before in many other places.) Then I say, all your former
reasons brought against the killing, and destroying of our natural heat, by
the great heat of Tobacco, and thereby, the procuring of so many crudities, and
ill digestions in our bodies, and all procured by the great inflaming heat* of
Tobacco, as you say: al these reasons I say, are quasht, and not worth a butto^.

Well, this is not enough: but yet still you proceed: and make answer to a
secret objection; which is this: Many (say you) in England do take the fume of
Tobacco, without hurt or inconvenience: and your self gives the reason, by
and by. Because (say you) the custom of taking of it, in that manner, which we
do vs^, that is to say, by receiving of it, at the mouth, or snuffing it up by
the nosthrils, can neither profit nor hurt much, etc. If this be so: why, then
have you so much inueighed against it all this while, as you have? yea, and
against that manner of taking of it too? For even of that only action, it
seems unto me: that your book bears that title that it does: of
Chimny-sweeping, as has been already said. But let us go on: and mark but
that reason: which your self has made, and in the same chapter, afterward
immediately follows: and you shall see, that it does wonderfully clear
Tobacco; and he is exceeding much beholding to you for it. For thus you say:
You are not ignorant that many perilous, and deadly poisons, are sometimes
taken into the body without offense, and danger: but then they are ever in
very small quantity, or else so repressed, and corrected with other cordials,
as that they cannot offend, etc. Let this speech of yours be well marked, and
remembered. For if this be so, (as I for my part, take it to be so) then there
cannot in all the world, a better tale, and in fewer words be told for Tobacco,
then this is. For if poisons, cannot be taken, without great, and present hurt
and danger, except they be taken in a very small quantity, and with many
correctiues too, to resist, and bridle them: then contrariwise; seeing that
Tobacco, is daily taken, and that in great abundant quantities too, yea and
that also without any correctiue in all the world, and yet for all that, God be
thanked, it poisoneth no body: what greater testimony or proof, can there
either be had, or brought, for the clearing, and quitting of this poor
gentleman, both from being a poison^ as also from the very suspicion of any
poison to be in it, then this is, that your self has said? In good faith, in
my fancy, I need say no more, then is confessed, and written by your self.

But yet, come what come will, you will still plod on: and needs you will have
it to be a poison, even to the very Indians, had not custom prevailed to the
contrary as you say. And here you do labor tooth and nail with a long
discourse, to set out, the nature, and force of custom, and to tell what great
acts, she can do, and bring to pass: all which we do yield unto. But yet, this
is nothing to the chief point in question. And for a brief answer to all,
that is, or may be said in that behalf: I am not of opinion that the Indians
long using of it, has made it no poison to them: but contrariwise, because of
it self, and in his own nature, it was not a poison, nor any hurtful thing,
therefore with them it grew into custom. For it is most likely, in all common
sense, and reason, that; things, must first either be found, or known, or at
the least thought to be good, and wholesome; before, they can be drawn into
any use, and custom. Some little trial, and experience I confess, must be had
of them: to know, and find out, the true nature of every thing, whether they be
good, or no: but yet that little trial, would never bring it to a daily
custom, or long use, but would by and by be checked, and controlled: if the
thing it self, were not found good, and wholesome; upon the first proof, and
trial thereof. So that, as I have said already: i^ is much more probable,
that the goodness of a thing, is the cause of the custom thereof, and not the
custom, cause of the goodness. As for those particular instances, of the
people that Virgil makes mention of: and of the woman, and maid, that fed
upon poisons, and killed others with her breath, and yet lived her self; let
them either be true stories, or but reports from mouth to mouth, let them I say
be what they will: yet I account them* but as pretty, and rare observations, of
certain secret Sympathies, and inward workings of nature: more to be wondered
at, for the strangeness thereof: then to be of any force, to prove any thing
against Tobacco: or to be answered, for any great matter of moment in this
case. But yet, if it so please you: let all this be granted: That use, and
custom, does make, a thing good in time: and yet what have you got by this
then? For then all the Tabacconists, have that, that they would have. For, if
custom, say they, made it good to the Indians: why may it not do the like to
the English, in time? If custom be the matter: and all in all, then let us
alone; for we will bring it into as great use, and custom, as ever aniething
was.

In that you grant it to have such a prerogative, for the Scorbute, commonly
called the Scuruy, and for other the like diseases incident to that kind of
people: herein also, you have said very much, in his commendation. For there
is no disease, that is more loathsome then that is: neither is there any that
deserves greater reward for the cure, then that does. I am sure it is not
unknown to you, what a notable treatise is written by that worthy old man
Wyerus, about the curing of this Scuruie, as they call it; and how much he has
written in the praise of one poor herb, called Coclearia: in respect that it
is so wholesome, for the cure of that disease. And if Tobacco, have this
singular gift also for that disease: then I hold him in great regard, and
estimation: and account of him, as of an excellent simple, that deser^eth
rather to be worthily written of, then to be so bitterly inueighed against.

To conclude, at the last, when you have ended all your talk of the Scuruie,
then yet you labor to prove Tobacco, to be a poison forsooth this way: Because
say you, when it is taken of an infected body, it draws out the poison, like
to himself. Your own words are these, or to this effect: That Tobacco does
the like to other poisons: which when they find any of their own quality and
nature in man's body, etc. they draw forth the same (the lik^ coveting his like)
and yet leave the sound, and healthy humors clear, and unspotted. Blessed
God, I never heard of such a reason, in all my life. For in my poor opinion, in
saying this that you have said, you have mightily freed Tobacco, even from the
very suspicion of all poison: or else, I am wonderfully deceived.

In this place, there is some occasion offered, to speak somewhat of the
nature, and manner of purgatiues in Physic. Namely to tell by what means,
this act of purging is performed: and what be the true causes, of this
attraction, or drawing, or purging of humors in a man's body. He that shall
enter into this question, shall find a large field to plough. For there be
many opinions, about it, and all earnestly defended: some saying it is, a
manifesta qualitate: others, ab occulta aliqua vi, and coelesti virtute: others
some: ab ipsa forma specifica, as they term it. And some again, a violento
quodam motu, and contrarietate substantiae: but the most famous for learning,
say it is, a similitudine naturae, and that is Galens opinion; albeit, he is
mightily gainesaid, and sore taxed for the same; by that learned, and famous
man Valariola.

And therefore knowing that this discourse, would be rather tedious then
profitable, in so short a Treatise, as this is: I will leave that point for
this time: and rather seek to answer, your words, as they lie in order.

Two things, you do attribute unto Tobacco: the one is, that from infected
bodies, it draws out all the ill humors: the other is, that it leaves all
the other humors in the body, clear and unspotted, as you say. Two notable
properties, I assure you: and such as would rather make a man in love with
Tobacco; then cause him to hate it, as a poison. What? does Tobacco draw out of
an infected body corrupt venomous humors, because it is a corrupt venom it
self? and is like to those venomous humors, that are drawn out by it and
expelle^? Me think in common sense that should not be so. As I told you even
now: so I say again, I will not stand upon the examining and sifting out, of
the causes, and the means, of this said attraction, and expulsion of humors:
for there be many opinions of that point, as has been already said, and all
of them probable, and defensible. But thus much, both you, and I do confess,
and we see it also to be so: that ill humors be purged, or expelled, or tumbled
out of the body. Marry, how they do come out: and by what means, that cannot I
tell: but that they do come ou^: that is flat, and plain, and every man sees
it, by these said purgatiues. And now Sir, to leave all school questions
aside, and plainly, and bluntly, to come to the point: let me ask you but
this familiar question: Does one friend use to drive out another friend, out of
his house, when he finds him there, who is like to himself: in nature, good
will, and conditions? or rather does he thrust out and expel, a thief, if he
find him there: or an enemy: or such a one, as loves him not: but is contrary
to him in all his actions and meanings? Me think the case, is too plain, and
needs no farther dispute. But yet; like, finding his like: it expels that
like: say you still: and this is the faburden of your song. And is it, even so
indeed? and does like, expel his like with you now: who have borne us in
hand, all this while, that like, added to like, did delight, and joy in that
like: and increase that like in our bodies? For if it does all this, then
belike, it expels it not: nor one venom does not thrust out another as you
affirm, now? For if this reason of yours be true: then he that has taken a
strong poison: should be healed, either by taking more, of that poison: or else
by taking of a stronger poison, then that is. But try that when ye will: and
give rats-bane, to him, that is poisoned with rats-bane already, and you shall
see, what a wise cure, you shall have of it. So that, to conclude, as far as
I can see, you are as far off, from proving Tobacco, to be a poison: as both
by reason, and your own words to: he is rather found to be an enemy unto
poison, and an expeller, and a conqueror of the same: yea, and more then so
to: for by your own report, it leaves the other good humors (which is a
wonder I can tell you) clear, and unspotted, as your own words do testify.
Now then: this great storm, we see is past, and ouerblowne: and this terrible
accusation, is much like to a Sampsons post, thwited to a pudding prick, as
the Proverb is. Well now: what more? We must not yet so go away. Then let us
hear your seventh reason in the name of God.

The seventh reason is: for that The first author, and finder thereof was the
devil: and the first practisers of the same, were the devils Priests, and
therefore not to be used, of us Christians.
I must needs think, that you were very near driven to go to the hedge for a
stake, when you picked out this argument. And must it needs be devised, and
invented by the devil? and must it needs be used by the devils Priests, and
servants, and by none other? and must not Chrstian men use it, in any case,
because Infidels, the devils servants, have used it? what remedy? But yet my
mind gives me: it should not be so. And yet all this while, why it should come
from the devil, I hear no other reason made by you, as yet: but only because
Monardus the Spaniard affirms it: nay rather for that he imagines it to be
so. And my answer forsooth is this, for that he does but barely affirm it
only; and for that his assertion is but coniecturall* I see no reason but that
it may be as safely, and as easily rejected, as believed. But yet if the
circumstances be well considered, that Monardus himself puts down, me
think it were a more charitable motion, to think that it came from God, who
is the author of all good gifts, then from the devil. This one thing I am most
sure of, that even this self same Monardus: whom you here bring against him,
as your greatest proof; has written as much good of Tobacco, as can be:
affirming him not only to be very good, against infinite diseases in a
manner: but also to have a singular gift, to refresh men of their great, and
intolerable wearisomnes in their iourneyings. Yea, and to be such a wonderful
preserver, and curer of poisons: yea, and of that great, and admirable poison
too, called Bague (how soever it has pleased you, to slander him in your last
Chapter before this) and in conclusion knitteth up, the whole Treatise of him
with these words: That for his excellent virtues, Tobacco, is had amongst the
Indians, in wonderful estimation, etc. Now Sir, how such, an excellent thing
as this is, by his own report, should now be said by him to come from the
devil; that would be known. Touching the taking of it by their Priests, and
by and by falling asleep thereupon, etc. Mark me but that whole discourse
well: and ye shall see, it is taken and reported quite amiss: for indeed it
makes all for Tobacco. For take but Monardus his own tale: and by him it
should seem; that in the taking of Tobacco: they were drawn up: and separated
from all gross, and earthly cogitations, and as it were carried up to a more
pure and clear region, of fine conceits and actions of the mind, in so much,
as they were able thereby to see visions, as you say: and able likewise to make
wise and sharp answers, much like as those men are wont to do, who being cast
into trances, and exstasies, as we are wont to call it, have the power and gift
thereby, to see more wonders, and high mystical matters, then all they can do,
whose brains, and cogitations, are oppressed with the thick and foggy
vapors, of gross, and earthy substances. Marry, if in their trances, and
sudden fallings, they had become nasty, and beastly fe^lowes* or had in most
loathsome manner, fallen a spuing, and vomiting, as drunkards are wont to do:
then indeed it might well have been counted a devilish matter: and been worthy
reprehension. But being used to clear the brains, and thereby making the mind
more able, to come to her self, and the better to exercise her heavenly gifts,
and virtues; me think, as I have said, I see more cause why we should think
it to be a rare gift imparted unto man, by the goodness of God, then to be any
invention of the devil. And if that their Priests, as you call them, do abuse
at any time, this good gift, to deceive thereby the people, with subtle, and
doubtful speeches in their answers: that was the Priests fault, and to be
ascr^bed unto them: and no whit to be imputed to the thing.

Now sir, by the way: whether those Priests, do serve the devil, or no, and be
his servants as you say they are, that I do leave to you, and others to judge.
I am of Cicero the Ethnickes opinion in this: That there is no people, or
nation so rude, or barborous in the world: but that they have some sense, and
feeling of God: and that thereby they do ordain and appoint to themselves,
some one kind or other of divine worship, and service of that immortal, and
omnipotent deity, and most blessed everlasting power: albeit, they understand
him not aright, as we Christians do. And albeit, neither these Indians, nor yet
those Philosophers, whom all ages have hitherto so much reverenced: and by whom
we have received so many helps, of learning, as we have, never knew Christ
aright, for that perchance they never heard of him: and therefore like enough
that they do all err in their religion, or rather superstition: yet, in my
fancy, it were a hard thing to pronounce them all to be the devils servants,
and his instruments: being otherwise good men of life, and couersation, and
blameless in the ^ight of the world. But for that this question, appertains
not unto this place, neither yet comes within the compass of your handling
or mine: I leave it to our reverend Divines: to whom it belongs to decide
such matters. Hoping for all that, it shall not seem to be repugnant to the
rules of Christianity, to judge the best, even of those Infidels: and to
think, that as God is omnipotent and wonderful in all his doings: so, by that
his omnipotency, joined with his infinite mercies, he has also many ways, and
means (though to us, and our weakness unknown) how to raise up, plant, and
preserve, some numbers amongst them: of such as shall be accounted, and
reckened among the fellowship of those his true servants, that shall be saved.
And if this opinion of mine shall be thought awry, and erroneous: yet I hope,
it shall be taken, and accounted, as pius error: and so I leave for this
matter: submitting my self to the censure and judgment of them, to whom it
does appertain.

But let us imagine, the worst: be it, that they be the devils servants: and
that the use of this Tobacco, came wholly from them: shall it therefore be
thought either impious or inconvenient, or unlawful, for Christians to use it?
For my part I am not of that mind. For I think, that religion forbids it not:
and I am sure, honest policy does not prohibit it. Touching religion: Omnia
munda, mu^dis: Take me yet here I pray you, as I mean it, that is: as spoken,
and meant of such matters, as are not otherwise precisely ordered, and
ouerruled by Scripture, but are counted indifferent, and stand only upon their
right use, or abuse, to be either good, or bad: and have no express rule,
example, or commandment to the contrary. As for honest policy; I refer
you over, to the daily practice of all good Christian Princes. Imagine those
Indians be as ill, as ill may be: yet I know, that the Turks are as ill as
they: who are the professed enemies, of Christ, and of his sacred Gospel: and
yet, I am sure there are many things both invented and devised by them: or else
by as ill as they: and also, that are daily used by them: which are held in
great price, and estimation, with all Christians, at this day, and by all
Christian Princes put in practice every where. Wherefore, in condemning
Tobacco, and the Tabacconists so eagerly in this point, as you do: in my
opinion you do in a manner condemn all Christendom for some one thing or other
used by them: which was either in^ented at the first: or else is now daily used
by the Infidels.

The eighth and last reason is: for that It is a great augmentor of Melancholy
in our bodies, which humor, is the cause of many great diseases, and hurtful
impressions in our bodies, etc.
In this chapter there be many things, very well, and learnedly put down: As,
the nature, and description of Melancholy: The difference between the natural
melancholy, and that melancholy which comes, by adustion, and accidentally:
the strange effects, and properties, that it breeds, and brings forth in
our bodies: the help and virtue that it has in it to make men wise: and how
that proposition, which avouches melancholy men, to be the wisest men, is
rightly to be understood, etc. All these things have very good matter in them I
confess. And though some of them, by some men, both are, and may be
contradicted, by the way of argument, and schollerly disputation: yet for my
part, I mind not to gainsay any one of them: for it were nothing to the
purpose, for that matter which we have now in hand. But when all is said, that
you can say, and when all those odd ends are brought together, of those
matters, which you have laid down, and scattered in your discourse; the vpshot
of all your talk in this matter: is, and must be this: that Tobacco increases
melancholy humor in our body, and increases it so abundantly, that it
manifestly destroys the temperature of our body, disordering and
overthrowing, the good actions of the same: and so consequently is a breeder,
and an occasion of many diseases in melancholy persons especially. And this is
the mark, I am sure that you shoot at. Well sir, then to leave your long
discourse, and to come to handie gripes, and to make short with you* then thus
I say: if Tobacco do these things which you affirm it does: that is: if it
increase the humor of melancholy, and breed black vapors in our body, as
you do say, it does: then su^ely sir, it must needs do it, either by his fume,
and smoke, or else by his purging faculty. For there be no more ways, I trow,
how he should do it: for by the way of food, I think you mean it not: for that
is already resolved upon, and put down as a principle: That no man feeds on
Tobacco, as to make his meals thereof. Well then, as touching the fume of
Tobacco, here in this chapter, you plainly, and precisely affirm, that by the
smoke, or fume of Tobacco, all sorts of melancholy are augmented, and
increased, etc. But in another place, you have as plainly affirmed likewise,
that no impression of any matter, either to do hurt, or good, can be made by
the smoke or fume of Tobacco. Of these two contradictions, I know not I promise
you, what to make: they appear unto me, much like to the Aegiptians fast and
loose: so that a man cannot tell where to have you. For to do no hurt at all:
as you say: and to do so great a harm, as to increase all sorts of
melancholy, being a matter of so great moment, etc. which also, you do say: it
does so puzzle my wits to reconcile them well: as in truth, I know not what to
make of it. If you can reconcile them, I pray you then do it; for in truth I
cannot.

As for the reason that you bring, to prove Tobacco, to leave in our brain, a
black, swarfe, sootish tincture, because it does all to be-blacke the Pipe
wherein it is taken: o Lord, it is a very weak reason. For between your dead,
and senseless Pipes, made of earth or otherwise; and the lively cauities,
passages, and pipes of ou^ breathing and living bodies, there is no likelihood
or comparison to be made.

And for proof hereof, let us not stand now upon making of school
syllogismes: but let us fall to a flat demonstration: and one demonstration you
know very well, is worth five syllogismes. My demonstration then at a word is
this: look me but into the throats, and nosthrils, of all the great Tobacco
takers: view them well, I say, and pry into their noses, as much as ye please,
and I will lay what wager you will, that you shall find them as fair nosed
gentlemen, and as clean mouthed, and throated, as any men alive, I will
warrant you. Again to go a little farther, and to prove that the smoke of a
thing, works no such operation, or increases not melancholy, as you
presuppose that it does, let me give you another instance, by another plain
demonstration. Behold your poor ploughmen, that live continually in smokie
houses: and your black Smiths, that are still moyling in sea-coale fire, all
the day long: and Grim the Colier, that is all his life time almost, in
continual smoke, in so much, as in a manner he feeds upon it: and tell me, if
you find many melancholy men among them. All to be smeered perchance you
shall have them, with smoke, and soote, on the outside, and with foul black,
quarrie, scorched hands: but yet you shall see them as merry, and as mad
knaves, with as white teeth, and as good complexions, as any men alive: and as
little touched with sadness, or melancholy; as he that is least subject to
that disease. Unless it be sometime now and then, when the poor Colier is set
upon the Pillorie for false measuring his coals: then perchance he may be
somewhat sad, and melancholy for the time, while his fools head stands
peeping out, at the Pillorie hole. But as soon as he has given them the slip,
and gotten his head once from the Pillorie; and is gone but some two or three
miles out of London, he is as merry again as a Cricket: and all to be-knaues
the Marshall for his labor, and biddes him come now, and he dare, to fetch him
to the Pillorie again. What? must poor smoke, being so light a thing, and so
soon vapoured away, and so, and so taken: as your self has described, and by
and by let out again; must smoke I say needs have so great a force, as to
increase such a sad sour humor as melancholy? Is no possibly, as Domingo was
wont to say. Marry, if the smoke, were a matter of solid substance, so that
it might be chewed, as other meats are, and swallowed down, and concocted,
and digested, and then distributed, and conveyed by the veins, to the
particular parts of the body, to feed and cherish them: then perchance upon
this long abode, in the truncke of our body, and upon the thorough fermenting,
and working of it self, into the whole mass, or lump of our blood, that
gives us nourishment: if all this, I say were done, or might be done: then
perchance, you had somewhat to say, and to warn good Students, to take heed,
how they did meddle with Tobacco: for fear of increase of melancholy.
Otherwise, in my judgment, this needless fear of yours, does somewhat savor
of melancholy in your self. For you know: that melancholy men, be sad, and
fearful, and non timenda, timent: which is one of the chiefest properties of
a melancholy person. And thus much briefly; touching the smoke of Tobacco.

But now sir, it may be your opinion is also, that Tobacco increases
melancholy, and works this great danger and offense, by his purging
faculty: and this perchance is that, which you seem to glaunce at by the
way, when you say: that, it auoideth that liquid Phlegmatic matter, which
would be good nourishment, and that which otherwise should be mingled with the
rest of our blood, and give a moisture to the dryness of melancholy, and so
keep all things in good tune, and temper, etc.

If this be your opinion, that because the smoke of Tobacco makes the takers
thereof to spit a little, and to avoid by the mouth some waterish matter, that
therefore I say when it is used in purging, it will purge the like matter also,
as it seems you do make your chiefest argument upon that point: then I say,
that even in this point also, either you are; or you may be deceived. For there
be many things, that will provoke a man to spit much, and yet they will not
purge at all. As for example, take but Mastich, and chew it up and down in your
mouth: and you shall spit for life: and yet it is no purgative. The like may be
said, of an unripe, sharp, sower apple, or the like: for it will not only do
so to the eater thereof: but also provoke the stander by sometime to spit, and
spattle as much and more too, as I have seen. And thereof I think comes this
English Proverb: That a man's teeth does water, at this, or at that, etc. And
here is to be noted by the way, (and it is worth the noting too, and has been
remembered already in another place before) that, of that same liquid moist
matter, which you so much talk of, and make it so necessary, and precious a
thing, as you do in all your discourse: there is I say such store and plenty
of it in our bodies for the most part, and it is at all times, so ready at
hand to come at a call, that there need be no fear at all, of spending of
that moisture by the use of Tobacco, especially to us, that are English men,
and Ilanders, as has been declared already before.

But here, you come upon me, and say: Yea sir, but Tobacco is a Purgative,
there is no question of that: and because it is a Purgative; therefore, it must
needs purge the like matter, by the belly, which it does avoid by the mouth:
and that is Phleame, and other liquide matter, and humiditie: and in purging of
that, it makes melancholy the drier* and so consequently, it makes it the
worse, etc. No, not so good sir, and to answer this objection fully: I doubt
not, but that you do know right wel^ that as touching purgative medicines,
there be two opinions of antiquity. The one affirms, that they do purge by
election: and are called El^ctiue purgantia: which is as much to say, as that
they do purge, with a kind of choice, or judgment, either this, or that humor
alone, or else some one humor more then any other. And yet those Elective
purgantia, do not so make special choice, of that only one humor alone: as a
Dear is wont to be singled out, from the rest of the heard, and so had in
chase by himself alone without any other: but their meaning is, that those
Purgatiues do expel and avoid some one humor more then the rest indeed, which
they do most fancy, and have a liking unto: but yet with that principal
humor, some one or other humor too, may in part, be expelled and avoided, at
the same instant: as you, and I do know, many of those elective Purgatiues,
which do purge some one: yea some two: nay, some three humors, all at one time,
though not all those humors indifferently at one time, but they shall not be
named by me, of purpose, because I think it not meet, to acquaint the vulgar
sort, with any such secrets.

The other opinion is (and those be jolly fellows too, I can tell you, that be
the authors of it:) That there are no purgatiues at all by election or choi^e,
which are called Elective purgantia, as I have told you: but that all
purgatiues do purge promiscue; or as a man would say, a like: or indifferently:
or at a venture, so that nature* being once set a work by a purgation: and
having as it were her sluices, or conduits, now open: look what humor she
finds her self most aggrieued withal, or that lies aptest and readiest in
the way to be avoided, that she tumbleth out, having now the help of art, to
assist her in her action.

So that make your choice of these two opinions, which you will; yet I see no
reason why Tobacco, should be so much feared, and misliked in the purging of
melancholy. For if you say with this latter crew of Physicians: that all
purgatiues do purge promiscue: then the case is clear: for then he may as well
purge melancholy, as any other humor; or at the least he may purge melancholy
with another humor, when nature is once set a work to purge and avoid that
which offends. But if you do say with the other sect of Physicians: That all
purgatiues do work Elective: or by choice, and a kind of judgment, then thus
I say, that neither I, nor you, nor any man else can give any reason, why
Tobacco, should not as well, as any other purgative, purge away mela^choly,
either alone, or principally, or at the least with some other humors, as well,
as we see other purgatiues do: notwithstanding that his smoke does seem to
keep such a stir, with a little spittering, and spattering by the mouth, as
is already said.

But it may be Sir: that you are of another opinion, then all this comes
unto, and that you do think, that in melancholy matters, there should no
purgatiues at all be used, and would have no other course to be taken in the
cure thereof: but only Alterantia, and Commoderantia, as we term them, to be
used: that is, you would have them use such things as might alter, temper, and
mitigate the harshnesse of that melancholy humor, and so in time at the length
alter the whole state of the body, without any more a do, etc If this I say be
your opinion: then is all at an end: and I have no more to say, either to it,
or to you, at this time, but only this: God speed you well: but therewithal
yet still this I say: That if you will not seem to swerve, from the steps of
the learned ancient writers, who used in the cure of melancholy, as round, and
as strong medicines, as Tobacco is, and such to, as were in their manifest
qualities, as ho^e, and dry as Tobacco is, also: Then it shall be no discredit
for you, to suffer Tobacco, to have his place among those ancient allowed
purgatiues, and to alter your opinion of this poor stranger, and hereafter to
give him no worse speeches, then upon good proof he shall deserve.

And thus having made, a wise foolish speech, or a foolish wise speech in the
behalf of this poor Tobacco: now it is not much amiss, to have a word or two
for my self. It is like enough, that in this brag-speaking age, there will not
want some store of those, that will be ready to start up, and make have to
carpe, and reprehend* all that ever is, or that can be said, either in this
matter, or any other, whatsoever.

And mark it when ye will, and you shall see, that none will be so ready
thereunto, as they: who either for lack of wit, are least able to judge and
understand what is well said: or else for lack of learning, are most unable,
to amend that which is amiss. But making small reckening, or account of any
such: my chief and only desire is: that this sporting exercise of mine, may
no whit displease, any of those learned sweet conceited gentlemen (in regard
of whose favor only, I have vnderta^en it) in whom there is neither
scornful, nor wayward* nor any such sullen sower humor, but that they can be
contented to hear, a Philosophical probleame, somewhat scholer-like handled:
to pass the time these Christmasse holy days. Moreover, it may be, that some
also, will muse to see any time at all to be spent, in so trifling an argument
as this is; in their conceit, and opinion: but yet, for their better
satisfaction, let this be said: Seeing that as famous men, as ever have been,
either in our age, or in our forefathers days, have not disdained to write of
meaner matters then these: as namely, some of baldness, others in the
commendation of folly: yea, and other some, of far baser matters to: as of a
gnat, a fly, and a flea: and yet nevertheless, they have thought no part of
their credit either touched, or impeached thereby: then I hope, it may be
permitted to him, that is no hater of learning, to attempt the like, in a
matter not far unlike: and so much the more for that I was provoked, or
rather in some sort much urged thereunto, (I protest) for that to my thinking, I
did perceive, the credit of that most excellent knowledge of Physic, not a
little touched and stained thereby, under his pretense of inueighing against
Tobacco. And albeit his meaning perchance, was far otherwise (as like enough
it was) yet I thought it not amiss, that such an ouerslip as that was, should
in some good sort, either be met withal: or else, at the least, be better
understood.

FINIS.

