A SVMMARIE ANSWER TO ALL THE MATERIAL POINTS IN ANY OF Master DAREL his books.

MORE ESPECIALLY TO THAT ONE BOOK OF HIS, INTITVLED, the Doctrine of the
Possession and Dispossession of Demoniaks out of the word of God.

By JOHN DEACON. JOHN WALKER.
Preachers.

And the Sorcerers or Charmers of Egypt: they did in like manner with their
inchauntments. For they cast down every man his rod, and they were turned into
Serpents: but Aarons rod devoured their rods, and so Pharaohs heart was
hardened.

Exdo. 7.11.12.13. Si de veritate scandalum sumitur: vtilius permittitur nasci
scandalum, quam veritas relinquatur.

Aug. de libro arbitrio. Talis est conditio falsitatis vel erroris, vt etiam
nullo sibi adsistente consenescat: talis autem e diuerso, veritatis status, vt
etiam multis impugnantibus, suscitetur and crescat.

Chrysostom. de laudibus Pauli. lib. 3. Eugubinus de perenni Philosoph. lib. 3.
(...).
Heu Tripodes lugete, perit praesagus Apollo.
Aye me alas Tripodes, perishes presager Apollo.
Propugnaculum vitae patientia.

LONDINI Impensis Geor. Bishop. 1601.

TO THE REVEREND FATHERS, THE LEARNED PREACHERS AND GODLY BREthren in this our
English Church: I. D. and I. W. do heartily wish the abundance of Revelation in
Jesus Christ, with an holy discerning spirit; that they may be the better
enabled thereby, to discern aright of the things that differ, and to hold fast
for ever the infallible truth, for the glory of God* the Churches good, and
their own everlasting comfort in Jesus Christ. So be it.
Reverend Fathers and Brethren, 1. Cor. 14.29.^ 31.32.33.
beloved and longed for in the Lord: The blessed Apostle putting down some
certain precepts or Canons concerning the sacred Schools of prophecy,
observes (in effect) this following order. First, he permits the Prophets
to speak by two or by three, appointing the other Prophets to determine
vprightlie of that which they speak: and then next, he decrees, that if any
thing be revealed to another which sits by, the former should be silent a
time, and the other man speak, because all (being thereunto called) may
prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all may have comfort. Howbeit,
least any the Prophets should happily presume (upon this his permission) to
speak at their pleasure, the Apostle forthwith (for avoiding disordered
confusion) subiecteth the spirits of the Prophets to which more is (if we
found them able to manage their matters) to give them the hand of fellowship
concerning their doubtful cause. Or if happily (upon better deliberation) they
yielded the question to us: we protested further, to conceal their secret
being, until some good course might forthwith be taken for informing
authority as well of their present conformity, as also for procuring their
speedy deliverance from the Ecclesiastical censures, so far forth as
possibly might be effected.

Sixthly, beholding the holy Religion of Christ very shrewdly scandalized, by
reason of such falsely pretended miracles: we knew (in our conscience) we might
do nothing at all against the truth, 2. Cor. 13.8.
but for the truth, and therefore not possibly conceal those truths which
the Lord has discovered unto us.

Seventhly, our holy established Religion being very scornefully derided with
Papists and Atheists, as a Religion that needs now at length to be presently
supported by superfluous miracles: we verily persuaded our selves, that no good
Christian heart could possibly forbear his best endeavor to stay their
intemperate courses.

Eighthly, Master Darel and his fellows very confidently persisting in the
unhappy support of those their newly broached opinions, has mightily moved
our hearts, Jude. 22.23.
to have (at the least) a compassion of some, by putting a difference, and
othersome again to save with fear, by pulling them violently forth of the fire.

Ninthly, their deceitful and colored kind of proceeding, in that they not
only pretend an holy cause, but which more is, do varnish the same with holy
pretenses, with fair words and flattering speeches, Romans 16.18.
to entangle (if possibly they may) the very hearts of the simple: has made
us the more carefully to discover unto all the world, what lurking poison lies
shrouded under those glorious pretenses.

Lastly, who would not both speak and write whatsoever they conscionablie
know concerning these causes, if he but respect (as in conscience he ought)
that shameful reproach which Master Darell and his fauourits (like disordered
persons) do very injuriously impose upon the whole land, D. Doctrine page 88.
upon Magitracie, Ministry and people in these following words. We doubt not
(say they) but that other nations and kingdoms about us, will both give credit
to this matter of fact, so soon as they shall hear thereof, and see how the
same has been witnessed upon the oaths of many: and will also receive the
Doctrine of possession and dispossession, which we so much have gaine-saide.
Blush then oh England, and be thou ashamed of this thy incredulity, which is
such as the like thereof has not bin read nor heard of before: for others have
yet acknowledged the work which has been done in them, but thou have not gone
so far, but rather denied the same. Lo, these (in effect) be the maine
occasions themselves, which moved us especially to labor these matters.

Now next, The maine ends which the authors propounded in writing. Psalm.
122.6.7.
the principal ends which we propound to our selves in publishing our labors,
are these that follow. Namely, we have (first) done it, to testify our hearts
desire for the timely accomplishment of Ierusalems peace.

Secondly, to make known to the world, our provident care for the speedy
preventing of every such future disordered courses, Tit. 1.10.11.
as happily might prejudice the whole, or any part of Gods truth, as heretofore
the Brownists and Hackets have too inconsideratlie effected, by their unruly
and headie conceits.

Eccles. 12.9. 1. Cor. 13.9.12. Phil. 3.13.14.
Thirdly, to insinuate unto all the world, our arnest endeavors to know the
truth: and to be better informed, if happily we err in these matters.

2. Tim. 2.25.
Fourthly, to lay open our Christian care for the timely informing of such as
are contrary minded.

Psa. 119.113.128. Psalm. 119.163.
Fifthly, to discover our undoubted detestation of all false ways in any, how
dear soever unto us.

Sixthly, to unfold the preposterous giddines of such humorous spirits, Tit.
1.11. 2. Tim. 4.3. 3. Ioh. 10.
as dare (in this our doting age) so dangerously pester the Church with
strange and unwonted opinions: very fitly consorting with their fauourits
natures.

Lastly, we have more especially published our labors, to stand in steed of
some provident watchword for young students in Divinity, and newly converted
Christians; that in any wise they beware how they do either broach abroad, 1.
Tim. 3.6. Ephe. 4.14. 1. Ioh. 2.14. 2. Ioh. 4.1.2.
or receive any such fantastical conceits of private persons, as are not
primarily examined according to the infallible rules of the word, neither yet
authentically approved by public authority. Lo, these (in effect) were the
maine occasions and ends, for the now publishing of our labors in print.

The premises therefore considered, and the arguments on both sides rightly
respected: we beseech you reverend Fathers and Brethren to consider diligently
whether of us both have caused divisions and offenses, Romans 16.17.18.
contrary to the infallible Doctrines which you have learned from Christ, and
avoid them. For they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their
own bellies: and with fair speech and flattering, deceive the hearts of the
simple. Judge. 19 30.
Consider therefore we humbly beseech you, consult and give sentence, either
with us, or against, as the Lord shall direct your hearts. If we be thought to
have the truth on our sides; we doubt not but that you will fight together with
us, Phil. 1.27.
in one and the selfsame faith of the Gospel. On the other side, if we be
found to have faulted either in matter or manner, we beseech you confute us
and spare not: and the blessing of God do light on your hearts for your labor
that way. Neither shall our privileged books be any stoppage at all to so
good a purpose: for if you be unwilling to deal that way because of
authority, your private conuictions shall suffice, to procure from us a
public retractation of whatsoever shall be soundly adjudged amiss. Augustine.
For howsoever we may happily err, we purpose (by Gods grace) to be no
Heretics. Referring therefore our selves and our labors to your approved
considerations: we humbly betake you all in our hartiest prayers, to the holy
directions of the only wise God, Romans 16.2^
who judges according to truth. Amen.

Your loving brethren assuredly in the Lord, and the Lord his unworthiest on
earth, JOHN DEACON. JOHN WALKER.


TO THE CHRISTIAN AND WELL AFFECTED READERS, WHO EXPECT THE Coming of the
Lord Jesus to their immortality: I.D. and I.W. do wish the necessary graces
of the spirit, with a saving knowledge in Jesus Christ: So be it.
GOod Christian Reader, when we duly considered Master Darel and his
accomplices their lately dispersed pamphlets, concerning their newfound trade of
Diuillitie, as also their undutiful manner of imprinting and publishing the
same to the world: we could not but call to remembrance a most pestilent
practice, which Cardinal Benno reports of Hildebrand. Benno Cardinal. in
vita Alexandri. 2.
Who (having killed Alexander the second, for that he refused to sit at his
special appointment in the Apostolic Sea, without the good Emperors license)
was (by the aid of his soldiers) forthwith enthronized into the Popedom
himself: not having therein the consent either of Clergy or people. The
which his proud usurpation, when Abbas Cassinensis was come to redress,
Hildebrand that insolent Usurper very scornefullie says unto him thus, Frater,
nimium tardasti, Brother, you have been somewhat too slow: to whom
Cassinensis very boldly replied saying, and tu Hildebrande nimium festinasti,
and thou O Hildebrand, thou have been ouer-hastie by much, both in killing thy
good predecessor, and in procuring the Popedom by such proud usurpation.

Even thus (surely) it falls forth with us at this present, concerning
especially the matters controuerted between our selves and those our
Antagonists. For they, not only giving the Canuisado of late to her Majesty's
high Commission, but having withal (by the venomous infection of their
viperous pens) very uncharitably endeavored to wound S. H. unto death, for
that (by means of the said S. H. his dutiful discovery of those their
undutiful dealings) they might not be permitted to vsurp (in our English
Church) a new Apostolical power at their pleasures, without any her Majesty's
authentical license. Master Darel the principal agent (partly by the
inherent pride of his insolent spirit, and partly by the proud support of many
his underhand fauorits) is very prowdlie enthronized into a new Popedom
forsooth. And by privilege thereof he has very peremptorily imprinted and
published sundry seditious pamphlets, having thereunto neither warrant from
God, nor dispensation from Prince, nor testimony of sound conscience, no nor
so much as the holy approbation of any good christian subject.

Notwithstanding all this, he has for a season (though fear and shame
enforces him now to pluck in his head) very prowdlie ietted from country to
country like a petty new Pope among his own Cardinals; yea and that also in
his pontificalities, portrayed and contrived after the newfound popelike cut.
The which their unbridled insolency, when we endeavored to encounter, by
publishing (as we verily believe) the infallible truth of these intricate
matters in a treatise at large, and had signified so much to themselves by word
and by letters in an only desire of doing them good, they labored by letters
and otherways to intercept our said enterprise a time at the least. And in the
mean time ( by printing and publishing the trifling toys of that their new
found trifling trade) they have sought to forestall our former good purpose,
and labored to calm our careful endeavors for doing them good. Yea, and by
these their preventing practices, they do (in effect) but disdainefullie say
unto us, with Pope Hildebrand their proud copartner, Dear brethren, you have
bin somewhat too slow in publishing those your dialogicall Discourses
concerning Spirits and Devils. Howbeit, we (by these our subsequent labors and
second encounters) may with Cassinensis very conscionablie reply upon them
thus: and you, oh counterfeit Exorcistes, you have bin ouer-hastie by much, not
only in killing your good predecessor by your poisoned pen, but also in
broaching a fond trial abroad, without any trial of truth: in designing a
Doctrine, so opposite to the Doctrine of Christ: and in discovering a
Detection, to detect your great folly, and shame to the world.

The truth of the premises (good christian Reader) may be made more
apparantlie evident, if thou will prouidently examine, first, the pamphlets
themselves: and then next, the spirit it self which may be supposed to endight
the same.

The pamphlets themselves (notwithstanding any their outward flourishing shows)
they are inwardly faulty (we verily think) both in matter and manner.

That they are overmuch faulty in matter, is more then may be denied, being
every of them fraught full of unsound, and absurd positions, as shall be showed
hereafter in a short Catalogue prefixed before this book.

Moreover, that they be likewise faulty in their manner or form, may easily
appear unto such as are not utterly ignorant of method: or, do any thing
know what belongs to an orderly manner of writing.

For first, their manner of writing, it seems to be something Schismatic,
and very shrewdly to savor of a Serpentine subtlety, 2. Cor. 11.3.4.
because (whatsoever their pamphlets pretend) they proceed not by a plain
course of teaching, but do rather incedere tortuose, go wrigginglie to work,
and walk this way and that way, like to the hunted Hare, which knows not
whereon to resolve for a certain.

Besides that, their manner of writing, it is also very enigmaticall, obscure,
and cloudie: their sentences or periods they are (in effect) no better then
riddles, and for the most part so uncertain, so variable, so flitting, and so
changing, as none but themselves may possibly spell, or spy forth their
meaning.

Briefly, the very frame itself of their whole proceeding resembles fitly a
pair of tarriours, or tyring yrons, and serves to no other purpose at all,
but to hold men occupied all the day long about a new nothing to hang on their
sleeves. Or they may well be compared to an intricate Labyrinth, or maskaring
maze, from whence (when a man is once entered into them) he wots not which ways
to wind himself forth, as may plainly appear unto such as carefully
consider the same, and this in effect for the Pamphlets themselves.

The spirit which may be supposed to indite those pamphlets, Deuteronomy. 13.1.2.3*
Matthew. 7.15.16* 1. Ioh. 4.1.3.
should make wise men beware how they do rashly entertain them for truths,
before they have soundly tried the same with the touchstone of truth. This
sacred trial being duly observed herein, it may greatly be feared, that the
spirit inditing those pamphlets, Iam. 3.17.
will hardly be found to savor of that wisdom which is from above, which is
pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good
fruits, without grudging, without hypocrisy: Iam. 3.15.
but rather to taste of that wisdom which descends not from above, but is
earthly, sensual, and devilish. 1. Cor. 2.11.
And howsoever no man knows the secrets of man, save only the spirit of man
which is in him, and therefore may judge nothing too rashly of man, 1. Cor.
4.5. Heb. 4.12.13.
before the time: yet when the Lord himself is come, and has lightened things
which were hid in darkness, and made manifest the counsels of the heart to all
men's eyes, then, I see no reason at all, but that ( by the outgoings of the
spirit) a man may as easily discern the nature of the spirit it self, Matthew.
7.16.17
as judge of a tree by the fruits. And therefore, when we behold men carried
headlong with self conceits, vaunting very prowdlie with the Anabaptists, and
saying, Quod volumus, sanctum est: quod nolumus, id iniquum and iniustum.
Whatsoever we will or affect, that same is holy; whatsoever we nil, or affect
not, that same is unjust and unholy. Briefly, when we do hear M. Darel and
his underhand fauorits (in sundry places of their published pamphlets) to cry
out and confess, that all the learned men in the land are of a contrary
judgment to them, and yet notwithstanding, do prowdlie oppose themselves to
all the learned men in the land, 1. Cor. 14.36.
as though the word of truth came out only from them, or came only unto
themselves: what should set them agog in such a glorious vaunt, but only a
proud and insolent spirit?

Jude. 9.10. 3. Ioh. 10.
Again, when we hear how these unruly spirits do nothing else in effect but
rail upon men, revile their persons, yea, and even utterly disable the
judgments of such and so reverend personages, as they themselves (in
comparison of true learning in deed, of sound knowledge, and of all good gifts
and graces of the spirit) are utterly unworthy to be named the seventh day
after the meanest of those, whom they so deeply disable: what may we imagine
should hale them headlong an end in such a disgracing course, but only some
phrentike, some furious, or some carnal spirit? since the holy spirit of truth
has told us for truth, 1. Cor. 3.3.
that where there is nothing but envying, but strife and divisions, there the
men themselves are yet carnal, and walk but as men.

Again, when as their published pamphlets are pestered full of apparent
contradictions, the one very cruelly giving a countercheck, and cutting the
throat of the other, as hereafter appears: 1. King. 22.22. Ioh. 8.44.
how may we justly imagine that any other then an erroneous and a lying spirit
should be the primarie inditor thereof: Ioh. 14.17.
seeing the holy spirit of God, is the spirit of truth, evermore but one and
the same, and leads men always into all soundnes of truth and Religion.

Again, when as they do nothing in effect, but accuse and sclaunder throughout
their several pamphlets they care not whom: Revel. 12.10.
what draws them thereto, but a devilish satanicall spirit? since the Devil
(you know) has evermore been the accuser of our brethren.

If they happily imagine, that those whom they accuse or slander, are but
beasts and no brethren at all: we answer, that is much more then they are able
to know, and we hold them no competent Judges, concerning such cases especially
as the Lord has purposely reserved to his proper Consistory, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
and appropriated wholly to his own judgment seat.

Neither shall it suffice to say, that (howsoever they be thought to accuse, or
to slander) they speak but the truth of every of them: because, if that were
so indeed, yet they do it untruly, in as much as they do it only to reproach,
and to slander the persons of men, and not to reform their supposed
disorders. For, neither do they proceed therein by a judicial course, Exodus
20.16.
neither yet are they iudiciallie called to testify against them: and so, not
only they break the ninth commandment, but (which more is) they do very
dangerously scandalize the minds of so many in the land, as (being but
ignorant before of those their falsely supposed crimes) are now (by their
clamorous accusations) uncharitably drawn into an hard conceit against their
persons. D. Doctrine, page 86.
Whether this be not a devilish Satanicall spirit, let M. Darel himself
determine: who does very confidently affirm, that so many as are given to
cursing and lying, to speak evil of persons which are in authority, to
railing, reuiling, sclaundering, hatred, and such like, they are undoubtedly
the children of the Devil, who himself was a liar, Ioh. 8.44.
and a murderer from the beginning.

Briefly, when we behold them throughout their whole pamphlets, not only to
impugn her Majesty's high Commission concerning ecclesiastical persons and
causes, but (which more is) by tongue, by pen, by practice, and such other
apparent shows of undutiful subjects, to resist her highness authority, and
(which is worst of all) even then to accomplish every of these, when they were
by God forbidden, by her highness restrained, by due order of law conuented,
convicted, apprehended, imprisoned, by the sentence of Justice definitiuely
condemned for gross malefactors, adjudged to prison; and so consequently by
God himself, by her excellent Majesty, by course of law, by all good
conscience, and by the approved practice of all holy Martyrs, enioined
eftsoons to a dutiful silence: whence come these unruly proceedings I pray
you, but from such a rebellious spirit, as neither for fear, Romans 13.5.
nor for conscience can be made to subject it self to Gods sacred ordinance,
but prowdlie resists the same, Romans 13.2.3.4.
and so procures the sword of Justice to be unsheathed against themselves, and
to take vengeance on them, as unruly and turbulent spirits?

Thus then, the truth of the premises, is very apparent you see, as well by
the several pamphlets, as by the spirit it self, which may well be supposed
to be the indighter thereof. And therefore we would to God (good christian
Readers) you could suffer us a little in our foolishnes: 2. Cor. 11.1.2.3.4.
and in very deed you do suffer us. For, we are jealous over you with a godly
jealousy, because we labor to prepare you for one husband, and to present you
as a pure virgin to Christ. Howbeit, we fear, least as the Serpent beguiled
Euah through his subtlety, so your minds should be corrupt from the
simplicity that is in Christ. For, if these men do preach another Jesus then
him whom others have preached before, or, if you receive another spirit then
that which you have received; either yet an other Gospel then that which was
taught you before: you might well have admired their persons, approved their
practices, and so desirouslie have entertained their factious pamphlets.
Notwithstanding, when there are no such matters at all as you happily imagine,
why have they so strongly bewitched your minds, Gal. 3.1.
that you should not obey the truth, to whom Jesus Christ has bin described in
your sight, and among you crucified? They do ring in your ears, and would
bear you in hand, that they only but display that authentical power of the
Lord, which others do darken: as though all other save only themselves did
daily obscure the glorious scepter of Christ; and herein also (by the
preposterous approbation of their underhand fauourets) they have gotten a
popular applause. But wherein will they not very fitly resemble Sulpitius,
Plutarch. in Silla.
a man fearfully confect in all kind of mischief? who having (by the voice of
the vulgar sort) very peremptorily passed a Decree, that no Senator should
borow above two hundred Crowns at the most, was found at his death to owe
thirty thousand himself. So surely, these men do seem with the vulgar sort
to dislike that any should darken the glorious power of the Lord: whereas they
them selves do obscure it the most of all others. For (howsoever they wholly
pretend to uphold the kingdom of Christ) what do they else by those their
iollie pretenses, but cover themselves (as we say) with a wet sack? For, it
will evidently appear by the following discourses, that none have more
dangerously trampled down the dignity of Christ then themselves: and yet (as
if the Crow had engendered the Swanne) these men forsooth, they will seem now
to build up the dignity they destroyed before.

Perhaps thou will say or surmize at the least, that we our selves (by
omitting, and taking what part of their pamphlets might make most for our own
purpose) have therein even purposely maimed their writings, and foiled the very
force of their cause. Our answer is this, we have carefully quoted the page it
self, from whence we do draw our several collections: and therefore, let the
learned determine, whether we have any where abstracted their pamphlets besides
their purposed scope, or have otherwise pretermitted any thing material, which
might but (in show) either manage or further their cause: and God forbid, but
that we should very willingly acknowledge and redress the offered wrong. In
deed, we have purposelie pretermitted many impertinent vagaries, extrauagant
speeches, idle excursions, needles dilatations, frivolous amplifications, and
humorous illustrations, which (like unto ugly botches, and swelling tumors)
do filthilie disfigure the body it self, and are nothing material, but
merely superfluous, because the very groundworke it self whereon they seem
to be builded, is ouersandie or weak to support such a combersome frame: very
confidentlie concluding withal, that for us to answer their nothing, with
something, would be (in the judgment of the learned) a labor worth nothing.
For, what do they (by such their clamorous outcryes) but deal with their
ignorant Readers, as the foolish huntsman deals with his hounds, who by his
crying so, ho, before the game it self be on foot, or, first found at the
least: do but set the unskillful hounds at an idle gaze. Our Antagonists in
deed, they do keep a clamorous coil against the impugnings of any their
pestilent practices, and tells i^ in the ears of all the world, that (do the
adversaries what they are able) their wisdom forsooth, Math. 11.19.
it must and shall be justified of all her children: as though they thought it
but an easy matter to break an Eele with their knee, or to build up the roof
without a foundation. Howbeit, they have herein very earnestly solicited
sundry of our honorable Judges and Magistrates, and presumed to prescribe them
their several courses, concerning any their judicial proceedings against
their persons: forgetting belike that they who take in hand to limit
authority, are like unto such as seek to stay the course of the Sun. They
should rather acknowledge with Plutarch, that it is unfitting for him who
falls, to lift up: who knows nothing, to teach: who is disordered, to
order: who is unruly, to rule: or, who cannot himself obey, to command
obedience to others. It had been much better for them to have truly learned
their duty to God and their Prince, before they had so prowdly presumed to
pester the Church with such undutiful and disordered Pamphlets. Howbeit,
because they have published abroad such perilous points without any respect of
Princes authority, or due regard of the Churches peace: it shall not be amiss
to tell to their faces, that they have therefore justly deserved the selfsame
recompense, which Alexander Seuerus gave to his friend Vetronius Turmius:
namely, vt fumo pereant, qui fumum vendunt, that they perish with smoke, who
sell forth smoke. For what other thing else do they set forth to sale, but
such fuming smoke, as is ready to break forth into dangerous fiery flames?

Beware therefore good christian Reader, that thou increase not the fire
already kindled, by blowing a popular applause into the wide open ears of any
those turbulent spirits. Be not too credulous or rash in intertayning their
Books as the approved oracles of Apollo Pythius at Delphos. Seneca. 1. These.
5.21.22.23.24.
Know this for a certain, that every light belief is none other thing else
but a foolish document. Therefore, try all things, and keep that which is
good: abstain from all appearance of evil.

Now the very God of peace sanctify you throughout; and we pray God that your
whole spirit, and soul and body may be kept blameles unto the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Faithful is he which calls you, who also will do it: Amen.

Romans 15.30.31.
And now brethren, we beseech you for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the
love of the spirit, that you would strive together with us, by prayers to God
for us: that we may be delivered from them which are disobedient in Judea, Isa.
9.6. Romans 15.33.
and, that our service which we have to do at Jerusalem may be acceptable among
the Saints of God. Thus the God of peace be with you all, Amen.

Your loving brethren assuredly in the Lord, and the Lord his unworthiest on
earth, JOHN DEACON. JOHN WALKER.


A summarie survey of Master Darel his absurd and unsound positions.
1 POssessions are only to be judged by the Scriptures. Doctrine page 5. 2 It
is impossible for Satan (being without man) to have the whole rule and
disposition of the body. Doct. page 2. 3 The Demoniakes, in their fits are
deprived of all their senses external, and internal. Doctrine. page 10. 4 A
direction left to the Church, to discern of possessions for ever. Doct. page
19. 5 A medicine left for the curing of possessions. Doct. p. 6 Satan is sooner
cast forth being essentiallie within a man: then when he but vexes him, by
some outward operation. Doct. 26. 7 Satan (by his operation) caused something
to be felt, and to appear in some visible form or shape. Doct. page 37. 1
Satan repossessing a man, may (notwithstanding that in Luke 11. of taking 7.
other worse then himself, and dwelling there) be cured by fasting and prayer.
Doct. page 37. 9 One place of Scripture may have two senses, the one
Spiritual, the other Literal. Doct. page 39. 10 Fasting, a more effectual
exercise then Prayer. Doct. 43. 11 Difference concerning the nature of Devils.
Doct. 49. 12 The Apostles Faith (being a miraculous Faith) could not possibly
fail: for it was given without means, and has no means ordained for the
increase thereof. Doct. 47. 13 The Apostles could not possibly err in
doctrine, or judgment: much less could their Faith fail about a Miracle,
since they were shortly after to receive the holy Ghost. Doctrine page 49. 14
Prayer and fasting an ordinance of Christ, though no such ordinance may be
proved by Scripture. Doct. page 54. 15 Many, yea infinite things are decreed in
the secret and eternal counsel of God, and known to be so of men: which are
not set down in his revealed will, and yet are the ordinances of God, and so
to be taken. Doctr. 54. Detect. 42. 16 The means which God himself has
appointed to some certain end: does not always prosper thereunto, as the word
preached, meats, husbandry, etc. Doctr. 58. 17 That is no miracle, which is
effected by any one means, ordained to that end. Doctr. page 60. 18 The
outward things or actions which sometimes were used in working of miracles
were not used as means, but as signs: when, and according as the Apostles
perceived them profitable for man. page 61. 19 If any heretofore have used
Prayer in working of miracles, they have not used it as a means leading
thereto: but used the same as a sign or document. page 63. 20 Prayer and
fasting is the only means to remove any judgment from us. Doctrine page 66.
21 Gods providence denied, in saying that Satan can enter into a man at his
pleasure: so the party but give his consent. page 80. 22 To entreat Christ to
cast out a Devil, is mirandum: but not miraculum. Apolog. page 33. Detection.
page 8. 23 Reprobates may now cast out Devils, Doctr. page 106. 24 Where the
proper sign of a thing is: there is also for certain, the thing signified.
Detection page 50. 25 Physic, and such like peculiar ordinances, are not
mentioned at all in the Scriptures. Doctrine page 54. 26 Devils do earnestly
desire, to be essentially inherent in the possessed man's body. Doctrine page 2.
27 Master Darell avouches a Vbiquitie in Devils: namely, that at one instant,
they are without, and within a man. Detection page 103.110.
Behold gentle Reader, we have here given thee an inckling (as it were by the
way) concerning the supposed soundness of Master Darell his subsequent
Doctrine, of the essential possessions and dispossessions of Spirits and
Devils: his published Pamphlets being every of them universally pestered with
these, and sundry other absurd and unsound Positions, as will plainly appear
in their orderly examinations. Now then, as by having the just length of the
one arm of a man, thou may very nearly guess at the just length also of
the other: so surely (having felt by these few a shrewd savor of palpable
absurdities) thou may very shrewdly imagine what the whole Discourse is
likely to be, the same being builded (as thou see) upon such fickle and
sandy foundations, as are utterly unable to support the vnwealdie frame of so
tottring a work.

Moreover, in that very many of these his Positions are directly opposite to
the infallible truth of the sacred Scriptures: it does minister unto thee a
notable watchword, and exact at thy hands a circumspect consideration,
concerning the entertainment of any thing contained in his Books. For do
tell me I pray thee, whether it be any ways possible, that such palpable
untruths should possibly proceed from that Spirit of truth, Ioh. 16.13.
which leads the servants of God into all soundness of truth? The Lord give
thee an understanding Heart to know, Phil. 1.10.
and a discerning Spirit to determine rightly of the things that differ, and to
hold fast whatsoever is good to thy own everlasting comfort in Jesus Christ.
So be it.

A brief Catalogue of Master Darel his apparent contradictions.
1 IN his doctrine, page 29. he says to be possessed of a devil, is as
ordinary a disease as blindness, deafnes, and such like: but ibidem page 67. he
makes both it and the cure an extraordinary work, calling for an
extraordinary use. And ibidem page 79. a disease supernatural, and medicine
supernatural. And ibidem. page 103. a rare and extraordinary work of God.
And ibidem page 105. the casting out of the devil at Nottingham, is made the
same with Christ's miraculous work, and above some other miraculous actions.
Also detection page 41. supernatural means, supernatural disease. And page
58. prayer is as ordinary a means as other medicines. And page 59. prayer and
fasting an ordinary means. 2 In his detection page 54. signs of
dispossession not necessary: but page 57, as also doctrine, page 36. they are
absolutely necessary for sundry reasons: and a direction left in the word
for discerning the same signs. 3 In his doctrine page 39. no eiection of Satan
in the papacy: yet page 70. a true deliverance in the papacy granted, and
that by their humiliation. 4 In page 39. he avouches a voluntary departure of
devils: but page 77. the devil (he says) must be enticed out. 5 In his
doctrine page 12.41.81. he says the Demoniakes receive no hurt at all by any
their torments, and page 13. he renders a reason why: but page 36. he says
Darling was so sore hurt, as for thirteen weeks after he was lame, and had no
use of his legs. 6 In his doctrine, page 40. he says that devils are now
cast forth by Christ his own absolute authority, and page 41. by his absolute
and supreme authority: but in page 55. he says that this supernatural
disease is cured by the supernatural medicine applied thereto, as a natural
medicine is applied to a natural disease. 7 In his doctrine page 41. he makes
fasting and prayer a warranted ordinance for the expelling of devils by the
words of Christ, in Matthew. 17.21. and in Mar. 9.29. but in his detection, page
41. we read not (says he) of the first ordayning of any such means. 8 In
examining the words of Math. 17.21. and Mar. 9.29. he says the same words were
spoken to the Apostles and Disciples, as appears in his doctrine, page
41.42.50. but page 43.44.45.46.47.48.49. he flatly opposes himself to that
exposition: and inuents many reasons why that speech of Christ should not be
appropriated to them of that age: but all this in his detection, page 43. he
does plainly confute in this sort. Christ speaks not (says he) of the future
but of the present time, saying thus: this kind ( goes) not out, but this kind
( shall) go out, etc. 9 In his doctrine, page 42. he makes sole prayer the
only means that ever was or shall be for casting out devils: but page 43 he
makes fasting the more effectual means, and in page 79. the more sovereign
means. 10 In his doctrine, page, 43, he says, that by prayer alone, and
betimes in the day, even straight after dinner, and without any fasting at all,
were sundry Devils cast out from K. Wright: but in his detection, page 46. he
makes it a difficult matter to drive out a devil by prayer alone, or by prayer
and fasting together. 11 In laying down the scope of the text, Matthew. 17.21.
he notes two impediments why the Apostles could not drive forth the devil;
namely their incredulity, and the nature of the spirit: but page 46. he says
that the Apostles then (by virtue of their miraculous faith) could do any
thing, and therefore cast out a devil of any kind whatsoever, which he further
confirms, page 47. 12 In his doctrine, page 47. he says that the Disciples
by virtue of their so large a Commission, could cast out a devil of any
kind: but page 50. in the second part of that his division, he says that the
child was possessed with one of the worst kind of spirits, and that thence it
came that the Disciples could not cast them out. 13 In his doctrine, page 54.
he says, that prayer and fasting being used aright, will certainly prosper,
either to the removing or sanctifying of the judgment: but page 59. he says
there is no assurance to prevail. 14 In his doctrine, page 52. he makes
Abraham's prayer the sole means of conception, and procreation of children: but
page 60. another means is found, and the same also appointed of God for that
purpose, or else the conception by sole prayer alone, would prove a miracle. 15
In his doctrine, page 60. and 73. he says that miracles are undoubtedly
ceased: but page 63. he says there is no determination of miracles in the
word. 16 In his doctrine, page 59. he says it is plain, that prayer, or
prayer with fasting may be an ordinary means appointed of God to drive out
devils, and yet (being used) not prosper to that self same end: but page the
same, he says that if any should affirm that prayer and fasting are not of
that efficacy, to cure any Demoniake without exception, it were an impious
affirmation. 17 In his doctrine, page 69. he says. In as much as our Church
has this power to cast out a devil, it conuinceth the papists, touching the
power they only brag of for casting out devils: but page 74. he says, the
papists have no more cause to brag of that power, then the Rogue has to boast
of the hole in his ear. 18 In his doctrine, page 63. he says, there is no
determination of miracles in the word: but page 74.75. that it is now the sole
and undoubted badge of Antichrist to work miracles. 19 In his doctrine, page
74.75. he says that the Papists may work true miracles: but page 76. he says
that spirits are never cast forth by papists, but of themselves go willingly
out: which if it be so, then there is no miracle wrought. 20 In his doctrine,
(in many places) he says that God has left but one ordinary means for
expelling devils, which is prayer and fasting: but page 79. he makes two
distinct means; the first is the supernatural medecin of prayer alone: the
second he calls another of the same kind, but yet more sovereign, namely
fasting and prayer. 21 In his Doctrine, page 11. and in his Detection, page
100. and page 107. he labors to prove that the parties in deed, were truly
possessed, and dispossessed, and that undoubtedly Satan did vex them. But in his
Doctrine page 81: he says, that Satan is so cunning, as he can cause things to
be in appearance, which are not at all. 22 In his Doctrine, page 5.16.25. and
29. he says, that possessions are only to be judged by the Scriptures, and
that therein, there is a direction left by the Lord, for the discerning of
them. But in his Detection, page 34. he says that Christ did not ordain any
such means, for then we should have it in the Scriptures; and such an
ordinance there, I dare be hold to say we have none. 23 In his Detection, page
163. he says, fire has power to burn: but in the same page that fire has no
power to burn. 24 In his Doctrine page 2. he says, that it suteth altogether
with Satan's nature, to be filthy and wicked in speech: but in his Detection
page 175. he says, that it suteth as well with his nature, to use good and
holy speeches. 25 In his Doctrine, page 89. he says, that the Lord (in these
days) does send Devils into men for these special ends, Namely, first, Luke
16.3^*
to confound Atheists: secondly to reform some. But (in the same page) he
alleges such a Scripture as shows evidently that no such thing can be
possibly effected: which causes him to say, there is little hope, that any of
the aforesaid ends should thereby be effected. Yet (opposing himself to the
word) he uses many idle speeches about that matter, and brabbles much for the
accomplishment of those ends thereby. 26 In his Doctrine, page 37. he says,
the Spirits were seen and felt of the parties in some visible forms or
shapes. But page 9.9. he says, they could not possibly be seen, or felt,
being invisible creatures: only they were beheld in their operations and
effects. 27 In his Doctrine (in many places) he makes it a most necessary work
which was done upon those his pretended Demoniakes. But page 102. he says it
was such a work, as neither any part of truth needs nor yet man, in regard
of his weakness: but in the words following, he would pin many necessary
uses upon it, namely, confirmation of the strong, persuasion of the weak, etc.
28 In his Detection, page 102. he doubts not, but Summers may be recovered. But
in his Narration of the Lancashire Demoniakes, page 13. he gives a definitive
sentence, that he, and two others, shall never be cured, quoting for proof,
Luke 11.26. 29 In his Doctrine, page 60. he says. It is no miracle that is
done by means. But page 63. he says, that God can, and often does bring most
mighty things to pass, by small, and weak means. 30 In in his doctrine,
page 10. The Demoniakes in their fits, are deprived of all their senses
external and internal: but page 11. they seem only to be so, and therefore
are said to be so. 31 In his doctrine, page 47. he says that the Apostles
faith failed not: but page 48. he says their faith failed at this time when
Christ spoke to them, and in this very work. 32 In his doctrine, page 38. he
says that these words ( going out and entering in) are never used in the
spiritual sense: but (in the same place) he says they are often and usually
taken in the literal sense: howbeit in his Detection, page 58. he says those
words are only but Metaphors. 33 In his doctrine, page 50. he says that the
Disciples could not drive forth the devil from the child by that their
miraculous faith: but page 47. and in his Detection, page 24. he says they
could, and that one eiected so is much more admirable, then that which is done
by prayer. 34 In his doctrine, page 59. he says, that neither the whole
Church, nor any member thereof (in using the means) can have assurance to
prevail: but (in the same page) he says, the assurance is or may be great in
such a case. 35 In his doctrine, page 66. he makes fasting and prayer the
only ordinary means to cast out devils: but (in the same page) he says,
that Satan was so cast out of Darling and the rest, as Christ himself did cast
him out, namely by the finger of God: which manner of working he advises to
distinguish from all other manner of casting out devils, as appears pa. 55.
36 In his detection, page 49. he says, that faith temporary, and historical,
are of sufficient force to cast out devils: but in his doctrine, page 93. where
he expresses what he means by fasting, he requires such fruits of faith to
be joined with fasting, as cannot possibly proceed from these his two former
kinds of faith. 37 In his doctrine (every where) he says that prayer is the
Churches ordinary means to drive out devils: but in his detection, page 6. he
says, to entreat Christ to cast out a devil is mirandum. 38 In his doctrine,
page 45. he says that Peter and Paul, they needed not to have prayed before
their working of miracles, their faith being strong: but page 45. he says
they did so pray, either to increase their faith or to some other good end. 39
In his doctrine, page 46. he concludes directly against his own Analyzing and
expounding of that scripture, which was put down, page 42. Also he sets Matthew.
17 21. and Luke 9.1. together fast by the ears. Again, he alleges Act.
19.12. Luke 9.1. and Matthew. 10.1. directly crossing his own exposition,
concerning Math. 17.21. 40 In his Doctrine, page 30. he calls all men to the
Law and to the testimony. But page 54. and in his Detection, page 42. he
stands for the defense of secret, and unrevealed ordinances. 41 In his
Doctrine (every where) and in his Detection, page 23. he says that those are
no miracles which are done by the ordinary means of fasting and prayer. But
in his Detection. page 49. he alleges Math. 7.22. to prove that there were
others besides the Apostles, who cast out Devils: which place of Matthew tells
us expressly, tha^ the men spoken of there, did work miracles. 42 In his 1.
Narration, page 10. and in his Doctrine, page 6. he says, there is no
determination for the ceasing of miracles in all the Scriptures: but in his
Doctrine, page 63. and 73. he says that the gift of working miracles continued
in the Church but a time. And in his Detection, page 23. and 25. he says, that
before Tertullian, Cyprian, and those Fathers times, the working of miracles
was undoubtedly ceased. 43 In his Doctrine, page 42. he calls fasting and
prayer a secret ordinance. But page 44. he makes it an express ordinance and a
means expreslie and by name spoken of by Christ. 44 In his Doctrine, page 42.
he puts down two impediments why the Apostle could not cast forth the
Devil from the Child. But page 44. he says, that, that text can no further be
understood of the Apostles, then only to signify unto them, the nature of
that spirit: whence partly it came to pass, that they could not cast him out.
45 In his doctrine, page 44. he says that Stapleton does not appropriate the
text in Mat. 17.21. to the Apostles of Christ: but page 45. he says, that
Thyreus and Stapleton both do understand that text of the Apostles themselves,
who (notwithstanding their miraculous faith) should also have prayed. 46 In his
doctrine, page 42.49.50. he so understands these words of Christ (this kind
goes not forth) as if they should contain in them an exception of the
particular, from out of the general: but page 46. he says that he takes
that sense to be very unsound, and contrary to the meaning of Christ. 47 In
his doctrine, page 49. he distinguishes devils by their sundry sorts,
degrees, or orders: but page 51. he distinguishes them by their only natural
qualities: as malice, cruelty, etc. 48 In his doctrine, page 59. he says God
is at liberty, and not tied to means: but page 61. he tieth him fast to
means; telling us that if God has appointed a thing to come to pass by this
or that means, then the means must be used, or else that thing will never come
to pass. 49 In his doctrine page 2. he says, it is absurd to affirm that
the devil (being without a man) can dispose of the whole or ante part of man's
body: but detection, page 110. he says that the devil (in all probability)
did use Summers his tongue; notwithstanding he was essentiallie and sensibly
playing boe peep under the couerled. 50 In his detection, page 111. he says
he would be ashamed to avouch, that the devil would never give Summers over,
until he had repossessed him: but in his doctrine, page 102. he confidently
affirms, that though Summers should (in deed) be dispossessed by the appointed
means: yet would the devil labor very earnestly to reenter, and never give
over till he had repossessed him, which also (he says) he has.
These and sundry such other apparent contradictions so universally scattered
in every of M. Darel his pamphlets: they may give the sound hearted Readers
some precedent taste of that subsequent soundnes, which they are likely to find
throughout the whole building. Math. 7.26.27
For even as when the ^oundation it self is sandy and sliding, the whole
frame that is founded thereon, must necessarily become but a reeling and
tottering Tower, and lie hourelie subject to a desperate downfall: so surely
when the groundsels, the studs, the raising pieces, the iouystes, the tracings,
and all the rest of the timber belonging thereto, are at such an apparent odds
in every of their Geometrical proportions, the workmanship whatsoever (when
it is brought to the best) it will seem but a bungerlie hotch potch, and the
whole frame it self can never be firm, howsoever M Darel or any his Fauorits
may other ways hug the same in their arms as the Ape does her brood, till
she has utterly beref^ them all of their lives.

The consideration hereof may make the considerate Readers to conceive thus of
the matter and say. If these men's several writings be apparantlie found at
such deadly debate in themselves: how is it possible they should continue or
hold any conformable concord with the approved writings of others.

Moreover, it may please the good Reader to remember withal, that such absurd
positions and so many apparent contradictions, they cannot possibly proceed
from that spirit of truth, John 16.13.
which leads into all soundnes of truth and religion: and that therefore they
have in them no force at all to fight for the Lord, Job. 13.9.
who needs not the lies of mortal men.

Briefly, this we our selves do certainly know, and all men (more
especially the judicial sort) they plainly perceive, that howsoever those
their pretended essential possessions and dispossessions of devils may happily
accord with the truth of the Scriptures: yet these their published Pamphlets,
they will never be able to make good the supposed truths which themselves do
pretend: and that therefore they must of necessity be forced to begin a new
ground, or to give over their cause. The Lord by his spirit direct us only unto
that which tends to the glory of his great name, the present good of his
Church, and our own everlasting comforts in Jesus Christ. So be it: even so
Lord Jesus. Amen.

The several Arguments handled at large in the subsequent Dialogues,
concerning our second encounter.
The first Dialogue. Page 1.
The Argument.
1 WHether Master Darel his second encounter (containing an hotch-potch of
things confusedly shuffled together) has found a better success, concerning
the pretended essential possession of Spirits and Devils; then any the
precedent particulars propounded at large in our former Dialogues.

The second Dialogue. Page 81.
The Argument.
2 WHether this fresh encounter (containing an hotch-potch of matters
confusedly shuffled together) has found a better success, concerning the
pretended dispossession of Devils by prayer and fasting, then any of the
precedent particulars propounded at large in those our former discourses.

The third Dialogue. Page 197.
The Argument.
3 THe holy and right uses, which the Church and Children of God are to make
of this Doctrine, concerning the final determination of possessions and
disposessions of spirits and devils.

A SVMMARIE ANSWER TO ALL THE MATERIAL POINTS in any of Master DAREL his
books.
The first Dialogue.
THE ARGUMENT.
Whether Master Darel his second encounter (containing an hotch-potch of things
confusedly shuffled together) has found a better success, concerning the
pretended essential possession of Spirits and Devils: then any the precedent
particulars, propounded at large in our former Dialogues?

The speakers names.
PHILOLOGVS. LYCANTHROPVS. PNEVMATOMACHVS. PHYSIOLOGVS. ORTHODOXVS. EXORCISTES.
Orthodoxus. EXorcistes? Having very lately received your late-spread factious
Pamphlets, as also your Champion-like challenge, concerning your old inueterate
opinions, about the essential possessions of Spirits, and Devils: I understand
by Master Physiologus, and the rest of our company, that (according to your
own appointment for time and place) you are now come purposely over unto us,
to manage your challenge. Surely (howsoever your maine forces may happily be
feeble) there is no want (I perceive) of a valorous mind. Vt desint vires,
tamen est laudanda voluntas.
Well sir, you are welcome unto us. And therefore, what say you man? Do you
feel your self no less ready, than willing: to adventure the combat afresh?


Exorcistes. Yea sir, I am very willing, and ready at all assaies: and, do
purpose, very valiantly to hold out the encounter, or lie fast by the heels.
But what say you first to those my three late published treatises: which you so
scornefully brand with the odious title of factious Pamphlets?


Orthodoxus. Or ever I come to open my mouth concerning any your own matters,
I must first of all, be very importunate upon the rest of our company, that
they would (in no wise) interrupt our talk, for protracting the time: but
only attend with silence, and become indiff^rent Judges, concerning the scope
of our conference. Unless happily, it may please Master Physiologus (for better
ease unto me, and more delight to your selves) to enterlace now and then, some
such Philosophical points, as may (in any sort) tend to the further
manifestation of the maine purpose in hand.


Lycanthropus. We like very well of, and do willingly submit to your motion:
proceed therefore in your matters, as the Lord (in mercy) shall direct your
minds.


Orthodoxus. Content. Come on therefore Exorcistes: what say you now, to the
essential possession of Spirits and Devils?


Exorcistes. Sir, be you sure, you must find me no Changeling, concerning that
so weighty a matter. But first show me (I beseech you) how you may possibly
make good the intolerable disgrace which you have primarilie imposed upon those
my fruitful labors: which it pleases your own self, to term but factious
Pamphlets.


Orthodoxus. Why man? It has been ever my ordinary manner of dealing (you
know) to call a spade, a spade: and therefore, you must pardon my plainenes
herein. Howbeit, be patient I pray you: we will never fall forth for naming the
Child. And therefore (pretermitting the term of factious Pamphlets) those
your three last published treatises (since forsooth, you will needs have them
entitled so) they are, either such as concern only but matters of fact: or,
such as concern matters of fact and Doctrine together. Your treatises,
concerning only but matters of fact, namely, your Trial, and Detection: I do
purpose, at no hand to intermeddle withal. Both, because you your own self
have purposely singled forth from the rest, your proper Antagonists, whom you
proudely entitle, the two English Inquisitours, Samuel Harsnet (I mean) and
his Master, whom also (in the very heat of your pride) you have (by a Hysteron
Proteron) preposterouslie put down in your Pamphlet: and, for that I also my
self, have no authentical Commission to enquire after, much less, to
determine such factious proceedings. For which special respects, I do
purposely put over the trying forth of your Trial, as also, the orderly
deciding of that your Detection: to such Ecclesiastical Commissioners, as her
excellent Majesty has authenticallie subordinate under her Highness, for the
orderly finding forth of all those vnorderlie, and gross malefactors, which
do indirectlie withstand, or impugn the same.


Exorcistes. Well; what say you then to the other of my treatises?


Orthodoxus. You shall understand anon, my censure concerning the same. In the
mean time, howsoever (for the former considerations) I do utterly refuse to
meddle with those two forenamed Pamphlets, being meerelie but matters of fact:
yet must I bicker with you a blow or two, concerning the several Epistles
prefixed to both. See Darels trial, in the Epist^ to Sir John Popham, page 4.
sect. 1. Item. page 6.
For, besides that they are (in some places) absurd and senseles: do labor
thoroughout, upon a pitiful begging of the cause of Possession, and
Dispossession: are branded with Grosthead his corrections, by matching (in your
Apocryphal text) that your pretended miracle, with the true miracles of
Christ, but yet making the same (in your marginall note) no miracle at all:
besides (I say) that they all keep only a circular motion: are full fraught
with idle excursions: with rouing fantasies: with extrauagant speeches: are
thirteen times pestered with an idle traducing tautologie: are stored with
fearful disloyal titles, and terms of disgrace: with vaunting challenges:
virulent raylings: and bitter exclamations: I must necessarily admonish you
Readers of some particulars in either of both: and therewithal, must advise
them, to beware they do not, either too rashly approve of your spirit, or,
too inconsideratelie affect your Cabalisticall conceits. See Darels Trial in
the Epistle. Ibidem. page 7.
For first, in one of the Epistles, you apparently discover to all the world,
your gross, and intolerable pride, by indighting, arraigning, adiudging, and
condemning of Passhur and the Prelates (as it please you to term them) of the
unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost. Laboring the Lord Chief Justice
withal, not only to recover himself with speed, from that forenamed
fearful sin, whereunto (it seems by the purport of your speech) you do
greatly fear he is fearefullie falling: but also, to practice a fresh, such a
platform of Justice, as your self does more deliberatelie portrature to him,
for those his judicial proceedings more especially concerning your special
matters. Namely, that he do forthwith reuerse the precedent judgment which
passed against you: and admit you a new plea, to proceed in a fresh, and the
same (at your pleasure) to prosecute eftsoons before the judgment seat.
Which motion of yours being freely admitted, and the same once made but a mere
matter of course: tell me, what one definitive sentence against malefactors,
must at any time stand currantly sound, without the speedy reuersing of some
at the least. For if offenders may once have free passage to such a proceeding:
they can very subtlelie suggest, and are cunning enough to pretend many
colorable pretenses, and probable presumptions for the timely annihilating,
See Darels Detection, in the Epistle. page 1. Item, Detection, page 204. Item
in the same Epistle page 2. Item page 3.
and for making a plain nullitie in any definitive sentence against themselves
whatsoever. Again, in the very title it self, as also, in the Epistle before
your detection, you do to too dangerously detect, a very undutiful and
disloyal heart to her Majesty, by branding her Majesty's judicial
proceedings against you, with the treacherous title of a sinful, shameful,
lying, and ridiculous discourse: terming the dealers against you, no better
then English Inquisitours: such as bewitch her Majesty's people with their
crooked conueiances: Item page 7.
Instruments of Satan: Impudent and shameless discoursers: the publishers of
shameless and malicious inuectiues: A base kind credit, that (...) not otherwise
gotten: tha^ discrediting ^hers. Item. page 8
yea, such, and so mighty adversaries, as you must necessarily crack and
diminish their credits, yea, take all credit quite from them, by detecting
their filthiness, especially, the Discoursers: that so (by making his name to
rot, and to stink) you may gain among men, the more credit to your silly
poor languishing cause. With these and infinite other like unchristian
courses, undutiful terms, and inhumane proceedings, are those your two
Epistles pestered full: what say you Exorcistes unto them?


Exorcistes. I am so far off from forethinking the same: as I could heartily
wish, they were doubled and trebled upon their pates.


Orthodoxus. Fie, fie for shame: these your undutiful and disloyal reuilings
of men endowed with her Majesty's lawful authority, do even make the very
ears of all men to tingle. 1. Sam. 3.1^
Surely, howsoever we our selves (in our former conferences) were in very
great hope of your happy conversion: yet now (the natural corruption of your
proud and intemperate spirit, so deeply discouers it self) all good men,
stand greatly in doubt of doing you good, by any their holy endeavors. But
tell me I beseech you, what spirit you are of? Tell me from whence you received
so large a Commission, as that you dare (by virtue thereof) thus insolentlie
inthronize your self into the sacred throne of the eternal God: for the
arraigning, adiudging, and condemning of consciences? What privilege have you
thus proudely to pull down from the seat of justice, such approved
Magistrates as her Majesty has authenticallie placed therein: and then so
proudely skippe up into their places your self, by countermaunding,
annihilating, and reuersing definitive sentences, yea and (which more is) by
aduising, disposing, and determining (at your pleasure) quite contrary
courses, for judicial proceedings? Where is your warrant, so irreverently to
rail upon, revile, and speak evil of any in authority? We know very well,
who has given us straightly in charge, Exodus 22.28. Act. 23.3.
not to curse or revile the rulers of the people: but we understand not as yet,
where, or from whence your self should possibly procure such a plenarie
power, Plenariam potestatem.
to countermaund or control that former charge of the Lord. You take much more
upon you herein, then ever did Iehoshuah the high Priest, Zach. 3.1.2. Jude 8.9.
or Michael the Archangeli, when they strove with the Devil: for, they durst
never give railing sentence to him, but only said thus, The Lord reprove thee
O Satan, even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem, reprove and rebuke thee.
Whereas your self (in most disloyal and undutiful manner) do offer a most
dispitefull disgrace to public government: and, do very seditiouslie deprave
and speak evil of persons in public authority, as though your tongue were
your own, See D. Doctrine among the use, page 86. he calls such as rail
upon men in authorit^e, the devils children.
to prate what pleases your self. But tell me good Exorcistes, do these the
outrageous outgoings of your unruly affections: proceed from the spirit of
God, or the Devil?


Exorcistes. I reverence the authority it self; and do only oppose my speech
to shameless, and graceles men in authority.


Orthodoxus. Romans 14.4.
Whatsoever you imagine the men to be, the best is, they do stand, or fall to
their Lord: and therefore there is no cause they should greatly fear the
boisterous thumps of any your Cannon-like thunder cracks, all the while the
greatest matter of your charge, 1. King. 18.20. 2. Chro. 32.10. Isa. 36.4.
is but wind and paper. For it is an undoubted truth I assure you, that as
these Rabshakeian reuilings, and raylings against the persons of men, do
bewray to the world the badnes of your cause, and primarilie proceed from the
very circumference it self of your circular conceits: so are they all equally
and proportionably directed to one and the self same period, viz. ad
vertiginem cerebri, I mean, to the giddi-braines disease* or the turne-about
sickness. Jude 10.
But be it the men were fully so bad as you bear us in hand: we hope you will
never hold them to be half so bad as the Devil: and yet the Devil, receiving
(notwithstanding his badnes) a Commission from God to afflict the Church;
Iehoshuah and Michael, they durst not (as we told you before) give railing
sentence against the Devil: Jude 3.
for fear of being found thereby, to rail against God himself, whose
Executioner or hangman he was. You are wise enough to make the application
your self. Psalm. 35.13. Act. 7.60. Luke 23.34. Luke 23.40.
Besides all this, we have the example of David, of Stephen, of our Savior
himself, of all the holy Martyrs of God, yea, and of the saved thief on the
Cross, who all prayed for their persecutors pursuing their deaths: but we have
no one president of any that ever reviled or railed on the persons of men, save
only that of cursed Shimei, 2. Sam. 16.^ Isa. 37.23. Luke 23.39*
of railing Rabshakeh, and of the damned thief on the Cross, whose number (we
hope) you will never increase, by seconding such their unchristian courses your
self. Eccles. 10.
For, if he who curses the Ruler, but only in the secret and hidden thought of
his heart, stands daily in fear least the fowls of heaven do carry the
sound, and that which has wings discover the matter: surely, you that
eftsoons do so outragiouslie ring forth your virulent reuilings, and railing
terms against persons in public authority, how should not you stand daily
in dread of a much more desperate downe-fall? Howbeit, that we may the better
beat back the very uttermost ebb of those raging waves wherewith you foame
forth at unawares, Jude 13.
your filthy shame, and the more forciblie cause them recoyle to the
infectious Channel it self, Matthew. 15.1^ Luke 6.45.
of that your imbred corruption, from whence they first floated amain with so
furious a stream: it shall not be amiss to admonish your Reader of two
cunning sleights of Legerdemaine, practiced by your self throughout your
Pamphlets. The first is this, namely; whatsoever is material in Master
Harsnets Discovery; and makes directly against, either the matter it self,
or the manner of your practice: that you do closely, and slielie ouerslip,
not heauing thereat with the weight of one finger.


Exorcistes. Put down but one instance, if possibly you are able: of any such
cunning omission of matters material.


Orthodoxus. I will. S. Harsnet his Discovery in the Epistle* page 8.9.
First therefore, whereas M. Harsnet (in that his Epistle before the
Discovery) has apparently discovered, and dashed to nothing, your fond and
ridiculous distinction of mirandum, and miraculum, by the only quoting of some
certain places of Scripture, wherein wonders and miracles are flatly
confounded, as terms proceeding from one and the self same root, and,
wherein also those two words themselves (or some other equivalent with them)
are indifferently used the one for the other: this Distinction of yours (being
the very Atlas it self, that supportes the whole frame of those your
Cabalisticall conceits concerning the pretended possessions and dispossessions
of Devils) is a matter (you see) very great and material: and therefore by
consequence, it craves your whole cunning and skill in confirming the same.
Howbeit, this new found Distinction of yours (for any thing hitherto heard) it
finds at your hands, a succourles shelter: neither are those his quotations any
otherways answered, then by laying your hand on your mouth. Again, See S.
Harsnets Discovery, li. 1. cap. 5. page 28. and 29. A point very material,
unanswered.
wheresoever Master Harsnet (in any one place thoroughout his Discovery)
lays down directly against you, an accusation concerning Summers his
counterfeiting, and then mannageth his said accusation, first, by the
testimony of Summers himself, then next, by your own answer unto it, and
lastly, by the several Depositions of several Deponents: the which (as all
wise men avouch) is a very orderly, direct, and material proceeding, and
therefore (for clearing your cause) it behooues you to show your cunningest
skill against such a course, and your uttermost force to weaken the same.
Howbeit, such his material proceedings, is (for the most part, by whole
Chapters together) pretermitted with silence: unless now and then, you catch at
some odd quippes, or terms of disgrace (for fear of being thought to say
nothing at all) and those you do hotelie and fiercely pursue. Dealing therein,
not unlike to the daintie-fed Dog, who having eftsoons the proffer of a good
morsel of meat, lets fall the same: and very eagerly skippeth at, and
follows a fly. And by this your cunning manner of dealing, you would make
your silly poor Readers believe, that (in any material point) you have
directly Detected Master Harsnets Discovery: whereas (in the opinion of all
the learned) you have rather indirectlie Discovered a very dangerous Detection
of some supposed fraudulent dealing. And this in effect, for your first cunning
slight.


Exorcistes. Well sir, and what is the other?


Orthodoxus. Your other cunning slight to cover your Legerdemaine, is this.
Namely, when any material point, is (by M. Harsnet) propounded from Summers
his mouth, See D. Detection. Epistle to the Reader. p 4. ra^. 4.
that may any way portend your teaching to counterfeit: then Summers forsooth,
he must be an infamous and notorious Liar, a forsworn, a counterfeit, and a
blasphemous wretch. Howbeit, when Summers utters any one word, that may seem
(in the least appearance) to uphold your idle conceits, or, that may any ways
be thought to support your Jesuitical supposes, or supposed bare signs of
essential possession, and dispossession of Devils: then, any your conceits
(how fantastical, or absurd soever) they must needs be esteemed for current
conclusions: and why? Because forsooth, K. Wright, T. Darling, M. Cooper, and
W. Summers do say it. As if these your silly poor Proctors, were all of them
equal with Pythagoras judgment. Or, as though any their incredible
predictions, must privilege your palpable asseuerations. Or (which more is) as
though we must needs be persuaded by your copartners mouths: that, you your
self is no thief. Whether you have ignorantly, or purposely practiced these
sleights of legerdemaine, I dare not certainly say, because I know not herein
your hearts corruption: but let the indifferent and diligent Reader observe you
throughout, by conferring your writings one with the other, and then tell me
where (in any these points) I misreport your proceedings. In the mean time,
this may summarily suffice as a caveat, or watchword for plain hearted
Readers; to beware how they do either affect, or approve of (hand over head)
those your two straggling Pamphlets, which only concern but matters of fact:
and thus much in effect, for those vagrant and rouing rapsodies.


Exorcistes. Be it so as you say: but what is your judgment concerning the
third?


Orthodoxus. Your third Pamphlet, is a notable compound of sundry devices
confusedly shuffled together: for it contains both matter of fact, and matter
of doctrine. The first part which concerns only but matter of fact, is
solemnly entitled: A true Narration of the strange and grievous vexation by
the Devil, of the seven persons in Lancashire, and W. Summers of Nottingham.
This your true Narration (if any upon your bare report will receive it for
truth) lies very free (I suppose) from either the encounter, or challenge of
any as yet: and therefore very free for such as take pleasure in trifling
toys, to undertake any trifling encounter therewith. Howbeit, for that, the
infallible truth as well, of the Narration it self, as of any the supposed
strange actions, or passions reported therein (how confidently soever you
report them for true) does wholly depend upon that certain truth, which must
certainly confirm unto us, the certain continuance of essential possessions,
and dispossessions in these days of the Gospel: you must have us excused,
though we hold all those your lately reported actions, or passions of the
parties possessed, in perpetual suspense, unless, the certain continuance of
those your pretended essential possessions, be first vnanswerablie propounded,
and proved unto us. And, in the mean time, you must give us good leave, to
esteem of this your new-coyned Narration no better, then of a pretty contrived
conceit to pass away winter nights, when friends (being merrily met) sit
sporting themselves by the fire side: and thus much in effect, for ye first
part of that frivolous Pamphlet, which only concerns mere fictions, I
should say matters of fact.


Exorcistes. And, what say you to the other part?


Orthodoxus. The other part of that Pamphlet, respecting matters of fact, and
matters of Doctrine, confusedly iumbled and blended together, is entitled: The
Doctrine of the Possession, and Dispossession of Demoniakes, out of the word of
God. Wherein we have summarily to observe, first, the Preface put down in the
very forefront of the Pamphlet: and then next, the Doctrine it self, with the
prosecution thereof.

The Preface contains first, the maine purpose of that frivolous Pamphlet:
and then next, a threefold Distribution of that selfsame purpose.

The maine purpose you pretend, for publishing that frivolous Pamphlet, is, the
glory of God: and the edification of the Christian Reader.

Surely, (how frivolous soever the Pamphlet be deemed) the pretended maine
purpose for publishing the same, is a very honorable, and a glorious purpose
no doubt. Howbeit, because the most counterfeit Coin, resembles eftsoons the
most glittering show, and, the most horrible Strumpet, the honestest face: yea,
and for that also we have it very strictly given us in charge, 1. John 4.1.
first, to search out and examine your Spirit, or ever we do over rashly give
credit to any your holy pretenses. It shall not be amiss, before hand very
euenly to peize with the holy waights of the Sanctuary, whatsoever payment
you proffer in liew of such purpose: and then after, approve, or disprooue of
your holy pretenses accordingly. And this in effect for the maine purpose,
prefixed in the very forefront of that frivolous Pamphlet. The threefold
Distribution of that selfsame purpose, is this that follows in order.

1. First, you would prove, that the eight persons you speak of: were every of
them possessed by Satan.

2. Secondly, that they were all of them undoubtedly dispossessed by your
fasting, and prayer.

3. Lastly, you lay down the holy and right uses, which (you say) we must
make of this wonderful work.

This (we suppose) is the threefold Distribution of that your former
pretended maine purpose: whereof we like wondrous well, especially, if you
shall show your self no less sufficiently able to prosecute, then you have
orderly disposed of that your pretended maine purpose. And (to ease you
something herein) this we must tell you before, that if you can soundly inform
our judgments concerning the infallible truth of those the two former points:
we will not greatly stick to yield you the latter. See D. doctrine among the
vse^ especallie in p^^ 88.
Albeit, the same be shrewdly intermingled with some such disloyal assertions,
such strange conceits, and such needless toys, as are not in our powers to
reform, and we wholly disclaim.

Moreover, whatsoever odd Question concerning these matters, has been
controuerted, or handled before, in any one of our former Conferences, that
we will not now disputs of afresh: but only refer you to the Dialogue,
wherein the same is determined.

Briefly, your needles Dilatations, your superfluous applications, your often
excursions, your idle repetitions, your wandering Vagaries, your roauing
Discourses, and extrauagant speeches (more befitting a Rhetorical Declamer,
then a Logical Disputer) all those we will pass by, with a purposed silence
for mispending the time.

Neither will we tie our selves strictly to your course of speech, but will
briefly abstract from the whole, your propositions, and proofs, with
whatsoever else is material: and only endeavor to answer the same. And this
in effect for the whole preface, put down in the very forefront of your
frivolous Pamphlet.

The Doctrine it self, with the prosecution thereof comes next to our
consideration. The Doctrine it self, is a Doctrine concerning the essential
possession and dispossession of Demoniakes, out of the word of God. Whether
this be an high, or rather a deep point of divinity, will appear in the
handling thereof.

The prosecution of this deep point of Doctrine, is performed according to the
threefold distribution aforesaid. Thus have we briefly and summarilie broken
up the whole body of this your Doctrinal discourse: with the due order observed
therein. Go to now Exorcistes, proceed according to this order and spare not:
what say you man to the first point of al, I mean, the essential possession
of those your pretended Demoniakes.


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine. p. 1.
I do confidentlie avouch to the world, that those eight persons we speak of,
they were in deed essentiallie possessed with unclean spirits: and did not
counterfeit a possession, as is affirmed by some.


Orthodoxus. You say they were in deed essentiallie possessed: I pray you
forget not your words. Howbeit (or ever we come to dispute the very point of
that Question) this I must tell you for truth, that you cannot possibly name
any one place throughout the whole Bible, wherein the words possession, or
possessed, are properly used to this your pretended purpose, as we have
showed sufficiently in our second Dialogue: and then, how should you possibly
prove your supposed essential possessions of those your pretended Demoniakes,
out of the word?


Exorcistes. O yes sir, every where throughout the Geneuah translation: those
words are ordinarily observed.


Orthodoxus. A proper Disputer you show your self. I insist upon the
Original, and you urge the Geneuah translation: which yet (being duly
conferred one place with another, Matthew. 15.22. (...). Erasmus has, a Daemonio
agitatur.

Beza, he has, a daemonio vexatur.

Castalio, he has, est furiata.

Montanus, has daemonizatur.

See D. Doctrine page 89.

Item, page 99.


) will be found directly against you. For first concerning the Original, the
word which the Evangelist uses therein, is, Daemonizomenos: that is, one
Diuellished, or one afflicted, tormented, or vexed with a Devil. And so has
your Geneuah translation, in the fifteenth of Matthew, the twenty two verse.
Yea, and herein also you your own self very fully accords in the very
Title of that your forenamed Narration: terming that your supposed Possession
in your eight pretended Demoniakes, to be nothing else but a grievous vexation
by the Devil. Yea, and (which more is) even in the very title of this your
treatise of doctrine: you do call them, only Demoniakes, as also in sundry
places throughout that book. By all which it is to too apparent, that, either
you finally distrust the finding of that word possession throughout the whole
Bible, and so speak of possession at a blind adventure: or that else, you do
(with the Geneuah translator) account the words ( possession, and vexation by
Devils) to be indifferently taken for one, and the selfsame matter, and so
your supposed essential possession falls flat to the ground. Howbeit, if we
should very favorably afford you the word possession, which by great hand
(you see) will never be gained: yet, then also you are as far from the point of
your purpose, as ever before. For how prove you those your eight pretended
Demoniakes, to be in such sort possessed: as you bear us in hand they were?


Exorcistes. I prove it directly, from the very cause of their actions, or
passions thus. Supernatural effects, do argue some supernatural cause. Those
actions, or passions which they endured, were supernatural effects: therefore,
those actions, or passions, they argue some supernatural cause.


Orthodoxus. Your Assumption is utterly untrue. See D. Doctrine, page 1.
For those their supposed actions or passions, they were not supernatural,
whatsoever you seem to report: and (which more is) mere natural causes have
had, and may have more wonderful effects, then any of those your eight
pretended Demoniakes, their actions or passions being soundly reported: as in
our seventh Dialogue is showed at large. Neither may you (in such uncertain
causes and courses of nature) so certainly conclude from the effect, to the
cause, as you seem at this present. Both because but one and the selfsame
cause, may bring forth sundry effects: and for that also, even one and the
selfsame effect, does eftsoons proceed from several causes. Touching the
first, we have a lively experiment from the Sun it self: whose heat being
ever but one and the same, does cause quite contrary effects. For it softeneth
wax, and hardens clay: it draws a very fragrant savor from flowers, and a
foul noisome stink from the dunghill. Now next for the other, I mean, that
one and the selfsame effect, may fitly proceed from several causes: we may
see it apparent, by an extraordinary heat in our bodies. Which extraordinary
heat (being but one, and the same) may be an undoubted effect, either of fire,
or of abundance of clothes, or of excessive drinking of wine, or of some
violent exercise. The like experiments do daily appear from the sundry
humors of our natural bodies, and from the variable operations of nature
arising thence. Yea and (which more is) those your supposed supernatural
effects (namely rending, foaming, crying aloude, leaving for dead, and so
forth) they may, and do eftsoons arise from sundry mere natural diseases:
I mean from melancholy, from mania, from lunacie, from frenzy, from the
Epilepsie, from the mother, from conuulsions, from crampes, and such like. And
therefore (from these so uncertain effects) you cannot certainly conclude
such certain essential possession of Devils: as appears at large, in
sundry our former Dialogues.


Exorcistes. See D. Doctrine, page 1.2.
But sir, the actions, or passions of those eight Demoniakes, they were
undoubtedly supernatural effects, and must necessarily proceed from some
supernatural cause: namely, either from God, or good Angels, or from Satan at
least. From God or good Angels they could not possibly proceed, being toys
and fooleries, so far unbeseeming their sacred natures: and therefore no
doubt from the Devil, to whose filthy disposition they are so correspondent
and suting.


Orthodoxus. They were not supernatural effects, as we told you before: and
your self shall never be able to prove them such. Besides that, your supposed
impossibility, for either God or good Angels to effect any such fantastical,
vain, and filthy effects, so much unbeseeming their natures, is to too gross
and absurd: since the judgments of God (whatsoever in show, howsoever, or by
whomsoever effected) are holy and good, and for that the Lord also, in the
orderly executions, or effects of his judgments is not preciselie tied to
this, or that, supposed seemly manner of effecting the same. In like manner,
your inference, concerning the suting of such unseemly effects, to the very
nature of the unclean spirit it self, and that your enforced conclusion of
essential possessions pretended from thence: is much more absurd then the
other before. For if those vain and unseemly effects, Math. 8.29. Mar. 5.7.
Luke 8.28. Acts 16.17. See D. Apolog. page 15.

S. Harsnet h^ discovery page* 223.

See D. Detection. page 165. page, 175.


so fitly suting (you say) to the nature of the unclean spirit, must
necessarily conclude an undoubted essential possession of some unclean spirit
effecting the same: then those holy, and those seemly effects (namely, the
confessing of Christ, and of the way of salvation, as also, Summers his sound
exposition of the Creed for a long time together) all of them so fitly
consorting with the nature of an holy spirit, they must necessarily conclude
an undoubted essential possession of some holy spirit effecting the same. But
the first (say you) is undoubtedly true: and therefore also the latter.
Notwithstanding be it supposed, that those vain and unseemly effects (which
your self so vainly pretend) were effected (in deed) by some unclean spirit,
as you seem to infer: yet, that concludes no essential, or inherent
possession in any of your eight pretended Demoniakes. Because, not only
those, but far greater effects may be wrought by the devil, though himself
be not essentiallie in the party possessed: and therefore, prove soundly
their essential inherencie in the parties possessed, or hold your peace.


Exorcistes. Why sir, the Scriptures in every place, they speak of the Devil
his entering in, and going out of the party possessed.


Orthodoxus. Wheresoever the Scriptures so speak of the possession of devils,
they speak it only by Metaphore: as has been sufficiently declared in our
second Dialogue. And this I say further, that you cannot possibly allege
throughout the whole Scriptures, any one text, wherein either Angels or
Spirits, or Devils are otherwise spoken of then only by metaphor: the which
places being interpreted literallie, would pester the Church with many absurd
and inconvenient opinions.

Job 1.7. and 2.2
As for example, the devil, he is said in Job to compass the earth. What? must
we therefore conceive, that the devil (in deed) has his legs and feet like
a man: wherewith (as it were a Malt-milne horse) he does compass the world by
a circular motion? So should we discover to the world, our circular folly.

Matthew. 12.43. Luke 11.24.
Again, he is said to walk through dry places, seeking his rest. Must we
therefore imagine, that the devil in deed does trudge up and down the
mountainous countries, like to a roging vagobond: having no habitation wherein
to hide his head?

1. Pet. 5.8.
Again, he is said to go continually about like a roaring Lion: seeking whom
to devour. Must we therefore believe that the devil in deed, runs hither
and thither; as a bellowing Bull, that seeks for pasture? So should we make
it apparent, that we ourselves, run wild in our wits. And as in these few
examples: so in all other besides, you may see the absurdities of such
expositions. Now then, if in expounding these, and all other Metaphorical
speeches concerning spirits and devils, you must necessarily let pass the bare
literal sense, or otherways fall flat into a thousand absurd and inconvenient
opinions: why should you stick so fast to the letter in this one place alone,
concerning the entering in, and going out of the devil, from the party
possessed? Which being spoken by Metaphor as well as the rest, may (with no
less absurdities) be made to undergo the literal sense, then any of the rest
whatsoever.


Exorcistes. See D. Doctrine, page 38.39.
I do therefore stick so fast to the bare letter, especially in this, above
all the rest: because these words of entering in, and of going out, are never
used in the spiritual sense, but often, yea usually in the other.


Orthodoxus. The best is, that which you so boldly avouch, is but one Doctors
opinion: yea and (which more is) such a Doctor besides, as is not yet of that
credit, that men may say, autos epha, Doctor Exorcistes has spoken it. (...).
ipse dixit.
Howbeit, because (in this point especially) you stick so fast to the bare
letter alone, and that also, of a very set purpose (I fear) to pull in (as it
were by the ears) your sensles opinion of essential possessions: I pray you
make known unto us your meaning, concerning this your supposed essential
possession of devils. My meaning is this, do tell us plainly, whether we
must understand the same of a devil, essentiallie inherent in the party
possessed: or, of the party himself, essentiallie inherent within the devil?


Exorcistes. A very absurd, and sensles demand: for who (by the essential
possession of devils) did ever understand the party himself. essentiallie
inherent within the devil: but, rather the contrary?


Orthodoxus. The demand is not so absurd, or so senseless as your self
suppose: but, very pertinent to the timely encounting with that your absurd
and sensles opinion of essential possessions, which you endeavor (with tooth
and nail) to canonize for current, by the only bare literal sense of the
devil his entering in, and going out. To the end therefore you may the sooner
conceive the reason of this my demand; I pray you (since you rely so sore upon
the bare letter it self) let me hear in what sort you interpret this text of
Scripture. Videl. There was in the Synagogue a man, Mark. 1.23. and 5.2. (...).
en pneumati acathartoo. The bare literal sense of that place, I verily
believe is this: a man, in spiritu impuro, that is, in an unclean spirit: and
so the vulgar, and Montanus interpret the same. Now then (if I should urge you
hardly with the bare literal sense) who does not plainly perceive, how that I
might (from the bare letter of this text) as boldly conclude the party
possessed, to be essentiallie inherent within the devil, as your self (by any
other like text) may conclude the contrary.


Exorcistes. Not so. Erasmus, in Mark. 1.23. Marloratus,^ Mark. 1 23.
For (howsoever your self do insist upon the bare letter it self) Erasmus,
and Marlorate, they interpret that place in this sort. There was in the
Synagogue, a man, obnoxious spiritui immundo, that is, subject to an unclean
spirit.


Orthodoxus. That interpretation of theirs, does rather explane the true sense
of the place: then express the propriety of the very words themselves, put
down in that place. And so, if that interpretation be simply taken: then
(howsoever the same does truly deliver the true natural sense of the place it
self) your pretended bare literal sense, falls flat to the ground.


Exorcistes. Tremellius, in Mark. ^.23. Theod. Beza, in Mark. 1.23.
Well, be it so as you say: but, what think you of Tremellius and Beza, who
jointly expound it thus. There was in the Synagogue, a man, in quo erat
spiritus impurus: in whom was an unclean spirit. This interpretation of
theirs, not only accords with the maine purpose of the holy ghost in that
place: but (which more is) it makes very directly, for the essential
possession of devils.


Orthodoxus. Tremellius, and Beza, they (in deed) do interpret the place as you
say: therein, respecting rather the very matter it self, then the bare meaning
of words expressing that matter. So then, not only Erasmus and Montanus, but
Tremellius also and Beza, they all (the two last especially) do flatly
forsake the bare letter in expounding that place: which directly overthrows
that your presumptuous and singular conceit, concerning the continual taking
of these words ( entering in, and going out) but only in the literal, and
never in the spiritual sense. Besides that, your Geneuah translator, he ties
himself, neither to the strict letter, with Erasmus and Montanus, neither yet
to the exposition of Tremellius and Beza: but simply sets down such a sense
of the place, as the propriety of our English tongue, does most aptly afford,
saying thus. See the Geneuah translation, in Mark. 1.23.
There was in the Synagogue, a man that had an unclean spirit. The which, as
it does plainly express the very true purpose of the holy Ghost in that
place: so does it digress very little or nothing at all, from the natural
propriety of the bare letter it self. Although notwithstanding, the same has
nothing in show, that may make for your sensles opinion of essential
possessions: but rather the contrary, as may plainly appear.


Exorcistes. Yea, but Tremellius and Beza, expounding it purposelie thus ( in
whom was an unclean spirit) it cannot be, but that by the words in whom they
did undoubtedly understand an essential inherency of Satan, in the very body
of the party possessed.


Orthodoxus. If that which you say, were their meaning in deed: yet then also,
even by this their said meaning they do flatly overthrow your idle assertion,
concerning the only bare literal sense of entering in, and going out. Since,
howsoever they (in expounding that place) do principally respect the only
true natural sense and scope of the Scripture: yet the bare literal sense is
undoubtedly this: namely, a man in an unclean spirit. The which (you see) is
flat opposite to that your supposed essential inherencie of a devil in the
party possessed: and, (by the only bare letter it self) it rather implies
the contrary: namely, that the possessed himself, is essentially inherent
within the devil. Notwithstanding all this, howsoever Tremellius and Beza for
the former respects do expound it thus, a man, in whom was an unclean spirit:
they understand not thereby, any essential possession, but, only an
effectual operation of Satan, Theod. litz Marc. 1.^^
in so many especially, as are slauishlie subjected unto him. And so, Master
Beza (by a very apt resemblance) interprets his meaning thus. Like as says
he, when we see one sick of a fever, we commonly say in our vulgar tongue,
the man is now in a fever, though we mean nothing else thereby, but that he is
held with a fever, because to be in a fever in our vulgar tongue, Vt, in febre
c* est febre ten^^ sic, in spiritu esse, est spiritu teneri.
is nothing else with the Latins, but to be held with a fever: so surely, to
be in a spirit with the Grecians, is nothing else with the Latins, but to be
held of a spirit, that is, to be slauishly subjected unto the effectual
working power of a spirit. That this was the only meaning of Beza, it
appears plainly in Mark; where he does thus expound himself, Theod. Beza.
Mark. 5.2.
Ideo dici quemquam in spiritu, quod, eum spiritus quasi inclusum, tenet, ac
deuinctum, that is: Therefore may any man be said to be in a spirit: because
the spirit does hold him enclosed, and fast bound as it were, by his effectual
power. So then, Master Beza (you see) he speaks nothing at all for your
idle supposed essential possession, but rather the contrary: understanding by
that which we call the possession of devils, none other thing else, but an
effectual wo^king power of Satan, in such as he does actuallie afflict, or
torment.


Exorcistes. Yea, but the Evangelist Luke (reporting that selfsame history)
puts it down in these proper terms. namely. There was in the Synagogue, Luke
4.33.
a man that had a spirit of an unclean devil: which must needs be understood
of essential possessions. For, how could that man possibly have a spirit of
an unclean devil: unless the said Spirit were essentiallie in him? And so
the vulgar accordingly, very fitly, and significantly expounds that place.


Orthodoxus. The vulgar I confess, it does truly express the true sense of
the place: but, observes not the propriety of words put down in that place.
Howbeit, the original (in deed) is thus. There was in the Synagogue, Luke
4.33. (...). id est, habens spiritum Demonij impuri.
a man, (...). i. habens spiritum daemonii impuri, that is, having a spirit of
an unclean devil. And so, the Syriack, Erasmus, Montanus, and the Geneuah
translates the same. The which translation of theirs, is undoubtedly tolerable:
especially, if, by the word (...), that is, a spirit, you understand not the
simple essence, but, the only impulsion, motion, or inspiration of the spirit.
According to which sense, the word spirit is usually observed; both in the
old and new Testament. For, first in the old it is said of Daniel, Dan. 4.5.6.
and 5.11.12.
that he had the spirit of the holy Gods: that is, a divine, and holy
inspiration of God. Again, in the new Testament, the Ambassadors of
Antichrist, they are said to be the spirits of devils: Revel. 16.24.
that is, men of most devilish spirits. And, even so (in that place which you
quote from the Evangelist Luke) where it is said, Luke 4.33.
There was in the Synagogue, a man, having the spirit of an unclean devil:
the meaning is, a diuelished unclean spirit, and so, the sense of that place
is current and sound: otherwise, if by these words ( the spirit of an unclean
devil) you do essentiallie understand the very spirit it self, according to
the only bare purport of the letter: who sees not then, how groslie you
distinguish a spirit and a devil; making them, two distinct, or several
essences, the one begetting the other, Theod. Beza, in Luc. 4.33. Est hebraea
ge^^inatio.
which is monstrous absurd. Howbeit, to interpret that place, both according to
the true natural sense thereof, and as near to the very letter it self as may
be: I would take the words of that text, to be only but an hebraicall
iterating, or doubling of one, and the selfsame matter, to make it more
notoriously, and expreslie apparent. And this hebraisme (I assure you) is very
ordinary, and usual throughout the old Testament. As, first in the Psalms,
where David says thus. Psalm. 40.2. (...). i. e luto coeni; pr^ luto coenoso.
Dan. 12 2. (...). i. in terra pulueris: pro puluer terrestri. Habens
Daemoniacum spiritum impurum.
The Lord brought me out of the horrible pit, out of (mittith haven) the clay
of mire, that is, the mirie clay, or the most deep mire. Again, in Daniel,
where it is said, and many of them that sleep, admath-gnaphar: in the earth of
dust, that is, in the dustie earth, shall awake. And even so, in this place of
Luke where it is said, there was a man which had a spirit of an unclean
Devil, that is, a spirit, very diuelishlie addicted to all manner of
uncleanness. Not understanding by the word spirit in that place, the simple
essence: but the motion, inspiration, or instigation of the spirit, as the
Geneuah Bible very aptly expounds it in the marginall note. By all the
premises then, it is very apparently evident, that those words of the entering
in, and going out of the devil, are spoken only but metaphoricallie: or that
else (because you so stricktlie restrain those words to the only bare
literal sense) we may also (by urging the bare letter upon you) as boldly
conclude the possessed man, to be essentiallie inherent within the devil, as
the devil himself, to be essentiallie inherent within the possessed man, both
which to affirm, were monstrous absurd. So then, from any thing hitherto
heard; you cannot possibly conclude the essential possession of devils. Both,
because no such thing is apparent in all the Scriptures: and for that also,
those your pretended effects of such a possession, they may very well be
wrought by the devil, though he be never essentiallie within the possessed, as
in our seventh Dialogue has been showed at large.


Exorcistes. The devil (I confess) may mightelie torment and vex a man, See
D. Doctrine. page 2.
being but only without him: howbeit, he cannot possibly dispose, either of
the whole, or any part of man's body, unless he be essentiallie in him.


Orthodoxus. This is to too absurd. 2. Tim. 2.26.
For, if the wicked are held captives by Satan, at his own will and pleasure:
is it impossible (think you) that he at his pleasure (so far forth I mean,
as his Commission extends) should dispose of the whole, or any part of their
bodies, by an only effectual operation, without any essential inherencie in
them? Matthew. 4.5.8.
The devil (by the permission of God) in those his sundry transportings of
Christ, did after a sort, dispose of the body of Christ: although yet, not
essentiallie inherent in the body of Christ. Ierem. 20.14. Job. 3.1.2. 2. Sam.
16.7. 2. Chro. 32.17. John. 13.2. Acts. 5.3. Romans 6.16.19.
The devil he disposed the tongues of Jeremy, Job, Shimei, and Rabshakeh to
cursing and railing: though never essentiallie, in any of their tongues. The
devil, he put into the heart of Judas to betray his master: yet, not
essentiallie in Judas his heart. The devil, he filled Ananias his heart with a
lie: and yet not essentiallie in Ananias his heart. The unregenerate, they give
over the members of their bodies, as instruments of unrighteousness to sin:
yea, even according to the disposing of Satan himself, Ephesians. 2.2.
who works effectually in every of them: although yet, he be never
essentially in any one of their members. Briefly, all those the aforesaid
actions, or passions pretended to be done in deed, by those your supposed
Demoniakes (namely wallowing, foaming, rending, tearing, crying, gnashing of
teeth, leaving for dead, and so forth) they are not (as the simplest man living
may see) so supernatural strange, or impossible: but, that the like, and
every way, as strange things are eftsoons effected by mere natural causes,
and diseases (as our seventh Dialogue declares) and that also, without any
operation of the devil essentiallie in them.


Exorcistes. See D. Doctrine, page 2. Mat. 12.43.44. Luke 11.24.25.
If the devil may fully effect as much in a man being only but without him,
as if he were essentiallie within him: why does he then so earnestly desire to
be essentiallie inherent in any man's body?


Orthodoxus. Its a very fantastical, or an idle conceit, to dream that the
devil has such a desire: I mean, to be essentiallie inherent in any man's
body, Luk 22.32. ^. Det. 5.8.
notwithstanding his inexorable desire to do the most mischief he may. I make
no question, but that the devil desired fully as much against Job, as he did
ever against any, either since, or before: yea, and this I hold further, that
the Lord (intending purposelie, to portraiture in the person of Job, Iam. 5.11.
an absolute pattern of perfect patience) gave the devil as much power over
Job, as over any besides. And yet, Job. 1.11. and 2.5 Job. 1.12. and 2.6.
neither did the devil so much as desire, nor the Lord once permit him any such
essential possession in the body of Job, as your self (in these your
pretended Demoniakes) would bear us in hand. 1. King. 22.21.22.
Again, the devil, he desired to become a lying spirit in the mouth of Ahab
his Prophets; yet, he never desired to be essentiallie inherent in any of
their tongues. 2 Chronicles. 18.20.21.
Neither will those your quotations from Matthew and Luke: enforce so fond an
assertion as you seem to avouch. For, that desire of Satan's reentrie expressed
there, being but an allegorical demonstration of the Jews accursed condition,
who wilfully reject the exhibited graces of God in Jesus Christ: (as appears
by the application thereof) it may at no hand be possibly tentered to these
your pretended essential possessions. Matthew. 12.4.
Both, because our Savior intended no such matter at all, in any of those
places: and for that the essential possessions of devils, is only a devise,
and dream of your own. But, be it supposed the same were purposelie spoken of
Satan's possession in men: yet, the same being a Metaphor (as we showed before)
it only implies the devil his earnest desire of an e^^ectuall reoperation,
but no one desire of any essential repossession, because he never had any
such possession at all.


Exorcistes. If the devil had not been essentiallie inherent in the parties
dispossessed by Christ, See D. Doctrine page 2.
to procure in them such supenaturall effects: how could those selfsame
effects of their possessions then, be any certain true signs of their
essential possessions now? which (that they are) were to too absurd to deny.


Orthodoxus. Whatsoever you would have us fondly imagine concerning those your
supposed true signs of essential possession: See D. Detection. page 34. and.
M. Darel does confidentlie avouch, that Christ never ordained any such means,
whereby we may certainly discern of those your supposed essential
possessions. For, then we should have it undoubtedly recorded in some part of
the Scriptures: but, such an ordinance there, he dare boldly avouch there is
none. Moreover, what one of those your supposed supernatural effects are you
able to name, which the devil cannot possibly accomplish: but, by such a
supposed essential inherencie in the possessed man's body? Again, those
selfsame effects which the Scriptures entreat of, they are only recorded as
mere matters of fact: but, no established perpetual means, to discern
soundly of all future essential possessions. Briefly, be it supposed, that
those selfsame effects, were then, and are now at this present, the undoubted
true signs of Satan's possession: yet were they at no time, the certain true
signs of any such his supposed essential inherencie in the possessed man's
body, as you would bear us in hand.


Exorcistes. See D. Doctrine, page 2.
If those vexations, or torments, were not the undoubted effects of some devil
essentiallie inherent in the bodies of men at the least: then surely, the
common people of the Jews (being able none otherways else to judge of
Demoniakes, but by those their vexations or torments) they had no certain true
means to discern of essential possessions, which were to too absurd to
imagine.


Orthodoxus. How absurd so ever such an assertion may happily seem in your
senseless eyes, it is too much presumption for your self to avouch as you
do, at a blind adventure: that, the Jews (by any supposed effects of
precedent possessions) had then, any certain established means to discern
soundly of their present Demoniakes. For first, if there were in Israel no
such Demoniakes at all, before the coming of Christ: there needed no such
supposed means, to discern the essential possession of devils. I will not
certainly avouch (although it might perhaps be probably disputed) that,
till a little before the coming of Christ, there were no such possessions at
all in Israel.


Exorcistes. No such possessions at all in Israel? What say you then to King
Saul, of whom the story reports, that he was vexed with an evil spirit: 1.
Sam. 16.14.
was not he (I pray you) essentiallie possessed of a devil?


Orthodoxus. King Saul (I confess) he might have some extraordinary judgment
upon him, and yet, neither essentiallie, nor actually possessed of Satan: in
such sort especially, as we understand of possessions, and as they were
supernaturallie apparent in the days of Christ.


Exorcistes. 1. Sam. 16.14.
O yes sir, the very text it self, it tells us plainly, that he was vexed
with an evil spirit, which is the very phrase that the Evangelist observes in
the new Testament, saying thus: have mercy on me, Matthew. 15.22.
for my daughter is pitifully vexed with a devil.


Orthodoxus. Saul might be straunglie vexed, though not essentiallie possessed
with either spirit or devil. For howsoever the word ( vexed) be the very
phrase in deed, which our English translator observes in the old and new
Testament: yet does not that selfsame phrase express to the full, the
natural propriety of the original word, put down either in the old or new
testament, as may plainly appear to such as indifferently examine the same.
For first, in the new testament, the word which the Evangelist observes there,
(...). Matthew. 15.22. Tremel. ibidem Pagnin. ibidem Beza, ibidem. Erasm. ibidem.
Vulgar. ibidem. Castle. ibidem. Montan. ibid.
Daimonizetai: the which Tremellius translates thus; pessime agitur, is
grievously tormented: Pagnine and Beza thus, male vexatur, is pitifully vexed:
Erasmus thus, misere agitatur, is miserably disquieted: the vulgar thus, male
vexatur, is mischievously troubled: Castellio thus, est furiata, is become
stark mad: and Montanus thus, Daemonizatur, is shrewdly diuellished. The
which last, does more naturally discover the proper sense of the word:
although yet, no one of them all do understand the same (you see) of
essential possessions, but only, of the actual vexations extraordinarily
inflicted by Satan. And, as not in the new: so, neither in the old testament,
does our English word ( vexed) so fitly express the natural propriety of
the original word there as were to be wished. 1. Sam. 16.14. (...). id est.
Affectus est passionibus, seu perturbationibus:

Exterritus est vehementer: Exagitatus est, vt Auenarius: 1. Sam. 16.14.
Montan. ibid. Vatab. ibidem. (...).

Vulgar. ibidem. Pagnin. ibidem. Munster, ibid. Tremel. ibidem. Septuagint.
(...).


For the word it self (in the Hebrew text is bagnath: that is to say, he is
so affected with passions and perturbations of the mind or body, and so
vehemently dismayed and disquieted with a furious madness, or fear: as he is
in a manner, become abominable, and most vile among men. That this is the true
sense of the word, may plainly be gathered, not only from the very
propriety of the word it self, but also by conference of several
translators. For first, Montanus, and Vatablus, they translate it thus.
Spiritus malus a Jehovah, vubignathattu: id est terruit eum, that is, an evil
Spirit from the Lord, did fearefullie fright him: the vulgar thus, exagitabat
eum, moved him: Pagnine thus, turbauit eum, disturbed him, Munsterus thus,
stupefecit eum, astonished him: Tremellius thus, perturbabat eum, disordered
him, and so forth. By all which it is very apparent, that the original word
imports no essential possessions, but only some mental passions: and that
therefore it was, that the Grecians from this word bagnath, do draw the words
petho, and pathenomai, that is, to endure the affections of mind or body.
(...).
Also, the words, pathe, pathos, pathema, that is, passion, affection, or
perturbation of mind. Because, passion (in deed) is nothing else but a
perturbation of mind, unnaturally opposing it self to reason: such as is
fear, anger, a vehement fury, or some other inordinate commotion of the minds
affections, not subiecting it self to the orderly rule of reason. By all which
it is very apparent, that those strange vexations, which our English
translatour reports of Saul^ they were only but mental passions, and no
essential possessions of either spirit or devil.


Exorcistes. Howsoever you may mince the original words, I cannot be
persuaded, but that Saul was essentiallie possessed of Satan.


Orthodoxus. That may not possibly be. Both because (the word bagnath,
importing only but mental passions) the possession then, it must necessarily
be inherent in the possessed man's mind, which were to too absurd to imagine:
and for that also, the word bagnath it self, may at no hand endure such a
violent sense, as may plainly appear by the orderly conference of this one,
with some other places of Scripture, where the selfsame word is also in use.
As for example, Job, intending purposelie to stay the rash and intemperate
judgment of those his three friends, Job. 13.11. (...) Septuagint. (...).
terrebit vos.
by recalling their minds to some timely consideration of God his unspeakable
majesty, he tells them thus, excellentia eius, an non tebagneth, id est,
terrebit vos? which we may not thus translate at any hand, the excellency of
Jehovah, shall it not be essentiallie inherent in every of you, for that were
to too absurd: but rather thus, the excellency of Jehovah, shall it not
mightily amaze your minds: that is, shall not the timely consideration of his
incomprehensible Majesty, be able to breed such an astonishment or fear in
every of your hearts, as may make you forthwith to desist from those your rash
and presumptuous judgments, which more especially concern my present
condition? Psalm. 18.4. (...) Septuagint. (...) 2. Sam. 22.5. (...).
So likewise the Prophet David, declaring what griefs he endured, before he
was fully established king, says thus in effect. The sorrows of death
compassed me about, and torrentes nequitiae (iebagnathuni) id est, terrebant
me, and the floudes of wickedness astonished, or made me afraid: Job. 33.7.
Hest. 7.6. 1. Chro. 21.30 Dan. 8.17.
And not thus; the floudes of wickedness did essentiallie enter into my mind,
for, that were to too absurd. The like use of the word bagnath you may see in
sundry places besides. By this then, it is apparently evident, that seeing this
word bagnath, in no one text, else may possibly import any such essential
inherencie in either body or mind (as your self does imagine) but signifies
only, some mental astonishments, perturbations, or passions: you may not
(without manifest violence to the original word) understand this one place of
Saul, of any essential possessions by either spirit or devil, whatsoever your
English phrase imports for the same.


Exorcistes. Well sir, whether you translate it a vexing or an astonishing, the
text tells us plainly, that those vexations, or astonishments of Saul, they
were undoubtedly effected by an evil spirit of the Lord: and must therefore,
be necessarily understood of some one devil or other, 1. Sam. 16.14
essentiallie inherent within him.


Orthodoxus. That follows not. For albeit we should grant by the way, those
self same astonishments or frights of Saul, to be some immediate work of the
devil, which will never be proved: yet must those the aforesaid astonishments,
be only understood of some actual operation, and not of any essential
possession, as may plainly appear by the opposition of spirits put down in
the text. For consider I beseech you, the text, it tells us plainly, 1.
Sam. 16.14.
that the spirit of the Lord departed from Saul: and an evil spirit of the
Lord astonished him. From the which opposition of spirits, I reason thus. The
evil spirit of the Lord, it so astonished Saul, as the good spirit of the Lord
possessed him before. But the good spirit, it only possessed him effectiuelie,
Pet. Mart. in 1. Sam. 16.14.
not essentiallie: therefore, the evil spirit, it astonished him only
effectiuelie, not essentiallie. Thus then you see, that the very opposition of
spirits put down in the text, it strikes stark dead, your idle conceits of
essential possessions. Howbeit, as by the good spirit of the Lord we are only
to understand the good graces and gifts of the spirit, which were wrought
before in the heart of Saul; namely, a principal spirit, a spirit of
prophecy, and such other good gifts: so likewise, by the evil spirit of the
Lord, we must understand the bad disposition and qualities of Saul his
corrupted spirit, which being then made destitute of the graces of God, and
even utterly left to it self: did follow the sway of it own inclination,
which made him forthwith astonished, fearful, furious, yea, utterly
disordered in his judgment or reason. And therefore, this affliction (you see)
it must only be understood of some mental passions, and not of any
essential possessions.


Exorcistes. I cannot believe for all this, but that Saul was essentiallie
possessed of a devil.


Orthodoxus. Why man the very effects themselves which followed his said
astonishment, do flatly conclude the contrary. For, neither was he blind,
nor deaf, nor dumb, nor lame, nor sensles, nor endued with supernatural
knowledge or strength, which (you say,) are the undoubted true signs of
essential possessions. Neither was he at any time hurtful unto him self, or
dangerous to any one of his Courtiours: but only malcontented, amazed,
astonished, and even mad in his mind, so often as he but only remembered the
glory of David among the daughters of Israel: 1. Sam. 18.8, 9, 10.
And therefore, there was in him, no essential possession of spirit, or
devil: but some temporary disordered perturbations or passions of mind, his
judgment or reason being utterly distempered, by a final deprivation of the
graces of God.


Exorcistes. Nay sir, his certain dispossession does plainly argue an
undoubted essential possession of some spirit or devil at the least. 1. Sam.
16.23.
For the text tells us, that when David but played before Saul with his
harp: Saul was forthwith refreshed and eased, for the evil spirit departed
from him.


Orthodoxus. Why man, the manner of this his deliverance, it does argue the
contrary of that which you say. For tell me I pray you, has the sound of an
harp any force at all to expel a devil essentiallie inherent in any man's
body? This we hold for a certain, that no created means may effectiuely
extend it self to the powerful effecting of any such supernatural actions,
as do any way concern the essential dispossessing of spirits, and devils,
the which point (in our eight Dialogue) is handled at large. And therefore the
melodious sound of David's harp, it might only assuage (for the present)
those melancholic passions which mightily swaied in Saul his mind: but it
could not possibly have cured the essential possession of spirits or devils,
if any such, had bin extant in Saul. Otherwise, it would consequently follow,
that men might fiddle forth spirits and devils from parties possessed, and so
there should be a necessary use of pipers and fiddlers for the timely
dispossessing of these your pretended Demoniakes. As for Saul (howsoever his
bad humor was eased a time) it is very apparent he was never perfectly cured
thereof to the day of his death: and therefore not essentiallie possessed. Thus
then, you may see it apparently evident, both by the propriety of the
original word: by the plain opposition of spirits put down in the text: by
the effects themselves which followed of Saul's astonishment: and by the manner
of curing that selfsame malady, that Saul was never essentiallie possessed with
either spirit or devil, and so consequently, that (till a little before the
coming of Christ) there were no possessions at all in Israel. Yea, and thus
much also, that general admiration of all the people, Matthew. 9.33. Mark. 1.27.
and 2.13. Luke 4.36.
which concerned especially those self same primarie dispossessions performed
by Christ, may seem to import; saying thus: the like was never seen in
Israel.


Exorcistes. That is, the like manner of curing: not the like matter of
essential possessing.


Orthodoxus. If there had been the like matter of essential possessing before
the coming of Christ, but, not the like manner of curing the same: then, tell
us (I pray you) what manner of curing they had in those days, I mean, by what
means they were cured before the coming of Christ. I hope you will not say
they were cured by physical means. Neither may you for shame, avouch their
cure to be wrought by that your supposed new ordinance of prayer and fasting;
because, such an ordinance (before the coming of Christ) was never established,
D. Detection* page 34.
and so much also, you do else where affirm your own self. If therefore the
manner of curing your supposed possessions then, was neither by physical
means, nor by prayer and fasting: it follows necessarily, that their said
cure, it was then also effected by some supernatural, and miraculous means.
Now then, if the cure of those your supposed possessions before the coming of
Christ, were every of them supernatural, strange and miraculous, how can it
be possibly true which the Evangelist reports here, saying thus, the like
was never seen in Israel? since, the miraculous expelling of spirits and
devils, Matthew. 9.33. Luke 4.36.
had been in every age of the world, even equally admirable, strange and
most meruellous? Again, since Christ is in deed, Genesis 3.15.
that promised seed of the woman, who (in his own proper person) was actuallie
to break the Serpents head: it is meruellous probable, that the eternal
father (even in his foreseeing wisdom) had purposelie determined (from before
all eternities) that the primarie, and first actual encountering with Satan his
actual possossion, should be primarily and actuallie accomplished by Christ
himself, in his own person first; and that therefore, this temporary
judgment of Satan his actual possession, was never actuallie inflicted upon
any, before the coming of Christ. Besides that, if there had been
possessions and dispossessions from the beginning of the world, D. Doctrine,
page 27.
as your self does else where avouch: the same then (no doubt) being so
fearful a judgment, would have been eftsoons foretold and threatened the
Jews, by some of the Prophets at least, for an especial part of the counsel
of God, as well as many other special judgments of less moment by much: Act.
20.27.
and so, even those their prophetical predictions and denuntiations of that so
fearful a judgment (being so necessary for the Church of God) it would no
doubt, have been as carefully registered for the succeeding ages to the end of
the world, as any other like judgment of God whatsoever. Moreover, if there
had been such a miraculous dispossessing of devils, any long time before the
coming of Christ, then surely, the same undoubtedly (being such admirable
matters of fact) they would in some one book or other throughout the old
testament, have been most carefully recorded for all posterities: since, many
other miracles (of less importance by much) are so precisely put down in
every place: namely the miraculous deliverance of Israel: the straung
wonders in Egypt: Exodus 14.29. Exodus 7. and 8. and 9.10. Exodus 14.28, 29 Exodus
16. and 17 Exodus 19. and 20 Josh. 10.11.12. Judge. 14. and 15. and 16. 1. Sam.
5. and 17. 1. King. 17. and 18 2. King. 5. and 6 and 7. and 8. and 1^
in the red sea: in the wilderness: in mount Sinah, and else where: the wonders
recorded in the books of Ioshuah, Judges, Samuel, of the Kings, the
Chronicles, and other historical books, wherein all such admirable matters of
fact, are purposelie put down and recorded. All which precedent miraculous
actions, being in some of those books at the least, so exactlie registered by
the spirit of God: it is not to be doubted, but that the miraculous
dispossessing of devils (if any such then) would have been likewise most
carefully recorded, as matters, either actuallie, or typicallie performed.
But, no such authentical record is any where extant in all the Canonical
scriptures: and therefore, it is very probable, there was then no such
miraculous dispossessing of devils before the coming of Christ.


Exorcistes. Howsoever, such a miraculous manner of curing then, be not
actuallie recorded, it is likely the same was typicallie shadowed forth in the
brazen Serpent. Numb. 21, 8, 9.
Because that Serpent was a lively figure of Christ himself: who was
actuallie to cure the deadly sting of that infernal Serpent the devil.


Orthodoxus. Be it so as you say. Yet, that brazen Serpent, it only
prefigured the effectual curing of the serpentine sting of sin, and not the
power of Christ his actual expelling of devils from out of the bodies of men:
unless happily you imagine, that, as all the Elect were effectually wounded
with the serpentine sting of sin: so were they also essentiallie possessed
with devils inherently dwelling within their bodies. Besides that, the brazen
serpent was only a shadow of that whereof Christ was the body: and therefore
by that reason, there could be only a bare shadow, but no essential
possessions, or dispossessions before the coming of Christ. Furthermore, if
there had (in deed) bin essential possessions before the coming of Christ:
what then could Christ himself have done more at his coming, then many
others had effected before him? Besides that, if there had been such
miraculous dispossessions before, then surely, though Christ at his coming,
had also (for the declaration of his deity) dispossessed ten thousand
Demoniakes more then he did: yet, this one exception had bin very forcible
against him from time to time: namely, that many others before him had
performed as much in effect. And therefore no reason, that (for such a
miraculous dispossessing of devils) they should esteem him to be rather the
Messiah, then any of the rest. Moreover, if there had been any such miraculous
dispossessings before, then had not that been true which our Savior speaks
of himself, John 15.24.
saying thus: If I had not done works among them which none other man did, they
had not had sin: but now have they seen and hated, not only me, but also my
father. Briefly, if there had been such dispossessions before the coming of
Christ: how then should our Savior himself (by such his powerful expelling
of devils) have been so particularly reputed for that son of David, Matthew.
12.23. and 15.25. Psalm. 91.13.
who especially was to walk upon the Lion and Adder, and triumphantly to
tread the young Lion, and Dragon under his feet?


Exorcistes. Whatsoever you say, I will never be persuaded, but that there were
dispossessions before the coming of Christ.


Orthodoxus. Well, be it supposed there were such miraculous dispossessings in
Israel, before the coming of Christ: yet is it to too absurd, to avouch that
those extraordinary effects which apparantlie brake forth in former
Demoniakes, are purposelie recorded for infallible ordinary means, or signs,
to discern soundly and truly of all the succeeding Demoniakes. Both, See D.
Detection, page 110. page 138. page 99. page 162.
because we are no where foretold by the Lord (your self also, else where
auouching the contrary) that devils should preciselie observe but one, and the
selfsame method, or order, in tormenting the parties possessed: and, for that
also there was then no such urgent necessity of any such means, or signs to
demonstrate Demoniakes. Detection. p. 54.
For first, respecting our Savior himself, all such demonstratiue signs had
bin meerelie superfluous: because he very well knew the parties possessed
without the weak help of any such sensible, or humane experiments. As also,
the people they very well might, and did also undoubtedly know the parties
possessed: partly, from the often revelations of the parties themselves,
partly, from the deliberate determinations of sundry their approved
Physicians, who duly examining the order and manner of the possessed man's
fits, could certainly tell them, that the same must necessarily proceed from
some supernatural cause. Partly also from the outrage of Satan more at the
presence of Christ, See Darels Detection, page 113
then ever before: acknowledging him withal, to be the son of the living
God. And, partly also from the common peoples proper experience: who having
thoroughly experimented all physical helps, Mar. 5.25. Mar. 9.18. Luke 8.42.
and finding such ordinary or natural means ineffectual for working the
cure, were driven to conclude of some other efficient, then the common course
of nature could possibly afford. Neither did the parties, who brought the
Demoniakes to Christ, purposelie relate those fearful vexations, as the
only infallible means whereby they truly discerned the party his undoubted
possession, Mat. 17.14.16. Mar. 9.17. Luke 9.38.40. Mat. 15.22.
which you very fondly imagine: but, they reported them rather as forcible
motions, to incline and stir up our Saviors heart unto some timely
compassionable care for their timely dispossession, as plainly appears.
Besides this, the inference you bring from that Cananitish woman whom you quote
in your margin: does rather maime, then manage your cause in question. For,
she was none of the common people of the Jews, but a Christian proselyte:
very truly instructed concerning a saving knowledge in Christ, Mat. 15.22.
as may plainly appear by her holy confession. And therefore, there is no
doubt but that selfsame Spirit which had instructed her soul so soundly
before, concerning the undoubted true means for her daughters deliverance: had
also foreshewed her as soundly before, the very true nature of her daughters
malady, from the which she was then to be miraculouslie delivered by Christ.
Moreover, if the common people of the Jews could not possibly discern of the
parties possessed, but, by some such sensible effects or signs, as they had
sensibly experimented in their precedent Demoniakes: Mat. 9.32.12.22. Luke
11.14.
then, how were those other Demoniakes discerned, of who^ no such sensible
signs at al are recorded in Scripture? Briefly, your pretended objection
concerning the Jews, does not concludentlie avouch, that either the Jews
themselves did undoubtedly hold an essential possession in those their
Demoniakes: or, that otherways it was needless for them to seek unto Christ
for his help, all the while the devil did but outwardly afflict the party
possessed. No, no, the manner of their speech imports rather the contrary of
that which your self do affirm: namely, that they (holding only but an
outward vexation by Satan, in those their Demoniakes) did very earnestly
importune our Savior Christ for their speedy deliverance. So then, that your
idle conceit concerning some certain true means or signs, for the Jews to
discern their Demoniakes by: See D. Detection. page 99. page 100. page. 138.
page. 162. D. Detection. page. 54.
is merely ridiculous. Both, because those your supposed means or signs, are
only recorded as mere matters of fact: and for that also, no certain rules
to discern of possessions may certainly be concluded, from such uncertain
effects. Since, as strange and as admirable matters as any you name: may, and
do eftsoons also proceed from the only operations and corruptions of nature,
as our seventh Dialogue declares.


Exorcistes. See D. Doctrine, page. 3.
Not so, for these actions or passions I speak of: they are undoubtedly such as
surmount the whole faculty, skill and power of nature.


Physiologus. Give me leave (M. Orthodoxus) to argue this point. Come on
Exorcistes, rehearse some few of the straungest of those your supposed actions
or passions: which so highly surmounted the whole faculty, skill and power of
nature.


Exorcistes. See D. Detection. page. 100. page. 136.
With very good will. First therefore, the youngman (having pinnes thrust very
deep into his legs, and other parts of his body) he was without sense or
feeling thereof: a thing utterly impossible to nature.


Physiologus. He himself has eftsoons deposed, and confessed since then,
that he has felt the pinnes, and plucked them forth: although (for the
present) he wholly dissembled the pain, as if he had been altogether in a
sensles condition. Howbeit, because in this and those other his deposed reports
which directly do cross your idle conceit, you usually give him the lie: let
us therefore, the more stricktly examine this your sensles opinion, concerning
his supposed sensles condition. Galene very flatly avouches, ^alen. Contra
Aristotel.
that sense is not the alteration or chaung which is made in the organon, or
instrument of sense: but, the knowledge rather of that selfsame alteration. As
for example, if (while I am attentive to any thing) one passes before me,
though the very image of that party be truly received into the Christalline
humor of mine eye, as it were in a glass: yet for all that, I do not see the
said party so passing before me. Because, either the visuall spirit with the
faculty thereof, is kept back in the spring and original fountain of sight:
or, for that the soul does not send forth the common sense into the eye (it
being else where employed) without which there can be no sense, and so by
consequence, either little or no pain at all. Again, if I be earnestly
busied, or attentively occupied about any matter, although (at that instant)
some one being near unto me, should speak or cry out aloud, yet should not I
discern what is spoken or cried: because, the common sense is employed and
hindered else where. As for example, Archimedes, he was so earnestly busied
about, and so attentively bent upon his Geometrical lines during the siege of
Syracuse: as (when the City it self was subdued) he did neither think, nor
know that the same had been taken before. Again, some having received many
dangerous gunshots in wars, yet (being wholly taken up with resolution and
purpose to fight) they felt (for the present) no pain at all: which pearcing
of shot, was ten thousand times more torment, then the youngman his pricking
with pinnes. Now then, if constancy and resolution in any set purpose: as
also, if a strong imagination may forciblie detain the spirit animal in her
original fountain: briefly, if the soul does not send forth her common
sense into any part or member affected, without the faculty of which common
sense there must needs be in that part or member, either little or no feeling
at al, and so by consequence, either little or no pain perceived for ye
present: shall we therefore imagine it straung, and highly surmounting the whole
faculty and power of nature, that your pretended poor patient at Nottingham
(being especially so resolute upon that his pretended purpose) should endure
(with very little or no pain) the pricking with pinnes, and so to dissemble
the same for the present, as if he had bin altogether in a sensles condition?
Yea, and (which more is) must we undoubtedly conclude, that he was therefore
possessed with a devil, because he felt not the pricking with pins? Nay, let us
rather conclude, that he was not possessed, because he felt not the pricking. For
there is no likelihood, and it is a thing unreasonable, yea, to too absurd, to
imagine that the devil should quite take away the feeling of pain, from those
whom he actuallie possesses with a purposed mind no vex and torment: no, he
would rather augment and increase the feeling of pain, See D. Doctri^^ page.
89. pag^ 106.
that their torment might be so much more intolerable to them. And therefore,
this is no action or passion surmounting the power of nature: or worth the
recital to prove your idle conceit.


Exorcistes. See D. 1. Nar^at. page 19.
Besides this senceleslnes of body: he foamed at the mouth like an Horse or a
Boar, for a great space together.


Physiologus. If foaming at mouth be a supernatural action: then the parties
affected with the Epilepsie or falling sickness, these can and do also effect
supernatural actions. Moreover, if foaming at mouth does undoubtedly
demonstrate a devil in the party that foameth: then may we likewise conclude,
that every such scould as foames at the mouth; yea, every Horse and Boar,
which foames at the mouth, has undoubtedly some dangerous devil in their
belly. But, who ever before now has heard any speech of the devil his white
foame? For surely, if a roaping white foame be some supernatural action or
passion, surmounting the whole faculty and power of nature it self* the same
then must needs be the foame of some dangerous devil demonstrated so plainly
unto us, by such supernatural occurrents. Notwithstanding, what wight (being
well in his wits) would not deem it a very ridiculous toy, to hear that a
man (by his foaming and spattle) may truly be discernde to be essentiallie
possessed with a devil? Fie, fie Exorcistes, that you should so impudently dare
to abuse your poor ignorant Reader. Are these the supernatural actions or
passions: from whence you so confidently conclude your essential possessions
of spirits and devils?


Exorcistes. See D. 1. Narra^. page 12.
Nay sir, besides these* he and the rest, they had every of them some certain
violent motions and stirrings: and that also without any alteration at al,
either in their pulse, their breathing or color.


Physiologus. Those their supposed strange motions or stirrings, they were (it
should seem) at no time so violent, but that the poor silly persons then
present could easelie stay them: which argues no such supernatural action, as
must necessarily be effected by some devil essentiallie inherent within them.
Notwithstanding, be it freely confessed, that those their imagined motions or
stirrings were (in very deed) so sudden, and so violent as you bear us in
hand, yea, and that also without any change or alteration in pulse, in
breathing or color: yet, this concludes no supernatural action or passion.
Only, Galen.
it signifies that the blood of those parties was earthie and thick, and so
it could not (on the sudden) be so easily kindled: which causes not only
the pulse of such persons to be seldom or rare, but even their color it self
to receive no sudden alteration or change. Again, who does not eftsoons
behold sundry Melancholic persons, not only many days and months, but
also many years to run up and down like madmen, crying very strangely, and
howling like Dogs: without any alteration or change at all in pulse, in
breathing or color? Moreover, very use and custom helps much in these
matters: yea, and that also, without any alteration or change of pulse, of
breathing or color. Your patient at Nottingham, he was (by profession) a
tumbler long before: and therefore, the daily and accustomed use of those his
supposed violent motions or stirrings, could procure in his body the less
alteration or change. Briefly, how many things else may we daily behold in the
variable causes and courses of nature more admirable, Baptista Porta, in magic.
naturali. Leuin. Lemnius de occult. naturae miraculis. Mizaldus, and
Fracastorius, in lib. Sympathiae, and Antipathiae.
more strange and incredible, than these are by much, the which
notwithstanding, are never attributed to Devils, but to the hidden secrets of
nature it self: as we have generally declared in our seventh Dialogue at
large, and may more particularly appear in the several authors set down in
the margin. By all which it is very apprant: that this, and the rest are but
slender weak reasons, to conclude so weighty a cause.


Exorcistes. Well, See D. 1. Narration, page 17.
but what say you to this? He was sometimes stretched forth in length, to such
an extraordinary stature, as he seemed to exceed in height the tallest man in
the town: which thing could never be wrought by any natural faculty, or
power of nature.


Physiologus. Howsoever the party reporting had simply deposed this point,
may not your self (having sense) be monstrouslie ashamed to pen down such
palpable, such impudent, and gross impossibilities, as neither man, nor devil
are able to accomplish but by an utter destruction of nature. Notwithstanding,
be it supposed, that some such unwonted extention had then been effected, as
you bear us in hand: yet, thus then we answer the same. The party intending
to reach at the coard, being something above his ordinary height, he might
therein have some extraordinary assistance from nature herself: who
endeavoring such an extention, could not recall her said purpose before she
had come to her uttermost limits. For, whatsoever is moved in recta linea, in
the right line: Arist. lib. 8. de Physic.
it must necessarily come to arest or ever it can take a contrary motion. As
for example, a ball being directly thrown against a wall: before it
reboundeth back, it rests it self against the wall. Again, an artery
after the dilatation thereof, before it may possibly make a contraction, it
rests it self. So surely, all the arteries in Summers his body, extracting
themselves toward the height of the coard aforesaid: they must needs raise
up themselves to their uttermost extention, or ever nature it self could cause
them (by a natural contraction) to return to their former accustomed course:
in all which time, that party (beholding the boy at a blush) might imagine him
to be of a supernatural stature. And thus you may see some natural reason,
for the youngman his extending himself to such extraordinary height: if (in
deed) the same had been so as the party does simply report it to be. See D.
1. Narrat. page 16. the 6. Deponent.
Howbeit, because this supposed supernatural sight is only reported by a silly
poor woman, perhaps in a maze when she saw the same: men may be too credulous
concerning those her reports. For, she not seeing such sight till the
afternoon, it may be some vapors arising then up in her brain, Hyperius in
Method. ^heolog. lib. 2. p. 311 (...).
did breed certain accidents, like to suffusions or clouds; yea, and the same
also in such an unwonted sort, as the poor woman might undoubtedly imagine,
Galenu^ libr. de Symptomatu^ differentijs.
that she beheld the youngman from out of his ordinary place, or stature:
which (with proper resemblances) may be lively demonstrated, especially by the
art optike at large, and therefore the same no such admirable matter as you
bear us in hand.


Exorcistes. Well sir, besides all this, he was eftsoons of such supernatural
strength: See D. 1. Narrat. page 14.17.
as he could hardly be ruled.


Physiologus. How then came it to pass that some few men or women were able
(by their own natural power) to subdue his said supernatural strength at
their pleasure? See D. 1. Narrat. page 14.17.
You shall hardly persuade me, that the mere natural power of a thousand
men, may possibly subdue the supernatural strength of a spirit or devil.
Math. 8.28. Mark. 5.3. Luke 8.29.
Howbeit, if this your supposed Demoniake had (in deed) been fast tied in
chains of iron, as were the Demoniakes put down in the Gospel, and could
also as easily have knapt them in sunder: you might then more boldly have
reported, and we would the sooner have believed, that the youngman (as you
say) had been (in deed) of an extraordinary supernatural strength, beyond
the faculty and power of nature. In the mean time, you may not be angry,
though we esteem these trothles tales as trifling toys: being altogether
insufficient to prove any such, either actions or passions, as do wholly
surmount the faculty, skill, and power of nature.


Exorcistes. Why sir, besides the precedent supernatural actions, the
youngman, See D. 1. Narrat. page 17.18.
he was of a supernatural knowledge: foretelling my coming unto him, and
telling of many things done, the actours themselves being absent.


Physiologus. This is not so supernatural as you make men believe. For he
might be ashsted in those his supposed predictions, and declarations of actions
else where effected: D. Detection. page 93.
by watch-wordes, by signs, by the insinuations, and speeches of others; by
his own observations, collections, and probable conjectures: yea, and
perhaps, by some cunning confederacies with Exorcistes himself. Now then all
these, and other like helps he eftsoons enjoying as has been deposed by
diverse: no merueile at all though those his cosining predictions, and
declarations of actions, to simple and plain meaning people, did seem very
admirable, strange and miraculous. Although yet with the circumspect and
provident beholders, there was in them no straungnes at all: but such as might
easily be effected by the meanest of wit, with the help of a cunning
confederate. Banks and hi^ black Horse confederate.
For, if Banks (by his continual prastise) had brought his black Horse to
such exquisite knowledge, as that (by the only sight of his masters eye, by
his words, and many other experimented observations and rules) he could, and
did eftsoons effect such admirable matters, as many of the beholders did
imagine him to be rather a black devil, then an Horse: why should we wonder at
all, that two cunning companions confederate together before, should conclude
such a course between themselves, as the one (by the help of the other) should
prognosticate such strange and incredible events, as that the silly poor
hearers would rather deem him some supernatural Cole-prophet, then any
natural cosining companion. So then this argues no such supernatural
knowledge, as you would make us believe. Howbeit, if he had spoken either
Hebrew or Greek, never having learned those languages before: that had been
in deed a very certain argument of some supernatural knowledge, and might
very probably have concluded some possession by Satan.


Exorcistes. Why sir, he spoke Latin I assure you: saying thus. Ego sum Deus.
Ego sum Rex. See D. 1. Narration, page. 19.
Yea, and (which more is) he spoke (for a good space together) with an hallow
voice in his belly, his mouth never closed, but stretched wide open.


Physiologus. It should seem he was only possessed with some poor petie
devil, See H. Discovery, p. 253.254. Ibid. page 215.
that had no more Latin in store. Howbeit, if the devils memory had failed
him, the best is, the boy himself, he had learned that Latin at school, many
years or ever the devil and he grew acquainted. See S. Harsnets Discovery,
lib. page 227.
As for speaking with an hollow voice in his belly, whatsoever it pleases
your self to put down with your pen: very many notwithstanding have
iudiciallie deposed, that he spoke as distinctlie, and as orderly as other men
do. But, be it supposed he spoke in such sort as you say: Iul. Scaliger co^tra
Cardan. Exercitat. 258. Hippocrates in Epidem. lib. 5. sent. 58. Johan. Gorreus
in definitionib. medicinal. Faetius, in aeconomia* Hippocratrin. Aug. de Ciuit.
Dei lib. 24. cap. 23.
does that argue necessarily some devil in his belly? So, every paltrie
ventriloquist must become a Demoniake. Hippocrates makes mention of the wife
of one Polemarchus, who spoke in her belly. John Gorreus, he says, that such
as speak in their belly, in Hipocrates, they are called (...), that is,
persons which speak in their belly; their mouth and their lips being
closed. Faetius, he writes, that the great Adrian Turnebus affirmed in his
reading chair: that he had seen a Rogue, who (without either opening his
mouth or stirring of his lips) did with his belly alone make such a sound,
and uttered such a sensible voice, as both pleased the hearers, and gainde to
himself great store of money by the practice thereof. If therefore these be
the supernatural actions whereupon you so greatly rely, for the undoubted
confirmation of those your supposed essential possessions: I am sorry for
intercepting M. Orthodoxus his course. Both, because these things are to too
course and ridiculous, to conclude such a cause: and for that also, they were
not in such sort effected, as they are by your self in your published Pamphlet
reported.


Exorcistes. Howsoever you would gladly discredit the truth of the History,
See D. Doctri^ page 3.
the same could not possibly be false: it having the undoubted truth thereof
so carefully reported with every circumstance, and the same also most
soundly deposed unto, by diverse Deponents.


Orthodoxus. Why man, the very matters themselves, they were nothing so
strange as the History reports them to be. For, how admirable soever they
seemed at first in the beholders eyes: yet, the Deponents themselves (deposing
with some better deliberation, their supposed straungnes a fresh) they have
since then more advisedly reformed their oaths, H. Discovery. page 207.20^
209.210. etc. Item. lib. 4. pa^^ 256.257.
and deposed the contrary. Namely, that now (by their better enlightened
judgments) they do plainly perceive all those the former supposed
supernatural actions or passions: to be but mere counterfeit toys, and
plain cosoning practices. And therefore, whatsoever your self may happily
imagine concerning the supposed infallible truth of that History, so
carefully reporting those several points, with the several circumstances
appertaining thereto: yet, the very best that wise men may think of that
History is this. Namely, that the writer thereof, reported those matters as
then only they seemed to be; but not as they were indeed and in truth. Besides
that, other Histories are therefore credited, because they report nothing in
nature impossible: or if happily they do, yet then they plainly demonstrate
how the same was effected. Moreover, whereas you tell us, that the truth of the
History has been deposed unto: See D. Detect* page 156. and page 168.
our answer is this, so has the supposed truth thereof, bin truly deposed
against, howsoever you your self (in your accustomed charity) do charge the
Deponents themselves with open penury. And therefore (notwithstanding that
your exceeding great care for the truth of the history) the matters reported
therein, they may be untrue.


Exorcistes. See D. Doctrine, page 4.
But sir? the Magistrates, they have not hitherto punished the reporters
themselves, for seducers and reporters of lies: and therefore, why should not
the published history be reported for truth?


Orthodoxus. As though (because some silly poor persons reporting those
matters as they verily supposed the same to be) the Magistrate therefore, he
must with no less severity, censure such flying reports, then if it had been
(in deed and in truth) for a mere matter of fact: or else, those matters
themselves (so flyinglie reported abroad) they must necessarily be entertained
for infallible truths: or as though, because the Magistrate, either in mercy
will not, or, in some negligence does not severely punish the reporters of
lies: therefore, those their reported lies escaping unpunished, must (hand over
head) be esteemed infallible truths. Or, as though, because the due punishment
for such seducing and lying reporters be prolonged a time: therefore (in the
mean time) the history it self (affoording such false and lying reports)
must necessarily be reputed an authentical history, notwithstanding the
principal parties, and the Deponents also themselves have iudiciallie deposed
the contrary. Neither does the principal party report any impossibility of
himself, as you would have us fondly imagine: because, it is undoubtedly
possible, and we make no question at all, but that he did counterfeite. And so
(notwithstanding those your thirty Deponents in store) that which the history
reports concerning those your supposed supernatural actions, or passions, it
might be utterly false.


Exorcistes. See D. Doctrine, page 5.
Yea, but I am sufficiently able (notwithstanding the Party his impudent
denials) to prove (by the apparent signs put down in the Scriptures) that he
was undoubtedly possessed of Satan.


Orthodoxus. When you have substantially proved unto us, first, that those your
pretended signs put down in the Scriptures, were purposelie recorded by the
spirit of God, for certain, and infallible perpetual means to discern truly
of essential possessions, and then next, that those falsely imagined signs in
your counterfeit patients, were every of them, as undoubted effects of such a
possession as were any of the other recorded in Scripture, of an actual
possession: then you say something unto us. Howbeit, this your exceeding great
labor to prove your supposed essential possessions from Scripture, by the
particular effects of parties actuallie possessed in Scripture: it might (we
verily suppose) until then, have been very well spared. Both, because those
pretended Scripture signs were never put down as any certain demonstratiue
rules, to discern of your supposed essential possessions, which we have
proved before: and, for that also we do freely acknowledge an actual
possession in the days of Christ, howsoever we do flatly deny an essential
inherencie of Devils in the possessed man's body, or mind, as in our third and
sixth Dialogue is plainly declared. Moreover, be it supposed, that those
selfsame effects of Demoniakes recorded in Scripture, were (in deed and in
truth) the undoubted true means to discern truly of actual possessions then:
yet does it not necessary follow, that they are now also the undoubted true
signs of an essential possession in Summers. H. Discovery, page 177. and
page 294. and page 297.
Both, because Summers himself has no less freely confessed, then
iudiciallie deposed his counterfeite carriage in all things: and for that also,
the possession of Devils whatsoever, is ceased long since, as in our seventh,
and tenth Dialogues has been sufficiently showed.


Exorcistes. If this be all you are able to say, concerning the infallible
signs set down in the Scriptures: your answer is weak.


Orthodoxus. The answer already avouched, might be fully sufficien^ to stay
the violent streams of these your outrageous courses. Notwithstanding all
this, least happily (by our voluntary silence to these your supposed signs
expressed in Scripture) you might, either falsely flatter your self, or fondly
imagine, that we are forced to silence, because, now you do in very deed,
Aiacis clypeo tympanizare: encounter our forces with such a dangerous two edged
sword as kills down right: See D. Doctrine, page 5.
let us therefore consider the matter so much the more exactlie, and see
whether the Lord (by those your pretended Scripture signs) has pronounced a
definitive sentence flat on your side, or not. And herein, we will first
examine those the supposed signs themselves: and, then next your orderly
applying of those selfsame signs, to that your pretended purpose. Your
supposed signs of possession are of two sorts; namely, either written or
experimented, or rather (if you will have it so) they are, either canonical or
apocryphal signs. Your written, D. Doctrine, page 6.
or rather (if you will) your canonical signs, they are those which your
self would forciblie strain from the sacred Scriptures. Forciblie I say, both
because there are no such matters established in Scripture, for infallible
signs of future possessions, as we showed before: and for that also, if some
such could be soundly produced from Scripture; yet these your published signs,
they keep no such certainty in themselves, as may certainly conclude any
certain established means, for the certain discerning of essential
possessions to the end of the world. No surely, these your published signs,
they do ebb and flow with the Moon; having sometimes their redundancie, and
sometimes their diminution, as best pleases your humor, to make them
proportionable with this your pretended purpose in hand. See D. 1. Narrat. at
the latter end of the treatise.
For first, in yt your primary imprinted Narration (the Moon being then in the
full) it was so full Sea with those your supposed signs of essential
possession in Summers, as they flowed just to three and twenty in number. Then
next, in your printed Apology (the tide being fallen, See D. Apology, page 9.
it should seem, to some lower ebb) they did forthwith forgo at that ebb,
full five of their former rate, and, only became but eighteen old ledgers,
as may very plainly appear. See D. Doctrine, page 6. to 17.
And yet now in this your Doctrine of possessions (wherein all things must
needs be esteemed, as the undoubted true Oracles of Apollo Pythius at Delphos)
they do suddenly flow to a fuller Sea then ever before; being now newly
amounted to nineteen in number. Whereunto also, See D. Doctrine, page 16.
if we add (as needeslie we must) those your own seven experimented or
apocryphal signs of possession: then do they arise fully to six and twenty
in the whole. Surely, if there do shortly fall into your hands another fresh
Demoniake, affoording some new coined signs of essential possessions: it is
not to be doubted, but that (in your next new coined Pamphlet) we shall have
just one and thirty signs of such a possession, and then (I believe) the game
will be hit. Howbeit, in the mean season, such palpable uncertainties
(especially in the very principles and rules themselves) do plainly
Prognosticate (to so many as are not purposelie blind) that this your new found
Cabalisticall craft, concerning the deep and mystical art of Diuillitie: is
nothing else in effect, but a mere Cabalisticall cogging conceit, or rather a
very nimble and crafty conueyance of Legerdemaine. And therefore, those your
supposed Scripture signs (continued from the sixth to the seventeenth page)
they might (I assure you, for any thing hitherto heard) very well have been
spared: were it not, that your self (in setting them down) did purposely
intend to set forth to the world your circular folly. Who (rather then it
should be supposed you did want your proper Antagonist, to encounter with these
your supposed signs of your pretended essential possessions) would even
purposely cross your own self, to make some sport with your self. For, See
D. Doctrine page. 5.
first (in the first page) you make Scripture signs the only assured means,
to discern truly of essential possessions: and then next (in the sixteen
and seventeen pages) you do to too presumptuouslie put down your own
experimented, See D. Doctrine page. 16. and 17
or rather your apocryphal signs, to be every way as undoubted demonstrations
of such an essential possession, as any of the other expressed before. The
which presumption of yours, your very friend (I mean M. Darel himself) has
censured thus. See D. Doctrine, page 22.
Oh monstrous impiety! is not the Lord Jesus (trow we) very highly beholding
to this presumptuous Exorcist, that dares even in his very Doctrine of
possessions and dispossessions, thus presumptuouslie place the signs which
Christ Jesus has given in his holy word of one possessed, among those his own
apocryphal signs, which are but uncertain and doubtful? If happily you be
offended with the peremptory Censurer of this your presumptuous practice: you
must (for any thing I know) be fame to pull your self by the nose. And this in
effect, for your pretended signs of essential possession.


Exorcistes. Very well: See D. Doctrine, page 6. etc.
and what say you next for my applying of those selfsame signe^, to my
special purpose.


Orthodoxus. This (in effect) is that which I say to the same: namely, that
your presumptuous applying of these particular signs set down in the
Scriptures, See D. Doctrine from page 6. to page 17.
to those your particular pretended patients, from the sixth to the seventeenth
page (as before) is an intolerable trifling with truth: deserving rather a
judicial censurer, then any logical confuter. Neither (when you have done
what you can) will this your filthy profanation of Scripture (in any
possibility) be made to support the ridiculous and idle frame of your palpable
fooleries, from a most fearful downfall before you beware: they are so
diversely opposite among themselves, and the one so cruelly cutteth in sunder
the throat of another. For, behold (I beseech you) what irreconcilable
garboyles, your own pen has rashly procured among those your pretended true
signs of your essential possessions? First, those your fantastical
Demoniakes, they have sometimes a supernatural strength, See D. Doctrine, page
14. and 16. See D. Detection page 100. See D. Doctrine, page 17. See D.
Doctrine, page 9.
and knowledge: yet sometimes again, they only but seem to have so. Sometimes
they hurt, but hurt not at all: for though Satan can hurt, yet he hurts not
forsooth: although yet, we have sometimes seen the contrary; for, Darling
was so sore hurt, that he was lame for thirteen weeks together. Again,
sometimes they seem to be sensles, but are not sensles: to see, but see not at
all: to hear, when they hear not: to speak, when they speak not: to strike
with their hands, See D. Detection. page 129.
when they strike not: to walk with their feet, when they walk not at al.
Yea, and (which I believe is a wonder of wonders) fire is sometimes no fire:
See D. Detection, page 163.
I mean it will sometimes burn, but yet not burn at all, if we dare credit
your pen, in reporting these parabables, or rather these paltrie
fantastical fooleries. For what is this else in effect (I beseech you) but
even most impudently also to avouch unto us, that those your pretended
patients, they seemed sometimes to foame, but foamed not: to cry out aloud, but
cried not at all: to wallow, but wallowed not: to swell, but swelled not: to be
left for dead, but were nothing less, and so forth? For surely, where the
causes themselves are only in a seeming show; there the effects can never be
truly in a showing substance. But good Exorcistes, never go about (by any your
bewitching persuasions) to make us believe any of these your cabasticall
conceits or fantastical effects, in those your fantastical patients: unless
you will freely permit us withal to conclude, that those the pretended effects
of all those your supposed essential possessions, they were only but
fantastical effects: and so consequently, but fantastical signs: but
fantastical possessions and dispossessions: briefly, but the fantastical
devises, of a fantastical Exorcist: intending (by those his fantastical
fooleries) to replenish the world with fantastical fools. For, would you not
(in good sooth) imagine us all to be out of our wits: if you could make us
believe, that the master devil himself with all his adherents, were able to
make a thing essentiallie existing in nature, either to be, or not to be, when
it pleases himself: or, that he can cause (at his pleasure) the same thing,
so existing in nature, to receive any other proportion, quality, shape or
form, then that which was primarilie appointed for it, and, even naturally
infused into it by the first creation of God? As in our fourth and fifth
Dialogues we have handled at large. Well, notwithstanding all this, we must be
forced to account al these the precedent fantastical fooleries, for
infallible truths: if (forsooth) we dare credit your bare report, concerning
such admirable matters. And surely, there is some reason we should harken unto
them at leisure: you your self especially having here showed your self the
most admirable mirabilist, among all the mirabilistes under the heavens. Here
is (I trow) not only mirandum and miraculum both, but (which more is)
mirabiliter mirificissimum: I mean, a very world of wonderles wonders.
Howbeit, these your pretended signs of essential possessions, with their
fantastical or fond application to those your supposed Demoniakes, being (in
very deed) mere matters of fact, and so, beyond the compass of our
Commission, we leave them therefore to M. Harsnet, See D. Doctrine page 19.20.
and Thyreus the Jesuit, with whom you are hotely disputing these points: and
will be I perceive (so gross is your impudency) until public authority do
either determine the contrary, or appoint you and us, to debate your question
afresh, concerning the essential possession of devils. Wherein, when you have
substantiallie prooned: first, that our Savior Christ has undoubtedly
established those selfsame supposed signs of actual possessions recorded in
Scripture, See. D. Doctrine page 18.
to be for ever, the undoubted true means, to discern soundly of essential
possessions to the end of the world. And then next, that the pretty
fantastical effects (pretended from those your fantastical patients) were
undoubtedly, even one and the same with the other: that they proceeded
apparantlie from one and the selfsame cause: and were also, essentiallie
effected after one and the selfsame manner, without either cosenage or crafty
conueiance: then conclude (as you do) from the effect to the cause, and spare
not. In the mean time, you must give us good leave, to doubt of their truth as
we have hitherto done; and must do (I believe) for any thing you are able to
allege to the contrary. The rather, because the Evangelist (we doubt not)
does put down all those which you call Scripture signs, as only mere
matters of fact, in the parties possessed then: and not as infallible means to
discern soundly of your essential possessions now, as we showed before.


Exorcistes. Nay sir, the Evangelist does not barely report them, as mere
matters of fact: See D Doctrine, page 19.
but, puts them down also, as rules of doctrine and directions for the Church,
to discern truly of essential possessions now.


Orthodoxus. How are you certain hereof?


Exorcistes. See D. Doctrine, page 19. (...). Ipse d^x^t.
Why sir? I conceive it so: therefore, no doubt it is so.


Orthodoxus. Oh irrefragable argument! autos epha, ipse dixit: M. Exorcistes
himself has spoken it: therefore, all the wisdom in the world will never be
able to impugn the impregnable truth thereof. Howbeit sir, I for my own part,
conceive it not so: therefore the same is not so. How now Exorcistes, here is
Pythagoras against Pythagoras: who I beseech you, shall be vmpier between them?


Exorcistes. Surely, the very words of the text. Wherein our Savior says not,
Mar. 9.21.
how long has thy son been possessed: but rather, how long has thy son
been thus handled? See D. Doctrine page 19.
Making (you may plainly perceive) such his manner of handling: an infallible
sign to discern sonndlie of all future essential possessions.


Orthodoxus. You labor, Maledicta gl^ssa, quae corrumpit textum.
to prove your idle conceit, from a plain text of Scripture: but accursed be
that gloss, which corrupts the text. For the question which Christ
propounds there to the father of the child, Mark. 9.21. (...).
respects only the first time of that accident, and not the manner or form
of his handling: as very plainly appears in the words of the text, saying
thus, how long time is it? ^agni^^, ex q^^ ei hoc accu^t. Bez^. quod ho^ (...)
ie. M^ntanus, vt hoc factum est*
ous touto gegonen auto: that is, since this thing befell thy son; or since
this thing happened to him: or, since this came to pass: or since this
vexation first seized upon him? Thus you see the very words of the text, and
the purest translators do simply refer that demand of Christ to the very
time it self, not to the manner of that accident: and therefore (were it not
that you would gladly draw in your essential possession, as it were by the
ears) all wise men would wonder you should so corruptly abuse the plain text.
Howbeit, this is not all, for (besides this your purposed corrupting of
Scripture) you do also very presumptuouslie add to the text the wicked
invention of your own idle brain, by foysting these words ( in him, or a
devil in him) into the very text it self: and so you enforce the holy
Scriptures to speak what you please, saying thus. How long is it since thy
son has had essentiallie a devil within him? And this no doubt, of a very
set purpose, to underprop your senceles opinion of essential possessions:
there being no words in the text, importing such matter, or tending that way.
For Matthew reporting that story says only thus: Math. 17.15* Luke. 9.36.
Mark 9.27.
He is lunatike, or sore vexed. Luke says, a spirit takes him. Mark says,
He has a dombe spirit: Lo, this is all that the Evangelists write of that
matter. How therefore are you able (from al, or any one of these places) to
conclude a Devil essentiallie inherent in the body of the Child? Nay rather,
why should we not boldly conclude the quite contrary? Namely, that the Devil
did only but actuallie vex and torment him: and therefore, from hence (you
see) there arises no rule of Doctrine or direction, to discern truly of
essential possessions.


Exorcistes. Why sir, there is a medicine left for the curing of essential
possessions: See D. Doctrine page 19.
therefore there is a means given to discern soundly of such a possession.
Otherways, what use of a medicine: where there is no means at all to discern
of the malady?


Orthodoxus. Perceiving the plain text of Scripture to be directly against
you: now you compass your matter about with a quite contrary course.
Laboring with tooth and nail, to prove ignotum per ignotius; Ignotum, per
Ignotius.
a matter uncertain, by a thing more uncertain: and so, in seeking to lay out
your matter apparently, you make it more obscure then it was at the first. For,
if there be no medicine left for the cure: then (to use your own reason) there
is no means to discern the disease. Whether there be now such a medicine as
your self do imagine: will hereafter appear, See D. Doctrine, from page 20.
to page 25.
when we come to entreat of that point. In the mean time (leaving Thyreus and
your self to dispute the infallible signs of possession) we expect better
reasons at your hands, for the proof of your supposed essential possessions:
or require at the least, your present submission.


Exorcistes. See D. Doctrine, page 25.
Why sir? those eight Demoniakes we speak of, they were undoubtedly
dispossessed by prayer and fasting: therefore essentiallie possessed of Satan.


Orthodoxus. They were not essentiallie possessed of Satan: therefore not
dispossessed at all by prayer and fasting. Howbeit, least you should think I
do now but put edge unto edge: go to, be it supposed they were so dispossessed
as you say: that only proves they were possessed, not that they were
essentiallie possessed of Satan. For possessed they might be: though the Devil
not essentiallie inherent in any one of their bodies, which is the point we
dispute of.


Exorcistes. See D. Doctrine, page. 26.
Their speedy deliverance does argue an essential possession: for had they
been only but outwardly afflicted of Satan, they had not been so presently
delivered as they undoubtedly were.


Orthodoxus. Nay rather, if they had (in deed) been essentiallie possessed, as
you say; the Devil would have been the longer in driving out: for possession
(we commonly say) is fully as good as eleven points in Law. Perceive you not
therefore how absurdlie you reason, when you affirm it more easy to deliver a
man essentiallie possessed of Satan: than to deliver a man not possessed at
all? For very certain it is, that if one and the selfsame working power for
the dispossessing of Devils, does (with equal expedition) both outwardly and
inwardly concur in that special business, it will bring forth even one and the
selfsame effect: and therefore, why should not that work whatsoever (whether
outward or inward) be then forthwith accomplished with like speedy deliverance?


Exorcistes. Because prayer and fasting being used herein, See D. Doctrine,
page 26.
this disease, it has a more particular, a more absolute, and a more certain
promise of speedy deliverance: then any other torment of body or mind
inflicted by Satan.


Orthodoxus. You do either most stranglie forget your self, or very rashly
avouch you care not what. For, has not every special torment else inflicted
by Satan as particular, as absolute, and as certain a promise as this your
pretended possession; that particular promise especially being implicatiuely
considered in that self same general promise, Ephesians. 4.27. Iam. 4.7. 1. Pet.
5.8.
which the Lord has undoubtedly given to each faithful resistance of Satan?
Now then, if generally all, then more specially every particular torment
inflicted by Satan (the same being faithfully resisted) shall undoubtedly
receive grace from above, for a like speedy deliverance: so far forth
especially as seems good to the Lord. Notwithstanding, it may be (and very
likely it is) you will answer us thus. All the external torments inflicted by
Satan, they have only a promise conditionally, namely, if the same seems
good to the Lord: howbeit the essential possession of devils being an
internal torment, it has a promise more absolutely, I mean (in plain
English) whether God will or not. This you avouch in effect throughout all your
pamphlets, in sundry places: therefore prove this assertion soundly, by either
Scripture or reason, and the conquest (I assure you) is your own.
Notwithstanding (howsoever Exorcistes surmiseth the contrary) we do
confidently avouch, that all external torments whatsoever, inflicted by Satan,
they have so much more certain promise of speedy deliverance then these your
supposed essential possessions: by how much that their said promise of speedy
deliverance, is more apparently and more certainly avouched to them, then is
any to these your pretended essential possessions of Satan. See D. Doctrine,
page 26.
For, howsoever you may possibly bear us in hand there was some gracious
promise of speedy deliverance granted freely unto it in tenebris, I mean in
some secret corner: very certain we ar^ (whatsoever you prate) that, there is
no apparent precept or promise concerning such matters, throughout the whole
Scriptures, as shall more plainly be proved, when we come to that point. See
D. Doctrine, page 26.
And therefore, that silly poor instance, wherewith you endeavor to prove a
more speedy deliverance from those your pretended essential possessions (that
selfsame instance arising especially from those your particular actions, now
justly called in question) it concludes not your cause, howsoever therein you
do but triflingly collude ^ith ^our ignorant Reader; no, no, it is only a
pitiful begging of that you should prove. Petitio principij.
For, we flatly avouch, that those your eight pretended Demoniakes, they were
not so possessed at all: and therefore, See D. Doctrine, page 26.
not dispossessed by your prayer and fa^ting. Briefly, when you are able as
substantially to demonstrate the undoubted certainty of your essential
possessions, Ioh. 20. and 21.
as Christ has unanswerably established the infallible truth of his glorious
resurrection: we will then (by the grace of our God) endeavor our selves to
become therein also, Ioh. 20.27. See D. Doctrine, page 26.
not faithless, but faithful Thomasses. In the mean time, you must be
content, though we also accord, and iumpe justly with those your other
Antagonistes, who do purpos^ly reject your fantastical opinion of essential
possessions. Moreover, we do here advertise your self withal, to wonder no
more, that the learned-men of our land should be of a diverse judgment to
yours: until you have exactly considered, and fully answered our former
Dialogues. Again, we would wish you to forbear from those your insolent
vaunts, concerning your having of Scriptures and Fathers f^lly on your side:
until you have suffici^ntly answered the several Scriptures and Fathers let
down in our sixth Dialogue at large. Briefly, we would have you surcease from
that your shameless pretending of common experience: until you have flatly
confuted whatsoever our seventh Dialogue sets down to the contrary. See D.
Doctrine, page 26*
Yea, and all these the former forbearings we would have you so much the rather
to perform: by how much we see it is nothing repugnant to the nature and will
of God, to deny your supposed essential possessions, especially now in these
days of the Gospel.


Exorcistes. Oh yes sir, See D. Doctrine, page 27.
the Lord he has threatened wonderful judgments both written and unwritten:
therefore, he has also threatened the essential possession of spirits and
devils.


Orthodoxus. Or ever I answer the very point of your argument, I must
necessarily censure a little, as well your inconsiderate quoting: as also your
unconscionable abusing and profaning of Scriptures. For first, in
Deuteronomie, we must in any case account your essential possession of devils,
Deuteronomy. 28.62.
some unwritten wonderful judgment: Revel. 22.18.
howbeit, in the Revelation forsooth, you will have us esteem of the same, as
of some written judgment of God. And thus, between written and unwritten you
keep such a coil: as men must never be quiet, before the supposed essential
pessession of devils be deemed, if not a written, yet some unwritten judgment
of God at the least. But go to, propound your own argument.


Exorcistes. I propound it thus. All wonderful judgments (whether unwritten
or written) are undoubtedly threatened to disobedient See D. Doctrine page. 27.
persons. But, the essential possession of devils is some wonderful judgment
of God unwritten or written: therefore, the essential possession of devils is
undoubtedly threatened to disobedient persons.


Orthodoxus. I do first answer your proposition thus. All such wonderful
judgments as the Lord in his eternal counsel has decreed for judgments:
those (whether unwritten or written) are undoubtedly threatened to disobedient
persons. Then next I deny your Assumption, namely, that the essential
possession of devils is any such wonderful judgment, as the Lord (in his
eternal counsel) has decreed for a judgment; neither will you ever be able
to prove the same. But go to, admit (by the way) your argument were current
in every point, which will never be proved: what then? how does this conclude
your supposed essential possessions now, in these days of the Gospel?


Exorcistes. Oh yes sir, if you admit the premises, I doubt not to prove
that Consequent, by a necessary prosyllogisme, in this following order. See D.
Doctrine, page 27.
Whatsoever wonderful judgments (unwritten or written) are perpetually
threatened to the disobedient persons, those judgments, they are also
perpetually inflicted upon the disobedient persons. But, essential
possessions (being some wonderful judgment unwritten or written) are
perpetually threatened to the disobedient persons: therefore essential
possessions, they also are perpetually inflicted upon the disobedient persons.


Orthodoxus. The proposition of this your necessary prosyllogisme, it halteth
down right: and will never be made to go currantly an end with all the
cunning you have. For then, all the wonderful judgments of God whatsoever
(whether unwritten or written) being perpetually threatened against, must also
be perpetually inflicted upon the disobedient persons: Ioh. 9.2.3. Psalm. 130.3.
and so (by consequence) there should be no salvation for any in Christ.


Exorcistes. Why sir, the essential possession of devils, it is only but a
corporal judgment: and inflicted upon men in this present life.


Orthodoxus. Then is the same also but a conditional and temporary judgment:
and may not be avouched perpetual. For, where the condition of the judgment
it self is not perpetual: there also the perpetuity of the judgment falls
flat to the ground.


Exorcistes. See D. Doctrine, page 27.
Though the essential possession of devils, be (in deed) but a temporary
judgment: the Lord notwithstanding, he may now (in these days of the Gospel)
inflict the same upon some, if so it seems him good.


Orthodoxus. And, he may cease to inflict the same upon any for ever, if so it
seems him good: which is every way as likely and as probable, as that which
you say your self. Howbeit, because this is not to answer in deed, but
rather to hacke sword with sword: we will therefore, more exactly examine the
very point of your argument, which I take to be this, namely, the Lord he may
now inflict the essential possession of devils upon some, See D. Doctrine,
page 28.
in these days of the Gospel. What then? therefore he does now also inflict
the same upon some? that follows fair and far off. Although yet, this in
very deed is your unanswerable argument throughout your whole pamphlets almost,
as all men may plainly perceive that shall exactly consider the same. Wherein
(like a superexcellent Logitian) you do but blindly reason, A posse, ad esse*
non valet consequentia.
from a bare may-bee, to the being of a thing in deed; which concludes as
justly as Germans lips, that stood seven miles distant asunder. Howbeit, if
you will have it (in any case) accounted an irrefragable reason: then, what say
you to another of mine, being cast in one and the self same mould with yours,
thus. The sky may now fall, and so shall we have great store of Larkes:
therefore, the sky is now fallen, and we have great store of Larkes. If your
self were forciblie constrained to feed upon the only most admirable fruit
of such a fantastical sequel, till you have fully confirmed your cause in
hand: it is to be greatly feared, that the very faintness of body would force
you to desist from your labors, before you had finished your business.


Exorcistes. Not so. See D. Doctrine, page 28.
For, there is as great cause the Lord should inflict this judgment now: as at
any time heretofore.


Orthodoxus. It is utterly untrue. See D. Doctrine, page 31.
For, the manifestation of Christ his Deity, and the confirmation of his
glorious Gospel were the maine causes of possession in Christ his time: those
causes being ceased long since, how should the effect it self be still
continued? So then, the maine ends of possessions being long since determined:
who sees not less cause of inflicting that temporary judgment, especially
now in these days of the Gospel? But, be it supposed there were now as great
causes of such a wonderful judgment as ever before, what then? Seeing the
same (as you lately confessed) is only but a conditional or temporary
judgment, and therefore, to be then and there inflicted, when and where it
seems good to the Lord: from whence have your self received this large
Commission, that you dare thus proudly presume to limitte forth the Lord his
times and his seasons, for the seasonable inflicting of this your supposed most
wonderful judgment? The only wise God, he stands in no need of your
counsel and direction: concerning the timely inflicting of this one, or any
other of his temporary judgments. Isa. 40.13.14. Wis. 9.13.14. Romans 11
34.35. 1. Cor. 2.16. See D. Doctrine, page 30. Romans 12.3. Deuteronomy. 29.29. 1 Cor.
4.6.
For, who ever taught him how to dispose of any his judicial proceedings with
the sons of Adam? So then, we conclude this point with Master Darrell, and
say thus unto you. You take too much upon you (good brother) in thus presuming
to understand above that which is written, and meet for your self to
understand: and do not understand according to sobriety. Know you not (good
brother) that the things revealed belong only to us, and our children? Why
then dare your self thus insolently undertake to limitte the Lord his times,
and his turns: for the timely inflicting of his temporary judgments; and to
avouch your own apocryphal conceits, as unanswerable reasons of those your
pretended essential possessions, which the Lord has no where revealed unto
you, but in truth the contrary, as appears plainly, even in all our
precedent Dialogues.


Exorcistes. See D. Doctrine page 28.
Howsoever your self do restrain the essential possession of devils, to the
only manifestation of Christ his Deity and confirmation of his glorious
gospel: very certain it is, yt the aforesaid essential possession was
evermore a judgment, inflicted also upon the ungodly for sin. But sins of
every kind are now as rife in the world, as in any age since the beginning:
and therefore the Lord, he may now as justly inflict that punishment upon
sinners, as heretofore he has done.


Orthodoxus. I make none other restraint of that temporary judgment, then the
sacred Scriptures do make thereof: as in our sixth, seventh, and tenth
Dialogues appears. Notwithstanding be it confessed, that sins of every
kind are as rife in this our age, as ever before: yet, who made you of counsel
with the Lord, that you dare so peremptorily, and so precisely put down the
supposed essential possession of devils (it being but temporary) as a
wonderful judgment of God, inflicted especially upon men for their sins?
Seeing it is certain, that even those natural infirmities themselves, John.
9.3.
which do now remain in the world, are not always inflicted upon men for
their sins: yea, and since it is also undoubtedly true (if we speak
properly, and according to the depth of Divinity) that the afflictions which
the Lord lays ordinarily upon the Elect in this life, Romans 8.1. Robert
Ponte. proposition 2. page 29.
cannot properly be called the punishments for sin. And therefore it must
necessarily follow, that either the possession of devils whatsoever, it was
not especially and purposelie inflicted upon men for their sins, but only
for the two former respects: or if so, that then only the reprobate sort were
fearefullie subjected to that special judgment. And so (by consequence) Tho.
Darling, he was not then possessed at all: because the whole world, and you
also your self do jointly hold him an elected child of God. Moreover, if
some natural infirmities were purposelie inflicted on men not for sin as you
say, Matt. 8.16.17, Ioh. 9.2.3. See D. Doctrine page 31.
but for the only manifestation of the glory of God, without any regard of
the party his sins: then why not much more a supernatural malady, I mean
the actual possession of devils? It being especially but a temporary
judgment of God; tending more especially to the glory of God: yea, and
(which more is) the admirable curing also thereof, appropriated more
especially and only to Christ himself, Matthew. 12.23. and 15.22. Genesis 3.15.
Psalm. 91.13, Matthew. 4.6.
as to that only son of David, who was actuallie to bruise the Serpents head,
and triumphantly to suppress the Lion and Dragon. Besides all this, if the
possession of devils whatsoever, was a wonderful judgment inflicted upon men
for their sin: it is very likely then, Matthew. 9.2. Mar. 2.5. Luke 5.20.
John. 5.14.
that our Savior Christ in curing the same (as in the rest of many other his
miraculous cures) would also have put the possessed especially in mind of
their sins, and of sinning no more. Howbeit, he never gave those men whom
he delivered from Satan's possession any such watchword at all, concerning
either their sins, or their sinning no more: and therefore it is very
probable, that that temporary judgment was never purposelie inflicted for
sin, but only for those the aforesaid respects. Neither can those your
quoted Scriptures, in any possibility, conclude your former assertion
concerning the inflicting of actual possessions upon men for their sins:
those selfsame Scriptures having only a relation to some natural
infirmities, Ioh 9.2.3* Matthew. 9.2. John. 5.14.
and not to this your supposed supernatural malady, I mean your essential
possession of devils. Furthermore, if possessions whatsoever be inflicted
especially upon men for their sins: it is very likely the same (being so
extraordinary a judgment) would have been more especially inflicted upon
extraordinary sinners: but that we may plainly perceive to be otherways. For
not only the same was eftsoons inflicted upon silly poor persons, upon
young children and infants: See D. Detection. page. 93. See S.H. Discovery.
page 114.
but (which more is) that your pretended patient, he did (you say) undergo
that wonderful judgment, not so much for any sin of his own, as for the
sins of Nottingham, and the Country about: and therefore it appears by the
premises, that even the actual possession it self, was not always inflicted
upon men for their sins. Now then, if not for sin, as has been declared,
then for the two former respects. But these two respects are long since
determined: and therefore the possession of devils whatsoever, was long since
also concluded and ended. Briefly be it supposed, that the possession of
devils whatsoever, was evermore a wonderful judgment inflicted especially
upon men for their sins, and that there be now as great sins in the world as
ever before: yet your ordinary conclusion (a posse, ad esse) enforced from
thence, namely, that therefore men (may be) as well possessed now, as at any
time heretofore, if so it seems good to the Lord, does not necessarily follow
thereof. For this (may be possessed now) does not certainly conclude any
certain possession now; unless you can first very certainly demonstrate unto
us, that even now also (as well as in Christ's time) it seems good to the
Lord, to inflict upon men the self same wonderful judgment. Because,
howsoever it be undoubtedly true, that the Lord (if it seems him good) may do
all things whatsoever: yet this also is as undoubtedly true, Psalm. 135.6.
namely, that whatsoever the Lord wills, that only does he in heaven and in
earth. Which will of the Lord, when you (by the witness of his own mouth) are
able to avouch directly unto us, as an undoubted confirmation of this your
singular conceit, concerning the essential possession of Devils: we will then
very willingly give over the field, and yield you the conquest. In the mean
time, if we also should argue against you thus. The Lord God, he has (besides
the possession of Devils) ten thousand strange judgments in store, to inflict
upon men for their sins: therefore (purposely pretermitting this temporary
judgment of actual possession) he may fearefullie inflict any other judgment
upon obstinate sinners. If I say, we should argue on this sort (a posse, ad
esse) would you not forthwith conclude great childishnes in us? And yet this
sophisme of ours ( from a bare may be, to the being of a thing in deed) it
has so much more probability of truth then has yours: by how much the
actual possession of Devils was only but a temporary judgment, and long
since determined by our Savor Christ, as in our seventh, eight, ninth, and
tenth Dialogues very plainly appears.


Exorcistes. Nay sir, See D. Doctrine, page 28.
I have the consent of all Churches: the testimony of Fathers, of travelers,
of Papists, yea and the very vaunts which the Jesuits make of their Exorcistes
calling: to prove the continuance of essential possessions now in these days
of the Gospel.


Orthodoxus. Your consent of all Churches (for any thing hitherto heard) is
only a consent, consisting wholly in silence. Moreover (whatsoever may be the
testimony of Fathers herein) your writers themselves, they are only brought
in as dumb shows on the stage, and so they depart again without speaking at
all: unless happily their general silence must argue their particular consents
to your purpose in hand. Otherways, it may be supposed, that the great
multitude of Fathers (whom you have so mightily mustered on ranks in your
margin) they would have been made to parle, and to fight in your quarrel as
well as Wyerus: had they not taken the pette at your manner of marching, or
been suddenly deprived of speech. As for Wyerus his rouing report concerning
the seventy possessed at Rome in one night, with the thirty also at
Amsterdam, it smells of the rotte, and argues some Legerdemaine among the
Exorcistes there at the least. Both because the parties themselves (being but
Children) were the less able to epsy and withstand the intoxicated potions,
and bewitched enchantments of those cousening paltrie Priests: and for that
those their pretended possessions befell them so on the sudden, as if the
possession of Devils, were only an infectious or catching disease. Besides
that, Wyerus he is one whose authentical credit, your own self has else
where disabled in matters more likely then this: and therefore the less
reason we should credit his rouing reports in these matters, especially so
strange and incredible. Now next concerning those your travelers, that must
tell us their terrible tidings of your essential possessions in places else
where, you know the accustomed Proverb: namely, that such as have been at Rome
may lie by authority. In consideration whereof, we deem it much better for us
to entertain (at our pleasures) those the Romish reports of your travelers:
then to trauerse the truth of their trothlesse tales, by traveling our selves
to Rome for the due trial thereof. In like manner, the testimony of your
Papists is of little importance concerning these special points. Both,
because when the same shall be brought to the highest degree, it is but the
bare testimony of some cogging Copartners in the selfsame like cosoning
practices: and for that also the reporter thereof is only Thyreus, D.
Detection, page 42.
a man, whom your own self does deeply discredit throughout your whole
Pamphlet, yea and M. Darrel he says: to convince by such, is to beat the
air, and not to dispute. Briefly, your Exorcists calling, their pretended
power and proud vaunts, for the powerful expelling of Devils (every of those
suting so fitly with Exorcistes him self and his several practices) are all
very fitly and fully confuted by D. Fulke, upon several occasions, and in
sundry places throughout our sixth, ninth, and tenth Dialogues. The which
reverend and learned Doctor, did therefore not purposely bend his pen against
the non-being of actual possessions now in these days of the Gospel: because
(in his time) the being thereof was never so confidently braued out, before
now, nor so impudently avouched from pretended examples of particular persons,
as it is now by your self.


Exorcistes. See D. Doctrine, page 29.
But, why seems it incredible there should be essential possessions: in these
days of the Gospel?


Orthodoxus. Because, the working of miracles being ceased long since: the
possession of Devils whatsoever (being always miraculous) did even then also
determine therewith, as in our sixth, ninth, and tenth Dialogues appears.


Exorcistes. See D. Doctrine, page 29.
It seems then, by the purport of your speech, that to be possessed with a
devil, is a miracle: and not any disease which was sometimes miraculously
cured. For why? the ceasing of miracles puts only an end unto miracles, and
not to any the diseases them selves which were sometimes miraculouslie cured by
Christ: otherwise, we should have none sick (now in these days) of any
natural disease whatsoever. Howbeit, as all other natural diseases
(notwithstanding any their miraculous curing in the days of Christ) are yet
still continued amongst us now, and are cured also by mere natural medicines:
so surely there may be essential possessions now, as a supernatural malady
remaining with men, although no such miraculous curing of possessions now, as
were heretofore effected by Christ, and his own Disciples.


Orthodoxus. Howsoever you catch at any thing spoken, it appears rather (by
the very purporte of your answer) that you do purposelie cavil, and but
wrangle at words as being utterly unable to encounter directly with the
matter it self, expressed in those words: and so (for default of an adversary)
you but sportinglie fight with a phantasied shadow. For who ever avouched the
only possession of devils to be simply a miracle? and not rather some such
supernatural matter, as was only, and at all times miraculouslie cured? Which
selfsame supernatural or miraculous manner of curing, being ceased long
since: that supernatural manner of vexing by Satan, must necessarily
determine therewith. Otherwise the Church should still undergo some
supernatural malady: for which there is now no supernatural medicine
remaining, which once to imagine, were to too absurd. Howbeit, that we may
the more strick^ly examine your confused answer by the several members: I
pray you propound the several points implied therein, in a more several order.


Exorcistes. Content: See D. Doctrine, page 29.
this then I say first. All natural diseases whatsoever (notwithstanding their
former miraculous manner of curing) are yet still continued with men: therefore
that supernatural disease, I mean the essential possession of devils
(notwithstanding the former miraculous manner of curing) it also is yet still
continued with men.


Orthodoxus. I answer you thus. Natural diseases they are yet still continued
with men, as infirmities naturally arising from the corruptions of nature:
supernatural diseases, I mean the possession of devils whatsoever, they ever
did, and do only proceed from some supernatural cause, namely, from that
eternal God, who alone is the creator, the orderer, the disposer, the director
and reformer of nature, as in our sixth Dialogue we have plainly declared. Now
then, howsoever we may certainly conclude the continuance of mere natural
diseases, so long esspeciallie as the corruptions of nature it self do
remain: yet can we not certainly conclude from thence, any determined
continuance of supernatural diseases, unless also we can certainly set
down a predetermined perseverance thereof, from the perpetual determination
of that supernatural and primarie efficient, who (having in his own hidden
counsel decreed it so) will also accordingly execute and effect the same upon
some at the least. Howbeit, such secret decrees are unknown to men: and
therefore such supernatural diseases may never (by any man living) be avouched
for certain. But go on I pray in expounding the other part of your answer.


Exorcistes. I propound it thus. Natural diseases (notwithstanding their
former miraculous manner of curing) are now still to be cured of us, See D.
Doctrine, page 29.
by mere natural medicines: therefore supernatural diseases, I mean the
essential possessions of devils (notwithstanding any their former miraculous
manner of curing) they also are now still to be cured by some supernatural
medicine, namely, by prayer and fasting.


Orthodoxus. I answer you thus. The curing of natural diseases by mere
natural medicines; Exodus 15.25. 2. King. 20.7. Pro 27.9. 1. Tim. 5.23. Eccl.
38.1.4.12
is a flat institution and ordinance of the only wise God: and therefore the
same is to be conscionablie and carefully observed of all men. Howbeit, the
supernatural remedy for supernatural diseases, it was then, and now also,
the only supernatural virtue and power of the omnipotent God: the which
supernatural power of his was so farforth, and so long time dispensed to some
certain particular persons, as those supernatural diseases continued in use.
And therefore unless you be able to prove directly unto us the perpetual
continuance of such supernatural maladies; it is in vain to pretend the
perpetuity and dispensation of any such supposed supernatural medicine.
Although notwithstanding, if you were sufficiently able to confirm the
continuance of actual possessions, eue^ now in these days of the Gospel: yet
surely, that your pretended ordinary remedy of prayer and fasting for the
curing thereof, will not possibly be made to serve for your purpose, as our
ninth Dialogue does tell you, and shall be declared more at large, when we come
to handle that point. For if the possession of devils whatsoever, be (as your
self does confess) a disease no less supernatural now, then were those
primarie possessions in the days of Christ: we do verily suppose, that the
curing of possessions now, must needs be as supernatural and as miraculous,
as were any the miraculous curings of actual possession in the days of
Christ, whatsoever you prate to the contrary. For (be the times what they
will) this is undoubtedly true, that supernatural maladies whatsoever, they
cannot possibly be cured but by the only supernatural medicine, I mean the
immediate virtue and power of the Lord. And so by consequence, the curing of
possessions now whatsoever: it must (notwithstanding any your pretended
ordinary means of prayer and fasting) be fully as miraculous now, as ever
before.


Exorcistes. See D. Doctrine, page 29.30.
Not so, for the miracle then was only the admirable curing of essential
possessions, by the immediate power of a commanding word: the extraordinary
use of which selfsame commanding power, is long since determined together,
with the miraculous manner of curing it self. Howbeit, the ordinary curing of
possessions now, it is only by the mediate power of an entreating word* and
therefore such ordinary manner of curing possessions now, is no more
miraculous then is the ordinary healing of blindness, deafnes, dumbnes, and
other like natural diseases by mere natural medicines. Among which said
natural diseases, the essential possession of devils is jointly recorded in
scripture; as a joint ordinary disease of like perpetual continuance.


Orthodoxus. The miraculous curing of possessions in Christ's time, was at no
hand effected by an only bare commanding word, prolated and uttered abroad in
the air with a vanishing sound, for so there should, even in only bare
syllables and words, be necessarily included some magical force: but the said
miraculous curing then, was primarily and efficiently accomplished by some
supernatural power concurring also therewith, and inabling that selfsame
commanding word, to the admirable effecting of such a miraculous work. In
like manner, neither is that your pretended ordinary curing of possessions now
whatsoever, effected by an only bare entreating word, prolated and vented
abroad in the air with a vanishing sound as before; for so, some magical
inchauntment should lie secretly lurking in the only bare syllables and words
pronounced, which were monstrous absurd to imagine: but this your pretended
ordinary curing of possessions now, it must also be primarilie, and
efficientlie accomplished by some supernatural power concurring also
therewith, and inabling that selfsame entreating word, to the admirable
effecting of such a miraculous work. For notwithstanding those your different
terms of commanding and entreating; that supereminent power which effects
the business, is ever but one and the same. And therefore, howsoever the
actual possession of devils be jointly recorded with those natural diseases,
which are only to be cured by mere natural medicines: yet neither are they a
joint ordinary disease, Job. 1.6. and 2.1.
nor of like perpetual continuance; no more than Satan himself may therefore
be said to be of like holiness with other the sons of God, because he is
jointly recorded among the sons of God: and therefore notwithstanding the
joint recording of this one, with those natural diseases which are now to be
cured by only mere natural means: that supernatural curing of the
precedent and subsequent possessions whatsoever, it was then, and is now (if
any such be) even equally and proportionablie most admirable, strange and
miraculous. Moreover, if the pretended possession of devils whatsoever, must
therefore be now deemed but a mere natural malady, and only because it is
jointly recorded among those other diseases of men which are merely natural,
a thing to too absurd and senceles: then surely (besides that you do therein
directly cross your former speech, where you make it a supernatural malady)
the curing of possessions now whatsoever, D. Doctrine, page 29.
must needs be as merely natural, as the ordinary curing of all other the
natural diseases recorded therewith. And so by consequence your prayers and
fastings they are now but mere natural medicines, no less naturally
effectual for the ordinary curing of people possessed with devils; then any
other physical receipts whatsoever, for the ordinary curing of mere natural
diseases, which were meerelie absurd to imagine, but most palpable gross to
avouch. Otherways, if the possession of devils whatsoever, be (as your self
does else where affirm) a supernatural disease, D. Doctrine, page 79. D.
Detection. page 41.
and the remedy also thereof, namely, prayer and fasting, a supernatural
remedy: then surely the curing of such possessions (whenever, and by
whomsoever effected) it also must needs be supernatural, strange and
miraculous, for a like cause argues a like effect. And so by consequence, the
working of miracles must still be continued in the Churches of Christ: an
opinion directly opposite to the approved judgments of all men. For all do
uniformly avouch, and very confidently conclude in one, that the working of
miracles was only but a temporary privilege particularly bestowed on some, and
that also, for those two former respects: namely, the declaration of Christ's
deity, and confirmation of his glorious Gospel, as in our sixth, ninth and
tenth Dialogues, has been showed at large.


Exorcistes. Howsoever principally for those two former respects, See D.
Doctrine, page 31.
there were in the days of Christ an essential possession of Devils, and
other diseases: yet were there some other cause or causes besides, especially
the outrageous sins of people, the which also our Savior Christ (in curing
the parties possessed) does eftsoons admonish them of, Math. 9.2. Mark. 2.5.
Luke 5.20. Ioh. 5.14.
as we showed before. Howbeit, the selfsame sins do now remain among men,
in these days of the Gospel: and therefore also the selfsame essential
possessions.


Orthodoxus. That there were essential possessions either then or now, we have
ever denied: and your self shall never be able to prove the same, before you
have fully disproued the several reasons put down in our second, third,
fourth and fifth Dialogues concerning those special points. Notwithstanding all
this, if (by the way) the same should be granted, which (by sway of argument)
would never be gained: yet were there no sequel at all in your argument. For
(besides that the same is your old accustomed suresbie, a posse ad esse) you
do reason absurdlie and fondly in reasoning thus. The like sins do still
remain among men in these days of the Gospel: therefore also, the like
essential possessions. Surely you shall never be able to make us believe that
this consequent is current: unless you can soundly persuade us before hand,
that the unmatchable God has (by some matchable covenant) concluded covertly
with Exorcistes himself, to make the execution of any his wonderful
judgments inflicted on sinners, every way proportionable and suitable to
Exorcistes his fantastical and itching conceit. For we have showed before,
that the Lord did not purposelie inflict that extraordinary judgment upon men
for their sins: and your quoted Scriptures they prove no such matter, as we
told you also before. If notwithstanding all this, you will needs have your
sequel canonized current; then how answer you this? The like sins do
remain among men now a days, Luke 17.27.
which were heretofore found in the days of Noah: therefore, there is now also
the like inevitable flood of water, that then drowned the world.


Exorcistes. Genesis 9.14, 15.
That follows not. For the Lord God (by a perpetual covenant) has put a
final end to the like flood of water for ever: and sealed that selfsame
covenant with a perpetual sign.


Orthodoxus. Ioh. 12.31.
Even so has our Savior Christ (by a solemn perpetual promise as it were)
put a final end to the actual possession of devils: and sealed up that
selfsame promise by a perpetual sign, Math. 12.39.40
I mean his death and resurrection, as in our sixth and seventh Dialogues
appears. But go to then, how answer you this? Isa. 1.10. and 3.9 Ezech.
16.49. Luke 17.29. 1. King. 2.23.24
The self same sins remain at this day, which were erst to be seen in Sodom
and Gomorrah: therefore also the selfsame judgment of Brimstone, and fire
from heaven. Or this, there is one and the selfsame deriding of the Prophets
and servants of God, which was in the days of Elisha: therefore there is one,
2. King. 17.25.
and the selfsame devouring with Bears. Or this, there is the selfsame
prophanenes now, which was erst in Samaria: therefore the like fearful
destruction by Lions. 2. King. 5.27.
Or this, There are as bribing companions now in these days, as ever was
Gehazi himself: therefore there is now the like leprous vengeance on them,
that was erst on Gehazi himself. Go to now Exorcistes, what say you to these
and the like exceptions against that your precedent invincible argument?


Exorcistes. These were every of them, extraordinary judgments.


Orthodoxus. And what one living man but your self alone, was ever so impudent
as once to avouch: that the possession of devils whatsoever, is an ordinary
judgment of God?


Exorcistes. Well sir, See D. Doctrine. page 31.
how extraordinary judgments soever, the Lord God notwithstanding (if it
seems him good) he may even now (in these days of the Gospel) inflict any
one of them all upon Sinners.


Orthodoxus. Oh sir, recall home your wits I beseech you. I have told you
ofttimes before, and must now tell you again, that the question is not what
God may do: but what he now does in these days of the Gospel. We very
confidently affirm that the Lord now in these days of the Gospel, does not
afflict any person, by an actual possession of devils, because the two only
ends of that wonderful judgment, are long since determined: your answer
thereunto is evermore but one and the same, namely the Lord may do it, a
silly poor answer God knows. And thus in all your disputations (when we
once come to the very period or point of the question) you are even forciblie
constrained to continue (as before) your circular motion: from a bare may be,
to the being of things.


Exorcistes. In deed sir, See D. Doctrine, page 31.
if it were certainly true, that men heretofore had bin only possessed for those
two former respects: I would then (without further contradiction) join fully
with you in this special point. Howbeit, very certain it is that they were
also possessed for outrageous sins. Now such sins are still remaining with
men: therefore also such essential possessions.


Orthodoxus. Had possessions bin only for those two former respects: you would
then (you confess) have freely consented unto us. Howbeit they were also (you
say) for sin. Now surely (if words could carry the matter away) you would
make a notable Captain to keep an hold; for sure they were to be well laden
with words. Neither will you ever give out, before your brains be beaten about
your ears: but still forsooth they were possessed for sin. Howbeit this
Cuckoe-like melody has been so often in your mouth: that it begins now to
wax very stale for want of variety. Notwithstanding all this, we need not be
curious for answer herein; if we please to accept of your courteous offer
concerning your joining with us in this point. D. Doctrine, page 30.31.
For that the possession of devils was generally for those two former
respects: your own self have confessed before. That the same also was
purposelie inflicted for sin, the impregnable proof thereof, does as yet
haerere in calamo, cleave fast to your quill: and we have sufficiently declared
the contrary a little before.


Exorcistes. See D. Doctrine, page 32.
Yes sir, there were essential possessions of Devils, before the coming of
Christ. But such possessions could not possibly be then for the declaration of
Christ his Deity, it being not then manifested to the world in the flesh: and
therefore those possessions must necessarily be then inflicted upon men for
their sins.


Orthodoxus. There were never essential possessions of Devils, either before,
or after the coming of Christ, as in our second, third, and fourth Dialogue
appears. Yea, and this we further avouch for the purpose in hand, that there
were no actual possessions at all (for any long time especallie) before the
coming of Christ, as we have sufficiently showed before, and your quotations
of Scripture conclude not your cause: especially that in the Acts. Math.
12.27. Act. 19.13.
Unless happily you would have us imagine that the presumptuous practice of
the seven sons of Sheua, and this your preposterous attempt did every of
them proceed from one and the selfsame ground, and tended jointly to one and
the selfsame purpose. Both because they were never authenticallie furnished
with a powerful authority from Christ, to manage thoroughly their
preposterous pretenses: and for that also they felt then, and your self feel
now (in a fearful experience) even but one and the selfsame effect. Act.
19.16.
Namely, their adjured Demoniake outragiously running on them, and rending
their carcasses: your coniured patient very fiercely returning on you in
discovering his cosinage, to the cracking of your credit for ever, as touching
your exquisite skill in the Cabalisticall craft: inso much as they, and you
also your self were driven out a doors all naked and wounded. Touching the
peoples discerning of possessions whatsoever, by any the supposed signs
thereof, we have answered fully before: and do here very confidently
conclude, that this your pretended possession in Summers (if the same was no
cosinage at all concerning your self) it was undoubtedly a mere illusion of
Satan at least.


Exorcistes. Nay sir, D. Doctrine, page 32.
that (I assure you) is utterly impossible. Because then not only our eyes, but
the rest of our senses (our tasting only excepted) they were all deceived. For
very certain it is, that my self with some hundred and fifty besides at the
least: we saw, we heard, we smelt, and we handled very strange and impossible
accidents, I assure you.


Orthodoxus. Your assurance herein, is not worth one rush. For if those your
pretended admirable accidents, were (indeed and in truth) so strange and
impossible as you bear us in hand: how then could your self, or any one of
those hundred and fifty either see, or hear, or smell, or handle them at all?
Since it is certainly sure that your corporal senses: they could not possibly
comprehend any such supernatural, strannge or impossible matters. Besides all
this, it is not impossible that the rest of your senses (as well as your eyes)
might all be deluded by means of some deceivable notions, at that instant
arising from some deceivable objects, apprehended forthwith in the imaginatiue
faculty, and disordering the judgment: as in our second, D. Doctrine. page
24. D. Detection, page 110.138.
fourth and fifth Dialogues is largely declared. Briefly you your own self,
do else where very confidentlie avouch for infallible truth, that devils (in
very deed) will undoubtedly seem to do some things in an outward show: when
as (in truth) they effect no such matters at all. And therefore trust not (I
advise you) your natural senses too far, in discerning of devils themselves,
or of any their supernatural actions: least (in the end) you be enforced with
open shame to acknowledge your natural folly. The rest is fully answered
before. And therefore to conclude this point; I beseech you beware, lest (while
with such a settled pertinacie you be drawn to deny the possibility of Satan's
illusions in those your pretended essential possessions) you do not both
purposelie delude your poor ignorant Reader, 2. These. 2.11.2
and preposterouslie procure (at unawares) such strong and such fearful
illusions upon your own soul, as may make you to believe erroneous lies, and
to repose your whole felicity and pleasure in all unrighteousness: Lo
Exorcistes, this is the worst I wish you, and this is the best I can do for
you. And thus much in effect for a summarie answer, concerning the supposed
essential possession of those your eight pretended Demoniakes, set down at
large in your second Narration.


Lycanthropus. Surely sir, this may suffice any reasonable man not partiallie
wedde to his proper conceit.


Pneumatomachus. A reasonable man say you? Let him be reasonable or
unreasonable: he shall never be able with any sound or substantial reason to
answer the same.


Phylologus. Very true as you say: but what says Exorcistes unto it.


Exorcistes. I say they were all essentiallie possessed of Satan: and your
selves have not hitherto proved the contrary.


Phisiologus. You say they were all essentiallie possessed, and we have not
hitherto proved the contrary: a proper Disputer no doubt. You must take
liberty to pester the Church with your idle affirmative positions: and then
put us (against all order of learning) to prove the negative part, or else
forsooth (because your mastership says it) your Cabalistical conceits must
needs be canonized current. No, no Exorcistes, you are not yet come to that
credit in the schools of the Prophets, that whatsoever your self shall but
barelie report, the same (without all peradventure) must be deemed an
authentical oracle. And therefore afford us some sounder arguments to prove
the essential possessions of spirits and devils: or presently give over the
conference.


Exorcistes. How slenderly soever you reckon of those my precedent reasons: I
have such an apparent confirmation of that which I hold concerning these
matters, as your self shall never be able to contradict. Namely, a very
strange and unwonted experiment, from a poor Boy at Northwich in Cheshire;
even now (at this present) essentiallie possessed of Satan.


Orthodoxus. Yea, but how are you certain the Boy is (in deed and in truth)
essentially possessed of Satan?


Exorcistes. Why sir, I my self have been there since he was so possessed, to
take a circumspect view of his fearful fits: and do plainly perceive ( by
his supernatural actions and passions) that he is (in very deed) essentiallie
possessed of some spirit or devil at the least.


Orthodoxus. So were you with him also (as some do credibly avouch)
immediately before he fell into these his supposed fittes: and might therefore
(for any thing known to the contrary) be confederate with himself or some
others, concerning those his cosoning courses. But be it supposed you never saw
him before, and then tell us how you dare so confidently conclude from those
his supposed actions, an essential possession of some spirit or devil: since
devils (you know) are such spiritual and invisible substances, as may not
possibly be discerned by any corporal sense.


Exorcistes. Why sir? his supernatural actions do plainly demonstrate the
same to all the world.


Orthodoxus. Rehearse some few of those his supposed supernatural actions I
pray you.


Exorcistes. I will. First he continually waggeth his head without any
intermission at all.


Orthodoxus. So does the palsy sick patient, as we may see by daily
experience: and (which more is) whereas the palsie-sicke has no intermission
at all: that your pretended Demoniake, he only waggeth the head in the day
time and when people are present, howbeit in the night time he sleeps very
quietly as his own mother reports. And therefore if an only bare wagging of
the head does necessarily argue an essential possession: then every palsy
sick patient that waggeth the head, he also is essentiallie possessed of
Satan. Howbeit sir? we also our selves have seen this your supposed Demoniake
as well as your self: but could not perceive in him any such supernatural
actions or passions, as you boldly report upon your bare credit.

Besides that, if the only bare wagging of the head must necessarily conclude
a supernatural action: then every little child that plays wag-wanton, it
also effects some supernatural action. Moreover this one and the rest of
those your pretended Demoniakes, they were and are commonly overtaken with
those their supposed supernatural fits, when they are laid on their bed, and
closely under a couerlid: by which means they may the more easily wagge
their heads, or work any their pretended actions, and so likewise the sooner
deceive the silly beholders. Who being wholly taken up before with a deep
impression of some supposed essential possession: were thereby so fearefullie
forestalled in judgment, as they could not prouidently behold nor advisedly
consider the manner of the Demoniakes working. And therefore this wagging of
the head, it is no such supernatural action, as may undoubtedly conclude an
essential possession.


Exorcistes. But sir? besides this extraordinary wagging of the head, he is
also of a supernatural strength.


Orthodoxus. No such supernatural strength was apparent to us, being present
with him (I assure you) in the very extremity, or midst of those his
pretended fits. For the one of us did easily hold his head, his shoulders, and
all the other parts of his body from moving at all, yea, and this also even in
despite of the boy himself, or of any supposed Devil inherent within him:
and therefore this supernatural strength, is rather supposed and suggested by
your self and your favorites, then any ways soundly proved, or but
probably demonstrated to us.


Exorcistes. Besides all this, he was undoubtedly of a supernatural
knowledge: for if two or three had suddenly come into the parlour where he lay,
with several books of sundry matters hid close in their hats: he could tell
which of them had the holy Bible of God in his hat, and at him he would catch
and snatch, letting all the profane books pass quietly by him without any
such stir at all.


Orthodoxus. So could Banks his black horse very sensibly demonstrate what
money some had in his purse, with sundry other tricks more admirable then
this by much: and yet not possessed at all with a Devil.

So a blind man (but casting his staff at all adventure) may happily at some
time to kill a Crow: and yet neither endued with supernatural knowledge, nor
possessed with a Devil in the doing thereof.

So likewise, a blindfolded lubber playing at blindman buzz, may happily (by
skuffling up and down in the house) to light upon one and the self same
person for two or three times together: and yet not assisted therein at all
with any supernatural knowledge, or led thereunto by any the extraordinary
directions of either Spirit or Devil.

Briefly, so likewise a little young child playing at handie dandie, may happily
(for three or four times together) to make choice of that hand wherein the pin
or the point is placed: and all this (I hope) without any supernatural
knowledge at all. And therefore it is very absurd that your self (from any
such action as stands only upon hap and hap hazard) should so confidently
conclude a supernatural knowledge, and so (by consequence) an essential
possession of either Spirit or Devil.

Besides that, how confidently soever you report this point of choosing the
Bible before any other book else: there be some of good credit, and such also
as favor your cause (so far forth especially as they perceive not as yet the
contrary truth) who do confidently report that in deed and in truth, this
your supposed Demoniake did so much as you say for once or twice: but that at
some other times again he had failed grossly therein: and therefore this
trick of hap-hazard, is no such certain sign, as may undoubtedly conclude an
essential possession, in that your pretended poor patient.

I told you a little before (if you have not forgotten) that (whenever you
happened afresh upon some other such newfound Demoniake) we then should have
some other new signs of this your supposed essential possession to make your
game hit: Supra, in page 44.45.
and now I perceive it is growing very fast toward such a pretended period.
For behold, we have here now (in this your newly pretended Demoniake) two
other essential signs forsooth of an essential possession: namely, the
wagging of the head: and the playing at handie dandie. Alas Exorcistes, though
your conscience trembles not, yet me thinks your very face should blush for
shame, in reporting these trifling toys for true and infallible tokens of an
essential possession of some one Devil or other, inherently couching within
the very body of this your newfound Demoniake.


Exorcistes. But sir, besides all this the boy (I assure you) he is (for the
whole time of his fearful fits) so senseless in every part, as he neither
sees, nor hears, nor speaks, nor feels: and therefore essentially
possessed with a Devil.


Orthodoxus. How know you for certain, that he is (in deed and in truth) so
senseless, as you bear us in hand? You are able (I confess) to know when
your self neither sees, nor hears, nor speaks, nor feels: but that you
should (in like manner) discern as soundly of any such defect of sense in
another, it is much more (I believe) than you are able to demonstrate truly
unto us. For be it supposed, that (for the whole time of those his pretended
fits) there is in him no use of his senses in any outward appearance to men:
does it follow necessarily, that therefore there is within him also no true
habit of sense at all? that is more (I believe) then you may truly avouch.
Since a man in a trance may seem (in all outward appearance) as though he were
utterly deprived of sense: when yet still he retains soundly an habit of
sense, though (for a season) he wants the use and practice thereof.


Exorcistes. Sir, the very instance you give, does clearly illustrate the
infallible truth of that which I tell you. For even as a man in a trance may
seem (in all outward appearance) as if he were sensles: so does this poor boy
(I assure you) in every of those his fearful fits: and therefore he is
essentially possessed with a Devil.


Orthodoxus. That follows fair and far off: yea and (by as good reason)
you may likewise very boldly conclude, that the man in a trance is also
possessed with a spirit or Devil: because (in all outward appearance) he seems
no less sensles then this your pretended Demoniake. But (by the way) be it
here granted freely unto you, that an undoubted true senselessness does argue
(in deed) an essential possession: yet are you not able to demonstrate truly
unto us, that the boy at Northwich, is (in those his pretended fittes)
undoubtedly and truly so senseless as you bear us in hand, but that
(howsoever it seemed in outward appearance) he both saw and heard, and spoke,
and felt, as may very probably be gathered thus.

First, that he sensibly heard it is very apparent, in as much as my self but
wishing (in his presence) a sight of his urine, and being told by his parents,
that the urine which he first made in the morning was newly cast forth, but yet
(said they) if you stay any time, you may happily have some from him afresh
before it be long: within a while after, such means was made by the boy
(notwithstanding he was then in the extremity of his fit) as I had forthwith
his urine (forsooth) in no less orderly a manner, then if he had been in his
perfect estate, which argues plainly, that either his mother she had an
extraordinary revelation concerning the fit time for affoording his urine unto
her: or that the boy himself (having heard before my motion concerning that
matter) did make such means as (notwithstanding that his said fit) his mother
very orderly received his urine without any spilling at all in the bed, and
therefore this concludes no senseless condition, but rather the contrary.

Again, that he sensibly saw at that present, we prove it thus: because
(besides the often casting of his eyes upon us at sundry times) when his
sister also came to his bed side in a foul or sluttish coat, and was
therefore rebuked sharply of her mother: the boy (both seeing his sisters
sluttishnes, and hearing his mothers rebukes) he laughed heartily thereat.
And thereupon, the mother being told by the one of us there, that the boy (it
should seem) he was not so sensllesse as they would bear us in hand, her
answer was this: namely, that the shrewd boy, he would oftentimes laugh in his
fittes at many such knaueries: which argues in him no such sensles condition
as your self would pretend.

Again, the Boy being kept (for ten days together) in the Lord Bishop of
Chester his palace, and secretly watched by some of his servants, to spy
forth his counterfeit carriage if any such were: he told his mother so much
when he was returned home (as she confesses her self) and how the Bishops
men stood peeping at him through the chinkes of the door to spy forth his
practices. But mother (says he) I saw them full well, and was also as crafty
as they: which argues no sensles condition at all.

Again, that he also (at that present) very sensibly felt, may thus be
proved. Namely, for that the one of us holding him fast perforce (as we told
you before) he not only endeavored to prevent our said purpose, but when he
perceived himself to be conquered in despite of his teeth, he forthwith roared
and cried out: which argues plainly that he sensibly heard, and saw and
felt; yea, and that he might also be made to speak (as appears by his crying)
if he were well coniured a while with a three corded whippe. And therefore for
any thing hitherto heard, this your newfound Demoniake, he was not so
sensles, as your self would senselesly bear us in hand.


Exorcistes. But sir, he spoke many wonderful things in every of his
traunces, yea such and so strange (I assure you) as could not possibly be
uttered forth by one of his years, without some supernatural direction of
either spirit or devil at the least.


Orthodoxus. We heard not any such speeches at all at our being there with him.


Exorcistes. Very true as you say. Howbeit at sundry other times he uttered
many: al which were penned down from his mouth by sundry persons, and some of
them also very grave and godly Preachers, as may plainly be seen in many
sheets of paper, wherein they are all very carefully recorded.


Orthodoxus. Might not those grave and godly Preachers have been better
employed in some more profitable study for the glory of God, and the good of
his Church: but that they must be wholly taken up many hours and days
together about such trifling toys, and become forsooth the public notaries to
a paltrie boy, or rather (if you please) to some supposed devil inherently and
essentiallie in him? We know not what account they themselves should
possibly make of so fruitless a course: howbeit, we think (for our own
parts) that they might have been better employed by much.


Exorcistes. What your self do happily imagine thereof, it makes no great
matter. Surely (for mine own part) I am fully persuaded that the Lord has
purposelie raised up, and appointed this Boy to lay open the truth of these
mystical matters, which hitherto have been hidden from many.


Orthodoxus. Fie, fie Exorcistes, do you not tremble to utter such an ungodly
and blasphemous conceit of your own? Howsoever I have hitherto spared your
person, and purposely covered your wants with the mantell of love: Pro. 10.12.
1. Pe^ 4.8.
yet surely I should fearefullie sin against my enlightened conscience, and
very grieuouslie offend my gracious God, if (as heretofore) I should still
forbear to reprove very sharply your gross and palpable wickedness.

You are fully persuaded (you say) that the Lord has purposelie raised up,
and appointed this boy to lay open the truth of these mystical matters, which
hitherto have bin hidden from many. I pray you consider well what you say: and
(out of your better thoughts) do tell me I beseech you, where, and from whom
we are now to expect the revelation of truths whatsoever? Know you not who it
is that the father (in these last days) has finally appointed to reveal,
and to speak all truths to his Church? Heb. 1.1.
What man? will you then forsake the fountain of living waters for the
revelation of truths; Ierem. 2.12.
and run to such filthy puddles of your own devising, as are able to hold
no water at all? Isa. 8.28.
Will you leave the law, and the testimonies, and trot after a blind and a
trothlesse lad for the revelation of these hidden truths? will you withdraw
your self from that holy ointment, 1. Ioh. 2.27. Ioh. 14.^^
whose only office it is to lead into all truth whatsoever: and hunt after a
supposed wicked spirit in a graceles and sensles boy? Will you return from the
author of truth; Romans 3.4. 2. Pet. 1.21. Ioh. 8.44. 1. Tim. 4.2. 2. Cor. 11.15.
to the author of lies? from the holy ministry of God; to an extraordinary
ministry of the devil and his devilish instrument? In the name of God do
presently humble your soul at the fearful remembrance of this your horrible
and fearful condition. Pray earnestly to God, that (if it be possible) this
blasphemous thought of your heart may be forgiven you when the time of
refreshing comes. Act. 8.21.
What great blasphemy is this against our Lord Jesus the Churches sole
Prophet? Revel. 19.10.
For the only testimony of Jesus, is that spirit of Prophecy, whereupon we
must soundly rely for the revelation of all truths whatsoever. What
intolerable injury is this to the office of his holy spirit: Ioh. 14.26.
who alone must bring to our remembrance whatsoever the Lord Jesus has spoken
before? What a fearful check gives this blasphemous speech of yours, to the
ordinary ministry of Christ, so singularly graced, and so notably qualified
with sundry gifts from above, Ephesians. 4.11.12.
for the manifestation of all truths whatsoever, to the end of the world? Yea
(besides these your sundry and intolerable blasphemies) what a deadly blow
have you given your own self, and your fellow-laborers: as though that might
be made known to the world by the ministry of devils: which could not, nor
cannot possibly be found forth by the Lord Jesus his ordinance. A very
dangerous conceit, and flat opposite (I assure you) to our Savior himself;
Luke 16.29.31
who says, they have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. That we
should therefore expect reue^ations of truths from any other means else, was
never taught from heaven, but from hell: yea, even out of the lying mouth of
that damned rich glutton: who (rejecting the revelations of the word) did say
unto Abraham, Luke 16.30.
that if one should arise from the dead, they would undoubtedly believe and be
saved. Behold here the infernal author of that your vile and fearful
conceit: and be forthwith ashamed of such a tutor. The Lord open your eyes, and
instruct you better, that so you may be enabled hereafter to divide the word
more truly; and to show your self a more sound and substantial teacher of
truth. 2. Tim. 2.15.
For consider (I beseech you) how harshlie this blasphemous speech of yours
would sound in the very ears of your prophanest hearers: namely, if you
should say thus unto them. Good people be not troubled I pray you, with any
your own ignorance concerning these hidden truths which we intimate to you,
and which are now in question among us. For be you well assured, that this
truth which hitherto has bin hidden from many, it shall now (notwithstanding)
very shortly be manifested unto you by such a corrupt boy, or rather (if you
will) by some devil in the boy at the least. Were not this pockie good stuff
(think you) to pester your Pulpit withal? And yet this (in effect) is even the
very same which you afford unto us, from that your former most filthy
conceit. Pro. 9.7.8.9*
Having thus (in some sort) discharged my conscience by giving you admonition
in time: do you now produce better arguments to prove your supposed essential
possessions of spirits and devils, or else do forthwith give over the field for
shame.


Exorcistes. Why sir, I dispossessed them all by prayer and fasting: therefore
they were all essentiallie possessed.


Physiologus. What man? are you quite spent up, concerning the pretended
essential possessions of those your eight Demoniakes: that you are now (like a
steale-counter) thus covertly creeping unto their supposed dispossessions by
prayer and fasting? Surely sir, if (while we be but in dealing spare blows the
one with the other) you begin (like a cowardly crauen) so soon to set up the
heckle: it is to be feared, you will never hold out when once we come to the
deadly fight.


Exorcistes. Yes, yes, I warrant you fear it not. For neither is my cause so
crasie, that I need to fear your encounter: nor my courage so cowardly, as
that I will ever fight crauen, be the bickering never so sharp.


Phyfiologus. Well said Exorcistes, when the cause it self becomes desperate:
then well fare a valourous heart: howbeit, it were much better (in my simple
conceit) to yield up the field by a fair and a friendly persuasion, then (in
a foole-hardie or humorous course) to continue a desperate fight, till you
receive a deadly foil.


Lycanthropus. Surely Exorcistes, howsoever you brave it in words, it were
better the controversy were brought to an issue: because the faster you run,
the further you range, and the more fiercely you fight, the more feeble you
grow: yea, all men may plainly perceive, that (howsoever you prate) you will
never prevail.


Exorcistes. Tush man, fear you not that.


Philologus. Nay, fear that fear will, we fear not at all.


Exorcistes. Neither yet I, I assure you.


Orthodoxus. Well then Exorcistes, having said what possibly you can
concerning your first distribution, I mean the supposed essential possessions
of those your eight pretended Demoniakes: let us now (for one hour or two) go
take the fresh air, and then revive our skirmish afresh, concerning your
second distribution, I mean your dispossessing of those eight, by your prayer
and fasting.


Exorcistes. I do willingly yield to your motion.


The end of the first Dialogue.
The second Dialogue.
THE ARGUMENT.
Whether this fresh encounter (containing an hotch-potch of matters confusedly
shuffled together) has found a better success, concerning the pretended
Dispossession of Devils by prayer and fasting: then any the precedent
particulars, propounded at large in those our former Discourses?

The speakers names.
PHILOLOGVS. LYCANTHROPVS. PNEVMATOMACHVS. PHYSIOLOGVS. ORTHODOXVS. EXORCISTES.
Orthodoxus. THis pleasant fresh air (I assure you) has well refreshed our
feeble spirits: and therefore, that we protract no further time, do tell us
directly Exorcistes* what you say now to your falsely pretended Dispossession
of Devils by Prayer and Fasting?


Exorcistes. Sir, having sufficiently proved, that the eight persons we speak
of, Doctrine, page 34.
were every of them essentiallie possessed by the Devil, yea, and this also,
with such unanswerable and invincible arguments, as may fully persuade an
indifferent Reader, there needs no further labor herein. Nnotwithstanding,
because that which makes for the proof of their Dispossession tends
directly to the further confirmation of that their said essential possession,
I am therefore ready with the like invincible reasons to deal in that point
if you please.


Orthodoxus. It pleases us passing well: and the sounder you deal, the better
we like it, and the sooner we shall make an end. As for your sufficient
proving of that which you falsely pretend: let the indifferent Reader
determine. In the mean time, because you brag beyond measure of your
unanswerable, and invincible arguments to manage your matters withal; we will
therefore the more exactly examine them severally, to make present trial of
that their pretended force. And whereas you seek to shelter all those your
falsely pretended Patients, Doctrine, page 34.35.36.
under an holy couerture of the parties dispossessed in Scripture, and by such
a device would seem to soar aloft in the clouds, before you be feathered
fleg, to fly at so lofty a pitch: this therefore we must tell you, or ever
we enter the combat, that the holy Scriptures themselves will not yield their
holy protection, to so paltrie a cause. And therefore that which we have
hitherto spoken against your falsely pretended essential possessions, may
fully suffice to answer the whole, because where there was no true
possession, there can be no dispossession in truth: yet, because the final
overthrow of these your pretended dispossessions, does more fully destroy your
falsely supposed essential possessions, we are also here ready to encounter
your uttermost force. Pretermitting therefore all those your falsely pretended
signs of dispossession from sacred Scripture, Doctrine, page 34.35.36.
as also your intolerable profanation thereof by your fond applications: do
presently proceed in propounding unto us your arguments.


Exorcistes. Doctrine, page 37.
I will. First, there were in every of our Demoniakes those selfsame signs or
notes of dispossession, precedent and subsequent, which we read of in the
Scripture Demoniakes: and therefore there was in every of them the selfsame
dispossession no doubt.


Orthodoxus. If there were no doubt in the matter at al: it were undoubtedly a
mere madness for any to impugn the same. Howbeit, thus we answer your
argument. There were not in those your pretended Demoniakes, the selfsame
signs or notes precedent and subsequent: therefore not the selfsame undoubted
dispossessions. That there were not the selfsame signs or notes, I prove it
thus. First, those signs or notes in the Scripture Demoniakes, they were
undoubted effects of their dispossessions: H. Discovery, page 177. and cap. 5.
page 294. and page 297. Doctrine, page 37.
the signs or notes in those your pretended Demoniakes, they were in truth but
counterfeit cousonages, as themselves have freely confessed upon their oaths.
Furthermore, those signs or effects which we find in the Scripture
Demoniakes, they were sensibly performed to the view of the beholders eye: the
other in those your pretended Demoniakes, they were not so by your own
confession. Again, howsoever those signs or notes in Scripture Demoniakes,
were the undoubted effects of dispossessions then, and so to be taken, because
they are recorded for such by the blessed Evangelist, who could not err in so
recording the same: those your falsely pretended signs, they are but the
unruly reports of your lying pen, directed therein by a deceitful heart: yea,
they be such signs (Master Darell affirms) as men may be deeply deceived in
discerning thereof. Doctrine. page 18. Detection, page 54.
Besides that, those selfsame effects in the Scripture Demoniakes then, they
cannot so concludently prove dispossessions now: because the like effects do
eftsoons also arise from mere natural causes, and corporal diseases, as our
seventh Dialogue declares at large. And therefore if those selfsame effects
then, must necessarily be made the undoubted true signs of dispossessions
now: then, wheresoever is the like rending and tearing, crying aloude, and
leaving for dead, there is also the like essential dispossession of Devils,
which were to too absurd to imagine. Detection, page 54.
Briefly, your good friend Master Darell, he does confidently conclude a
dispossession of Devils, where no such signs are apparent: and therefore those
your pretended signs precedent and subsequent, they do not necessarily
conclude an essential dispossession of Devils.


Exorcistes. Oh yes sir, Doctrine, page 36.37.
for besides those Scripture signs, I have (in my proper experience) eftsoons
observed in the dispossession of some certain Demoniakes, a very sensible
seeing, or feeling of some thing going out of their bodies like to a Mouse, 2.
Narration, page 13.
an Vrchin, a Toade, a Bull, a foul black man, a Dog, and such like: and
therefore there is undoubtedly an essential dispossession of Devils.


Orthodoxus. What man? are you weary already of those your Canonical notes
of dispossessions, that you are fled so soon to those your own experimented
apocryphal signs or effects? Surely it should seem your force is but weak.
Notwithstanding, howsoever you say you have eftsoons observed such things in
your own experience: very certain it is, that not your own self, but those
your counterfeite Patients rather (if any at all) they alone experimented some
such supposed sensible seeings, and feelings of some thing going out of their
bodies: and therefore it is very untrue to say that you your own self
observed the same in your proper experience. Besides that, Doctrine, page 36.37.
Master Darell (your good friend) does flatly affirm, that the Spirits
themselves, they neither were, nor continued with those his pretended
Demoniakes, in any such sensible bodies, as you say here you have eftsoons
observed in sundry of them: and therefore impossible there should be any such
sensible seeing or feeling of substances proceeding forth from them, Doctrine,
page 37.
as you bear us in hand. For howsoever you seem to qualify your former
speech from the Spirit his supposed operation in the present procuring of some
such sensible matters in show, at the very instant of their several
dispossessions: that is over childish a conceit, to persuade any reasonable
man, having especially his eyes in his head. Eccles. 2.14.
For the Spirits, they could not by any their supposed operations whatsoever,
procure such sensible things, as might be sensibly seen, or palpablie felt of
any whosoever: as in our second, third, fourth, and fifth Dialogues is showed at
large.


Exorcistes. Doctrine, page 37.
Yea, but besides all this, I have (by my proper experience) observed eftsoons
in sundry Demoniakes, a vomiting immediately before the egresse of the Spirit,
prognosticating plainly unto us, his imminent essential dispossession: and
therefore there is undoubtedly an essential dispossession of Devils.


Orthodoxus. If this your new-coyned Prognostication, had (indeed) been
printed with privilege, we might (by the warrant thereof) not only be
persuaded of the very truth of that which you prate: but withal, we might (by
virtue thereof) very boldly avouch, that every Gormandizing belli-god, and
surfeiting Swil-boule (so often as they happen to spue) are essentially
dispossessed, of one Devil at the least. Yea, and so much more likely than the
other you speak of, by how much those your pretended Demoniakes spitting up
but a little quantity of choler or phlegm (as your self do report) and that
also with very great labor: D. 2. Narration, page 13.
these drunken Epicures, they do spue forth the Spirits by whole pottles at
once, and that with a trice. Besides that, if vomiting (forsooth) be an
undoubted true sign of essential dispossessions: it is very probable that men
may mightily further the essential dispossessing of devils, by procuring the
possessed to vomit forthwith. Briefly the scriptures, they make no mention at
all of these your apocryphal signs of essential dispossessions: Doctrine.
page 37.
and therefore they are no certain signs of any such matter, but must (says
good M. Darel) be regarded of all men accordingly. Darell* in the report of
Thomas Darling, page 153. S. Harsnette^ discovery, in page 279.280.
Namely, they must (in deed and in truth) be deemed no better then the dreaming
dotages of some fantastical or idle brain: howsoever you your self (being
destitute of true scripture signs to (...) port your purpose in hand) do make
them the undoubted true signs of Thomas Darling his dispossession. And
therefore propound better arguments then these: or put an end to your prattling
discourse for shame.


Exorcistes. Why sir, Doctrine. page 37.
we used prayer and fasting in such proper terms, and to such special end, I
mean to their essential dispossessions, and the same was forthwith
effectual; for the Lord, he undoubtedly heard us, and we saw the very work
it self accomplished according to our own desires: therefore there is now,
undoubtedly an essential dispossession of devils.


Orthodoxus. If you so stricktly tied your self to some set and appointed
terms for such purpose as you pretend, it seems then (by the purporte of your
speech) that you rather coniured the devil from those your Demoniakes, then
entreated the Lord to cast them out: and then how can you from thence so
confidently conclude that your prayer and fasting was effectually heard of the
Lord? For this question may justly arise from your speech: Namely, whether the
powerful efficacy of those your charming terms, had simply and only
their relation to God alone: or to God and the devil together? If simply, and
only to God alone, then you do therein directly affirm, that God respected
rather the form, then the faith; rather the terms then the truth of your
prayer. And therein withal, you do implicatiuely put down the principal
cause why the rest of the Preachers (notwithstanding their often attempts by
fervent prayer) could not possibly expel William Summer his combersome devil
as well as your self: namely for that they wanted every of them, those
terrible terms which would have stricken it dead. D. Narration page 1. D.
Apology, in page 31.32.
Notwithstanding this crosses Master Darel very shrewdly over the thumbes,
who tells us plainly that the dispossession of Satan is so ordinary and so
easy a matter, as it may be effected of any, how simply soever: whereas that
which your self here reports, implies a quite contrary tale, and concludes
it impossible for any to accomplish the work, but such as are first made
thoroughly acquainted with the proper terms of that trade. Again, if the
powerful efficacy of those your charming terms had their relation to God
and the devil together: then how dare you so confidently avouch, that those
your said prayers (uttered forth in such set and appointed terms) were heard
of God: since (it may be) the devil himself (being fearefullie frighted with
those terrible terms) was voluntarily fled beyond the utmost borders of
Egypt, Tob. 8.3.
or ever the Lord once opened his mouth concerning such his present departure
from those your pretended Demoniakes. Besides all this, those your charming
terms, they are (it should seem) of a wonderful working power: in that not
only they are able (by your own saying) to drive out the most combersome
devil with a trice: but (which more is) to accomplish (in all likelihood) an
undoubted regeneration even in the Demoniakes themselves, D. Doctrine, page 37.
as a man may collect by your speech. For you desired (you say) that the devil
might so be driven forth from every of them, as their bodies might forthwith
become temples of the holy Ghost to dwell in: and even at the very instant you
saw the work visiblie accomplished, according to your own desires. This being
so as you say, no wonder at all, though the Inhabitants of Nottingham were so
desirous to entertain your person and preaching: the very terms of your
prayers being so effectual as you bear us in hand. But tell us (I beseech
you) from what special grounds you are so certainly assured, that the means
which you used in those your supposed dispossessions, D. Doctrine, page 59.
Darrels Apolog. page 32. Dar. Doctrine, page 18.
were so effectual then: since M. Darel himself does flatly affirm, that
both prayer alone, or prayer and fasting together: they are not always
effectual to that selfsame work. Yea, and (which more is) how could your
self be so certain thereof, seeing Satan (as you say) is so cunning, that he
can cause many things to be in appearance which are not so indeed and in truth:
and can also pretend a departure, when as yet he lies secretly lurking within
the Demoniakes bodies? Briefly, how are you sure the work it self was
forthwith effected in such sort as you say, I mean, D. Doctrine. page 37.
that you visiblie saw the devil driven forth of those your Demoniakes, and
their bodies effectually made temples (at the very instant) for the holy Ghost
to dwell in: since as well the essential dispossession of devils, as also that
admirable work of regeneration, are either of them spiritual matters, and may
not possibly be discerned with corporal sense? And therefore we see not how
the work was forthwith accomplished according to your own desires: unless
happily your own desires (being then only to have the beholders deluded)
came so to pass, as you saw (therein) your hearts desire in such sort
effected. This reason therefore (howsoever it may serve in some sort to
discover your dissimulation) it concludes no essentiell dispossession of Devils.


Exorcistes. But sir, D. Doctrine. page 37.
there was then and after, an earnest desire of Satan his repossession in every
of those our Demoniakes: and therefore there must necessarily be performed in
every of them, an undoubted essential dispossession before.


Orthodoxus. Do tell us (I beseech you) how you became (on the sudden) so
familiarlie acquainted with the Devil his earnest desire of a repossession?


Exorcistes. Even by the consonancie of the sacred Scriptures: Matthew. 12.43.
Luke 11.24.
and the several reports of the parties themselves.


Orthodoxus. Those Scriptures (being merely metaphorical) how should they
certainly conclude any such earnest desire of Satan his repossession: unless
you could first assuredly demonstrate unto us, both his essential possession
and dispossession before, in those your pretended Demoniakes. As for the
several reports of the parties themselves; that (we verily think) should
yield unto you no such certain assurance. Since they have voluntarily deposed
before authority, H. Discovery page 177. and pa^ 294. and page 297.
and we also our selves (having diligently enquired into the matter it self)
do plainly perceive in our own experience, that the parties themselves, they
had (for the present) no purpose at all, to relate the undoubted truth of
things as they were done in deed: but reported them rather according to the
predeterminate purpose of your proper desires, as we told you before. Moreover
it may be, that those your pretended Demoniakes, they were then (when they
reported those matters) in some one of their falsely pretended fittes, and were
not (in deed) possessed or dispossessed at all, but they and the devil
dissembled the work in hand: and if so, then the parties themselves
(whatsoever they seem to report) they are not to be believed in any those
intricate matters. For first, if they but dissembled the things they reported,
there is no reason at all, that men should give credit to any such false
dissemblers, as make no conscience of any such cosoning courses. Again, if
they did not dissemble, but were (in deed) possessed of Satan, D. Doctrine,
page 10.11. D. Detection. page 97.98.
yet you do tell us your self, that all the while they are in their fits,
they be altogether senseless, not knowing what they either say, or do: and
then (by Master Darell his unchangeable rules) they are not to be credited
whatsoever they seem to report. And so by consequence, these their dissembling
reports concerning Satan his earnest desire of repossession: they are none
other then the bare reports of a lying devil, or senseless Demoniake at
least, and no better to be esteemed of us, then merely fantastical and
senseless reports. Besides all this, those your pretended Demoniakes, they
reported no more concerning these admirable matters, then either that alone
which they were taught before to prattle like parrats, or then that which they
(being grossly deluded by the devil him self, or his devilish dissembling
ympes) did verily imagine to be undoubtedly even so as they supposed the same:
and therefore they only reported the idle imagination of their own idle
brain. D. Doctrine, page 81. D. Doctrine, page 10.11.
For, Master Darell does tell us directly, that the Demoniakes them selves,
they neither saw* nor heard, nor felt, nor perceived any such matters. In like
manner, that your confident auouching of the bare literal sense (of entering
in, and of going out) is to too absurd, as we showed before. For, neither will
such a sense be made to agree with the maine purpose of Christ: and Master
Darell himself more simply, D. Detection, page 58. Math. 12.45.
and more plainly expounds those Scriptures m^^^aphorically; accordingly
also as Christ himself applies the same to the Jews. And therefore, these
your collections from thence, as they are to too absurd and senseless: so do
they argue apparently, the beggerlinesse of this your cause, and mightily
bewray your unspeakable poverty in supporting the same. Who perceiving your
self destitute of direct and plain Scriptures, to prove your fantastical
fooleries: do vnconscionablie seek to underprop the same, by those your
fantastical conceits, which you have violently enforced from the only bare
literal sense of such metaphorical terms, as the holy Ghost has peculiarly
put down in a quite contrary sense or purpose, to that which your self would
falsely pretend, as may plainly appear, by conferring faithfully the one with
the other, Math. 12 43. Luc. 1^.24. Ephesians. 2.12.
from point to point. For first, how can you soundly collect the essential
possession of devils: from the Jews their only accursed condition, as they
are without Christ in the world? Or, how can you imagine any essential
dispossession of devils: from the Jews their present desisting from sin? Or,
how may you fitly infer an essential repossession of devils: Act. 13.46.
Pro. 26.11. 2. Pet. 2, 22.
from the Jews their rejecting the proffered graces of God in Christ, and their
returning afresh to their former vomit? Or (to be brief) how can you soundly
conclude the reentring of seven distinct several devils: from the Jews their
seuenfold more accursed condition then ever before? Math. 12.45. Luc. 11.26.
Heb. 6.4. and 10.26. 2. Pet. 2.20.2^
Surely Exorcistes, such unsavory collections, they do rather proceed from
the senseless profunditie of some new found senseless Diuillitie, then from
the depth of sacred Divinity: yea, and (which more is) these your absurd and
senseless collections, they are undoubtedly such, as (being also observed
literallie in other like metaphors) might teach melancholic persons to cut off
their own hands: Math. 5.29. Math. 5.30. Pro. 23.2. Eccles. 2.14.
to put out their own eyes: to cut their own throats: yea, and that also,
the eye of a fool is set in his heel, because a wise-mans eye is placed
aloft in his head. Yea, and this I say further, they would make wise men to
wonder in what part of your body your own eye was fixed: when you first
squibbed forth these your squinting ^ollections. For, your dealings herein is
not unlike to the fetches of a wily fox: S. D. Trial* page 83.
who, when he looks a man very full in the face, will then most covertly
squint aside with his eyes, to epsy an escape on the one side or other.
Howbeit, these your squinting collections, they are over much squeamish to
settle us soundly in an undoubted assurance of tha^ your pretended essential
dispossessions.


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine* page 39.
Why sir? those our Demoniakes, they have ever since remained well in their
bodies, and have been free (for these two years or more) from those their
former extraordinary vexations whatsoever: and therefore, essentiallie
dispossessed of Satan.


Orthodoxus. They were never essentially possessed by Satan, but did
counterfeite their fittes, as them selves have confessed; being every way free
from all such supposed extraordinary vexations both then and before: and so by
consequence, they were not essentiallie dispossessed at all. And howsoever you
fondly bear us in hand, that those voluntary confessions of theirs concerning
their counterfeytings, are undoubted demonstrations of Satan his repossession
in every of them, very certain it is, that the parties them selves, they knew
their own estates far better then you could by much: and therefore (
deposing the contrary to that you avouch) they are to be believed before your
self. Yea, even Thomas Darling him self (of whom you threape so much
kindness) he plainly confesses (as Master Darell does grant) that he also
(for his part) did but counterfeite whatsoever he did: D. his trial page 22.
D. Detection, page 179.180.
and therefore either he was not essentiallie possessed at all: or else (by
your own reason) he is as undoubtedly repossest as any of the rest whom you so
confidently charge that way. Howbeit, we do resolutely assure our selves, that
those your pretended demoniakes, they were neither possessed, dispossessed, nor
repossessed at all. D. Doctrine. page 39.40.
For, very certain it is, that the casting out of devils is a miraculous
work: but the working of miracles, it was only in Christ and his Apostles
days, and is ceased long since, and therefore also the casting out of Devils,
it is ceased long since.


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 40.
The casting out of devils in the days of Christ, was effected either by an
absolute or committed authority. The one was in Christ alone, the other in the
twelve Apostles, and seauenty Disciples: both which manner of expelling devils
are ceased long since as you say. Only, now there remains prayer, or prayer
and fasting: by which we entreat Christ to cast them out now, by his own
absolute authority, and therefore the casting out of devils by these means,
is no miracle at all.


Orthodoxus. If Christ's absolute authority for the driving out of Devils be
ceased long since: do tell us I beseech you, how Christ (notwithstanding any
your earnest entreaties by fasting and prayer) may now possibly drive forth
Devils by that his said absolute authority, which (you say) is ceased long
since? For in that you avouch the work of dispossessing Demoniakes now to be
also effected by the absolute authority of Christ: you must necessarily make,
that his said absolute authority, either the only efficient, or an instrument
at least, in every such powerful expelling of spirits and Devils. If you make
Christ his absolute authority the only efficient cause for the powerful
expelling of Devils in these days of the Gospel: then surely (howsoever you
may urge your pretended ordinary means of prayer and fasting, for the
entreaty of Christ) the authority or power that expels the Devil, is either
but one and the same, and so by consequence the casting out of Devils, even now
in these latter days of the Gospel, it must needs be as miraculous as ever
before. On the other side, if the driving out of Devils be now wrought by the
absolute authority of Christ, but instrumentallie at the beck and appointment
of your prayer and fasting: then your said speech, it implies thus much at the
least. Namely, that either the bare exercise of your prayer and fasting, is
able efficiently to accomplish that work, ex opere operato, by the only bare
work being barely done: or that, in the very words of your prayer at least,
there is covertly contained some certain magical force, for the timely
effecting thereof. Thus then, as your reason is very ridiculous: so surely your
fond allusion from the Queen, and Lord Chancellor is to too absurd. D.
Doctrine, page 40.
For first, you propound a case which never shall be: and therefore, the same
can never illustrate your purpose in hand. Besides that, you do (by the Lord
Chancellors death) too highly derogate from her Majesty's absolute authority:
in making those matters whatsoever, which her highness (being thereunto
entreated by some of her subjects) shall by her absolute authority effect in
her own proper person: to be less admirable by many degrees, then those which
were wrought before, by the Lord Chancellor his committed power. Howbeit, to
the end we may lively illustrate the matter it self: let us admit the case
to be thus; The Queens Majesty (next and immediately under God) does govern
this kingdom by her absolute authority. This absolute authority, she has
(in part) dispensed to some certain persons, subordinate under her, for the
orderly execution of justice and mercy among the rest of her subjects:
ratifying, and approving whatsoever those persons shall correspondently
conclude according to the tenor of her Majesty's pleasure, expressed at large
in her Laws. Yea, and approouing the same to be as authentical, as if she (by
her absolute authority) had effected the same in her own proper person. And
(which more is) upon the primarie establishment of her said absolute
authority, she appoints (as a temporary officer) the L. Keeper of her great
seal, to confirm and establish (from time to time as occasion requires) all
those the former constitutions of mercy or justice, by annexing the broad
seal of England unto them: ratifying and approving (as before) whatsoever he
accomplisheth accordingly. This Lord Keeper being (as you heard) but a
temporary officer) he dies; whereupon her Majesty intends that his said
temporary office shall fully determine for ever: and (reserving that
extraordinary power to her self) she never purposes to set to her said
seal, as before, but will now have her said subjects very dutifully to accept
of her future graunts and decrees, in no less assurance of her former
experimented faithfulness, then if they were extraordinarily sealed up (as in
former times) with ten thousand authentical seals. The case being thus, the
question is this: Whether her subjects (seeing her Majesty's pleasure to the
contrary) may warrantablie supplicate now, for her Highness said temporary
seal to any her future graunts or decrees: or (if any shall rashly attempt
such a course) whether the same does not argue in him, an undutiful
presumption, or hopeless distrust at the least, and so by consequence, does
highly offend her Majesty. There is no man of common sense, that may justly
deny the same. Now then, the application is this: Christ Jesus having absolute
authority from God the Father, to govern his Church, commits part of his
said authority to Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, pastors and teachers:
commanding them (by his Word and Sacraments) to witness his good will toward
his Church to the end of the world. Giving to some peculiar persons among the
rest, a temporary grace or power, to seal up (for a season) his said Word and
Sacraments, with extraordinary and miraculous actions. These extraordinary
actions he does after determine for ever, and will now have all men to receive
his said Word and Sacraments, as the authentical truths of his former
experimented faithfulness toward his said Church, without any farther
superfluous seals, to the end of the world: and (reserving that extraordinary
power to himself) never purposes to set to his said extraordinary seal, as
in former times, but will now have his said Church very faithfully to
entertain the timely revelation of his future promises, in as full an
assurance of that his former experimented faithfulness toward her, and every
member, as if this said faithfulness were extraordinarily sealed up with ten
thousand such temporary seals. Now then, the case being so as you see, the
question is this: Whether (the purpose of Christ standing so as we say) it be
not an intolerable presumption, or filthy distrust at the least, for any
whomsoever, to supplicate Christ for that extraordinary favor afresh, which
he has finally and fully determined: and so (by consequence) whether it be
not now a presumptuous sin for any (how holy soever in show) to undertake,
or attempt such a rash and unwarranted course? I verily believe it is sin:
and that your self dare never deny the same. Notwithstanding, admit by the
way, that any presumptuous person (so supplicating our Savior in such
doubtful uncertainties) should (for the bewitching of himself, 2. These.
2.9.10.11. Deuteronomy. 13.1.2.3. Matt. 24.23.24* Luke 17.23.
and the trial of others) obtain (in some secret judgment) his hearts
desire: the question is, whether that extraordinary seal so set to (in
judgment) by Christ his absolute authority, be not as glorious, yea much
more glorious, and more admirable now, then that which was put to before, by
some such special persons as were thereunto enabled by Christ for a time: and
whether that power which effects such work (either then or now) be not
evermore one and the same, of equal authority and like admiration? I hope you
have not the face to withstand the infallible truth thereof. And therefore, in
auouching so confidently, that this your newfound ordinance, for the powerful
expelling of Devils by prayer and fasting, is now established and continued for
ever, even by the apparent proclamation of our Savior himself, when no such
proclamation is any where recorded throughout the Canonical Scriptures: you
do therein very blasphemously belie our Savior Christ, and make it
apparently evident, that your idle head, it was fraught too full of
fantastical and idle proclamations forsooth: when you thus proclaimed (in
print) all these your idle and fantastical conceits to the world.


Exorcistes. See D. Doctrine, page 41.
Not so sir: for howsoever the same be not apparently expressed in the Word, our
Savior Christ, he has secretly ordained and established prayer and fasting,
as a perpetual secret ordinance, for the essential dispossessing of Spirits
and Devils to the end of the world: and therefore there are, and shall be such
dispossessing of Devils to the end of the world.


Orthodoxus. If this your pretended newfound ordinance be not apparently
expressed in the Word: how know you the same to be a secret ordinance
perpetually established by Christ? Again, if prayer and fasting be (as you
say) but a secret ordinance: from whence have you your special warrant to be
tampering therewith, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
since the secret things belong only to God?


Exorcistes. See D. Doctrine, page 41. Matthew. 17.21. Mark 9.29.
It seems to us such a secret ordinance, from out of those Scriptures,
recorded by Matthew and Mark: therefore it is such an ordinance.


Orthodoxus. If the same be recorded by Matthew and Mark, it is then no
secret, but a revealed ordinance of Christ: and so (by consequence) it
belongs to us and our children. Deuteronomy. 29.29.
Howbeit, the same seems to us no such secret ordinance from out of those
Scriptures recorded by Matthew and Mark (Master Darell also very flatly
affirming, D. Detection, page 41.
that we read not of the first ordaining of any such means) and therefore
the same is no such secret ordinance of Christ, as you bear us in hand from
those Scriptures. But go to, put down the very words themselves, from whence
you would seem to collect the secret institution of such a secret ordinance,
as your self do imagine.


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 41.
I will. Our Savior Christ says thus: This kind can by no other means come
forth, Matthew. 17.21. Mark. 9.29.
but by prayer and fasting. Wherein prayer and fasting seems unto us, to be
some secret ordinance of Christ, for the powerful expelling of Spirits and
Devils.


Orthodoxus. This seeming of yours was fully answered before by Master Darel
his mouth: D. Detection, page 41.
where he flatly affirms, that we read not in Scripture, of the first
ordaining of any such means. But proceed (I beseech you) in examining that
Scripture.


Exorcistes. Let Master Darell affirm what he please: that which I say, is
very apparent, both by the coherence and purpose of the text it self.


Orthodoxus. Let pass the coherence, and speak of the purpose alone.


Exorcistes. Christ's purpose (in that text) was, D. Doctrine, page 41.
to put down such an ordinary means for the powerful expelling of Devils to
the end of the world: as may plainly appear by the prosecution of that purpose
it self, which is also expressed unto us, partly by a question, and partly by
an answer thereto.


Orthodoxus. Very well. But who (I beseech you) propounded the question?


Exorcistes. That did the Disciples of Christ.


Orthodoxus. What was the maine reason of propounding the question?


Exorcistes. Their not expelling of that Devil from the child. D. Doctrine,
page 41.



Orthodoxus. To whom was the question propounded?


Exorcistes. Even to our Savior himself.


Orthodoxus. What was the answer of Christ to their question?


Exorcistes. That they could not cast out the Spirit, D. Doctrine* page 41.
because of their unbelief: and that this kind goes not forth but by prayer
and fasting.


Orthodoxus. To whom was this answer propely given?


Exorcistes. Even to the Disciples themselves: who propounded the question.


Orthodoxus. What does Christ his answer implie?


Exorcistes. Two special impediments to that present business. Namely first,
D. Doctrine, page 42.
the weakness of the Disciples faith: then next the kind of spirit wherewith
they were then to encounter. As if Christ should thus have answered. Your own
faith was too weak: and that kind of devil was too combersome for you to
encounter withal.


Orthodoxus. Will you stick fast to this sense, which you presently make of
that scripture?


Exorcistes. Make you no doubt thereof: whatsoever shall be written or said to
the contrary.


Orthodoxus. Well then (pretermitting a time, the first impediment I mean, the
weakness of the Disciples faith: for that so vnwealdie a work) do tell us,
how you are certainly sure that Christ put down your other pretended
impediment, namely, the kind of spirit: since there is no such distinguished
let laid forth in that special text?


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine* page 42.
Though the same be not expreslie put down in the text: yet the words of our
Savior Christ, do secretly implie so much: because the spirit (it should
seem) was one of that kind, which (in the ordinary means that ever were, or
shall be in the Church) could not be expelled by sole prayer, without fasting
annexed unto it.


Orthodoxus. If sole prayer alone be able to drive out a devil, then is it
altogether a superfluous course, to have fasting annexed thereto: Frustra fit
per plura, quod fieri potest per pa^^io^^.
because many things together are needles, where the work may be thoroughly
effected by one only means. As also if prayer alone, be unable to accomplish
that work unless the exercise of fasting be joined therewith: then by what
other means I pray you, were Katherine Wrights seven devils driven out of her
body: for at her dispossessing you only but prayed without fasting at all?


Exorcistes. Those seven devils in Katherine Wright: were none of them all of
that worst kind of devils.


Orthodoxus. I am just of your mind for that. Notwithstanding, how knew you so
fitly what kind they were of: before you had given the first onset upon them?
Surely your hap was wonderful good, in that you (dealing with seven at a
clap) should not meet with one combersome devil among them all: seeing the
Apostles of Christ (being to deal but with one devil alone) were so hardly
beset. Howbeit, referring the farther discourse of these your fantastical
toys, to place more convenient: do tell me Exorcistes, how (from that
Scripture) you may possibly conclude a perpetual established ordinance for
the casting out of devils to the end of the world: since that very text was
specially and purposelie spoken to the Apostles themselves, as you told us
even now.


Exorcistes. Why sir? D. Doctrine, page 42.43.
from these words (this kind goes not forth but by prayer and fasting) we may
as confidently conclude, that Christ would have prayer and fasting to be
practiced as a perpetual ordinance for the powerful expelling of devils: as
the Physician (by telling men that the pleurisy can no other ways be cured
but by only Phlebotomie) would have Phlebotomie used for the only curing of
Pleurisies.


Orthodoxus. If you have no deeper an insight into this your newfound trade of
diuillitie, then you show skill in the curing of pleurisies: there were no
great regard to be given unto this your pretended ordinance, for the expelling
of devils by prayer and fasting. Auicen. lib. 3. tractat. 4. cap. 1. Phil.
Barrowgh. de methodo curandi. lib. 2. cap. 8.
For what learned Physician has ever affirmed, that a pleurisy cannot
otherways be possibly cured, but by the only use of Phlebotomie? Seeing (if
the body of the patient abound not with evil humors) it shall suffice (in
the beginning of the inflammation) to mittigate and discuss the pain, with
foments and medicines that do moderatlie heat: with an ^^ of Christ must have
their special and only relation to the ages succeeding: then the ages
succeeding, they should have (by your saying) a far greater power for the
expelling of devils then ever had any the Apostles of Christ. Because (by your
Doctrine) the ages succeeding, they are successively enabled to cope with
those combersome devils: against whom the Apostles themselves could not
possibly prevail with all their po^er. Furthermore, if Christ in those words
did but barely establish a perpetual ordinary means for expelling of devils
in the ages succeeding: then surely the Apostles of Christ, they have hitherto
concealed some necessary parts of the counsel of God from the ages
succeeding: Act. 20.26.27.
for that no one of them all (in any their canonical writings) have so much as
mentioned that self same ordinance, or given any directions at all concerning
the same. Briefly, whereas you confidentlie avouch that Christ (in those his
words) did then undoubtedly establish prayer and fasting, as a perpetual
ordinary means for the powerful expelling of devils to the end of the world:
you do therein directly oppose your own self to good Master Darel your
friend. D. Doctrine.
For he tells us confidently, that this ordinance of prayer and fasting for
the dispossessing of devils, it was so far off from being then first
established by Christ, as that it had been ever an ordinance thereunto in the
Church continually, even from Adam himself. And this (says he) may plainly
appear by the words of our Savior himself: who says not thus, this kind
shall not go forth, as speaking in the future or following time, as of that
which should afterward be put in use: but he rather says thus, this kind (
goes) not forth, as meaning purposelie of the present and former seasons, or
of that which had been practiced long before the days of our Savior
himself: and therefore the same was no ordinance, then presently established by
Christ.


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 43. Matthew. 12.27. Act. 19.13.
Why sir, there were sundry others besides Christ himself and his own
Apostles, that were commonly conversant in casting out devils: as may plainly
appear by the scriptures. But Christ gave unto them no such special power for
casting out spirits, as he gave his Disciples: and therefore they did it either
by prayer alone, or by prayer and fasting, according to the kind of spirit
possessing the party.


Orthodoxus. That is not so: D. Detection, page 43.
for M. Darel does plainly avouch, that even those others also (besides our
Savior and his own Apostles) they accomplished those selfsame extraordinary
actions, and that also by the selfsame finger of God: and therefore by no such
supposed ordinary means as your self do imagine. Again, you your own
self do likewise affirm, that this ordinance of prayer and fasting, it was
not then an established ordinance; and Christ he tells us further, that those
other (whatsoever they were) they also eiected spirits and devils by the only
miraculous faith, Matthew. 7.22.
as appears in the seventh of Matthew: and therefore they did not the same
by any ordinary means, as you very fondly would bear us in hand. Briefly,
if those other besides the Disciples then, and the rest whatsoever in these
days of the Gospel now, may none other ways drive out devils but by this
your newfound ordinary means, namely, by prayer alone, or by prayer and
fasting together, according to the kind of spirit possessing the parties: then
it is necessarily required, that men should first be thoroughly acquainted
with the kind of spirit possessing the party, or ever they undertake to
accomplish so weighty a work.


Exorcistes. That is not requisite: neither in deed can be. D. Doctrine, page
43.



Orthodoxus. Then may no certainly know; either how or when to deal in so
doubtful a business.


Exorcistes. Yes, D. Doctrine, page 43.
let him first of all deal in the ordinary and perpetual means which is
left to the Church, namely, by prayer alone, for some two, three, or more
hours together: and then if in that time (the means so observed) he prevail
not at all, let him join fasting thereunto: and that certainly (if God will)
shall forthwith accomplish the work.


Orthodoxus. Very true as you say, Prayer and fasting together (if God will)
shall be sure to prevail: and even so likewise should prayer alone, if God saw
it good. Howbeit, it should seem by the manner of your speech, that the
powerful effect of this newfound ordinance does wholly consist upon doubtful
uncertainties: and therefore do tell us directly from whence you receive your
apocryphal canons or rules: and from what unwritten verity, you have drawn
these your unwritten directions in practice? Is it not Exorcistes, an
intolerable pride of heart, that you should dare thus impudently to institute
in the name of Christ any of these your unwritten ordinances, and apocryphal
Canons concerning the same: without either warrant or word from the mouth of
Christ? Again, how shall you be able (in the day of your fearful account) to
justify your blasphemous taking of the Lords holy name in vain, Exodus 20.
by so vainly abusing the holy ordinance of prayer, for three or four hours
together, for no other purpose at all, but only to prove an idle experiment,
concerning the uncertain effect of this your newly conceited ordinance? Know
you not man, Matthew. 7.7. Mark. 11.24. Luke 11.9. Ioh. 14.13. and 16.23. Iam.
1.6.
that we are to pray only in faith without any doubting, and that faith it
self must needs have a ground from the written word? And therefore how should
not those your idle prayers (for three or four hours together) be turned to
sin: they having especially no one word for their warrant? Moreover, who tells
you that fasting (annexed forthwith to those your experimental prayers) will
undoubtedly make them marvelous effectual: seeing the most glorious
Ceremonies of all (not proceeding from a faith grounded fast on the word) are
but holy abominations, yea, and since fasting it self (when it is at the
highest of all) is but a bodily exercise, which (the Apostle tells us) does
profit but little? Besides all this, 1. Tim. 4.8.
if prayer alone be the only ordinary means that ever was, or shall be in the
Church, for the ordinary expelling of Spirits and Devils, as you told us a
little before: how then can you warrant that your superfluous additament of
fasting to be annexed therewith? Briefly, these your apocryphal Canons
concerning the exercise of prayer alone, for some three or four hours, and
then next of fasting annexed unto it; do directly cross your own practice
with Summers: for you proceeded in prayer and fasting together, without making
an experiment first, by prayer alone.


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 43.
Very true. Howbeit, that was done so, because we would make sure work at the
first: and drive out any Devil from him (how combersome soever) without any
further ado in the matter.


Orthodoxus. But in the mean time, what became of your appointed rules? and
how was this your prescribed order observed therein? Nay, who sees not the
same to be a very fantastical and frivolous order? For what needs an
experiment first by prayer alone: since prayer and fasting together will strike
it dead? Well sir, howsoever you prescribe rules to your pupils, I perceive you
will be your self an irregular person: yea, and that you can (at your
pleasure) expel any Devil, how dangerous or deadly soever. Howbeit, it is
wonderful, you took not that selfsame prevailing course with K. Wright, and
her seven Devils: for (among seven) you might peradventure have fallen upon
one of those combersome Spirits, which would not be removed but by prayer and
fasting together: and yet notwithstanding, you only but prayed at her
deliverance.


Exorcistes. Indeed she was dispossessed by prayer alone, Dar. Doctrine. page
43.
upon the very day of her appointed deliverance, by my only prayer, without
fasting joined therewith, or so much as intended either by her self, or any
other in her behalf, or so much as advised thereto.


Orthodoxus. Surely it should seem you have a very rare gift for driving forth
Devils: in that sometimes without either prayer or fasting at all (having only
but a purpose thereto) you can so easily accomplish the work. For, upon the
very day of K. Wrights second deliverance (when you neither prayed nor fasted)
it seems you could drive out those seven at a clap, if it be true that others
report, S. Harsnettes discovery, page 302. and page 307.
and your self depose. For first, your self having well dined before with
Master Beresford at Cutthorpe, and then after dinner, going two or three miles
unto the appointed place: you had fully dispatched them all by noone, or
shortly after. Howbeit, I am something too blame for intermedling so far with
the secret mysteries of this newfound trade: for notwithstanding the
premises, and those your precedent Canons concerning the same, there may be
couched some hidden conceit under those your changeable (...) Spirit had time
long enough for his further continuance: yet K. Wrights seven Devils, they had
continued in her their appointed term to the full: and then (Master Darell
affirms) they will go out of their own accord, D. Detection. page 102.
without any such means at all. Thus then it is uncertain (you see) whether
that their speedy departure from out of her belly, was voluntary of
themselves, or constrained rather by the inevitable force of your fasting and
prayer: neither do we perceive how we may be soundly resolved herein, but by
old Midlecubs mouth. For if their speedy departure was voluntarily performed
by their own accord: then what need (I beseech you) of that your newfound
ordinance of prayer and fasting, especially where such courteous Devils must be
encountered with? Surely none at all. Nay rather, much needles labor might well
have bin spared, and such causeless sturres needed never have been raised all
the country over, about a new nothing. On the other side, if their speedy
departure was not voluntary (as before) but that they were (by the very force
of your prayers) compeld to be packing, without longer delay: then tell us I
pray you, how your rule was observed concerning the use of fasting therewith?
Now surely this newfound trade of Diuillitie, it was first founded (it seems)
upon a tottering pillar, or fickle foundation: and that is the reason why you
have made your chaungeable Canons so suitable and correspondent thereto.


Exorcistes. Doctrine. page 43.
Howsoever it pleases your self, very disdainfully to term it a newfound
trade: very certain I am, that our Savior Christ, he has (in those
Scriptures) established prayer and fasting, as a perpetual ordinary means
for the powerful expelling of Devils.


Orthodoxus. Not so. Doctrine. page 44.
Those Scriptures have only a reference to the Disciples of Christ concerning
that action in hand: as we showed, and your self confessed before. For by
them alone the question was moved: to them alone the answer was given: and of
them alone must the same be understood.


Exorcistes. To appropriate that speech of Christ, Doctrine, page 44.
and to restrain it precisely to the persons of the Disciples alone, as
merely and peculiarly appertaining to them: is much more then the text it
self either in express words, or by necessary consequence, may possibly
bear.


Orthodoxus. Oh, D. Doctrine, page 42.
then I perceive you are a Kingstroppe man concerning your word: who will say,
and unsay with a breath. For, did not your own self so appropriate this
scripture a little before, when you gave the sense of the place: protesting
withal, you would stick fast to that sense for ever?


Exorcistes. Yea, D. Doctrine, page 44.
but I have (upon better deliberation) considered since, that there is no
scripture besides, to help in this case: and therefore that former sense is
more then any man may for certainty avouch. Yea, it is such a sense I assure
you, as we our selves may by as good warrant deny, as others may dare to
affirm.


Physiologus. Master Orthodoxus, this man (by his variable answers) does make
me remember a merry old jest of an Hermit. Who (coming in a cold winters
night to a Farmers house, and blowing his fingers) was demanded of the Farmer,
what he meant by blowing his fingers: I do it (quoth the Hermit) to warm
them with all. This Hermit being forthwith set down to his supper with a
good mess of warm pottage before him; he blew his said pottage: The Farmer
beholding the man, said thus unto him. Thou did blow thy fingers even now, to
warm them withal: but I pray thee, for what purpose do thou now blow thy
pottage? I blow my pottage (says he) to cool them thereby. Yea (quoth the
Farmer) can there come out of thy mouth, both heat and cold at a clap? I
perceive then by these pranckes, thou art but a dissembling fellow, or some
counterfeite Friar; and therefore, be packing (I pray thee) from out of my
house: for I like not those fobbing companions, which can so cunningly blow
both hot and cold with a breath.

Exorcistes? Howsoever this tale befitteth your person: the allusion (you see)
resembles your practice in every point. For you told us even now, D. Doctrine.
page 42.
very confidently, that Christ did appropriate this text, to his Disciples
demand: and now, with one and the self same breath, you do bear us in hand,
that such a sense is much more then may be avouched for truth, it having none
other scripture besides, to manage the same. Surely, Revel. 3.16.
as the Lord (for his own part) protests to vomit such lukewarm Laodiceans
out of his mouth, as are neither hot nor cold: so shall it not be amiss for
the wise Farmers of England, to beware how they harbor those doublefaced
Ianusses, which know how to blow both hot and cold with a breath. Besides
that, this your new found ordinance (having neither express scripture to
establish it, nor any text else to support the supposed truth thereof) it must
needs be a pitiful ordinance: yea, and (which more is) an ordinance flat
opposite (both in nature and quality) to all ordinances else whatsoever. And
therefore, it shall not be amiss for your ignorant Reader, to have a more
watchful respect to the maine point it self: being thus matched, with such a
coging companion, as knows how to alter his shape with atrice.


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 44.
Howsoever you catch hold of any thing said by my self to the contrary, that
scripture, it cannot be understood of Christ's Apostles, or of any others
endewed with like miraculous gifts: neither may it any further be meant of, or
directed to them, then thereby to signify to them, that it was one of the
worst kind of Spirits wherewith the child was possessed, whence partly it
came to pass, they had not cast him out.


Physiologus. Philologus? do you mark Exorcistes his speech?


Philologus. I mark it well. For he says, that Scripture had no further
relation to the Apostles them selves: then only to set forth unto them, with
what kind of spirit the child was possessed.


Physiologus. You observe him aright. But, go to now: fast or loose, for a
shilling?


Philologus. It is fast for a shilling.


Physiologus. Nay, loose for a shilling: as will plainly appear by the trial
thereof. For first, if this Scripture has an apt reference unto the Apostles
themselves, so far forth especially as concerns the necessary demonstration
of that kind of spirit wherewith the child was possessed: then so far forth
also, that portion of scripture was (by Exorcistes own mouth) appropriated to
the Apostles them selves. As also, if that kind of devil was but partly a
cause, why the Disciples could not drive him out from the child, as Exorcistes
affirms even now: then their weakness of faith, was partly the other
impediment to that special work, D. Doctrine, page 44.
as Exorcistes also avouched before, when he put down the sense of that
Scripture. Making only but two impediments to that self same business:
namely, the weakness of the Apostles faith, and the kind of spirit wherewith
the child was possessed. Both which impediments (he says) are necessarily
employed in that portion of Scripture: whereupon it must necessarily follow,
that the very Scripture it self is peculiarly appropriated to the Apostles of
Christ, the which thing here he does flatly deny. Thus then yourselfe may
plainly perceive, that (by trusting the Egyptians tongue too far, without
any farther regard to the sleight of his fingers) your shilling is flatly my
own.


Philologus. I may not deny it. Howbeit, this being the first penny that ever
I lost at fast or loose: it shall make me beware how I rely too fast upon the
leger-demaines of such iuggling mates; for fear of loosing the purse and all.


Orthodoxus. Physiologus? You your self (I perceive) and Philologus are
pleasantly disposed: in that you can so pleasantly sport your selves with
Exorcistes his slippes. Howbeit, forbear I beseech you, and let the poor man
proceed in putting down his reasons: why this portion of Scripture (howsoever
the same was taken before) may not now be understood of the Apostles, and
seventy Disciples?


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine. page 44.
My reason why that Scripture may not now be understood of them: is chiefly
this. Christ speaks (in that place) expressly, and by name, of an ordinary
means to cast out devils: and therefore (by consequence) he speaks only to
such ordinary men, as by that self same means, either had or should cast
them out, and not to any the Apostles of Christ, who dealt in those cases by no
appointed ordinary means, but without means by that only power or gift,
which they received immediately for the working of miracles.


Orthodoxus. Either your wits are bewitched; or else you are purposely bent to
blindfold your poor ignorant Reader, that so you may the more boldly give him
the bobbe. D. Doctrine.
For, fasting and prayer (spoken of in that text) it seemed to your self a
little before, to be there but a secret ordinance of Christ, for the expelling
of spirits and devils: and does Christ now, expreslie, and by name entreat
there also, of an apparent ordinary means for casting out devils? Surely, it
seems you would show your self an exquisite Artist, in devising this new
found trade of Diuillitie: were you but furnished thoroughly with the necessary
supply of a liars memory. Howbeit, our Savior Christ, he does (in that
portion of Scripture) neither expreslie, nor secretly establish any such
supposed ordinary means, for the ordinary expelling of devils by any
whomsoever: but speaks (by the way) of prayer and fasting, as of the ordinary
helps to that self same miraculous faith, whereby his Disciples should have
driven that devil from the child. Neither do we say, or so much as imagine,
that the Apostles at any time expelled spirits or devils by any your supposed
ordinary means alone: and it is absurd for your selves to avouch, that they
used no means at all. For, they used that their miraculous faith, which
apprehended the immediate power of Christ in their miraculous expelling of
devils: the which their said faith (being but weak at that present) should
have been stirred up and confirmed by fasting and prayer.


Exorcistes. This iumpeth very patte with traiterous Stapleton, D. Doctrine.
and Thyreus the Jesuit: who jointly affirm, that there are some kind of
spirits, which the Apostles (with all their power) could not possibly expel
but by prayer and fasting.


Orthodoxus. And tell me in good earnest, D. Doctrine, page 49.
whether Exorcistes our diuel-driuer does ^ot also avouch the same. Howbeit,
let Stapleton, Thyreus and Exorcistes affirm what they will, we hold no such
Jesuitical fooleries: and the difference between them and our selves, is
apparently evident, if your self had but eyes to behold the same. For, whereas
they and yourselfe (by foysting in a combersome kind of devils, vnwealdie for
the Apostles them selves through any their miraculous faith to ouersway) do
go very fondly about to establish a new found ordinance, for the orderly
exorcizing of spirits and devils, under an holy pretense of prayer and fasting,
as an ordinary means appointed by Christ to that self same business: we (never
dreaming of any such doting distinction of devils) do flatly deny such an
ordinance to be any where established by Christ, and with all, we very
confidently avouch, that all devils whatsoever, were ever driven forth by the
only immediate power of the Lord, apprehended wholly by a miraculous faith.
Which said faith (being at any time grown sluggish or weak) must necessarily
be stirred up by fasting and prayer: even as also the extraordinary
prophetical spirit of Elisha was excited, 2. King. 3.1^.
or quickened by the melodious harmony of a musical harp. And therefore (by
the self same reason) you may as boldly conclude a new found ordinance for
prophesiyng by the means of an harp; because such a means was once
practiced, to awaken Elisha his prophetical spirit: as conclude an established
ordinance for driving forth devils by fasting and prayer, because Christ (at
one time) did tell his Disciples that such a means should have been used by
them, for the timely stirring up of their miraculous faith, in that their
intended business. In which holy exercise of prayer and fasting, the Disciples
themselves being somewhat too negligent all the while that Christ was absent
from them in the mount: their said faith was therefore unable to accomplish
that self same miraculous work.


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 45.
If this exposition were true, then should there be some such kind of devils, as
the Apostles of Christ (by all the faith they either had or could have) were
unable (without further supply) to subdue: which seems very strange unto
me, and such a sense, as I neither can nor dare believe, neither yet receive
for infallible truth.


Orthodoxus. Why man, Stapelton, Thyreus, and you your own self do flatly
affirm such a sense of the place. Either you are to too forgetful what you
affirm: or else you are groslie impudent in auouching the thing you dare not
believe, nor receive for infallible truth. But what might be the reason of such
your sudden Apostasy concerning this point?


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 45.
Surely sir, even this and none other. First, when I but remember those
wonderful works which the Apostles themselves did eftsoons effect, and
consider withal that absolute power of Christ, whereby they effected the same:
I perceive not how any infernal power could ever be able, to resist or hold
out against that divine and absolute power of Christ.


Orthodoxus. It appears by your speech, that either you have had your later
cogitations concerning these matters: or that else you have filthilie forgot
what you said but a little before, and (or ever it be long) will be forced
eftsoons to avouch it a fresh. Howbeit, this (in the mean time) we do
flatly confess for an answer, and Master Darel also avouches as much: D.
Doctrine, page 46.47.
namely, that all the infernal powers of hell shall never be able to
withstand that absolute power of Christ, which must necessarily drive them from
the possessed. Although notwithstanding it follows not, but that the devil
might then be able enough to withstand the Apostles miraculous faith, Calvin.
in Matthew. 17.20.
in the timely apprehending of that selfsame absolute power of Christ. And
this also by their own carelesnes in stirring up their said faith by earnest
prayer to God: for which their said carelessness, they were then so sharply
rebuked of Christ, and for confirmation of which faith, from thenceforth they
eftsoons practiced such fervent prayer, Act. 9.40. and 28.8.
about the powerful accomplishment of many their miraculous actions.


Exorcistes. They sometimes prayed I confess at their working of miracles: D.
Doctrine, page 45.
howbeit, they needed not so to have done their faith being strong.


Orthodoxus, Very true. But (their faith being weak) there was great cause
they should do it: yea, and even then also our Savior Christ very sharply
rebukes them for not doing the same. D. Doctrine, page 45.
And (which more is) you your own self do affirm that at other times also,
they did earnestly pray for the increase of their faith: which faith of theirs
being then but weak, D. Doctrine, page 46.
M. Darel he tells you, that was the cause why they could not drive forth the
devil.


Exorcistes. Nay sir, the very words of our Savior himself, are so directly
against this interpretation: as we may by no means admit of the same. Matthew.
17.20.
For he tells his Disciples, that nothing should be impossible to their
miraculous faith: and therefore not the casting out of any devil, how
combersome or crabbed soever. Unless happily you will make these words of
Christ, ( this kind goes not forth but by fasting and prayer) a particular
exception from out of that general power of the Apostles miraculous faith:
whereunto nothing should be impossible, save only the expelling of devils of
that kind, which is utterly unsound, and flat opposite to the meaning of
Christ himself.


Orthodoxus. Yea, but M. Darel he tells you a quite contrary tale. For he very
confidentlie affirms, that the scope and purpose of Christ was, to make
known to his own Disciples, that the spirit possessing that child, D.
Doctrine, page 42.
was one of the worst kind of spirits: for as much as it was one that would not
be removed, without the strong and chief of those means which were ordinary
and perpetual, and that thence partly it was, that the Disciples themselves did
not cast him forth. And for this cause M. Darel does tell us, D. Doctrine. page
49.
that our Savior Christ from out of those words ( this kind goes not out)
notes a certain distinct sort, order, or degree of devils, some way differing
and distinguished from others: with one of which number, he implies that the
child was possessed, whereby it came, that they themselves had not cast him out.


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 46.
Howsoever it pleases you to make your self sport with Master Darel his
speeches, M. Darel (upon better deliberation) now tells you plainly, that so
often as he considers the authority and power which Christ gave his Disciples
over al unclean spirits, and their mighty prevailing therewith: as also when
he remembers, that this selfsame received power of theirs, Luke 9.1.
was not bounded or limited to this or that kind of devil, but stretched it
self over all evil spirits whatsoever; so that if he were but a devil, they
had power to expel him: so often (I say) as M. Darel considers and remembers
these matters, he dare boldly conclude, that no devil (how combersome or
cruel soever) was able to withstand the Apostles miraculous faith.


Orthodoxus. Iam. 1.8. Ephesians. 4.14.
If M. Darel be fraught with such variable and flitting considerations: no
marvel at all, though the poor man be carried hither and thither, with such
variable and chaungeable opinions, as are like to the chaungeable taffeta
resembling all colors. Howbeit, such wavering weathercockes should make wise
men beware, how they credit any his uncertain oracles concerning this
newfound diuillitie, howsoever the beak stands full in the wind. More
especially then it behooues them to have their eyes in their head, when Master
Darel concludes so directly against the plain words of Christ: Eccles. 2.14.
D. Doctrine, page 47. Matthew. 17.20.
who tells his Disciples, that the very cause why they could not cast forth that
spirit, was their unbelief and weakness of faith, which they should have
stirred up by fasting and prayer.


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 47.
Sir, by your patience, you are quite from the purpose of Christ: For he speaks
there of the miraculous faith, as appears by the text it self: which tells us
of such a faith no doubt as (being effectually had) is able to remove
mountains out of their places. Matthew. 17.20.



Orthodoxus. And we also understand it of such a faith: but what then?


Exorcistes. Do you ask me, D. Doctrine, page 47.
what then? Why sir, that kind of faith it was given without means to
certain men. And as the Lord appointed no means for the begetting of that
selfsame miraculous faith: so neither has he ordained any means at all for
the increase thereof.


Orthodoxus. A mad man might happily imagine that Exorcistes (by this his
immediate miraculous faith) had stricken the Popingay dead: beholding him
especially so crowslie to set up the crest. But sir, how are you sure the
miraculous faith was given the Apostles without any means? or that the Lord
has appointed no means at all, for the begetting thereof? Very certain it
is, that the miraculous faith (how extraordinary soever) is given unto men by
the inspiration of God: and therefore the spirit it self is a means whereby
the Lord begets that selfsame miraculous faith, in some certain special
persons, foreordained by the foreknowledge of God to that special business. 1.
Cor. 12.9.
For to some (says the Apostle) is given faith by the same spirit: whereby you
may plainly perceive, that even the miraculous faith it self has also a
means, for the timely begetting thereof.


Exorcistes. These are but starting holes, whereby to slip forth when you
feel your self hardly beset. For sir, I speak only of an ordinary, and not
of any extraordinary means for the begetting of faith: D. Doctrine, page 47.
and (which more is) I would gladly know where the Lord has sanctified any
ordinary means, for the begetting or increase of that, which he gives without
such means?


Orthodoxus. And these are but quicksands wherewith you do gravel your deep
skill of Diuillitie, so often as you plunge your self in the same. Howbeit, thus
much (for advantage) you confess by the way: namely, that even the miraculous
faith it self is extraordinarily begotten in men by the spirit of God. But
tell me (I pray you) does the Lord inspire the miraculous faith into the minds
of some, by his only immediate spirit? or has he appointed no ordinary
means at all, whereby his said spirit may engraue, or beget that selfsame
faith in their hearts? It is one thing to have the bare matter of that faith it
self: and another, to have withal the admirable manner of executing the same.
And therefore me thinks you might learn to distinguish between the bare habit
of that faith, and the admirable execution thereof. Touching the only bare
habit of such a miraculous faith, I see not as yet to the contrary, but that
we may boldly avouch the spirit alone, to be the immediate: Ioh. 17.21. Heb.
11.6. Romans 10.17.
and the word it self the mediate cause which begets both the justifying,
the historical, and also the miraculous faith it self. For as all faith
whatsoever does come by hearing the word: so surely the miraculous faith it
self (being none other thing else, Matthew. 17.20. Musculus ibid. Pet. Martyr.
loc. com. Class. 1. cap. 8. sect. 14.
but an undoubted persuasion, by which we firmly believe that there is nothing
impossible to God) it also must necessarily fetch the groundwork of such a
persuasion from the infallible word of God: for what else but the word it self
may certainly assure us, that there is nothing impossible to God? By this then
you may also very plainly perceive an apparent begetting of the miraculous
faith (respecting especially the bare habit thereof) by an ordinary means, I
mean by the word of God. Calvin. in Matthew. 17.20. Musculus ibid. Pet. Martyr.
in 1. Cor. 12.9.
And as this the miraculous faith does undoubtedly gather her first begetting
from the word it self, respecting especially the only bare habit thereof: so
surely the mind it self (being in that self same habit of faith)
extraordinarily raised up by some special motion from the spirit of God, unto
the timely execution of that selfsame faith (begotten (as before) by the word
and spirit of God) it does extraordinarily undertake the powerful effecting of
some such admirable matters as seems best to the Lord, for the present good
of his Church. And this undoubtedly is that extraordinary execution of the
miraculous faith, whereof the Apostle purposely speaks, 1. Cor. 12.9.
saying thus: To one is given faith by the same spirit: that is, an
extraordinary execution of that the miraculous faith, for the edification of
the Church of God. And according to this selfsame begetting of the miraculous
faith, by the ordinary means of the word, the Apostle elsewhere (having
spoken of many miraculous operations a little before) advises the Corinthians
to desire to follow after, 1. Cor. 12.31. and 14.1.
and very earnestly to labor for the best spiritual gifts: which neither he
would have advised them to, neither yet could they possibly have attained unto
them, if so be there had been no ordinary means by the word, by prophecy,
by conference, by meditation, or prayer at least to beget them withal.


Exorcistes. Well sir, be it there are some such both extraordinary and
ordinary means, for the timely begetting of this the miraculous faith: D.
Doctrine, page 47.
yet can you not prove, and I would gladly be made to perceive where the Lord
has sanctified any ordinary means, for the timely increase and confirmation
of that which he bestows upon men, without such a means?


Orthodoxus. Would you gladly be made to perceive this mystical point? Iam.
1.18.19. 1. Pet. 1.22. 1. Pet. 2.2. Brentius. in Luc. 17.5.
Why man, is not all faith whatsoever, to receive her further increase and
growth from those selfsame means, whereby she was first begotten in the mind
of man? If therefore the miraculous faith has her first begetting,
extraordinarily from the spirit, and ordinarily from the word of the Lord, as
has bin declared: who doubts then, but that by those selfsame means also
she is stirred up, increased, and confirmed from time to time? Otherways, what
think you of Timothy his extraordinary gifts and graces of the spirit: 1.
Tim. 1.18. Johannes Calvin. ibidem and in 1. Tim. 4.14. Cruciger, in 1. Tim.
4.13.14
who being called after an extraordinary manner to the office of an
Evangelist, was (notwithstanding his said extraordinary calling) very earnestly
advised by Paul, to stir up those his said extraordinary gifts, by the
ordinary use of the word. Yea, and (according to this sacred counsel of Paul)
the Disciples themselves did pray unto Christ for the increase of their faith.
Luke 17.5.



Exorcistes. You purposely pervert the scope of that Scripture. D. Doctrine,
page 46.
For the Apostles pray there for the only increase of their justifying faith,
as appears very plainly by the essential fruits thereof: Luke 17.1, 2, 3,
4, 5.
which (being put down by Christ in the verses precedent) occasioned the
Disciples to pray as they did.


Orthodoxus. Not only they prayed for the timely increase of their justifying
faith (as you say) but of their whole faith whatsoever. Howbeit, more
especially for the timely increase of their miraculous faith, as appears
plainly by the answer of Christ: who (approving their zeal in craving so
earnestly the increase thereof) commends them more especially for that, and
tells them withal, Luke 17.6.
that if they had but so much of that faith as is a grain of mustard-seede,
and should say to this Mulberie tree, pluck up thy self by the roots, and
go plant thy self in the Sea, it should forthwith obey their command.
Neither in that place only, but elsewhere also the Disciples they do (by their
earnest prayers) very earnestly entreat the Lord, Act. 4.29.30.
to grant unto them all boldness to speak his word, and to stretch forth his
hand, that healing, and signs, and wonders might be done by the name of his
holy son Jesus. D. Doctrine, page 45.
Yea, and (which more is) Master Darell himself does confess, that both Peter
and Paul very earnestly entreated the Lord by their prayers, to make their
miraculous faith very powerful in restoring Tabitha to life, Act. 9.40. Act.
28.^.
and in recovering the father of Publius from his dangerous and deadly fever.
By all which it is very apparent, that as the Apostles miraculous faith was
begotten by means: so surely they used an ordinary means for the increase
thereof.


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 45.
They did so I confess: howbeit, there was no necessity at all in doing the
same, for these following reasons. Namely, first their said miraculous faith,
it was of it self so strong, as it needed no help of any such ordinary
means for the increase thereof.


Orthodoxus. Your reason it is to too absurd. For in saying the Apostles faith
was so strong of it self, as it needed no manner of increase: D. Doctrine,
page 46.
besides, that you directly do cross your own self elsewhere, you do
therein also first condemn the Disciples themselves, for putting up a needles
and superfluous prayer to God, so often as they prayed for the increase of that,
which needed (you say) no increase at all. Again, you do therein very plainly
give the Apostle the lie: who does elsewhere avouch, that (so long as he and
the rest of Gods children remain in this mortal life) they but know only in
part, 1. Cor. 13.9.10.
yea, and that so they must do, till this their imperfection be utterly
abolished, by the coming of that which is perfect. And therefore this your
first reason, concerning the Apostles perfection of faith, is to too absurd,
very false, and unreasonable. Besides that, there is small reason we should
credit your bare affirmation concerning that their supposed fulness of faith, we
having especially the authentical judgment of one so far surmounting your
self in the depth of Diuillitie, I mean your friend Master (...): who tells
us confidently, D. Doctrine. page 45.
that doubtless the Disciples they (...), in an especial regard of themsel^^^,
I (...), to stir up and increase their faith: and therefore this first reason
of yours is unworthy (by Master Darell his judgment) to receive any answer.


Exorcistes. Whatsoever Master Darell avouches concerning the Apostles
prayers, D. Doctrine, page 48.
for the timely increase of that their miraculous faith, very certain I am,
they did more therein then God enjoined them to do, in regard of any their
extraordinary gifts and graces: and therefore their said prayers (if they only
respected but the timely increase of any their ordinary graces) make nothing
against me.


Orthodoxus. How came you so thoroughly acquainted with those the secret
counsels of God, that you are certain the Disciples (in praying for the timely
increase of their extraordinary graces) did more therein, then God himself
enjoined them to do?


Exorcistes. I am (I assure you) very certain thereof: D. Doctrine, page 48.
and so much the rather, for that they had no revealed word from the Lord to
warrant the same.


Orthodoxus. They had (besides their ordinary approved practices) the
undoubted re^^lation^ and motions of Gods spirit therein; as may very ^^^bablie
appear by the extraordinary blessing and effect which the Lord (at that
instant) bestowed upon their holy endeavors concerning Tabitha, Act. 9.40.
Act. 28.8.
and the father of Publius. Howbeit (because you so confidently avouch, that
the Disciples did more therein, then they were enjoined by God) do tell me (I
beseech you) whether they sinned or not, in doing the same?


Exorcistes. Nay surely, howsoever they prayed they sinned not therein, as may
plainly appear by the good success of their prayers: for ( whereas God
hears not sinners) he heard them effectually, and granted unto them the
request of their lips.


Orthodoxus. It is not always safe to reason from the success of our prayers
either one way or other; because the Lord he might hear them in judgment: and
so the Disciples (notwithstanding any the success of their prayers) they might
fearfully offend in craving an increase of that, which needed (you say) no
increase at all. Besides that, they having (as you further affirm) no revealed
word to warrant their prayer, the same could not possibly be put up in faith:
Dar. Doctrine, page 48. Romans 14.23.
and being not made or put up in faith, it must needs be sin; for whatsoever
is not of faith, is sin, and so (by consequence) the Apostles (if they prayed
in such sort as you say) they sinned no doubt. Briefly, the Apostles and all
others, they are not only to forbear from the doing of what which God has
forbidden, Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 12.32. Josh. 1.7. Pro. 30.5.6. Revel. 22.18.
but (which more is) they are strictly enjoined withal, to do only that
which the Lord commands them to do: if therefore the Apostles then prayed to
God (having thereunto no warrant at all from his word) they did more therein,
then they were commanded of God, and so they sinned in doing the same.


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 48.
I am sure (whatsoever you say to the contrary) that the Apostles (in praying
for the timely increase of any their extraordinary graces) they did more
therein, then they needed to have done: neither yet did they sin at al in doing
the same.


Orthodoxus. If they did more then they needed to have done, and yet sinned not
at al in doing the same: it seems by your speech that the Apostles prayer, it
was then some (...) of supererrogation at least; and so, therein not only they
iumped justly with our Papists now, whom we generally condemn for such an
insolent and proud conceit, but (which more is) they dealt directly therein,
against the holy institution of their master Christ. Who wills them else where,
that (when they have done whatsoever they were able) they should
notwithstanding, Luke 17.10.
acknowledge themselves but unprofitable servants: and so (by consequence) if
(in praying as before) the Disciples did more then they needed to have done;
then surely (howsoever the pride of man's nature might superarrogate some thing
unto it self) it appears by Christ's mouth, that they were but arrogant
sinners, if that which your self does avouch, be counted for current. Howbeit,
your friend master Darel^ ( analyzing and expounding the text) does tell us
directly, D. Doctrine. page 59.
that this Scripture contains first, a commandments to fast and pray: and
then next, a promised blessing in doing the same. By which it is very apparent
(whatsoever you pra^e to the contrary) that the Apostles (in so praying) they
did no more then they needed: but that rather, which was imposed upon them, by
a special commandment from their master Christ. Yea, and that also according
to the meaning of Christ himself: Matthew. 17.20. D. Doctrine, page 47.
who having told his Disciples before that the very weakness of their faith was
one special impediment to the speedy dispatch of that special business: then
teaches them further, Matthew. 17.2^. Mark. 9.29.
that they should have quickened their said faith by fervent and earnest prayer
to God.


Exorcistes. Whatsoever you tell me concerning master Darels exposition: D.
Doctrine, page 48.
this text may (at no hand) be peculiarly appropriated to the Apostles
themselves, for many respects.


Orthodoxus. What is one, to begin with?


Exorcistes. Why this? D. Doctrine, page 48.
If that Scripture has special relation to the Apostles themselves, as you
seem to avouch: then surely, (howsoever they had faild in their enterprise)
they might notwithstanding have made this one defense, or excuse for
themselves: namely, that they had no spare time for those special exercises,
since they first saw the child. The which so fit a defense or excuse, they
would never have omitted: being especially so sharply reproved of their master
before.


Orthodoxus. That Scripture, it may not be appropriated to the Apostles (you
say) for many respects: making their pretended excuse (from a supposed want of
time, in the timely dispatch of those special exercises) the principal
respect thereof. Surely, a worthy respect; and the same very respectively put
down no doubt, for many respects.

For, First you were thoroughly acquainted (it seems) with all the spare time
the Apostles then had at that present.

Secondly, it is very likely you knew how much of that time they must
necessarily have bestowed to the full: in the effectual discharge of that
duty.

Thirdly, you were also very certain no doubt, that if they but wanted one
minute of that your appointed time: then surely (how succinctly, or how
fervently soever they should put up their prayers to God) their labors therein
had been utterly lost.

Lastly, you were made privy (it seems) to the Apostles purpose then, in not
praying at all: who, perceiving some want of time for the timely performance of
those special exercises, would not therefore undertake them at all, for losing
their labors, but took (as it seems) their said want of time for a
backesette, or a proffered advantage in their proper defense, if happily they
should fail (as they did) in the powerful dispatch of that enterprise.

Now surely, the Disciples of Christ are highly beholding unto you for this
their proper defense; whereof they themselves (it should seem) were utterly
ignorant. Howbeit, had the Disciples dreamed in deed of such a silly defense:
yet surely, that dreaming defense, it had been directly against the whole
course of the history, as may very plainly appear by the several
circumstances concerning the same.

Matthew. 17.1.
For, first the possessed child was presented unto them, at the very self same
time their master Christ was gone up to the mount: being in the mount, he was
forthwith transfigured, in the presence of Peter, James and John.

Verse 2.
In the time of his transfiguration: he talked a time with Moses, and Elijah.

Verse 6.
After his transfiguration, he comforted the three Disciples: who were greatly
amazed at that which they saw and heard.

Verse 7.
Having comforted and revived their troubled Spirits: he wills them very
carefully to conceal the vision it self, till after his death.

Verse 9.
After this special charge, he reformed their error concerning Elijah his
coming.

Verse 11.
These things thus dispatched in order: he forthwith descended from out of the
mount. Being so descended, he saw the people thronged together: Mark. 9.14.
Verse 16. Verse 17. Verse 18.
and the Pharisees very hotly disputing with his other Disciples, about their
not dispossessing of the child as it seems.

These circumstances duly considered, it is apparently evident, that the
Disciples they had time enough to have prayed: and therefore, that your
imagined want of time, it could be no colorable excuse, to color their
careless negligence in awakening their faith by fervent prayer to God.
Moreover, in saying the Apostles would never have omitted that proffered excuse,
from the want of time to those spiritual exercises: therein you derogate much
from the Disciples their conscionable dealings in such sacred matters. For,
what other thing else does your speech import, but that either there was in the
Disciples themselves, such absolute perfection of foreseeing knowledge, as they
neither would, nor possibly could have ouerseene, or pretermitted whatsoever
might make for their proper defense: or that the Disciples at least (if
especially they had been men of your humor and quick conceit) they would
(upon every occasion) have been forward enough, in making their present
apologies, how preposterous, absurd, or unsound soever.

Briefly, howsoever you dream, that the Disciples would have made their
excuse from that your imagined want of time to such spiritual exercises: it
seems rather (their conscience being fully convinced before, from the due
consideration of the precedent circumstances concerning the sufficiency of
time for such business) that they (in all good conscience) did plead
themselves guilty of careless negligence, in not using the means of fervent
prayer for the timely stirring up of their faith. And therefore, they (by their
purposed silence) do secretly consent to Christ's reprehension, as a
reprehension very justly imposed upon them for their former negligence: so
far off are they from falsely excusing themselves, by any falsely pretended
want of time. By all the premises then, it is very apparent, that this your
first reason hinders nothing at all; but that the former speech of our Savior
Christ may peculiarly, and only be appropriated unto the Apostles themselves.


Exorcistes. If, D. Doctrine, page 4^.
by the purport and drift of this text, we must necessarily be made to
understand, that the Disciples themselves (in their present weakness of faith
for that present business) should in deed have fasted and prayed: then surely
our Savior Christ, he had not (in those words) directly answered unto the very
point it self of the Apostles former demand, nor rendered any reason at all,
why they had not cast forth the spirit, they not having sufficient time to
fast and to pray, as was showed before.


Orthodoxus. And we have sufficiently showed before: that they had time
sufficient for the timely performance thereof. Howbeit, do tell us plainly,
in which words our Savior Christ had not answered directly to the Disciples
demand; nor rendered a sufficient reason for their not doing the present work?


Exorcistes D. Doctrine. page 48.
In these words: namely, this kind goes not forth, but by prayer and fasting.
For the Disciples demanding why they could not drive forth that devil, Mark.
9.29.
and Christ telling them the reason was, because they had not solemnly prayed
and fasted before: they might justly have answered, that they had no spare time
for the orderly undergoing of such solemn, and sacred exercises.


Orthodoxus. By forging a reason of the nullitie of that work, from whose
words of Christ, it is to be feared ( Exorcistes) you do purposelie fight and
struggle against the very light of your conscience: and therefore (that it
should seem) was the only cause why your self (insisting upon your falselie
supposed answer and reason of Christ) do even purposelie and (perhaps with a
settled pertinacie) very unconscionably conceal the words themselves, from
whence you would seem to collect your falselie supposed inference. For
howsoever it may not be doubted of any, but that our Savior Christ did
directly answer the point of his Disciples demand, and very concludentlie
yield them the reason of their not doing the deed: yet is it denied of all,
that Christ did either of both in those selfsame words which your self does
allege. But he having in the words before, put down their weakness of
faith for the principal or maine impediment to that purposed business, D.
Doctrine, page 46.

D. Doctrine, page 41.42.


as your own self affirmed a little before: in those following words
whereupon you fondly insist, he teaches them how they should have quickened
their faith: namely, by fervent and earnest prayer to God. And so this
scripture (you see) notwithstanding any thing hitherto heard, may well be
appropriated to the Apostles themselves.


Exorcistes. If that scripture must (in any wise) be meant of the Apostles
themselves, D. Doctrine, page 48.
then surely so often as their miraculous faith was unable (of it self) to
encounter with a combersome spirit: they must (for their further prevailing
therein) have necessarily consumed a whole day together in prayer and fasting:
for fasting, Leuit. 23.32.
it required a whole day, I mean from eeuen to ^euen.


Orthodoxus Exorcistes? you deal too triflinglie with your ignorant Reader:
and do purposelie endeavor to dazell his eyes by your sundry tricks of
legerdemaine. For first (in urging so stricktly the ceremony of time for
fasting and prayer) all the world may plainly perceive, that therein you do
but Iudaizare; and labor to entangle men's consciences a fresh, Gal. 5.1.
with the heavy yoke of that Jewish bondage, from which they were freed by
their liberty and freedom in Christ. And therefore by such needless
observation of days, Gal. 4 10.11.
of months and of years, you may happily enthrall the poor ignorant souls
afresh, and bring their spiritual fathers in fear of bestowing their labors
among them in vain.

Moreover, if fasting does necessarily require a whole day from eeuen to
eeuen; or otherwise, the holy ordinance of God concerning that exercise, is
apparently violated and fearefullie broken: then surely the strickt and full
observation thereof in the powerful expelling of devils may have many
absurdities following the same. For be it supposed the devil should be driven
from the party possessed before noone at the furthest (as were those seven
from K. Wright, D. Doctrine, page 43.
if we may boldly credit your own report) who sees not then, but that the one
of these two absurdities must follow thereof at the least. Namely, that either
men must necessarily transgress that holy ordinance of prayer and fasting, by
giving over the solemn continuance thereof, before the set and appointed time
be fully accomplished, because the devil is departed before: or must else very
triftlinglie continue in calling upon Christ for his absolute power to cast
forth the spirit, notwithstanding he be cleerelie expelled before, and only
because the set time for the fast is not fully expired, which were fond and
ridiculous.

Besides that, you your own self observed no such set or appointed times for
fasting and prayer in any one your pretended dispossessions. For in some of
them, you rather f^asted then fasted: and therefore how can you (in conscience)
commend the said exercise of fasting to any of your pupils, unless it be
purposelie and only done to make good the old verse, which says. Qui satur
est, pleno laudat ieiunia ventre, that is, Who so crammeth himself till his
stomach does staunch:
He fasting commends with a pampered paunch.


Again, in that your pretended dispossessing of Summers and the rest, you
spent not a whole day in prayer and fasting from eeuen to eeuen: but beginning
about nine of the clock in the morning, you had finished your work between
three and four at the farthest. So that (howsoever you would bind the
Disciples teeth and hands to the good behavior for a whole day together, from
eeuen to eeuen) it seems you your self must have your own teeth and tongue
at liberty, so soon and so often as it pleases your self.

Briefly, whereas your self (by urging so stricktly the Leuiticall fasts)
would have the Disciples of Christ, even necessarily taken up with those
exercises of fasting and prayer for a whole day together: your old friend M.
Darel, it seems he affoords them more favor, D. Doctrine, page 82.
in not tying them so stricktly to any set time for the same. For he tells us
directly, that the devil (how combersome soever) he has in the party
possessed his determined time appointed of God: longer then the which he cannot
continue one minute of an hour, but must necessarily depart at that time,
though no means for dispossession were used at all. And therefore since (for
any thing we know to the contrary) the Lord may determine the spirits
departure before the one half of the day be spent in those exercises: it were
but a vain and uncertain course to appoint a whole day for fasting and
prayer, from eeuen to eeuen. So then, by this you see, it is very apparent,
that (notwithstanding any your supposed want of time for the work) this
speech of Christ, it may very well be appropriated to the Apostles them selves.


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 48.
Nay that I flatly deny. For the Apostles (being filled with the holy Ghost at
the feast of pentecost) they were never after so far emptied thereof, but
that (in attempting any miraculous work whatsoever) they were thoroughly able
to accomplish the same, without any such use of fasting and prayer: and
therefore it is very unlikely that our Savior Christ (for forty days space
and no longer) would ever establish such an ordinance of fasting and prayer for
them to observe in any their dispossessions whatsoever.


Orthodoxus. This then (by the way) you confess at unawares, that (before the
Apostles were filled with the holy Ghost at the feast of pentecost) their
faith was but weak, and needed fasting and prayer to support the same. But
this accident befell the Apostles before the said feast: and therefore (by your
own speech) they needed fasting and prayer (at that present) to stir up and
quicken their faith.

Besides that, D. Doctrine, page 47.48.
your old friend M. Darel, he tells us directly that the Apostles in deed by the
power they received from Christ, were able to drive out any devil whatsoever,
and (as occasion was offered) they did so undoubtedly from time to time, if
their faith failed them not: which (says he) at that present it did, and even
in this very work: and therefore this speech of Christ (concerning fasting and
prayer) it was peculiarly appropriated to them.

Briefly, our Savior Christ he tells his Disciples directly, that their
unbelief and weakness of faith, was the maine impediment to that special
business: D. Doctrine* page 42.44.46.47.
and therefore (howsoever your self affirms (else where) that their faith was
so strong as it needed no means to stir up the same) Christ tells them
plainly, they should have underpropped their said faith by the holy exercise
of fervent prayer to God.


Exorcistes. Very true, D. Doctrine, page 48.49*
before they were filled with the holy Ghost, there was some need to have
stirred up their weak faith by fasting and prayer: but after the feast of
pentecost there was no need of any such helps. For even as after they received
the fulness of the spirit, their faith never failed in doctrine and judgment: so
neither in the working of miracles.


Orthodoxus. A man may perceive by your manner of writing, that you mean to
turn ere you burn: yea, and when you have turned your self besides all
manner of turnings; that then you will not stick to return a fresh to your
former turnings: and so begin there to turn as fast, as ever you turned
before. For what an odd jest is this to affirm but even now, that (before the
Apostles were filde with the spirit) their faith was so strong, as it needed no
means to stir up the same: and even then also (with the turning of an hand)
to turn the Catte in the pan, and to say (on your credit) that before the
feast of pentecost there was some need to quicken their faith, by fasting and
prayer. May not those your young pupils be pestilent proud, who (in this
newfound trade of diuillitie) are got under the trusty tuition of such a
turne-about tutor, Ephesians 4.14. Iam. 1.8.
as turns like the weathercocke with every blast of Doctrine? Howbeit, you
seek to shelter your weather shaken opinion with this slender shift: D.
Doctrine, page 48.49.
namely, that howsoever the Apostles faith might be weak before they were
filde with the spirit (and thereupon they needed prayer and fasting to stir up
and strengthen the same) yet after the fulness of spirit, as their faith never
failed in doctrine or judgment: so neither in the working of miracles. This
seems an irrefragable reason no doubt: and such a one I believe, as may not
possibly be shaken.

Well, be it supposed that after the Apostles received the holy Ghost, their
faith failed sometimes in Doctrine or judgment: then it is very probable their
said faith, it might also fail at sometime in the working of miracles. That
the Apostles at sometimes failed in the first, it is very apparent. For, Gal.
2.14. Revel. 19.10. and 22.8. (...) 1.2. D. Reinolds, in 2. conclusione page
695. Amand. ^olan. Syllog. these. page 381.
Peter he went not rightly to the truth of the Gospel. John would have
worshipped the angel once or twice. The Apostles and brethren who were at
Iudaea; they thought that the word of God was not to be preached unto the
Gentiles. All these were errors in doctrine and judgment. And therefore the
Apostles faith (failing directly in these) it might fail much more in the
working of miracles. Howbeit, because you seem so confident in this one
assertion: do show us the reason why the Apostles faith (so soon as they were
filled with the holy Ghost) could not possibly fail in doctrine or judgment?


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, 48.49.
My reason is this. The holy Ghost is called the spirit of truth: This spirit,
being promised to them, was afterward in miraculous manner bestowed upon them:
they therefore receiving the fulness of this spirit, their faith from
thenceforth could not possibly fail in Doctrine or judgment, and therefore
much less in the working of miracles.


Orthodoxus. I answer. Ioh. 14.17. Ioh. 14.16. and 15.26. and 16.13. Act.
2.1.2.3.
The holy Ghost is justly called the spirit of truth. This spirit of truth was
faithfully promised unto the Apostles: and, at the feast of Pentecost, very
miraculouslie bestowed upon them. Hitherto, we accord (you see) in every point.
Howbeit, your inference enforced from hence is not proved, but pitifully
begged: for we deny, that either all or any one of the Apostles received the
fulness of this spirit.


Exorcistes. Then you deny the truth of the sacred Scriptures. For, does not
the Evangelist Luke very flatly affirm, that they were all filled with the
holy Ghost, Act. 2.4.
and spoke with new toongs, as the spirit gave them utterance?


Orthodoxus. He denies not the truth of the sacred scriptures: who only denies
but your erroneous collections, untruly gathered from the sacred scriptures.
For, it is one thing to be filled with; and another thing to receive the fulness
of the spirit. It is an axiom, not only warrantable by learned Philosophers,
and commonly known to the simplest on earth, but approved of all by common
experience: that, whatsoever thing is received of another, the same thing is
received only according to the capacity of that which receives the same. We
do willingly acknowledge, that the holy Ghost has replenished only our
savior Christ with the unmeasurable abundance of his graces, and that Christ
only has received the fulness of the spirit: because, that unto him the father
gives not the spirit by measure. Ioh. 3.34.
Notwithstanding, the Apostles and all other the elect, they do only apprehend
the graces of the spirit in their proper measure: according to which measure,
Ioh. 1.6.
they have received not the fulness it self, but, of the fulness of Christ his
spirit, even grace, for grace. By all which it is very apparent, that even the
blessed Apostles and other the elect in Christ, they receive the graces of the
spirit only, according to the simple capacity of humane frailty: and, not
according to the majesty and fulness of the spirit it self, so as their faith
could not fail in any respect. For, howsoever they were truly renewed and
enlightened with the holy Ghost: yet were they not (in this present life) so
absolutely enligtned renewed or cleansed from all perverseness of heart, or blindness
of mind, as that they could neither swerve in doing their duty, nor be
deceived at all in their judgment. Not, that the measure of the spirit which
they received, was (of it self) insufficient to preserve them absolutely from
either of both: but, for that it pleased the father in such sort to dispense
his spiritual graces to men in this life, as the very best might perceive
their own imperfections, and therewithal, be driven to acknowledge, that the
fulness of perfection consists only in Christ. For, who will deny, there is
water enough in the main Ocean sea, to quench the raging flames whatsoever
which wast a whole town: howbeit, this we must needs acknowledge withal, 2.
Cor. 4.7.
that a simple earthen vessel cannot possibly contain enough of that water
to assuage the fire alone, Act. 14.15.
that burns one house. The blessed Apostles, they acknowledge themselves to
be men, yea men, who (being naturally begotten in the image and likeness of
Adam their father) must naturally flame and burn as the Prophet reports.
Genesis 5.3. Psalm. 57.4.
And therefore, Ioh. 3.5.
albeit they were certainly borne anew of water and the spirit: yet, the water
of the spirit, it does not so thoroughlie extinguish in them all sparks and
ouersights whatsoever, as that their faith could not fail in any respect. For
then, what needed their corruptible bodies to put incorruption upon them, 1.
Cor. 15 53. Phil. 1.23.
or themselves desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ? Howbeit, this we
certainly know, that (during this life) there remains even in the best of
all, a daily strife between the spirit and the flesh: Romans 7.22.23. Gal* 5.17.
yea, and that the remnants of flesh do stick very fast not only in their
hearts, but also in their minds. And for these selfsame respects, the very
Apostles themselves do freely acknowledge, that now (namely while they live in
this life) they know only but in part: 1. Cor. 12.11. 2. Cor. 12.9.
that the power of God is perfited in weakness: and that therefore they do all
cry out with the Prophet and say, heal thou us O Lord, Ierem 17.14. Phil. 3.10.
and we shall be healed: yea, and even Paul, he acknowledges of himself,
that he is not yet perfect, although he be laboring earnestly toward the mark.
Iam. 3.2.
And James says generally concerning the faithful, that in many things they
all offend. Briefly, Ioh. 13.16. Psalm. 51.7.
our savior affirms flatly, that he which is washed the whitest of all, has
need notwithstanding to wash his feet. By all which its very apparent, that
the Apostles themselves, they were not so absolutely filled with the graces of
the spirit, but that their faith notwithstanding it might and did fail at one
time or other, in some point of doctrine or judgment, and therefore much more
in the working of miracles.


Exorcistes. If it be certainly true, that their faith (at any time) failed in
doctrine or judgment: Ioh. 16.13.
how then is the promise of Christ to be credited concerning the holy Ghost,
for he told his Disciples, that the same should lead them into all truth?


Orthodoxus. That the Apostles faith in some things, and at sometime might
fail, it is undoubtedly true* and, the promise also of Christ concerning the
holy Ghost his direction, is as undoubted a truth. For the holy Ghost (no
doubt) did lead them into all truth, yea, I say further, into all holiness of
soul and body: howbeit, he led them into all truth, in such sort as Paul
protests unto the Ephesians, Act. 20.27.
that he showed them all the counsel of God. Now, he showed them all the
counsel of God, not absolutely and simply, but so much thereof and so
farforth also, as was profitable for them: Act. 20.21.
otherwise, if he had absolutely showed them the whole counsel of God
whatsoever, he must necessarily then have showed them also the secret things of
God, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
which only belong to the Lord alone, and concerned neither them, nor their
children. And therefore whereas our savior promised such a comforter unto his
disciples, Ioh. 16.13.
as should lead them into all truth: the meaning is, that he should lead them
into nothing else but the truth of God, and into all that truth whatsoever,
which concerned their own, and his Churches salvation. For, more then this our
Savior never promised to them: and, more then this, they were not to expect at
their masters hands. So then, howsoever the particle (al) may seem to have
reference unto whatsoever the Apostles should speak or do: yet Christ, he
restraines the holy Ghost his directions to those only truths which he (by his
own mouth) had taught them before, as appears by the very ten^ur of that
promise it self, Ioh. 14.26.
which says. But the Comfortor which is the holy Ghost, whom the father will
send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance which I have told or taught you before. Giving them thereby to
understand, that whenever they spoke or did that, which was not according to
the revealed truth he had taught: them: that saying or doing of theirs was more
then he had told them before, and more then they were led unto by the spirit of
truth. By all the premises then, it is very apparent that the holy Ghost (in
those days) enlightened the Apostles minds, and now also (at this present)
does sanctify the hearts of all the elect, so far forth as is expedient for
their own and the Churches salvation. But it was then, and is now expedient
for them and for us to err in some things, 1. Tim. 1.15, 16.17.
that we may give all glory to God alone: that so (seeing our own frailty
and weakness) we might not be high minded, R^m. 11.20. Gal. 6.1.2.
but fear: that thereby we may be taught, very willingly to bear one
another burden: that we might learn to work forth our own salvation with
fear and trembling: Phil. 2.12. 2. Cor. 12.9. Mark. 9.22. Luk 7.47. Luke 7.5.
Luke 11.4. 1. Cor. 9.24. and 16.13. Ephesians. 4.14. Heb. 12.1.2. Ioh. 14.26.
that we may be made to understand with Paul, that the grace of God is
sufficient for us: that we may sharpen our trust in him: stir up our love
toward him: pray more fervently unto him, to increase our faith, and to
forgive us our sins: briefly, that we may run forth the whole race of our
life, with greater stedfastnes and constancy. Now then the case being thus,
we may boldly conclude, that the Apostles themselves and all the elect in
Christ, they are led in all truth and holiness by the certain direction of the
holy Ghost: howbeit, this we have to consider withal, that they are so led
unto this salvation, as they are not absolutely free from every spark and
wrinkle, either of manners or doctrine, but that at some time, and in some
special points they might and did err, as has been declared.


Exorcistes. How then could the efficacy of Christ his intercession,
concerning their soundnes of faith, be certain unto them: who (having related
the insatiable desire of Satan to sift them, Luke 22.31.32.
as men winnow wheat) told them forthwith, that he had prayed their faith
should not fail. By which we may learn, that (if the intercession of Christ
be any thing gracious with God his father) the Apostles faith could not
possibly fail in doctrine or judgment.


Orthodoxus. D. Bilson, in his true defense part. 2. page 380
Nay rather by this we may learn, that you grossie abuse both the providence of
God and that promise of Christ: and all to support your idle fancies. For
Christ did not promise that Peter's judgment should never fail: but that (in
the following temptation which was forthwith to fall upon Peter) his faith
should not finally perish. I have prayed for thee (says Christ) that thy faith
shall not fail: Chrysostom. i^ Iohannem. homil. 72. Item, in Matthew* homil. 83.
Beda in Lucam. cap. 22.32,
that is (says Chrysostom) that thou finally perish not. For Christ did not
say, I have prayed that thou might not deny me; but that thy faith should
not (wholly) fail: for by the favor and care of Christ it came to pass, that
Peter's faith was not utterly extinguished. Hereunto accords Beda, saying: Our
Savior prayed for Peter, not that he should not be tempted; but that his
faith should not fail: that is, that after Peter was fallen by denying his
master, he might rise again by repentance to his former state. Now then, if
you rightly frame your argument from the premises, you may plainly behold the
absurdity of your own illation, thus: I have prayed for thee (says Christ)
that thy faith should not utterly vanish away, though thou shall thrice deny
me, and most shamefully forsake and forswear me: therefore neither Peter
himself, nor the rest of the Apostles could possibly err in matters of
doctrine or judgment. This you see is your argument: and now I ask you, not
what boy, but what Bedlem would thus dispute?


Exorcistes. Peter denied not the faith: but the person of Christ.


Orthodoxus. And he that denies the person of Christ, denies not a part, but
the whole faith of Christ. It is a sorer and more dangerous fall to deny the
Lord himself, then to be deceived only in an opinion of faith, and this also
according to the very confession of Peter himself. For thus he places them
both in his second Epistle: 2. Pet. 2.
There shall be false teachers amongst you, which shall privily bring in
damnable sects, yea denying the Lord that has bought them. And our Savior, in
his (admonition to the seven Churches of Asia) shows the Church of Pergamos,
that he which denies his name, Reul. 2.12, 13.
denies his faith. Thou hold fast my name (says he) and have not denied my
faith: wherefore, not to hold fast the name of Christ, is flatly to deny the
faith of Christ. And how can you doubt of the truth of this, since the missing
of any point of faith is only but heresy: whereas the denying of Christ's name
(which fearful offense Peter fell into) is flat Apostasy, far worse then
the former by much? See then (I beseech you) how lewdly you pervert the words
of our Savior. For where Peter is only forewarned of his fall: you would make
Christ's words a warrant unto him that he shall never fall. And where the Lord
promised Peter repentance, you turn the text, as if he were finally freed from
all future offenses.


Exorcistes. Not so, I confess Peter offended, but not in the faith.


Orthodoxus. Could Peter deny his master Christ, and not deny his faith and
hope in Christ? or can there be greater infidelity, then flatly to deny the
son of God? And yet Peter not only denied him thrice, but with an oath, and
a curse he ratified his former denial.


Exorcistes. Peter only denied that he knew Christ.


Orthodoxus. And he that knows not Christ, what faith or hope has he in
Christ? Ambrose yielding a reason why Peter (after his fall) did not speak,
Ambrosius, sermon. 46.
but weep, says thus: Peter does not now use speech by the which he had lied:
by the which he had sinned: by the which he had lost his faith. I^em, sermon. 47.
And again, Peter became more faithful after he had bewailed the loss of his
faith. By all the premises then, it is very apparent, that (notwithstanding
the prayer of Christ) the Apostles faith, it might and did fail at some time,
in doctrine and judgment: and therefore much more in the working of miracles.


Exorcistes. This (in my opinion) is a dangerous point. For if it be fully
concluded, that the Apostles (at some time) both might and did also err in
their judgment concerning some points of doctrine: then how may we be
certain, which of their writings must be held for infallible truths?


Orthodoxus. Surely, even all those their writings whatsoever, which the holy
Ghost did lead them into: those are the only infallible truths of the spirit
of truth. But such only are all those which their master Christ had taught them
before: Revel. 19.10.
for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy, and none other truths
then those which Jesus before had testified to them, Ioh. 13.19.
were they led into by the spirit of truth. Those their testimonies therefore
(what, or how many soever) they are to be esteemed as authentical, and
infallible truths. Al other their testimonies which only but slipped from
humane infirmities (how glorious soever in show) as they are not the testimony
of Jesus, and therefore not the spirit of prophecy: so are they (in every
place of the Bible) all tainted and branded for errors or untruths, by the
spirit of truth, as we showed before. For howsoever the Apostles themselves
were subject to errors: Amand. Pola^. Syllog. These. (...) Eccles. page 381 Ioh.
10.27.2^ Ioh. 14.26.
yet could they not possibly err, so long as they only but heard the voice
of Christ their Master and Shepherd, and but followed the only directions of
the spirit of truth.

Again, howsoever some one of them, at some time, and in some special point,
both might and did err, as has been declared: yet al their whole College or
company, it did not nor could not possibly err. But evermore the light of
truth was clearly conserved in some of their minds, to discover the clouds
of darkness which shadowed the rest, and to propagate the light of the truth to
all posterity: Math. 5.14. Ephesians. 2.20. Gal. 2 9. 2. Tim. 3.15.
in which only respect they are purposely called the lights of the world, the
foundations and pillars of truth.

Besides that, the Apostles they did never universally err, I mean, their
faith never failed in all the parts of Christian doctrine: howsoever some of
them, at some one time or other, might happily swerve in some certain point.

Moreover, 1. Cor. 3.10.12. 1. Cor. 3.11. Ephesians. 4.20.
they did never decline from the foundation it self: because then they could
not have been the true Church of Christ, which must necessarily be builded
upon Christ the head corner stone, and therefore they evermore held the
foundation fast.

Briefly, the Apostles faith, it never finally failed: for howsoever they at
some times stragled aside through humane frailty, yet were they in time
recalled from their errors, as may plainly appear. Luke 24.48.49 50.51.52.53.
For not only they all returned to Christ, so soon as he was risen from death:
but (which more is) they first acknowledged themselves, and then taught soundly
to others the state of Christ's kingdom. And Peter being reproved of Paul did
willingly yield unto him: and John stayed himself upon the Angels admonition,
Gal. 2.11.14. Revel. 19.10. and 22.8.9. Act. 11.18.
from offering worship unto him: and the Apostles with the brethren (being
taught the truth) rejoiced greatly, that God had granted the Gentiles also
repentance to life and salvation. Yea, and in this their sound conversion, is
fully performed that which was promised before by Christ: Matthew. 16.18.
when he said unto Peter, upon that his worthy confession of faith: Thou art
Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall
never prevail against the same Mark the words, (...). Therefore he calls
them, (...). 2. Cor. 10.4.
the gates of hell, they shall not prevail against the Church: yt is, they shall
not be of a prevailing strength, for so much the word imports. They shall
then be of strength against the Church; but they shall not prevail by their
strength, no, albeit their said strength be as strong as holds, as the Apostle
elsewhere does purposely call them: yet are they not prevailing holds. For the
elect and chosen of God may take a fall at some time: but fall finally away
they can never. Perhaps at some time they build straw or stubble: 1. Cor. 3.12.
yet they build on the foundation, and the foundation is Christ. The sheep of
Christ may eftsoons go astray in the wilderness, Luke 15.4.
but perish they cannot: because none shall ever be able to pluck them forth
of the true shepherds hands. Ioh. 10.28.29. Luke 15.12.
The prodigal son may happily at sometime go away from his fathers house:
but he shall be made to return again, and be no less favorably entertained
of his father, then he was before. The faith of Peter himself did even
swoune, Luke 22.31.3^.
as we say: but finally it failed him not. He was turned away from the Lord,
whom he also denied: Matthew. 26.56.70. Matthew. 26.75. Psalm. 129.1.2.
but he returned again to the Lord with the bitter tears of repentance.
Briefly, the faithful, they are often times very shrewdly pressed with many and
mighty enemies: howbeit, they are never suppressed. It is certain therefore,
that the elect and chosen, Romans 8.15.16.
albeit they be made the children of God by adoption: yet are they subject to
errors and slips. Howbeit, on the other side, they are subject so, as they are
freed from the guilt of error by Christ, and accepted as holy in the sight of
God: Cant. 1.4.
because they are holy in part. I am black, O ye daughters of Jerusalem
(says the Spouse) yet am I comely as the tents of Kedar, yet as the hangings
of Solomon. Yea further, the bridegroom (he says) she is fair, Cant. 1.14.
and 4.1.7. Cant. 1.7.
nay (which more is) that she is the fairest, but yet, the fairest of women:
not simply the fairest, but in comparison of women, but in respect of earthly
creatures. To teach the Church thereby (least happily she grow proud of her
borrowed beauty) that so long as she lives in this tabernacle of the body,
Ezech. 16.14. Bernardus, in Cant. sermon. 38.
she goes on toward, but is not yet come to the perfection of fairenes: and
therefore that she is not fair altogether, though she be therefore commended
for her fairness, because she walks after the spirit, Romans 8.1.
not after the flesh. So then (to conclude this point) since it is apparently
evident by all the premises, that the Apostles faith, it might and did
sometimes fail in doctrine or judgment, yea, even since that very time they
were filled with the spirit: therefore it is likewise apparently evident, that
their said faith, it might much more fail in the working of miracles.


Exorcistes. Their faith never failed in the working of miracles; D. Doctrine,
page 49.
since that time especially, they were filled with the spirit.


Orthodoxus. Then was it needles for them to have prayed for the timely
increase and confirmation thereof, Act. 4.29.30* Act. 9.40. and 28.8.
which they undoubtedly did, as we have proved, and your self confessed
before. And, whereas you would strengthen your cause from the Apostles fulness
of faith: if you rightly consider the matter that does rather confound, then
confirm the same. For, by arguing, that the Apostles faith could not possibly
fail, from the time they were filled with the spirit: you do implicatiuelie
conclude, that it might and did also fail before, which is the very point you
deny. And thus (having lost your self in a thicket of thorns) the faster you
run, the further you raunge: and the fouler you bescratch your face with the
briers. D. Doctrine, page 48.49.
Briefly, whereas you seem to infer, that fasting and prayer, it had been
but a needles ordinance for the Apostles of Christ, especially after they were
filled with the spirit: and, that therefore it is very unlikely, that our
savior (for that short time only wherein the Apostles faith was subject to
failing) would have instituted the same, as an ordinance only for them to
observe. Our answer is, that you do ouerproudly or peruersely control the
wisdom of Christ: and it may please you to consider withal, that the time
between Christ his transfiguration and Pentecost, was not so short, as you
happily (by your inconsiderate account of bare forty days) would bear us in
hand: for, if you run over your reckonings afresh, you shall find the
interim, I mean the distance between them, to be full ten weeks at the
least. In all which time the Apostles of Christ (though at several times they
had fasted and prayed a whole day together) they might notwithstanding have
kept a combersome coil in casting out Devils, especially if they had happened
upon many such tractable patients as was Katherine Wright: who (having seven or
eight devils (you say) within her at once) had them all driven forth in less
space then an hour. And therefore (for any thing hitherto heard) I cannot
perceive, but that those words of Christ, namely, this kind goes not forth but
by fasting and prayer they may, and are to be peculiarly appropriated unto the
Disciples themselves.


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 49.
Nay sir, that interpretation is so far opposite to the words of Christ, as we
dare (by no means) admit of the same. For Christ (in the dispossession he
speaks of here) requires a means for the expelling of Devils, as without
which means the same could not possibly be brought to pass: and then tells
us what that means is, namely fasting and prayer. Whereas this your objected
interpretation implies, that this kind of spirit, it might be cast forth,
without this said means of fasting and prayer: if so be the Apostles faith had
been strong enough.


Orthodoxus. Very true as you say: and what one inconvenience I pray you, in
holding so? We (for our own parts) perceive no such opposition between our
said interpretation, and the words of Christ, as you falsely would bear us in
hand. Nay rather, you your own self do shrewdly overthwart, not only our
savior, but also even your greatest acquaintance, M. Darel I mean. For first,
you make prayer and fasting an ordinary established means for the perpetual
expelling of Devils, whereas our savior says plainly, that the Apostles
miraculous faith, was the only powerful means which should have effected the
same.

Again, you do here very flatly avouch, that this was such a dangerous kind
of Devil, as could not possibly have been cast forth at all by the Apostles
faith, had the same been never so strong, without fasting and prayer annexed
thereto: Whereas your good friend M. Darel does firmly hold, D. Doctrine. page
46, 47.
that the Apostles faith was so strong, as if he were a Devil (of what kind
soever) they could, and were able to have cast him out.


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 49,
Very true, if he had been any devil, of the one sort of devils. For you must
note, that Christ (in saying, this kind goes not out) observes therein a
distinct sort, degree or order of devils, some way differing and distinguished
from others: with one of which number he implies that the child was
possessed, whereby partly it came, that they had not cast the devil forth.


Orthodoxus. How know you, that Christ notes therein: such a distinct order of
devils differing from others?


Exorcistes. First, D. Doctrine* page 49.
the same does fitly accord with the very letter of the text: which tells us
directly, that this kind of devils goes not forth, but by fasting and prayer.


Orthodoxus. You do falsely belie the text it self. For the words of the
text, they are not thus ( this kind of devils, but this kind) and no more.
Wherein, Christ only distinguishes devils from all other creatures: but
seuereth not spirits by any distinct, or several orders among themselves. As
if some man (intending to set forth a shrewe to the full) should say in this
sort: the best of this kind is shrewish enough. Who sees not plainly, that
the man (by this speech) does only distinguish women from men by their sex or
kind: but seuereth not shrewes by several degrees among themselves? So
surely, our Savior Christ in saying (this kind goes not forth) intends to
set down no several orders of devils among themselves, but speaks only of
devils in general* as if he should say thus, this kind, that is, these devils,
they go not out, but by prayer and fasting. Notwithstanding, if you will have
us approve of this your new-coyned distinction, do tell us I pray you, from
whence you first learned the same: I mean where find you these your
distinguished devils, into such their several orders among themselves? For
tell me I beseech you, are not all the holy Angels (how glorious soever) of one
and the self same kind? Again, are not all men (how different soever in the
doing of mischief) of one and the self same kind? I believe you dare never
deny it. And only are spirits or devils distinguished into their several
kinds? Aug. in Psalm* 104.4.
Hitherto I have been (I assure you) of this opinion, that all devils
whatsoever, they are only spirits by nature, and Angels by office: and that
the distinction of Angels, is only of good and evil Angels. As for those your
supposed sundry kinds of devils, distinct into some several orders among
themselves, that mystical point of Diuillitie, I never heard of I assure you,
before this present: neither yet of any further distinction of devils, then
only that of the devil and his Angels.


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 49.
Sir, I distinguish not devils in an especial respect of any their essential
being, for therein they are all of one and the self same nature or kind: but
my meaning is, that there is a distinct sort or order of devils, severed by
sundry degrees among themselves. For howsoever, when we distinguish the whole
state of this kingdom of England (by the Queen and her subjects) we do make
therein, but one only superior, and all the other inferiors: yet, who sees
not withal, but that the inferiors themselves, they are distinguished also by
sundry sorts or degrees, namely, by Dukes, Earls, Lords, Judges, Justices,
Knights, Gentlemen, Y^omen, and so forth. So surely, howsoever when we
distinguish the whole kingdom of darkness, by the devil and his Angels, we
therein make but one a Prince, and the other his subjects: yet who sees not
with all that the devil his Angels, they are also distinguished themselves by
sundry sorts or degrees. Matthew. 17.21. Mark. 9.29. Matthew. 12.45.
And so much, not only the former places of Matthew and Mark do plainly
import: but our Savior else where, he makes it apparent by telling us, D.
Doctrine, page 51.
that the unclean spirit (being gone out of a man) is said to return with
seven other spirits far worse then him self. By which it is very apparent,
that among unclean spirits, some go beyond others in malice and cruelty
toward men, in subtlety and iniquity: and these are called (by our Savior
Christ) the worst kind of spirits, as distinguished from others, which are
less cruel and wicked.


Physiologus. Now surely M. Orthodoxus, this fellow he has a very deep
reach, or rather an odd kind of conceit concerning the hidden meaning of this
mystical trade of diuillitie: out of al doubt he surpasses old doting
Dionysius by many degrees. Dionysius in caelest. Hierarch. page 2. page 7.8.
For howsoever that good Seraphicall Doctor has to too prouidently penned the
celestial hierarchy of Angels, he did not so much as once dream of any
infernal hierarchy of devils all the days of his life: no surely, that
mystical matter surmounted (by many degrees) the shallow reach of his stinted
conceit. Seeing therefore that good old father has left the same in suspense,
and that no one writer ever since durst hitherto undertake so vnwealdie a
work: it shall not be amiss for your self Exorcistes (being especially a
man (as it seems) of such singular profunditie concerning such points) to give
the timely adventure upon some admirable supply of Dionysius his want, and to
set forth to the world the infernal hierarchy of spirits and devils. For by
such means the simplest on earth may be brought in continuance of time, to an
exquisite skill in that your newfound faculty, and be made to understand with
a trice, the several sorts of infernal spirits: which undoubtedly would be a
labor exceeding profitable for people on earth, and very pernicious to the
devils in hell. In the mean time propound unto us (I pray you) some one or two
of your soundest arguments, to prove directly unto us some further distinction
of infernal spirits, Matthew. 25.41. Ephe. 2.3.
then only that of the devil and his Angels. This one distinction howsoever we
acknowledge for current, as having it warrant from the revealed word: yet
surely, we have hitherto esteemed all further inquisitions into those the
supposed several orders of devils, to be merely but frivolous. Howbeit your
self (it may be) have lately received these lately revealed oracles, from
old Middlecubs mouth: and therefore I pray you, discover your reasons to
manage this matter.


Exorcistes. Why sir, Hyperius, in method. theolog. lib. 2. page 273.
there are several degrees or sundry sorts of orders among me^ on earth: and
therefore also among ye infernal devils of hell.


Orthodoxus. That follows not. For this difference of order among men here
on earth, arises in an especial regard, either of men's ages or callings:
which makes our sin either more or less, according to the quality of the
persons themselves, against whom we offend in those respects.

For first concerning their age, whereas all men naturally descend from Adam,
and (being (by reason of that their descent) either elder or younger then
others, according to the course of times or seasons) are therefore to be
reverenced themselves, Exodus 20.12. Leuit. 19.32. Romans 12.10.
and to yield reverence also to others, in an only regard of their age or
condition, accordingly as the Lord has appointed: Basilinus, in Psalm. 44.
homil. 11.
the case is not so with spirits and devils. For neither issued they all out of
one, as all men by propagation were procreated first from Adam, but they were
all jointly and forthwith created together, not having among them an infant, a
young or an old one: but they are all of equal antiquity, and so no
difference among them, in any regard of their nature or age. Neither yet do
they come to perfection by little and little, or grow up by nutriment and
ordinary exercise: but do continually retain in themselves that selfsame
estate of subsistence, which they ever enjoyed from their first creation,
without any such natural supplies, or serviceable additaments by nature or
natural means, as might make them any ways ( in duty) beholding one to
another, and therefore no difference among devils at all in any regard of their
nature or age.

Again, that there is no difference among them at all, in consideration of any
their different degrees of calling, it is very apparent to so many, as are
not purposelie blind. For howsoever among men, Hyperius, in method. theolog.
lib. 2. page 273.
there are superiors and inferiors, magistrates, and ministers, some to rule,
and some to be ruled, and all this especially (respecting their natural
infirmities) for avoiding disorder and confusion among themselves, in this
their warfayring state: there are no such several orders among spirits and
devils in hell. Ioh. 8.44. 2. Pet. 2.4. Jude. 6.
Both because they (being (by their fall) deprived from all manner of dignity)
are now destinated and tumbled headlong into such a confused state as has in
it no order at all: Math. 8.12. and 25.30.
and for that also, confusion it self is much more befitting their accursed
condition and kingdom of darkness, then any such seemly order of government,
as the Lord (in mercy) has established among men here on earth. Besides that,
the several degrees and orders among men upon earth, they are an undoubted
ordinance of the eternal God: decreed from all eternity, for this special
purpose. Namely, that therein (the lively image of Gods sacred justice and
mercy being shadowed forth unto men upon earth) that his said ordinance, it
might more inuiolablie be executed and obeyed of all in this warfayring world:
according to his own unchangeable purpose, and special appointment. For
this, all men are made to acknowledge by the very instinct and light of nature,
namely, that wheresoever is found a maioritie, Vbi maiorita^, ibi mandandi
auctoritas: vbi minoritas, ibi obediendi necessitas.
therein is also implied a commanding authority: and where there is only but
a bare minority, there is only an obeying necessity. Howbeit the Lord, he
has instituted no such ordinances at all, among spirits or devils in hell.
Because then, as here upon earth: so likewise in hell there must be Judges and
Justices, Parliaments, Terms, Assizes, sessions, and Courts for the orderly
conuenting and conuicting of gross malefactors among them, and for the
fearful tormenting of daily disordered devils, which were to too absurd to
imagine. Both because the Lord himself (having already endighted, arraigned
and adjudged the devil and his Angels to endless damnation) reserues them in
chains under darkness to the great and notable day: 2. Pet. 2.4. Jude 6.
and for that also he has now no further use of the service of devils in any
such his judicial courses with men, then an earthly judge has use of the
hang-mans help, to execute the sentence of death upon such malefactors, as he
himself has before condemned to death. And therefore unless you be able
directly to prove, that hang-men are distinguished also into several orders
among themselves; this your imagined reason (from the several degrees and
orders among men upon earth) has in it no show at all to maintain any
difference of order among spirits and devils in hell.


Exorcistes. But sir? there are distinct or several orders among the Angels in
heaven: therefore also among spirits and devils in hell.


Physiologus. Master Orthodoxus, do take your ease for a time, and let me
alone with this argument. Come on Exorcistes, I heartily thank you for this
irrefragable reason: this I trow is a toucher. Surely howsoever Dionysius
himself be departed long since: his dottage I perceive must never decay, so
long as Exorcistes is living. Now fair fall a sure friend at a pinch. But go
to man, do tell us I beseech you; how many distinct orders of spirits and
devils are established in hell?


Exorcistes. That is much more then any may possibly know: D. Doctrine, page 43.
or yet needs to enquire of.


Physiologus. Why man, seeing you do show your self no less presumptuous
now, in urging a distinction of devils in hell, then was Dionysius before you
in putting down a difference of Angels in heaven: why may you not as boldly
determine this point from Dionysius his mouth by an argument of proportion
thus? There are nine several orders of angels in heaven: therefore nine
several orders of devils in hell.


Exorcistes. What inconvenience could follow thereof: if happily I reasoned so?


Physiologus. Nay, none at all I assure you, if in so saying you happily be
able to prove what you say: but that must be done (I suppose) at our latter
Lammas.


Exorcistes. Not so sir: the proof (I assure you) is pregnant enough, if we
but mark what we read in the scriptures concerning this point. Isa. 6.2. Psalm.
80.1. Ezech. 10.1. Col. 1.16. Ephesians. 1.21. and 6.12. Ephesians. 3.20. Col. 3.10.
Ephesians. 6 12. 1. These. 4.16. Matthew. 25.31. Dionysius, in caelest* hierarch. cap.
2. page 7.8.
For therein is mention made of Seraphims, Cherubims, Thrones, Dominations,
Virtues, Powers, Principalities, Archangels and Angels: all which (you may see)
are distinct or several names. But those nine several names are given unto
Angels in regard of their nine several orders in heaven: therefore there are
also nine several orders of devils in hell.


Physiologus. Dionysius in deed, from those nine several names, does conclude
(as you say) nine several orders of angels: yea, and (which more is) he does
afterward very quaintlie distinguish those nine several orders into a
threefold ternarie of Angels, as may plainly appear in his book, if any were
so surprised with palpable folly, as he could be brought to believe the same.
M. Dearings Reading, 6. in Heb. 1.14. page 104.
Howbeit, there is no sound order of reasoning from that which your self or
Dionysius does dream. Because, if from an only bare distinction of names, we
may boldly conclude a distinction of orders: then surely, Dionysius and your
self have missed the mark by many degrees. For besides those the aforesaid
nine several names, Psalm. 104.4. Heb. 1.7. Job. 1.6. and 2.1.
the Apostle (from out of the Prophet) alleges two other names more: namely,
spirits and flaming fire: and in Job, the Angels are called the sons of God.
So then in this account (because there be twelve several names) there must
necessarily be made twelve several orders of Angels: which gives to your
self and Dionysius directly the lie.


Exorcistes. Not so, for those three last you speak of your self, namely
spirits, flaming fire, and the sons of God: they are names common to all
Angels whatsoever.


Physiologus. So is (I am sure) the name of Angels, Psalm. 103.20. Matthew. 25.30.
Hy^erius, in method. theolog. lib. 2. page 288.
as Dionysius also confesses: which yet notwithstanding, he and you both do
preciselie put down for one particular order of Angels. And therefore, if the
community of name confounds the particularitie of order, then are there but
eight orders of Angels: other ways, if the variety of names must make also a
variety of orders, then are you necessarily enforced to confess twelve
several orders of Angels at least. Howbeit, we have to consider with Augustine,
Augustinus, in Psalm 104.4. Hyperius, in method. theolog. lib. 2. page 273.
that by the name ( Angel) is not meant the nature, but the office of Angels.
Do thou enquire (says he) the name of this Angelical nature? it is a
spirit. Would thou know the office? it is an Angel. Behold the selfsame
distinction (says he) in the nature of man. If thou ask the name of man's
nature: it is man. If thou ask the name of his office, it is Preacher. The
name of his nature, is man: the name of his office, is Soldier. Hereunto also
appertains the speech of Rabbi Shelomoh, Rabbi Shelomoh.
who says, that the names of Angels are secret, yea so secret, as the Angels
themselves do not know them: they having (indeed) no proper names, but only
some certain sir-names (says he) imposed upon them, from those special
respects whereunto they are purposely sent, according to that in the Hebrews,
which says: Heb. 1.14.
Are not his Angels all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for their
sakes, who shall be heirs of salvation? And according to the matter of their
several ministeries, they have (for the present) their several names bestowed
upon them, in an especial regard of our slender and shallow capacities. Isa.
6.6. (...) ex (...) id est, combuere. Tob. 3 17. (...) ex (...) id est. ^eder^.
Dan. 8 16. Luke 1.26.
For so the Spirit that was sent to Isaiah (because he purged the Prophets
mouth with a fiery coal) he was fitly called Seraphim, of Saraph: which
signifies properly to burn. So the Angel who cured Tobiah, is called Raphael,
that is, the medicine of God, of Rapha, which properly signifies to cure or to
heal. So the Angel who was sent to Daniel, and the Virgin Mary (because he
revealed matters impossible for any but a supernatural power to effect) he was
correspondently called Gabriel: (...) ex (...), id est, praeualere. Judge.
13.18. (...) ex (...). Admirabil^ esse.
that is, the fortitude or strength of God, of the radical word Gabar, which
signifies properly to prevail. So in like manner, the Angel who was sent to
Manoah (because he miraculouslie brought fire from heaven, that consumed the
sacrifice) he was fitly called pele, of pala: which signifies properly to be
secret, or wonderful. By all these and the rest, we may boldly conclude, that
the several names which are given to Angels, do rather set forth their
several temporary employments: then establish among them any distinct or
several orders. For if we examine the matters aright, we may plainly
perceive, Hyperius, in method. theolog. lib. 2. page 273.
that all the names attributed to them in the sacred Scriptures, they have
relation either to their nature or office, but not to any your supposed
different orders at all.


Lycanthropus. What names (I pray you) respect only their nature?


Physiologus. That do these three: namely, Spirits, Seraphims, and Cherubims.
Spirits, Genesis 3.24. (...) ex (...), id est, auis.
because they are of a spiritual essence: Seraphims, in regard of their fiery
disposition or working, as we told you before: and Cherubims, of Cherub, which
properly signifies a bird: and this also in consideration of their agilitie or
swiftnes for performing the business imposed upon them. These names (you may
see) they set forth no several orders: but do only lay open the admirable
nature of Angels.


Pneumatomachus. And what names do properly import their office?


Physiologus. The names which properly import their office, are especially two:
M. Dearing, in Heb. Lecture. 7. page 104.
namely, Angels and Archangels, that is, messengers, and principal messengers.
And howsoever these two several names (the one signifying simply a messenger,
the other a principal messenger) may seem at a blush to import a several
order of Angels: yet is it not so. Besides that, if (indeed) it were so as it
seems, yet does it not conclude your purpose in hand: but comes short of
Dionysius, and your own account, by seven supposed several orders at least.
Howbeit, this I say for an answer, that wheresoever the name Archangell is
mentioned, it signifies our Savior Christ, and no creature at all. Or if
happily the name Archangell be any where attributed to any creature in heaven:
Tremellius, in Daniel. 10.13. nota. 28.
yet then he that in one work is called simply an Angel, in another work
of greater glory in our eyes, may there be called an Archangell. Even as we
see a Messenger, sent from the Prince of a message to some of his subjects, is
simply called an Ambassador: whereas notwithstanding the same person, being
employed by his Prince to some foreign Potentate, is more honorably termed a
Lord Ambassador. All the other names attributed to Angels, namely, Thrones,
Dominations, Virtues, Powers, or Principalities, they are but borrowed from
matters of state concerning humane policies, and but metaphoricallie
transferred to Angels, in an especial regard of some special actions, as we
said before of Gabriel, Raphael, and Pel^: but do signify unto us no distinct
or several orders of Angels.


Exorcistes. If those several names do signify no several orders of Angels,
why then were they bestowed upon them?


Physiologus. They were so bestowed upon them, Hyperius. in method. theolog*
lib. 2. page 288
partly to express what superexcellent dignity they were destinated unto:
partly to declare unto us what great and admirable matters the almighty has
wrought by means of their ministry: and partly in regard of our natural
weakness, who could not otherwise be made to conceive of their nature or
actions. For these and such other respects, best known to his wisdom, has
the Lord bestowed those metaphorical titles, of Thrones, Dominations, Powers,
and Principalities upon Spirits or Angels: but in no wise to distinguish any
different superiority, or several orders among themselves, or no further at
least, then only to difference Michael and his Angels, Revel. 12.7.
I mean Christ and his heavenly host, as was showed before.


Exorcistes. But sir, they are called Thrones, Principalities and Powers in the
plural number, which imports not simply one singular superior, but many
superiors possessing several superiorities, degrees and orders among
themselves in heaven: and therefore (by consequence) there are several
superiorities among Spirits and Devils in hell.


Physiologus. The Angels respectively referred to Christ, are all of equal
condition, Tremellius, in Daniel. 10.13. nota. 29. Matthew. 25.31.
and generally set forth by the only name of Angels, without any other swelling
words of superiority: as Michael and his Angels, Christ and his Angels.
Howbeit, when Angels are spoken of comparatively in an only respect of humane
Princes, then are they purposely put down by the titles of Thrones,
Dominations, Principalities, or Powers: to express their glorious dignity in
comparison of earthly creatures, and to teach us withal, that they have a
superiority and chiefdome over the kingdoms of the world committed unto them,
from that almighty Jehovah who is Lord and King over al. Ephesians. 3.10.
For which only respect they are called Principalities or Powers in the
heavens. Notwithstanding, be it supposed yt those several names implied some
several orders of Angels: yet can they conclude no certain number of any such
several orders. Ephesians. 1.21.
Because the Apostle (having elsewhere expreslie put down those several
names) contents not himself therein, Ephesians. 1.21.
but goes on further thus: and every name that is named, not only in this
world, but also in that that is to come, leaving the names (you see)
indefinitely, and your supposed several orders of Angels in perpetual
suspense. And therefore Dionysius and your self do but triflingly deal with
your Readers; Theod. Beza, in Ephesians. 1.21.
both in presuming to put down a certainty of that, which the holy Ghost so
uncertainly expresses, and in nominating also such several orders of Angels
there, where the holy spirit of God did purpose no such special matter at
all: but labored only (by that excessive manner of speaking) to lift up our
Savior Christ far above the excellency of all created powers in heaven, in
earth or in hell. Again, be it supposed indeed, that the Apostle (by those
several names) did purposely put down some several orders of Angels in
heaven: yet your inference enforced from thence, namely, that therefore there
are likewise some distinct or several orders among Spirits and Devils in hell,
is to too absurd. For howsoever the Lord might have singular use for the
several orders among Angels in heaven till the coming of Christ; there can be
no further use of any such several orders of Devils in hell, then only that
of the hangmans use, as has been declared. Yea and (which more is) whatsoever
further pre-eminence of order they jointly enjoyed before their fall; the same
now is so utterly lost by the coming of Christ, as they are destinated for
ever to utter confusion. According to that of the Apostle, who tells us
directly, that Christ has spoiled principalities and powers, and made openly
a show of them all, and triumphed over them in his cross: Celos. 2.15. 2. Pet.
2.4. Jude 6.
and not only this, but also has chained them up under darkness unto the great
and notable day. So far off is it therefore (you see) that there should be
now any further distinction of orders in hell, then only of the Devil and his
Angels: as that they are rather even utterly spoiled of all princely
pre-eminence and power whatsoever.


Exorcistes. That is not so. For the Apostle else where (speaking purposely of
the power of devils) does call them principalities, Ephesians. 6.12.
powers, worldly governors, princes of darkness, spiritual wickednesses, and
so forth. But all these are several names of order: therefore there are
several orders of devils in hell.


Physiologus. The Apostle in deed, he calls them so as you say: but concludes
from thence, no further distinction of orders among them, then only that of
the devil and his Angels, as we told you before. Making therein the devil an
only superior, and all other infernal spirits, his inferiors: but yet all
of them equal inferiors. I prove it thus, The devil alone he is called
(...), I mean a prince, Ephesians. 2.2.
as having all other infernal spirits subjected unto him: the rest, they are
al equally called together, (...), that is, Ephesians. 2.2. and 6.12.
a power, or rather powers in the plural number, as it were all very equally
combined in one and the selfsame power. And this also according to the
accustomed course of the Scriptures themselves: which (whenever they entreat
of the hierarchy of infernal spirits) do only but mention the devil and
his Angels. Matthew. 25.30. Ioh. 12.31. and 14.30. and 16.11. 2. Tim 2.26. Heb.
2.14. Luke 4 6. 2. Cor. 4.4. Isa. 27.1. 1. Pet. 5.8. Revel. 12.3.
The devil, as a prince alone: the Angels, as his only subordinate powers.
Yea, and (which more is) even Satan himself (in an only regard of his
superiority over the rest of the devils) is called the God of this world: the
great Leuiathan: the ramping, and roaring Lion: the great red dragon and so
forth. Howbeit, no one such note of difference else, is any where put down in
the sacred scriptures, to distinguish the rest of infernal spirits, the one
from the other: but they are all equally entitled by the name of Angels.

That is untrue. For the rest of infernal spirits, they also are called
principalities in the plural number. Ephesians. 6.12.
We wrestle (says Paul) (...), against principalities. But principalities
belong to more then to one alone: and therefore, there are several orders of
devils in hell.


Physiologus. V^ry true as you say, all devils whatsoever are called
principalities: not princes. For Satan alone is elsewhere called their prince.
Ephesians. 2.2. Matthew. 9.34. Mark. 3.22. Luke 11.15.
We walk (says the Apostle) in trespasses and sins, (...), according to the
prince of the air. Putting down Satan (you see) as an only prince: the rest,
but holding their principality in him alone. Which notes no difference among
the rest of infernal spirits: but makes them all equal in that one and
selfsame principality, whereof Satan alone is the prince.


Exorcistes. Yea, but all other infernal spirits whatsoever, they also are
called powers in the plural number. We wrestle (says Paul) (...), against
powers. Ephesians. 6.12.
But the name powers implies a distinction of order: therefore there are
distinct orders of devils in hell.


Physiologus. True, they are called powers (as you say) in the plural number:
howbeit, else where they are entitled, only a power, in the singular number.
For we walk (says the Apostle) (...), Ephesians. 2.2.
according to the Prince of the airie power. That is, according to the pleasure
of that Prince: who has a pre-eminence over the airie power. By which it is
apparently evident, that howsoever the other infernal spirits are also
entitled powers: yet, that their said power whatsoever, it consists only in
Satan their Prince. And therefore, the word powers in the plural number, does
rather make all the rest of infernal spirits or equal dignity under Satan
their prince; then distinguish them into any several orders among themselves.


Exorcistes. Not so. For the words principalities and powers, as they are words
of pre-eminence: so have they relation to some other besides themselves, over
whom they are to exercise their said principality or power.


Physiologus. Very true as you say; they are words of pre-eminence, and have
also a relation to some other besides themselves. Howbeit, they have no
relation from any one devil to another among themselves: but only unto men in
the world, over whom (by the just judgment of God) they have their
pre-eminence. Ioh. 14.30. 2. Cor. 4.4.
And therefore howsoever (in regard of themselves) they are equally called but
Angels: yet in comparison of men, they may truly be said to be principalities
and powers, as we confessed before concerning good Angels. Notwithstanding,
howsoever (in comparison of men) they are called principalities and powers:
yet, in comparison of Satan their prince, they do all jointly make but one
principality or power, whereof Satan alone retains the chiefedome. And
therefore he is properly said to be a prince, Zanchius, in Ephesians. 2.2. page 83.
not of powers as of many, but a prince of the airie power; as of one only
power, all jointly combined together in Satan himself. Neither is this change
of numbers (the putting down I mean of a singular word for a plural) so
strange as happily you take it: but very frequent and ordinary in the sacred
Scriptures. Of many examples hereof, consider only this one for the present.
Behold (says John) the Lamb of God which takes away, (...), the sin of the
world, in the singular number: meaning by sin, Ioh. 1.29.
all sins of the world whatsoever. Even so Satan is said to be a prince of
the airie power, meaning by the airie power, all the powers of the air
whatsoever: because, what powers soever the infernal spirits do jointly
execute, that power is only in Satan himself, and not peculiar to any of the
rest.


Exorcistes. If by the change of numbers, the holy Ghost entendeth no several
orders of devils, but simply and only respects the special power of Satan
himself: why then (I beseech you) is that self same simple power of Satan
expressed sometimes singularly, sometimes plurally, and not always alike?


Physiologus. The holy Ghost does purposely observe such a course, in an
especial consideration of our drowsy and secure condition: who
(notwithstanding we do daily hear of the inexorable malice of Satan against
us) have very great need to be awakened by the most terrible means that may
be. Matthew. 26.41. Ephesians. 5.14. Zanchius, in Ephesians. 2.2. page 89.
And therefore the simple and united power of infernal spirits, is sometimes
purposely put down in the singular number: to teach us therein, that howsoever
the feendes of hell be many and infinite, their power notwithstanding is simply
but one and the same, is undertaken of all with one only consent, yea, and
that they do all jointly combine themselves together in one, against every of
us: for one and the selfsame end, I mean, to effect our final destruction.
And that therefore we had the more need to be sober and watch: 1. Pet. 5.8.
yea, and so much the rather to give over our selves to fasting and prayer,
Omnis autem vis vnita, fortior est seipsa disgregata. Eccles. 4.12. Matthew.
12.25.
by how much we know, that every united power is more forcible, then that which
is disioyned in it self. Again, the power of infernal spirits is sometimes
expressed in the plural number, to teach us the rather, how terrible it ought
to be unto every of us: not only in consideration of the common hatred of
devils against us all, but more especially in regard of their mighty several
powers: they being many and mighty among themselves, and every ways ready at
hand to assault us in body and soul. In consideration whereof, the holy Ghost
does covertly teach us how needful it is for every of us to take to him self
the whole armor of God: because, Ephesians. 6.12.13.
we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against pincipalities, against
powers, against worldly governors, the princes (I mean) of the darkness of
this world, yea, and against spiritual wicnesses in the air, that is, quite
over our heads, and thereby the more able, and more ready to hurt us unawares.
By all the premises then, you may plainly perceive, that howsoever our Savior
does say ( this kind goes not forth) he means not by the words ( this kind)
to distinguish any several orders of devils in hell: neither yet, to teach us
any such needeles matters.


Exorcistes. Whatsoever you say to the contrary, very certain I am, that
there be distinct and several orders: not only of Angels in heaven; but also
of devils in hell.


Physiologus. Further distinctions then those we granted before, namely, that
of Michael and his Angels, and of the devil and his Angels: very certain I am
you shall never be able to prove in heaven or in hell. For first by auouching
several orders of angels in heaven, you do therein directly oppose your
self, not only unto that definition which the Apostle makes of Angels in the
Epistle to the Hebrews: but (which more is) even unto his maine purpose in
that selfsame place. Heb. 1.14.
For first he defines all Angels (howsoever called in scripture) to be none
other but ministering spirits: that is, to be all of one and the selfsame
condition in nature and office.

Secondly his maine purpose, M. Deaering, in his 6 Reading Heb. 1.14. p. 95.
in so speaking of Angels there, is to advance Christ Jesus far above all
principalities or powers whatsoever: and therefore if any Archangell, Throne,
Domination, power, or any other name else that is named, were any greater then
an angel: surely all that disputation of the Apostle were nothing worth. For
how could it conclude the excellency of Christ above all creatures, because he
is greater then Angels: if Cherubim, Seruphim, or any Archangell were also
greater in dignity then Angels? And therefore that the Apostles reason may (as
it is) be strong and unanswerable, we must confess all blessed spirits
(whatsoever they be) to be all but this, namely, ministering spirits for all the
Elect.

Moreover, by auouching for certain, some several orders also among spirits
or devils in hell: you do therein bewray your intolerable pride to all the
world. Genesis 1.1. etc.
For if Moses (knowing by inspiration the original of the world how it was)
had it not yet revealed unto him, what to write of angels or devils: Act. 7.56.
2. Cor. 12.24.
if Stephen who saw the heavens open, yet saw not these supposed several
orders of angels or devils: if Paul, who was taken up into the third heaven,
saw notwithstanding so little concerning such several orders of angels or
devils, that whosoever will avouch so curiously thereof, Col. 2.18.
he says, they be puffed up with a fleshly mind, to speak of things which
they never saw: briefly, Revel. 1.10.19.
if John in all his revelations had no such knowledge revealed concerning the
several orders of spirits or devils: who then is Exorcistes, or what is his
parentage, that he dare so proudly determine such certeintie of things
uncertain, or that we should once believe him in that, wherein I am certain
he believes not himself? For this we hold an infallible truth, Hyperius, in
method, theolog. lib. 2. page 301.
that the several names which are given to angels or spirits, they were
purposelie given them for our better understanding of the unspeakable power of
God in their several ministeries: and not to have us so precisely determine of
any their several orders. And this is most clear in Paul himself, who when
he had reckoned up principalities, thrones, dominions and powers, Ephesians. 1.21.
he adds: and every name that is named in this world, or in the world to
come. A clear sentence of his own modesty, in confessing an holy ignorance
concerning the several orders of angels or devils: Aug. in Enchir. ad
Laurentium* cap. 29. Item, ad Orosium, contra Priscil. and Origenistas.
and such as should move us in all holy sobriety, to say with Augustine.

The difference of these several degrees I confess I know not: if any man
will say that he knows it, let him speak: but let him prove what he
speaks. Seeing therefore Exorcistes you do vaunt it so bravely, of your
certain knowledge concerning the several orders of spirits and devils, do
prove directly unto us, that of infernal spirits some are greater or less
then other in princely pre-eminence: or else do now plainly confess that
Christ by these words ( this kind) does but generally understand all Devils
whatsoever.


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 51.
Oh then I perceive you have hitherto wholly mistaken my meaning. For Christ in
saying ( this kind) does not preciselie distinguish spirits or devils into
several officers, making some higher, and some lower in princely pre-eminence
among themselves: but teaches us rather, that among the sundry sorts of
unclean spirits, some go beyond others in malice and cruelty toward men, in
subtlety and iniquity. And that therefore these are called (by our Savior
Christ) the worst kind of spirits: whereby they are distinguished and do
differ from others, which are less cruel and wicked.


Physiologus. Oh then I also perceive, that (howsoever your knowledge may be
infinitely profound in comparison of others) your hap in disputing these
parabables is to too overthwart at this present. For the further you wade in
the bottomless gulf of this newfound diuillitie, the deeper you diue your
self over head and ears in all gross and senseles absurdities. Before, you
did only distinguish devils into their several sorts or orders: D. Doctrine.
page 49. D. Doctrine, page 50.51.
but (finding no fast footehold in those wandering vagaries) you would now
difference them only in regard of their natural qualities. Making of infernal
spirits, some cruel, some kind, some good, some bad, some meek, and some very
malicious in comparison of others. Thereby insinuating closely unto us, that
some Devils are but yet in declining, and not come to the full period of their
fearful Apostacy or falling from God. I ever did think till now, that all
Devils whatsoever, they had been equally malicious, equally envious, equally
cruel, equally ramping, and roaring like Lions, equally compassing the world
to work our destruction: and that therefore, they are all purposely, and all
jointly said to be (...) that is, Ephesians. 6.12. Zanchius, in Ephesians. 6.12. page
499.
spiritual wickednesses above in the air. Mark I beseech you the Apostle, he
calls them spiritual wickednesses in the plural number, to signify unto
us, that every Devil severally has complete in that his spiritual nature, H.
Discoueri* lib. 5. cap. 7. page 380.
the fulness of spiritual wickedness. Howbeit, your mind (it should seem) was
musing upon the gentle departure of Midlecub and his courteous companions: and
that was some cause why you put down at unawares such palpable, gross, H.
Discovery lib. 4. cap. 2. page 227.
and ridiculous fooleries. For surely, had you only but thought upon Summers
his knauish devil (for so it pleases your self to account him) you would
never have dreamed of any such kind or courteous Devils, H. Discoueri* of M.
Brosie* page 28.
as you tell us of here. Notwithstanding (since you are now anatomizing the
nature of Devils) do show us I pray you, among whether of those your two
contrary ^anckes of infernal spirits, we may boldly raunge Devil Ascalon the
Iester of Hell? It may be, you will have him to make up a full consort among
those your musical Lancashire spirits, D. 2. Narration pa. 3. and 5. and ^*
who were given (for the most part) to singing and dancing, to gibing and
jesting, and so keep a seemly decorum in those your several orders of
Devils. H. Discovery lib. 5. cap. 7. page 380.
As for Roofye, your old acquaintance, we see not as yet how we may possibly
make of him either flesh or fish: for, he has only (you say) the appellatiue
name of all Devils whatsoever: and by reason thereof, he may boldly partake
with the Devils of every kind, whether cruel or courteous. But fie, fie
Exorcistes, are you not even groslie ashamed, thus triflingly to delude your
poor ignorant Readers, in making them believe the Crow is white, I mean, in
bearing them thus boldly in hand that all Devils whatsoever, are even such as
your self do devise them to be? Yea, and this also without due regard of God,
of Religion, of reason, of common sense, and all honest humanity. I have the
more carefully and more earnestly labored this point, because (under the
cunning pretense thereof) you do cunningly go about to establish your
newfound ordinance of fasting and prayer in the powerful expelling of Devils.
For, unless you be able (by one means or other) to find us forth some such
combersome kind of Devils, as the Apostles of Christ (by all their miraculous
faith) were unable to expel without fasting and prayer annexed therewith: that
speech of Christ concerning prayer and fasting (you did plainly perceive, D.
Doctrine, page 52.
and do elsewhere confess) it must needs have a peculiar relation to the
Apostles themselves. This you cannot but see, and in consideration hereof, you
do purposely keep this combersome coil about the distinction of Devils.
Howbeit, the very matter of your charge being but gunpowder and piss, the
untimely discharge of your bellowing Cannon has procured more stink to your
cause, then stir to your adversary. For, in laboring to build your newfound
Ordinance, upon this so sandy and frail a foundation, the fall (you see
plainly) is so much the sorer, and your loss grows greater by many degrees.
Notwithstanding, be it supposed that Christ (in those words) does put down (in
deed) some such several orders of Devils as happily you dream of, yet then
are you never the nearer your purpose. For, let master Orthodoxus now hear,
how you may possibly conclude from thence any such an established ordinance
for the perpetual expelling of Spirits and Devils, as you would bear us in
hand?


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 50.
Why sir? that very text it self does intimate these four things unto us.
First, that there are two kinds of Devils, the one less, the other more
mighty, cruel, subtle and more wicked. Secondly, that the former kind are
more easily cast out of man; the other, with greater difficulty. Thirdly, that
the Child was possessed with one of the second kind. Fourthly, that thence
partly it was, that the Disciples had not driven him forth from the child.


Physiologus. Here we may see skill with a witness. The unlearned no doubt
(wanting art to analyze the scriptures) may here learn the trade to bebutcher
a text at the least, yea, and how to quarter it forth both for the seller his
best advantage, and according to the compass of the buyer his purse.
Notwithstanding, whether any of those your four intimations are intimated
truly unto us from the true natural scope of that text: let the skillful
Artists determine between us. As for those your two kinds of Devils, you have
sufficiently heard before. Your other three intimations, we leave them to such
silly poor senseles souls, as desire (by their fond intertainement) to
intimate their own and your folly to all the world. In the mean time, let
master Orthodoxus now hear how either all, or any one of those your silly
intimations, may soundly intimate your supposed perpetual ordinance of prayer
and fasting?


Exorcistes. They intimate the same very fitly unto us. D. Doctrine, page 50.
For since there be (in deed) such several sorts of Devils as has been
declared, and that thence also it was, why the Disciples could not drive forth
the Devil from that child, our savior Christ was necessarily constrained to
establish such an ordinance, as should effectually do it for ever.


Orthodoxus. But if there be no such several orders of Devils as we have
fully declared before, then (by your own reason) there needs no establishment
of any such supposed perpetual ordinance. Besides that, D. Doctrine^ page 47.
master Darel, he tells us directly, that the Disciples faith was fully
sufficient to effect it before, if he were but a Devil: and was their said
faith unable to deal with that Devil? That Devil (it should seem) was not
the Devil himself, but rather the Devil his Dame: and therefore it was, that
the Disciples could not possibly prevail: for one she Devil (as some
oldwiues affirm) is far worse to encounter withal, then four and twenty
he Devils besides. Howbeit, perceive you not Exorcistes how dangerously you
derogate from the foreseeing wisdom of Jesus Christ: who having given his
Disciples an extraordinary faith which could not prevail with every kind of
Devil, was now (as you say) enforced upon better deliberation, to establish
such a powerful ordinance, as should be able for ever to strike it dead?
Briefly, if these your four intimations (pretended perforce from that portion
of scripture, with that your newfound ordinance of fasting and prayer enforced
from thence) be current in every condition: D. Doctrine, page 52.
master Darell does tell you it must necessarily follow, that then the
Apostles themselves should have fasted and prayed, because either it must then
have been, that there was a kind of Spirit, which (for all the power the
Apostles received) could not possibly be expelled by them except (besides
their said miraculous power) they had used the means of prayer and fasting,
which is directly against the scripture as we have heard before: or, that the
Apostles weak faith should (at the least) have been helped by prayer and
fasting, that so they might have expelled the spirit, all which (says he)
could not possibly be.


Exorcistes. Let master Darel prate what he please, D. Doctrine, page 52.
the interpretation I gave is sound and good, and therefore it ought to be
received.


Orthodoxus. He is a wise man no doubt, who certainly knows what
interpretation you give: because (whatsoever you pretend) you hold nothing for
certain. Howbeit, if you mean that interpretation of yours, which properly
respects those your four intimations reported even now: then surely there is
small soundnes therein, and therefore no reason your said interpretation should
be received for current, but very great reason to account master Darel and
your self a couple of prattling companions.


Exorcistes. Howsoever you imagine the contrary, D. Doctrine, page 52.
I see not what should hinder any from receiving my said interpretation: since
the very occasion, coherence, text, and letter of that scripture make all and
every of them for it: and for that also the same is nothing against the
analogy of faith.


Orthodoxus. How fitly the occasion, coherence, and text it self do tend to
the timely support of that your supposed interpretation, has bin fully showed
before. What concord it has with the anologie of faith, is further then may be
perceived as yet: and much more then M. Darel himself dare freely acknowledge.
D. Doctrine, page 44.
For he tells us else where, that there is no scripture besides, to help in this
case: and then how should it possibly accord with the analogy of faith?


Exorcistes. Dar. Doctrine, page 52.
Why sir, what impiety or what great absurdity is it to hold, that prayer and
fasting is an ordinary means established by Christ for the powerful expelling
of devils? Or what danger may possibly befall the Church of God, by embracing
the same for a truth, it being so indeed? And this is all the evil fruit you
can gather from that my former exposition.


Orthodoxus. You demand what impiety, absurdity, or danger do follow your
said exposition: I am content to give you some inckling thereof.

First, it is impiety to avouch any thing for truth, which is not a truth:
Romans 1.18.
or to father a lie upon Christ, and so to hold the truth in unrighteousness. It
is impiety to put upon the pure Spouse of Christ, 2. These. 2.^.10.
the besmearing brand of that antichristian strumpet; to whom alone is given
power to work lying signs and wonders in all deceiueablenesse of
unrighteousness: and so make her (says M. Darel) to boast or brag that she
has in her ear the mark of a Rogue, D. Doctrine, page 74.
or that she is burnt in the hand like a thief. For as these (says he) are
the infallible marks of rogues and thieves: so surely, the miraculous
expelling of devils by papists and others in these days of the Gospel, it is
the undoubted true ensign, badge or cognizance of antichrist. It is impiety
to affirm that fasting and prayer ( ex opere operato) may possibly effect
such a work: and so to iumpe with traiterous Stapleton and with Thyreus the
Jesuit. It is impiety to profane the holy exercise of prayer and fasting, by
such preposterous practices: without any warrant at al from the word. Theod.
Beza, in 1. Cor. 7.5. Moses Pellacher. in Matthew. 17.21.
It is impiety to draw prayer and fasting from their peculiar and proper
appointed ends, namely, from being but proppes and helps for the only support
of our feeble faith in the promises of God: and to make them the only sole
means for the powerful expelling of devils without any faith at al. Yea, D.
Doctrine, page 106.
and even such a means forsooth, as may (says M. Darel) enable a reprobate to
effect such a work. Lo, these are the several impieties which do
necessarily succeed your sensles exposition: and yet you ask what impieties
would follow thereof.

Now next for absurdities. It is to too absurd to avouch that fasting is more
effectual and more powerful for the expelling of spirits and devils; then is
prayer it self. It is absurd to make sole prayer, but a practical means to
prove experiments by. Theod. Beza, ^^ 1. Cor. 7.5.
It is absurd to make fasting the subsequent of prayer: whereas it should
(indeed) be a precedent exercise, or rather an ordinary preparation thereunto.
It is absurd to establish a trade without a tuition: or to prescribe a
medicine where there is no malady at all. Lo, these and such other
absurdities do necessarily succeed your sensles exposition of Math. 17. verse.
21. and yet you enquire what absurdities may possibly succeed the same.

Now next shall be handled succinctlie the dangers also thereof: which are
both many, and those also most mighty. For first it cannot but be fearefullie
dangerous, that the Church should be brought to embrace for infallible truth;
that which cannot possibly be proved a truth. Again, it is undoubtedly
dangerous for the Church, by this means to consort her self with her enemy,
especially in such gross and erroneous opinions. To practice prayer and
fasting, as a perpetual ordinance established by Christ for the powerful
expelling of devils: having no one warrant in the word for the same. To be made
careless of the true spiritual armor against Satan in deed: by buzzing
secretly into her ears, that which is not her armor appointed by God. Ephesians.
6.12.
Lo, these are some of those palpable impieties, absurdities, and dangers
which must necessarily succeed your said exposition: and yet you are not
ashamed to enquire what impieties, absurdities, or dangers may possibly
follow thereof.

These and such like, they are the supposed good fruits which grow up, and may
possibly be gathered from your former most fruitles exposition, concerning
that portion of scripture. As for the evil fruits you enquire after, therein
you are sufficiently able to resolve your self. For what fruit may you have of
that whereof you are now so filthilie ashamed, Romans 6.21.
that you dare not show forth your face as in former times?


Exorcistes. Sir, I would you knew it, I am nothing ashamed of that infallible
truth which I teach.


Orthodoxus. If you blush not for very shame at so gross an exposition: the
less is your glory, and the greater your confusion no doubt. For who (but an
impudent person) would not be highly ashamed of the ignorance of his own
soul? Pro. 23.23.
Howbeit, if (in very deed) you be not ashamed thereof from your heart: why
then do you thus hide your head in a corner? Tertul. in Apologetic.
Truth (you know) she seeks no corners: neither fears she more in her
heart, then to be hid from the eyes of the world.


Exorcistes. I forsake not the truth it self be you sure: I only but flee
those fiery trials which so fiercely do follow the truth. Neither take I this
course, Matthew. 10.2^.
without the warrant of Christ: who wills me (when I am persecuted in one City)
to fly into another.


Orthodoxus. Alas poor pitiful cause, what hard hap had thou to put thy
self under the protection of so cowardly a Patron, as only but braues it in
words: without either beating once back, or bearing off the blows, which daily
befall thy untimely birth! Howbeit, you do blasphemouslie belie our Savior
Christ, in saying that he should approve of your cowardly flight from city
to city. For the flight which Christ warranteth there, is yt wherein only your
person (not your profession) is hotly pursued by persecuting Tyrants. You are
not pursued with any purposed hurt to your person: but only with a provident
respect to those your preposterous practices, which your self (having
preposterously set first on foot) do now (by this your cowardly carriage) even
purposely betray in the open field.

Besides that, howsoever your flight might be warranted lawful before the
challenged combat, yet being once purposely billed forth for the battle, and
your own self undertaking the graund-Captaine his charge in this singular
skirmish; you have from hence-foorth no more warrant to flee the very forefront
of the field, then has the apprehended offender to break out of prison.

Notwithstanding, let us set these things aside for the present, and do show
forth unto us (I pray you) how (from that portion of Scripture) you may
possibly conclude the timely establishment of that your supposed ordinance of
prayer and fasting.


Exorcistes. Why sir, D. Doctrine page 52.
he knows nothing at all in the holy things, who understands not this:
namely, first if any be now possessed, and by prayer prevail not; then prayer
and fasting together must forthwith be used. Secondly, that prayer and fasting
(being so used) will certainly prosper: either to the present removing, or to
the powerful sanctifying of the said judgment at least.


Orthodoxus. If that man, who understands not the profunditie of these
newfound mysteries, knows nothing at all in holy things: then surely I for
mine own part must freely confess, that hitherto I have known nothing at all
concerning that mystical way. Yea and (which more is) this your pretended
great knowledge therein, it is (I verily believe) but a presumptuous knowledge,
having in it no soundnes of knowledge at all. For who ever taught you as yet,
or from what spiritual fountain can you possibly convey such a profunditie
of sacred knowledge, D. Doctrine, page 43.
as may warrant us to undertake, first an experimental practice of prayer
alone: and then next (if this course prevail not at all) to use prayer and
fasting together, for a more speedy dispatch of the business? What may we
imagine has taught you these different and variable practices: but only a
certain secret fear of being taken tardie at unawares, in those your different
and variable courses, concerning the supposed expelling of Spirits and Devils?

Notwithstanding, let it be granted to be so as you say, how proves this the
matter in question: namely, that prayer and fasting is an ordinance established
by Christ, for the perpetual expelling of Devils?

Moreover, whereas you confidently avouch, that this your newfound ordinance
(being rightly observed of those your pretended Demoniakes) it will undoubtedly
prosper, either to the removing or sanctifying of the judgment at least: do
tell us (I pray you) how it comes to pass, that this your said ordinance
should now (at this present) enjoy but a doubtful prosperity, the prosperity
thereof being (in Summers and some of the rest) so certain before, D.
Doctrine, page 43.

Quantum muta^us ab illo?


as you purposely used the same to make sure work at the first? Here is a
strange metamorphosis, and mighty alteration: yea, a sudden exchange from that
in former times.

But how do you certainly know, that prayer and fasting (being so used) will
certainly prosper, either to the removing or sanctifying of the judgment at
least?


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 52. Genesis 20.17.
I prove it from former experience thus. The same prospered so far forth by
the practice of Abraham, as it opened the wombes of all the women in Abimelech
his house.

Again, Judge. 20.28
it so prospered by the Israelites practice, as that thereby they conquered and
killed the Beniamites. And therefore the same so observed of us, will likewise
prosper in this special business.


Orthodoxus. Examples may serve very fitly, to illustrate a point of doctrine
proved before: but they suffice not of themselves to prove any matter in
question.

Besides that, you do grossly forget your self, and ouerrashly avouch you
care not what. Genesis 20.17. Judge. 20.35
For, did Abraham's prayer get Abimelechs women with child: or the Israelites
fasting conquer the Beniamites? I was ever persuaded till now, that the act of
generation had effected the one: and the men of war had accomplished the other.


Exorcistes. Very true. Howbeit, by prayer and fasting those selfsame means
were sanctified, for the powerful effecting of those special works.


Orthodoxus. Then their prayer and fasting were not the means it self which
effected those works: but only a spiritual exercise, to sanctify the means
themselves which were to effect the same. And so by consequence, prayer and
fasting, they are not the sole means that drives forth a devil: but they are
rather a spiritual exercise, to sanctify and strengthen the means in deed
that must do it, namely the miraculous faith. Which said faith being then over
sluggish and weak in the Apostles themselves: should necessarily have been
stirred up, and supported thereby.

So then those words of Christ, they implie no established ordinance for the
perpetual expelling of devils: but do only import a special means for the
timely confirmation of the Apostles faith. And therefore, this which you
hitherto speak will never endure the hammering, for that which you purpose.


Exorcistes. Why sir, D. Doctrine, page 53.
I used that self same means to Katherine Wright, to Tho. Darling, to W.
Summers, to the seven in Lancashire, and prevailed thereby: why therefore may I
not now as safely say, that prayer and fasting was the sole and only means of
expelling Satan in every of these: as the Physician, applying a natural
medicine for the cure of a natural malady, (that same medicine having
prospered also in the timely recovery of sundry diseased parties before) may
boldly avouch, that that his said medicine was the only means of curing those
parties diseased? 1. Cor. 9.2.
If Paul did justly make the Corinthians conversion, the undoubted true seal
of his Apostleship: why may not my self with like boldness, propound my
several dispossessions, as a full confirmation of this established ordinance?


Orthodoxus. The Physician who cures natural diseases, he cures them not (I
hope) by sole prayer and fasting, but by mere natural medicines; as by the
natural remedies appointed of God for that purpose. Although yet, I deny not,
but that earnest prayer before, is a warranted spiritual exercise to sanctify
the medicine it self; and to make it (by the good blessing of God) become much
more effectual in working the cure. Howbeit possession of devils, the same (I
am certain) is no natural malady: neither yet are prayer and fasting any
natural medicine to cure the same. And therefore, even as prayer it self
cannot possibly cure, but serves only to sanctify that natural medicine,
which must help the natural malady: so surely, prayer of it self cannot
possibly dispossess any man of the devil, but is only a spiritual exercise,
to stir up and to strengthen that spiritual means which must do it in deed,
I mean, the miraculous faith. And so by consequence, sole prayer and fasting
alone, they are no ordinary means established by Christ for the perpetual
expelling of spirits and devils.

1. Cor. 9.2.
Besides that, howsoever the Apostle Paul might justly challenge the Corinthians
as his peculiar seal, and call them the proper defense of his Apostleship,
because they themselves (by means of his powerful preaching) were soundly
converted unto the faith, and the authority of his Apostleship more
authenticallie sealed up and confirmed: yet, the falsely pretended cures of
those your supposed patients (being in very deed but counterfeite seals) they
cannot possibly seal up your Exorcists calling; nor be any other in effect,
but counterfeite confirmations of your falsely pretended new ordinance, and so
by consequence, they prove you to be but a counterfeite Exorcist. For we have
ever denied, and your self have not hitherto proved any such certain
ordinance established by Christ.


Exorcistes. Well, D. Doctrine, page 54.
be it admitted, that neither those words of Christ, nor any one Scripture else
do purposely institute prayer and fasting an established ordinance, for the
perpetual expelling of devils: yet notwithstanding, the same may well be, and
is also in deed, a means ordained by God himself to that same end.


Orthodoxus. Are you fled on the sudden, from this your new found established
ordinance of prayer and fasting, for the powerful expelling of spirits and
devils; and do now make them but only a means thereunto ordained of God? I
perceive you are to too afraid to tarry over long in a squatte: the following
cry of the Hounds is so hot in your ears. But go to, how are you certainly
sure, that prayer and fasting is a means ordained by God himself: to that
self same end?


Exorcistes. I am not simply fled from the ordinance it self; D. Doctrine,
page 54.
but herein do make it more apparently evident, that albeit prayer and fasting
be not revealed, yet are they undoubtedly a secret ordinance of God at the
least, to that self same end. For even as this, or that medicine, applied by
the Physician or Chirurgian, to this or that malady, and healing the same in
sundry Patients, may (by experience) be known to be a medicine secretly
ordained of God to such an end, though no such particular medicine be thereunto
expreslie mentioned in sacred Scripture: so surely, prayer and fasting being
rightly used, and prevailing with many from time to time in the powerful
expelling of devils; who sees not now but that the said exercise of prayer and
fasting, is a certain secret means ordained of God to that self same end,
though there were (in the Canonical Scriptures) no one mention at all of any
such ordinance?


Orthodoxus. You flee (I perceive) from one starting hole to another, as a man
almost spent, or in much fear at the least of being ferretted forth. For here
now (as before in possessions) you are driven to your popish distinction of
written and unwritten ordinances. And thus (by laboring very egerly to shun
the sands of suspicion concerning a supposed confederacy with Summers his
cousoning courses) you run your self desperately upon the dangerous rocks of
discredit, concerning your iumping with Papists in their popish opinions. For,
(by this your blind distinction of ordinances unwritten and written) you do
very plainly demonstrate your self to be a chicken of father Bellarmines
hatching, who (elsewhere no less fondly then your self here very foolishly)
distinguishes the word of God, into verbum scriptum and verbum non scriptum,
Bellarm. de scriptu^. lib. 4. cap. 2.
into the word written and the word unwritten. By which your cunning sleights
of legerdemaine, you do very cunningly endeavor to foist in (underhand)
whatsoever gross fooleries or fond conceits your own private fantasies shall
fondly affect. And therefore it shall not be greatly amiss, if you jointly
together receive your answers, first, from the written word it self, and then
next from your holy fathers decrees, under whose traiterous ensign you
jointly skirmish in this so special a combat.

First therefore (from the written word it self) we will finally squash your
fond distinction thus. Isa. 8.20.
If the Prophet Isaiah reduces the adversaries of truth whatsoever to the law
and the testimony, telling them farther, that if they speak not according to
this word, it is because there is in them no sacred truth: then surely, father
Bellarmine and your self (laboring thus lewdlie to foyst in such your
unwritten fooleries, as are not according to the law and the testimony
revealed at large in the written word) you do plainly declare, that you are
now necessarily driven to these indirect dealings, because there is in you no
truth at all.

Again, if Christ commands his adversaries to search the scriptures, Ioh.
5.39. Act. 17.11.
because in them they think to have eternal life, telling them withal, that
they are those which testify truly of him: then no doubt, he does purposely
restrain them all from enquiring after any unwritten verities, because such do
neither testify of him, nor may possibly afford any sound evidence at all to
eternal life.

^. Tim. 3.15.16.17.
Again, if the holy scriptures (the word written I mean) are (of themselves)
sufficiently able not only to make men wise to salvation, but (which more is)
were purposely given of God, as the only profitable directions and rules for
teaching, improuing, correcting and instructing in righteousness, to make the
man of God very absolute to every good work. If the written word I say, be
fully sufficient to work these effects; then surely those your supposed
unwritten ordinances are merely superfluous. D. Willet. in Tetrastylon
Papismi. part. 3. page 146.
For, what may more be required from the written word concerning the Churches
good in this present life, then to make the good Minister an absolute man of
God, and the christian hearer a saved creature? But both these effects (says
the blessed Apostle) are sufficiently attained unto by the written word: and
therefore that unwritten word which father Bellarmine and you so fondly dream
after, is merely superfluous, and does nothing else (in effect) but defile the
flesh, and deceive your own souls.

Now next we will likewise lay open your dottages concerning this your supposed
unwritten word, from your holy father his authentical Canons thus. Decret. p.
1. distinct. 8. c. 9.
Si solus Christus audiendus est, non debemus attendere quid aliquis ante nos
faciendum putauerit: sed quid (qui ante omnes est) Christus prior fecerit. That
is: If Christ only be to be heard, we are not to respect what any one else has
or shall think meet to be done; but what Christ (who was before all) has
first done himself. Now then, if Christ alone must be heard, whose voice is
only known in the scriptures, I mean in the written word: then surely your
unwritten word, and whatsoever ordinance else is not apparently extant in
scripture, nor may (by necessary consequence) be soundly collected from thence,
the same is merely superfluous. So then, this your exorbitant distinction of
written and unwritten ordinances, it may not possibly be made to support the
importable burden of that your supposed established ordinance of prayer and
fasting, for the perpetual expelling of Spirits and Devils: but it falls flat
(you see) to the ground.

Besides that we have ever denied, and your self shall never be able to prove,
that sole prayer and fasting is either a written, or unwritten ordinance,
forth powerful expelling of Spirits and Devils. And (which more is) this your
own argument of comparison, it cutteth asunder the very throat of this your
fantastical opinion, as may plainly appear by conferring each part of your
comparison more fully together.

For, seeing you insist so much upon natural infirmities, and (by proportion
thereof) would prove unto us the supernatural possession of Spirits and
Devils: this you know (in experience) that every natural cure is either
ordinary or extraordinary. An ordinary cure is that which in an ordinary
course, and by ordinary means procures an ordinary effect in the party
diseased. Now in an ordinary cure there must necessarily concur these
following matters.

Namely, first, an ordinary natural medicine to effect the intended cure: as
for example, eie-bright to clear the dimnes of sight.

Secondly, a secret operation of nature must necessarily concur with the
medicine it self, to make it naturally forcible for effecting the cure:
otherwise the medicine it self is utterly unfruitful.

Thirdly, there must be a ministerial hand for the orderly apprehending, and
applying of that the aforesaid medicine.

Fourthly, there is also required in the Physician himself the theorie, or
knowledge of natures operation, to direct him aright in that selfsame business.

Fifthly, there must be also an ordinary means to imprint such a theorie, or
knowledge in the Physicians breast.

Lastly, the habit of this theorie or skill is that only, which imboldeneth
and warranteth the Physician himself in such an orderly practice.

Thus then you see that the Physician his only knowledge concerning the secret
operation of nature, is that which imboldneth and guides the hand it self, in
an orderly apprehending and applying of that selfsame medicine to such an
effected cure. And the cure in such sort effected, it is without doubt an
ordinary cure, as having all things ordinarily concurring together in an
ordinary course of nature. Howbeit, if the Physician should effect the said
cure by sole prayer and fasting alone, without any such natural medicine, or
by a quite contrary means: namely, if he (together with prayer and fasting)
should work the said cure by the only applying of a plaster of clay, Ioh. 9.6.
which naturally has in it self no natural disposition at all for the
orderly effecting of any such work, and wherein nature her self neither
has, nor naturally can have any such secret operation at all: then surely the
cure it self (in such sort effected) it is undoubtedly supernatural,
extraordinary, and merely miraculous. By the premises then you may plainly
perceive, what things (in a natural disease) must necessarily concur, for
the timely effecting of the ordinary cure thereof: and therefore do tell me
plainly, whether you make the possession of Devils a disease or not?


Exorcistes. Yes sir, D. Doctrine, page 29.
it is a disease as ordinary as other diseases in men.


Orthodoxus. But whether is it a natural: or supernatural disease?


Exorcistes. It is a supernatural disease no doubt. D. Doctrine, page 79.



Orthodoxus. And is not the cure thereof either ordinary: or extraordinary at
least?


Exorcistes. The cure thereof in Christ and his Disciples days, D. Doctrine,
page 29.55.
was extraordinary no doubt: but now in these days of the Gospel, it is
altogether ordinary.


Orthodoxus. If an ordinary cure (as you say) then must you be able to
demonstrate unto me, the necessary concurrencie of all the precedent matters,
and so you say something unto us. My meaning is this, you must demonstrate unto
me: first an ordinary medicine for that selfsame cure. Secondly, a secret
operation of some other effectual power concurring therewith. Thirdly, a
ministerial hand to apprehend and apply that selfsame medicine. Fourthlie, a
theorie or skill to direct the said hand. Fiftlie, a means to imprint that
selfsame theorie in the physicians breast. Lastly, an habit of that
selfsame skill to imbolden and warrant the practice thereof: and then the cure
in such sort effected, is undoubtedly ordinary.


Exorcistes. Why sir? D. Doctrine, page 55.
prayer and fasting is a medicine ordained by Christ to effect that ordinary
cure.


Orthodoxus. Have prayer and fasting any such energetical force in themselves,
as does naturally and directly tend to the timely effecting of that selfsame
cure: or do they rather ( ex opere operato) effect the said work?


Exorcistes. Neither of both. Although yet sole prayer and fasting do effect
the said work, as we see in experience: notwithstanding my self be utterly
unable to express the manner how it effects the same.


Orthodoxus. I do verily believe you in this. Howbeit, if sole prayer and
fasting be able of it self to effect such a work, without any the other
precedent matters concurring therewith: then surely that selfsame cure (as we
told you before in natural diseases) it must needs be extraordinary, and so
(by consequence) a miraculous cure no doubt. D. Doctrine, page 63.73. D.
Detection, page 23.25. D. Doctrine, page 79. D. Detection, page 41.
Notwithstanding all this, the working of miracles (you say) it was ceased long
since: and therefore also the miraculous expelling of spirits and devils.

Besides that, you your own self do term the possession of devils a
supernatural disease. But supernatural diseases do necessarily crave a
supernatural manner of cure; for nothing in an orderly course of nature, may
possibly cure a supernatural infirmity: and therefore that selfsame
pretended cure of yours concerning Summers (if ever the same was truly
effected) it must needs be as extraordinary now, as ever were any before: and
so by consequence as miraculous now, as ever were any before, whatsoever you
prate to the contrary, as in our tenth Dialogue is plainly declared.


Exorcistes. Sir, I prate not at all, but do advisedly report that infallible
truth, D. Doctrine. page 55.
whereof we have the examples, the practice, and counsel of fathers: who
generally avouch the holy exercise of prayer and fasting, for the perpetual
expelling of spirits and devils.


Orthodoxus. Your Fathers forsooth (being every of them mute before, concerning
the essential possession of devils) are here mustered afresh in one and the
selfsame rank, to support your idle conceit of an ordinary dispossessing of
devils by prayer and fasting.

And herein (howsoever you wrest open their mouths, to make them speak what
you please) they speak nothing at all to your purpose in hand: my meaning is,
they do not concludently prove that Christ has purposelie established prayer
and fasting, as an ordinary and perpetual means for the powerful expelling
of devils.

For first, howsoever you begin with Origin, Origin. in Matthew. 17 21.
he rather insinuates simply the supposed efficacy of fasting and prayer in
those your pretended admirable actions, then purposelie put down the practice
thereof, as a perpetual ordinance peculiarly and purposelie established by
Christ, for the powerful expelling of spirits and devils.

Tertullian, Tertul. Apol. ad Scapulam. cap. 3.
he speaks of many pretended deliverances from some supposed extraordinary
afflictions of Satan: but shows not the manner how they were freed from
thence.

Neither had Cyprian (in those his pathetical persuasions) any purpose at all,
Cyprian. ad Demetrian. tract. 1. pa. 328.
to put down the pretended establishment of that your conceited new ordinance,
for the powerful expelling of spirits and devils: as may plainly appear by
that authentical censure, Iacobus Pamelius in Cyprianum edit. vlt. page 254.
which Iacobus Pamelius has set down upon that selfsame place of Cyprian,
which your self does allege. Telling us confidently that the Exorcists
office was not then of any use in the Church: and gives this reason withal.
Nam, munus illud cum miraculorum dono coniunctum temporarium fuit. For that
office or function (being conjoined with the gift of miracles) it was only a
temporary office. Yea, and (in an utter detestation of this your deluding
conceit concerning the perpetuity thereof from those your preposterous
practices) a little after he says: that the crafts and iuggling sleights of
counterfeit Exorcists and coniuring Priests, Chrysostom. tom. 5. de incompreh. dei
natura. hom. 4. Kemnitius de sacramento ordinis. Phil. Melanch. lib.
epistolarum. Beza homil. 26. in histor. pass. edit. 2. page 656. Vogel. in
thesauro theologico. page 986. Danaeus quaest. 38. in Marcum. Cassani^. si^
loc. com. li. 1. page ^7
they are (long since) apparently evident: yea even to the very eyes of the
blind. By that then which is hitherto spoken concerning your mustered Fathers,
you may easily judge the very just length of all the others footings,
concerning especially their hoped relief toward this your languishing
ordinance. For whatsoever they may seem (in your silly conceit) to set down
concerning some supposed supply for your falsely pretended ordinance, very
certain it is, they do not nor durst not avouch the pretended establishment
of that selfsame supposed ordinance by Christ his authority, as you very
fondly imagine.

And as you are not herein assisted by any their determinate or resolute
judgments: so neither have you their own examples or practice to any such
purpose: but only their bare reports concerning the apocryphal practice of
some others conuersing among them.

Neither do they once open their mouths concerning any such established
ordinance: only Origin (as we yielded unto you before) he speaks of prayer and
fasting by way of advise, all the rest (if they speak any thing) they speak
only of prayer alone, as of that which they deem a notable exercise or fruit
of faith.

Neither do any one of them all in any their published works, write either of
sole prayer alone, or of prayer and fasting together, as of a perpetual
ordinance established by Christ to any such purpose: only they give their
advise for the exercise of prayer alone, if any such supposed occurrent should
at any time befall the people of God.

Besides that, these your produced Fathers (not proving before your private
opinion concerning essential possessions) their now propounded speeches to
prove your pretended dispossessions by prayer and fasting (as by a perpetual
ordinance established purposely by Christ himself to such special purpose)
are merely vain and superfluous.


Exorcistes. The Fathers (you say) they only but give their advise concerning
such works: would the Fathers presume to advise unto that (think you) whereof
they had no warrant at all in the word?


Orthodoxus. Yea, why not, they having especially the selfsame aduising course
so authentically warranted to them, by good Master Darels example: D. Doctrine.
page 64.
who (without any warrant at all from the word, as he says) presumes to give
the selfsame advice concerning the cure of parties bewitched.

Howbeit, if either those fathers, or you your self were possibly able to
prove prayer and fasting such a perpetual ordinance established by Christ, as
you falsely pretend: then surely (albeit they gave no such advice at all) the
same supposed ordinance (being at any time orderly used) should be ever
effectual. Numb. 23.19. Romans 9.19. Iam. 1.17.
For who may be able to alter the certain appointment of God: or possibly
withstand his absolute will, concerning the purposed efficacy of any his
established ordinances? D. Doctrine, page 59.
Otherwise (says good Master Darell) the Lord should have instituted something
in vain, a medicine for the curing of that selfsame disease which never can
be: or if happily it so fell forth that any were sick thereof, yet should not
the medicine it self be of that powerful efficacy, which is by your self
pretended.


Exorcistes. That follows not: D. Doctrine, page 58.
because the means which God himself has appointed to some certain end, do
not always prosper thereunto.


Orthodoxus. It may follow very fitly, D. Doctrine, page 59.
for any thing hitherto heard: yea, and it is impious, and to too absurd (says
good Master Darell) for any to affirm the contrary. Besides that, the means
which God himself appoints to some certain end, it shall and does evermore
prosper to that selfsame end, whereunto it is appointed of God: though we
perceive not the manner how, nor yet know the period of time when the same is
effectual.


Exorcistes But we see it eftsoons to be otherwise in preaching, D. Doctrine,
page 58*
in feeding, and plowing, which the Lord has appointed for the conversion of
sinners, for the sustentation of nature, and for the increase of fruits: all
which (notwithstanding the Lord his appointment) are eftsoons ineffectuall.


Orthodoxus. You prate herein you know not, or care not what at the least. For
if the Lord has certainly appointed preaching, feeding, and plowing for those
the forenamed end^ they shall undoubtedly accomplish those ends,
notwithstanding any supposed occurrent whatsoever. As for example, the Lord
has appointed the preaching of the Gospel to be either a savor of life unto
life, 2. Cor. 2.16. Isa. 5.10. Isa. 6.9.10.11
or a savor of death unto death: and therefore the said preaching of the
Gospel it shall certainly prosper, and have it undoubted effect concerning
life, or death at the least.

For first, Act. 13.48.
it shall be evermore effectual concerning the work of salvation in all the
elect enjoying the same: howsoever your self imagine the contrary. Romans
10.16. Gal. 4.19. Ioh. 3.8. Act. 1.7. Romans 10.20. and 11.33.
First, because so many as are certainly ordained to life, shall thereby be
converted, and brought in time to a saving faith.

Secondly, the very period of time concerning their said conversion, is utterly
unknown to all, yea even to the converted himself: who knows no more the
certain time of his spiritual regeneration, then the natural man knows the
certain season of his natural conception; though they have both in time an
experimental knowledge that they were certainly begotten in time.

Ephesians. 3.16. 1. Pet. 2.2.
Thirdly, their said conversion is continually increasing and growing thereby;
though we cannot possibly discern the manner of that selfsame increase, no
more then we may possibly discern the growing of grass, albeit we should
daily stand staring and gazing upon it.

Act. 2.36.37. Romans 7.21.^2.23.
Fourthly, even then also when we imagine their said conversion to prosper the
least, or is resisted the most; it does eftsoons prosper the best.

Lastly, the said preaching of the Gospel, it shall be (from time to time) as
effectual in every respect, 2. Cor. 4.4. 1. Pet. 2.8. Luke 4.18. Act. 26.16,
17, 18.
for the elects conversion, as for the reprobates certain conviction: but the
same is evermore an effectual means which makes the wicked to stumble, and
therefore effectual to raise up the elect in Jesus Christ.

Now next for the usage of meats and drinks, they (in like manner) are
evermore effectual either to nourish, or to annoy the bodies of men at the
least: which are the two certain ends, whereunto they are certainly appointed
of God. Psalm. 105.40. and 107.9. 1* King. 19.8. Psalm. 78.30.31. and 105.16.
and 106.16.
For as men at sometimes do feed very moderatly, and are much refreshed
thereby, because the Lord so appointed the same: so surely at sometimes again,
even when they are eating, and while the meat is still in their mouths, the
wrath of God falls very fearfully upon them.

Lastly, for plowing and sowing, very certain it is the same shall evermore
effectually prosper, in procuring abundance or barrennes upon the ground at the
least: which are the two certain ends whereunto they are certainly appointed
of God. For howsoever we may (by the secret operation of God) behold in Isaac
his tillage the blessing of abundance: Genesis 26.12. Psalm. 107.34.
yet sometimes again, the Lord makes the fruitfullest land to become very
barren, because of the wickedness of such as dwell therein.

Thus then you may plainly perceive, that both preaching, and feeding, and
plowing they are never in vain, but do effectually work to that certain
end, whereto they are certainly appointed of God: and therefore praying and
fasting, if they be certainly appointed by God for the powerful expelling of
Devils, they shall certainly prosper to that selfsame end, and be always
effectual thereunto. Howbeit, because you so confidently impugn the truth of
these points, let us hear your reason why the same should not be always
effectual.


Exorcistes. The reason is, D. Doctrine. page 59.
because the Lord is ever at liberty, and not tied to any one means at all,
he may bless or keep back (if he please) the blessing which himself has
appointed: and then the means or second cause it self will never prevail.


Orthodoxus. That is untrue. For if the Lord has appointed the means it self
to a certain end, he is not then at liberty, but has necessarily bound
himself to that selfsame means, so far forth especially, as concerns that
certain end whereunto he has certainly appointed the same: yea, and he must
also (in equity) even make the said means to be very effectual. So as if at
any time the means it self be utterly ineffectuall, we may certainly
conclude, that the Lord had not certainly appointed the same to that certain
end.

The which point Master Darell perceived full well, D. Doctrine. page 61.
as appears by his speech, saying thus: When the Lord appoints a thing to come
to pass by such or such means, the same means must be used: otherways that
thing shall never be. So then, if prayer and fasting be (as you say) an
ordinary means very certainly and purposely appointed of God for the
powerful expelling of Devils, the said means (being used accordingly) must
needs be effectual from time to time: and (being so made effectual) the
work it self is undoubtedly miraculous.


Exorcistes. Nay sir, D. Doctrine, page 59.
you are greatly deceived. For to cast out a Devil by a commanding word (as
did Christ and his own Disciples) is a miracle I confess, yea of miracles the
greatest: but to do it by an only entreating word, or rather to entreat Christ
to do it by his own absolute authority, that is no miracle at all.


Orthodoxus. Very true as you say, the entreating word it self is no miracle.
Howbeit, the question is, whether that work so extraordinarily effected by
Christ his absolute authority, at the only entreatie of some one or a few, be
not in very deed a miraculous work?


Exorcistes. It is not I assure you, and that also for these following reasons:
first, because there is no assurance to prevail in this case.


Orthodoxus. Your assurance is as certain to trust unto, as the holding of a
wet Eele by the tail: D. Doctrine, page 59.
yea, and Master Darell himself does flatly affirm, that this reason of yours
is a very absurd and an impious reason. Besides that, in saying there is no
assurance to prevail in this case; you do therein directly conclude, that
the same is ^o ordinance established by Christ. Because every of his ordinances
(how weak or how wavering soever they seem in the eyes of the world) they are
sure and certain, D. Doctrine, page 25.
according to his absolute decree and most certain appointment.

Besides this, in saying that (albeit prayer and fasting be used accordingly)
we have yet no assurance at all to prevail in this case, you do nothing
therein but give good Master Darell the lie; D. Doctrine, page 26.
who tells us plainly, that howsoever the Lord has appointed us to fast and
pray when we are in any other affliction of body or mind, neither shall our
said labor be undertaken in vain: yet has he no where so certainly promised,
that our said prayer and fasting shall so effectually prosper to the delivering
of us from such an affliction, as in this very case of possession he has
promised in particular and by special words, saying thus: This kind goes not
forth but by prayer and fasting. Therein secretly promising, that prayer and
fasting being used accordingly, the evil Spirits they do, and shall go forth.

Moreover, if you have no assurance at al to prevail in this case, why did you
then so presumptuously undertake to pray for a spiritual blessing upon those
your Demoniakes, D. Doctrine, page 26.
namely, that their bodies might forthwith be made temples for the holy Ghost
to dwell in: since all spiritual graces whatsoever, must evermore be prayed for
earnestly, and with an undoubted assurance? Yea, and how could you even now so
confidently avouch, that the work it self was undoubtedly effected before
your eyes, since the effects themselves are not possibly comprehended by
corporal sense, and there is no assurance (you say) to prevail in this case.

Briefly, if there be no assurance at all to prevail in this case, then those
your former directions or rules (concerning especially an experimental prayer
for three or four hours together, and that your effectual addition of
fasting, with your warranted assurance of prevailing against any Devil how
headstrong soever) they are (for ought I perceive) but uncertain directions:
yea, and then also you have therein procured your young practitioners else
where, very groslie to profane the holy exercise of prayer and fasting, by
their taking of the same (for some three or four several times) in vain,
about the dispossessing of your newly pretended Demoniak^, they having (as your
self here affirm) no assurance at all to prevail in that case. And therefore
(for any thing I see) their only refuge is this, to say (in excuse of that
their said enterprise) aliquando fallit regula: or to make (for their proper
defense) that selfsame answer, which the Scholemen do make for their Master
thus. Hic non tenet Magister, here our Master has missed the Cushion.

By all the premises then you may plainly perceive, that (notwithstanding the
supposed force of this your first reason) the work it self (being truly
effected in such sort as you say) it was undoubtedly a miraculous work.


Exorcistes. If the work was in deed a miraculous work, Dar. Doctrine. page
59.60.
then surely Tertullian, Cyprian, Chrysostom and others, so often as they
expelled the Devils by prayer and fasting, they also wrought miracles. But
either that is utterly false: or, you do otherways conclude, that the working
of miracles was also in use at those times, a thing directly opposite to the
judgment of all men.


Orthodoxus. Tertullian, Cyprian, Chrysostom and others, so often as they
expelled Devils by sole prayer and fasting alone: so often no doubt, they
effected true miracles. Howbeit, no such powerful expelling of Spirits and
Devils has been hitherto proved in any one of them all: and therefore
(notwithstanding any thing you prate to the contrary) the working of miracles
might be ceased long time before their days.

Otherways, if it be undoubtedly true, that Spirits and Devils, either then
or now are, and may be expelled by sole prayer and fasting: then surely, the
work it self (notwithstanding the force of your second reason) is undoubtedly
a miraculous work, as in our ninth and tenth Dialogues very plainly
appears.


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 60.
Why sir, that can be no miracle which is wrought by means thereunto appointed
of God: because then (as Danaeus affirms) the number of miracles would grow
to be infinite.


Orthodoxus. Admit the case to be even so as Danaeus (by your speech)
reports it to be: and do tell us withal whether Danaeus in the place you
pretend, or in any other of his writings denies the driving out of Devils, by
sole prayer and fasting, to be a miraculous work: and then you shall have our
answer unto it. In the mean time (howsoever you for your credit, pretend the
contrary with glosing terms) declare now at length very conscionably and
plainly unto us, whether you account not the conversion and calling of Isaiah
the Prophet a very miraculous work: Isa. 6.7 8.
As for the conversion of sinners, the conception of children, the sustentation
of nature, the fertility of fields, and such other like instaunces produced by
you to illustrate this point: they make nothing at all to your purpose in hand.
For howsoever the conversion of sinners, the conception of children, the
sustentation of nature, and fruitfulnes of fields, are every of them ordinarily
accomplished by their peculiar and proper means appointed of God: Isa. 51.18.
1. Cor. 4.15. 2. Pet. 2.2. Philem. 10. Gal. 4.19. Genesis 2.28. Deuteronomy. 8.3. Matthew.
4.4. Genesis 2.15.
namely, by powerful preaching, by the natural copulation of man and woman,
by corporal sustenance, by ploughing, by sowing, and so forth: yet, do tell
us I pray you, whether prayer it self be not also appointed of God, as an
ordinary fruit of faith, for the sanctifying of all those the aforesaid
ordinary means, to their set and appointed ends?


Exorcistes. Who (being well in his wits) will ever deny the same?


Orthodoxus. Well then, be it supposed that all those the aforesaid operations,
namely, the conversion of sinners, the conception of children, the sustentation
of nature, and the fruitfulness of fields; should every of them be forthwith
effected by sole prayer alone, without any ordinary use of any the forenamed
means: were not every of those the aforesaid operations (notwithstanding any
your said prayers) to be every of them accounted miraculous actions?


Exorcistes. Yes no doubt, D. Doctrine, page 61.
every of those the forenamed operations (being so effected by sole prayer
alone) they were then to be repu^ed miraculous actions.


Orthodoxus. But, how comes it to pass (I pray you) that such natural
operations, so effected by sole prayer alone, should forthwith be deemed
miraculous actions: and the supernatural expelling of Satan by sole prayer
alone, should be no miracle in any respect?


Exorcistes. The reason is, D. Doctrine, page 61.
because prayer alone is the only spiritual means, ordained by God to that
supernatural work: whereas those other natural operations do every of them
enjoy (by the singular appointment of God) their sundry peculiar means
besides.


Orthodoxus. Howsoever you would seem to insinuate unto us, that sole prayer
is an ordinary and peculiar means appointed by God, for the powerful
expelling of Devils: very certain I am, you shall never be able to prove sole
prayer and fasting a purposed ordinance of Christ, to any such special work.

Besides that, if you were able in deed, to prove it so: yet then also, even
those your pretended special means, they could not possibly of themselves
expel either Spirit or Devil* D. Doctrine, page 59.
But that supernatural work, it must (as good Master Darell affirms) be
necessarily effected, by the only absolute authority and power of Jesus
Christ.


Exorcistes. Very true, D. Doctrine, page 59.
Christ being earnestly entreated by sole prayer alone: does (of his own
absolute authority) cast forth the Devil.


Orthodoxus. Then is it not the force of your prayer: but the absolute
authority and power of Christ, that expels the Devil. A thing very well
known to Master Darell himself; D. Doctrine, page 66.
and therefore he tells us confidently, that the seven in Lancashire, W.
Summers, and the other two, I mean, Th. Darling, and K. Wright, D. Doctrine.
page 55. Exodus 8.19. Luke 11.20.
were in deed essentiallie possessed of Satan: and being so, were undoubtedly
dispossessed by the finger of God, which said finger of God was evermore a
miraculous manner of expelling Spirits and Devils. Notwithstanding all this,
how could your self apprehend, and apply that absolute authority and power
of Christ; without the means and help of a miraculous faith?


Exorcistes. D. Detection, page 49.
In deed I must and do freely confess, that faith also (in that selfsame
admirable action) is necessarily required for the powerful apprehending and
applying of that absolute authority of Jesus Christ.


Orthodoxus. Then not any force of your prayer entreating, but the power of
your faith apprehending and applying the absolute authority of Christ, was the
means alone that effected the work: and so your pretended false means of
sole prayer and fasting falls flat in the dust. But go to, since faith (as you
say now) is required in that action; what manner of faith do you mean? The
miraculous faith is ceased you know: and the justifying faith it may not
possibly be, as in our ninth Dialogue is plainly declared. And therefore it
must (by your own speech) be the historical faith, or no faith at all.


Exorcistes. D. Detection, page 49.
Very true as you say. For howsoever the justifying faith be (in deed) the best,
and were to be wished in this special case: yet notwithstanding the faith
temporary, or the historical faith may fully suffice for the expelling of
Satan after this manner, or by this ordinary means. Which stands not so much
in the faith of the person used therein, as in the mercy of God apprehended
thereby: man using the means which the Lord (to that end) has ordained.


Orthodoxus. This answer of yours is fearefullie fraught with many
irreligious and absurd assertions. For first you therein very groslie bewray
an unspeakable Pride: presuming to control the abolute wisdom of the only
wise God. Romans 16.27.
Who having instituted the only miraculous faith for the powerful expelling
of devils: you your self do proudly oppose your idle conceit to his said
absolute wisdom, auouching very presumptuouslie the justifying faith far
better, and much more to be wished in this special case.

Secondly, you do in the following speech very fondly dally with your former
assertion. For if the temporary, or the historical faith may fully suffice
to the powerful expelling of Satan, the supposed ordinary means being used
therewith: how should the justifying faith be far better, and much more to be
wished in this special case?

Besides that, it is very absurd to avouch that the only historical faith may
fully suffice for doing the deed; because then one devil may possibly drive
forth another: Iam. 2.19.
for they have the historical faith, as fully as the best of you all. And so
by consequence, you therein do give a very dangerous blow to Christ his
argument, Matthew. 12.26.
drawn from the absurdity of such an assertion: telling us plainly it is to
too absurd to imagine a dispossessing of one devil, by the help of another:
because, if Satan be divided against Satan, his kingdom it cannot possibly
endure.

Moreover, whereas your self so confidentlie avouch, that the expelling of
devils by such your falsely pretended means, does not stand so much in the
faith of the person for that action employed, as in the mercies of God
apprehended thereby: you do directly cross M. Darel himself, D. Doctrine,
page 106.
who tells us confidentlie, that this work may well be effected by any one
reprobate. But this also we suppose is utterly untrue. For if the timely
accomplishment of that special work, consistes (as you say your self) in the
only apprehension of the mercies of God: then surely no reprobate may possibly
drive forth a devil. Romans 14.23. Heb. 11.6.
Because a reprobate (being utterly destitute of the true saving faith) he
cannot possibly please the Lord, nor any ways apprehend his said mercies in
Jesus Christ.

Yea, Matthew. 7.22.
and (which more is) your own quoted scriptures do plainly declare, Matthew.
7.22.
that reprobates (if at any time they cast forth devils) they accomplish that
work by the miraculous faith; as by an extraordinary means appointed of God,
to that special business. And therefore (notwithstanding any of these your
supposed reasons) it is very apparent, that (if devils at any time be driven
out of men) the work it self is a miraculous action: yea, albeit the same (as
you say) should be effected in deed by the only means of your prayer. Even as
many other things else have been brought to pass by the prayers of sundry
persons: and yet notwithstanding the actions themselves, they were undoubted
true miracles, as in our ninth and tenth Dialogues appears at large.

Besides all this, even the very instances themselves which you produce for
your purpose: they all import so much as I say. 1. King. 2.8. 2. King. 6.10.
Mark 7.33. Ioh. 9.6.7.
Namely the dividing of Jorden by Eluah his cloak: the curing of Naamans
leprosy, by washing seven times in Jorden: the opening of the dumb man's
ears, by the touch of Christ's finger, and the loosing of his tongue by his
spattle: his curing of the blind by a plaster of clay, and by washing in
Siloam: with sundry such other besides, as in our tenth Dialogue does plainly
appear.


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 61.
These outward things or actions which were sometimes practiced by the Prophets,
Apostles, and others in the working of miracles, they were not used as means,
but as signs: when, and accordingly as the actors themselves perceived them
profitable for the people present.


Orthodoxus. Why man, what more profit might grow to the people of God: by
using them rather as signs, then as means of those their miraculous actions?


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 61.
They used them rather as signs, then as means, happily to try the beholders
faith the better thereby, or imprint the work wrought the more in the
beholders minds, and parties cured; or for some other special purpose, best
known to the Lord.


Orthodoxus. Your Divinity (it should seem) is but silly Divinity, standing
(for the most part) upon silly and doubtful grounds: namely, either upon hap
and hap hazard, or upon some other fickle foundation you wot not well what. And
yet notwithstanding, you do no less impudentlie avouch the same for an
infallible truth, then if you meant to outface the whole world with the sway
of your words. But good Exorcistes, do tell us directly, how any man's faith
may the better be tried, or the action it self more deeply imprinted in the
beholders breasts; by making those accidental matters to be rather the signs,
the^ the means of such miraculous actions.

Moreover, in auouching those matters to be rather the signs, then the means
of such miraculous actions: you do therein directly conclude, that every of
those admirable actions, whereof those outward matters are only but signs,
and no means, D. Doctrine, page 61.
were undoubtedly true miracles. Because (says good Master Darel) whatsoever
is brought to pass without means, that same is a miracle: as we have handled
at large in Oath, and mopeth, in semeion and teras, throughout our tenth
Dialogue. But what might be the maine reason it self, which makes you so
careful in avoiding the word means: and so egerlie to take up the word signs
concerning this point?


Exorcistes. I purposelie do it, D. Doctrine, page 61.
to prove all those the aforesaid strange actions no miracles at all, how
wonderful soever in show. For whatsoever is brought to pass by means, is no
miracle: because of the same means.


Orthodoxus. If for this only respect you deny those outward matters to be
means, and only avouch them to be but bare signs of the action effected:
then surely, you therein do make those selfsame actions (whereof such outward
matters are only but signs) to be much more miraculous, then if these
outward matters themselves had been some means at the least to accomplish the
action. And so by consequence, the dispossessing of those your Demoniakes, it
was an action very miraculous: as having no means at all to effect the same.


Exorcistes. Yes sir, D. Doctrine, page 55.
they had prayer and fasting: as the only appointed means to that special
work.


Orthodoxus. Yea, but you flatly deny those outward matters whatsoever, to be
thereunto any means at all: and do avouch them to be but the only bare signs
of such actions effected.


Exorcistes. I denied those other matters, which were mentioned before in the
Prophetical and Apostolical operations, to be any means at all: and did
make them but the only bare signs of those their miraculous actions.
Howbeit, I ever have held, and do confidently avouch, that prayer and fasting
is a peculiar means appointed by God; for the perpetual expelling of spirits
and devils.


Orthodoxus. This your pretended ordinance of prayer and fasting, having
hitherto been often denied, and never yet by your self confirmed for truth:
it is to little, or no purpose to insist (as you do) upon one and the
selfsame point. Besides that, Ioh. 11.41. Act. 9.40. D. Doctrine, page 63.
your self having spoken elsewhere of the prayers of Christ, of Peter and
others in the working of miracles; you make their said prayers to be only but
signs and no means of their miracles.


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 63.
Very true as you say. For they expelled Devils by a commanding power, not by
any entreating word: and therefore, if at any time they prayed at their working
of miracles, they used not those their said prayers as any appointed means
leading to the action intended, but rather, in regard of the people present. To
teach them thereby, that whenever they effected miraculous actions, they
wrought not those works by any godliness or power of their own: Act. 3.12.
Act. 3.16. 1. Pet. 1.21.
but by the only immediate power of him whom they called upon.


Orthodoxus. Well, be it so as you say. But declare plainly unto us I pray
you, your own purpose in praying also at the dispossession of those your
pretended Demoniakes. Was it to persuade the people, that your self expelled
those devils by any your own godliness, or power of your prayers: and not
rather, to teach them, that the devils (so expelled) were undoubtedly driven
forth by the only power of him, upon whom you did call by your fervent prayers?


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 63.
We purposely praid (I must needs confess) to teach the beholders: that the
work was effected, by the only power of him, to whom we put up our prayers.


Orthodoxus. Herein then you confess at unawares, that your said prayer and
fasting was no means at all for those your pretended dispossessings of Satan,
but only a bare sign of the absolute power of Christ which drove forth the
devil: and so (by consequence) you do fully conclude, that your expelling of
Devils by prayer and fasting (if any such were) was also a miraculous work.


Exorcistes. I deny such a driving out of devils, D. Doctrine, page 60.
to be any miracle at all: and do very confidently avouch, that prayer and
fasting (in such sort observed) is a supernatural medicine, for the timely
curing of supernatural diseases.


Orthodoxus. If prayer and fasting be (as you say) a supernatural medicine for
supernatural diseases: why then are not parties bewitched, delivered (in like
manner) from those their torments, by the only means of prayer and fasting?


Exorcistes. Had we the like Scriptures for the extraordinary curing of
parties bewitched, D. Doctrine, page 64,
by prayer and fasting, as we have for the admirable dispossessing of parties
possessed: we would not then doubt, but that the one might thereby be helped as
well as the other.


Orthodoxus. But, tell us in good earnest, have you not as full warrant from
Scripture, for the curing of parties bewitched, by prayer and fasting: as you
have for the timely dispossessing of those your pretended Demoniakes?


Exorcistes. No in very deed, D. Doctrine, page 64.
we have not in Scripture the like warrant for one, which we have for the other.


Orthodoxus. By what warrant then, did you undertake the pretended
dispossession of Kath. Wright, of Th. Darling, of W. Summers, and of those
seven also in Lancashire: if you had no Scripture to warrant the undertaking of
any such course?


Exorcistes. Yes sir, we had Scripture to warrant whatsoever we enterprised
concerning those several persons. For they being all essentially possessed by
Satan, D. Doctrine, page 37.55.
we used prayer and fasting in their timely dispossessing: and this also
according to the established ordinance of Christ himself.


Orthodoxus. For this your often pretended ordinance established by Christ, you
have sufficiently heard before: and therefore it were merely superfluous to
enter thereon afresh, especially your self propounding no fresh arguments to
manage the same. But good Exorcistes, tell us here without halting, whether
you do verelie hold, that those ten persons aforesaid, were all of them
essentiallie possessed of Satan.


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 66.
I make no doubt thereof: and it were mere madness for any to call that in
question, it being so apparently and so credibly avouched.


Orthodoxus. Well then, we will (for the present) forbear to call it in
question afresh: for fear of being reputed by your self, to be more then
mad. But come on, show us directly, by what means the Devil did
essentiallie enter into every of them. Go to man, never pawse at the matter,
but tell the truth and shame the Devil.


Exorcistes. What skils it how the Devil entered into them: since it is
apparently evident, they were all essentiallie possessed?


Orthodoxus. It skilled not greatly: were we not all desirous to hear the
truth hereof from your own mouth. Howbeit, because either your memory fails
you herein, or for that else, you are utterly unwilling that any should know
the mysteries of this your new found trade: S. Harsnettes discovery, in page
304.310. D. Apology, page 29. D. Detection, page 81. D. 1. Narration, page 1.
D. 2. Narration, page 17.
let Master Darell be deemed indifferent between us both, to discover these
matters. For he tells us plainly, that Margaret Roper bewitched Katherine
Wright: that Alice Goodridge sent her Spirit called Minnie, to torment Thomas
Darling in all the parts of his body: that William Summers was strongely
possessed by a Witch in Worcestershire, who sent her spirit (called Lucie) into
him, by giving him a piece of bread and butter, and all this for a hat, and a
hat band: and that Edmund Hartlay (a supposed Coniurer) by kissing the seven in
Lancashire, did breath the Devil into every of them. These are Master Darels
reports concerning the essential possessions of those ten several persons:
tell us therefore what you say to these his reports, and whether you hold them
for truths?


Exorcistes. Yea, I do hold them all for infallible truths.


Orthodoxus. It seems then that (these ten persons being only bewitched,
and not essentiallie possessed) you had not the like scripture for the curing
of them, as (it seems) you have for parties possessed. And so by consequence,
you your self observing in their several cures the selfsame ordinance, which
Christ (you say) has only established for parties possessed: you dealt
altogether therein without warrant from scripture.


Exorcistes. Not so, for there is (you must note) an apparent difference
between essential possessing, and an actual bewitching: and therefore
howsoever those ten persons were all vexed of Satan, by the only means of
four several Witches; yet was the Devil essentiallie inherent in every of
their bodies: and so they (being every of them essentiallie possessed) were
also effectually dispossessed by prayer and fasting. Whereas all other actual
bewitchings of Satan, they are only but external vexations by spirits and
devils: and therefore the parties bewitched not being essentiallie possessed,
we have not the like scripture for them which we have for the other.


Orthodoxus. A man (no doubt) may highly commend your dexterity in finding a
present shift, when you are hardly beset. For, howsoever you were here (on the
sudden) deprived of a liars memory, you are not destitute (I perceive) of a
woman's wit, you have your answers so ready to help at a pinch. But go to, do
tell us I pray you, whether essential possessings, and actual bewitchings be
not both of them supernatural diseases?


Exorcistes. Yes, D. Doctrine* page 64.
I confess they are both of them supernatural diseases, and inflicted also by
Satan himself.


Orthodoxus. Then surely, that supernatural medicine which accomplisheth the
cure of the one, it must also effectually work the cure of the other. D.
Detection, page 41.
But prayer and fasting (you say) is a supernatural medicine to cure
supernatural vexations in parties possessed: and therefore also a
supernatural medicine, to cure supernatural vexations in parties bewitched.


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 64.
It is even so I confess: neither is there any other way or means for the
curing of such, but only prayer and fasting, unless happily they will go to the
Devil for help, as many have done, and yet do.


Orthodoxus. Your answers (I perceive) they grow very giddie, for prayer and
fasting was but even now no way or means approved by scripture to cure the
supernatural vexations of parties bewitched: and now the same is become on the
sudden, the only way or means thereto, unless happily men will go to the
Devil for help. Well then, for as much as you make them now (by your new
edition) the only way or means to cure the supernatural vexations also of
parties bewitched: why do you not practice that selfsame means, and make
apparently evident those selfsame effects of sole prayer and fasting in
parties bewitched, which you falsely pretend in parties possessed?

Besides that your speech it is to too absurd concerning the peoples going to
the Devil for help: for, neither have the bewitched parties any power of
themselves to go (at their own pleasures) to the Devil for such a supposed
help, without some secret purpose of God, and so you make the Lord some secret
patron to such sinister practices: neither yet (if happily they attempt such a
course) can one Devil possibly drive forth anothee, if Christ his argument be
any thing current, Matthew. 12.26.
as we told you before.


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 65.
Why sir, your own speech imports, that parties bewitched can have no help at
all but from God: and therefore let them fast and pray, and never give over,
till they have received some comfortable answer from God.


Orthodoxus. But seeing they have no warrant thereto from the scriptures, as
you confessed before: how should they possibly (by their said prayer and
fasting) conceive either hope of ease, or expect any favorable answer from
God? Romans 14.23.
For, whatsoever is not done of faith, is sin: and nothing may be said to be
done of faith, which has not it warranted ground from the scripture.
Notwithstanding, be it supposed that the parties bewitched, should (in such an
unwarranted course) present their fervent and often prayers to God in vain:
what then were best to be done in this case?


Exorcistes. Then let them join fasting therewith. D. Doctrine, page 65.
For, seeing none for a temporal judgment have more cause to be humbled then
they, and that fasting is a means to humble our hearts: who should more fast (I
beseech you) then such? and so seek (by prayer and fasting) to remove that
heavy hand of God which lies pressing upon them, and which cannot otherwise
be possibly removed, but to their further hurt.


Orthodoxus. Your answers are fallen at deadly debate among themselves. For,
before you had no scripture to warrant their curing of parties bewitched by
prayer and fasting: and now, you make prayer and fasting the only cure, except
they will run to the Devil for help, and so procure more hurt to themselves.
Prayer and fasting, they are made I perceive (ex opere operato) your only salve
for all manner of sores. But how dare you thus boldly adventure to give these
variable aduises, without any warrant from scripture? You have hitherto very
falsely pretended an established ordinance from Christ, for the curing of
parties possessed, by prayer and fasting: and now here again, you do no less
prowdlie presume of your self to institute another new ordinance, for the
curing of parties bewitched, by prayer and fasting, without any warrant from
scripture, as your self confessed before. Whither will not the height of your
pride procure your unruly pen?

Briefly in saying there is (for parties bewitched) no ordinary help
prescribed in all the scriptures, and yet notwithstanding dare thus boldly
avouch an established ordinance from Christ for parties possessed: you do
therein make the parties bewitched to lie under an heavier judgment of God,
then do any the parties possessed. And so by consequence to be in a much more
fearful condition: as having no means at all for their cure, but only a
devise of your own, without any warrant from scripture.


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 65. Judge. 20.26. 1. Sam. 7.6. etc. 2. Chro.
20.3. Ezra. 8.23. Ester. 3.13. Jonah. 3.4 5. Neh. 1.4. Act. 12.6.7.
Though we have not like special scriptures for parties bewitched, as we have
for parties possessed; yet have we great store of general scriptures, which
teach us to remove all judgments whatsoever by prayer and fasting: and so by
consequence they teach the timely removing also of this one special judgment,
by that selfsame special practice. And therefore, if (in such orderly
practice of prayer and fasting) the parties bewitched obtain not their
purpose: yet shall not their labors therein be bestowed in vain, but they
shall have great comfort in doing their duty; yea, they shall have their
afflictions sanctified unto them, and made a means of much good to their
souls.


Orthodoxus. Isa. 22.12. Joel. 1.13.14. and 2.1.
You have general scriptures to call unto humiliation: but no scriptures
general or special, which teach men, that sole prayer and fasting have any
power of themselves (ex opere operato) to remove supernatural judgments of
God. And therefore the parties whatsoever, which practice prayer and fasting to
any such purpose: they can have no comfort at all by the unwarrantable practice
of that which they do not certainly know, is a duty enjoined them by God. But
this knowledge they cannot certainly have without some warrant from scripture,
howsoever your self do prowdlie presume to prescribe them such manner of
practice. Neither can you certainly say, that the parties shall be sure (by
such an unwarranted practice) either to have their purpose obtained, or their
afflictions sanctified unto the^ at least, and made a means of much good to
their souls: because you are not (as we verily suppose) so deeply engaged in
such secret counsels of God, as that you are able to know certeinely the one or
the other. Deuteronomy. 29.29.
Much less may you so certainly avouch, that their bewitched condition shall
be made a means of much good to their souls: unless you could certeinely
say, that the parties themselves are within the secret election of God.
Howbeit, what might be that great good (I beseech you) which their said
affliction shall procure to their souls?


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine. page 65.
It is this. Namely, though they themselves in their outward man (I mean in
their bodies) be marueilously afflicted still: yet in their inner man they
shall be renewed daily more and more.


Orthodoxus. Then is it not good to be freed at all from those their
supernatural afflictions: because the more their bodies be pressed therewith,
the more shall their souls be bettered in the work of their spiritual
renouation. But where have you warrant from Scripture, that the supernatural
vexations inflicted on parties bewitched, should so effectually work to the
renewing of their souls? Are you not ashamed thus rouingly to raunge with your
pen, about a pretended new ordinance for the powerful expelling of Devils by
sole prayer and fasting: which (albeit you should run your self out of
breath) you will never be able to prove?


Exorcistes. Suppose I am herein also deceived, D. Doctrine, page 65.
and that there is no such ordinance of Christ, as I affirm, and that prayer
and fasting is no medicine appointed by God, and left to his Church for the
timely curing of such as are possessed of Satan: 1. Pet. 5.9.
yet seeing we are straightly commanded to resist the Devil (not only in
tempting, but also in possessing) and have a promise, that (we so resisting)
the Devil undoubtedly will or shall flee from us: who sees not that there was
good and just cause to take up this holy exercise of prayer and fasting, and
sufficient in Scripture to warrant the same?


Orthodoxus. Suppose your supposals were as undoubtedly true, as you verily
suppose, and make no question but they be: have you not then made a proper
piece of work, in broching thus busily so dangerous a garboyle, about Goats
wool or moone-shine in water? Notwithstanding, whether we suppose your
supposals to be true or false, such an ordinance forsooth, it seems you will
have it to be by hook or by crook: otherwise you will make S. Peter his
general exhortation to crack, by building upon it perforce, a resistance of
Satan, not only in tempting; but also in possessing. As though all Christians
whatsoever, which are continually tempted, are also essentially possessed of
Satan. Amand. Polanus, in Syllog. These. de verbo Dei Didast. page 124.
But deal plainly (Exorcistes) and tell us even in the integrity of your
conscience, and before the presence of the al-seeing God: whether you verily
think the holy Ghost (in that portion of scripture) had any respect at all to
those your supposed essential possessions of Devils? If yea, we pray you then
demonstrate the same more apparently to our dull understanding: if no, then how
should that portion of scripture give any such warrant to the unorderly
practice of that your pretended new ordinance of prayer and fasting?


Exorcistes. D. Doctrine, page 66.
Well, be it further granted, not only that prayer and fasting is no such
means, as I affirm it to be, but also that none of the forenamed persons were
essentially possessed: yet there is notwithstanding sufficient to justify the
advice I gave, and the work of our hands. Because it is apparently evident
they were all vexed by Satan; if not essentially within them, yet by some
external operation of his: or at least were otherwise afflicted. If not so,
that yet the hand or judgment of God was one way or other upon them.


Orthodoxus. Your disputing about these intricate points, is not utterly
unlike to the country young Gallant his dancing a galliard: who coming on
open stage hand in hand with his mate, at the first beginning of all they shake
hands and sunder themselves, never joining their hands together again before
the dance be quite done. But the gallant in the mean time he keeps a
flouncing and frisking about; as though he would teach the whole world a new
trick in dancing. So surely you play the young gallant in this your idle
discourse. For in the very title of your book you come hand in hand with some
strange and grievous vexation by Satan, and then ( shaking hands at the first
with that your assertion) you never join hands with the same, before the full
period of this your rouing discourse: but keep (in the mean time) a vengeable
coil about the essential possessions and dispossessions of Devils by fasting
and prayer, as by a perpetual ordinance, purposely established by Christ for
that selfsame purpose. But now (being grown very weary with your violent
fiskings and figgings about those your idle vagaries) you begin to join hands
afresh with that your former assertion: which only concerns Satan his
grievous vexations.

Howbeit, you are fallen giddie (it seems) by reason of your too often
tripping and turning about, or otherwise so fearfully possessed with the
turne-about sickness, as you wot not well what you say: but only imagine that
those your pretended Demoniakes were all vexed by Satan, if not essentiallie
within them, yet by some external operation of his, or at least were
otherways afflicted. If not so, that yet the hand or judgment of God was one
way or other upon them; but by what way or means you know not your self. And
yet forsooth (as if all your idle conceits were certain Oracles from Apollo
Pythius at Delphos) you dare proudly presume to justify thereby the advice you
gave, and the work of your hands concerning the same. An advice you know not
wherein, and a work you wot not well whereabouts, as it seems by your words:
and therefore how could you (in such doubtful uncertainties) either pray in
faith, or expect any blessing in hope? Notwithstanding, what was the advice you
gave? and wherein (I pray you) consisted the work of your hands?


Exorcistes. The advice which I gave, D.Doctrine, page 66. Judge. 20.26. 1. Sam.
7.6. 2. Chro. 20 3. Ezra 8.3. Ester. 3.13. Jonah. 3.4.5. Neh. 1 4. Act. 12.6.7.
and the work which we practiced was prayer and fasting, being thereunto
secretly summoned by the Lord himself: who (so often as he inflicteth any
judgment upon us) does put us in mind of girding in sackcloth, as appears in
sundry places of Scripture.


Orthodoxus. Yea, but how could you possibly conceive any certain form of
prayer, or faithfully put up any fervent petition to God; not knowing certainly
before with what kind of judgment the parties themselves were presently
afflicted? Put case they were not afflicted at all, or molested only but with
some melancholic passion: how then could you use words in your prayer
concerning the speedy removing of Satan his supposed essential possession,
he having in the party distressed no such possession at all?

Again, suppose the parties were vexed with some kind of sickness unknown to
your self, and you put up petitions to God concerning only some other disease:
how could you use your proper terms to express the desire of your heart, or
put up your prayers in faith to God, Matthew. 7.7. Mark. 11.24. Ioh. 14.13. and
16.23. Iam. 1.6.
for the speedy remoouing of a judgment you wot not what? Is it not more then
audacious impudency, thus presumptuouslie to determine a certain course, in
any such doubtful uncertainties? As for your quoted scriptures, they only do
testify the peoples humiliation by prayer and fasting; so often as any strange
judgment of God was fearfully inflicted upon them: but prove not essential
possessions, and dispossessions of Devils by prayer and fasting, as by a
special ordinance perpetually established by Christ for that selfsame
purpose. And therefore they conclude not the cause you pretend: but rather the
contrary. Neither do any of those scriptures import the thing it self, for
the which you produce them: my meaning is, they do no ways demonstrate unto
us, that any one of those judgments of God were at any time removed by sole
prayer and fasting alone, without the ordinary assistance of some other
ordinary means annexed thereto. Or if any the said judgments of God were
forthwith removed by sole prayer alone, without any ordinary means besides:
then surely the said work it was undoubtedly a miraculous action.

As for example, in Judges, the people of Israel (intending a just revenge upon
the Beniamites for their so shameful disorder) they prayed and fasted before:
Judge. 20.26.35.
howbeit, the Israelites sword and spear was the ordinary means whereby the
Lord overthrew the Beniamites.

So, in Samuel again (being to wage war with the Philistims) they prayed and
fasted for their happy deliverance: 1. Sam. 7.6.10.11.
but yet the sudden thunder of God was the matter that daunted the Philistims
hearts, and the Israelites weapons the only ordinary means that made so
bloody a massacre among the whole army.

2. Chro. 20.3.22
So in the Chronicles, the Israelites (being to war with the Ammonites) they
prepared themselves to the battle by prayer and fasting: howbeit, the
slaughter of the Ammonites, it was effected by means of the intestine
dissentions among themselves.

So in Ester, the Jews (being proscribed and destinated to a fearful
destruction) they prayed and fasted for their hoped deliverance: Ester. 4.3.16.
notwithstanding the personal presence and prudent persuasions of Ester, were
the ordinary means which pacified Ahashuerosh his anger against them.

So in Jonah, the Ninevites (being threatened with present destruction) they
prayed and fasted: Jonah. 3.5.10.
howbeit, their faithful conversion (whereof their said prayer and fasting
were only but frui^es) was the ordinary means that turned away their
threatened destruction.

So likewise Nehemiah, Nehem. 1.4. and 2.18.20. Moses Pellache^ ibidem.
he prayed and fasted to testify his faith toward God, his love to his
people, and sorrow for that their present condition: howbeit the industry and
diligent labor of skillful artificers, was the ordinary means that erected
their City.

So in the Acts, the people they prayed and fasted for Peter's deliverance: Act.
12.5.7.
but yet Peter was extraordinarily and miraculouslie delivered by the Angels
means. By all the premises you see it apparently evident, M.Dent his ^athwa^e
to heaven. pa. 248.
that sole prayer ^lone is not the only means; but that rather which
fau^tinieth some other ordinary means, for the timely removing of any the
judgments of God.

Neither can you possibly propound any one instance from out of the
scriptur^s, wher^in ^^le pra^^r and fasting alone (without some other (...)
means concurring therewith) did ever effect an^e work whatsoever: but the
same was evermore reputed a miraculous action. And therefore do you plainly
avouch, that (in every of those your pretended dispossessions by sole prayer
and fasting) you wrought true miracles: or else now at the length give over your
gross errors for shame. Yea, and this so much the rather, by how much you may
plainly perceive, that the faster you run the further you roane from the
mark, and the more you seek to confirm, the more you confound your own
cause. Being now brought (you may see) to such issue, as you know not what to
make of the matter it self which you labor to manage. Neither yet can
certainly tell us whether it was an inward possession, or an outward
vexation. Or whether it was neither of both, but some other strange judgment
of God: or whether it was the hand of God some one way or other upon them, but
what way you know not. And yet notwithstanding, you dare proudly determine
these intricate matters: as if they were certainly revealed unto you by an
Angel from heaven.


Exorcistes. Whatsoever you say to the contrary, the parties we speak of, they
were every of them essentiallie possessed of Satan, and dispossessed also by
means of our prayer and fasting: yea, and these things we hold very
confidentlie without any doubting at all. Neither will we be otherways
persuaded: though an Angel from heaven should come and tell us the contrary.
M. More avouched so much in a conference between the authors and him. Gal.
4.18.



Orthodoxus. It is very commendable to be confident in a good and commendable
cause, both when you are present and absent. As for your present purpose in
hand, it were much better to acknowledge the ignorance of your soul, and
freely to confess that you hold a lie in your right hand: Eccles. 4.25. Isa.
44.20.
then with such settled pertinacie to persist (as you do) in your peevish
opinions, and thus blasphemouslie to profane the Apostles speech concerning
the infallible testimony of an Angel from heaven. For hereby you give all
good men a just occasion, Gal. 18.9.
not only to suspect very shrewdly the sincerity of your spirit: but also
(after twice or thrice admonition) to show themselves very careful in fleeing
from your person, Tit. 3.10.11.
as from a man that sins, and persisteth in sinning, you know very well how.

In the mean time whatsoever you have hitherto said for your purpose, it
moves not our minds the breadth of one hair, but makes us more confident
concerning the goodness of our own cause. And so we mean still to continue
until your self (upon further conference, and sounder deliberation with your
secret favorites) shall be found able to say more for the matter then hitherto
you have done.

D. Doctrine, page 67. M. Darel his own conclusion retorted upon himself.
And therefore now to conclude for the present, and to infer something of the
premises, and so to proceed to some special uses concerning the same. If it
be undoubtedly true, that men now (in these last days) are not essentiallie
possessed with devils, nor dispossessed, and that sole prayer and fasting, they
are no special means appointed purposelie by the Lord himself for their
perpetual dispossessing: but that also, the seven in Lancashire, and William
Summers with the other two, namely, Darling and K. Wright were not (in deed)
essentially possessed, and being not so, were not dispossessed at all by your
pretended ordinary means of prayer and fasting: then let the good Christian
Reader judge, whether those men do not very groslie err in the general, who
so confidentlie hold that men (now a days) both may be, and are also
essentiallie possessed: and those also, who (affirming fully so much) do yet
further very flatly avouch, that (even in these days of the Gospel) men
possibly may be, and are also essentially dispossessed by sole prayer and
fasting, as by a special ordinance established purposelie by our Savior
Christ to that special purpose. And whether those men likewise, be not as
faulty in the particular, who cannot (with any patience) endure, that the
pretended possession and dispossession of those the forenamed persons (how
absurd soever) should be impugned by any. Yea, and rather then any sound
opposition of truth, to those their palpable untruths should gain a public
passage: they will (by all manner of means, directly or indirectlie) contend
for a most vain and frivolous matter: namely, that the said Summers, Darling,
and K. Wright were no counterfeits. Notwithstanding howsoever some in the world
(for any thing that may possibly be said to the contrary) will never be
brought to acknowledge the infallible truth which we teach, nor disclaim those
palpable untruths, which your self so undutifully have broched abroad to the
world, and thereupon be moved to give the Lord that glory and praise, which is
justly due to his Majesty for these his lately revealed counsels, concerning
these intricate questions: and endeavor withal to make their right use of
every point (a thing rather to be wished then hoped for) yet wisdom (no
doubt) she shall and will be justified freely of all her children. Matthew.
11.19.
And thus much in effect for your two first distributions: namely, the
essential possessions and dispossessions of spirits and devils: which may
serve to give wise men a watchword, till we hear your further determination
concerning the same.


Exorcistes. Well, but what say you now to my third distribution: I mean, the
several uses which we are to make of the same.


Orthodoxus. We will say no more concerning those matters, then that which we
have spoken before: namely, that in many of those your supposed uses, there
are some things to too unsound and absurd, as in some part of our answers
has been partly observed. Notwithstanding were they every of them so sound
and so current as you would have us imagine: yet could they not gain at our
hands any entertainment or answer, before the two precedent points be more
substantiallie proved unto us. For what one sauorie use may any man possibly
draw from matters unsavory: or rather (which more is) from matters not now
existing in nature?


Physiologus. Very true as you say. And therefore Exorcistes either you must
presently forsake your cause: or more sufficiently confirm the same, then
you have hitherto done. Otherwise the whole world will forthwith condemn you
for a very per^erse and contentious person: very wilfully bent to your idle
conceits without either sway of reason, or show of sense.


Exorcistes. Well sir, since you so carelessly reject those holy and profitable
uses, which are drawn from this my Doctrine concerning essential possessions
and dispossessions of devils: I pray you what one good use may be made of that
which you hold to the contrary.


Orthodoxus. I do no further reject your said uses then their proper
unsoundness, and want of sound matter to be grounded upon, does necessarily
require at my hands. Howbeit, because you shall not imagine, that we have
broached such opposite points to yours, as cannot possibly afoorde any
profitable use to the Church or people of God: we are therefore not unwilling
to put down some few uses of many, to make known to the world what true uses
in deed may soundly be drawn from the soundness of our Doctrine. Which being
by us very faithfully propounded, are now authentically priuileged by public
authority. Howbeit, because we are almost all weary of this wearisome
business: let us walk forth to refresh our selves, for one hour or two: and
then proceed in our purpose.


Physiologus. We all approve of your motion.


The end of the second Dialogue.
The third Dialogue.
THE ARGUMENT.
The holy and right uses, which the Church and children of God are to make of
this Doctrine, concerning the final determination of possessions and
dispossessions of Spirits and Devils.

The speakers names.
PHILOLOGVS. LYCANTHROPVS. PNEVMATOMACHVS. PHYSIOLOGVS. ORTHODOXVS. EXORCISTES.
COme on Exorcistes, you do earnestly expect (I am sure) what holy uses we may
possibly make of these our former discoursed opinions: so opposite to yours in
every point.

Exorcistes. I do so indeed: neither need you to wonder thereat. For if you so
carelessly reject those several uses which I made before, and only because
there is no matter (as you say) to ground them from: what ground have your
self to build any uses upon; denying so flatly the essential possession, and
dispossession of Devils?


Orthodoxus. Why man, we will draw our uses from the final determination of
possessions and dispossessions: but seeing you are in such expectation thereof,
we will no longer protract the time.


Lycanthropus. Nay sir, we also our selves are all held in as earnest
expectation thereof, as is Exorcistes, I am sure: and therefore I pray you
proceed in your purpose.


Orthodoxus. With very good will. Wherein also you have to understand, that the
uses whatsoever which we entend to put down from any the precedent points,
they are summarilie such as have a special relation, either to the Lord
himself; or to some other besides.


Pneumatomachus. A very excellent order. I pray you therefore proceed in
putting down, first, those several uses which have a more special relation
to the Lord himself.


Orthodoxus. The 1. use. Romans 3.4. Tit. 1.2. Heb. 6.17.18.
Content. First therefore, these our precedent discourses, they offer unto us in
general a very holy meditation, concerning the undoubted faithfulness and
truth of our eternal God. Who (promising four thousand years fully before to
send such a blessed seed of the woman, Genesis 3.15. 1. Pet. 1.19.20. Act. 2.23.
as should actually bruise the Serpents head) has in his own determined time,
very faithfully fulfilled the same by sending his own Son into the world, to
accomplish his said eternal decree concerning the timely subduing of Satan his
kingdom of darkness. This therefore, may serve very fitly to confirm our
faith and hope, in the faithful assurance of all the rest of his promises as
yet unperformed: how impossible soever they seem in our weak apprehension.
More especially, it may fully assure our souls of the faithful performance of
that one infallible promise of God, which concerns the utter subversion of
Satan his whole kingdom of darkness, and of the quite treading down of
himself, very shortly under our feet. Romans 16.20.
Because, whatsoever is already fulfilled in part; the same is a very sure
pawn to our souls of fulfilling the whole, in that convenient season which
the Lord has appointed. Let us therefore (in an holy meditation of this so
faithfully performed a promise) be more ready to raise up our drouping souls
with an holy consideration, Heb. 6.11.12.
and full assurance of all the rest of Gods promises. Yea, and whenever any
doubtings (by the suggestions of Satan) shall at any time hereafter arise in
our hearts, and seek to surprise our faith and hope concerning the undoubted
certainetie of any one promise of our gracious God: Psalm. 42.5.11. and 43.5.
let us forthwith begin to check our fainting souls, and very earnestly to
meditate thus with our selves and say. My Soul be not faithless (I pray thee)
but faithful in those the assured promises of God, which chiefly concern the
final and full subversion of Satan. For what though he be daily assaulting,
Ephesians. 6.11.12. 1. Pet. 5.8. Luke 22.^31.
suggesting, and tempting? what though he seek daily to fan and to winnowe
thee, as men winnow wheat? what though he rages howrely like a cruel red
Dragon: Revel. 12.7. 1. Pet. 5.8. 2. Sam. 12.7.8 Luke 22.57.
and goes continually about like a ramping and roaring Lion to devour thee?
yea, admit he does eft soones trip up thy heels at unawares, and give thee a
fearful fall? yet shall he never finally prevail against thee; thou can
not finally lie still in the dust of death; Luke 22.32. Ioh. 17.20.21. Psalm.
19.13.
thy faith cannot finally fail. No no, thou have a sure promise from God to
go conqueringlie upon the Lion and Adder: and to trample the young Dragon under
thy foot: yea, the Lord God, he has promised very shortly to tread Satan
down under thy feet. Romans 16.20.
And what one cause have thou (I pray thee) to distrust the truth of this
promise, Heb. 12.1.
thou having especially such a sure earnest penny thereof, in the faithful
performance of other his faithful promises? Heb. 12.12.13. 2. Pet. 3.9. Genesis
3.1^.
Let not any supposed lingering delay procure in thee a languishing hope.
Consider the Lord his experimented faithfulness concerning that promised seed
which was actuallie to bruise the serpents head. That promise being solemnly
pronounced upon Adam his fall, was four thousand years after very faithfully
fulfilled in Christ: and therefore this his latter given promise concerning the
treading down of Satan under thy feet, it shall in his certain appointed
time be certainly performed unto thee. For as all times with the Lord are
presently present, 2. Pet. 3.8. Mal. 3.6. Iam. 1.17.
and therefore, no forgetfulness may possibly lodge with his majesty: so is
there with him no shadow of change, and therefore he will undoubtedly perform
whatsoever he has certainly promised.


Lycanthropus. This (I assure you) is a most comfortable use for Christian
consciences: I pray you proceed in the rest.


Orthodoxus. I will. ^he. 2. use.
This doctrine again as it frankly affords an holy meditation concerning
the faithfulness and truth of God: so does it no less freely offer unto us a
very deep and sacred consideration concerning the omnisufficiencie of our
all-sufficient Creator, Genesis 17.1.
and of the exceeding mighty power of his ouer-ruling arm over every of his
creatures of what nature or kind soever. Yea even over those the intellectual
spirits, Revel. 12.10. 1. Pet. ^.8. Revel. 12.3. 2. Cor. 11.3. Revel. 12*9.
Ioh. 12.31. 2. Cor. 4.4.
who for their inueterate malice, are called accusing adversaries: for their
insatiable cruelty are termed ramping and roaring Lions: for their inexorable
rage, are entitled the red fiery Dragons: for their undermining subtlety, are
said to be Serpents: and for their Lordly dominion are accounted the Princes,
and gods of this world. These titles howsoever they seem terrible unto us, yet
are the Spirits themselves no better then hangmen to the heavenly majesty o^
the mighty Jehovah, but vile vassals to accomplish his unchangeable decrees,
and the slavish executioners of his inevitable judgments. Yea, and howsoever
they make an out-facing brauado in any their outrageous attempts against the
sons of mortal me^, as though they would forthwith surprise the whole world,
2. Pet. 2.4. Jude 6. Revel. 20.2. Tob. 8.3.
not unlike to the chayned Monkie which keeps a skipping and leaping, as
though she would presently ouerleape the utmost borders of Egypt: yet can they
extend their fury no further then the length of their chain will give them
leave, because their whole malice, power, and policy are perpetually limited
within those their appointed bounds, which they cannot possibly pass. And
therefore the serious consideration of this the ouer-ruling hand and power of
the Lord, may notably serve to support those often fears, which do
ordinarily arise from the often feeling of our frail and feeble condition
concerning our powerful resisting of any the forcible assaults of Satan. Let
us therefore in every of these daunting fears, endeavor to strengthen our
weak knees, Heb. 12.12.13.
and to support our feeble hands which hang so dro^pingly down, by meditating
daily upon the almighty power of our conquering Jehovah. Yea, let us tell our
distrustful souls, there is little cause to be frighted herein, Exodus 8.19.
Luke 11.20. Psalm 107.16. and 116.16. 2. Cor. 12.7.
they having such an etsbang elohim, I mean, so powerful a finger of the
almighty God, as is sufficiently able to knap in sunder the iron bars of
Satan, and to beat back the uttermost force of his buffeting blows from all
his beloved in Christ, who having promised that his power alone shall be a
sufficient protection for every of them, 2. Cor. 12.7.
and purposed to make perfect the same by those their manifold weaknesses, will
have them thus exercised a season for the further manifestation of his
watchful providence over them; for their greater triumph, in the day of their
glorious coronation; 2. Timoth. 4.8. 1. Pet. 5.4. 2. Pet. 2.4. Jude 6.
yea, and for the sorer confusion of Satan himself in the general judgment.


Philologus. A worthy meditation no doubt: and such as is able to support the
feeblest soul on earth.


Orthodoxus. The 3. use.
Again, this doctrine of ours concerning the final determination of Satan his
power of actual possession, by the promised seed of the woman, who has
actually bruised his head: it ministers fitly unto us a very fruitful
meditation of that unspeakable majesty and power of Jesus Christ, which
respects especially his triumphant conquering, or rather his actual
vanquishing, subduing, and spoiling of Satan's tyrannical dominion and power:
more especially his actual afflicting, tormenting and vexing of men's bodies
and minds, as in former times. Revel. 6.2. Matthew. 4.3.5.6* Genesis 3.15. Job.
40.20.
For this our conquering Jesus he has encountered with Satan hand to hand, he
has actuallie bruised the Serpents head: he has brought under that proud
Leuiathan: he has put an ouerruling hook into the nosthrils of that
outrageous Behemoth: Job. 4.10.
he has so put to flight the fiery fierce Dragon, Revel. 12.8. Psalm. 88.18.
Ephesians. 4.8. Io^. 12.31. Revel. 12.9. Gal. 5.1. Ephesians. 2.13.14. Col. 2.13 14.
as he has now no more place in heaven: he has led captivity captive, and
even actuallie cast forth that prince which deceives the whole world with all
his Angels. Yea and (which more is) he has not only freed us finally from
the burden of legal Ceremonies; from the extreme malediction and curse of
the moral law; from the strength of sin; and from the power and sting of
Death: but has so effectually destroyed, and so finally determined the said
actual dominion of the Devil concerning our bodies, by the very death of his
body: Col. 2.15.
as he has even utterly spoiled Principalities and Powers themselves, and made
a show of them openly, and triumphed over them all in his cross; yea he has
even destroyed through death, Heb. 2.14. Luke 11.22.
him that had power of death, that is, the Devil, and so divided his spoils,
as he shall never be able any more to recover his former possession, neither
yet be of power any more actually to molest, either our own, or the bodies of
any appertaining unto us. So as if we can from henceforth but heedfully and
warely watch his intestine windings and turnings, Matthew 26.41. Mark. 14.38.
Luke 22.40. 1 Pet. 5.8. Ephesians 4 27.
and be correspondently furnished with the spiritual armor of God, for the
timely withstanding of that his power of spiritual obsession, which wholly
consists in those his spiritual assaultings, suggestings and temptings,
wherewith he endeavors continually from time to time ( like a ramping and
roaring lion) to devour us afresh: he will not only very cowardly flee from us,
Iam. 4 7.
but (which more is) we may also with boldness, and in all holy assurance
insult upon him, and his proud usurping power, saying thus. Death, Hosh. 13.14.
1. Cor. 15.55.
where is now thy power? sin, where is now thy sting? yea Satan, Heb. 2.14.
where is now thy actual dominion over our bodies? Behold Satan, we all see
and know now in experience, that the mighty Jehovah our God and most merciful
father, has finally freed us from thy tyrannical dominion and power of
darkness: Col. 1.13. Math. 3.17. 2. Pet. 1.17. Col. 1.14.
and has translated us into the kingdom of his dear son our Lord and
Savior, in whom we have the redemption through his blood. And therefore (
Satan) the joyful remembrance of this our happy deliverance, may make us the
more freely to rejoice in those our former sufferings under thy actual power;
because we have therein fulfilled but the rest of the afflictions of Christ in
our flesh. Col. 1.24.
Who suffering still in us and with us, will (at his own appointed time)
triumph over thee also in every of us his members, as he has actually done in
his own proper person: for he is gloriously mounted upon his white horse,
Revel. 6.2.
having a bow and crown in his hand, and is gone forth conquering, that he
might overcome. And thus in effect for those holy uses, which respectively
have their special relation to God himself.


Lycanthropus. Very well: and what are those other uses (I pray you) which
respect some other besides?


Orthodoxus. The uses respecting some others, are those which more especially
respect the creatures themselves: namely, they are such as have a more special
relation to Satan, or men.


Pneumatomachus. A very plain order of teaching: and therefore (I pray you)
proceed first to the unfolding of those which have a special relation to Satan.


Orthodoxus. The 4. use.
With very good will. First therefore this Doctrine of ours (so substantially
deciphering forth to the world the final determination of Satan his actual
dominion, and the glorious triumph of Christ concerning the same) it does very
lively demonstrate unto us at large, the miserable estate, and captiuated
condition of that cursed catife the Devil. Ioh. 12.31. 2. Cor. 4.4. Ephesians.
2.2.3. and 6.12. 2. Tim. 2.26.
Who having hitherto very proudly tyrannized over the whole offspring of Adam,
and even actually tormented their bodies and minds at his pleasure, so far
forth especially as concerns his commission from God; was (at the very first
onset of Christ in such actual encounter) so fearfully frighted with his
glorious presence and power, as he roared forth and cried fearfully, saying:
Jesus thou son of the living God, what have I to do with thee? Math. 8.29.
Mar. 5.7. Luk 8.28.
art thou come hither to torment me before the time? Yea and which more is (the
work it self being once actually effected, according to the predeterminate
purpose and promise of God) he is now not only very powerfully pulled down a
pegge lower by Christ himself, who (having actuallie bruised his head) did
behold him like lightning fall down from heaven, Luke 10.18
that is, he beheld him very suddenly, very terriblie, and vnrecouerablie
tumbled down from his tyrannical dominion: but also even actually expelled
from his actual possession in man, and so determinatelie driven and exiled
from al future hope of recovering the saine afresh, Matthew. 12.43 Luke 11.24.
as he walks now through deserts and stony dry places (like a forlorn and
comfortless catife) seeking rest every hour, but finds none, nor, is never
in hope to find any again, as in former times. But is now reserved in chains
under darkness unto the great and notable day: 2. Pet. 2.4. Jude. 6. Iam. 2.19.
Apoc. 20.1.2.3
waiting every hour (in trembling and fear) when that mighty Angel, who has
the key and a great chain in his hand, should gloriously descend from heaven,
should bind him hand and foot, and tumble him headlong into that bottomless
pit, which (from the beginning) was prepared for him and his Angels. Isa.
30.33. Matthew. 25.41.
And therefore now is salvation in heaven, and strength, and the kingdom of
our God, and the power of his Christ. For the accuser of our brethren is
(actually) cast down, Apoc. 12.10.11.12.
who accused them before our God day and night. But they overcame him by the
blood of the lamb, and by the word of his testimony: and therefore rejoice you
heavens, and you that dwell in them.


Exorcistes. This use (concerning the final determination of Satan his actual
possession) makes men careless, and lulleth them very shrewdly asleep in all
carnal security.


Orthodoxus. Nothing less I assure you. Nay rather this doctrine of ours
concerning the final determination of Satan his power of actual possession,
The 5. use.
is so far off from making us careless concerning Satan his spiritual
assaults: as it rather kindles our care by many degrees. Yea, it does more
consideratelie put us in mind of Satan his inexorable and outrageous malice
toward men: in the mischievous practice of that his power of obsession. Who
(perceiving himself so vnrecouerablie, and so determinately driven from his
actual domineering over the bodies of men) does stir up and kindle his said
wrath to the uttermost in the speedy execution of that his said power of
obsession: Apoc. 12.12.
yea, and this so much the rather, by how much he knows very well that he
has but a short time to work. 1. King. 22.22. 2. Chro. 18.21.
This makes him very earnestly to entreat the Lord that he may become a
lying spirit in the mouth of false Prophets. Luke 22.31.
This holds him in continual desire to sift and winnow the souls of Gods
servants, as men winnow wheat. This makes him to dart his sundry suggestions
into the minds of the wicked. Luk 22.3. Ioh. 13.2.27. Act. 5.3. 1. Cor. 12.7.
This causes him to replenish the hearts of hypocritical Professors with
all untruth and lies. This makes him by his own messenger (I mean the
rebellious pricks of the flesh) immeasurable to buffet the dear saints and
servants of God. Apoc. 12.4.
This makes the great red Dragon to draw with his tail, a third part of the
stars of heaven, and to cast them down on the earth. Apoc. 12.15.
This enforces the furious Serpent to cast forth after the Church, even floods
of water from out of his mouth: that the said Church might be carried away of
the flood. Yea the consideration of Satan his shortness of time to work, 1.
Pet. 5.8. Job. 1.7. and 2.2.
is that which causes him continually to trudge all about, seeking whom he
may possible devour. And for this purpose he snatcheth continually at every
occasion, as well without, 2. Cor. 4.4.
as within us: laboring especially to blindfold the minds of men at the
hearing of the word, or while men sleep to play the envious man at the least,
Matthew. 13.25.39. Ephesians. 4.17.18. 2. Tim. 2.26. Ephesians. 4.19.
by mingling tares with their wheat, that so ( corrupting their judgments)
he might captiuate their minds at his pleasure, and cause them to commit all
manner of uncleanness, yea even with greediness. This therefore (you see)
should make us so much the more watchful over our ways, our words and our
thoughts: by how much we know the disease in the entrals to be much more
dangerous then those without; and an intestine war more deadly then are the
enemy his outward assaults. I mean those inward temptations and suggestions
of Satan (arising upon our natural concupiscences, Iam, 3.15. and 4 4.5. 1.
Ioh. ^.16.
inordinate desires, and carnal lusts) will much more endaunger our slumbring
souls, then any his external operations concerning our bodies: unless they
be the more watchfully looked unto, Ephesians. 6.11. 1. Pet. 5.9. Apoc. 2.4.
and the more warily resisted with the spiritual armor of God. For by them
he will make us (in continuance of time) to forsake and fall from our first love
and zeal of religion. Ephesians. 5.14. Ephesians. 4.19.
By them he will bring us into a secure and sensles condition. By them he will
breed a benummednes over our souls: so as (being once without feeling) he may
draw us to all manner of uncleanness. Yea by the custom of them, 1 Timothy 4.1.
he will so sear up men's consciences, as not only they shall speak lies
through hypocrisy, 2. Tim. 3.8.
and become reprobates concerning the faith: but so carry themselves in their
whole conversation, Matthew. 24.12. 2. Pet. 2 7.
as iniquity shall have the upper hand, and the love of many become key-cold.


Lycanthropus. Surely it is even so as you say, and therefore the Lord make us
more circumspect in every condition: but I pray you proceed.


Orthodoxus. Moreover, The 6. use.
this Doctrine of ours (laying forth so directly unto us, the final
determination of Satan his power of actual possession, and the continuance of
his power of obsession) it teaches us plainly the full compass and measure
of the devil his commission; wherein his spiritual power more especially
consists; how far it extends it self, what he can possibly do, Ephesians.
6.1^. 1. Pet. 5.9. Ephesians. 4.27. Iam. 4.7.
and wherein he is most able to hurt us: to the end we may become wise in
furnishing our selves with spiritual weapons, and be made more courageous in
resisting his uttermost force. Yea surely, the fruitful consideration hereof,
should deliver and free us quite, from those many unnecessary and wonted
fears* wherewith (in former times) we have been fearfully taken up, and
tormented by reason of our gross ignorance concerning this counsel of God,
and for not knowing rightly what powerful restraint the Lord has laid upon
Satan his actual power of possession. 2. Pet. 2.4. Jude 6. Revel 20.2.
Whereby, it comes eftsoons to pass, that (being in company with a supposed
Demoniake, and mightily dismayed with a causeless fea^^ of Satan his
essential inherencie in the bodies of men) we dare neither open our eyes, our
ears, nor our mouths, for fear of his leaping essentially into our selves:
Ioh. 13.2. Act. 5.^. Ephesians. 6.12.
forgetting (in the mean time) these inward suggestions, and spiritual
temptations wherewith he does howerly assault and circum^ent our slumbring
souls. This therefore may fully suffice to reform our judgments concerning
these points: that (being now no more ignorant hereafter, of Satan his
enterprises) we be not circumuented by him at unawares, but may surely keep
watch and ward: may stand fast in the faith; may quite us like men: and be
ready to encounter with all his assaults.


Pneumatomachus. The Lord enlighten our hearts with this sacred knowledge, and
sanctify the same to our souls: but proceed in the rest.


Orthodoxus. The 7. use.
Moreover, in that this Doctrine of ours, concerning the final accomplishment
of Satan his power of actual possession, is so mightily impugned by some, and
has such hard intertainement in the minds of men: it offreth unto us a very
fruitful consideration of Satan his deep policy, cunning, and slight,
concerning especially such points of faith, as do plainly discover his
crafty practices and wily proceedings against our souls. 2. Cor. 2.11. 2.
Cor. 4.4. Ephesians. 2.2. 2. Tim. 2.26.
As for example, we may ( even by these matters in question) very apparently
perceive his circumuenting purpose, in withholding of men from keeping due
watch and ward against his power of obsession: by setting them so earnestly at
an idle gaze concerning that his pretended power of actual possession, which
Christ (he knows very well) has long since determined, and concerning which
there is now no danger at all. Ephesians. 4.18. 2. Tim. 2.26.
That by this his cunning devise he might hold men's minds, from all holy
meditations concerning their continual wrestlings with Principalities, Ephesians.
6.12.
with Powers, with worldly governors of the darkness of this world, yea, and
with spiritual wickednesses, in the high places themselves: while he surprise
their slumbring souls at unawares, Matthew. 13.25. and 25.5. Ephesians. 5.14.
with his spiritual assaults and ^irie temptations. And therefore, whenever
we behold hereafter an extraordinary or unwonted course undertaken by any, for
the special supporting of this idle conceit: let us then undoubtedly assure
our selves, that even Satan himself is a principal party, and has very
cunningly his hand in the pack, Genesis 3.1. 1. Kin 22.21.22 2. Cor. 11.3.13.14.
Revel. 12.9. Ephesians. 4.17.18.
by being a lying spirit in the practisers mouths, of very purpose, to
circumuent and deceive unstable souls. That thus holding their cogitations
captiuated, by a causeless conceit of a matter which is not at all: he might
the more cunningly suggest his intestine poisons and spiritual temptations;
yea, Ioh. 13.2. Act. 5.3. Ephesians. 6.12.
and the more covertly miscarrie men's minds in a corrupt conversation, without
any due regard of the glory of God, or the good of their Souls.


Philologus. The truth of this point, is apparently evident to all in their
proper experience: but proceed I beseech you.


Orthodoxus. Furthermore, The 8. use.
inasmuch as this Doctrine of ours (concerning the final accomplishment of
Satan his power of actual possession) is so mightily maligned, and so
preposterouslie impugned by some certain persons professing the holy religion
of God, it does very lively demonstrate to all the world the unsuspected
subtilties and wily proceedings of that old Serpent the Devil. Genesis 3.1.
Who (at his first beginning of mischiefs) having purposely employed the
external ministry of the subtilest beast, in the speedy subversion of Adam
and all his posterity, and perceiving there was ever since (by the
predeterminate purpose of God) such a perpetual enmity between them and
their seed, Genesis 3.15.
as he became utterly without hope of using that selfsame means (as before)
in any his mischievous purposes against the persons and bodies of men, does
practice now a quite contrary course, and the same also more dangerous then
the other by many degrees. Namely, he endeavors eftsoons (for the speedier
and more effectual corrupting of every such sacred ordinance of God, as
concerns especially the service of Saints) to stir up in the Church not
cruel persecutors, Act. 20.30.
but some certain professors of the selfsame society. Men I mean, not only
reputed precise in the world: but such (for the most part) as will not stick
forsooth (in the pritching heat of their holy pride) to say (with skornefull
disdain) to all others besides themselves, Isa. 65.5.
Stand apart, and come not near unto me, for I am holi^r then thou:
notwithstanding they be (for the most part) the smoking wrath of Jehovah, and a
fire that burns all the day.

These men for their outward shows of sincerity, being (among many others) in
the least suspicion of all concerning any sinister practices, and so (in very
deed) the fittest instruments for the timely accomplishment of Satan his
pestilent purposes: therefore he does cunningly seduce their souls by one
means or other, and so makes them eftsoons very fearefullie to fall into, and
boldly to broach some odd fantastical conceit of their own proper brain,
to the fearful infecting of many poor souls before they beware.

In this cunning course he began to work first by our grandmother Euah, Genesis
3.5.6.
who (being her self before very groslie bewitched by his wily persuasions
and holy pretenses, and fobbed up with a fond conceit of being like unto God
in the knowledge of good and evil) became forthwith a very fit instrument to
seduce and deceive her own husband, and so brought him and all his into a
miserable experience (indeed) not of good, but of evil.

Genesis 3.7. Genesis 34.14.15. Exodus 32.2.5. 1. King 22* 11. Ierem. 28.11. Act. 15
1. etc. 1. Cor. 1.11. and 3.3. Gal. 2.11.12.13 Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 4. cap.
6. and lib. 5. cap. 24.25 26. and lib. 8. Ruffin. lib. 1. c. 1 Zozom. li. 6. c.
4. Basil. Mag. ad fratres in occident. epist. 61. and 69. Act. 20.30 1. Ioh.
2.19. Genesis 25.22. 2. Tim. 2.17.
And this Connie-catching course the Devil has successively continued from age
to age unto this present time, as the sacred scriptures themselves, and the
ecclesiastical histories do plainly record, if any desire to peruse the same.

Neither does this cunning conueyance of these his inueterate mischiefs stay
here, or take up themselves from any further proceeding, but (even also in this
last age of the world) he goes still forwards with his legerdemaines, and
iuggling sleights, procuring among our own selves some certain persons to
spring up from time to time, and to utter many perverse and pestilent points,
of very purpose to draw disciples after them. That even as Jacob and Esau
(being brethren by nature) contended together in one and the selfsame womb,
to the deadly grief of Rebecca their mother: so surely the Devil (by these
cunning devises) endeavors daily to stir up among brethren by outward
profession such an intestine strife in the true Church of Christ, and to hatch
up in the same such a secret viperous brood, as should (like the fretting
Gangrena) devour and eat through the very bowels thereof before the danger it
self be espied.

A most lamentable experience concerning the infallible truth of that which we
teach we may have from the Anabaptists in Europe: from the Donatists in
Affricke: from the Jesuits in Germany, in France, and elsewhere: from the
Familists, and Barrowists in England: from the fearful seduction of Hacket,
of Coppinger, of Arthington; yea, and even now (at this present) from the
seducing Exorcists of every condition. Every of these (howsoever they
otherways pretend the good of the Church, and the credit of christian
Religion) have bred a more dangerous scandal, and given a more deadly wound to
the happy proceeding of our holy Religion in deed, then if they had bin the
professed and open adversaries to the holy profession thereof.

The dutiful consideration of these dangerous occurrents (arising especially
from Satan his subtle proceedings) should help to engraue in our hearts a
deeper impression of that the Apostle his heavenly admonition: 1. Ioh. 4.1.
concerning the due trial of Spirits before, we do rashly believe their
roauing reports. Yea, and the same does further demonstrate to all the world,
that (howsoever the fantastical crew may happily impute a great folly unto us
for these our painful proceedings) yet notwithstanding (the premises duly
considered) the wise will confess that we have very just cause to cry out with
the blessed Apostle and say, 2. Cor. 11.1.2.3
Would to God you could suffer alittle our foolishnes: yea, and (indeed) do
you suffer us. Because we are jealous over you all with a godly jealousy:
endeavoring to prepare you for one husband, and to present you a pure virgin to
Christ. Howbeit, we stand greatly in fear, least, as the Serpent beguiled Euah
through her subtlety, so your minds should be corrupt from the simplicity
that is in Christ.


Physiologus. This use (I assure you) is worthy of consideration: but proceed
in the rest.


Orthodoxus. Moreover, The 9. use.
in that the holy exercise of prayer and fasting is so stoutly pretended to be
a sole and only ordinary mean established by Christ, for the powerful
expelling of devils without the help of any other besides: and that (the said
means so observed) the spirits they shall and will vndoublie depart from the
party possessed.

This serves very fitly to discover unto us, another of Satan his cunning
devises. Who when he cannot otherways wrest from out of our hands religious
exercises, and other such sacred matters of God: namely, the word, Sacraments,
invocation, prayer, and calling upon God, with the rest of that kind: will then
very carefully bestirre his stumps, not only very mischieuously to mislead
men's minds and judgments (concerning those matters themselves) by bearing them
earnestly in hand, that there is essentiallie inherent in every of them, such
an unspeakable operation, virtue or power, as of it self is able (ex opere
operato) to effect many maruels: but he will labor withal (if possibly he
may) to miscarie even the holiest and wisest men in their ordinary practice of
any the aforenamed exercises and matters of God. So as (even in the very use
of the forenamed matters) he will cause them very gros^ie to sin: in having
(without any warrant at all from the word) an idle conceit, that even those
very things themselves (by some essential inherent virtue they wot not well
what) are able forthwith very fully to effect, whatsoever their fantastical
conceit shall fondly affect or desire.

And hereof it is, that the superstitious sort are so superstitiouslie carried
away with an idle persuasion, that the five first verses of S. John's Gospel
(being written in virgin parchment, and fastened privily about the patients
neck) is not only a singular medicine for the falling sickness, but a notable
preservative also against the power of infernal spirits. This makes them
believe that the sixteenth verse of the fiftieth Psalm, being (by the Exorcist
himself very solemnly pronounced over an hollow kney, having in it the names
of the parties suspected) will undoubtedly discover the suspected thief. This
bears them in hand, that the devil may (by no means) endure to have the sixth
petition of the Lords prayer pronounced within his hearing: D. 2. Narration, in
the history of W. Summers, page 16.
and that therefore it was why Summers (for his heart) could not possibly
pronounce the same. Yea, this persuades them forsooth, that some texts of
Scripture do only but serve to discover the devil; D. Detection, page 100.
and some others again, to drive him very forciblie forth from the parties
possessed.

And that therefore it is, that the Exorcists both can and do also (as they
say themselves) so fitly frame the very words of their mouths, D. 2.
Narration, in the history of W. Summers, page 17.18.
as best may serve to their present intended purpose: yea, and that in the
dispossessing of Summers, and at the only hearing of these words (namely, the
spirit he cried aloud, and rent him sore, and came out from the child, and
left him for dead) the devil he not only rored exceedingly, D. 1. Narration,
fol. 8. page 2. D. 2. Narration, in the history of W. Summers, page 20.
but (which more is) even Summers also himself, he was forthwith enforced
perforce, very lively to act those selfsame several matters, as they were
then presently pronounced by Master Darel himself. As if forsooth there had
been secretly enclosed within the very frame of the Exorcists words: such a
magical force or enchauntment, as tended directly (by the only
pronountiation thereof) to the powerful afflicting, and fearful tormenting
of devils.

Hence also it is, that the gross headed papists do so grossly imagine a
magical force, in hoc est corpus meum: for the present transubstantiating of
bread and wine, into the very natural Body and Blood of Christ.

Hence it is, that their Idolatrous mass is made a sacrifice propitiatory for
quick and dead: and that therefore they have their several masses for
several matters.

That the daily rehearsal of their Ladies Psalter: does purchase to themselves
the remission of sins.

That the continual saying of S. Bridgets Beads, commonly called their
fifteen Ooes: will (for fifteen days before) very directly demonstrate unto
them, the very day and hour of their death.

That the only pattring over of five pater nosters, with fifteen auies, and
three creedes: is a penance satisfactorie for all their former faults.

Briefly from hence also it is, that the Exorcists of every condition do
make sole prayer and fasting (ex opere operato) their only effectual means
for the powerful expelling of devils: D. Doctrine.
yea, and that M. Darel also himself, does so confidentlie avouch the same to
be the only means, for the speedy removing of any judgment of God
whatsoever. And that the holy exercise of prayer and fasting is made an
ordinary medicine for every malady: and the only salve for every sore.
Whereby it comes to pass that the most men (neglecting all other means else
for their good) do grieuouslie sin in tempting the Lord: and (which more is)
do superstitiouslie profane the holy exercise of prayer and fasting.

And (which is to be respected the most of all) they do thereby very strongly
confirm the wisards of the world in their wicked opinions, concerning the
supposed force of those their filthy sorceries and magical inchauntments:
bearing the the world in hand, that (by the only means of their filthy
charms, their frame of words, their superstitious inuocations, and other their
unlawful orisons) they are able (without any more ado) to amend whatsoever is
amiss in man or beast.

And hereof it is, that the ignorant sort (beholding a man affected but only
with melancholy) are so strongly conceited: that it is no physical means,
but only the good words and prayers of learned men that must restore them
again to their perfect health.


Lycanthropus. The truth of this use, I my self have proved long since in my
proper experience: but proceed I beseech you.


Orthodoxus. The 10. use.
Again, this Doctrine of ours (so notably discovering the profanation of
prayer and fasting, by Exorcists, by Diueldriuers by Sorcerers, and such like
superstitious persons) it does notably lay open the inueterate malice of
Satan, against any the public meetings of the people of God. Who when (by the
Magistrates special appointment) they have just occasion to assemble together
at their sacred meetings, to make known, and to further thereby their
humiliation and hearty repentance, in an hoped assurance of their
reconciliation with God, by an holy observation of the public exercises
appointed thereto, are very sure to be dangerously assaulted therein, by the
circumuenting sleights of the Devil. Who will very earnestly endeavor to
deface and obscure the forenamed exercises, by stirring up such persons for the
performance thereof, as know not how to undergo them aright, or which else do
but grossly abuse them to unnecessary and vainlie conceited purposes, yea
even unto such as they were never ordained for. D. Doctrine.
Namely, to drive forth Devils, ex opere operato: and to be the sole and only
means (without any other besides) for the timely removing of any the heavy
judgments of God, of what kind soever.

Yea, and this their pretended effectual power for the powerful expelling of
Devils, they ascribe not (forsooth) to the more material part of that the
appointed worship of God (namely to their fervent prayers) which were more
tolerable by many degrees: D. Doctrine.
but they impute it rather to the very meanest among all the rest, I mean to
their abstinence from meats and drinks, which is but a bodily exercise, and
such also as profits very little or nothing at all. Notwithstanding, these
silly poor souls, or rather these strongly seduced sots, they speak and
esteem of such superstitious fastings, as of a superexcellent and the most
powerful means of all other, to work many wonders withal. Yea, and so this
be (in every point) performed according to the just compass of their idle
conceit, Isa. 58.3.
though the parties themselves have only but a bare historical faith, law.
2.19.
which the very Devils are endued withal: yet their said exercises they are
undoubtedly of force (as themselves very fondly imagine) not only to remove
any temporary judgment, how heavy soever, but also to obtain any temporal
blessing at the hands of God.

And whereunto tends this paltrie stuff (I beseech you) but only to bring the
holy things of our God into public reproach among the irreligious Atheists and
godless crew; who (when they shall see them practiced but only as cloakes to
cover men's paltrie pretenses, and to nousle up the world in their hypocritical
practices) will presently grow into scorning thereof. Yea, and (which more is)
seeing these cunning seducers do so stoutely bear men in hand, that even those
very outward worshippings (albeit they proceed but from a bare historical
faith) will work such strange and wonderful things: what a dangerous blow
do they offer unto all the sound reprehensions of the Prophets, Apostles, and
all other the servants of God, who used evermore very sharply to check the
people of God, for their only relying on, and for resting themselus too much
upon those their external exercises, when (in the mean time) they neglected a
true saving faith, with all other the unfeigned fruits of repentance.

Moreover, this their idle conceit concerning the falsely supposed efficacy of
sole prayer and fasting for the powerful expelling of Devils, what does it
else (I beseech you) but joy the very hearts, and open the cauilling mouths of
all those our Iusticiaries and cunning Recusants, who remembering very well that
(in all our former preachings and writings) we have hitherto very mightily
impugned, and flatly denied them the expected merits of those their voluntary
worships, and of all other their own works of what nature soever: shall yet
now (notwithstanding) behold us to challenge the same to our selves, yea even
unto the very meanest of al our exercises; and those also not performed by the
holy directions of a sanctified knowledge, but by the only sudden fier-flash
of a bare historical faith, without any warrant at al from the spirit of God.
And thus much for the present concerning those several uses, which have a more
special relation to Satan himself.


Philologus. Very well: and what are those other (I pray you) which more
respectively apper^aine unto men?


Orthodoxus. They are summarilie such as respect men's several cariages,
concerning those intricate and unwonted occurrents, which in these our former
discourses are handled at large. And these uses also they do either generally
appertain to al: or they are more particularly befitting some special persons.


Pneumatomachus. Which do generally appertain to all?


Orthodoxus. They are all those which do indefinitely belong to every
condition of people, without any respect of their persons. And these uses also
they are such as do generally concern either the several points propounded
at large: or the parties whatsoever perusing those points.


Lycanthropus. We approve of your order. Begin therefore (we pray you) with the
orderly declaration of such special uses, as have special relation to any the
several points propounded.


Orthodoxus. Content. First therefore in that we have showed at large, how the
unsearchable power of God (concerning especially the promised seed) was not
only (in his eternal counsel) very certainly established before all
beginnings of time: but (which more is) the same also was correspondentlie
promised, and performed in time, according to the predeterminate purpose of the
eternal God. Surely the deliberate and serious consideration hereof, does
minister unto us a singular meditation, or rather a notable document concerning
the stabilitie, and perpetuity of any the sacred mysteries propounded unto us
at large, in the sacred Scriptures.

Wherein (for the better confirmation of our faith in any other the eternal
Decrees of God, propounded unto us in his unchangeable word) we have deeply to
consider and mark, what an immutable Coherence, method or order, the Lord
has observed from time to time: 1. Pet. 1.10.11.1^
not only in causing to be, but also in bringing to pass (yea, even in the
fittest seasons of all) his own unchangeable purposes, his hidden Decrees and
Counsels, his admirable operations, and wonderful actions, how impossible
soever in nature; yea, though never so absurd or obscure in humane reason. As
for example, the Lord having (in his eternal Counsel) purposed before all
times the manifestation of his glory by the work of his hands, Psalm. 19.3.
Prou. 16.4.
did (in his own appointed time) correspondently accomplish the same, Genesis
3.3. 2. Cor. 4.6. Genesis 1.1. Wisd. 11.14. Genesis 1.2. Wisd. 11.17.
by bringing light out of darkness, by causing something of nothing, and by
producing of order, from out of palpable confusion: and all this, by the
methodicall and orderly creation of things in heaven and in earth. The which
work of creation (being in his own eternal purpose before all times) was in
time (you see) very effectually performed.

So likewise, Romans 8.^0. Ephesians. 1.9.10.
the Lord having purposed (from before all eternities) to call out from the
kingdom of confusion and darkness, such ^ selected people (for the further
manisfestation of his glory on earth) as should in a more special manner
profess his holy religion: this said purpose (being in his eternal Counsel
determined before all times) was in due time accomplished, Genesis 12.1. Act. 7.3.
Genesis 1^.^. Romans 4.28. Genesis 12.2.3. and 17 4.5. and 22.18.
by calling forth Abraham from his own Country and kindred, and by raising
(from out of his withered Loins) such an unspeakable seed, as should surmount
in number the Stars of heaven, promising them certainly the appointed
Savior, and performing the said promise to them in due time.

Again, Genesis 15.13. Act. 7.6.
the Lord having eternally decreed, not only to deliver his said Church from
the fiery furnace of Egypt, but also to plant the same in the promised Canaan:
this his said purpose (being before all beginning of time) was correspondently
accomplished four hundred years after: Genesis 15.13.16. Exodus 12.40. Act. 7.6.
Gal. 3.17.
in that he caused the said Land to cast out the Amorites, and planted therein
his own inheritance.

So likewise the Lord having (from before all eternities) determined with
himself, to deliver the children of Israel from that Egyptian bondage, by
the mediation and ministry of Moses; he observed the selfsame order also
therein. For this his said purpose being in himself from before all
beginnings of time: was correspondentlie accomplished at his own appointed
time. (...). 15.14.16. Act. 7.35. Exodus 2.11. Act. 7.23.
And therefore (accordingly as he had promised before unto Abraham) he sent
Moses his servant to accomplish the work. Both by putting into his mind (when
he was forty years old) to visit his brethren: and by confirming him also in
that honorable calling forty years after; Exodus 3.1.2. Act. 7.30.
partly, by an admirable order of appearing unto him, and partly also by a
miraculous manner of working by him.

Thus then (you see) their said deliverance (being determined with God before
all times) it was accordingly promised and performed in time.

And as before the Law written from the very first creation, the Lord observed
this method and order in the orderly manifestation of any his unchangeable
ordinances: so surely, both at, Mal. 3.6. Iam. 1.17.
and after the giving of the Law, there was in him no shadow of change
concerning that selfsame unchangeable course.

For First, (having determined with himself (before all beginnings of time) to
establish the Moral Law, as a perpetual rule of perfect obedience) not only
he did (in very fit time) make promise thereof to his people: Genesis 15.16. Act
7.7. Exodus 12.40. Act. 7.38. Gal. 3.17.
but (which more is) after the full expiration of four hundred and thirty
years: (I mean, at the very appointed season it self) he did correspondently
accomplish the same.

Neither has the Lord observed such an orderly method of working only
before, Mal. 3.6. Iam. 1.17.
and at the giving of the Law: but ever since then, he has been altogether
one and the same in the orderly accomplishment of al his actions, as may
plainly appear in his orderly establishing and subuerting of the several
Monarkes, how mighty soever: in the seauentie years captivity of Israel his
people: in the birth and death of his only Son: in the universal
establishment of his glorious Gospel: in Ierusalems final destruction: in
rejecting his own people the Jews, and in bringing the Gentiles into their
rooms. And as in all these the precedent operations and actions: so likewise
in the powerful dispossessing of Satan, and in the final determination of
that his tyrannical power of actual possession, the Lord has carefully
observed (not only in purposing, but also in promising and performing) the
selfsame order accordingly. For as the Lord before all beginnings of time, did
purposely determine such a temporary judgment, as a peculiar demonstration of
the Deity of his only Son, and promised withal, the admirable conquering
of the selfsame judgment in that promised seed, which was actually to bruise
the Serpents head: so has his said Son correspondently accomplished the same,
Heb. 2.14.
by his death and resurrection, destroying through death, him that had power
over death, that is to say, the Devil. Col. 2.15.
Yea, he has spoiled Principalities and Powers, made such a show of them
openly, and so triumphed over them all in his Cross: as we may boldly assure
our selves of the final accomplishment of that which our Savior affirms
saying. Now is the judgment of this world, now is the Prince of this world
cast out, that is, his power of actual possession is fully and finally
determined. According to that his authentical message (else where) unto Herod
saying: Luke 13.3^
Behold, I cast out Devils to day and tomorrow, and the third day I shall be
perfected, or the third day, I will make an end of that business.

The prem^sses therefore considered, there is no more reason to doubt of the
final determination of this one, then of any other the eternal Decrees of God
whatsoever.

For, seeing the Lord not only purposed the final determination of Satan his
power of actual possession from before all beginnings of time, Genesis 3.15.
but also very solemnly promised, and most powerfully effected the same in
that promised seed which was actually to bruise the Serpents head: who sees
not even one and the selfsame method, and order herein observed, as in all
other the forenamed purposes and determinations of our eternal God.

And therefore, there is no more reason to deny the final determination of
this one, then of any other the like purposed operations of God: unless we do
purposely entend to bring present confusion upon the orderly actions of that
only wise agent, Dan. 5.25.26. etc. Wisd. 11.17.
who accomplisheth and orders all things in measure, in number, and weight.


Physiologus. Very true as you say. And therefore let those men beware, who so
constantly avouch the continuance of actual possession now in these later
days of the world. But proceed in the rest.


Orthodoxus. Again, this doctrine of ours (deciphering so plainly unto us all
those the deceiuable notions whatsoever, which more peculiarly appertain to
this newfound trade of Diuillitie, with the several points thereof) it
ministers unto us a notable meditation, or rather a watchful consideration
concerning the very proper foundation of all those the common received
opinions, fantasies, dreams or idle conceits, which run all the world over,
about the Devils their essential assuming and transforming of bodies: their
pretended apparitions in this or that essential form: their absolute power
for creating of substances: their essential possessions; their supernatural
operations, with sundry other such idle conceits.

These their strange imaginations concerning Spirits and Devils (if we rightly
consider the same) they arise not from any the infallible truths of the Lord,
revealed unto us in the sacred scriptures; for then we might and ought boldly
to embrace them for truths, how absurd soever in humane reason: but they do
rather proceed from the only imagination of man's idle brain. Who having their
cogitations darkened through the ignorance that is naturally in them, Romans
1.21. Ephesians. 4.18.
cannot possibly be made to discern aright of any such intricate matters.

Ephesians. 2.2.
Yea, and they spring partly also from the corrupt customs of the world. Isa.
29.13.14. etc. Matthew. 15.5.6.
For men receiving such untruths from hand to hand (as it were an inueterate
lie by an ancient tradition) do carelessly transfer the same from themselves
to their own posterity, and the ages to come.

And thus forsooth, an old doting custom having carelessly begotten many
gross and erroneous opinions concerning Spirits and Devils, the world (at this
present) is so universally besotted bewitched, Isa. 44.20. etc.
and possessed with these palpable fooleries, as they had rather to hold a
manifest lie in their very right hand, then be brought from their former most
fond conceits, and corrupt customs, 2. Tim. 2.25.26 2. Tim. 3.5.
to an undoubted knowledge of the truth it self.

For howsoever they may happily pretend herein the holy Religion and fear of
the Lord, they fear him not in deed and in truth, 2. King. 17.33.34.
but do serve him only after the manner of former nations: yea, even unto this
day they deal in these points, according to the old accustomed manner, and not
after the ordinances, customs, laws, and commandments which the Lord
commanded the children of Jacob. Isa. 8.20.
They run not (for a true understanding of these mystical matters) to the
law and the testimony, neither speak they at all according to this truth:
Romans 1.21.22. Ephesians. 2.2.
but every man speaks herein according to the blind imagination of his own
^oolish heart, and after the corrupt customs of the world itself, because
there is in them no light of truth concerning these matters. And thus much in
effect for those special uses which have a more special relation to any the
several points propounded.


Lycanthropus. Very well. Proceed now (I pray you) unto those other uses which
more specially concern the parties themselves, perusing those several points.


Orthodoxus. With very good will. Wherein especially we have to consider, that
seeing the matters we handle at large concerning these several points, are
every of them (as you have heard) the infallible truths of the Lord, and the
same also most soundly confirmed by the very sway of sound reason, by the
testimony of fathers, and by the undoubted authority of the sacred
Scriptures, notwithstanding (any thing hitherto written or said to the
contrary) this Doctrine therefore of ours it ministers a most christian
admodition to all (especially the fauourits of this newfound diuillitie) to
beware how they do ouer-rashlie judge or condemn any (how contemptible soever
in their ouer-weening conceits) for Atheists, reuolters, formalists and
irreligious persons, who either oppose themselves against, or (at least) do not
favor such fantastical fooleries and fond conceits, as are lately broached
abroad concerning these matters in question. Let men therefore beware how they
do ouer-rashly judge, or condemn their brethren for these things, least
happily they be thought to oppose themselves not only against evident reason,
Act. 5.35.39. and 7.51. 2. Tim. 3.8.
and the approved testimony of ancient Fathers, but also against the
infallible truths of the sacred scriptures.

Besides that, let them further consider, that they cannot so rashly speak
evil of, Iam. 4 11.12.
and condemn their brethren in these points: but necessarily they must speak
evil of the law, and condemn the law, Romans 14 4.13.
and so make themselves no obseruers, but judges over the law, forgetting that
there is but one lawgiver and judge, who alone is able to save and destroy.
Yea, and so much the rather should wise men be willingly admonished to beware
of every such rash and inconsiderate censuring of others: Matthew. 15.18.19 1.
Cor. 4.4.5.
by how much they may easily perceive not only their corrupt inclination very
prone thereto, but also the several effects thereof to be very filthy and
dangerous.

That their corrupt inclination is very prone to such an unchristian course, it
is not to be doubted for these following reasons.

Ioh. 8.44. Iam. 3.15.^6.
First, Satan himself (being carried an end with an inueterate rage against
humane societies) he endeavors nothing more earnestly, then to make
divisions in the Church of Christ, Job. 1.9.10. and 2.4.5. Revel. 12.10.
and to cause among Christians such an unchristian censuring of one another:
that (by such their inconsiderate courses) he might make them more conformable
to his own cursed nature, in accusing and condemning their brethren.

Secondly, the corruption of their own heart (which naturally lusts after
evil things) does naturally affect the godles gracing of themselves, Iam 4.1.
by their ungodly disgracing of others.

1. Cor. 1.10. Phil. 2.2.3.4.
Thirdly, a proud and vainglorious conceit concerning their proper supposed
excellency, in comparison of all other besides themselves: does easily draw
them unto such an unchristian course.

Lastly, their inueterate malice and envy against other men's gifts, Number. 11
28.29 Mark. 9.38. Luke 9.49. 2. Cor. 10.11.12. 3. Ioh. 10.
does breed in them an inexorable disdain, that any other but their own
twinkling stars, should so much as peep forth at all, within the
circumference of their proudly usurped element.

Neither only the pronenes of this their corrupt inclination, but (which more
is) the filthy and most dangerous effects which will undoubtedly follow
thereof, should forciblie dissuade their minds from such an uncharitable
censuring of others.

Matthew. 7.4.5. Romans 2.2. 2. Tim. 3.5. Iam. 1.26.27.
For first, pretending an holy zeal of religion, and yet determining to too
rashly of others for but opposing themselves to any their preposterous and
idle conceits: what other thing else do they effect thereby, but an apparent
discovery of their own cloaked hypocrisy?

Romans 14 4.10. Ephesians. 4.31.
Besides that, they do thereby also, very uncharitably provoke their poor
brethren to anger against their persons: and so procure them to sin.

Thirdly, they do (by those their inconsiderate courses) very apparantlie
discover to all the world, that they are (in effect) no better then beastly
incarnate devils: Job. 1.9. and 2.5. Revel. 12.10.
thus rashly to accuse and condemn their poor brethren, for but only
opposing themselves to any their sensles opinions.

Lastly, Leuit. 24.20. Deuteronomy. 19 19. Matthew. 5.38.
by those their uncharitable censurings of others, they do (in the just
judgment of God) very justly procure to themselves the law of like. For what
one good thing can they possibly purchase thereby to themselves: or what other
event does follow thereof, Matthew. 7.1.2. Luke 6.37.38. Romans 2.1.2.3.
but a very just occasion for others, to render and repay them their measure
running over, pressed down, and shaken together?

The premises therefore duly examined, and consideratlie wayed with the even
balance of an holy discretion: we doubt not but that this admonition of ours
being given to the wise, Prou. 9.9.
will make them more wise, and very warily to consider how they
inconsiderately rush upon any those uncharitable censurings of others, 1. Cor.
4.5. Heb. 4.13.
or judge rashly of any man before the time: until the Lord come who will
lighten things that are hid in darkness, and make manifest the counsels of
every man's heart, that so every one may have his due praise, or dispraise from
God.

In the mean time therefore this one use of ours may fitly serve as a
watchword for wise men, to make them beware how they do either approve or
disprove of any the published labors of other, in an only regard of the
author himself: 1. Cor. 3.3.4.
which argues in every of them very gross and carnal affections.

Yea, and it may in like manner very fully suffice to make them much more
considerate how they do entertain (hand over head) the faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ with respect of persons: Iam. 2.1.
which is undoubtedly a very preposterous kind of profession.

Briefly, it advises better and worse to take diligent heed, that (in their
proving of spirits, and trying of all things) they do only hold that which is
good, 1. Ioh. 4.1. 1. These. 5.21.2^
and very conscionablie abstain from all appearance of evil.


Lycanthropus. Surely sir (if a word be enough for a wise man) this one use may
fully suffice to admonish so many, as are not over wilfully wed to the
unruly sway of their corrupt inclination: but proceed in the rest.


Orthodoxus. Again, in that the resplendent beams of this plain truth which
we teach so lively, and so notably lays open to all the world the palpable
and foggie clouds of that their newfound trade of Diuillitie, which hitherto
have so dangerously dazeled the judgments of men, together with all and every
the appurtenances appertaining thereto: who sees not now how fitly and how
forcibly the same admonishes al men of every condition, Act. 8.9. Gal. 3.1.
to cease forthwith, and to take up themselves in time, from being any further
bewitched (as in former seasons) with such babbling fooleries, as are broached
abroad in those their undutiful Pamphlets, and from being carried about any
more, Ephesians. 4.14. Iam. 1.6.
like children, by any those vain and windy blasts, which (like to untimely
births) are so vainly vented forth from their proud and insolent puffes.
Namely, the Devils their supposed absolute power to work what they lust: Psalm.
12.3.4. Psalm. 144.8 Pro. 3.8.
their pretended essential possessions: their imagined assumings and
transformings of what bodies they please at their pleasure: their falsely
conceited faculty for the creating of substances: their dreamed
dispossessions, by an established ordinary means of prayer and fasting, as by
themselves is fondly imagined, with sundry such other supposals besides.

Isa. 9.15. and 28.^5.
All these their unwritten verities, or rather their unwarranted trifling toys,
as they have bin hitherto received (hand over head) among the irreligious and
profane of the world, with no l^sse admiration forsooth, then if they had been
the Alcoranean Oracles of Mahomet himself: so are they (alas) at this present,
to too readily entertained with many (of no small account in the Church) as the
infallible truths of the eternal God. Isa. 5.20.
Howbeit, the same (being once equally waied and wisely examined, according to
the very touchstone of truth: they will (notwithstanding any the supposed sway
of their books) appear to be no better in effect than old wives fables; then
the Legerdemaines of cunning Imposters; and the cousoning sleights of some
Popish priests, as has been proved at large.

The premises therefore considered, let the authors or favorers of those
published Pamphlets, endeavor what they possibly may, to support and uphold
those fondly conceited fooleries, in their former account with the people of
God: they will (notwithstanding) very shortly vanish away like snow in the
Sun, and be deemed no better in effect, then Hobgoblings, Bugboies,
Night-sprites, or Fairies, to make the young children afraid with their
supposed shadows, while the aged ones in Christ do take their comfortable
rest, in an assured confidence, concerning the ouerruling power and providence
of Jehovah himself. And thus much in effect for those several uses which do
generally appertain to all men.


Pneumatomachus. They are all singular uses no doubt. But proceed now (I
beseech you) to the putting down also of such as are more particularly
befitting some special persons.


Orthodoxus. With very good will. Wherein we have first to consider, that the
several uses more particularly befitting some special persons, they are
summarily of two sorts. Namely, either such only as concern the affectors of
that newfound Diuillitie: or else such also as respect the mislikers thereof.


Lycanthropus. What are those uses (I pray you) which more specially concern
the affectors thereof?


Orthodoxus. They are summarily such as do purposely tend to the timely
informing, either of the authors themselves, or of any their fauourits.


Philologus. Declare first (I pray you) those several uses, which more
particularly respect the authors themselves.


Orthodoxus. Content. Wherein we have first to consider, that for so much as
all those the former conceits, which Exorcistes has broached abroad,
concerning these matters in question, are every of them undoubtedly such, as
(notwithstanding any his glorious pretenses) do not only not bring any one
benefit to the Church in general, or to any the particular members thereof:
but do rather tend covertly to the timely support of his own private
purposes, without having relation to public good; nay rather to the untimely
procuring of many public and private mischiefs. The consideration hereof may
serve to discover those secret plots and underhand practices, which our
miracle-mongers (of what condition soever) do mutually observe among
themselves with one harmonicall consent and course.

For they all (in the very first progress of any their plotted proceedings)
do primarily propound to themselves such purposed proiects, as they
(notwithstanding any their outward iollie pretenses) do cunningly prosecute,
and eftsoons accomplish, by the secret means of many their underhand
practices, and iuggling sleights of legerdemaine: yea and this also with such a
sly and nimble conueiance, as a man would hardly imagine, that not any other
but May-butter it self could possibly melt in their mouths.

1. Tim. 6.5. Iud. 16.
For these cunning practitioners, as they have evermore had an insatiable thirst
to the filthy pleasures and pelf of the world, as to the only true objects
of their hearts desire, and the very purposed proiects which they principally
propound to themselves in any their underhand practices, though they falsely
make show of a quite contrary end, in all outward appearance: so have they
their sundry devices to further their said enterprise, and to accomplish
effectually that their primarie pretended purpose, wherein also they are
resolutelie bent, notwithstanding any crossing occurrents; although yet with as
little suspicion as they possibly may.

And therefore in the very first progress of those their proceedings, they
solemnly pretend the glory of God, the gracing of sundry his sacred
ordinances, and the singular great good of his Church. Namely, either an
approbation of the real presence of Christ in their Mass, or a confirmation of
public fasts in those their solemn meetings: or a perpetual establishment of
the worship of Saints, of Purgatory, of Masses, of Trentals, of Dirges, of
praying for the dead, of plodding on Pilgrimage, with ten thousand such other
devices.

Howbeit (notwithstanding these wonderful sturres) if we more prouidently
respect the full period of those their proceedings, we may plainly perceive
that their primarie propounded pleasures and profits (which they hourly expect
as an ordinary interest, 1. Tim. 3.3. and 6.5. Tit. 1.7. Jude 16. 1. Pet. 5.2.
successively arising from such colored courses) they are that quickening
spirit which only affoordeth life and motion to those their intended actions:
yea, and that only preexisting efficient which gives an essential form to
all their purposes, Job. 15.31. Psalm. 7.14. Isa. 59.4.
and without which their underhand practices would become an untimely birth,
would quickly vanish away of themselves, and forthwith come unto nothing.

Neither only these their lewd plots and practices are apparently laid open:
but the fearful effects also of such counterfeit pranckes, they are (by the
consideration hereof) very plainly discovered. For who sees not how opposite
the same is to the eternal purpose of God concerning the actual brusing of the
Serpents head: how derogatorious to the supereminent dignity and power of
Christ, Genesis 3.15. Ioh. 12.31.
for the final determination of Satan his power of possession: how injurious
unto the certain established truth of the Gospel, Mar. 16.20. Heb. 2.4. Psalm.
122.6. Gal. 5 4.
in that it reuiueth the miraculous confirmation thereof afresh: how hurtful
to the Church of Christ, by breeding therein such unnecessary and fruitless
garboyles: how grievous to the godly, in procuring such an horrible
profanation of prayer and fasting, Exodus 20.7. Matthew. 6.7.
under an holy pretense of doing great good to the Church: how scandalous to
the weak, in making them doubt whether the Gospel be yet fully confirmed by
miracles: Mar. 16.20. Heb. 2.4.
how offensive to Athei^^s, in causing them to skorne the holy things of God,
so odly profaned: how grateful an enterprise to Antichrist, Isa. 52.5. Ezech
36.20. Romans 2.24 Matthew. 24.24 2. These. 2.9 Psalm. 4.2. Ioh. 15.31. Psalm. 7.14.
Isa. 59.4.
in that it puts upon the true spouse of Christ the proper badge of his whorish
strumpet: how dangerous to all men, by drawing them thereby into many idle
conceits, and needless troubles: and lastly, how acceptable a service it is to
the Devil and his Angels, in that it erecteth and holds up their kingdom
afresh, by bearing the world in hand, that Spirits and Devils have such an
essential inherencie in the bodies of men, as cannot be helped without
fasting and prayer, when there is no such matter at all; but only the bare
imaginations of idle brains, and the deluding devices of such cunning
Impostors, as account worldly gain the greatest godliness, and thereunto also
do hourly apply all their purposed plots and predetermined practices, as
experience in every age of the world has made it apparently evident.


Lycanthropus. This use (I assure you) it serves for singular purposes: but
proceed in the rest I beseech you.


Orthodoxus. Moreover, it being (by these our precedent discourses) apparently
made known to all the world, that the very Authors themselves of any such
underhand practices, have (in every age) been fearfully disgraced by the all
seeing God: sharply censured by godly Superiors: greatly disliked of all the
Religious: perpetually impugned by the most judicial sort: miserably scorned
among the secure and godless Atheists: yea, and even generally condemned of
one and other: this should sufficiently inform the late spronge plotters, and
daily deuisers of every such new found senseless Diuillitie, concerning the
undoubted vanity of every such vain invention: yea, and it should make them
withal to be mightily amazed, Act. 20.41. and 13.10.11. 2. Tim. 3.8.9.13
and to tremble exceedingly at the unsearchable judgments of God, concerning
such subtle Impostors, as seek to seduce the world by any their underhand
shifts. Who, notwithstanding they be never so outwardly holy in those their
plotted pretenses: yet, when they shall once but dare to enterprise the
unorderly mannaging of any such sly and cunning conueyances without an
authentical warrant from the word of the Lord: Exodus 8.19. Act. 8.11.12. and
13.10.11. 2. Tim. 3.9.
they do thereby not only procure the mighty Jehovah to bring their
Legerdemaines to light, but (which more is) they do also (to any one of sound
judgment) so evidently bewray their palpable folly, and so apparently lay
open their own weakness, concerning the necessary support of their
languishing cause, as even the very best affected toward their proceedings
(being especially judicial persons, and such also as are not too much
overcome, and too preposterouslie carried with partial conceits) may easily
be led, to think that the very Authors themselves do but struggle against
their enlightened judgments; not unlike unto those, who (making shipwreck of
conscience) have fearfully forsaken their former synceritie, and soundness of
faith. And this in effect, for those several uses, which more particularly
respect the Authors themselves.


Pneumatomachus. Very well. But proceed now (I pray you) to those other uses,
which more specially concern their underhand fauourits.


Orthodoxus. With all my heart. Wherein we have first to consider, that seeing
(howsoever the cunning Impostors of every age have, like Iannes and Iambres,
even openly encountered with the sound ministry of Moses) their deceivable
signs and lying wonders could never possibly stand against the inevitable
force of the word, but (like to the Egyptian sorcerers rods) have been
evermore devoured by Aaron his rod: this therefore may fitly serve to
admonish to the full, our underhand fauourits of every such newfound
Diuillitie, that (now at length) they beware how they do hereafter receive the
holy word of the Lord, Iam. 2.1.
in an only respect of persons, which is the ordinary usage of carnal
professors. Least, as Simon Magus, along time bewitched the giddie brains of
Sam^ria ^ith his seducing sorceries: 1. Cor. 3.4. Act. 8.9.10.
so their minds alas, should (by some serpentine subtlety) be drawn at
unawares from that holy simplicity which is in Christ. 2. Cor. 11.3


Yea, and this should admonish them further, that in these and all other like
intricate causes, they receive not (hand over head) whatsoever is disorderly
printed or underhand broached by those, whom they partially favor with a
personal respect: but that they would rather have speedy recourse to the Law
and the testimonies, and search there (with the good men of Berrea) whether
they do proportionably speak or write according to the infallible truth
thereof, Isa. 8.20. Act. 17.11.
which they will undoubtedly do if there be in them any true light at all.
Because (being otherwise, either too partial toward those whom they fondly
affect, or too preiudicate at least toward such, as soundly impugn their
proceedings) they should show themselves to have no love of the truth, for the
only truths sake: and therefore no marvel though they be purposelie subjected
to strong illusions, 2. These. 2.10.11.12.
and even desperately given over to entertain untruths, falsehoods, and lies,
to their further perverting, and the fearful hazarding of their hoped
salvation.


Philologus. The Lord grant, that this use may become no less profitable,
then we see it expedient for every condition of people: but proceed in the
rest.


Orthodoxus. Moreover, since the fearful inconveniences ensuing such
Legerdemaines, are diversely dangerous concerning the glory of God, and the
good estate of his Church here on earth: this therefore should thoroughly advise
the underhand fauourits of any such newfound Diuillitie, to beware how (either
by company, conference, continuance, or any their underhand maintenance) they
do covertly uphold such cunning Impostors in any their counterfeite courses
more especially concerning those idle conceits which have so undutifully, and
so disordredly been broached abroad by their Books. Least they be otherwise
very justly adjudged to iustle against the glory of God: to undermine the
supereminent dignity of Jesus Christ: to enlarge that temporary power of the
Devil, which Christ has long since restrained for ever: to weaken the
certainty of faith, respecting especially those particular promises, which the
Almighty has made concerning our full deliverance in Jesus Christ: yea and
(which more is) to countenance a confused disorder, against her Majesty's
established Laws and orders. And this in effect, for those several uses which
only concern the inconsiderate affectors of this newfound Diuillitie.


Lycanthropus. Proceed now I beseech you to some such several uses, as may
more especially respect the mislikers thereof.


Orthodoxus. With very good will. Wherein also we have to consider that al
those the following uses, they are here to be put down in a double respect.
Namely in an especial respect of public or private persons.


Lycanthropus. A very plain order: and therefore I pray you proceed first to
the timely unfolding of those sundry uses, which more especially concern
the public persons.


Orthodoxus. Content. Wherein especially you have to consider, that the
several uses respecting public persons, they are such as have a more special
relation to their public places and callings. And these public persons are
also twofold, namely, either the civil magistrates, or the ecclesiastical
ministers.


Philologus. Unfold those uses first I beseech you, which more especially
concern the civil magistrates.


Orthodoxus. With very good will. Wherein we have first to consider, that
seeing so many and such dangerous mischiefs do daily proceed from the
underhand practices and legerdemaines of cunning impostors, as in our several
discourses has been handled at large: this therefore may fitly serve for the
further enlightening of all in authority: concerning especially their orderly
esteemings and iudgings about any the like occurrents, which may happily
hereafter be brought into their open consistories, or before any their
judicial thrones.

And this moreover may give them accordingly some further inckling, 2. Tim. 2.5*
how to proceed against the persons of any (how holy soever in show) that
shall once but dare to maintain such idle conceits to the high dishonor of
God, and the daily encumbrance of Christ's Church.

Yea, and (which more is) we doubt not at all but that these poor labors of
ours (how loathsome soever in the eyes of the scornful) they daily do, and
will undoubtedly take so much more deep impression in the honorable hearts
of all holy superiors: by how much they may now plainly perceive in
experience, that (partly for want of looking into with the soundest judgment,
and partly also for not proceeding against such gross malefactors, with some
sharper censure accordingly) such strange and unwonted occurrents do
eftsoons become very intricate, obscure and doubtful, and procure withal
many perilous and incurable conceits among the simpler sort.


Pneumatomachus. A very excellent use: but proceed in the rest.


Orthodoxus. Again, in that the outrageous flames of this wildfire, which at
the very first beginning of all so universally and so fearefullie ouerspread
it self, are now so quietly calmed by the cooling streams of justice, so
forciblie suppressing the same: this tends very notably (you see) to the
singular commendation of those our superiors, who so timely took notice of,
so seriously enquired into, so iudiciallie proceeded against, and with such
holy perseverance persisted constantly in the necessary restraint, and
timely stoppage of all those outrageous courses, which the busy headed
broachers of such idle conceits, were so vndutifullie entered into, by the only
instigation of their own itching humor, without either due regard to the
glory of God, or any respect of the Churches good. Yea, and (which more is)
the magistrates singular care is so much the more highly commended, by how
much an urgent necessity (in this erroneous and reeling age of the world)
required the same at their hands. Wherein every odd companion does boldly
take liberty to fancy whatsoever him likes; penneth and printeth whatsoever
he pleases; and broacheth and buyeth whatsoever his itching humor affects:
though never so opposite to our holy established religion, never so contrary
to her Majesty's lawful proceedings, never so absurd and unsound in it self,
or never so daungerously entendeth the Churches hurt: Judge. 17.6.
yea, and all this, as though there were no king at all in Israel,

Besides all this, the magistrates their deserved commendation (concerning the
timely supprssing of these untimely occurrents) does break forth (like the
Sun in his strength) more especially in this, that they also (respecting
especially that special charge which Christ Jesus by an holy adiuration
imposes upon them thus: Cant. 2.15.
Take to us the foxes, the little foxes which destroy the vines; for our vines
have small grapes, have (notwithstanding all humane frailties) continued an
invincible courage against so many strong means which were hourly used unto
them, in the only behalf of the parties offending: yea, and that also by the
often importunities of sundry solicitours of very good worth and place. Who
every of them (from out of their approved love to good men, and good causes no
doubt) were so earnest that way, as it is to be wondered that the Magistrates
christian courage was not utterly quailed, Exodus 18.21.
or something calmed at least. Which would undoubtedly have come to pass: had
they not (with a single eye) respected their duties enjoined them in the word,
the sundry examples of sundry good governors before them, and their singular
care for the Churches peace. And this in effect, for those several uses, which
more especially concern the civil magistrates.


Lycanthropus. Declare now some such other uses I pray you, as may have a more
special relation to the ecclesiastical ministers.


Orthodoxus. With very good will. Wherein we have first to consider, that
seeing there have been and shall be to the end of the world, some such cunning
seducers and cogging companions, as not only will cry out, Matthew. 24.24.
lo here is Christ, lo there is Christ, but shall moreover be able to effect
many lying signs and wonders in all deceiueablenes of unrighteousness, 2.
These. 2.9.10.
among such especially as receive not the love of the truth: this therefore
very fitly gives the check to those the pillars of truth in this secure and
selfeliking age. Gal. 2.2.
Who partly for fear of foregoing their good reputation among the preciser
sort, as they commonly call them, partly in an only doubt of undergoing some
displeasure with the higher powers, and partly for fear of endaungering their
proper estate in the smallest degree, can at no hand be drawn either by pen,
or by preaching, or by public conference to confirm that infallible truth,
which (in their hearts) they affirm concerning these unwonted occurents. Yea,
and (which more is) howsoever they pretend to be implicatiuely infolded within
that absolute number of wisedoms seven pillars; Pro. 9.1.
yet may they at no hand be procured to support this necessary building of
wisdom, so far forth especially as their proper titles import: but are
otherways willing enough that some other besides themselves should bear the
whole burden, and very well contented that any (so he have but a seeming show,
though no showing substance at all) should pass smoothly away with his
error, to the intolerable prejudice of the truth it self; the irrecouerable
poisoning of many poor people; and the fearful hazarding of their own
proper souls.


Pneumatomachus. A use worthy of observation: but proceed in the rest.


Orthodoxus. Moreover, in that so many gross and palpable absurdities do not
only arise from this newfound Diuillitie (as has bin declared at large) but
which more is, do covertly trudge up and down from hand to hand, and are too
carelessly entertained among the simpler sort, as necessary, fruitful, and
most current conceits, to the intolerable scandalizing of many, the high
dishonor of God, the undoubted prejudice of that supereminent power of Jesus
Christ over Spirits and Devils, to the palpable obscuring of such special
promises as more especially concern those special points, to the fearful
profanation of prayer and fasting, to the dredful endaungering of the poor
people of God, to the needles confirmations of popish adiurations, Exorcizings,
and coniurings of Spirits and Devils, to the daily propagation of atheism,
epicurisme, and irreligious opinions among the prophaner sort. This therefore
may something make known to the true Ministers of Christ, how necessarily it
appertains to every of them in their several stations, 1. Tim. 4.24. 2 Timothy
2.15.16 Tit. 1.13. Phil. 1.27. Tit. 1.9.
to stir up the gifts that are graciously bestowed upon them, to take the
Lords part in these holy truths, to fight together in one faith of the
Gospel, to teach wholesome doctrine, and to stop the mouths of all the
gainesayers how holy soever in any their outward pretenses. Yea, and albeit
they have heretofore too inconsiderately affected the persons of some in an
only conceit of their inherent holiness, yet whenever they shall hereafter
perceive any to arise among themselves, Act. 20.30.
which purposely speak perverse things to draw disciples after them; that then
(laying aside all carnal respects) they be forthwith taken up with an holy
consideration of their own proper places, their callings, their titles, the
condition of the times, the gadding affections of people, this itching age of
the world, 2. Pet. 5.2.
the approaching day of the Lord, their conscionable care toward God, to his
Church, to their own souls, and more especially to that people of the Lord
which peculiarly depends upon them. And that also (in an only respect of
these the precedent considerations) they do forthwith make apparently known to
all the world their proper ability, their valor, and courage in defending the
truth, and in conuincing the adversaries thereof, of what condition soever.
That by such a conscionable course they may truly declare themselves to be men
sanctified and prepared for the service of the Lord, yea and such also as can
do nothing against the truth, ^. Cor. 13.18.
but for the truth: notwithstanding any the sinister persuasions of men, or the
carnal respects of this bewitching world. And this in effect ^^r those
several uses which more especially concern the public mislikers of this
newfound Diuillitie.


Lycanthropus. Very well. Proceed now (I beseech you) to the timely unfolding
of some such special uses, as have a more special relation to the private
mislikers.


Orthodoxus. With all my heart. Wherein we have first to consider, that seeing
the ^ound truth of this doctrine we teach, Genesis 3.4. 2. Cor. 11.3. Matthew.
24.24. 1. Tim. 6.5. Romans 1.18.
has (in every age of the world) bin so mightily undermined by Satan
himself, and so dangerously darkened by such seducing companions, as
(accompting glory or gain the greatest godliness) do endeavor to withhold the
verity it self in unrighteousness, and to turn the manifest truth of God into
a mystical lie. Romans 8.25.
This therefore, it tends very notably (you see) to the timely commendation
and comfort of all such sound hearted Christians, as (notwithstanding these
encountering occurrents) are not lightly carried about with every vain blast of
deceivable doctrines, Ephesians. 4.24. Iam. 1.8.
from the sincerity and soundnes of that sacred faith, which they firmly hold
in Jesus Christ: 1. Cor. 16.1^
but do rather very circumspectly watch, most courageously stand fast in the
faith, to too valiantly quite themselves like valorous soldiers; are
vnconquerablie strong against principalities and powers, Ephesians. 6.12. 1. Pet. 5.8.
against the worldly governors, even the princes of the darkness of this
world, Phil. 1.27.2^
against spiritual wickednesses in the high place: yea and (which more is) do
even fight together in one faith of the Gospel, not fearing the outrageous
force of their adversaries how many or how mighty soever, which is undoubtedly
unto their adversaries a token of perdition, but unto them a sign of
salvation, and that also of God.

Surely such their sound persisting in the purity of faith, as it argues no
small measure of grace: so does it freely afoord the^ a singular meditation of
spiritual comfort, so often as they (in the midst of this reeling and wavering
world) be soundly touched with the due consideration of that their settled
constancy.

For consider I beseech you and tell me directly, what persons they were that
were freed from those the bewitching Enchantments, Exodus 7.11.^*
wherewith Pharaoh and the Egyptians were so grossly deluded: but only the true
Israel of God?

Again, who are they that do considerately foresee those seducing practices of
such miracle-mongers, Deuteronomy. 13.1.2
as give men a sign or a wonder to draw them from God: but they who do
circumspectly respect the purpose of Jehovah in sending such seducers among
the^, which is only to ^ound and to try their sincere and faithful cleaving to
him with all their hearts?

Again, 1. King. 22.2 22.
who were they that discerned the lying spirit in the mouth of Baall his
prophets: but those only seven thousand whom the Lord (in mercy) had elected
to himself, and called to the sincere profession of his holy name?

Again, Matthew. 24.^
who are they that discover those the deceivable sounds and signs of such
counterfeit Christ's as cry out and say, Lo here is Christ, Lo there is Christ:
but only those saved ones, who (having received his cognizance) do hear only
his voice, Ioh. 10.27.
and follow him whether soever he goes?

Again, what were they that escaped the bewitching snares of Simon Magus, Act.
8.6.
very pestilentlie termed the great power of God: but such only as gave an
attentive regard to the preaching of Phillip, and faithfully entertained his
powerful miracles?

Again, who had an immunitie from those satanicall inticements of Elymas the
sorcerer, who mightily withstood the preaching of Paul, Act. 13.^.
and seducingly sought to turn Sergius Paulus away from the faith: but only
those prudent deputies, and those provident people, Act. 13.7.
who (conscionablie conuersing with Paul and Barnabas) do desire to be soundly
instructed in the word of God.

Again, who are mercifully delivered from the deluding enchantments of such
schismatic teachers, 1. Co^. 3.3.4.
as draw men into factious courses: but they only that receive not the word
with respect of persons?

2. Cor. 11 2. 2. Cor. 13.8.
Again, who are they that are sincerely preserved and cheerefullie presented
chaste virgins to Christ: but such only as are not seduced with serpentine
sleights, but can and do prouidently perceive the legerdemaines of those
cunnicatching companions, who cunningly transform themselves as if they were
the Apostles of Christ?

Revel. 13.13.14 Phil. 4.3. Revel. 2.5. and 13.8.
Again, who are they that are not spiritually entrapped with the deceivable
signs and wonders, which the second Beast has power to work upon earth: but
such only as (being wise to number the name of the Beast) have their own names
assuredly written in the book of life?

Thus then these holy mislikers of this new found Diuillitie (who account the
faith of miracles to be but rash and uncertain) they plainly perceive (by all
the premises) their happy condition in Jesus Christ: Tertul. contra Ma^ion.
lib. 3.
and may assuredly comfort their souls in this their immovable constancy,
notwithstanding the daily contemplation of such strange signs and wonders,
Matthew. 24.24
as (if it were possible) are able to deceive the very elect.


Peuumatomachus. This sir (I assure you) is a comfortable use: but proceed in
the rest I beseech you.


Orthodoxus. Moreover, in that the holy mislikers of this new found trade of
Diuillitie, have found themselves (notwithstanding Satan his sundry sleights
of legerdemaine) to remain sincerely and immutably constant in their holy
profession: surely the timely consideration of this so singular a mercy in
Jesus Christ, should stir up their hearts unto a dutiful thankfulness to God
for the same: Yea, and it should make them to testify such special favor,
both in laboring earnestly the hoped salvation of the rest of their brethren;
Jude. 22.23.
by having a mutual compassion upon some, and other some again by saving with
fear, in pulling them violently from out of the fire. That being by this
means recovered, they may conscionablie confess their holy conversion, and
therewithal be brought not only to present all those their vnpriuiledged
books (concerning this curious craft) to the public Magistrate, Act. 19.18.^^
to be sacrificed forthwith in the fire: but also even jointly and
courageously to encounter with Satan himself, or any his Serpentine ymps, for
the speedy suppressing of all such seducing courses, as our miracle-mongers
do hourly imagine, Romans 16.17.1^
and (with flattering speeches) do purposely plot to deceive the hearts of the
simple.

Briefly, let them undoubtedly assure themselves, that by such an happy
conversion of these their poor seduced brethren, thus straggling aside from
the way, Iam. 5.19.2^ Revel. 2.24.
they shall not only save a soul, and cover the multitude of sins: but
(which more is) they may (in having this learning, and in knowing the deepnes
of Satan concerning these mystical matters) very assuredly expect (with
patience) their happy coronation with Christ in the celestial throne. Revel.
3.21.
And thus much in effect for the holy uses of this doctrine, whether they
concern the Lord himself, or his creatures.


Lycanthropus. These uses they are every way so pertinent, and so consonant to
the substance of the doctrine it self, as none but the headie and obstinate
(who having with a settled pertinacie even secretly and finally devoted
themselves to their self-conceit) will any ways mislike or impugn the same.
But what says Exorcistes unto them?


Exorcistes. I neither could, nor would willingly be opposite to them,
especially if the Doctrine it self, from whence they are drawn, were so
currantly sound, as Master Orthodoxus and the rest would bear me in hand.

Howbeit (notwithstanding any thing hitherto heard) I am, and must still be in
the self same opinion I was in at the first. For if none (in these days) be
essentially possessed of Satan, do tell me (I pray you) how we are to esteem of
such extraordinary actions or passions, as do eftsoons befall to sundry
distressed persons?


Orthodoxus. I will simply tell you what my own self suppose them to be, and
how also I would have your self and all others account of such accidents.

First, such extraordinary and unwonted occurrents may eftsoons appear, and
be practiced by mere cousoning collusions, and crafty conueiances of
legerdemaine. Yea, and these counterfeite actions or passions may also be
broached, either by the only pretended Demoniake himself (as did the
dissembling caitife, who cousoned that reverend father Master Fox) without the
assistance of any other besides: or else such extraordinary actions they may
be effected by the joint assistance, help and direction of some crafty
confederate, conjoined with that the aforesaid pretended Demoniake, in the
covert dispatch of those his counterfeit prankes. Of this kind of Demoniakes,
the world has been successively pestered in every age since the Primitive
Church: and therefore no wonder at all though now (in these days) some
certain persons should likewise depart from the faith, 1. Tim. 4.1. 2. Tim.
3.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9. 2. Pet. 3.3.4. Iud. 1.18.19.
giving heed to spirits of error, and to doctrines of Devils.

Sometimes again the pretended Demoniake may (in deed and in truth) be easily
drawn to believe that he is (without doubt) essentially possessed of Satan,
when there is no such matter at all, he having only (at unawares to himself)
and by some paltrie Priest or cunning Impostor) been before very grossly
abused; partly by Patheticall and circumuenting persuasions, and partly also by
some intoxicated perfume, some filthy confection or potion. The which
bewitching sorceries do so strangely disorder the poor Patients body, his
mind it self with all the powers and faculties concerning them both: Act. 8.9.
as (for the present) the very beholders themselves are easily persuaded (with
the people of Samaria) to believe that the party (in deed) is essentially
possessed. Act. 8.9.10.
Yea and (which more is) the very Exorcist himself (who pretends and
undertakes the supposed dispossession of this newly supposed Demoniake) he may
also very easily bear the beholders in hand, that he is undoubtedly some
mighty Magnifico in this newfound trade of Diuillitie, Act. 8.9.10.
and make them thus to cry out from the least to the most; Doubtless this man
is the great power of God. Of this kind of Demoniakes, as also of that the
intoxicated potion it self: the Jesuitical Exorcists (in their Exorcising
pamphlets) they afford us sundry examples.

Thirdly these extraordinary and unwonted occurrents, they may and do also
eftsoons arise from mere natural causes, namely, from Mania, from
Melancholy, from Lunacy, from Fury, from the Frenzy, from the Epilepsie,
from the Mother, from Conuulsions, obstructions, and sundry such other
unnatural accidents, as we have eftsoons declared in our former discourses.

By the vnwontednes and efficacy of which unnatural infirmities, the mind it
self (being mightily disordered before by means of the Fantasy) does easily
resolve that some extraordinary operations of Satan do mightily distemper
his natural constitution, and strangely afflict the same in every part. Of this
kind of extraordinary actions or passions very many but lately departed this
life, and many yet living have oftentimes had an experience: yea and the best
use you may possibly make of all those your eight supposed Demoniakes (more
especially of your newly pretended Patients sprung up in Cheshire of late) is
only this. Namely, that the excess of melancholy, By the view of the Physician
his Bill, we perceived that his judgment concerning the boy^ was only an
excess of some melancholy.
or some other disordered humor, did (for the present) disorder their bodies,
according to the approved judgment of learned Physicians, concerning
especially the boy at Northwitch.

Lastly, the Devil (being always desirous to work (among the dear children
of God) the greatest disturbance that may be, and finding withal some such
lewd disposed person as is naturally inclined to all manner of knaueries) he
takes the opportunity of so fit a subject, and works so cunningly upon the
corruption of that lewd persons nature, as the party himself is easily
brought to believe, and to bear others also in hand, that he is (in deed and
in truth) essentially possessed of Satan. Yea, and (which more is) the said
ungracious body (partly for gain, partly for glory, and partly also in an
affected desire to be deemed terrible to others about him) he does from thence
forth very willingly endeavor himself to speak and to act some such strange
and unwonted acts, as the like were never espied in him before. By which his
villainous practices, the silly beholders (surprised before with an inueterate
opinion of Demoniacall possessions) are easily brought to intertaine for
infallible truth, that the party is (in deed) essentiallie possessed with some
Spirit or Devil. Of this kind of Demoniakes, we have often experience in
every age: and the cousoning of good Master Fox does plainly confirm.

By the premises then you may plainly perceive, that the supposed strange
actions or passions, in any such falsely pretended Demoniakes, they may, and
are also eftsoons effected without any supernatural power of a Devil: and
therefore you need not so easily be led to conceive of those matters in
such sort as you do, but ought rather to examine the causes themselves with
the sundry occasions and several circumstances of persons, of times, and of
places with other occurrents: that thereby you may more soundly be able to
determine thereof.


Lycanthropus. Surely sir (these Cautions and considerations being duly
observed) there could not possibly be such contrariety of opinions concerning
these matters, as now are rashly broached abroad to the intolerable disturbance
of the Peace of the Church. But what says Exorcistes to all these matters?


Exorcistes. I say and hold (as before) that there are essential possessions
of Spirits and Devils in these days of the Gospel: and that sole prayer and
fasting is a perpetual ordinance established by Christ, for the powerful
expelling of Spirits and Devils to the end of the world.


Physiologus. Master Orthodoxus, our endeavor to do the man good, I perceive is
utterly lost. And therefore, I deem it a very direct and convenient course to
extract a summarie of all our precedent discourses into several Questions:
that so the matter it self (being universally looked into) it may in some
better order of conference be either soundly answered, or syncerely yielded
unto.


Orthodoxus. I like very well of your motion, and will therefore accordingly
put down the several Questions in this following order.

1 Whether now (in this last age of the world) there be essential possessions
and dispossessions of Devils?

2 Whether sole Prayer and Fasting be an undoubted true ordinance of Christ,
for the powerful expelling of Devils to the end of the world?

3 Whether (if any be truly dispossessed by sole prayer and fasting) that
selfsame dispossession be not indeed a miraculous work?

4 Whether the working of miracles be yet still in use in these days of the
Gospel?

Behold Exorcistes? these Questions (you see) they fully contain the whole
scope of our conference: do take them therefore to your fauourits, that they
and your self may more soundly consider upon them.


Exorcistes. Your questions sir, they have been viewed, and reuiewed, by a
grave and reverend Preacher, who says they be frivolous, unworthy the
consideration of any, and such as he scorned to answer.


Orthodoxus. If the man be so grave and so reverend as you bear us in hand: we
wonder he would ever afford an answer so answerles. For (howsoever his
Seraphicall skill had soared at too lofty a pitch to stoop to a fly) yet
surely we expected better measure from the man, in an only regard of his
gravity. Howbeit, consider by the way what a deadly blow his answerelesse
answer does give to whatsoever you hold? Namely, that his and your own
opinion (concerning these matters) it is but a frivolous opinion unworthy of
consideration; yea, and such as any grave or reverend person would scorn to
answer. For do not these our forenamed questions implicatiuely contain the
very body it self, with the marrow and bowels of that which your self do
hold and practice? But what? do you hold indeed such fantastical and idle
conceits, as are merely frivolous, unworthy the consideration of any, and
such as a wise man would scorn to answer. If wise men should scorn to
answer such frivolous matters: what wisdom (I pray you) in those that do
hold (with tooth and nail) such frivolous fooleries, as that for the
patronizing thereof, they will lie al their lives in prison? Well, we crave an
answer, we expect an answer, and therefore do urge them (I pray you) to
yield us an answer either one way or other.


Exorcistes. Sir, I will take up your questions, and acquaint them with
whatsoever you have said concerning these matters.


Orthodoxus. Do so (I pray you) and in the mean time you shall not want the
assistance of our earnest and hartiest prayers to God, for his heavenly
illumination in these and all other things else, which may any ways make for
the glory of his name, the good of his Church, and the everlasting consolation
of your own souls: And so for this present we take our leaves.


Lycanthropus. Sir, we are all highly beholding unto you for this your
Christian care: and greatly bound to pray and praise God for your happy
continuance.


Orthodoxus. 2. Tim. 3.15.
Well, the Lord make us all wise to salvation, and so guide us with his gracious
spirit, as we may all speak one thing, and that there be no dissentions among
us: 1. Cor. 1.10.
but that we may be all knit soundly together in one mind, and one
judgment, and mutuallie expect with patience, 2. Tim. 4.5.6.7. 1. Pet. 5.4.
the hour of our happy coronation in Jesus Christ.


Physiologus. Revel. 22.20.
So be it: even so Lord Jesus. Amen.


The end of this second Conference.
A TABLE FOR THE PRESENT FINDING FORTH of all the principal points, that are
handled in this book.
THE FIRST DIALOGVE. page 1.
MAster Darel his books no better then factious Pamphlets. page 2 The Epistles
Dedicatorie, to those his said Pamphlets, are sharply and soundly censured. 3
Master Darel is a man very peremptory in deprauing public authority. 4.5
From what fountain such undutiful railings proceed. 6 Master Darel his two
tricks of legerdemaine. 7 His Doctrinall treatise is but an hotch-potch of
things. 9 The method of that book is truly laid down. 10 Whether Master Darel
his pretended patients, were essentiallie possessed with a Devil? 12 The word
possession is not to be found in all the original. 12.13 The pretended effects
of those eight Demoniakes, did not proceed from any supernatural cause. 13 The
actions or passions of those his pretended Demoniakes, they were not any
supernatural matters. 14.15 The Devil his entering in and going out, is to be
understood metaphorically, as appears by sundry places. 15 Whether the Devil
be essentially inherent within the possessed: or the possessed essentially
inherent within the Devil. 17 To be in a Spirit, what it imports. 19 To have
a Spirit of an unclean Devil, what it is. 20 Whether Satan be able to dispose
of our members being but without us. 21 It is an idle conceit to dream that
the Devil has an earnest desire to be essentially within a man. 22 Whether
the effects of precedent possessions be the certain signs of subsequent
possessions. 23 How the Jews did discern of possessions then. 24 No
possessions in Israel, till a little before the coming of Christ. ibid.
Whether Saul was essentially possessed of Satan. ibid. The word possession is
not to be found in the Bible literally and properly appropriated to Devils. 25
The word Daimonizetai is truly interpreted. ibid. The word Bagnath rightly
expounded. ibid. The word Bagnath imports only but mental passions, and no
essential possessions. 26 The opposition of Spirits overthrows the supposed
essential possession in Saul. 27 The effects of Saul's passions, they conclude
no essential possessions at all. 28 The manner of Saul's deliverance, argues
only but mental passions. ibid. Reasons against the supposed essential
possessing of Saul. 30 Whether the curing of the Serpentine stings by the
brazen Serpent, did typically foreshew Christ his powerful expelling of Devils
from out of men's bodies. 31 Reasons concludently proving that there were no
possessions in Israel before the coming of Christ. 32 Whether senselesnes be a
true sign of essential possessions. 34 Whether Summers was senseless in his
supposed fits. ibid. Whether foming at mouth be any true sign of possession.
36 Whether Summers was of an extraordinary stature. 37 Whether he was of a
supernatural strength. 38 Whether he had a supernatural knowledge. 39 Whether
he spoke Latin supernaturally. 40 The history concerning the eight supposed
Demoniakes is shrewdly tainted. 41 The examination of Summers his supposed
signs of possession. 43 Exorcistes his applying of those signs is censured.
45 Whether Scripture signs be put down as directions to determine of future
possession. 48 Whether essential possession be an ordinary disease, and sole
prayer and fasting an ordinary medicine to cure the same. 50 Whether the
essential possession of Devils be a written or an unwritten judgment of God.
53 Whether as great cause that the Lord should inflict the judgment of
possession upon men now, as at any time heretofore. 55 Whether it be judgment
inflicted upon men for sin. 56 Whether the consent of Churches, Fathers,
Travelers, Papists, and vaunts of Jesuits, may suffice to prove the pretended
possession. 59 Whether essential possessions be as ordinary now, as are other
diseases: and have also as ordinary a remedy to cure them. 61 Whether the
continuance of like sins argues the continuance of like supposed essential
possessions. 65 Whether our corporal senses may truly discern of the
essential possessions of Devils. 69 Whether it be reasonable to put men to
prove the now being of essential possessions. 70 Whether the pretended
passions in the Chesshire Demoniake, may concludently prove essential
possessions. 71 Whether in any of his fits he was utterly senseless. 74
Whether wagging of his head be a supernatural action of Satan. 71 Whether this
boy be raised up of God, to prove the truth of these supposed essential
possessions. 77 Whether the supposed dispossession of those eight Demoniakes,
do prove essential possessions. 78
THE SECOND DIALOGVE. page 81.
THe pretended signs of dispossession in our supposed Demoniakes, they are not
the same with Scripture signs 82 Exorcistes his own experimental signs,
they are no true signs of the pretended dispossessions. 83 Whether vomitting
be a true sign of dispossession. 84 The pretended proper terms and special
ends of dispossessions. 85 Whether Satan his supposed desire of repossession
does argue an undoubted true sign of dispossession. 87 The casting out of
Devils by an absolute or committed authority. 90 The instance from the Queen
and L. Keeper, is fitly retorted. 91 Whether sole prayer and fasting be any
secret ordinance perpetually established by Christ, for the powerful expelling
of Devils. 94 Whether the seventeenth of Matthew, and ninth of Mark do implie
any such a supposed ordinance. 94 Whether Christ in those places puts down
a distinction of Devils. 96 The instance from Phlebotomie very fitly retorted.
97 Whether there be Scripture or sound reason to appropriate the use of that
supposed means, unto the primitive age. 98 Whether all other besides Christ
and his Apostles did drive forth Devils by that only supposed ordinance. 100
Whether it be requisite to know the kind of spirit, or ever the Exorcist
undertake the intended business. 101 Whether sole prayer may be made a
practical experiment, for the discovering of Devils. ibid. Why Master Darel in
dealing with Summers did dissent from his own established Canons 102 Master
Darel his own practice and Canons are different things. 103 Master Darel and
an old Heremits practice compared together. 105 Master Darel he plays at fast
or loose in his speech. 107 Christ neither expreslie nor secretly establishes
sole prayer and fasting, as an ordinary means for the perpetual expelling of
Devils. 108 Master Darel, traitorous Stapleton, and Thyraeus the Jesuit do
all iumpe together in this conceit. 109 Whether there be some kind of Devils,
with whom the Apostles their miraculous faith could not possibly deal,
without prayer and fasting annexed thereto. 110 Whether the Apostles (praying
at their working of miracles) did more therein then they needed to do. 111
Master Darel is at odds with himself about the exposition of the seventeenth
of Matthew. 111.112 Whether the Apostles enjoyed the miraculous faith without
any means at all. 113 Whether the spirit and word were not means to work in
every of them the miraculous faith. 114 Whether the Lord has sanctified any
ordinary means to the timely increase of extraordinary graces. 115 Pretended
reasons to prove the needlesnesse of prayer in any the Apostles, concerning
especially their miraculous faith. 116 Whether the Apostles had any revealed
word to warrant their praying for an increase of the miraculous faith. 117
Whether the Apostles sinned not, in doing more therein then they needed to do.
118 Reasons why the seventh of Matthew, verse. 21. may not (says Master Darel)
be appropriated unto the Apostles. 119 Whether Christ did not directly answer
the Disciples demand. 122 Master Darel endeavoring with tooth and nail to
uphold his pretended ordinance of prayer and fasting, falls flat into
Iudaisme. 123 Whether (after the feast of Pentecost) the Apostles needed to
pray for any increase of their faith. 125 Whether the Apostles received the
fullness of the spirit at the feast of Pentecost. 127 If the Apostles faith
failed at any time in doctrine, where is the efficacy of Christ his promise,
Ioh. 16.13. 129 Whether Peter's faith (after Christ prayed, Luke 22.32.) did
ever fail in doctrine or judgment. 130 Wherein, when, and how the Apostles
faith is said to fail. 132 Whether the Apostles faith ever failed in the
working of miracles. 135 Whether Christ did purposely put down a distinct
order or degree among Devils, Matthew. 17.21. 137 Master Darel and Dionysius that
Seraphicall Doctor, do iumpe together in the distinction of Angels and Devils.
138 Whether difference of order among men on earth, implies a distinction of
order among Devils in hell. 139 Whether the supposed different degrees among
Angels in heaven, implies a distinction of Devils in hell. 141 Whether the
diversity of names do conclude a diversity of orders among Angels. 142 The
names given to Angels, respect only their nature or office. 144 Why such
several names were given to Angels, if they implie no several orders. 145
What is meant by the several names of Devils. Ephesians. 6.12. 147. Whether the word
(...), Ephesians. 6.12. does import any different degrees among Devils. 148 Why the
power of Devils is put down sometimes singularly, and sometimes plurally. 149
Further distinction then that of Michael and his Angels, and of the Devil and
his Angels, cannot be found in heaven or hell. 151 Whether Devils are
distinguished in regard of their qualities. 152 Whether the text Mat. 17.21.
does implicatiuely contain Master Darel his four intimations. 154 The
impieties, absurdities and dangers which do necessarily succeed Master Darel
his sense of Matthew. 17.21. 156 Whether Master Darel his carriage concludes not
his great shame concerning his cause. 158 Master Darel his directions
concerning the usage, first of sole prayer alone: and then of prayer and
fasting together. 159 Whether sole prayer and fasting did get Abimelechs women
with child, and overthrow the Beniamites. 160 Prayer and fasting they are not
the sole means it self, but a spiritual exercise which sanctifies some
other means for the powerful expelling of Devils. 161 Whether the curing of
natural diseases by mere natural medicines, does prove the supernatural
expelling of Devils by prayer and fasting, as by the only ordinary means
thereto. 162 Whether sole prayer and fasting be an unwritten ordinance of
Christ, for the expelling of Devils. 163 Master Darel and Bellarmine iumping
pat in this point, they jointly receive their answer. 164 What things must
necessarily concur in an ordinary cure. 166 Whether essential possessions
be an ordinary disease, and has also an ordinary manner of curing. 167
Whether Master Darel his produced Fathers do prove his pretended ordinance.
168 Pamelius his censure concerning Cyprians authority. 169 The Fathers do
only propound their advice, but prove no ordinance. 170 Whether the means
which God appoints to some certain end be always effectual. 171 Whether
the Lord be at liberty to bless or not bless the means which himself has
ordained to some certain end. 173 Pretended reasons to prove the expelling of
Devils by sole prayer, no miracle at all. 174 Whether that be a miracle which
is wrought by means. 176 How all other things effected by sole prayer alone,
should be miracles: and dispossessions effected so, no miracle at all. 177
Whether the justifying faith be the best for the expelling of Devils. 178
Whether a temporary, or historical faith will serve the turn. ibid. Whether
those matters which the Prophets and Apostles observed in working miracles,
were used rather as signs, then as means thereto. 180 Master Darel concludes
directly against himself. 181 Again Master Darel concludes directly against
himself. 183 If sole prayer and fasting be a supernatural medicine for all
supernatural diseases: why are not parties bewitched cured thereby. 183 If
Master Darel has no Scripture to warrant the curing of bewitched parties by
prayer and fasting: then had he no warrant to cure his Demoniakes, being all
bewitched. 183 Master Darels advice for parties bewitched. 186.187 Whether the
usage of sole prayer, by parties bewitched, will work their regeneration. 188
Master Darels disputing these points, is like to the Gallant his dancing a
galliard. 190 How Master Darel could conceive any certain form of prayer, not
knowing before his patients vexations. 191 Sundry examples to show that sole
prayer of it self did never effect any work, but the same was ever a miracle.
192 A blasphemous speech to uphold their settled pertinacie. 194 Master Darels
conclusion retorted upon himself. ibid.
THE THIRD DIALOGVE. page 197.
THe uses of this Doctrine do arise from the final determination of Satan's
actual possession. 197 The first use concerns Gods faithfulness. 198 The
second has relation to Gods omnisufficiencie. 199 The third, the majesty and
power of Jesus Christ. 200 The fourth, the captiuated condition of Satan. 202
The fifth respects his inexorable outrage. 203 The sixth discovers the full
compass of Satan's commission. 205 The seventh lays open the deep policy of
Satan. 206 The eight shows his unsuspected proceedings. 207 The ninth
propounds his cunning profaning of holy exercises. 209 The tenth, his
inueterate malice against holy meetings. 212 The eleventh shows the
immutable coherence and order of Gods works. 214 The twelfth unfolds the
foundation of all their fooleries. 218 The thirteenth gives the general
admonition to all men 219 The fourteenth advises them to beware of bewitchings
hereafter. 221 The fifteenth unfolds the underhand plots of the authors. 223
The sixteenth tells them the vanity of such practices. 225 The seventeenth
forbids them a respective Religion. 226 The eighteenth discourageth from
countenancing such. 227 The nineteenth tends to the inlighting of Magistrates.
228 The twentieth gives them their due commendation. 229 The twentieth one
checketh the careless ministers. 230 The twentieth two stirs them up. 231 The
twentieth three commends private mislikers. 232 The twentieth four stirs them
to thankefulnes. 234 How we are to esteem of the extraordinary passions of
people in these our days. 236 The summarie of all this encounter is drawn
into four several questions.
(...) So be it.
Gentle Reader, so many faults in the printing as came to our remembrance, we
pray thee correct as follows: the rest (if any arise) we refer to thy
favorable correction.

Page 73. lin. 11. for happlie, read happen. page 85. for simply, read
simple. page 88. lin. 20. for now either, read none other. p. 91. lin. 15. for
either, read ever. p. 140. in the margin read Basilius. p. 169. in the
margin l. 7. read Demetriad.


