Troia-Noua Triumphans. London Triumphing, OR, The Solemn, Magnificent, and
Memorable Receiving of that worthy Gentleman, Sir JOHN SVVINERTON Knight, into
the City of LONDON, after his Return from taking the Oath of Maioralty at
Westminster, on the Morrow next after Simon and Iudes day, being the 29. of
October. 1612. All the Shows, Pageants, Chariots of Triumph, with other
Devices, (both on the Water and Land) here fully expressed. By Thomas Dekker.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, and are to be sold by John Wright dwelling
at Christ Church-gate. 1612.

To the Deseruer of all those Honors, which the Customary Rites of this Day,
And the general Love of this City bestow upon him; Sir JOHN SVVINERTON,
Knight, Lord Mayor of the renowned City of London.
HONOR (this day) takes you by the Hand, and gives you welcomes into your
New-Office of Pretorship. A Dignity worthy the Cities bestowing, and most
worthy your Receiving. You have it with the Hearts of many people, Voices and
Held-vp hands: they know it is a Roabe fit for you, and therefore have clothed
you in it. May the Last-day of your wearing the same, yield to your Self as
much Joy, as to Others does this First Day of your putting it on. I swim (for
my own part) not only in the Maine Full sea of the General praise and Hopes
of you. But power out also (for my particular) such a stream as my Prayers can
render, for a success answerable to the Onset: for it is no Field, unless it
be Crowned with victory.

I present (Sir) unto you, these labors of my Pen, as the first and newest
Congratulatory Offerings tendered into your hands, which albeit I should not (of
my self) deserve to see accepted, I know notwithstanding you will give to them
a generous and grateful entertainment, in regard of that Noble Fellowship and
Society, (of which you Yesterday were a Brother, and This Day a Father) who
most freely have bestowed these their Loves upon you. The Colors of this Piece
are mine own; the Cost theirs: to which nothing was wanting, that could be
had, and every thing had that was required. To their Lasting memory I set down
This; And to your Noble Disposition, this I Dedicate. My wishes being (as ever
they have been) to meet with any Object, whose reflection may present to your
Eyes, that Love and Duty,

In which I stand Bounden To your Lordship. Thomas Dekker.
Troia Noua Triumphans. London Triumphing.
TRyumphes, are the most choice and daintiest fruit that spring from Peace and
Abundance; Love begets them; and Much Cost brings them forth. Expectation feeds
upon them, but seldom to a surfeite, for when she is most full, her longing
wants something to be satisfied. So enticing a shape they carry, that Princes
themselves take pleasure to behold them; they with delight; common people with
admiration. They are now and then the Rich and Glorious Fires of Bounty, State
and Magnificence, giving light and beauty to the Courts of Kings: And now and
then, it is but a debt paid to Time and Custom: And out of that dept come
These. Riot having no hand in laying out the Expenses, and yet no hand in
plucking back what is held decent to be bestowed. A sumptuous Thriftinesse in
these Civil Ceremonies managing All. For it were not laudable, in a City (so
rarely governed and tempered) superfluously to exceed; As contrariwise it is
much honor to her (when the Day of spending comes) not to be sparing in any
thing. For the Chaires of Magistrates ought to be adorned, and to shine like
the Chariot which caries the Sun; And Beams (if it were possible) must be
thought to be shot from the One as from the Other: As well to dazzle and amaze
the common Eye, as to make it learn that there is some Excellent, and
Extraordinary Arm from heaven thrust down to exalt a Superior man, that
thereby the Gazer may be drawn to more obedience and admiration.

In a happy hour therefore did your Lordship take upon you this inseparable
burden (of Honor and Cares) because your self being Generous of mind, have met
with men, and with a Company equal to your Self in Spirit. And upon as
fortunate a Tree have they ingrafted their Bounty; the fruits whereof shoot
forth and ripen, are gathered, and taste sweetly, in the mouths not only of
this City, but also of our best-to-be-beloued friends, the Noblest strangers.
Upon whom, though none but our Sovereign King can bestow Royal welcomes; yet
shall it be a Memorial of an Exemplary Love and Duty (in those who are at the
Cost of these Triumphs) to have added some Heightning more to them then was
intended at first, of purpose to do honor to their Prince and Country. And I
make no doubt, but many worthy Companies in this City could gladly be content
to be partners in the Disbursements, so they might be sharers in the Glory. For
to have been leaden-winged now, what infamy could be greater? When all the
streams of Nobility and Gentry, run with the Tide hither. When all Ears lie
listening for no news but of Feasts and Triumphs: All Eyes still open to behold
them: And all hearts and hands to applaud them: When the heap of our
Sovereigns Kingdoms are drawn in Little: and to be seen within the Walls
of this City. Then to have tied Bounty in too straight a girdle: Proh scelus
infandum! No; she has worn her garments loose, her lips have been free in
Welcomes, her purse open, and her hands liberal. If you think I set a
flattering glass before you, do but so much as lanch into the River, and there
the Thames it self shall show you all the Honors, which this day has bestowed
upon her: And that done, step again upon the Land, and Fame will with her own
Trumpet proclaim what I speak; And her I hope you cannot deny to believe,
having at least twenty thousand eyes about her, to witness whether she be a
Truetong'd Fame or a Lying.

By this time the Lord Mayor has taken his oath, is seated in his barge
again; a loud thundering peale of Chambers give him a Farewell as he passes
by. And see! how quickly we are in ken of land, as suddenly therefore let us
leap on shore, and there observe what honorable entertainment the City
affoords to their new Praetor, and what joyful salutations to her noble
Visitants.

The first Triumph on the Land.
THE Lord Mayor, and Companyes being landed, the first Device which is
presented to him on the shore, stands ready to receive him at the end of
Pauls-Chayne, (on the south side the Church) and this it is.

A Sea-Chariot artificially made, proper for a God of the sea to sit in;
ships dancing round about it, with Dolphins and other great Fishes playing or
lying at the foot of the same, is drawn by two Sea-horses.

Neptune.
In this Chariot sits Neptune, his head circled with a Coronet of silver,
Scollup-shels, stuck with branches of Corrall, and hung thicke^ with ropes of
pearl; because such things as these are the treasures of the Deep, and are
found in the shells of fishes. In his hand he holds a silver Trident, or
Three-forked-Mace, by which some Writers will have signified the three Natural
qualiies proper to Waters; as those of fountains to be of a delitious taste,
and Christalline color: those of the Sea, to be saltish and unpleasant, and
the color sullen, and greenish: And lastly, those of standing Lakes, neither
sweet nor bitter, nor clear, nor cloudy, but altogether unwholesome for the
taste, and loathsome to the eye. His roabe and mantle with other ornaments are
correspondent to the quality of his person; Buskins of pearl and cockle-shels
being worn upon his legs. At the lower part of this Chariot sit Mer-maids,
who for their excellency in beauty, above any other creatures belonging to the
sea, are preferred to be still in the eye of Neptune.

At Neptunes foot sits Luna (the Moon) who being gouernesse of the sea, and
all petty Floods, as from whose influence they receive their ebbings and
flowings, challenges to herself this honor, to have rule and command of those
Horses that draw the Chariot, and therefore she holds their reins in her hands.

She is atired in light roabes fitting her state and condition, with a silver
Crescent on her head, expressing both her power and property.

The whole Chariot figuring in it self that vast compass which the sea makes
about the body of the earth: whose Globicall Rotundity is Hieroglifically
represented by the wheel of the Chariot.

Before this Chariot ride four Trytons, who are feyned by Poets to be
Trumpeters to Neptune, and for that cause make way before him, holding strange
Trumpets in their hands, which they sound as they pass along, their habits
being Antike, and Sea-like, and sitting upon four several fishes, viz. two
Dolphins, and two Mer-maids, which are not (after the old procreation) begotten
of painted cloth, and brown paper, but are living beasts, so queintly
disguised like the natural fishes, of purpose to avoid the trouble and
pestering of Porters, who with much noise and little comeliness are every year
most unnecessarily employed.

The time being ripe, when the scope of this Device is to be delivered,
Neptunes breath goes forth in these following Speeches.

Neptunes Speeches.
WHence breaks this warlike thunder of loud drums,
( Clarions and Trumpets) whose shrill echo comes
Up to our Watery Court, and calls from thence
Us, and our Trytons? As if violence
Weere to our Siluer-footed Sister done
(Of Floods the Queen) bright Thamesis, who does run
Twice every day to our bosom, and there hides
Ebb
Her wealth, whose Stream in liquid Crystal glides
Guarded with troops of Swannes? what does beget
These Thronges? this Confluence? why do voices beat
The Air with acclamations of applause,
Good wishes, Love, and Praises? what is it draws
All Faces this way? This way Rumor flies,
Clapping her infinite wings, whose noise the Skies
From earth receive, with Musical rebounding,
And strike the Seas with repercussiue sounding.
Oh! now I see the cause: vanish vain fears,
* Isis no danger feels: for her head wears
Crowns of Rich Triumphs, which This day puts on,
And in Thy Honor all these Rites are done.
Whose Name when Neptune heard, it was a strange Spell,
Thus farre-vp into the Land to make him swell
Beyond his Bownds, and with his Sea-troops wait
Thy wished arrival, to congratulate.
Go therefore on, go boldly: thou must sail
In rough Seas (now) of Rule: and every Gale
Will not perhaps befriend thee: But (how black
So ere the Skies look) dread not Thou a Wrack,
For when Integrity and Innocence sit
Steering the Helm, no Rock the Ship can split.
Nor care the Whales (never so great) their Jaws
Should stretch to swallow thee: Every good man's cau^^
Is in all storms his Pilot: He that's sound
To himself (in Conscience) nere can run-a-ground.
Which that thou may do, never look on it still:
For (Spite of Foul gusts) calmer Winds shall fill
Thy Sails at last. And see! they home have brought
A Ship which Bacchus (God of Wines) has fraught
With richest Iuiee of Grapes, which thy Friends shall
Drink off in Healths to this Great Festival.
If any at Thy happiness repine,
They gnaw but their Own hearts, and touch not Thine.
Let Bats and Skreech-Owles murmr at bright Day,
Whiles Prayers of Good-men Guide. Thee on the way.
Sownd old Oceanus Trumpeters, and lead on.
The Trytons then sownding, according to his command, Neptune in his Chariot
passes along before the Lord Mayor. The four Winds (habilimented to their
quality, and having both Faces and Limbs proportionable to their blustering and
boisterous condition) drive forward that Ship of which Neptune spoke. And this
concludes this first Triumph on the Land.

These two Shows pass on until they come into Pauls-Church-yard, where
stands another Chariot; the former Chariot of Neptune, with the Ship, being
conveyed into Cheap Side, this other then takes the place: And this is the
Device.

The second Land-Triumph.
IT is the Throne of Virtue, gloriously adorned and beautified with all things
that are fit to express the Seat of so noble and divine a Person.

Upon the height, and most eminent place (as worthiest to be exalted) sits
Arete (Virtue) herself; her temples shining with a Diadem of stars, to show
that her Descent is only from heaven: her roabes are rich, her mantle white
(figuring Innocence) and powdered with stars of gold, as an Emblem that she
puts upon Men, the garments of eternity.

Beneath Her, in distinct places, sit the Seven liberal Sciences, viz.
Grammar, Rhetoric, Logic, Music, Arithmetike, Geometry, Astronomy.

Having those rooms allotted them, as being Mothers to all Trades, Professions,
Mysteries and Societies, and the readiest guide to Virtue. Their habits are
Light Roabes, and Loose (for Knowledge should be free.) On their heads they
wear garlands of Roses, mixed with other flowers, whose sweet Smells are
arguments of their clear and unspotted thoughts, not corrupted with uice.
Every one carrying in her hand, a Symbol, or Badge of that Learning which she
professes.

At the back of this Chariot sit four Cupids, to signify that virtue is most
honored when she is followed by Love.

This Throne, or Chariot, is drawn by four Horses: upon the two foremost ride
Time and Mercury: the first, the Begetter and Bringer forth of all things in
the world, the second, the God of Wisdom and Eloquence. On the other two
Horses ride Desire and Industry; it being intimated hereby, that Time gives
wings to Wisdom, and sharpens it, Wisdom sets Desire a burning, to attain
to Virtue, and that Burning Desire begets Industry (earnestnestly to pursue
her.) And all these (together) make men in Love with Arts, Trades, Sciences,
and Knowledge, which are the only stairs and ascensions to the Throne of
Virtue, and the only glory and vpholdings of Cities. Time has his wings,
Glass, and Sithe, which cuts down All.

Mercury has his Caduceus, or Charming Rod, his fethered Hat, his Wings, and
other properties fitting his condition, Desire caries a burning heart in her
hand.

Industry is in the shape of an old Countryman, bearing on his shoulder a
Spade, as the Emblem of Labor.

Before this Chariot, or Throne (as Guardians and Protectors to Virtue, to
Arts, and to the rest; and as Assistants to Him who is Chief within the City
for that year) are mounted upon horseback twelve Persons (two by two)
representing the twelve superior Companyes, every one carrying upon his left
arm a fair Shield with the arms in it of one of the twelve Companies, and in
his right hand a lance with a light streamer or pendant on the top of it, and
every horse led and attended by a Footman.

The Lord Mayor being approached to this Throne, Virtue thus salutes him.

The Speech of ARETE (Virtue.)
Hail (worthy Praetor) stay, and do Me grace,
(Who still have called thee Patron) In this place
To take from me heaped welcomes, who combine
These peoples hearts in one, to make them thine.
Bright Virtues name thou know and heavenly birth,
And therefore (spying thee) down she leapd to earth
Whence vicious men had driven her: On her throne
The Liberal Arts wait: from whose breasts do run
The milk of Knowledge: on which, Sciences feed,
Trades and Professions: And by Them, the seed
Of Civil, Popular government, is sown;
Which springing up, lo! to what height it is grown
In Thee and The Al^ men.
These is seen. And (to maintain
This Greatness) Twelve strong Pillars it sustain;
Upon whose Capitals, The tw^ Compa^
Twelve Societies stand,
(Grave and well-ordred) bearing chief Command
Within this City, and (with Love) thus rear
Thy fame, in free election, for this year.
All armed, to knit their Nerves (in One) with Thine,
To guard this new Troy: And, (that She may shine
In Thee, as Thou in Her) no Misers kay
Has bard the Gold up; Light flies from the Day
Not of more free gift, thau from them their Cost:
For what is now spared, that only they count Lost.
As then their Ioynd-hands lift Thee to thy Seat.
(Changing thereby thy Name for one More ^io^.
Great
And as this City, with her Loud, Full Voice,
(Drowning all spite that murmures at the Choice,
If at least such there be) does Thee prefer,
So art thou bound to love, both Them and Her.
For Know, thou art not like a Pinnacle, placed
Only to stand aloft, and to be graced
With wondering eyes, or to have caps and knees
Heap worship on thee: for that Man does leeze
Himself and his Renown, whose growth being Hye
In the weale-publicke (like the Cypres tree)
Is neither good to Build-with, nor bear Fruit;
Thou must be now, Stirring, and Resolute.
To be what thou art Sworn, (a waking Eye)
A far off (like a Beacon) to descry
What storms are coming, and (being come) must th^n
Shelter with spread arms, the poor'st Citizen.
Set Plenty at thy Table, at thy Gate
Bounty, and Hospitality: he is most Ingrate
Into whose lap the Publicke-weale having powered
Her Golden shewers, from Her his wealth should hoord.
Be like those Ancient Spirits, that (long agon)
Could think no Good deed sooner, than it was Don;
Others to pleasure. Hold it Thou more Glory,
Than to be pleased Thy Self. And be not sorry
If Any strive (in best things) to exceed thee,
But glad, to help thy Wrongers, if they need thee.
Nor fear the Stings of Envy, nor the Threats
Of her inuenomd Arrows, which at the Seats
Of those Who Best Rule, evermore are shot,
But the Air blows off their feathers, and they hit not.
Come therefore on; nor dread her, nor her Sprites,
The poison she spits up, on her own Head lights.
On, on, away.
This Chariot or Throne of Virtue is then set forward, and follows that of
Neptune, this taking place just before the Lord Mayor: And this concludes the
second Triumphant show.

The third Device.
THe third Device is a Forlorn Castle, built close to the little Conduit in
Cheap Side, by which as the Throne of Virtue comes nearer and nearer, there
appear above (on the battlements) Envy, as chief Commandresse of that
infernal Place, and every part of it guarded with persons representing all
those that are fellows and followers of Envy: As Ignorance, Sloth, Oppression,
Disdain, etc. Envy her self being attired like a Fury, her hair full of
Snakes, her countenance pallid, meagre and lean, her body naked, in her hand a
knot of Snakes, crawling and writhen about her arm.

The rest of her litter are in as ugly shapes as the Dam, every one of the^
being armed with black bows, and arrows ready to be shot at Virtue. At the
gates of this Fort of Furies, stand Riot and Calumny, in the shapes of Giants,
with clubs, who offer to keep back the Chariot of Virtue, and to stop her
passage. All the rest likewise on the battlements offering to discharge their
black Artillery at her: but she only holding up her bright shield, dazzles
them, and confounds them, they all on a sudden shrinking in their heads, until
the Chariot be past, and then all of them appearing again: their arrows,
which they shoot up into the air, break there out in fire-workes, as having
no power to do wrong to so sacred a Deity as Virtue.

This cave of Monsters stands fixed to the Conduit, in which Envy only
breathes out her poison to this purpose.

The speech of Envy.
ENVY. ADders shoot, hysse speckled Snakes;
Sloth craule up, see Oppression wakes;
(Baine to learning) Ignorance
Shake thy Asses ears, Disdain, advance
Thy head Luciferan: Riot split
Thy ribs with curses: Calumny spit
Thy rancke-rotten gall up: See, See, See,
That Witch, whose bottomless Sorcery
Makes fools run mad for her; that Hag
For whom your Dam pines, hangs out her flag
Our Den to ransacke: Virtue, that who^re;
See, see, how brave she is, I am poor.

VERTVE. On, on, the beams of Virtue, are so bright,
They dazzle Envy, on: the Hag's put to flight.

ENVY. Snakes, from your virulent spawne engender
Dragons, that may peece-meale rend her,
Adders shoot your stings like quils
Of Porcupines, (Stiff) hot Aetnean hills
Vomit sulphur to confound her,
Fiendes and Furies (that dwell under)
Lift hell gates from their hindges: come
You clouen-foote-broode of Barrathrum,
Stop, stay her, fright her, with your shreekes,
And put fresh blood in Enuies cheeks.

VERTVE. On, on, the beams of Virtue, are so bright,
They dazzle Envy: on the Hag's put to flight.

OMNES. Shoot, Shoot, etc. All that are with Envy.

Either during this speech, or else when it is done, certain Rockets fly up
into the air; The Throne of Virtue passing on still, never staying, but
speaking still those her two last lines, albeit, she be out of the hearing of
Envy: and the other of Enuies Faction, crying still, shoot, shoot, but seeing
they prevail not, all retire in, and are not seen till the Throne comes back
again.

And this concludes this Triumphant assault of Envy: her conquest is to come.

The fourth Device.
THIS Throne of Virtue passes along until it come to the Cross in Cheap,
where the presentation of another Triumph attends to welcome the Lord Mayor, in
his passage, the Chariot of Virtue is drawn then along, this other that
follows taking her place, the Device bearing this argument.

Virtue having by help of her followers, conducted the Lord Mayor safely,
eue^, as it were, through the jaws of Envy and all her Monsters: The next and
highest honor she can bring him to, is to make him ariue at the house of
Fame, And that is this Pageant. In the upper seat sits Fame crowned in rich
attire, a Trumpet in her hand, etc. In other several places sit Kings,
Princes, and Noble persons, who have benefice of the Marchant-tailors: A
particular room being reserved for one that represents the person of Henry the
now Prince of Wales.

The only speaker here is Fame her self, whose words sound out these glad
welcomes.

The speech of Fame.
VVElcome to Fames high Temple: here fix fast
Thy footing; for the ways which thou have past
Will be forgot and worn out, and no Tract
Of steps observed, but what thou now shall Act.
The book is shut of thy precedent deeds,
And Fame vnclaspes another, where she reads
(Aloud) the Chronickle of a dangerous year,
For Each Eye will look through thee, and Each Ear
Way-lay thy Words and Works. Thou Have yet but gone
About a Pyramid's foot; the Top's not won,
That Is glass; who slides there, falls, and once fallen down
Never more rises: No Art cures Renown
The wound being sent to 'th Heart. It Is kept from thence
By a strong Armor, Virtues influence;
She guides thee, Follow her. In this Court of Fame
None else but Virtue can enrole thy Name.
Erect thou then a Serious Eye, And look
What Worthies fill up Fames Voluminous book,
That now (thine own name read there) none may blot
Thy leaf with soul ink, nor thy Margent quoate
With any Act of Thine, which may disgrace
This Cities choice, thy self, or this thy Place:
Or, that which may dishonor the high Merits
Of thy Renowned Society: Royal Spirits
Of Princes holding it a grace to wear
That Crimson Badge, which these about them bear,
Yea, Kings themselves amongst you have Fellows been,
Styled by the Name of a Free-citizen:
For instance, see, seven English Kings there placed,
Clothed in your Livery, The first Seat being graced
By second Richard: next him Hen^
Bullingbrooke:
Then, that Fifth (thundering) Henry: who all France shook:
By him, his son (sixth Henry) By his side
Fourth Edward: who the Roses did divide:
Richard the third, next him, and then that King,
Who made both Roses in one Branch to spring:
A Spring of which Branch, (Highest now but One)
Is Henry Prince of Wales, followed by none:
Who of this Brotherhood, last and best steps forth,
Honoring your Hall: To Heighthen more your worth.
I can a Register show of seventeen more,
(Princes and Dukes All:) entombed long before,
Yet kept alive by Fame; Earls thirty one,
And Barons sixty six that path have gone:
Of Visecounts only one, your Order took:
Turn over one leaf more in our vast book
And you may read the Names of Prelates there,
Of which one Archbishop your cloth did wear.
And Bishops twenty four: of Abbots seue,
As many Priors, to make the number even:
Of forty Church men, I, one sub prior add,
You from all these, These from you honor had:
Women of high blood likewise laid aside
Their greater State so to be dignified:
Of which a Queen the first was, then a pair
of Dukes wives: And to leave the Roll more fair
Five Countesses and two Ladies are the last,
Whose Birth and Beauties have your Order gracd.
But I too long spin out this Third of Gold;
Here breaks it off. Fame has them All en-rold
On a Large File (with Others,) And their Story
The world shall read, to Add unto thy Glory,
Which I am loath to darken: thousand eyes
Yet aching till they enjoy thee, win then that prise
Which Virtue holds up for thee, And (that done)
Fame shall the end crown, as she has begun.
Set forward.
Those Princes and Dukes (besides the Kings nominated before) are these.

In the time of Richard the second.
John Duke of Lancaster. Edmond Duke of York. The Duke of Gloucester. The Duke of
Surrey.
In the time of Henry the the fifth.
Humfry Duke of Gloucester. Richard Duke of York.
In the time of Edward the 4.
G^orge D. of Clarence.
In the time of Richard the third.
Duke of Suffolk John D. of Norfolk George D. of Bedford.
Edward D. of Buckingham, In the time of Henry the 7. with others, whose Roll is
too long, here to be opened. The Queen spoken of, was Anne wife to Richard the
2.

Dukes wives these, viz.

The Duchess of Gloucester. In the time of Richard the 2. Elionor Duchess of
Gloucester. In the time of H. the 5.

Now for Prelates, I reckon only these,

The Prior of Saint Bartholmewes, And his Sub-prior. The Prior of
Elsing-spittle, Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury Henry Bewfort Bishop
of Winton. The Abbot of Barmondsey. The Abbot of Towrchill. Philip Morgan
Bishop of Worster. The Abbot of Tower Hill. The Prior of Saint Mary Ouery. The
Prior of Saint Trinity in Cree-church. The Abbot and Prior of Westminster. Kemp
Bishop of London. W. Wainfleete B. of Winchester. George Neuill Bishop of
Winchester, and Chauncelor of England. John May Abbot of Chertsay, Laurence
Bishop of Durham. John Russell Bishop of Rochester.
If I should lengthen this number, it were but to trouble you with a large
Index of names only, which I am loath to do, knowing your expectation is to
be otherwise feasted.

The Speech of Fame therefore being ended, as it is set down before, this
Temple of Hers takes place next before the Lord Mayor, those of Neptune and
Virtue marching in precedent order. And as this Temple is carried along, a Song
is heard, the Music being queintly conveyed in a private room, and not a
person discovered.

THE SONG.
HOnor, eldest Child of Fame,
Thou far older then thy Name,
Waken with my Song, and see
One of thine, here waiting thee.
Sleep not now
But thy brow
Chac't with Olives, Oak and Baies
And an age of happy days
Upward bring
Whilst we sing
In a Chorus altogether,
Welcome, welcome, welcome hither.
Longing round about him stay
Eyes, to make another day,
Able with their virtuous Light
Utterly to banish Night.
All agree
This is he
Full of bounty, honor, store
And a world of goodness more
Yet to spring
Whilst we sing
In a Chorus altogether,
Welcome, welcome, welcome hither.
Envy angry with the dead,
Far from this place hide thy head:
And Opinion, that nere knew
What was either good or true
Fly, I say
For this day
Shall fair Justice, Truth, and Right,
And such happy sons of Light
To us bring
Whilst we sing
In a Chorus altogether,
Welcome, welcome, welcome hither.
Go on nobly, may thy Name,
Be as old, and good as Fame.
Ever be remembered here
Whilst a blessing, or a tear
Is in store
With the pore
So shall SVVINERTON nere dye,
But his virtues upward fly
And still spring
Whilst we sing
In a Chorus ceasing never,
He is living, living ever.
And this concludes this fourth Triumph, till his Lordships return from the
Guild Hall.

In returning back from the Guild Hall, to perform the Ceremonial customs
in Paul's Church, these shows march in the same order as before: and coming
with the Throne of Virtue, Envy and her crew are as busy again, Envy uttering
some three or four lines toward the end of her speech only: As thus:

ENVY. FIends and Furies that dwell under,
Lift Hell-gates from their hindges: Come
You clouen-footed-brood of Barathrum,
Stop, stony her, fright her with your shreekes,
And put fresh blood in Enuyes cheeks.

VERTVE. On, on, the beams of Virtue are so bright,
They dazzle Envy: On, the Hag's put to flight.

This done, or as it is in doing, those twelve that ride armed discharge their
Pistols, at which Envy, and the rest, vanish, and are seen no more.

When the Lord Mayor is (with all the rest of their Triumphs) brought home,
Justice (for a farewell) is mounted on some couenient scaffold close to his
entrance at his Gate, who thus salutes him.

The speech of JUSTICE.
MY This-dayes-sworne-protector, welcome home,
If Justice speak not now, be she ever dumb:
The world gives out she is blind; but men shall see,
Her Sight is clear, by influence drawn from Thee.
For One-yeare therefore, at these Gates she will sit,
To guide thee In and Out: thou shall commit
(If She stand by thee) not One touch of wrong:
And though I know thy wisdom built up strong,
Yet men (like great ships) being in storms, most near
To danger, when up all their sails they bear.
And since all Magistrates tread still on ice,
From mine own School I read thee this advice:
Do good for no man's sake (now) but thine own,
Take leave of Friends and foes, both must be known
But by one Face: the Rich and Poor must lie
In one even Scale: All Suitors, in thine Eye
Welcome alike; Even He that seems most base,
Look not upon his Clothes, but on his Case.
Let not Oppression wash his hands in the Tears
Of Widows, or of Orphans: Widows prayers
Can pluck down Thunder, and poor Orphans cries
Are Laurels held in fire; the violence flies
Up to Heauen-gates, and there the wrong does tell,
Whilst Innocence leaves behind it a sweet smell.
Thy Conscience must be like that Scarlet Dye;
One foul spot stains it All: and the quick Eye
Of this prying world, will make that spot thy scorn.
Tha^ Collar (which about thy Neck is worn)
Of Golden Esses, bids thee so to knit
Men hearts in Love, and make a Chain of it.
That Sword is seldom drawn, by which is meant,
It should strike seldom: never the innocent.
It Is held before thee by another Hand,
But the point upwards (heaven must that command)
Snatch it not then in Wrath; it must be given,
But to cut none, till warranted by Heaven.
The Head, the politic Body must advance
For which thou have this Cap of Maintenance,
And since the most just Magistrate often erres,
Thou guarded art about with Officers,
Who knowing the ^athes of Others that are gone,
Should teach thee what to do, what leave undone.
Nights Candles lighted are, and burn amain,
Cut therefore here off, Thy Officious Train
Which Love and Custom lend thee: All Delight
Crown both this Day and City: A good Night
To Thee, and these Grave Senators, to whom
My last Fare-wels, in these glad wishes come,
That thou and they (whose strength the City bears)
May be as old in Goodness as in Years.
THe Title Page of this Book makes promise of all the Shows by water, as of
these On the Land; but Apollo having no hand in them, I suffer them to dye by
that which fed them; that is to say, Powder and Smoke. Their thunder
(according to the old Gally-foyst-fashion) was too loud for any of the Nine
Muses to be bidden to it. I had deuiz'd O^e, altogether Musical, but Times
Glass could spare no Sand, nor lend convenient Hours for the performance of
it. Night cuts off the glory of this Day, and so consequently of these
Triumphs, whose brightness being ecclipsed, my labors can yield no longer
shadow. They are ended, but my Love and Duty to your Lordship shall never.

-- Non displ^cuisse m^retur,
Festinat (Praetor) Qui placuisse Tibi*
FINIS.

