IF IT BE NOT GOOD, The Devil is in it. A New Play, AS IT HAS BIN lately
Acted, with great applause, by the Queens Majesty's Servants: At the Red Bull.

Written by THOMAS DEKKER.

Flectere si nequeo Superos, Acheronta mouebo.

LONDON, Printed for I. T. And are to be sold by Edward Merchant, at his shop
against the Cross in Paul's Church-yarde, 1612.

TO MY LOVING, AND LOVED FRIENDS and fellows, the Queens Maiesties-seruants.
KNowledge and Reward dwell far a-^under. Greatness lay once between them. But
(in his stead) Covetousness now. An ill neighbor, a bad Benefactor, no
paymaister to Poets. By This Hard-Houskeeping, (or rather, Shutting up of
Liberalities Doors,) Merit goes a Begging, and Learning starues. Books, had
wont to have Patrons, and (now,) Patrons have Books. The Snufft hat is
Lighted, consumes That which Feeds it. A Sign, the World has an ill Ear,
when no Music is good, unless it Strikes up for Nothing. I have Sung so, but
will no more. A Hue- and Cry follow, his Wit, that sleeps, when sweet Tunes are
sounding. But it is now the ^ashion. Lords, look well: Knig^ts, Thank well;
Gntlemen, promise well; Citizens, Take well; Gulles, Swear well: but None,
Give well, I leave therefore All, for You: And All (that This can be) to You.
Not in hope to Have; but in Recognition of What I Have (as I think) Already
(your Loves.)

Acknowledgement is part of payment sometimes, but it neither is, nor shall be
(between you and me) a Cancel^ing. I have cast mine eye upon many, but find
none more fit, none more worthy, to Patronize this, than you, who have
Protected it. Your Cost, Counsel, and Lab^ur, had bin ill spent, if a Second
should by my hand snatch from you This Glory. No: When Fortune (in her blind
pride) set her foot upon This imperfect Building, (as scorning the Foundation
and Workmanship:) you, gently raizd it up (on the same Columns,) the
Frontispice only a little more Garnished: To you therefore deservedly is the
Whole Frame consecrated. For I durst swear, if Wishes and Curses could have
become Witches, the neck of this Harmles Devil had long a go bin broken.

But I am glad that Ignorance (so insolent for being flattered) is now stripped
naked, and her deformities discovered: And more glad, that Envy sits maddingly
gnawing her own Snakes, whose Stinges she had armed to strike Others. Feed
let her so still. So, still let the Other ^e laughed at. Whilst I (pitying the
One, and not Dreading the Other,) send these my Wishes flying into your
Bosoms; That the God of Poets, may never (...) your Stage with a Cherilus, nor
a Suffenus, (Males, Eminent in nothing but in Long Ears, in Kicking and in
Braging out Calumnies) upon whose Cruppers may be aptly pind, That Morrall of
poor O^nus making Ropes in Hell, whilst an Ass stands by, and (as he twists)
bites them in sunder. But if His Versifying Deity, sends you Any, I wish they
may be such, as are worthy to sit, At the Table of the Sun. None else.

I wish a Fair and Fortunate Day, to your Next New-Play (for the Makers-sake
and your own,) because such Brave Triumphs of Poesy, and Elaborate Industry,
which my Worthy Friends Muse has there set forth, deserve a Theater full of
very Muses themselves to be Spectators. To that Fair Day I wish a Full, Free,
and Knowing Auditor. And to that Full Audience, One Honest Doore-keeper. So,
Farewell.

Yours. Tho: Dekker.
Prologue.
WOuld ^'were a Custom that at all New-playes
The Makers sat o'th, Stage, either with Bays
To have their Works Crowned, or beaten in with Hissing,
Pied and bold Ideotes, durst not then sit Kissing
A Muses cheek: Shame would base Changelings weane,
From Sucking the mellifluous Hypocrene:
Who write as blinde-men shoot, by (Hap, not Aim,)
So, Fools by lucky Throwing, often win the Game.
Phoebus has many Bastards, True Sons ^ewe,
I mean of those, whose quick clear eyes can view.
Poesi^s pure Essence, It being so divine,
That the Suns Fires, (even when they brightest shine)
Or Lightning, when most subtillie love does spend it,
May as soon be approchd, weyed, touchd, or comprehended.
But it is with Poets now, as it is with Nations,
Thil-fauouredst Vices, are the brauest Fashions.
A Play whose Rudenes, Indians would abhor,
I^t fill a house with Fish wives, Rare, They All Roar.
It is not Praise is sought for (Now) but Pence,
Tho dropd, from Greasie-apron Audience.
Clapd may he be with Thunder, that plucks Bays,
With such Foul Hands, and with Squint-Eyes does gaze
On Pallas Shield; not caring (so he Gains,
A Cra^d Third-Day, what Filth drops from his Brains.
Let Those that lou^ Pans pipe, dance still to Pan,
They shall but get ^ong Ears by it: Give me That Man,
Who when the Plague of an Impostumd Brains
( Breaking out) in^ects a Theater, and hotly reigns,
Killing the H^arers hearts, that the vast rooms
Stand empty, like so many Dead-mens ^oombes,
Can call the Banishd Auditor home, And tie
His Ear (with golden chains) to his Melody:
Can draw with Adamantine Pen, (even creatures
Forg'de out of the Hammer, on tiptoe, to Reach up,
And (from R^re silence) clap their Brawny hands,
TO Applaud, what their charmd soul scarce understands.
That Man give me; whose Breast filled by the Muses,
With Raptures, Into a second, them infuses:
Can give an Actor, Sorrow, Rage, Joy, Passion,
Whilst he again (by selfsame Agitation)
Commands the Hearers, sometimes drawing out Tears,
Then smiles, and fills them both with Hopes and Fears.
That Man give me: And to be such-a- One,
Our Poet (^^is day) strives, or to be None:
Lend not (Him) hands for Pity, but for Merit,
If he Please, he is Crowned, if Not, his Fate must b^are it.
IF THIS BE NOT A GOOD PLAY, THE DEVIL IS IN IT.
Enter (at the sound of hellish music,) Pluto, and Charon. Plu. H^!

Cha. So.

Plu. What so.

Cha. I Will be thy slave no longer.

Plu. Wha^ slave?

Cha. Hels drudge, her Gally-slaue. I ha'wore,
My flesh toth' bones, bones marrowles, at the Oaer
Tugging to waft to'thy Stygian empire, Souls,
Which (but for Charon) never had come in Sholes,
Yet (swarmde they nere so,) them on shore I set,
Hell gets by Charon, what does Charon get?

Plu. His Fare.

Char. Scuruy fare, i will first cry garlic.

Plu. Do:
And make hell stinck, as that does hither.

Cha. If I do!
Some like that smell, my boat to shore i will pull;
Not work a stroke more.

Plu. How?

Ch^. Not touch a Scull.

Pln. Why?

Cha. I have no doings: Graues-end-barge has more,
And car^es as good as any are in hell;
I fear the infernal rivers are frozen over
So few by water come: else the whores that dwell
Next door to hell, go about: besides, it is thought,
That m^n to find hell, now, new ways have sought,
^s Sp^nirards did to the Indies. Pluto, mend
My wages, or row thy self.

Plu: Ugly, grumbling slave,
Have I not raisde thy price? yet still do crave?
Such bold brave beggars (heard off never before
Are thy fares now, they teach thee to beg more.
Thy fare was (first) a halfe-peny, then the souls gave thee
A penny, then three-halfe-pence, we shall have thee
(As market-folkes on darth,) so damned-deere,
Men will not come to hell, crying out they are here
Worse rack then they are in tauernes: why do howl for money?

Cha: For money: I Will have ij. d. for each soul
I ferry over; Im'e old, crazed, Stiff, and lam'de,
That soul that's not worth ijd. wou'ld twere damb'd.

Plu: Thou shall not.

Cha: I will have it, or lie still,
If Charon fill hell, hell shall Charon fill:
For Ghosts now come not thronging to my boat,
But drop by one and one in; none of note
Are fares now: I had wont brave fellows to ply,
Who, (hack't and mangled) did in battles dye.
But now these gallants which do walk hells Rowndes,
Are fuller of diseases, than of wounds.
If wounded any take my boat, they roar,
Being stabd, either drunk, or slain about some whore.
That's all the fight now.

Prod: Charon.

Within. Plu: Get thee gone:
That called for.

Prod: Charon.

Cha: Ball not. I Will come anon.
Hagges of hell gnaw thee with their foul furd-gummes.

Plu: Pluto, no wonder if so few hither comes?

Cha. Why:
Gingerly: See See,
One of thine own promooters, (with hawks eyes,
That should for prey be watching) here suoring lies.

Plu: With a mischife! cabind! a fury.

Char. I Will Ferret out more.

Ruffman comes up, Fury Enters. Cha. Another: look: dancing abaw'de on's knee.

Enter Shackle-soule comes up. Shack. I do enquire if rich bawdes Carted be
On earth as well as poor ones: I sleep not Pluto.

Plu. Twist stronger-knotted whips, I Will wake you (slaves!)

Cha. Two of thy Summers dead drunk here too.

Lur. Thou lie.

Charon. Lurchall and another Sqirit comes up. Cha. I come: If I must work,
let these
Thy Prentices, plye their occupation,
T uphold hells Kingdom, more must work then one.
Exit.
Plu. Ha; Are there whipping-posts for such as dwell
In Idleness on Earth, and yet shall Hell
(As if we took bribes here too,) let such pass*
I Will have you tawde: Is not the world as it was?
Once mother of R^pes, Incests, and Sodomies,
Atheism, and Blasphemies, plump Boys indeed.
That sucked (our Dams breast) is she now barren? Ha*
Is there a dearth of villains?

Omn. More now then ever?

Plu. Is there such pe^urie of mankind Hell-houndes*
You can lie snoring.

Ruff. Each Land is full of Rake-hells.

Shac. But sholes of Sharkes eat up the Fish at Sea.

Lur. Brave pitchy villains there.

Plu. Yet you playing here.

Omn. No, No; most awefull Plut^.

Plu. Were you good Hell Hounds, every day should be
A Symon-and- Jude, to crown our board with Feasts
A blacke-eyde-soules each minute: were you honest devil*
Each officer in hell should have at least,
A brace of whores to his breakfast: above us dwell,
Devils brauer and more subtle then in Hell.

Omni. We Will fill thy palace with them.

Plu. I Will try that: go:
Rufman, take instantly a Courtiers shape
O^ any country: choose thine own disguize
And return swiftly.

Ruf. Yes.
Exit.
Plu. Shackle-soule wear thou
A Friars grave habit.

Shac. Well.
Exit.
Plu. Grumshall walk thou
In trebble-ruffes like a Merchant.

Lur. So: it is don.
Exit.
Plu. The bars of our latigious Courts had wont
To crack with thronging pleaders, whose loud din
Shook the infernal hell, as if 't had bin
An earthquake bursting from the deep Abisse,
Or else Jove's thunder, thrown at the head of Dis
(The God of gold,) for hiding it below,
Thereby to tempt churles hither. Nor did we know
What a Vacation meant: continual term
Fattend hels Lawyers, and shall so again.

Enter Rufman, Srackle-soule and Lurchall. Ruf. Here.

Shac. Here.

Lur. Command us.

Plu. Fly into the world:
As ^'are in shapes transformde be so in name,
For men are our sides only: be you the same;
(...) thee to N^pl^s, (Rufm^n), thou shall find
A Prince there (newly crownde,) ap^ly (...) de
To any bendin^^^* least his youthful brows
(...) at Stars only, wey down his loftiest boughs
(...) leade^ plome^^ poison his best thoughts with taste
O^ things most sensual; if the heart once wast
The body feels consumption; good or bad kings
Breed Subjects like them: clear streams flow from clear springs.
Turn therefore Naples to a puddle: with a civil
Much promising face, and well oylde play the court devil.

Ruff. I Will doo'^ in bravery: if as deep as hell,
The large ears hear a Land curse me, my part's played well.

Plu: Fly Shackle-soule.

Shac. Whither?

Plu: To the Friery,
Best-samde in Naples for strict orders: throw
What n^ts thou see can catch them: Amongst 'em sow
Seeds of contention, or what ever sin
They most abhor, sweat thou to bring that in.

Shac: A wolf in lamb skin leapes into the rout,
Bell, book, or candle cannot curse me out:
I Will curse ^aster than they.

Plu. Do:

Grumball. Lur. Here.

Plu. Be thou a cittie-diuell, make thy hands
O^ Harpyes claws, which being on courtiers lands
O^ce fastend, never let loose, the Merchant play,
And on the Burse, see thou thy flag display.
Of politic b^n^k-rupt^s^e: train up as many
To f^^ght under it, as th^^ can, for now is not any
That break, (they will break their necks first) if, beside
Thou can no^ through the whole city meet with pride,
Riot, lechery, enu^, (...), and such stuff,
B^ing 'em all-in coach'd, the gares are wide enough.
The spirit of gold instruct thee: hence all.

Omn. Fly.

Plu. Sta^, le^st you should want helpers at your calling
Any devils shall come, (S^arch hound, Tobacco-spawling,
Vpshotten, Suckland, Glitterbacke, or any
Whom you shall need to employ, but call not many,
The'rs but ^ew good in hell. And stay, remember
We all meet to hear how you prosper.

Omn. Where?

Plu. The Tree
Blasted with Goblins, that about whose root
5. Mandrakes grow, ^'th Grove by Naples there,
Meet there.

Omn. We shall.

Plu. Our blessings with you bear.

Ruff. Dread king of Ghosts, we will plye our thrift so well,
Thou sh^lt be forced to enlarge thy Iayle of Hell.

Plu. Be quick th'at best, let saw^y mortals know,
How ere they sleep, there is one wakes here below.

Exeunt. Enter Alphonso (King of Naples) Crownde, wearing Robes Imperial,
Swords of State, Maces, etc. being borne before him, by Octauio Astolfo, (2.
uncles) Narcisso, Iouinelli, B^isco, (Counts) with others, Count Spendola
meeting them. Spen. One of those gallant Troops went forth to meet
Your admirde Mistress (Erminhild the fair)
Has left your Conuoy with her on the way.

K. And brings glad news of her being here (this day)
Let Canons tell in T^under her Arrival,
When she is at hand our self ^ill meet her,

FlourishOmn. On. He takes his Seat; Al kneel. K. Pray rise; until about
our brows were thrown,
These sparkling beams, such adoration
Was not bestowde on us: whom does the knee
Thus lovely worship? this Idol, (Gold) or me?
Indeed it is the world^ Saint, if that you adore,
G^e, pray to you^ coffers. None to us shall bow,
Give God your knees.

Oct. Whose own voice does allow
That Subjects should to those who ^re Supr^me,
Bend, as to God, (all King^ being like to h^^)

Ast. Thou wonder of thy time, I Will pay no more
To thee of duty than has been before
And ever shall be paid to those sit Hye.

K. Pray mock not me with such Idolatry,
Kings, Gods are, (I confess) but Gods of clay,
Brittle as you are, you as ^ood as they,
Only in weight they differ, (this poor dram)
Yet all bu^ flesh and blood; And such I am.
If such, pray let me eat, drink, speak, and walk,
Not looked clean through, with superstitious eyes,
(Not star'de at like a Comete.) As you go
Or speak, or feed, (un wondered at) let me so*

Oct. Not Kings of Ceremony.

K. Uncle what then?
Still are they Kings.

Oct. But show like common men.

K. Good uncle know, no Sun in this our Sphere,
Shall rule but We, let others shine as clear,
In goodness, None in greatness shall.

Ast. Blessed reign!
The Golden world is molding new again.

K. All that I crave is this, and it is not new,
Pay unto Caesar only Caesar's due.

Oct. We owe thee loyal hearts, and those we will pay,
Each minute (Mirror of Kings.)

Iou. Mark, the old Lords promise their hearts, but no money.

Oct. Here are the Names ^f bold conspirators,
(Young Catilines, and far more desperate)
Who in your Fathers days kindled the fires
Of here R^bellion.

K. Which are now burnt out.

Oct. Who knows that? embers in dead Ashes lie.
King, Set thy hand to this let raytors dye.

Ast. It Is fit you should do so.

Oct. Sound ^ollicie.

K. Men many things hold fit,
That are not good,
A young Beginner and set up in blood!
(Butchers can do no more.)
Shall Records say
Being Crownde, he played the Tyran the first day,
How should that Chronicler be cur^'d? your paper.
When such a fatal book comes in my sight,
I Will with Vespasian wish I could not write,
Their bond is canceld. I forgive the debt,
See that at liberty, they all be set.

Omn. A Princely Act.

Oct. If wisely it is well done.

Sp^n. That reign must bost,
Which mercy has begun.

K. Bear witness all, what pace the Chariot wheels
Of our new guided Sovereignty shall run.

Rus. A main gallop I hope.

K. And here I vow to end as it is begun.

Ast. Heaven fill thee full of days,
But (being all told)
Ending no worse,
Their sum we will write in gold.

Oct. The course you will take dear Lord.

K. This: pray observe it.

Iou. Call you this Coronation day? would I were ith streets where the
condu^tes run claret wine, there is some good fellowship.


Oct. Peace.

K. Each week within the year shall be a book
Which each day i^e read over: I well may do it,
The book being but six leaves (six days,) the seventh
Be his that owes it;
Sacred is that and hye;
And who prophanes one hour in that,
Shall dye.

Spen. How many will be left alive then this day fortnight?

Oct. First, beat all Tauernes down then, Souls are lost
(Being drownde in Surfets) on that seventh day most.
Stay (best of Kings) mine own hand shall set down
What laws thou made first day thou wor'st a Crown.
Begin, begin thy week.

K. Write Monday.

Oct. So so, Monday.

Iou. They say Monday's Shooemakers holliday, I Will fall to that trade.


Oct. I have writ it down my liege.

Iou. Peace, harken to your lesson.

K. That day, from morn till night, I Will execute
The office of a Judge, and wey out laws
With even scales.

Iou. That's more than grocers do.

K. The poor and rich man's cause
I Will poize alike: It shall be my chief care
That bribes and wrangling be pitched over the bar.

Iou. We shall have old breaking of necks then.

K. Down with that first.

Oct. O for a pen of gold!
You Will have no bribes.

K. None.

Oct. Yet terme-time all they year!
A good strong law, suite cannot now cost dear.

K. Have you done?

Oct. I Am at bribes, and wrangling done presently.

Nar. We must all turn pettifoggers, and in stead of gi^t rapiers, hang
buckram bags at our girdles.


Iou. All my clients, shall be women.

Spen. Why?

Iou. Because they are easiest fetched over: there is something to be gotten out
of them.


Oct. Thy monday's task is done: what is next?

Iou. Sunday if the week goes backward.

King. Tuesdayes weel'e sit to hear the poore-mans cries,
Orphans and widows: our own princely eyes
Shall their petitions read: our progress then
Shall Be to hospitalls which good minded men
Have built to pious use, for lame, sicks, and poor
We Will see what is given, what spent, and what flows over
Churles (with Gods money) shall not feast, swill wine,
And fat their rank gutts whilst poor wretches pine.

Iou. This is a brave world for beggars, if it hold.

Oct. Poor wretches pine, So are they left: tot'h next.

Kin. Wednesdaies we will spend.

Iou. In fish dinners.

Kin. In the affairs
Of farren states, treat with ambassadors,
Hear them and give them answers. Thursday, for wars.

Iou. That Is well: better be together byth'^ares, then to go halting to
hospitalls.


Kin. Our Neapolitane youths (that day) shall try
Their skill in arms, poor scorned Soldiers
Shall not be suffered beg here (as in some lands)
Nor stoop slaue-like to Captains proud commands,
Sta^ue, and lie (...), when the selfsame pay,
The Soldier fights for, keeps the Leaders gay.
Nor shall he through ice and fire make gray his bread,
Wear out new Moons, only to earne his bread,
Wade up to the beard in torrents; and be drowned
All save the head; march hard to meet a wound,
In The very face, and even his heart strings crack,
To win a town, yet not to cloth his back:
And the black storm of troubles being gone,
Shund like a creditor, not looked upon,
But as court-pallats (when bright day draws nigh)
Rold up in some dark corner is thrown by.
Uncle write that.

Oct. Fast as my pen can trot.

Spen. What a number of tottred roagu^s will be turned into brave fellows a this
new change of the moon


Iou. The brauer they are, the sooner are mercers undone.

Oct. Soldiers are down too.

Kin. Down with Learning next.
For friday shall be spent in the reverend Schools,
Where we will sift br^nne from Hour, (hiss babbling fools,
But crown the deepe-braind disputant) none shall hold
Three or four Church-liuings (got by Symonious gold)
In them, to fat himself as in a stye,
When greater Scholars languish in beggary:
And in thin threadbare cassacks wear out their age,
And bury their worth in some by vicorage:
This we will see mended.

Enter Iouenella. Iou. Tyth pigges youl'e smoke for this.

Kin. So set it down.

Oct. Scholars languish in beggery-So:
Thy fridaies law is writ; for Satterday, what?

King. I mary sir, All our cares now for that.
Well to begin, and not end so were base,
The winning of the gole crowns eachmans race.

Narcisso stepping in before in the Scene, Enters here. Nar: Sir, there is a
stranger newly ariu'de your court,
And much importunes to behold your Highness.

Kin: What is he?

Nar: Of goodly presence.

Kin: Let him see us.

Rufman brought in by all. Ruff: The powers that guide me, guard thee, I have
heard thy name
In regions far hence, where it does refound
Louder than here at home; to touch this ground
Iha passed through countries, into which none here
Would willingly sail I think, and with me bring,
My love and service, which to your grace I tender.

Kin: What are you, and whence come you?

Ruff: From Heluetia.

Spen: What hell says he?

Iou: Peace you s^all know hot hell time enough.

Ruff: I am an Heluetian borne, the house from which I am descended, ancient
and well known to many princes: Bohor is my name.


Iou: Zounds! Bohor! has struck two of my teeth out with his name,

Ruff. A Shalcan Tartar being my grandfather
Men call me Shalkan Bohor. About the world
My travails make a girdle (perfect round:)
So that, what wonders Kings on earth ever found
I know, and what I know, Is yours.

K. Brave Heluetian,
We give you thanks and welcome: your arrival*
Is fair and to our wish, of those days
Which Time sets down, to number up a week,
Every day have we tasked; save only one,
How in these courts of Kings (through which you have gone,)
Do Princes wast their hours?

Ruff. How but in that,
For which they are borne Kings? (Pleasure:) every man's aim,
Is to hi^ pleasure: only it is changde in name,
That's all the difference; Are Kings Tirants? Blood
Is then their pleasure: thirst they after wars!
Ambition tickles them; that for which man most cares,
Good or bad, it is his pleasure, and to gain it,
His soul must compass i^ tho hell restrain it*
To this mark all men's thoughts, Creation drew,
That all might strive for a thing, that's got by few:
Who are those few but Kings? and it is fit they
Should have it, because true pleasure does soon decay.

K. How like you his counsel?

Omn. Rarely.

Oct. What ^uffians this?

K. Bohor tha'st warmed our young blood; Al cares of state;
Shall that day sleep, to our self we will Saturday have,
Pleasure (the slave of Kings shall then be our slave,
Lords let there be a proclamation drawn,
What man soever (strange or native borne,)
Can feast our spleen, and heigthen our delight,
He shall have gold and be our favorite.
Tilts, turneys, masks, plays, dancing, drinking deep
Tho ere noone all Naples lie dead-drunke a sleep.

Oct. How King?

Kin. We Will have it so vn^le.

Omn. Down with that too.

Iou. Print Satterday in great text letters.

Oct. Well, well, it shall.
Our swan turns crow, poisond with one drop of gall.

Kin. I Will have this proclamation forthwith drawn.

Nar. And publish all the days.

Pris. And Satterday.

Iou. Especially that at large if you can in red, like a Dominicall letter.


Kin. Go see it don.

Iou. My task.
Exit.
Kin. Why sigh you? Of six days would you not spare me one?

Oct. Thine own laws from thine own mouth, we will proclaim, if thine own
words thou e'a^st, be it thine own shame.


Enter Iouinelli hastily. Iou. Your long expected happiness is arrived,
The princess of Calabria.

Kin. Thou crown'st me again*
Dear uncle, honored Lords, with (...) whole court
Honor her hither; I am rapd with Joy,
And lost till I behold her: fetch me my love.

Oct. I fear deep whirlepooles tho it run smooth above.

Ki. To our worthy friend your welcomes.

Ex. Oct. and Ast. Iou. But pray Sir tell us, mean you that we indeed
Shall have but one playing day through the whole week?

Kin. All Iouinells, we will be Iouiall all.

Bris. Till Satterday came, we liu'de in terrible fear.
Thank Bohor, who your dead spirits up did rear.

Kin: Had I (as first I did begin) gone on,
I like a Schoole-boy should have worn my crown,
As if I had borrowed it.

Ruff: Had bin most vile.

Kin: I Will be a Sea, (boundles.)

Spen: Thou art a sun,
And let no base clouds muffle thee.

Kin. Brave Kings all!
Crown, Scepter, Court, City, Country, are at your call*

Iou: There spoke young love indeed.

Pris: The tide now turns.

Nar: And now we will swim.

Kin: And laugh, tho the whole world mournes.

Flourish. Omn: Tantara, hey.

Ttu^pets. Erminghild brought in.

Enter Octauio and Astolphe, vshering Erminhild, attended by Ladies and others.
Nar: Call up your lustiest spirits: the Lady's come.

K. O my earthly bliss! embraces! kisses! how sweet
Are you to parted Lovers when they meet?
That entertainment which the Duke your Father,
Lent royellie (late to me,) I now can pay
At a Kings charge: to our Neapolitane Court,
None (brightest Erminhild can come longd for
More then your self.) You have stolen upon us (Lady)

Erm: You have good Law against me, (playing the thief)
Your Grace may keep me prisoner.

K. In these Arms;
From whence not Jove shall ransom thee; We Twain
Will wed, and bed, and get a Prince shall reign
In Naples bravely, when we both lie dead:
Till then, Pleasures wings, to their full breadth be spread.

Exeu^. Enter S^umbroth, ringing a Bell; Alphege, a Friar, and Shackle-soule,
in a Friars weed, with cloth to lay. Scum. A mangier, a mangier, a mangier, I
must needs have a mangie voice, when I do nothing but ball for a company of
hungry Scabs; a mangier.


Alph: You must be nimble Rush.

Sha: As a drawer in a new Tauern, first day the bush is ^^u^g up.

Scum: A mangier, a manger, a mangier,
Exit.
Alp. So: the Lord Priors napkin here, there the Subpiors: his knife and case
of pick-toothes thus: as for the covent, let them lick their fingers in stead
of wiping, and suck their teeth in steed of picking.


Shac. What other duty Sir, must I call mine?

Alp. As you are nouice, you are to say grace demurely, wait on the Priors
Trencher soberly, steal away a mouthfull cunningly, and munch it up in a
corner hungerly. Ply your office, Rush.

Exit.
Shak. Thanks good Friar Alphege: yes, Shackle-soule will play
The task he is set to: Devils never idle lie:
Friar Rush! ha, ha: y'haue now an excellent quire,
To sing in hell, the Devil and the Friar.

Enter Prior, Subprior, Alphege, Hillary, Rush, and other Friars. All sit:
dishes brought in before. Pri. Where Is Rush, our Junior Nouice?

Ru. Here Lord Prior.

Pri. Stand forth, and render thanks.

Ru. Hum, hum:
For our bread, wine, ale and beer,
For the piping hot meats here:
For brothes of sundry tastes and sort,
For beef, veale, mutton, lamb, and porke.
Greene-sawce with calfes head and bacon,
Pig and goose, and cramd-vp capon.
For past raiz'd stiff with curious art,
Pie, custard, florentine and tart.
Baked rumpes, fried kidneys, and lam-stones,
Fat sweete-breads, luscious maribones,
Artichoke, and oyster-pyes,
Butterd Crab, prawnes, lobsters thighs,
Thanks be given for flesh and fishes,
With this choice of tempting dishes:
To which proface: with bly the looks sit ye,

Rush. Bids this Covent, much good do it ye.

Pri. How dare thou mock us thou ill nurtured slave?

Sub. Contemn'st thou our order and religious fare?

Shac. He has spoken treason to all our stomaches.

Omn. Down with the villain.

Sub. Mischief on us waits
If we feed so vile a wretch.

Pri. Thrust him out at gates.

Shac. I do conjure you by my hallowed beads
To hear me speak.

Pri. Can thou excuse thy self?

Shac. Alas (my Lord) I thought it had bin here
As in the neighboring Churches, where the poor'st Vicar
Is filled up to the chin with choice of meats,
Yet seeks new ways to whet dull appetite,
As there with holy spells men's souls they cherish,
So with delitious fare, they themselves nourish.
Nor want they argument for sweet belly-cheere
To prove it lawful.

Sub. Most profane and fearful.

Shac. But since your order (pious and reverend)
Tied to religious fasts, spends the sad day
Wholly in meager contemplation,
I absolution beg on both my knees,
For what my tongue offended in: las! poor Rush
(See It by his cheeks) eats little: I can feed
On roots, and drink the water of the Spring
Out of mine own cup: make an Anatomy
Of my most sinful carcas: then pardon me.

Pri. Thy ignornnce is thy pardon, we believe thee.

Shac. Gratias reuerenda domine Prior.

Pri. But do our brethren in parts more remote,
Feed so delitious say thou?

Shac. Rush cannot lie.

Sub. Thou falsely do accuse those holy men.

Pri. How can it stand with their profession?

Sub. Thou say (vile yongman) they have arguments
To prove it lawful gluttonously to feed.

Omn. Rush, answer the Sub-prior.

Shac. Au^ite fratres, they do not only prove it lawful, but make it
palpable, that he who eats not good in eat is dambde.


Sub. Benedicite.

Scu. What shall become of all us then?

Pri. Thou art distracted, whence can thou force argument?

Shac. From silly reason, would you hear me speak?

Pri. Speak freely and be bold, listen.

Omn. Hum, hum, hum.

Shac. He that eats not good meat is dambd: Sie Dispute.
If he that feeds well has a good soul, then e Contra.
No, he that feeds ill, has a bad and a poor soul.

Scu. That's we.

Shac. And so co^sequenly is dambd, for who regards poor souls? and if they
be not regarded they are cast forth, and if cast forth, then they are dambde.


Sub. I deny your minor, he that feeds well has a good soul.

Shac. Sic probo: the soul follows the temperature of the body, he that
feeds well has a good temperature of body, Ergo, he that feeds well has a
good soul.


Pri. A full and edyfying argument.

Omn. Hum, hum, hum.

Sub. I deny that the soul follows the temperature of the body.

Shac. Anima sequitur tem^eratura^ Corporis, It is a principle, and contra
principia non est disputandum, All we.


Pri. Its most apparent.

Scu. O most learned Rush!

Sub. A shallow Sophister, hear me farther.

Pri. Subprior, we will hear the rest disputed at our leisure: you take too much
upon you.


Scu. Shall I take this upon me my Lord?

Pri. Hence with this trash, we have too long forborne to taste heavens
blessings fully, which to our duty had more enabled us, Rush ^hart some Angel.


Sub. Rather some devil sent to bewitch our souls.

Pri. Sub-prior no more.

Sub. I must speak, hear me brethren,
Shall we (bound by solemn oaths) t'abuire the world,
And all her sorceries* to whom night and day
Are as one hour of prayer? whose temperance makes us
Endure what ful-fild belly Gods admire;
Shall we (by zealous patrons) tide to observe
Dirges and Requiems for their peaceful souls,
In gluttonous riot bury sacred alms!
Turn Sanctimonious zeal and Charity
To loathsome surfeit? and those well-got goods
Our benefactors saved, by their own fasts
And moderate living, shall we feed upon
Ful-gorging us till we vomit? fore-fend it heaven!
By all the Saints, by him first taught our order
What temperance was, here shall poor Clement feed,
Till his ore-wearied life, takes her last leave
Of this all tempting world where all sins breed.

Pri. Howes this? are you become our confessor?
Best thrust us out at gates, lock up the Cloister,
And call in whom you like: be you the Prior.
Speak are you agreed, Rush be our maister-cooke?

Scu. You have my voice.

Alp. And mine.

Pri. Do you all consent?

Omn. Yes, all.

Sub. First send this fiend to banishment.

Pri. We have most voices on our side.

Sub. You may;
Las! most men co^et still the broadest way.

Pri. Ciue Rush his charge then, Scumb: you must resign.

Scu. With a good maw, I shall have a fatter office to be his scullion.

Shac. Worthy Lord Prior, hear me yet,
I must not my profession let,
To Scumbroath, what I know i will teach,
To make candels, Iellies, leach,
Sirrup of violets, and of roses,
Cow slip sallads, and kick-choses,
Preserve the apricock, and cherry,
Dam^in-peare-plom, raspis berry;
Potates ike if you shall lack,
To corroborate the back:
A hundred more shall Rush device,
And yet to early mattins rise,
Our ladies office, sing at prime,
At euen-song, and at compline time.
Chant Anthems, Aniuersaries, Dirges,
And the doleful de profundis.

Pri. Thou shall not change thy order: Sir, cook,
From Rush take lessons against night, for fare
Ab^ndance and delitious.

Scu. I shall be greedy to learn of him sir, since your lordship is turnde,
our very Jack and his spits shall turn too,

Exit.
Enter 2. Pilgrims. Pri. What men are these?

Sub. Welcome good holy father.

Both. Thanks reverend master.

1, Pil. Blessed sir, according to the Churches ^ite
We (Pilgrims, to Jerusalem bound) this night
Desire repose, and pious charity
In your most holy Covent.

Pri. You are most welcome.
Alphege, go lead'em in.

Shas: By no means.

Pri. Why?

Shac. It Is mortal sin.

Sub. O black impiety!

Pri: How? s^^ to feed religious vo^a^ies!

Shac: Rather to nourish idl^ vagabo^d^:
The Clergy of other lands, have with much pletie
And thrift destroyde those drones, that l^zily
Live eating up the labors of the be.
A churchman there cares but to feed the soul,
He makes that charge his ^ffice. Alsmisdeeds! alas!
They through the Lawyers hands are fitt'st to pass.

Sub. Can you hear this Devil?

Shac. Besid^s my reverend Lord,
These manderers here are spies, and soon bear word to Princes ears of what
they hear and see.

Pri. Ha Rush! thou speak right.

Sub. Dambd iniquity!

Pri. Hence with those runnagates.

Omn. Come, hence.

Pri. Spurn 'em away.

Sub. Oh had mine eyes dropped out ere seen this day.
Stay comfortles poor souls, my pitying tears
Shall speak what my tongue dares not, here holy men,
You nere shall say when next we meet again,
Friar Clement to the hungry grutch'd his meat,
Or to the weary pilgrim lodging, this makes you eat,
And when you have relieved your fainti^g limbs,
Commend me in your prayers, and midst your hymmes
Thus wish, that he who did your Journey further,
May never live, to break his holy order.

Pri. Old superstitious do^^rd; beat hence these beggars.

1. Pil. Many old men's curses will on his soul be ^pent,
Who thus defaces, Charities monument:

Exeunt. Sha^. I told you they were curs, that cea^e to bark, no longer then
you feed them.


Pri. Friar thou speak right:
Make have with fare delitious, we will crown the night.

Exeunt Manet Shackle soul. Shac. Ha ha, laugh Lucifer, dance grim fiends of
hell,
Of souls thou judge must, ^ut most terrible,
I must exact a double pay from thee,
Nere had thou Journey man deserude such ^ee,
Let me cast up my reckonings, what I ha won
In this first vo^age: Charity! she is undone:
Fat gluttony broke her back: next her stepped in
Contention (who shakes Churches) now the sweet sin
(Sallow lechery,) should march after: Avarice,
Murder, and all sins else, hell can device,
I Will broach: the head's in, draw the body after,
Begin thy feast in full cups, end in slaughter
That damnedst fury: oh, but Friar Clement's free!
True: have no snare to intr^p him let me see.
He Is old, choke him with gold; hold on thy Reuells,
Pluto makes Sackle-soul^ president of Devils.
Exit.
Enter K. Octauio, Narcisso, Iouinelli, Spendola. K. What pictar's that (Uncle
Octauio?)

Oct. The picture of thy state, (drawn by thy self,)
This is that book of statutes, were enacted
In the high Parliament of thy royal thoughts
Where wisdom was the speaker. And because
Thy subjects shall not be abusde by laws
Wrapped up in ^^racters, crabbed and unknown,
These thine own language speak.

K. Hang 'em up uncle.

Oct. What says the King?

Ion. You must hang up the laws.

Oct. Like cob-w^bbe in ^owle rooms, through which great flies
Break through, the less being caught bith wing, there ^ies.
No no, thy laws (...) fix full in thy sight, Hangs a table up.
(Like sea-markes,) that if this great ship of sway
And kingly ventures, loose her constant way.
Ith bottomless gulf of state, (bea^en by the storms
Of youthful folly, raging in monstrous forms)
She may be sau'de from sinking and from ^rack,
(S^ee^d by this compass, for the points of it
Shall guide her so, (...) rocke^ she cannot split.

Kin. You are our careful pilot in this voyage
Of Government, be you our Admiral.
Wisdom and Age being props, realms seldom fall.

Enter Brisco. Oct: Oraculous is thy voice.

Kin. How now count Brisco?
Me thinks I read a comedy in thy looks.

Nar: Has met some merry painter, he is drawn so lively.

Omn: Come count your news.

Bris: I shall bestow them freely:
The physic of your proclamation works:
Your gilded pills (rolled up in promises
Of princely favors to his wit, who highest
Can raise your pleasures) slip so smoothly down
Your Subjects throats, that all (upon a sudden)
Are loosely given.

Kin. How? loosely given? why count?

Br. Name but what sport, your Highness would have Acted
I Am prologue too^: your court must have more gates
To let in rufling Saturday: without (now) waits
Music in some ten languages: each one swears
(By Orpheus fiddle-case) they will tickle your ^ares
If they can do it with scraping.

Bri: There Is seven score Noise at least of english fiddlers.

Io: 7. score! they are able to eat up a city in very scraps

Bri: Very base-viall men most of 'em: besides whole swarms of welsh harpes,
Irish bag-pipes, Jews trompes,

And french kitts. All these made I together play:
But their dambd catter-wralling, frighted me away.

Oct. These sports to please
A Princes eyes?

Bri: How like you then of these?
The cittie-waterbearers (trimly dight)
With yellow oaker-tankerds (pind upright)
Like brooches in their hatts; In their fresh loves
A may game bring, All, wearing dog-skin gloves.
Made not to shrink in the wet^^ng.

Kin. Bid these poor men drink well, and so be gone.

Bri. What will you have then?
Will you see the Turners show, bravely preparde
With colors, drumes, and gunnes (with rust half mar'de
Bearing that, of which they long have bin depriu'de.

Kin. What is it?

Bri. Their daring Giant, (newly reui'de)

Omn. For Jove's sake lets see that.

Oct. O fie (Prince) fie!
In thy court painted monsters, they come not here,
Ride forth, thou shall meet Giants every where.
Me thinks (young Lords) your souls being new refinde
With beams of honor, should not be declin'de
To sports so low and vulgar: but since the King
Of birds (the Eagle) letts you spread a wing
So near his own, you should put up such game
As fits an Eagle, and pursue the same.
And not like ravens, kites, or painted Iayes
So'are high, yet light on dunghills, for stinking preyes.

Iou. Old Lord you rave.

Nar. What sports wood you devise?

Oct. Most fit for Kings. Were I (before his eyes)
To present objects, they should all be rare,
Of Roman triumps, laden with the spoils of war:
Or Lions, and wilde-Beares killed by active force:
Or sea fights: or land battles on foot, or horse:
Such sights as these, kindle in Kings brave fire,
And meeting spirits that dare mount, mount'em higher,
Where ^pish pastimes lay our souls down flat,
Groueling on earth, base and effemminate.

Bri. I have bowls of this bias too, for your Lordships alley.

King. Trundle'em out before him.

Bri. The wodden-leg Soldier,
Waits to present you with his show of war.

Oct. I mary my liege.

Bri: The Scholar has his device, the Mariner his.

Oct. These are Kings sports indeed.

Bri. Will you see these?

Kin. Faith be it so; because we will now rather please
Our uncle than our self, pray fetch in these.
The rest cashere.

Spen. Send the fiddlers merrily home.

Bri. And yet pa'em scuruily! it is impossible.

Iou: And bid the water-bearers cleanse the city
There Is many a foul thing in it.

Oct: Marshall 'em in.

Bri: I Will fetch these worthy spirits in my self.
No, no, we will aid you sir.

Iou: March: and give us room.

Exeunt. Ki: Sdeath! if these doting gray-beards might have their wills,
We never shall have ours: let us cross ^^em
As they cross us.

Omn: How, how!

Kin: Every device
Their Ningles bring in, abuse with scuruie jest,
Beet nee're so good.

Omn. Agreed.

Nar: If Ninies bring away the Nest.

Ki: Teach Iou^nell^ and Brisco when to give fire.
Dromes and trompe^s sounding,

Enter Octauio, Iouinelli, Brisco, Rufman, the Soldier, Scholar, Ma^^^er.
Sol. I am a Soldier.

Iou: We know that by your legs.

Sol. Does my stump grieve you?

Bri. Not if you be (...) our slu^panimbly sir.

Nar: What hot shot's this?

Sol. A Soldier sir: that's all:
That's more than sir I think you dare be Zounds! baffuld
For my limbs lost in service! your (...) father
Has clapd this buff-ierkin, when this Stump of wood
Has up to^' knee stuck three hours in french blood:
When such as you, with your Spangled roses, that day
Bravely bestird their (...), and ran away:
I Will stand ^oot, I.

Spen. With one leg.

Sol: Yes: with one.

Oct: Young Lords, thus to scorn Soldiers, it is ill don.

Kin. Uncle, here is no man scornes'em; must we be brau'de
By a staring fellow, for a little fighting? go.

Sol: Fighting! I cannot halt I, but speak plain,
No King on earth baffalls me, i would baffall again,
The whole race of great turks, had iem ith field: I ha brought
With me a hundred Soldiers, (old Seruitors)
Poor as my self in clothes; pick out five hundred
Of such silke-stocken men, if they beat us, hang us,
S'bloud if we toss not them, hang's again: a fort
We ha built without, and mand it, this was the sport
A Soldier wood ha given thee: my ^ne hundred
Had taught thee all the rules in the School of war.

Kin. All this i will read without may me, wound or scarre.

Sold. What say you to an Engine, that at once
Shall spoil some thirty men?

Iou: Thirty men! nothing.

Sold. If nothing! have thou bin beat for this? farewell.

Iou. I can fetch twenty ^^r^ueners have don more
With a bare goose-quill.

Sold. May thou but live, to need a Soldiers arm,
That laughed to see him bleed.
Exit.
Bri. You have lost the day sir, for your Soldiers fly.

Kin. Fly to the devil let them.

Iou. Your leaders before.

Spen. You fight all under one colors? do you not?

Scho. Sir: these pleasures to the King which I prefer,
Flow from Jove's brain.

N^^: Heyda! here is one has beaten out Jove's brains.

Seap. Wud I had thee hung up at our maine k^t.

Sch: No Sir Jove's brain, (Mine^ua queen of wit)
If all the Muses and the Arts can fit
With their high Tunes, such choice and Princely ears,
Apollo (Father to them all) -- ^ppeares --

Iou: Apollo was an Ass; he let a wench whom he lou'de to be turned into a
Bay Tree, and now she is glad for a penny to stick Ale-house-windowes, and wind
dead coarses.


Bri. Let Apollo go and lie with his own Daughters.

K. Are you a Scholar Sir?

Iou. A schoolmaster as I take it; and comes to present a very pretty s^ow
of his scholars in broken La^^.


Oct: Can we be dumb and see this?

Sch: O haples Learning!
Fly and complain, to Heaven (where thou were borne)
That thou (whom Kings once nursde,) art now their scorn.
Exi^.
Nar: How blows the wind Sir?

Seaf: Wind! is Nore-Nore-West.

Nar: To hoyse your sails up too, I think it is best.

Sea: A black Gust is coming: up a low-there hey: A young man up toth
Top-mast-head, and looke-out: stand to your Sails: stand to your Top-sailes:
let ^oe your Harriars, let go, amain louere amain, quick, quick,
Goo^f^llowes.


Omn: He Is mad.


Sea: Whoes at Helm? bear up hard: and hard up: and thou be a man bear
up; Star-borde, Port-agein: off with your Drablers, and your Banners; our with
you^ Courses: Ho, -- I spy two Ships yonder, that yaw too and again, they
have both sprung a Leake, I think the Devil is sucking Tabaccho, heeres such
a Mist: out with your boat, and you Besmen, cut-downe Maste-bith-borde; bear
up,

I Am a B^unt-fell^^ you see, All I say is this,
You that scorn (...), shall a Seaman miss.
Exit.
Oct. Now by my life I have patient stood too long.
To see rich merit and love, paid with base wrong:
Learning! and Arms! and Traffic! the triple wall
That fortifies a Kingdom, race em down All!
This Seaman, (he that dearest earnes his bread)
Had rigd and manned 4 Galleys bravely furnished,
With Soldiers, Rowers, and Fire-workes for a Sea Fight.

K. You are full of Squibs too, pray go fire em all.

Oct: Must I be then cashierde too? mary and shall.
To save thy sinking Honor, I Will send hence
These men with thanks, with praise, and recompense.
Exit.
Omn: Pray do.

K: Brave Shalcan-Bohor, all this while
Our eye has followed yours, and seen it smile,
(As twere in scorn) of what these men could do,
Which made us slight them off; to ingrosse you
(Our best and richest prize:) ith Courts of Kings
Through which you ha passd, you ha seenewonders, show em.

Ruff: I shall at opportune hours. If your Grace
Arride the toys, they bragd of (Fire-workes,
And such light-stuffes) Sit fearelesse without danger
Of murdring shot, which villains might discharge
In (idle counterfeit Sea Fights) you shall see
At opening of this hand, a thousand Balls
Of wilde-Fire, flying round about the Air -- there.
Fire-workes on Lines.

Omn: Rare, Rare.

K. It Is excellent S^eath from whence flew they?

Bri. Hell, I think.

Ion. Hell! Nay, if any that are in Hell, skip up ever so nigh Heaven, as these
Devils that spit fire did, I Will drink nothing but Gun-pouder.


Ruff. Ha, ha, a trifle this. Your Scholar there,
Come with his Arts and Muses shallow, leaden brain,
Your swaggering Soldier, lead a tottered train
Of ruffianly Boore-hallers: I noted all
These feasts for Kings: ith garden of variety
The vast world! you are staru'de midst your satietie,
Pluck no one Apple from the golden Tree,
But shake the fruit of every pleasure down.

K. Thanks Bohor; why else wears a King his Crown?

K. Shalcan, all Naples shall not buy thee from me.

Ruff. Nor you and these from me.

K. Ask what thou will have
But to stay here.

Ruff. Lo, this is all I crave.

K. Thou have our fast embraces.

Ruff. Swift as man's thought,
Various delights shall be each minute borne,
And dye as fast that fresh may rise; we scorn
To serve up one dish twice; be it nere so rare,
Will you that against to morrow I prepare
A Feast of strange Mirth for you?

K. Dear Bohor do.

Ruff: I shall; Nor do I thus your love pursue,
With servile hopes of Gold, I need it not:
If out the jaws of Hell Gold may be got
Black Arts are mine to do it; and what delights
Those work be yours.

K. Thou art gracious in our sight.
Exeunt. A Table is set out by young fell^wes like M^rchants men, Books of
Accounts upon it, small Deskes to wri^e upon, they sit down to write Tickets,
Lurchall with them. 1 Come fellow Lurchall write.

Lur. Fuh, Stay not for me,
I shall out-goe you all.
2 I hold 5. Crowns,
We all leave you behind us.

Lur. Don; but I
Must not leave you behind me; what pains a poor Devil takes to get into a
Merchant? he is so civil,

One of Hell must not know him, with more ease
A Devil may win ten Gallants, then one of these,
Yet a Merchants wife, before these ten is won
To entertain her Devil, if Pride be one.
But Lurchall, now tha^rt in, and for years bound,
To play the Merchant, play him right: thou have ^ound
A Master, who more villenie has by heart,
Then thou by rote; See him but play his own part,
And thou do Hell good service; Barteruile,
There Is in thy name a Harvest makes me smile.

Bart. Lurchall: -- within

Omn: My master calls.

Lur. I.
Enter Barteruile. Men too and fro bring in Bags, and have Bills. Exit.
Bart: Oh, art there?
This day twixt one and two a Gallants bound
To pay 400. Crowns to free his Lands
Fast morgag'de to me, Lurchall, got thee up hye
Into my Turret, where thou may epsy
All comers every way; if by thy guess,
Thou see the Gull make hither.

Lur. So Sir.

Bar. That, his Hour
Lie gasping, at the last Minutes; let him beat at door,
Within I Will beat his heart out.

Lur: I Will let him stand.

Bart: Do, take my Watch, go faster. All his Land
Is sumd with these two Figures, (2. and 1.)
At past one, (his,) strike but two, it is mine own.

Lur: I Will turn the wheels: and spin the hours up faster

Bart: The Citie-clockes then strike, and kill thy Master.
Would all the Citie-Sextons, at my cost
Were d^unke this day 4. hours.

Lur: Troth so wud I,
And we their Iackesath Clocke-house.

Bar: Wee'de strike merrily.
Fly up to the topath house,

Lur. There sir, I Will sit,
And c^oake like a R^uen, to damb thee in hels pit.
Exit.
Barteruile set amongst his men reading a long seroll. Bar. How goes this
month?

Omn. Much shorter than the last.

Bar. Weddings this month 12. thousand: not worth the scoring,
But think there is little marying, we ha so much whoring.
Grynding milles so much-vsde; about the city
Such grinding, yet no more money; suites in law,
Full brought to an end this month, no more but ten:
This law will beggar us: had I the bags again,
I bought this combrous office with, the King
Should make his best often: he that did farm't before
Had it for less than I, yet receiude more.
H^w much remains of the salt tribute due?

1. Ser. 7000. Crowns.


Bar. That's well: a sauorie sum:
These our Italian tributes, were well deuisde,
Me thinks it is fit a subject should not eat
But that his Prince from every dish of meat
Should receive nourishment: for (being the head)
Why should he pine, when all the body is fed?
Besides, it make us more to awe a King,
When at each bit we are forced to think on him.

Enter a Brano with money. 1. Ser. What payment's this?


Bra. The pension of the Stews, you need not untie it, I brought it but now
from the sealers office: there is not a piece there, but has a hole in it, because
men may know where it was had, and where it will be taken again: bless your
worship? Stew-mony sir, Stew-Prunc cash sir.


Bar. They are sure, tho not the soundest pay mai^^ers,
Read what is the sum.

1. Ser. Bu^ bare 20^. crowns.


Bra. They are bare crowns indeed sir, and they came from Animals and vermin
that are more bare: we that are clerks of these flesh-markets have a great
deal of rotten mutton lying upon our hands, and find this to be a sore
payment.


B^r. Well, well, the world will mend.

Bra. So our surgeons tell'em every day; but the pox of mendment I see.

Bar. Do not your gallants come off roundly then?

Bra. Yes sir, their hair comes off fast enough, we turn away cracked french
crowns every day. I haue^ suite to your worship in behalf of all our dealers
in small wares, our freewhores sir, you know my meaning.


Bar. If your whores are known, what is thy suite?

Bra. I should have brought a petition from 'em, but that it is put off sir, till
clensing-weeke, that they may all be able to set to their hands, or else a
whores mark.


Bar. Well, well, what is their request?

Bra. Mary sir, that all the shee-tobacco-shops, that creep up daily in every
hole about the City, may be put to scilence.


Bar. Why pray thee honest fellow?

Bra. I thank your good worship, I had not such a sweet bit given me this 7
years, honest fellow: marry sir I Will open to you your suppliants cases: they
that had wont to spend a crown about a smock, have now their delight
dog-cheape, but for spending one quarter of that money in smoke: besides sir,
they are not contented to rob us of our customs only, but when their pipes
are foul with spitting and driueling in those foresaid shops, they have no
place to burn 'em in, but our houses.


Bar. Draw their petition, and we will see all cur'de.

Bra. Let a frost come first sir: I thank your venerable worship; the pox gnaw
out so many small guts as have paid thee crowns.

Exit.
Enter Lurchall running. Lur. The tyd's against you sir, the crowns are come.

Bar. How goes my watch?

Lur. As most watches use to go sir, sleepily, heavily.

Bar: Not reached to one yet; were thou to be hanged,
The hour had galloped.

Lur. I spurd it all that I could.

Bar. God's Death keek his hour, heaven help poor Citizens,
If Gentlemen grow thus wary: let him in.
Extit Lurchall. Barren now, that have in craft so fruitful bin.
Your business sir to me.

Enter with 2. Gentlemen. 1. Gent. Do you not know me sir?

Bar. No in good truth sir.

1. Gent: To know you I am bold sir,
You have lands of mine in morgage, this is my day,
And here is your crowns.

Bar. Signior Innocentio;
My memory had quite lost you, pray sit both,
A bowl of wine here.

1. Gent. Sir it shall not need:
Please you to fetch my evidence, whilst we tell.

Bar. What needs this forward spring? faith two months hence
Had bin to me as welcome.

1. Gent. Sir I thank you.

2. Gent. Your hour draws on Signior Innocentio,

Bar. Go beat a drum ith garret, that no tongues
Of clockes be heard but mine.

Lur. Little past one.

Bar. Wind, wind.

Lur. Thus wind'st thou to domnation.

2. Gent. I Will part with none sir, pardon me, till I see
Your writings: will you fetch the evidence sir.

Bar. What evidence sir, have I of yours?

1. Gent. My friend sir, whose money he lends me to redeem my morgage.

Bar. Which you would have for your security.

2. Gent. It Is so sir?

Bar. No sir Innocentio, To morrow on your bare word will I lend you 30.
crowns more: I love you sir, and wish you beware whose hands you fall into:
the worlds a serpent.


2. Gent. This does but spend the hour sir, will you take your money?

Bar. With all my heart.

1. Gent. Let him see my writings then.

Bar. Have you such covenant from me? I remember none.

1. Gent. Your conscience is sufficient covenant sir.

Bar. Ha! what is that conscience? I know no law-termes I,
Talk to me as to Citizen.

2. Gent. We Will dally no longer;
We knew what snake would sting us, and therefore brought
Our medcine against his venom: you will keep the writings,
And we will ith Court of conscience tender your crowns,
Whither this writ does summon you.

Lur. A fox, and ore-taken?

Bar. Serve writs upon me, yet keep my money too?
Dull slave have thou no brain?

Lur. Brain! try this.

Bar. Peace.

2. Gent. Will you as fits a Christian give us in
What is our right, and take your crowns sir yet?

Bar. It Is good to try men's patience, fetch me down
Exit Lur. Those writing on my pillow, there they ha slept
These two hours for you: must not friends jest? ha!

Both. Yes sir: let your men tell, just 400. crowns.

Bar. Besides the use.

1. Gent. The use is there too.

Bar. Hold: I Will take it without telling, put it up.

Both. Not till we see the writings.

Enter Lurchall. Bar. Dare you touch it?

Both. Dare! ye^ sir, and dare stab him to the heart,
Offers to take it from us:

Bar. Who stabs first? Flings money amongst it.
Now touch it if you dare: there is gold of mine,
And if they lay one finger on it, cry thieves,
They come to rob me, touch it if you dare.

1. Genesis Dambde wretch, thou will go quick to hell I fear.

A^r. No sir, the devil shall fetch me when I go.

Lur. That all my errand.

2. Gent. We are cheated both.

Bar. Proceed, in your chancery suite, I have begun your bill.
Humbly complaining.

1. Gent. Of thee villain He complain
That sels thy soul for money, devils on earth dwell,
And men are no where, all this world is hell.

Exeunt. Bar. I kiss thy forhead, my witty Oedipus
That can unfold such riddels: one ringes.

Exit. 1. Servant. Lur. Sir, I am bound
To do you all service, till I you all confound.

1. Ser. Master Siluerpen the procter sir, sends word, if you come not in to
morrow and personally depose your payment of the 200. crowns, you will be
nonsuited.


Bar. That is a law-draught goes down coldly.

Lur. Why sir? It Is but your swearing the money is paid.

Bar. If oaths had back-dores to come in at, without danger of damnation, to
catch a man's soul bith back, swearing were brave.


1. Ser. What answer shall I give the Proctors man?

Lur. Tell him my master shall come in and swear.

Exit. and Enters. Bar. Do, tell him: on thee I Will build: now all my fear,
Is for appearance at the Chancellors Court,
No trick to save that?

Lur. I have a brave one fort.
Exit. 1. for wine: bring't in. Bring in a pottle of wine: will Carlo here my
fellow,
Depose a truth if he see it, to help his master?

Bar. What thou not honest Carlo?

2. Ser. Yes sir.

1. Ser. Here Is the wine.

Enter with wine. Lur. Set this to your head anon sir, when it is there
Away you, and to morrow thou mai'st swear
Before the Chancellor, and swear true, if he
Were in that case thou leftst him, twere in vain
To hope he could live, till thou camst back again.
All Knights a'th Post learn this trick: the fits upon me now.

Lur. Take a good draught, twill help you sir: It gulpes, he is almost
breathles Carolo; away.


Car. I am gone.
Exit.
Lur. He Is gone, he is gone sir.

Bar. One gulpe more had choked me;
This wine had washed my fears off, tha'st given me power
To make me doat upon thee. Carolos gone.

Lur. Yes and will swear his heart out, to your good.
Swear let him; be thy self and he dambde too.

Bar. So I may get by it. In my bosom sleep
(My dove, my l^ue,) prosper but thou and I,

Lur. And let all else sinck.

B^r. Let Them: so I kiss gold,
The yongmans whore, the saint of him that sold.

Exeunt. Enter Prior, Alphege Hillary, and Friars with pruning knives, spades,
etc. met by Subprior, and Shackle-soule. Sub. Whither (madmen) run you?

Omn. To (...) Vines.

Sub. Your Vines?
(The tree of (...) and shame?) this Serpent here,
H^^ with that l^q^orish poison, so set on fire
The brains of Nicodeme and Siluester,
That they in drunken rage have stabd each other.

Pri. Stabd!

Shac: Yes, they bleed a little, but have no harm,
Their young blood with the grapes Juice being made (warm,
They brawld and struck, but I kept off the blows,
Yet the Subprior says from me their quarrel rose.

Sub. It did.

Shac. In very deed (for I not swear)
It did no^ sir: to me you malice bear,
As if that all such mischife don, were mine,
But cause your self shall see how I repine
To see vice prosper, pardon me good Lord Prior*
If I a tell-tale be of what mine eyes
Beheld with water in them: sin will rise
In holy sircles I see sometimes.

Pri: What sin?

Sub: What have tho^ seen?

Shac: Wud present I had not been,
But till I utter it, my clogd conscience bears*
A man upon a woman.

Omn: Ha*

Shac: I speak't in tears:
Scumbr^^^ our cook, and a female I beheld
Kissing in our orchard: on her lips he dwelld
I think some half hour.

Sub: Shame to our reverend order!
A woman in our covent! Sin black as murder.

Pri: Our cook shall be severely punished: a woman,
A tempter here.

Omn: Abominable!
Rush, thou wilt rebuke sin.

Shac: Tho my Lord I Am bad, I Am not given that way.

Pri: Let us some plagues invent to lay on this ^echerous knave*

Shac: Some light punishment
(Good my Lord Prior) suppose twere your own fault,
Whip as you would be whipd, the best's naught.

Sub: He shall be punished, and then loose his place.

Pri. That sir shall be as we will: to our Vines: away.

Sub. For shame give over, dare you profane this day
That is to holy uses consecrate?

Pri. Why? what day is this?

Omn. Lambert the marter.

Pri. No matter,
To vex thee deeper, this whole day we will spend,
Only about our Vines.

Sub. You vex not me,
But heaven: what warrants you to this?

Pri. Our will.

Sub. Thou have thy will, thy wish thou never shall have,
In ^ight of heaven who sees and punishes
Men's black impieties; And in sight of these
(Sharers in thy full sin:) And in his sight,
TO express whose vileness, there is no epithet.

Pri. No matter what he says Rush.

Shac. I Am known what I am.

Sub: To thee I prophecy, (vicious old man to thee,
Who ^r'st with lift-vp-hands, and downe-bowed knee,
Seem to'haue had work in heaven: now (full of spite,
Only to eat a liquorish appetite;
D^gst our religious wales up, planting there
Luxurious fruits to pamper belly-cheere*
(For all thy pains to dress it,) of this Vine
Thy lustful lips shall never taste the wine.

Pri. Distracted fool, in stead of my just anger,
Thou only have my pity: thou prophecy?

Omn. Ha, ha.

Sub. Laugh on, but since nor prayers prevail not tears,
I Will power my grief into my Princes cares.
Exit.
Shac. Heel go and complain to the King.

Pri. Let him complain,
Kings cannot Subjects of their food restrain,
Away.

Exeunt: Manet Shackle-soule. Shac. Engender sin with sin; that wines rich he^^^
May bring forth Lust, Lust murder may beget,
But here strike ^aile, this bark awhile hale in,
And lanch into the deep, a brighter sin:
Ho, Glitterbacke, ascend, to shackle-soule,
To shackle-soule ascend, ho Glitterbacke;
Thou richest spirit, thrust up thy golden head
From hell thus hie: when? art imprisoned
In misers chests so fast thou can not come?
O^ fearst thou thieves, or cu^purses? here be some
Can save thee from their fingers: when? Arise;
And dazzle the approaching night with ^hy glistring eyes.

Glitt: Here.

A golden Head ascends. Shac: How thou sweatst with coming? Save me those drops
(Golds pure Elipar) stilling from thy locks:
Shake from thy brows and hair that golden shower,
So: get home: quick: (to hell) least hell grow poor,
If Richmens paws once fasten thee, and beware
It'n way thou meetst no Lawyers: the^le pull thee bare,
Hence: down.

Glitt. I me gone.

Descendit. Shac. Cool night will call Friar Clement forth anon:
Angels, be you his strong temptation:
Wines lustful fires him warm not: At this spring,
(Scorn^e by the rest for him,) spr^d thy gilt wing,
Full in his eye; As he drinks water down
In streams of Avarice, let his weak soul drown.
Exit.
Enter the King, Narcisco, Brisco, Spendola, (...), Rufman, followed by
Astolfo. Ast. I do beseech your Highness, yet turn back
And comfort the sad Lady, whose fair eyes
Are worn away with weeping.

Iou. If her eyes be worn away, what should a man do
With a blind wife? kill her with flies?

Kin: I cannot abide a woman that's fond of me.

Spen. Nor I.

Nar. I would love a woman but as I love a walnut, to crack
It, and peele it, eat the meat, and then throw away the Shell.

Iou. Or as noblemen use their great horses, when they Are past service:
^ell'em to brewers and make'em drey-horses: So use a woman.


Ast. So so.

Ruf. The Indians are warm without clothes, and a man Is best at ease without
a woman: or if your Highness must (...) have one, have factors to buy the
fairest, do ate no^ any, (...) the turk, regard none, yet keep many. (...)
You hear the Iuries verdit. (...) those foreman's the devil? (...) counsel
thee to thy destruction.


K^n. Destruction? why? the heaven can abide but one sun,
I h^pe we on earth may love many men's daughters^
T^^l Erminhilda so: send her home to the duke her father:
And tell him too, because the disease of marriage
Brings the stone with it, I hate a woman; I love not
To be cut: inclosde grounds are too rank.

Ruf. Best feeding on the Commons then.
Will you not mary this cha^^ Lady then?

Kin. No sir, and will you now my reason have?
A woman's is an insatiate grave.
Wherein he is dambd that lies buried.

O^^. On, on, away.

Ruf. Brave battles I fight you, but i will win the day*

Exeunt. Manet, Astolpho, Enter Octauio and Ermynhilda. Erm. I heard the
story, tell't not over again,
Twere cruelty to wound men, being half slain.

Oct. It Is cruelty too much, and too much shame
That one of your high birth, youth, beauty, name,
And virtues shining bright, should hence be sent
(Like some offender into banishment)
Abusde by a King, and his luxurious train,
Of parasites, knaves, and fools, (a kingdoms bane,)
For them, by him not card for; you came not so,
But as his bride, his Queen, and bedfellow.

Erm. And yet am neither, from my fathers court
Came I (being sude by Princes too) for this?
To see him, his subjects scorn, and my self his?
Once thought I that his love had bin (as fate)
Immovable; and ^st now turned to hate?
Yes, yes, he is wavering as the running stream,
And far more idle than a mad-mans dream.

Ast. Se^d to the duke your father, let him enforce
Your plighted marriage.

Erm. Worse than a diuor^e
No: to his eyes since hateful I am grown,
I Will leave his Court and him, and dye unknown.
Ex^^*
Ast. All runs I see to ruin.

Oct. If he pursue,
These godles courses, best we leave him too,
That land to it self must a quick downefull bring,
Whose King has lost all, but the name of King.

Exeunt. Enter Subprior with an earthen p^t, ^^d a lan^horne; Scumbroath with
him with a piece. Sub. Get thee to bed thou foolish man and sleep.

Scu. How? Sleep? no sir no, I am turned a tyrant and cannot sleep:

I stand centinell perdu, and somebody dies if I sleep,
I am possessed with the diu^ll and cannot sle^pe.

Sub. What d^uell possesses thee?

Scu. The ^encers devil* a fighting devil; Rush has committed a murder upon
my body, and his carcas shall answer it; the cock of my revenge is up.


Sub. Murder! what murder?

Scu. He has taken away my good name, which is flat mansl^ughter, and half
hanged me, which is as much as murder, he told the Lord Prior and you that I was
kissing a wench: Its a lie, I give him the lie, and he shall fight with me at
single pistall against my caliuer, do I look like a whorme^monger? when have
you seen a wencher thus ^iary as I am: Rush thou die for this treason
against my members concupiscentiallitie.


Sub. Thou wut not kill him, wut thou?

Scu. No, but I Will make him know what it is to boil a cook in's own grease.

I am scalding hot; I am chargd with ^urie, I carry a heart-burning within me.
I kiss a whore? I shall have boys cry out to me, now who kis^ Mary? No Rush,
Scumbroth shall give thee sugar pellets to eat, I will not be danc'de upon.


Sub. Let me persuade thy peace of mind to night,
Get thee to rest, if Rush have thee belide,
Rejoice, by wrongs to have thy patiencee tried.
He shall forgiveness ask thee.

Scu. Let me but have one blow ats head with my cleauer Ith kitchen, and I
freely forgive him, or let me bownce at him.


Sub. T^ese bloody thoughts will dam thee into hell.

Scu. Do you think so^ what becomes of our roaring boys then that (...)
healths one to another, do you think they will be damb^ up too?


Sub. I think so, for I know it, dear son to prayer,
Two sins beset thee, murder, and despaite,
I charge thee meet me at my cell anon,
To save thee will I spend my o^^son.
In name of heaven I charge thee to be gone.

Suc. Well si^* the cold water of your counsel has laid the neat of my ^urie:
he had met with his match, but I will shoot off my anger, I will be gone, and
why? Look you, because the moon is up and makes horns at one of us; As the
noblemans coach is drawn by four horses, the knights by two, and the cuckold
by three, even so am I drawn away with none at all. Vale, Bonos Noches: I am
possessed still: It buzzes, here. Vale.

Exit.
Sub. Blessed star of light, stuck there to illuminate
This world darkened over with sin: thou watchest late,
To guide man's coming home, showing thereby
Heavens care of us, seeing how we tread awry
We have two great lights for midnight and for noon,
Because black deeds at no time should be don.
All hail to thee (now my best guide) be given,
What needs I earths candle, having the lamp of heaven?
Now Benedicite? where am I?

Enter rush. Rush. O whether am I going? which way came I?
Ah wellada, I come to fill my pot,
With water not with thee; thou art mis begot.
Else would thou not lie there; what Orphans blood
Have thou sucked out, to make this golden flood?
None drink this well but I, how is it than
Thou thus way-lay'st me, (thief to the soul of man?
Would some poor wretch (by l^sse of law undone)
Had thee: go do him good: me can thou none.
My wholesome cup is poysond, it flows over
With man's damnation (gold,) drink there no more

Shac. Not taste what all men thirst for? old and so brave,
When money assaults, one combat more I Will have.

Enter Scumbroth. Scu. So, ho, ho, father, Subprior.

Sub. Whoes there? what art thou callst me?

Scu. One that feeds the hungry, the cook sir, Scumbroth.

Sub. Come hither, I have for thee a golden prize.

Shac. Ha ha: heel take it.
Villains and fools will ha gold, (tho got from hell,)
But they who do so, (as thou shall) pay for it well.
Exit.
Scu. But stay, father Subprior, before we go one step farther, what do you
think I have done since I went from you?


Sub. No hurt I hope, say have thou?

Scu. Hurt? If I did hurt in that, how much ha^me do Alma^^ke makers, who lie
coldly quiuering at it all the year long? I did do nothing but stand staring
at the man in the moon.


Sub. And what good thoughts bred that within thee?

Scu. This: I thought to my self, what a happy fellow that man in the moon
was, to see so many fools and knaves here below, and yet never to be troubled
with 'em, nor meddle with 'em.


Sub. He Is h^ppy that meddles not with this world indeed.

Scu. If that man in the moon should write a prognostication, oh he should not
need to tell astronomicall lies to fill his book, nor talk in gibrish no man
understands, of Quartiles, Aspects, Stations, Retrogradations, Peragrations;
Centricall, Eccentricall, Cosmicall, Acronicall, and such Palquo^icall, Solar,
Lunar, L^naticall vaulting over the railes of heaven, that no Christian dare
look upon their tricks, for fear his wit break his neck.


Sub. Thou putst into a Sea, thou can not sound,
Ignorance still is foe to Arts profound.
Come hither man, come hither.

Scu. Arts profound, Arts make men as very asses as women do, I have no Art,
and yet I know this Moon that shines to night, sees more than you or I do,
for all your spectacles.


Sub. True, it is the eye of heaven.

Scu. Which of the eyes? it is but the left eye: and the Sun is the right: and
yet the left sometimes sees more than the right, and the right as much as the
left, ther^'s paxonisme for you father globicall paxonisme.


Sub. I understand thee not.

Scu. No, why here is the oyster opend, I say the Sun sees much knavery in a
year, and the Moon more in a quarter* the Moon sees men carried by a
quarelling watch to prison, and the Sun sees the constable and the booke-keep^r
share fees the next morning.


Sub. That's not well.

Scu. Yes, but they swear it is well: the Moon sees bastards come b^wling into
the world, and the Sun sees'em shifted and shuftled in dossers, away to nurse,
and that's the cause we have so many dosser-heads: the Moon sees old
curmudgeons come reeling from Tauerns with s^pping of half pi^tes of Sack, and
the Sun sees the same churles the next day, soberly cutting any man's throat
for a penny.


Sub. Enough of this: come hither: look what here lies.

Scu. What here lies: mary, father Subprior, the devil and some Vsuters money
have bin here at their lechery, and see what goodly children they have begot:
if you will i will keep the bastards at nurse.


Sub. I am content that half this gold he thine,
(If it be asked for never, for it is not mine,)
So thou will promise the other half to give
To such as I appoint.

Sub. By this gold I will lay it out bravely, as you appoint me*

Sub. Look not to prosper; if thou dealst amiss;
Good works are keys opening the gates of bliss,
That golden key, thou in that heap may find;
If with it thou relieve the lame, sick, blind* and ^u^gry

Scu. I will do it I protest.

Sub. One half bestowed so, take thy self the rest.
So fare thee well.
Exit.
Scu. Farewell good father, ^ fool: I Will give the blind a dog to lead 'em, the
lame shall to the whipping-post, the sick shall dye in a cage, and the hungry
leap at a crust: I seed ^o^gues, the pox shall: the world is changde: a beggar
yesterday, and full of gold to day: an ass to day, and a prow'd scab to morrow.


Gl^^: Stay: stand. -- Golden head ascends.


Scu: Stand: cannot a Gentleman grow rich, but he must keep knaves about him?


G^^t: That gold is none of thine.


Scu. But all the craft in that great head of yours cannot get it out of my
^angers. Zounds who the devil art thou?


Gilt. A spirit sent up from hell to make thee ri^h.


Scu. Thank hell for it: hell makes worse fool rich in a year.


Gilt. That gold I laid there for thee.


Scu. When do you lay again, that I may have more of these eggs?


G^it. Sp^nd those I charge thee first.


S^u. Yes, Head.


Glit. And bravely I charge thee.


Scu. What need you be at such charges, I Will do^'t: but shall the poor be a
penny the better for me, as the old fellow charge me, yea, or no?


Gilt. No. ^ Within?


Shac. No.


Scu. Whose that?


Gilt. It Is thine own Genius cries unto thee no.


Scu. My Genius, I am a cook, my Genius then belike is a s^ullion; but when
this is spent, can my Genius tell me whither I shall have more.


Shac. More.


Fl^t. More.


1. More.


within. 2. More.


In a big voice. Scu. Because my Genius keeps company with a great man, I Will
take all their words; and his bond.


Glit. When thou have spent all that: I charge thee come
To the black tree, that stands in Naples grove,
Clymbe boldly to the top, and keep fast hold,
For there i will rain on thee a shower of gold,
If what thou see there, thou to any tell,
Devils shall tear thee.

Shac. Away.

Omn. Away.

S^u. Farewell.
Exit.
Enter Shacklesoule la^ghing. Shac. Ha, ha! down down bright spirit, thou w^t
be mist anon, hell mynt stands idle.


Glit. Loose not that fool.

Shac. Be gone.

Glit. Have care to meet at next infernal court:
The day draws nigh. -- Goes down.

Shac. I thank thee for this spirit.
Exit.
Enter K. Rufman, Narciss^, Spendola, Brisco, Io^uinelli. K. You that complain
against Barteruile, (receiver of all our tribute-monies) speak your wrongs; nay
you have deafl'd our cares too much already, he does confess your crowns
(paid and receiude) but to give back your writings there is no clause, If them
you will win, fight it out by our laws.


Bar. I humbly thank your highness. A gracious doom.

1. Gent. One day to try this plea, to hell thowlt come. Ex. 2.

K. Toth next, we ha business of our own, toth' next:
O Barteruile! ^ for these 2^o. crowns.

Bar. I payde'em to that man.

Far. Now before the King
And his Lords here, thou lie: thou have paid me none.

K. Your chollers sir too hye.

Far. Tho my collar stand
So hye, it scarce bears up this falling band.
Thou say thowlt swear thou have paid it: vd^ nails swear so,
And the foul ^eende go with it: 200. crowns?
I ha lost as much at loggets: swear but to revel,
And spend't in hell, gallop thee and that toth' devil.

Far. Man wherefore do not swear?

K. Reach me a book.

Bar. Let me before I swear, on my notes look,
I Will tell you the very day; pray hold my staff,
Till I draw out my false eyes.

Far. Draw thy heart out an't wut: thou may well say thy false eyes.

Bar. The day: August, 14.

Far. That's now, be da^od, and so away.

Bar. On this day (August, 14.) I swear I paid
Into these hands, 200. crowns in gold.

Far. Zounds not in silver: by this book I had none.

K. One of you two is periuriously forsworn.

Far. He, he, as I am true Curstian man.

Iou. He swears,
To your own hands he paid them.

Bar. Else let that eye,
Which sees me play false, scourge my perjury
With fearful stripes.

Far. O iu^tice I fallen down dead*
Lurcha^^ and Rufman about him, Wud I had lost all* tho I had bin cozened,
Rather than thou thy soul.

(...). He bleedes at mouth.

Far. See his staff (beating the earth, for heaven loves truth
Is burst in shiuers, and that gold he swore
W^^ p^y'd to me, lies scattred on the ^^ore.

Ruff. He comes again, the devil will not receive him.

K. Take him away, we will punish him for this crime.

Ruff. Beg his office: you a Courtier?

(...). I have a suite to your highness.

K. What (...) count Spendola?

Lur. Master, look up man,
In this black trance had thy soul flyen away,
I had wrought hard and made a holliday.

Ruff. Loose not a minute (pue-fellow) leave him not yet,
I have whales here too, lie playing in the net.
^^it.
Far. I Will take this gold at venture, (sweet young King,)
For all this hel-hound owes me.

K. Do, and be gon^.

Far. I am paid: the devils turned puritan I fear,
(...) ^^tes (me thinks) to hear his own child swear.
Exit.
K. The office of this periurd^ Barteruile,
I (...) give away, dividing it
To the Count Spendola, and our worthy friend
Brave (...) here; farm it to whom you please.

Both. We thank your Highness.

Sp^^. Who bids most, he buys it.

K. (...) his life* the devil gives longer lease,
To build more work for hell; go see, and from him
(...) of what he ow^^ us.

Ruff* That (...) account (...) take.
Exit.
K. Show him no fauou^.

Enter (...) with (...). Oct. If now th^^ ar^ a ^ust King, keep thy word,
With thy poor subjects.

K. How now v^cle? why

Oct. This is thy day to hear the poor man's cry:
And yonder is crying e^ough, at thy Court gat^s;
Five hundred (...) heads, and scarce (...) good ha^s,
Yet haberdashers too, of all trades some,
Crying out they are undone.

Omn. Undone, by whom?

Oct. Mary, look: by such as you are, who go gay,
Weare't out, book down more, set to their hands but never pay;
Never in dear years was there such complaining
Of poor starved servants, or (when plagues are reigning)
Mourn orphans so and widows, as those do
That owe these sorrowful papers.

K. Pray how can I
To their complainings add a remedy?

Oct. I Will tell thee how: are any here in debt
To Merchants, Mercers, Tailors? let them iet
In their own sattins, pay for what they ha^^ane,
And these will go less brave, the other less complain.

Omn. Ha ha!

Oct. The mighty wrongs the weak, the rich the poor,
This man should have his own, could he greaze more
His too-fat lawyer; that wretch for's coat does sue,
But his coat's gone, and his skin flead off too,
Is It his purse be ore-match'd: these gross impure
And rank diseases, long unto thy cure,
Thy word's in pawn fort, these are the poores cries,
How will thou stop their throats?

K. With halters.

Omn. Hang 'em.

Oct. Hang 'em! any halters here list so set down?
This law-booke speaks not so, yet it is thine own.

K. Still brauing me with this? burn it.

Oct. Yes do.
If you burn all the week, burn saturday too:
Do one good dayes-deed first, read poor men's plaints.

K. Hels plagues confound 'em: in their heads and thine
Vex me no more.

Oct. I warrant thee i will save mine.
Meets the Sub. Holy^Saint pardon me, ((...) good father, my brain
So wild is I forgot thee, but i will to him again,
It Is but an old man's head off. King take it, i will speak whilst this stands on
my shoulders.


K. But that you are. --

Oct. An honest man, thou^'st have this, o I beseeke thy attention to this
Reverend sub^Prior,

Who plains against disorders of this House;
Where once Devotion dwelt and Charity,
There Is Drunkenness now, Gluttony, and Lechery,
Tell thou the Tale.

Sub: Bad Story soon is told;
Because it is foul, that Leaf does all infolde,
Their sins grow hye, and fearful, and strike at Heaven,
Punish them THOU, whose power from thence is given.

K, Your Friars so lusty!

Iou: All the Barbers in N^ples tell news of that Priorie.

Bris: I would your Grace would let me purge this ^ouse of her infection;
bestow the Livings of it on me, i will s^eeten it (...) one Month.


Iou: Heel lay it in* Lauender.

K. The Covent, the Demeasnes, Immunities, Rents, Customs, Chartres, what to
this house of Baall soever is belonging -- Brisco it is thine.


Oct: Wut rob the Church too, (Now thou have nothing left* scarce for thy self?)


Sub: O heaven for-fend such theft!

K. Bestow it at thy pleasure.

Oct. Woe to thoses days,
When to raise Vpstarts, the poor CHVRCH decays.

Sub: Call back thy gift (o King) and ere these eyes
Behold unhallowed hands to Tyrannize
Where many a good man his his O^^sons said,
And many a R^quiem been sung out for the Dead,
(Till I am thrust ou^ by Death) o let ^^ee have
My dwelling there, there let me dig my Grave,
With mine own Nails, (shut up from worldly Light,
Between two walls,) and dye an Anchoryte.

K: I refer you to your Patron there.

Rris: That's I:
Show me first where your Abbey-gold sleeps, then go dye.

Sub: I fear RELIGIONS Fall: Alack I see
This world's a City built by the most Hie,
But kept by man, (GODS) greatest enemy.
Exit.
Oct: Let ill-Newes fly together, thou art full of tears,
But I more full of woes, of cares, of fears.
Exit.
Enter Astolphe. K. God's Death shall we have yet fair weather?

Iou. Heeres one storm more.

Ast: Cal^brias Duke demands of you a Daughter*

K. Let me but lie with his wife, I Will give him a Son.

Ast. He sends for Ermingh^ld.

K. Deliver her.

Ast. S^^ ^s not to be found.

K. Ya're an old Fool,
To ask for that which is not.

Ast. Thus he says,
Deny her and look for wars.

K. So go your ways.

Ast. I Am quickly gone.
Exit.
Enter Ruffman and Barteruile. K. With Sack i will swear you (...),
This was short and sweet, -- Seem^^ then we shall ha wars,
Bohor, the Drum must* scolde, the ^anon thunder:
Fighting about a wench.

Om^: Tush, that's no wonder,

K. Who bayld him out of (...)
Out of mine eye.

Ruff: I neu^r begd before,
P^^don his (...) (I entreat) and back restore
Both your hye favor to him, and his place.

Bar. Let me want life, rather then want your Grace.

Spen. Do you think I Will loose the Kings gift?

Bar: I Will send you Gold.

Spen: That stops my mouth, pray let him still Sir hold,
This Office of Receiver, I resign
That part which I have in it.

Ruff. And I all mine.

K. Sirr^, thank these Lords.

K. I shall their loves deserve.

K. Barteruile, we have wars, I Will have thee lend me some* 30000. Chicquines
at least.


Bar. Take all my Gold.

K. We^, get you home with your bags sir, we will make bold.

Bart: Your Majesty shall have what bags you will,
Bags only, but I Will keep my money still.
Exit.
Enter Octauio and Astolphe. K. Now Shalcan, some new Spirit.

Ruff. A thousand wenches
Stark-nak'd, to play at Leap-frog*

Omn: Oh rare sight!

Iou: Your uncle.

K. Sdeath, still haunted with this gray sprite.

Oct: You need no Tailors now, but Armorers,
There Is a dear reckoning for you all to pay,
About a Lady; the Calabrian Duke
Is on a March: the Lightning flashes now,
You Will hear the crack anon. Before the star
To call whom up, the wakefull Cock does sing
Be twice more seen abroad; At your City gates
The Devils pu^seu^nt will beat (the Canon)
Will these brisk leaders (stuck with Estridge-feathers*)
Go brave your enemy now, and beat (...) back?
Save thee, thy Kingdom, and themselves from wrack?

K: Do^ard, I scorn to take prescription
From any breath to which ours is supreme,
Stood Devils with fireworks on your battlements,
A thousand Armed Jove's at your proud walls
Hurling forked Thunder, and the gates rambd up
With piles of Citizens heads, our spring-tyde pleasures
No adverse winds, no Torrent shall resist*
Midst flames we will dance, and dye a Nerenist.
Exit.
Omn: Fight you, yare good for nothing else.

Exeunt. Ast. They mock us.

Oct. All stark mad: let us be wise,
And fly from buidldings falling to the surer side,
If we can his safety, if not, (our own provide.)

Exeunt. Enter Barteruile like a Turk; -- Lurchall. Bar. Thou had like t'ha
sent me swearing into Hell,
I Will weaue my Nets my self, how do thou like me?
Is not this habit Turke-Merchant-like?

Lur: A mere Turk sir, none can take you for less.

Bar: King borrow 30000. Chequines of me^! ha, ha!

Lur: But pray sir, what is it turns you into a Turk?

Bar: That, for which many their Religion,
Most men their Faith, all change their honesty,
Profit, (that gilded god) Commodity.
He that would grow damnd-Rich, yet live secure,
Must keep a case of Faces, sometimes demure.
Sometimes a grum-surly sir, now play the Jew,
Then the Precisian; Not a man we will view.
But varies so. My self, (of bashful nature)
Am thus supplied by Art.

Lur. Mine own dear creature.
But sit, your Aims, and ends in this.

Bar. Mary these --
A hundred thousand-^lorens fill my Coffers,
Some of it is mine own, and some the Kings,
Some taken up at use of sundry Merchants,
To pay at six six months, on mine own band,)
Sue that, I Will keep the moneys in my hand.

Lur. You Will bre^ke sir.

Bar. Not mine own neck, but their backs;
To get the^r moneys, Bartaruile must die,
Make will, name an executer, which am I.

Lur. R^re!

Bar. Given out his kinsman, lately employed him in Turkey.


Lur. What will hence befall?

Bar. Like an executer will I cozen all.
Make creditors Orphans, and widows spend those tears
They sau'de from their late husbands burialls;
They get not ij. d* in the pound.

Lur. They Will tell the King.

Bar. The King? ha ha: the King is going this way;
He means to borrow,
(If the wars holds) my gold: yes: when to morrow.
All debts of mine, on him shall be conferd,
Iha breifes and tickets which from time to time
Show what large sums his minions ha fetched from me,
His tribute money has paid it, that is no matter,
The world bites these dead, whom alive they flatter.
And so must I; then give it out I left
A complete state, but the Kings death bereft
Me of those sums he owde.

Lur. Say the King preuailes.

Bar. With that wind must I likewise shift my ^aile:
And where the fox gets nothing, will turn Ape,
Make legs, crouch, kiss my paw, present some stale
Device of virtues triumph to express
How much I joy him safe, with nothing less.

Lur. But how can you excuse your turning Turk?

Bar. Easiest of all: I Will swear, this saude my life,
Pursued by kennells of barking creditors:
For my much love to him, and thus being forcde
To walk obscure, my credit fell to wrack,
Want of return made all my factors break,
In parts remote; to recompense which loss,
And that with s^^etie I may give direction
To my disturbd state, eraue I the Kings protection.

Lur. Protection! what is that?

Bar. A merchant, and yet know not
What a protection is? I Will tell thee.

Lur. Pray sir, for I never broke with any man.

B^r. It is a buckler of a large ^ayre compass
(...) within with Fox-skinnes: In the midst
A p^ke sticks out, (sometimes of two years long,
And sometimes longer.) And this pike keeps off
S^rieants and Bailiffs, Actions, and Arrests:
It Is a strong charm against all the noisome smells
Of Counters, ^aylors, garnishes, and such hels;
By this, a debtor craiz^e, so (...) grows,
He may walk by, and play with his creditors nose.
Under this buckler, here i will lie and fence.

Lur. You have out-reacht me.

Bar. I Will out-reache the devil:
But I tempt danger: ^oe thou and fetch some Friar
As if (at point of death,) I did desire,
(No, Barteruile did desire (to make confession:
If any creditors beat, or rail at door,
Vpstarts this Turk and answers them.

Lur. Why fetch I a Friar?

Bar. I hau^ a reaching plot in that (boy) hasten,
That we may sm^le in our securer port:
Seeing others sea tossed: why it is but a sport
For him that's safe, to see the proud waves swallow
Whole fleetes of wretched souls: it needs must follow,
Nature sent man into the world, (alone,)
Without all company, but to care for one, and that i will do.

Lur. True City doctrine sir.

Bar. Away, thy have, our richest love shall earne,

Lur. I came to teach, but now (me thinks) must learn.

Enter Scumbroth like a beggar. Exeunt Scu. What says the prodigal child in
the painted cloth? when all his money was spent and gone, they turned him out
unnecessary; then did he weep and wist not what to don, for he was in's hose
and doublet verily, the best is, there are but two batches of people molded in
this world, that's to say Gentlemen and Beggars; or Beggars and Gentlemen, or
Gentlemanlike Beggars, or Beggerlike Gentlemen; I rank with one of these I am
sure, tag and rag one with another: Am I one of those whom Fortune favors? No
no, if Fortune favored me, I should be full, but Fortune favors no body but
Garlic, nor Garlike neither now, yet she has strong reason to love it; for
tho Garlic made her smell abhominably in the nostrills of the gallants, yet
she had smelt and stuncke worse but for garlike: One filthy sent takes away
anoher. She once smilde upon me like a lamb, when she gave me gold, but now
she roares upon me like a Lion. Stay: what said hea^? Spend this bravely, and
thou shall have more: can any prodigal new^come vpstart spend it more bravely?
and now to get more, I must go into the grove of Naples that's here, and get
into a black tree, hears a black tree too, but art thou he?


Glitt. He. -- within.

Scu. H^ ha, where art thou my sweet great head?

Glitt. Head.

Scu. O'at the head, that's to say at the top: how shall I get up? for it is hard
when a man is down in this world to get up, I shall never climb hie.


Glitt. Hye.

Scu. I will hie me then, but I am as heavy as a sow of lead.

Giltt. Lead.

Scu. Yes, I will lead (big Head) whatsoever follows, Many a gallant for gold,
has climbde higher on a gallowes' The storm even as Head nodded) is coming:
Cook, lick thy fingers, now or never.


Glit. Now or never.

Rain, Thunder and lightning: Enter Lucifer and Devils. Omn. Oooh.

Luc: This is the tree.

Scu. On which would you all were hanged, so I were off it, and safe at home.


Luc. And this ( I am sure it is this) the horrid grove
Where witches broodes engender, (our p^ace of meeting.)

Scu. Do witches engender here: zounds I shall be the devils bawd whilst he
goes to his techerie.


Luc. And this the hideous black infernal hour:
Ha^no appearance yet? if their least minute
Our vassailes break, sinck shall these trees to hell.

Scu. Alas!

Luc. This grove i will turn into a brimstone lake
Which shall be euer-burning.

Scu. The best is, if I be a match in the devils tinderbox, I can stinck no
worse than I do already.


Luc. Not yet come* Oooh!

Enter Shacklesoule, Rufm^n, embrace, and Lurchall, at several doors with
other devils. Omn. Oooh, oooh.

Scu. Sure the fear no Christian
Devils, they so love one another.

Luc. Stand forth.

Sits under the tree all about him. Scu. Friar Rush amongst 'em

Luc. And here unlade you of that precious ^reight
For which you went, (men's souls;) what voyage is made?

Omn. No saving voyage, but a damning.

Luc. Good.

Scu. I thought the devil was turnde Merchant, there is so many Pirates at Sea.


Ruff. Ith Court of Naples have I prospred well,
And brave souls shall I shortly ship to hell*
In sensual streams, Courtier and King I ha crownde,
From whence war is flowing, whose tide shall all confound.

Scu. Are there gentlemen devils too? this is one of those, who studies the
black Art, that's to say, drinks Tobacco.


Luc. Are all then good ith City?

Lur. No Lucifer.

Scu. No nor scarce ith suburbs.

Lur. Great Prince of devils,
Thy hests I have obayde,
I am bartring for one soul, able to lade
An Argocy; if City, oaths, if periuries,
Cheatings, or gnawing men's souls by vsuries,
If all the villainies (that a City can,)
Are able to get thee a son, I ha found that man.

Luc. Serve him up, -- stands up.

Scu. Alas, now now.

Lur. Damnation gives his soul but one turn more,
Cause he shall be enough.

Scu. Its no marvel if markets be^ dear, when the (...) is b^und to find the
devil roast-meate.


Luc. Has Rush lain idle?

Shac. Idle? no Lucifer.

Scu. All the world is turned devil. Rush is one too,

Sha. Idle? I have your nimblest devil bin,
In twenty shapes begetting sin.

Scu. One was to get me thrust out of the priory.

Sha. I am fishing for a whole schoale of Friars.
Al are gluttoning or muttoning, stabbi^g or swelling
There Is only one Lamb scapes my killing,
But I will have him: then there is a cook. --

Scu. Whose arse makes buttons.

Sha. Of whom I some revenge have took.

Scu. The devil choke you fort.

Sha. He mickle scath has done me,
And the knave thinks to out^run me.

Scu. Not too fast.

Luc. Kick his guily soul hither.

Sha. I Will drive him to despair,
And make him hang himself.

Scu. For hanging I stand fair.

Luc: Go, ply your works, our Sessions are at hand.

Fire. We fly to ^xe^ute thy dread command.

Exeunt. 3. Scu. Would I could fly into a bench-hole!

Luc. But what have you don? nothing.

1. Diu. We have all like bee^
Wrought in that Hy^e of soul (the busy world:)
Some ha lain in cheesmongers (...).

Scu. Wud I were there but (...).

1. Diu. For one half ounce, we had (...) soul

Scu. If he melted ^allow, he smelt sweetly as I do.

1. Diu. Walk round hels shambles, thou shall see there sticks
Some 4. bu^ch^rs souls, puffed queintly up with pricks.

Scu. 4. Sweete-breads I hold my life, that devils an ass.

1. Diu. Tailors ore-reachers, for to this it is grown,
They scorn thy hell, having better of their own.

Scu. They fear not satin nor all his works.

1. Diu. I have with this fist beat upon rich-mens hearts,
To make 'em harder: and these two thumbes thrust,
(In open Churches) into brave dames ears.
Damning up attention; whilst the loose eye peers
For fashions of gowne-wings, laces, purles, ruffes,
Falls, calls, tires, wires, caps, hats, and mufs, and pufs.
For so the face be smug, and carkas gay,
That's all their pride.

Luc. Twill be a festival day
When those sweet Duckes comes to us: loose 'em not: go:
More souls you pay to hell, the less you owe.
This Ewe-tree blast with your hot-scorching breath,
^ mark, (toth' witch who next sits here) of death.

Omn. Ooooh. -- Fireworkes: Scumbroath ^alls.

Exeunt Omn. Scu. Call you this, rayning down of gold? I am wet toth' skin
in the shower, but it is with sweating for fear: had I* now had the conscience
that some Vintners and Inholders have? here might I have gotten the devil and
all. But two sins have undone me, prodigality, and covetousness: and three
Pees have pepperd me, the Punck, the Pot, and Pipe of smoke, out of my pocket
my gold did soake. I cannot swear now, zounds I am gallant: but I can swear
as many of the ragged Regiment do, zounds I have bin a gallant. But I am now
down, dejected, and debash'd, and can better draw out a thirdendale gallant,
that's to say, a gallant that wants of his true measure, than any (...) can draw
him out of his scores: thus he (...) up and (...) he is pulls down; thus is he
raised and thus declinde:

(...) Nominatiuo, (...) Gallantus, a Gallant.
Genetiuo, Hugious, brave.
Datiuo Hu^c, If he gets once a ^^ck,
Accusatiuo Hunc, Of a ^affa^y Punck.
Accusatiuo Hunc, (...)
Hunc, H^nc, and Hoc, With (...) up her smock*
(...) He Is gone if he crye^ so.
(...) Away with him, he has the pock*
(...) If the pox (...),
Genetiuo, Horum, Yet he is a beggar in coram.
Datiuo, His: His gilt rapier he does miss.
A^cus^tiuo Hos, Without his cloak he goes.
Accusati^^ Has, To the Counter he must pass.
Hos, has* and Hae^, With (...) Catchpols at his back.
(...)! A hole he desirde, and to t^' hole he must go.
Abl^tiuo, ab His, Thus many a C^llant declined is.
Exit.
Enter Ermin^ild to the Subprior. Sub. What art thou?

Er. Daughter to the Calabriam Duke.
The haples troth^plight wife to your sad King.

Sub. Alack! what notes are these I hear you sing?
Pardon me madam:
O Lady! want of you has bred much woe;
Calamity does every where ore-flow,
All long of your strange absence.

Drommes af^r off marching. Er. I confess,
Laden with your Kings contempt* and loath to bear
Shame to my country* who from thence came freighted
With many glorious honors, I preferred
An obscure life before a public shame;
O then (good ^^ther) be it not my blame
If my supposde death, on the King have thrown,
Dangers, which from himself are merely grown.

Sub. What (princely Maiden) would you wish me do?

Er. I do con^ure you sir, by all the bonds
Tie you to pious Acts, you would make way
To my incensed father; give him these lines,
This Ring, pledge of that blessing he deliuerd me
At our last parting: add unto these, if ever
His daughters memory to him were dear,
To wound the Prince let his rash hand forbear:
Since through each wou^d he gives him, I am slain,
If the sad king you meet, venture to tell him
That more for him, than he for me, I bide,
And am his subject still, tho not his bride.

Sub. This shall I do, how shall we meet again?

Er. Fears follow me so, I know not where nor when.

Sub. Hark how the sound of horror beats the Air,
Your fathers up in Arms and does prepare
Sharp veng^^nce, for this city, woe is me: trust yo^
To me, who nere made much of woman yet,
Rest here sweet maid, till an old Friar beget
What joys he can to comfort thee? Is Clement grown
A woman's man now? No, I am not mine own,
Where your command may sway me:
Much more in this,
Where heaven) through virtues trial) makes you his.
Exit.
A table is set out with a candle burning, a deaths head, a cloak and a cross;
Subprior sits reading: Enter Shackle-soule, leading in an Italian Zany, five or
6. Gurtizans, every one holding a Jewel. Shac. That's he, and there is your
golden hire to charm him;
Your fees i will treble, let but lusts flame be felt;
The Alpine-snow at the ^un's beams does melt,
So let your beauties ^haw his frozen Age,
Music first ^^act an old Lecher, then a devil on hells black Stage:
Strike, strike your silver strings: brave set of whores?
At your striking up, diuell^ dance, and all hell roares.

Z^ny and Curtizans fall into a short dance, Sub. What sound offends mine ear?
Soul of temptation?
Enchanters I defy ye, get you gone;
I Am blind to your enticements, from this I learn,
At how dear rate the careless world does ^arne.
That thing called pleasure: how many souls do fall?
(Sold for a little guilt top daube this wall?)
Hence with your witchcrafts, the sight of this drives hence,
All thoughts besieging our voluptuous sense.

Shac: Another bait, at this he will not bite.

The Zany singes: Subprior holds his head down as fast a sleep. Zany. Will
you have a dainty girl? here it is:
Currall lips, teeth of pearl: here it is:
Cherry checkes, softest flesh; that^s she,
Breath like May, sweet and fresh; she she.
Be she white, black, or brown,
Pleasure your bed shall crown,
Chose her then, use her then,
Women are made for men.
Pretty, pretty wast:
Sweet to be embracde:
Pretty leg, o pretty foot,
To beauties tree the root*
This is she shall doo'te,
Or she shall do it, or she shall do it, she shall do it, she shall do it
Kiss, kiss, play, play, come and dally,
Tumble, tumble, tumble, in beauties valley.

Shac. His soul is chaind in pleasures, bind it fast,
If he break your charms* the strongest spell comes last.
(Eexit.
All wake him. Sub. Hence devils incarnate, it is not the ^orcerie
Of your deceitful tunes, shuts up mine eye,
Mine ears are likewise stopped, hence, hence I say.

Omn. Ha ha, a man of ye, a clod of clay.

Exeunt. Enter Shackle soul, or some spirit in a frightfull shape. Sub. Are
all thy incantations spent now? art come again?
Base workmanship of heaven, what other train,
Were all hells frightfull horrors stuck in thy look,
Thou can not shake me.

Shac. I can.

Sub. Thou lie, thou shall not*

Shac. I bring thee tidings of thy death this nigh^*

Sub. How do thou know that hour of my last fight?
False herald, Minister of despair and lies.

Shac. I know to how many minutes thy days must rise.

Sub. Who gives thee the number.

Shac. All things to us are known,
What ever have bin, are, or shall be don.

Sub. I Will pose thee presently, what is this thou fiend*
Which now I have turned too, do but tell me that
And i will believe thee*

Shac. I scorn to be thy slave*

Sub. Down, down, and sincke into thy damned cau^:
Look here, do fly thou hell-hound? I dare thee stand,
Over thee by these holy spells have I strong command,
Thy battries are too weak: by goodmens prayers,
The continence of saints, (by which as stayres,
They ascend to heaven) by Virgins chastity;
By Marti^s cround deaths, which recorded lie
In silver leaves, above: I charge thee down,
Howl where tha'rt bound in slavery, till the last dome,
Exit.
Shac. Storms, thunder, lightning, rip up the earths womb.

Sub. Eternal power, thanks on my humbled knee,
Thou still to constant breasts give victory.

Shac. No way to conquer thee? I Will give thee ore:
Never fishd I so, (yet lost a soul) before.
Exit.
Allarums* Enter King, Rufman, Spendola, Brisco, with drawn weapons. Iouinelli
here. Kin. Black horrors, mischief ruin and confusion affright us, follow us.


Ruf. Da^e them to the face,
And you fright them.

Spen. No safety but to fly.

Kin. Whither Spendola, whither? better stay, and die.

Enter Narcisco: King, Allarums afar of. Omn. What hope? what news?

Kin. Is my uncle fled?

Nar. He Is is gone: -- And fights against you.

Kin. Follow him damnation,
That leaves his Prince so in distress, in misery;
O ban^ of Kings! (thou enchanting flattery,)
Thy venom now I feel, ^ating my heart,
More mortal than an Indians poisned dart.

Ruf. Yar'e too dejected, gather head and fight it ou^.

Kin. The head's here, where are hands to lay about?

Enter Iouinelli. Iou. Where is the King?

Kin. The man that title mockes
Is here, (thou sad-visage man) are any hirde to kill me,
Or betray me? let 'em come:
Griefs growing extreme, death is a gentle doom.

Iou. Prepare then for the worst.

Kin. I am armd ^ort: show it.

Iou. Thy kingdom is a weak ship, bruizd, split, sinking,
Nor have thou any pilot to waft us over
Out of this foul Sea, to some calmer shore.
Thy peoples hearts are turned to rocks of flint,
The Scholar, Soldier, and the Mariner,
Whom (as themselves say) once thou trodst upon,
Now serve as wheels of thy destruction.

Iou. Flying swiftly backward, the kingly Lions quaild,
What shall the weaker heardes do, if he fall?

Spen. Lets fly.

Omn. Zounds whither?

Bris. So we may be safe --

Iou. But where?

Spen. At Barteruile: the churle's to me beholden,
His house so stands, we may enter without fear.

Omn. Beet so, to Barteruile.

Spen. What will your Highness do?

Kin. Die Spendola, a miserable King,
None here can hinder us of that.

Spen. How? die? -- ha you any stomach to death sirs?

Omn. Not I.

Spen. Not I.
Troth's, tho you grow desperate, we will grow wise.

Omn. Farewell sir, we will save one. --

Exeunt. King. Oh my cruelst enemies!
Stabs Bru^^s at me too?

Ruf. Now mine own or never.

Kin. Why art not thou gone?

Ruf. I, I Will stick to you ever:
I am no Courtier sir of fortunes making

Kin. Thou art no wiseman to prefer thy love.
To me, before thy life, pray thee leave me.

Ruf. Not I.

K. I shall not hate the world so really
As else I would, O had the ancient race
Of men (who had long leases of their lives)
Bin wretched as we are, no recompense
Could the Gods have given them for their being here,
But now more pitiful wise nature grows,
Who cuts of man's years to cut off his woes.

Ruff. True sir, and teaches him a thousand ways
To lead him out this horrid giddy maze.

K. I apprehend thee, a small daggers point,
Opens the veins to cure our plurizy.

Ruff. Than to be made your foes-slaue, better dye.

K. A hundred thousand deaths, than like a captive
Be chaind to grace proud Caesar's Chariot wheel.

Ruff. Much less a petty Dukes.

K. Fetch me dear friend,
An armed Pistol, and mouth it at my breast:
I Will make a way my self, and all my sorrows
Are made away.

Ruff. The best and nobler spirits
Have done the like.

K. Your brauest men at Arms
Have done the like.

Ruff. Philosophers have don it.

K. Great peers have don it.

Ruff. Kings have done the like.

K. And I will do it.

Ruff. Nay it shall nere be said,
I lived a minute after you: here, here.

K. I embrace thee noblest friend.

Ruff. Lets sail together.

K. Content brave Bohor: oh! but whither? whither?

Ruff. From hell, (this world,) from, fiends, (in shapes of men.)

K. ^No: into hell, from men to be dambd black with fiends.
Me thinks I see hell ^awne to swallow us.

Ruff. Fuh, this is but the swimming of your brain,
By looking downe-wards with a timorous eye.

K. My soul was sunck too low, to look more hye,
Forgiveness heaven. -- Allarums.

Ruff. The whippes of furies lash me: the foe comes on.

K. And we will meet him, dare confusion,
And the worlds mixed poisons, there is a hand
That fights for Kings, and under that we will stand.

Allarum still a far off: Enter a Friar running. Ruff. Whither runs this
^rier?

Fri. To save my wretched life,
From th'insolent soldier, threatening the Cities spoil.

K. Of what house art thou?

Fri. Of father Clements Order, The Capachines Subprior: a quick messenger
fetched me to be rich Bateruiles confessor, who lies a dying.


K. A (...)!

Fri. He does, but I
Have come thus far, with so much ieopardy.
That could I safely get the keys shore,
Nor the priory would I see more.
For charities sake, direct me, and defend me.

K. To help destressed men, religion binds me,
Should thou in this hot broiles, be met abroad,
It will be iudgde you leave your Priory,
Carrying gold and silver with you.

Eri. Las I have none.

K. But Friar if you be thus taken, your life is gone,
Here, here, cast off thy habit, better that lie
Ith Streets than thou poor wretch; wear mine, and away
Strike down that lane.

Fri. Thanks master, for your lives i will pray.
Exit.
K. This Bohor shall disg^ise me, whither will thou fly*

Ruff. I Will shift I warrant: have thou toth' Priory*

K. If we nere meet again, (best friend) farewell.

Ruff. Not meet, yes, I hope, you must not thus chea^e hell.

K. I will not trust this fellow: toth' Priory, no:
(Exit. Barteruiles Confessor: ^f to betray
Thou findst the churl apt, leave him, if not, there stay,
The downfall of that Prince, is quick and steep.
Who has no heart to leave, nor power to keep,
Exit.
Enter Barteruile and Lurchall, with the Courtiers. Lur. Make the door sure
the house is round beset.

Omn. Beset!

Bar. Put up: fear nothing: Armies should they enter, Cannot here find you.


Omn. How shall we escape?

Bar. Send ^or your trancks and jewels, i will ship you this night mean time,
this unknown way, leads to a ce^lar, where a world cannot fetch you forth: In,
In, if danger pursue you, in a dry^fa^ i will pack you hence*


Omn. Zounds into the dungeon?

Bar. So to Sardini:
Exeunt. Your cloakes and your gilt rapiers down, down, down.

K. How soon meets Babels-pride, confusion?

Lur. What nest of birds are these new-kild with fear?

Bar. Foul cannot last long sweet, therefore kept there Serieants.
In my cold cellar; stay, house beset? what ^ees?

Lur. Such as strike dead the heart, yet give no blows.

Bar. This -- foot^a for 'em: proclamations Lurchall,
6000. Crowns are his, can these be^ray,
Soon earnd, we will share fetch, the Ca^abriam hither,
They are here say: dam 'em.

Lur. You shall de dambd together.
Exit.
Enter Ki^^ as a Friar. K. Where Is that deuote sick man desires to take
Leave off this world? D^us ^ic to all now here.

Bar. Now Domine ^^ier; what I to you confess
You are bound by oath to ^eepe.

K. I a^er no l^sse.

Bar. Keep then this close, I am no Turk, not I,
But Barteruil^ disguis^^e i^ policy.

K. Ar^ you the Sickma^*

Bar. Sick of a disease,
Bad as a plague to Citizens, I must break,
Play a banckrowts part) I have money of the kings,
Of merchants, I Will keep all, these are Citie-springs;
Here lies Serieants Leaguer: about my doors:
My house to me is an hospital, they the sores
Which run upon me vily, (peep I but out.)
To raize this Dunkirke seige, thus cast I about.

K. Lets hear, pray how?

Bar. Thus, thus sweet Domine Friar,
I Will be like you, a ^apuchine: So, by your Prior,
Sub-prior, and covent, I may be fetched hence,
Spite of all Showlder-clappers violence.
Tho the King should lay hands on me, I wud not tarry.

K. You need not.

Bar. You are my guard, my Sanctuary.

K. But what your leuel in this, when this is don?

Bar. Alas* what ^euell but pure devotion?

K. The Devil you have.

Bar. When I dye there, take All:
Will you go to your prior and tell this?

A March afar. K. Yes I shall.

Bar. I Will send him an earnest penny (a 100. Crowns)
As the first stone my charity builds upon.
What drom's this? come, dispatch Friar, and be gone.
Exit.
K. Out of this hell thou meanest: yes i will fly from thee
As from the Devils hangman: thowl't else betray me.
World* to what crest of villainy art thou grown?
When (of good men) ^^ole kingdoms scarce breed One.
Exit.
Lur. Here Is the Duke of Calabria sir if you have made me tell a ^ye, thei^e
se^^ me of a voyage to the yland of Hogs and Devils, (the Barmudas,) ^e Duke
sir.


Bar. His grace is welcome, ^as! I had more need
To have Physicians and Apothecaries,
Than fighters at my gates: Lurchall why come they?

Cala. Deliver up those monsters in thy house,
That have deuourd a Kingdom and the King.
It Is death to thee, and him, if thou detainst 'em.

Bar. I detain 'em, here, here, here.

Ast. Reward if thou deliuerst them.

Bar. I Am past rewarding in this world, I look only for good men's prayers,
there is the key Lurchall.


Call. Unbind him: stay why did thy house receive them?

Bar. Full fore against my will: the bed I rise from
Count I my deathbed; for (each minute) I look
When Angels (heavens good porters) will let me in,
Yet (like my betters) I Am heavy laden with sin.
And being thus sick, and at last gasp, I sent for my neerst cozen, my
executor,
Who seeing brave fellows beating at my gates,
Took 'em for honest men, let 'em in simply,
And undertook this night, to ha shipd 'em hence;
My faithful Servant telling me this, (In zeal,
To you and my country) I bid him, All reveal.

Call. Thast played a Subjects part in it.

Bar. Heel lead you to them.

Call. My Lord, take force and seize 'em, nere stand upon
More trialls; give 'em speedy execution*

Ast. Come fellow. --

Exeunt Ast: and Lurchall cum Militibus. Bar. Your grace has don with me?

Cal^b. Go, look to thy health:
The crowns the proclamation promised,
Shall to thy man be paid.

Bar. Thanks to your Grace:
Las what I did in this, was for no hire.

Call. Ha ha, the rent of a cellar never was so dear.
On beat the drum.
Exit.
As they go off; Enter Octauio with Rufman and a guard. Octa. Are the rest
tanc?

Call. Yes.

Oct. The graund-Pyrat's here.
Here Is the Devils bellows, kindled all those fires,
Which now are burning: This is the Snake, whose sting
(being kept warm in the bosom of a King)
Struck him to'th^heart: This he, who by the force
Of his damb'd Arguments, was the first divorce,
Of the Kings Love, this is Bohor.

Call. This that Serpent,
Y'haue all (like Traitors) wrought a Princes fall,
And all shall taste one death.

Oct. Sir, where is the King?

Ruff: Warrant me life, i will bring you to the place where you shall take him.

Oct. Wult thou betray him Slave?

Ruff: Yes.

Call. Thou shall have life.

Ruff: And you the King shall have.

Oct: And the Gallows shall have thee, else hang me. Away

Exeunt. Enter Scumbroth. Scum: Alas, whereas the sub Prior?

Sub: Here, what ailest thou?

Scu. Can you pick nothing out of my face?
Is there not a Deaths-head standing on my shoulders?

Sub: Why, what is the matter?

Scu: The Lord Pryor is called away:

Sub: Whtiher, by whom?

Scu. By the Great-head, I think he couzened ^ee,
He is gone to the blacke-squibbe-tree, to
Judas Oak! set by the Devil, I told you then,
I saw ^rier Rush spit fire amongst other Hel-c^t^,
and ye would not believe me* Now I tell you,
that the Pryor is choackt; will his choking
go down your throat?

Sub: How choackt?

Scum: Yes, choackt: that of which men die ore-night, and are well the next
morning, wine has killed the Lord Pryor: he ^^ud in a bravery taste the liquor
of our Vines, because you thr^atned he should never lick his lips after. And
the Kernel of a grape stopped his winde-pipe, for want of a ^kowring-sticke.


Sub: Art thou sure he is dead?

Scum: How dead, because I wud be sure,
I cut his throat of purpose, to take out the Kernel.

Sub: Most fearful and prodigious, whither runst thou?

Scum: To see more throats cut, and Execution of certain Gallants is this
morning. And I came running to see them, who like a whore spoils every good
thing that comes into his hand. The hangman, I leave you to the Gallows.


^Enter Barteruile like a Friar, brought in by the Subprior, the King,
Shackle-soule, and Lurchall, with others. Rush: Welcome dear brother: now your
heed must be
Not to look back at this worlds vanity,
Riches and pleasures: you have laid aside
That Garment, and must now be mortifide.

Bar: I am mortifide, I warrant you.

K: So is the Devil.

Pri. Your Gold and silver, you must see no more.

Bar: O ^ye! give it every farthing to the poor,
When I have sent for it hither.

Lur: That will be never.

Ru^^: Your money shall be spent in pious sort.

Bart: I know that: Let my s^^le be the better ^or't,
That's all I crave for, after I am dead.

Pri. Many a Requ^em for it shall be said.

Omn: What Dru^^ is (...)?

S^^ck. ^ryers stand upon your Guard.
The Prio^^e is beset with Armed-men,
Of which some Troops are (...).

Kin. I am betrayed.

Bar. Lurchall I feel my wezand pipe cut.

Lur. I warrant you.

Enter Calabria, Octauio, Astolfo, Rufman led by two holding pistalls,
Soldiers, drums, and Colors. Call. Guard the Abbey gates, let not a Friar go
forth:
You have a King amongst you, which is he?

Omn. A King!

Sub. I know of none here*

Call. Villains you lie:

Oct. This caitife does delude you, tortur him.

Call. Hang him, and these up over the Abbey walls,
Our wrath shall smite like thunder where it falls.

Bar. I shall like a dog, die without money, Lurchall.

Lur. I warrant you.

Kin. Tyran, that royal heart thou huntst, is here,
Stand from me all, you have betrayed me all,
And i will trust none of you, if the Lion must fall,
Fall shall he like a Lion; think thou (base Lord)
Because the glorious Sun behind black clouds
Has a while hid his beams, he is darkened for ever?
Ecclipsd never more to shind, yes, and to throw
Fires from his sparklings eyes, thee to confound,
Touch not that noble friend of mine, (It seems,
For my sake markd for danger,) let your arrows
(Dipd in rank poison) be shot all at me,
Since all is lost, die nobly, and loose life too:
O uncle! must the first dart fly from you?

Oct. Into thy bosom fly I.

Kin To betray me?

Oct. To fight for thee till I can fight no more:
Had thou possessed this Kingly spirit before,
We never had left thee: what makes Judas here?

Ast. Here Is he that to the Duke thy life betraide.

K. Bohor!

Oct. I, Bohor.

Ruff. I told him where you were.

Oct. I tell thee tha'rt a traitor and i will have
Thy head off, or thou mine.

Ruff. Head?

Oct. Thart a slave?
Thou see Duke what to trust too.

Bar. I have confessed, and shall be hanged, the King?

Call. Our fair game come to this? our swords I see*
Must from your hearts-blood let out al my wrongs?
A murdered daughter for just vengeance cries,
Whom to appease, your lives we will sacrafize:
Beat the drom.

K. Thunder mock thunder, beat^ ours.

Sub. O let these fires be quench^ out with my tear^s,
I^ waters cannot, (Duke) I bind thy rage
With this strong charm, and th^s read ore that spell,
And let thy hard breast grow more flexible.
Exit.
K. Where Is Iou^nelli; and that bastard c^ue
Of my false friends?

Oct. Beheaded.

K. They have their due.

Call. The ring I gave her, and her hand: old man, --
Where Is the old Friar deliuerd these?

Omn. He Is gone.

Call. Make after him, it is some delusion.

Enter Subprior and Ermin^ild. Erm. It Is no delusion (father) am I the ground
Of this your quarrel, which must both confound
If you go on: your battles thus i will p^^t,
The first blow given, shall run clean through my heart*
Oh (...) constant maid, forgive my wrongs,
The (...) of heaven to a pyning spring
(...) such comfort give as thy glad presence
(...) my bosom.

Octa. Will you fight or no?

Call. Twere madness to wish storms when fair winds blow:
Will you your says yet keep?

Kin. Inuiolate.

Call. Then here end all my wars.

King. And all my hate.
Ha^^ all these Friars up to the Abbey walls,
And with shrill voices, this our peace proclaim,
Stay holy father: Bohor, See you this don.

(Exeunt. Suf. Vengeance, I have now lost more than I have won.

Bar. I shall go scot free Lurchall.

Lur. Passing well?

Bar. They do not smell me, yet my self I smell.

Exeunt. Oct. Why sends your Hignes, thus these Friars to play
Your heralds parts in publishing this peace?

Kin. There Is in it a riddle (uncle) which by none but by these Friars only,
can be don. -- Enter Friars above. So: are you mounted? Sing now.


Omn. Sing.

Kin. Yes sing,
Like Swannes before your deaths: there you all shall dye;
Ciue fire to this most damned priory.

Sub. Alack for pity!

Kin. Father, but for thee,
Thunder from heaven had (long ere this) to dust
Grinded these hellish buildings: that hand was ^ust,
Which ^^ruke your vicious Prior, so is our doom,
That Synagogue of devils, let fire consume.

Bar. But means the King that I shall burn here too?

Kin. Thou? the grand villain, give him a villains due.

Bar. I am no Friar, see I Am poor Barteruile.

Omn. How? Barteruile?

Kin. He lies the slaue's a Turk.

Bar. A Christian by this hand, Your officer.

Kin. The city canker, the courts cozener,
A devil in shape of man.

Bar. Half that I have
I freely give, so you my life will save.
I Will lend your Hyghnes 30000. chequines.

K: Ten Kingdoms cannot buy thee; were there (...) hel^
Thart dambd in all, God's Death! fie that house of devils.

3. Diu. Do: lets not want light to set forth our Revels.

Ruff. King, little do tho^ know, whom (all this while)
Thy court, this Covent, and this Barteruile,
Have entertaind: of hell, 3. Spirits we are.

Omn. How?

Ruff. Sent to catch souls for Pluto, our Prince and master.

Omn. Defend us heavens.

Ruff. Thy self have burst those bands
In which I once held thee: these are in our hands.

Bar. If you be right Serieants, for money you will let me go. 5000 Crowns i will
give but to go home.


All. 3. No.

Bar. I Will put in 4. brokers to be my bail: I ^ope they will be (taken.

Ruff. Yes as thou art, (to hell,) vou dog leave howling.
This pile of green young devils, needs no fire
Of mortals kindling to consume, these frames,
You shall with us to hell ride, all in flames.

Shac. Catch.

Au. 3. Come.

Ruff. Let every spirit his own prize bear

Au. They are so heavy with sin, they will soon be there.

Ruff. Away then and be dambd, wud you all were here.

Omn. Oooh -- Sinck down, above flames.

K. Immortal thanks for our deliverance:
Race to the ground those walls: no stone shall stand,
To tell such place was ever in our land,
What wealth can there be found, give to the poor,
Another house we will build and thee restore,
To former virginity: weep not for these ruins,
Thou shall from us have honors. Here we begin
O^r reign anew, which golden threads shall spin,
Justice shall henceforth sit upon our throne,
And virtue be your Kings companion.
War here resignes his black and horrid stage
To sportfull Hymen, God of Marriage.

(Exeunt. The play ending, as they go off, from under the ground in several
places, rise up spirits, to them enter, leaping in great joy, Rufman, Shackle
soul, and Lurchall, discovering behind a curten, Rauillac, Guy Faulx,
Barteruile, a Prodigal, standing in their torments. Omn. Spir. Ha, ha, ha.

Omn. Dam. Torments in-vtterable! oh! dambd for nothing?

Rauill. Terrors incomprehensible.

Fau. Back: you are blown up else.

Bar. Whooh: hot, hot, hot,-drinck,-I am heart-burnt.

Prod. One drop, a bit.

Faul. Now, now, now.

Bar. I am perbold, I am stewd, I am sod in a kettle of brimstone, pottage. --
it scaldes, -- it scaldes, -- it scaldes, -- it scaldes -- whoo^


Diu. Ha ha ha:

Prod. But one half crom, a little little drop, a bit.

Faul. Towers, towers, towers, towers, pinnacles and towers, battlements and
pynnacles, steeples, abbeys, churches and old chimnyes.


Bar. Zounds drink, shall I choke in mine Inn? drinck.

Omn. Drinck, drinck, oh! one drop, one drop, to cool us.

Ruff. So many tapsters in hell, and none fill drinck here:

Omn. Ball no more, you shall be liquord.

Exeunt. Rau. Why art thou dambd toth' horrors of one hell,
Yet feelst ten thousand.

Fau. Wherefore is thy soul
Made sensible of tortures which (each minute)
Kill thee ten thousand times, yet can not dye?

Bar. Some sack.

Prod. Why for a few sins that are long hence past,
Must I feel torments that shall ever last? Ever ever.

Bar. Let the sack be mulld.

Rau. Why is the devil,
(If man be borre good) suffered to make him evil?

Bar. Man is an ass, if he sit broyling thus ith glass house
Without drink: two links of my chain for a three half penny bottle of mother
consciences Ale: drink.


Omn. One drop of puddle water to cool us.

Enter Shackle soul with a burning torch, and a long knife, Lurchall with a
handful of Snakes, A third spirit with a ladle ^ull of molten gold, All three
make a stand, ^aughing. Omn. Leave howling and be dambd.

Shac. Here Is drink for thee royal villain.

St^bs Rauillac. Rau. Oh!

Sbac. Is It not good!
For blood thou have thirsted, and thy drink is blood.
Strikes it so cold to thy heart? here is that shall warm thee (Again.

Rau. Damnation, suries, fire-brandes. --

Hand burned off. Omn. Ha, ha, ha.

Prod. One drop of moisture, but one crum.

Lur. Art hungry, eat this adder: dry? Suck this Snake.

Prod. Suck and be dambd thy self: I Will starve first. Away

Bar. Is not this all waters? Ruby water, some Ruby water,
Or else a bottle of posterne water to save charges, or else a
Thimble-full of lymon water, to cool my stomatch the ru-^

Spir. By is swilld up all, here is lymon, down with it.

Bar. Foh, the great devil or else some Aquauite woman has made water, It
s^alds me.


Omn. Oooh.

Diu. Ha ha ha* --

Curtains a^ ^ drawn over them. E^ter Rufman. Ruf. Hell grinnes to hear this
roaring: where is this black child of faddomles perdition? rarest devil

That ever hold in Barathrum? here, (dear pupil)
Of a new damnations stamp, Saucer-eyde Lucifer,
H^s drunk to thee this deep infernal boule off,
Wut pledge his vglines?

Fau. Reach it me.

Ruf. Choke with it.

Omn. Ha ha ha.

Fau. Give fire, blow all the world up.

Ruf. Bounce: it is don. Ha ha ha. --

Fires the barrell-tops. Fau. I shall be grinded into dust; It falls: I am mad.

Omn. I am mad, I am mad. --

Within. A^^ 4. Ha ha ha.

Others. Ho ho ho. --

Spirits from below. E^ter Pluto, attended by Minos, Aeac us, and Rhad^manth,
and 3. Faries. Plu. Fetch whippes of poisoned steel, strung with glouing wires.
And lash these saucie hell hounds: ducke their souls,
Nine times tot'n bottom of our brimstone lakes,
From whence up pull them by their sindged hair,
Then hang'em in ropes of ice nine times frozen over:
Are they scarce hot in hell, and must they roar?
What holliday's this? that here is such grinning, ha!
Is hell a dancing School? yare in extremes,
Snoring, or else horne-mad? who are set on shore,
On this vast land of horror, that it resounds,
With laughter stead of shrikes, who are come to our bounds? ha!

Ruf. Dread Lord of this lower tortary, to thy Iayle
Have we thy busy Catch-polls (prisoners) brought
Souls, for whose coming all hell long has sought.

Plu. Their names: Is Ward and Dantziker then come?

Omn. Yes: Da^^ziker is come.

Plu. Where Is the dutch Schellum? where is hells factor (...)?

Ruf. C^aron has bound him for a thousand years,
To tug ats oar: he scourd the Seas so well,
Charon will make him ferriman of hell.

Plut. Where Is Ward?

Rush. The Merchants are not pilld nor pulld enough,
They are yet but shaven, when they are fleade, he will come.
And bring to hell fat booties of rich thieves,
A crew of swearers and drinkers the best that lives.

Omn. Ward is not ripe for damming yet.

Plu. Who is it then?
Cutlar the Serieant: ha! he come.

Ruf. Yes Pluto:
Cutlar has bin here long, sent in by a carman,
But his stern looks the feindes did so displease,
Bound hand and foot, he houles in little ease,
Having only mace to comfort him: he does yell,
And rave, because he cannot rest in hell.

Shac. It Is not for him, that we this holliday hold.

Plut. The baude of Shorditch, Is that helleat come?

Ruf. No: but sha's bin a long time lanching forch,
In a Rosa-solis-barke.

Plu. Devils! who is it then?
Mall Cutpurse is she come?

Omn. Our cosen come? No.

Shac. It Is not yet fit Mall Cutpurse here should houle,
She has bin too late a sore-tormented soul.

Plu. Where is our daughter? ha? Is she idle?

Omn. No.
She was beating hemp in bridewell to choke thieves,
Therefore to spare this she ramp she beseeches,
Till like her self all women wear the breeches.

Lur. Mall Cutpurse plyes her task and cannot come.

Plu. For whom then ^s this wild Shroue-tuesday kept?

Ruf. See King of gloomie shades what souls resort,
To this thy most just, and least-fying court.

Plu. Stay, since our Iayle is with braue-fellowes storde,
Bid Charon that no more yet come aboard.
Seeing our Judges of hell here likewise are
Sit: call a Sessions: set the souls to a bar.
Minos (the just:) Rhadamanth (the temperate.)
And Aeacus (the severe,) each take his state.

Min. Not an officer here?

Omn. A Fury.

3. Iud. Make an Oyes?

Fury. Oyes! All manner of souls, if they love their own quietness, keep out
of hell, unless they have horrible business at this infernal sessions, ypon
pain of being damnably plagude for their lustines. Back there, let those
shackeld rakehels show their faces.


Omn. Room here, we must come into the court within.

Plu. What damned fiends are those dare make this noise?

Shac. A Jury of Brokers impanelde, and deeply sworn,
To pass on all the villains in hell.

Rhad. Euill-Conscience be their keeper.

Fury. Look to the Jury: Euill-Conscience look to the Brokers.

Plu. Now proceed.

Aeac. Stay, let the King of Ghosts have first a view
Of those who are doomed to pains horrid, but new.
Then produce those who came to your prison untried.

Fur. Peace there.

Omn. Here Is one, hels tortures does deride. -- Rauillac.

Rau. Arraigne me, rend me peece-meale, i will confess nothing.

Ruff. Peace, thou shall ball thy throat out.

Rau. Merciles hangmen! to tiranize over so brave a Roman spirit.

Plu. Ho, ho, what country devil is this?

Rau. Thine own.

Ruff: A french.
The eagerest blood hound that ere came from thence;
Is there a King to be murdered, whilst he does stand
Colossus-like, supporting a whole land,
And when by his fall that Land most fears a wrack,
Send forth this devil; his name is Rauillac.

Rau. R^uillac: I am Rauillac, that laughes at tortures, (...) at death, defies
all mercy: Iybbets, racks, fires, pincers, scalding oil, wilde-horses, I spit
in the face of all.


^ur. Peace.

Rau. No: were my tongue torn out with burning fleshhookes, Fames 1^00. tongues
shall ^^u^der ou^ Rauilla^s name, ex^oll it, eternise it, (...) it! Canonise
it: oh!


Min. Down with this devil to the dunge on, there let him houle.


Rau. Worlds shall applaud my Act, and crown my soul.

Plu. Another.
Exit.
Omn. Come, you lean dog. --

Prodigal. Brought in Prod. One drop, a bit.

Plu. What Is he? what staruelings this?

Prod. One that lacks a medicine for hunger: I am fallen away.

Omn. From heaven.

Judge. To The common Iayle with him.

Fur. He must feed on beggeries basket: leave balling serra.

Prod. Shall I be undone for a little drink.

Lur. No, thart undone for drinking.

Plu. Starve him away --
Exit Prodigal. What was he when he liu'de.

Lur. A prodigal:
Who (in one year,) spent on whores, fools and slaves,
An Armies maintenance, now begges for cromes, and raues
To see his sumptuous buildings, pastures, woods,
That stood in vplands, dround in Rhenish floodes.

Plu. Is here all?

Shac. All! no, the Arch-helhoud's here.

Faulx Enters. Plu. What Peter Goner's this?

Fau. Speak softly, within an inch of giving fire, within an inch.

Shac. Had all thy gray devils in their highest lust sat,

M. TO have litterd furies, they could not have begot.

Fau. One to match this: in the dark he groapd damnation,

Fau. Now, now.

Shac. Digd cellars to find where hell stood and has found it
There was but one villainy unborn, and he crowned it.

Fau. So: all the billets lie close; glorious bonfire? pontifical bonfire;
brave heads to contriue this, gallant souls to conspire in it, resolute hand to
seal this with my blood, through fire, through flint; ha, ha, ha, whither fly
my self to heaven, friends to honor, none to the halter, enemies to massacre,
ha ha, dismal tragical Comedy now?


Plu. What does he?

Shac. As he thinks, giving fire to powder;
Nere in any land could devils have found, such walks,
As he was beating out.

Plu. His name.

Omn. Guy Eaulx.

Fan. Who calls? damnation stops throat.

3. Iud. Let it stop thine.

Fau. Am I betrayed? give fire, now, now, give fire.

Omn. Te burn thine own soul villain.
Exit.
Plu. Pay him his hire:
He has a desperate rakehels face.

Shac. Had his plot taken fire,
One real me before any other had doomesday seen,
Kings who in tombs lay at rest had wakened been,
He was within 12. hours of he wing down
A whole land at one blow, and at once drown
In a flood of flames, an Ark-roiall with his whole fleet,
Of nobility and clergy: in a leaden sheet
Law and her children had bin hotly wrapped;
Millons ere this had in our iayle bin clapped,
For damned Arts not known now, which had then
Bin ri^e, but now lie dead (the Acts with the men.

Plu. Make much of this our ningle: for the res^
Deliuer'em to our head-hangman.

Omn. When?

Omn. When?

Plu. In a twinkling.

Min: How applaudes Pluto
Our enginous tortures, and most rigorous doom?

Plu. Minos, thy doom is just; -- But your all-fac'de Cai^ffs.)

What fi^h in your infernal Nets, Drew you up
Ith N^pl^s Court, (...) and ^^rierie?
We chard'de you sail thither: Is mischiefs River there d^ie?

Ruff: Dry, No: Fat preyes for hell we all did meet,
In Court, City, Country, Nay, in every street,
In every house, within-him, and without-him.
He that wore best clothes, had some Devil about him:
Courtiers from Naples hither in sholes are come,
Some for Ambition, for Flattery, and Envy some:
Some, who (each meal) eat subi^cts up, and wore,
Whole Families in their shoo-strings, such, and others more,
Being here, have been examining (ever since
They came) by Hells-clarke, (spotred-Conscience.)

Min: Till the next Sessions, these we must defer.

Plu. None come fro'th City, so many bad being there!

Lur: Yes, (King of endless horror) see who is here: Barteruile

Plu: Rich-me^ in hell! they are welcome, what is the gray beard

Bar: One that can buy thee and ten such as thou art out of thy Sea-coale-pits
^ere. Is not this Newcastle?


Lur. No covetous wretch: it is Hell, thy blacke-soules prison.

Bar: Soul in prison! I never had any soul to speak on.

Lur: Now thou shall find thou have one.

Rar: Can Angels Bail me?

Min: Not all the wealth which the worlds back does bear
Can Bail thy wretched soul hence, No^ it is here.

Bar: A thousand Pounds. --

Fur: Where (...) fool?

Rhad: Thy wealths now gone,
Thy hands still catch at bags,, but they gripe none.

Bar: What Is this? --

Omn: Ha, ha, ha.

Aeac. Air, shadows, things Imaginary:
That is thy Torment now, which was thy Glory.

Bar: If you give me bags full of Saw-dust, in stead of money, my Ghost shall
walk.


3. Iud: To thy grim Father of Hell.

Bar. No, to my old brother, Sir Achi^ophell Pinch gut shall I: shall I?

Plu. Hence with him the, Churl's mad:
In Lethes-flood drowned all the wealth he had.

Bar. My chain, Let me hang in chains, so it be my
Gold chain; Thieves, thieves, thieves.
^ -- Exit.
Min. Throw him headlong into our boyling-Lake,
Where molten Gold ^unnes.

Lur. His thirst it cannot slake,
Seas could not quench his dropsy: Gold to get
He would hang a City, statue a Country. Even yet
Raues he for Bonds and incombers: to save who^e soul,
(Tho he fed none living) Saw-sages were his dole.

A confused noise to come pressing in. Omn. What coil is that?

A Noise. Enter a Ghoast, cole-blacke. Pur. It Is a burning zeal must consume
the wicked, and therefore I will not be kept out, but will chastize and
correct the foul Fiend.


3. Iud. What Is this black Incubus?

Shac. An Arch great Puritan once.

Omn. Ha! How! a Puritan?

Min. An Arch-great Puritan! How comes thy soul so little*

Pur. I did exercise too much with a lively Spirit.

Plu. Are there any more of his Synagogue?

Ruff. Yes, a whole Hoy-full are Landed.

Omn. Ha!

Pl^. Are they all so black as he is?

Omn. Worse.

Min. Syrra, why being a Puritan is your soul so black?

Pur. We were all smoakt out of our own Country, and sent to Rotterdam.


Min. How camst thou lame and crooked, why do halt?

Pur. All the brethren and sisters for the better part are crooked, and halt:
for my own part, I never went upright.


Judge. And yet a puaitane? hence with him.

Pur. Alack!
How can I choose but halt, go lame, and crooked?
When I pulld a whole church down upon my back.

Min. Hence with him, he will pull all hell down too.

A noise to come in. Pur. Let in the brethren, to confound this wicked assembly,

3. Iud. Thrust him out at hell gates.
Exit.
Plu. They Will confound our kingdom,
If here they get but footing: rise therefore, away;
Keep the Jury of brokers till our next court day.

Min. Ad^ourne this.

Fur. O yes! Sessions is deferd
Because of Puritanes, Hell cannot be cleerd.

Plu. Set forward to our Hall paued all with brass,
Judges we thank you: let our officers drink,
In The bottom of hells celler, for their good service.
Since to this height our Empire up you rear,
Hell shall hold ^^umphes, and (that's don,) prepare,
Again to walk your circuites over the earth,
Souls are hells Subjects, and then grone^ our mirth.

FINIS.
Epilogue.
If It be not good, the D^uell is in it, (they say,)
The Devil was in it, this then is no good play
By that conclusion, but hereby is meant,
If for so many no^es, and midnights spent
To reap three hours of mirth, our haruest-seede
Lies still and rot. The Diuelt in it then indeed*
Much Labor, Art, and Wit, make up a Play
As it does a Ship, yet both are cast away,
(When bravely they have past the humorous Seas)
At landing, What black fates curses both these?
Sail it, or fi^ck it, now it is forth, and nere
The Haven at which it longs t'ariue: if there
It suffers wrack, the spitefuller Rocks shoot forth,
Yet non may bring it home lade^ with much worth.
By your wonted gentle gale, (sweet as the Balm,)
Or by extending fair liberal Palm.
To fan away all storms, if you see it lowers,
The air shall ring thanks, but the glory's yours.

