THE MAGNIFICENT Entertainment: Given to King James, Queen Anne his wife, and
Henry Frederick the Prince, upon the day of his Majesty's Trvumphant Passage
(from the Tower) through his Honorable City (and Chamber) of London, being
the 15. of March. 1603. As well by the English as by the Strangers: With the
speeches and Songs, delivered in the several Pageants.

Mart. Templa Deis, mores populis dedit, otia ferro, Astra suis, Caelo sydera,
serta Ioui. Tho. Dekker.

Imprinted at London by T. C. for Tho. Man the younger. 1604.

A DEVICE (proiected down, but till now not published,) that should have served
at his Majesty's first access to the City.
THe sorrow and amazement, that like an earthquake began to shake the
distempered body of this Ila^d (by reason of our late Soueraigns departure,)
being wisely and miraculously prevented, and the feared wounds of a civil
sword, (as Alexanders fury was with Music) being stopped from bursting forth,
by the sound of Trompets that proclaimed King James: All men's eyes were
presently turned to the North, standing even stone still in their Circles, like
the points of so many Geometrical needles, through a fixed and Adamantine
desire to behold this 45. years wonder now brought forth by Time: their
tongues neglecting all language else, save that which spoke zealous prayers,
and vnceasable wishes, for his most speedy and longd-for arrival. Insomuch
that the Night was thought unworthy to be crowned with sleep, and the day not
fit to be looked upon by the Sun, which brought not some fresh tidings of his
Majesty's more near and nearer approach.

At the length Expectation (who is ever waking) and that so long was great,
grew near the time of her delivery, Rumor coming all in a sweat to play the
Midwife, whose first-comfortable words were, that this Treasure of a Kingdom
(a Man-Ruler) hid so many years from us, was now brought to light, and at hand.

Martial. Et populi vox er at vna, Venit. And that he was to be conducted
through some utter part of this his City, to his royal Castle the Tower, that
in the age of a man (till this very minute) had not been acquainted nor bor^^
the name of a Kings Court. Which Entrance of his (in this manner) being fam'de
abroad, Because his loving Subjects the Citizens would give a taste of their
duty and affection: The Device following was suddeinly made up, as the first
service, to a more royal and serious ensuing Entertainment; And this (as it
was then purposed) should have been performed about the Bars beyond
Bishops-gate.

The Device.
SAint George, Saint Andrew, (the Patrons of both Kingdoms) having along time
looked upon each other, with countenances rather of mere strangers, then of
such near Neighbors, upon the present aspect of his Majesty's approach toward
I ondon, were (in his sight) to issue from two several places on horseback,
and in complete Armor, their Breasts and Caparisons suited with the Arms of
England and Scotland, (as they are now quartered) to testify their leagued
Combination, and new sworn Brotherhood. These two armed Knights, encountering
one another on the way, were to ride hand in hand, till they met his Majesty.
But the strangeness of this newly-begotten amity, flying over the earth, It
calls up the Genius of the City, who (not so much mazde, as wondering at the
Novelty) Intersepts their Passage.

And most a^tly (in our Judgment) might this Domesticum Numen (the Genius of
the place) lay just claim to this pre-eminence of first bestowing Salutations
and welcomes on his Majesty, Genius being held ( Inter fictos Deos), to be God
of Hospitality and Pleasure: and none but such a one was meet to receive so
^xcellent and princely Guest.

Or if not worthy, for those two former respects: Yet being Deus Generationis,
and having a power as well over Countries, herbs and trees, as over men, and
the City having now put on a Regeneration, or new birth; the induction of
such a Person, might (with out a Warrant from the court of Critists) pass very
current.

To make a false flourish here with the borrowed weapons of all the old Masters
of the noble Science of Poesy, and to keep a tyrannical coil, in
Anatomizing Genius, from head to foot, (only to show how nimbly we can caruevp
the whole mess of the Poets) were to play the Executioner, and to lay out
Cities household God on the rack, to make him confess, how many pair of Latin
sheets, we have shaken and cut into shreds to make him a garment. Such feats
of Actiuitie are stale, and common among Scholars, (before whom it is
protested we come not now (in a Pageant) to Play a Masters prize) For Nunc ego
ventosae plebis suffragia venor.

The multitude is now to be our Audience, whose heads would miserably run a
wooll-gathering, if we do but offer to break them with hard words. But
suppose (by the way) contrary to the opinion of all the Doctors) that our
Genius (in regard the place is Feminine, and the person it self, drawn
Figura Humana, sed Ambiguo sexu) should at this time be thrust into woman's
apparel. It is no Schism: be it so: our Genius is then a Female, Antique; and
reverend both in years and habit: a Chaplet of mingled flowers, Inter wouen
with branches of the Plane Tree (crowning her Temples: her hair long and
white: her Vesture a loose roabe, Changeable and powdered with Stars: And
being (on horseback likewise) thus furnished, this was the tune of her voice.

Genius Locj.
STay: we conjure you, by that Potent Name,
of which each Letter's (now) a triple charm:
Stay; and deliver us, of whence you are,
And why you bear (alone) th'os^ent of War,
When all hands else rear Olive boughs and Palm:
And Halcyonean days assure all is calm.
When every tongue speaks Music: when each Pen
(Dul'd and did black in Galle) is white again,
And dipped in Nectar, which by Delphick fire
Being heated, melts into an Orphean-quire.
When Troyes proud buildings show like Fairie-bowers,
And Streets (like Gardens) are perfumed with Flowers:
And Windows glazde only with wondering eyes;
(In a Kings look such admiration lies!)
And when soft handed Peace, so sweetly thriues,
That Bees in Soldiers Helmets build their Hiues:
When loy a tip-toe stands on Fortunes Wheel,
In silken Robes: How dare you shine in Steel?

Saint George. Lady, What are you that so question us?

Genius. I Am the places Genius, whence now springs
A Vine, whose youngest Branch shall produce Kings:
This little world of men; this precious Stone,
That sets out Europe: this (the glass alone,)
Where the neat Sun each Morn him self attires,
And gildes it with his repercussiue fires.
This Jewel of the Land; Englands right Eye:
Altar of Love; and Sphere of Majesty:
Green Neptunes Minion, bou't whose Virgin-waste,
Isis is like a Cristall girdle cast.
Of this are we the Genius; here have I,
Slept (by the favor of a Deity)
Fortie-foure Summers and as many Springs,
Not frighted with the threats of foreign Kings.
But held up in that gowned State I have,
By twice Twelue-Fathers politic and grave:
Who with a sheathed Sword, and silken Law,
Do keep (within weak Walls) Millions in awe.
I charge you therefore say, for what you come? What are you?


Both. Knights at Arms.

S George. Saint George.

Saint Andrew. Saint Andrew
For Scotlands honor I.

S. George. For Englands I
Both sworn into a League of Unity.

Genius. I Clap my hands for Joy, and seat you both
Next to my heart: In leaves of purest gold,
This most auspicious love shall be enrold.
Be ioynde to us: And as to earth we bow,
So, to those royal feet, bend your steelde brow.
In name of all these Senators, (on whom
Virtue builds more, then these of Antique Rome)
Shouting a cheerful welcome: Since no clyme,
Nor Age that has gone over the head of Time,
Dide're cast up such Joys, nor the like Sum
(But here) shall stand in the world, years to come,
Dread King, our hearts make good, what words do want,
To bid thee boldly enter Troynouant.
Rerum certa salus, Terrarum gloria Caesar! Mart.

Sospite quo, magnos credimus esse Deos:
Dilexere prius pueri, Iuvenesque senelque, Idem.

At nunc Infantes te quoque Caesar amant.

This should have been the first Offering of the Cities Love: But his Majesty
not making his Entrance (according to expectation) It was (not utterly thrown
from the Alter) but laid by.

Mart. Iam Crescunt media Paegmata celsa via. BY this time Imagine, that Poets
(who draw speaking Pictures) and Painters (who make dumb Poesy) had their
heads and hands full; the one for native and sweet Invention: the other for
lively Illustration of what the former should devise: Both of them emulously
contending (but not striving) with the proprest and brightest Colors of Wit
and Art, to set out the beauty of the great Triumphant day.

For more exact and formal managing of which Business, a Select number both
of Aldermen and Commoners (like so many Roman AEdiles) were ( Communi
Consilio) chosen forth, to whose discretion, the Charge, Contriuings, Projects,
and all other Dependences, owing to so troublesome a work, was entirely, and
Iudicially committed.

Many days were thriftily consumed, to molde the bodies of these Tryumphes
comely, and to the honor of the Place: and at last, the stuff whereof to
frame them, was beaten out. The Soul that should give life, and a tongue to
this Entertainment, being to breathe out of Writers Pens. The Limbs of it to
lie at the hard-handed mercy of Mychanitiens.

In a moment therefore of Time, are Carpenters, Ioyners, Caruers, and other
Artificers sweating at their Chizzells.

Vir. Accingunt Omnes operi. Not a finger but had an Office: He was held
unworthy ever after to suck the Honey dew of Peace, that ( against his coming
by whom our Peace wears a triple Wreathe) would offer to play the Droane. The
Streets are surueyed; heigthes, breadths, and distances taken, as it were to
make Fortifications, for the Solemnities. Seven pieces of ground, (like so
many fields for a battle) are plotted forth, upon which these Arches of
Triumph must show themselves in their glory: alost, in the end do they
advance their proud foreheads.

Virg: -- Circumpueri, Innuptaeque Puellae,
Sacra Canunt, funemque manu contingere gaudent.
Even children (might they have bin suffered) would gladly have spent their
little strenght, about the Engines, that mounted up the Frames: Such a fire of
love and joy, was kindled in every breast.

The day (for whose sake, these wonders of Wood, clymde thus into the clouds)
is now come; being so early up by reason of Artificial Lights, which wakened
it, that the Sun ouer-slept himself, and rose not in many hours after, yet
bringing with it into the very bosom of the City, a world of people. The
Streets seemde to be paued with men: Stalles in stead of rich wares were set
out with children, open Casements filled up with women.

All Glass windows taken down, but in their places, sparkeled so many eyes,
that had it not been the day, the light which reflected from them, was
sufficient to have made one: he that should have compared the empty and
untrodden walks of London, which were to be seen in that late
mortally-destroying Deluge, with the thronged streets now, might have
believed, that upon this day, began a new Creation, and that the City was the
only Workhouse wherein sundry Nations were made.

A goodly and civil order was observed, in Martialling all the Companies
according to their degrees: The first beginning at the upper end of Saint Marks
Lane, and the last reaching above the Conduit in Fleetstreete: their Seats,
being double-railde: upon the upper part whereon they leaned, the Streamers,
Ensigns, and Bannerets, of each particular Company decently fixed: And
directly against them, (even quite through the body of the City, so hie as to
Temple-Barre) a single Rail (in fair distance from the other) was likewise
erected to put off the multitude. Amongst whose tongues (which in such Consorts
never lie still,) tho there were no Music, yet as the Poet says:

Mart. Voxdiuersa sonat, populorum est vox tamen vna. NOthing that they speak
could be made any thing, yet all that was spoken, sounded to this purpose,
that still his Maieftie was coming. They have their longings: And behold, A
far off they spy him, richly mounted on a white Iennet, under a rich Canopy,
sustained by eight Barons of the Cinqueports; the Tower serving that morning
but for his withdrawing Chamber, wherein he made him ready: and from thence
stepped presently into his City of London, which for the time might worthily
borrow the name of his Court Royal: His passage along that Court, offering
it self for more State) through seven Gates, of which the first was erected at
Fanchurch.

Thus presenting it self.

IT was an upright Flat-square, Fa^church.
(for it contained fifty foot in the perpendiculer, and fifty foot in the
Ground-lyne) the upper roof thereof (one distinct Grices) bore up the true
moddells of all the notable Houses, Turrets, and Steeples, within the City.
The Gate under which his Majesty did pass, was 12. foot wide, and 18. foot
hie: A Posterne likewise (at one side of it) being sour foot wide, and 8.
foot in height: On either side of the Gate, stood a great French Term, of
stone, advanced upon wodden Pedestalls; two half Pilasters of Rustic, standing
over their heads. I could shoot more Arrows at this mark, and teach you
without the Carpenters Rule how to measure all the proportions belonging to
this Fabric. But an excellent hand being at this instant curiously describing
all the seven, and bestowing on them their fair prospectiue limbs, your eye
shall hereafter rather be delighted in beholding those Pictures, than now be
wearied in looking upon mine.

The Personages (as well Mutes as Speakers) in this Pageant, were these: viz.
1 THe highest Person was The Brittayne Monarchy. 2 At her feet, fate Divine
Wisdom. 3 Beneath her, stood The Genius of the City, A man. 4 At his right
hand was placed a Personage, figuring, The Counsel of the City. 5 Under all
these lay a person representing Thamesis the River.
Six other persons (being daughters to Genius) were advanced above him, on a
spreading Ascent of which the first was, 1 Gladness. 2 The second, Veneration.
3 The third, Promptitude. 4 The fourth, Vigilance. 5 The fifth, Loving
affection. 6 The sixth, Unanimity.


Of all which personages, Genius and Thamesis were the only Speakers: Thamesis
being presented by one of the children of her Majesty's Revels: Genius by M.
Allin (servant to the young Prince) his gratulatory speech (which was delivered
with excellent Action, and a well tun'de audible voice) being to this effect:

That London may be proud to behold this day, and therefore in name of the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen, the Council, Commoners and Multitude, the heartiest
Welcome is tendered to his Majesty, that ever was bestowed on any King, etc.

Which Banquet being taken away with sound of Music, The (...) and Haultboyes
of London.
there, ready for the purpose, his Majesty made his entrance into this his
Court Royal: under this first Gate, upon the Battlements of the work, in
great Capitalls was inscribed, thus:

LONDINIVM. And under that, in a smaller (but not different) Caracter, was
written,

CAMERA REGIA: The Kings Chamber. Too short a time (in their opinions that were
glewed there together so many hours, to behold him) did his Majesty dwell
upon this first place: yet too long it seemed to other happy Spirits, that
higher up in these Elizian fields awaited for his presence: he sets on
therefore (like the Sun in his Zodiaque) bountifully dispersing his beams
amongst particular Nations: the brightness and warmth of which, was now spent
first upon the Italians, and next upon the Belgians: The space of ground, on
which their magnificent Arches were builded, being not unworthy to bear the
name of the great Hall to this our Court Royal: wherein was to be heard and
seen the sundry languages and habits of Strangers, which under Princes Rooses
render excellent harmony.

In a pair of Scales do I weigh these two Nations, and find them (neither in
hearty love to his Majesty, in advancement of the Cities honor, nor in
forwardness to glorify these Triumphs) to differ one grain.

To dispute which have done best, were to doubt that one had done well. Call
their inventions therefore Twynnes: or if they; themselves do not like that
name, (for happily they are emulous of one glory) yet thus may we speak of
them.

Ovid. -- Facies non omnibus vna,
Nec diuersa tamen, Qualem decet esse sororum.
Because, whosoever ( fixis oculis) beholds their proportions, Expleri mentem
nequit, ardescitque tuendo. Virg.

The street, upon whose breast, Gracious street.
this Italian Jewel was worn, was never worthy of that name which it carries,
till this hour: For here did the Kings eye meet a second Oblect, that enticed
him by tarrying to give honor to the place. And thus did the queintnesse of the
Engine seem to discover it self before him.

The Italians Pageant.
THe building took up the whole breadth of the Street, of which, the lower part
was a Square, garnished with four great Columns: In the midst of which
Square, was cut out a fair and spacious high Gate, arched, being twenty seven
foot in the perpendicular line, and eyghteene at the ground line: over the
Gate, in golden Caracters, these verses (in a long square) were inscribed: Tu
Regere Imperio populos Iacobe memento,
Hae tibi erunt Arts, Pacique imponere morem,
Parcere Subiectis, and debellare superbos.


And directly above this, was advanced the Arms of the Kingdom, the
Supporters fairly cut out to the life: over the Lion (some pretty distance from
it) was written,

IACOBO REGI MAGN. And above the head of the Unicorn, at the like distance,
this,

HENRICI VII. ABNEP. In a large Square erected above all these, King Henry the
seventh was royally seated in his Imperial Robes, to whom King James (mounted
on horseback) approches, and receyues a Scepter, over both their heads these
words being written,

HIC VIR, HIC EST. Between two of the Columns, (on the right hand) was fixed
up a Square table, wherein, in lively and excellent colors, was lim'd a woman,
figuring Peace, her head securely leaning on her left hand, her body modestly
bestowed (to the length) upon the earth: In her other hand, was held an Olive
branch, the Ensign of Peace, her word was out of Virgil, being thus, -- Deus
nobis haec otia fecit.

Beneath that piece, was another square Table, reaching almost to the Bases of
the two Columns: In which, 2. (seeming) Sea personages, were drawn to the
life, both of them lying, or rather leaning on the bosom of the earth, naked;
the one a woman, her back only seen; the other a man, his hand stretching
and fastening it self upon her shoulder: the word that this dead body spoke,
was this, I Decus, I Nostrum.

Upon the left hand side of the Gate, between the other two Columns, were
also two square Tables: In the one of which were two persons portrayed to the
life, naked, and wild in looks, the word, Expectate solo Trinobanti.

And over that, in another square, carrying the same proportion, stood a woman
upright, holding in her hand a Shield, beneath whom was inscribed in golden
Caracters, -- Spes fidissimarerum.

And this was the shape and front of the first great Square, whose top being
flat, was garnished with Pelasters, and upon the root was directed a great
Padestall, on which stood a Person carved out to the life (a woman) her left
hand leaning on a sword, with the point downward, and her right hand reaching
forth a Diadem, which she seemde by bowing of her knee and head, to bestow
upon his Majesty.

On the four corners of this upper part, stood four naked portraytures (in
great) with artificial Trumpets in their hands.

In the Arch of the Gate, was drawn (at one side) a company of Palm trees,
young, and as it were but newly springing, over whose branches, two naked
winged Angels, flying, held forth a Scroll, which seemed to speak thus, Spes
altera.

On the contrary side, was a Vine, spreading it self into many branches, and
winding about Olive, and Palm trees: two naked winged Angels hanging likewise
in the Air over them, and holding a Scrol between them, filled with this
inscription, Vxor tua, sicut vitis abundans,
Et filii tui, sicut palmites Oliuarum.


If your imaginations (after the beholding of these objects) will suppose, that
this Majesty is now gone to the other side of this Italian Trophee; do but
cast your eyes back, and there you shall find just the same proportions,
which the forepart, or Breast of our Arch carries, with equal number of
Columns, Pedestals, Pilasters, Lim'd pieces, and Carved Statues. Over the
Gate, this Disticho^ presents it self.

Nonne tuo Imperio satis est Iacohe potiri?
Imperium in Musas, Aemule quaeris? Habes.
Under which verses, a wreathe of Laurel seemed to be ready to be let fall on
his Majesty's head, as he went under it, being held between two naked Antique
women, their bodies stretching (at the full length) to compass over the Arch
of the Gate. And above those verses, in a fair Azure table, this inscription
was advanced in golden Capitals:

EXPECTATIONI ORBIS TERRARVM, REGIB GENITO NVMEROSISS. REGVM GENITORI
FAELICISS. REGI MARTIGENARVM AVGVSTISS. REGI MV SARVM GLORIOSISS. Itali
statuerunt laetitiae and cu^us Signum. On the right hand of this backe-part,
between two of the Columns was a square table, in which was drawn a Woman,
crowned with beautiful and fresh flowers, a Caducaeus in her hand: Al'the
notes of a plenteous and lively Spring being carried about her, the soul that
gave life to this speaking picture, was: -- Omnis seret omnia Tellus.

Above this piece, in another square, was portrayed a Tryton, his Trumpet at
his mouth, seeming to utter thus much, Dum Caelum stellas.

Upon the left hand of this back part, in most excellent color, Antikely
attired, stood the 4. kingdoms, England, Scotland, France and Ireland, holding
hands together, this being the language of them all, Concordes stabili Fatorum
Numine

The middle great Square, that was advanced over the Freeze of the Gate, held
Apollo, with all his Ensigns and properties belonging unto him, as a Sphere,
Books, a Caducaeus, an Octoedron, with other Geometrical Bodies, and a Harp
in his left hand: his right hand with a golden Wand in it, poynting to the
battle of Lepanto fought by the Turks, (of which his Majesty has written a
Poem) and to do him Honor, Apollo himself does here seem to take upon him
to describe: his word, Fortunate Puer.

These were the Mutes, and properties that helped to furnish out this great
Italian Theater: upon whose Stage, the sound of no voice was appointed to be
heard, but of one, (and that, in the presence of the Italians themselves) who
in two little opposite galleries under and within the Arch of the gate, very
richly and neately hung, delivered thus much Latin to his Majesty:

The Italians speech.
Salve, Rex magne, salve. Salutem Maiestati tuae Itali, faelicissimum Aduentum
laeti, faelices sub Te futuri, precamur. Ecce hic Omnes, Exiguimunere, pauculi
Numero: Sed magni erga Maiestatem tuam animi, multi obsequij. At nec Atlas, qui
Coelum sustinet, nec ipsa Coeli conuexa, altitudinem attingant meritorum Regis
optimi. Hoc est, eius, quem de Teipso expressisti doctissimo (Deus!) et
admirabili penicillo: Beatissimos populas, vbi and Philosophus regnat, and Rex
Philosophatur. Salve, Rex nobilissime, salve, viue, Rex potentissime salua,
viue, Rex potentissime, faeliciter. Regna, Rex sapientissime, faeliciter,
Italioptamus omnes, Itali clamamus omnes: Omnes, omnes.

Having hoysted up our Sails, and taken leave of this Italian shore, let our
next place of casting anchor, be upon the Land of the 17. Provinces; where the
Belgians, (attired in the costly habits of their own native Country, without
the fantastic mixtures of other Nations) but more richly furnished with love,
stand ready to receive his Majesty: who (according to their expectation) does
most graciously make himself and his Royal train their Princely ghests. The
house which these Strangers have builded to entertain him in, is thus
contriu'de.

The Pageant of the Dutchmen, by the Royal Exchange.
THe Foundation of this, was (as it were by Fate) laid near unto a royal
place; for it was a royal and magnificent labor: It was bounded in with the
houses on both sides the street, so prowdly (as all the rest also did) did this
extend her body in breadth. The passage of State, was a Gate, large, asc^eding
eighteen foot high, aptly proportioned to the other lymmes, and twelve foot
wide, arched; two lesser Posternes were for common on feet, cut out and opened
on the sides of the other.

Within a small Freeze, (and kissing the very forhead of the Gate) the Aedifice
spoke thus, Vnicus a Fato surgo non Degener Haeres.

Whilst lifting up your eye to an upper larger Freeze, you may there be
enriched with these golden Capitalls,

IACOBO, ANGL. SCOT. FRANC. HIBERN. REGI OPT. PRINC. MAX. BELGAE ded.

But bestowing your sight upon a large Azure Table, lyned quite through with
Caracters of gold, likewise you may for your pains receive this inscription,

ORBIS RESTITVTOR. PACIS FVND. RELIG. PROPVG. D. IAC. P. F. REGI. P. P.

D. ANNAE REGIAE CONIVG. SOR. FILL, NEPTI, ET D. HENRICO. I. FILL. PRINC. IVVENT.

IN PVBL. VRBIS ET ORBIS LAETITIA, SECVLIQVE FAELICITAT. XVII. BELGIAE PROVE.
MERCATORES BENIGN REGIA HAC IN VRBE EXCEPTI, ET

S. M. VESTRAE OB ANTIQ. SOCIALE FOEDVS, ET D. ELIZ. BENEFICENT. DEVOTI.

FAVSTA OMNIA ET FOELICIA AD IMPERII AETERNITAT. PRECANTVR.

Above which (being the heart of the Trophee) was a spacious square room, left
open, Silk Curtains drawn before it, which (upon the approach of his
Majesty) being put by, 17. young Damsels, (all of them sumptuously adorned,
after their country fashion,) sat as it were in so many Chaires of State, and
figuring in their persons, the 17. Provinces of Belgia, of which every one
carried in a Scutchion (excellently pencilde) the Arms and Coat of one.

Above the upper edge of this large Square Room, and over the first
Battlement, in another front, advanced for the purpose, a square Table was
fastened upright, in which was drawn the lively picture of the King, in his
Imperial Robes; a Crown on his head, the Sword and Scepter in his hands: upon
his left side stood a woman, her face fixed upon his, a burning heart in her
right hand, her left hanging by, a Heron standing close unto her: upon his
other side stood upright (with her countenance directed likewise upon him)
another woman, winged, and in a Freeze beneath them, which took up the full
length of this Square: this inscription set out it self in golden words: --
Viroque Satellite Tutus.

Suffer your eyes to be wearied no longer with gazing up so high at those
Sunbeams, but turn the^ aside to look below through the little Posternes:
whose State sweld quickly up to a greatness, by reason of 2. Columns, that
supported them on either side. In a Table, over the right hand Portall, was in
perfect colors, drawn a Serpent, pursude by a Lion: between them, Adders and
Snakes, chasing one another, the Lion scornfully casting his head back, to
behold the violence of a black storm, that heaven powered down, to overtake
them: the sound that came from all this, was thus: -- Sequitur grauis Ira
feroces.

The opposite body to this (on the other side, and directly over the other
Portall, whose pomp did in like manner lean upon, and uphold it self by two
main Columns) was a square piece, in which were to be seen, Sheep browzing,
Lambs nibbling, Byrds flying in the Air, with other arguments of a serene and
untroubled season, whose happiness was proclaimed in this manner, -- Venit alma
Cicuribus Aura.

Directly above this, in a square Table, were portrayed two Kings, reverently
and antiquely attyrde, who seemed to walk upon these golden lines, Nascitur in
nostro Regum par Nobile Rege Alter lesiades, Alter Amoniades.

From whom, lead but your eye, in a straight line, to the other side, (over
the contrary Posteme) and there in a second upper Picture, you may meet with
two other Kings, not fully so antique, but as rich in their Ornaments; both of
them, out of golden letters, composing these words, Lucius ante alios,
Edwardus, and inde IACOBVS Sextus, and hic sanxit, sextus and ille fidem.

And these were the Nerves, by which this great Triumphall Body was knit
together, in the inferior parts of it, upon the shoulders whereof, (which were
garnished with rows of Pilasters, that supported Lions ra^pant, bearing up
Banners) there stood another lesser Square, the head of which wore a Coronet of
Pilasters also; and above the^, upon a Pedestal, curiously closed in between
the tails of two Dolphins, was advanced a Women, holding in one hand, a golden
Warder, and poynting with the forefinger of the other hand up to heaven. She
figured Divine Providence, for so at her feet was written.

Prouida Men's Caeli. Somewhat beneath which, was to be seen an Imperial
Crown, two Scepters being fastened (crosse-wise) unto it, and delivering this
speech, -- Sceptra haec concredidit vni.

At the elbowes of this upper Square, stood upon the four corners of a great
Pedestall, fource Pyramides, hollow, and so neately contriu'de, that in the
night time (for anger that the Sun would no longer look upon these earthly
beauties) they gave light to themselves, and the whole place about them: the
windows, from whence these artificial beams were thrown, being cut out in
such a fashion, that (as Ovid, describing the Palace of the Sun, says) Clara
micante Auro, Flammasque imitante Pyropo,

So did they shine afar off, like Crysolites, and sparkled like Carbuncles:
Between those two Pyramides that were lifted up on the right hand, stood
Fortitude; her Pillar resting it self upon this golden line, Perfero curarum
pondus, Discrimina temno.

Between the two Pyramides on the other side, justice challenged her place,
being known both by her habit and by her voice, that spoke thus, Auspice me
Dextra solium Regale pere^nat.

We have held his Majesty too long from entering this third Gate of his Court
Royal; It is now hie time, that those eyes, which on the other side ache with
rolling up and down for his gladsome presence, should enjoy that happiness.
Behold, he is in an instance passed thorough; The Objects that there offer
themselves before him, being these:

Our Belgic Statue of Triumph, wears on her back, as much riches, as she
carried upon her breast, being altogether as glorious in Columns, standing on
Tip-toe, on as lofty and as proud Pyramides; her walks encompa'st with as
strong and as neat Ptlasters: the colors of her garments are as bright, her
adornements as many: For,

In the square Field, next and lowen, over one of the Portals, were the Dutch
Country people, toyling at their Husbandry; women carding of their Hemp, the
men beating it, such excellent Art being expressed in their faces, their
stoopings, bendings, sweatings, etc. that nothing is wanting in them but life
(which no colors can give) to make them be thought more than the works of
Paynters.

Lift up your eyes a little above them, and behold their Exchange; the
countenaunces of the Merchants there being so lively, that bargains seem to
come from their lips.

But in stead of other speech, this is only to be had,

PIO INVICTO, R. IACOBO, QVOD FELL. EIVS AVSPICIIS VNIVERSVM BRIT. IMPERIVM
PACAT, MARE: TVTVM PORTVS APERIT. Over the other Portall, in a square
(proportioned, to the bigness of those other) men, women and children (in Dutch
habits) are busy at other works: the men Weauing, the women Spinning, the
children at their Hand-loomes, etc. Above whose heads, you may with little
labor, walk into the Mart, where as well the Froe, as the Burger, are buying
and selling, the praise of whose industry (being worthy of it) stands published
in gold, thus,

QVOD MVTVIS COMMERCIIS, ET ARTIFICVM, NAVTRARVMQVE SOLERTIA CRESCAT, DESIDIA
EXVLAT, MVTVAQVE AMICITIA CONSERVETVR. Just in the midst of these four
Squares, and directly over the Gate, in a large Table, whose feet are fastened
to the Freeze, is their fishing and shipping lively and sweetly set down: The
Skipper (even though he be hard tugging at his Net) loudly singing this: Quod
Celeb: hoc Emporium prudenti industria fuos,
Quouis Terrarum Negotiatores emittat, exteros
Humaniter admittat foris famam, domi diuitias augeat.


Let us now clime up to the upper battlementes; where, at the right hand Time
stands: at the left (in a direct line) his daughter Truth; under her foot is
written, Sincera. And under his, Durant. Sincera Durant.

In the midst of these two, three other persons are rancked together, Art,
Sedulitie, and Labor: beneath whom, in a Freeze rouing along the whole breadth
of that Square, you may find these words in gold.

Arts, Perfecit, Sedulitate, Labor. As on the foreside, so on this, and equal
in height to that of Divine Providence, is the figure of a Woman advanced:
beneath whom, is an imperial Crown, with branches of Olive, fixed
(crosse-wise) unto it, and gives you this word.

Sine Caede at Sanguine. And thus have we bestowed upon you, all the dead
Colors of this Picture, (wherein not withstanding, was left so much life) as
can come from Art. The speaking instrument, was a Boy, attyred all in white
Silk, a wreath of Laurel about his temples: from his voice came this sound.

Sermo and Regem.
Qvae tot Sceptra tenes forti, Rex maxim, dextra,
Prouida Men's summi Numinis illa dedit,
Aspice ridentem per gaudia Plebis Olympum.
Reddentem et plausus ad sua verba suos,
Tantus honos paucis, primi post secula mundi
Obtigit, et paucis, tantum vnus incubuit,
Nam Regere imperijs populum faelicibus vnum,
Arduares, magnis res tamen apta viris.
At non vnanimes nutu compescere gentes,
Non homines pensum, sed labor ille Dei,
Ille ideo ingentes qui temperet orbis habenas,
Adiungit longas ad tua fraena manus.
Et menti de mente sua praelucet, et Artem*
Regnandi, regnum qui dedit illa, docet.
Crescentes varijs Cumulat virtutibus annos,
Quas inter pietas, culmina summa tenet.
Hac proauos reddis patriae, qui barbara Genti^
Flexere inducto Namine, corda ferae.
Hac animos tractas rigidos, subigisque rebels,
Et leave persuades quod trahis ipse iugum,
Illi fida comes terram indignata profanam,
Aut nunc te tanto Regereuersa Themis.
Assidat et robusta soror, ingentibus ausis
Pro populo carum tradere prompta caput.
Quin et Regis amor, musae et dilectus Apollo,
Regali gaudent subdere plectra manu.
Aurea et vbertas solerti nata labor,
Exhibet aggestas Ruris et vrbis opes.
Sunt haec dona Poli, certa quae prodita fama
Miratum vt veniat, venit vterque polus,
Venimus et Belgae, patrijs Gens exul ab oris
Quosfouit tenero matter Eliza sinu.
Matri sacratum, Patri duplicamus amorem,
Poscimus et simili posse fauore frui.
Sic Deum Panthaeci tibi proferat alitis aeuum,
Sceptra per Iunumeros qui tibi tradit Auos,
Sic Regina tua pars altera, et altera proles,
Spes populi longum det, capiatque decus.

Whilst the tongues of the Strangers were employed in extolling the gracious
Aspect of the King, and his Princely behavior toward them, his Majesty (by
the quicknes of Time, and the earnestness of expectation, whose eyes ran a
thousand ways to find him) had won more ground, and was gotten so far as to
S. Mildreds Church in the Poulterie: close to the side of which, a Scaffold was
erected; where (at the Cities cost) to delight the Queen with her own
country Music, nine Trumpets, and a Kettle Drum, did very sprightly and
actiuely sound the Danish march: Whose cunning and quick stops, by that time
they had touched the last Ladies care in the train, behold, the King was
advanced up so hie as to Cheapeside: into which place (If Love himself had
entered, and senne so many gallant Gentlemen, so many Ladies, and beautiful
creatures, in whose eyes glaunces (mixed with modest looks) seemde to dance
courtly Measures in their motion) he could not have chosen, to have given the
Room any other name, then, The Presence Chamber.

The stately entrance into which, Soper lane.
was a fair Gate in height 18. foot. In breath 12. The thickness of the
passage under it, being 24. Two Posternes stood wide open on the two sides,
either of them being 4. foot wide, and 8. foot high. The two Portals that
ietted out before these Posternes, had their sides open four several ways,
and served as Pedestalles (of Rusticke) to support two Pyramides, which stood
upon four great Balls, and four great Lions: the Pedestalles, Balls, and
Pyramides, deuowring in their full upright height, from the ground line to the
top, just 60. foot. But burying this Mechanicke Body in scilence, let us now
take note in what fashion it stood attyred. Thus then it went appareled.

The Device at Soper-lane end.
Within a large Compartiment, mounted above the forehead of the Gate, over the
Freeze, in Capitalles was inscribed this Title:

NOVA FAELIX ARABIA. Under that shape of Arabia, this Island being figugured:
which two names of New, and Happy, the Country could by no merit in it self,
challenge to be her due, but only by means of the secret influence
accompanying his Majesty wheresoever he goes, and working such effects.

The most worthy personage advanced in this place, was Arabia Britannica, a
W^man, attyred all in White, a rich Mantle of Green cast about her, an
imperial Crown on her head, and a Scepter in one hand, a Mound in the other;
upon which she sadly leaned: a rich Veyle (under the Crown) shadowing her
eyes, by reason that her countenance (which till his Majesty's approach, could
by no worldly object be drawn to look up) was pensiuely dejected: her
ornaments were marks of Chastetie and Youth: the Crown, Mound, and Scepter,
badges of Sovereignty.

Directly under her in a Cant by her self, Fame stood upright: A Woman in a
Watchet Roabe, thickly set with open Eyes, and Tongues, a pair of large golden
Wings at her back, a Trumpet in her hand, a Mantle of sundry colors
traversing her body: all these Ensigns desplaying but the propettie of her
swiftness, and aptness to disperse Rumors.

In a Descent beneath her, being a spacious Concaue room, were exalted five
Mounts, swelling up with different ascensions: upon which sat the five Senses,
drooping: Viz.

1 Auditus, Hearing. 2 Visus, Sight. 3 Tactus, Feeling. 4 Olfactus. Smelling. 5
Gustus, Taste.
Appareled in Roabes of distinct colors, proper to their natures; and holding
Scutchions in their hands: upon which were drawn Herogliphicall bodies, to
express their qualities.

Some pretty distaunce from them (and as it were in the midst before them) an
artificial Lauer or Fount was erected, called the Fount of Arate (Virtue.)
Sundry Pipes (like veins) branching from the body of it: the water receiving
liberty but from one place, and that very slowly.

At the foot of this Fount, two personages (in greater shapes then the rest)
lay sleeping: upon their breasts stuck their names, Detractio, Obliuio: The
one holds an open Cup; about whose brim, a wreath of curled Snakes were
winding, intimating that whatsoever his lips touched, was poisoned: the other
held a blacke-Cuppe couerd, in token of an envious desire to drown the worth
and memory of Noble persons.

Upon an Ascent, on the right hand of these, stood the three Charites or
Graces, hand in hand, attyred like three Sisters. Aglaia, Figuring Brightness,
or Majesty. Thalia, Figuring Youthfulnes, or flourishing. Euphrosine, Figuring
Chearfulnes, or gladness.


They were all three Virgins: their countenaunces laboring to smother an
innated sweetness and chearefulnes, that appareled their cheeks; yet hardly to
be hid: their Garments were long Roa^es of sundry colors, hanging loose: the
one had a Chaplet of sundry Flowers on her head, clustard here and there with
the Fruits of the earth. The second, a Garland of ears of Corn. The third,
a wreath of Vinebranches, mixed with Grapes and Olives.

Their hair hung down over their shoulders loose, and of a bright color,
for that Epithet is properly bestowed upon them, by Homer in his Himne to
Apollo.

PVLCHRICOMAE CHARITES. The Bright Hayrde Graces. They held in their hands
pensild Shieldes: upon the first, was drawn a Rose: on the second, 3. Dyce: on
the third, a branch of Mittle.

Figuring
Pleasantness. Accord. Flourishing.
In a direct line against them, stood the three Hours, to whom in this place
we give the names of Love, Justice, and Peace: they were attyred in loose
Roabes of light colors, painted with Flowers: for so Ovid apparrels them.

Conueniunt pictis incinctae vestibus Horae. Wings, a^ their feet, expressing
their swiftness, because they are Lackies to the Sun: lungere equ^s Tytan
velocibus imper at Horis, Ovid.

Each of them held two Goblets; the one full of Flowers (as Ensign of the
Spring,) the other full of rypened Figs, the Cognizance of Summer.

Upon the approach of his Majesty (sad and solemn Music having beaten the
Air all the time of his absence, and now ceasing,) Fame speaks.

Fama. Turn into Ice mine eye balls, whilst the sound
Flying through this brazen trump, may back rebound
To stop Fames hundred tongues, leaving them mute,
As in an untouched Bell, or stringlesse Lute,
For Virtues Fount, which late ran deep and clear,
Dry, and melts all her body to a tear.
You Graces! and you hours that each day run
On the quick errands of the golden Sun,
O say! to Virtues Fount what has befell,
That thus her veins shrink up.

Charites Horae. We cannot tell.

Euphrosine. Behold the fiue-folde guard of Sense which keeps
The sacred stream, sit drooping: near them sleep
Two horred Monsters: Fame! summon each Sense,
To tell the cause of this strange accidence.

Hereupon Fame sounding her Trumpet; Arabia Britannica, looks cheerfully up,
the senses are startled: Detraction and Oblivion throw off their iron slumber,
busily bestowing all their powers to fill their cups at the Fount with their
old malicious intention to suck it dry; But a strange and heavenly music
suddenly striking through their ears, which causing a wildnes and quick
motion in their looks, drew them to light upon the glorious presence of the
King, they were suddenly thereby daunted and sunk down; The Fount in the
same moment of Time, flowing fresh and abundantly through several pipes, with
Milk, Wine, and Balm, whilst a person (figuring Circumspection) that had
watched day and night, to give note to the world of this blessed Time, which he
foresawe would happen, steps forth on a mounted Stage extended 30. foot in
length from the maine building, to deliver to his Majesty the interpretation
of this dumb Mystery.

This Presenter was a Boy, one of the Choristers, belonging to Paul's.

His Speech.
Great Monarch of the West, whose glorious Stem,
Does now support a triple Diadem,
Weying more tha^ that of thy grand Grandsire Brute,
Thou that may make a King thy substitute,
And do besides the Red-rose and the white,
With the rich flower of France thy garland dight,
Wearing above Kings now, or those of old,
A double Crown of Laurel and of gold,
O let my voice pass through thy royal ear,
And whisper thus much, that we figure here,
A new Arabia, in whose spiced nest
A Phoenix lived and died in the Suns breast,
Her loss, made sight, in tears to drown her eyes,
The Ear grew deaf, Tastelike a sick-man lies,
Finding no relish: every other Sense,
Forgot his office, worth and excellence,
Whereby this Fount of Virtue began to freeze,
Threatened to be drunk by two enemies,
Snakie Detraction, and Oblivion,
But at thy glorious presence, both are gone,
Thou being that sacred Phoenix, that do rise,
From th'ashes of the first: Beams from thine eyes
So vertually shining, that they bring,
To Englands new Arabia, a new Spring:
For joy whereof, Nymphs, Senses, Hours, and Fame,
Echo loud Hymns to his imperial name.
At the shutting up of this Speech, his Majesty (being ready to go on,) did
most graciously feed the eyes of beholders with his presence, till a Song was
spent: which to a loud and excellent Music (composed of Violins and an other
rare Artificial Instrument, wherein besides sundry several sounds effus'd
(all at one time) were also sensibly distinguished the chirpings of birds, was
by two Boys (Choristers of Paul's) delivered in sweet and rauishing voices.

Cant.
Troynouant is now no more a City:
O great pity! is it not pity?
And yet her Towers on tiptoe stand,
Like Pageants built on Fairie land,
And her Marble arms,
Like to Magic charms,
bind thousands fast unto her,
That for her wealth and beauty daily woo her,
yet for all this, is it not pity?
Troynouant is now no more a City.
2
Troynouant is now a Summer Arbor,
or the nest wherein does harbor,
The Eagle, of all birds that fly,
The Sovereign, for his piercing eye,
If you wisely mark,
It Is besides a Park,
Where runs (being newly borne)
With the fierce Lion, the fair Unicorn,
or else it is a wedding Hall,
Where four great Kingdoms hold a Festival.
3
Troynouant is now a Bridal Chamber,
whose roof is gold, floor is of Amber,
By virtue of that holy light,
That burns in Hymen's hand, more bright,
Than the silver Moon,
or the Torch of Noone,
Hark what the Echoes say!
Britain till now nere kept a Holiday:
for love dwells here: And it is no pity,
If Troynouant be now no more a City.
Nor let the scrue of any wresting comment upon these words, Troynouant is now
no more a City.Enforce the Authors invention away from his own clear
strength and harmless meaning: all the scope of this fiction stretching only
to this point, that London (to do honor to this day, wherein springs up all
her happiness) being ravished with unutterable joys, makes no account (for the
present) of her ancient title, to be called a City, (because aluring these
tryumphes, sheeputs off her formal habit of Trade and Commerce, treading even
Thrift it self under foot, but now becomes a Reueller and a Courtier. So
that, albeit in the end of the first Stanza it is said, Yet for all this, is it
not pity,
Troynouant is now no more a City.


By a figure called Castigatio or the mender, here follows presently a
reproof; wherein tytles of Summer Arbor; The Eagles nest, a wedding Ha^ll,
etc. are thrown upon her, the least of them being at this time by virtue of
Poetical Heraldrie, but especially in regard of the State that now vpholds
her, thought to be names of more honor, than that of her own. And this short
Apology, does our verse make for it self, in regard that some, (to whose
settled judgment and authority the censure of these Devises was referred,)
brought though not bitterly the life of those lines into question: But
appealing with Machaetas to Phillip, now these reasons have awakend him: let us
follow King James, who having passed under this our third gate, is by this
time, graciously receiving a gratulatorie, Oration from the mouth of Sir Henry
Mountague, Recorder of the City, a square low gallorie, set round about with
pilasters, being for that purpose erected some 4. foot from the ground, and
joined to the front of the Cross in Cheap; where likewise stood all the
Aldermen, the Chamberlain, Towne-clarke, and Counsel of the City.

The Recorders Speech.
High Imperial Majesty, it is not yet a year in days since with acclamation
of the People, Citizens, and Nobles, auspitiouslie here at this Cross was
proclaimed your true succession to the Crown. If then it was joyous with Hats,
hands, and hearts, lift up to heaven to cry King James, what is it now to see
King James? Come therefore O worthiest of Kings as a glorious Bridegroom
through your Royal chamber: But to come near, Adest quem querimus. Twenty
and more are the Sovereigns we have served since our conquest, but Conqueror
of hearts it is you and your Posterity, that we have vowed to love and wish to
serve whilst London is a City. In pledge whereof my Lord Mayor, the Aldermen,
and Commons of this City, wishing a golden Reign unto you, present your
Greatness with a little cup of gold.

At the end of the Oration three Cups of gold were given (in the name of the
Lord Mayor, and the whole Body of the City,) to his Majesty, the young
Prince, and the Queen.

All which but above all (being gifts of greater value) the loyal hearts of
the Citizens, being lovingly received; his Grace was (at least it was
appointed he should have been) met on his way near to the Cross, by Syluanus
dressed up in green Iuie, a Cornet in his hand, being attended on by four other
Syluans in Iuie likewise, their bows and quiuers hanging on their shoulders,
and wind Instruments in their hands.

Upon sight of his Majesty, they make a stand, Syluanus breaking forth into
this abrupt passion of joy.

Syluanus. Stay Syluans, and let the loudest voice of Music proclayme it
(even as high as Heaven) that he is come.


Alter Apollo redit, Nouus En, iam regnat Apollo. Which acclamation of his was
borne up into the air, and there mingled with the breath of their musical
Instruments: whose sound being vanished to nothing, Thus goes our Speaker on.

Syluanus. Most happy Prince, pardon me, that being mean in habit, and wild
in appearance, (for my richest liuorie is but leaves, and my stateliest dwelling
but in the woods,) thus rudely with piping Syluanes. I presume to intercept
your royal passage. These are my walks: yet stand I here, not to cut off
your way, but to give it a full and a bounteous welcome, being a Messenger
sent from the Lady Eirene my Mistress, to deliver an errand to the best of all
these Worthies, your royal self. Many Kingdoms has the Lady sought out to
abide in, but from them all, has she been most churlishly banished: not that
her beauty did deserve such unkindness, but that (like the eye of Heaven) hers
were too bright, and there were no Eagles breeding in those nests, that could
truly behold them.

At last here she arrived, Destiny subscribing to this Warrant, that none but
this Land should be her Inheritance. In contempt of which happiness, Envy
shootes his impoisoned stings at her heart, but his Adders (being charmed)
turn their dangerous heads upon his own bosom. Those that dwell far off,
pine away with vexing to see her prosper, because all the acquaintauce which
they have of her, is this, that they know there is such a goodly Creature as
Eirene, in the world, yet her face they know not: whilst all those that here
sleep under the warmth of her wings, adore her by the sacred and Celestial
name of Peace, for number being (as her blessings are) infinite.

Her daughter Euporia (well known by the name of Plenty, is at this present
with her, (being indeed never from her side) under yonder Arbor they sit,
which after the daughters name is called, Hortus Euporiae ( Plenties Bower:)
Chaste are they both, and both maidens in memory of a Virgin, to whom they
were nurse children: for whose sake (because they were bound to her for their
life,) me, have they charged to lay at your imperial feet, (being your
hereditarie due) the tribute of their love: And with it thus to say.

That they have languished many heavy months for your presence, which to them
would have been, (and proud they are that it shall be so now,) of the same
operation and influence, that the Sun is to the spring, and the spring to the
earth: hearing therefore what trebble preferment you have bestowed upon this
day, wherein besides the beams of a glorious Sun, two other clear and
gracious stars shine cheerefullie on these her homely buildings: Into which
(because no duty should be wanting) she has given leave even to Strangers,
to be Sharers in her happiness, by suffering them to bid you likewise welcome.
By me (once hers now your vassaile,) she entreates, and with a knee sinking
lower than the ground on which you tread, do I humbly execute her pleasure,
that ere you pass further, you would deigne to walk into yonder Garden: the
Hesperides live not there but the Muses, and the Muses no longer than under
your protection. Thus far am I sent to conduct you thither, prostrately
begging this grace, (since I dare not, as being unworthy, lackey by your
royal side) in that yet these my green Followers and my self may be joyful
forerunners of your expected approach, away Syluanus.


And being (in this their return) come near to the Arbor, they gave a sign
with a short flourish from all their Cornets, that his Majesty was at hand:
whose princely eye whilst it was delighting it self with the quaint object
before it, a sweet pleasure likewise courted his ear in the shape of Music,
sent from the voices of nine Boys (all of them Queristers of Paul's) who in
that place presenting the nine Muses sang the dittie following to their Viols
and other Instruments.

But, least leaping too bluntly into the midst of our Garden at first, we
deface the beauty of it, let us send you round about it, and survey the
Walls, Allies, and quarters of it as they lie in order.

This being the fashion of it.

The passages through it were two gates, arched and grated Arbor-wise, their
height being 16. foot, their breadth 10. from the roof, and so on the sides,
down to the ground, Cowcumbers, Pompions, Grapes, and all other fruits growing
in the land, hanging artificially in clusters: Between the two gates, a pair
of stayres were mounted with some 20 assents: at the bottom of them (on two
pillars) were fixed two Satiers carved out in wood; the sides of both the
gates, being strengthened with four great French frames standing upon
pedestals, taking up in their full height 20. foot.

The upper part also carried the proportion, of an Arbor, being closde with
their round tops, the midst whereof was exalted above the other two, Fortune
standing on the top of it. The garnishments for the whole Bower, being Apples,
Pears, Cheries, Grapes, Roses, Lillies, and all other both fruits and flowers
most artificially molded to the life. The whole frame of this somer banqueting
house, stood (at the ground line) upon 4 foore; the Perpendicular stretching
itself to 45. We might (that day) have called it, The Music room, by
reason of the change of tunes, that danced round about it; for in one place
were heard a noise of cornets, in a second, a consort, the third, (which sat
in sight) a set of Viols, to which the Muses sang.

The principal persons aduancde in this Bower, were, Eirene (Peace) and
Euporia (Plenty) who sat together.

Eierene.
Peace: Was richly attired, her upper garment of carnation, hanging loose, a
Robe of White under it, powdered with Stars, and girt to her: her hair of a
bright color, long, and hanging at her back, but interwouen with white
ribbands, and Jewels: her brows were encompast with a wreath compounded of the
Olive, the Laurel, and the Date tree: In one hand she held a Caducaens, (or
Mercuries rod, the god of eloquence:) In the other, ripe ears of corn gilded:
on her lap sat a Dove: All these being ensigns, and furnitures of Peace.

Euporie.
Plenty: Her daughter sat of the left hand, in changable colors, a rich
mantle of Gold traversing her body: her hair large and loosely spreading over
her shoulders: on her head a crown of Poppy and Mustard seed; the antique
badges of Fertility and Abundance, In her right hand a Cornucopia, filde with
flowers, fruits, etc.

Chrusos.
Directly under these, sat Chrusos, a person figuring Gold, his dressing, a
tinsell Robe of the color of Gold.

Argurion.
And close by him, Argurion, Silver, all in white tinsell; both of them
crownde, and both their hands supporting a Globe, between them, in token that
they commanded over the world.

Pomona.
Pomona, the goddess of garden fruits; sat at the one side of Gold and
Silver; attirde in green, a wreath of frutages circling her temples: her arms
naked: her hair beautiful, and long.

Ceres.
On the other side sat Ceres, crowned with ripened ears of Wheat, in a loose
straw-coloured roabe.

In two large descents (a little below them) were placde at one end, The nine
Muses.
Clio. Euterpe. Thalia. Melpomene. Terpsicore. Erato. Polymnia. Vranio.
Calliope.
With musical instruments in their hands, to which they sung all the day.

At the other end. The 7 liberal Arts.
Grammar. Logique. Rhetorique. Music. Arithmeticke Geometry. Astrology.
Holding shieldes in their hands, expressing their several offices.

Upon the very upper edge of a fair large Freeze, running quite along the
full breadth of the Arbor, and just a^ their feet were planted ranks of
artificial Artichocks and roses.

To describe what apparel these Arts, and Muses wore, were a hard labor, and
when it were done, all were but idle. Few Tailors know how to cut out their
garments: they have no Wardrob at all, not a Mercer, nor Merchant, though they
can all write and read very excellently well, will suffer them to be great in
their books. But (as in other countries) so in this of ours, they go attirde
in such thin clothes, that the wind every minute is ready to blow through
them: happy was it for them, that they took up their lodging in a summer
arbor, and that they had so much music to comfort them, their ioies (of
which they do not every day taste,) being notwithstanding now infinitely
multiplied, in this, that where before they might have cried out till they grew
horse, and non would hear the^, now they sing.

Aderitque vocatus Apollo. Chorus in full voices answering it thus.

Ergo alacris Syluas, and caetera rura a voluptas
Panaque pastoresque tenet, Driadasque puellas,
Nec Lupus insidias pecori, nec retia Ceruis
Vlla dolum meditantur, amat bonus otia Daphnis;
Ipsi laetitia voces ad sider a iactant
Intonsi montes: ipsae iam carmina Rupes,
Ipsasonant Arbusta, Deus, Deus ille!
Syluanus (as you may perceive by his office before) was but sent of an errand:
there was another of a higher calling, a Trauailer, and one that had gone over
much grownd, appointed to speak to his Majesty, his name Vertumnus, the
master Gardner, and husband to Pomona: To tell you what clothes he had on
his back were to do him wrong, for he had (to say truth) but one suite:
homely it was, yet meet and fit for a Gardener: In stead of a hat, his
brows were bound about with flowers, out of whose thick heaps, here and
there peeped a queen apple, a cherie, or a pear, this boon-grace he made of
purpose to keep his face from heat, (because he desired to look lovely) yet
the sun found him out, and by casting a continual eye at him, whilst the old
man was dressing his arbours, his cheeks grew tawnie, which color for the
better grace, he himself interpreted blushing. A white head he had, and
sunne-burnt hands: in the one he held a weeding hook, in the other a grafting
knife: and this was the tenor of his speech. That he was bound to give thanks
to heaven, In that the arbor and trees which growing in that fruitful
Cynthian garden, began to droop and hang down their green heads, and to
vncurle their crisped forlocks, as fearing and in some sort, feeling the
sharpness of Autumnian malice, are now on the sudden by the divine influence
apparelled with a fresh and more lively verdure than ever they were before. The
nine Muses that could expect no better entertainment than sad banishment,
having now lovely and amiable faces: Arts that were threatened to be trod under
foot by Barbarisime, now (even at sight of his Majesty who is the Delian
Patro^ both of the Muses and Arts) being likewise advanced to most high
preferme^t whilst the very rural and Syluane troops dancd for ioy^ the Lady
therefore of the place Eirene, (his mistress) in name of the Praetor, Consuls and
Senators of the City, who carefully pruine this garden, (weeding out al hurtful
and idle branches that hinder the growth of the good,) and who are indeed,
Ergatai Pistoi, faithful Laborers in this piece of ground, She does in all
their names, (and he in behalf of his Lady) offer them selves, this Arbor, the
bowers and walks, yea her children gold and silver, with the loving and loyal
hearts of all those the Sons of peace, standing about him, to be disposde after
his royal pleasure. And so wishing his happy Arriual, at a more glorious
bower, to which he is now going, yet welcoming him to this, and praying his
Majesty not to forget this poor Arbor of his Lady, Music is commanded to
carry all their prayers for his happy reign, with the loud Amen of all his
Subjects as hie as heaven.

Cant.
Shine Titan shine.
Let thy sharp rays be hurld
Not on this under world,
For now it is none of thine.
These first 4. lines were sung by one alone, the single lines following, by a
Chorus in full voices.

Chor. No, no it is none of thine.

2
But in that sphere,
Where what thine arms infolde,
Turns all to burnisht gold,
Spend thy guilt arrows there,
Chor. Do, do, shoot only there.

3
Earth needs thee not:
Her childbed days are done,
And She another Sun,
Fair as thy self has got.
Chor. A new new Sun is got.

4
O this is had!
Whose new beams make our Spring,
Men glad and birds to Sing,
Hymns of praise, joy, and glee.
Sing, Sing, O this is he!
5
That in the North
First rizing: shonne (so far)
Bright as the morning Star,
At his gaie coming forth.
Chor. See, see, he now comes forth.

6
How soon ioies vary?
Here staide had still! O then
Happy both place and men,
But here had list not tarry.
Chor. O grief! had list not tarry.

7
No, no, his beams,
Must equal divide,
Their heat to Orbs beside,
Like nourishing silver streams.
Chor. Ioies slide away like streams.

8
Yet in this lies
Sweet hope: how far soever,
He bides, no clouds can sever,
His glory from our eyes.
Chor. Dry, dry, your weeping eyes.

9
And make heaven ring,
His welcomes showted loudelie,
For Heaven it self looks proudly,
That earth has such a King.
Chor. Earth has not such a King.

His Majesty dwelt here a reasonable long time, giving both good allowance to
the song and Music, and liberally bestowing his eye on the workmanship of the
place: from whence at the length departing, his next entrance was, as it were,
into the closet or rather the privy chamber to this our Court royal: through
the windows of which he might behold the Cathedral Temple of Saint Paul:
upon whose lower batlements an Antheme was sung, by the Quiristers of the
Church to the music of loud instruments: which being finished, a latin
Oration was Viua voce delivered to his grace, by one of master Mulcasters
Scholars, at the door of the free-schole fownded by the Mercers.

Oration habita, and ad Regem, and coram Rege prae schola Paulina.
BReuis ero, ne ingratus sim, Rex serenissime, licet, and plane, and plene
putem Regem tam prudentem, in tam profusa suorum laetitia, ita se hodie
patientia contra taedium armauisse, ne vllius toedij ipsum posset toedere. A
Edificium hoc magno sumptu suo extructum Dominus Johannes Collettus Ecclesiae
Paulinae Decanus, sub Henrico septimo, maiestatis tuae prudentissimo abauo,
erudiendae pueritiae consecrauit, vt huius scholae infantia tuo in Regnum.
Anglicanum iure coetanea existat. Tanta magnificentia conditum parique
magnificentia dotatum fidelissimae Mercerorum huius vrbis primaria semper,
hodie etiam Praetoriae societati tuendum testamento moriens commendauit. Quae
societas, and demortui fundatoris spei, and nostrae educationis studio fidem
suam sanctissime exoluit. Hic nos cum multis alijs erudimur, qui communi nomine
totius pueritiae Anglicanae, a Domino Rege, licet sponte sua ad omnia optima
saris incitato, bumillime tamen contendimus, vt quemadmodum sua aetatis
ratione, in omnire adultioribus prospicit, ita in summae spei Principis Henrici
gratiam tenerioribus, parique cum ipso aetate pueris, in scholarum cura velit
etiam consulere. Virgae enim obsequium sceptriobedicntia^ and parit, and praeit
inquit preceptor meus. Quique metu didicit iuuenis parere puerque, grandibus
imperiis officiosus erit. Habent scholae Anglicanae multa, in quibus Regiam
maiestatis correctionem esflagitant, ne inde in Academias implumes euolent vnde
in Rempublicam implumiores etiam e prima nuditate emittuntur. Quod malum a
Preceptore nostro accepimus: qui annos iam quatuor supra quinquaginta public,
priuatimque erudiendae pueritiae praefuit, and haec scholarum errata, cum
aliquo etiam dolor suo, and passim, and sparsim deprehendit. Nostra haec
schola fundatorem Collettum homine^tam pium; tutores Merceros homines tam fidos
cousequuta, quam esset foelix, si placeret, Domino etiam Regi, quod Regibus
Angliae, ad summam apud suos charitatem saepissime profuit, huic Mercerorum
principi societati, fratrem se, and conciuem adscribere, Quantum huic vrbi
ornamentum, quantum socierati honestamentum, Quantum scholae nostrae
emolumentum? Quantus etiam Regi ipsi honos inde accederet, mauult, qui hoc vuit
alias inter alia per otium Regi suo apperire, quam hodie cum taedio and praeter
aream eidem explicare. Omnipote^s Deus Jesus Christus and cum co, ac per cum
noster, et Pater, et Deus serenissimum Rege^ Iacobum, honoratissimam Reginam
Annam, nobilissimum Principem Henricum, reliquamque Regiae stirpis ad omnia
summa natam sobolem diu nobis ita incolumes tueatur, vt cum huius vitae
secundissimum curriculum confeceritis, beatissimam vitae caelestis aeternitatem
cousequamini. Dixi.

Our next Arch of triumph, was erected above the Conduit in Fleetstreete, into
which (as into the long and beauteous gallery of the City) his Majesty being
entered; a far off (as if it had been some swelling Promentory, or rather
some enchanted Castle guarded by ten thousand harmless spirits) did his eye
encounter another Tower of Pleasure.

Presenting it self.

Fourscore and ten foot in height, and fifty in breadth; the gate twenty
foot in the perpendicular line, and fourteen in the ground line: The two
Posternes were answerable to these that are set down before: over the
posternes riz up in proportionable measures, two turrets, with battlementes on
the tops: The midst of the building was laid open to the world, and great
reason it should be so, for the Globe of the world, was there seen to move,
being filled with all the degrees, and states that are in the land: and these
were the mechanical and dead limbs of this carved body. As touching those
that had the use of motion in it, and for a need durst have spoken, but that
there was no stuff fit for their mouths.

The principal and worthiest was Astraea (Justice) sitting alost, as being
newly descended from heaven, gloriously attirde; all her garments being
thickely strewed with stars: a crown of stars on her head: a Silver veil
covering her eyes. Having told you that her name was Justice, I hope you will
not put me to describe what properties she held in her hands, sithence every
painted cloth can inform you.

Directly under her, in a Cant by her self, was Arate (virtue) inthronde, her
garments white, her head crowned, and under her Fortuna: her foot treading on
the Globe, that moude beneath her: Intimating, that his Majesty's fortune, was
above the world, but his virtues above his fortune.

Inuidia.

Envy, unhandsomely attirde all in black, her hair of the same color,
filletted about with snakes, stood in a dark and obscure place by her self,
near unto Virtue, but making show of a fearfulness to approach her and the
light: yet still and anon, casting her eyes, sometimes to the one side beneath,
where on several Greeces sat the four cardinal virtues: Viz.
Iustitia. Fortitud^. Temperantia. Prudentia.
In habiliments, fitting to their natures.

And sometimes throwing a distorted and repining countenance to the other
opposite seat, on which, his Majesty's four kingdoms were advanced.

Viz.
England. Scotland. France. Ireland.
All of them, in rich Robes and Mantles; crowns on their heads, and Scepters
with persild scutchions in their hands, lined with the coats of the particular
kingdoms: for very madness, that she beheld these glorious objects, she stood
feeding on the heads of Adders.

The four Elements in proper shapes, (artificially and aptly expressing their
qualities) upon the approach of his Majesty, went round in a proportionable and
even circle, touching that cantle of the Globe, (which was open) to the full
view of his Majesty, which being done, they bestowed themselves in such comely
order, and stood so, as if the Eronie had been held up on the tops of their
fingers.

upon distinct Ascensions, (neatly raisde within the hollow womb of the Globe)
were placed all the states of the land, from the Nobleman to the Ploughman,
among whom there was not one word to be heard, for you must imagine as Virgil
says: Aegl. 4. Magnus ab integroseclorum nascitur ordo.
Iam redit at * virgo redeunt Saturnia regna. Astraea.



That it was now the golden world, in vhich there were few parts.

All the tongues that went in this place, was the tongue of Zeal, whose
personage was put on by W. Bourne, one of the servants to the young Prince.

And thus went his speech.

THe populous Globe of this our English I Will,
Seemde to move backward, at the funeral pile,
Of her dead female Majesty. All states
From Nobles down to spirits of meaner Fares,
Mooude opposite to Nature and to Peace,
As if these men had bin Th Antipodes,
But see, the virtue of a Regal eye,
Th'attractiue wonder of man's Majesty,
Our Globe is drawn in a right line again,
And now appear new faces, and new men.
The Elements, Earth, Water, Air, and Fire,
(Which ever clipped a natural desire,
To combat each with other, being at first,)
Created enemies to fight their worst,
See at the peaceful presence of their King,
How quietly they moude, without their sting:
Earth not devouring, Fire not defacing,
Waternot drowning, and the Air not chasing:
But proping the queint Fabric that here stands,
Without the violence of their wrathful hands.
Mirror of times, lo where thy Fotune sits,
Above the world, and all our human wits,
But thy hye Virtue above that: what pen,
Or Art, or brain can reach thy virtue then?
At whose immortal brightness and true light,
Enuies infectious eyes have lost their sight,
Her snakes (not daring to shoot-forth their stings
Against such a glorious object) down she flings
Their forkes of Venom into her own mawe,
Whilst her rank teeth the glittering poisons chawe,
For it is the property of Enuies blood,
To dry away at every kingdoms good,
Especially when she had eyes to view,
These four maine virtues figurde all in you,
Justice in causes, Fortitude gainstfoes,
Temprance in spleen, and Prudence in all those,
And then so rich an Empire, whose fair breast,
Contaynes four Kingdoms by your entrance blessed
By Brute divided, but by you alone,
All are again united and made One,
Whose fruitful glories shine so far and even,
They touch not only earth, but they kiss heaven,
From whence Astraea is descended hither,
Who with our last Queens Spirit, fled up thither,
Fore-knowing on the earth, she could not rest,
Till you had locked her in your rightful breast.
And therefore all Estates, whose proper Arts,
Live by the breath of Majesty, had hearts
Burning in holy Zeales immaculate fires,
With quenchles Ardors, and unstained desires,
To see what they now see, your powerful Grace,
Reflecting joys on every subjects face:
These painted flames and yellow burning Stripes,
Upon this roab, being but as shows and types,
Of that great Zeal. And therefore in the name
Of this glad City, whither no Prince ever came,
More loved, more longed for, lowely I entreat,
You Would be to her as gracious as you are great:
So with reuerberate shoutes our Globe shall ring,
The Musicks close being thus: God save our King.

If there be any glory to be won by writing these lines, I do freely bestow
it (as his due) on Tho. Meddleton, in whose brain they were begotton, though
they were delivered here: Qnae nos non ^ecimus ipsi, vix ea nostra voco.

But having peiced up our wings now again with our own feathers; sufter us a
while to be pruning them, and to lay them smooth, whilst this song, which went
forth at the sound of Hault-boyes, and other loud instruments, flies along
with the train.

Cant.
Where are all these Honors owing?
Why are seas of people flowing?
Tell me, tell me Rumor,
Though it be thy Humor
More often to be lying,
Than from thy breath to have truth flying:
Yet alter, now that fashion,
And without the stream of passion,
Let thy voice swim smooth and clear,
When words want gilding, then they are most dear
Behold where Jove and all the States,
Of Heaven, through Heavens seven silver gates,
All in glory riding
(Backs of Clouds bestriding)
The milky way do cover,
With starry Path being measured over,
The Deities convent,
In Jove's high Court of Parliament.
Rumor thou do loose thine aims,
This is not Jove, but One, as great, King JAMES.
And now take we our flight up to Temple Bar, (the other end of this our
Gallery) where by this time, his Majesty is upon the point of giving a
gracious and Princely Farewell to the Lord Major, and the City* But that his
eye meeting a seventh beautiful object, is invited by that, to delay awhile
his (lamented) departure.

The Building being set out thus.

The Front or Surface of it was proportioned in every respect like a Temple,
being dedicated to Ianus, as by this inscriptio^ over the Ianus head may
appear.

Iano Quadri fronti Sacrum. The height of the whole Aedifice, from the grownd
line to the top, was 57. foot, the full breadth of it 18. foot: the thicknes
of the Passage 12.

The personages that were in this Temple, are these.
1. The principal person, Peace. 2. By her stood, Wealth. 3. Beneath the feet
of Peace, lay Mars (War) groueling. 4. And upon her right had (but with some
little descent) was seated Quiet, the first handmaid of Peace. 5. She had
lying at her feet, Tumule. 6. On the other side was the second hand-mayd,
Liberty at whose feet lay a Catte. 7. This person trod upon Servitude. 8. The
third handmaid was Safety. 9. Beneath her was Danger, 10 The fourth attendant
was, Faelicitie: 11 At her feet, Unhappiness.
Within the Temple was an Altar, to which, upon the approach of the King, a
Flamin appears, and to him, the former Genius of the City.

The effect of whose speech was, that whereas the Flamin came to perform rites
there, in honor of one Anna a goddess of the Romans, the Genius vows, that
none shall do Sacrifice there, but himself, the offering that he makes being,
the Heart of the City, etc.

And thus have we (lowely and aloof) followed our Sovereign through the
seven Triumphal gates of this his Court Royal, which name, as London received
at the rising of the Sun; so now at his going from her (even in a moment) She
lost that honor: And being (like an Actor on a Stage) stripped out of her
borrowed Majesty, she resignes her former shape and title of City; nor is it
quite lost, considering it went along with him, to whom it is due. For such
Virtue is begotten in Princes, that their very presence has power to turnea
Village to a City, and to make a City appear great as a Kingdom. Behold how
glorious a Flower, Happiness is, but how fading. The Minutes (that lackey at
the heels of Time) run not faster away then do our joys. What tongue could
have expressed the raptures on which the soul of the City was carried beyond it
self, for the space of many hours? What wealth could have allurde her to
have closde her eyes, at the coming of her King, and yet See, her Bridegroom
is but stepped from her, and in a Minute (nay in shorter time, then a thought can
be borne) is she made a Widow. All her consolation being now, to repeat over
by roate those Honors, which lately she had perfectly by heart: And to tell of
those joys, which but even now, she reallie beheld; yet thus of her absent,
beloved, do I hear her gladly and heartily speaking.

Virg. In freta dum Fluvii Current: dum montibus vmbra,
Lustrabvnt Conuexa, Polus dum sidera pascet,
Semper Honos, Nomenque tuum, Laudesque manebunt.
The Pageant in the Strond.
THe City of Westminster and Duchy of Lancaster, perceiving what preparation
their neighbor city made to entertain her sovereign; though in greatness they
could not match her, yet in greatness of Love and Duty, they gave testimony,
that both were equal. And in token they were so, hands and hearts went
together: and in the Strond, erected up a Monument of their affection.

The Invention was a Rayne-bow, the Moon, Sun, and the seven Stars,
called the Pleiades, being advanced between two Pyramides: Electra (one of
those seven hanging in the air, in figure of a Comet) was the speaker, her
words carrying this effect.

That as his Majesty had left the City of London, happy, by delivering it
from the noise of tumult: so he would crown this place with the like joys;
which being done, she reckons up a number of blessings, that will follow upon
it.

The work of this was thought upon, begun and made perfect in xij. days.

As touching those five which the City builded, the Arbor in Cheap Side, and
the Temple of Ianus, at Temple Bar, were both of them begun and finished in six
weeks. The rest were taken in hand, first in March last, after his Majesty
was (...), upon which, at that time, they wrought till a Month after S. James
his day following, and then gave over by reason of the sickness: At this second
setting upon the^, six weeks more were spent.

The City elected sixteen Comitties, to whom the Mannaging of the whole
business was absolutely referred: of which number, four were Aldermen, the
other grave Commoners.

There were also Committies appointed as Overseers, and Serueyors of the works.

Artificum Operarium que in hoc tam celebri apparatu, summa. summa.
THe City employed in the Framing, building, and setting up of their five
Arches, these officers and worke-men.

A Clarke that attended on the Committies. Two officers that gave Summons for
their meetings. etc. A clarke of the Works. Two master-Carpenters. Painters.
Of which nnmber, those that gave the maine direction, and undertook for the
whole business, were only these seven.

William Friselfield. George Moss. John Knight. Paul Isacson. Samuel
Goodrick. Richard Wood. George Heron.
Caruers. 24
Over whom, Stephen Harrison Ioyner was appointed chief; who was the sole
Inuentor of the Architecture, and from whom all directions, for so much as
belonged to Caruing, Joining, Molding, and all other work in those five
Pageants of the City (Paynting excepted) were set down.

Ioyners 80 Carpenters. 60 Turners. 6 Laborers to them. 6 Sawyers. 12 Laborers
during all the time, and for the day of the Triumph. 70 Besides these, there
were other Artificers, As: Plommers, Smythes, Molders.
To the Reader.
REader, you must understand, that a regard, being had that his Majesty should
not be wearied with teadious speeches: A great part of those which are in this
Book set down, were left unspoken: So that thou do here receive them as
they should have been delivered, not as they were. Some errors wander up and
down in these sheets, under the Printers warrant: which notwithstanding may
by thy Authority be brought in, and receive their due Correction. As in F. 2.
For, From his own clear strength, Read, clear, straight, etc. And within
few lines beneath that: In steed of, ( Because alluring this triumph) Read,
because that during these, etc. In the Cant. likewise, beginning thus, Shine
Titan Shine, In steed of, O this is Had, read, O this is He. And in the sixth
staff: For, Here stayed, Had still. But here Had list not tarry. Read for every
Had, he* Other faults pardon, these I think are the grosest.

FINIS.

