A Strange Horse-Race, At the end of which, comes in The Catch-pols Masque. AND
AFTER THAT The Bankrouts Banquet: Which done, the Devil, falling sick, makes
his last will and Testament, this present year. 1613.

Aliquid latet, quod non patet.

Written by THOMAS DEKKER.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hunt, and are to be sold at his Shop in Bedlem,
near Moore-field Gate. 1613.

TO THE VERY WORTHY, IVDITIOVS AND UNDERSTANDING Gentleman, THOMAS VVAL^HAL
Esquire.
IF I put into your hands a homely piece of Work (neither so good as you
deserve, nor so rich as I do wish it) I must entreat you to blame the vanity
of our times which are so fantastical, that they covet Stuffes, rather
slight, to feed the eye with show, then Substantial for enduring. Let the
Fashion be French it is no matter what the Cloth be. I have therefo^ ^ot (with
the Sturgeon) swomme against the stream; But followed the Humorous Tides of
this Age, and (like Democritus) have fallen a Laughing at the world, sithence it
does nothing but mock it self. But seeing no creature is so wise as man, nor
any so foolish, my Wits have here been at charges to feast either sort. A
mixed Banquet of Sweet and Sour, Fulsome, and Wholesome, Seria cum Iocis,
stands furnished before them. In this Horse-Race there is no cheating, my
Building (as many Rich men's great houses) is not only to keep Rats, and
Spiders in it, but every Room (though all be but mean) has some picture to
delight you. The Plat-forme being narrow, I could raise no lofty Stories; for
when the Ditty is light, the Air must not be Grave; A Crow is not to build so
high as an Eagle: as the Face of my Invention was drawn, such I could not
chose but proportion out the Body. Yet the Picture has lost some of the
Colors I gave it.

I know you love to Read, because you know to Censure; Read, this I pray as I
writ it -- (willingly,) and Censure, as I send it -- (in Love) Bear with the
hard-fauourdnesse of the Title. The value of a Diamond is not lessened by the
roughness when it is Uncut. It can be no shame to gather a Violet, growing
close to the ground. Had I better you should enjoy it; such as it is if you
entertain, I shall rest.

Most affectionately devoted Yours, THOMAS DEKKER.

Not to the Readers: but to the Understanders.
HE that writes, had need to have the Art of a skillful Cook; for there must
be those Condimenta (seasonings) in his pen, which the other caries on his
tongue: A thousand palats must be pleased with a thousand sawces: and one
hundred lines must content fi^e hundred dispositions. A hard task: one says,
it is too harsh another, too supple: another too triuiall: another too serious.
The first reads, and mewes: the second reads, and railes: the third reads,
and rackes me: the fourth reads, and rends me. He is tied to a stake like a
Bear to be baited that comes into Paul's Churchyard to be read. So that bare
Readers (I mean not threed-bare) are not Lectores, but Lictores, they whip
Books (as Dionysius* ^id boys) whereas to Understanders, our libri, which we
bring forth, are our Liberi (the children of our brain) and at such hands are
as gently entreated, as at their parents: at the others, not.

The Titles of Books are like painted Chimnies in great Countrey-houses, make
a show a far off, and catch Travelers eyes; but coming nere them, neither
cast they smoke, nor has the house the heart to make you drink. The Title of
this book is like a Iesters face, set (howsoever he draws it) to beget mirth:
but his ends are hid to himself, and those are to get money. Within is more
then without; you shall not find the kirnell, unless you both crack and open
the shell. Aliquid latet, quod non patet: Dig under the right tree, and it is
ten to one but you take up gold: for in this (as in all other my former
Nocturnis lucubrationibus) I have strove to feed the mind, as well as the body:
If one leaf make you laugh, the next settles your countenance. Tart meats go
easily down, being strewed with sugar: as music in Tauerns makes that wine go
down merrily, till it confound us, which (if the Fiddlers were not there) would
hardly be tasted. So for the sake of the sauce which I have tempered for this
dish, you may (perhaps) eat the meat, which otherwise you would not touch.

The maine plot of my building is a Moral labyrinth; a weak thread guides you
in and out: I will show you how to enter, and how to pass through, and open
all the Rooms, and all the private walks, that when you come to them, you may
know where you are: and these they be -- Y^^ will not; I know it is more
pleasure to find out the conceitfull-deceits of a Pair of Tarriers, then to
have them discovered. That pleasure be yours, the Tarriers are mine. Farewell.

The Contents of this Book.
A Strange Horse-race. Chariot-races. Foot-races. The Suns Race. The Moons
Race. Races of winds and waters. Races of the Elements. Races of Virtues and
Vices. A Masque of Catch-pols. Who are Catch-pols. The Devils falling sick.
His Will and Legacies. His Recovery. His Dam brought to bed with two Children.
Their Nursing. A Banquet of Bankrouts. The Comfit-makers inuectiue against
Bankrouts.
A strange Horse-race.
THE first step into a Princes Court, treads not in the brauest rooms, but
they are reached to, and ent^e^ by ascensio^s, and degrees. This state and
complement begetting more observance, delectation, astonishment, and reverence:
by the same (...) ^^sser squares draw^^. For if you come into a Goldsmiths, or
Lapidaries shop, and desire to buy the fairest Jewels; the running Artizan
tempts you first with slight ones, and then bewitcheth you with costlier, and
(for the vp-shot) strike^ your eye with admiration, by gazing at the best of
all. So that (...) man, (how wretched soever) can comparatively be miserable,
because the pal^^e dame hand of Fortune can throw him to no baseness and
deiection so low, but he shall fall upon some other as low as himself. Even
likewise (...) contrary par^^ are there no objects of triumph, (a^ ^ashe^
presentations, banquets, and such like) how glorious soever of themselves, but
may have their splendour and dignity ^eightned by a comparatiue tra^^cing of
things in the same rank^ and quality.

Give me lean therefore, first to make a flourish with my pen, and clear the
way, (as a Fe^cer does in a May Game) for more room, until the Masquers come
in: so shall you know the cause of that cost, and the sumpt^^^snesse of the
Banquet; to which I wish no man to be too saucy in pressing in, lest he pay
more dear for his sweet (...) (the banquet being prepared in ^^ll) then the
^^essing (...) of one Peacocke, and two Pheasants cost in one of the Kings of
Tunis his Kitchen, which amounted to an hundred ducats. What talk I of an
hundred ducats? Nay, lest he be more peppered then those Masons,
Bricke-layers, and Carpenters were, that builded those Pyramids in Egypt,
during their work ab^^^ o^e of which Pliny brings in a ^^t of a 1800. Talents,
that were laid out for Scallions, Onions, Garlic, and Leekes only, besides
Bread and Cheese, which he scores not down: for belike the Gypsey-Kings left
that unpaid.

But before either this Masque, or Suger-feast come marching in their true and
most sw^^t state, I inuit you (for variety) to behold a Race, on ^^^t, and
horse, with some triumphing in Chariots, after the Roman fashion: to set forth
which of ours (...) their thundering velocity, lightning-like violence, and
earthquak^^^, ^^orrying, so lively, that (i^ it were possible) the noise should
make you mad, as the sight could make you merry: I will (as I held it fit,
before) give you several pictures of Races, that in former Ages ran themselves
out of breath^ to the end that the now dead colors of the one^ may set off the
brave, fresh, and amazeable-starting pageantry of these our other. When the
Romans were Lords over the world, and their Emperors masters over them, no
glory was wanting to illustrate their triumphs, after the (...) of strong
Nations, nor any cost spared in popular presentations, to bind unto them, and
bewitch the hearts of their own people, after their victorious returning home.
Blondus de Roma Triumphante. Chariot Races for triumph. Tranquil. Suetonius.
The manner of Roman Triumphs.
Those that did triumph* sat in Chariots gilded all (...), drawn sometimes
by white horses; so was Augustus: sometimes with Elephants, so was Pompey. To
excel whom in that pride, Caesar had his Chariot of triumph drawn by forty
Elephants: so^^ have been drawn by Hearts, and so was Aurelianus. In these
Chariots, with the Emperors, sat their sons, as heirs to their fathers
glory; and after them followed the Roman Soldiers, crowned with garlands, as
partners in their Emperors honors. Before the Chariots we^^ the Capti^^s,
(Kings, Queens, and others) chained, the spoils taken in wars, borne al^^^
to despite them, and more to dignifie the Conqueror, pictures and countersets
of all the Cities, Mountains, Rivers and Battles, from whence they came
victors, were drawn in Ensigns to the liueliest portrature, all supported
before the Triumpher. Cor. Tacit. lib. 2. annal.
And in this last manner did Germanicus Caesar enter into Rome, in a triumphall
Chariot, laden with five of his children, after the victories gotten against
the Cherusie, Chatti, and Angrinari, with all other Nations inhabiting to the
river Albis, as Corn. Tacit. sets down in the second of his Annalles.

Now, lest these highest exaltations of Fortune should make their Emperors
swell into too much insulence, and so into a scorning of their subjects; the
Soldiers themselves, yea and the common Plebeians that stood upon (...) so
beh^ld these sights, would commonly (in have of such honors, and in abatement
of such pride that might (...) Emperors) as they march in all that pomp, ca^^
b^^ter aspersions upon them. As for example: When Ven^idius Ba^sus came home in
a Parthian triumph, Qui Mulos frica^a^ factus est Co^sul.
the Soldiers aloud cried out thus in mockery of him; Behold, (...) la^ely
rubbed horses heels, is now your glorious (...). And at another time to the
people thus: O you Citizens of Rome, keep your wives at home in your shops,
Romani seruate vxores, Maechum calvum vobis adducimus.
you are best for now we have brought you your bald-pate Whore-maister, their
Emperor having, at that time, more used of a peri^ing, then a Barber.

These beams of worldly felicity sh^^ ab^^t ^he heads of their Princes: let us
now see what pleasures the Roman people enjoyed.

For them were built Theaters, In the Roman Theaters were always their
Scoenici Ludi, stageplayes.
and Amphi theaters, in some of which might fit fourscore thousand people
together; the Theaters themselves being some of ^^one, some of wood, curiously
adorned with columns, and Images of their Emperors: some gilded all over,
some moving upon wheels, to avoid the heat of the Sun. All of them
spacious, all sumptuous: In these they sometimes saw plays tragical or
comicall, Grecian music.
with all sorts of music, Doricke, Chromaticke, soft and delicate, Lidian,
Nypolydian mournful, fit for Tragedies: and to these sorts of music they had
all sorts of Dancing; And Hyporchema (in time of a pestilence) a dance to
Apollo in the Camp; The Pyrichian, which was a dance in Armor: In the
Chamber (as we now have) dances, Plutarch. in Moralib.
with wanton gesticulation. All which, as well Music as Daunces, they
borrowed from the Greeks.

Tra^quillus Suctonius.
Then had they both in Circo, and Theatris, (their Race and Theaters) fights
both on foot and horseback; sometimes Man to Man, now and then Men and Beasts
incountring together, three hundred Gladiators, or Sword-players, Sword-players.
fighting at one time at sharp, with equal number. In which pastimes
Gordianus the Emperor, to feed the people to the full, consumed twelve days,
every days presentation* varying from each other; As sword-playing, (...)
kinds, casting of Darts and Spears, Sword-playing, Hunting, and the fighting
of beast in the Roman Amphitheaters.
Chariot-chaces, Huntings, and such like; In one day to a hundred Fencers,
thrusting out a hundred and fifty of the fiercest Lybian beasts; in another a
thousand, which they were to kill with their swords, or to hazard their own
lives: for he maintained a large and thick wood, strongly defensible, in which
ran two hundred wild Hearts, thirty vn-back'd fierce horses of Britain, a
thousand sheep, ten Roe-buckes, which he caused to be gilded all over; thirty
wild Asses, a hundred and fifty wild Boares, two hundred Ibices, and two
hundred wild Heluetian Goats: upon all which he cried havoc to the people,
to have them torn in pieces in one solemn festival meeting.

Ludi Circe^ses, cuius ludi Originem. Virgil. lib. 5. describit
The like did Philippus Arabs the Emperor, at two several times; the first at
the celebration of the Circumcision Games (so called of Circus, the place where
they were performed) At which time he turned out two and thirty Elephants,
twenty Tigers, an hundred Hyenae^, one Rhynoceros, threescore tame Lions, and
ten curle-mained Lions, ten Panthers, thirty Leopards, and ten fierce Horses to
be cut in pieces.

The second time was at the celebration of those games, which were held but
once in a hundred years; and thereupon were called Ludi Seculares, (of
Seculum, an age of a man, which was then counted an hundred years) their
Solemnization being in honor of Apollo, and Diana. Against which day a Crier
went up and down the City of Rome, Venite ad Ludos quos nemo mortalem vidit,
neque visurus est.
with this note: Whosoever will see games, which no man alive has ever seen,
nor any man living shall ever see more, now let them come. At which time, the
Rites due to that Celebration being performed, and the people of Rome in
infinite numbers assembled together, he caused to be hunted (besides the
beasts before named, to as great or a greater number) ten horned Elkes more, by
no other persons, then by two thousand Fencers, armed only with their Swords
in their hands, the beasts running loose, madding and roaring up and down.

Thus have you s^ene the Roman Emperors in their Chariots of Triumph, Vide
Plin. Lib. 18.
after which the people further rewarded them with Statues, or Images made to
the life, some in massy gold, some in silver, some in brass, and some in
marble, upon which were insculped and richly cut out, all their Battles,
Conquests, and Triumphs: and besides these Statues, Aureis post-modum
successerunt, Laureae: erantque and virtutis and honoris eiusdem praemia.
Gellius.

Garlands given to the Romans.

The first sort of Ru^ners were called Stadiodromi.


they had also at first Crowns of Gold sent them, and those were after changed
to Garlands of Laurel, the honor of both being all one. The common people
received after their combats, fights, victories, etc. (to incite them likewise
to hunt after ^ame, and military renown) wreathes and Coronets to adorn their
temples. The horsemen and Charioters being by this time wearied, give way for
the infantery to come up, and try how nimbly they be^tir their heels. In which
Races on foot, not only the Romans, but also the Greeks, Trojans, Athenians,
Macedonians, and many other Nations excelled for their incredible swiftness: I
think the wild Irish are bent at it in these latter times. This kind of
exercise had three changes in it: For some, upon whose heads the wagers were
laid, stood breast-wise in a direct line, at a mark, and ran only to a goal
proposed and left there: The second sort were called Diaulodromi.
others being at the goales end before their fellows, wan no glory by it,
unless they could again recover the mark from which they first set forth.

The third sort were called Dolichodrmi.
The third Race was to run and return to and fro, from the mark to the goal,
without intermission by the space of eight changes, and never under six: and
he that could hold out his wind so long, to be first at the bounds where he
began his race, carried away both garland and prizes.

Races in heaven.
My Muse could here leave running at Base thus upon earth, and stretching her
wings forth to a more noble expansion, soar aloft up into the Celestial
Habitations, and from thence bring news, what race the Sun runs in his
Zodiacall Circle, The Suns Race.
where he sets out every morning, and where he rests every night: at what
houses he stays (being 12 in number) and how long he tarries, in what part of
the world he shortens his Careeres, and in what part he enlarges it: his
fires burning at all times alike, Sol fons lucu.
but not alike in all places: by whose heat all Countries do propagate and
bring forth blessings to their inhabitants; but no Country can boast she
possesses all, because what one wants, another should supply, and so every
land to be beholden one to another: then to show, that al-be-it he runs not in
a perfect Orbicular Circle, but that sometimes he runs side-wise with an
oblique carriage of his body, yet his course is constant: his horses, ( Pirois,
Eous, Aethon, and Phlegon) as they are four in number, making four great
Stoppes, or Careeres in Heaven, which beget four Changes, or four Renouations
of time upon earth, 1 Spring. 2 Summer 3 Autum. 4 Winter.

that is to say: the Vernall, Aestmall, Autumnall and Brumall, they keeping
ever their day (like just Debitors) only a few minutes difference. But so much
reverence do I owe to the Divine study of the transcendently-learned
Astronomer, that I lay down here this Buckler, knowing him most worthy to
take it up.

The (...) Race.
From tracing therefore any further the wheels of this Illuminous Chariot,
wherein the God of the day rides, our Protean Muse altering the shape of her
course, a little lower could stand and discover how the Queen of the night
(^he Moon) is, (with a swifter whirling then the Sun her brother) whirled up
and down in a coach of silver, and there show likewise, The Sun the cause of
the Moons variable shapes.
why sometimes ^he sits Horned, sometimes Halfe-faced, sometimes Full and
perfectly Round: then, where that Light is locked up that is taken from our
sight; and by what means, and how so quickly it is again restored.

Then could I without help of her light, slip in a moment into the Seas, and
sail only by that Star, whose influence now guides my pen. There could I
describe what warlike Races the Winds held with the Waters: The Race of the
winds and the Waters.
their Wrestling, Running, Retiring, and Chasing this way and that way, like
two great Princes striving for Superiority, and confounding, by their
contention, not themselves, but those under them, Quicquid delirant Reges,
plectuntur Achiui.


But because you shall not be weary by being weather-beaten in Tempests:
suppose the Winds have spent their Malice (like Rich-men, undone by going to
Law in defending unjust Actions) But the Seas swell still up by a Natural
pride which the Moon (their Mistress) puts into them, The Sea flows when the
motion of the Moon is downwards and nearer to it.
because their Nature being quarrellous, they rage (like Roaring Boys upon the
Land) that they can fasten no opposite to go together ^i'th ears withal, the
next they meet they instle, and that is the Earth: there they purpose to begin
another Race; for their Wanes run (like Madmen out of Bedlam) beyond their
bounds up into the Land, doing what they can to swallow it, and that shows
(me-thinkes) like an unthrifty riotous Heir, washing away (in Tauernes) the
possessions of his father, and his own Patrimony, whilst the careful old man
seeks to keep all within compass; as the walls of the Earth strive to hold
the unruly Waters within their own dominions, and to bar them entrance into
her own, for all their bustling, and for all their billows, we are now leaped
safe on shore.

Whilst thus I stand upon the soft and vn-remoueable habitation of our great
Grandmother (the Earth) Another Race, The Race of the Elements in Man's body.
is presented to mine eye, for I could here describe, how the four Elements,
(like so many wheels in a Clock) are proportioned to more diverse ways, and
with strange turnings, yet all to meet in one delicate tune within Man's body,
And then, 1 Earth. 2 Water. 3 Air. 4 Fire.

if any one of those four Protectors, be predominant above the other, and so
set the rest together by the ears, how then the blood has his Race, and
runs into diseases, and the shortning of that Race is to stumble at Deaths
Door. Again, if I should rifle this Treasure-house of living Creatures, and
look into the depth of it, I could bring you to those hidden Races of
Minerals, The Race of Minerals.
and Metals, which the Sun neuersees, yet can they not live without him:
there should you behold a Mine of Lead, The ambition of Lead.
laboring to turn it self into Tynne, and so to rise to preferment; but like
a poor Man, that works day and night to grow rich, he strives with
impossibilities, and is at the years end no better then at the biginning. The
ambition of Tynne.
There should you behold a Mine of Tynne, (sister to Silver) using all the Art
she can, to be transformed into her sisters shape, and to carry a beauty as
fair as here is; but like a Rich Man, that having enough, and being well to
live, yet practices vnlaw^ull courses to increase his state, Ambition of
Silver.
as his, so her doings do seldom prosper: There likewise should you behold a
Mine of Silver, ambitiously aspiring to be as glorious Gold: but she works
like an Alchimist, watches long, and looses her labor; yea, though she were
able to pass through those twelve gates.

1 Calcination. Rip^^y^ Chanon of (...).
2 Dissolution. 3 Separation. 4 Conjunction. 5 Putrefaction. 6 Congelation. 7
Cibation. 8 Sublimation. 9 Firmentation. 10 Exaltation. 11 Multiplication. 12
Proiection.
And so come to wear in a King, the very Philosophers Stone, yet the trial of
her beauty would be when her painting came to the Touch* Last of all, Gold
has no ambition.
you should there likewise behold (the eldest child of the Sun) A Mine of
Gold, who being King of Metals, never aspires to be higher, because it
knows, there is none above him.

Touching Minerals of ba^er quality let us not cast our eye upon them, having
enriched our Lading with the best; hoyst now up Sails, therefore from hence
and away; for these Races (if I should measure the shortest of them to his end)
would weary me too much, and appear, yrkesomely, too long, like that journey
of Philippides, who ran one thousand, two hundred and forty furlongs (which
makes 155 miles) (from Athens in Greece to Lacedemon) in two days, if
Polyhistor lies not.

I could here be content after this weary Uoyage, round about the vast compass
of the world (dispatched, as you see, by my Sea-chariots, within a little time,)
now to fire up Herculean Pillars, and write upon them Non vltra. But our Muse
is ambitious, A fres^ Race.
and (to her) Non sufficit Orbis, she must on again. For she has one Race yet
to Run, which (for Antiquity) is as Reverend, (for Persons) as Renowned, (for
the Contention) as Glorious, and (for the Uictory) as Memorable, as any that
ever yet have been in the World.

It is (because you shall weary your eyes with staring no longer) A Race or
Challenge betwixt the Uertues that dwell in the little world ( Man) and the
Uices to whom he gives free entertainment; Virtue and Vice run.
they are all ready to present their Troops, and to do their Deuoire: But
before they enter the lists, (some on horseback, some on foot, some in
Chariots) I will play the Herald to marshall them in order, according to their
quality and worth, and send them forth, marching in brave equipage before you.

Virtue is seldom mounted. Her picture.
The Virtues are not Mounted, and have Few Followers, they have no Plumes, and
so, no Pride; their Attire is decent, sober, girt to them, and civil: their
Faces grave, austere in very sweetness, sweet in austerity; fairest when
they are nearest; lovely a far off, and all open; used to no mask, their
pace demure, maiestically-humble, constant and comely.

Vice is ever mounted.
The Vices are Gallant Fellows, they are Mounted, and have no small Fools to
their Followers: they have Plumes, like Estridges, and Perfumes like
Muske-cats, (so strong) they are soon smelt out: for Attire, they carry
Lordships on their backs, a Knights living in their Breeches, and a
Shopkeepers wealth in a Hat-band, Garters, and Shoestrings; Their Faces light,
Her picture.
anticke, impudent, disdainefull, amorously bewitching, shadowed now and then,
but not possible always to be covered: As a Fools face can never be hid.

The Virtues will go sometimes from you (when anon you see them) but the Vices
will still come with their Faces toward you, for if you look narrowly upon
their backs, if they show but them to you first, you will straight turn tail
to them too, and no more care a pin for their company, unless you be mad; I
will give you an example of some of them, that carry their heads highest: thus,

The back part of Riot.
The Hole in the Counter, is the Back of Riot; if a Prodigal lay there in
Hunger and Cold, but five such moneth^ no worse then the last great Frost was,
in a dear year, and in a Plague-time when no body would come at him; and this
he should suffer before he bound himself for ever to his Mercer, being sure,
else, to suffer it after-wards, I do not think but my Gallant would love a
warm Freze Ierkin better then a saite of cut Satin, and choose rather (like a
Horse) to draw beer, then to wear rich trappings like an Ass, for which his
bones pay so derrely, So

The back part of drunkenness.
Headache is the Back of Drunkenness: if the Headache would knock our Coxcombs
soundly, so soon as we cry out Drawer in a Tavern, we should never quarrel
with ye Watch, nor break do (...) Bandy-house windows of midnight.

But best sins, like the worst faces, are most and ever painted, and that is
the reason they so bewitch us, for it is a good eye can see their deformity:
Hark,

The Trumpets sown^, The Race begins.
they are ready for the Lists: behold, they enter; you perhaps (that are but
Standers-by) may mistake them, and therefore I will describe them, as they
either begin the Race or end it.

The first that r^ns, is Blasphemous Insolence, a Turk, (for you must
understand, that of all Nations, some are at this Race) he will be first, The
charracter of a proud Turk.
because he will be first; his looks are full of Darings, his voice thunders
out Braues; he lays down Threats instead of Wagers, he scorns to Wage any
thing upon an even Lay, for if terror or tyrany can win it, he will have All;
By his side comes his Surgeon (called Infidelity) the horse he rides on is
swift Uengeance, his two Pages are Fire and Sword.

A Christian Lady runs against him, her name Innocen^ Humility, if she get to
the (...), she is promised a pair of wings, besides the pr^^e her looks are
modest, her words few, to her-selfe (as she sets forth) she prays, she has
only one Maid waits upon her, called Sufferance; they both run on foot: See,
see, the Turk flies like a winged Dragon, the Christian flies too, like a
D^ue, yet with no^^er speed; ^h^e has now gotten the better way (...), and is
gone beyond him, and see! Rage and Have to disgrace her, in her speed, The
Turks own vengeance prepared for others, co^founds himself.
have cast him from his Horse; his own Horse kickes and tramples on the
Master. The Christian Lady runs in pity to save him: but he cursing Her, and
calling only upon his own Surgeon (Infidelity) she (for want of skill)
poisons his wound in steed of curing it; he is dead: his Surgeon rips his body,
to search what was perished within him (upon so ^light a fully as she terms
it) and (see!) his heart is turned into a Flint, Hungary ouer-run by the Turks.
Black, and Hardened as Marble; and lying ^rown^ in the blood of a thousand
poor Hungarians, yet all that could not ^often it. The Wager they ran for
was a Garland of Palme-trees held up by a Lady at the Goales end (whose name is
Eternity) and by her given to the Christian Conqueror, with the Wings, besides,
which were promised her, if she fainted not in her Race. When the wheels of
Desire are once set a going, the more weights you hang upon them, the faster
turn they about, for lo^ all the Opponents in this Race-running have done what
they came for in a moment, whilst you were busy about the first Challenger and
Defendant, so great was their Fernor: but I have the Roll here of the persons
and their names, and albe^t you have lost the sight of them in Action, you
shall not loose the sport of it in my Relation.

Prodigalities Race.
The second that ran, and made the brauest show, was a young Gallant, his name,
Prodigallity, loved of many Ladies for his good gifts, and followed by many
rich Citizens sons, who were preferred unto him by their fathers Money, he sat in
a Chariot, The Character of a Prodigal.
open on every side, four Horses drew him, ( Rashness, Luxury Folly, and
Hanger-on) his Coachman being drunk, A Whore whipped him for-ward, and made
all Fly; at the back of the Chariot, two leaped up, and were drawn after him,
viz: Beggary and a Fool, whose gesture of making mouths and anticks faces was
excellent sport to the spectators, he ran a swift and thundering pace, after him
and close by him rid many Merchants, Mercers, and Silke-men, who had laid great
Wagers on his head, but he gave them all the slip* and was before hand with
them still.

Thrifts Race.
The Defendant whom he challenged, was a polliticke Belgicke, his name,
Hans-thrift (a Dutchman) vigilant in his course, subtle in laying his wager,
provident in not venturing too much, honest to pay his losses, industrious to
get more (twenty sundry ways) if he should happen to be cheated of all; his
Horse was not so swift as sure, his Attire not curious, but rich and neat,
they set out both together, but before Prodigallity came half way of his
journey, Thrift got the start of him, out-went, out-wearied, out-spent him,
the other lost all, this won what the other lost.

Prodigality upon this disgrace hid his head, Disconte^t the mother of Treason.
(...) incountring when, he went away, with a c^ue of Male-^ontents, they
schooled him, and they spoiled him: for in a ho^e blood he presently grew
desperate, and swore to undertake (for raising of his fortunes) the plots of
Treason, A malo in peius.
to blow up kingdoms, to murder ^ings, and to poison Princes: But the Hangman
(...)ing their whispering, set up a pair of gallows in his way at which he
can ^^lt* but, fell down, brake his neck, and never since could keep any
good quarter.

The third that same sneaking in was a (...) faced shotten-herring-bellied
rascal, The Character of a Niggard.
his nose ^r^pt as soon as he entered into the Race, whose ^^lth, because it
would scour, and so same so^e, he wrapped up in as filthy a hand-kercher: his
apparel was cut out of 6 or 7 religions, and as they turned, that turned: He
stole one only (...) of fire from Prodigality, which he to^^ betwixt his
hands to (...) them: he had in his pocket (to victual him for this voyage) two
dried cobs of a red herring reserved by a ^^^^menger at the ^iege of Famagosta,
and then afterward laid on a (...), and the (...) of a (...) that had (...) at
the (...) Indies. This Thing was a Usurer, called Niggardliness, he had no page,
but two Brokers (out of their love to him, Hospitality pictured.
hoping to get by it) came along with him upon their own charge.

Against this wretch (in brave (...)) (...) ^orth (...) did Lord (that is now
no (...) for has (...) place in the Country, and all the (...) in it smoke^
(...) his money as he spends the water that passes to his house, it comes
thither in great pipes, but it is all consumed in his kichin, his name
Hospitality. It is a grave and reverend counteneance; he wears his bea^^ (...)
of purpose, that ye hairs being white, and kill in his eye, he may (...) any
thing unworthy their honor: his app(...) for war^^^^, not bravery: if he think
ill at any time, he presently think^ well: for just upon his breast he wears his
Reprehension. As a jewel comprehends much treasure in a little room; and as
that nut-shell held^ all Homers Iliads smally written in a piece of Vellum. So,
though the tree of his virtues grow high, and is laden with goodly fruit, yet
the top-bough of all, and the fairest Apple of all he counts his Hospitality:
His bread was never too stale, his drink was never sour, no day in the year
was to them that are hungry, A ^asting day, yet he ^bseru^s them all: He gives
moderately every hour, but in reverence of one season in the year, all that
come may freely take.

Chaucer in the Franklins tale.
And this is (as the Book does remember)
The cold frosty season of December:
Phoebus waxed old, and hewed like Lato^^
That before in his hot Declination
Shone as the burned gold, with streams bright,
But now in Capri^^^^^ adowne he light,
Where is he shor^^ full pale, I d^^^ well seyne,
The bitter frostes with the sleet and ^a^e
Destroyed has the green in every yerd,
Ianus firteth by the fire with double ^erd,
And drinks of his Bugle-hor^^ the wine,
(...) the Brawne of the (...)
The h^rse he sat upon was gray and aged, like his master, They that uphold
hospitality are in these days weak, because few.
but weak by reason of years; yet his heart good, and knew the way to many
holy places, whither he had (...) carried (...) he should ^ncounter (...) an
opposite as he saw stand brauing; ^ee breathed a kind of quick fire in and
out at his snoring nostrils in sign he had quickened his old courage, and that
he wished to stand on ^^ ground till this ^^^^ke were ended. Forward therefore
both (...), Niggardliness and Hospitali^^ (...).
Hospitality had thou(...) and prai^es (...) Niggardliness every man laughed,
every man disdained him; none clapped him on the back, but his two trunch-men
(the Brokers) the the other rode like a prince with all eyes thrown upon him in
admiration: but this poor (...) ran as if a scar-crow had flowen: it was not a
running, but a kind of false scur^y Am^le, or rather Hobling, which put him
into such a heat (he never in all his life sweating before) that he melted
all his tallow, which at the most was not able to make a pi^^ing Candle; and so
the snuff of his life went out ^^inking. Before he dyed, he gave his keys to
the Brokers, and made them his heirs, with charge to bury him there in the
highway, only to save charges, and to strip off his clothes, which he made
them swear they should sell: Et hic finis priami, and with that word he lay as
dead as a dog. His heirs performed his will, and going home me^^^, to share
his wealth, which they knew to be infinite, they (...) nothing in the house but
two penny Halter: (for all his money he had buried under the earth in a field)
the sight of this struck cold to their hearts: and so (seeing their own
Father* as it were, had cozened them) the Broken went ^^th away like a cupple
of Hounds from the dogge-house in a (...) together, and lie buried at the grate
which receives the common Sewer in the midst of Hounds-ditch. Hospitality had
the honor of the day, and went away: crowned with poor men's Benedictions.

The next Contenders that followed those (...) an English Knight and a Spanish*
The Spaniard temperate in diet, the English a glutton.
the Don was a temperate and very little feeder, and no drinker, as all
Spaniards are: the Knight had been dubbed only for his valor in that service:
to it they went both, h^^^ed alike, manned (...) alike, the Spaniard not so
gaudy, but more rich. Sir D^gonet had scarce set spurs to his Bucephalus, but
with health^ which he took out of every commanders fist, drinking to his ^oone
voyage, ^e fell sick, and his horse both of the Scaggers, of which he never
recovered: A drunkards followers.
he had (besides his Page) some Voluntaries that attended him, that is to say,
the drowsy and decayed Memory, the one filled his glasses, the other his
Tobacco-pipes. Shortness of Life held his bridle, and helped him still off. The
Diego was a dapper fellow, of a free mind and a fair, bounteous of his purse,
but sparing in his Cups, as scorning to make his belly a wine^eller, therefore
the more nimble; and having nothing in him but fire, (as the other nothing but
the contrary Element) he flew before the wind like a gallant Pinnace under
sail, Plures occidit ^rapula, quam glad^us.
and held out his Race to the end, leaving the Englishman dead-drunke, in
less then a quarter of the way.

Other Races.
Then came in two by two, other Troops, whose onsets, and ouer-throwes,
honors, and disgraces, darings, and dauntings, merit an ample Chronicle,
rather then an Abstract; of all which the Braggadochio-vices still got the
worst: the Virtues departing in Triumph, but not with any insulting. And thus
the glory of this Race ended.

Now, as after the clear stream has glided away in his own current, the
bottom is muddy and troubled. And as I have often s^ene, after the finishing
of some worthy Tragedy, or Catastrophe in the open Theaters, that the Scene
after the Epilogue has been more black (about a nasty bawdy Iigge) then the
most horrid Scene in the Play was: The Stinkards speaking all things, yet
noman understanding any thing; a mutiny being amongst them, yet none in danger:
no tumult, and yet no quietness: no mischife begotten, and yet mischief
borne: the swiftness of such a torrent, the more it ouerwhelmes, breeding the
more pleasure.

So after those Worthies and Conquerours had left the field, another Race was
ready to begin, at which, though the persons in it were nothing equal to the
former, yet the shoutes and noise at these was as great, if not greater. They
marched in no order, and that made them seem comely; Handsomeness in them had
been a disgrace, the worse they showed, the better they were liked: They could
do nothing ill, because they could do nothing well, and were therefore
commended, because there was in them nothing commendable: Such praise as they
brought, they carried away; and this it was.

The first Troop that came thronging in, Belly-gods.
were a company of brave staring fellows, that looked like Flemings, for they
were as fat as butter, and as plumpe in the face as Trumpeters are when their
cheeks swell like bladders. No horses could be hired for them: for (as
Gallants do Citizens) they were sure to break their backs: they were all
Footmen therefore, and ran very heavily (like men going to hanging) because if
they should fall, their bellies making them leap heavy, they were sure to
break their necekes. These termed themselves Epicures, Of Epicurus, from whom
sprang that Sect.
and all that heard them believed it: for their Guts was their God, their
Heads, Hogsheads of wine, their Bodies, Cages for wild-fowle, and their Souls
nothing else but the steame and breath of roasted Capons served up piping bot.
These ran into a thousand men's Debts, but ran so far one from another, (for
fear of breaking Ribs if they had iustled) that they would be sure never to
run in any certain danger.

The last Race they ran (for you must know they had many) was from a cry of
Sergeants: yet in the end the Law ouer-tooke them, and after a long, sweaty,
and troublesome Race, ouer-threw and laid them in the dust; they dyed in
prison, and were buried in silence.

After them came in a pert Lawyer, A Lawyer and his conscience run.
puffing and blowing (one that for putting a wrench into the Laws mouth, to
force her to speak any thing, was pitched over the bar) and he can really:
but with whom think you? against this own Conscience: but in the Race (sweat
and swear, do what he could) she gave him the slip, tired him extremely, and
was still out of his reach the length of Gracious street, at the least; yet the
Lawyer was a goodly man, strong, and full of action, and his Conscience nohing
in the world to speak of.

A Vicar.
The next was one that should have been a scholar, and was indeed, and he ran
horrible fast after four Benefices all at one time, they held him nobly to it
a long space; but with much ado he got beyond them, and won what he ran
for: Mary he caught such an incurable cold (by reason of his pursinesse) that
hes lost his voice presently, and grew by degrees, so hoarse, that he never
spoke after to any great purpose, all his lights we^e so stopped.

A Tailor runs with Pride.
At last comes skipping in a terse, spruise, neatified Capricious Tailor, new
leaped from his Shopboord, and the Diuill could not persuade him, but he would
run with Pride, and with none else. Pride was for him, and took hold of him
presently, Horses were offered to them both: No (said the Tailor) I will not
be set on Horfe-backe, I will not ride, nor be ridden: Pride scorned any
courtesy more then he. To it they go then; Pride got still before him, and he
followed her at an ench like a madman, tooth and nail. In the end he had her
at his back: Pride then (for anger that any should outstrip her) made such
extreme haste, that she caught a fall. The Tailor (having many gallant parts
of a Gentleman about him) looking aside, and seeing his Incounterer down, came
bravely to her, offering to take her up, which she disdaining, allowed him a
yard before her, which he was content to take, and to it they go again: Pride
followed him close, and coming home up to him, spyed her advantage (being
near the Races end) and leaping forward, hit him full at the heart, and so
overthrew him. Enraged at which, he drew out a Spanish weapon, and would have
run it through her; she put him by, and cut his comb, which so cut his
heart (to see a woman his confusion) that he was never his own man afterward.
But he said he wrought his own woe himself, and confessed it was his own
seeking to meddle with her; and therefore such bread as he brake, was but
broken to him again, yet swore (if a man might believe him) that though he
sunk into hell for it, he would, at one time or other, sauce her.

This quarrel made peace; for the vn-rauelling of this bottom, was the last
thread that ended all. You now see what voyage this ship of fools (in which
these last were embarked) has made. Here cast they Anchor, and leap on Shore.

A preparation to the Masque ensuing, and the cause thereof.
FAME, A news spread.
who has as many tongues as there are mouths in the world, hearing of the
honorable defeature given by those worthy Champions to to their ignoble (but
insulting) enemies, could not choose (because she is a woman, but pratile of
it, in all places, and to all persons; insomuch that the Courts of Kings rang
of it Cities made bone-fires for it, the Country had almost broke all their
bells about it: at every Cross it was proclaimed, at every Market, one word
went about the price of victuals, and flue about that: Barbers had never such
utterance of a news, Booke-sellers sold more sheets then Linnen-drapers;
Carriers could load their horses with no Packes but of This: No Ship went to
Sea, but some part of the freight was this victory: It was written of at home,
dispersed in letters abroad, and sung to a new Tune every where. Omitting these
hither parts of Christendom, she ( Fame I mean) taking her Trumpet (because
she is Times Herald) flew with it over the Mediterranean-sea into Asia, first
into Turkey, so to Caldaea, Persia, Hircania, Assiria, Armenia, and then
getting up higher over the Caspian sea, away she poasted to the Tartars, and
Cathayans, then to the Chynois, and other East Indians, so back again over
the Arabian Sea, into Arabia Foelix: then crossing over Numidia, her next cut
was into Barbary in Africa, from thence down to Noua Guinea; and from thence
crossing the Line into the Ethyopian sea, away swoopes she by Brasill, and so
beats her Wings in the West Indies, whose heat being ready to melt her, (as
the East Indies did before) over the Line again she scuds to Noua Hispania,
and so to the Northward of America: then homeward through Florida, taking
Virginea, Noua Francia, Norembega, and all those Septentrionall Countries in
her passage, and so crossing the Deucalidonian sea, having beaten her self
almost to death in proclaiming and trumpeting lowdly the News, she pantingly
ariues where she set forth, pruning and peecing up her flagging and broken
Wings.

The winds caching her breath in all kingdoms, through which she went, were as
great with it as her self, and ready to burst until they were delivered.
Never was such puffing and blowing, such blustering and roaring, since they
threw down Babel: The natural cause of an earthquake.
so that with their struggling who should cry out first, they were all brought a
bed of it at one time: for all of them breaking by force into the bowels of the
earth, and by that irrruption tearing her very foundation with an universal
earthquake, the massy frame was cleft and riuen asunder, and so the terror of
the report was by the wherrying winds shot (as if with a thunderbolt from
heaven) and never tarryed, or met any rub, till it burst open the Gates of
infernal Erebus.

The Grand-Sophy of the Satanicall Synagogue, The Devil put in fear when
Good-men prosper.
at the very sound of it belchd out a groan, the rebound of which (like one
bandogs whyning in Paris Garden, setting all the Kennels a barking) left all
the Stygian Hel-hounds in a most clamorous howling. The dismal consort having
(with a worse noise then the grating and crashing of Iron when it is a ^yling)
ended these Black Sants, and shook their ghastly heads four or five times
together, and with chains rattling at their heels, (as if so many black Dogs
of Newgate had been mad in a Tavern there) ran bellowing All, about their
Father of Mischief, to know what Qualme came over his stomach. He (darting an
eye upon them, able to confound a thousand Coniurers in their own Circles,
(though with a wet finger they could fetch up a little Devil) and with an
Vlulation, (his chin almost bursting his breast bone with a Nod) from which,
fumed out a breath (blacker then sea-coale smoke out of a Brew House chimney)
which if their withered chaps had bin there, yawning to suck it down was of
power to have turned ten thousand old Beldams in Lapland into the rankest
Witches) He thus grumbled: Hel's undone, Hels Army defeated.
Why, yelped all the rest? An Armada (quoth he) cannot save us, our Legions (in
the world next above us) are overthrown by that Stigmaticall Virago Virtue:
All those Battalions that warred under ye colors of our Red and fiery Dragon
are debaushed: Suffer this bracke into our Acheronticke Territories; and hotter
Assassinations will every day pel mel maule us. Al about him cried they would
never endure it.

Whilst this indisgested mischief lay broyling on their stomachs, room was
made for an Intelligencer newly arrived upon these stronds of Horror. It was
one of those nimble Vmbratici Daemones, Paracelsus de gnomis.
as invisible as the Air, and (like Air) never out of our company, one of
those Gnomi, whose part Theophrastus Paracelsus takes so terribly, proving that
whether we swmme, or are on land, or in the woods, or in houses, we are still
haunted with a spirit or two at least, neither hurtful nor doing good, and
such a One was This: Belial Beelzebub of Barathrum, had lately employed this
Purseuant of his about serious business; Furies are H^ls Beadels, are three in
number: Alecto, Tysiphone, and Maegera: to the number of those three Passions
which carry us headlong, viz. Anger, Covetousness, and Luxury. Lactantius de
verae cultu. Blasphemy the dia else spittle.
in which having done nothing, and dreading but sorry payment for his labor,
he knew not how better to escape the Furies, then by forging some egregious
lies, by the same Anuile, that all hell was now striking (that is to say,
touching the late victory of the Virtues) and so to be thought he had spent
all his time in that intelligence.

He therefore being tossed, (the throng was so great) upon their glowing
flesh-hookes, from one to one, till he came before the grand Cacodemon, (his
Master) who sat in a chair all on fire, down fell my little spirit flat at
his cloven feet: and then, the Captain of Damnation, (having first spit out
four or five Blasphemies, which one of his Gentlemen Ushers still trod out)
he gnashed his teeth, and asked if the news were current: it was replied, yes.

Nay (cries this Goblin) to unclasp a book of my further travels, let me be
hung in chains of ice (as you are in fire, if I lie) and be bound to eat
flakes in the Frozen Zone for a thousand years, if the Gloabe of the
Terrestrial world be not new Molded, the Ball of it has none of the Old
Stuffing: not an inch of knavery can now be had for love or money, if you
would give a Million of Gold you cannot have a Courtier in debt, if you would
bestow a thousand pounds worth of Tobacco on a Soldier but to swear a
Garrison-oth, he would die ere he drunk it; besides all Rich-men are
liberal, Poor men not contentious, Beggars not drunk, Lawyers not covetous,
rich heirs not rietous, Citizens not envious, clownes most religious.

No more, (...) Tarrarian Tarmag^n^* The ^^ther stopped in his (...), and it was
time, for this sa^ Cannon, Schellum in Dutch, a Theife: Wasserhand a Fauning
Cur, Names fitting for the Devil.
(...) Schellum Wafferhand through both his broad sides. The fair of this
Mile-stone had almost burst his heart, he (...) nothing but flashes of fire,
spit nothing but flakes of (...), weep'd nothing but scoopes-full of
scalding-water, for now he saw the Dilaceration of his own Luciferan Kingdom.
And the exaltation of his enemies; out of his presence he commanded all, They
break their Necks for have; he hawle for Music, Ten thousand souls were
presently set a yelling, he took no pleasure in it, He felft himself
damnably heart-burnt, pan^ues worse then the tortures of everlasting death fell
upon him, and no hope of his Recovery, which made an inerpressible howling in
hell.

No Amendment being in him, he calls for Physicians: not one would come near
him, they knew his payment too well, for Potecaries they were little enough,
and cared not for his custom. He then ^ard out, for a cunning (...) to make
his Will, The Notary dwells in Helstreete in Paris.
one was at his Elbow presently, (...) he hugd in his arms, and cried out.
Welcome my Son; thou (...) ever bind me unto thee. Sr Satrapa^ Satan, then
(...) him He Is (...) and miserable estate, (...) desperate, (...) being
utterly given over, he (...) for him to (...) his Last Will and Testament, and
(...) or Scriuano, begins, and galops as fast but then, as Monsieur Diabole
(...) his chaps, The Will (...) this.

The Devils last Will and TESTAMENT.
The Diuill is Behemah, an Elephant for strength to overcome and Dornschweyn, a
Porcupine for quils, he shoots daily at our souls.

A Vayuode is a chief Ruler: an Attribute given to great Men in those parts of
Morauia and Transalpine Hungary.


BEHEMAH Dornschweyn, Prince of all that lies between the East and the West,
the North and the South; Mighty both on the Sea, and on the Land, chief
Uayuode of Usury, Symony, Bribery, Perjury, Forgery, Tyrranny, Blasphemy,
Calumny, etc. (My Uassails and Deputies, with all their Petty Officers under
them) Patron of all that study the black and Negromanticke Arts; Father of all
the Roaring Boys; The Founder and Upholder of Paintings, Dawbings,
Plaisterings, Pargettings, Purflings, Cerusings, Cementings, Wrinkle-fillings,
and Botchings up of old, decayed, and weather-beaten Faces; being confounded,
and tormented in every limb: but having my Memory and Wits fresh and lively,
do make this my last Will and Testament in manner and form following:

The Legacies.
Inprimis, I will bequeath the World (whereof I am Prince) with all the
Pleasures, Inticements, and Sorcerous Uanities thereof, to be equally
distributed amongst my Sons and Daughters; To his children.
and because (of my own knowledge) I find very many of them, to be damnable
and wicked, I lay upon all such a fathers heavy curse; not caring though they
ha^g in hell, because they have ran a villainous, impious, preposterous, and
devilish Race.

Item. A Legacy to Ladies.
To all those Ladies, Gentlewoman, and Citizens wives, (being set down by
their Names in my Black book) to whose houses and company I have been welcome
at midnight, my Will is ye they all, shall mou^ne.

Item. A Legacy to Usurers.
I further will and bequeath to my loving and dearest friends, the Usurers of
this City, all such moneis as are now, or shall hereafter be taken above the
rate of 10.ith hundred.

Item. A Legacy to Gallants, that follow him.
My Will is, that every Gentleman who serves me, shall be kept in his Chain,
yea; the worst that has followed me, let him go in a black s^^te of Durance.

Item. A Legacy to Puncks of the City.
Whereas, I have many Base Daughters lurking about ye Suburbs, I give to the^
Carbuncles a piece, the biggest that (...) be gotten. And to those Matrons (that
for my sake have been ever dear to those my said Daughters) I give to each of
them a bottle of the same Aquavitae, A Legacy to Baudes.
whereof I my self drink.

Item. A Legacy to Bankrouts.
I give my invisible cloakes to all Bankrouts, because they made them, but to
one Poet only (called Poet Comedy) I give my best invisible Cloak, because it
only fits his shoulders better then mine (...), but chiefly for that he will
trim it up well, and line it with Come not near me, or stand off; And because
he is a ^lip of mine own grafting, I likewise bequeath to him my best
Slippers, to walk and play with his keepers noses.

Item. A Legacy to Officers tha^ love him.
I give to all Officers that love me, a brace of my own Angels to hang about
their necks, as a remembrance of me.

A Legacy to Brokers.
Item, my Will is, that all the Brokers in Long-lane be sent to me with all
speed possible, because I have much of them laid to pawn to me, which will, I
know, never be redeemed, and what I give to them shall be in Hugger-Mugger;
and for their brethren (the rest of their Jewish Tribe in the Synagogue of
Houns-ditch) let the^ be assured they shall not be forgotten, because I hear
they pray for me howrely, I pity these poor despised souls, because if they
should miss me, I know what would become of them.

A Legacy for repairing the way to Tyburne.
Item. I give toward the mending of the Highwaies, between Newgate and
Tyburne, all the gravel that lies in the Kidneys, Reins and Bladders, of
Churles, Usures, Baudes, Harlots, and Whoore-maisters, and rather then those
Grauel-pits, should grow scanty, I will that they be supplied continually.

A Legacy to Iaylors.
Item. I give to all Iailors and Keepers of prisons, to every one of them, the
soul of a Bear (to be ravenous) the body of a Woolfe (to be cr^^ll:) the
speech of a Dog (to be churlish;) the Tallons of a ^ulture (to be griping,)
and my countenance to bear them out in their office, that they may look like
devils upon poor prisoners:

A Legacy to Roaring Boys.
Item. My Will is, that if any Roaring Boy (springing from my Race) happen to
be Stabd, swaggering, or swearing three-pil'd oaths in a Tavern, or to be
killed in the quarrel of his Whore* let him be fetched hither (in my own
Name) because here he shall be both ^ookt too* and provided for.

A Legacy to the Devils Ouer-seers.
Lastly, I make and ordaint (by this my last Will and Testament) a common
Barretour to be my Executor; and two Knights, who are my sworn servants and
are of the Post; (their Names and service being naild upon Pillars in
Westminster Palace) I make them, (al-be-it they are pur-blind) my Overseers,
and for their pains therein, I will bequeath to each of them a great round
Pearl, to be worn in their eyes, because I may be still in their sight, when
I am gone from them.

And to testify that this is my last and only Will which shall stand, I
subscribe my Name unto it, thereby Renouncing, Retracting, Reuocating,
Disanulling, and quite Cancelling, all former Wills whatsoever by me at any
time or times made; In witness whereof all the States Infernal; Auernall,
Acheronticke, Stygian, Phlegetonticke, and Peryphlegitonticke, have likewise
subscribed, in the year of our Ranging in the World, 5574.

Mounsieur Nouerint (being a man, whose conditions were too well known) had
nothing said to him at this time, Although there be, Vestigia nulla retrorsa
out of Hell, yet you must know he had a conueiance for that purpose, to have
ingresse and egresse.
because the Devil was very bad, and had no stomach to talk of old
Reckonings (for Universe was in his debt) but had his payment, and was glad he
got away.

Now, as it often happens to rich Curmudgeons, that after they have settled
their estates on their deathbeds, (as they verily fear) and that their wives
gape day and night to be widows, that from their husbands (...) they may
leap into a Coach and be Ladies, Rich men's false alarums.
their sons and heirs cursing as fast (as the mothers pray) until they
great Capon-bell ring out, the daughters weeping (when they know their
portions) only because they are not marriageable, or if mariageble, because
ere they mourn in black, they have not Suitors to make them merry and the
kindred as greedy (for their parts) to see the winding sheet laid out, that
they may fetch their (...) Legacies, and then (oh terrible then!) ye old Fox
reuiues, falls to his sleep, calls for his victuals, feels himself mend,
remembers his bags, cries out for his keys, seals up his, money* no talk of a
Will, no hope of a Widow, no sharing of his wealth; Even the selfsame Pill
took this Diego Daemonum, and recovered upon it.

For all his children, acquaintance, and servants, standing round about him,
howling and ^rying for him, behold! this howling of theirs made him almost o^t
of his wits, that madness quickened his spirits, his spirits made him rowze up
himself, with that rowzing he began to look into what danger he was fallen,
and by looking into it, to devise plots again to raise it.

Hereupon, a Synod was called of all the subtillest and plaugiest prates in
Hell, (of which there are good store) Magog Mammon, there discouers his
disease, the cause of it, and the peril; his fear is that his Kingdom would
now be sorely shaken, and his sorrows, because all they should be sure to
smart for it more then he himself, he therefore craves their infernal
counsel.

They sit, they confer, they consult, and from that consultation (after many
villainous proiects tosd on their horns like dung upon Pitch-forkes, and
smelling worse) this Advice was hatched, and had feathers stuck on the back,
the rest were plucked naked; And this it it was, That Minotaure Polyphem (the
Sire of all those Whelps barking thus in the Kennels of Hell) should
forthwith put fire into his old Bones, and fall to threshing of their Damme,
to get more Hell Hounds, (brave young little Devils) whom he may (like
Tumblers) hoyst from one Fiends shoulder up to another, and so pop them into
the world: And they again going to Bull, with other black Goblins, may
engender, what monsters they please to set all the world and all the people in
it out of tune, and the worse Music they make, the more sport it is for him.

This Act was Filed upon Record: most Uoyces carried it away; the Council
flowed current, the Court is adiourned, and the great Beglherby of Lymbo falls
ho^ly to his business. Now you must understand that the Devil bring able to
get children faster then any man else, had no sooner touched his old ^aplendian
Gueneuora, but she as speedily quickened; and no sooner quickened, but was
delivered, and lay in, and had at this Litter or Burden, two twins.

Dabh* Dabh, the Hyaena that digs dead men out of graves to devour them Aldip
Alambat, is a ravenous or furious Woolfe* Ingratitude, and Hypocrisy borne.
Hypocrisyes cloak maker.
Aldip Alambat, their father gave them their names, the one was called
Hypocrisy, the other Ingratitude. Hypocrisy was put to nurse to an Anabaptist
of Amsterdam, but Ingratitude was brought up at home. In a short time they
battend, and were plunipe as fat Chop-bacons they were, and toward to practice
any tricks that were showed them.

So that being ripe for masters, Hypocrisy was presently bounded a Puritan
Tailor, by his Nurle, and did nothing but make Clokes of Religion for to wear,
of a thousand colors. He ran away from the Tailor, and then dwelt with a
Uizard maker, and there he was the first who invented the wearing of two faces
under a hood. After this he traveled into Italy, and there learned to embrace
with one arm, and stabbe with another to smile in your face (...) a poniard in
your bosom: to protest, and (...) lie to swear love, yet hate mortality.

From Italy he came into the Low Countries, where he would not talk, unless
he drank with him* and-cast you Mine Leeuin Brother, with a full grass, only
to ouer^ reach you in your cups of your bargain.

Out of Germany he is again come over into England, his lodging is not
certain: For (like a whore) he lies every where. He sometimes is at Court,
and is there exceeding full of complement, The picture of an hypocrite.
he goes sometimes like a threed-bare Scholar, with looks humble, as a
Lambs, and as innocent, but his heart prouder then a Turks to a Christians.

He has a winning and bewitching presence, a sweet breath, a musical voice,
and a warm soft hand. But it is dangerous to keep company with him, Fistula
dulce canit, etc.
because he can alter himself into sundry shapes. In the City he is a Dog,
and will fawn upon you: In the fields he is a Lions Whelpe, and will play
with you: In the Sea he is a Mer-mayd, and will sing to you. But that fawning
is but to reach at your throat: that playing is to get you into his paws, and
that singing is nothing else but to sink and confound you for ever.

This picture of Perdition (Hypocrisy) was not drawn so smoothly, so
cunningly, and so enticingly, but his brother (Ingratitude) though there went
but a pair of Sheares between them, Ingratitude pictured.
was as ugly in shape, and as black in soul: he was a Fiend in proportion,
and a Fury in condition. It is a monster with many hands, but no eyes: It
catches at any thing, but cannot see the party from whom it receives. This is
that follow made all the Devils at first, and still supplies their number
continually.

Lethargiaest mentis alienatio and ^erum prope omnium obliuio.
This is that Lethargy that makes us forget our Maker, and never to thank him
for whatsoever he bestows on us: for no estate is content with his state. If
we are poor, we curse: If rich, we grumble it comes in no faster; If
hard-fauoured, we envy the beautiful; If fair, it is our tree of damnation,
and for money every slave climbes it.

Torped^aem pistem, siquis attgeril, torpent m^mbra.
This is that Torpedo, which if we touch, a Numbnesse strikes all our joints,
and we have no feeling one of another. This is he which makes one forget God
and his country, the King and his kindred, only to please the great Devil his
father. He that this day has been comforted with thy ^^e, fed with thy bread,
relieved with thy purse, and kept from being lousy by thy linen, to morrow
will be ready to set the same house on fi^^ yt hid him from cold, for thy
bread to give thee stories; for the money thou lentest him, to sell thee (like
a Judas,) and for thy linen, which wrapped him warm, glad to see thee in
danger to go naked* Thus have thou this Gorgon in his lively colors: A Gorgon
is a beast ever looking downward, it eats serpents, is scaly as a dragon,
toothed as a swine: it has wings to fly, the breath is venomous, the eyes
fiery, and strike beholders dead. All which properties belong to the Devil.
Aesop. Fab. 5.
because therefore that the odiousness of this beast, Ingratitude, should
still be in our eye, God has Hierogliphically figured it in many of his
creatures.

The Viper is an Emblem of it, whose yong-ones gnaw out the belly in which
they are bred. So is the Mule, whose panch being full with sucking, she kickes
her dam. So is the Iuy, which kills that by which it climbes: and so is fire,
which destroys his nourisher.

The tongue of Ingratitude is the sting of that frozen Snake, which wounds the
bosom that gave it heat and life.

The hands of Ingratitude are those Tubbes full of holes, which the daughters
of Da^au^ fill up with ^^ter in hell, and as fas^ as it is (...) in, it all
rans out again.

An ungrateful man therefore is not like Nero, Cantharidum succos, dante
parente bibas. Ovid. in Ibim.
that gathered flowers out of Ennius his heap of dung, but like the
Cantharides that sucke^ poison out of the sweetest flower.

Not without great wisdom did that old Serpent, (the Anchropophagiz de Satyr)
cloth his Hellish brood of his in human shapes: The Man-eating-monster.
Anthropophagi were Scythians (now Tartars) so called for eating men, and
drinking blood in their sculs. Polyhistor.
for you see how beneficial their service may ^ee to him, and how maleuolent
they are likely to be to man: for these are those Ichneumons that creep in at
our mouths, and are not satisfied only first with devouring what is within us,
and then to eat quite through our bodies* but the food which they lust after,
is to raven upon the soul.

My purpose was (when the grand Helea had gotten these two Furies with nine
lives, only to have drawn the Curta^^es of her Childe-bed, in which she lay
in, and to have she^^e no more but the well-fauoured faces of her (...) of
Monkyes; But you see, from her withered T^^tes I have brought them to their
cradles, from the coadle (...) thee to Nurse; and from thence followed them
till they were able to do service in the world. How they have sped, you hear,
and how they are likely to prosper, you may judge.

But you must think that there father, after he had begun to dig* and
seeing his labors thr^^ie, would not so give over: Canidia a witch of whom
Hor. writes.

Lamia a letcherous, spirit, that never takes rest. a spectre.

A Race of vnhapy children.


For the old Countess Canidia, (his wife) being a teeming Lamia, after she was
delivered of the two first Lemures, ( Hypocrisy and Ingratitude) did within
short time after, bring forth others, as Schism, Atheism, Paganism,
Idiotisme, Apostasy, Impeniten^cy, Diffidence, Presumption, and a whole
generation of such others: of whom the father needs not be jealous that the
Sorceresse their mother played false with him, every one of them (...) him in
visage, and carrying in their bosoms his villainous conditions: For as he
himself goes prowling up and down for his Prey, so do these take after him,
and play their parts so well, that all Hell routes with ^^ughing, and rings
with giving them plaudits.

For these Furies have in the Church bred Contentions, in Courts Irreligion, in
the Ctity Profanation; in the Country ignorance of all goodness; and in the
World, a knowledge of the most flagicious Impieties.

At the birth of every one these Monsters, were particular Triumphs, but above
all the rest, one had the glory to be graced with a Masque, and it was at an
vpsitting, when the Gossips and many great States were there present.

It was a Moral Masque, The Masque.
a Mystical Masque, and a Conceited, set out at the cost of certain
Catchpols, who were witty in the Invention, liberal in the Expense, quick in
the Performance, and neat in the putting off.

The Masquers themselves were brave fellows, The Masquer^
barefaced, not needing, nor caring for any Uizards, (their own visages
being good enough, because bad enough) they were not ashamed of their doings.
Every one of them came in with some property in his right hand, Their Masquing
apparel.
appliable to the name of a Catch-poll, and to the nature of the Catch-pols
Masque: For one had a Fishermans Net, another an Angling rod, another a tree
like a Lime-bush, another a Welsh-hooke, another a Mousetrap* another a
handful of Briars, and such like: and every one of these had ^ ^aite, and a
Soul nibling at eueuery bait. In their left hands they held whips, upon their
heads they wore Anticke crowns of Feathers plucked from Ravens wings, Kites
and Cormorants, (being all Birds of Rapine and Catching:) And on their bodies
loo^e Iackets of Wolves skins, with Bases to them of Uultures, whose heads
hang dangling down as low as their kn^es; which made an excellent show. Their
legs were buttoned up in Gamashes, made of Bears paw^, the naile^ sticking
out at full length.

They who supplied the places of Torch-bearers* The Torch-bearers.
carried no Torches, (as in other Masqueries they do) but (their arms being
stripped up naked to their elbowes) they griped (in either hand) a bundle of
living Snakes, and Adde^s, which writhing about their wrists, spit wild fire
and poison together, and so made excellent sport to the assembly.

They had a Drum, Their Drum.
after which they marched ((...) and two) and that was made of an old Caudron,
the head of it being covered with the skins of two flead Spanish Inquisitors,
and a hole (for vent) beaten out at the very bottom: the Drum-stickes were the
^hin-bones of two Dutch-Free-booters: So that it sounded like a Switzers
Ket^le-drum.

The Masquers Dance.
The Music struck up, and they daunced; in their dancing it was an admirable
sight to behold, how the Souls that lay nibbling at the baits, did bobbe up
and down: and still as they did bite, the whippes lashed them for their
liquorishnesse. The swallowing of the baytes was (to those Souls) a pleasure,
and their skipping to and fro, when they were whipped, made all Hell fall into
a laughing. One of those baytes was Promotion, the second was Gold, the third
Beauty, the fourth Revenge, the fifth a pipe of Tobacco: and such rotten stuff
were all the rest.

The Dance was an infernal Irish-hay, full of mad and wild changes, which
(with the Masquers) vanished away as it came in, (like unto Agryppaes shadows.)

Now because (in naming this the Catch-pols Masque) some squint-eyd Ass,
(thinking he can see quite through a load of Millstones) will go about to
persuade the credulous world, that I mean those Sergeants and Officers who sit
at Counter^^ates. No, there is no such train laid, no such powder, no such
liustocke in my pen to give fire: they are Boni and legaies homines, good
fellows, and honest men: (that name of Catch-poll is spitefully stuck upon
them by a by-name: for to these Catch-pols, that are now under my fingers, does
it properly, naturally, and really belong, and to n^^^ other.

If those two set of Counters compel a man to cast up his Reckoning, what he
owes, and how much he is out, yet they catch no man, except the Law put them
on, and it is their office. No, no, Paulo Maiora Canamus. Those Catch-pols whom
we deal with, are of a larger stamp, of a richer metal, and of a coin more
current. I will therefore first tell you what a Catch-poll is, and then you may
easily pick out what those gallants are whom we call so.

A Catch-poll is one that does both catch and poll: What a Catchpoll is.
who is not content only to have the sheep, but must sheare it too; and not
sheare it, but to draw blood too. So then by this Etymology of the word, Their
Species.
any one that sinisterly wrests and serves Monopolies into his hands, to all
his Coffers, (though his own conscience whispers in his ear, that he beggars
the Commonwealth) and his Prince never the better for it: but the poor
Subjects much the worse: He is a Grand Catchpoll.

Any one that takes Bribes, and holds the Scales of Justice with an uneven
hand, laying the rich man's cause (be it never so bad) in the heavy scale, and
the poor man's (be it never so good) in the light one, he is a Catch-poll.

A Pastor, that having a Flock to feed, suffers them to break into strange
fields, lets them stray he cares not how; be dragged away by the Wolf, he
regards not whither: sees them sick and diseased, and will not cure them; he
is a Catch-poll.

So is a Lawyer, that fleas his C^^ent, and does nothing else for him.

So is an (...) man, if he rob the poor Widow, or friendlesse-forsaken Orphant.

So is a Soldier, that makes blood, rapes, lust and violence his proper ends;
and not Gods quarrel, his Princes right, or the honor of his Country.

So is a Citizen, that cozens other men of their goods, and ^els bad ware in a
blind shop, to honest Customers, of which they never are able to make the one
half: yet if they break their day, he will let them rot in prison rather
then release them.

And lastly, that Prentice, who robs his master, and spends his substance upon
Harlots; he is a Catch-poll as egregious as the best.

Out of these Ranks were those Hot-shots (the Masquers) drawn, whom I leave
to double their Files by themselves, because I see the Reare-ward coming up,
and I must likewise teach them their Postures.

THE BANKROVTS BANQVET.
WHAT is a Masque without a Banquet? And what is a Banquet if it he not served
up in State?

To heighten therefore the Solemnity of this Childbeds vp-sitting, as also to
curry favor, with the Black King of Neagers, (their Lord and Master) Another
crew, of as bo^ne Companions as the former, as fat in the purse and as lavish
in spending, but more-carefull of being blazoned in the world, for what they
did, and therefore all of them hiding their heads, laid their moneys together,
and presented a Strange, Rare, En^ious, and most Sumptuous Banquet, to Donzell
Diauolo. Inuitng not only himself, but also his new-deliuered Spouse (Queen
of the Grimme Tartars, the Trogto^^^^res, who eat Serpents, the food of
Devils, the Cimerians, the Sodomites, and the Gomorrhaeans) and with her, the
great Diabolical Conuenticle there assembled together.

To stop all these mouths with Sugar-plumes, you must needs think, would
ask a huge charge; but they who undertake the cost, respected not the expense,
for they had not only coin of their own enough, but they had shragd others
too of theirs, and being hunted from corner to corner in the world, hither
(into the Island of the Bermudes haunted as all men know with Hogs and
Hobgoblings) came they for shelter, Bermudes called the Island of Devils, by
reason of the grunting of Swine, heard from thence to the Sea.
for here they know they are sure, from hence none dare fetch them; they are
called Bankrouts.

And because the Catch-pols proportiond out a Device responsible to their Name
and Quality; these Bankrouts, (treading in the same steps of Ambition) Martiald
up a Banquet, rellishing likewise of their name, carriage and condition. So
that, although they had hooked into their hands, all sorts of Wares, Goods,
Commodities, and Merchandise, out of the true Owners singers, and had laid them
far enough from their r^ath; yet would they serve this Banquet to the Table,
neither in Plate, in Crystal, in Chyna dishes, glass or any other furniture,
but in a Stuff, deerer to them (and more dear to others) then any of the
Metals recited, For they to get wealth into their Fists, not makings fear.
nor conscience to seal to any Parchements, in Sealed Dishes, therefore was
their Banquet brought in. And thus the Bankrouts themselves (to add more State
to the Ceremony) come marching with their Suckets, etc. in order.

The Bankrouts banquet.
First, the upper end of the Table was such (...) with the heauiest, costliest,
and cunningst Bonds that could be got, Bonds, a binding meat.
for love, wit, or money; and they were heaped up with Cynamon Comfits. (Cynamon
being an extreme Bynder;) and of this Banqueting Dish was such store, that it
ran clean through the Board.

Bills, binders too.
Next, came in Bills Obligatory, (a thousand in a cluster) and they were filled
with Conserues of Slowes, and other Stipticke sweet meats.

After these in most Judicial manner, and with great pomp and charge,
Statutes dangerous meats.
were Statutes served up: and they were laden with Candyed Ering^^s* of purpose
to put spirit into him that should eat of this dish, and to keep him up,
because, if he sink or grow sick with chewing down or swallowing of
Statute, he^es g^ne and little hope of recovery.

Just in the tail of those, Defeysance comfortable to the stomach.
were brought to the Table a goodly company of Defeazances, and they held
delicate Flakes of White and Red Iellies, being both Restoratiue, and very
loosing to the stomach, and good against those Binding and Restringent dishes,
which came in first, at the upper end of the Table this dish should have been
served up, but it had a mischance.

After all this, Latitats no sweetness in them.
a C^pias with a Latitat, went from one to one, but none touched those dishes,
yet they were heaped full to the brim with Sugar-pellets, and cakes of
Gynger-bread piled round about them; Hot in the mouth and biting.
But the Pellets when they were shot did scarce hit, and the Gynger so bit
their tongues, and set their mouths in a heat, that none at the Table touched
them, but shifted them one from another.

At the last, Attachments appeared in their likeness, Attachments a
heady-drinke.
and they were filled into bottels of Hypo^^as, and other strong Wines, able to
lay hold of a (...), as suddenly as he lays hold of them, and to make him (if
he drink hard of them) to be carried away, and his goodnight Landlord.

Next those dishes, were brought in, a number of Outlaries, Outlaries are
terrible Purges.
thwackt with Purging-Comfits, for they are able to make a man fly over nine
hedges.

And below them stood Judgments, Judgments lie heavy in the stomach.
full of newbakt Diet-bread, and therefore hard for the stomack^ to digest.

Executions a very sour meat and unwholesome.
But close by them were placed Executions, which cloyed every ones stomach
there; for they were Tarts of of several Fruits, stuck with Muske-comfits of
purpose, to sweeten the mouth, if any should happen to lay his lips to sour
a dish.

Ne exeat Regnum good to stay a running.
The last Banqueting-(...) (save one) were Ne exeat Regnum, and those were
heaped to the top with Annis-seed-comfits, being exceeding good to procure
Long-winds, if a man have a mind, or be forced to Run his Country.

Protections wholesome and comfortable.
The last of all were Protections, some larger then other; and when these came
in, a shoute was given, for all the Bankrouts slung up their caps, and bid
their Guests profaces, for now they saw their Cheer. In those Protections lay
March-panes, which showed like Bucklers, ye long Orange-comfits standing up
like Pikes, and in the midst of every March-pane a goodly sweet Castle, all the
bottomes being thickely strewed with Careawaies. And this was the Bankrouts
Sybariticall Banquer.

The queint casting of the dishes so bravely, all in wax was wondered at, the
working, tempering, moulding, and fashioning of the Sweete-meates were
commended, the conceit of Furnishing the Table extolled, the cost well liked
off, and the Bestowers, not reward with common thanks, for the Grand-Signior
of the triple worse called the Bankrouts his White Sons, and swore a Damnable
Oath, that he himself would have an Eye over them.

And so, after he and his Bash^^^, had (...) their guts, they rose, every
Officer being charged to look to his place, that no more such (...) hills, that
support his Kingdom, and with such lessons, they fly several ways, swift,
and as horrid as whi^lewindes. A musse being made amongst the poorer sort in
Hell, of the sweete-meate-scraps, left after the Ban-quet.

The Feasters being dispersed, the masters of the Feast, (the Bankrouts) held
in a knot together: it was told them, there was beating at the gates to speak
with them. All went to see: and who was it but the Comfitmaker, that trusted
them with his stuff, and brought a bill of threescore and odd pounds,
requesting to have his money. His Pay-maisters told him this was no world to
part from money, but to get as much as every man could into his own hands:
other men did so, and so would they, their elders read them that lesson, and
they must take it out. If he would take two shillings in the pound, they would
pay him down upon the na^le: If not, they were resolved to try the utmost, and
therefore bid him go shake his ears.

The poor rotten-tooth'd Comfit-maker, et these out-of-tune notes, was ready
to run out of his wits: He rapt at the gates, swore, cursed, and railed; Are
you m^^ (cried he out) or devils? Now shall I pay my Sugarmarchant: Now my
Grocer^* Now my Bakers? Now my worke-men* Now my Orange-women, if you pay me
thus with slips? Into halters slip you all; you have robbed me, undone me,
beggered me, and left nothing in my ship but one box of (...) Almonds, and I
would they were burning red-hot in your bellies too.

The more sour his language was, the more sweet it was to them: for they did
but laugh to hear him curse, and went their ways: He seeing no remedy, swore
he would rattle all hell about their ears if they bod'd him off thus: And so
between scolding and whining, he thus took his peny-worths of them in words,
though not in silver. Men that are forced to break are to be pitied.


If (fai^ he) you were poor, (...) had it not, I would never ask you a penny,
if you (...) forced to break by any (...) ship-wracke at sea, or by the
villainy of Debitos on the land, or by the frowns of the world, or the
falsenesse of servants, I should pawn my shirt from my back to releive you;
but you burst upon knavery, cheating and roguery.

An inuectiue against voluntary and cofening bankerouts.
You that thus undermine your own estates, (with other men's) your selves, are
like trees standing in your next neighbors ground, which you climb in the
dark, and gathering the fruit (like thieves) run away with it by Moone-shine.
But if your states were weak for want of ability to pay, then are you those
tree that (in your own ground) are beaten with storms, whose apples are
shaken down spitefully on the earth, and are devoured by such Hoggish debtors
before the true Owners can come to take them up and if so, you are to be
pitied and relieved. You tell me you will break: Their good name lost.
do so, break your necks. But before you do so, make this account, that you
are as bad as half hanged; for you have an ill, and a most abominable name:
try else.

Who is a Bankrout.
A Bankrout, that is to say, a Banker-out: A Citizen that deals in money, or had
money in Bank, or in stock, He is out (when he Breaks:) But me thinks he is
rather In. I see no reason we should say, he breaks, there is more reason to
cry out, He makes all whole, or he makes up his mouth, The life of a Bankrout.
(as you have done with my plums) or he gets the devil and all. For what do
you, but lie grunting in your flies, like Hogs, and sat your ribs with
fruits of other men's labors. In my opinion you should fear the bread you eat
should choke you, because it is stolen; the drink you swallow should strange
you, because you quaffe the blood of honest householders: and that the wine you
carowse should dam you, because (with it) you mix the tears of mothers, and
the cries of children.

If a Rogue cut a purse, he is hanged: if pilfer, he is burnt in the hand:
You are worse then Rogues; for you cut many purses: The (...) of a Bankrout.
Nay, you cut many men's throats, you steal from the husband, his wealth: from
the wise her dowry: from children their portions. So that over your heads hang
the curses of Families: how then can you hope to prosper? For to play the
Bankrout, is to bid men to a Citty-rifling, where every one puts in his money,
and none wins but one, and that is the Bankrout.

If all the water in the Thames were ink, The villainy of Bankrouts can not be
expressed.
and all the feathers upon Swans backs were pens, and all the smoky sails of
western barges, were white paper, and all the Scriueners, all the Clerks, all
the Shoole-maisters, and all the Scholars in the kingdom were set a writing,
and all the years of the world yet to come, were to be employed only in that
business: that ink would be spent, those pens grub'd close to the stumps,
that paper scribled all over, those writers wearied, and that time worn out,
before the shifts, legerdemaines, conueiances, reaches, fetches, ambushes,
trains, and close vnder-minings of a Bankrout could to the life be set down.
This was the last winter-plum the sad Comfit-maker threw at their heads; and so
left them, and so I leave them.

My Muse that art so merry,
When will thou say thou art weary?
Never (I know it) never,
This flight thou could keep ever:
Thy shapes which so do vary,
Beyond thy bownds thee carry.
Now plume thy ruffled wings,
He Is hoarse who always sings.
Contigimus portum, quo mihicursus erat.
FINIS.

