THE GVLS Horne-booke: Stuliorum plena junt omnia.

Al Sauio meza parola, Basta.

By T. Deckar.

Imprinted at London for R. S. 1609.

To all Guls in general, wealth and Liberty.
WHOM can I choose (my most worthy Mecaen-asses) to be Patrons to this labor
of mine fitter the^ your selves? your hands are ever open, your purses never
shut. So that you stand not in the Common Rank of Dry-fisted Patrons, (who
give nothing) for you give all. Scholars therefore are as much beholden to
you, as Vintners, Players and Puncks are. Those three trades gain by you more
then Usurers do by thirty in the hundred: You spend the wines of the one, you
make suppers for the other, and change your Gold into White-money with the
third. Who is more liberal then you? who (but only Citizens) are more free?
Blame me not therefore if I pick you out from the bunch of Booke-takers, to
consecrate these fruits of my brain (which shall never die) only to you. I
know that most of you (O admirable Guls!) can neither write nor read. A
Horne-booke have I invented, because I would have you well schooled. Powles is
your Walk; but this your Guide: if it lead you right, thank me: if astray,
men will bear with your errors, because you are Guls. Farewell.

T. D.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, I could willingly be content that thou should neither be at
cost to buy this book, nor at the labor to read it. It is not my ambition to
be a man in Print, thus every Term; Ad praelum, tanquam ad praelium; We
should come to the Press as we come to the Field (seldom.) This Tree of Guls
was planted long since, but not taking root, could never bear till now. It
has a relish of Grobianisme, and tastes very strongly of it in the beginning.
The reason thereof is, that having translated many Books of that into English
Verse, and not greatly liking the Subject, I altered the Shape, and of a
Dutchman, fashioned a mere Englishman, it is a Table wherein are drawn sundry
Pictures: the callors are fresh: if they be well laid on, I think my
workmanship well bestowed: if ill, so much the better, because I draw the
pictures only of Guls.

T. D.

The Chapters contained in this Book.
CHAP. 1. The old world and the new weighed together: The Tailors of those
times and these compared: The apparel and diet of our first fathers. CHAP. 2.
How a young Gallant shall not only keep his Clothes (which many of them can
hardly do) from Brokers; but also have the charges of taking physic, with
other rules for the morning: The praise of sleep, and of going naked. CHAP. 3.
How a Gallant should warm himself by the fire: How attire himself:
Description of a man's head: The praise of long hair. CHAP. 4. How a Gallant
should behave himself in Powles-Walkes. CHAP. 5. How a Gallant should behave
himself in an Ordinary. CHAP. 6. How a Gallant should behave himself in a
Playhouse. CHAP. 7. How a Gallant should behave himself in a Tavern. CHAP.
8. How a Gallant is to behave himself passing through the City at all hours
of the night: and how to pass by any Watch.
The Guls Horn-booke: OR Fashions to please all sorts of Guls.
Pr^aemium.
I Sing (like the Cuckooe in June) to be laughed at: if therefore I make a
scuruy noise, and that my tunes sound vnmusically (the Ditty being altogether
lame in respect of the bad feet, and unhandsome in regard of the worme-eaten
fashion) you that have authority under the broad seal of moldy custom, to be
called the Gentle Audience, set your goodly great hands to my pardon: or else
because I scorn to be vpbraided that I profess to instruct others in an Art,
whereof I my self am ignorant, Do your worst: choose whether you will let my
notes have you by the ears or no: hiss or give plaudities, I care not a
nut-shell which of either: you can neither shake our Comic Theater with your
stinking breath of hisses, nor raise it with the thunder claps of your hands: up
it goes in Despetto del fato: ye motley is bought, and a coat with four
elbowes (for any one that will wear it) is put to making in defiance of the
seven wise masters: for I have smelt out of the musty sheets of an old
Almanacke, that (at one time or other) even he that iets upon the neatest and
sprucest leather, even he that talks all Adage and Apothegme, even he that
will not have a wrinckle in his new Satin suit, though his mind be vglier then
his face, and his face so ill fauoredly made, that he looks at all times as if
a tooth-drawer were fumbling about his gommes with a thousand lame Heteroclites
more, that cozen the world with a guilt spur, and a ruffled boot, will be
all glad to fit themselves in Will Somme^ his wardrob, and be driven (like a
Flemish Hoy in foul weather) to slip into our School, and take out a lesson.
Tush, Caelum p^timus stultitia, all that are chosen Cunstables for their wit go
not to heaven.

A fig therefore for the new found College of Critics. You Courtiers that do
nothing but sing the Gamuth-Are of complementall courtesy, and at the
rusticall behavior of our Country Muse, will skrew forth worse faces then
those which God and the Painter has bestowed upon you, I defy your perfumd
scorn: and vow to poison your Musk cats, if their ciuet excrement do but
once play with my nose. You ordinary Gulles, that through a poor and silly
ambition to be thought you inherit the revenues of extraordinary wit will spend
your shallow censure upon the most elaborate Poem, so lauishly, that all the
painted table-men about you, take you to be heirs apparent to rich Midasle,
that had more skill in Alchimy, then Kelly with the Philosophers stone: (for
all that he could lay his fingers on, turned into heaten gold) dry Tobacco with
my leaves (you good dry brained Polipragmonists) till your pipe offices smoke
with your pitifully stinking girds shot out against me. I conjure you (as you
come of the right Goose-caps) stain not your house; but when at a new play you
take up the twelue-penny room next the stage, (because the Lords and you may
seem to be hail fellow well met) there draw forth this book, read alowd,
laugh alowd, and play the Antickes, that all the garlike mouthd stinkards may
cry out, Away with the Fool: As for thee Zoylus, go hang thy self: and for
thee Momus chew nothing but hemlock, and spit nothing but the sirrup of Aloes
upon my papers, till thy very rotten lungs come forth for anger. I am
Snake-proofe: and though with Hanniball you bring whole hogs-heads of vinegar
railings, it is impossible for you to quench or come over my Alpine-resolution:
I will sail boldly and desperately along the shore of ye I Will of Guls: and in
defiance of those terrible blockhouses their loggerheads, make a true discovery
of their wild (yet habitable) Country.

Sound an Allarum therefore (O thou my courageous Muse) and like a Dutch crier
make proclamation with thy Drum: the effect of thine O-yes, being, That if any
man, woman, or child, be he Lord, be he Lowne, be he Courtier, be he Carter, of
ye Innes a Court, or Innes of City, that hating from the bottom of his heart,
all good manners and generous education, is really in love, or rather doates on
that excellent country Lady, Innocent simplicity, being the first, fairest, and
chiefest Chamber-maide that our great Grandame Eve, entertained into service:
Or if any person aforesaid longing to make a voyage in the ship of Fools,
would venture all the wit that his mother left him, to live in the country of
Guls, Cockneyes, and Coxcombs; to the intent that hau^ting Theaters, he may fit
there like a popiniay, only to learn Play-speeches, which afterward may
furnish ye necessity of his bare knowledge, to maintain table talk, or else
heating Tauernes, desires to take the Bacchanalian degrees, and to wait
himself in Art bibendi magister: that at ordinaries would sit like Bias^e,
and in the streets walk like a braggart, that on foot longs to go like a
French Lacque, and on horseback rides like an English Tailor, or that from
seven years and upward, till his dying day, has a months mind to have ye
Guls Horn-booke by heart, by which in time he may be promoted to serve any Lord
in Europ, as his crafty Fool or his bawdy Iester, yea and to be so dear to
his Lordship, as for the excellency of his fooling, to be admitted both to ride
in Coach with him, and to lie at his very feet on a truckle-bed. Let all such
(and I hope the world has not left her old fashions. but there are ten
thousand such) repair hither. Never knock, you that strive to be
Ninny-hammer) but with your feet spurn open the door and enter into our
School: you shall not need to buy books, no, scorn to distinguish a B from
a battle door, only look that your ears be long enough to reach our
Rudiments, and you are made for ever. It is by heart that I would have you to
con my lessons, and therefore be sure to have most devouring stomaches. Nor be
you terrified with an opinion that our Rules be hard and indigestible, or that
you shall never be good Graduates in these rare sciences of Barbarism, and
Idiotisme: Oh fie upon any man that carries that ungodly mind! Tush, tush,
Tarleton, Kemp, nor Singer, nor all the litter of Fools that now come drawling
behind them, never played the Clownes more naturally then the arrantest Sot of
you all, shall, if he will but boil my Instructions in his brainepan.

And lest I my self, like some Pedanticall Vicar, stammering out a most false
and cracked latin oration to maiester Mayor of the town, and his brethren,
should cough and hem in my deliueries, by which means you (my Auditors) should
be in danger to depart more like woodcockes then when you came to me: O thou
venerable father of ancient (and therefore hoary) customs, Syluanus, I inuoke
thy assistance; thou that first taughtest Carters to wear hob-nailes, and Lobs
to play Christmas gambols, and to show the most beastly horse-trickes: O do
thou, or (if thou art not at leisure) let thy Mountibancke goat-footed Fauni,
inspire me, with the knowledge of all those silly and ridiculous fashions,
which the old dunsticall world woare even out at elbowes: draw for me the
pictures of the most simple fellows then living, that by their patterns I may
paint the like. Awake thou noblest drunkerd Bacchus, thou must likewise stand
to me (if at least thou can for reeling) teach me ( you sovereign Skinker)
how to take the Germanies vpsy freeze; the Danish Rowsa, the Switzers stoap of
Rhenish, the Italians Parmizant: the Englishmans healthes, his hoopes, cans,
half cans, Gloves, Frolicks and flap dragons, together with the most notorious
qualities of the truest tospots, as when to cast, when to quarrel, when to
fight, and where to sleep: hide not a drop of thy moist mystery from me, (thou
plumpest swil-bowle) but (like an honest red-nosed wine bibber) lay open all
thy secrets and ye mystical Hierogliphick of Rashers ath coals, Modicums and
Shooing horns, and why they were invented, for what occupations, and when to
be used. Thirdly (because I will have more then two strings to my bow) Comus,
thou Clarke of Gluttonies Kitchen, do thou also bid me proface, and let me not
rise from table, till I am perfect in all the general rules of Epicures and
Cormorants. Fatten thou my brains that I may feed others, and teach them both
how to squat down to their meat, and how to munch, so like Loobies, that the
wisest Solon in the world shall not be able to take them for any other. If
there be any strength in thee, thou beggarly monarke of Indians, and setter-vp
of rotten-lungd chimney-sweepers (Tobacco) I beg it at thy smoaky hands: make
me thine adopted heir, that inheriting the virtues of thy whiffes, I may
distribute them amongst all nations, and make the fantastic Englishmen (above
the rest) more cunning in the distinction of thy Roll Trinidado, Leaf and
Pudding, then the whitest toothd Blackamoore in all Asia. After thy pipe, shall
ten thousands be taught to dance, if thou will but discover to me the
sweetness of thy snuffes, with the manner of spawling, slauering, spetting and
driueling in all places, and before all persons. Oh what songs will I charm
out in praise of those valiantly-strong-stinking breaths. which are easily
purchased at thy hands, if I can but get thee to travel through my nose. All
the foh's in the fairest Ladies mouth that ever kissed Lord, shall not fright me
from thy brown presence: for thou art humble, and from the Courts of Princes
have vouchsafed to be acquainted with penny galleries, and (like a good fellow)
to be drunk for company, with Watermen, Carmen and Colliers, whereas before,
and so still, Knights and wis^ Gentlemen were, and are thy companions. Last of
all, thou Lady of Clownes and Carters, Schoolemistres of fools and wisacres,
thou hemely (but harmless) Rusticity, Oh breath thy dull and dunsticall
spirit into our ganders quill; crown me thy Poet, not with a garland of Bays,
(oh no! the number of those that steals Lawret is too monstrous already) but
swaddle thou my brows with those unhandsome boughs, which (like Autums rotten
hair) hang dangling over thy dusty eyelids. Help me (thou midwife of
unmannerliness) to be delivered of this Embryon that lies tumbling in my
brain: direct me in this hard and dangerous voyage, that being safely arrived
on the desired shore, I may build up Altars to to thy Vnmatcheable Rudeness:
the excellency whereof I know will be so great, that Grout-nowles and Moames
will in swannes fly buzzing about thee. So Herculean a labor is this that I
undertake, that I am enforcd to ball out for all your succors, to the intent I
may aptly furnish this feast of Fools, unto which I solemnly inuit all the
world: for at it shall sit not only those whom Fortune favors, but even those
whose wits are naturally their own. Yet because your artificial Fools bear
away the bell, all our best workmanship (at this time) shall be spent to
fashion such a Creature.

CHAP. I. The old world and the new waighed together: T the Tailors of those
times and these compared: The apparel and diet of our first fathers.
GOOD Clothes are the embrodred trappings of pride, and good cheer the very
Eringo-roote of gluttony: so that fine backs, and fat bellies are Coach-horses
to two of the seven deadly sins: In the boots of which Coach, Lechery and
Sloth fit like the waiting-maide. In a most desperate state therefore do
Tailors and Cooks stand by means of their offices, for both those trades are
Apple-squices, to that couple of sins. The one inuents more phantasticke
fashions, then France has worn since her first stone was laid: the other
more likerish Epvcurean dishes, then were ever serud up to Gallonius table. Did
man (think you) come wrangling into the world, about no better matters, then
all his life time to make privy searches in Bucch^n-law for Whalebone doublets,
or for pies of Nightingale tongues in Heliogabalus his kitchen? No* no, the
first suit of apparel that ever mortal man put on, came neither from the
Mercers shop, nor the Merchants warehouse: Adams bill would have been taken
then sooner then a Knights bond now, yet was he great in no bodies books for
satin and veluets: the silk-wormes had something else to do in those days
then to set up loomes and be free of the weauers, his breeches were not so much
worth as K. Stephens* that cost but a poor noble: for Adam* holyday hose and
doublet were of no better stuff then plain fig leaves, and Eues best gown of
the same piece, there went but a pair of sheeres between them. An Antiquary
in this town, has yet some of the powder of those leaves dried to show.
Tailors then were none of the twelve Companies: their Hall that now is larger
then some Dorpes among the Netherlands, was then no bigger then a Dutch
Butchers shop^ they durst not strike down their customers with large hills:
Adam cared not an apple-paring for all their lowzy hems. There was then neither
the Spanish slop, nor the Skippers galligas^^: the Switzers blistred Cod-peece,
nor the Danish sleeue, sagging down like a Welsh wallet, the Italians close
strosser, nor the French standing collar: your trebble-quadruple Daedalian
ruffes, nor your stiff necked Rebatoes (that have more arches for pride to row
under, then can stand under five London Bridges) durst not then set themselves
out in print: for the pattent for starch could by no means be signd. Fashions
then was counted a disease, and horses dyed of it: But now (thanks to folly)
it is held the only rare physic, and the purest golden Asses live upon it.

As for the diet of that Saturnian age, it was like their attire, homely: A
sallad, and a mess of leeke porridge, was a dinner for a far greater man
then ever the Turk was: Potato-pies and Custards, stood like the sinful
suburbs of Cookery, and had not a wall (so much as a handful hie) built rownd
about them. There were no daggers then, nor no Chayres Crookes his ordinary in
those parsimonious days, had not a Capons leg to throw at a dog. Oh golden
world, the suspicious Venecian carved not his meat with a silver pitch forke:
neither did the sweet toothd Englishman shift a dozen of trenchers at one
meal. Peirs ploughman laid the cloth, and Simplicity brought in the voyder.
How wonderfully is the world altered? and no marvel, for it has lain sick
almost five thousand years: So that it is no more like the old Theater du
munde then old Paris garden is like the Kings garden at Paris.

What an excellent workman therefore were he that could cast the Globe of it
into a new mould: And not to make it look like Mullineux his Globe with arownd
face sleekt and washed over with whites of eggs; but to have it in Plano, as it
was at first, with all the ancient circles, lines, paralels and figures,
representing indeed, all the wrinckles, crackes, creuises and flawes that
(like the Mole on Hartens cheek, being os amoris) stuck upon it at the first
creation, and made it look most lovely; but now those surrowes are filled up
with Ceruse and Uermilion, yet all will not do, it appears more ugly. Come,
come, it would be but a bald world, but that it wears a periwig. The body of
it is foul (like a birding-peece) by being too much heated: the breath of it
stinks like the mouths of Chamber-maides by feeding on so many sweet meats.
And though to purge it will be a sorer labor then the clensing of Augeaes
stable, or the scowring of Moore-ditch: yet Ille ego, qui quondam, I am the
Pasquilles mad-cap, that will doot.

Draw near therefore all you that love to walk upon single and simple souls,
and that with to keep company with none but Innocents, and the sons of
civil Citizens, out with your tables, and nail your ears, (as it were to the
pillary) to the Music of our instructions: nor let ye title Gullery, fright
you from school: for mark what an excellent ladder you are to clime by. How
many worthy, and men of famous memory (for their learning of all offices, from
the scauenger and so upward) have flourished in London, of ye ancient family
of ye Wiseacres, being now no better esteemd then fools and younger brothers?
This gear must be looked into, lest in time (O lamentable time when that
houre-glasse is turned up) a rich man's son shall no sooner peep out of the
shell of his minority, but he shall straight ways be begd for a concealment,
or set upon (as it were by free-booters) and taken in his own purse-nets by
fencers and cony-catchers. To drive which pestilent infection from the heart,
heeres a medicine more potent and more precious then was ever that mingle
mangle of drugs which Mithrydates boyld together. Fear not to taste it, a
cawdle will not go down half so smoothly as this will: you need not call
the honest name of it in question, for Antiquity puts off his cap, and makes a
bare oration in praise of the virtues of it: the Receipt has been subscribed
unto, by all those that have had to do with Simples with this moth-eaten
Motto, Probatum est: your Diacatholicon aureum, that with gunpowder brings
threatens, to blow up all diseases that come in his way, and smells worse then
Assa soetida in respect of this. You therefore whose bodies either ouerflowing
with the corrupt humors of this ages phantasticknesse, or else being burnt up
with the infla^mation of vpstart fashions, would feign be purgd: and to show
that you truly loath this polluted and mangy-fisted world, turn Pimonists, not
caring either for men or their manners; do you pledge me: spare not to ^ake a
deep draught of our homely council: the cup is full, and so ^rge, that I
holdly drink a health unto all comers.

CHAP. II. How a young Gallant shall not only keep his clothes (which many of
them can hardly do for Brokers) but also save the charges of taking physic:
with other rules for the morning. The praise of Sleep and of going naked.
YOU have heard all this while nothing but the Prologue, and seen no more but
a dumb show: Our Vetus Comaedia steps out now. The fittest stay, upon which
you (that study to be an Actor there) are first to present your self, is in my
approved judgment) the softest and largest Downe-bed: from whence (if you will
but take sound council of your pillow) you shall never rise till you hear it
ring noone at least. Sleep in the name of Morpheus your belly full, or
(rather) sleep till you hear your belly grombies and waxes empty. Care not
for those coorse painted cloth rimes, made by ye Uniuersity of Salerne, that
come over you, with S^ breuis, aut nullus; tibi somnus meridianus.
Short let thy sleep at noone be,
Or rather let it none be.


Sweet candied council, but there is rats-bane under it: trust never a Bachiler
of Art of them all, for he speaks your health fair but to steal away the
maidenhead of it: Salerne stands in the luxurious country of Naples, and who
knows not that the Neapolitan, will (like Derick the hangman) embrace you
with one arm, and rip your guts with the other? there is not a hair in his
Mustachoo, but if he kiss you; will stabbe you through the cheeks like a
penyard: the slave to be avenged on his enemy, will drink off a pint of poison
himself, so ye he may be sure to have the other pledge him but half so much:
And it may be that upon some secret grudge to work the general destruction of
all mankind, those verses were composed. Physicians I know (and none else)
took up the bucklers in their defense, railing bitterly upon that venerable
and princely custom of Long lying a bed: Yet now I remember me, I cannot blame
them: for they which want sleep (which is man's natural rest become either
mere Naturals, or else fall into the Doctors hands, and so consequently into
the Lords: whereas he that snorts profoundly scorns to let Hippocrates
himself stand tooting on his Urinall: and thereby saues that charges of a
groates-worth of Physic: And happy is that man that saues it: for physic is,
Non minus venefica, quam benefica, it has an ounce of gall in it, for every
dram of honey. Ten Tyburnes cannot turn men over ye perch so fast as one of
these brewers of purgations: the very nerves of their practice, being nothing
but Ars Homicidiorum, an Art to make poor souls kick up their heels. In so
much that even their sick grunting patients, stand in more danger of M. Doctor
and his drugs* then of all the Cannon shots which the desperate disease it
self can discharge against them. Send them packing therefore to walk like
Italian Mountibankes, beat not your brains to understand their
parcell-greeke, parcell-latine gibrish: let not all their sophistical buzzing
into your ears, nor their Satyricall canuasing of feather-beds and tossing men
out of their warm blanckers, awake you till the hour that here is prescribed.

For do but consider what an excellent thing sleep is: It is so inestimable a
Jewel, that if a Tyrant would give his crown for an hours slumber, it cannot
be bought: of so beautiful a shape is it, that tho a man lie with an Empress,
his heart can not be at quiet, till he leaves her embracements to be at rest
with the other: yea so greatly indebted are we to this kinseman of death, that
we owe the better tributary, half of our life to him: and there is good cause why
we should do so: for sleep is that golden chain that ties health and our
bodies together. Who complains of want? of wounds? of cares? of great men's
oppressions? of captivity? whilst he sleeps? Beggars in their beds take as
much pleasure as Kings: can we therefore surfeit on this delicate Ambrosia? can
we drink too much of that whereof to taste too little, tumbles us into a
Churchyard, and to use it but indifferently, throws us into Bedlam? No, no,
look upon Endymion, the Moons Minion, who stepped threescore and fifteen
years and was not a hair the worse for it. Can lying abedde till noone then
(being not the threescore and fifteenth thousand part of his nap be hurtful?

Besides, by the opinion of all Philosophers and Physicians, it is not good to
trust the air with our bodies till the Sun with his flame-coloured wings has
fand away the mistrie smoke of the morning, and refind that thick
tobacco-breath which the rheumaticke night throws abroad of purpose to put out
the eye of the Clement: which work questionless cannot be perfectly finished
till the Suns Car-horses stand prancing on the very top of highest noone: so
yt then, (and not till then) is the most healthful houce to be stirring. Do
you require examples to persuade you? At what time do Lords and Ladies use to
rise but then? your simpring Merchants wives are the fairest liars in the
world, and is not eleven a clock their common hour? they find (no doubt)
unspeakable sweet^esse in such lying, else they would not day by day put it so
in practice. In a word, mid day slumbers are golden, they make the body fat,
the skin fair, the flesh plump* delicate and tender; they set a russet color
on the cheeks of young women, and make lusty courage to rise up in men: they
make us thirfty, both in sparing victuals (for breakefasts thereby are sand
from the hell-mouth of the belly) and in preserving apparel: for whilst we
warm us in our beds, our clothes are not worn.

The casements of thine eyes being then at this commendable time of the day,
newly set open, choose rather to have thy windpipe cut in pieces then to
salute any man. Bid not good morrow so much as to thy father, tho he be an
Emperor. An idle ceremony it is, and can do him little good; to thy self it
may bring much harm: for if he be a wise man that knows how to hold his
peace, of necessity must he be counted a fool that cannot keep his tongue?

Amongst all the wild men, that run up and down in this wide forest of
fools* (the world) none are more superstitious then those notable Ebritians,
the Jews: yet a Jew never wears his cap threed-hare with putting it off:
never bends in the hammes with casting away a leg: never cries God save you, tho
he sees the Devil at your elbow. Play the Jews therefore in this, and save
thy lips that labor, only remember that so soon as thy eye lids be vnglewd
thy first exercise must be (either sitting upright on thy pillow, or rarely
loling at thy bodies whole le^^th, to yawne, to stretch and to gape wider then
any oysterwise: for thereby thou do not only send out the lively spirits
(like Vaunt-currers) to fortify and make good the uttermost borders of the
body; but also (as a cunning painter) thy goodly lineame^ts are drawn out in
their fairest proportion.

This lesson being played: turn over a new leaf, and (unless that Freezela^d
Curre cold winter, offer to bite thee) walk a while, up and down thy chamber,
either in thy thin shirt only, or else (which at a bare word is both more
decent aad more delectable) strip thy self stark naked. Are we not borne so?
and shall a foolish custom make us to break the laws of our Creation? our
first parents so long as they went naked, were suffered to dwell in paradise,
but after they got coats to their backs, they were turned out a doors: Put on
therefore either no apparel at all, or put it on carelessly: for look how much
more delicate liberty is then bondage, so much is the looseness in wearing of
our attire, above the imprisonment of being neatly and Tailorlike dressed up in
it: To be ready in our clothes, is to be ready for nothing else. A man looks
as if he hung in chains; or like a scar-crow: and as those excellent birds
(whom Pliny could never have the wit to catch in all his sprindges commonly
called woodcocks (whereof there is great store in England) having all their
feathers plucked from their backs, and being turned out as naked as Platoes
cock was before all Diogenes his Scholars: or as the Cuckooe in Christmas,
are more fit to come to any Knights board, and are indeed more serviceable
then when they are lapt in their warm liueries: even so stands the case with
man. Truth (because the bald-pate her father Time, has no hair to cover his
head) goes (when she goes best) stark naked; But falsehood has ever a cloak
for the rain. You see likewise that the Lion, being the king of beasts, the
horse being the lustiest creature, the Unicorne, whose horn is worth half a
City, all these go with no more clothes on their backs, then what nature has
bestowed upon them; But you Babiownes, and you Iack-anapes (being the scum, and
rascality of all the hedge-creepers) they go in ierkins and mandilions: marry
how? they are put into these rags only in mockery.

Oh beware therefore both what you wear, and how you wear it, and let this
heavenly reason move you never to be hansome, for when the Sun is arising out
of his bed, does not the element seem more glorious then (being only in gray)
at noone when he is in all his bravery? it were madness to deny it. What man
would not gladly see a beautiful woman naked, or at least with nothing but a
lawne or some loose thing over her, and even highly lift her up for being so?
Shall we then abhor that in our selves, which we admire and hold to be so
excellent in others? Absit.

CHAP. III. How a young Gallant should warm himself by the fire: How attire
himself: The description of a man's head: The praise of long hair.
BUT if (as it often happens unless the year catch the sweating sickness)
the morning like charity waxing cold, thrust his frosty fingers into thy
bosom, pinching thee black and blew, (with her nails made of ice) like an
invisible Goblin, so that thy teeth (as if thou were singing prick-song) stand
coldly quauering in thy head, and leap up and down like the nimble Iackes of a
pair of Uirginals: be then as swift as a whirle-winde, and as boystrous in
tossing all thy clothes in a rude heap together: With which bundle filling
thine arms, step bravely forth, crying Room, what a coil keep you about
the fire? The more are set round about it, the more is thy commendation, if
thou either bluntly ridest over their shoulders, or tumblest aside their
stools to creep into the chimney corner: there toast thy body, till thy
scorched shinne be speckled all over, being staind with more motley colors
then are to be seen on the right side of the rainebow.

Neither shall it be fit for the state of thy health, to put on thy Apparel,
till by sitting in that hot house of the chimney, thou feel the fat dew of
thy body (like basting) run trickling down thy sides: for by that means thou
may lawfully boast that thou live by the sweat of thy brows.

As for thy stockings and shoos, ^o wear them, that all men may point at thee
and make thee* amous by that glorious name of a Male content* Or if thy
quicksiluer can run so ^arre on thy errant as to fetch three boots out of S.
Ma^ren^ let it be thy prudence to have the tops of them wide as ye mouth of a
wallet, and those with fringed boote-hose over them to hang down to thy
ankles. Doves are accounted innocent and loving creatures: thou in observing
this fashion, shall seem to be a rough-^ooted dove, and be held as innocent.
Besides, the strawling, which of necessity so much lether between thy legs must
put thee into, will be thought not to grow from thy disease, but from that
gentleman-like habit.

Having thus apparelled thee from top to toe, according to that simple fashion
which the best Goose-caps in Europ strive to imitate, it is now high time for
me to have a blow at thy head, which I will not cut off with sharp documents,
but rather set it on faster, bestowing upon it such excellent caruing, that if
all the wise men of Gottam should lay their heads together, their
Iobber-nowles should not be able to compare with thine.

To maintain therefore that sconce of thine, strongly guarded, and in good
reparation, never suffer comb to fasten his teeth there: let thy hair grow
thick and bushy like a forest, or some wilderness, lest those sixe-footed
creatures that breed in it, and are Tenants to that crowne-land of thine, be
hunted to death by every base barbarous Barber; and so that delicate and
ticling pleasure of scratching, be utterly taken from thee: For the H^ad is a
house built for Reason to devil in: and thus is the tenement framd. The two
Eyes are the glass windows, at which light disperses it self into every
room, having goodly penthouses of hair to ouershaddow them: As for the nose,
tho some (most injuriously and improperly) make it serve for an Indian chimney
yet surely it is rightly a bridge with two arches, under which are neat
passages to convey as well perfumes to air and sweeten every chamber, as to
^arry away all noisome filth that is swept out or vncle^ne corners. The cherry
lips open like the new painted gates of a Lords Majors house, to take in
provision. The tongue is a bell, hanging just under the middle of the roof,
and lest it should be rung out too deep (as sometimes it is when women have a
peale) whereas it was cast by the first founder, but only to tole softly,
there are two even rows of Iuory pegs (like pales set to keep it in. The ears
are two Music rooms into which as well good sounds as bad, descend down two
narrow pair of stairs, that for all the world have crooked windings like
those that lead to the top of Powles steeple: and because when the tunes are
once gotten in, they should not too quickly slip out, all the walls of both
places are plaistred with yellow wax round about them. Now as the fairest
lodging, tho it be furnished with walls chimnies, chambers, and all other parts
of Architecture, yet if the feeling be wanting, it stands subject to rain, and
so consequently to ruin. So would this goodly palace, which we have moddeld
out unto you, be but a cold and bald habitation, were not the top of it rarely
covered. Nature therefore has played the Tyler, and given it a most curious
covering, or (to speak more properly) she has thatcht it all over, and that
Thatching is hair. If then thou desire to reserve that Fee-simple of wit,
(thy head) for thee and the lawful heirs of thy body, play neither the scuruy
part of the Frenchman, that pluckes up all by ye roots, nor that of the
spending Englishman, who to maintain a paltry warren of unprofitable Conies,
disimparkes the stately swift-footed wild Dear: But let thine receive his full
growth that thou may safely and wisely brag it is thine own Bush-Naturall.

And with all consider, that as those trees of Cob-web-lawne, (wouen by
Spinners the fresh May-mornings) do dress the curled heads of the mountains,
and adorn the swelling bosoms of the valleys: Or as those snowy fleeces
which the naked bryer steals from the innocent nibling sheep, to make
himself a warm winter livery, are to either of them both an excelcellent
ornament: So make thou account that to have feathers sticking here and there on
thy head, will embellish and set thy crown out rarely None dare vpbraid thee,
that like a beggar thou have lain on straw or like a traveling Peddler upon
musty flocks: for those feathers will rise up as witnesses to choke him that
says so, and to prove that thy bed was of the softest Down.

When your noblest Gallants consecrate their hours to their Mistresses and to
Reuelling, they wear feathers then chiefly in their hattes, being one of the
fairest ensigns of their bravery: But thou a Reueller and a Mistris-seruer all
the year by wearing feathers in thy hair* whose length, before the rigorous
edge of any puritanicall pair of scizzers should shorten the breadth of a
finger, let the three huswifely spinsters of Destiny rather curtall the thread
of thy life. O no, long hair is the only net that women spread abroad to
entrappe men in; and why should not men be as far above women in that
commodity, as they go beyond men in others? The merry Greeks were called (...)
long haird: loose not thou (being an honest Trojan) that honor, sithence it
will more fairly become thee. Grass is the hair of the earth, which so long
as it is suffered to grow, it becomes the wearer, and carries a most pleasing
color, but when the Sunne-burnt clown makes his mowes at it, and like a
Barber) shaues it off to the stumps, then it withers and is good ^^r nothing,
but to be trust up and thrown amongst Iades. How ugly is a bald pate? it looks
like a face wanting a nose: or like ground eaten bare with the arrows of
Archers, whereas a head al hid in hair, gives even to a most wicked face a
sweet proportion, and looks like a meddow newly married to the Spring: which
beauty in men the Turks envying, they no sooner lay hold on a Christian, but
the first mark they set upon him, to make him know he is a slave, is to shave
off all his hair close to the scull. A Mahumetan cruelty therefore is it, to
stuff breeches and tennis balls with that, which when it is once lost, all the
hare-hunters in the world may sweat their hearts out and yet hardly catch it
again.

You then to whom chastity has given an heir apparent, take order that it may
be apparent, and to that purpose let it play openly with the lascivious wind eue^
on ye top of your shoulders. Experience cries out in every City, that those
selfsame Critical Saturnists, whose hair is shorter then their eyebrows,
take a pride to have their hoary beards hang slauering like a dozen of Fox
tails, down so low as their middle. But (alas) why should the chinnes and
lips of old men lick up that excrement which they vyolently clip away from
the heads of young men? Is it because those long beesomes (their beards) with
sweeping the soft bosoms of their beautiful young wives, may tickle their
tender breasts, and make some amends for their masters unrecoverable dullness?
No, no there hangs more at the ends of those long gray hairs, then all the
world can come to the knowledge of. Certain I am, that when neue but the
golden age went current upon earth, it was hither treason to clip hair, then
to clip money: the comb and scizers were condemned to the currying of
hackneyes: he was di^franchized for ever, that did but put on a Barbers apron.
Man, woman and child, woare then hair longer then a lawsuit: every head, when
it stood bare or uncovered, looked like a butter-boxes ^owle having his thrumbd
cap on. It was free for all Nations to have shaggy pates, as it is now only
for the Irishman: But since this polling and shauing world crept up, locks-were
locked up* and hair sell to decay. Revive thou therefore the old buried
fashion, on* and (in scorn of per^wigs and sheep-shearing keep thou that
qu^lted head-peece on continually. Long hair will make thee look dreadfully
to thine enemies, and manly to thy friends. It is in peace, an ornament: in
war, a strong helmet! It blunts the edge of a sword, and deads the len^en
thunip of a bullet. In winter it is a warm nightcap, in summer a cooling
^a^ne of feathers.

CHAP. IIII. How a Gallant should behave himself in Powles-walkes.
BEING weary with sailing up and down almost these shores of Barbaria, here
let us cast our Anchor and nimbly leap to land in one coast^, whose fresh air
shall be so much the more pleasing to us, if the Ninny hammer (whose perfection
we labor to set forth) have (...) much ^oolish wit le^t him* as to choose the
place where to such in: ^or that true humorous Gallant that desires to power
himself into all fashions ((...) his ambition be such to excel ever
Complement it self) must as well practice to diminish his (...) as to be
various in his salle^s curious in his (...); or ingenious in the tru^^ing up of
a new Sretchhose: All which virtues are excellent and able to maintain him,
especially if the old worme-eaten Farmer, (his father) be dead, and left him
five hundred a year, only to keep an Irish hobby, an Irish horse-boy, and
himself (like a gentleman.) He therefore that would strive to fashion his
legs to his silk stockins, and his proud gate to his broad garters, let him
whiffe down these observations, for if he once get but to walk by the book
(and I see no reason but he may as well as fight by the book) Powles may be
proud of him, Will Clarke shall ring forth Encomiums in his honor, John in
Powles Churchyard, shall fit his head for an excellent block, whilst all the
Innes of Court rejoice to behold his most hansome calfe.

Your Mediterranean I Will, is then the only gallery, wherein the pictures of all
your true fashionate and complementall Guls are and ought to be hung up: into
that gallery carry your neat body, but take heed you pick out such an hour,
when the maine Shoale of Ilanders are swimming up and down: and first observe
your doors of entrance, and your Exit, not much unlike the plaiers at the
Theaters, keeping your Decorums even in phantasticality. As for example: if you
prove to be a Northern Gentleman I would wish you to pass through the North
door more often (especially) then any of the other: and so according to your
countries, take note of your entrances.

Now for your venturing into the Walk* be circumspect and wary what pillar you
come in at, and take heed in any case (as you love the reputation of your
honor) that you avoid the Serving man's Logg, and approach not within five
fadom of that Pillar, but bend your course directly in the middle line, that
the whole body of the Church may appear to be yours, where, in view of all,
you may publish your suit in what manner you affect most, either with the slide
of your cloak from the one shoulder, and then you must (as twere in anger)
suddenly snatch at the middle of the inside (if it be taffata at the least) and
so by ye means your costly lining is betrayed, or else by the pretty advantage
of Complement. But one note by the way do I especially we^e you to, the neglect
of which, makes many of our Gallants cheap and ordinary, that by no means you
be seen above four turns, but in the fifth make your self away, either in
some of the Sempsters shops, the new Tobacco-office, or amongst the
Booke-sellers, where, if you cannot read, exercise your smoke, and inquire
who has writ against this divine weed: etc. For this withdrawing your self a
little, will much benefit your suit, which else by too long walking, would be
stale to the whole spectators: but howsoever, if Powles Iacks be once up with
their elbowes, and quarrelling to strike eleven, as soon as ever the clock has
parted them, and ended the fray with his hammer, let not the Dukes gallery
conteyne you any longer, but pass away apace in open view. In which departure,
if by chance you either encounter, or aloof off throw your inquisitiue eye
upon any knight or Squire, being your familiar, salute him not by his name of
Sir such a one, or so, but call him Ned or Jack etc. This will set off your
estimation with great men: and if (tho there be a dozen companies between you,
it is the better) he call alowd to you (for that's most gentile) to know where he
shall find you a^ two a clock, tell him at such an Ordinary or such, and be
sure to name those that are dearest, and whither none but your Gallants resort.
After dinner you may appear again having translated yourselfe out of your
English cloth cloak, into a light Turky-grogram (if you have that happiness of
shifting) and then we seen (for a turn or two) to correct your teeth with
some quill, or silver instrument, and to cleanse your gummes with a wrought
handkercher: It skilles not whether you dinde or no, (that's best known to your
stomach) or in what place you dinde, though it were with cheese (of your own
mothers making) in your chamber or study.

Now if you chance to be a Gallant not much crossed amongst Citizens, that is, a
Gallant in the Mercers books, exalted for Sattens and veluets, if you be not
so much blessed to be crossed (as I hold it the greatest blessing in the world, to
be great in no man's books) your Powles walk is your only refuge: the Dukes
Tomb is a Sanctuary, and will keep you alive from worms and land-rattes, that
long to be feeding on your carkas: there you may spend your legs in winter a
whole afternoon: converse, plot, laugh, and talk any thing, jest at your
Creditor, even to his face, and in the evening, even by lamp-light, steal ant,
and so cozen a whole coup of abominable catch-pols.

Never be seen to mount the steps into the quire, but upon a high Festival
day, to prefer the fashion of your doublet, and especially if the singing
boys seem to take note of you: for they are able to buzze your praises, above
their An^hems if their v^y^es have not lost their maiden-heads, but be sure
your silver spurs dog your heels, and then the B^yes will sw^rme about you
like so many white (...) when you in the open Quire shall dr^we forth a (...)
embrodred purse, (the glorious ^ight of which* will ent^ce ma^y Countrymen
from their deu^sion to wondering) (...) Silver into the Boys hands* that it
may (...) hea^d (...) the first lesson, although it be read in a voy^e as big
as one of the great Organs.

This noble and notable Act being performed you are to vanish presently out of
the Quire, and to appear again (...) the ^alk; But in any wise be not
observed to t^e^d there long alone, for fear you be suspected to be a Gallant,
^^sh^^rd from the (...) of Captens and Figh^ers.

Suck this humor up especially* Put off to none unless his hatband be of a
(...) ^uainter: but for him that (...) about his h^tte, (though he were an
Aldermans son) never move to him: for he is suspected to be worse then a Gull,
^ not worth the putting off to, that cannot observe the time of his hat^band,
nor know what fashiond block is most kin to his head: for in my opinion, ye
brain that cannot choice his Felt well, (being the head ornament) must needs
power folly into all the rest of the members, and be an absolute confirmed
Fool, in Summa Totali.

All the diseasd horses in a tedious seige, cannot show so many fashions, as
are to be seen for nothing every day in Duke Humfryes walk. If therefore you
determine to enter into a new suit, warn your T^lor to atte^d you in Powles
who, with his hat in his hand, shall like a spy discover the stuff, color,
and fashion of any doublet or hose that dare be seen there and stepping behind
a pills to fill his table-bookes with those notes, will presently send you
into the world an accomplished man, by which means you shall wear your clothes
in print with the first edition.

But if Fortune favor you so much as to make you no more then a mere country
gentleman, or but some* degrees remoud fi^ him* (for which I should be very
sor^e, because your London-experience will cost you (...) before you shall have
ye wit to know what you are) then take this lesson along with you: The first
time that you (...) Powles, pass through the body of the Church like a P^r^er,
yet presume not to fetch so much as one whole turn in the middle I Will, no nor
to cast an eye to Siquis d^o^e (pasted and plais^^ed up with Seruingmens
supplications) before you have paid tribute to the top of Powles steeple with a
single penny (...) when you are mounted there, take heed how you ^oo^e down
into the yard; for the ra^^es are as (...) as your great Grandfather: and
thereupon it will not be (...) if you (...) how ^it Woodros^e durst vault over,
and what reason h^ had ^or^, to put his neck in hazard of reparations. From
hence you may descend to talk about the horse that went up, and (...) to know
his keeper, take the day of the Month, and the number of the steps, and
suffer your self to believe verily that it was not a horse, but something else
in the likeness of one. Which wonders you may publish when (...) into the
country, to the great amazement of all Farme^s daughters that will almost
swound at the report, and never recover till their ba^es be asked twice in the
Church.

But I have not left you yet: Before you come down again, I would desire you
to draw your knife, and grave your name, (or for want of a name, the mark
which you clap on your sheep) in great Caracters upon the leads by a number of
your brethren (both Citizens and country Gentlemen) and so you shall be sure to
have your name lie in a coffin of lead when your self shall be wrapped in a
winding-sheete: and indeed the top of Powles conteins more names then Stowes
Cronicle. These lofty tricks being played, and you (thanks to your feet) being
safely ariud at the st^^es ^oote again, your next worthy work is, to repair
to my Lord Chancellors Tomb (and if you can but reasonably spel) bestow some
time upon ye reading of sir Phillip Sydneyes brief Epitaph in the compass of
an hour you may make shift to stumble it out. The great Dyall is your last
monument, there bestow some half of the threescore minutes, to observe the
sauciness of the Iackes, that are above the man in the moon there: the
strangeness of the motion will quit your labor. Besides, you may here have
fit occasion to discover your watch by taking it forth, and setting the wheels
to the time of Powles, which I assure you goes truer by five notes then S.
Sepulchers Chimes. The benefit that will arise from hence is this, yt you
publish your Change in maintaining a gilded clock; and withal the world shall
know that you are a time-pleaser. By this I imagine you have walked your belly
full, and thereupon being weary, or (which rather I believe) being most
Gentleman-like hungry, it is fit that as I brought you into the Duke, so
(because he follows the fashion of great men, in keeping no house, and that
therefore you must go seek your dinner) suffer me to take you by the hand, and
lead you into an Ordinary.

CHAP. V. How a young Gallant should behave himself in an Ordinary.
FIRST, Having diligently enquired out an Ordinary of the largest reckoning,
whither most of your Courtly Gallants do resort, let it be your use to repair
thither some half hour after eleven, for then you shall find most of your
fashion-mongers planted in the room waiting for meat: ride thither upon your
galloway-nag, or your Spanish Iennet, a swift ambling pace, in your hose and
doublet (gilt rapier and poniard bestowd in their places) and your French
Lackey, carrying your cloak, and running before you, or rather in a coach, for
that will both hide you from the baseliske-eyes of your creditors, and
out-runne a whole kennell of bitter mouthd Serieants.

Being ariud in the room, salute not any but those of your acquaintance: walk
up and down by the rest as scornfully and as carelessly as a Gentleman Usher:
Select some friend (having first thrown off your cloak) to walk up and down
the room with you, let him be suited if you can, worse by far then your
self, he will be a foil to you: and this will be a means to publish your
clothes better then Powles, a Tennis-court, or a Playhouse: discourse as loud
as you can, no matter to what purpose, if you but make a noise, and laugh in
fashion, and have a good sower face to promise quarrelling, you shall be much
observed.

If you be a soldier, talk how often you have been in action: as the
Portingale voyage Cales voyage, the Island voyage, besides some eight or nine
imploiments in Ireland and the low Countries: then you may discourse how
honorably your Grave used you: observe that you call your Grave Maurice your
Grave; How often you have drunk with Count such a one, and such a Count on your
knees to your Graves health: and let it be your virtue to give place neither
to S. Kynock, nor to any Dutchman, whatsoever in the seventeen Provinces for
that Soldiers complement of drinking. And if you perceive that the vntraueld
company about you take this down well, ply them with more such stuff, as, how
you have interpreted between the French King, and a great Lord of Barbary,
when they have been drinking healthes together, and that will be an excellent
occasion to publish your languages, if you have them; if not, get some
fragments of french, or small parcels of Italian to fling about the table; but
beware how you speak any latin there, your Ordinary most commonly has no
more to do with Latin then a desperate town of Garrison has.

If you be a Courtier, discourse of the obtaining of Suits: of your mistresses
favors, etc. Make inquiry if any gentleman at board have any suit to get,
which he would use ye good means of a great man's Interest with the King: and
withal (if you have not so much grace left in you as to blush) that you are
(thanks to your stars) in mighty credit, though in your own conscience you
know, and are guilty to your self that you dare not, (but only upon the
privileges of hansome clothes) presume to peep into the presence. Demand if
there be any Gentleman, (whom any there is acquainted with) that is troubled
with two offices; or any Uicar with two Church-liuings; which will pollitickly
insinuate, that your inquiry after them, is because you have good means to
obtain them; yea; and rather then your tongue should not be heard in the
room, but that you should sit (like an A^^e) with your sinner in your mouth
and speak nothing: discourse how often this Lady has sent her Coach for you:
and h^w often you have swe^t in the Tennis-court with that great Lord: for
indeed the sweating together in France (I mean the society of Tennis) is a
great argument ^^most dear affection, even between noble men and Pesants.

If you be a Poet and come into the Ordinary (though it can be no great glory
to be an ordinary Poet) order your se^^e thus: Observe no man, do not cap to
that Gentleman to day at dinner, to whom not two nights since you were behold^n
for a supper, but after a turn or two in the room, take occasion (pulling out
your gloves) to have some Epigram, or Satyr or Sonnet, fastened in one of them,
that may (as it were vomittingly to you) offer it self to the Gentlemen: they
will presently desire it: but without much coiuration from them, and a pretty
kind of counterfeit loathnes in yourselfe, do not read it: and though it be none
of your own, swear you made it. Mary (...) chance to get into your hands any
witty thing of another man's that is somewhat better, I would council you then,
if demand be made who composd it, you may say, faith a learned Gentleman, a
very worthy friend: And this seeming to lay it on another man will be counted
either modesty in you or a sign that you are not ambitious of praise, or else
that you dare not take it upon you for fear of the sharpness it carries with
it. Besides, it will add much to your fame to let your tongue walk faster
then your teeth, though you be never so hungry, and rather then you should sit
like a dumb Coxcomb, to repeat by heart, either some verses of your own, or of
any other man's stretching even very good lines upon the rack of censure, though
it be against all law, honesty or conscience, it may chance save you the
price of your Ordinary, and be^et you other Suppliments. Ma^y I would further
entreat our Poet to be in league with the Mistress of the Ordinary because
from her upon condition that he will but ryme Knights and young gentlemen to her
house, and maintain the table in good sooling) he may eas^y make up his mouth
at her cost, Gratis.

Thus much for particular men but in general let all that are in Ordinary-pay,
march after the sound of these directions* Before the meat come smoking to
the board, our Gallant must draw out his Tobacco-box, the ladell for the cold
snuff into the nosthrill, the tongs and prining Iron: All which artillery may
be of gold or silver (if he can reach to the price of it) it will be a
reasonable useful pawn at all times, when the current of his money falls out
to run low. And here you must observe to know in what state Tobacco is in
town, better then the Merchants, and to discourse of the Potecaries where it
is to be sold, and to be able to speak of their wives as readily as the
Pottecary himself reading the barbarous hand of a Doctor: then let him show
his several tricks in taking it. As the Whiffe, the Ring, etc. For these are
complements that gain Gentlemen no mean respect, and for which indeed they
are more worthily noted, I ensure you, then for any skill that they have in
learning.

When you are set down to dinner, you must eat as impudently as can be (for
that's most Gentleman like) when your Knight is upon his stewed Mutton, be you
presently (though you be but a Capten) in the bosom of your goose: and when
your Justice of peace is knuckle deep in goose, you may without disparagement
to your blood, though you have a Lady to your mother, fall very manfully to
your woodcocks.

You may rise in dinner time to ask for a close stool, protesting to all the
gentlemen that it costs you a hundred pound a year in physic, besides the
Annual pension which your wife allows her Doctor: And (if you please) you may
(as your great French Lord does) inuit some special frind of yours, from the
table to hold discourse with you as you sit in that withdrawing chamber: from
whence being returned again to the board, you shall sharpen the wits of all
the eating Gallants about you, and do them great pleasure to ask what
Pamphlets or Poems a man might think fittest to wipe his tail with (mary this
talk will be some what foul if you carry not a strong perfume about you) and
in propounding this question, you may abuse the works of any man, deprave his
writings that you cannot equal, and purchase to your self in time the
terrible name of a severe Critic: nay and be one of the College, if you will be
liberal enough: and (when your turn comes) pay for their suppers.

After dinner, every man as his business leads him: some to dice some to drabs,
some to plays, some to take up friends in the Court, some to take up money in
the City, some to lend testers in Powles, others to bo^rrow Crowns upon the
Exchange: and thus as the people is said to be a beast of many heads (yet all
those heads like Hydraes) ever growing as various in their horns as wondrous
in their budding and branching, so in an Ordinary you shall find the variety of
a whole kingdom in a few Apes of the kingdom.

You must not swear in your dicing: for that Argues a violent impatience to
depart from your money, and in time will betray a man's need. Take heed of it.
No! whether you be at Primero or Hazard, you shall sit as patiently (though you
loose a whole halfe-yeares exhibition) as a disarmd Gentleman does when he is in
ye unmerciful fingers of Serieants. Mary I will allow you to sweat privately,
and tear six or seven score pair of cards, be the damnation of some dozen or
twenty bail of dice, and forswear play a thousand times in an hour, but not
swear. Dice your self into your shirt: and if you have (...) that your frind
will lend but an angel upon, shave it of^ and pawn that rather then to go
home blind to your lodging.

Further, it is to be remembered, He that is a great Gamester, may be trusted
for a quarters board at all tunes, and apparel provided if need be.

At your twelue-penny Ordinary you may give any Justice of peace, or young
Knight (if he sit but one degree toward the Equinoctial of the Salt-seller)
leave to pay for the wine, and he shall not refuse it, though it be a week
before the receiving of his quarters rent, which is a time albeit of good hope,
yet of present necessity.

There is another Ordinary to which your London Usurer, your stale Batchilor,
and your thrifty Attorney do resort: the price threepence: the rooms as full
of company as a Iaile, and indeed divided into several wards, like the beds
of an Hospital. The complement between these is not much, their words few: for
the belly has no ears, every man's eye here is upon the other man's trencher,
to note whether his fellow lurch him or no: if they chance to discourse, it is
of nothing but of Statutes, Bonds, Recognizances, Fines, Recoueries, Audits,
Rents, Subsidies, Suerties, Enclosures, Liueries, Indicements, outlaries,
Feoffments, Judgments, Commissions, Bankerouts, Amercements, and of such
horrible matter, that when a Lifetenant dines with his punck in the next room,
he thinks verily the men are coniuring. I can find nothing at this Ordinary
worthy the sitting down for: therefore the cloth shall be taken away, and
those that are thought good enough to be guests here, shall be too base to be
waiters at your Grand Ordinary. At which, your Gallant tastes these
commodities; he shall fare well, enjoy good company receive all the news ere
the post can deliver his packet, be perfect where the best bawdy-houses stand,
proclaim his good clothes, know this man to drink well, that to feed grossly,
the other to swaggar roughly: he shall if he he minded to travel, put out
money upon his return, and have hands enough to receive it, upon any terms of
repaiment: And no question if he be poor, he shall now and then light upon
some Gull or other, whom he may skelder (after the gentile fashion) of money: By
this time the parings of Fruit and Cheese are in the voyder, Cards and dice lie
stinking in the fire, the guests are all up, the guilt rapiers ready to be
hanged, the French Lacquey, and Irish Footeboy, shrugging at the doors with
their masters hobby-horses, to ride to the new play: that's the Randenous:
thither they are gallopt in post, let us take a pair of Dares, and now lustily
after them.

CHAP. VI. How a Gallant should behave himsefe in a Playhouse.
THE Theater is your Poets Royal Exchange, upon which, their Muses (ye are now
turned to Merchants) meeting, barter away that light commodity of words for a
lighter ware then words. Plaudities and the Breath of the great Beast, which
(like the threatenings of two Cowards) vanish all into air. Plaiers and their
Factors, who put away the stuff, and make the best of it they possibly can (as
indeed it is their parts so to do) your Gallant, your Courtier and your Capten,
had wont to be the soundest paymaisters, and I think are still the surest
chapmen: and these by means that their heads are well stockt, deal upon this
comical freight by the gross: when your Groundling, and Gallery Commoner buys
his sport by the penny, and, like a Hagler, is glad to utter it again by
retailing.

Sithence then the place is so free in entertainment, allowing a stool as
well to the Farmers son as to your Templer: that your Stinkard has the self
same liberty to be there in his Tobacco-Fumes, which your sweet Courtier has:
and that your Car-man and Tinker claim as strong a voice in their suffrage,
and sit to give judgment on the plays life and death* as well as the prowdest
Momus among the tribe of Critic: It is fit y^ he, whom the most tailors bills
do make room for, when he comes should not be basely (like a vyoll) casd up in
a corner.

Whether therefore the gatherers of the public or private Playhouse stand to
receive the afternoones rent, let our Gallant (having paid it) presently
advance himself up to the Throne of the Stage. I mean not into the Lords
room, (which is now but the Stages Suburbs) No, those boxes by the iniquity of
custom, conspiracy of waiting-women and Gentlemen-Ushers, that there sweat
together, and the covetousness of Sharers, are contemptibly thrust into the
rear, and much new Satin is there dambd by being smothred to death in
darkness. But on the very Rushes where the Commedy is to dance, yea and under
the state of Cambises himself must our fetherd Estridge like a piece of
Ordnance be planted valiantly (because impudently) beating down the mewes and
hisses of the opposed rascality.

For do but cast up a reckoning, what large cummings in are pursd up by sitting
on the Stage, First a conspicuous Eminence is gotten, by which means the best
and most essenciall parts of a Gallant (good clothes, a proportionable leg,
white hand, the Persian lock, and a tolerable beard) are perfectly revealed.

By sitting on the stage* you have a signd pattent to engrosse the whole
commodity of Censure; may lawfully presume to be a Girder: and stand at the
helm to steer the passage of S^aenes yet no man shall once offer to hinder you
from obtaining the title of an insolent ouer-weening Coxcombe.

By sitting on the stage, you may (without traveling for it) at the very next
door, ask whose play it is: and by that Quest of Inquiry, the law warrants
you to avoid much mistaking: if you know not the author, you may rail against
him: and peradventure so behave your self, that you may enforce the Author to
know you.

By sitting on the stage, if you be a Knight, you may happily get you a
Mistress: if a mere Fleet Street Gentleman, a wife; but assure your self by
continual residence, you are the first and principal man in election to begin
the number of We three.

By spreading your body on the stage, and by being a Justice in examining of
plays, you shall put your self into such true Scaenicall authority that some
Poet shall not dare to present his Muse rudely upon your eyes, without having
first unmasked her, rifled her, and discovered all her bare and most mystical
parts before you at a Tavern, when you most knighly shall for his pains, pay
for both their suppers.

By ^itting on the stage, you may (with small cost) purchase the dear
acquaintance of the boys: have a good stool for sixpence: at any time know
what particular part any of the infants present: get your match lighted,
examine the play-suits lace, and perhaps win wagers upon laying it is copper,
etc. And to conclude whether you be a fool or a Justice of peace, a Cuckold or
a Capten, a Lord Majors son or a dawcocke, a knave or an under Shreife, of
what stamp soever you be, current or counterfeit, the Stagelike time will bring
you to most perfect light, and lay you open: neither are you to be hunted from
thence though the Scar-crowes in the yard, hoot at you, hiss at you, spit at
you, yea throw dirt even in your teeth: it is most Gentleman like patience to
endure all this, and to laugh at the silly Animals; but if the Rabble with a
full throat, cry away with the fool, you were worse then a madman to tarry
by it: for the Gentleman and the fool should never sit on the Stage together.

Mary let this observation go hand in hand with the rest: or rather like a
country-seruingman, some five yards before them Present not your self on the
Stage (especially at a new play) until the quaking prologue has (by rubbing)
got cullor into his cheeks, and is ready to give the trumpets their Cue that
he is upon point to enter: for then it is time, as though you were one of the
Properties, or that you dropped out of ye Hangings to creep from behind the
Arras with your Tripos or three-sooted stool in one hand, and a teston mounted
between a forefinger and a thumb in the other: for if you should bestow your
person upon the vulgar, when the belly of the house is but half full, your
apparel is quite eaten up, the fashion lost, and the proportion of your body
in more danger to be devoured, then if it were serud up in the Counter amongst
the Powltry: avoid that as you would the Bastome. It shall crown you with rich
commendation to laugh alowd in the midst of the most serious and saddest
scene of the terriblest Tragedy: and to let that clapper (your tongue) be tossed
so high that all the house may ring of it: your Lords use it; your Knights are
Apes to the Lords, and do so too: your Inne-a-court-man is Zany to the Knights,
and (many very scuruily) comes likewise limping after it: be thou a beagle to
them all, and never lin snuffing till you have sented them: for by talking and
laughing (like a Plough-man in a Morris) you heap Pelion upon Ossa, glory upon
glory: As first, all the eyes in the galleries will leave walking after the
Players, and only follow you: the simplest dolt in the house snatches up your
name, and when he meets you in the streets, or that you fall into his hands
in the middle of a Watch, his word shall be taken for you, heel cry, He Is such
a Gallant, and you pass. Secondly, you publish* your temperance to the world,
in that you seem not to resort thither to taste vain pleasures with a hungry
appetite; but only as a Gentleman, to spend a foolish hour or two, because
you can do nothing else. Thirdly you mightily disrelish the Audience, and
disgrace the Author: mary you take up (though it be at the worst hand) a strong
opinion of your own judgment and enforce the Poet to take pity of your
weakness, and by some dedicated sonnet to bring you into a better paradise,
only to stop your mouth.

If you can (either for love or money) provide your self a lodging by the
water side: for above the conueniencie it brings, to shun Shoulder-clapping,
and to ship away your Cockatrice betimes in the morning it adds a kind of
state unto you, to be carried from thence to the stairs of your Playhouse:
hate a Sculler (remember that) worse then to be acquainted with one ath
Scullery. No, your Oars are your only Sea-crabs, board them, and take heed
you never go twice together with one pair: often shifting is a great credit to
Gentlemen: and that dividing of your Fare will make ye poor watersnaks be ready
to pull you in peers to enjoy your custom: No matter whether upon landing you
have money or no, you may swim in twenty of their boats over the river, upon
Ticket: mary when silver comes in, remember to pay trebble their fare, and it
will make your Flounder-catchers to send more thanks after you, when you do
not draw, then when you do: for they know, It will be their own another day.

Before the Play begins, fall to cards, you may win or loose (as Fencers do
in a prize) and beat one another by confederacy, yet share the money when you
meet at supper: notwithstanding, to gul the Ragga-muffins that stand a loofe
gaping at you, throw the cards (having first torn four or five of them) round
about the Stage, just upon the third sound, as though you had lost: it skils
not if the four knaves ly on their backs, and outface the Audience, there is
none such fools as dare take exceptions at them, because ere the play go off,
better knaves then they will fall into the company.

Now sir, if the writer be a fellow that has either epigramd you, or has had
a flirt at your mistress, or has brought either your feather or your red beard,
or your little legs etc. on the stage, you shall disgrace him worse then by
tossing him in a blancket, or giving him the bastinado in a Tavern, if in the
middle of his play, (be it Pastoral or Comedy, Moral or Tragedy) you rise
with a skreud and discontented face from your stool to be gone: no matter
whether the Scenes be good or no, the better they are, the worse do you
distaste them: and being on your feet, sneake not away like a coward, but
salute all your gentle acquaintance, that are spread either on the rushes, or on
stools about you, and draw what troop you can from the stage after you: the
Mimicks are beholden to you, for allowing them elbow room: their Poet cries
perhaps a pox go with you, but care not you for that, there is no music without
frets.

Mary if either the company, or indisposition of the weather hind you to sit
it out, my counsel is then that you turn plain Ape, take up a rush and
tickle the earnest ears of your fellow gallants, to make other fools fall a
laughing: mewe at passionate speeches, blare at merry, find fault with the
music, whew at the childrens Action, whistle at the songs: and above all,
curse the sharers, that whereas the same day you had bestowed forty shillings
on an embrodered Felt and Feather, (scotch-fashion) for your mistres in the
Court, or your punck in the City, within two hours after, you encounter with
the very same block on the stage, when the haberdasher swore to you the
impression was extant but that morning.

To conclude, hoord up the finest play-scraps you can get, upon which your
leave wit may most sauourly feed for want of other stuff, when the Arcadian
and Euphuird gentlewomen have their tongues sharpened to set upon you: that
quality (next to your shittlecocke) is the only furniture to a Courtier that's
but a new beginner, and is but in his ABC of complement. The next places that
are filled, after the Playhouses be emptied, are (or ought to be) Tauernes, into
a Tavern then let us next march, where the brains of one Hogshead must be
beaten out to make up another.

CHAP. 8. How a gallant should behave himself in a Tavern.
Whosoever desires to be a man of good reckoning in the City, and (like your
French Lord) to have as many tables furnished, as Lackies (who when they keep
least, keep none (whether he be a young Quat of the first years reuennew, or
some nustere and sullenfacd steward, who (in despite of a great heard, a
satin suite, and a chain of gold wrapped in cipers) proclaims himself to any
(but to those to whom his Lord owes money) for a rank coxcombe, or whether he
be a country gentleman that brings his wife up to learn the fashion, see the
Tombs at Westminster, the Lions in the Tower, or to take physic, or else is
some young Farmer, who many times makes his wife (in the country) believe he
has suits in law, because he will come up to his letchery: be he of what stamp
he will that has money in his purse, and a good conscience to spend it, my
council is that he take his continual diet at a Tavern, which (out of
question) is the only Rende-vous of boon company; and the Drawers the most
nimble, the most bold, and most sudden proclaimers of your largest bounty.

Having therefore thrust your self into a case most in fashion (how course
soever the stuff be, it is no matter so it hold fashion) your office is (if you
mean to do your judgment right) to enquire out those Tauernes which are best
customd, whose masters are oftenest drunk (for that confirms their taste,
and that they choose wholesome wines) and such as stand furthest from ye
counters, where landing your self and your followers, your first
complement-shall be-to grow most inwardly acquainted with the drawers, to
learn their names, as Jack, and Will, and Tom, to diue into their
inclinations, as whether this fellow uses to the Fencing School, this to the
Dancing School; whether that young coniurer (in Hogsheads) at midnight, keeps
a Gelding now and then to visit his Cockatrice, or whether he love dogs, or be
addicted to any other eminent and Citizen-like quality: and protest your self
to be extremely in love, and that you spend much money in a year, upon any
one of those exercises which you perceive is, followed by them. The use which
you shall make of this familiarity is this: If you want money five or six days
together, you may still pay the reckoning, with this most Gentlemanlike
language Boy, fetch me money from the Bar, and keep your self most,
prouidently from a hungry melancholy in your chamber. Besides, you shall be
sure (if there be but one fawcet that can betray neat wine to the bar) to
have that arraignd before you, sooner then a better and worthier person.

The first question you are to make (after the discharging of your pocket of
Tobacco and pipes, and the household stuff thereto belonging) shall be for an
inventory of the Kitchen: for it were more then most Tailor-like, and to be
suspected you were in ^eague with some Kitchen-wench, to descend your self, to
offend your stomach with the sight of the Larder, and happily to greaze your
Acconstrements. Having therefore received this bill, you shall (like a Capten
putting up dear paies) have many Sallads stand on your table, as it were for
blankes to the other more serviceable dishes: and according to the time of the
year, vary your face, as Capon is a stirring meat sometime, Oisters are a
swelling meat sometimes, Trowt a tickling meat sometimes, green Goose, and
Woodcock a delicate meat sometimes, especially in a Tavern, where you shall
sit in as great state as a Churchwarden amongst his poor Parishioners at
Pentecost or Christmas.

For your drink, let not your Physician confine you to any one particular
liquor: for as it is requisite that a Gentleman should not always be plodding
in one Art, but rather be a general Scholar (that is, to have a lick at all
sorts of learning and away) So it is not fitting a man should trouble his head
with sucking at one Grape, but that he may be able (now there is a general
peace) to drink any stranger drink in his own element of drink, or more
properly in his own mist language.

Your discourse at the table must be such as that which you utter at your
Ordinary: your behavior the same, but somewhat more careless: for where your
expense is great, let your modesty be less: and though you should be mad in a
Tavern, the largeness of the Items will bear with your inciuility, you may
without prick to your conscience set the want of your wit against the
superfluity and sawcines of their reckonings.

If you defice not to be haunted with Fiddlers (who by the statute have as much
liberty as Roagues to travel into any place, hau^ng the pasport of the house
about them) bring then no women along with you; but if you love the company of
all the drawers, never suppe without your Cockatrice: for having her there, you
shall be sure of most officious attendance. Enquire what Gallants sup in the
next room, and if they be any of your acquaintance, do not you (after the City
fashion) send them in a ^ottle of wine, and your name sweetened in two pitiful
papers of Sugar, with some filthy Apology cramd into the mouth of a Drawer;
but rather keep a boy in fee, who under hand shall proclaim you in every
room, what a gallant fellow you are, how much you spend yearly in Tauernes,
what a great gamester, what custom you bring to the house, in what witty
discourse you maintain a table, what Gentlewomen, or Citizens wives you can
with a wet finger have at any time to sup with you, and such like. By which
Encomiasticks of his, they that know you not: shall admire you; and think
themselves to be brought into a paradise but to be meanly in your
acquaintance: and if any of your endeered friends be in the house, and beat
the same Iuy-bush that your self does, you may join companies and be drunk
together most publikly.

But in such a deluge of drink, take heed that no man counterfeit him self
drunck, to free his purse from the danger of the shot: it is an usual thing now
amongst gentlemen, it had wont be the quality of Cockne^es, I would advise
you to leave so much brains in your head, as to prevent this. When the
terrible Reckoning (like an indictment) bids you hold up your hand, and that
you must answer it at the bar, you must not abate one penny in any
particular, no, though they reckon cheese to you when you have neither eaten
any, nor could ever abide it, raw or toasted: but cast your eye only upon the
Totalis and no further; for to trauerse the bill, would betray you to be
acquainted with the rates of the market, nay more, it would make the Uintners
believe, you were Pater-familias, and kept a house which I assure you is not
now in fashion.

If you fall to dice after Supper, let the drawers be as familier with you as
your Barber, and venture their silver amongst you: no matter where they had it,
you are to cherish the unthriftiness of such young tame pigions, if you be a
right gentleman: for when two are yoakt together by the purse strings* and draw
the Chariot of Madam Prodigality, when one faints in the way, and slips his
horns, let the other rejoice and laugh at him.

At your departure forth the house, to kiss mine Hostis over the bar, or to
accept of the courtesy of the Celler, when it is offered you by the drawers (and
you must know that kindness never creepes upon them, but when they see you
almost cleft to the shoulders) or to bid any of the Uintuers good night, is as
commendable, as for a Barber after trimming to laue your face with sweet water.

To conclude, count it an honor either to inuit, or to be invited to any
Rifling, for commonly though you find much satin there, yet you shall
likewise find many cittisens sons, and heirs, and younger brothers there who
smell out such feasts more greedily then Tailors hu^t upon sundaies after
weddings. And let any hook draw you either to a Fencers supper, or to a
Players that acts such a part for a wager: for by this means you shall get
experience by being guilty to their abominable shauing.

CHAP. 8. How a gallant is to behave himself passing through the City at all
hours of the night, and how to pass by any watch.
AFter the sound of pottle pots is out of your ears, and that the spirit of
Wine and Tobacco walks in your brain, the Tavern door being shut upon
your back, cast about to pass through the widest and goodliest streets in
the City. And if your means cannot reach to the keeping of a boy, hire one
of the drawers, to be as a lantern unto your feet, and to light you home:
and still as you approach near any night-walker that is up as late as your
self, curse and swear (like one that speaks hie dutch) in a lofty voice,
because your men have v^d you so like a rascoll in not waiting upon you, and
vow the next morning to pull their blew cases over their ears, though if your
chamber were well searched, you give only six pence a week to some old woman
to make your bed, and that she is all the seruing-creatures you give wages to.
If you smell a watch, (and that you may easily do, for commonly they eat
onions to keep them in sleeping, which they account a medicine against cold)
But if you come within danger of their brown bills, let him that is your
candlestick, and holds up your torch from dropping (for to march after a lin^k,
is shoemaker like) let Ignis Fatuus, I say being within the reach of the
Constables staff, ask alowd, Sir Giles, or Sir Abram, will you turn this
way, or down that street? It skils not, though there be none dubd in your
Bunch, the watch will wink at you, only for the love they bear to arms and
knighthood: mary if the Centinell and his court of Guard stand strictly upon
his martial Law and cry stand, commanding you to give the word, and to show
reason why your Ghost walks so late, do it in some Jest, (for that will show
you have a desperate wit, and perhaps make him and his halberdiers afraid to
lay foul hands upon you,) or if you read a mittimus in the Constables book,
counterfeit to be a French man, a Dutchman, or any other nation, whose country
is in peace with your own, and you may pass the pikes: for being not able to
understand you, they cannot by the customs of the City take your examination,
and so by consequence they have nothing to say to you.

If the night be old, and that your lodging be in some place into which no
Artillery of words can make a breach, retire, and rather assault the doors of
your punck, or (not to speak broken English) your sweet mistress: upon whose
white bosom you may languishingly consume the rest of darkness that is left,
in rauishing (though not restoratiue) pleasures without expenses, only by
virtue of four or five oaths (when the siege breaks up, and at your marching
away with bag and baggage) that the last night you were at dice, and lost so
much in gold, so much in silver, and seem to vex most that two such Elizabeth
twenty shilling pieces, or four such spur-ryals (sent you with a cheese and a
bakt meat from your mother) rid away amongst the rest. By which tragical* yet
pollitick speech, you may not only have your night work done Gratis, but also
you may take diet ther^ the next day and depart with credit only upon the bare
word of a Gentleman to make her restitution.

All the way as you pass (especially being approcht near some of the Gates)
talk of none but Lords, and such Ladies with whom you have played at Primero,
or daunced in the Presence the very same day: It is a chance to lock up the
lips of an inquisitiue Bel-man: and being arriud at your lodging door, which
I would council you to choose in some rich Citizens house, salute at parting
no man but by the name of Sir, (as though you had supt with Knights) albeit you
had none in your company, but your Perinado or your Inghle.

Happily it will be blown abroad that you and your Shoale of Gallants swom
through such an Ocean of wine, that you danced so much money out at heels, and
that in wild-^oule there slew away thus much, and I assure you to have the
(...) of your reckoning lost of purpose, so that it may be ^ublisht, will make
you to be held in dear estimation: only the danger is, if you owe money, and
that your revealing ge^s your Creditors by the ears; for then look to have a
peale of ordinance thundering at your chamber door the next morning. But if
either your Tailor, Mercer, Haberdasher, Silkeman, Cutter, Linnen-Draper, or
Sempster, stand like a guard of Switzers about your lodging watching your
vprising, or if they miss of that, your down lying in one of the Counters,
you have no means to avoid the galling of their small shot, then by sending
out a light-horseman to call your Potecary to your aid, who encountering this
desperate band of your Creditors, only with 2. or 3. glasses in his hand, as
though that day you purgd, is able to drive them all to their holes like so
many Foxes: for the name of taking physic is a sufficient Quietus est, to any
endangered Gentleman, and gives an acquittance (for the time) to them all,
though the twelve Companies stand with their hoods to attend your coming
forth, and their Officers with them.

I could now fetch you about noone (the hour which I prescribed you before to
rise at) out of your chamber, and carry you with me in to Paul's Churchyard,
where planting your self in a Stationers shop, many instructions are to be
given you, what books to call for, how to censure of new books, how to mew at
the old, how to look in your tables and inquire for such and such Greek,
French, Italian or Spanish Authors, whose names you have there, but whom your
mother for pity would not give you so much wit as to understand. From thence
you should blow your self into the Tobacco-Ordinary, where you are likewise to
spend your judgment (like a Quacksaluer) upon that mystical wonder, to be
able to discourse whether your Cane or your Pudding be sweetest, and which pipe
has the best boar, and which ^urnes black, which breaks in the burning, etc.
Or if you itch, to step into the Barbers, a whole Dictionary cannot afford more
words to set down notes what Dialologues you are to maintain whilst you are
Doctor of the Chair there. After your shauing, I could breath you in a
Fence-schoole, and out of that cudgel you into a Dancing School, in both
which I could weary you by showing you more tricks then are in 5. galleries, or
15. prizes. And to close up the stomach of this feast, I could make Cockneies,
whose fathers have left them well, acknowledge themselves infinitely beholden
to me for teaching them by familiar demonstration, how to spend their
patrimony, and to get themselves names when their fathers are dead and rotten.
But lest too many dishes should cast you into a surfeit, I will now take away:
yet so that if I perceive you relish this well, the rest shall be (in time)
prepared for you.

Farewell.
FINIS.

