The Defense of Contraries. Paradoxes against common opinion, debated in form
of declamations in place of public censure: only to exercise young wits in
difficult matters. Wherein is no offense to Gods honor, the estate of Princes,
or private men's honest actions: but pleasant recreation to beguile the iniquity
of time.

Translated out of French by A. M. one of the Messengers of her Majesty's
Chamber.

Patere aut abstine. Imprinted at London by John Winde^ for Simon Waterson.
1593.

To the King.
SIr, after you had heard the censures of diverse learned Gentlemen, on the
several Paradoxes which you pleased to propound, and were therein (as I
imagined) fully satisfied: yet you would needs make trial of my mean
judgment in such matters, and thereupon commanded me to set down mine opinion.
How simple soever they be, done they are, and now in all humblenes presented
to your Majesty: who doubtless will allow them gracious countenance, because
it was a task imposed by your self, and beside, requires labor and good wit
to defend such contraries. Let no man think then, that I or any other would
be so senseless, as to hold directly any of these vain reasons: but what
(for arguments sake) may be said, that set I down, and no otherwise. Your
Highness knows, that the simplest conceit can maintain: It is better to be
rich, then poor: better for a Woman to be fair then foul: better for a man
to be wise, then a fool, etc. But to defend the contraries to these, so far
as modesty and reason will allow, deserves no hard conjecture among the
learned, because they are only but exercise of wit, to make proof of a man's
ability in such difficult occasions. Cornelius Agrippa deserved good report
for his Vanitas Scientiarum, and I hope to pass the pikes with my
Paradox'apologia: how ever it fall out, so your Majesty buckler me with wonted
favor, I am of Caesar's mind: Iactaest alea.

Your Majesty's most humble subject and servant. R. G. S. D. M.

To the friendly Reader.
GEntle Reader, even as contrary things compared one with another, do give
the better evidence of their value and virtue: so the truth of any matter
whatsoever, appears most clearly, when the different reasons against the
same, is equalled or neighboured therewith. Beside, whosoever would prepare a
Knight to the field, must first exercise himself, in the most common and
vulgar acts of Arms, that cunning stratagems may seem the less laboursome
to him. In like manner, for him that would be a good Lawyer, after he has
long listened at the bar; he must adventure to defend such a cause, as they
that are most employed, refuse to maintain: thereby to make himself more apt
and ready, against common pleaders in ordinary causes of process. For this
intent, I have undertaken (in this book) to debate on certain matters, which
our Elders were wont to call Paradoxes: that is to say, things contrary to most
men's present opinions: to the end, that by such discourse as is held in them,
opposed truth might appear more clear and apparent. Likewise, to exercise thy
wit in proof of such occasions, as shall enforce thee to seek diligently
and laboriously, for sound reasons, proofs, authorities, histories, and very
dark or hidden memories. Notwithstanding, in this conceits, I would not have
thee so much deceived, as that either my sayings or conclusions, should make
thee credit otherwise, then common and sensible judgment requires: and yet
withal remember, that diversity of things, does more comfort men's spirits,
then daily and continually to behold, whatsoever is common and frequent to our
judgments.

Farewell.
For Poverty.
Declamation, 1. That it is better to be poor than Rich.
COnsidering for what, and against whom I am to speak in your presence, I
have great occasion to fear, and withal to request, that credit and favor
should have no more means, to blemish and obscure truth on your parts; then
may innocence and simplicity on my behalf, by bringing and conducting ye
into the apparent light; For minding to commend such things, as are blamed and
hated by most part of men, it will be almost impossible for me to escape
displeasure in the matters themselves, which of each one, and at all times have
been loved, esteemed and cherished aboued all other things. But one thing that
heerin gives me some comfort, is, that among the wise and virtuous, the number
whereof are dailye without comparison far less (albeit much more esteemed)
then the bad and ignorant; I shall escape vnblamed. Wherefore I need not be
dismayed, if I find few protectors and friends, for praising matters so good
and honest, when my adversary finds greater advantage, for extolling such
things as are evil and pernicious.

Now because the principal point of my cause, consists in letting ye
understand, the estate and value of such matters, as I stand for: I desire ye
to wish him, who would turn ye from the knowledge heerof (as pretending not to
know, that the well skilde in letters, have (for the most part) been poor and
needy persons:) To call to memory the life of Valerius Publicola, Menenius
Agrippa, as also the good Aristi^es, who died all so poor, as they were feign
by alms to be buried. He may remember likewise, Epaminondas king of Thebes,
in whose rich houses and Palaces (after so many fair victories and noble
deeds of arms by him performed) was found but one poor straw-bed or base
mattresse, for to put in his Inuentory. He may be mindful also of Paulus
Aemillius, Attillius Regulus, Quintus Cincinnatus, Cato Elius and Marcus
Manlius: whose noble hearts were more commanded by want; then the height of
worldly fortunes. And who knows not, that love of poverty had such power over
the good Abdolominus, that to be ruled thereby, he refused the most rich and
abounding kingdom of Sydonia, he being elected by the people of the Country,
to be governor thereof?

Herein appears sufficiently, the great number of molestations and
travails, hidden under the vain splendour of riches, and the abundance of
honors hidden in the beautiful bosom of poverty: honors well known and
understood by the Poet Anacreon, to whom it happened, that having been two
whole nights together without any rest, troubled with continual deuisings, how
he might keep from thieves, and employ the five talents of gold which
Polycrates had given him: at length, to deliver himself from this perpetual
molestation, and return to his former happiness, he brought back the fair
Talentes to the Tyrant, with such words as one of his sort might very well
use, and notwithstanding he was poor and indigent, yet he refused those
things so highly accounted on. It is certain, that he who has always
lived poor in this world, has no grief or sorrow when he departs from it:
for it is to be considered, that he leaves this earthly life more contented
and joyfully, then he that by the means of riches, has therein endured long
time of pleasure.

As for my self, I never saw one that was poor indeed, who at his death
desired to be better stored. O chaste and humble poverty, whereon, as on a most
firm rock, was builded (of old) the Church of God* Poverty, architectrix
of great cities and towns: inuentresse of all Arts and fair sciences, alone
without any fault or reproach: Triumphant in very great excellence, and worthy
of all honor and commendation. By thee was the Philosopher Plato esteemed so
divine: Socrates so wise, and good Homer so eloquent. By thy means was erected
the Empire of the great Roman people, and to be brief; how much for other
things thou art to be loved singularly: yet for this one respect art thou
highly to be praised, because apparantlie thou make known, who (among
friends) are the feigned and counterfeit. Wherefore I say, that such as forsake
and reject thee, ought to be shunned as a savage beast, and chased from every
one: considering that in refusing thee, he repulseth the mistress of all
goods, and excellence of the spirit of man.

That this is true, how many persons have been seen (by the means of honest
want) to be brought to all modesty, humility, chastity, providence, and
lastly to joy in that, which false philosophy, by long time and continual
study, could hardly at any time bring to memory. If mine oath might urge ye
to belief, I durst affirm before ye, that I have seen some in their worldly
felicities, more furious, than ever was Orestes, more proud, then Athamantis,
more voluptuous and libidinous then Verres or Clodius: who soon after by some
inconveniences being brought to poverty, became in one instant chaste, courteous
and so debonaire, as not so much as the very shadow of their bodies, but
appeered to be affable and gracious. And never did so much the gainesaiers of
this virtue, no not in the honesties of moral philosophy, for it is a thing
very certain, that she could never perform like worthy deeds, as our good
poverty has done; I beseech ye consider, what a mistress in her house she
has always been, to forbid, that (where she soiourneth) sloth, prodigality,
gouttinesse, luxury, with such like misshapen and detestable matrones should
have any harbor. Whersoeuer she shows her self, it behooves pride to be
gone with all diligence; never must envy have any place there, such trumperies
and abuses she scatters from her abroades.

But may it please ye to understand (Gentlemen) whereon they so much affected
to riches and covetousness of money, do ground themselves, which in all
seasons has been held for the greatest ruin and destruction of men. They
say, that such is the inclination of our spirit. I would demand of them, what
society have the spirits of men, being of their own nature divine and
celestial, with earthly superfluities, because nothing else is gold or silver,
then the very excrement of the earth? where find they, that any one of them
who were highly wise, would ever place riches in the number of those things,
that truly ought to be called goods? Unhappy thorns, which brings ye such
grief in the gathering, which with so many warm tears, and ouer-bitter
sighs, ye leave lost and dissipated: and with such pains and anguishes, ye
cause to be guarded and tended.

Seneca, an author of great reputation, said: That the man is greatly to be
commended, who prizeth earthen vessels as much as if they were of silver: but
much more praise deserves he, that esteems vessels of gold or silver no
more then if they were of earth. So in truth, if we consider well the condition
of these so highly beloved riches, we shall find them naturally to be such; as
in dispending or employing them, they cause nothing else but trouble and
torment. And thinking to keep them safe and sure under key, never the more
easy benefit is received thereby: but oppressions of such care, as we cannot
but repute our selves simple subjects, and servants to them. For this it is,
that our God, of infinite wisdom and bounty, calls the poor most blessed:
and who ever gave so much favor to poverty as he? in imitation of whom, many
(I think by him inspired) have buried their goods, fearing least themselves
should be buried in them.

And brieflye to discover the pleasure of these riches. If we desire them, to
have a sumptuous stable of horses, double and single, Courtals, ambling and
trotting Geldings, Iennets, Hungarian, Barbarian, Turkish, and other horses of
excellence: let us consider, that the horse by nature is a fantastical
beast, night and day eating the goods of his master, yet for all that never
satisfied; a lofty and a courageous beast, bread and nourished up for war,
to whom sometimes their needs but a wispe of straw, to affright him with a
shadow, which endagers the overthrow of his master. A beast, that often times
will not obey the bridle or the spur, and without the means of well ordering
and managing, will fall into a thousand bogges or quag-mires. How many
dangerous alarmes, and spoil of Countries (caused by the unhappy incursions
of the Gotthique, Vandalian, Hunnes, and Danish horses) have the noble kingdoms
of France, Italy and Spain received: who but for this help, had never been
enterprized upon by those barbarous Nations? What damage yearly do the post
horses, not only to riders for offices and benefices: but likewise to Princes
and Lords, who sometime (for their pleasure) desire to win ground in have? I
never look on them, that so boldly place their affection in horses; and who
without any reasonable cause, so affect and keep them, but I say to my self:
between him that loves, and the thing beloved, it behooves there should be
some similitude and resemblance, otherwise such an appetite should never be
engendered, nor could these two so well agree together. Seeing then that rich
men are so immesureably affected to their horses, as they can think on no
other pastimes in the world, but to send to buy them at Naples, in Turkey, in
Almaigne and Spain: it must needs be esteemed, that they hold some
disposition agreeing with the horses, participating with some strange and
brutishe nature. And not to be silent in other discommodities which horses
brings, as well in the field as the City: first of all, if they trot, they
will break their reins: and if they amble, they are ready to stumble and
fall, hazarding thy overthrow, or perishing some member of thy body. Beside,
this, as says the great Alfirtocus, and many good Authors of Escuyrie: the
horse is subject to more diseases then a man. So let me leave ye, to bethink
on such other greefes and vexations, which horses daily bring unto ye.

If we see into the pleasure of the rich, concerning the beawtie of their
Cabinets, garnished (among other jewels) with pointed diamonds, Rubies,
Topazses, Emeraldes, or other beautiful stones: we may at this day perceive
by proof, that the price and value of precious stones, consists only in the
affection of very wealthy persons, or in the smooth language of the abusers
that sell them, the reputation and esteem of them, being subject to the
incertitude and variety of opinions. That it is so, the Agath which now is of
so slender prize, was of old had in great reputation with Pyrrhus, who kept
one as most dear and precious. The Sapphire, because it resembled the fair
color of Heaven, was wont to be in very high account: now it is of little
esteem, and held as a slender jewel. The Diamond was never by our elders
greatly prized: now ye see how it is reckoned and valued. The Topaze was in
good credit with Ladies, but now at this present (for what occasion I know not)
it is reputed the simplest jewel one can wear. And who knows not in what
dignity the Emerald should be? Now ye see how it lies complaining on Fortune,

Thou will tell me, that it were good for one to be rich, that he may be
decked in fair and sumptuous garments, finely cut and framed after diverse
fashions. Thou art very sottish and simple if thou perceiuest not, that such
braueries bring thee perpetual sollytude and molestation; for having gotten
garments of these sorts, thou must so often rub, wipe, brush, fold, unfold,
alter, amend, air, and such like quallitie else beside, to keep them from
spots and moaths, wherein thou may apparently note and express deep
vanity, that thou will cover thy body, which is made of nothing but dirt and
slime, with purple, silk, gold, and other curiosities.

Some good drinker, would desire money, to see his sellers full of the best and
most delicate wines, as of Balm, Arbois, wine of Orleance, Rosetta, Muscadels,
Bastardes, Malmesies, Corsa, Greek wine, Vernacula, Romania, and others, which
are not here to be nominated. These were good for thee; were it not that thou
forgettest the discommodities which drink brings, and to be drunk. For wine
(according as Plato holds) was in manner sent down here beneath by the Gods,
to inflict punishments upon men, and to take vengeance on their offenses,
making them (after they be become drunk) to kill and murder one another. For
this cause Androcides advertised Alexander, that wine was the blood of the
earth, and he ought to guard himself well in the use thereof. This counsel
being not well observed by that great Emperor; in his intemperance he slew
his most dear Clitus, burned the City of Persepolis, stabbed his Physician,
committing many other filthy and infamous deeds of excess. Wherefore was it,
but for this, that the Carthaginians forbad wine to their soldiers and
household servants, and to such likewise as held any estate of government in
their Common wealth, especially during the time of their authority and office
in the City.

Leotichus being desired to tell the reason, wherefore the Spartanes (by his
commandment) were so sober in drinking wine: answered, that he did it to
deliver them from trouble, in consulting with other nations touching their own
affairs. Cyneas, Ambassador to Pyrrhus, whose sweet tongue was so much
esteemed by every one, and of so great profit to his Prince, being one day in
Auara, beholding the exceeding height of the country vines; in smiling merely,
thus spoke. Good right had such a mother, to be hanged on so high a Cross or
Iibbet, because she brought forth such a dangerous child as wine was. Should
one wish riches, to have great troops of fat cattle, store of wool or corn?
to see his court full of fowls, his doue-cotes well bred and haunted, Turtle
doves in cages, Peacocks, Phesants, Turkey hens, with other kinds of excellent
foul choisly kept up? I think that the great number of these several
kinds, serves but for venison to the Fox or Wolf, or else their rapine, that
have not the mean to compass the like: the pleasure whereof may be called
somewhat beastly, because it is nourished among beasts.

And as for fowls, what are they (if not kept as a pray for foxes, Cats, and
Weasels) then are they viands for hunters, the spoil of gardens, and
destruction of Garners? Can one imagine like vexation to this beastly delight?
for one paultry egg, what cry, what cackling and noise hear we for so small a
thing: albeit it were good, as some doubt it is not. For who knows not by
experience, chiefly by the testimony of Physicians, that the new laid egg
subuerteth the stomach, and when it is not new, it corrupts and hurts it?
What shall I say of the Turtle dove, whose sorrowful note brings such grief to
the hearer, and to the eater, such appetite to fleshly concupiscence? What
likewise shall I say of the Pigeon? whose noise never cease day or night,
which breaks her masters head, and beside, fileth the fairest houses? And as
for her hoarse note, I find it nothing inferior to that of the Peacock, in
matter of annoying and bad sound: saving that the Peacocks cry is more mighty
in terror, even as it were to affright the devils. I believe the man that
brought them into this country, had much more regard to his belly, then to the
quarrels and disturbing of neighbors, to disgrace the couerture of houses, and
spoil of so many well mannured and pleasant gardens.

Some good supposer may say, that riches serve for a pleasant and recreatiue
life. Because if I have wealth, I can make good cheer, I can behave my self
merrily, and entertain companies of most excellent Musicians, that shall make
me pastime, and take from me all offending irkesomnesse. Let me advertise
thee, that in music is not to be received one only good or honest pleasure;
because it is naturally vain and dissolute. That it is so, Saint Athanasius
Bishop of Alexandria, a man of very profounde knowledge, to the reading of
whose books, Saint Ierom most instantly exhorts us: chased music forth
of the christian Church, because it too much weakened and softened men's spirits,
making them inclined and disposed to all worldly pleasures and lasciuiousnes:
beside this, it increased melancholy in him, that was first by nature
surprised therewith. Saint Augustine had never any will at all to prove it: the
Egyptians blamed it, not so much for being unprofitable, as dangerous and
damnable. Aristotle most highly hated it, when it happened him to say: that
Jupiter never could sing or play on the harp. Phillip of Macedon very much
blamed his son Alexander, because he saw him given too much to music, and
saw him (one time among other) take too great pleasure in singing melodiously:
who would then wish great store of goods, to employ them in such a
fantastical study?

Who would desire riches, for the pastime of hunting, hawking, and other manner
of chasing sportes? the chase is no recreation at all, that a studious or a
virtuous spirit should follow: for whosoever will well resolve himself
thereof, shall find it an exercise of cruelty, a sport for desperate people,
and (if I durst say so) for mad men. This pastime was first invented by the
Thebanes, a nation beyond other most cruel and beastly: nor was it had in any
use, but among the most barbarous, such as were the Idumaeans, Ismaelites and
Philistines. For the truth hereof, look in holy writ, if any one of the good
Patriarchs was ever a hunter? We read somewhat of Caine, Esau and Nemrod: but
this was the cause why Saint Augustine held, that the said Esau was reckoned
among the number of sinners. According to which opinion, the chase was
forbidden to Preests in the Mileuitane council, albeit that decree at this day
is little accoumpted of.

Wherefore think ye the fabulists feigned Acteon, to be turned into a Heart as
he was chasing? but only to let us understand, that the ouer-earnest and
immeasureable love borne to that exercise, with the consuming of goods bestowed
thereon: makes the hunters in the end not only beastly, but even horned
altogether likewise. For proof and example of this dangerous pleasure, I am
to tell ye, that not many days past, a marvelous fair young Gentlewoman,
accoumpted of greatest trust where she dwelt, so soon as her husband was risen
early in the morning to go on hunting: received the injurious company of her
secret friend, with whom she had greater pastime, not forsaking her bed, then
the hunter could have in midst of the fields, where he pursuing some horned
beast, himself (without thinking thereon) was at home turned into a masque of
the same fashion. Poor and miserable huntsmen, let me in courtesy tell ye, to
what end serves this great affection ye bear to savage beasts, but to make ye
continually haunt the woods and forests, where ye likewise become savage and
brutish, ready oftentimes to break your necks in bushes or ditches. Take
example I pray ye by Viriatus, he that by his prowess conquered the kingdom of
Portugal, and consider, how of a shepherd, he became a huntsman, and from a
huntsman, to be a robber and these in the woods.

The youths that are termed nice-wantons, will never yield to me, but that
riches will serve to feast their Ladies, to banquet, daunse, vault, brave it,
revel all the night, and use a thousand idle tricks of lovers, wherein we see
the wealthy youths of these days, most commonly to place their pleasure.
Heereto I would not willingly agree, were it not I imagine, what is done in
secret to Ladies: so that the love of the very fairest, or most queint and
finest Gentlewoman, is nothing else than a secret hidden death, a close
contrived poison, incident to the spirit of the most sensible person that is.
And for this cause, the Egyptians (willing to show love portraied in every
part,) were wont to paint a snare or halter: signifiyng thereby (as I think)
the miserable end and condition, whereto poor lovers are daily led, a passion
too bitter to feel, that suddenly making his entry into the hearts of men,
departs again very slow and slacklie: whence springs afterward infinite
fountains of tears, sighs too piersing, anguishes and travails
insupportable.

This was it that moved Alcesimarchus Plautinus to maintain, that love was the
first inuenter of begging and the wallet, by reason (I think) of the
incredible molestings and torments, which he loades his poor beggars withal,
being as often present with him as absent, and absent as well as present: by
means whereof he sends them in the end (if they be not well grounded) the bag
for their first salutation; and with a new shirt or sheet on their shoulder,
to the hospital, by four horses or bearers. And that love is (of all
torments) the most cruel in the world, it appears by the answer which
Apolonius Thianeus made to the king of Babylon; concerning the pain he desired
to be invented for punishing of an Eunuche, who was found with a gentlewoman
his affected favorite. Ye need not bethink any greater persecution for him
(quoth the Philosopher) then to let him live: for I make no doubt (mighty king)
if the fire of love go forward in him, according as already it has begun: ye
cannot make him feel and endure a more cruel passion, nor may he be so
tormented with what else ye can devise. He shall find himself like the
ship, tossed with contrary winds, himself (by his own procurement) even
like the foolish fly, shall burn and consume in this flame: he shall burn when
he is as cold as ice: he shall request and refuse in one selfsame instant,
and desire as much to die as to live. In these words Thianeus erred not a jot,
if we could consider, how grievously Solomon was toiled and tormented with this
love, till men beheld him transported from all natural sense, and made a mere
preuaricatour of the holy law.

If we should seek after this wicked money, to take pleasure in many farms,
country houses, environed with trim gardens and buildings, beset with clear
fountains, Thickets, Arbours, Vineyardes, Meadows, earable land, and other
singularities: I say, such things make us often poor by slothfulnes, and
undoes us by ouer-lauishnesse, inducing us to grievous offenses, through many
by-places, and behauiours that are over secret. That it is not unlikely, let us
remember what Cicero wrote to his friend Verres, and we shall find, that when
he would well discipher and portrait to life (as it were) the libidinous acts
of a Gentleman: that first of all he painted forth, the walks and pleasures of
country houses and fair places, which accustomably he frequented, as if such
things were the ministers and helps, of his very chiefest faults and
misbehauiors.

For conclusion, riches have ever been in so bad reputation; that they have
been called brambles, flames, and burning coals. See how they make insolent
people arrogant, spightfull, beastly, negligent, disdainful, fools,
melancholy, solitary and hateful: ye shall not find one alone, but doubts
of their service, as being baits and nourishments to al unhappy works. Hence
it came that Pliny said, treasures hid by nature for our profit, do commonly
stifle us, and plunge us in the deapth of all mischances. So was Zeno wont to
say, that the goods of the world did more hurt then help: which was the
cause that made Crates the Thebane, passing one day from his country of
Athens, to follow the study of Philosophy, to throw all the gold and silver
he had about him into the sea, imagining, that virtue and riches could never
partake together: the same speeches were likewise confirmed by Bias, Plato, and
many other wise Philosophers.

But what need I spend time in producing so many witnesses: when the holy mouth
of the Creator has said: that sooner shall the cable of a ship enter the
eye of a needle to sow withal, then can a rich man into the kingdom of heaven.
He spoke it, who (all his life time) distributed and spent his faculties on the
poor. But the Pagan that invented the fiction (in truth very ingenious) how
Jupiter surprised with the marvelous and exceeding beauty of Danae, converted
himself into a shower of gold, falling into the bosom and lap of the Lady,
by this mean to have iouissance with his so long desired and purchased pray:
does he not plainly enough give us to understand, that gold is the most
proper and conuenable thing, wherewith to oppugn and overthrow the chastity
of innocent maidens? Yet think not, that gold serves only as a custom, to
persecute the modesty of women withal; but assure your selves beside, that it
is daily the cause of monstrous treasons, slaughter, and many other deeds of
vile excess, which the breuity of time, and fear of offending ye, will not
permit me to rehearse.

Wherefore I will conclude with the good Philosopher Possidonius, that riches
is the cause of infinite evils: which contrariwise cannot be so said or
alleged, against our holy and well advised poverty, of whom learned Seneca
speaks honorably, saying; That the naked by this special mean, is out of
danger of thieves, and such as are free from money, may in besieged places live
at ease, not dreading the fear of enemies. Much better then (without
comparison) is frank poverty, then such slavish riches: seeing from poverty
springs infinite profits and commodities, and from worldly goods, proceeds
nothing but unhappiness.

For the hard-fauoured face, or foul Complexion.
Declamation, 2. That it is better to be foul than fair.
WHo knows not, how much the deformity of body and hard favored face is to
be esteemed, principally in women (for in men it was never in so great
request:) has never considered, how many amorous sparks is daily to be seen,
under an il-fauoured countenance and badde composed body, choicely hid and
covered: which in a fair face finely polished, gives often occasion of
ceaselesse flames and cruel passions. But the strong and invincible bulwark,
which the foul face (not only of old, but likewise in these times) has
erected for it self, will encounter the fires of love that are so damageable.
Do ye believe (Gentlemen) if fair Helen the Greek, and the gentle Trojan
Shepherd, had been hard favored or counterfeit in personage, that the
Greeks would ever have taken so much pain in pursuing them? Nor had poor
Troy endured such cruel ruin and destruction, in long description whereof,
so many skillful wits were wearied and tired.

And if we shall compare and unite together, the beawty of the mind with that
of the body: shall we not find a greater number of deformed people, to be more
wise and ingenious then the fair and well fourmed? Let Socrates be our
witness, whom the historians and ancient figures represent, to be so
ill-favored as might be: notwithstanding, by the Oracle of Apollo, he was
acknowledged to be the wisest man of his time. Phrigian Aesope, the most
excellent fabulist, was in form of body so strange and misshapen, as the very
ougliest in his time (in comparison of him) might rightly be resembled to
Narcissus or Ganimede: nevertheless, as each one may read, he was most rich
in virtues, and in spirit (beyond all other) most excellent.

Of great deformity were the Philosophers, Zeno and Aristotle, Empedocles
fowlie composed, and Galba a very ougly counterfeit: nevertheless, they al
were of marvelous and sweet disposed spirit. Could any impeach the deformity
of Philopoemen, who after he was seen to be a good and hardy soldier: came
he not to the dignity of a most valiant captain? and was he not reverenced
among his people, for his high and excellent virtues? Consider (Gentlemen) on
such as are of fair and corpulent fashion, and ye shall commonly find them to
be sickly, more weak, and less able to travail: more soft, delicate and
effeminate, then the other kind of people. Again, ye shall sildome times see
it happen, that in a beautiful body, being of great excellence, chastity
agrees in selfsame likelihood: because it is to be kept with great
difficulty, being by so many sought after so earnestly.

What shall we say of such, who (not contenting themselves with nature,) do
daily frame very great complaints against her, making no spare of their goods
or labor, to reform (with all endeavor) what seems best to them for fashion
of their bodies: because they be not appropriate or agreeing with their curious
appetites? Of such fools I demand, seeing nature (the most careful and
discrete mother of all things) has given them what she thought meet and
profitable in the form of their bodies: for what cause they should be
displeased with her, or imagine her a bad bestower, who would never give them
any part of that folly, which is so vainly set by and esteemed of by every
one? Nature gives not to her friends, the things that may quickly be wasted by
sickness, or overthrown by the course of age: therefore true liberality is
known, by the firm and long continuance of the gift bestowen upon any one:
and what see ye of less permanence then beawty?

Consider, how it has headlong thrown down young people, into secret greefes
and perilous dangers, and allured them to such hateful sins: as right happy
might he count himself, that could escape them with his honor unstained.
Contrariwise, note the good and profit ensuing by deformity, when all they in
general, that of old time have been, and yet at this day are studious in
chastity, do openly confess, as nothing has like force in them, to tame and
check the pricks of the flesh, neither long watchings, grievous disciplines, or
continual fastinges; as one only look upon an il-fauoured and counterfeit
person. Hence ensues that, which is used as a common proverb, concerning a
very foul deformed woman: that she serves as a good receipt and sovereign
remedy, against fleshly tentations.

O sacred and precious deformity, deerly loved of chastity, free from all
scandalous dangers, and a firm rampart against all amorous assaults, I
perceive that by thy means, company keeping is the easier to be allowed, for
thou take from them all greefes and annoiances: chasing from thy society all
wicked suspicions, as a very special remedy against desperate jealousy. O
that I could find words worthy thy praises and deserts, whence proceeds
infinite good and treasure, which with great shame has been (by the ignorant)
despised and blamed. O what affection I have to persuade my friends, how they
should know (henceforth) to adorn and embelish themselves, with the beawtie
that for ever endures: and not to depart therewith from among us, either
drinking, eating, waking, sleeping or breathing. I mean that beawtie, that
keeps us company even to our grave, and leaves us not till the latest gasp:
that which we may truly call our own, no way due or attributable to our
parents. Gainsay me who shall, I will rest my self on this opinion, that much
better is it to be adorned with such a color, then to trust or repose only in
borrowed corporal beauty, which so easily corrupts, even by the least touch
of any fever that may come upon us.

I remember a young maiden of Perigourd, who perceiving her beauty to be a very
great, suspicious, and capital enemy to her good fame, and that in regard
thereof, she was daily required and solicited by many young yoonkers: her own
self with a rasour, or some piece of silver made sharp for the purpose, so
disfigured her fair face, that her two cheeks, which seemed before like roses
or shining Carbuncles, contained nothing at all of their former and natural
beawty. Like act did many wise, well learned Damsels, and holy virgins of the
Primitive church, of whom especial memory is made among Christians at this day.

What say ye of our Courtezans? whom God (by his especial grace) having not
given the gift, to be the fairest of all other: how daily they cease not to
invent, new and strange manners of paintinges, to counterfeit and disguise
their age and first natural shape: with false hairs, Spanish white, Pom^des,
Targon, distilled waters, braied drugs, Oils, Powders, and others follies too
long to be recounted. Oftentimes they shave or burn their artificial hair,
and then again, rub slick, chafe and wash themselves, only to seem fair:
yet notwithstanding, look on them at night or in the morning, and ye shall
find them more deformed than before: but what ensues soon after upon this
goodly industry? Sin, Death, and the anger of God.

Now then, desire this feigned fair beawty who will, and such as best think
themselves worthy of it: for I hold most firmly, that it is better to hate and
fly it, then to wish or affect it, seeing nothing proceeds thereof, but
pride, ouer-weening and vainglory, as also the most misshapen horned
creatures of the world. Never was I of any other mind, since the time I had
power of reason, to discern and know truth from falsehood, but that deformed
people deserved more praise then the beawtifull, nor is it without cause, or
disagreeing with best sense, considering such as are hard favored, are
commonly chaste, humble, ingenious, holy, and have ever some sweet appearance
of most commendable grace.

But for them that boast of beauty, I leave to you the consideration of their
behavior, which is often times so counterfeit, as nothing can be said to
agree less with nature. You shall see them of lofty countenance, inconstant
demeanor, wandering looks, bold pace, and like language: now judge at your
pleasure what ye conceive of them. Conclude then will I, that it is much better
to be foul than fair, and let no adversary party intrude himself to reply
against my speeches, for I am both stoutly determined, and sufficiently
furnished, to make him answer.

Had I no more but the testimony of Theophrastus, who has left us in writing;
that bodily beawtye is nothing else but secret deceit: And he that will not
here with content himself, to him let me produce the advice of Theocritus:
that beawty is an unknown detriment.

Shall we then be so unwise and sottish, that (even at the first sight) we
will pursue our own evils and misfortunes? more easily embracing most
perilous and damageable beawtie, then deformity ten times more auailing and
profitable? Would God that foolish mind might not abide in any one, but
rather, that we all would hate what is so unfit for us, and from which comes
no goodness or felicity.

For the ignorant.
Declamation, 3. That ignorance is better than knowledge.
THe more I think heereon, the more I resolve and rest in this opinion, that
it is better to have no knowledge in letters, then to be expert or skillful
therein: considering, that such as have consumed the more part of their age in
the study of sciences, have in the end repented themselves thereof, and have
oftentimes found very evil success thereby.

Valerius the great, writing of Cicero (who by good right deserved to be
called, not only the father of eloquence, but even the fountain of all
excellent lerning) says, that in his latter years, he conceived such an hatred
against letters, as if they had been the cause of his so many greefes and
travails. The Emperor Licinius, Valentinianus, Heraclides, Licianus and
Philonides of Malta, have openly termed the skill in letters; sometime to be
a public plague, and sometime a common poison to men. And I have found
written in many good Authors, that he which couets knowledge, couets vexation,
and that from great experience, ensues (oftentimes) the greatest danger.
Likewise it is certain, that all heresies, as well ancient as modern, came
from men of knowledge: and contrariwise, that in people esteemed idiots, or men
of little knowledge, have been vsuallye noted express signs of virtuous
works and good examples.

I highly commend the order among the Lucanes, that no one professing capacity
of letters, or esteemed learned, may obtain any office, or sit as a Magistrate
in their parliament: for they stand in fear, least these lettered men (by
their great knowledge, which makes them presume so much on their persons)
should trouble the good order and tranquillity of their common wealth. Nor may
this be reckoned but to very good purpose, if we would well consider their
insolency, who under shadow of probation in a college, would have every one
stand bounden or be holding to them, and think under color of their fair
allegations, with interpretations (God wots) crooked enough sometime, to
overthrow the best natural sense in the world, and they of duty ought to be
above all only heard, and listened to. Some of them there be, that (like to
Mydas) confound in their obstinate opinions and stiff-necked conceits, all
things whatsoever they take in hand.

I cannot imagine, to what end are available these men so highly learned, who
(in honor of their followers) are called fine, polished, curious and ingenious
wits. For if they might serve to govern any public cause; how many nations
are seen, without the knowledge of laws imperial, or of Stoical, or
Peripatetical philosophy, so to govern and entertain themselves, that they
out-goe al ancient Commonweals.

To think that they may serve for the art military, I dare boldly witness
thus much unto ye, that I have known more then one or two Gentlemen, and
captains well lettered, who (by the help of their books) have labored and
busied themselves, to point out a field, leuy an army, put men in arraie, and
furnishe their squadrons; which practice never returned them any honor. For in
truth in matter of war, we daily behold to happen incident novelties, and
unaccustomed stratagems, which never before were registered, or put in use, by
the very skilfullest writers in times past. How can we then with reason
affirm, the books of Frontinus or Vegetius, to be profitable for the art of
war? In my conceit, the good judgment of a Captain, joined with his long use
and experience in these matters; is sufficient enough for him, without
troubling him to turn over books of the Art military.

That these lettered people are meet to guide a house, or govern a household
(which the Philosophers called Oeconomia) how can I agree thereto? when at
this day is to be noted, both here and elsewhere; how many good and honest
mothers of families, who never in their lives studied in any University, yet
both have and do well order their houses, and guide their household? yea, above
one or two hundred women for example, who (no displeasure to Aristotle or
Xenophon) may learnedly read them a Lecture, and turn them confusedly out of
their household catalogue: so good and right a course do they carry in these
causes. And I do not doubt, but if those Philosophers or Oeconomikes of times
past, were at this day present to see, how these huswiues govern and content
each one: themselves would avouch, that they might learn of them new precepts
and instructions, that better would become their fair books and volumes.

May it please ye that I show ye, how these expert fellows in letters, even as
by another Cyrces, are transformed, and deprived of the greater part of their
natural power? Find me out a young man, lusty and bravely disposed of person,
affable, endued and garnished with all such things, as are best beseeming his
age: let him follow the study of letters, ye shall find him in short time
unlusty, louttish, unapt to al things, and as little while (for conference) can
he tarry from his book, as can the fish out of the water.

I pray ye note the looks of poor Students, how sad they are, melancholy,
grim, dreadful, languishing, humorous and heavy, in brief, the very nearest
portrait to a deadly counterfeit, or a long dried anatomy. And as for their
complexions, they are the hardest in choice that can be amongst men: ever they
are suspicious of some evil, so bad they are themselves, proud, presumptuous,
despising all honest companies, mortal enemies to the so noble and sweet sex
feminine, vaunters to the uttermost, and frantique inuenters of tales, trifles
and inventions. Which Saint Paul divinely foreseeing, admonished us, not to be
wise, but soberly minded: fearing, least by ouer-plunging our selves in the
depth of humane doctrines, we should fall into far greater perils and
dangers: therefore he counsels us, not to seek after high and difficult
matters, but to abide in fear, without passing the bounds of obedience.

Likewise, did not he show himself, to have left and despised all litterature
and worldly knowledge, after he had gotten the true knowledge of GOD, when he
said: nothing was more to be desired, then well to know his master crucified?
That he was not come to preach, garnished with humane wisdom, or rhethoricall
cunning? And that the wisdom of this world, was nothing else but folly before
God? And that it did nothing else but puff up the hearts of men? And that
whosoever sought after things over high, should find themselves shut quite out
of glory? And these words agree with the saying of Ecclesiasticus: that we
should seek after nothing, which surmounteth the capacity of our spirit. To
prove the same, has not God menaced by the mouth of his Prophet; to destroy
the wisdom of the wise, and to reprove the prudence of the skillful?

What shall let me from believing, that the wisdom of this world, was the
invention of the enemy, whom our elders called Demon: seeing the word Demon,
signifies wise and learned? This was he that promised to poor Adam (so easy
to be deceived,) the knowledge of good and evil, if he would but taste of the
fruit which God had forbidden him. Plato rehearses to this purpose, that an
evil spirit named Theudas, was the first inuenter of Sciences: and hence it
follows (as I think) that we see so few learned men, but some of them are
wicked, seditious, envying the glory one of another, lurking deceivers, and
cruel reuengers: which though it be not done by arms in field like men, yet
have they the means of performing the same, in Comedies, beastly Satyrs, too
sharp and biting verses, cruel Iambicks, and furious Epigrames.

I would willingly demand of such, as make doubt of the disprofit and
slender value of letters: if they were of such price and esteem as they make
them to be; our great Lords, who are (as every one perceives) very curious of
the most fair and precious things in the world: would they endure such
dearth in their houses? Why does not learning make them so rich and
magnificent, as other temporal goods do? And were it so greatly profitable for
youth, as also such an honest recreation for age: I am ashamed to see, that in
our great Cities and Towns, the professors thereof go from house to house,
like such as beg bread with empty wallets. For in truth this is the end of
letters followers and favorers, in these unhappy and accursed times: not only
to be beggars, but (beyond al other) to be most miserable and malcontent.
That this is true, do but note the very first figure, character, or letter,
which we teach our children in their infancy: is it not the Cross?
beginning with all poverty, going on with anguishe, trouble and grief, and
ending with like dolorous death?

For example, see what was the end of Socrates and Anaxagoras: who by sentence
and decree of the Senate of their countries, were both miserably poisoned.
Thales likewise, who died with thirst. Zeno, who was slain by commandment of
the Tyrant Phalaris. Anaxarchus, who was detestably murdered by the
commandment of Nicocreon. The great Philosopher, and most singular
Mathematician Archimides, who was slain by the soldiers of Marcellus. And
Pythagoras likewise, who was slain in company of three score of his
Scholars.

Think on the glorious recompense, made to the Philosopher Plato; when after
his long travail for the cause public, he was (in the end) sold as a slave by
Dionisius the Tyrant. Anacharsis died suddenly. Diodorus died in despite,
because he could not resolve a question, which was proposed to him by the
Philosopher Stilpo. Aristotle, when he saw himself out of credit with
Alexander, he drowned himself in Chalcide in the river Eurypus: and
Calisthenes his scholar was cast forth of the windows. Cicero had his head and
hands cut off, and his tongue pulled out having been before banished from
Rome, where he saw his house ruined, his so deerly beloved daughter ded before
his face, and his wife in the arms of his utter adversary. Seneca died a
violent and outrageous death. Auerroes the great commenter of Aristotle, was
broken with a wheel that passed over his body. Johannes Scotus, making his
Lecture in England, was stabbed to death by his scholars, with their penkniues.

But leaving these ancient matters, and to speak of them of our time: let us
consider the death of Hermolaus Barbarus, who was banished from the Signorie of
Venice, because without the consent of them, he had accepted the Patriarchs
authority of Aquilea, he died by a cole, that took hold under one of his
toes. Domitius Calderinus died also of the plague. The learned counceller or
peacemaker, was burned after he was dead, because they could not catch him in
his life time. Angelus Politianus ended his days, beating his head against the
walls. Sauanarola was burned at Florence, by the commandment of Pope
Alexander. Peter Lion of Spoleta, was thrown into a well. Johannes Tissierus,
died in an hospital. Erasmus in exile. The French Poet in like manner, by the
miserable and implacable suit of the court, even in his oldest years. The Lord
John Fraunces Pica Mirandula, was slain by the people of his own country. If
I would stand to number all, I should undertake one of Hercules labors:
specially, to recite the misery of them, that have been, and even now are (to
their pain) glad to go seek their fortune, only through the cause of
learning.

Wherefore is it, that a Cook, a Horse-keeper, a Gardener or a Peazant, shall
be received more honorably, and better provided for in the Courts of princes
and great Lords, then shall a man of great wisdom? It is because they
receive more profit by such fellows, then they do by curious students or
laborers in letters: the countenance and slender service of whom, makes them
in the Court so little regarded, as they are but mocked at for every word, so
that if any one of them think to advance himself in company, by pronouncing
three poor words of latin: hardly can he have opened his mouth, but one is
ready to call him master of the Town, or School-maister of the College,
which are words of no more regard (by the report of themselves that utter
them) then if one should call him poor and miserable wretch: for that is
understood, without the speaking, as under the name of an unthankful man, are
comprehended all the faults that may be alleged against him.

Did not one make a law, that whosoever should speak of letters, should be
grievously punished and corrected? And he that should touch a book, of what
science soever, should have his hands either burnt or cut off: with
particular forbiddings to every one (under the pain of hanging) no more to use
paper, ink, pens, or inke-hornes, with utter abolishing of the arts of
impression, cutting, grauing, or other kind of stamp, in what manner soever it
should be: to the end, that learning being (by this edict) driven forth of the
sight and beholding of men, by the same means might be prevented the
unhappiness, that from thence dailye ensues: as well through the grievous
afflictions, that learninges followers suffer in themselves, as also in respect
of the great danger and loss in those places, where the Academies are
assembled of learnings scholars.

Better it is then to be ignorant then skillful, better to hate letters, then
so dearly to cherishe and love them. Moreover, our poor ignorant people, show
not themselves astonished or confounded, of whom (God be praised) I see a
sufficient competent number, and as it were infinite: but they rejoice and
thank God in their hearts, for the great Fortune happening to them, by reason
of their ignorance. For they remember, that when good Socrates was judged
generally, and held by the Oracle to be wise: then himself openly manifested
to every one, that it was because he knew nothing. Likewise, they forget not
the goodly proverb of Saint Augustine: that the simple are lifted on high, and
rejoice the heavens: but the learned, with their curious lessons and sciences,
shall be overthrown. Lastly they call to mind, that which was so highly said,
and reproved to S. Paul by Festus the judge: that the multitude of Sciences,
and deep knowledge in things, oftentimes puts a man beside himself, and
carries him quite from all good sense.

For Blindness.
Declamation, 4. That it is better to be blind, then to see clearly.
IF we would in brief, compare the commodities of sight, with the great hurts
it brings to men: we should find on the one side, all voluptuous delights and
pleasures, which daily end in bitterness, alienation of sense, provocation to
envy, irritation and commotion against the heart: and on the other side we
should behold, the strength of spirit, better imagination, and contemplation
of things high and heavenly, with perfection of memory, which more excellently
shows it self to the blind, then to the cleerest sighted: because that their
light (which is the force of man's understanding) is neither here or there
disorderly transported.

Now, that memory is the most noble part of the heart, it is sufficiently made
plain unto us, by the Testimony of Cicero in his Orator, where he calls it
the treasure of wisdom. Also by the honor the Greeks have done thereto, in
naming it the mother of sapience. Beside this, that so many other persons,
knowing themselves to be deprived of natural memory; in regard of the
estimation they made thereof: invented another, called artificial, with very
delicate and precious oils, sundry emplaisters, sirrops and drugs, fetched from
very far countries.

That the blind are of far better apprehension and imagination, then the
sharpest sighted: it is too evident unto us, if we would consider, that the
powers of the soul are in them more equallye assembled: withal, that they
have this special prerogative, of not beholding so many deformed and
dishonestactions, which are daily to be seen in this world, whereby their
spirit might be alienated or turned, from contemplation of high and heavenly
matters.

First of all, when a blind man is led by his little lad along the streets, he
is free from beholding a multitude of counterfeited monsters: people but half
made by nature, a thousand toys on their heads, their bellies all buttons,
holding up their nose and chins like puppets; with other such like vain
heads, so misshapen and deformed, as Octauianus Augustus would call, the very
iestes and mockeries of Nature. He is free from seeing so many troubled with
palsies, leprosies, dropsies, goutes, falling euilles, impotent with botches,
biles, scabs, blaines, scurffes, and such like.

What shall I say of the graces, that blindness brings to her children? not
suffering them to taste one only grief or molestation: but gives them leisure
and commodity of power (at their own ease,) to contemplate celestial
beawties and excellences divine. Here of was the Philosopher Democritus so
zealous, that he made himself blind, regarding firmelye and steadfastly the
sun: that by the loss of his bodily eyes, he might recover better use of the
eyes of the mind, and with more ease contemplate supernatural things, which
otherwise he could not so well intend, when he used the objects of this world,
which always constrained him to continual laughter.

Homer, as blind as he was, was accounted and held to be the most famous and
excellent Poet in all Greece. Blindness never hindered Dydimus Alexandrinus,
but that most elegantly he attained the Greek and Latin languages: and which
is more, (a thing perhaps incredible) he became very excellent in the
mathematical sciences. Blindness did no way impeache Claudius Appius, (though
he was very old and weak) but he was daily seen in council with the Senate
of Rome: where most prudentlie he deliberated on the affairs public, and
governed (beside) with great honor, a mighty and innumerable family. To be
blind no way offended Lippius, albeit he was a most perfect Orator. What was
it the worse for Ha^nibal, that he had lost one of his eyes? did he thereby
loose one jot of courage, but pursued the more furiously upon the Romans?
persuade your selves, that if he had lost both his eyes, he would have been a
much more valiant Captain. See if old Tobias (after he became blind) did
fear or love God ever a jot the less, then he did before.

It was my chance one day to reason and confer privately, with certain of
mine acquaintance that were blind, and I remember, that one among the rest, who
sometime had been a dealer in merchandise, swear and avouched faithfully unto
me: that his blindness did no way grieve or offend him, but he the more
highly thanked God therefore. Because (quoth he) my sight being taken away; I
have likewise lost the offense of spirit, whereinto I was drawn in diverse
places I frequented. And he justified, that since this good fortune befell him,
he travailed about his affairs into Spain: where he found himself highly
contented, that he could not see the great vaunting Spaniard, nor so many
Gentlemen by the dozens, that for five shillings of yearly rent, cause
themselves to be entitled, my Lord such a one, or must be named Knights at
the least.

Another told me, that he caused himself to be led into Germany, about
certain business he had with the Foulcres: but never did he esteem himself
so happy, as that he could not behold the manifold discords among the Lords of
the Country, so many deuisions, so many garrisons of Spaniards, with so many
new imperial cuts.

A third man told me, that he had been in France about traffic of
merchandise, where he not a little reioysed, that he could not behold the
infinite pleaders, a Hydra of suites and quarrels, the number-lesse throng of
catchers and purloiners of benefices, a world of false accusers and masqued
people, changing as often in opinions, as they do in habites and attire. Then
breaking forth into a great laughter, if (quoth he) I should hereafter pass
into diverse places of Italy, where I have accustomablie haunted heretofore:
first of all, I shall no more see in Romania and Lombardy, so many partialities
of Guelfs and Gibelines, so many fair buildings ruined, so many bewtifull and
goodly Cities destroyed by factions. I shall no more see the gross feeding
Millanois, the auaritious Pauoyan, the mutinous Playsencian, the fantastical
Parmesan, the graceless Cremonian, the slothful Mantuan, nor the proud
Ferraran. I shall see no more the prating Florentine, the dissembling
Bolognian, the glorious Lucane, the usuring Geneway, nor the boasting Modenan.

And continuing his speech, he said to me beside, that he imagined himself
most happy, that the year past he had not been at Rome, no more to note the
excessive pomp of infinite curtezans, who clad and decked in the habilements
of Queens, triumph on the patrimony of the poor fisher. Likewise no more to
behold in Naples, the troops of Moors, the bands of Ruffians, bawds and
brothels: the great number of knights of the broch, who al day do nothing
else, but walk with their noses up in the wind like Plouers, as well in the
fields as the Cittye, with white wands in their hands, so expecting their
Fortune, to the great detriment of their followers. Nor likewise to see in
Sicilie, those great managers of iron-wheeld Chariots: who at the least word
offered them, will counterfeit the countenance of another chollericke God Mars,
as if they would fight with the sea and the fishes. Nor also to see so many
fine dames, ready to be bought for a little, to pass the time away with
Gentlemen.

In brief, this good blind man told me so much, and so sweetly lulled me
asleep with his words, as he well-neere made me of the mind, to pluck forth
mine own eyes: for the grief I have to behold in Venice, such a crowde of
nice darlings: in Padua, such indiscreet looks: in Vincenza, such beast-like
demeanor: in Treuiso, such disordered liberty: at Verona, such frantike fury;
at Brescia, such miserable avarice; at Bergamo, such scrupulous countenances,
with sundry such like qualities in other places.

Of force then must they that are clear sighted, behold such things, as would
enforce stones to starte out of the walls, by the great despite and grief
they bring to men. In witness of the holy man, who being newly become blind,
by chance happened to meet on the way, with Arrius the father of heretics:
and hearing among other talk, that Arrius grieved for the accident befalne the
good man, the blind father thus answered. That it was needelesse for him to
grieve so much, because (quoth he) for this blindness I highly thank my God:
were it not in any other respect, but only that I may not see thee, that art
such a wicked enemy to God. Said not good Job, that he had made this
covenant with his eyes, that they should content themselves with looking upon
one only woman, and not to gaze after any other?

Hence it is, that the Prophet complained so much, that his eyes robbed from
beasts, saying: death entered into his heart by the windows of the body, which
are the eyes, serving to overthrow man's understanding, whereto suddenly they
represent and deliver (without finding any hidden ambush) all that they see and
perceive abroad. And when they look to vanity, listen what the gentle Poet
says: So soon as I had seen, I was lost.

How happened it to the holy Psalmist, when by the very seeing of Berseba: he
was so overcome with burning and lascivious regarding her, as he wanted not
much of incurring the danger of death? The Evangelist exhorts us, to pluck
forth our eyes, if they do scandalize of offend us: and when is it that they
do not both these to us?

If I would seek further for the benefits of the blind, I should find an
infinite number. First, they have no need of spectacles, wherewith to see small
things, nor of eye glasses, otherwise called Bernacles, when they travel in
windy weather. In Winter they need not fear, that the overmuch whitenes of
the snow, will hurt or offend their sight. They are free from subjection to
eye medicines, which they have need to practice, that are subject to the eyes
inflammation, to the dilating or enlarging the apple of the eye: to help the
disease called Scotomie; or when all things in view seem to be round: for
illusions: the eye-gellie: the web, pearl, tears fistula, rheum, bleared
eyes, and other such like diseases. They have no need to distill the waters of
Fennel, Sage, Veruaine, or Eyebright. They need no Aloes infused in wine, or
prepared Tuthie, the whites of eggs beaten in rose water, nor pills for the
sight.

Wherefore I conclude, that it is better to be blind, then to see never so well:
because the blind sees nothing that afflicts or torments them; where
contrariwise, the best sighted have ten thousand objects, that molest and
offendes them without pardon: which does purchase to them so many anguishes,
and brings them into such dangerous extremes, as they cannot well tell how to
recover themselves again.

How much think ye will it displease a poor pilgrim, when he shall see in
travailing on his journey, a great many hideous horrible serpents, creeping
vipers, and such like beasts? when he shall see under him quick-sandes,
quag-mires, downe-fallings, and most fearful deep places? when he shall
meet to beard him, his most mortal enemy? when he shall see himself mocked,
scorned and railed at, with all unseemly gestures both of mouth and hands?
Poor eyes, of how many evils are ye the cause, through your own curiosity?
How many follies do ye deliver to the most mild and simple spirit, only to
troble the gracious rest thereof? What letters written, or what words
engraven, are by ye represented to the poor heart, to fill him full of all
bitterness? How many gests and motions do ye show to the natural sense,
which soon after are the cause, that man lives in no quiet in his conscience?
How many dissimulations do ye note, as well in the Court, as elsewhere, under a
counterfeit smile, with a calfe-like made courtesy, an Italian reverence, a
Iudas-like kiss and embracing, and a bare voice offering service? Do ye not
then account them happy, that have believed, and never seen any of these
things? Upon these speeches and reasons, produced on my behalf, I leave ye
Ge^tlemen to set down such judgment, as to you shall seem best: assuring my
self very confidently, that after all considerations, ye will not diminish any
part of my due right or equity.

For the Fool.
Declamation, 5. That it is better to be a fool, than wise.
ALbeit the like matter which I am now to prove and defend, has been already
by two excellent men, delivered in this honorable assembly, and by them
deliberated on to their advantage: It may please ye yet not to think it
strange, if in regard of the occasion, which this day offers it self, I come
as now to gleane and gather after them gone before, if so be I can find any
thing by them left or omitted, either as unadvisedly, or else if perhaps they
had not proves sufficient ready at hand to exchange in the cause.

For the first advertisement, I will use the advice and opinion of the
ancient Philosophers, which was, that to live securely in this world, they
thought it best to use the counterfeit shadow of a fool: and they said, that
even as he who has some mean to counterfeit well a Prince, Lord or
Gentleman, can do no less for the while but enter into the same travail,
solicitude, cares, pains and greefes, as the person he imitates is subject
unto: so he that in this world, will sometimes cunningly disguise himself
with the masque of folly, as one may perceive nothing else by him, but even
natural foolery: (cannot in so doing) but participate with the happy parts
and conditions of a fool, which are of such sort, as the very richest and best
pleased in this world, are not in any thing like, or to be compared to them.

Witness a brave Gentleman, a younger brother, who by mishap, that his elder
brother would not impart livings reasonably with him, became a fool: during
which Fortune, he had this imagination, that all the ships which daily arrived
in the Port of Diepe, were his own. By means of which persuasion, so soon as
he understood of their coming thither, he would walk before them a mile and
more on the land, using such kind and cheerful gestures to the^; as by his
words he seemed to think and assure himself, that all the merchandise on
boorde in the Haven, appertained to himself. The like would he do, when any
ships departed thence to Sea, either for Flaunders, Spain, Portugal, England,
or any other country: he would veil his bonnet to them a far of,
recommending them to God, wishing them fair wind, a good voyage, and speedy
return. His evil hap at length was such, that his brother (in this time of
folly) returning from the wars at Bologna, and seeing his brother come thus
before him, with such new manner of salutations: greeuing (as I think) at this
his happy state of life, he delivered him into the hands of the most skillful
Physicians he could find in the country, by whose industry, the happy fool
returned to his former disposition of good sense: which made him afterward
offended with his brother, because he had deprived him of so great recreation
of spirit, which he confessed he received in his pleasing folly: whereof he yet
having some small remembrance, affirms, that never before, or since that
time, he lived more joyfully, nor better agreeing with his own mind.

In like manner, is it not a thing highly to be commended, to see a man of
mean and base condition, among the inferior and abject sort of people, by
virtue of this brave kind of folly, to enter into such an humor; as to ween
himself to be a Pope, an Emperor, a King, a Duke, or some great Prince or
Lord? And withal, to feel in his heart, the self-same affections and
contentment of mind, as accustomablie are felt by such, as truly are
constituted in those high dignities?

Hereof may bear record the Lackey of a Gentleman of Aniou, who by the aid
and comfort of his fortunate folly, imprinted in his mind the pontifical
dignity: for the administration whereof, at a certain hour of the day, which
he had obtained by license of his master, he would lock himself apart into a
chamber, with his confederates and instructed companions, who notwithstanding
they mocked him, yet took great pleasure therein: and there, (after his own
mind) would he appoint a Consistory, (like unto little children, that in their
pastimes do counterfeit the actions of the very greatest personages,) dispatch
Bulls, give benefices, create Cardinals, send embassades, in brief, he would
do all that he imagined beseemed a Pope: and when the hour was expired, he
would return to his wonted service.

Think ye that he which walked through Paris, and notwithstanding he was all
dirtie bedagled, yet supposing himself to be a Cardinal or Legate, deserved
no esteem in his own conceit? He that named himself to be a Prophet? He
that preached and wrote himself the father of Caine? He that said he was of
the lynage of Zabulon? And another, who with his Scepter and Crown of gold
glistering, thought himself to be an Emperor? Think ye not (I say) that such
as these are highly contented in mind, and more (perhaps) then if they were
such as they ween themselves to be? What think ye of Villemanoche, who
expected the kings daughter in marriage, and would complain in all companies
where he came, what wrong was done him, in that they delaied his marriage so
long? Deem ye not such fools have as much, or rather more pleasure in these
imaginations, then such as rightlye are placed in those dignities? They have as
much by these means, in that they partake not in the molestations, which often
are found in the high estates of great personages, being not trobled with
governing the train belonging to their huge houses.

I cannot well conceive the cause, why some are so suddenly waspishe, when they
are called fools: it may be said, that they forget the number has been
always infinite, whereby some have dared to affirm, that this world is a very
Cage or mine of such people. And if all they which hold of that race, would
suffer themselves to be written in the roll or paper belonging to the Prince
of fools, or be registered in the Abbey of these happy people: there should
not need so much strife and law, for calling one another sot or fool.

For in sooth, it is a name that may beseem the very greatest and wisest in
the world: yea, were it to the great king Solomon, who albeit he only among
the Hebrews bare the title of wise: yet beside that, he well deserved the
name of a fool, when he sacrifised to Idols, and entertained so long such a
great number of Concubines. Also, of this name were capable the seven Sages,
whom ambitious and lying Greece vaunted to bring forth and nourish: their
actions and behauior Cicero affirms, that whosoever will lightly run over
and cull them out, shall find them to be more full of folly then wit.

How many have been seen since the Creation of the world, that have escaped
infinite dangers, only by counterfeiting folly? What might they more have
done, if they had been fools indeed, when the only shaddowe was to them the
cause of such good? How many have we known and heard of, that have been
absolved of theftes, murders and other misdeeds, by supposition that they
indeed were fools? Think ye that heaven does customablye give, so fair and
excellent privileges to others, as to people divine and celestial?

The farther I wade in contemplation of folly, the more pleasing I find it,
and garnished with all fair commodities. See how a fool troubles him self
with a kingdoms affairs, or fortifiyng of a Cittye. See what pain he puts
himself to, in governing an household, or pertaking with one Prince or other:
yet notwithstanding, we see such as are esteemed the wisest, to injury
themselves hereby, and wexe very old with such molestations of the mind. May
it please ye to understand the difference, which I find between the fool and
wise man? Regard the passions and affections in them both. First of all, the
fool is not any thing curious in his meat or drink, neither cares for fine
decking and clothing himself: they whom we call wise, never have enough, and
never are satisfied with the goods of this world: neither can all humane
industry, or the very goddess abou^dance with her great Cornet, suffice their
insatiable desires.

Now judge hereby, which of these two come nearest the observation of Gods
commandment: who forbids us in his Gospel, not to be careful for our food
or raiment. Beside, the fool makes no esteem of honors and worldly
dignities: he contemns great preheminences, refusing the places and seats
honorable in magnificent companies. Contrariwise, they that hold themselves
so wise, seek nothing at this day but worldly honor. And to attain superior
dignities, they fear not to endure heat or cold, they forget the discommoditie
of great travail, as also loss of rest by day and night, to the hazard
oftentimes of their lives so dearly beloved, and by them held in such precious
account.

The fool feels not himself provoked with so many pricks of Fortune: he
meddles not with sights or combats: he has no Lawe-pleadings, nor quarrels,
whereby to get or defend his goods: he has not such pain in attending on the
Court as others have, to be entertained by one or other: he yields not him self
(for the miserable requital of two or three crowns) a buckler to ten thousand
bullets of shot, muskets or harguebuzes: he breaks not his neck in riding post
after offices, benefices or confiscations: he languishes not in pursuing the
love or favor of Ladies: he paies no tax or tribute: lastly, he is not
subject to any one, but lives in perfect franchise and liberty. He is
permitted and licensed, to speak what himself thinks good, touching the
dealings of Princes and private persons, without encurring thereby any danger
of imprisonment or corporal punishment. He has no need of Rhethoricall
cunning, to make him self attentively listened unto; but bestows on each one
the joyous pastimes of his meriments.

I stand in need of a whole sourse of eloquence, wherewith I might thorowlie
paint forth and discipher, the honest virtues of most precious folly: the
contrary whereof, has been cause of the punishing of an hundred thousand
injuries, and of overthrowing the intelligence and actions of many great
personages. I find, that Fortune has evermore been very careful, in
bestowing particular aid upon fools, and defended them (as her most dear
children) from infinite perils and dangers.

Likewise we see by experience, that the greater part of fools live longer
and more happily, then the wise do. Wherefore should we think this to be so:
but because they give not themselves to any melancholy, never meddle with
Lawe-causes, debates or quarrels, neither mollest themselves with matters
public or private? which makes me say and affirm unto ye, that folly (even as
Poesy) is somewhat celestial, and fills the hearts of her children, with a
certain spirit of prophecy and divine fury: by means whereof, they seem
agreeable to every one, and purchase very great esteem and favor in the eyes
of Princes.

You shall find by experience, that many great and wealthy Lords, turn their
faces from company and conference with wise men, yea, such as are said to have
the greatest learning: that they may intertaine pleasure with a fool, and
commune familiarlie with him: yea, sometimes they will leave their best and
most ancient servants or favorites, to delight and bestow countenance on the
first fool that comes before them.

Is it not marvelous, that we shall never see a man of great knowledge
indeed: but has some part of this precious folly in him? Though ye would
produce never so many learned men, or of what profession else so every please:
be they Philosophers, Orators, Painters, Statuaries, Musicians, Builders, yet
they have some taste hereof, and generally all people of learning whatsoever.
Where shall ye find one singular Poet at this day, that does not participate
in this folly? Every one knows, that the Poet deepest skild therein, is
accounted most excellent. And if the great Philosopher Plato had not had, more
then a reasonable portion of this divine folly; think ye that he had
delivered so many fair and excellent matters, which we have at this day after
his manner? And yet you are ashamed, to be accounted or called fools.

The inuenter of the Italian Cards, whereat they have a play or pastime called
Tarault, did (in my conceit) very ingeniouslie, when he put the Deniers or
monyes, and Bastons or clubs in combat together, as the very encountering of
force and justice. But yet he deserved more praise, for giving (in this play)
the most honorable place to the fool: as we do to the Ace, which we should
rather call Nars, that in dutch signifies a Fool. This deviser well noted the
great servitude, whereto they most commonly are subject, that covet a place
among the very wisest: for it behoues them to have so many discretions, so
many respects, so many considerations, (wherewith the happy fool never
troubles himself;) so that they are constrained oftentimes, to submit
themselves, and continue like countenance, and daily (against their natures) to
seem grave and severe.

The Fool does not repose any confidence in his own wisdom, neither has
recourse to the subtletie and deceits of this world. He never rests himself on
the support and favor of other, whereby any harm may happen to him: for God
has him in his custody and safegarde. Which is a word, whereat (our Catoes
at this day) will easily enter into choler. But they must lightly pass it
over, and by constraint of verity confess it true (if they will give but never
so little regard to the holy Scriptures:) there they shall find, that the
wisdom of this world has been more sharply taxed, and with more grievous
arrests condemned, then folly. And yet our bold ouer-weeners, will go contrary
to this divine word: to take part with that, which God the Creator, not only
has reproved among men, but likewise greatly hates.

I find that the very greatest, and most renowned Nations in Europe, have
(long while since) gotten some title or mark of folly. To begin with the
Gauls, did not Saint Paul call them foolish Gallathians? Albeit the prowess
and strength, which they have daily shown in deeds of Arms: may
sufficiently testify from East to West, yea, even to the Antipodes; at the
end and limits of which regions, has their Ensigns been most bravely
displaied. The Portugals by their haughty enterprise (who notwithstanding have
been reputed foolish) passed so far as the Indiaes: where with loss and
damage of their men, they conquered many places in those Countries, and got by
these means, the commodity to traffic with many places, before not
inhabited.

This is it which makes them so proud in the trade of merchandise, and brag of
the excellency of their Lishbone, enritched with so fair a port of the sea,
also two so well proportioned mountains, at the entrance, and the flood with
golden sands. As for the Germans, it is well known that they have a large
share herein: especially they, who (in imitation of women or children,) so
often change into many opinions, and masters services. For this it may be
said, that Caesar in his Commentaries did them not so much honor, as to call
them valiant champions, or prudent in affairs of war.

If we will pass so far as into Italy, we shall find many goodly and noble
Cities among the rest, that serve as great or very fair Cages, to fools of
all fashions, and that they are (in favor of such an esteemed matter) the most
honorably situated in all the Country; and by the great number of fools
contained in them, they are divinely embellished and inritched, with the very
cheifest excellencies, and noble privileges that can be desired. That this is
true, let us consider the excellent situation of ancient Sienna, for the
honest liberty whereof, the King (not many days past) so earnestly travailed.
You shall there behold, as a matter of antiquity (to preserve fools in
health) erected a pleasant and beautiful building, environed with the most
sweet and gracious air in the world, garnished with rich and honorable
lodgings: villages near hand of great receipt, natural Bathes very pure and
healthful. Moreover, as with men, so is it well furnished and adorned with
Ladies gentle and courteous, young people so well disposed as may be, good
musicians and Rhetoricians, as any city else thereabout: except the ancient
University adjoining, and the new Academie of the Intronati, who by the
means of their so highly favored folly, do (in time of peace) things of
incomparable pleasure and recreation.

What shall I say to ye of Parma? where to maintain fools in pastimes, is a
very fair plain of grass, rounded and neighboured with many pleasant
mountains? How fertile is it likewise of noble and puissant families, and
courageous soldiers; who by virtue of their singular follye, being assisted
with the aid and succor of the French, are redoubted and feared of all their
neighbor countries? I will hold my peace of the Parmesane cheese, whereof,
notwithstanding that I have tasted, yet I cannot forbear but say in my heart:
that if for that meat our Father Adam had transgressed, in my conceit he had
been somewhat excuseable, nor should I (after taste thereof) have any desire
to the Nectar and Ambrosia of great Jupiter.

O how they of Verona, Brescia and Venice were beholding to worthy folly, when
they made answer to K. Jews the twelfth, that they were wise enough: whereby
they constrained him, to send them so many Frenchmen as were accounted fools,
because their wisdom and magnificence, knew not how to resist the others forse
and prowess. So were the fools of the said king, Regentes and masters over
the wise Venetians, as before they had been over the Genewaies and Millaineses:
and as long time before that, the fools that were led by the great French
Captain, were masters over the mighty and wise Romans.

Too long would the rehearsal be, of fools and Arch fools, that are to be
found enclosed within the Cities of Italy. Wherefore to finishe this
discourse, I will thus frame my conclusion, that fools ought to be singularly
esteemed and commended: because God does them so much favor, as he has
chosen (by them) to confound and overthrow the wisdom of this world: withal,
that the most noble Cities and puissant Nations, ought to be esteemed much
more for folly, then wisdom.

For him that has lost his worldly Honors and Preferments.
Declamation, 6. That a man ought not to be grieved, though he be despoiled of
his goods and honors.
I Am not a little abashed, for what cause the noble men of our time, make so
much adoo, and move such quarrel and contention, for the loss of their
frail and slippery estats: seeing it follows upon necessity, that one day
they must needs be dispossessed and taken from them, if not by force, yet by
the means of death, who, of his own nature, imposes an end on all things.
And I see no cause or reason, why they (being subject to so many human
passions and fortunes, as even the very poorest and basest condition in the
world:) should presume and hazard themselves, before so many persons, (of
greater valor perhaps then themselves) for advancement and superiority, and
yet they take scorn to be made of like metal as they are, to whom by right of
nature, they are altogether equal and semblable.

An excellent Philosopher, and of very great reputation in his time,
maintained, that the rich had ever some occasion, to contend with their
riches and temporal goods, as also beautiful persons with their bodily
graces: But the greatest and most excellent contention, that men ought indeed
to have among themselves, were to strive, who should surmount each other in
gentleness and honesty: and the very highest pre-eminence, that should be
sought for in this world, were to envy one another, who should be most
liberal, courteous and affable.

For this cause, Dioclesian was praised and esteemed, among the wise men of his
time, when by his modesty, he deigned to make refusal of the Romain Empire,
which then was far greater and better provided, then ever it had been
before: in imitation of whom, many other great persons, have since been moved
to do the like. Such an one was the Uncle to great king Charlemaine, who
became a Monk at Mont Cassin, where he lived the remainder of his years,
most holy and religiously: drawing (by his example) to the like, many Barons
and great Lords of the Realm of France.

Antiochus King of Syria, being by the Romans deprived and deposed from the
jurisdiction which he had by the mountain Taurus: came and rendered sollemne
thanks therefore to the Senate, commending them; because hereby he found
himself well delivered and disburdened, of such a great and weighty
molestation. Heracleus and Galerian, in like manner eased and discharged
themselves, from the superiority and rule they had over the people: and gave
their delight altogether to the pleasure of husbandry. And why has not the
like mind continued since then, in the hearts of our Noble men to this instant?
What mean our wise men, that they dissuade not the fancies of great Lords,
from this endless heat and desire of rule, which brings nothing else
therewith, but an ouer-feruent and ambitious will? That it is so, look where
such covetous and ambitious men bear sway: there is slender justice, the rich
eat the poor, and the Nobles outrage the Peasants.

The Inhabitants of the Isle Taprobane, had (in mine opinion) a very worthy
and commendable custom, when they used to elect for their Prince and
Governor, such an one among them; whom they had known and had proof of a
long time, to be a true desirer of the profit of their weal public: and him
likewise, by right and semblable order, they would again deiect and depose, if
by any means he swerued or changed from his right course. I have heard, that
they of Dace and Bohemia went very near this custom: but it came to pass,
that since those times, they could not make choice of any better. I could
wish, that such as deserve the government of Signiories and commonweals,
should be drawn and compelled thereto (as it were) perforce: and by the same
means, the gate to be barred against covetousness, greediness, ambition,
violence and deceit.

But what makes me speak thus? Marie because I have known in Italy, certain
Lords and governors of the people, to lead their lives after a very strange
course or manner, bearing capital hatred to their poor subjects: Lords that
have had no other care, but here and there licentiously to revel, and
dishonor the very honestest maidens in their jurisdiction, drawing them
violently (by means of certain ruffians, which they entertain as hounds
only for this vile purpose) forth of the best houses in their towns and
Cittyes.

Poor blind men, destitute of natural sense, is this the manner your elders
taught ye, whereby to rule and guide your subjects? Was it thus, that the good
Lords of times past, the virtuous Princes, as well Ecclesiastical as secular
(whom Homer would so honorably call, pastors of the people) were wont to do?
This so beast-like and dishonest custom, does it any jot savor of true
Christianity? They are no pastors that commit such insolences: they are
ravening wolves, and destroyers of all humane society.

Some are to be found in Italy, and elsewhere, to whom is publicly given
this fair report, that they dilligently enquire after their people, not to
chastise or reform their vices and bad behauior: but contrariwise, to enquire
secretly, who amongst them has the best pursse, and after knowledge thereof,
seek some couerture to make them lose their goods: subborning false witnesses
against them, who without any reason, shall inform false plaints or quarrels
against them: or else by grievous injuries and outrages, provoke them to
undertake Arms, where likewise, false villains (appointed for the nonce)
taking some intended cause of offense, presently inform or complain against
them, and having seized on their bodies, afterward (by these means) their
riches comes into the Lords hand, who (under color of justice,) causes them
to be condemned by Judges, in grievous pains and amercements: so getting
subtillie (yet with some color of excuse) their goods, by way of confiscation.
Cruelty well beseeming a Tragedy, and which (since the creation of the world)
was never the like heard of.

A Baron of Lombardie one day made this brag, as for a great proof and example
of his singular virtue and prowess; that (not long before) he had gotten the
spoil of one of his mightiest subjects, emptiyng his Garners, seazing on his
goods perforce, proceeding even to the imprisonment of his body. The matter
objected against him, (by forged witnesses at the Lords appointment,) was,
that he had run the Hare, and flowne the Partridge upon his land: albeit the
poor honest Gentleman, was more ready to chase a good piece of Beef then
Hares, and had never run (far of near) after strange beasts or birds. Yet
notwithstanding this good deed, the honest minded Baron (which matter most of
all displeases me) would make profession of sanctity, religion and devotion.

Lord God, that thy patience is thus great, nor is it without great reason,
that thou art called full of patience and longanimitie: seeing that so sweetly
thou endurest the dealings, of these so cruel and insupportable monsters,
brought forth and borne on the earth, only to consume and devour thy poor
people. Assure ye, that I have seen in the kingdom of Naples, many monsters
of this fashion and nature, having hearts like Lions, and nails like Griffons,
to whom nothing seemed impossible, concerning inhumanity and impiety.

And with these few examples, I am constrained to content my self, without
spending time to bring ye other proofs, for defense of this present occasion:
because the grief I both find and feel, in rehearsing these enormities,
drives me into over great affliction, making my heart so weak and feeble, as
all the residue of my vital powers want their helping use.

Now in truth let us thus reason a while. What is he who will deny, that such
deeds and behavior of life, is not sufficient to provoke the anger of God
against us? And to cause, that those Lords, through long space of time, that
they have thus ruled and held their places, should in a moment be elsewhere
transported? Think ye, if the very greatest Lords, as well spiritual as
temporal, would at this day do their endeavor, and employ themselves night
and day (as best beseemes them) to well govern and admonish their people: we
should find such a number of men, to covet and reach after kingdoms and
Signiories, as now we do? and such as are so mal-conte^t, to be deprived of
their great charges and vexations, as now with grief we may behold?

It is then (in conclusion) great folly in any Lord, to be displeased or
offended at the loss of his honors and livings: but rather with such fortunes
he ought to rejoice and be glad, as being (by so good occasion) discharged of a
burden so grievous and heavy. For this is my opinion, that it were better for
him to lose his worldly estate and dignity, then himself to be thereby lost
and destroyed for ever.

For Drinkers.
Declamation, 7. That Drunkenness is better than Sobriety.
I Did heretofore (so breefely as I could) deliver unto ye, the great
excellence and noble nature of wine: that I might afterward infer, in what
great honor and reputation he ought to be, that especially loves it, and
longest continues in delight thereof. And albeit it seems to many, a very
hard and laborious enterprise, by reason of the abundance of good words and
well conuaied language: wherewith it is necessary they should be thorowlie
furnished in such a cause: yet nevertheless, will I boldly deliver my opinion,
though I am unfurnished of that divine fury, which ordinarily works
marvelous matters in our spirits; whereof (in this need) might I receive never
so little favor, I should far better satisfy your desires, that are bent
with attention, to hear what I can say in this matter.

To proceed in our discourse, I find that the great virtue and excellence of
wine, has been of our elders so entirely known and approved: that the highly
esteemed Asclepiades did it so much honor, as to couple the faculties and
virtues thereof, with them of the very cheifest Gods. Which is agreeable with
the consent of holy scripture, whereby was autenticallie pronounced, that wine
was sent to men, as by the especial grace and immortal gift of God, therewith
oftentimes to refresh and recreate their spirits, over much weakened and
travailed with long cares, which they suffer continually in this world. And
heerewith altogether agrees the opinion of good Homer, in many places of his
divine Poesy. And whosoever shall require of me greater proof and assurance, I
pray them to consider, how that truth it self (which is the thing that has,
and yet at this day does overrule the greatest case in the world) from all
antiquity, holds principal consent with wine. This is it which made place
for the ancient proverb, known sufficiently of every one, that in Wine is
truth to be found: wherein fools, children and drunken men, are most
accustomed to display it.

Wherefore I cannot sufficiently marvel, at the great fault of learned
Democritus, who would sometimes maintain, that truth lodges her self in the
bottom of a well: this is greatly against the advice and opinion of all the
Greeks, which evermore defended, that her lodging continually was in Wine.
VVhereto very well consents Horace, one of the most excellent Latin Poets;
who so soundly confirmed this matter in his learned verses, made and composed
by the help of this sweet liquor, wherewith his stomach so plentifully
abounded, as he could deliver it back again forth at his eyes. To the same
purpose, the great Philosopher Plato would prove and maintain, that wine was
a very firm and sure foundation of men's spirits: by the favor and virtue
whereof, I may easily conjecture, that he found the invention of his goodly
Ideas, of his numbers, and of his laws so magnificent: also that with the aid
of this sweet drink, he spoke so deeply on the gracious argument of love,
and likewise disposed his so well ordered Commonwealth. VVithall, he defended,
that the Muses flourished far and near, in the very smell of Bacchus liquor:
and the Poet that drunk not profoundly thereof, could frame no verse excellent,
high-reaching, or of good measure.

But leaving verse and Poesy, let us come to the kind drinkers of clear
water: I would willingly demand of them, what good they can receive in this
world, by using such an unsavory drink? In the first place, how can a drinker
of water well accomplish household duty: when the natural seed is more
moist then any thing else, and less strong for the procreation of children?
Which is the cause such people are always weak, feeble, sick and
colour-lesse. Likewise, ye never saw a drinker of water, but was deprived of
the true strength of all his members, and hardy courage of heart. He has so
little stomach, and so weak an appetite to digest his meats; as commonly his
life is short, or else unhealthful. For this cause it was, that Saint Paul,
knowing Timothy (albeit he was very young, and in the strength of his age) to
take delight in drinking nothing but water: admonished him, to use therewith a
little wine, if it were but for the only health of his stomach, and prevention
of such diseases, whereto (by his complexion) he was overmuch subject.

I await upon this point, the reply of some opiniatiue person, who will tell
me, that such was not the advice of Cistus Bullengerus, nor yet of Nouellus
Tricongius, who drank three measures of wine daily, called Congii, which
contained three gallons and three pintes of our measure: for which the Emperor
Tiberius promoted him to honor, and at the last made him Consul of Rome. I
again reply on the contrary, that such was the opinion, of the most wise and
prudent king of all ancient memory, who said in his Proverbs, that wine
comfort and refreshes the hearts of men: likewise, it is witnessed by the
consent and testimony of all Physicians, as the most singular remedy to chase
grief from the mind of man.

But if peradventure, some misbeleeuing humanist, will not give so much credit
to the word of so great a wise man, as to the precepts of ancient Physicians:
let him then consider and note well, what at this day is to be found written by
Hippocrates, Galen and Oribasus: that wine serves for a medicine to the cold
and dulled sinews; gives comfort to the weary and travailed eyes, bestows
an appetite on the tast-lesse stomach; rejoices the sad and afflicted
spirits; banisheth the imbecility of the members; gives warmth to the body;
provoke urine, restrains casting; moves sleep; takes away ill digestion;
consumes moist humors; and makes a kindly consent in the body. Galen says
moreover, that wine greatly avails against wearisome complexion of age;
moves the hearts of men to force and prowess; recreateth natural heat; and
gives vigor to the spirits.

O how well did that good Lady Hecuba (of whom Homer speaks so honorably)
know the precious nature of wine: when (above all things) she exhorted her
valiant son Hector, to cheer up and revive his members, wearied by
continual travail he endured in Arms, with drinking of this divine liquor?
The virtue whereof, learned Pindarus knew well enough, which made him a
peerless heroycall Poet: never could he have accomplished his so high and
excellent Poem, by the virtue and goodness of water, but changing his style,
into the great praise and noble description of the virtue of wine: the chiefest
and most notable men in the world, made likewise such price and estimation
thereof, as the more part of the^ joined on his side, and martched under his
Ensign. For example, let us remember the holy man Noah, who first planted the
vine, and the favor that he bare to wine. Neither was it less loved by
Agamemnon, Mark Anthony, Lucius Cotta, Demetrius Tiberius and their children,
Bonosus, Alcibiades, Homer, Ennius Paccu^ius, Cossus, Philip, Heraclides and
many other, who (for this cause) were never reputed the less wise or virtuous.

And if we should need, to make a more ample discourse on this behalf, by such
nations as were addicted to this drink: we shall find, that the Tartares
greatly subjected themselves thereto: and much more the Persians, whose
custom was, to consult of their grauest and greatest matters of importance,
amongst their cups and bottels of wine. And so were the Germans wont to do,
according as Tacitus witnesses, making the description of their complexions.
The Macedonians in like manner, were beyond all things else great lovers of
wine: for whom, their Emperor Alexander instituted, the most brave fight of
drinking with carowsing.

King Mithridates was greatly given to wine: and yet (for all that) ceased not
to war manfullye against the Romans, for the space of forty years
together. I am very sorry, that I want apt words, and terms worthy,
whereby to express the singular virtue, which wine of it self bestows on
the hearts of men: I am well assured, that if I could recount them all unto ye,
they would drive ye into no little marvel or admiration.

But say now in sooth, does not wine deserve supreme praises, in making a
sluggard or gross conceited person, to become a sweet, pleasant and affable,
man? A Lourden or lobcock, to be a man apt and skillful? Of a coward or faint
hearted crauen, to make a man hardy, bold and courageous? who (without this
mean) should find himself alone, and even stark naked, as it were, though
he be engirt with a thousand other defenses. Has not Greece by the means of
wine, wunne fame and honor through all Europe? And in like case Bohemia and
Germany? what shall I say of Polonia, and generally of all Dalmatia? What is
spoken of Italy, I will refer my self to the report of Pliny, who writes,
that drunkenness reigned there in his time in such sort: as they would not
only drink themselves vnderfeet, but likewise compel their horses and mares
to drink wine vnmeasurably: so much was drunkenness (through all parts of the
world) praised, celebrated, and held in such account and esteem, as he that
would not be drunk, at the least once a month, was not reputed a friendly
companion.

Young Cyrus would needs be accounted worthy to rule, because he especially,
undertook to drink a greater quantity of wine, then any other in his
kingdom: yet felt he not thereby any perturbation of spirit. Plutarch, in the
life of Licurgus, gives this good note to the Spartanes, that it was a custom
amongst them, to wash their newborn childrens noses and eyes with wine: to
make them more strong, healthful, and the better able to endure all pains
whatsoever. Infinite power of wine, in how many kinds do thou show and
deliver thy self helpeful to men? well have thou acquainted them with
sufficient proof of thy virtue, when the very least part of thy power, can
abate and utterly destroy the strength of deadly Hemblock.

Wherefore do ye think good Hesiodus, recommended and enjoined by his learned
verses, that twenty days before the rising of the dog star, and twenty
days after: only pure wine should be drunk, without tasting one drop of
water? If this custom had been entertained and observed, by the great
Lycurgus of Thrace: he had not been so dishonestlie cast headlong into the
Sea, for putting water into his wine. To this effect serves us, the opinion of
Celsus, a very excellent Physician, who among other precepts, ordained
(touching the government of health) to drink sometimes beyond measure. And to
proceed a little further, let us consider, how many profitable medicines,
bathes and emplaisters are made with wine: and the Hircanes would wash the
bodies of their dead with wine, either to purify them, or perhaps, because
they imagined, that by the virtue of this good liquor, they might be recalled
or brought to life again.

Marvel not then if good drink be pleasing to common people, seeing we
find, that the very wisest and best learned, have always maintained the
law, held and allowed among the Greeks in their meetinges and banquets, which
was: that so soon as any one came among them, during their feast time, they
would constrain him to drink, or get him gone: which yet at this day is
observed in Germany, if not of all, yet at the least of the greater number.

I will not blab, that the puissance of wine had sometime such authority: as to
make the Seneses take Arms, and thereby to obtain such victories, as are
worthy to be registered in perpetual Annals. Nor will I tell, how in the
year of the foundation of Rome, three hundred and eighteen: Luc^us Pyrrhus
was sent against the Sarmates, whom by the aid of wine only, he conquered,
made subject, and yielded tributarie to the people of Rome. Wine was afterward
in so great reputation with our forefathers: as Mezentius, to recover only
some quantity thereof for his disease (according as Varro has left to vsin
writing) gave succor to the Rutillians against the Latins.

And if it were lawful in this case, to produce holy Scripture, do we not
find, that our Lord, at the wedding in Cana of Galile, miraculouslie
vouchsafed, to change water (being a thing less good and excellent) into wine
most delicate and precious? With wine were the wounds of the poor Samaritane
washed. And beside, some say, that good old Abraham made his daily offerings
to God, with the best wine in his vaults.

I could willingly proceed further in this matter, which especially pleases
me beyond all other: were it not, I have always shunned odious prolixitie:
wherefore I will stay my self in this place; earnestly entreating each one of
ye, to embrace this so sweet desire of wine, and to forsake the simple course
of sobriety, because it makes men so melancholy, and bestows on them such
slender strength and vigor courage.

For Sterilitie.
Declamation, 8. That the barren woman is more happy, then the Childe-bearing.
I Know not by what reason it should be maintained, that barrenness is in any
sort hurtful or offensive: considering it is the mean, to make strange
affected and fantastical woman, to become more pleasing, benign, and ready to
obey her husband. Which contrariwise is not commonly found in a fruitful
woman: who never wants height of heart, and such bold hardiness withal, as
is marvelous to note. Nor is it without reason, considering the woman beholdes
so many fair and pretty children, that depend only upon her commandment,
and with so great reverence obey her words or signs: hereby she is puffed
up in such sort, as she thinks she should not be a wife, or companion to her
husband only, but indeed, Lady and mistress over her house and family.

And if (for example) the reports of fundry places might serve, I would (above
all other) willingly persuade ye to this one. That I being one day at Lions,
devising privately with a very fair and young woman, as is the manner in this
City here: we entered into talk, concerning the brave fashion of a garment,
which one of his neighbors ware, and had caused newly to be made. When I
gave her council, to have such another: she began to sigh marvelously. Now I
knew her husband to be rich enough, able to content her in a greater desire,
and not to give her one, but a doozen far better: wherefore Lady (quoth I)
why speak ye not to your husband, who can and will herein satisfy ye? She
answered, she durst not, neither would she require it, because she had not yet
as so well deserved: but if it pleased God to favor her so much, as to send
her one or twoe sweet young babes, she should have the means to ask of him
other things then a new gown. It happened according to her wish, that a
year after, she was delivered of two male children at one burden, so soon as
she saw her desire accomplished: she, who before had been so kind and loving
to her husband, began to hold all her household in such subjection, as the
poor Gentleman had no better help, but even to forsake his house: now behold
what fruit comes by this kind of domestical increase.

As for the advantages that ensue by barrenness: I find so great a number of
them, as it is impossible for me to acquaint ye with them all. First of all,
if thou have a barren wife: consider, thou shall not need to do as many do,
nursse other folks children. It shall not displease thee, to hear the stir she
makes, when thy wife is sick with child: nor shall thou abide the painful
trouble, during the month of her downe-liyng: nor shall thou hear the cryinges
and cradle-noise, to waken thee out of thy first sleep. Thou shall be free
from the strifes, and perpetual molestations, of injurious and unnatural
nursses. And to conclude, thou shall not feel that yikesome anguish: in seeing
them die by thee, or in thy presence.

Witness hereof let serve the wise Solon, who being one day gone to visit
his friend Thales, that then for more quietness of study, was gone not far off
from the City of Myletum. And seeing no children go up and down before his
house, he marvelled greatly thereat, and conceived but rudely of Thales, that
he had no care of lineage to ensue him. Thales within few days after, would
return the like to his companion, and came to visit him even in his lodging.
And while they discoursed on many things, there entered to them a young Lad (who
before had been instructed for the purpose by Thales:) he said, that he was
come from Athens to see the Philosopher, and to enquire, if he would command
him any thing thither, for which cause only came now to salute him. Solon
dilligentlie enquired of him, if he knew any matter of news, and how all
things fared at Athens. The young youth answered, he knew no other thing, but
the death of an honest and wise young man, for whom all the City mourned and
lamented at his departing; because he was said to be the son of a wise
Philosopher of that Cyttie, who as then was absent, and every one accounted
well of him, but his name he had then utterly forgotten. O poor and unhappy
father (cried out Solon) being moved with fear and trembling.

Then afterward, cariyng suspicion of his own son in his mind, he could
not forbear from demanding, if perhaps the name of the dead childs father,
was not Solon? he answered, that it was Solon, for so he heard him called. Then
the poor Philosopher began to weep, and to beat his head against the fair
walls: so that if he had not swouned in the place, he was in danger, had the
doors been open, to have run into the fields, and there have raunged up
and down as mad or frantike. Thales seeing himself revenged, and that he
had prevailed enough against him: after he had dawned him to remembrance, by
the help of vinager and cold water, he said. Now thou see Solon, the cause
which has withheld me so carefully, from listening to the desire of children:
in that it can so easily offend the sense of such a man as thou art, whom I
esteemed the firmest and most constant in the world. Afterward, he let him
understand the fallacy, to show him, whence proceeded his slender affection to
have any lineage.

I would feign learn of him, that is so earnestly this way addicted: how does
a woman know what her children will be, when she has brought them forth?
For but by the issue of women, had ever the Roman Empire been tormented with
such horrible monsters, as were Caligula, Nero, Commodus, and Bascianus? Had
they ever lived upon the earth, if Marcus Antonius, Domitian and Septimius had
not been married, or at least had met with barren women?

Augustus would often wish, that of his wives he might never have children,
and would many times call his daughter and Niece two horse-leaches, that
destroyed and eat up his days, with great and extreme greefes. The
selfsame words might poor Agripina have used, who was mother to the cruel and
hated Nero. Likewise the good father to Phraates K. of Parthia, when he beheld
his son so cruelly slain; and at length, without any remorse of conscience,
the homicidiall sword to be sheathed, in his own poor and ouer-wearied aged
body.

Epaminondas, a king of so high spirit and most noble wisdom, lived a long
time without marriyng, when being one day reproched and bearded by Pelops, as
in the way of reprehension, for making no regard of procreation of children,
for aid of the common wealth, which already declined and fell to ruin: he
returned him this quick answer. Take heed that thou have not done worse than
I for the Common wealth, by such seed as thou shall leave behind thee. Heereon
they elected one of his sons: who was of such an infamous and wicked
disposition, as he hoped for nothing more, then to bring all things to
confusion.

What shall I say of Mithridates, who by desire to succeed in the kingdom of
Pontus (seeing the ambushes he had secretly prepared against his father,
sorted to none effect:) made open war against him, and assailed him very
dishonorably, for to depose him? And what may be said of Lotharius, son to K.
Jews, who having suspicion, that he was not so well beloved as his brother
Charles: found the means to imprison his father? I might in this place produce
the deed of C. Thuranius Antipater, of Gal^en, son to the Emperor Valerian:
and of infinite other homicides, or rather paricides. But I will not trouble
ye with multitude of examples, in a matter not to be any way gaine-said.

Believe me that will, but I hold as a matter doubtless, that barrenness is
a most singular remedy, against the piersing thorns of household life: which
by better means (then this only) cannot be escaped or prevented. And I
believe for certainety, that this would be a sovereign medicine, against the
private malice of children: except by good hap, the divine plant called
Hermetiae could be gotten, which whosoever uses (if Democritus be not a liar)
not only shall engender honest children and well disposed; but likewise very
fair and gracious.

But I stand in doubt that this herb is lost: for which of the skilfullest,
and most dilligent herballists of our time, that ever knew it? Or where is
the hand that ever planted or gathered it? If nothing can be found in
Dioscorides, in Crescentius, or in Plateairus, all good Apothecaries: I think
assuredly, that this plant is altogether lost for our time: seeing by good
proof we now behold, children so disobedient, being liars, Tavern hunters,
Gamesters, swearers, and (for conclusion) capital enemies to all virtue. Then
doubt not, but that good Democritus imagined this herb, or dreamed on some
other thing: or else that he saw and knew it, after he had put out his own
eyes, to become thereby the better Philosopher.

I thus conclude then, that a barren woman is much better then a fruitful: and
let us not be careful to have such store of children, seeing they have done
harm to so many persons. As for my self, I was sometime of contrary opinion:
but soon after I began to repent my self, seeing that how many children
soever a man has; if they be strong, they are but so many servants to
princes: if they be of spirit and know ought, then make they slender account
of their parents. Some give themselves to law and estate of Justice, others to
lay hold on benefices, and others to follow new opinions, which makes them
oftentimes fall from aloft, to a hotter place then willingly they would: but if
voluptuous pleasures once catch hold on them, God knows what honor they do
then to their lineage.

It was my chance sometime to be in a Country, thick beset with barren
mountains, where ordinarily was to be seen, an infinite throng of Potters or
drudging penny-getters, whereof daily resorted to Venice a very great number:
so that when any child happened to be borne in that country, the inhabitants
would say (as a common Proverb) this is a young Ass for the Venetian.

If I should recite the latest comforts that children bring us, I must borrowe
the words used in France: that in their youth, they befo^ their fathers and
mothers, and when they are great, they serve for nothing but to vexethem.
Consider what pleasure they bring to their parents, when news is heard of
them, that they have been abroad all night keeping il rule, and then come home
with their heads broken, their arms shiuered in pieces, their ears cut off:
Or if word be brought their fathers, that they are in prison for some
battery, or carried to the Galleys for some theft, or that they have gotten
the soul discase, or (to make amends for their misbehauiour) they have beaten
the servants of the house, broken perforce their fathers counting houses, and
then fled away with all the money. Then when they are returned again, if the
good man but show himself agreeued: answer is made, he may be ashamed in so
doing.

I have at the tongues end, an infinite number more of troubles to recount,
which issue from this goodly increase: but for the present time I am content to
omit them, and now to use silence, to shun offense as well of you as my
self, who with very ill will do speak of such matters.

For the Exiled.
Declamation, 9. That it is better to be banished, than continue in Liberty.
IF such as are mighty and virtuous, take no displeasure by being banished or
sent into exile: what need they fear, that have not so much to loose, their
hearts not reaching so high, nor their minds addicted to so great enterprises?
A Philisopher, a man of council and prudence, execised in affairs for the
weal public: a Captain or ruler of a Cittye, may with some reason find
himself agreeued, and sorry to be sent away through report, malice or
otherwise, in that he exercised his authority to the benefit of every one,
and notwithstanding, whatsoever pains he took, yet he had therein delight and
pleasure.

Nevertheless, we find left by the most expert and auncientest, that they
reputed exile to be an honor and contentment of their minds. Witness hereof
is the honest answer of good Diogenes, to him that reproved him (as with a
matter ignominious) because the Sinopians had banished him their country.
Quoth he, this rather ought to return far greater shame to thee, that thou
have never been forth of thy country: resembling Oysters herein, that never
dare come forth of their shelles, but are continually beaten against stones and
rocks. As hurtful (in my opinion) is the want of courage herein, and such as
are ignorant of the great number of privileges, which the banished have in
their exile: whereof I will make some bre^fe recital, to deliver ye from
occasion of marvel, why many of our elders (with good will) made choice of
exile, and did so patiently endure the same.

First of all I may say, that the banished give no cause to others, of falling
into the sin of envy, and during the time of their flight or absence, very
few are so bold as to ask them money for interest: for each one knows well
enough, that poor exiles have rather more need of their help, then
hinderance. Wherefore they may without blushing, or using any other conscience,
borrowe the more easily, importuning and disquieting them they have to deal
withal: for under this advantage of being out of their country, and given to
understand, that their goods are confiscated: they may without any other
oration require the aid and succor of every one.

The banished finds himself not troubled with lodging strangers; nor is
indebted or bound to making of banquets; to attire himself sumptuously; bear
Arms day and night, to go honorably accompanied companied for the credit of
his house; to show himself brave and magnificent. But he may well vaunt, if so
he think it good, that when he was in his country: he kept a table for all
comers; did wonders; was rich and honorably attired, and had the train of a
brave Caualier after him. Beside, it will be no dishonor to the man exiled,
if he keep not always his promise, or make delivery of that he stands
bound for, at the time by him prefixed. And so it happens, that many seem
satisfied, by acknowledging their good turns, or promise of paiyng all, if
ever they may return into their long desired Country.

And doubt not, but many desire to partake with this goodly privilege, for
sparing of expenses, and to deliver themselves from very great troubles. For
the banished are not bound, to keep a house garnished with all provisions:
they are rid of continual keeping company with their wives, who cease not to
storm, strike and fight, first with one, then with an other, according to the
quallity of most house keepers. They hear not so often their young children
brawle, murmr or be peevish, demanding first one thing, then another:
neither see they the privy hidings of their men servants and maids, which is
such an evil, as the subtillest in the house sometimes knows not how to
defend.

This the good Anasangris of Sparta well knowing, and that exile was not a
matter so offensive, in regard of the privileges before named: sent an answer
in writing to one of his friends, that he took it in no ill part, to be sent
forth of his Country. But rather (quoth he) I ought to grieve the abandoning
of justice, reason, and society of all good things: then the country which
thou so dearly esteemest. The parting wherewith, should be the less yrkesome
to thee, because when thou leauest it: thou forsakest likewise infinite greefes
and tribulations, which it brings to such as are besotted therewith.

And in sooth, less grievous and troublesome to us are the calamities of our
country, when we are far off, then when we are near at hand. Nor is the
report, of the death or hurt of a friend, so offensive as the sight. Being
far from civil discordes, and sadness of Magistrates: we take no care for
being called to council; nor whether the officers of the City do their
duty, or keep their accounts even. We shall not hear the difference of our
Contrymen among themselves, stand croutching to borrow, nor listen to the
quarrels and strifes between neighbors. But contrariwise, we shall see
ourselves free from all molestations: and oftentimes meet in the fields with
better fortunes, then we could have done in the City.

I have known some, that have lived more commodiouslie and pleasantly out of
their houses, then if they had continued in them: for there they could not make
a little cheer, without Saint Iulians Pater Noster, or being half-crucified.
Abroad is daily found some one, who has pity on the stranger: and one would
not imagine, what kindness and tenderness of heart, poor needy widows show
to the bannished. Agamemnon returning from the expedition of Troy, and
threatened by his father Telamon, to be thrust from his country into exile: I
know not father (quoth he) any other country to be affected, then that
whereinto a man is best welcome. If exile had been reputed a thing evil and
hateful, by the wisest and most prudent persons of times past (as many for
want of other matter, would gladly allege:) should we then find so many
virtuous people, that so voluntarily and cheerfully embraced it, as did
Metellus, Numidicus, and many other of great renown?

Calaster, commanded to exile by the Athenians, received his banishment for so
great a blessing, as (at his departure) he would not have any thing known
thereof to his very dearest friends: and for fear by them he should be again
revoked to his country, he very strictly forbad them by his letters, not to
travail any jot for his return: accounting it much better, to end his
days in poor tranquillity, out of his country; then among riches full of
tribulation, and business of the City, to languish in the place of his birth.

Demetrius Phalerean, sent in exile to Thebes, was most highly displeased with
his fortune, and durst not show it to Crates the Philosopher; because
(according to the manner of Ciniques) he lived very poorly and obscurely. Within
a while after, the Philosopher Crates came to visit him, whom when he had
saluted, he revealed to him so good a discourse, in praise and commendation of
exile: as Demetrius (suddenly recovering his better senses) began to account it
for a great glory, that he had been banished. So soon afterward as he came
home again, he blamed very much the opinion, and forgetful iudgementhe had
before, and the troublesome state of his affairs: which had so long held and
detained him, from ioying in a life so excellent as banishment was. We shall
find few men of valor or worth, that have escaped this fortune: and if he we
would confess the truth, this harm (if harm it may be called) has more
commonly and ordinarily fallen on men of virtue, then on any other.

For proof thereof, Hanniball, after he had endured so many travails, in
service of his ungrateful common weal: was he not banished by the
Carthagenians? was he not deprived of his so dear belooued City, by the
Athenians? Noble Theseus, who had done so many memorable things, worthy of
eternal honor and praise, only by means of his virtue: was he not chased
forth of his Country, which he had so amplified and enlarged? The like was
done to Solon by the Athenians: whom (in recompense of ordering their laws
and manner of life) they made to end his latest days in the Isle of Cyprus.
The virtuous and puissant Miltiades, by whose means were vanquished about
thirty thousand Persians: dyed in this blessed state of exile. Like happened
as a reward to valliant Camillus: after he had so often given succor to his
noble country. Traian the just, when he was chosen Emperor, was in exile.

Banished was the learned Aristotle, and worthy Themistocles, constrained to
get him gone from his Country: the like befell to Alcibiades. What regard
had the Ephesians to the virtues of Hermodorus, when they banished him out of
their Country? Rutillius could not resist like fortune; nor poor Cicero, on
whom the Romans bestowed this favor of exile, for a recompense, because he
had preserved their public estate, beside many other innumerable good
turns. Now what is he, that in heart would not wish, to be in perpetual
exile, with so many good and honorable companions? Perhaps it may be some
coward, hart-lesse, strength-lesse, courage-lesse or councel-lesse creature.

I should be ouer-long, in showing ye by diverse ways and examples, that exile
is a thing neither evil nor hurtful: but at this present I am forced to
forbear, not so much for fear of offending your delicate ears: but because I
remember, that the most elloquent Master John Boccace, writing to a
Florentine friend of his, has already discoursed very amply on this argument.
Wherefore I will here conclude this matter, after I have entreated your good
wills, by that which heertofore has been said: to combine the sundry profits
issuing from exile and banishment, with the small greese or harm, which a
heart not ouer-weake and slothful, may receive thereby.

The rather, because by reason it is more to be desired, or (at the least)
liberally endured and supported: before yrkesome license and liberty, that by
testimony of the old Comic Poet, makes us ordinarily more wicked, and given
to all kind of vices: never eleuating or exercising so much, the spirits of
men well borne and enstructed in all virtues, as does the precious state of
banishment.

For infirmity of the Body.
Declamation, 10. That it is better to be sick, then always healthful.
The advice of the most ancient wise men, has evermore been, that the feeble
and weak complexion of our bodies; has at al times served as a sovereign
advertisement, to the holy life of sobriety and parsimonie. Wherefore I dare
maintain, against him that will strive to justify the contrary: that
perpetually this virtuous dame has been adversary, to men's vain pleasures
and idle lubricities, even as the most sovereign mistress of all humility
and modesty,

True it is, that (at the first sight) she seems scant pleasing, or rather
very offensive to some natures: but they consider not at all, the special good
she does to men, by continual exhorting them to all constancy, and hope of
immortality: bringing so many times to the memory of the mind, the most
pitiful and miserable frailty of our earthly bodies. This was it that moved
Stilpo the Philosopher, to make comparison of a sick man, to one found in a
prison fore crazed, and shiuered (as it were) in many parts of his body, by
means of the manifest ruins, from which he speedily hopes to pass, and
enter into perpetual liberty.

In like manner I believe, that sick and infirm people, have always this
good hope of quick departure from their mortal prison: when they perceive
themselves so often subject to Catharres, weakness of stomach, Collickes,
Goutes, and other natural imbecilities. For even as in a broken or torn
scabbard, many times is found a sword or knife, of perfect metal and good
temper: so (by experience) we shall commonly see, in a sickly and crazed body,
an excellent spirit and rich in all nobleness, a courage high and magnificent:
ready (notwithstanding the bodies weakness) not only to attempt, but to bring
to pass many fair and honorable enterprises. See we not in the Galleys, that
they give the Oar to the strongest and most mighty Galliots: when to the
weakest and feeblest of members (which oftentimes are the wisest and most
skillful) is left the charge and guide of the Rudder? Has not the strength
sooner been overthrown, of Milo, Ajax and Hercules; then the abillities in
Solon, Nestor, Cato or Socrates?

Even so, what other thing is the body, whereof we make so great account: but
the house and poor lodging, of the most rich and noble spirit? And albeit the
body be found sometimes frail and diseased, yet does it no hurt to the
spirit: because it is her Inn but for a little while. Poor and miserable
wretches are we, who never knowing aright what we ought especially to wish or
desire: daily find fault and are discontented, with our sickly weak bodies,
which nevertheless are of longest life and continuance. As for proof, the
Italians, who for the better seething of a great turffe of herbs, are wont to
cleave and break the cover of earth wherewith they are hidden in the pot, to
give them air, better boiling and savor: yet notwithstanding, the earthen pot
thus bruised, will serve and endure longer time, then a sound one nothing at all
broken: as if by means of the cleaving and rupture, it had attained a longer
while of continuance. The self same may be said of our bodies, the strongest
and most sturdie whereof, is found to be sooner infected, then they whose skin
is more thin and soft: by reason they cannot so easily euaporate or exhale
the superfluities out of them; whence ensues, that more suddenly and oftener
strong men die, then such whose bodies are sickly and tender.

Pliny (in his natural history) makes the number infinite, of grievous and
dangerous diseases, that customably take hold upon us: yet nevertheless, we
are of so simple consideration, as for a little head-ake, or one fit of an
Ague, we enter into unspeakable impatience. And we complain on the fever
quartaine, wherein we rather ought to rejoice, or (at the least) not grieve or
offend our selves therewith so strangely: considering, that if she be a bad
mother to us for one day, she is good to us for two after: and whosoever is
cured thereof (say many Physicians) shall live afterward more healthful and
better disposed.

If for so little we contend with patience, we may then hazard loss of all
together: if it should happen to us, as it did to Pherecides the Philosopher,
that from our bodies should come forth innumerable serpents: as much as befell
to good Mecaenas, that our eyes should not shut in three years together: or if
we should fall into an Ethick fever, which lasts perpetually, and never would
leave us till we came to our grave. Then would we cry out against God:
howbeit, we ought contrariwise rather to rejoice, because the Apostle himself
has said: That never is the body well indeed, but when it is sick indeed.

To prove this true, the party afflicted with any sickness, is never puffed
up with pride, never buffeted with fleshly desire, never couerous, envious, or
overcome with wrath, never strangled with gluttony, sursetting in
slothfulness, or conquered by ambition: and would to God we were such in
health, as oftentimes we promise to be when we are sick. The good Saint
Basil, because he felt himself weak and not sound in health, practiced
right well the art of medicine: wherein he profited so perfectly, as he was
esteemed one of the wisest, and most expert physicians in his time.

Plato the Philosopher, because he felt himself strong, and ouer-mightie in
nature, to follow his study as he ought: chose for his place of abiding, a
watrie marshie ground, a trobled and disconte^ted air, where heaven showed
none other, but dark and pichie clouds, that thereby he might become sick:
and so have means to refrain, the tedious and perilous assaults of the flesh,
wherewith he felt himself sometimes pricked and moved: for his advise was,
that a good mind could not flourish, if first of all the flesh were not
ouer-maistred. And certainly I am thus persuaded, that the weakness of the
slender thread, whereto my poor and miserable life is fastened, makes me the
more highly to rejoice, and my heart the merrier: for the desire it has of
speedy departure, and the sooner to fly or mount alofte, where it first
received her fair soul.

Now see in conclusion, of how many felicities, the infirm and sickly
complexion of men are the cause? First of all, it is the mean of making us
live long in this world: which is the thing, that men of greatest courage with
for. For admit the case so falls out (as there be people of diverse
complexions, some more chollericke and impatient then other) that the sick man
desires in himself, to depart from this world; through the grief, vexation
and tediousnes he here receives; yet then he happens to be crossed with so
many impeachments, as delays and makes him tarry therein the longer. But if he
would remember (setting all other troubles apart) to wish he might live
longer, for the profit and commodity of his friends: he may then chance to
escape longer, then one in perfect health never minding such matters. For the
poor sick man, considering that he is weak and diseased, will preserve
himself very dilligentlie, from al manner of excess: and live more soberly,
then can the stiffest and strongest composed bodies.

These kind of men are such, to whom oftentimes it happens (through the
overmuch fierceness of their good disposition and strength) that boldly or
carelessly, they oppose themselves against a thousand greefes, perils and
dangers: using meats prohibited for the health of man, taking the corrupted
air in the evening: or else (without any need) will wander into tempests,
rain, snow, wind, storms, and thus adventure themselves from morning to
night. And the worse is their success, through the confidence which they
repose in their bodies, which they feeling to be strong and lusty: fear not
(without any discretion) to fight here with one, there to smite an other,
spoil, outrage, and commit a thousand evils. Then, what recompense have they
for all these? They fall into the rightful hand of Justice: who without any
regard of valor, strength, dexterity, parents or riches, makes them
(miserably and shamefully) to finish their days before their expected time.

It is then great folly, to desire strength and health of body so earnestly,
seeing it is the cause of so many mishaps: were it not only but in regard of
the wars, which we should never behold so cruel or fierce, but by the
confidence, that men suppose to be in their health and bodily strength:
wherewith great and wise Lords use to jest at each other, and make as small
account thereof, as of balls running along the pent-house of a Tennis court.

For Tears.
Declamation, 11. That it is better to weep often, then to laugh at any time.
NOt without great occasion is it, that I must assuredly, and by good right
confess, the mourner to be in better estate then the laugher: seeing Solomon,
in his most holy Proverbs, has left us in writing, that it is better to
sleep and repose in the house of sorrow, then in that of joy and pleasure.

By laughter, many souls have been severed from their bodies, to the infinite
grief of their good friends: but by sadness, not one only (which I ever heard
of) at any time departed but well pleased* Laughter has evermore been
perticularlie proper to fools mouths, or people without sense. And it is not
read in any one place of the holy Scripture, that our blessed Savior ever
laughed at any time: but that he wept and sorrowed, is to be found in sundry
passages, of the good and faithful Evangelists. For this cause, has he
promised eternal felicity to such as mourn, and them that laugh, he has
menaced with death.

To weep, is a sign of penitence and compunction, whereto we are often
invited and exhorted, by the voices of the holy Prophets: but laughter has
been the cause of mocking it self, as the evident sign of overmuch boldness.
If we would make regard, of the commodities ensuyng by tears: how many
disdaines, and how many rages, have been qualified, by one little tear of
the eye? How many poor lovers have they united and confirmed together, that
before lived not, but in langour and distress? How many storming hearts,
fierce and cruel one against another, have they brideled, softened, and made
gentle? How many great and honest recompenses, have been obtained and
measured, by the weight of tears? I am of this opinion, that all the force and
puissance of men assembled together, cannot so soon win or compass what it
would have: as one only tear can, yea, oftentimes it has conqueringly
obtained grace, even from obstinate and most pitiless persons.

For proof hereof, Heraclitus was always more esteemed for his weeping, then
ever was Democritus for his laughing. See how many things, worthy of eternal
memory, Crassus by this virtue accomplished; purchasing the name of a scorner
of vanities. If we should need to produce, the profit of tears and often
weeping: Let us consider, that while our bodies are but young and tender, they
make them to grow and increase. Wherefore many Nursses (in regard hereof) are
not very hasty to quiet their infantes, when they lie criyng in the Cradle:
but (by these means) suffer them to dilate and stretch forth their members,
for so they come to the suddener growth. And if proofs should fail me against
laughter, I would content my self with this only of good Hyppocrates, who has
left written: that the diseases which ensue by accident of laughter, without
any manifest cause; are the most difficult to be healed.

Let us then set laughing apart, seeing it brings such offense to man, and
agrees not with his honesty and gravity: beside, we find not at this day,
among so many lamentable ruins, where any place or opportunity for laughing
indeed, may be granted or suffered. And let us conclude, that laughter
wrinkles and makes old the face, counterfeits the person, makes the heart ache,
wounds the lungs and inwards of the belly: so that after long laughing, many
greefs do follow, whereof we never make doubt, till we feel them. So that if
laughter be not refrained, it makes the pallat of the mouth to fall, the
throat sore, the voice hoarse, and often times shakes the body very grievously.

Wherefore very excellently said the wise man, that the end of laughter, was
grief and tears: which ordinarily endures more space of time, and has a
longer tail behind it, than ever had mourning. But the end of continual
tears, after this mortal life: is joy and perpetual delectation, which never
has ending, and such as are promised by him, who is only truth it self.

For Dearth.
Declamation, 12. That Scarsitie is better, than abundance.
ANy man of common sense and opinion, will assure ye, that for the ease and
better estate of his person, as also continuance of his pleasures: abundance
or earthly goods ought well to be had in request. But for one voluptuous man ye
shall find of this opinion; I will furnish ye with an hundred of very
singular spirit and perfect judgment, that liberally will maintain: the
fertillitie and abundance of goods in this world, is the mother and nursse
of all evils, enemy to all modesty and honesty, and chief adversary to
sobriety.

The good Lady of Henault, bemoned the great Dearth, which the turbulence of
the wars had caused, and among other things, she wept for the fertillitie of
the former years past; when as she called to mind, what store of corn and
wines she had, and that before a week would be past, both she and all her
house should scant tell, where to get food or drink once a day. But the
sober and frugal Solon-nist says well to the contrary, that the less store
of victuals are in a country: the less is the insolence of the inahbitants,
who (in time of abundance) disdain the service of their superiors: and then
has a man greater pain to get a servant (how poor soever, or bad disposed he
be) then a man of wisdom, well skilde in good letters.

Moreover, what else think we, may be the plenty of one or two yeeares, when
we give our selves to so great feasting: but even an earnest of the dearth in
them, that may or will follow soon after? The interpretation that just Joseph
made of Pharaohs dream, may serve for witness hereof. What is it, that better
gives knowledge of the price of any thing, be it never so excellent; then the
Dearth or scarsity thereof? In the East Countries, among the Savages, no more
esteem is made of gold or precious stones: then we in these parts, do make
of iron, lead or brass. In Madera, Cyprus and other Islandes, where the Sugars
do grow, they give them to their Swine to eat: as we in the Countries nearer
hand, give them great abundance of fruits. And wherefore do they thus? Even
because exceeding plenty, makes the contempt of most excellent things. For
experience, when times fall out according to our own wish: how many is there
among us, that remembers God thereby, and gives him thanks with a good heart: but
only in a manner, by way of countenance? But when times come that we like
not of: then is it that we turn unto him, and cry him mercy, then confess we
only his divine, incomparable bounty, greatness and excellence.

Infalliblie, the value of bread and wine, which are things needful for
nourishing the body, and to preserve the soul therein: is never known in the
time of abundance, when we make spoil thereof, cast it at our feet, and give
it to feed filthy beasts. Nor may I forget, how in some Countries stored
with Vineyardes, when one plentiful year comes among other: they will be so
insolent, as to make waste thereof at every street corner. But when they have
little store of wine and grain: then they taste, savor so well, and use them
in so small quantities, as nothing at all is lost. We think on God, praise him
and give him thanks: but then we do it best, when we give our selves to know
his great virtues. Then our bodies are most healthful and active, because our
wine is well tempered, and we eat our wheat so pure: as they both together
may engender the opilations of faith, and not of other matters.

And as for the viuacitie of the spirit, I say that even as in the time of fast
or diet, the spirits work best and greatest causes: so in the time of
searsitie, they engender not such huge numbers of smokes, as hinder them from
doing their divine operations. For this especially, among other causes, at
first were the fastes and Lent time instituted: in good season and time of
flowing plenty after wine, good corn, a thousand disagreements, a thousand
batteries, a thousand lawe-strifes and contentions. When a poor laboring man
had his halfe-peny toward a pint of wine; then could he make merry with his
fellows, so long as to drive away yrkesome weariness. Then were none so
simple, but sat at the table with the house-mayster, and fed as at a frank
marriage feast: and when the belly was full, then to dancing.

Let us now make some little discourse, of Countries fertile and abounding in
all goods, comparing them with such as are barren and unfruitful: and let us
see, if their inhabitants are better natured or disposed, then they that dwell
in the deserts, or regions never tilled and not fertile. First of all, in
Hircania (if it be true, which that most faithful Greek has written in his
history,) one only stock of a Vine, yields about a Tun of wine: and every
foot of a fig tree, fills well near forty frailes with that fruit. The
wheat, although it naturally fall to the ground from the ear on the stalk;
yet without any industry or humane labor, it increases every year in mighty
abundance. The Bees do naturally work their honny on the trees: from whence
(even as Manna from Heaven) it droppeth continually down on the earth, and
there are none will take the pains to gather it. All this notwithstanding, the
people of that country are accounted the most cruel, fierce and wickedst
Nation in all the world.

In the Indian Countries, the Earth bears twice a year, and they have two
seasons for gathering their fruits: nevertheless, if ye knew the people of
the Country, ye shall find them fantastical, liars and deceivers to the
uttermost. In Babylon, every little corn of wheat, brings forth two
hundredth other for it: beside this, the millet and other bread grain (through
the strange and wonderful nature of the soil) stretches up in such height,
as do the trees. Yet notwithstanding all these things, the inhabitants of the
Country, are more abounding in vile life and villainies, then all other nations
are beside. In Tacapa, a great City of Africa, is to be found such store and
abundance, of whatsoever can be desired, for the nourishment and life of man,
and al things at so small a rate or price, as they scantlye make any reckoning
thereof: in like manner is there to be found, the very plentifullest store
that can be named, of thieves, adulterers, treasons, and infidelities.

Now let us confer heerewith the other part, the barren regions or less
fertile in goods; and let us see, if they be not altogether industrious,
friends to virtue, and greatly hardened for pains and bodily labors. In the
first place, let us consider what the Country of Denmark is, and what the
Franconians and Danes have been, that thence issued. Let us remember withal,
the Scythians, that live at this day in travail, without any certain
habitation, now in one place, then in another. What and how many brave
warriors, have come from this people? Even as in our times, we have seen
issued from the Isles of Ireland, Swethen, and Countries unfruitful, cold,
and partly neighbors to Scotland. Yet in these countries, is found for
nourriture of the inhabitants, nothing more then milk and fish; but for
softness and delicateness, none else like them.

But let us leave strangers, and only make discovery of ourselves. How many
men of wisdom and authority (think ye) in time of our memory, has issued
from the untilled and mountain countries of Sauoye, Daulphine, Auuergne,
Gascoigne, Limosine and Perigueulx? Imagine ye, that the Rabulanes, Onions and
Beans of these several soiles, could in ought diminish their goodness of
spirit? Think ye for these, they owe ought to our minions of the Court and
elsewhere: who are nourished, and brought up with all wanton and lickerish
things? How many Chancellors, Presidents, Counselors, Knights, captains, and
such like, have ye seen, and daily do behold, in honor of these quarters,
more then any other? yet their countries are of such nature, as their
Coleworts, Mullets, Turnips and Chesenuts, does there give them better
nourishment, then will the most precious wheat or grain in the world. This
infers, and proves well unto ye, that without this scant and frugall
arsimonie, which to them is natural; never would they have been such, as now
they are.

I agree very well with ye, that after they have once dwelt in a country more
abounding, they become finer and foolisher, like the savage Spaniardes, who
leaving their first untilled region, where they wore hempenshooes, shirtes,
clothes, and such like, came afterward to their pumpes of velvet. But all
this, (proceeding from their original nurssing) has given them such heart and
industry, as makes them nothing inferior to other strange nations.

I say for conclusion, that the great fertillitie, of abounding in goods of
the earth, serves to no other purpose; but to stir and move us, to attemptes
of succession, Farms, dismes, rents and revenues: wherein we trust so much the
most part of our time, as we become careless, and void of all desires of
virtuous knowledge. True it is, that the ouer-great plenty of grain, even in
such as are covetous, serves them to fatten fowls, Pigeons, Partridges and
other birds, as well of the Garden as flight, the flesh whereof (soon after)
serves but to abridge and shorten their lives. But withal, they should
remember, that this huge store in lofts and garners, draws thither a million
of Rats, Mice, weeuels, Fitchets and other vermin: nor is there so good a
house, but hereby oftentimes it may be spoilde and consumed, beside the labor
taken to separate the blasted corn, spirted and barren Oats from the other.
And when all this corn is gotten together, it troubles the master merualously
to lock it up, by reason of the abundance: so that the torment of safe
keeping, and well looking to it, makes him sometime minded, to forgo the land
for the corn, because of the displeasures, greefes and vexations he receives
thereby, in recompense of his labors,

In brief, dearth of victuals, makes poor people careful, and ready to their
work, contented (beside) with how little soever they get, to withstand the
necessity and danger of time to come. It entertaineth and augmenteth good
minds, in their duty and endeavor: to the great profit of the weal public,
which otherwise would but slenderly rejoice, if by occasion of plenty, they
should run at their own liberty. It makes known the bounty, strength and
virtue of him, who (of nothing) raises mighty matters. It rebateth the pride
of the highest mounted. It makes that seem better, which one labors for,
or gets by his own pains: then if he received it from the hand, of never
so liberal affluence, or if it were given and bestowen upon him, even for
nothing. Lastly, in times of scarsitie, all good things augment and increase:
but in the times of plenty and superfluity, they fade, diminish and utterly
die.

FINIS.
GEntlemen, here I thought good to break off, and conclude this first Book,
both for your ease and mine own: least wearying you too much, you should fall
in dislike of me and my labor, and so both of us miss your gentle favor, the
only recompense I expect for my pains: and very unkind are ye, if ye cannot
part with so small a reward. But not despairing thereof, let me entreat thus
much at your hands, if ye find any harsh English in my rude Translation, or
faults unwillingly escaped in the Printing: mend the one with Patience, and the
other with your pens, so both shall pass for current, you resolved, and I
sufficiently contented.

Yours to his power, A. Mundy.

A Table of all the several Paradoxes contained in this first volume, gathered
for the Readers more easy finding them.
For Poverty. Declama. 1. Fol. 1. That it is better to be poor than Rich. For
the Hard-fauoured face or foul Complexion. Declama. 2. fol. 3. That it is
better to be foul than fair. For the ignorant. Declama. 3 fol. 23 That
Ignorance is better than knowledge. For Blindness. Declama. 4 fol 33 That it
is better to be blind than to see clearly. For the Fool. Declama. 5. fol. 41
That it is better to be a fool, than wise. For him that has lost his worldly
goods, honors and Preferments. Declam. 6. fol. 53 That a man ought not to be
grieved, though he be dispoiled of all his goods and Honors. For Drinkers.
Declama. 1. fol. 59 That Drunkenness is better than Sobriety. For Sterillitie.
Declam. 8. fol. 68 That the barren woman is more happy, then the Childbearing.
For the Exiled. Declam. 9. fol. 76 That it is better to be bannished, then
continue in liberty. For infirmity of the body. Declam. 10. fol. 83 That it
is better to be sick, then always healthful. For Tears. Declama. 11. fol. 89
That it is better to weep often, then to laugh at any time. For Dearth.
Declama. 12. fol. 93 That Scarsitie is better, than abundance.
The end of the Table for the first Volume.
A Table of such Paradoxes, as are handled in the Second Volume, which upon the
good acceptance of this first Book, shall the sooner be published.
For desire of Death. That it is better to wish speedy death, then long life.
For the Country man. That the poor Husband man is more at ease, then the
wealthy Citizen. For hard Lodging. That the simple lodging is more to be
commended, then those in great palaces and houses of pleasure. For the
Wounded. That the wounded man ought to rejoice more, than he that is whole and
sound. For the Bastard. That the Bastard is more to be esteemed, than the
lawfully borne or legitimate. For Imprisonment. That it is more healthful and
profitable to be in prison, than at liberty. For War. That war is more to
be esteemed, than peace. For a dead Wife. That a dead wife is a most profitable
virtue to her husband, and better than a living Wife. For Service. That it is
better for a man to serve himself, than to be served of any. For Poor
descent. That the meanest place of birth, makes a man most noble. For the
Niggard. That the niggardly sparing life, is better than the bountiful. For
Women. That a woman's excellence, is much greater than a man's. For fear. That
it is better to live in fear, than in assurance. For the Lawyer. That a Lawyer
is a most profitable member in a Commonwealth.
FINIS.

