A TRVE, MODEST, AND JUST DEFENSE OF THE PETITION FOR REFORMATION, EXHIBITED TO
THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY. CONTAINING AN Answer to the Confutation
published under the names of some of the University of OXFORD. Together with
a full declaration out of the Scriptures, and practice of the Primitive Church,
of the several points of the said Petition.

2. COR. 13. 8. We can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth.

Hierom. dial. advers. Pelag. Veritas laborare potest, vinci non potest.

The truth may be contradicted, but it cannot be conquered.

Imprinted 1618.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
IF ever Impar congressus (gentle Reader) were between Combatters, just cause
of exceptiue complaint; then certainly it is between the Saints and Antichrist,
(in respect of outward worldly helps) and that as well in the lesser
skirmishes, as in the greater battles. For in both, the Saints do enter the
lists, and hold out the conflict upon very many no small disadvantages: as may
most easily appear to any that with indifferent judgment, shall (to omit all
others) weigh but even these particulars ensuing.

1 Our adversaries that strive for the defense of the Romish trash, which the
Devil and that Man of Sin has left yet among us, have the countenance of
worldly authority; whereas it fares with us, as with the maine of the Gospel
in the days of our Lord himself, Ioh. 7. 48. Have any of the Rulers believed
on him?

2 Their cause being received by tradition from our Forefathers that lived in
blindness, has the applause generally of all natural men; Ours, because it
is so hardly discerned, is scarcely received by the children of Wisdom, and is
every where spoken against, Act. 28. 22.

3 They abound in outward wealth: We poor.

4 They have great store of witty and learned men to defend their cause, we are
in number few, and of those few very many timorous and fearful of ensuing
dangers.

5 The Authors of their pleadings richly rewarded with some Bishopric,
Deanerie, or other fat Benefice: We deprived and cast out of our livings, and
liuelihoods, if we be discovered; yea clapped up into prison, if the Prelates
lay hold on us.

6 They men of glorious state and pomp in the world: we are esteemed as were
the Apostles, 1. Corinthians. 4. 13. Even the offscouring of all things.

7 They have leisure enough to invent and publish what they think meet to say
for their defense; We must first labor for food and raiment for our selves
and ours, and then take some stolen hours now and then to do what we do this
way.

8 To them the Presses are always open and free: But to us they are more then
shut. For it is not safe for us once so much as to suffer the Printers to know
that we have any such Copy to be printed.

9 The Stationers at home are ready to give them large moneys for their
copies, and so undertake the printing and publsihing thereof: We must, at our
great charge and hazard, hire the printing of ours in some other Land.

10 Open sale in every Booke-sellers shop is free for them: Ours, if they be
taken by the Bishops, are burnt, or otherwise utterly suppressed.

11. They have sundry loathsome prisons at their command, whereinto they shut us
up, even until we dye sometimes, when by arguments they are not able to
confute us: We have only bodies so to be afflicted by them, and sure arguments
unanswered.

12 They are in their own causes both parties and Judges: and we, without
help by any appeal to any other then the Lord Jesus, must at their pleasures
abide their censures.

13 Their threed-bare Allegations of man's writings is accounted deep and
ancient learning, but our avouching the most clear evidence of the written
word of the Ancient of days, is reckoned ignorant noveltie.

14 We challenge them to try it out in the open field by dint of the sword of
the Spirit; witness the Modest offer of Conference, the Humble Motion, etc.
and yet are blamed; they are praised, though they utterly refuse this way of
trial, and war against us only with carnal weapons, as Suspensions,
Deprivations, Imprisonments, etc.

15 Threatened dangers make men afraid to read our books, though never so
secretly conveyed unto them: Theirs all may most freely read openly, and that
with thanks and commendations.

Now by reason of these, and sundry such like disadvantaging hindrances, this
ensuing Treatise has lien hid (as many other the like still do, never like to
see the light for want of means of publishing them) about 14. years. For in
the year of our Lord 1608. certain Oxford men, having gotten into their hands
a Copy of a dutfull and pious supplication prepared to be exhibited to his
Majesty for Reformation of certain corruptions crept into our Churches, or
rather left in them by Antichrist at his extrusion, forthwith published the
same in print, together with an answer thereto (such as it is) defending and
maintaining all or most of the said corruptions so intended to be petitioned
against, and that in the name of the Vice Chancellor, the Doctors, both the
Proctors, and other the Heads of houses in the University of Oxford, avouching
it to be agreeable undoubtedly to the joint and uniforme opinion of all the
Deanes and Chapiters, and all other the learned and obedient Clergy in the
Church of England, and to be confirmed by the express consent of the
University of Cambridge, although many of them both Doctors, and Heads of
Houses in either University, and members of Chapiters otherwhere in the Land,
and also many more of the obedient Clergy were openly known to be of contrary
judgment unto them in the particulars mentioned in the Petition, and by these
men defended, and most of the residue never saw, nor once heard of the answer,
until it was published in print. Such was their boldness. Not long after,
some of the chiefest Ministers, that were interessed in the same Petition,
penned this discourse following in defense of the said Petition, and reply to
the above mentioned Answer, which has been obscured from that time till now,
partly for the reasons above rehearsed, and partly because such is the woeful
coldness of these backsliding days, that even those which seemed heretofore
most forward for Church-reformation, are so declined, that they like not so
much as to hear of that, that may in any sort once seem to threaten the least
hinderance of their worldly profit, or disquiet to their carnal peace, be it
never so healthful to their souls. Insomuch that they are so far from being
aiding and assisting to Christ, in this his cause, either by labor or cost,
that when books are printed in defense thereof for their information and
instruction, they either neglect to buy the same, or having bought them, cast
them aside into some hole or corner, never vouchsafing to peruse them: yet
Wisdom is justified of her children, and some enter the gate of life be it
never so straight; and walk in the Lords way, be it never so narrow. If any
object, that these are no matters of salvation, but of less moment, and
therefore not to be so much stood upon; Let him hear for answer, That no man
can have sound assurance of being exempt from confusion, that has not respect
to all Gods commandments to the best he is able, as well lesser as greater.
Psalm. 119. 6. neither may any hope for plenary redemption by Christ's
Priesthood, that is not willing to yield plenary obedience to his Prophecy,
and kingdom: seeing he only is with God accounted truly gracious, that
gives himself both to learn all that God teaches concerning him in his
place, and to practice whatsoever God so causes him to know. Affected
ignorance refusing necessary knowledge, and wilful rebellion against the light
received, being alike detestable before the Lord.

Now that the knowledge of these points is very needful for all sorts of
Christians, whether of higher or lower degree, and of what Calling soever, may
most evidently appear by these reasons, to omit sundry other.

First because many of them are matters of daily practice, even of all sorts
and ranks of persons amongst us, and will any say that it is, or can be safe
for a man in the special service and worship of God, to do either he cares
not, or knows not what?

Secondly, for that they mainly tend to the honor or dishonor of that Lord
whom we all profess to serve, and shall his glory be so lightly regarded by us?

Thirdly, they make directly either to the beautifying or deforming of the
visible Church, which is the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereof we are
members, every one for his part. And can any godly mind be careless hereof?

Fourthly, they do plainly serve either to the edification or destruction of
themselves, and many other of their dear brethren, for whom Christ died,
chiefly by their mystical signification: who then can judge them to be of
small moment?

Fifthly, many of the lively members of Christ suffer for them unto
imprisonment, besides many other miseries, yea even unto a languishing death:
And will any good Christian fall under the fearful doom, Mat. 25. 41. 43. for
not visiting and helping Christ persecuted in his members? Or shall we endanger
our selves to that dreadful curse, Judge. 5. 28. for neglecting to help the
Lord against the mighty? God forbid. Or shall any persuade us in those things
to go on careless or blindfold without discerning whether we please or
displease God in our doings? Far be it from us; for that which is not of
knowledge, can not be of faith. Romans 10. 17. and whatsoever is not of faith
cannot be pleasing to God. Heb. 11. 6. but is sin, Romans 14. 23. and the wages
of sin is death. Romans 6. 23. I trow no gracious heart will esteem any sin
light, or the wages thereof trivial. Wherefore in the fear of God let all men
beware how they do so slightly esteem these matters so frequent in practice,
near to Gods special presence, for which his Glory, Churches and Children
suffer so many, and so great evils. Indeed they are not to be ranked with
things of the greatest moment; but yet seeing it is apparent, that no man among
us (especially as things now stand) can without manifold sins neglect them:
therefore forasmuch as besides sundry other treatises handling the same matters,
this offreth it self to thy view, be not unwilling duly to consider what is
said on both sides, and the Lord give thee understanding to discern truth from
falsehood, and good from evil, that thou may reject and eschew the one, and
embrace and follow the other. On the one side thou may presume as much is
said as probably can be, seeing it is the fruit of so many learned Doctors
labors, as the title boasts of: yet if the other have not more sincerity,
and soundness of truth and reason, I desire not it should find any favor in
thy sight: but if yea, then do as God shall move thine heart, and even so I
commend it to thy diligent reading, and advised and godly judgment, and thee
to the guidance of the most high.

Moreover, whereas of late there is published a certain Scholasticall (I had
almost said Sophistical) Tract, mostly of the same subject, by one M. Sprint, a
Glocestershire Minister, entitled, Cassander Anglicanus, tending in a sort to
the patronizing of these Popish ceremonies here treated of, which may occasion
the stumbling of some weak ones: although I hear that by Gods mercy, it is
fully resolved upon some time since, that the said Tract shall be at large
answered and confuted. Yet for the stay of the feebler sort in the mean time,
that are less able to discern how he himself is therein deceived, and
deceives others, I offer to consideration: First, a few things observable in
the Tract it self; and secondly, certain Tables written heretofore by the
same Author, touching the same subject, and by him entitled, The Anatomy of
the Ceremonies, etc. and Bellum Ceremoniale. The Tables I have annexed hereto,
desiring thee, that if thou have his foresaid. Tract by thee, thou will be
pleased to compare them together; and then with indifferent judgment give
sentence, whether is more agreeable to the truth, this or the other. Deny them
to be his own in any part, as I am assured he cannot; so, I hope he will not
once be willing to do, chiefly seeing there are so many living witnesses
thereof: And that they are more suitable to the sincerity of the Gospel, and
the integrity of a good Christians conscience, I nothing doubt, but that all
men equally affected, upon due survey of both, will most easily and freely
grant. Of what validity or worth then this his later work is, I leave to the
understanding Reader to judge, doubtless that his Anatomy and Bellum
Ceremoniale, can never be reconciled to this his Cassander Anglicanus, but
does most clearly contradict and confute the same, evincing it to be utterly
erroneous, and unsound. And concerning the Tract it self, I observe diverse
things worthy to be remarked: First, it has met with some Iesuit-like Index
expurgatorius: For, falling into the hands of the Prelates (or at least of some
of their Chaplains) not to speak of other Purgations, it is in one place
purged of this whole Paragraphe following, scil: It scandalizeth and offends
the Bishops, making them guilty of many sins, in depriving so many and so
worthy Ministers for trifling ceremonies: which hindering and forbidding to
preach, is by the H. Ghost reproved and plagued. Amos. 2. 12. and 8. 12. Act.
17. and 4. 18. and 5. 28. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 16. As for example.

First, to put by Gods substantial and necessary worships by him commanded for
trifling and indifferent ceremonies of humane invention.

Secondly, to rob the people of the appointed food of their souls, and
ordinary means of their faith, Romans 10. 17. Regeneration. 1. Cor. 4. 16. and
salvation, 1. Cor. 1. 21, matters of so great importance for trifles of so
small consequence; yea for these things to take away many a true Sheppard, and
to commit or leave the flock unto many a Wolf and blind guide, which will
either make havoc of them, or lead them into the ditch of destruction.

Thirdly, to leave the Papists cause wholly, 1. by retaining their ceremonies,
2. suppressing our best Ministers, 3. by withdrawing or misspending the gifts
of themselves and others to mutual brawles, and so to give them rest to
mischief the Church, and increase their Synagogue, 4. by opening their mouth
to blaspheme the Gospel by these our mutual brables.

Fourthly, to drive many hereby on the rock of Schism, and lamentable
Separation: the plentiful experience whereof has bred much grief in the
hearts of the well affected.

Fifthly, to undo so many Ministers and their families, of very good desert,
of the means of their maintenance, to their utter undoing, being so fitted for
the Ministry, and unfitted for any thing else.

Sixthly, to cause the Sabbath, a moral precept of God, to be profaned for
ceremonies of men's addition and that in so many places of the Nation.

Seventhly, to punish the people for the fault of their Pastor (if any be:) For
it is the Minister that conformeth not, but by his silencing the people are
plagued, Pro. 29. 18. Hosea. 4. 6. This is injustice to punish one man for the
offense of another.

Eighthly, to do a thing clean contrary to that themselves pray for, at least
which Christ commands to pray for. For Christ commands his to pray to the LORD
of the harvest, that he would thrust forth laborers into his harvest; which
when he has done, they thrust them out. Math. 9. 38.

Ninthly, it utterly undoeth the Minister (a painful labourer of Jesus Christ)
as also his wife and children, and disableth them to live, which by Gods
apoyntment should be maintained, 1. Cor. 9. 14. yea well maintainded, 1. Tim.
5. 17. This is opposite to the law of love and Justice. Whereby it does
manifestly appear, that the Author is very grossly abused, because his whole
mind is not published, but so much only as best serves the Prelates turn, a
trick not unusual with them for their advantage. Witness amongst others the
English translation of Bucanus his Common places. Whereout the Authors
discourse touching Discipline (translated by Doctor Hill, yea imprinted) is
taken, and a discourse of Bishops government put into the room thereof; both
without Doctor Hills knowledge. Nay, has not this Index expurgatorius tampered
with the holy Scriptures themselves? Observe for the present but two places,
Act. 14. 23. is thus translated, not only in the Geneva, but also in the
former Church translation, And when they had ordained them Elders by election.
But the new translation with the Rhemists, leaves out these words, by
election. Why? It is not to be suffered, that the people should have any hand
in choosing their ministers, but papal Bishops must do all, 1. Cor. 12. 28. is
translated both by the Geneva, and former Church translation, Helpers,
Governors; but the new translators herein worse then the Rhemists, translate it
Helps in governments, foisting into the Text this preposition [in.] Why? They
cannot abide Elders to assist the minister in governing Christ his Church. So
that Curchwardens are but the Prelates promoters. But we must pass by this as
their natural weakness, seeing it is sucked in with the milk of their mother,
scil. the Church of Rome, from whom they have received their callings, and also
these corruptions thus by them pleaded for, together with this unscholler like,
nay dishonest means of upholding the same.

2 The terms of the main conclusion of the whole Tractate are to be
considesidered. scil. It is necessary for a Minister to conform to the
ceremonies prescribed in the Church of England, rather then to suffer
deprivation. Where it is to be noted, 1. that he speaks not one word in
defense of the subscription required, and yet most, if not all these that are
debarred from the execution of the work of the Ministry in our Churches,
whether they have been heretofore silenced, or not, are debarred principally
for refusal of the said subscription. To very little purpose therefore are his
four inferences laid down in the third page of his book; nay in truth to very
little purpose were his whole book, were he able to justify all he has
written, which all wise men may easily perceive that he is never able to
perform.

2. That he speaks so saintly for those ceremonies, that not daring to say,
the required conformity is necessary, either in it self, or in respect of the
Magistrates command, he says only this, That it is necessaty rather then to
suffer deprivation. So that as in the Paragraph gelded by the Prelates, it is
evident, that extra casum deprivationis, a Minister is not to be blamed for
not conforming to them in this Authors judgment; nay that the Prelates are
rather utterly to be blamed for requiring Conformity thereto.

3 Every of those three arguments, whereby he endeavors to prove this
conclusion, falls as much too short of proving the conclusion, as the
conclusion it self does of condemning the silenced Ministers of sin for not
conforming rather then to suffer deprivation, which are not deprived for not
conforming, but for not subscribing, which he himself amongst his religious
friends has often both of old, and also of late professed, he neither would
nor could yield to do for any man's pleasure under heaven, what loss or
punishment soever he suffered therefore.

The first Argument drawn from the doctrine and practice of the Apostles, who
taught that the Jewish Ceremonies were beggarly rudiments, Traditions,
Will-worships, Doctrines of Men, etc. and yet did practice the same; besides
many other just exceptions, is guilty of the fallacy, a been divisis ad male
coniuncta, seeing it is altogether as false, that the Apostle did so teach, and
yet so practice in the same Churches, as it is true that they did so teach, and
yet so practice at all. For among the Jews, and in their Churches only did
they so practice, to whom those Mosaicall Ceremonies were even lately before
the saving ordinances of God given by God himself, for their edification and
training up in religion to eternal life. And the Author has utterly failed to
prove that the Apostles did so teach as is abouesayd, in any of those Churches,
but only in the Gentile Churches, to whom they were never given by God to any
such end, nor indeed at all, and there the Apostle Paul would not by any means
suffer the use and practice of those Ceremonies to be brought in, no not for
the space of an hour, Galath. 2. 5. but rather sharply reproved Peter and
Barnabas openly and to the face, for giving way thereunto, Gal. 2. 14. lest by
building again the things he had destroyed, he should make himself a
transgresser, Gal. 2. 18. And hereto agree the rest, Acts 21. 25. And if he
would not give way, no not for an hour, that the Mosaicall Ceremonies should
be used in the Gentile Churches, although they had lately been unto the Jews
(of whom came salvation, Ioh. 4. 22.) the heavenly Ordinances of GOD, given
them for their building up in grace, how much less would he have suffered our
rotten and accursed ceremonies to have been brought in, that never had better
birth, then from Hell by the Devil, and Antichrist, for the defacing of Gods
glory, and destruction of his people. Wherefore the doctrine and practice of
the Apostles is most fully and flatly against him in this point, and his
fallacious argument worse then sie upon it. Yet further, If those ceremonies
did turn the Gentile Churches from the truth, as he says, quoting for proof,
Tit. 1. 14. which once having in them the breath of life, led the Jews to the
truth, even to Christ, Gal. 3. 24. Whither do ours, that never had better
breath in them, then the poison of destruction, turn, yea drive and thrust men.

As for the Apostles enioyning the Gentiles to abstain from blood and
strangled, himself does give sufficient answer to it. Where, by
distinguishing, he shows, that ours are not of the like kind, seeing the
practice of the one stands in matter of abstinence, and of the other in matter
of action, and so do differ toto coelo.

Finally, it is needful for this man, in mine opinion, to repent himself of
his accusing the Apostles of the Lord, yea the Holy Ghost it self, to teach
one thing and practice the contrary. Which can be no less (the holy Ghost it
self being judge) then to build by doctrine, and destroy by practice the same
things, and so to be guilty of transgression, Gal. 2. 18. And his second
argument is no better then the first, being plainly guilty of the fallacy which
Scholars call ignoratio elenchi: for the argument lies, as if the duties
therein mentioned, were both affirmative: which is utterly false. For we
profess our selves restrained by the negative part of the 2d Commandment. Now
let him, if he can, show where any negative part of the first Table is to give
place to any affirmative of either first or second, and then I will confess,
that he has spoken more then is to be found in all his impertinent and
confused rumble about this point, and also, that he has anihilated that old
distinction of Schoolmen, scil. of Commandments binding semper, or ad semper,
neither will it suffice to tell us of Sacrifices of the old Testament, which
fell under the second commandment, not immediately, but mediatly, scil.
mediante praecepto ceremoniali, so that in this, as in the former, there are
very many words, and much labor bestowed altogether beside the point in
question, and the whole argumentation is utterly deceitful.

Moreover, the one of the duties here by him compared, scil. the bearing
witness against the Ceremonies, is but one consequent among many, flowing from
our obedience to the second commandment in refusing the said conformity. Now
what good dealing is this, first to change the nature of the precept, whereto
we perform obedience in refusing the said conformity from negative to
affirmative, and then to put one consequent of many flowing from this
obedience, for the whole obedience it self? If this be not deceitful dealing,
what is, or can be.

Lastly, if this Argument of his be so firm and good against us, as he would
have his Reader believe, then I desire him in his next, to teach me how to
free Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego mentioned Dan. 3. from being worthy of
blame. For if their case should fall under such Legier-demaine as this of his,
a man might call their refusing to fall down before the golden image, nothing
more but a bearing witness against the image, and say, that they being great
Magistrates, did prefer the bearing witness against the image a less duty,
before the duties of the Magistracy, and of preserving their own lives, which
by this man's reckning, should be greater duties, and so be guilty of sin in so
doing. For that the loss of the lives, and deprivation of so great places in
the Magistracy of three so gracious and eminent persons as these, is of
greater moment and consequence, then the deprivation of any three of us from
our Ministry, none can reasonably deny. The like may be said of very many of
the Martyrs of Christ, both former and later: but a taste is as much as I
intend, this therefore shall suffice.

Neither is his third and last argument any thing. less ill, but rather worse,
if worse may be, then either of the former. For it is liable to both the parts
of the Orthodox Protestants answer to the Papists argument of universality, and
more then so: For first, to patch up his forged universality, he foysteth in a
multitude of corrupt Fathers, and brownpaper fellows, being Lutherans, or
worse, which approving almost all the superstitious ceremonies of Papistry, are
in this case no competent judges, nor allowable witnesses. Secondly, he cannot
be ignorant, that all Orthodox Protestants do answer the Papists thus: That an
argument from humane authority in such a case, is very insufficient. And
lastly, he well knows, that all incompetent judges or witnesses set a part,
he has been offered to his face an Oliver for a Rowla^d readily to be given
him, and more then so (that is) more witnesses of the truly Orthodox to be
against him, then he can find to be with him, so that neither is this consent
so universal, as he boasts of, nor if it were, is it any thing worth in this
case, and so both antecedent and consequence are both naught. Also what a
multitude of Papal, nay worse then Papal rites both his ancienter and later
witnesses maintain, himself in this his Tractate being judge; I leave to the
Judicious Reader to consider: for they are so many and so beastly, that I will
never once defile my pen with relating them. Only this question I will
propound to the Author, desiring him as in Gods presence to answer me. scil.
Whether the residue of the Papists ceremonies may not be maintained by this
argument as well as these of ours? And if yea; then why he does not as well
blame all Orthodox Protestants for rejecting the one, as for refusing the
other? yea, why he does not also persuade all Calvinists, in matter of
Ceremony, to Conform to Rome.

There are very many other weighty, and just exceptions to be taken to the said
arguments and the Prossyllogismes brought for the proof thereof, but my
purpose, at this time, and in this place, is only to touch them, and therefore
not willing to hold thee any longer from the body of this treatise, I take my
leave, beseeching thee to take the pains advisedly to peruse it, and God to
make thee rightly to understand, and wisely to judge of it, and also to give
thee grace to love the known truth and to walk in the same, according to al thy
might; For many are therefore given up to believe lies, through strange
delusions, because they received not the love of the truth that they might be
saved, 2. These. 2. 10. 11. Now the very God of peace sanctify thee throughout
in thy person and in all thy ways and works, and I pray God that thy whole
spirit, and soul, and body may be kept blameless unto the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, even so Amen.

TO THE MOST CHRISTIAN and excellent Prince, our gracious and Dread Sovereign
JAMES by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, etc.
We the Ministers and Preachers of the Church of England, that desire
Reformation, wish a long prosperous and happy reign over us in this life, and
in the next everlasting salvation.
MOst gracious and dread Sovereign) we little thought when first our humble
Perition was exhibited to your excellent Majesty, (it being both for the matter
honest, and for the manner peaceable) should have found so hard entertainment
abroad, as that this action of ours so Answ. to the Petit. Epist. Ded. p. 4. l.
21.
secretly, orderly, and lawfully enterprised, should be by public writing
traduced, as unduly, and dishonestly attempted. Our meaning was only to
intimate to your Majesty the state of our Church, not to lay open the nakedness
of our Mother to the scandal of the enemy, nor to appeal to inferior judges,
to the prejudice of your Majesty, to whom the cognizance of this cause, and
deciding of this strife of right appertains.

We trust therefore that as Abraham composed the variance between Genes. 13.
Exodus: 2.
his, and Lots servants, Moses between the Hebrews, Constantine among the
Church Ministers so it will please your Majesty to be a judge between us, and
to give us leave to defend and justify our innocent cause. As for us we say
with the Apostles: We cannot but speak the things, which we have seen and
heard: and approve that saying Act: 4. 20.
of Hierome: Minoris peccati est sequi malum, quod bonum putaris, quam non
audere defendere quod pro bono Dialog. 1. advers. Pelagian.
certo noveris.

Now then most noble King, give your faithful subjects and unsained lovers of
the truth, your princely leave to justify their honest and godly petition,
which has been by some of our Brethren in their heat impugned. In which their
enterprise we humbly crave license to propound certain general observations,
which we refer to your Highness Christian consideration.

First whereas we your Majesty's 1. Observation. Opposition between the Kings
judgment and the Censurers of Oxford.
humble Petitioners have throughout conformed our desires and requests to your
Majesty's judgment, who have wished us to judge of your future proiects,
according to your bypast actions: and have proportioned our suites after the
rule prescribed in your Majesty's book, which you would Preface to Basil.
have taken of all men as an image of your mind, and a Discovery of that which
may be looked for at your hands: Yet our brethren to our understanding, have
been bold in diverse points to oppose their indgement to your Majesty's.

1. They count it an unsufferable Page 7.
thing to permit: any thing touching the government of the Church: to be so
much as questioned: Whereas it has pleased your Majesty in your princely
wisdom, to permit, and will a conference of the learned concerning such
matters.

2. They will not grant that these Page 10.
articulated, are the peccant humors of the Church, and so consequently
acknowledge none: Your Majesty says otherwise: no kingdom lackes her own
diseases: and seems not to be ignorant of corruptions stolen into the state.

3 They justify ceremonies and traditions not warranted by the word, as the
cross in baptism, the surplice, interrogatories ministered to infants,
Confirmation: But your Majesty Basil. p. 18. 19.
has showed us to ground our conscience only upon the express Scripture, and
to discern between the express will and Commandment of God in his word, and
the invention, and ordinance of man.

4. They count them turbulent p. 14.
that would not have the Apocrypha read in the Church: But your Majesty's
judgment is otherwise: as to the apocrypha books I omit them, because Basil.
p. 1.
I am no Papist, and indeed some of them are no ways like the ditement of the
Spirit of God.

5. Your Majesty's princely resolution Basil. p. 43.
is to see all your Churches within your Dominions planted with good Pastors:
Our brethren say it is impossible, and that the defects of some p. 15. Ans:
men may be better supplied by other means then by preaching, as by reading of
Scripture, and of homilies, p. 16. p. 14.
and of the service book: and that all Ministers were not preachers in the
primitive Church.

6. Your Majesty most truly affirms Basil. p. 4.
according to the Apostle, that faith comes by hearing the word preached: Our
brethren say that the P. 16. Ans.
reading of Scriptuers, of Sermons, and Homilies, are the ordinary effectual
means to increase faith.

7. Your Majesty's Christian motion to the University is, that leases of their
tithes impropriate be so demised, as Ecclesiastical persons only may be
maintained and enabled to execute their functions, the Collegdes being provided
for. But our Brethren do charge the p. 19.
Petitioners for this motion with lack of conscience.

8. Your Majesty's care is, that the Basil. p. 43.
doctrine be preserved in purity according to Gods word: The Petitioners for
moving to have an uniformity of Doctrine, and all popish opinions abolished,
are challenged for shameless p. 13.
suggestions.

9. Your Majesty's will is, that the Basil. 13.
discipline be likewise preserved in purity according to the word of God: The
Petitioners humbly desire accordingly that the discipline may be administered
according to Christ's institution: for this motion they are reproved. p. 20.


10. Your Majesty most princelike Basil. praef.
professes, equally to love and honor the learned and grave men, of either
opinion: that like better of the single form of policy in the Church of
Scotland, or of the many ceremonies in the Church of England. Our brethren
Epist. p. 5.
count the Petitioners Shismaticks, Hypocrites, dishonest persons, for
misliking of some ceremonies, and other abuses, and wish the land were clean
purged of them.

11. Your Majesty gives this honorable Basil. praef: 11.
testimony of the godly ministers of Scotland, that there is presently a
sufficient number of good men of them in that kingdom: But the Confuters p. 30.
say, There are not many men brought up among them in this last reformed age,
worthy of that wonted honorable maintenance.

12. Your Majesty specially provideth for keeping holy the Lords day: so that
always the Sabboths be kept holy, and no unlawful pastime be used: But our
brethren seem to urge the Ans. p. 13
rest upon other holy days as strictly as upon the Lords day.

Whatsoever opinion is conceived of our brethren, and howsoever they are men of
credit and estimation in the world: these humble petitioners would by no means
hane presumed thus to have thwarted your Majesty's Christian judgment: We for
our parts wish none other reformation, then your Majesty's own profession has
given us hope of: We thank God for your Christian judgment and constant
resolution: It is our happiness that God has sent us such a king, not only
noble in princely birth and nativity, but in virtue, knowledge and piety as
the preacher says: Blessed art thou, O Eccl. 10. 17
Land, when thy King is the son of Nobles: and such an one as Ambrose
describes the King of Ninivie: ser. 40.
Necesse erat, ut qui potentior cunctis fuerat, devotior fieret universis.

Further, may it please your Majesty 2. Observat. difference between the old
and new Oxford doctors.
to understand how much these Doctors and Proctors of Oxford do vary from the
judgment of their predecessors, approving those abuses and corruptions, which
were even in the time of Popery condemned in a Council held at Oxford under
Stephen Langthon Archbishop of Canterbury, not above 250. years since.

1. There the Pastors are enjoined, Consil: oxoniens: sub steph:
Vt plebes sibi commissas, etc. That they procure the people committed unto
them to be informed with the food of Gods word: otherwise canes muti
iudicentur; they are counted dumb dogs: But these Oxford men excuse
unpreaching Ministers, affirming that all were not Preachers in the primitive
Church. page 14.

2. They decreed that none should be admitted to a vicarage, nisi velit etc.
unless he will be personally resident in his Church. They condemn
Non-residence, these justify Non-residents. page 17.

3. They decreed, that if they which are admitted to Cures of a certain value,
were not resident, seeing bread must not be given but to those that labor,
Ecclesijs suis spolientur, etc. should be deprived. But these count it an
uncharitable act, yea though other provision be made for them, that they which
cannot labor should be removed. p. 15.

4. They would have no spiritual offices farmed, under pain of suspension:
statuentes, etc. decreeing that no Archdeaconry, Deanery, or other Office,
which consists in mere spiritual things, nulli dentur ad firmam, etc. be
put to none to farm. These count it an indifferent thing. page 24.

5. Old Oxford men thought good that none should be excommunicate where the
fault is not apparent, Nisi canonica monitione praecedente, unless they be
canonically, that is, thrice admonished. These new Oxford men count it contempt
for the which men are now excommunicate. p. 23. when as they use but once to
be summoned before.

6. They forbid, Ne praesumant pariter iudices esse and actores: that they
should not be both judges and actors, or promoters. But these simply approving
the oath ex officio, p. 25. do consequently allow such proceedings, for in this
case the Judge dealing Ex officio is an agent and promotor of the cause.

7. They punish such Advocates qui protrahunt matrimonium malitiose, etc. which
wittingly protract suits of marriage: and such are excommunicated because by
them it comes to pass, ut contra iustitiam processus causae diutius
suspendatur: the proceeding in the cause is longer, then justice would,
suspended. But these take upon them to defend longsomnesse of suits in
Ecclesiastical courts.

8. They determine, Ne Monachus vel Canonicus Ecclesiam audeat retinere ad
firmam: That no Monk or Canon should hold any Church to farm: but these
maintain the demising of impropriate Churches to lay Farmers, p. 19. which is
more unlawful.

9. They thought good, Vt in singulis Ecclesijs, ubi parochia est diffusa, duo
sint vel tres presbyteri: That in great parishes there should be two or three
presbyters. But these allow two or three parishes to one Presbyter. p. 18.

10. This Council prohibiteth, Ne Clerici iurisdictiones exerceant seculares,
etc. That Cleargy-men exercise not secular jurisdictions, especially to the
which the judgment of blood is annexed, and not to be present where the
judgment of blood is handled. But now it is an usual thing with our brethren,
not only to be present, but to sit as assistants to the Judge in matters of
life and death.

Thus was it decreed in those superstitious times: It may seem strange that
any professing purity of religion should come short of them in those duties;
for our righteousness Math. 5. Homil. 5. Exodus
should exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees. And as Origin
well says, Movenda sunt castra cum Israelitis, urgenda est perfectio. Our
brethren should have run before their blind predecessors in pious
proceedings, not be cast behind them: to have moved their tents forward to
Canaan, not to have looked back to the corruptions of Egypt.

Beside as our brethren have thus 3. observat.
failed in the matter, so they have been much overseen in the manner of
handling. They have burdened the Petitioners, and others, with many untrue
accusations, laying to their charge, lewd, absurd, false suggestions, untrue
imputations.
clamorous libels, defamatory supplications, p. 5. We are further accused to be
Schismatikes, p. 5. Puritans, resembled to Papists, Epist. p. 9. Dislikers of
set and stinted prayers, refusers, condemners of the Lords prayer, such as from
whom Barrow and Greenwood took their beginning, p. 11. favorers of those
which write against Princes titles, p. 9. That some of us have caused our
servants to go to plough and cart upon the feast day of Christ's nativity, p.
13. Men accustomed to disobedience, p. 23. That we give power to the Presbytery
to excommunicate Kings: that we give the Prince, not potestatem iuris, but
only facti, p. 29. We are also charged with undue and dishonest practice, in
making petition, Epist. p. 4. with hypocrisy, Ans. p. 10. with factious
Sermons, scurrile Pamphlets, ibid. To have the hands of Esau, Epi. p. 8. The
mouth of iniquity, p. 31. To be Foxes, Epist. p. 11. Evil, malicious,
ungrateful men, p. 30. Neither have our brethren stayed here, but they have
taken upon them also to censure others: some they call busy headed strangers,
imputing unto them the want of manners and discretion, to take upon them in a
state wherein they have nothing to do, in which words they seem to mean some
who should not be in our opinion counted strangers, seeing we are all under one
God and King.

Now may it please your Majesty, what could we do less, then being thus
uniustly accused, by a modest and true defense, to deliver our selves and our
brethren from these imputations, being not secretly surmised, but publicly,
and that in writing; yea and in your Majesty's ears suggested. We doubt not
but your Majesty will grant us equal hearing, as King Agrippa said to Paul: Act.
26. 1
thou art permitted to speak for thy self. We press not to offend them but
being provoked defend our selves, as Hierom says: Vulneratus nequaquam contra
persecutorem tela divexi, sed ad Russin:
meo tantum vulneri admovi manum.

Lastly, we note our brethrens oversight 4. observat.
in their manner of proceeding in public impugning what was secretly
intended, and in proclaiming to the world that which only we presented to your
Majesty. And whereas our brethren suggest, that soon after (this our petition
and motion being made) were sent forth Epist: p. 3.
into all quarters of the Realm store of the said pretended Petitions. It is
true may is please your Majesty, that no copies of the said petition were
delivered to any beside our selves, (excepting that only which was exhibited to
your Majesty) since which time no copies at all were dispersed into any
quarters of the realm, much less into all: neither before were any hands
required to it, but only consent. So that notwithstanding these pretenses our
brerhren are found to be troublers of the state, not the petitioners, and to
have blown the coals, and kindled the flames, which we go about to quench.

Wherefore we humbly desire your Majesty, that it be not imputed to us as a
presumptuous part to answer for our selves being provoked, neither prejudicial
to the conference determined: we may verily say with Hierome, si superbum Ad
Theoph.
sit respondisse, multo sit superbius accusasse. If it be a proud thing
modestly to answer, much more insolently to accuse.

Beside, as is our Brethrens cause, such are their proofs: they have
inmayntena^ce The Censurers sparing in their proofs out of Scripture.
of their fa^sies throughout their book alleged, but one text of scripture for
any matter in question between us, which are about the number of thirty
several points, so that we may say unto them in Augustines words: Qui divina
testimonia non sequuntur pondus humani testimonij perdiderunt. They which
follow not the divine testimony, have lost the credit of their own.

Now we humbly commend the innocence of our felues, and the goodness of our
cause to your Majesty's Christian judgment: we sue for nothing but wherein
Gods word does bear us out, whereof your Majesty has given us hope, and for
the which we doubt not but to answer for our selves in the presence of God. We
trust that God has raised your Majesty up as another David, to settle the
pillars of the earth Psalm. 73. 3.
that were shaken: and as the Prophet says, to take off the heavy burdens,
Esaias 58. 6.
burthenous ceremonies, burthenous censures, burthenous abuses, which many have
a long time groned under. Augustine to this purpose says well, handling these
words of the Psalm, They have ploughed upon my In Psa. 128.
back: Ascend in dorsum meum portare te habeo, etc. Nunquid semper super
dorsum meum eris: veniet tandem qui te inde excutiet. And he is now come we
trust which shall break these yokes: and God we are persuaded will enable your
Majesty to do that which shall be acceptable to himself, profitable to his
Church, comfortable to your own soul, that we may all salute your Majesty with
the salutation of the Church of David, Psa. 20. 4. 5
the Lord grant thee according to thine heart, and fulfill all thy purpose,
that we may rejoice in thy salvation, and set up our banner in the house of
God, when the Lord shall perform all thy petitions, that we may all
triumpha^tly say of your Majesty, as Ambrose of Ambr. Theodosij fides.
the good Emperor Theodosius: Iacobi regis fides nostra victoria.

Your Majesty's most faithful subjects, The humble Petitioners, the Ministers
and Preachers that desire reformation according to the word of God.

THE ANATOMY OF THE CONTROVERSED CEREMONIES OF THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND, BEING
considered in their Nature and Circumstances. By John Sprint Minister of
Thornby in GLOCESTERSHIRE.
1 Beginning. 1 Blind zeal and superstition, as the Fountain. 2 Tradition,
as the stream and Channel. 3 Popish Masse-booke, as the puddle.
2 End. 1 Of inventing 1 To please Jew and Gentile by a perverse imitation. 2
To paint Gods Worship with a needless adornation.
2 Of maintaining 1 To claw and curry favor with Papists, Atheists, etc. 2 Vo
uphold our Church corruptions, 1 Lordly Prelacie. 2 Non-residency. 3 Dumb
Ministry.
3 To snare the faithful professor. 4 To nourish the carnal Gospeller. 5 To
thrust out the faithful Teacher. 6 To keep out Christ's Discipline.

3 Persons 1 For them. 1 Ordaining 1 Satan inspired them. 2 Man invented them.
3 Fathers by tradition delivered them.
2 Commanding and enforcing them. 1 The Beast. 1 Antichrist. 2 His Bishops.
2 Man. 1 The Magistrate abused. 2 Lordly Prelates abusing.

3 Defending 1 Popish Champions. 2 Dignified Chaplins, alias Chop-livings. 3
Covetous Chancellors. 4 Ambitious Pluralists. 5 Symonaicall Patrons, alias
Latrons.
4 Approving. 1 Impious Atheists. 2 Ignorant Papists. 3 Dumb Homilists. 4
Temporizing Statists. 5 Povvling Registers. 6 Provvling Paritors. 7 Prating
Proctors. 8 All profane livers.

2 Against them 1 Refusing the most faithful, painful, blessed 1 Pastors. 2
Exiles. 3 Martyrs.
2 Disliking the most zealous and godly people of all sorts. 3 Disproving the
most sincere and learned, foreign and English 1 Writers. 2 Preachers.
4 Rejecting the purest and best reformed Churches.

4 Matter 1 Negative: No ordinances or commandments of God. 2 Affirmative. 1
Man's 1 Inventions. 2 Precepts. 3 Traditions.
2 Antichrists 1 Idols. 2 Will-vvorships. 3 Relics.


5. Manner of urging and maintaining 1 Reasoning 1 Cavilling. 2 Railing. 3
Slandering. 4 Stirring up the Magistrate 1 Against the Innocent. 2 Against
their Brethren,

2 Censuring 1 Suspending. 2 Excommunicating 1 For a trifle. 2 For things good.
3 Ipsofacto.
3 Deposing, depriving, degrading of 1 Law. 2 Living. 3 Ministry.


6 Quality 1 Needless and superfluous; because 1 Added to Gods perfect
Ordinances. 2 Gods Church and worship may be without them. 3 Not required of
God, nor having any special or general ground out of the Word.
2 Unprofitable; because they 1 Edify not Men. 2 Glorify not God. 3 Serve not
in the Church 1 For Order. 2 For decency.

3 Hurtful unto the 1 Weak, by offense. 2 Ignorant, by superstition. 3
Popish, by Idolatry. 4 Brethren, by dissension. 5 Godly, by 1 Inward grief. 2
Outward persecution.
6 Schismatickes, by separation.
Occasioned. 4 Wicked against the 2d. commandment. 1 In disgracing the
Sacraments, and Worship of God. 2 In being defiled with superstion and
Idolatry. 3 In being the monuments of Idolatry. 4 In being Will-worships. 5 In
bringing into Gods Worship the manner of 1 Jews. 2 Gentiles. 3 Heretics 4
Papists.
6 In being symbolicall or signifying holy signs of man's invention.


Effect. 1 In the persons for them 1 Prescribers and maintainers. 1 Privation,
or abolishing of good: namely of -- 1 Of Christian liberty to bind the
conscience 1 Where God has not tied. 2 Where Christ has freed. 3 Under the
same censures are greater penalty and strictnes then the breach of Gods
commandments. 4 Not to do that 1 Which is agreeing to the Word. 2 Which God
co^ma^ds

2 Exercises of Religion, Gods own ordinances 1 Preaching. 2 Prophesying. 3
Fasting. 4 Dispossessing.
3 Quiet and peace of the Church. 4 People robbed of their Pastors. 5 Painful
Pastors of their maintenance.
2 Occasion of e-evill, of 1 Sin, 1 Abuse of censures in 1 Suspending. 2
Excommunicating 1 Vainly. 2 Unjustly 3 Ungodly 4 Ipso facto
3 Depriving
2 Profanation of 1 Sabbath. 2 Worship.
3 Tyranny in Prelates. 4 A foul-murdring ministry 1 Dumb. 2 Non-resident
5 Carnal liberty, Atheism, and gross ignorance in the people. 6 Contempt of
GODS 1 Word. 2 Ministry.

2 Punishment: Judgments certainly following these evils. 1 Bodily. 2
Spiritual.


2 Users (a)
2 In the persons against them (b)

(a) Users 1 For love. 1 A Cloak of their 1 Ignorance. 2 Slothfulness. 3
Fleshlinesse. 4 Covetousness. 5 False and corrupt Doctrine. 6 Scandalous life.
2 A spur and sword unto their 1 Envy and Malice. 2 Railing, disgracing and
persecuting of their

2 For fear. 1 By present practice 1 Destroying former doctrine. 2 Shutting up
the mouth against corruptions 3 Quenching their zeal. 4 Wounding their
conscience. 5 Rejoicing the enemies of the truth. 6 Grieving the friends of the
truth. 7 Estranged from the better part. 8 Linked to the worser part, in 1
Affection. 2 Practice. 3 Fellowship
9 Confirming and countenacing the Prelates ungodly and tyrannous proceedings.
10 Alluring and occasioning others to fall by their (...)
2 By preparation unto 1 Subscription unlimited and ex animo to that all good
Christians consciences do ex animo abl^ 2 To plead for the great corruption of
1 Lordly Domination 2 Dumb Ministry. 3 Non-residency.
3 To practice, favor, and maintain them. 4 To oppose and persecute 1 The
cause of God. 2 Their innocent and godly bre^^^^^



(b) In persons against them 1 Refusing 1 God is glorified. 2 The truth is
justified. 3 The godly edified and strengthened. 4 The adversaries mouths
stopped. 5 The ignorant provoked to search and find the truth. 6 Themselves
have 1 Peace of conscience. 2 Trial of patience. 3 Note of faithfulness. 4
Joy in suffering. 5 Increase of zeal. 6 Hope of glory.

2 Removing 1 Evil falls 1 Corruptions in 1 Doctrine. Of the Church 2
Ministry. Of the Church 3 Government. Of the Church
2 Scandal to the 1 Godly. 2 Weak. 3 Wicked.
3 Profanation in 1 Sacraments. 2 Worship. 3 Sabbath.
4 Papistry, Atheism, open wickedness.
2 Good flourishes 1 Increase of faithful Pastors. 2 Increase of godliness
in the people. 3 Purity of 1 Doctrine. 2 Worship.
4 Peace, love, and decent order in the Church. 5 Co^formity with the 1. Word.
2 Best reformed Church
6 Gods blessing on 1 Church 2 Whole land.




BELLVM CEREMONIALE, THE CEREMONIAL BATTLE.
Behold the Leaders and the Soldiers.
The better part disclaimes them. The worser sort retains them. 1 God never
planted, nor his spirit inspired them. 1 Satan inspired them, Man invented
them. 2 Christ has freed us from them. 2 Antichrist enthrales us with them. 3
Holy Apostles never taught, nor practiced them. 3 Romish Apostates ever taught
and practiced them. 4 Christian Churches reformed have abolished them. 4
Antichristian Romish church deformed retains them. 5 Word of God condemns
them. 5 Mass book justifies them. 6 Purest Writers conclude against them, 6
Popish vvriters patronise them. 7 Godly Martyrs suffered for them. 7 Ungodly
Bishops persecute for them. 8 The godly zealous Exiles withstood them, 8
Carnal contentious Exiles stood for them. 9 The most Reverend Bishops wished
them removed to further the Gospel. 9 The most tyrannous proud Prelates
suppresseth the Gospel for them. 10 Our soundest Doctors taught against them.
10 Our popish Rabbis and corrupt Statists plead for them. 11 Our faithful and
unreproved Pastors refuse them. 11 All scandalous Non-residents, Non-preaching
Ministers use them. 12 All sincere Professors are offended at them, and detest
them. 12 All popish carnal and wicked haters of God rejoice in them.

The Weapons.
1 Offending svvord of the Spirit. 2 Defending shield of 1 Faith. 2 Patience.

1 Offending 1 Svvord 2 edges 1 Railing, slandering. 2 persecuting, imprisoning.
2 Cannon 1 Excommunicating. 2 Suspending. 3 depriving of Living Law.
4 degrading or deposing

2 Defending by the buckler of authority -- 1 Fathers traditions. 2 Men's
precepts.

The Event of the Battle.
1 Humiliation in Gods sight. 1 Increase of pride before God and Man. 2
Exercise of Christian patience. 2 Practice of Antichristian cruelty. 3 Trial
of faithfulness. 3 Discovery of unfaithfulness. 4 Unity of faith. 4 Endless
dissentions. 5 Increase of love among themselves. 5 Increase of contentions
among brethren. 6 Godly zeal inflamed. 6 Superstitious zeal occasioned. 7
Conformity with Christ and the godly. 7 Conformity with Antichrist and
Worldlings. 8 Peace of conscience. 8 Conscience accusing. 9 Joy in suffering. 9
Terror in persecuting, 10 Furtherance of the Gospel. 10 Hinderance of the
Gospel. 11 Christian liberty maintained. 11 Bondage enforced. 12 Offenses
removed. 12 Offenses given. 13 The elect converted. 13 The wicked hardened. 14
The truth cleared. 14 Papistry cloked. 15 Gods blessing on their life and
labors that vvithstand them. 15 Gods judgments on the hand of them that
maintain them. 16 Gods holy name glorified. 16 Gods holy name blasphemed. 17
Pleasing the godly, greiuing the wicked. 17 Grieving the godly, pleasing the
wicked. 18 Confidence and gladness at the judgment day. 18 Confusion and
trembling before the judgment seat of God.

THE DEFENSE OF THE PETITION FOR REFORMATION.
The Reply to the general censures.
CENSVRE. 1. IT is inconvenient and unsufferable to permit a long and
well-setled state of government to be so much as questioned.
Ans. First then, wherein the state is well-setled, we neither make question
nor desire alteration: but where some wants and imperfections are found, which
are indeed no parts of our state, but blemishes, it is neither inconvenient for
your Majesty, where you see cause to alter, nor unsufferable in us to make
question. It is both honorable to your Majesty to supply what is wanting, to
restore what is decaying, to remove what is offending; and we trust not
disloyal in us to desire some things to be questioned, and conferred upon,
which your Mry in your Christian policy sees neither to be inconvenient nor
insufferable. It is an honor for Princes to add to their predecessors work,
as Joshua did to Moses, Solomon to David's, Nehemiah to Zorobabels. Religion is
perfected by degrees, and reformation can Religion perfected by degrees. Lib.
7. in Luc.
hardly be wrought in one age. Ambrose says well: Non in principijs perfecta
quaeruntur: sed a principijs ad ea quae perfecta sunt pervenitur. The
perfection of things is not sought in their beginnings; but men proceed from
the beginnings to those things which are perfect. The Law Imperial says: Qui
subtiliter factum emendat, laudabilior Cod. lib. 1. tit. 2. l. 1. Justinian.
est eo qui primus invenit. He that exactly bettereth that which is done,
deserves more commendation then he who first invented it. And as for your
Majesty's poor subjects the Ministers of the Gospel, we have greater cause
to think our selves happy that we may pour out our complaints into your
Christian bosom, then Paul did for that he was suffered to answer before king
Agrippa; and we doubt Acts 26. 3.
not but that your princely ears are open to hear us for our selves, that
would have us heard for your self, as Ambrose says to Theodosius: Ipse non
audies eos, quos pro Ambros. epi. 29. ad Theodos.
te audire velis. Will not you hear those, whom you desire may be heard for
you.

2. Cens. Augustine says, The very change of custom otherwise profitable,
hurts by innovation.
Answ. Neither should custom prevail Custom no rule of truth,
against truth, nor antiquity counterpoise the verity: Innovation is not to be
feared where reformation is effected: for then neither Christ's Gospel should
have taken place against the Jews traditions, nor Christianity against
Paganism, or Protestancie against Popery. Augustine says well even in the
same place, where he is alleged for custom, Aut propter fidem aut propter
mores, vel emendari oportet quod perperam fiebat, vel institui quod non fiebat.
For faith and manners that may be amended, which was evil used, and that may
be a new instituted, which was altogether omitted. And Ambrose answers
Symmachus well, that urged custom for certain Pagan rites: Nulla aetas ad
perdiscendu^ sera est, crubescat senestus, quae se emendare non potest: non
annorum canities est lauda^da, sed morum: nullus pudor est, ad meliora
transire. Old age should not be ashamed to amend, and it is no shame to change
for the better.

3. Cens. If the ceremonies were superstitious, with what conscience did they
subscribe in respect of the times, etc?
Ans. 1. The Ceremonies which we desire to be removed, as we judge them not Of
subscription.
all to be alike superstitious, so neither do we hold them profitable or fit to
be retained being diverse ways scandalous, as shall afterward be showed in
particular.

2. Some men by subscription did bear them as tolerable in their opinion for
the time, not as condemnable in themselves: And do our brethren ask with what
conscience they could do this? Did not the Apostles subscribe in their Epistle
for the retaining of the Jewish rites of abstaining from strangled and blood,
not thereby simply giving them approbation, but yielding toleration for a time.
As Augustine does fitly resemble it: Sicut defuncta corpora necessariorum
officijs deducenda erant, quomodo ad sepulturam, etc. As the bodies of the dead
must have a time to be brought after a seemly manner to the grave, and not to
be straight ways forsaken, etc. so they which desired the peace of the Church,
and were loath to deprive the same of their labors, did think they might by
their subscription and tolleration bear these ceremonies for a time, as the
Apostles did the Jewish, though the case be not altogether alike, the one being
legal rites, the other humane inventions, yet neither apparently impious, the
time and other circumstances considered.

3. And yet diverse which sue for reformation, did refuse at all to thrust their
necks under this yoke of subscription. But how little the subscription of
some makes for the allowance of these offensive ceremonies, shall further
appear in the defense of the preface, Art. 6.

4. Cens. If they be indifferent, etc. then the Magistrate may command, and we
must obey. Where is then their pretended obedience? etc.
Answ. Concerning the indifferency of Some Ceremonies urged not indifferent.
Epist. 118. c. 8.
these ceremonies: 1. It will be hard to show that they are all indifferent.
Augustine has this rule of things indifferent: Quod neque contra fidem neque
bonos mores iniungitur, indifferenter est habendum. That which is not enjoined
against Faith and manners, must be held as indifferent. Such Ceremonies then as
have no warrant in the word, and so against faith, (as the Cross in Baptism:
and are offensive to the brethren, and so against charity (as the Surplice) how
can they be said to be indifferent. 2. Were they indifferent in their own
nature, yet the scandal that is given to the Church of God does take away the
indifferent use of them. As S. Paul says, he would not eat flesh while the
world stands, if it offend his brethren: 1. Cor. 8. 13
and it is no small danger to wound the conscience of the brethren: the Apostle
says, they sin against Christ. 3. And if these ceremonies were indifferent
in their own nature; yet to him that cannot be so persuaded, they are not
indifferent: For whatsoever is not of faith, that is, of a Romans 14. 23.
full resolution without doubting, is sin. For this were as Ambrose says, to be
strenuum operibus, affectu infidum. To be stong in action, and unstable in
affection. Wherefore if either these ceremonies be not at all indifferent in
their own constitution, or not so in the persuasion of the heart: it is no
disobedience to forbear and refuse though they are commanded: for the Apostles
resolution is to be followed, to obey God rather. The Magistrate must not Act.
4. 19.
be resisted, and yet that which is against the conscience, may without
disloyalty be refused, as Ambrose excellently resolves, Volens nunquam ius
deseram, coactus repugnare non novi, potero flere, potero gemere. Orat. in
Auxentium.
I will never willingly forsake that which is right, I cannot resist though
provoked: this I can do, even to weep and wail. Lastly, seeing these
ceremonies are confessed by our brethren to be indifferent, then is it in your
Majesty's power to take them out of the way.

Then seeing the removing of these ceremonies will be no offense of conscience
to those that hold them indifferent, and yet the retaining of them will grieve
the consciences of many good Christians that take them not to be such: we
humbly beseech your excellent Majesty to take away these occasions of
stumbling; and we doubt not but your Majesty is resolved with the Apostles, to
lay upon your people no other burdens beside necessary things, Act. 15. 28.
Like to Theodosius the Emperor, of whom Ambrose says, Malluit sibi homimines
religione, quam metu constringere, in obit. Theodos. He had rather bind men
unto him by religion then by fear. Positive abuses.


5. Cens. These men should not be suffered Untruth 1. we do not calumniate the
state. Vntrutht 2. There are many things positive in the church worthy of blame.
to calumniate the State wherein there is nothing positive worthy of blame.
Answ. As touching the abuses in the Church, some of them are in the very
co^stitution, as of Non-residents, pluralities, dumb ministers, faculties,
excommunication by Chancellors Officials, and such like, as shall afterward
appear in particular. Were there nothing herein positive that is worthy of
blame, happy were this Church, and twice happy shall your Majesty be to procure
it to be such: neither is this to calumniate the state to complain that the
Church of Christ is pestered with some usages and offices begun under
Antichrist, of the which we are bold to pronounce with our Savior, every
plant which Math. 15. 13.
my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted up: and according to the
rule of the Law: Absurdum est ipsa origin rei sublata, Cod: lib. 7. tit. 6.
leg. 1. Iustine.
eius imaginem relinqui. It is absurd that the thing it self being taken away,
the image thereof should be still remaining. Seeing then popish doctrine, as
the root and original is abolished, all papal platformes, as the shadow
should vanish.

6. Cens. No Church in Christendom is Untruth: 3.
able so much to justify their abuses, as this Many reformed churches go
beyond us for discipline.
of ours, which are not so heinous as deserve their bitter reprehension.
Answ. Beside also many abuses there are in the execution of Ecclesiastical
laws and orders (as shall afterward appear) 1. Which we heartily wish did no
more abound in this Church, then in some other reformed churches, whose example
herein we desire to be followed according to the word of God. 2. What if no
Church can justify all the corruptions and abuses crept in: Yet every Church
ought to press foreward unto perfection, and to follow the Apostles rule: to
forget that which is behind (not to please our selves in our imperfect state)
and to endeavor to that which is before, and to follow hard toward the Philip.
3. 13.
mark. 3. Neither had our brethren of Oxford cause to object that the
Petitioners Mask under an unknown generality, seeing they themselves express
not their names, nor remove the veil from their faces: and as for us, we
conceal not our names as ashamed of the cause, but we forbear, because it is
your Majesty's pleasure we should not gather hands to our petition: but as
Ambrose says to the Emperor toll legem and fiat certamen: Take away the law,
and let the trial be made upon even term. So when it shall please your
Majesty, the consent and number of the Ministers and others desiring
reformation, will soon appear. We are able to show that these abuses are not
only worthy of reprehension (which in our petition is done without bitterness
according to the 2. Tim. 2. 25.
Apostles rule, instructing them with meeknes that are contrary minded) but of
alteration; not only fit to be repoved, but for ever removed: we are now to
declare the one, and we trust your Majesty in good time will determine the
other: and we doubt not, but that you are resolved with the Cod. lib. tit. 6.
leg: 42.
Emperor Justinian: omnia quae pro honor sanctae Ecclesiae ad Dei placitum
fieri properamus, legibus constituere and operibus adimplere desideramus: all
things which may be for the good of the Church by your laws to will, and in
your works to fulfill.

The defense of the Preface.
1. Object. They favor them too much Untruth: 4. Princes titles.
that were wont to subject all kings Titles to popular election, etc.

Answ. How they which now sue for reformation were before affected to your We
do not therein favor them.
Majesty's title, we appeal to your princely knowledge: and who they were that
did show themselves most earnest to have had the same in Queen Elizabeth's time
declared, is well known. Our brethren are then to blame, to draw those into
suspicio^ which will not give place to any of themselves in zealous and loyal
affection: And what if some otherwise of good parts have written undutifully of
Princes titles, do we justify or favor them therein? University men
brought up in the schools might remember that from secundum quid to
simpliciter the argument follows not, that because we like them in some
things we should approve them in all. We say Pammach. and Ocean.
with Hierome: non consuevi eorum insultare erroribus, quorum miror ingenia.

2. Object. The petitioners by seeking this, Untruth 5. We disturb not the
state.
and the like dangerous alterations do disturb the state, etc.

Answ. Flatterers are the disturbers of the state, not they which desire things
amiss to be amended: But this has been always the reward of the servants of
Christ, that duly sought for redress, to be counted troublesome and busy
bodies, according to the saying of the Apostle: am I become your enemy because
I tell you Gal: 4. 16.
the truth? to the which answers that common saying: Obsequium amicos,
veritas odium parit: flattery makes friends, and verity makes foes. The
Prophets did not disquiet the state of Israel, but they which Ezech. 13.
cried peace, peace, sowing pollowes under men's elbowes, and flattering them in
their sins, saying all is well. If other men were as willing to be reformed
as some desire the Magistrate should reform, there need to be no disturbance
at all: It is good to have peace, and follow love, but as the Apostle says
(...), in the truth: then shall we rest quietly, when we sleep not upon men's
pillowes, but in Christ's arms: as Origin well notes on these words Homil: 2 in
Cantic.
Cant. 26. his left hand is under my head: noli consuere cervicalio vel aliunde
capiti requiem quaerere, habe sponsi laevam sub capite. Sew not pillowes to
thine head, nor seek rest unto it elsewhere, get the left hand of the bridegrom
put under it.

3. Object. Howsoever in words they decline Untruth: 6. We mean as we write.
the imputation of factious men, etc. it is well known in this kingdom and that
of Scotland what manner of men they be.

Answ. We mean as we say, we wish not the dissolution of the state
Ecclesiastical: we would have Episcopal labors joined with Episcopal
honor, that they would do their duty and have their duty, as the rule in law
is: rationi convenit Reg: iur. 76
vt succedat in onere, qui substituitur in honor: that they encroach not upon
other men's callings, but that they may be (...). p. 40
chayned with such bonds, as may preserve that estate from creeping to
corruption. If any in Scotland have been to forward, we excuse them not: yet
that whole Church is not to be blamed for some man's fault: wherein are many
reverend, learned and godly pastors, as his majesty has given a princely
testimony of them, that Pref: to (...).
there is presently a sufficient number of good men of the ministry in this
kingdom. Other men's oversightes we justify not, neither will answer for
their errings, if any have unduly in their indiscreet zeal sought for
reformation we praise them not: neither ought it to be a prejudice to moderate
proceedings. As in our enemies we condemn not that is good, so neither in our
friends commend we that which is evil: as he well says: nec bonis
aduersariorum (si quid honestum Hierom: Pammach: and Ocean.
habuerint) detrahendum est, nec amicorum laudanda sunt vitia.

4. Object: Those men might have better performed their obedience to God, etc:
what are these men they should assume so much?

Answ. 1. we have assumed nothing Just complaints not disloyal.
which becomes not good subjects, to lay open our complaynts to our gracious
Sovereign, as the members send up their greifes to the head. 2. Neither do
we seek to abuse the Clergy, but to honor them, when we desire they might
in every congregation shine as lamps both in life and doctrine. 3. What
greater obedience to God then to be found faithful? what better service to
his Majesty then to acquaint him with the wants of that body, whereof he is the
head? what truer love to the Church then to desire her perfection? 4. We
trust his Majesty counts it no trouble to hear his honest subjects
complaynts, as by his own princely words we are encouraged, weary not to
hear the complaints of the oppressed (...). 92.
aut ne Rex sis. Preachers and ministers that humbly sue for redress, trouble
not the Church but idle non residents, dumb ministers, covetous pluralists are
the men which are settled in their dregs, and will not have their sour lees
drawn forth. As for us we bless God for our external peace, and heartily
desire the true internal peace: that we may be all according to the Apostles
rule (...) Ephesians. 4. 15.
, following the truth in love, and louinge in the truth, and so we say with
Hierome, ad. Theoph:
unto our brethren that seem to stand so much upon peace and quietness: nihil
grande est voce pacem praetendere, and opere destruere; etc. it is nothing to
pretend peace in word, and destroy it indeed. We also would peace, and we
wish not only but entreat peace, the peace of Christ, true peace: pacem quae
not ut adversarios subijciat, sed ut amicos iungat, such peace which may not
subdue us as enemies, but ioyn us as friends.

5. Object, They must prove that those Untruth 7. These are the peccant humors.
are the peccant humors of the Church, which in truth is the least peccant of
any other, etc.

Ans. 1. If these and such like be not the Who come nearest the Catharsts.
peccant humors in the body of the Church, there are none at all: thus these
men seem to come nearer to the Puritans and Catharists, then those (whom they
in their answer have traduced) that acknowledge all things pure in the Church,
and no thing amiss, how far are they from redressing that are so far of
from confessing their wants? Ambrose well says sensus vulneris est sensus
vitae the sense of grief is the sense of life. 2. We wish even in our hearts,
it were as they say, that our Church were least peccant in the world, then
should we have no contention about humane rites, Non-residents, dumb
ministers, Commendams, faculties, abuse of Excommunication, and such like,
which are strange in other reformed Churches. 3. Reverend Bishop Jewel, where
he says; we are come as near as possibly we could to the Church of the
Apostles: neither means How we are come near the Apostles.
the abuses and peccant humors of our Church, which he would never have
justified, nor yet all the ceremonies, for else were he alleges out of
Valafridius Abbas that in the beginning the communion was ministered without any
difference of apparel, and shows that it was so in Hieroms time: defense
Apol. 401. Neither yet does he mean that the discipline of the Primitive
Church is exactly restored, for the book it self confesses, that the godly
discipline of the Primitive Church is now wanting, and besides In the
commination.
he shows in this place, wherein the Church of England is departed from the
Church of Rome, which is not in the administration of discipline received from
them: and else where he reproves Harding Defenc. apol. 41.
for saying Christ and his Apostles never ruled the Cburch in better order then
it is now ruled by the Pope and his Cardinais. Our brethren say as much in
effect that it is ruled as well by Bishops. Wherefore his meaning must needs
be, that in doctrine and in the substance of the Sacraments we are come near
it, and for the rest, as near as possibly we could, that is, as the times
would permit and suffer. And we desire our brethren to tell us in good sooth
whether in the Primitive Church of the Apostles, the cross in Baptism, the
surplice in the Communion were used, whether they read of any Chancellours,
officials, etc. Non-residents, dumb Ministers in those times? It is all we
desire that the discipline of our Church may be reduced to the form of the
Apostles government. Lastly, have our brethren no more chariry, then to wish
that the petitioners (whom they untruely call unquite and mal-contended humors)
were purged out of the land: If they proceed on in such wishes they will give
us cause to complain, as Hierome does of an uncharitable adversary of his:
talibus institutus Apol. 3. advers. Ruf.
es disciplinis, ut cui respondere non poteris, caput auferas, and linguam quae
tacere non potest seces. You have learned, that whom you cannot answer, his
head you would chop off, and cut out the tongue that you cannot silence: but we
wish better unto them with the Apostle: if ye be otherwise minded that God
would reveal it unto you, in his good time.

6. Object. To subscribe to that in respect Of subscription upon protestation.
etc.
of the times which in it self is unlawful proves little less then
hypocrisy. etc.

Answ. In these petitioners which subscribed to the book (in which term is no
disdain at all) there was neither dishonesty nor hypocrisy so to do.
although they simply allow it not. 1. They subscribed with protestation, some
with condition, other some upon expositions given them, which is no mere
falsity, but a clear verity, as some of our Bishops and their Registers do
know, and some of the subscribers are able to show. Fox. p. 118.
But this argues no sincerity (say our brethren;) What would they then have
said of Reverend Cranmer who was sworn to the Pope upon protestation,
acknowledging his authority no further then it Zanch. Miscel. p. 35.
agreed with the express word of God: Or what would our brethren have thought
of Zanchius, that with some exceptions and interpretations subscribed to
certain Lutheran points of doctrine, who aledgeth the judgment of Calvin in
the same matter to Gulielmus Holbracchus, likewise urged by the Lutherans to
subscribe praecise, ut recuses non co^sulo, etc. nunc ergo exceptiones
interponere necesse est, quae te molestia libere^t. I give not counsel
precisely to refuse, etc. but to put in exceptions which may ease you Supplic.
ad Senate. Arg.
of trouble? Hereupon Zanchius says se sincero pacis and concordiae studio
adductum subscripsisse: that he subscribed being thereunto moved of a sincere
desire of peace. But the subscribers case is far more equal and reasonable,
who upon protestation expositions, etc. subscribed not to suspicious doctrines,
but to certain superfluous rites. 2. Because they were loath to deprive the
Church of their labors, and forsake their flocks, for these matters, which
are though inconvenient, yet not of the substance of Religion: and hereunto
agrees the canon, utilitatis intuitu quaedam in Ecclesia Cause. 1. q. 7.
tolerantur. Thorough the show of profitablenesse, some things are tolerated
in the Church. The Petitioners then subscribing, did not therein allow these
ceremonies as profitable, seeing the state intended a greater perfection,
howsoever it was hindered, as may appear by the statute set before the book of
Common prayer, the words are these, Such ornaments, etc. of the Ministers shall
be retained, till other order shall be therein taken. And the book it self in
the Co^mination aims at the restoring of the Discipline of the prim. Church.
3. And herein by subscription to tolerate Subscription of some excused.
things not apparently impious for a time: But now there is no reason, that
subscription which was yielded to the necessity of time, should either
prejudice the subscribers according to the Canon: temporum necessitate
perfecta, hac ratione ad veniam Cause. 1. q. 7. c. 13.
pertinere decernimus, quod gestum est: what the necessity of the time
required, in reason ought to be pardoned: or hinder the reformation, according
to the like Canon: quod necessitas pro remedio reperit, etc. that which Cause.
1. q. 7. c. 7.
necessity found for a remedy when the necessity is removed, must cease also
that which is urged, for a due and orderly course is one thing, that which by
usurpation for the time is enforced, another. Lastly some of the subscribers
are now of another judgment and see more into the cause, then they did before,
and doubt not to say with Hierome: imitati estis errantem, imitamini correctam:
You have followed him that erred, be you followers of him that has corrected
his error. And could wish that this vinculum subscriptionis, as Ambrose calls
it in another case, were dissolved, as Eusebius Vercellon: caused Dyonisius
subscription (but in an harder case) to be razed out. Any of these reasons
will free the petitioners subscribers from this uncharitable imputation of
Hypocrisy, and dishonesty.

7. Object: The Church of England had Untruth. 8. We condemn factious Sermons,
etc.
been happy if it had not been troubled with their factious sermons, etc.

Answ: We mislike factious Sermons, and scurrile pamphlets, as much as these
censurers of Oxford: and some of their friends and favorits are not free from
the imputation of both: The painful labors of the ministers Painful Preachers
not factious.
petitioners in the Church of England both by preaching and writing are well
known. And though the rule has been, better no preachers, then such as
desired reformation (therefore miscalled factious) yet this is our comfort to
say with the Apostle: in the declaration of the truth, we approve our selves
to every man's 2. Cor. 4. 2.
conscience in the sight of God: and herein we say again with the same
Apostle: we pass very little to be judged of you or of 1. Cor. 4. 3.
man's judgment: being sorry that you thus account of the friends of the
gospel, as of enemies and cannot endure the lovers of the truth, which you
profess to love. And so, as Augustine says: res multum dolenda and miranda
contingit, etc. A strange Tractat. in Joan.
and heavy thing often falls out, that the man whom we take to be unjust,
and yet he is just; loving in him justice which we know not we hate: and
hominem bonum tanquam malum affligamus: and afflict a good man as though he
were evil.

8. Object: The number of more then a Vntr. 9. It is not a vizard. There are
not so few godly Preachers that wish reformation.
thousand is but a vizard, etc.

Answ: The number of more then a thousand is no vizard, as theirs is, that mask
under the name of the heads of the university, yea of all the learned and
obedient of the clergy, as the title shows, whereas we know there are diverse
hundred of learned, obedient, sober, discreet preachers in the universities and
other places of the Church that neither like, nor allow their proceedings
herein. As at the passing of that grace in Cambridge, whereof our brethren make
mention in their epistle, there was not present the third part of the
university that gave voices, nor one Doctor of divinity besides the Vice
Chancellor as we are credibly informed. Let them first pull of their vizard and
show themselves, they should not object that to others which it seems they
are ashamed of, to profess their names: Therefore we may apply Augustines
words a-against them: conferamus de medio si placet Lib. 1. cont. Julian.
ista communia, etc. let us leave these common matters, which may be said of
each side, though not truly of each side. 2. How can that be a Christian and
commendable church government under Chancellors, Officials, Co^missaries,
Registers, Proctors, Sumners, which is the same in the form nothing altered
(the supremacy only and dependancy of the Pope excepted) with that now used
and practiced in the Antichristian and papal sinagogue. Therefore to this
untrue assertion, we return no other but Hieromes answer: Non necesse habet
vinci, Ep. ad Ctepant.
quod sua statim professione falsum est. That needs no refutation, which
appears false in the very relation. 3. The humble Petitioners have done
nothing maliciously, or injuriously we wish that they, which thus censure them,
were as far from both. Hierome could have told them: non facilis est venia
prava dixisse de rectis. Pardon for Hierom. Asellae.
speaking evil of that which is good, is not easily obtained. Thus men for
their conscience, and unfeigned love unto the Church of Christ, are laden with
the reproach of sedition, presumption, dishonesty, hypocrisy, scurrility,
malice, injury. etc. A likely matter that such pleaders have a good cause in
hand, when they begin their plea with such intemperate and uncharitable stuff:
therein committing the same fault, which Origin obiecteth Lib. 7. cont. Cess.
to his adversary. Philosophus iste cum nos instruere velit calumnatur etc.
this Philosopher when he should instruct us raileth, when in the beginning a
wise Orator, should show himself friendly toward his Auditors, And thus end
their censures upon the preface.

THE DEFENSE OF THE FIRST PART OF THE PEtition concerning Church service.
1. Against the Cross in Baptism.
1. THE Sacraments are to be preserved in that simplicity and pureness,
wherein Jesus Christ has left them to the Church: So S. Paul says: I have
received of the Lord that which 1. Cor. 11. 23.
I delivered unto you. S. Paul so great an Apostle innovated nothing, but
delivered that only which he had received: And this is the Lords own charge:
ye shall put no thing thereto nor take ought there from: therefore Cyprian says
well: neque aliud fiat a nobis Deuteronomy. 12. 32 Cyp. lib. 2. Epist. 3.
quam quod pro nobis dominus prior fecit. We may not do any other thing (in the
ministration of the sacraments) then the Lord himself has done before us.

But Jesus Christ commanded only to baptize with water in the name of the
Father and of the Son, and of the H. Ghost not to sign with the sign of the
cross. Mat. 28. 19. The commission is: Go and baptize, wash with water. And
this the disciples observed: here is water what does let but that I Act. 8. 36.
and 38.
may be baptized, and they went both into the water, and he baptized him.
Philip did no more. Peter Martyr is clear for this. The Peter Martyr loc. com:
4. c. 9.
word and the water (says he) make the sacrament the other things, which were
added after, came from the B B. who where too much addicted D. Fulke in Rhem.
Test. Luke 44. 50
to ceremonies. D. Fulk likewise speaking of the sign of the cross, says: it
can not be a convenient memorial of Christ, because Christ commanded it not.

Therefore the cross in baptism departing from the simplicity and plainness
of our Lord Jesus institution is to be rejected.

2. If the cross be superstitious and popish in the one sacrament, then it
cannot be convenient nor Christian in the other, according to the rule de
similibus similiter iudicandum: In the like case, the like judgment is to be
passed, which our Savior Christ uses.

But in the sacrament of the supper the cross was taken by the church of Eng.
to be superstitious, and popish, and therefore Math. 12. 3 Aug. tract. 108. in
Joan: Missal. Romans
extruded, though some of the Fathers and the Popish Church had brought it in
before.

Therefore by the same rule the cross in baptism should have been removed
also.

3. That which has been idolatrously abused in popery, and has no necessary
use in Gods Church ought to be removed: As Ezechiah pulled down the brazen 2.
Reg. (...)
serpent because the people made and Idol of it. This has been the judgment
of The Church. Tertullian shows at large, Tertul. de coron. Milit.
then when things indifferent have been abused by Pagans, and Idolaters,
Christians may not use them, unless they have Gods warrant for them. And
Augustine shows Aug. epist. 86. ad casul. Jewel. defen. of Apol. p. 441.
distinct 63. quia sancta.
that the Church of Christ left to fast upon the Lords day, because the
maniches had taken up, that day to fast on, worthy Jewel shows many examples
of the like: Nay the very Popes law resolves thus: that if some of our
praedecessours have done those things, which were well in their times, and yet
afterward they be turned into error, and superstition, they must without any
delay be reformed.

But the cross has been Idolatrously Whit. cont. Bell. descrip. c. 6. Ra^n.
confut. 586. Bellar. lib. de sacr. author. apud. Aug. sect: 59.
abused in popery as our best writers show) yea the very cross in baptism
to be a defense and muniment against the Devil. de Cons. distinct. 4. postea
etc.

Therefore there being no necessary use of it in the Church of God, it ought
to be removed.

4. It is not lawful for any either man or Angel to add any thing to the
substance Gal. 3. 15.
of the sacrament: For as well they might ad to the tenure of the Covenant as
add to the seal whereby it is confirmed.

But the adding of the cross in baptism is an addition to the substance.
Therefore it is not lawful for any to do it.

The assumption, or second proposition is proved thus.

To add a sacramental sign to the sacrament, is to add to the substance of it.

But the cross in baptism is made a sacramental sign: signa (says S.
Augustine) cum adhibentur ad res sacras significandas sacramenta vocantur.
Signs when they Aug. epist. 5.
are used to signify Sacred things, are called Sacraments. But the cross in
baptism is taken up to signify a holy thing, namely our constant profession
in Christ, that we shall not be ashamed to confess Christ The sacrament of
baptism robbed of his signification, and the same attributed to humane
invention, viz. the Cross. Aug. Epist. 119. c. 18.
crucified and to fight under his banner etc.

And so by consequence, it is an addition or substance of a sacrament, which is
utterly unlawful. Augustine shows the care of the Church in his time this way:
epi. ad Ianuar. where speaking of washing of feet which was used of some when
they came to be baptized: Multi hoc in consuetudine recipere noluerunt, ne ad
ipsum baptismi sacr. crederetur pertinere: nonnulli de consuetudine auferre non
dubitarunt: Many would not receive into use, and many took it away, where it
was used, lest it should seem to belong to the very Sacrament of Baptism: So
religiously careful were they, lest they might seem to make any addition to
the sacrament.

1. Object. The Cross in Baptism is a most Answ. to the petition. p. 11.
ancient ceremony.

Ans. To say it is ancient it is too much, but say it is most ancient is most
untrue: Mea antiquitas est Jesus Christus: my antiquty Ign. epis. 6.
is Jesus Christ (says Ignatius the blessed Martyr:) Now who knows not, that
to use no cross in baptism is more ancient then to use the cross? And
therefore if the Lords rule may hold: ask and enquire for the Ier: 6. 16.
old way for that is the good way: or that of Tertul. quodcunque primum, id
utique verum. That which was frst, that is the truest; it Tertull. de prescript.
must needs be better to baptize with no cross, as Christ and his Disciples
did, rather then with the cross, as some have done in later time.

But a little to search the antiquity of it, we must first agree what cross
it is which we so oppugn, and our brethren stand for. To cross the water in
baptism? or to cross the child in baptism. To cross the water is
superstitious (though the Fathers liked it) and therefore the Church of England
has removed it. To cross the child in baptism has not one authority in all
antiquity that we can read of. In Justin Martyrs time there was no Just. apol.
2. Tertul. de coron. Milit. D. Rain. confer. p. 581.
such thing. In Tertullians time, Christians began to Cross themselves with
the sign of the cross, but it was not yet crept into the sacraments (as a
learned writer has well observed) for in his book de Corona Militis, where he
mentions other ceremonies that were used in baptism, as milk, honey, etc.
he makes no mention of the cross. And lib. de Baptis. entreating professedly
of this sacrament Tert. de bapt.
and the ceremonies of it, he has not one tittle of the cross. In
Chrysostomes time Chrysostom. hom. quod Christus sit Deus.
the cross was crept further (as all superstition will wind up like Ivy) In
sacra mensa, etc. crux fulget: In the holy Supper the cross appears in his
glory: but yet Aug lib. 1. confess. c. 11. and de symb. ad Cateches. l. 4. c.
10.
it was not impressed in the foreheads of such as were baptized. In Augustines
time the Catechumeni were signed with the sign of the cross before baptism,
but no such sign was used when they came to be baptized; and therefore unless
better authority can be brought, then we know of, or Popish Bellarmine either,
Bellar. lib. 2. imag. c. 29.
(who has raked all corners to help himself) we think the cross in
baptism will be feign to fetch his pedigree out of the Popes Mass book, if
happily it be able to deduce it thence.

2 Obj. We must needs have some ceremonies in the administration of the
Sacrament, why then not the cross?

Answ. We grant that some ceremonies may be used: but if all be used, why then
not cream, oil, salt, and spittle? etc. Lumb. 4. did. 3.
for the Papists make but ceremonies of those. And therefore it does not
follow, some ceremonies may be used, therefore the cross in baptism may be
used. It is evident then, that there must be a choice. Well, let us see what
must be the rule. The ceremonies that must be used, must have three conditions.

1. They must be such as serve for comeliness and order sake, as the Apostle
says, Let all things he done comely and in order. 1. Cor. 14. 40.
But the cross in baptism is not such: for if it make a Decorum in the
Sacrament, then Christ and his Apostles, and all the reformed Churches of
Geneva, Scotland, France, Helvetia, Belgia, Poland, etc. that use it not, must
commit an Indecorum, which were absurd to affirm. Thus Peter Pet. Mart. class.
4. c. 9.
Martyr disputes against the schoolmen, who affirmed that the word and water
Pet. Mar. clas. 4. c. 9.
were of the essence of baptism; but the rest that were added, oil, etc. did
facere ad honestatem, and decorum Sacramenti, make to the honesting and
adorning of the Sacrament. Admit this (says he) then it will follow, that John
and Christ, and the Primitive Church has baptized indecently, disorderedly,
etc. Quia eorum baptismus istis omnibus carebat: Because their baptism wanted
all these things.

2. The Ceremonies must not be scandalous and offensive, especially to our 1.
Cor. 10. 32.
brethren, and to Gods Church, but the cross is offensive and scandalous both
to other Churches that account it a profanation Szedig. loc. comm. p. 169.
of baptism, and to godly and good men at home among our selves: yea M.
Calfeild says against the Papists, that to cross with the finger is both an
idle ceceremony and unlawful to. Calf. in answ. Pet. Mart. loc cit.
to the treatise of the cross. art. 2, p. 49.

3. They must not be idle and needless ceremonies, but to such only, as be
needful. See the whole Senate of the Apostles conclude in their council. It
seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us to Act. 15. 28.
lay no burden upon you, praeter necessaria haec, beside these necessary
things: but the cross in baptism is not necessary either ad esse to the
being, or been esse, to the well being of the Sacrament not ad esse, the very
papists confess: nor ad been esse, because the Sacrament may be well enough
Lumb. ut supra.
without it, as the very book confesses in private baptism where no cross
is used yet the minister is prescribed to say: I certify you that ye have done
well, and according Common book cap. of private bapt.
to due order etc. though they have not crossed.

Wherefore (most Noble King) 1. seeing the cross in baptism is a departing
from the plain and simple institution of our Savior Christ. 2. Seeing it is
thrust out of the other Sacrament to which it had as good right as to this. 3.
Seeing it was idolatrously abused in popery, and has no necessary use now. 4.
Seeing it encroacheth upon the very substance of the Sacr. 5. Seeing it is but a
late device hatched by the Pope. 6. seeing it is not a ceremony pertaining to
the decency of a Sacrament. 7 seeing it is scandalous and offensive to many
good Christians both preachers and people. Lastly seeing it is an idle and
needless ceremony and so not warranted either in genere or in specie either
in general or in special terms (as all the true worship of God must be) we
most humbly beseech Deu. 4. 2. and 5. 32.
your highness in the love you have to preserve the Sacraments of the Lord
Jesus in such purity as he has left them, that you will do as good K.
Ezekiah did who cleansed the house of God, and carried 2. Chr. 29. 16
out the filth of it into the brook Cedron.

2 Against Interrogatories in Baptism.
1. TO utter an untrueth in such a place, and in such a presence, and in such
an action so serious cannot be but a great and greevous sin, according to that,
thou have not lied to men but to God. But to say, as the book prescribes in
the Act. 5. 4. Com. Book. cap. of Bapt.
name and behalf of the infant: that it believes all the articles of the faith,
that it desires, to be baptized into the faith of Christ, is a great untrueth,
because the little infant neither believes, nor desires any such like thing:
Nay (as Augustine says) Aug. Epist. cap. 7.
quando ijs Christiana gratia subvenitur vocibus quibus possunt and motibus
reluctantur; they show themselves unwilling to be baptized.

Therefore to affirm this, It cannot be but a great and greevous sin.

2. That which gives strength to error and heresy in Christian wisdom ought
to be avoided according to that: non pones scandalum coram caeco. Thou shall
not put a stumbling block before the blind. Leu. 19. 14.


But to affirm that the child believes all the articles of the Christian
faith, is to give strength to their error that think Romans 10. 17 Aug. ep. 57.
children have faith, which indeed they have not, as both the Scripture
shows, and the Fathers.

Therefore in Christian discretion and wisdom this occasion of error is to be
avoided.

3. If the Infant be to be baptized into Abraham circumcised his servant as
well as his sons. Genesis 17. 13.
the faith of the parent, or of some, that will undertake to be as a parent to
it, then it suffiseth the father or he that will undertake to be as a parent,
to make confession of his faith.

The Antecedent is true because as the covenant runs so runs the seal of
the covenant, but the covenant is made with the father in the faith of the
father not with any relation to the faith of the child, as appears by that, I
will be thy Genesis 17. 7.
God, and the God of thy seed. Therefore it is sufficient for the father, or he
that will be in stead of the father, to make confession of his faith, because
as the scriptures show, it is the faith of the parents that brings the child,
within the compass 1. Cor. 7. 14
of the covenant of grace.

Ob. The interrogatories be most ancient.

Answ. Antiquity without verity is but vetustas erroris, oldnesse of error,
as Cyprian Cypri. ad Pomp. and lib. 2. ep. 3.
speaks, and again. Non debemus attendere quid aliquis ante nos faciendum
putaverit, sed quid qui ante omnes est Christus prior fecerit, neque enim
hominis consuetudinem sequi oportet, sed Dei veritatem: we are not to regard
what any one has thought good to do before us, but what Christ did first
before all, neither should we follow the custom of men, but the truth of God.

Oil in baptism is ancient as appears by Tertullian and Cyprian so is
exufflation used of the Church, as Augustine speaks: Tert. de resus. Carn. Cyp.
lib. 1. epist 22. Ang. lib 2. de imp. and corrup. c. 18. Ang. lib 1 de pecat.
and remis. c. 24. Mald. in Ioh.
toto orb diffusa, in qua ubique omnes baptizandi infantuli exufflantur. And
yet the Church of England for good cause has refused both. In Augustines time
and long before the Sacrament of the Lords Supper was given to Infants.
Maldonatus the Jesuit confesses it was so, and that with opinion of necessity
that children perished that died without it. And yet the antiquity of this
cannot make it good, as being contrary to the doctrine of Paul: Ergo, every
thing that is ancient is not 1. Cor. 11. 28.
therefore by and by current.

2. It cannot be proved that the use of interrogatories is most ancient, we
read in scripture of interrogatories ministered to Act. 8. 37. Tert. de. spec.
c. 4.
such as were of years and discretion, as to the Eunuch. Si credis etc. Credo.
If thou beleeuest, etc. I believe. And Tertul. says: aquam ingressi
Christianam fidem in suae legis verba profitemur renunciasse nos diabolo ore
nostro contestamur. Being to be baptized, we profess the Christian faith
according to the words of the law, we solemnly profess with our mouth, that
we have renounced the Devil. But of any Interrogatories that were ministered to
Infants, we read not at all in the book of God.

3, Though the Fathers mention this use, yet that many disliked it even in
their times appears by Tertullian himself, lib. de bape.
who wishes that infants may be kept till they can make their own answer,
least we promise that for the^ which they will never perform. And Boniface the
BB. moves the doubt to Aug. and argues against it, when the Aug. epist. 23.
witnesses say, the infant believes: dicunt eos facere etc. they say they do
that which that age is not able to think. 2. If they do believe yet it is a thing
unknown to us. 3. If a man should by and by ask the witnesses of the child
whether it shall be a thief or no, they will answer they cannot tell, and if
they cannot tell this, how can they tell, that it will believe. Augustine a man
so learned that he could have helped the cause, if there had been any help in
it resolves the matter very weakly: habet fidem..i. sacramentum fidei. the
infant has faith. Com. books c. of baptis.
.i. has the sacrament of faith: And yet by our book, the witnesses are caused
to say, it does believe, and it has faith before it has the sacrament of
faith:.i. the water of baptism powered upon it. Therefore Bucer one of their own
authors, better resolves the point, showing that it is Buc. lib. 1. de reg.
che. c. 5.
fittest for those that be of years and discretion to make promise of
obedience at the same time when they be baptized. But that children do it
after they have been catechized and taught the doctrine of Christ: And so
Szegedinus si baptizandus Szeg. de. bap. p. 167.
est infans, nec fides, nec fidei confessio ab illo poscatur: absurdu^ enim est
id requirere ab infant, quodnec Deus ipse ab illo requirit, nec ille per
aetatem habere nec exprimere potest. Bez. in conf. c. 4. 48.
Of the same judgment is Beza.

Wherefore (most noble King) 1. Seeing the interrogatories give men occasion to
utter an untrueth before the Lord. 2. Seeing they give strength to their error
that think children have faith, which indeed they have not. 3. Seeing the
infant is not baptized into his own faith, but into the faith of his father or
susceptor. 4. seeing it is ridiculous to say, they do that which in the judgment
of any reasonable man they cannot do. 5. seeing the first and best Churches
knew them not. Lastly, seeing those Churches that received them, yet had many
learned and good men, that upon good grounds disliked them, we trust your
Majesty will establish that which shall be more pleasing to God, and better
liking to your best affected subjects.

3. Against confirmation.
1. Where the gift is ceased there the ceremony and the sign must cease also
as annoynting of the sick used in the Apostles time is now ceased because the
miraculous gift of healing is ceased, Iam. 1. 14.
but the gift of giving the graces of the HOLY GHOST, by imposition of hands
is now ceased; as Augustine says: neque enim temporalibus and sensibilibus
miraculis per manus impositionem Aug. lib. 3. de Bapt. c. 16.
modo datur spiritus sanctus, sicut antea dabatur etc.

And therefore seeing the miraculous gift is ceased, this kind of Imposition of
hands which is the sign of it, must cease also: This is Chemnitions reason
against the popish sacrament of confirmation, and so Chemnic. in exam. fid. de.
confu. M. Calf. art. 4. treat. of. the cross.
likewise that learned man M. Calfield says, Laying on of hands served to good
use then when it pleased God at the instance of the Apostles prayers to
confer the visible graces of his spirit: But now there is no such ministry
in the Church: now that miracles be ceased to what end should we have this
imposition of hands, the sign without the thing.

2. To bring in a new sacrament, beside those two which Jesus Christ has
ordained, is utterly unlawful: But confirmation as it is prescribed by the
book is made a new sacrament beside those two which Jesus Christ ordained:
therefore confirmation, as it is prescribed by the book is utterlie unlawful.

The assumption or second proposition is proved thus. That which is made an
outward sign, and seal to assure of Gods love and favor, that is made a
sacrament in most proper sense, as both the scriptures show and our own
articles of religion defining Romans 4. 11. Arti. relig. 25.
the sacraments to be sure witnesses and effectual signs of grace and of Gods
goodwill to us: but the imposition of BB. hands is made a sign to assure us,
of Common. book c. of confirm.
Gods favor and gracious goodness to us, (so be the words of the book:)
therefore it is made a sacrament in most proper sense: But this is unlawful:
and therefore this kind of confirmation is unlawful; and yet the poor
ministers of Christ, were urged and enjoined under most greevous penalties to
subscribe to all.

3 That which is the general duty of all the ministers of the Gospel ought
not to be made the particular duty of some few of them.

But to confirm Christians in the faith of Christ is the general duty of all
the 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2 Ezekiel: 34. 4 Ephesians. 4. 12. 13. Hier. ad. luci
ministers of the Gospel: as appears by the Scriptures.

Therefore it ought not to be made the particular duty of some few of them.
Hierome says plainly of confirmation by BB. disce hanc obseruationem potius ad
honorem esse sacerdocij quam ad legis necessiate^. Know that this order is
rather for the honor of priesthood then necessity of Law.

Object. 1. It can not be amiss that BB. pray over the children.

Answ. 1. To think the BB. prayers be more holy then any other man's, is
superstitious: the scriptures tell us, that if any man be a worshipper of God,
the Lord hears Act. 9. 31
him, be he BB. or preacher. 2. they do not only pray over them, but impose
hands upon them, that by means thereof they may com. book c. of Confir.
receive strength against all the tentations of sin, which is to take that
power to them which the Lord never gave them, contrary to that which is
written: No Io. 3. 27.
man can receive any thing unless it be given him from above.

Obj. It is meet that such as be baptized make open profession of their
faith, that it may appear how they have profited, and that they may be further
confirmed therein.

Ans. All this may be done without any such ceremony by diligent catechizing
1. Pet. 22. Act. 20. 32.
and teaching in every congregation: and if there needed any confirmation who
are more fit to do it, then the pastor of every congregation, who best knows
the profiting of his sheep.

4. Against baptizing by women.
HEre we both agree in the doctrine that women ought not to baptize. Our
brethren say, fieri non debuit; women should not have taken upon them Answ. to
the petition. p. 11. s. 2.
to baptize, but yet exception is taken to our speech.

Exception.
The book of common prayer does not prescribe that baptism should be
administered Answ. ibid.
by women.

Answ. Yea but if the book permit it though it do not prescribe it, it is more
then true divinity will warrant. Now whether the book seem not to incline
that way let it be considered by these reasons.

1. By the book the Priests and Curats are commanded to warn the people, that
without great necessity they baptize not children at home in their houses and
when great need shall compel them so to do, that then they minister it on
this fashion.

2. This same they (they that minister it) is a relative; therefore if they look
back to to find the antecedent what will meet us, but (they) whom the Priests
and Curats warned not to baptize their children at home: but they whom the
Priests and Curats warned not to baptize their children at home, were the
people, yea the vulgar people, not ministers: and therefore they that be
permitted by the book to baptize, be the people, yea the vulgar people.

3. If the child live it is to be brought to the church by order of the book
and there the minister is to examine who baptized it, which were a folly if the
minister had done it himself, and further with what words it was baptized,
which were as fond if it were baptized by an ordinary minister of our Church.

4. The book prescribes no more but that they that be present call upon God
and use the right form N. I baptize thee etc. so that these two things be
observed by the midwife, or whosoever present, the minister is to certify them
by order of the book, that they have done well and according to due order.

5. The child is supposed by the book to be baptized by such as happily knew
not what they did in that great fear and trouble of mind, but such as be so
greatly feared and troubled at such times be not the ministers who have nothing
to do in those actions but the wives and such as be present at such times:
therefore they be not ministers, but the people yea the very women that be
permitted to baptize in such times of necessity.

Wherefore (most noble king.) Seeing the book seems to carry this sense and
Math. 28. 9.
to warrant that which the word of Christ never approved: We most humbly
entreat that it may be either quite remooved, or better explained.

5. Against the Cap and Surplice.
1. THE Massing garments in popery be no fit garments for the ministers of
the Gospel according to that charge of the Lord: you shall pollute Is. 30. 22.
the coverings of the images and the rich ornaments, etc. and say unto it, get
thee hence: and again, hate even the garment spotted by the Jude. 21.
flesh. Hence it was that Jacob when he reformed the idolatry of his
household, Genesis 35. 2:
he made them also to change their garments.

But the surplice is one of the massing garments in popery, as both the
Protestants Fox. martyr. p. 501. and 853
and popish writers show. M. Fox for the Protestants, who declares, that when a
Popish Priest was to be degraded they took away the surplice from him, as one
of his priestly garments. For the Papists, Innocentius and Durandus, who bring
in the popish Priest so apparelled to his Innoc. mist. miss. lib. 1. c. 10.
Duran. lib. 3. c. 1. in rational.
Mass: therefore it is no fit garment for the ministers of the Gospel.
Tertullian confirms this reason, showing that Christians ought not in outward
things to conform themselves unto Idolaters, no not in wearing a garland of
flowers: Nihil (says he) dandum est Idolo, sic nec sumendum ab Idolo, si in
Idoleio recumbere Tertul. de. corou. milit.
alienum est a fide, quid ni Idolei habitu videre? etc. Nothing is to be given
to the Idol, so neither to be taken from the Idol: if to sit down in the
Idol-temple be strange from the faith, why not to be seen in the Idols habit?

2 That simplicity and plainness which Christ and the Apostles, and the
Fathers in the best time of the Church used is fittest and meetest for the
ministers of Christ, according to that, From the beginning it was not so, where
our Savior Mat. 19. 8.
Christ teaches us to reduce and bring things back to their first original.

But our Savior Christ and the Apostles, and the Fathers in the best and
purest times of the Church, had neither cap nor surplice to minister in:

Therefore that ancient use is fittest to be retained still: That Christ and his
Apostles Luc. 4. 16.
had no ministering garments, it appears Luke 4. where our Savior Christ
entered into the Synagogue, and stood up to read, the minister brought him not a
surplice, but a book. And when Paul and Barnabas entered into the Synagogue, and
Act. 13. 36.
the Ruler sent to them to preach, they stood up without any more ado. P.
Martyr Pet. Mart. clas. 4. c. 1.
is clear for this: Papists (says he) despise us, because we have no
priestly garments, when Christ and his Apostles had none neither. So likewise
Epi. ad Hooper, Defense of Apol. p. 401 Walfr. de exord. and in ca. Eccles. c.
24
B. Jewel brings authorities to prove it, Walafridus and others, to show that
the Massing garments came in by little and little: So at first men celebrated
in common apparel, as certain of the East Churches are said to do at this
day. M. Fox Mart. p. 5.
Fox likewise says, That in the Apostles time little regard was had of days,
or meats, or apparel, etc. And therefore seeing Christ used no distinction
of apparel, herein we desire but to be like our master.

3. That which does not add grace and comeliness to the ministry of the
Gospel, but makes it ridiculous, is to be removed: But so do the Cap and
Surplice; it makes the minister of the Gospel ridiculous: for first it brings
him in like a Popish priest. Elias was known to be a 2. King. 1. 8.
Prophet because he went like a Prophet, i. in a Prophets garment: so if men
would have the people take us for Ministers of the Gospel, why be we still
apparrelled like Popish priests. Secondly, this kind of white apparel is now
grown into disgrace in our Churches, because none but harlots that do penance,
come so attired into the congregation, and therefore seeing the surplice does
not add any grace unto the Minister of the Gospel, but makes him ridiculous,
it is therefore clear that it is to be removed.

4 That kind of garment which procures scruple of conscience to diverse that
wear it, offense to many good Christians that behold it, comfort to the
Papists that love it, loss to the Church of the labors of many worthy men,
ought not to be used.

But such is the surplice, as daily experience teaches. Therefore it is not to
be used

1. Obj. To leave every man to his own Answ. to the Petit. p. 11. sect. 3.
liberty implies confusion.

Answ. No confusion at all: for if our brethren will hold them to their own
grounds, if the surplice be not urged by Princely authority, they may not use
it: for when the learned man whom they term T. C. had demanded why the Bishop
Thomas Cartwright. Synod. Loud. anno 1571. cap. de Decanis. Doct. Whit. p. 283.
in the Synod Anno 1571. had taken away the gray Amice, as a garment spotted
with superstition, and left the surplice which had been more filthily abused in
Popery, the Reverend Archbishop replies, that the Bishop took it away because
it was not established by any law of this land. And since herein in our mind the
Bishop did well in it, that they will not suffer any rite or ornament to be
used in this Church, but such only as are by public authority established,
and therefore as we say, if they will stick to their own grounds, if the king
do not urge the surplice by law, they must not use it.

2. Obj. Do not their own words import, Answ. to the petit. p. 11.
that they may be well used so they be not urged.

Answ. 1. That they may be used is one thing, that they may be well used is
another. Many things may be tolerated, which cannot be justified. 2. The
consequent is not good: for if they be not urged by authority, then they may
not be used, as before is showed.

3. Obj. What is there in the Cap or Surplice Answ. ibid.
that should offend any man of judgment? Bucer, P. Martyr, Augustine, Calvin.

Answ. Then be like our brethren take all that be offended at the surplice to
be men of no judgment. Rev. Jewel, a man as of more learning, so of more
modesty Defense Apol p. 399.
and love, confesses that there were godly learned men that refused the
apparel and that they had their grounds, and reasons from authority to do so:
and our present Arch. BB. professes there were some that never received the
apparel, whom (says ibid. p. 400. Doct. Whit. page 289.
he) I for my part have always reverenced, and do reverence not only for
their singular virtue and learning; but for their modesty also. Peter Martyr
their own author, Pet. Mart. ep. 3. amico cuidam.
resolves, that though the surplice may be tolerated till things become to
some stay, yet it were much better that it were removed: I (says he) writing
to a friend in England) think as you do, that these things being indifferent
of themselves make not a man either good or bad, but as you also think, so I
think it more convenient, that that garment, and many things of that kind, cum
fieri commode, poterit auferuntur. i. that when conveniently it may be done
they be removed: and in the same epistle here quoted, I like well (says he) if
you desire that Christian religion should aspire again to chaste and simple
pureness: for what should all godly men more wish for: and to speak of my
self, I hardly suffer my self to be drawn from that simple and pure use,
which we all long used at Strasburgh, where difference of apparel in regard of
the ministry was taken away, that manner as being the plainer, and especially
savouring of the Apostolic Churches: I have always approved above all others,
and I pray God that it may be long continued there, and wheresoever the Church
of Christ is restored, it may at length be received: and therefore if the matter
may pass upon this worthy man's verdict, we shall soon agree.

Hemingius shows, that the ministers Clas. 3. c. 16
of the Gospel in these parts utterly refused the surplice, because although
the thing in it self were indifferent, yet the abominable abuse of it in
popery had made it not indifferent.

Osiander speaking of popish garments Cent. 3. lib. 3. c. 14.
brought in by a false decree of Steven, Quod (says he) profecto nihil aliud
est, quam umbras leviticas in clara luce Evangelij in Ecclesia^ stulte
reducere, et ex Christianis hac quide^ in part Iudaeos facere. Which in truth
is nothing else then to bring into the Church shadows in the clear light of
the Gospel, and to make in this respect of Christians Jews. As for Augustine
and Calvin they only affirm against the Anabaptists, and their like, that
some things used by idolators and heathens may be used of Christians, namely
such things as have a necessary and honest use, as we may use the same
Churches, Bells, pulpits, that were used in popery, but to infer of this, that
therefore we may use the Surplice, is as weak a reason, as if a man should
gather that therefore we may use all the other trash, Augustine resolves well:
Egiptij (says he) they had Aug. l. 2. de Doct. Christ. cap. 40.
their idola and onera their idols and their burdens. And they had also vasa
and ornamenta vessels and ornaments of gold, silver. etc. The I sraelits
abhorred their Idols and their burdens, but their vessels and their ornaments
of gold and silver they turned to a better use: he shows his meaning after,
that Idolaters and heathens have some profitable, and good things, and those we
may use; and they have some Idolatrous and burthenous things, and those we may
not use, in which number because the surplice is, therefore by S. Augustine
rule, we may not use it.

Wherefore (most noble king) seeing the surplice is one of the massing garments
in popery, an habit not beseeming the Ministers of the Gospel. 2. seeing Christ
and his Apostles and the Fathers in the better times of the Church made no
distinction in apparel. 3. Seeing it does not grace the ministry, but make
it ridiculous to the people. 4. Seeing it offends the Protestant, and gives
heart unto the Papist. 5. Seeing the gray Amice and other Popish garments are
gone that could have made as good a plea for themselves as the Surplice can. 6.
Seeing men of excellent learning and judgment, in sundry Christian kingdoms
reformed, have disliked it as coming too near to the Popish fashion: we
trust your Princely Majesty tendering the distress of your Preachers, the peace
of the Church, and the edification of your people, will remove this
stumbling block, that a number of faithful and good laborers either extruded
or discouraged by such occasions, may return again unto the Lords work.

6 For examination before the communion.
THat examination say they) where need Answ. to the petit. p. 11.
is, should go before the communion, who disliketh? And to have it where no
need is, who requires? Therefore let us rest in this: not so neither, but two
exceptions be taken to our speech.

Except. 1. That none should be admitted Answ. ibid.
to the blessed Sacrament, of what state or condition soever he be, except they
were first examined, were injurious, etc.
Answ. Then this is our brethrens meaning, that though there be need, yet if
he be an old man, or a man of any wealth or account, though there be need, and
the man never so ignorant, blockish, and profane, yet it is injurious and
inconvenient to take any trial of him; as if a man because he is old, or rich,
or bears some sway, may therefore come still to his judgment, or as if we
could be so excused 1. Cor. 11. 29. Mat. 24. 45
before God for giving the bread of the household to such as in our conscience
and knowledge belong not to it, only because they are old and rich. Our master
charge us without distinction, Mat. 7. 6.
Give not that which is holy unto Dogs. Chrysostom has a goodly saying: If
(says Chris. hom. 83. in Mat.
he) the keeping of a most clear and sweet fountain were committed to thee
for thy sheep to drink at, and a sort of swine should come to puddle it, and
to foul it with their feet, would not thou restrain them? would thou
suffer them to descend into it? Behold, not a fountain of water, but a
fountain of the blood and of the Spirit of Christ, is committed to thy keeping,
and will thou suffer wicked and vile sinners to desce^d into it and pollute it?
And so he concludes: If thou dare not prohibit the unworthy, Dicito mihi,
etc. sanguinem meu^ profundi potius patiar, quam ^^ the place.
sacratissimum illum sanguinem praeterquam digno concedam. I had rather suffer
mine own blood to be powered out, then that most holy blood of Christ should be
given to any unworthy person. Bucer does much complain of the neglect of this,
that some lib. 1. de regn. Christ. c. 4.
ministers will let all come to avoid their own trouble, etc. The place is
worth reading: yea, our own Bishops have decreed speaking of the minister, Ad
mysteriorum Synod. Land an. 1571. cap. cancal.
communionem neminem admittet, qui catechismum and articulos fidei non
didicerit. He shall admit none to the partaking of these mysteries, etc. which
has not learned the Catechism and Articles of faith. And again, in catechismo
instituant, and omnes suos omnium aetatum atque ordinum non tantum puellas and
pueros, sed etiam si opus est grandiores. Let them instruct in the catechism
all theirs, of all ages and degrees, not only boys and girls, but even the
elder sort also if there be need.

2. Except. To examine every man, etc. Answ. to the petit p. 12. sect. 4.
after the Consistorian fashion, were insolent.
Answ. Surely too many of us be too well acquainted with the Consistory
fashion, and we think it a proud fashion indeed, to bring our dear brethren,
redeemed with the precious price of the blood of Christ, and borne continually
in the hands of Angels to stand like poor prisoners at the bar as some have
done, for the omitting the cross and surplice. Nay, God forbid, let it be
far from the soul, and from the thought of every one of us: we will be the
servants of the Church, and as Abigail said, so we 2. Cor. 4. 5. 1. Sam. 25.
41. Ioh. 13. 14.
say in the humility of our hearts, that we will be ready to stoop down to
wash the feet of the meanest servant of our Lord and Master. Wherefore to
think that because that which we move for, may not be done in pride, in
insolency, with contempt of our brethren, that therefore it may not be done at
all, no not in humility, in meekness, in tenderness, and love, is to reason
as if men had made a fray with their wits.

And therefore seeing the matter is confessed to be needful, and exceptions to
the manner are found to be frivoulous, we most humbly entreat your most
excellent Majesty that Pastors may be charged to examine their people before
they come to the communion, and so to prepare them to come with comfort, as the
Leuits in the 2. Chr. 35. 6
Law sanctified and prepared their brethren.

7. For a Sermon before the Communion.
HErein also we both consent, unless Answ. to the petiT. p. 11. sect. 4.
our brethren deceive us with ambiguous words no body say they disliketh, that
it be ministered with a sermon, yet here also two exceptions are taken.

1. Exc. It is absurd to think it should not be Answ. ibid.
ministered without a sermon, and has bred in many a vain and false opinion as
if not the word of Christ's institution, but rather the word of the ministers
exposition were a necessary and essential part of the Communion.
Answ. The ignorance of our people considered, the shortness of men's memories
especially in good matters, the deadnes and coldness of the greatest part,
unless they have some good means to stir them up, and even as it were to
carry and bear up their hearts to God, it is not only convenient, but very
expedient, yea and necessary too, if possibly it may be, that at every
communion there should be a sermon, there is not a better time to work upon a
people, then when the ground is, as we may say, ready to eat up the seed from
the hand of the sower: this is that which S. Paul speaks of, to preach in
season 2. Tim. 4. 1
and that which our Lord commends to give the portion of meat in fit time.
This was the practice of John Baptist, of Christ Mat. 24. 45 Mar. 14. Mat. 28.
19 Act. 2. 22. and 20. 7.
and the Apostles who continually joined the word and the Sacraments together.
It is true, it may be a true sacrament without a sermon at the instant, because
the Sacraments do not only seal that which we learn then, but all the
merciful and good promises of life and grace which we have heard before; yet
because the Sacrament Romans 4. 11.
is more fruitful and effectual unto us, when it has the ministry of the
word annexed to quicken it, and to give life to it, by renewing the promises of
God, and stirring us up to lay hands upon them.

Therefore in consideration hereof, it is earnestly to be wished that the word
and the Sacraments may still go hand in hand together. We hope, nay we know
University men be not to learn to know, That aliud est sacramentum aliud est
vis sacramenti. The sacrament is one thing and the virtue of the sacrament is
another. Or as Augustine speaks in another Aug. tract. 26. in Joan. and lib. 4
de Bapt. c. 17.
place: Aliud est habere, aliud est utiliter habere. And therefore though it be
a sacrament without a sermon, yet the preaching of the word makes it a more
profitable sacrament, more fruitful and more effectual to the receivers.

Except. He that reads our Communion Answ. to the petit. p. 11. sect. 4.
book shall see that therein the whole manner, end and use of that holy
institution is so excellently described as may be in stead of many sermons.
Answ. That which was reached us with the right hand, is here pulled away from
us with the left. The communion book (say they) may be instead of many
sermons. The learned divines in this Land (and we (as they say,) have the
best in Christendom,) can preach but one sermon at once, and therefore if this
be so that the book may be in stead of many sermons the dumb minister with his
Communion book shall be better able to prepare a people for the Sacrament,
the the learned divine in all Christendom with his sermon. And is not this
goodly stuff. Our Reverent Bishops as it seems, were not so deeply conceited
of the book and therefore they decreed in their Synod: si tempore sacrae
communionis Synod. Land. anno 1571.
nulla erit concio de scripto and e pulpito, pronuntiabit unam aliquam ex
homilijs etc. here there must be a sermon or an homily to help out the book,
a sermon, if it may be: and therefore in the judgment of these learned men,
the book may not suffice in stead of many sermons. Godly Bucer one of their
own authors would Bucer de reg. Christ. l. 3. c. 7. p. 57.
have King Edward establish it as a Law in this Land, that before the
communion the Scripture be not only read, but also expounded to the people:
and sure (as we take it) there is reason for it, for howsoever there be some
good things in the book, yet they may not be matched with preaching. 1.
because preaching is the most effectual means whereby God works conversion
in his people, as the Apostle says: It pleased God through 1. Cor. 1. 21
the foolishness of preaching to save the believers. 2. The doctrine of the
book is always one and the same, but the doctrine Mat. 15. 39
of the preacher, may be varied. The doctrine of the book is general, but
the doctrine of the preacher may be fitted 2. Tim. 2. 15.
in particular, as he sees occasion: and therefore howsoever the book may be
good, yet in the judgment of any reasonable man, preaching must needs be
better.

Wherefore (most noble king) we trust your highness so well acquainted with
the ways of God, and all the means of life and comfort, will establish that,
which in the judgment of any feeling Christian, is the fittest.

8, Against the name of Priests,
1. THat distinction which the holy Ghost has constantly retained in all the
new Testament between the Priests of the law and the ministers of the Gospel,
that distinction must we retain if we will speak the language of Canaan, and
Esaias. 19. 18 Neh. 13. 24.
not as the children did in Nehemias time half in the speech of Ashdod and
half in the language of the Jews.

But the holy Ghost has constantly retained this distinction in all the new
Testament between the Priests of the Law, and the ministers of the Gospel.

Therefore if we will speak as the holy Ghost has taught us, we must retain
this distinction.

The assumption or second proposition has all authority to confirm it. 1.
the Phil. 1. 1. Ex. 4. 11. Doct. Fulk. answ. to the hand. c. 6.
Scripture it self. 2. the judgment of our best divines. Doctor Fulke,
because (says he) the Scriptures calls the ministers of the new Testament by
diverse other names of (...), (Priests) we thought it necessary to observe that
distinction, which we see the holy Ghost has so precisely observed. And again
showing why the ministers of the Gospel be never called Priests in any one
translation of our Bibles: It is reason (says he) we should retain that
disserence of names of the ibid.
ministers of both the Testaments, which the holy Ghost does always observe.
Doctor D. Whit. against. Reyn. c. 4. 199.
Whitakers says, Christ committed his Church to be ruled by Pastors, and
Bishops for ever, and not to Priests. And after: whereas their office is
declared diversely in great variety of names, yet is this name of Priests never
once given them in any Gospel, Epistle, or book of the new Testament. D.
Reynolds says, Seeing our language does D. Reynold cons. Heart. p. 538.
mean by priests, sacrificers, which in the Apostles language are called (...)
and they never gave the name (...) to the Pastors of the Christian Church, it
follows that they gave them not the name of Priests.

3. The papists themselves confess, yea Ballar. l. 3. de Romans Pont. c. 18.
Bellar. says Apostoli in scripturis nunquam vocant sacerdotes Christianos,
sacerdotes: sed solu^ Episcopos and presbyteros. The Apostles in the scriptuers
never call Christian Priests by the name of priests, but only by the name of
bishops and Presbytrs or Eders. And elsewhere Lib. 3. de sanct. invoc. cap. 4
he gives the reason to be this, to distinguish them from the Leviticall
priests, and therefore seeing the holy ghost has constantly kept this
distinction of names between the Priests of the Law and the ministers of the
Gospel we may not confound them.

2. The Royalties of our Lord Jesus Esaias. 42. 8.
both in his offices, and in his titles are to be preserved whole and entire to
him upon which no man without the Lords own grant may presume to enter.

But it is one of the royalties of our Lord Jesus to be the sole and the only
Priest of the new Testament, and so to be termed according to that: he holds
Heb. 7. 24.
(...). i. such priesthood, as can not pass to another, either for name or
nature, so that Augustine: says Aug. lib. de conf. Evang. cap. 3. D. Whit.
against Reyn. c. 4. p. 42.
well: Dominus Jesus Christus unus verus Rex, and unus verus sacerdos. The Lord
Jesus Christ is only true king, and only true Priest And D. Whitakers: Christ
has (...). i. such a Priesthood as cannot pass to another, but abides only
with himself, whereof it does invincibly and necessarily ensue, that the only
Priest of the new Testament is Jesus Christ.

Therefore this being one of the Royalties of our Lord Jesus ought to be
preserned whole and entyre to him.

3. Where there is a distinction in the things there must also be a
distinction in the names according to that of Tertul. fides nominum, salus est
proprietatum: to keep De carn. Chr. p. 19.
the names right, is a good means to keep the things right.

But there is a large and a wide distinction between the callings and the
functions of the ministers of the Gosspell, and the popish Priests. Therefore
there ought also to be a distinction in their names.

This reason Doctor Fulk presses, against the Papists, seeing the holy Ghost
had made such a broad difference between the D. Fulk. ans. to Hard. c. 6
names, and offices of the Priests of the Law and the ministers of the Gospel:
those ancient Fathers that confounded those names, which the spirit of God will
have to be distinct cannot be excused.

4. The name of priest in our Language is appropriated to signify no thing but
a sacrificer: so our best writers affirm: Tindall, Tynd. of the obed. of Chr.
Fulk. loc. cit.
D. Fulke: [the name of Priest is commonly taken to signify a sacrificer which
is (...), in greek, and Sacerdos in Latin: By which names the ministers of
the Gospel, are never called by the holy Ghost:] so Doctor Reynolds: the
custom of our English Reyn. loc. cit.
speech has made the name of Priests proper to a man appointed to sacrifice:
But the ministers of the Gospel cannot truly be Heb. 10. 10
called sacrificers, because they have no body and outward sacrifice to offer.
Therefore they cannot in true sense be called Priests.

5. To call the ministers of the Gospel by such a name, as is never read in
the new Testament, is to put a scruple into the peoples heads, that our calling
and office has no ground, nor warrant in the word of God.

But to call them by the name of Priests is to call them by such a name, as is
never read in the new Testament, in this sense as has been showed.

Therefore to call them by this name is to put a scruple into the peoples heads
that our calling and office has no ground in the word of God. But this we may
not, Ergo.

1. Object. Es. 66. 21. where the Geneva Answ. to the petition p. 12. sect. 5.
note does show that the ministers of the new Testament, are to be termed
Priests.

Answ. We had need make much of this Scripture: it is the only place, that is
alleged in all the book in any matter of question: the very same prophet
would have taught them better: ad legem and testimonium etc. But to the point:
Esaias does not say they shall be called Priests, Esaias. 8. 20.
but they shall be taken (...). i. into the place, and into the room of
Priests. i. to execute the same office and ministry of teaching and preaching
in the new Testament, that the legal Priests did in the old: for nothing is
more usual in the Prophets then figuratly under terms of the legal service
Deuteronomy. 33. 10
to set out the service and worship that was to be used in the Gospel, as ibid.
there shall be an altar of the Lord in the midst of the land of Egypt, and yet
we may not gather Esaias 19. 19
thence (as our brethrens logic will infer) that therefore the Lords table
must be called an Altar, and not a Table, there be infinite examples to this
effect. Now that Esaias speaks not of the name of Priests, 1. Cor. 10. 21.
may appear thus: 1. Esaias speaks of Luke and Timothy, and Titus, the first
preachers of the Gentiles: so says the Geneva note which is alleged. But they
as we heard before, were never called Priests. Therefore Esaias does not here
speak of the name of Priests. 2. If our brethrens sense be good, then the
Ministers of the Gospel may well be called Sacerdotes, Sacrificers, D. Fulk
ans. to Hard. c. 5.
for so is the Hebrew, (...): the Greek (...). But thus they may not be
called, therefore this cannot be the sense. 3. If by this place of Esaias the
preachers of the Gospel may be called Priests, then by the same reason they
may be called Levits: for the words be thus: Of them I will take for Priests
and Levits. But this were too too Jewish, and therefore as we said, Esaias only
means, they shall have the same place and office in the teaching of the
Gospel, that the Priests and the Levits had in the teaching of the Law: and
this also is the plain meaning of the Geneva note.

2. Obj. These terms be justified by diverse page 12. s. 5.
of our learned Divines.

Answ. Our best learned Divines are so far from justifying them, that they
condemn them. D. Reynolds says, Since Conf. c. 8. s. 5. p. 619.
the name of Priests have relation to Sacrifice, etc. the charge of the Lord
not to lay a stumbling-blocke, might have removed that name from the ministers
of the Gospel, as the name of My Baal, Hos. 2. 16. with him our learned men
consent, D. Fulke, Whitakers, and the rest: yea some of us can remember since
that Reverend In Act. 14. in Test. Rhem. Whit. ut sup.
Father D. Heton, being then Vicechauncellor of Oxford, two Jesuits were
brought to the Assizes to be arraigned for treason: the Doctor being requested
by the honorable Bench to speak something to them, stood up and demanded of
the Jesuits what they were: They answered, that they were Priests. Why, said
he, there be but two approved orders of Priests that I can read of in the
Scriptures, the order of Aaron, and the order of Melchisedecke: I pray you of
what order are you Priests? After some pause, one of them answered, they were
Priests after the order of Melchisedeck. Nay (said the Doctor) that ye be not;
for Melchisedeck had neither beginning of his days, nor end of his life: but
you both have had a beginning of your days, and I believe shortly for your
treason will have an end of your lives also; and therefore ye cannot be
Priests after that order. With this the poor Priests were dashed: the people
laughed, and the Doctor was much commended. And if the new Vicechauncellour
have found out a third kind of priesthood, which the old Vice Chancellor
never heard of, they may do well to inform him of it at their leisure: for our
parts we must assent unto the Doctor, that there be no other priests approved
in the word of God, but after one of these two orders, and therefore the
Ministers of the Church of England being priests after neither order, must
leave the priesthood of the new Testament solely and entirely to the Son of
God, and content themselves with those titles and names of Pastors, Preachers,
Ministers, Elders, etc. wherewith the wisdom of the Holy Ghost has endowed
them.

3. Object. A Priest comes of presbyter: But the ministers of the Gospel are
called presbyteri. Ergo they may be called Priests:

Answ. We hope men are not to learn now that words are not to be taken
according to their derivation, but according to their use, for an Idiot in our
speech comes from (...): And yet he that should say the Apostles might be
well termed Idiotes because they are called (...), would prove himself little
Act. 4. 13. Col. 1. 1.
less: so likewise a friar comes of frater, And yet he that should argue that
therefore the ministers of the Gospel may be called friars because they are
called fratres, should make but a frier-like conclusion. Thomas Aquinas might
have taught Aquin. 22. qu. 91. art. 1. 2.
men this, that aliud est etymologia nominis aliud est significatio. The
derivation of a name is one thing and the signification another, yea Aristotle
can show us that verba significant ad placitum. i. they signify not of Arist.
peripa - (...). lib. 1.
themselves, but accordingly as people consent and agree to use them, but the
name of Priest by common use of our people, is taken up to signify a
sacrificer, ut supra. And therefore we say of the name of Priests, as
Augustine says of the name of fatum which some expounded in a good Aug. lib.
5. de civ. Dei. c. 1.
sense, sententiam teneat, linguam corrigat. Let him hold his meaning, but let
him mend his speech. Wherefore (most oble King) 1. seeing the holy Ghost, who
should be the framer of a Christians tongue has kept a continual distinction
between the Priests of the Law and the ministers of the Gospel. 2. seeing it
is one of the royalties of the son of God to be accounted, and so called the
only Priest of the new Testament. 3. seeing in our office and ministry we
quite differ from the popish Priests and so should differ in our names also. 4.
seeing the name of a Priest in our language imports a sacrificer, which no man
of judgment will say is a fit name for a minister of the Gospel. 5. seeing it
leaves a scruple in the peoples heads. 6. seeing the soundest and the best
divines in the land have disliked the title. We therefore beseech your most
excellent Majesty to take away the Popes liverie from us, and to bestow upon us
by your princely laws those names and titles, which the holy Ghost in great
wisdom has assigned us. No doubt but to be continual looking glasses and
remembrances of our duty.

Against the Ring in Marriage.
THat there may be a civil use of the ring in Marriage we make no question:
good divines approve it. At Buc. loc. cit. Szeg. loc. com. p. 174. Pisc. ib
Mat. 23. 17. Nic. ad resp. Bull. c. 30. q. 5.
first it was used in the matrimonial contract, as appears by that in the
decrees: postquam arrhis sponsam sibi sponsus per digitum fidei annulo
insignitum despo^derit etc. aut mox aut apto tempore etc. ambo ad nuptialia
foedera perducantur. After that in pledge the bridegroom have espoused unto
himself the bride, by putting upon her finger the ring of promise etc. either
immediately after, or in convenient time, let the^ both be brought forth to the
marriage bond. And if it had been so used still, we know no body that would
have disliked it, but to bring every humane invention into the Church of God
and there, to offer it up to God in prayer, makes us to renew that complaint
of Aug. ep. 119 ad Ianuar.
Augustine. Ipsam religionem, quam paucissimis celebrationem sacramentis
misericordia Dei liberam esse voluit, servilibus oneribus ita premunt, ut
tolerabilior sit conditio Iudaeorum, etc. That religion which God in mercy
would have to be celebrated in a very few Sacraments, they so laden with
servile burdens, as that the condition of the Jews is more tolerable.

Beside the words that be used with it be so strange in our language, (with
this ring I the wed, with my body I thee worship) etc. that no man can make any
sense of them in true congruitie, and though happily there may be some far
fetched meaning of the words, yet there is not one of a thousand among our
people, that understands the meaning thereof: and who willingly in an actio^ so
frequent and of that moment will make people speak so, as the one shall not
understand the other.

10. Against longsomnesse of Service.
THat which serves to the most edification and building up of the people of
God, that must especially be 1 Cor. 14. 4, 5. Act. 20. 32. Ephesians. 4. 12.
regarded in the Church assemblies. But preaching does much more edify and
build up the people of God, then this same long service.

Therefore it must rather be respected. Ambrose said well upon these words:
let Ambr. in 1. Cor. 14
them speak by two or three, viz. Ne occuparent diem linguis loquentes and
eorum interpretes, and non haberent tempus prophetae Scripturas discernendi,
qui sunt totias Eccl. illuminatores. Let not them speak witb tongs, and their
interpreters take up the day, so that the Prophets which are the light of the
whole Church have no time to open the Scriptures.

2. It is a rule in divinity that of two good duties, if a man cannot do both
in Math. 12. 7
christian wisdom, he must do the better: So the Lord says: I will have
mercy and not sacrifice: And the Apostle says: Christ 1. Cor. 1. 17.
sent me not to baptize, but to preach.

Now which of these two is the better (we mean not in it self, but in regard
of the edification of Gods Church) Let the scriptures decide: Come, let us go
up to house of the Lord. And for what especially, Is. 2. 3
and cheiflie? Ipse docebit nos vias suas, the especial end is to know the
ways of God. Bucer upon these words says: Precipuum opus indicatur very
christiani coetus sincera Lib. 1. de reg Christ. c. 3.
doctrina and eius prompta obedientia. The principal work of the true
Christian congregation is noted to be sincere doctrine and the ready obedience
thereof. See Gratians gloss Great. 1. 9. 1.
sect. Interrogo.

Therefore seeing preaching is the better, when a man either through weakness of
body, or want of time cannot do both, we take him bound to do the better.i.
to preach to the people.

3. That which makes the minister unfit to preach and the people unfit to
hear is to be amended. But so does the Opus tripart. lib. 3. c. 1.
same long and tedious service, opus tripart. In many Churches they read so
long, as scarsely any hears all, and if any stay there they commonly fall a
sleep: bonum ergo fuit, ut ita temperatae lectiones legantur in matutini, ut
fragilitas humana prae taedio non recedat. Synod. It was good, that the lessons
should be read in that order in morning prayer, that men's frailty be not
wearied with Synod. Ang. c. 8.
the tediousness. Augustine says: ut nimia festinatio in missae lectione
religiosas aures offendit, ita incongrua prolixitas fastidium generat, me
diocritatem igitur commendamus. As the hudling in reading the mass offends
the ears, so excessive tediousness is irckesome, whereas a mean between botb
is commendable.

Therefore this abuse ought to be amended.

1. Object. This well befits these men's great devotion.

Answ. If this argue want of devotion Answ. to the pet. p. 12. sect 6.
in us, to abridge the longsomnesse of Church service for preaching, then
surely the Doctors and Proctors and heads of houses in Oxford want devotion
among whom no thing is more usual in their Colleges, then to abridge the
prayers to go to S. Mary's to the sermon.

2. Again, this is such divinity, as we never heard of to place all devotion
in long prayer: the Pharisees were Luc. 21. 47 Aug. de here is c. 57. Math. 6. 9.
of this mind, and Enchits of old, and the Monks, and friars of late; But our
Savior Christ belike measured devotion by some other rule, who taught his
disciples so short a prayer. The humble publican said Luc. 11. 13
no more but this, God be merciful to me a sinner. Platina writes of the
Apostles that they did consecrare ad solam dominicam So Gregor. lib. 7. epist.
63.
orationem: he means they had no other set prayer: then the Lords prayer. What
shall we think they wanted devotion also Augustine writes of the religious men
in Egypt: dicuntur fraters in Egipto crebras quidem Epist. 121.
habere orationes, sed eas tamen brovissimas and raptim quodammodo iaculatas.
The Religious men in Egypt are said to have frequent prayers but the same very
short, and as it were by sudden ejaculations. This we speak Ast. 13. 15. On S.
Michaels day the epist. is Rev. 12. 7. there was a batell in heaven Michael
etc. as if this Michael fighing for the church were not Christ. but an Angel.
p. 12. s. 7.
not to condemn long prayer when occasion serves. but to show, that even they
that use shorter prayers may be devout. 3. Beside all that we desire to be
abridged, is not prayer, but a number of Scriptures unhandsomly shredded and
pared from the rest, many times neither fitly sorted, as the lectures of the
law and Prophets were, nor truly applied to the present purpose.

2. Object. Some of these preachers spend almost an boure in senseless, and
inconsequent prayer.

Answ. 1. If devotion be measured by our bretherns rule, then belyke those men
be full of devotion, for they pray long.

2. If some spend the time in senseless and inconsequent prayer, what does
this prejudice those faithful and good teachers, that spend it better?

3. Obj. From this dislyke of all set and stinted from of prayer etc. Ibid.


Ans. Do the Petitioners dislyke all set and stinted form of prayer? do they
Untruths diverse.
condemn the saying of the Lords prayer? do they refuse to use it? who told
them so? In the beginning of their book they say, we mask under unknown
names, and yet now they can tell that we dislyke all set and stinted form of
prayer, that some of us omit the Lords prayer, and some of us refuse to use it;
these be the strangest men we have heard of, who though they know not a man,
nor his dwelling, nor his country, yet they can tell what prayers he uses in
his Church. Nay they can tell his secret thoughts, that though he use the
comunion book, yet he disliketh all set and stinted kind of prayers. But that
our brethren would willingly blindfould themselves to traduce us: they might
have well conceived by our words, that we dislike not all kind of set prayer,
because we desire not to have the service removed but to have it abridged.

Wherefore (most noble King,) 1. seeing preaching serves most to the
edification of the Church. 2. Seeing when both cannot be done, the long prayer,
and the preaching, it is Christian wisdom to do the better. 3. Seeing the
practice of both our Universities gives liberty this way. 4. Seeing nothing but
mockes and untrue tales be opposed against it, we must renew our humble suite
to your highness, that the long and tedious service be abridged, where there
be preachers that be able with their faithful and godly labors to take up
the time better.

11. Against the abuse of Church songs and Music.
WHETHER our brethren yield to this or no, we know not, they have so pleased
themselves in a conceit of our moderation and the kings great devotion (as they
term it) in hearing the Organs, that they forget to tell us their resolution:
therefore we will justify the equity of our request.

1. In the Church of God nothing ought to be done, but that which serves to
edification: this is Paul's rule. 1. Cor. 14. 26.


But the Church Music and songs, as they be now used in Cathedral Churches,
and some Colleges with Organes and descant foreward and backward serve not to
edification.

Therefore it ought not to be permitted in the Church of God. The assumption or
second proposition is proved thus.

If the Latin service in popery served to no edification, because the
greatest part understood not that which was spoken, then also this theatricall
music, wherein the greatest part understand no thing, serves so Aug. terms it
in psalm. 32. com. c. 1. Class. 3. c. 13 s. 29.
to as little. Peter Martyr one of their own authors approves this, nec iure
potest (says he) retineri fracta illa and Confragosa musica, qua ita
detinentur astantes ut verba etiamsi velint percipere minime queant. That
broken and chaunting Music, by which the standers by cannot, though they
would understand the meaning of the words ought not to be retained. And so even
popish Aquinas: Aquin. 22. qu. 91. art. 2
huiusmodi musica instrumenta magis animum movent ad delectationem, quam per ea
formetur interius bona dispositio. These musical Iustruments do rather affect
the mind with delight then further any good dissposition in him. And therefore,
as he says the Church used not them. Consil. Aquisgran. Co^ci. Aquis. con. 137.
Decreed well, Psalmi in Ecclesia non cursim and excelsis inordinatis aut
intemperatis vocibus, sed plane and dilucide and cum compunctione cordis
recitentur, ut and cantantium men's illorum dulcedine pascatur and audientium
aures pronunciatione demulceantur. Let not the Psalms in the Church be hurried
over or sung with loud, and strained throats but plainly and distinctly, with
feeling of the heart; so as both the mind of the singer may be fed with the
melody, and the ears of the hearers refreshed with the words.

2. That which draws down the mind from meditation and heavenly
contemplation to sensual and carnal delight, is not fit to be used in the
house of God, where all our affections are rather to be mounted, and to be
lifted up.

But so does the same light and theatricall kind of music. Therefore it is
not to be used in the Church of God. This reason has both protestant and
popish writers to approve it. Peter Martyr says, Loc. cit.
If we should see at this day Christian people run to the Church as it were
to a theater to delight themselves with music and songs, (as they daily do at
Paul's church when the Organs and the anthems be sung) abstinendum potius esset
a re non necessaria: we should rather abstain from a thing not needful then
by occasion thereof hazard the souls of the comers. So likewise Thomas
Aquinas resolves in his Aquin. vt supra.
sum.

3. To bring in any part of the Leuiticall service into the Church of Christ is
utterly Heb. 7. 12.
unlawful, as the Apostle shows-

But this kind of music by Organs and Instruments was a part of Leuiticall
service. Therefore it is utterly unlawful in 2 Chr. 29. 25. Bez. in colloq
mompelg. part. 2. p. 36. Aquin. 22. q. 91. art. 2. arg. 4.
the Church of Christ.

Beza not only urges this, but that deep divine, as they take him, Aquinas
says, the Church does not receive Musical instruments to praise God with, ne
videatur iudaizare, Lest she seem to Iudaize. And he gives good reason, why
the Jews under the Law had such music, and Christians have none 1. because in
the old Ibid. ad 4.
law the people were more carnal. And the second, because these instruments
did figure some things to come, namely the spiritual joy, which we have in
Christ.

4. That which Christ and the Apostles, and all the godly Fathers of the Church
for six hundred years together thought to be the fittest, and meetest music
for the Church, that must we think to be fittest, unless we think to be
wiser then they. But Christ and the Apostles and all the godly fathers of the
Church for 600. years and more have taken plain voice music, and not this
kind of music by Organes and descant to be the fittest and meetest for Gods
service, as appears by their practice, and precepts, Math. 26. 30. Col, 3.
16. Pliny says of the first (...). Plin. apud Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 30. Aug.
lib. 10. canf. c. 33.
Christians, that they did ante lucanos hymnos Christo Deo canere. Sing Psalms
to Christ the Lord in the morning before day, And Augustine reports of
Athanasius: tam modico flexu vocis faciebat sonare lectorem Psalmi, ut
pronuntianti vicinior esset, quam canenti: He made the reader of the Psalms
vary his voice so little, that he seemed rather to speak then to sing. And
Hierome dislikes, that such as sing in the Ierom. epist. ad Epiphan, did. 82.
Church should stretch their mouth and throat, as though they were at a play:
And therefore this plain voice music is fittest to be used in the service of
God.

1. Object. Just. martyr qu, 107. and Answ. to the pet. p. 12.
Augustine. lib. 10. c. 11. allow music.

Answ. But what kind of music do they allow: Organs and curious prick sung?.
Augustine speaks but of singing of Aug. lib. 9. confess. c. 6. and 7. and
Epist. 119. c. 18.
psalms as may appear in many places, that liquida voce with a clear plain
voice, and co^uenientissma modulatione a most fit and seemly tune: for else
where he professes, that where as some had brought In. Psalm. 32. com. 1.
in the use of the harp and citharane into the Church, he by his authority
removed it. Let no man marvel, says he, that we have cast out the harp,
and behold it is commanded to sound, saying, praise the Lord upon the harp:
nemo convertat cor ad organa, quod ei iubetur in se habet. Let no man spend his
efection upon the musical Instruments, being to make melody in himself.

For Justin Martyr (though that be none of his work) because he there cites
Author apud Justin. q. 107.
Origin, (who lived after) yet whosoever is the author, he is directly against
our brethren, as dirictlie for us in this cause: Instruments (says he) be not
used in the Church of God: sed simplex cantio in eis manet: there is nothing
but plain singing: nam canere instrumentis in animis puerorum est: To use
instruments is for babes and children. Itaque in ecclesijs sublatus est tantum
instrumentorum vsus, and relictum est canere simpliciter: so that our brethren
thinking by these authorities to help their cause, have indeed cut the throat
of it.

The Papists themselves confess, that their harmonicall music is much later
lib. 4. Chronol. p. 729.
then Iustine Martyr, or Augustine either. Genebrand confesses that Pope
Constantine sent Organs to King Pippin anno 757. as yet unknown to the
Germans and Frenchmen: and Beza shows by good authorities, that they were
first brought in by Pope Viteliane at the soonest, and Colloqu. Mompelg. par.
2. p. 37.
into France anno 878. So long the Churches of Christ stood without them: and
it had been well with them if they had stood so still.

Wherefore (most noble King) 1. Seeing this theatricall Music serves not to
edification in the Church, to the which all things there used should serve by
the Apostles rule. 2. Seeing it hinders edification in withdrawing the mind
from contemplation, and pulling it down to carnal delight. 3. Seeing it was a
part of the Leviticall service, which is now ceased in Christ. 4. Seeing plain
voice music was taken to be fittest for Gods service by Christ and the
Apostles, and all the Fathers in the best times of the Church; we most humbly
entreat your majesty, that this stage-like music may be removed, and that
which is fittest for edification, and best beseeming the spiritual worship of
the Gospel may be retained.

12. Against the profanation of the Lords day.
HErein we both consent, He is very Answ. to pet. p. 12.
profane (say our brethren) that desires not this from his heart. Now we
heartily thank the holy God of Heaven even for this; and we pray him that has
begun this good in our brethren, to increase it to the day of Jesus Christ.

Indeed the sanctifying of the Sabbath Esaias. 58. 13 Exodus 31. 13
is it that gives life to all religion: and therefore this being once well
settled, all religious and Christian duties will quickly follow.

Wherefore (O most noble King) not only we the ministers that desire
reformation, but both your Universities, the Vice Chancellors, Doctors, and
heads of houses, and the rest of the learned Clergy and obedient subjects,
expect this at your Highness hands, that as you have by your most Christian
proclamation give Constant. Eusebius. lib. 4. c. 19. Theodos. and Valent. c. de.
ferijs. Carolus. magn. 139. K. Canutus K. Iuas. in martyrol. Fox p. 73.
Gythcon. K. of Danes. ibid. p. 755. Exodus 20. 10.
charge for the sanctifying of the Lords day and for restraining of idle sports
and games upon it (as the godly, Emperors and Kings have done before) So
because through the backwardnes and disorder of many brutish people, that day
is not yet so carefully regarded as it should be: It will please your
highness so soon as God shall give opportunity, to enact it as a Law, that
all your Majesty's people may not only keep a rest, but a religious and holy
rest upon that day. We know your highness knows the largeness of your
gates, that they be as large, as your kingdom, and therefore will provide by
godly and wholesome laws, according to the charge of your God, which is upon
you: that all within your gates. i. within your highness government and
dominions shall keep the day of the Lords rest in all the holy duties and
services of it.

13. That the rest upon holy days be not so strictly urged.
Argument. 1. IF Saints days may without any offense to God be remooved, then
the strict observation thereof should not be so severely urged.

But the first is true: for some Churches reformed have de facto taken them
away, as brought in by men: and de iure they might so do: because the keeping
of such times without special commandment, seems to be an observing of
days, contrary to the Apostle. Gal. 4. 10. and a consecrating of them, to the
memory of men, which should only be observed to the Lord Romans 14. 6. As
Ambrose well says: qui calendas Ianuarias colit, peccat, quoniam homini mortuo
defert divinitatis obsequium, he that keeps the calends of January, sins,
because he gives divine worship to a dead man, his reason is as good against
holy days, Amb. ser. 17
kept in the memory of Christian men, as Pagans: for divine honor should be
yielded to neither,

Arg. 2. There should be a diffrence made between the rest upon the Lords day,
and other holy days. But now there is no difference, the rest being as
strictly urged upon the one day as the other: Ergo.

The proposition is thus proved. i. The Lord himself makes a difference
between the Sabbath, and other holy days of his own appointment: for upon the
passover day it was lawful to dress that, which they did eat, Exodus 12. 16,
But not so upon the Lord day. Exodus 16. 2. 3. 2. the Sabbath is of the Lords
institution, and so precisely to be kept: holy days are but an Ecclesiastical
constitituon) and therefore not in the observation to be made equal to the
other. 3. Difference to be made in the observation of the Lords day and other
holy days.
the rest upon the Lords day does simply bind in conscience, as all the
commandments of God do: the rest of holy days does not simply bind in
conscience, in respect of the thing commanded, but as we are bound in
conscience to obey our governors in all lawful things: for there is but one
lawgiuer which is able to save and to destroy. Iam. 4. 12. 4. the constitutions
of the Church have observed this difference, making greater restraint of labor
upon the Lords day, then upon other festivals: upon the Lords day all ruralia
opera, works of husbandry are forbidden: Cabilonens. c. 18. itinerari cum
caballis, to travel with horse or oxen. Aurelian 3. 27. to keep Fairs, or
Markets upon the Lords day. Coloni. part. 9. c. 10. no courts or pleas then to
be holden: Tarraconens. c. 4. no dansing, or plays, or shows to be used:
Mogunt. c. 61. All these canons and many more provide only or chiefly pro
diebus dominicis, for the Lords days.

Argu. 3. That liberty which God has given to work six days, ought not
(where Exodus 20. 6
there is no urgent necessity) to be restrained, especially where there is a
necessity to labor: for where necessity requires, we deny not but a day of
cessation may be enjoined upon the work days, as when a general day of fast,
or of thanksgiving is proclaimed: yet even upon these days, necessary labors
are excepted.

But the rest of holy days is upon no necessity: yea many pore men working a
crash for necessity have been fetched to the Courts, and forced to pay large
fees: Ergo it impugneth the liberty which God has given, and so is unlawful
as it is urged.

Arg. 4. This rest upon holy days ministers occasion of idleness, haunting
of Alehouses, unlawful gaming, which are twice so offensive as working. Men
keep them as the Israelites kept holy days; They ate, they drunk, and rose up
to play. Exodus 32. 6. As Ambrose speaks of the Gentiles feasts, Vides quomodo
convivia sua adornent, festa annuntient, sed pijs mentibus infestiora sunt. Ye
see how they adorn Epist. 4.
their feasts, and proclaim their festivals, offensive to all good minds, etc.

Ergo this straight urging of holy days rest, as ministering occasion of evil,
ought to be qualified, if not abolished.

Arg. 5. It is more lawful by the law to work upon holy days, then for
Judges Cod. lib. 3. tit. 12. leg. 2 Theodes.
to keep Courts, and hear suits. The Imperial commands, omnes Iudices
cessent: that all Judges should cease upon the Lords day: but it permits ut
agrorum culturae inserviant, that they may follow husbandry upon that day. Yet
for this we cite not the Imperial, but only to show the difference of these
two works.

But upon all holy days in term time (excepting four, viz. the Ascension,
John Baptist, All Saints, and the Purification) the Judges keep their Courts
in Westminster Hall. Ergo as well by the civil Law may Country men follow
their rural works.

Arg. 6. We will lastly show the practice of the Church for liberty of working
upon holy days.

Gregory 1. calls them predicatores Antichristi, preachers and Prophets of
Antichrist, lib. 2. epist. 3. decr. par. 3. did. 3. c. 12.
qui die sabbati operari probibent, which forbid to work upon saturdayes: But
so do the spiritual courts prohibit to work upon that day, when it falls out
to be a festival.

Leo and Anthenius provide only in their constitutions for the Lords day: Nec
huius religiosi diei (i. dominici) otia relaxantes etc. and prescribing the
rest of this religious day, yet we would not have it spent in filthy pleasures:
and the law gives a reason, calling the dominical days, dies festos maiestati
altissimae dedicatos: festiuals dedicated to the highest majesty, whereas the
rest were dedicated to Saints. Simon Islip Archbi. of Canturburie forbids
upon pain of excommunication: Fox Martyr. p. 393.
that people should not abstain from labor upon certain Saints days, which
were before consecrate to unthrifty idleness.

Reformat. Ratisp. artic. 20. in minorib. festivitatib. etc. in the less
festivals we give liberty after service done, for men to go to their work.

Treverens. sub Joan. c. 10. usque in meridiem in festis dieb. seriart volumus
etc. We will have me^ to keep holy day till none, and then go to their work:
Thus was it decreed in Popery, when they had many blind Saints days, which we
observe not now: But as they dispensed with their less festivals so among
Protestants, the rest of the holy days (which are the least) might be
released; so that in time of divine service labor be forborne.

Objections answered. Object. 1. Would they have men upon such days to go to
plough and cart.

Answ. to Petition. p. 13.

Answ. 1. Would ye have them go to dice, tables, quaffing, dancing (as the
common use is) which is the worse, we pray you? Augustine thus says of the
Jews sabbatizing: melius toto die foderent, Aug. in Psalm. 32. par. 1.
quam saltarent: they might better delue all the day, then dance all the day.
2. And why might not men be suffered to follow their vocation upon such days
(so it be not done with contempt of divine service, as the reason is given in
the Law: quia non aptius alio die frumenta sulcis, aut vineae scrobuli
manda^tur: it falls out that no day is fitter to sow corn, and set vines in:
the same Cod. lib. 3. l. 12. leg. 3.
law also gives liberty for like works to be done upon the Lords day: But
therein it must give place to Gods law.

Object. 2. As some of their humor have caused their servants to do on the
feast day of Christ: Answ. to petit. ibid.

Answ. This is a most untrue assertion, that the petitioners or any like minded
to Great. untruth.
them have caused their servants to go to plough or cart upon that day. 2. We
make great difference between the holy days consecrated to the honor of
Christ, and the other: which are memorials of men: Which difference both the
Imperial and Ecclesiastical laws observe. Cod. lib. 3. tit. 12. leg. 7. all
the Saints days are omitted: only the Lords day with the festivals of
Christ, his nativitie, circumcision, the Epiphanie are decreed to be holy
days: So likewise Council. Agathens. c. 94. cited Cause. 7. qu. 1. c. 29.

Wherefore (O most noble King) 1. seeing holy days of Saints might be
altogether spared. 2. and that difference between them and the Lords day should
be observed 3, seeing poor men are forced upon necessity to labor upon such
days. 4. Idle and unthrifty persons, are occasioned by such play days to do
evil. 5. seeing the practice of the honorable Courts allow it. 6. laws and
cannos have decreed it: It may please your most excellent Majesty, that your
pore subjects be no more vexed and troubled in Ecclesiastical courts, for
following their necessary labors upon holy days) so it be out of the time of
divine service) for the sustentation of their families: As in time of popery
the poor Saints were troubled for the same: as Isabel Tracher, was persecuted
for working upon an holy day; William Wingraue and Thomas Hawks for the like:
That your excellent Majesty resolve with the Christian Emperor Constantine, A
nullo etc, presumi debet, ut authoritate sua ferias condiat: that none presume
by their own authority (without Gods and yours) to make such holy days to
restrain all labor.

THE DEFENSE OF THE FIRST PART of the petition concerning Church Service.
ARTIC. 1. Of uniformity of doctrine.
Object. WHAT imputations are these, etc. What shameless suggestions, as
though there were no uniformity nor consent of doctrine among us.

Answ. 1. Are our brethren so ignorant that they know not, or so wilful that
they will not acknowledge how by diverse both in their preaching and writing,
opinions have been taught, and defended not having a smattering only, but a
rank taste of Popery. What say you then to Popish positions. Hooker, lib. 1 1.
p. 60. and 61.
these positions: there is in man naturally that freedom, whereby he is apt to
take or refuse any particular object. The like position the Rhemists hold, it
lies in man to give consent, helped also by grace. Annot. Apoc. 3. 4. they
give not a full sufficiency or ability but an aptness and inclination to
freewill by nature to consent to any object.

There are works of supererogation, that a Hook. lib. 2. page 122.
man may do more, and God approve much more, then he commands. So say the
Rhemists: the works that we do more then precepts, (...) called works of
supererogation, whereby it is evident against the Protestants, that there be
such works. Annot. in Luc. 10. sect. 3.

That the Chapter of Rome is the family of Jesus: Hook. lib. 3. p. 130.
whence it will follow that the pope is not Antichrist, who cannot fit in the
family of Christ. So the Rhemists call it the Church and house of Christ,
confuted therein by our divines as D. Fulk. Math. 16. sect. 10.

That the Sacraments are moral instruments Lib. 5. p. 128. p. 133.
of salvation, and in their place no less required then faith it self: This
differs not far from that popish position, that the sacraments give and
confer grace, Rhemist. act. 22. sect. 1.

That the Scriptures and nature jointly not Lib. 1. p. 8^
severally are complete unto everlasting felicity.

Whence it follows that the Scriptures severally by themselves are not
complete to salvation: What other thing is affirmd by the Rhemists, saying
the Scripture contains not al necessary truth. Heb. 9. s. 2.

That the Sacraments are no Sacraments without the serious meaning and
intention of the Minister: the like assertion B. Jewel confuteth against
Harding calling it the very dungeon of uncertainty to stay upon the intention
of a mortal man. Reply art. c 1. p. 34.

Infants if they have not baptism howsoever, etc. the Church as much as in her
lies ib. 5. p. 135.
casts away their souls. So the Rhemists say, no man can enter into life
everlasting unless he be baptized of water and the Holy Ghost. Annot John.
3. sect. 2. This position By one Butler a Commissary.
of the necessity of baptism, that infants, dying without it are damned, has
been of late publicly taught, with other positions of the like nature, by an
unsound dogmatist in North ampt on shire, as we are informed. All these and
diverse such like popish paradoxes have been broached and set a foot in public
writing, and since the Authors death have been again revived (with whom we wish
they had been buried) and defended by public writing to the great offense of
sincere Protestants and the no small joy of superstitious Papists: of this sort
and savouring of the same leaven are these such like doctrines, that justifying
faith may be lost: that it is not proper to the elect: that a man cannot be
sure of his salvation: that a man has free will to believe: that Christ died
not only for the Elect. These and such like positions have been publicly by
some maintained, both in pulpits and Schools: How then are not our brethren
ashamed to call these false imputations and shameless suggestions.

2. We charge not the Leiturgie with Popish opinions, though we wish it
discharged of some needless ceremonies: and what a simple argument is this;
The book contains no popish opinions: Ergo none have been taught in the
Church, or there is a book of articles of religion agreed upon, and in the^ an
uniformity of doctrine in some things: Ergo there is an uniformity of doctrine
prescribed for all other points. There are diverse hundred points of doctrine,
wherein Protestants and Papists dissent; the fourth part of them is not
contained in that book. We reverence and allow that book, and wish, that what
is wanting may be added, that an uniformity Uniformity of dostrine.
of doctrine may be agreed upon for all other points of doctrine, as is done
for those already there expressed.

3. We put not weapons into the adversaries hand to wound us, which complain
of unsound teaching, but they give occasion and advantage to them that depart
from the curra^t doctrine of the Protestants, and refine over the old Popish
dregs. Wherefore our brethrens words (it bad been good that these men had
been never able to write, then to write thus to the scandale of Gods Church and
his sacred truth) might more truly have been uttered against those that have
thus in their writing maintained corrupt popish doctrine, then against them
that have profitably employed both their tongues and pens against the common
Adversary. How far now are our Brethren from the Spirit of Moses, who wished
that all the people of God could prophecy. And Numb. 11. 28.
our Savior bids us to pray the Lord of the harvest to send forth laborers
into his harvest. But these wish that many Mat. 11. 38
profitable men had been never able to write.

We may say to them as Hierome to his adversary: there are Papists among us,
Atheists, Hier. ad Theophi. advers. Joan. Hieros.
Familists, etc. Why do they not tax them, have they a spite only at us? do
we only make a rent in the Church that communicate with the Church: Nos soli
qui Ecclesiae communicamus: Ecclesiam scindere dicimur.

ARTIC. 2. Of bowing at the name of Jesus.
Object. REverence done at the name of Jesus is not superstition, etc. But an
apparent token of devotion: why do they not find fault likewise with kneeling,
sighing, weeping, etc.

Answ. 1, How follows it? we may kneel, sigh, weep, knock upon our breasts,
hold up our hands to heaven in our prayers: Ergo it is lawful to bow at the
name of Jesus: seeing for the one we have warrant both by precepts and example
of Scripture, and so we have not for the other. 2. In that the knee is bowed
rather at the name of Jesus then of Christ, or of God the Father, and God the
holy Ghost, it is evident that this reverence is done to the name, not to the
divine Majesty, which equally in all these names is to be adored: if then the
sound of the name be adored, it is superstition: if the person, it brings an
inequality of the Godhead. 3. As well may the name of Jesus be bowed unto, when
it is seen painted or written in the glass windows, as when it is
pronounced: for why should not the sight thereof be as holy to the eye, as the
sound to the ear? And indeed thus a certain late Popish Synod persuaded to
kneel down before an image because the people bow at the name of Jesus: these
are their words: Nec maiori idololatriae periculo, quam ad nomen Jesus genu
flectitur: quem enim vocula cursim auribus insinuat, hunc eunde^ fidelibus
oculis imago repraesentat. 4. The petitioners therefore had good cause to move,
that ministers be not (contrary to their judgment and consciece, wit hout
warant of the word) to teach their people: for that place which is commonly
alleged Phil. 2. 10. God has given him a name above all names, that at the
name of Jesus should every knee bow, both of things in heaven, things in earth,
etc. can have no such meaning. 1. The Apostle speaks not of the outward knee
for the Angels have no such knees, wc notwithstanding do bow at the name of
Jesus, as the Apostle says: let all the Angels Hebr. 1. 6.
of God worship him. And Ambrose says: agnoscentes Angeli mysterium genu illi
flectentes: Ambros: in ^. lim. 3.
the Angels do bow their knees. 2. Neither does the Apostle speak of a name
consisting of letters and sillables, but of the divine power given unto Jesus,
that shall be adored of all, as the Prophet expounds: every knee shall bow to
him, and every Esaias. 25. 23.
tongue shall swear by him. This argument is urged by Ambrose, nomen quod est
super Ambr. in Ph. 1. 2.
omne nomen, etc. this name above all names is the name of God: if this name
did not consist by nature, it were not above every name: appellativum enim
nomen in solo vocabulo est, non in natiuitate naturae: a name appellatiue is
only in the word, not in the natural generation.

3. Of the puklick reading of Apocrypha.
Obi. THEY are grossly ignorant, if they know it not, or wilfully malicious,
etc. if knowing they impugn, etc.

Answ. 1. I hope our brethren will not Defens: Apol: p. 57^
account Reverend Bishop Jewel either grossly ignorant, or wilfully malicious
and turbulent, though they so call us at their pleasure, who proves out of the
Laodicene and Hipponense Council, as also Laodicen: cans: 59.
out of Chrysostom, and the decrees of the French Kings lives, and Charles,
that nothing should be read in Christ's congregation but the Canonical
Scriptures: The words of the Laodicene Council are these: non oportet libros
qui sunt extra canonem, legere, nisi solos canonicos veteris and novi
testamenti. 2. Hierome himself, (who is here objected giving way to those
times, seems sometime to tolerate the reading of the Apocriphall books for
the stories sake, yet wishes the same to be done cautelously: Caveat omnia
Apocrypha, etc. Take heed of the Apocrypha; and if Hierom: ad Laetam.
any will read them, not for the worth of doctrine, but reverence of the story,
know he that they are not theirs, whose title they bear: Multaque his admixta,
vitiosa, and grandis esse prudentiae aurum in lute quaerere. And that many
faulty things are mingled, and it is a prudent part to seek gold in the mire.

3. But the Apocrypha give light to the divine story.

Answ. So does Josephus and Pliny, with other foraine writers: does it follow
therefore that they should be read in the Church; though they give some light,
yet the Scripture gives to it self a greater light: which as his Majesty
says: is always the best interpreter of it self. And (...). p. 10 Meditat.
in 20. Revel.
in another place his Majesty excellently writes: We are taught, only to use
Scripture for the interpretation of Scripture, if we would be sure, and never
swerve from the analogy of faith in expounding.

4. Our reasons against the public reading of Apocripha are these. 1. In the
Church of the Jews in the Apostles time only Moses and the Prophets were
read. Act. 13. 15. and 15. 22. 2. The Scriptures are sufficient both for
doctrine and manners, 2. Tim. 3. 16. 3. Because the Apocrypha books, as Hierom
says, contain many falsities mixed with truth. The contradictions between the
Canonical book of Esther, and the Apocryphal are diverse, and not to be
reconciled, as the learned have noted: the story of Bell and the Dragon, Hierom
calls fables: and so does Augustine in Tobie the Angel is Consule Whit. q.
1. de script. c. 18. Praef. in Dan. Aug. de mirabilibus. lib. 2. c. 32.
brought in to tell a tale, that he was of the stock of Azarias c. 5. 8. The
devil is driven away with the smell of a broiled liver. c. 8. 3. The story of
Judith commends such tricks and devises, as became not the modesty of a
woman professing virtue. Ecclesiasticus tells us that Samuel prophesied
after he was dead. c. 46. 20. In the Macchabees, Judas is commended for
offering sacrifice for the dead, l. 2. c. 12. Razis extolled for killing
himself. l. 2. c. 14. v. 42.

4. Books that bear false titles are not to be read in the Church, which the
Canon calls (...). can. Apost. 59. but such are the Apochriphall books.
Hierom says: non eorum esse, quorum titulis praenotantur: they are not theirs
whose title they show. Augustine says, that the book of wisdom is thought to
be Salomons, propter non nullam eloquij similitudinem, but for some likeness
of the style: l. 17. de Civ. Dei c. 20.

5. That which gives occasion of error, should not be admitted: but the
reading of Apochripha is occasion of error; to induce the people to think
that they are Scripture: And therefore the Laodicene Council joins both
these together quae oportet legi, and in authoritatem recipi, haec sunt: these
are the books which ought to be read and received into authority. can. 59. Ergo
etc.

Lastly, what other thing have the petitioners here moved, then his Majesty
has first written: As to the Apocripha books I omit them, because I am no
Papist, and (...). p. 1^
indeed some of them are no ways like the ditement of the Spirit of God. I
hope now our brethren will leave for the urging of this point of those fierce
terms of grossly, ignorant, wilfully malicious, and turbulent, lest we say
to them as Augustine to Julian, when he had produced Hilarie against lib. 2.
cont: Julian. pelag
him: nunc ergo ne tuis stomachi fellis indigesta maledictorum cruditate
rumpatur, in bunc evome si audes calumniosas tuas vanitates: Now lest your
stomach burst with undigested rankor, cast it upon him, if you dare, etc.

THE DEFENSE OF THE SECOND part of the Petition concerning Church Ministers.
1. Of a learned Ministry.
FIRST in that we desire that none but Preachers from hence forth be admitted
to the ministry: what do our brethren mean to impugn so honest and
reasonable a petition; do we herein request any more then his Majesty has in
his princely Book approved, thus writing: see all your Churches within your
Dominions planted with good pastors: what (...). p. 43.
is there now so gross in our Church which these men will not maintain,
taking upon them to justify an unlearned ministry, unless they mistike this
motion because it proceeds of us Hierome says in alijs probant quod in me
reprobant, quasi praefac. in paralip.
virtus and vitium non in rebus sit sed cum authoribus mutetur. They like that
in others, which in me they mislike, as though good and evell were not in the
things, but altered with their authors. 2. what reason had they for the Lord
day, which term the petitioners Of the name of Sunday.
use, to say Sunday? Does this name which was invented of the heathen, better
like them then the name of that day, found in scripturs: Or did not the fathers
much mislike those heathenish Apoc. 1. 10. (...). Pref. in Psalm 43.
names of the days of the week? As Augustine thus writes of dies Mercurij
nolumus vt dicunt atque vtina^ corrigantur ne dicant. We would not have men call
it Mercury day or wednesday? and I wish that order were taken, that they might
not so call it. The very papists themselves confess that the word Sunday is an
heathenish calling. And some of our best writers acknowledge that the name of
Sunday and the rest Fulk Rhemis annot. in apoc 1. 10.
had an heathenish beginning, and therefore were better to be otherwise
termed. But passing over these lighter matters we will first produce our
reasons for a learned Ministry: and then examine theirs in justification or
excuse of an unpreaching order in the Church.

Reasons and arguments showing the necessity of a learned Ministry.
Arg. 1. THE Lord says by his prophet, because thou have refused knowledge I
baue refused thee, thou shall be no Priest unto me Hos: 4. 6. so says Gregory
qui quae Dej sunt nesciunt, a Deo nesciuntur: they which know not the things of
God, are not known of him. Pastorol: par. 1. c. 1.

Arg. 2. Pastors and Ministers are the A learned Ministry necessary.
Lords stewards 1. Cor. 4. 1. but no man will appoint an unskillful steward
over his house, as our Savior says who is a faithful servant and a wise
whom his Master has made ruler over his household to give them meat in due
season. Math. 24. 25.

Ergo ignorant and unfit persons much less are to be set over the Lords house,
Ambrose says: Si terrestrium rerum dispensatores idonei quaere^di sunt, quanto
magis coelestiu^, if fit stewards of earthily things must be sought for, much
more of heavenly. in 1. Tim. 1. 3.

Arg. 3. Hierom urges to this purpose that saying of our Savior, si
infatuatu^ est Hier. ad Heiodor.
sal, etc. if the salt loose his savor, it is good for nothing, but to be cast
out. Mat. 5. 13.

Ergo ignorant ministers as unfatuate and unsavory salt, should be cast out.

Arg. 4. Ignorance is excusable in the people: my people go into captivity
because they have no knowledge: Esaias. 5. 13. much less is it to be suffered in
the Minister: this reason is alleged by Leo: si in laicis vix tolerabilis
videtur inscitia, quanto magis in ijs, qui praesunt, nec excusatione digna est
nec venia. If ignorance in lay men be intolerale, much less in those that are
set over them is it excusable or pardonable. epist. 22. ad Cler, Constantinopol.

5. That is not to be suffered which tends to the ruin of faith: but by an
unlearned ministry faith decays, which comes by hearing the word preached:
Romans 10. 17. thus reasons the Council of Toletane 4. c. 24. let all their
work be in preaching, ut aedificent cunctos fidei scientiam, etc. that they may
edify all in the knowledge of faith.

6. That should not be permitted in the Church which gives occasion to the
destructions of men's souls: But such is an unteaching ministry: if the blind
lead the blind, both fall into the ditch: Math. 15. 14. And it is as Hierome
says: tanquam perforatam navim debilis gubernator regat: as Hierom. ad
Chromatium
though an unskilful Pilote should be set to guide a broken ship.

7. S. Paul does especially require this, as an essential property in a
minister to be (...), apt or able to teach. 1, Tim. 3. 2. Hierom says well:
Innocens and absque sermon conversatio, quantum exemplo prodest, Hier. Ocean.
tantum silentio nocet, An innocent conversation without teaching as it helps
by example so it hinders by silence. And it is Origenes note upon these words
of Paul: woe is me, if I preach not the Gospel etc. propter hoc solum, Tract.
^3. in Math
etc. for this thing only, if I preach not, not for conversation is this woe
pronounced.

8. That ought to be declined, which is sent as a punishment and judgment
upon the people: But dumb and ignorant ministers are a punishment, etc. as the
Lord threatneh to take away the Prophet Esaias. 3. 2. And there shall be like
prophet, like Priest. Esaias 24. 2. So says Isidore as he is alleged Aquisgran
c. 25. pro malo merito plebis aufertur doctrina praedicationis, Ergo, etc.

9. All those whom Christ sends are furnished with gifts accordingly: Ephesians. 4.
8. 11. He has given gifts unto men, etc. some Apostles, some Doctors, etc.
Jeroboam made of the basest of his people to be Priests of his golden calfes:
only Aarons sons, ministered to the Lord at Jerusalem. 2. Chron. 13. 9. 10.
What shepherd will carry into the field a dog that can not not bark: for
as Hierome well says: Hier. ocean.
latrata canum, baculoque pastorum, luporu^ rabies deterrenda est: the wolves
rage, the sheapheards staff, and dogs barking must assuage. Wherefore
seeing ignorant ministers are as dumb dogs, Ieroboams Priests, men of no
gifts, they are not sent of Christ, etc.

10. We will adioyne the consent of antiquity and decrees of Counsels, that
have condemned rude and ignorant ministers: Ca. Apostol. 57. Episcopus aut
presbyter, qui negligentius, etc. A Bishop or presbyter that is negligent about
the people, and does not instruct them in piety, must be put from the Communion.

Valens. ca. 2. pro aedificatione omnium Ecclesiarum, etc: for the edifying of
all Churches, it pleases us that not only in cities but in all parishes we
give power to presbyters to preach: that if the presbyter being sick cannot
preach himself the homilies of the fathers be read by the Deacons. Toletan: 4
c. 24. Ignorantia matter, etc. Ignorance the mother of all errors is espcially
to be avoided in the ministers of God who have taken upon them to preach to
the people: let such therefore know the Scriptures that all their work may
consist in preaching, and to edify all in faith and manners.

Aquisgranens. c. 13. ex Gregor. praeconis officium suscepit: he takes upon
him the office of a preacher, whosoever comes into the Priesthood. The
minister then or Priest if he be unskilful of preaching, what voice can he
give that he is a dumb crier.

Coloniens. p. 4, c. 1. Officium parachorum, etc. the office of parish
ministers consists in two things, the dissemination of the word, and
administration of Discipline.

Objections made in defense of an unlearned ministry answered. Object. 1. DOES
not the sufficiency of ministers, Suscipere magis and minus, admit of his
degrees.

Answ. Does it follow? the sufficiency of ministers does suscipere magis and
minus: Ergo, all need not preach? We grant that there are diversities of
gifts: some have less, some greater; but is it simply inferred, that therefore
they which have no gifts at all should be admitted.

2. Obi. Were the ministers of the Primitive Church all of them able to preach?

Answ. It is untrue, that there were No unpreaching Pastors in the primitive
Church.
any Ministers in the Primitive Church which had charge of souls, being not
able to preach. Chrysostom and Peter Martyr with others are only named, their
words are not alleged: the first indeed says: Senioribus, qui inutiliores
sunt, hoc baptizandi munus committimus, verbum autem quod doceant,
sapientioribus: We commit the office of Baptism to some somewhat
unprofitable, but the preaching of the word, to the wiser sort. Peter In 1.
Cor. 1.
Martyr says: tingendi munus cuilibet in Ecclesia committi potest. the office
of dipping may be committed to any. But first these testimonies serve not for
the Primitive Church, which reached not to Chrysostoms time (if we speak
properly) yet Chrysostom speaks but by way of Chrysostom. ibid
comparison, that where ministers were, they made choice of the wisest for
preaching: in comparatione civili prudentia utitur: he speaks by way of
comparison, as civil wise men use to do: they were not then altogether
unprofitable, that baptized, but in comparison. And Peter Martyr speaks not
of ministers only, but his opinion was that any might dippe or lay on water
the minister using the words, which conceit we leave unto the Author. Further
we deny not but that in some Churches Deacons, and other Ministers baptized,
which preached not (which use how commendable, we are not now to discuss.)
But never shall it be showed, that in the better and first ages of the Church
any Minister had the charge of souls, that could not preach, as Chrysostom
shows: quoniam oportet and eum quae sunt Rectoris habere, idcirco subiunxit
aptum ad docendum: because he must have those things, which belong to the
Rector or spiritual governor, he adds apt to teach, etc. this is not
required of the people, sed illi ante omnia adesse debet: but he must have it
above all which takes upon him this office. Lastly, admit that such a corrupt
use had crept into the Church to allow unpreaching pastors, yet is it directly
contrary to the Apostles precept who makes it of the essence of the pastor to
be apt to teach. 1. Tim. 3 2. such was also the practice of the Primitive
Church: all their pastors were preachers. Act. 20. 28. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. 1. Pet.
5. 2.

3. Object. The urging of that strange doctrine, that he is no Minister, that
can not preach, etc.

Answ. The urging of that doctrine, Untruth. We so urge not.
that he is no Minister that cannot preach: what is it to the petitioners?
they so affirm not. Is it all one to say, there ought to be no Ministers that
can not preach, and they are not Ministers that can not preach? why do our
brethren, whom the schools might teach to dispute ad idem, thus break out
into matters not in question between us. We deny not, but that such are
Ministers, though unprofitable ones, and the sacraments given by them
sacraments, yet unduly ministered: and we say of them. as Augustine in a
somewhat diverse case: in bonis sacramentis non Contra crescen. lib. 1. c. 26.
sunt boni, quomodo in bona lege non sunt boni Iudaei: The sacraments are good,
but they are no good Ministers of them.

4. Object: Has it not made the Brownists confidently to reproach us, that our
Church is no church, etc.

Answ. 1. Neither is it true that the Brownists condemn our Church and
Sacraments. Untruth.
etc. only because some of the Ministers could not preach: for they mislike
also and condemn the most painful preachers amongst us, but they pretend many
other reasons of their separation, 2. Our brethren needed not therefore to have
cast the Brownists in our nose, seeing it is well known that the ministers
which desire reformation have most of all other opposed themselves by writing
to that faction, 3. But is this a good argument: the Brownists have taken
offense at unpreaching Ministers: Ergo there may be such, etc. Nay rather the
occasion of their offense and stumbling should have been removed.

5. Object. It is not possible to have all Ministers men of worth till all
church livings be very sufficient, etc.

Answ: Of like consequence is the argument A learned ministry possible.
that follows, The livings are not sufficient to maintain preachers Ergo it
is not possible to have all preachers and men of worth. 1. Why do our
brethren then of Oxford and Cambridge hinder the sufficiency of Ministers
mayntenance, as much as in them lies by gainsaying the Kings princely motion,
for disposing of the leases of impropriations to the use of the incumbent
preachers, whereof we shall have cause to entreat afterward. 2. This yet is no
excuse for such insufficient Ministers, as enjoy sufficent livings whereof there
are a great number. 3. Although the want of mayntenance be a great let to a
learned Ministry: yet it is possible though with much difficulty, to plant
preachers even where such defect is, as in the Apostles time, and many years
before the Church was endowed: and the next way to enlarge the Ministers
mayntenance were to place every where worthy men whose painful labors would
provoke men's liberality: At the least, let such Churches as have sufficient
mayntenance, first be sufficiently provided of good men: And for the enlarging
of the rest, the Prince and the state must be humbly sued unto. And Clergy men
for so much as lies in their power, should show themselves ready by their
example.

6. Object. Many do please themselves in their extemporall gifts. etc.

Answ. Is not this also a goodly argument: Of extemporal Preachers
Many do please themselves in their extemporall gift, etc. and for their gross
ignorance have deserved to be blotted out of the number of preachers: ergo all
Ministers need not to be preachers for this must be the conclusion, or else
they do but trifle: as though the presumption of the one does excuse the
idleness of the other: because one shoots too far, shall another shoot too
short. An extemporall gift as we simply allow not (for the word of God must
be reverently handled) so we see not why men of long study and exercise may
not, where the present necessity is such, show their readiness that way. As
Origene was sometime forced to do: singula rimari extemporaneus Homil. 8. in
Levit.
iste sermo non patitur: Such extemporall preachers were Joan. Antiochen,
presbyter, and Honoratus Mussiliens. episcopus, extempore in Ecclesia
declamator. An extemporall preacher in the Church. And as extemporall sermons
are loose, so bosom sermons, that are verbatim delivered, are too curious: as
we condemn the one, so we commend not the other approving therein the
judgment of Augustine; Donec significet, i. se intelligere, versandum est quod
agitur multimoda varietate dicendi, quod in potestate non habent, qui
praeparata and ad verbum memoriter retenta prvnnntiant. Till it appear that
the people understand that which is handled it must be opened with variety of
phrase, which they that repeat things word for word as they have conned the^ by
heart cannot do. Thus by such weak arguments, as we have seen the Confuters
have boulstered out (as Mammets and men of straw) the dumb and Idol
Ministers. We are right sorry that Oxford Doctors now under the Gospel
should so much swerue in the judgment of the truth from their predecessors in
the time of Popery: who decreed much better concerning this matter, then these
men now write. Presbyteris parochialibus districte iniungimus etc. we enjoin
the presbyters of every parish to instruct the people committed to them, with
the word of God: ne canes muti iudicentur Council. Oxoniens. sub. Stephan.
cum salubri latratu in caulis dominicis luporum spiritualium morsus non
repellunt. This Council calls them all dumb dogs, that do not instruct
and preach unto their people, and drive away by their wholesome doctrine the
wolves.

Wherefore O most noble King 1. seeing God refuses them to be his ministers,
that The conclusion.
have no knowledge, 2. neither are such fit stewards over Gods house, 3. they
are infatuated salt, 4. seeing ignorance is inexcusable in the people, much more
in the pastor. 5. and by the ignorance of such faith decays. 6. the
destruction of many souls ensues. 7. seeing a Minister by S. Paul's
description should be apt to teach. 8. and that it is a punishment sent of God
to have unskilful shepherds. 9. and all whom Christ sends, he furnishes
with gifts. 10. Seeing by the canons and practice of the Church such
unsufficient Ministers are condemned: Seeing nothing can be objected in the
contrary of any moment, 1. Ob. that although there be diverse gifts, yet every
pastor ought to have them in some measure. 2, Obj. neither were there any
pastors in the Primitive Church no preachers, 3. neither is it a thing
impossible to have every where sufficient Pastors, We are persuaded that your
Christian Majesty out of your Princely judgment will in due time see the Church
reformed in this point and therein follow the example of that noble Charles
King of France who enacted thus: providimus pro aedificatione omnium
Ecclesiarum, etc. We have provided for the edifying of all Churches, that not
only in Cities, but in all parishes, the presbyters Synod. Arelat. sub.
Carolo. cause. 10
preach the word to the people, that they may learn to live well, etc.

ARTIC. 2. Of the removing or supplying of unlearned Ministers.
1. Object. HOW charitable are these men that would have men removed out of the
ministry, etc.

Answ. 1. How can the Petitioners be counted uncharitable, when they wish some
charitable course to be taken for the relief of unsufficient Ministers.
Neither is it propounded simply, but with a disjunction, or else that they be
forced to maintain preachers, according to the value of their livings, etc.
And we pray you, how many are there to be now found, that were entreated to
take upon them the Ministry for want of sufficient men, or that were in time
past sufficient and are now decayed by age, sickness etc. are there not almost
an hundred other unsufficient Ministers to one of this sort? and they that are
of that quality, why should they not have coadiutors, as Augustine was to
Valerius, Eradius to Augustine, Nazianzene to his Father: Anysius to Acholius
of Thessalonica. Should the people perish for want of instruction because of
their infirmity? But say it had been simply moved to have all unsufficie^t
ministers removed, so they were provided for: is this course uncharitable? then
count the Apostle uncharitable, who wills that he which labors not, should
2 Thessalonians. 3.
not eat: or what think you of these ancient canons: peregrini presbyteri, si
praedicatores sint veritatis suscipiantur, sin minus, ne necessaria
subministrentur eis, Can. apost. 34. Episcopus vel presbyter, etc. si in
pietate populum non erudit, a communione segregetur, si in ea socordia
perseveraverit, deponitur: can. 57. So was it also decreed in the Council of
Oxford: si residere noluerint, cum non nisi laborantibus panis dandus sit,
Ecclesijs per Episcopum spolientur. Say also that they are uncharitable that
thus decreed; that unpreaching Ministers should not be releeved, that they be
put from the Communion, and finally if they continue in their idleness, to be
deposed.

2. Object: How can they maintain preachers that have not where with to
maintain themselves, etc.

Answ Many insufficient and unpreaching Ministers have sufficient living and
mayntenance, and as many, as we think are of that sort, well provided for
that ways, as are not: inioying some an 100 marks, some an 100. pound by the
year some more: and those might very well he charged to maintain preachers,
the rest, that are not able alone, two or three should join together to have a
preacher by course, rather then the Churches should be altogether unfurnished,
till better provision be made.

3. Object How much better has our Church devised to supply the defects of
some men, etc. by other means, as by the frequent reading of scripture, etc.

Answ: Our brethren tell us of better supplies of these defects, then by
preachers: To be otherwise supplied
as by frequent reading of scripture, by the form of common prayer, by the
reading of homilies, quarterly sermones: for answer whereunto we say, 1. if
quarterly sermons make a good supply, we hope that weekly sermons every Lords
day afford a better: how unadvised then are our brethren to call the word
seldom preached a better supply then the same diligently preached? 2. Bishop
Ridley is alleged to speak in commendation of the book of common prayer:
neither do we for the substance condemn it: the times must be considered
wherein he wrote, when the mass was restored, in respect whereof our Leiturgy
is much to be preferred. His words further are these, Howsoever in time past in
certain by matters and circumstances of religion your wisdom and my simplicity
(I grant) has a little iarred: Fox Martyrol. p. 1504. epist. ad Hooper.
ex epist Rid: ad Hooper. Here the same Reverend Bishop gives way to Bishop
Hooper, and modestly confesses his too much stiffness in mayntayning of some
ceremonies. But he was far off from making the book of common prayer a
supply of preaching, and therefore he is here very impertinently alleged. 3.
But what unsavory words are these to say that the reading of homilies and of
the book of common prayer are ordinary and effectual means to continue and
increase the people in the true faith: 1. We had thought that as the word of
God is the ordinary effectual means to begette faith: as the Apostle shows,
that faith comes by hearing. (Rom: 10, 7.) the word preached. v. 14. So it
had been likewise the ordinary effectual means to increase faith, according
to S. Peter: as newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye
may grow thereby. 1. pet. 2. 2. We are not only begoten by the word, but we
also increase and grow thereby. Hierome, or who also was the author, says much
better: Quando doctrina non erit in Ecclesijs, etc. when teaching is not in the
Church, Reg. monar^.
we know that all virtues perish; because the word of God is not taught: But
if reading were the ordinary and effectual means, etc. virtue for lack of
other teaching, needed not to perish 2. But if they be ordinary means, etc.
then tell us, do those Churches which have no such reading of Homilies. as in
Scotland, Geneva, etc want the ordinary and effectual means to increase them
in the true faith: and show us how many of the people have been converted, and
increased in the faith, by these your ordinary and effectual means. 3. We
commend reading of scripture, and allow a godly form of prayer, but not as
principal and sole means by them selves effectual or ordinary to increase or
beget faith: More equal seems to be that decree of the Lateran Counsel inter
caetera etc. Among other things, which Lateranens. sub. Innocen. 3. c. 10.
concern the salvation of the people: pabulam verbi Dei per maxim sibi
noscitur necessariu^. The food of the word of God is known to be most
necessary. for as the body is not nourished without material food, so neither
is the soul without spiritual?

This decre prefereth the food of the word of God before all other helps: not
as our brethren which say the defects of some men may be supplied better, then
by preaching. 4. Lastly, our kingly Ecclesiastes has determined this question,
that faith comes not by reading, but by hearing the word preached, who having
first taught his princely son deligently to read, and to meditate in the word
of God adds further. I join to this the carfull hearing of the doctrine with
reverence and attention, for faith comes by hearing (...). p. 4.
says the Apostle. By preaching of the word then are we begotten unto God,
and by the same as by a notable ordinary means we grow and increase. Bernard
has a good saying: qui creauit nos, creatur in De interior. donis. c. 21.
nobis etc. He that did create us, is created in us, and as though it were not
enough that we have God to our father he will have us to be his mother. fide
concipitur Christus, verbi praedicatione nascitur: by faith is Christ
conceaved, by the preaching of the word he is born in us. The wise man says:
Where there is no vision (or as the great bible reads: where the word of God
is not preached) the people perish. prove: 29. 18.

And yet our brethren, as though they had never read this place, are not
affrayd to affirm that reading is as effectual a means to increase men in the
faith. I would they had not given occasion to have Jobs words returned upon
them, Job. 13. 4. lib. 1. in. luc.
Ye are all Physicians of no value, and as Ambrose says: leprae medicina
verbum est, contemptus utique verbi lepra mentis est: The medicine agrinst
leprosy is the word, and the contempt of the word the leprosy of the soul.
they then that extenuate the preaching of the word, are like sooner to
increase, then cure the maladies of the soul.

3. Of Non-residencie. Reasons and arguments against Non-Residents.
1. PAstors are shepherds: but shepherds ought to attend, and be resident
upon their flocks, as it is said of the shepherds. Luc. 2. 8. they watched
their flocks by night: upon the which words Ambrose well says: grex populus,
nox lib. 2. in luc.
soeculum, pastores sacerdotes, esto ergo vigilans: the flock is the people,
the night this world, the sheepheards the Ministers; be therefore watchful.
Thus the Apostle exhorts the pastors of Ephesus, attend unto Act. 20. 28
your selves and the whole flock.

2. Diligence and attendance is required in other external offices: the
steward must give the household meat in season. Mat. 24. 41. He that rules
must do it with diligence. Romans 12. 8. much more is diligence and residence
required where men are set over the peoples souls. Heb. 13. 17. which is more
then to have charge over their bodies and goods. Ambrose says well: quo
praeclarior causa, eo cura debet esse Offic. lib. 1. c. 44.
attentior: the better the cause, the greater should be the care.

3. Bernard thus applies these words of Epist 88.
the Apostle, art thou bound to a wife, seek not to be loosed: aut ergo
oportuit te gregem dominicum minime servandum suscipere, aut susceptum
nequaquam relinquere. You ought then either not at all to have undertaken to
keep the Lords flock, or being undertaken not at all to leave it. But if
these words of the Apostle will not bear this collection, the other going
before will, 1. Cor. 7, 20. Let every man abide in that vocation, wherein he is
called: but Non-residents leaving their flocks abide not in their vocation:
ergo, etc.

4. A watchman ought not to leave his watchtower (Esaias. 21. 8. I stand
continually in the watchtower by day, and I am set in the watch by night: but
Pastors are watchmen: Ezeck: 33. 7. son of man I have made thee a watchman to
the house of Israel, etc. To this purpose Ambrose well writes upon these
words of S. Paul 2. Cor. 6. 7. by watchings, etc. tam sollicitus erat circa
officium sibi delegatum, ut ne nocte cessaret: he was so careful about the
office committed to him, that he rested not in the night.

5. The Prophet calls him an idle shepherd that leaves the flock, Zach.
11. 7. Our Savior names him an hireling that leaves the sheep and flies:
Ioh. 10. 12. But hirelings and idle sheepheards are not to be suffered in the
Church. Augustine says well, Quae igitur fuga cavenda est, etc. What fleeing
is to be shunned; even that whereof our Lord speaks; the hireling when he
sees the thief flies. Psalm. 141.

6. They that feed not the flock of Christ, are convinced not to love Christ;
for our Savior said to Peter, Love thou me feed my flock. John. 21.
whereupon Damasus well says: omnis negligenter pascens, Damas. epist. 4.
decretail.
etc. every one negligently feeding the Lords flock so often commended is
found not to love the chief shepherd: nec eius se velle discipulum fieri,
cuius exemplum negligit imitari: Neither will become his disciple, whose
example he neglects to imitate.

7. Non-Residents cannot discharge their pastoral duty being absent, as it
belongs to the sheppard to heal the sick, to bind up the Esa. 34. 4.
broken, to seek that is lost. Bernard says well: quomodo securus abis, qui
gregi tibi commisso omnem de se securitatem aufers, etc. How Epist. 4.
can thou be secure being absent, when thy flock cannot be safe or secure,
who shall comfort them in their tribulations, provide for them in their
tentations: quid facient novellae plantationes Christi, etc. What shall the
tender plants do, set with thy hand, who shall dig and dung the^ about, hedge
them in, and prune them, etc. these duties it is impossible for non-residents
to perform.

8. That is not to be suffered, which brings apparent peril and danger to
the flock: but this does the absence of the Pastor: when the shepherd is
absent, the wolf comes to devour. Ezekiel. 34. 5. they were scattered without
a shepherd, and were devoured of all the beast of the field. So Ambrose
says, lupi explorant pastoris absentiam, quia praesentibus pastoribus oves
Christi incursare non possunt: The wolves do wait for the pastors absence, for
while they are present, they cannot invade the sheep of Christ, Lib. 7. in Luc.

9. Non-Residencie does lay an heavy burden upon the pastors themselves: God
will require the sheep at the sheepheards hand: Ezech. 34. 10. and if the
watchman warn not the people, When the sword comes God will require their
blood at the watch man's hand: Ezekiel. 33. 6. So Hierome well says detrimentum
pecoris, ignominia Hier. ad Huriam.
pastoris: the loss of the flock shall be a shame and confusion of face to
negligent sheepheards.

10. We will in the last place adioyne the consent and practice of the Church
against The constitutions of the Church against non residentes.
Non-Residents.

First the Canons have limited the time of the Pastors absence: si intra sex
menses non redierit, etc. If he that is Non-Resident return not within six
months, he must be deprived. Innocen. 3. Greg. 3. 4. 11. Qui infra proximum
mensem, etc. He that refuses to be resident within one month, let. him be
deprived: Synod. Hildeshemen. c. 16. But the ancient Canons give not so much
liberty. Episcopus per tres Dominicos, etc. The Bishop must not be absent
above. 3. Lords days from his Church. Sardic. c. 4. Oportet eos qui persunt
Ecclesiis, etc. they which are set over Churches ought every day, but
especially the Lords day to teach the people precepts of Godliness out of the
Scriptures. Tertull. c. 9.

Secondly the Canons punish such Pastors, as are absent from their flocks: he
that returns not to his Church: oportet communione privari, must be put from
the Communion: Antiochen. c. 17. as it is alleged, distinct. 92. c, 7. Et qui
receperit, amittat. etc. he that will not be resident let him leese that which
he received, and he that gave it, be deprived of his gift, Later. sub. Alex. 3.
c. 13,

Thirdly Non-Residents are deprived of all privileges, or benefit of law: Qui
Ecclesiae non deservierit, etc. he that attends not upon his Church, must be
deprived, sublato impedimento appellationis: without having any remedy by
appeal: Decr. Greg. 3, 4. 6. non obstantibus indulgentijs Apostol. revoces eas
ad residentia^ etc. notwithstanding indulgence Apostolical call them home to
their Churches. Decr. Greg. 3. 4. 16.


4ly. Gratian the Empr. made a Law, that advocates chosen to any place of
government in their country should not extra eam evagari, wander abrood from
the charge. Cod. l. 2. tit. 7. leg. 2. And Justinian decreed that advocates
above 3. years absent from the city should lose their privilege ibid. ti. 8.
l. 7. much more is the residence of Pastors required in their Churches, who
have cure of souls, if their presence be so necessary, that have charge only
of men's bodies and goods.

Objections Answered 1. Object. Many have two parishes committed unto them,
which both will not make one living.

Answ: 1. It were better the pastors should want maintenance then that many
souls should perish for want of instruction. 2. where the Church has not
maintenance enough of it self, it is not helped by accepting of another, for
that Minister, which is the others substitute is in want still, so the parson
is provided for, but neither the place, nor the people. 3. in this case
provision may be otherwise made for mayntenance, then by pluralities, as by
disposing otherwise of impropriate tithes: that such as are not yet improved,
might be demised for the old rent to the incumbent preacher: such as are
improved should be taxed with a convenient portion, issuing forth to the
preacher: as also Churches may be united for the same end: which uniting is by
the Canons allowed in 4. cases. 1. for the paucity and fewnes of the people:
quae minus In what cases Churches may be united.
december mancipia habeat alijs coniungatur Ecclesijs Toletan: 16. can. 4. 2:
propter vicinitatem loci, for the neerenesse of the place, as Gregory did unite
Cumanam and Micenatem Ecclesias. Vicinitas loci nos inuitat cause. 17. qu. 1. c.
48. 3. When any Church is vasted or decayed: post quam hostilis impietas
diuersarum ciuitatum vastauit Ecclesias: cause. 16. qu. 1. c. 49. 4. si ita
fuerint tenues in substantia, and. If they be so small in substance, that they
are not able to maintain the proper pastor: Greg. 1. 14. 4. 4. This objection
helps not them that possess many and rich benefices, who are not driven to
have pluralities of necessity, but of an ambitious and covetous mind, and
superfluity.

2. Object: Many have but one parish, etc. which would require two or ten men
to speak at once etc.

Answ. Neither does it follow, because some parishes are large, and have many
Chapels, which would require two or ten men, etc. that therefore a man may be
as well non resident in diverse Parishes. 1. the one is a non residence
necessary, it being but one parish by the law, the other voluntary: the
Chapels are united for neerenesse of place and want of sufficient maintenance:
but some have Churches far distant, which each of them would suffice for the
Pastors sustentation: therefore the reason is not alike. 2. Such What course
should be taken with large parishes
large Parishes might without any inconvenience be divided, as large Diocesses
have been shared into diverse: as the Bishopric of Toulouse was divided into
five: Extravag. com. lib. 7. tit. 2. cap. 5. And here in England the Diocese
of Ely and Oxford were taken out of Lincoln: So also large Parishes might
safely be apportioned into more: Propter nimiam distantiam Ecclesiae etc. For
the great distance of the Church a new may be builded in the parish, and a
certain portion of maintenance be allotted. This liberty Alexanber the third
granted in his rescript to the Arch Bishop of York. Decret. Greg. lib. 3. tit.
48. cap. 3. 3. Or else he that is Rector of the Mother Church ought to provide
sufficient maintenance for the Chapels: as Vrbane the second took order in
the Placentine Synod; Si quae capellae sunt quae suis reditibus, etc. If there
be any Chapels which are not able by their revenue to maintain the Clerks,
the Rector of the Mother Church shall provide both for the maintenance and
Ecclesiastical duties in the Chapels. The like constitution was made Consil.
Oxoni. sub Stephan. In singulis parochialibus Ecclesijs, etc. In every parish
church where the Parish is scattered, there shall be two or three Presbyters,
according to the largeness and ability of the church, lest when one is sick,
the ordinary duties should be withdrawn.

Object. 3. It has been permitted by wise and godly Magistrates, that have
given way unto it, etc.

Answ. 1. If Princes have given way by their laws to non-residency, forced
through the iniquity of times, to tolerate that which they could not
altogether remove: that does no more make it lawful, then for the same reason
usury should be approved, because in some positive laws it has been in some
cases permitted.

2. If it has been in some cases and in some persons permitted, and them of
best desert, this is no excuse for non-residency for most parsons that will;
and many of them of mean desert, and upon small color and occasion as it is
now practiced.

3. Princes rather, and other Magistrates civil and Ecclesiastical, have by
laws more restrained then permitted non-residency, as has been declared
before. arg. 10.

Object. 4. That it is absolutely unlawful etc. neither has been proved or
ever will, etc.

Answ. Absence from the flock for a time upon necessary occasion is permitted
both by the Scriptures and by the ancient Canons. As 1. for the service of the
Church, as Paul says, Bring Mark with thee, for he is profitable unto me to
minister In what case the pastors absence is permitted for a time from his
flock.
2. Tim. 4. 11. So Ambrose, Paucorum dierum occupatione detentus, etc. being
detayned a^ few days called away by the necessities of another Church, I have
been absent from your Assemblies. Ser. 28. Pro servitijs Ecclesiae, etc. A man
may be absent for the service of the Church, as being present at Councels,
disputing against heretics, and such like. Decret. Greg. lib. 3. tit. 4. cap.
13.

2. When the flock it self does pursue their Pastor. Si quis plebis, etc. If
any man be absent because of the opposition of his people. Antioch. can. 18. In
this case Paul shook off the dust of his feet against the Jews, and turned to
the Gentiles. Act. 13. 46. But it is not the stubburnesse of a few that should
make a man leave his flock, as Augustine excellently shows; Thou will say,
Feci omnia, nihil me video profecisse, etc. I have done what I could, yet I
profit not, I would I might rest somewhere else, Oh that I had the wings of a
dove, etc. Thus men say, Sed plerunque ita ligantur, ut volare non possint,
ligantur non visco, sed officio. But they are bound, they cannot fly, not with
bird lime, but in duty. Therefore seeing they cannot forsake their flock, let
them say with the Apostle, I desire to be dissolved, and be with Christ. Aug.
in Psalm. 54. It must not be then the perverseness of some, but the resistance
of the whole flock, which should force a man to depart in this case.

3. For healths sake the Pastor for a while may be absent, as to change the
air, or when he is deteyned by sickness, as Epaphroditus was kept from the
Phillippians, Phil. 2. 26, 27. So Gregory caused one to be restored, Qui
aegritudinis causa per duorum mensium spacium Ecclesiae defuit, which by
occasion of sickness had been absent two months. Cause, 7. q. 1. cap. 3. As
Augustine when he was sick removed from Hippo. Epist. 56.

4. In time of persecution our Savior allows to flee from one City to an
other, Mat. 10. 23. Metu hostilitatis. cause. 7. qu. 1. cap. 42. But does it
therefore follow, if for a time upon those necessary occasions, the Pastor may
be absent, that therefore he may upon an ambitious covetous humor, and at his
pleasure, and that very often, or continually absent him self.

Object. 5. In what congruity may he be counted an idle non resident, that is
always present in some part of his charge, etc.

Ans. And is it enough that a man at some time, and in some part of his charge
take pains? what dawbing is this? Then give a man 10 or 20 Benefices, for he
may at some time, and in some one of them do a little duty. Let us be ashamed
that profess the Gospel to use such cloakes which the Church of Rome has
rejected. Later. par. 29. cap. 6. This is rendered as a reason why one should
not have diverse offices in diverse Churches, Quia singula officia quae sunt in
Ecclesijs, assiduitatem exigunt personarum: Every office in the Church
requires the assiduity of the persons. Colon. part. 1. cap. 32. Vnus Presbyter
per omnes sibi commissas Ecclesias solus nec persolvere potest, etc. One
Presbyter cannot do all the duties in all Churches committed to him. Mogant.
cap. 64. Vnus pluribus Ecclesijs curam impendere necessarium nequit. One cannot
take care for many Churches.

Object. 6. There are no more intolerable non residents then some etc.

Ans. That some of the Petitioners or such as favor them are intolerable
Non-residents, are but idle words, and are worthy of no answer. The Confuters
shall never be able to show any such thing.

Object. 7. It is impossible (as church livings Untruth. Non-residents helps
not, but hinder a learned Ministry.
are now allotted) that non-residency should not be permitted, and yet a
learned ministry maintained, Princes and Peers attended upon, etc.

Ans. Non residency nourishes an unlearned Ministry (so far is it from
maintaining a learned) when poor Curates are constrained to serve for small
stipends, and as the Synod of Collen truly complained, Colouiens. sub Alph.
med. 3 c. 9.
Churches are spoiled of their due services. Meliores, qui laborare in Ecclesia
cupiunt, excluduntur. They which would do more good in the Church, are
excluded. As though Princes and peers were not able to maintain Chaplens to
attend upon them, but such as live of their flocks where they labor not. It
is ambition that draws such to Princes Courts, not any necessary service,
which is contrary to the Canons, Sardicens. cap. 8, 9, 10. Episcopus ambitione
magis quam Deo servire, si videbitur, etc. A Bishop rather for ambition then
Gods service, going to Court, must be deprived, (yet his Majesty as reason is,
may have to preach before him men of the best gifts, without any long absence
from their flocks.) Bernard when Pope Innocent sent for him refused to go,
making Epist. 153.
his answer: Non dico, juga boum, aut villam emi, etc. sed plane parvulos me
lactare fateor etc. I say not I have bought oxen, or a farm, but I suckle
little ones, and therefore I see not how I can come without their great danger.

Universities are not maintained, but hindered by non-residents, when by this
means the elder sort live there like drones, and keep out younger students,
that might do more good. As for the masters of howses, most of their places
are sufficient without other helps to maintain them in competent sort, the
other might be provided of dignities without cure, that they need not clog
themselves with benefices. Cathedral Churches also may be served with
residence of Prebends by course: there is no necessity of continual or long
absence from their flocks for this cause: the only inconvenience is to their
purse, if they be not perpetual residents, according to that Canon which
forbids, Ne canonici non residentes, quotidianas distributiones ex integro
perciperent. They should but so much want of their divident.

Wherefore (most noble King) 1. Seeing sheepheards ought to attend upon their
flock. 2. and Stewards upon their charge. 3. and every one must abide wherein
he is called, 4. seeing ministers are watchmen, 5. and they which flee from
their flocks are idle shepherds and hirelings, 6. they which feed not the
flocks love not Christ, 7. and they which are absent cannot discharge the
pastoral duties, which are many, 8. seeing non residency brings apparent
danger to the flock: 9. and makes the Pastor inexcusable: 10. and is condemned
by the Canons and constitutions of the Church. And further, seeing nothing of
any moment can be alleged in excuse of Non-residents, 1. Neither the
smalenesse of living, 2. nor largenesle of the parish, 3. nor sufferance by
some positive laws, giving way to the time, 4. nor absence upon some necessary
occasion, 5. Seeing non-residency tends not to the maintenance of learning,
Court, Church nor University: we trust your Majesty is resolved to cherish good
Pastors, and to see all Churches planted with such, as shall reside to do
their duty among their people. And to say with Ambrose, Ego Amb epist. 54.
diligo eos vel Presbyteros, vel Diaconos, qui cum aliquo processerint,
nequaquam se patiuntur a suo diutius abesse munere. I love such Presbyters and
Deacons, who when they are gone abroad, will not long be from their charge.

ARTIC. 4. Of the Marriage of Ministers.
IT is well our Brethren consent with us for ratifying of the civil marriage
of Ministers: we would also, that they did accord with us concerning their
spiritual marriage, whereof Ambrose thus writes upon these words of the
Apostle, Vnius uxoris virum, etc. Prohibet bigamum Episcopum ordinari, si vero
ad altiorem sensum conscendimus, inhibet Episcopum duas usurpare Ecclesias: He
forbids a Bishop that has two wives to be ordained: but if we will go to an
higher sense, he forbids a Bishop or Pastor to usurp two Churches.

The fifth Article of Subscription. Reasons against subscription to the book.
1. MINISTERS were forced to subscribe to many things not warranted by the
word: In such cases the Apostle gives this rule: to whom we gave not place by
subjection, not for an hour: Gal. 2. 5. And Hierom confidently says: Ego
libera voce reclamante mundo profiteor, etc. I do Ierom. Augustine.
freely profess though the world say nay, that the ceremonies of the Jews are
deadly, and pernicious to Christians, and whosoever observes them is cast down
into the Devils dungeon. Wherefore in imposing subscription, not to Jewish
only, but which is worse to ceremonies used in the Popish Church, they laid a
yoke upon men's shoulders too heavy to bear.

Secondly, seeing the preachers consented in all substantial points of
doctrine, they should have used their Christian liberty in such ceremonies
according to the Apostles rule: the kingdom of God is not meat nor drink (nor
by the like reason apparel) but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy
Ghost, for whosoever in those things serves Christ is acceptable to God, and
approved of men: let us follow those thing which concern peace, and wherewith
one may edify another. Romans 14. 18, 19. Uniformity in ceremonies then should
not have been so strictly urged, seeing there was a general consent in
doctrine, but forbearance should have been used in matters (say indifferent)
for peace sake: in una fide nihil officit Ecclesiae sanctae consuetudo diuersa.
Toletan. 5. can. 5.

3. Though it had been a fault in the preachers not to be conformable in these
ceremonies, yet did it not deserve so great a punishment, as suspension,
degradation, incarceration, deprivation: that Non-residents, idle, ignorant,
superstitious, adulterous Clergy men were not so proceeded against as honest
painful preachers, what was this else, but with the Pharisees to strain at a
gnat and swallow a Camel. Such severity in trifles was taxed long ago by
Augustine: hoc nimis doleo, etc. this They were wont to observe the 8. day
after baptism, Aug. contra Petil. 2. 37. Aliud est quod octave die
baptizatornm nos celebramus.
much greeveth me, that many things wholesomely commanded in Scriptures, are
not endeavored, and all things are so full of humane presumptions, that he is
more censured that in his octaues sets his bare feet upon the ground, then
he that is give^ over to drunkenness Epist. 11. c. 19.

4. Profitable ministers though wanting in some external matters should have
been borne with for the common good of the Church: this course S. Paul took:
what then? yet Christ is preached all manner of ways; whether under pretense
or sincerely, I therein joy, and will joy: Phil. 1. 18. Thus Hierom says well:
Ecclesia numero superata Advers. Joan bierosol.
peccantium, etc. the Church overcome with the number of offenders does pardon
the shepherd to do the sheep good. Yea the Canons allow a toleration for the
profit of the Church, Vbi Ecclesiae maxima utilitas, vel necessitas postulet;
where the necessity or utility cause. 1. q. 7. cap. 17.
of the Church so requires. There was small reason to thrust out preachers for
trifles, there being such want of preachers, 4000 Churches in England yet being
without. 5, Subscription was urged by force not by persuasion, there was no
course taken to resolve them that doubted, and Bishops peremptorily required
subscription, without yielding any reason further, or satisfaction to the
doubtful contrary to the Apostle, who says: not that we have dominion over
your faith. 2. Cor. 1. 24.

But they which urged subscription commanded, they persuaded not men's
conscience, the Church of Rome some time was more equal, as Leo, 1. thus
writes: plus erga corrigendos agat benevolentia, quam severitas: plus
cohortatio, quam comminatio: plus Charitas, quam potestas, etc. with those,
that are to be corrected, let Clemency prevail more then severity: cohortation
then commination: charity, then authority, but they which seek their own, not
Jesus Christ's, do swerve from this Law, which seek rather to rule then
counsel their subjects for while honor pleases, pride puffs up, that which
was provided for a remedy to a malady. Leo epist. 82. distinct. 45.

6. In the urging of subscription they forget Christian compassion stripping
Ministers; and some of them aged of their livings to the undoing of themselves,
their wives, and children. Josias showed more compassion to the Chemarims that
were idolatrous Priests: who though they were not permitted to come up to the
altar, yet did not eat unleavened bread among their brethren. 2. Reg. 23. 9.
they had their maintenance from the temple. The Popes Canons herein were more
equal, that pitied old age, as Gregory thus decrees sed quia simplicitatem
tuam cum senectute novimus, interim tacemus: the penal sentence was ready to
be inflicted, but because we know your simplicity joined with old age, we hold
our peace. Cause. 1. q. 7. can. 11.

7. This forcing of subscription to Ceremonies not warranted by the word, is
contrary to the Scriptures and practice of the Church: In Nehemiahs time
Subscription was required, and an oath of the chief of the people, but it was
only to walk in Gods Law: Neh. 10. 29. not to keep any traditions not
written. When Victor would have forced the East Churches to keep Easter, as
the Latin Churches did, and was resolved to excommunicate them certain
Christian Bishops, and Irenaeus among Eusebius. lib. c. 22.
the rest did reprove him, tanquam inutiliter Ecclesiae commodis consulentem,
as unprofitably regarding the Churches good. There arose in Gregory the first
his time a Tolet. 4. c. 5
great difference in Spain about the thrice dipping in baptism, some doing it
but once, Leander, a Spanish Bishop sent to Gregory about it, who determines
that the Infant was baptized: sive trina, sive simpla mersione: whether with
thrice or once dipped, he would have no contention about that ceremony. But
his successors more rigorous, then charitable, one decreed that it was
Evangelicum praeceptum, Part. 3. did. 4. c. 82.
an Evangelicall precept to dip thrice. Another, that he was not a perfect
Christian that was not thrice dipped. Lastly, Pelagius.
it was decreed in the 8. general Council at Constantinople, that whereas
Photius the Can. 8. 9. council. general. Constantinop.
usurper of that sea did extorquere chyrographas, etc. extort from clergy
handwritings, promising thereby to cleave unto him, and he again gave them by
his hand writing faculties to preach. And certain Catholic Bishops had taken
up the like custom to urge subscription. The contrary was decreed by that
Council: ut Episcopi nullus chyrographas, etc. that Bishops should no more
exact such subscription: sed tantummodo fierent solennitates de more, but to be
content with the old use: they should enforce no new subscriptions, but keep
the old customs and solennities. The Bishops then in urging new subscriptions
to combine the Clergy to cleave unto them, and not otherwise to grant them
licenses to preach, did reviue the corrupt use of Photius the pseudo-Patriark
condemned in this Council.

8. To require absolute subscription to the book is to make it almost equal
to the Scripture, as freed from all error, but this properly the holy writings
only have, viz. to be perfect, right, pure: Psalm. 19. 7. The Law of the Lord
is perfect, the statuts of the Lord are right. What could be required more
then to subscribe absolutely to the word of God, as pure, perfect, and without
any error. Augustine well distinguishes between divine and humane writing: de
Scripturis canonicis non licet dicere, etc. of the Canonical Scriptures it is
not lawful to say, the Author was deceived, but in other books which are
written by us, not with authority of precept, but exercise to profit, though
there be found the same verity yet are they not of the same authority, which
kind of writing must be read not with necessity of belief, but liberty of
judgment, Aug. cont. Faust. l. 11. 5. But there is now no liberty of judgment
left, but necessity of belief imposed in this absolute subscriptio^.

9. Beside, this violent course of subscription has bred a great scandale in
the Church, and disturbed the peace thereof, that whereas quietly before
Ministers joined together in building the Lords house, after the same began to
be urged, then suspensions, imprisoning, silencing, depriving of many
profitable ministers followed. Saint Paul says, Would to God they were cut off
that disquiet you. Gal. 5. 12. They were disquieters of the Church that urged
the ceremonies, not they that refused them. Conscience forced not the one to
urge subscription: for they themselves hold these Ceremonies not to be
necessary: but conscience moved the other in not subscribing unto them. Who
were then disturbers, they which urged those things, which with a good
conscience might be left: or they which refused those which with a good
conscience they thought they could not use. There is a rule in the law, In
rebus dubijs pars tutior sequenda; In doubtful matters the safer way is to be
followed. Not to use such rites and ceremonies is no sin: but to yield unto
them, in him that is not resolved, is sin. The law resolves, that the less
doubted course should be taken, not to use them at all. Cyrillus thus writes
to Gemadius: Sicut ij qui mare navigant, etc. As they which sail in the Sea,
when a tempest arises, and the ship is in danger, do disburden it of some
things to save the rest: so seeing it is not in our power to save all,
despicimus ex ijs quaedam ne cunctorum patiamur dispendia: We seem to neglect
or wink at some things, lest we should leese all. So it had been better to
have cast out such burthenous ceremonies, then to put the ship of the Church in
hazard, and disturb the peace thereof.

10. The form of, subscription is contrary Subscription contrary to law.
to the law of the land, as may appear by these reasons, 1. The Law requires
subscription only to the Articles of Religion in these words, He shall declare
Anno 13. Eliz. c. 12.
his assent, and subscribe to all the articles of Religion, which only
concern, the confession of the true christian faith, and the doctrine of the
Sacraments. But to subscribe to the book of common prayer, does not only
concern the confession of true Christian faith: Ergo by the law it is not to
be subscribed unto.

2. That which Ministers do subscribe unto by law, must appear under the
seal, testimonial of the Bishop, and be publicly declared in the Church
within two months of induction: but neither does the testimonial make mention
of subscription to the book, neither is the Minister bound to declare his
assent thereto in the Church: Ergo it is not agreeable to the law.

3. The law especially enacted concerning An. 1, Eliz. cap. 12.
the book of Common prayer only punishes such as do not observe it, and use
the rights and ceremonies therein prescribed, it punishes not such as refuse
to subscribe thereunto: so that the law requires only obedience in practice,
not subscription in judgment to the book.

4. This may appear in the equity of other laws and statutes of this land, as
for the observation of lent and fasting days, and other such matters,
whereunto it requires not subscription, but only execution: and a faithful
subject will be content to yield his observance and obedience unto many laws,
whereto he would be loath to give his assent.

Wherefore seeing subscription to the book is first against piety, in that
many things are there prescribed, not warranted by the word: 2. without any
necessity. seeing there is a consent in the substantial points of faith: 3.
with great partiality in punishing, more for ceremonies then other greater
transgressions: 4. against the utility of the Church in depriving the same of
so many profitable men: 5. preposterous enforcing by authority, not persuading
by argument: 6. against charity in not sparing aged Ministers, their wives and
children: 7. contrary to the practice of the Church: 8. equalizeth humane
writings to Scriptures: 9. disturbeth the peace of the Church: 10. is against
the law of the land. A most happy service your Majesty should do unto Christ,
benefit to his Church, contentment to your best disposed subjects, to remove
this hard yoke and heavy burden of subscription: and do herein as good
Constantine did, who when bills of complaint were brought unto him by the
Bishops, cast them into the fire, and made a peace among them. And as Pompey
intercepting a packet of letters sent to Sertorius tending to sedition, burned
them. And as Basilius the Emperor caused all the syngrapha and subscriptions,
which Photius had of the Ministers to be committed to the fire. council. gener.
8. Act. 8.

Objections. 1. Obj. BUT it will be objected that the most part of the
parishes of this land have subscribed already, as the Bishops have to show in
their books of subscription, only a few persons excepted.

Answ. To this we have answered before at large in the defense of the general
censure: Art. 3. And of the preface; art. 6. upon what grounds and reasons some
were resolved in respect of the time to tolerate by subscribing that which
simply they thought not fit to be prescribed to the Church.

2. Object. This forcing of subscription has made an uniformity in the Land,
and wrought great peace in the Church.

Answ. 1. We have showed before that nothing has bred greater variance and
disturbance in the Church then this torture of subscription. 2. It was such a
peace as Hierome speaks of, which the Hierom. ad Theophil.
Patriarch of Jerusalem brought his Clergy to: quod si pacem habere non potest
cum fratre, nisi cum subdito, ostendit se non tam pace^ capere quam sub
occasion pacis vindictam. If he cannot have peace with his brother, unless he
be his subject, he desires not so much peace as revenge under that color. And
again: nihil grande est pacem voce praetendere, and opere destruere: It is no
great matter to pretend peace in word, and overthrow it in deed. so the urgers
of subscription pretended peace, but they intended it not, but rather
extinguished it, of who^ we say with Hieroms words: Moneas illos pace^ no^
extorquere, sed velle: Tell them they should not extort peace, but exhort unto
it.

3. Object We know no subscription urged not disagreeable to law.

Ans. That the subscription urged is not agreeable to law is showed before,
arg. 10

4. Object. At Geneva they strictly tie all etc. to the observatio^ of their
Church government, etc.

Answ. If the Church of Geneua urge a But to nothing in controversy as our
ceremonies and Discipline.
conformity to that which they are able to warant by the word, and have a
positive law for the same, that can be no rule or president for such
subscription and conformity, which is not so warranted. And if either they or
any other Chur. shall impose subscription to that which is not grounded upon the
word, we neither defend nor commend it.

Object. 5. Not urging a conformity in Church discipline is to set open the
high way to all disorder and confusion, etc.

Answ: Though it may be remembered that in the time of popery, when they stood
more upon conformity in ceremonies, then protestants do, there were 4 or 5
kinds of diverse services in the laud, some following the use of Sarum, some of
Bangor, some of Lincoln others of Hereford, orhers of York: yet we mislike
not a conformity even in external matters. But first let no thing be urged,
but that which may be warranted by the word, then let our brethren call for an
universal conformity. And we could wish the same rule to be kept which
Gregory the 1. some time prescribed for England: non pro locis res, sed pro
rebus loca amanda sunt: ex singulis ergo quibuscunqe Ecclesijs, etc. Things
must not be loved for the place, but the place for the things: therefore out of
every Church chose such things as are godly, religious, right, and these bound
as it were in a bundle, lay up in English hearts: we could wish likewise that
for ceremonies we followed the best reformed Churches.

The Defense of the third part. Reasons and arguments against Plurality of
Benefices.
1. Arg. Our Savior Christ Describing a good shepherd in his own person
says: I am the good shephard, and know mine own, and am known of mine. Joan.
10. 14. A good shepherd then must be conversant among his flock, as the
preacher says: Agnosce vultum pecoris tui: Be deligent to know the state of
they flock and take heed to the herds, prove: 27. 23.

But so cannot they do that have many flocks. Damasus hereupon well says: si
domini desideramus esse descipuli, ipsius imitemur Damas epist. 4. decret.
vestigia, etc. If we desire to be the Lords disciples, let us walk in his
steps, that it may be said of us, I am a good she epheard and know mine
own, and call them by name, etc.

2. Arg. A faithful Pastor must not be given to filthy lucre. Titus. 1. 7.
but to have two or mo benefices, proceeds of covetousness. Nicen. 2. can. 5.
Clericus ab hoc deinceps tempore in duabus Ecclesijs non collocetur hoc enim
est negotiationis, and turpis lucri proprium. A Clergy man must not be placed
in two churches, for this savoureth of filthy lucre.

3. Arg. S. Paul says, Let every man wherein he is called, therein abide with
God. 1. Cor. 7. 24. But they which are called to one Church, and after accept
another, remain not in their first calling. This reason is used by the same
Council against the having of two Churches: Ab ipsa Domini voce audivimus non
posse quenquam duobus Dominis servire, unusquisque in eo quo vocatus est debet
manner. We have heard from the Lords own mouth, No man can serve two Masters,
Every one ought to remain in that to which he is called.

4. Arg. The Apostle says, Who is sufficient for these things. 2. Cor. 2. 16.
A man is not sufficient to discharge one cure, much less can he supply the
Pastors duty in diverse. This reason was used in the Lateran Council. part. 1.
cap. 13. sub Alex. Cum unum officium vix supplere possint, stipendia vendicant
plurimorum: When they cannot do one man's duty, they challenge the stipend of
many.

5. Arg. The Apostle again says, If there were any that would not work, he
should not eat, 2 Thessalonians. 5. 10. But pluralists work not in their charge from
whence they are absent: Ergo, they should not eat of such flocks. This reason
is urged Oxoniens. sub Stephano, Si residere noluerint, cum non nisi
laborantibus panis dandus sit, Ecclesijs per Episcopum spolientur: If they will
not be resident, seeing bread must be given only to them that labor, let
them be deprived.

6. Arg. That use and custom which maintains hirelings in the Church, and an
unpreaching and insufficient ministry, is not to be suffered in the Church:
for our Savior speaks against hirelings and mercenary Pastors, Ioh. 10. 13.
An hireling flies, because he is an hireling, etc. But the plurality of
Benefices brings in hirelings. This reason is used by Innocent. 2. Ne
Ecclesiae conductitijs presbyteris co^mittantur, cause. 22. q. 2. c. 5. Lest the
church be committed to Hirelings. This complaint was made many years since,
as is extant, opusc. trip. lib. 3. c. 6. Quando ponantur vicarij, etc. When
hirelings are placed, respect is not had to the sufficiency of the person, but
to him that will serve for least wages.

7. Arg. It is not fit that some Ministers should a bound, and others want:
that some men should be eased, others grieved, as the apostle says, but that
there be an equality. 1. Cor. 8. 14. Inhonestum videtur vt alij sacerdotes
habeant, alij detrimentum patiantur? Decr: cause, 16. qu. 7 -c. 1. But
pluralities cause many Ministers to be in want, and by this means keeps
them out of the Church, that would do much good: Meliores qui laborare in
Ecclesia, etc. The better sort, that would labor in the Church; are excluded,
and are forced to profane studies, when as they might be an ornament to the
Church: Coloniens: sub Adulpho med. 3. c. 9.

8. Arg. S. Paul would have the pastors to be examples to their flock, (...),
to be as seals to leave a print upon their people. The latin text adds by
way of exposition Exanimo, to be examples fram the heart. 1. Pet. 5. 3.

And Augustine therefore fitly sayeh, the Ser. 40. ad fratres in cremo.
pastor is compared to the olive, propter vim oleae triplicem: nam illuminat,
pascit, and fessa membra fovet, etc. oil does lighten, feed, and cherish: so
Prelates should illuminate by the word, feed by their example, foster the poor
by temporal benefits. One of these the Pastor may do being absent, to feed
the needy; but the other, to feed by his example, and lighten by doctrine, he
cannot do, unless he be present.

9. Arg. Gregory gathers this argument against pluralities out of that place
of S. Paul: If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? 1. Cor. 12.
17. Sicut indecorum est, ut in corpore humano alterum Distinct. 89. cap. 1.
membrum alterius fungatur officio, etc. As it is unmeet that in the body one
member should do the office of another: so it is hurtful if every ministration
be not to several persons distributed.

10. Arg. We will now show how this abuse of coveting after diverse Churches,
has bee^ censured by the ancient Canons. 1. They are decreed to be disgraded:
Non licet clericum in duabus simul Ecclesijs conscribi, etc. qui aliter
fecerint, cadant de proprie gradu. Chalc. c. 10. 2. They were deprived of the
benefice received after the first: si aliter factum, qui receperit, amittat,
Lateran. 1. c. 13. 3. Et qui dederit, largiendi potestate privetur, ibid. The
patron in this case lost his gift. 4. Electio cassatur: His election and
admittance that had other dignities, is made void, Greg: lib. 3. tit. 5. c. 18
5. Si illud forte retinere contenderit, alio spolietur. He that contendeth to
hold the first, having accepted the second, shall loose both. Lateran. sub.
Innocent. 3. c. 29. 6. Excommunicatur nisi ad proximam revertatur Ecclesiam.
Chal. c. 20. He is judged to be excommunicate, that returns not to his own
Church.

Objections.
1. Object. THESE canons mean, that no man should be set over two cities, or
great towns, not any two Churches.

Answ. The clean contrary is evident: Episcopi non in castellis, etc. Bishops
must not be set in small towns but presbyters should be by the Bishops ordained
in villages and towns: singuli tamen per singulos titulos suos: but several
persons in their several titles. Anaclet. distinct. 80. 3. Here it is
evidently expressed that the smaller towns shall be committed severally to
several pastors. So likewise Dionysius: Ecclesias singulas singulis presbyteris
dedimus: we have granted every Church to his proper presbyter. cause. 13. q.
1. c, 1. Nullus presbyter duas habeat Ecclesias: no presbyter must have two
Churches, Alex. cause 16. qu. 7. c. 20. In duabus Ecclesijs clericus conscribi
nullo modo potest. A Clarke must by no means be placed in 2: Churches: cause.
21. q. 1. c. 1.

2. Obj. Where the maintenance of the Minister is small there it is fit the
minister should unto it adioyne another.

Answ. To this see our answer before: defense of the second part of the
petition art. 3.

3. Obj. Why may not one man hold two or three benefices, as well as one hold a
Church with two or three Chapels.

Answ. To this we have answered likewise before: defense of the second part of
the Petition. art. 3.

4. Obj. The Canons only spoke against pluralities that are held without
dispensation, not otherwise.

Answer. By these means if pluralities were lawful by dispensation, all the
restraints by Canons would be nothing else but engines to draw profits to
Courts for faculties and dispensations. 2. The Canons have no power to dispense
with any precept or constitution of the Scriptures, as this is of Residence and
attendance upon the flocks of the people. 3. But the better Canons do allow in
this case no dispensation at all. Greg. Decr. lib. 1. tit. 6. 54. The Canon
calls concessionem per Archiepiscopum Dispensation for pluralities not good
by the Canons.
factam frivolam excusationem. The grant or dispensation made by the Archbishop
to hold more Churches, a frivolous excuse. Greg. lib. 3. tit. 5. c. 6. Ad
mandatum Papae, etc. At the commandment of the Pope one is not bound to
provide for him that has a benefice already, who cannot be provided for
without scandal. Extrav. Joan. tit. 3. c. 1. Obtinentes plura beneficis curam
animarum habentia ex dispensatione virtute illius non poterunt retinere nisi
unum. By virtue of a dispensation one can hold but one benefice. This canon is
repeated verbatim, Extrav. Com, lib. 3. tit. 2. c. 4. And it is the last canon
in force of this matter.

5. Obj. Some that would seem to make more conscience then others, do think
that if they hold but one benefice with cure, that it is no transgression of
the Canons to heap up and multiply other dignities, as many as they can get.

Answ. Yes even this also is forbidden by the Canons. Venet. council. can. 8.
Abbatibus singulis diuersas cellas vel plura monasteria habere non licet, etc.
It is not lawful for Abbates to have diverse celles or monasteries, one ought
to be content with one Archdeaconrie. Lateranens. part. 24. c. 5. Illud omnino
est rationi contrarium, etc. It is against all reason that one person in
diverse Churches should have an Archdeaconry and Deanery, when as every office
in the church requires personal attendance. Lateranens: part. 39. c. 6.
Nullus debet habere plures vicarias: None ought to have diverse vicarages, Decr.
Greg. lib 3. tit 5. c. 5. The Canon caleth multitudinem praebendarum canonibus
inimica^ The multitude of prebends an enemy to the canons. Thus by the Canon it
is not Lawful to hold many Monasteries, Colleges, Archdeaconries, prebends:
only we find liberty to hold a Church with cure, and a prebend, and that
without dispensation: habere personatum cum cura, and prebendam, etc.
Dispensatio necessaria non existit. Sext. decr. lib. 3. tit. 4. c. 6. Yea by
the imperial Law it was not lawful for one to hold two civil offices: nec
sit concessum cuiquam, etc. Let it be granted to none to have two
Magistracies, and to exercise judgment in both: for it is not like that one
man should suffice for two necessary duties: for when he is present in one
place, he must needs be wanting in the other, and so be wholly fit for
neither, but let him be content with one Magistrates place, leaving the other.
Cod. lib. 1. tit. 52. leg. 13. Justinian. Thus by this Imperial constitution
to hold two Chancellors, or Registers places, to be a Judge in two Courts, is
thought to be inconvenient.

6. Obj. They desire to limit the Kings favor, seeing none except he be the
kings Chaplayne may hold three benefices with cure, etc. p. 18.

Answ. We take not upon us to limit the kings favor but humbly beseech his
excellent Majesty that it would please him to limit his own princely favor
that non-residents and pluralists, to the hurt of Christ's Church, and damage
of many Christian souls, use no longer that cloak of their covetousnes.

7. Object It is not known that there be five in all the land that hold three
such benefices.

Answ. If there were but one to be found that held three such benefices, it
were too much 2. Yet all the kings Chaplaynes, if they were an hundredth, might
enjoy the same favor, which who sees not, how inconvenient it would be? and
it is against the Law of favors: quod alieni gratiose conceditur, trahi non
debet alijs in exemplu^: That which is granted of favor to one, should not be
a measure or example for other. 3. Our brethren all this while say nothing of
double beneficed men, which are almost (sance number) the confuters should have
done well to have mustered them as they have done the other. But whether they
are double or treble beneficed men, they may all be ranged in the rank of
pluralists, according to that rule in the Law: Pluralis locatio duorum nomine
contenta est. Two make a plural number.

8. Obj. What good dealing is this etc. To make the world believe it is aco^mon
fault etc.

Answ. We take our brethrens confession, that it is a fault, though as they
say, no common fault, to have three benefices: and we pray you why is it not
also a fault to have two? It is a fault to have three, because it argues a
covetous mind and such an one takes upon him more then he can discharge: both
these faults concur in accepting of two benefices, where one for mayntenance
may be sufficient, and two are more then a man can discharge. Wherefore
according to another rule in the Law. Cum quid prohibetur, prohibentur omnia,
quae sequuntur ex illo. Reg. Iuris. 84.
when any thing is forbidden, all things are forbidden which follow it.

Wherefore (O most noble king.) 1 seeing a good shephard ought to be
conversant The conclusion.
among his flock. 2. Not given to lucre. 3. must abide wherein he is called. 4.
Is not sufficient for one charge, much less for two or three. 5, Seeing he
that works not in his charge must not eat. 6. And by pluralities hirelings
are mayntayned in the Church. 7. By this means some men want, and other
overflow. 8. And such pastors can not be examples to their flocks 9. neither
is it fit that one member should have the office of diverse. 10. The practice
of the Church in former times condemns pluralities. Seeing nothing can be
objected to the contrary of any moment. 1. That it is unlawful to have not
only two cities, but two towns. 2. That neither the smallnes of the living. 3.
Nor largenes of the parish is a sufficient excuse. 4. Nor yet to hold them by
dispensation. 5. nor yet to have many dignities without cure. 6. or to hold
them by special favor. We trust your Majesty in good time will see this
abuse reformed, which was sometime odious even among the Romanists: Quis per
Deum immortalem miserabilior aspectus esse Suggest. Cardin. abus. 8.
potest Christianum orbem peragranti, quam haec Ecclesiarum solicitudo. O good
God, what more wretched sight can there be in the whole Christian world, then
this desolation of churches.

ARTIC. 3. Of Impropriations. Reasons and Arguments showing that it is neither
lawful nor convenient for Ecclesiastical corporations to demise their
impropriate tithes to Lay Farmers.
1. Arg. Tithes should be used according to the first institution: but then
they were permitted only to the Priests: Ergo, they should now be proper to
the Ministers of the Gospel. Thus Damasus groundeth his reason upon the equity
of Moses Law, which prohibiteth any stranger saving only Aaron and his sons
to eat of the holy things. Exodus 29. 33. VVhereupon he writes thus:
Oblationes, quae intra sanctam Ecclesiam offeruntur, etc. Oblations offered in
the Church should by no means be under the power of lay men, but it is only
lawful for Ministers to eat and drink thereof, because in the old Testament
the Lord did forbid any of the children of Israel to eat of the holy bread,
but only Aaron and his sons, Damas. Decr. 3.

2. To usurp the Lords right without his warrant, is presumption. But tithes
are holy to the Lord, Lev. 27. 28. What is holy to the Lord he gives to the
Priest. Numb. 18. 14. Every thing separate from the common use, shall be thine.
And God has no where transferred his right to any other but the Priest: Ergo,
it is presumption for any (but the Priest) to challenge tithes. Thus reasons
Boniface, Decr. 3. Omne quod Domino consecratur, etc. Whatsoever is consecrate
to God, belongs to the right of the Priest, therefore he is inexcusable that
takes such things away.

3. Tithes are due for the service in the house of God: they only have right
to reap temporal things that sow spiritual: Lay men perform no spiritual
duty, Ergo, they ought no ways to reap temporal things due for the same.
This reason Chrysostom uses: Quomodo nunc sub Eva^gelio debe^t Laici
oblationes etc. Under the Gospel how should Lay men either eat themselves, or
let to others the oblations which Christians offer to their Pastors seeing it
belongs not to them to pray for others, in Math. 12.

4. Augustine upon that place, Exodus 22. 29. Primitias areae tuae, etc. The
first fruits of thy flower and wine press, thou shall not be slow to pay, thus
collecteth: Si tardius dare peccatum est, quanto pejus est non dedisse? If it
be a fault to give slowly, a greater it is not to give at all. de Temp. sermon.
219. from hence we infer thus: Lay men must pay tithes, Ergo, it belongs
not to them to take tithes. As Jerome well shows, speaking of the difference
of Lay men and Clergymen. Clerici pascunt oves: Ego pascor, etc. Clergy men
feed their sheep, I am fed: they live of the Altar, but the axe is laid to me
as a fruitless tree, if I bring Hieron. ad Heliodorum
not to the Altar.

5. I urge Ambrose reason: tanta merces esse debet Evangelizantis regnum Dei,
etc. Such should be the reward of him that preaches the Gospel, that he be
neither grieved nor extolled, 1. Tim. 5. But where lay men farm their tithes,
the Ministers portion is scant, and has not sufficient maintenance, therefore
it is inconvenient that they should farm the tithes.

6. The Bishop and other Clergy men are bound by the Canons to relieve poor
ministers of their own, if need so require: Si quis Episcopus aut Presbyter
Clerico ex inopia laboranti, etc. If a Bishop or Presbyter do not minister
things necessary to a clergy man in want, let him be put from the communion.
Can. Apost. 58. Episcopus pauperibus and infirmis, etc. A Bishop to those poor
and impotent that cannot work with their own hands, must give victual and
raiment. Aurelianens. can. 18. If they are bound to help other poor, much
more such as are of their own calling; and if they ought to give them of their
own, much more to restore them that which by right is theirs, and not to
enrich lay men, and suffer the minister to beg.

7. That is neither Lawful nor convenient whereby an unpreaching Ministry is
maintained, and the preaching of the word hindered. But by demising tithes to
Lay men, and seuering them from the Ministers use, this inconvenience ensues,
Ergo. etc. Hierome complaining of covetousnes of Bishops in his time, showed
what ensued thereupon. Solus Episcopus incubat diuitijs, solus vniuersa sibi
vendicat, solus parts invadit alienas, solus occidit vniuersos. The Bishop
only would be rich, he only challenges all things, he only invadeth other
men's right, he only kills all. de 7. ordinibus. By this means, while the
Minister was deprived of his maintenance, many men's souls perished for want of
teaching. The same reason is alleged in the Canons, that for want of
sufficient maintenance saepe contingit quod non inveniantur idoneae personae,
etc. It often falls out that fit persons are not found which will take such
Churches, and so often times they are bestowed upon such as are not fit,
whereby souls are endangered. Greg. lib. 3. tit 4. c. 1: Decr.

8. The same Canons allow not Religious men themselves to occupy to their own
use the tithes of the Churches, sufficient maintenance not being left for the
Minister, much less ought others to do it in their right: Clemens 3. Fuit
olim per sedem Apostolicam provide constitutum, etc. It has been in time past
provide^tly decreed by the seat Apostolic, that the Diocesans should admit
none to any Church presented by Religious persons, unless in their presence so
much of the revenewes of the Church were assigned, whereout they might have
sufficient maintenance Decr. Greg. l. 3. tit. 4. c. 1. yea ecclesiastical
persons are bound for their lands to pay tithes, much more not to take away
tithes, where otherwise the maintenance is scant. Cabilonens. sub Carolo, c.
19. Decrevit sacer iste conventus, ut Episcopi, and Abbates de agris, and
vineis decimas Ecclesi^^ dare faciant. If then clergy men themselves are not to
possess tithes where sufficient is not remaining for the Minister, much less
ought Lay men in their name to do it.

9 By the Law both Imperial and Canonical, it is unlawful to alienate by any
means the possessions and laws of the Church, Cod. Lib. 1. tit. 5. leg. 14.
Leo Antbenius: Iubemus nulli posthac Archiepiscopo esse facultatem, praedia,
etc. We will that from henceforth no Archbishop have power by any kind of
alienation, to convey to any person whatsoever, their manners, immoueables,
civil revenewes; let them keep them inviolably without any mutation: no
though all the clergy men should consent with the religious Bishops in the
alienation of such possessions. Sicut ipsa Ecclesia perpetua est, etc. Ita ejus
patrimonium jugiter servetur illaesum: as the church is perpetual, so should
the patrimony thereof remain untouched: he that buyeth such, shall loose that
he paid, the writer shall be banished, the judge shall forfet his goods and his
place. Hereunto also the Canons agree: Definivit Synodus, etc. The Synod has
dereed that no Bishop shall sell the salaries or possessions of the church, let
him be deposed as a transgressor of the Divine laws. Octav. Synod. general.
c. 15. Non licet Papae, etc. Cause. 12. q. 2. c. 10.
It is not lawful for the Pope to alienate any man, nor of the Church for any
necessity. Nec in usum fractuarium dare, etc. Nor to give the lands in fee
farm. But it is much more to alienate tithes from the Minister, which is the
proper inheritance of the Church, then other temporal laws. If this be
unlawful, much more the other.

10. The Canons do not only hold it unlawful for lay men to possess tithes,
usus decimarum secularibus provenire non potest, Cause. 16. qu. 1. c. 68. Nullus
decimas ad alios pertinentes accipiat. Leo cause. 16. qu. 2. c. 4. But they do
grievously censure them, Qui non Ecclesiae restituerint iterum, etc. He that
restores not to the Church the things which belong to the Church, neither do
yield his evidences to be cancelled, let him stand accursed till he do it.
Cause. 12. q. 2. c. 13. Decimas quae in usus pietatis concessas esse, etc.
Tithes which the canons show to have been given to pious uses, we forbid any
lay men to hold, whether they have received them of Kings or Bishops: unless
they restore them to the church, let them know that they have committed
sacrilege, and incurred the peril of damnation. Cause. 16. q. 7. c. 1. What
more grievous sentence could be given, then that they which usurp the tithes
of the Church, commit sacrilege, stand accursed, and are guilty of eternal
damnation.

11. Bishops also and Clergy men making grant of tithes to lay men, are
censured by the Canons: Episcopus, qui non sacerdotibus, sed laicalibus
personis decimas conferat, inter maximos haereticos and Antichristos, etc. A
bishop conferring tithes not upon Priests, but lay men, is not the least among
heretics and Antichrists. Cause. 16. q. 7. c. 3. Statuimus ut si quis alicui
laico concesserit, etc. He that grants a Church or a tithe to a lay man, let
him be cut off from his place, as an unfruitful tree, Greg. lib. 3. qu. 30. c.
17.

12. Impropriations where sufficient maintenance is not left to the incumbent,
are supposed not to be good in law. By what degree impropriations came in.
That this may appear, we will show by what degrees they were first founded.

1. At the first the annexing of tithes to other places, and converting them to
other uses, was held unlawful: as mention is made of a general Council,
wherein it was decreed, Quod ex tunc canonicis ad eorum sustentationem capellae
non co^cederentur: That Canons should not have chapels for their maintenance.
Greg. l. 3. tit. 5. c. 33.

2. Afterward a restraint was made, that no more Churches should be
appropriated Vt praelati beneficia non applicent mensis: that Prelates apply not
benefices to their tables. Clem l. 7. tit. 5. c. 1.

3. Then order was taken, that no Churches should be appropriate, unless
sufficient maintenance were left to the Minister: non obstante Episcopi
consuetudine; notwithstanding any Episcopal custom. And that he which did not
leave congruentem de proventibus Ecclesiae portionem: a competent portion of
the Church revenewes, should be deprived of the benefice: sciat se authoritate
istius Decreti illa privatam. Decr. Greg l. 3. tit. 12. c. 1.

4. By the law of the land bequeasts alienated, and not employed according to
the mind of the founder, are forfeited being contra formam collationis: ann.
13. Edward 1. as in this case tithes are, which were first given for the
maintenance of the Minister, and preaching of the word.

5. Yea it is also provided that no Church be appropriate, but a certain
sum of Money should go yearly to the relief of the pore parochians, and
vicar be well and sufficiently endowed, otherwise to be void: ann. 4. Henr.
4. c. 12. and what it is to be conveniently endowed, is there expounded, to do
divine service, to inform the people, and keep hospitality ibid.

13. We will lastly show the inconveniences that arise by farming tithes to
layme^. 1. By this means we showed before an unpreaching ministry is
maintained, and many perish for want of teaching. 2. Learning decays, the
rewards thereof being taken away: Vnde fit, ut in his regionibus, etc.
Wherefore it comes to pass that in these countries scarce any parish Priest
is found, qui ullam vel modicam habeat peritiam literarum: which has any mean
knowledge of letters. Decr. Greg. l. 3, tit. 5. c. 30. 3. Hospitality fails,
and the poor want their relief. 4. The Ministers themselves are in great want,
and many times driven to hard shifts, as Hierome complayneth in his time,
mendicat infoelix Clericus in plateis. The pore clergy man beggeth in the
streets, and is constrained to live of his labor, and to ask alms. de 7.
ordinibus. 5. The Marriage of Ministers is made scandalous, who dying, by this
means wanting provision, leave many pore widows, and orphans. 6. It is the
occasion of Non-residency and pluralities when Ministers not finding one living
sufficient are forced to take another to it. 7. By this means where a
sufficient pastor is wanting, the wolf takes occasion to spoil the flock:
many Seminaries and Jesuits do creep in corners. 8. The people paying their
tithes to others, are burdened which new collectio^s to maintain a preacher. 9.
Clergy men give offense in disposing so evil of their impropriations, and
cause other noble and gentle men by their example to draw back, and they
themselves are corrupted by it, and become careless in their own flocks, as
Hierome well notes. si carnales diuitias quae labuntur non been dispensatis,
etc. If ye do not well dispense riches that fade, the true and ever enduring
riches of heavenly doctrine who shall give you. Hier. Algas. q. 6. 10. They
cause other men to usurp upon the possessions of the Chur. occupying the place,
and habitation of Rectors and parsons, as they are called, not being answerable
to the name in any duty which kind of title and calling the Civil Law utterly
condemns. Si quis sub nudo appellationis velamine se collegiatum appellat,
etc. If any do call himself by the naked name of a Collegiate or
Ecclesiastical person, another shall be put in his room. Cod. lib. tit. 5.
leg. 9. Theodos. Valent. All these inconveniences might as much as in them
lies easily be helped, if Bishops, Cathedral Churches, Colleges would
demise their tithes only to the incumbent Minister during his life and
incumbency for the old rent, and some reasonable fine at his entrance, as the
first years fruits, the charges diducted.

Objections answered.
1. Object. THESE Canons before alleged only prohibit lay men in their own
right to possess tithes.

Answ. Yea they forbid that they should take tithes to farm sub interminatione
anathematis, etc. Under pain of the curse. Ne laici Ecclesias ad firmas
teneant: that lay men take not Churches to farm. Thus Alexander the third did
write to the Bishop of London Decr. Greg. 3. tit. 50. c. 6. Which Canons are
yet Law in the Church of England, where they are not contrariate to the
statutes of the Realm.

2. Obj. But ministers are prohibited by statute Law to hold any leases or
farms.

Answ. This law was made only against that abuse of Ministers, which busied
themselves in buying and selling, in occupying brew houses, and tanne houses,
and engrossed farms. It was not made against such which did it for necessity.
Hierome makes mention of the like imperial law, that was made against the
greedy purchasing of Clergy men: Non de lege conqueror, sed doleo quod
meruerimus hanc legem. I complain not of the Law, but I am sorry men have
deserved this Law: the Medecin is good, but how do I need it: ad Nepotian. 2.
Yet this law objected allows Ministers to occupy farms for the sustentation
of their family. 3. This statute may be helped by another.

3. Obj. The statutes of some Colleges are against it, by the which the senior
is always to be preferred, whether sufficient or not, and so the Church should
have some unmeet men still.

Ans. 1. If any fellows of houses be unsufficient, it is their fault that
chose them and they in such elections transgress their own statutes 2. And yet
we hope none are so unsufficient, but if they be willing, might do good in the
Church. 3. Better a mischief be suffered for once to prefer a man not so
meet, then a perpetual inconvenience in preferring no meet men at all.

4. Obj. They could not be assured of their fine and rent, fellows of houses
for the most part being poor.

Answ. As though it be not in the power of the College, so to make their
leases with a clause of reentrie or forfeyture, that they may be secured of
both.

5. Object. It would make division in the Colleges about the bestowing of such
leases.

Answ. If an uniforme order be set, that the Senior be always preferred in
his place, it will make no division at all.

6. Obj. Yea but the College shall sustain loss in their mean fines, which
they might take for the renewing of such leases of their farms.

Answ. 1. If it were some loss, is it not every man's part for a common good to
be content to depart with some private gain? 2. It would be no loss, but a
benefit, both in that their own Society in their course should be provided
for, and the College should have fines for every life, whereas now they fine
but once for three lives, or 21. years.

7. Obi. But some impropriate tithes are worth 300 or 400 pounds by the year,
too much for a preacher.

Ans. 1. Is it not too much for a lay gentleman or yeoman, and is it to much
for a preacher. 2. And if this be too much for a preacher, how coms it that
some yt preach not, or very little possess twice so much? 3. Where the tithe
is of such value, for the most part, there are Chapels annexed, where
Preachers by proportionable allowance should be maintained.

8. Obj. But the Church, where tithe is not to be let, is full already with a
minister not sufficient.

Answ. Let him be provided for else where, or else the preacher, that has the
impropriation may expect the avoydance, and then take the whole charge, and
this doubt is but for the first time only.

9. Obj. In many places the Rectory and the Manor go together.

Answ. The tithe may be easily divided from the Manor, and the rent
apportioned.

10. Obj. In some places the vicarages belong to one Patron, the impropriate
tithes to another, how then can they be conferred upon one man?

Answ. As in some Churches already the Patrones present by turns: so it may be
in this case, that as much as the tithe is better then the vicarage endowed, so
the like, odds should be in their turns of presenting the one to present
twice or thrice to the others once.

11. Obj. But the impropriations are now the free hold of the Church, which
cannot be disposed of them without great danger to their state.

Answ. We move not to have the inheritance of impropriations taken away from
the Church, but the farm thereof to be otherwise disposed of for the
maintenance of preachers.

12. Obj. Their disposing of Impropriations does notably bewray their lack of
conscience, etc. Ans. p. 19.

Answ. We tremble to think that the Confuters should object to us lack of
conscience, for desiring that the impropriations of the Churches ought to be
let to the incumbent preachers for the old rent. O what blind Judges are they
of matters of conscience! We appeal to God and their own conscience, that
nothing but conscience has moved us to make this suite; seeing that such
impropriations so employed are a great occasion to nusle the people in
ignorance, and an apparent let to preaching, and propagation of the Gospel:
But if this were lack of conscience, that is more, to let out Impropriations
as they do, to lay farmers, without respect to the preachers, and the poor
peoples souls. God be judge between us and our brethren for this.

13. Obj. If they should be demised for the old rent, without fine, etc. Who
sees not that it would be the certain overthrow, and utter ruin of
Bishoprics, Colleges, etc. ibid.

Answ. Neither can this device possibly tend to the ruin and overthrow, of
Bishoprics, Colleges, etc. Seeing the old rent is still continued. The fine if
it were remitted, were in most of these places, but a loss to private men's
purses, who make a diuident of it: where it goes to the stock of the house, a
reasonable fine might be reserved as the fruits of the first year, or such
like: and as for improuement, it is well known that such corporations use not
to improve their rents being certain: but contrariwise this course would
establish all the foresaid foundations, this being a service so acceptable to
God, that his Church should be provided for.

14. Object. But by this, a few, and those the meanest of the Clergy only
should be provided for, the hinderance would redound to the better sort.

Answ. Not so few as 400. preachers should be mayntayned by this means: for
the number of impropriations belonging to Ecclesiastical corporations, cannot
be less. 2. We grant that they are meaner in dignities and preferments, but
as necessary for the Church, as richer prelates. 3. And the meaner they are,
they have so much the more need: the richer the other, so much better able to
spare it.

15. Object. These men in all their purity can content themselves with a
seventh part only of an impropriation in a lay man's fee.

Ans. If for a lay man to hold tithes or impropriations, were originally
unlawful, and contrary to the first institution, as our brethren truly say,
why then do they like that lay men should be farmers of their impropriate
tithes, rather then preachers? Why should they envy that benefit to their
fellow-ministers, which they yield to their fellow brethren of the lay sort?
For as the Canons do prohibit, That lay men should hold tithes by inheritance,
Lateranens. sub Alex. par. 50. cap. 29.
Decimae a Laicis non debent iure haereditario possideri: So neither do they
permit that they should take them to farm. Ne Laici Ecclesias ad firmam
teneant. Neither part. 27. c. 3 untruth. We do not content our selves with a
7. part only. Reasons of the Petitioners motion conceruing lay men's tithes.
Synod. Colo^. part. 8. c. 5.
need it offend our brethren that we seem to be content with a sixth or seventh
part, (not a seventh part only as they charge us) of such impropriations: we
could wish the whole were restrained. But seeing that some hold them by
inheritance, and some by purchase, some of good place are wholly maintained of
them, such a motion would have seemed unreasonable: we say as not long since a
provincial Synod complained: Decimas potissimum Ecclesiarum ministris deberi
non est dubium: That tithes are principally due to the Ministers, it is not to
be doubted, but now they are every where so usurped of lay men, that they
cannot easily be pulled out of their hands. And this was one cause of so
qualifying our motion; as also lest we might have seemed to be partial, while
we wish Ecclesiastical impropriations to stand, for the maintenance of their
corporations, and aim at the dissolution, of them of the lay sort: as further
fearing lest such a motion for these might have been prejudicial and dangerous
for the other, that serve to the maintenance of learning.

16. Object. It is possible that the men, untruth. We despise them not,
whom they so much contemn, would be able to propose some other course, etc.

Answ. This course to be taken for impropriations, tends not to the
alteration or injury of any state. And if the confuters (who it were to be
wished did no more despise their brethren then they are despised) could have
proposed any other course for the maintenance of the Church, they might have
done well so to do. But it may be worthily suspected, that they can hardly
give counsel to others, that will not take it themselves: that they which take
upon them the defense of Non-residents, pluralists, impropriations, can speak
for the maintenance of the Church. Ambrose saying may well fit such: Quis
vtilem causae alienae iudicet, quem inutilem Lib. offic. 2, 12.
videt vitae suae, quommodo eum iudicare potes superiorem consilio, quem vides
inferiorem moribus: supra me esse debet, cui me committere paro: an eum idoneum
putabo, qui mihi det consilium, qui non dat sibi. He cannot give counsel to
another that will take none himself: neither can he be superior in advice,
that is inferior in life. And to conclude, nothing can be objected of any
weight or moment to hinder so good a work, and so princely a motion, which the
Kings Majesty by his letters has first made, whose Christian zeal ought to
make others forward: Let every man laying aside his own private respects,
further the common cause, and seek the general good of Christ's Church, that
S. Paul's complaint be not renewed; All seek their own, and not that which is
Jesus Christ's, Phil. 2. 27. And Hierome well says: Ne lucra saeculi in Christi
quaeras militia, etc: Seek not the worldly gain in Christ's service.

THE DEFENSE OF THE FOVRTH PART OF THE PETItion concerning Church Discipline.
1. Obj. WE have been taught heretofore Ans. p. 20.
that Discipline is an essential part of the Gospel, etc. and matter of faith.

Ans. That the Discipline of the Church (being generally understood) is a
matter of faith, and an essential mark of the Church, I hope our brethren
will not deny: For Discipline comprehends not only the administration of the
keys, but Perpetual government of the Church. p. 208.
ordination and imposition of hands: but without ordination there are no
preachers: How shall they preach unless they be sent, Romans 10. 15. And
without preaching there is no belief, ibid. verse. 14. Wherefore without some
part of Discipline it cannot be denied, but that the Church is no Church,
faith no faith: but generally of every part it cannot be so affirmed. Cyprian
is very peremptory for the necessity of discipline, thus writing: Apparet non
aliter Lib. 2. ep. 7.
Ecclesiasticae saluti consuli posse, etc. It appears that the safety of the
Church cannot otherwise be provided for, unless they which are against it, as
contrary floods, be repelled; and the ordor of Discipline, as the stirring
oar in a tempest, be kept safe.

2. Obj. It is now come to be so indifferent, etc. that it will suffer an OR
ELSE, or AT THE LEAST. Ibid.

Ans. And what have the petitioners here moved, which the kings most excellent
Majesty has not first written: That the Discipline of the Church be preserved
in (...). p. 44.
purity according to Gods word. What needed our brethren then to have carped
at this petition? Neither is that disjunctive clause (or else at the least) any
contradiction or repugnance to the former, but an exception and qualifying
thereof, which gives the adversary no advantage, as the Law says: Exceptionem
obijciens non videtur de intention adversarij confiteri, Reg. Iuris 63. And it
is a condescending to the time, that where the perfection desired can not be
had, reformation be sought, that may be attained. Wherefore as the rule is in
the Law: In Argumentum trahi nequeunt, quae propter necessitatem aliquando sunt
concessa, Reg. Iuris. 78. That which is yielded to the necessity of time, must
not be urged as the integrity of the thing. If Christ's institution were
exactly kept, many things should be amended that are here not named: but the
Petitioners have only mentioned those things which in reason they thought
would not be denied or gainsayd.

3. Obj. Were we persuaded that their discipline were of Christ's institution,
could we be without it? etc.

Answ. What our brethren will be persuaded we know not: but if these things
which are moved be not proved to be agreeable to the word of God, and the
practice of the primitive Church, we desire not to be heard, but to be
rejected with our cause. We will not obtrude our own fancies but measure our
judgment by the scriptures, as Origin says: Exhibeo sensus mei testem
scripturam: Homil. 1. in Ierem. Homil. 9. in Ierem.
sensus nostri and enarrationes sine ijs testibus non habent fidem: I yield the
scripture a witness of my sense: my exposition without the scripture let it
be of no credit.

4. Object. His excellent Majesty has had Ans. p. 20.
experience of the manifold mischeifes, that attend their pretended discipline,
etc.

Answ. This discipline and reformation intended by us, is not attended upon by
any such mischifes: other men's ouersights we justify not, neither approve any
unadvised proceedings. Neither has his Majesty so evil opinion of the
Scottish Discipline, as they insinuate. The right use of a thing must not be
condemned for the abuse: as the Law says: vtile non debet per inutile vitiari:
Neither the cause misiudged for the persons fault. Delictum personae Reg.
Iuris. 37. Reg. Iuris. 76.
non debet in detrimentum Ecclesiae redundare.

1. Enormity against Excommunication by lay persons.
1. THeir first defense is that whatsoever the Chancellor does on this case,
he does it in the authority of the ordinary.

Answ. 1. It is a question whether the Bishop himself, the Archdeacons, or any
other ordinary, alone have any power to excommunicate. We are sure that
neither Scripture, or example of the primitive Church will bear them out in
it. Our Saviors rule is: Dic Ecclesiae: tell it to the Church: after the
contempt whereof the party is to be held, as an heathen and publican that is to
be excommunicate. But never was it yet heard that one man should stand for the
Church. That Dic Ecclesiae, in some man's constructio^ should be dic Episcopo,
dic Ca^cellario, dic Officiali: as the Papists wrest this place: dic Ecclesiae,
that is, dic Papae, dic Pontifici Romano: but of this matter more shall be said
in the end of this treatise. Then if they have not this power in themselves,
they cannot transfer it to another as the law says: Nemo potest Reg. Iuris.
79.
plus iuris transfer in alium quam sibi co^petere dignoscatur. No man can
give more to an other, then he has himself. As the comparison is
presumptuous to compare the Bishop to the King, the Chancellor to the Lord
Chancellor, so the case is not alike, for a civil power may be committed
over to others, but a spiritual power cannot be transferred, but ought to be
executed in every man's person, as the Apostle says: he that has an office,
let him attend upon his office. Romans 12. 7. Solomon Cant. 8. 11. 12. No
substitute in duties spiritual.
in the Canticles shows the difference of the Civil and Ecclesiastical
administration: Solomon gave his vineyard to keepers: but my vineyard, says
Christ, which is mine, is always before me. As we mislike that Christ should
have any vicar in earth: so neither should any of Christ's ministers execute
their charge by their vicars: S. Peter 1. Pet. 5. 2.
says; Feed, (...), the flock which is in you, that is, always in your sight.

The Canon law says: Non potest esse Decr. Greg. lib. 5. tit. 40 c. 5.
Pastoris excusatio, si lupus oves comedit, and pastor nescit. It is no excuse
of the shepherd if the Wolf devour the sheep, to say, he knows it not. It
was never well with the Church since Prelates taking more upon them then in
their own persons they could discharge, committed their spiritual affairs to
Deputies and Vicars. Of this abuse Eckius, a man otherwise bad enough,
complained in the popish Church: Nostrates praelatos ordinem Apostolicum
invertere, etc. Our Prelates invert the Apostolic order, who thinking
spiritual things too heavy for them to bear, do use the help of Suffragans
in their Pontificals; of Officials in their Judicials; of Penitentiaries in
absoluing sinners, of Monks in Preaching. Iodocus Clictoveus in his sermons
was wont thus to Hom. 2. de Stephano.
taunt such: Adibunt per vicarios in paradysum: in persona inferos. Such shall
by their vicars go to heaven: but in their own person to hell.

3. Though the Ordinary had power to excommunicate alone, and might transfer
that power to another, yet lay persons alone are not capable thereof. For
Christ when he said: Whose sins ye remit, are remitted; whose sins ye
retain, are retained, spoke only to the Apostles and Ministers. Hereunto the
Canons agree: Indecorum est laicum esse vicarium Episcopi, etc. It is unfit for
a lay man to be a Bishops vicar, and secular ^ispel. 2. c. 9
persons to judge in the Church, and a diverse profession to be in one office.
And by the same Canon, the Bishop that shall make a lay man his vicar, is held
to be Contemptor Canonum: A contemner of the Canons. But nothing is now more
usual then for lay men, Civilians, to be Chancellours, and Vicars general to
Bishops.

The second defense: The Chancellor, Official, Commissary, decrees the party
to be excommunicate, a Minister associate unto him by exprresse authority from
the Ordinary denounces the sentence of excommunication. Ans. p. 22


Answ. 1. This is but a new trick, and frivolous device: who knows not the
Minister assistant to the Chancellor (who is for the most part of the meanest
and simplest of the Clergy) is but a Cyphar, he does nothing but by his
masters direction, exco^municateth and absolueth at his pleasure, contrary to
the Apostles rule to Timothy. I charge thee etc. that thou observe these things
without prejudice, or prefering one 2 Timothy 5. 2
before another, and do nothing partially. 2. By the Provincialls, no sentence
of Excommunication is good but in writing: Linwood de senten. excommun. 6.
sententiae latae sine specialibus literis dominorum, quorum interest, non
ligant. Wherefore this sentence of the Minister being not extant in writing
under his seal, and so delivered, is of no value in Law: and the people under
this color are abused. 3. It is unlawful for a lay Ciuilian in cases, which
appertains to correction to send out citations, or to decree
excommunications: he must neither Investigare, inquirere, punire, corrigere,
excommunicationum literas decernere; And as he cannot do it in his own name,
so neither can he by the Law publish excommunications in another man's name. The
Law is: Quod alicui suo non liceat nomine, nec alieno Reg. iuris. Bonif. 67.
Linwood de
licebit. And the provincial is flat, Ne laicus quouis exquisito color sub
suo uel alieno nomine, etc. that a lay person by any pretense (...). coniug.
cum ex. 1.
under his own or others name do exercise no jurisdiction spirtual
whatsoever. And all such citations, excommunications, and process are void:
not only if the judge be a lay person, but the Register also.

Thirdly: they use but the advice and Ministry of a wise ciuilian in decreeing
who is to Ans. p. 22.
be excommunicate.

Answ. 1. If had been to be wished that Ecclesiastical persons had not
meddled in such affairs, wherein they have no skill: according to the ancient
Canons: Episcopus tuitionem testamentu^ non suscipiat: Carthag. 4. 18. That the
Bishop should not take upon him the tuition of a testament. Clerici ad sacrum
Ministerium electi actibus saeculi renuntient: Clergymen must renounce all
secular acts. Auerens. can. 12. The Apostle says no man that warreth,
entangleth 2. Tim. 2. 4
himself with the affairs of this life: whereupon Ambrose well writes,
Ecclesiasticus officium impleat quod spospondit, a seculari Amb. in 2. 2.
negotio alienus: non enim convenit unum duplicem professionem habere: a
Clergy man must be free from secular business, for it is not fit that one
should have a double profession. 2. But seeing these causes, as matrimonial,
testamentarie, decimarie, are now annexed to the Episcopal jurisdiction, such
matters, as they call of instance it is fit they be referred to the Civilians:
In such cases let them not only be advisers, but judges. But as for matters of
office, as they are called, which are merely Ecclesiastical, we suppose that
Ministers are better able to judge, then Civilians, and herein it is not fit
they should be assistants to advise, much less judges to determine, let them
contain themselves within their own element. 2. Whereas we are referred to
the book of the perpetual government of the page 320.
Church: let it be noted that there it is confessed that Judges of the Civil
law take not upon them the power of the keys committed to the Apostles: their
suspensions, excommunications, etc. they claim not by Gods law, but by man's.
Wherefore seeing it is confessed, that this manner of Excommunication by lay
men, is humane, the Petitioners request is reasonable, that this abuse be
reformed, and such usurpers upon the keys of the Church restrained.

Fourthly it is objected: If the discipline were once a foot we should then
hear tell of Ans. p. 22.
Lay Elders, etc.

Answ. 1. The Petitioners say nothing of Lay Elders in their Petition, but that
there have been such Lay Elders in the Church, which have intermedled in the
Ecclesiastical affairs, it cannot be denied. As Reverend D. Fulke confesses
Fulke ans. to the Rhem. 1. Tim. ^. sect. 13.
out of S. Ambrose thus writing: or else he means of those Elders that Saint
Ambrose speaks of upon the first verse of this chapter, that were appointed
only for government not for teaching. 2. Is not the like practiced in the high
commission, for causes Ecclesiastical, wherein diverse Reverend persons of the
civil state are Commissioners. And let not our brethren be so hot against Lay
Elders, seeing I hope they will not deny, but that they may have voices in
Sinods. And what greater inconvenience is it for lay men to be assistants in
Ecclesiastical affairs then for Clergy Of lay Elders
men to interpose themselves in Civil, and why might not as well Civil
persons if it so pleased the state, be of the Convocation house, as
Ecclesiastical of the parliament, as it was practiced in K. Henry the 8. his
Fox. p. 1182
reign, when that worthy Lord Crumwell was made vicegerent in matters
Ecclesiastical, and was himself present in the assemblies, and at the
disputations of the Bishops. 3. Yet are we far from making him a Clergy man,
as the Confuters a little before confessed (though they have soon forgot
themselves) of Civilians in these words: A chancellor or a commissary is not a
lay man in this case. And yet there is a great difference between these lay
Elders which are but assistants in the presbytery with others, and theirs, who
are sole agents and principals in Ecclesiastical Courts. And therefore we may
retort the Confuters saying upon their own heads, that they reprove others for
speaking for Lay Elders, and allow the same themselves. But there is a
principle in the Law: Quod semel Reg. iuris. 21.
placuit iterum displicere non potest. That with once did please, cannot again
displease. And Hierome could have told them: perdit Hieron. Ocean.
authoritate^ dicendi, cujus sermo opere destruitur: He loses the authority
of teaching, that overthrows his words by his works.

Of Excommunication for trifles.
THE excuse is that men are not excommunicated for trifles, but for their
contempt. Ans. p. 23.

Answ. Indeed according to our Savior Christ's rule he that hears not the
Church Mat. 18. 18
must be held, as an heathen and publicane. But it is not yet proved, that the
official and his Register make the Church, neither shall our brethren be ever
able to show it. 2. It is true that the letters of Excommunication presuppose a
contumacy and contempt preceding. But he is not contumacious, which at the
first monition appears not upon every cause pretended, as it may appear by
these reasons taken out of the Canons.

1. First no man should be excommunicate before the offense be proved against
him: nemo Episcopus aliquem excommunicet priusquam causa probetur, cause. 2. qu.
1. c. 11. But his contumacy is not proved, who upon the first citation
appears not, for he may be ignorant of it, or otherwise necessarily let.
Ergo such an one is not to be excommunicate.

2. Such only are to be excommunicated, as are otherwise incorrigible: as by
Christ's rule he must be taken, as an heathen and publican, that refuses to
hear the adomonition of one, of two, lastly of the Church. Anathema non debet
imponi nisi illi, qui aliter non potuerit corrigi. Anathema ought not to be
imposed, but upon him that can not otherwise be amended. Council. Meldens. c.
56. Excommunicatio non infligenda est, nisi his, qui aliter corrigi noluerint.
Excommunication must be inflicted upon such, as cannot otherwise be corrected.
Coloniens. par. 13. c. 4. But they which once cited, appear not, are not
straight way incorrigible. Ergo. etc.

3. Excommunication should be only inflicted for criminal offenses: Non nisi
pro mortali debet imponi crimine: Meldens. ibid. Excommunicationis sententiae
ob criminales tantum causas, easque valde graves and lethales feruntur.
Augustans. c. 33. As the Apostle bideth an heretic to be after once or twice
admonition rejected. Tit. 3. 10 As likewise the Law of the Land awardeth the
writ de exco^municato capiendo to take place only when the Excommunication
proceeds upon contempt of some original matter of criminal offencee, as of
heresy, refusing to come to the Church. Incontinency, usury, Simony, Perjury,
Idolatry But every absence upon the first citation proceeds not of any such
contempt. Wherefore a man ought not to be excommunicate for the fees of the
court, or Cans. 23. q. 4. c. 27
such like. Pro vindicta propriae iniuriae, etc. To be revenged for your own
wrong you have given sentence of Anathema, which is against the Cannons:
penitus interdicimus, we forbid that for covetousnes sake none dare to
excommunicate any. Lateranens. sub innocent. 3. c. 49.


4. The Canons allow that a man should be twice or thrice cited before he be
excommunicate: secunda vel tertia admonitione interposita, exco^municationis
sentetia procedat, Cause. 24. 3. 15. Neither should the first citation be
peremptory: diem peremptorium ad primam citationem non statuendum: especially
Lateranens. sub Alexan p. 3. c. 5.
for Ecclesiastical matters, but upon great and urgent necessity. S. Paul
allows a manifest heretic two admonitions before he be rejected. Much more
where the offense is not manifest, a canonical, that is thrice admonition
should be used, according to the constitution of Oxford: nemo excommunicationem
promulget, etc. No man shall denounce Excommunication, where the excess is not
manifest, but Canonical monition going before. The manner is that the
apparitor cannot personally cite the party to be summoned, he uses to leave
word at his house: if he come not at the day, he is forthwith as contumacious
excommunicate. Herein a double error is committed: for if a man never
appeared in the cause before the judge, he cannot be cited at his house,
unless he can not be personally apprehended, and again he that is not
personally cited, is not vere but interpretative Linwood de iudic. c. item
verse. decernimus ibid. v. personaliter.
contumax in the judgment of the sounder Canonists. Wherefore it is evident
by these reasons that Excommunication goes forth often for trifles and 12 penny
matters, not for contumacy or contempt.

5. If Excommunication be sent forth only for contempt where the original is
but a trifle, and a twelve penny matter, then what needed all those cauteles by
Councels: ne quenquam pro parvis and levibus causis, etc. that none should be
excommunicate for small or trifling matters. Aur. 3. c. 2. Vormatiens. c. 13.
Avernens. as it is cited. cause. 11. q. 3. c. 42. for by this evasion there
shall be no trifling matters at all, but the pretense and color of contempt
shall countenance excommunication. Wherefore the request of the Petitioners is
agreeable to the Scriptures and Canons, that none be excommunicate for trifles.

The 2. Enormity against Excommunication without the consent of the Pastors.
Reasons and arguments to prove that Excommunication ought not to proceed from
one alone, but by the joint advise of the presbyters and Pastors.
1. EXcommunication should be exercised by the Church that is, an assemble:
math. 18. 11. tell the Church, etc. If he will not hear the Church let him be
as an heathen and publicane. Origene upon these words says: tertio coreptionem
mandat ad Ecclesiam deferendam, etc. In the third place he will have the
correction brought to the Church In the second he will have two or three
witnesses to be used. So Chrysostom understands Episcopos and praesidentes
Ecclesiae: The Bishops or Pastors, and presidents or governors of the Church.
in Mat. 18. But one or two make not a Church for this were a preposterous
course to proceed from one to two or three, and then to go back again to one.
Hierome writes well concerning John Hieron. pammach.
Patriarch of Jerusalem. An tu solus Ecclesia es and qui te offenderit a
Christo excluditur: tibi soli licet Ecclesiae iura calcare, tu quicquid
feceris, norma doctrinae est? Are you alone the Church, that whosoever
offends you is excluded from Christ: is it lawful only for you to tread
under foot the rights of the Church: whatsoever you do, is it a rule of
doctrine? Ergo, one man not being the Church, cannot excommunicate.

2. The government of the civil and Ecclesiastical state are unlike, etc. But
ye sha not be so, Lu. 22. 25. But they rule alone as Monarchs, The Kings of
the Gentiles reign over them. Ergo, Bishops or other officers of the Church
ought not to govern alone, There ought to be no Monarchy in the spiritual
regiment of the visible Chur.
as Monarchs in the Church, and so not excommunicate alone. This place is urged
by a learned Writer against a monarchy in the visible Church: Quid apertius?
nisi expectetis, ut locum proferamus ubi dixit aperte, vos monarchae Ecclesiae
esse non debetis: What could be said more plainly, D. Sutcliffe l. 1. de opt.
Reip. statu. cap. 7.
unless you would have us bring forth a place where Christ should say in
plain terms, Ye shall not be Monarchs of the Church. As there ought not
then to be a Monarch over the universal Church, so by the same reason neither
should there be any Ecclesiastical Monarch over a Province or Diocese.

Arg. 3. If S. Paul, who had Apostolical power, would not excommunicate the
incestuous person amongst the Corinthians without the consent of the Pastors,
and spiritual governors: much less ought any Bishop, Archdeacon, etc. do so
now. But the first is evident, that S. Paul exco^municateth together with the
Pastors of Corinth.
the Apostle sent not only his mandate to the Corinthians for them to execute,
but that the power and right of excommunication was jointly with the Apostle in
the Pastors of Corinth, as it may appear by these reasons. Ergo.

1. The Apostle rebukes them for that they had not put him from them already
before he had written to them, verse. 2.

2. They which had power to reconcile had power also to excommunicate: For
Eiusdem est ligare and soluere: It belongs to the same to bind and to loose:
But the Pastors of Corinth have power to reconcile, 2. Cor. 2. 10. To whom you
forgive any thing, I forgive also, etc.

3. It is not like that the Church of Corinth had no power to excommunicate
without the Apostle, for then should they have wanted a principal point of
discipline, when the Apostle was absent in remote places from them.

4. The words of the Apostle do evidently give unto them the judgment of
Excommunication: Do ye not judge them that are within, 1. Cor. 5. 12. Upon
the which words Augustine thus writes: Aug. hom. 50. c. 12. ut citatur cause.
2. q. 1. ^. 1^
Quibus verbis satis ostendit, non temere aut quommodo libet, etc. By which
words he sufficiently shows, that not rashly, or howsoever, but by judgment
the evil are to be removed from the communion of the Church.

Arg. 4. All that have authority to preach, have power to bind and loose, as
the Apostle says: We are the sweet savor of Christ in them that are saved,
and in them that perish. 2. Cor. 2. 16. Our Savior gives one general
commission to his Apostles, and all faithful Pastors their successors:
Whosoever sins ye remit, they are remitted. Ambrose says, Remittuntur
peccata per Dei De Cain and Abel. l. 2. cap. 4.
verbum, cujus Levites interpres and executor est. Sins are remitted by the
word of God, whereof the Minister is the interpreter and executor. Basil says,
Confession of sins must necessarily he made to them, to whom the dispensation
of the mysteries of God is committed. Our English confession says: Seeing In
regal. contractioribus. q. 288. Horn ser. 11.
one manner of word is given to all, and one only key belongs to all: we
say there is but one only power of all ministers, as concerning opening and
shutting. But all pastors have authority to preach: Ergo, to bind and loose,
and consequently to excommunicate.

It will be answered, that there are two kinds of administration of the keys: a
spirirituall in remitting and retayning of sins, and external in releasing the
outward censures of the Church. The first belongs to all Pastors, and the
preachers of the Church, but not the other.

Answ. 1. Our Savior Christ comprehends the whole power of the keys under
the name of retayning and remitting sins Joan. 20. 23. Therefore he that has
right to the one, has likewise to the other. 2. Where sins upon the
sufficient declaration of repentance, are remitted, there the censures of the
Church ought to be released: Neither is it lawful to hold the penitent long
under the censures, when they have sufficiently testified their repentance? as
the Apostle moves the Corinthians to forgive the incestuous person, after he
had sufficiently sorrowed, he then which 2. Cor. 2. 10
has right to the more, has right to the less, according to the Law: cui
licet quod Reg. iuris. 53
est plus, licet utique quod est minus. If Pastors then and preachers have
power to remit sins in the name of Christ, much more to release the temporal
censures.

Arg. 5. To whom the power of order belongth, the power also of Jurisdiction
appertains. S. Paul joins them both The Pastors and Presbyters right in
laying on of hands. Extran Ioa^. tit. 4. c. 5.
together in Timothy. 1. Tim. 5. 19. against an elder receeiue no accusation,
etc. there is the power of jurisdiction verse. 22. Lay hands sudde^ly on no man:
there is the power of order, the corrupt Extravagants will grant this
proposition: claues de quibus agimus in collatione sacerdotalis ordinis
conferuntur: the keys whereof we entreat are conferred in the collation of
Priestly order. But Presbyters have interest in conferring of orders. 1. Tim.
4. 14. Despise not the gift that is in thee, etc. by the laying on of hands of
the presbitery, or Eldership: Here it is evident that the Pastors and
Presbyters laid on their hands together with the Apostle.

Some by the presbytery here understand the office of Eldership, which Tymothy
1. Exposition. Perpetual govern. p. 78.
was ordained unto: but the words will not bear this sense: for here is
mentioned the imposition of hands (...) of the The place 1. Tim. 4. 14. of the
Presbyters expounded. 2. Exposition ibid. 249.
Eldership. How can the office it self put on hands: the persons then, not the
office must of necessity be understood.

Some by the presbyters understand Bishops, but that can not be: for as yet in
the Apostles time there was no distinction between Bishops and presbyters, as
it may appear by S. Paul's description of Presbyters and Pastors of old
admitted to lay on hands.
a Bishop. 1. Tim. 3. Which is common to the presbyters. And this point
follows more fully to be declared in the next argument.

Others say that the presbyters and Pastors 1. Exposition Ibid. p. 93.
might lay hands on Timothy, as well as Paul: but at another time and to
another end. But S Paul saying in another place, stir up the gift of God
which is in 2. Tim. 1. 6.
the by the putting on of hands, evidently shows that he at the same time put
on hands with the presbyters: for he speaks of the same gift in both places
which was conferred upon him by imposition of hands. And further if the
presbyters joined 4. Exposition
with Paul in imposition of hands, yet was it not of necessity, as though S.
Paul's Ibid. p. 94.
hands had not been sufficient without them to give the holy ghost. We
answer that although it be granted, that in respect of Paul's person, who was
an Apostle, and had an extraordinary power and calling, the imposition of hands
by the presbytery was not essentially necessary, yet in respect of the
president, and perpetual order, which was to be left to the Church of Christ,
it was necessary: for it is not like that so wise an Apostle would else have
busied himself with so unnecessary and superfluous a work, in associating the
Elders where he needed not. But notwithstanding all these naked shifts and
deceitful glosses, this place of S. Paul is pregnant to prove the
copartnership of presbyters in giving of orders: and thus was it practiced by
the Church afterward: Carth. 4. c. 3. Omnes presbyteri, qui praesentes sunt,
etc. Let all the presbyters present lay their hands by the hand of the Bishop
upon his head, that is to be ordained. And can. 24. Episcopus sine concilio
Clericorum, etc. The Bishop must not ordain Clerks without a council of his
Clergy.

Object. This Imposition of hands by the Perpet. govern. p. 251.
presbyters was a consent rather, then a consecration.

Answ. That appears to be otherwise by that constitution of Urban:
ordinationes factaesine communi sensu Clericorum irritae. Ordinations made
without the common consent Cause. 12. q. 2. cap. 37.
of the Clergy are void. If the presbyters had not power and right of
ordination, there was no reason to make it void without them. Ergo seeing
presbyters have a joint power in ordination. jurisdiction is not to be denied
unto them.

Arg. 6. If both the name and office of a Bishop and presbyter by the word of
God are all one, then by the word of God the spiritual jurisdiction belongs
to them both, But the first is true: as Hierome proves out of S. Paul,
Apostolus perspicue docet eosdem esse presbyteros, quos Episcopos, etc. The
Apostle plainly teaches, that Presbbyters are the same with Bishops, as Tit.
1. 5. he calls them presbyters, which verse. 7. are named to be bishops, ad
Evag. Bishop Jewel proves by the Word that a Bishop and Presbyter are allone:
def. apol. p. 284. In 1. Tim. Hom. 11. 3.
Reverend Bishop Jewel shows the same by the testimony of Hierom,
Chrysostom, Ambrose, Augustine, that a Bishop and a Priest are all one.
Chrysostom says, Inter Episcopum and Presbyterum interest fere nihil. There
is almost no difference between a bishop and a Priest. And then he infers
thus, All these and more holy Fathers, with S. Paul the Apostle, for thus
saying (that a bishop and a priest are all one) by M. Hardings advice must be
holden for Heretics.

If it be answered, that the names were confounded in the Apostles, but the
office and functions were diverse, Bellar. lib. 1. de Cleric. c. 25. This answer
may be easily removed: for as a reverend writer tells us: The same charge
and the same grace Perpetual gover. p. 203.
concludes the same function. But S. Paul requires the same graces in a
Bishop and Presbyter, 1. Tim. 3. Hierome says: De Hier. Evag.
Presbytero reticetur, quia and in Episcopo Presbyter reticetur, etc. There is
no mention made of a Presbyter, because he is contained in the name of a
Bishop. Ambrose says, Episcopi and Presbyteri una ordinatio est, etc. There is
one ordination of a Bishop and Presbyter, but the Bishop is the first. If they
have one ordination, then they have both one function by the word of God:
howsoever afterward the Church in policy has distinguished them: which was
done as Hierome says: In schismatis remedium, To avoid schisms. Ergo, seeing
a Bishop and Presbyter are the same by the word of God, jurisdiction does of
right belong to both.

Arg. 7. All pastoral duties do equally belong unto the Pastors: but to
separate the precious from the vile, is a Pastoral duty, Ier. 15. 19. as it
belongs to the shepherd to seek that which is lost, Ezekiel 34. 4. that is, to
reconcile the penitent; so also to separate the unclean, to correct the
obstinate. Augustine says, De corrept. and great. cap. 15.
Pastoralis necessitas habet, etc. The Pastoral necessity requires, lest the
contagion should spread further, to separate the diseased sheep from the
sound. Ergo, it belongs to Presbyters which are Pastors, and have their
flocks, Act. 20. 17. 28. to separate ane excommunicate the vile and unclean.

Arg. 8. Whatsoever belongs to the gathering together of the Saints, the
work of the Ministry, the edifying of the body of Christ is to be performed by
the Pastors and Doctors, with other Ministers of the Church: for to this end
has Christ ordained these offices, Ephesians. 4. 11. But to separate or
excommunicate, and reco^cile, are profitable to the said purposes: This
authority is given for edification, 2. Cor. 10. 8. Ergo, it belongs to the
Pastors and Teachers of the Church.

Arg. 9. The discipline should be administered by such as are more likely to
have the spirit of direction, and to whom with the least peril of the Church
the censures might be exercised. But an assembly of Presbyters are more like to
have the spirit of Direction, as the Apostles and Presbyters assembled in
council, saying, It seemed good to the holy Ghost and Council. Affrican. can.
138. epist. ad Coelestium.
to us, Act. 15. 28. Thus says the Council of Affrican: Unless there be any
that thinks God inspireth one particular person with righteousness, and
forsakes a number of Priests assembled in Synod.

Again there would arise less danger to the Church by this means for there is
a rule in the Law: Excommunicatus non potest excommunicare: he that is
excommunicate himself cannot excommunicate another. cause. 24. q. 1. c. 4. But
a Bishop or any one Ecclesiastical person may by many occasions stand under
the censure of excommunication: In what cases Bishops are liable to the
censures of the church
as if he have two wives; cause. 24. q. 3. c. 19. or if he be a teacher of
error he must be delivered to Satan. cause. 24. q. 3. c, 13. Pelagius or if
he be an usurer cause, 14. q. 4. c. 4. or a blasphemer or swearer. Carth. 4.
cap. 61. or a player at dice. Trullan. c. 50. or be negligent in preaching and
so continue. can. Apost. 57. or give orders for money. Chalced. c. 2 Or be
promoted for money: Constant. Conc. 6. gener. c. 22. or make a lay man his
vicar general, Hispatiens. 2. c. 9. Or take upon him any civil office, as
vice-presidentship, Iusticiariship, Decr. Greg. 3. 58. 4. or sit in causes of
blood, or give sentence for the cutting off of any meber, as of ears, hands,
etc. ibid. c, 5. So writes Alexander 3. in his rescript to the Bishop of
Canterbury. But a Bishop or any one man may stand excommunicate where an
assembly or company cannot, in this case by whom should the discipline be
administered. Ergo it is safer that the censures of the Church should be
disposed by many, then by one.

Arg. 10. Presbyters by the word of God, and practice of the Church are
interessed in the spiritual rule and government of the Church: but the
Excommunication belongs to the spiritual regiment: Ergo, For the proof of
the proposition: first in the Scriptures we find that the Apostles called
together the Presbyters for the deciding of doubtful questions: and by the
Apostle the Elders that labor in the word are made rulers: the Elders that
rule well, especially they that labor in the word. 1. Tim. 5. 17. they then
that labored in the word, were also ruling Elders: for how else should they
have a double honor, being excluded from government which is counted one of
the greatest honors of the Church. Now the practice of the Church is most
evident: Hier. says: communi presbyterorum concilio Ecclesiae regebantur,
^^^rom. in ^. 1.
In the beginning Churches were governed by the common advise of presbyters.
cause. 11. q. 3, c. 106. debent 12. sacerdotes Episcopum circumstare, etc.
twelve Priests must stand by the Bisbop, when he denounces excommunication:
can. 108. When the penitent party was to be reconciled the Bishop must be
assisted with as many: cause. 12. q. 2. c. 5. The Bishop could not dispose of
the temporal things of the Church, much less of spiritual, inconsulto
presbyterio, not having before consulted with his presbitery: neither was the
assistance of the presbytery for decency and order only, but of necessity:
Episcopus nullius causam audiat absque praesentia clericorum, aliter erit
sententia irrita; The Bishop shall hear no man's cause. without the presence of
his Clarks: otherwise let the sentence be void, Carth. 4. c. 23.

Thus it is evident that at the beginning the presbyters did assist the Bishops
in the regiment and government of the Church, as is confessed also by our
learned writers the government of the Church at the first was so apportioned:
that neither the presbyters should do any thing without the Bishop, Perpetual
gover. p. 307.
nor the Bishop dispose matters of importance without his presbytery. D. Fulke
thus testifies: it is manifest that the authority of binding Ans. to Rhem in 2
Cor. 2. sect. 4.
and loosing committing and retaining pertains generally to all the Apostles
alike, and to every pastor in his cure.

Thus was it in the beginning: but by little and little in process of time
Bishops began to encroach upon presbyters and their office.

1. Bishops had at the first but a priority before their presbyters, they were
not How Bishops by little and litile encroached upon Presbyters.
to suffer a presbyter to stand before them Carth. 4. 34. and within doors
Collegam se presbyterorum esse cognoscat: let the Bishop take himself to be
the presbyters colleague and fellow: but now Bishops are callled Prelates,
Ministers subditi, their subjects.

2. As yet the Bishops had no special kind of ordayning, as differing in order
from presbyters, as Ambrose says: Episcopi and presbyteri una ordinatio: there
is but one ordination of a presbyter and a Bishop: uterque enim sacerdos; for
they are both but Priests or Ministers, in 1. Tim. 3. afterward the Bishops
brought in a special kind of consecration for themselves.

3. Then they went further that whereas in giving of Orders, presbyters were
joined with Bishops: Carth. 4. c. 3. (cited before) they did assume that office
to Hier. Evag. 10.
themselves, quid facit excepta ordinatione Episcopus. etc. What does a Bishop,
that a Priest cannot do, ordination only excepted.

4. But not contented to stay here: they forbid a presbyter, Benedictionem
super plebem in Ecclesia fundere: To pronounce benediction or blessing over the
people in the Church Agathens. can. 30.

5. Nay it was not lawful for the presbyter, the Bishop being present either
to pray, or do any sacred action, unless he were bid. Gelas. decr. 8.

6. But it was too painful for the bishop to take upon him these ministerial
functions of praying, preaching, celebrating the Sacraments, and therefore they
were content to remit these duties to the Presbyters. But confirmation was
appropriated unto Bishops: Disce hanc observationem ad honorem Hier. advers.
Luciferan.
esse potius sacerdotij, quam legis necessitatem. This observation is rather
for the honor of the Preisthood, then by necessity of any Law.

7. But yet in Hieroms time, though presbyters ^dicens. ^6. 17.
were excluded from ordination and confirmation, they enterposed themselves in
the jurisdiction of the Church: Nos habemus Hier. in Esa. 3.
senatum nostrum, etc. As the Romans had their Senate, so the Church had a
presbitery by whose counsel all things were done.

Thus by litile and little have Bishops nibled upon the presbyters, leaving them
the laborious works: and taking the honors to themselves. We desire that
things only may return to their first institution.

Objections answered.
1. Obj. SAint Paul himself alone did deliver Two kinds of delivering up to
Satan.
Alexander and Hymeneus to Satan, that is excommunicate them 1. Tim. 2. 20.
Therefore excommunication many be decreed by one.

Answ. 1. We may here understand a double kind of delivering up to Satan.
Extraordinary, How S. Paul delivered up to Satan.
when as satan did torment the bodies of such, as were delivered up, as Satan
tried Job, thus thinks Chrisost. upon this place: for like as the Apostles
had then the gift of healing to lose faithful men from the bonds of satan, so
had they power to give over the obstinat to satan. This power extraordinary
might be executed by the Apostles Act. 5. Act. 13.
alone, as Peter did upon Ananias and Saphira, and Paul upon these two
blasphemous persons. There was an odinary delivring up to Satan by
Excommunication: quia diabolo traditur qui ab Ecclesiastica communione ^erbis
Apost. ser. 98.
removetur: Because he is delivered to the devil, that is, removed from the
fellowship of the Church, for without the Church is the devil August. This
kind of delivering to Satan Paul excercised together with the Church. 1. Cor.
5. 5. 2. Or rather taking this for the same kind of delivering to Satan there
mentioned: The Apostle is named here not as the sole but principal agent: as
in another place he makes mention, only of the imposition of his hands: 2.
Tim: 1. 6. yet the presbytery imposed hands with him, 1. Tim. 4. 14. So then
here the Apostle only expresses the act done, that they were delivered, as
for the manner how it was done, we must have recourse to the Apostles practice
before in the Church of Corinch: as Chrisostom well notes on this place:
quommodo illum tradiderit audi, congregatis vobis and spiritu meo. etc. But how
the Apostle delivered him, hear, Hom. 5. in 2 Timothy c. 1.
when you are gathered together, and my spirit: and so he refers us to that
place. 1. Cor. 5.

2. Object. There the Apostle did send his mandate, and the rest did but
execute it. Paul Parpet. gov. p. 125.
asked not their consent, but tried their obedience: [For this cause did I
write, that I might see the proof of you, whether ye would be obedient in
all things.] 2. Cor. 2.

Answ. 1. If follows not, because the Apostle tried their obedience,
therefore ^dicens. ^6. 17.
they had no power to excommunicate for they were to be directed by the
Apostle in their administering and executing of that power. 2. So as they in
their spiritual obedience, were to forgive where the Apostle would have them
to forgive: so there was in the Apostle a mutual correspondence to forgive
where they did forgive. 2. Cor. 2. 10. There was then a concurrance of their
powers in this action. 3. That the Church of Corinth did concur as principal
agents, not as Ministers only with the Apostle in this act of Excommunication
is showed bfore arg. 3

Obj. 3. We will allow every Pastor and preacher the key of knowledge to
discern, but not the key of power to excommunicate and absolve.

Answ. 1. These 2 keys of knowledge and power though in some respect they
differ Of the key of knowledge and the key of power.
yet in use they ought always be joined together, and in effect are the same:
for the key of power is the key of the kingdom of heaven, given to Peter and
the rest of the Apostles: math. 16. 19. I will give thee the keys of the
kingdom of heaven so the keye of knowledge is that whereby heaven is opened: as
our Savior says: Luc. 11. 92. Woe unto you interpreters of the Law, for you
have taken away the key of knowledge, as Ambrose shows: clauem Petri fidem
esse dixerim petri, per quam Ambr. set. 38.
caelos aperuit: the key of Peter I call the faith of Peter, by the which he
opened the heavens. 3. As then the Priest in the law did not only discern
between leper and leper, but did give sentence of separation: so the Pastors
which have the keys of discerning, should have the key of excluding or
receiving: who is able better to judge, then he that can discern. 4. The
corrupt extravagant, that brought in the disioyned use of the keys confesses
ad aliquid convenienter definiendum vtraque Extrav. Joan it. 14. c. 5.
clauis cognossendi and definiendi necessaria requiritur: to define any thing
well both the keys of determining and discerning are necessary.

Object. 4, The private use of the keys in appointing offenders to forbear
for a time Perpet. gov. p. 316.
the Lords table we deny not to presbyters, but not the public use to
exclude an impenitent person from all fellowship of the faithful.

Answ. 1. This distinction of the private and public use of the keys is but
an humane invention: the Scripture knows no such difference: he that has
right to the one, has interest in the other: the general commission given to
all pastors is: Whose sins ye remit are remitted, Here is no Ioh. 20. 23.
limitation of remitting publikly or privately. 2. it is more to separate from
the sacramets, then from the prayers only of the Church. He then that can do
the more, is enabled to do the less. 3. The Canons do take those for all
one, Communione Sardicens. can. 16. 17.
priuare, and abijcere: To deprive of the communion, and cast out; Exterminare
de Eeclesia, and separare a communione: To thrust out of the Church, and put
from the Communion.

5. Object, If Bishops have any further auhoritie, then stands with good
reason, and the manifest examples of the primitive Perpet. gov. p. 406.
Church, we strive not for it.

Answ. 1. But why (we pray you) do you make mention of the Canons of the Church
only, and not of the word of God: will you have bishops to have more
authority, and Pastors less, then the word of God allows them? 2. But we
refuse not to debate this matter by the Canons, and practice of the Church,
which notwithstanding has been in part showed before: argum. 10. and shall be
declared further in the answer to the 11. Objection. Hierom thus writes:
quomodo ibi leprosum sacerdos mundum vel immundu^ In Mat. ^. 16.
facit, sic and hic alligat, vel solvit Episcopus and presbyter. As there
(under the Law) the Priest made the leprous person clean or unclean, so here
the presbyter binds or loses. So then as the judgment and censuring of the
leprosy belonged not only to the chief Priests, but indifferently to them
all: He shall be brought to Aaron the Priest, or one of his sons the Priests.
Lev. 13. 2. So now the censuring of spiritual leprosy should indifferently
belong to all spiritual Pastors.

Further we find that presbyters sat together with Bishops, and gave voices,
and made decrees, not only in matters, which concern the word and doctrine
(as we are borne in hand) but such as belonged Perpet. gov. page 291.
to discipline and excommunication, and anathematizing as is evident. Council.
Eliberrm. to the which subscribed 36. presbyters can. 52. 62. 67. And in
Arelatens. 2. can. 25. 28. and can * 30. they decree concerning the suspension
of Bishops: to this Synod subscribed 12. presbyters, from hence it is clear
that presbyters assembled in a synod have power to excommunicate. The imperial
Law says: We charge all Bishops and Priests that they separate no Novil.
constitut. 125. c. 11.
man from the sacred communion, before they show the cause: etc. And he that
presumes to excommunicate, let him be put from the communion. Thus it was
indifferent for Bishops or presbyters to excommunicate.

Obj. 6. Not in very Church, but in every city there were presbyters assisting
and ayding Perpet. gov. p. 183.
the Bishop, and these were Clergy men, to help him in all sacred actions, and
advise him in all judicial and Ecclesiastical proceedings. p. 184.


Answ. 1. Neither do we urge to have a presbytery of Clergy men in every
parish Church, but that in every division the presbyters and Pastors should
assemble together for the execution of Discipline: 2. It being confessed that
presbyters in cities have assisted the Bishop in Ecclesiacall proceedings, why
then may not the presbyters of country Churches be admitted, who are so much
the more fit, because they are acquainted with the particular diseases in their
several cures. 3. The Presbyteries were not only in great and populous
cities, neither had the bishops them such large circuits, but that one
presbytery might suffice for the City and confines thereof: for then the
bishop had his proper parish, Episcopus propriam parochiam non derelinquat.
Can. Apost. 13. his The Bishop had his proper flock.
proper Church. The bishop qui non acquierit ire ad Ecclesiam sibi co^missam,
Which did not resolve to go to the Church committed to his charge, should be
put from the communion. Antioch. council. c. 17. he had his peculiar flock.
Episcopus grege sibi commissum, etc. The bishop must instruct the flock
committed unto him, with the preaching of the word. Turonens. sub Carol. Then
bishops lived not only in famous great Cities, but in base and obsure towns.
Episcopus de loco ignobili ad nobilem per ambitione^ non transeat: A bishop
ambitiously must not go from a base and ignoble town to a noble, Carth. 4.
can. 15. Then bishops had not such a large Diocese. In Augustines time there
were in one province under Carthage of the Catholic and Donatist above
Bishops 9000. Of the Catholics part there were present 286. and absent 120. by
reason of sickness and old age. Epispall Churches void 60. in all 466. Of the
Donatists there were present 279. absent 120. Churches void, 60. in all 459.
These so many bishops in one province cannot be thought to have had Diocesses
much larger then some parishes. And few bishoprics have so many parish
Churches under them: and none in England (unless it be Norwich) is found to
have more. It is no marvel then if one presbytery with the bishop sufficed
for such Diocesses.

Object. 7. Presbyters sat with the bishops at the first as assessors and
consenters, before Perpet. gov. p. 317.
Synods undertook such causes.

Ans. 1. The frequenting of Synods was no let to the authority of the
presbytery. 1. It was a Synod that decreed, that Sententia Episcopi, etc. The
sentence of the Bishop should be void, if it were not confirmed by the sentence
of the Clergy. Carth. 4. c. 23.

2. From the Nicene Council to the time of this Synod, were assembled in the
space of an hundred years and somewhat more, twenty provincial Synods as the
Elibortine. Arelatens. 1. and 2. Gangrens. Agrippin. Antioch. Sardic. with
others. 3. And before this it was decreed, that there should be a Synod of
bishops twice every year, Antio. c. 20. Constantin. 1. c. 2. But after the
time of this Synod of Carthage, when the authority of the presbytery began to
be impaired, it was decreed that bishops should assemble but once in the
year, Toletan 3. c. 18. So that, even when Synods were most frequent, the
presbytery was in greatest authority, and it began to fail when Synods were not
so often celebrated.

Obj. 8. For our parts though we take the keys to be common to all that have
pastoral charge of souls in their degree: yet to avoid Perpet. gov. p. 320.
the infinite showers of excommunication, etc. if every presbyter at his
pleasure might excommunicate, we praise the wisdom of Gods Church in
suffering no inferior to excommunicate without the Bishops consent, etc.

Answ. 1. If by the institution of Christ, the administration of the keys be
common to all pastors: what presumption is this for men to take upon the^ to be
wiser then God, and to change his institution: The Esaias. 40. 13
prophet says: who has instructed the spirit of God, or taught him: 2. It is
not the wisdom of the Church, but the ambition of Bishops, that has excluded
the pastors, as Diotrephes, that loved to have preeminence, would not receive
the brethren. 3. Neither are Ioh. epist. 3.
exco^munications the fewer, because one by the Bishops authority
excommunicateth, but the more: for there is like to be more grace and
discretion in a company of reverent and learned pastors, then in one unlearned
Chancellor or Official: and the Courts now intend their own gain, and
therefore multiply excommunications, whereas then the profit of men's souls
should be expected. As though there has not been long since complaint made of
the multiplicite of excommunications: tot hodie fiunt and officiales, quod vix
est aliquis etc. There are so many excommunications now a days by officials,
that scarce any man, that fears God can live in the world with a safe
conscience. Whereupon it was directed, vt caveant ab earu^ multiplicatione,
etc. That they should beware of multiplying excomunications, lest they be
brought to contempt, These are the showers of Chancelors and officials
excommunications, that flee faster then lightening in tempest.

Object. 9. In our understanding the Minister of the parish does give his
consent. to the petition. p. 23.

Ans. What consent call ye this, when the Chancellor, or Official sends
his mandate, and the Minister must denounce the sentence of excommunication, or
be suspended himself: do ye count this consent sufficient: what is the
pastor here else, but the officials slave to denounce his censures; What is
this else, but against the Apostle to be the servants of men: But 1 Cor. 7. 21
De 7. ordin. Eccles.
as Hierome says: non in dominatione vt servos habeas, sed in ministerio
liberos: preachers should not be used, as servants with indignity but as free
men in their ministry.

Object. 10. They intend the inabling of every particular pastor alone to
excommunicate. Answ. to the petition ibid.

Ans. Neither is it our desire, that every particular Pastor should be enabled
to excomunicat untruth. We give no such power to particular pastors.
himself alone against the Apost. rule: not as Lords over Gods heritage, As the
the other is slavish, so this were popelike as Hierome will says: contenti
sint honor suo, sciant se patres esse, non dominos, Let them be content with
their own honor, and know they are fathers and not Lords.

Obejct. 11. If the pastor ought to be joined in commission, there would
follow a world of troubles: Answ. ibid.

Answ. Neither were it fit, that every pastor, should be joined in commission
with the Chauncelor, and attend upon his courts, for that were infinite, and
tedious for the pastors, to withdraw them from their flocks, Cyprian will
says: Neque in altari meretur nominari in sacerdotum prece, 1. Pet. 5. 3. Lib.
1. ep. 9.
qui ab altari sacerdotes avocare volunt. Hce deserves not to be mentioned in
the Minicters prayers that would draw him from executing his Ministry. But it
shall even now appear what our desire is.

Our desire is, that discipline, may be administered according to the rules of
Gods word? or, as things now stand, seeing there are three persons in this
business to be respected the Bishop in his diocese: the officers and Ministers
of the Bishop: and the several pastors; We would have every man's right
reserved, that all matters of instance and civil pleas should be still
referred to the Civil Judges: but matters of office as they are called
excommunication, and spiritual misdemeanors, to be censured by the company of
presbyters in every Deanrie and division (assisted if it please the kings
Majesty with some grave persons of the Lay sort) to be assembled monthly
together, or otherwise: as there shall be cause, and from them if there be
any just agrevance, appeal to be made to the bishop Synods of the Bishops and
Presbyters necessary.
with his synod of presbyters. For this course to appeal, and refer
doubtful matters to synods, is both agreeable to scriptuers, and practice of
the ancient Church: As in Antioch, when the Church was troubled about
cercumcision they sent to the Apostles and Elders about that question, Act. 15.
2. Thus was it decreed in the great Nicene synod, that in every province
bishops should assemble twice in the year, to hear the complaints of such as
were excommunicate. can 5. The same decree is revived: Antioch. c. 20. Neither
had they only provincial synods, but the bishop for the same cause, had his
assembly of pastors. Cyprian writing to the presbyters, and deacons of Carthage
says; A primordio Episcopatus mei statui nibil sine consilio vestro mea
privatim sententia gerere, etc. Since Cypr. lib. 3. epist. 10.
my first entrance into my Episcopal charge. I dermined to do nothing
privately of my self without your counsel: Gregory says: lest there be any
dissension among brethren etc. Lib. 7. epist. 110.
In unum convnire sacerdotis est: etc, It is necessary for the Priests to meet
together: quem negligentia reijcit, cum omnium presbyterorum consilio
refutetur: whom his own negligence makes unworthy, let him be displaced, by
the council of the presbyters, Turenens. 2. c. 7. For this cause it was not
long since decreed by a provincial synod: singulis annis saltem synodus
diocesane a singulis Reformat Ratisp. art. 35.
Episcopis celebrant: Every year at the least let every Bishop celebrate a
synod in his diocese.

Thus if this course were taken Christ's institution for the censure of
excommunication shall be kept, the Pastors shall be reverenced, the preaching
of the word furthered, people with long iournies not wearied, manners shall be
duly corrected. And thus much is insinuated by Cyprian: Epist. 3. ad Cornel.
A Equum est and iustum, ut uniuscujusque causa illic audiatur, ubi est crimen
admissum, and singulis pastoribus sit portio gregis a scripta, quam regat
unusquisque and gubernet, rationem sui actus Domino redditurus. It is right and
just, that every man's cause be heard, where the fault is made, and to every
pastor a part of the flock should be committed to be governed.

Wherefore (most noble King) 1. seeing The conclusion.
excommunication should be decreed by an assembly according to Christ's rule.
Matthew. 18. 18. 2. Neither should there be any monark or sole commander in the
spiritual regiment of the Church. 3. If S. Paul did not excommunicate without
the Pastors. 4. If all that have authority to preach have right to the keys.
5. If they which have a joint power of ordination, have also of jurisdiction.
6. If by the word of God a Bishop, and a Priest are all one. 7. If all
pastoral duties equally belong to all Pastors. 8. If whatsoever appertains
to the edifying of the Church is appendant to the pastors office. 9 If it be
safer that many excommunicate by consent, then one. 10. If it has been the
practice of the Church to join presbyters with Bishops in the spiritual
regiment of the Church. 11. If all Priests indifferently under the Law did
separate and restore lepers, whereunto answers excommunication, and
reconciliation now. 12. If presbyters sat in councels, and gave voices, and
are allowed, by the Law imperial to excommunicate.

And further seeing nothing can be objected of any moment: 1. Neither S. Paul's
delivering to Satan of Alexander and Hymeneus 2. Neither of the Incestuous
young man at Corinth. 3. seeing the key of knowledge, which pastors have, is not
to be severed from the keye of power 4. and as well may the public use of the
keys, be committed to Pastors, as the private. 5. And seeing presbyters in
cities have dealt with the censures, the Pastors of the country should not be
excluded. 6. Neither is the frequenting of Synods any hinderance to the
Ecclesiastical presbytery. 7. 8. 9. Nor any other inconvenience need to be
feared: We trust your Majesty will follow, the example of David, to distribute
the offices indifferently among the sons of Aaron, 1. Chronicl. 24. 4. that a
Theodoret. lib. 5. c. 37.
few only have not the preeminence, and the rest be despised. Theodosius the
Emperor, when he was excommunicate a levi homuncione, of a light cockbrain
fellow, because he granted not the thing which he requested, would not enter
into the Church, before he had been of the same party absolved. As we condemn
the malepartnesse of the Priest (no such authority being given to any one in
the world to censure Kings) so thus far we wish that good Emperor to be
followed that the censures of the church may be revere^ced, being first
restored to the original institution: We ask nothing; but what your Majesty
has given hope of that discipline (...). p. 43. B. Bilson p. 320. Perpet. gov.
be preserved in purity according to the word: and which some of the greatest
opposites to this cause have granted: We take the power of the keys to be
common to all that have pastoral charge of souls, in their degree. And so we
conclude this matter with that sentence of Hierom: which we desire our
reverend Bishops to think upon, sicut presbyteri etc. as presbyters know, that
by the custom of the Church they are made subject to him that is set over
them: ita Episcopi se noverint magis consuetudine, quam dispensationis
dominicae veritate presbyteris esse maiores, and in commune debere Ecclesiam
regere? So let Bishops know, that rather by custom then any divine
dispensation, they are greater then presbyters, and ought to govern the Church
in common, in 1. c. ad Titum. and citatur, distinct. 95. c. 5 And Hierome
again says: Episcopi sacerdotes se esse noverint, non dominos, honorent
Clericos, quasi Clericos, ut and ipsis a clericis, quasi Episcopis honos
deferatur: scitum est illud oratoris Bomitij: cur ego te habeam ut principem,
cum me non habeas ut senatorem. If Bisbops will be counted as chief and
principal they must admit their Pastors to be as Senators, and of their
Council. Hierom. ad Nepotian.

4. Against extorting of unreasonable fees.
Obj. 1. There are severe laws made already in that behalf. p. 24.

Answ. Notwithstanding the severe canons provided against the extorting of
unreasonable fees: who knows not, what intolerable exactions are used in
Ecclesiastical Courts. The time was, when the Cod. lib. 9. tit. 27. Leg. 3.
Gratian.
Judge ought to take nothing for his sentence: when nothing was to be exacted
of the innocent party: Colon. p. 13. c. 7. speciem aequitatis non habet, quod
ab Innocentibus absolutis quippiam expensarum nomine exegatur: when nothing was
to be taken of the poorer sort, a pauperibus non valentibus solvere nihil
recipiatur, append. Basil. c. 10. It is not above 250. years since, when this
order was taken by John Stratford of Canterbury, Liuwood. de censen. c. Saeva.
that ministers should pay for their letters of orders, but 6 pence for their
letters of institution but 12 pence. It has bin decreed, that none should
exact ultra statuta Cause. 16. q. 1. c. 62. leo. Extr. com. l. 3. tit. 10. c. 1.
patrum beyond the rates appointed, and should take less then the custom, not
more: But how the world is changed, who can be ignorant what large fees are
paid for sentence, innocents not spared the pore not pitied: for probates of
testaments double required to that which the statute aloweth: for acquittances.
Executors, some ten, some twenty years after are forced to pay some forty,
some fifty Shillings, some more. Letters of institution are grown from twenty
Shillings in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign to four or five pound.
Letters of orders taxed in many places after the same rate. Archdeacons in
their visitation have exacted twelve pence, sixteen pence yea two Shillings for
the article books, not much more above three pence. And not long since, when
the fifth of August was commanded to be solemnised for the Kings deliverance,
in some dioceses the Churchwardens were urged to pay twenty pence for copies
of the letters. It were too long to reckon up all the exorbitant courses of
these Ecclesiastical courts and officers, which since the canon made in the
convocation. anno 1597. have been more intolerable, then before: and seeing
convocation canons are no more regarded, we desire that their exactions may be
restrained by parliament statutes, that some of the ancient laws may be
revived against such: as either the law of Theodosius to be punished
fourefould: or the decree of Innocent. the 3. Extorta restitu it, Cod. lib. 9.
tit. 27. l. 6.
and tantundem pauperibus eroget, to restore what is exacted, and to give so
much to the poor: or of Benedict. the 12. that they pay twice so much within
two months, or Decr. Greg. lib. 3. c. 49. c. 8. Extrav. com lib. 3. tit. 10 c.
1. can. 24.
else be suspended from their office: or the decree of the 8. general Council,
concerning such enormities aut corrigatur, aut deponatur: that if they be not
amended, they should be deposed.

5. Of farming of jurisdiction.
Censure: IT is of it self a matter indifferent, neither good nor evil, but
as it is used. p. 24.

Answ. And do our brethren hold the farming of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to
be so indifferent a thing? How is it possible, when some Chancellours and
officials pay 20. some 30. some 50 pound, yearly for their place: registers,
some an hundred, some 200 pound, some more, but that they should extort in
their office, and by unreasonable and intolerable exactions make up their hard
rents? Is this thing, neither good, nor evil: We wonder, that men professing
the Gospel should be thus besotted and blinded; seeing the papal Hierarchy
has detested such corruptions. Lateranens. par. 1. c. 15. quidam pro certae
pecuniae quantitate jurisdictionem Episcopalem exercent, qui de caetero
praesumpserit sic facere, officio suo privetur, and Episcopus conferendi hoc
officiu^ potestate^ amitttat: both the officer that farmeth his office shall
be deprived, and the Bishop loose the gift. So was it also decreed. Coloniens.
sub Adulph. med. 3. c. 3. Non licet praelatis officia sua pro pecunia alicui
committere: that no prelates should let out their offices for money.

6. Of the restraint of marriage at certain times.
Object. IT is falsely called a popish canon, it was anciently used in the
Church. Laodicen. c. 52. and being rightly used is commendable etc. Ans. to
Petit. p. 24.

Answ. 1. The 52. canon of the Laodicene Council, which decrees, that
marriage should not be solemnized in Lent, does no more show, that the
restraint of marriage is not superstitious, then because, can. 24. mention is
made of 7. Ecclesiastical orders, and can. 48. of chrisme to be used after
baptism, it might be inferred, that neither are these observations popish: We
count not only those corruptions popish which the pope in his ruff invented,
but those of Elder time, which he has retained: and seeing the mystery of
iniquity wrought in the Apostles time, it is no marvaill, if it wrought in the
time of this Council.

2. This canon objected makes but one restraint of Marriage in time of lent,
but the Church of Rome brought in three: from More times of restraint for
marriage observed in England, then in the popish Church.
Advent to the Epiphany, from Sepauagesima to the octaves of Easter: from the
Rogatio^ week to the octaues of pe^tecost: all which times are strictly urged in
Engl. still: And yet the last time interdicted at Pentecost the Tridentine
Chapter has dispensed with. Ses. 24. cap. 10. So that herein Protestants are
more superstitious then Papists. 3 This canon for restraint of marriage had but
a superstitious beginning: it was prohibited against such festivals, because of
the holiness of the time: so that these absur dities follow that marriage is a
disgrace to these times, which the Apostle calls honorable, Heb. 13 4. And
that some time are more holy, then other, contrary to the Apostle Galath, 4.
10. And if marriage be not fit to be solemnized, then all matrimonial duties
might as well be forbidden and so married persons should be forced to
forbear and to abstain the third part of the year: who judges not, how
inconvenient this would be? 4. But seeing marriage in these times may be
lawful by dispensation, to what other use served that canon, then to draw
advantage to their purses? If they can make it lawful for money to some, as
well may the parliament make it lawful to all persons without money. And so the
Petitioners request is reasonable, that (day of fast only excepted) this and al
other Popish and inconvenient canons should be abrogated, according to the
statute of Henry 8. that such canons, as by the 32. Commissioners to be
nominated by the king should be found contrary to the word of God and the law
of the land be abolished. This act was made ann. Henry 8. 25. c. 19. repealed,
ann. 1. 92. of. P and M. reviued ann. Eliz. 1. c. 1. We desire only the
execution of it.

7. of the long somnesse of Ecclesiastical suites.
Object. IT is not the fault of the Court, or Judge etc. but some time the
error of pleading, the intricatnesse of the cause, cunning of proctors. etc

Answ. 1. None of these pretenses can excuse the length of suits. 1. If the
error Cod. lib. 2. tit. 28. c. 1.
be in the form of pleading, let Constantins law take place. Iuris formulae te
aucupatione syllabarum amputentur. They sbould not stand so strictly upon
terms and querks of law, but go directly to the equity of the cause: as
Innocent wrote to the Bishop of Hereford: Non secundum formam Lateranens. par.
7. c. 13.
in literis expressam, sed secundum vigorem iustitiae iudicandum: Judge not
according to the terms of the letter, but after the tenure of justice. 2. If
the fault be in the advocate, let Justinians law be executed: Cod. lib. 3. tit.
1. c. 11.
Puniatur in duab. libris auri: Let a fine be set on his head. 3. If the
proctors trifle, and make unnecessary pleas, let Theodosius law be revived,
that the judge may remove the^, ab executione, from their practice, vt sciant
causas a se non esse deludendas, that they may learn, not to delude causes. 4.
If the Clients be perverse, Cod. lib. 3. tit. 3. c. 2
and absent themselves, Justinian also has taken order for that: The Judge may
determine the suite in their absence, and against their wills.

2. Now for the time to be limited for the determination of suites, the civil
law prescribes two years for criminal causes: three years, for civil and
pecuniarie suits. The canon law also sets, for the Extav com. lib. 1. tlt.
9. c. 1. Sixtus. 4.
hearing of Ecclesiastical suites between party and party two years: But
this is to be presupposed in most difficult and intricare causes: for the
determining of some other civil or criminal, a less time is limited, as the
space of 20. days: Sciant Cod. lib. 1. t. 5. leg. zeno
Iudices intra viginti dierum spatium debere se prefata litigia postquam orta
fuerint, terminare: And generally this respect of Clergy men's suites. Vt
disceptatio litis Cans. 11. q. 1. c. 45.
duorum mensium spatium non excedat. They should not exceed two months: It
were to be wished, that some of these laws What time may be thought meet to be
limited for the detaining of suites.
were restored that a certain time should be prefixed, for a final end of
suites. A year or two at the most might suffice for the deciding of the most
intricate causes. Now the Judge, Register, advocate, proctor are all agreed to
prolong suits for their aduantatage, and so, as the prophet says: they wrape
it up. Mic. c. 7, 3. But the chief fault is in the Judge, who might abridge
suits, if he would: And therefore Justinian punishes the Judge, in 10 Cod.
lib. 1. tit. 1. leg. 11.
pound of gould, that determines not causes within the time prescribed: Leo
the 10 decrees the^ to be excommunicate: Iudices causas coram eis pendentes
sub poena exco^municationis terminare debent. The like Latran. sub. Leon. 10.
sess. 11.
course if it were taken with our Ecclesiastical Judges the whole kingdom would
soon find great ease.

8. Of the oath ex officio.
Object. THE oath, ex officio is used as it ought to be by men of wisdom,
experience, conscience etc. Answ. p. 25.

Answ. The oath ex Officio we desire that it were in Ecclesiastical courts
more sparingly used, or rather never used, and in these points reformed,
wherein we think it is enforced contrary to the word of God, and the law of
this land.

1. The oath whereby a man is forced to accuse himself, should not be used in
ordinary proceedings, and in trifling and common causes, as now it is, but in
weighty and great matters, which tend to the disturbance of the common peace,
or are against the State, such as are handled in the most honorable Court of
the Star Chamber: and it should be used rather in civil causes then
canonical, as in matters of trust, Exodus 22. 11. And so by the Imperial law,
in action depositi, a man might be onerated with an oath. Cod. lib. 4. tit. 1.
leg. 10. So in action of debt, the debtor might be put to his oath. Ibid. leg.
9.

2. This oath is ministered propter inopiam probationum, where other proofs
fail, Cod. lib. 4. tit. 1. leg. 3. And the Canon law says, In ipso causae
initio non est a quaestionibus inchoandum: They must not begin in the entrance
of the suit with questions. So in the case of jealousy between man and wife,
where no other evidence was, the woman was charged with an oath or execration,
Numb. 5. 21. But now a man convented is first put to his oath, though other
profes be at hand.

3. Where one is pressed with this oath a party and accuser should be given,
that he which is accused may refer juramentum, may have liberty to return
the like oath upon his accuser. Cod. lib. 4. tit. 1. leg. 9. Justinian gives
this reason, Non debet respuere in persona sua quod placuit in persona
adversarij. He must not refuse to swear in his own person, seeing he put his
adversary to it, ibid. leg. 12. This course is held in the honorable Court of
Chauncery, that where that party is examined upon his oath; his adversary that
puts in the bill appears against him. This standing forth of the accuser
is approved by our Savior, Woman, where are thine accusers, Ioh 8. 10. The
heathen Judge had this equity to say unto Paul, I will hear thee when thine
accusers are com, Act. 23. 35. The Canons are most pregnant this way, Iulij. 1.
decr. 1.
that an accuser should be produced in judgment: Non oportet quenquam
iudicari aut damnari antequam accusatores suos presents habeat: None ought to
be judged or condemned before he have his accusers present. Non ante accusatus
supplicio deputetur, quant accusator presentitur: That the party accused be
not adjudged to punishment before his accuser be produced. Wormatens. c. 42.
Necesse est secundum scripturarum documentum, and accusatorum and accusatum
simul adesse. It is necessary according to the doctrine of the Scriptures, that
both the accuser and accused be present at once. Nicol. 1. de Iudic. c. 10. No
cause shall be admitted to any to determe, Nisi personae appareant, quae volunt
personam criminosi impetere: Unless the parties appear that will accuse the
guilty person. Thus both by Scripture, laws imperial, Canons of bishops,
Councels provincial and general, it is evident, that no man ought to be
condemned without an accuser; wherein the course which is taken by the
ministering of an oath Ex Officio fails.

4. Clergy men are privileged not to be examined upon their oath, Citra
iniuriam questiones testimonium dicunt. Cod. lib. 1. tit. 6. leg. 8. Theodos.
They must give their testimony, not forced thereto by question. As they are
excepted by this law from torture of body, so by the same reason from the
forcing of their conscience; especially the Bishop should not exact such a
compulsiue oath of his Clergy. Nullus Episcopus Clericos suos, nisi forte
quibus Ecclesiasticarum rerum dispensatio commissa fuerit, sibi iurare
compellat, Cause. 22. 5. 23. Placuit ut nullus Episcopus quenquam Clericorum
iudicare, aut condemnare presumet, nisi accusatus legitimos accusatores habeat.
We think fit, that no Bishop do judge or condemn any of the clergy, unless
the party accused have lawful accusers present. This also is agreeable Inter
decret. ab Adrian collecta.
to the Apostle: Against an Elder or a Presbyter receive no accusation but
under two or three witnesses, 1. Tim. 5. 19. But now in Ecclesiastical
proceedings there is no respect had to the reverent calling of preachers, but
they are indifferently put to the oath, neither is there an accuser produced.

5. The Prophet Jeremy would have us to swear in judgment. Ierem. 4. 2. that
is, not rashly, but deliberately and advisedly: but they which are examined
upon the oath can not swear in judgment, because they know not the articles
before to consider of them, but they that swear make a present and direct
answer, they know not to what. This is also contrary to that decree: Latran.
sub Innocent. 3. c. 8. Contra quem facienda est iniquisitio, etc. exponenda
sunt illi capitula de quibus fuerit inquirendum, ut facultatem habeat,
defendendi seipsum etc. He against whom inquisition is made, must have the
points, declared unto him, whereof he is to be exaamined that he may have
power to defed himself, Ergo the oath ex officio is not according to judgment.

6. We must swear also in righteousness Ierem. 4. 2. But so do not they,
which take the oath ex officio, because they are forced to accuse and bretray
their brethren, which is against the law of charity and righteousness. In which
case a man should be resolved to say with Ambrose, prius est, ut animam mihi
quam fidem auferat. I will sooner loose my life then my faith.

7. It is against the Law, to force a man to produce witnesses against him
self: Nemo contra se cogitur testes producere. Cod. lib, 4. tit. 20. leg. 6.
Ergo it is against the law for a man to be forced to be a witness against him
self.

8. By the civil law a witness produced against his will, must not carcerali
custodia detineri etc. Be committed to prison, nor deteyned above 15. days:
Cod. l. 4. 20. 15. But they which are produced to testify against themselves
are committed to prison, and kept not only, 15. days, but so many weeks and
months, till they submit themselves to the oath.

4. The Scripture says: in the mouth of two or three witnesses, shall every
word stand 2. Cor. 13. 2. Hereunto agrees the civil law, vox unius, vox
nullius: the voice of one is the voice of none, Cod. l. 4. tit. 20. l. 8.
Constan. And the canon law: Vnius testis responsio omnino non audiatur: one
witness is not to be heard, Cause. 4. q. 3. c. 2. If one witness is not to be
accepted, much less where no witness is, should any be condemned.

10. The same party should not be both accuser and judge: our Savior, to whom
as a judge they presented the adulterous woman, would not condemn her without
accusers, Joan. 8. The Canons agree: Nullus praesumat Cans. 4. 44 c. 1. 2.
accusator simulesse, and iudex: Let none presume to be accuser and judge.
Fabian. epist. 1. Damasc. ep. 3. c. 7. Concill. Oxoniens. sub Steph. But in
urging the oath ex officio the Judge and Court are accusers.

Wherefore (O most noble King) 1. seeing the oath ex officio should be in
weighty not common, in civil rather then in criminal causes. 2. seeing it
should be used, but when other proofs fail. 3. And that an accuser should be
produced. 4. And the Ministers by law are privileged. 5. Seeing such cannot
swear in judgment, not knovving the articles objected. 6. nor in
righteousness, being forced oftentimes to accuse their brethren. 7. Neither
should a man be forced to produce vvitnesses against himself, 8. neither
should witnesses be imprisoned. 9. And every word should stand in the mouth of
two or three witnesses. 10. Neither should the same be Accusator and Iudex. We
hope your Majesty sees, what just cause the Petitioners had to move, that the
oath Ex officio be more sparingly used: which course seemed strange in ancient
time: as Ambrose reproves one Syagrius Bishop of Verona; for condemning a
virgin without an accuser: Vbi talis iudicandi formula, Epist. 64.
si leges publicas interrogamus, accusatorum exigunt, si Ecclesia, etc. Whence
had you this form of proceeding, if we ask the common Laws, they require an
accuser; if the Church, in the mouth of two or three witnesses every truth
stands.

9. Of Licenses for marriage without banes asking.
Object. LIcenses for marriage are most cautelously granted and that upon
severe punishment to ensue if the constitution be violated. Answ. p. 25.

Answ. The inconveniences which ensue upon licenses for marriage, as they are
now granted, are many.

1. By this means injury is done unto the parents without whose consent their
child, and sometimes heir is carried away, and married without further notice.

2. Precontracts are by this means deluded, when as marriages are hudled up
without public warning, that they which have interest might take exception.

3. These licenses give way to clandestine and secret marriages, which are
forbidden both by Gods law and man's.

4. The Church and congregation is offended, the Pastor mocked, when two of
their parish are joined in marriage, they know not where, nor when. Secondly,
as for the severity of the constitution, the strength thereof depends upon
the bonds of the suerties which may be knights of the post, and men of no
worth? And notwithstanding this canon, licenses have been abused as much as
before, as some of us can speak of experience. Thirdly, the Petitioner then had
reason, to move, as they did: And further, we explain our Petition, that
either licenses might be clean cut off, and banes thrice asked without any
exception, according to the Communion book, as it has been in some Synods also
decreed: or that noble personages, or men of the like quality only be
privileged, as the constitution intends: and that they to other be granted
very seldom, and that upon necessary and urgent occasion, better cautions, and
more reasonable fees: that, as other Coloniens. par. 7. c. 43. August. c. 21.
things, so marriages may be done, according to the Apostles rule, Comely, and
in order. 1. Cor. 14 40. But now by these licenses order is broken, and a way
made to many uncomely, and unhonest proceedings.

The defense of the Conclusion.
1. Censure THE idle vaunt, that the Answ. p. 2^
Petitioners make, etc. they have passed over in silence many learned tractes.
Answ. We trust by this defense it does appear, that it is no idle vaunt
(that the Petitioners are able to show the particulars given in instance, not
to be agreeable to the scriptuers:) The treatises written on the contrary part,
the Petitioners profess not to confute, the world is too full of such books
already, and the common adversary rejoices too much in our domestical
contentions: yet some of them where it was needful, are answered: some as
superfluous, are omitted: of the which we may say with Ambrose, Accusationem
non tacendo confirmant sed despiciunt In Luc. 22.
non refellendo: They are best refuted, by being despised.

Ye will by argument silence them.] Boast not too much of your strengh, let
not him that puteth on his armor, boast, as he that puts it off: we doubt
not, but to whom God has given affection to love his truth, he will also
grant elocution to defend it. But though you could put men to silence, the
truth, will not be silenced: Melior est causa, quae non defenditur, and
probatur, taceat Sermon. 49.
lingua necesse est, vbi ipsa equitas sibi adest: as Ambrose says. The
goodness of the cause does the better appear when it is approved without
defense. The gracious effects under her Majesty's late happy reign, proceeded
not from the discipline but from the doctrine of the Church, which if it had
been cherished by a good foster sister, would have brought forth more glorious
fruits. His Majesty, what defects soever he found in the reformation of his
former kingdom, (which are not such as you insinuate) he knows wisely to
distinguish between the faults of men, and the nature of the thing, as the law
says, Delictum Reg. iuris. 76
personae, non debet in detrimentum Ecclesiae redundare. The persons fault
should not be the Churches praeiudice.

2. Cens. That God has appointed his Majesty etc. for such a purpose as they
conceit, what point of divination? etc.
Answ. We doubt not, but that God has appointed his Majesty to the kingdom
for such a time: even to reform such things as are out of square both in
Church and Commonwealth: that we may say of his Majesty with the Prophet:
Vocaberis instaurator ruinae, and institutor semitarum. Esaias. 58. 12. As for
the Petitioners, they have neither Popish nor puritan humors to be purged of:
Where the sickness is we trust our princely physician will in time find out:
As Augustine says, Qui Soliloq. 1. 14
medici officio fungitur melius intelligit, qui sani sunt, quam ipsi qui
sanantur: The Physician better knows who are sick, or sound, then they which
are healed. Neither do we wish the state to be dissolved, but the corruptions
to be reformed: The state of the Church as we deny it not to be in part, as
they say; acceptable to God, honorable to his highness, comfortable to many
thousand Ministers, so we desire, that in each sort it may be more: and say
with Augustine in an other case optandum Epist. 16.
est vt fiat, supplicandum est, vt fiat, non quasi factum fuerit consulendum.
It were to be wished that so it were, but cannot be said, that so it is.

3. Censure. He that will indifferently consider, etc. shall have just cause to
approve the justice, commend the mildnes, etc.
Answ. We wish the same which our brethren write, that such mildnes had been
used by the governors of the Church toward the preachers, which were silenced,
imprisoned, deprived for refusing the surplice and cross, and such other
matters (to the vrgers of them) of no great importance: God show them more
mercy in that day. Certainly howsoever their severitie before men, by
authority may be excused, yet their clemency would have been more commended,
as Ambrose Epist. 58.
well says, Vides quid authoritas tribuat, quid studeat misericordia:
excusationem habes, si feceris laudem, si non feceris.

4. Cens. As for that clause of men's traditions, it is odious: Answ. p. 27.
Answ. Let our brethren tell us in good sadness, whether they can prove, the
surplice, cross in baptism, non residencie, excommunication by Chancelors,
officials, by the scriptuers? If they cannot, what are they else, but men's
traditions? And it is acknowledged, Perpet. gov. p. 320.
that this last is challenged not by Gods law, but by man's: How say our
brethren then is it not an humane tradition: this hiding of the disease tends
not to healing, but to Lib. de dile. c. 5.
further hurt: Nolens se esse reum addit ad reatum, excusando ignorant, non se
poenam removere, sed veniam. He that will not be guilty, increases his guilt,
and by excusing himself procures (...) pardon, but punishment.

5. Cens. Are we the men, that are addicted to our own quiet, credit, and
commodity? Ans. to petit. p. 27.
Answ. Who seek their quiet in the world more then idle ministers that either
do not, or cannot preach? who their credit more then they that seek to have
pre-eminence above their brethren? who their profit more then they that heap
living to living, benefice to benefice, dignity to dignity? Are not they the
men that take upon them to be proctors and patrons for all these? We charge
them not to put out their money to usurie, their multiplicity of livings will
make them rich enough without it: their labors by preaching and writing
against the common adversaie we dispraise not, but wish the one were more, and
the other in many to better edifying: Neither are their brethren the
Petitioners inferior in any of these travels: But this we dislike, that our
brethren should think by their labors to color and countenance these
corruptions: This were as Hierome says: Rem medecinae vulnus Ad Demetr.
facere, remedium animae venenum: To make a wound with a medecin, and turn
the remedy of the soul into a malady.

6. Cens. It is objected, That the desire of the Petitioners does not suit with
the state of a monarchy: whereunto our answer briefly is this:
First to enforce this conclusion, the confuters Untruth diverse.
produce false and slanderous premises, as that we would have the king confined
within the limits of some particular parish: that they give unto the presbyters
power to Answ. to pet. p. 29.
censure, euioyne penance, excommunicate the king, and where there is cause to
proceed against him as a tyrant: that they deny appeals to the prince, would
draw all causes to be Ecclesiastical, that they allow the magistrate, Non
potestatem iuris, sed facti.

1. The Petitioners utterly renounce all these uncharitable imputations: they
are further off from making all causes Ecclesiastical, then the Bishops and
their officers: for they think that actions matrimonial, decimarie,
testamentary, de jure belong to the deciding of the civil Magistrate, which
now de facto are appropriated to the Ecclesiastical courts.

2. Not presbyters, but Bishops have taken upon them to censure and
excommunicate Kings: as Odo suspended King Edwine: the Bishop of London, Elie,
Winchester, Hereford, Fox. p. 151. Fox. p. 251.
interdicted K. John, and the whole Realm: they were the Bishops, not
presbyters, that iutted with and iostled their Kings. Anselme opposed himself
against William Rufus, Becket against K. Henry the 2. Ste. Langhton against K.
John. Rob. Winchelsey against Edward the 1. Thomas Arundel against Rich. the 2.
And few Archbishops we find (says M. Eox) with whom kings have not bad some
quarrels or Fox. 395.
other. But as for the Petitioners concerning the censuring of Kings: we assent
unto their determination that thus write, Si quis vetus and novum Testamentum,
gestaque reuolverit, patenter inveniet, quod aut minime, aut difficulter
possint reges and imperatores excommunicari: admoneri possunt, increpari, argui
a discretis viris, etc. If a man turn over the old and new Testament Epist.
Leodiens. Eccles. Cont. Pasch.
he shall apparently said, that none at all, or very hardly Kings and Emperors
can be excommunicate: they may be admonished, rebuked by discreet men, etc.
And they add further: Hildebrandus papa primus levavit sacerdotalem lanceam
contra diadema regum: The Pope a Bishop (not the presbyters) did first lift up
the Priestly lance against the Kingly crown. If in some places some heady men
have presumed without warrant, it ought not to prejudice neither us, nor our
cause: But as Ambrose says: the example of such, Non excusationi obtenditur,
sed cautioni proponitur: should not be pretended to imitate, but propounded to
take heed.

Secondly, would our brethren have the The Ecclesiastical state in earth not
Monarchical.
state of the Church Monarchical by this color, to make the Ecclesiastical
and Civil state suitable, when there was but one Emperor, ambitious policy
brought in one supreme Bishop the Pope, that took upon him to be chief over
all Bishops: There is great difference between the Church and the Kingdom:
their regiment cannot be alike: Our Savior himself shows a difference, The
Luc. 22. 23.
Kings of the Gentiles reign over them etc. but ye shall not be so. Christ
would have no Monarks and sole commanders in his Church, as the Kings were
among the Gentiles. Do not our learned writers maintain against Bellarmine
that the policy of the Church, Quam D. Sutcliffe. l. 1. de. pont. Romans c. 5.
proxime accedere. etc. does come most near to an Aristocraticall estate, not
a Monarchical: And in this manner was the Church governed at the beginning, as
Hierome witnesses, communi presbyterorum consilio: by the common In Tit. 1.
counsel of presbyters.

Thirdly, yet shall it appear, that the regiment and Discipline of the Church,
which the Petitioners move, is much more suitable to the state of a Monarchy,
then the Episcopal Hierarchy: 1. We acknowledge no other Monarch, both in
Civil and Ecclesiastical causes, but the kings Majesty: there need not to be
any other Prince, or chief of the Bishops, but the King, 2. the civil state,
though it be Monarchical in the head, yet it is not throughout in the members.
The King first, has his honorable state of Counselors, all of equal
authority: to that may answer for Ecclesiastical matters a Synod of Bishops:
then in every shire, there are worship full knights and Squires in commission
for the peace: were it not a confused The presbyter of Pastors proved suitable
to the state.
estate, that there should be but one Justice in a shire, as now there is but
one Chancellor or Archdeacon? How much more suitable were it, if every Deanery
and division had their assembly and reverent learned Pastors, for the
administration of discipline, then one ignorant Civilian, or some other
ordinary substituted person? We appeal now to all religious politic
statesmen, whether this form of Ecclesiastical government were not much more
fitting to the Commonwealth, then that which now is used: Wherefore the
Confuters are too blame to charge the Petitioners, and their requests, as not
suitable to the state: We say with Ambrose: Didicimus omnes fidem proprio regi
servare, nec usurpare regnum sed vereri: We have learned to be faitbfull to
the Prince, not to usurp any kingdom, but to reverence the king, etc.

6. They further untruly charge the Petitioners, Vutruth. No such thing will
ensue.
That poverty and lack of learning would creep into the Clergy if their
desire take place. Answ. p. 29.

Whereunto we answer. 1. what though there be not sufficient maintenance left
in some reformed Churches: We pity their estate, and as much condemn the
embeazelers of Church revenues, as these censurers: And it is an uncharitable
speech, that we would have our Churches reduced and made conformable to the
calamity of those places: Neither is the poverty of those Churches the fruit
of their reformation, but of some men's covetousness, that are ready to Untruth.
We would not have our Church so reduced.
take any occasion to enrich themselves: neither do the Petitioners urge the
alteration of the ecclesiastical state, according to their platform: the
Petitioners stand for the maintenance of a learned Ministry, as it may
appear by their motion of impropriations; and we say with Origin: Nisi
dederit oleum populus, extinguetur lucerna in templo. Hom. 13. in levit.


2. That there are not many men brought up among them (they mean in Scotland
and other reformed Churches) worthy of that honorable maintenance: is not far
from a defamation of so worthy a Church, neither had that land ever more
learned men both preachers and writers, then are at this time: The Kings own
Testimony shall clear this point: There is presently a sufficient number of
good men of the ministry of this kingdom; How may his Majesty take it, to have
such an evil report brought up of his country.

3. Of like truth it is, that the petitioners Untruth.
here called at their pleasures (evil, malicious, ungrateful men) can see
nothing in the Church but defects, deformities: We neither condemn that
which is good for the evil, nor yet iustifiy the evil, as they do, together
with the good: that were to use too little a measure, and this too large, as
one says: Mensura mayor est, quando plus donatur rebus, quam merita deposcunt;
minor, cum subtrahitur meritis Apol. pamph.
quod debetur.

4. We wish also, that all which profess the truth were in our condition, but
with S. Paul's exception: Excepting these bonds; our Act. 26. 29.
state were most happy, if this servitude under humane constitutions were
removed.

5. And we wish with all our hearts it were as they say, That our Reverend
Prelates did contain themselves within such bounds, as preserve that state
from creeping to any papal corruptions: But how can this be truly said, when
as the discipline of the Ecclesiastical courts is altogether the same, setting
the supremacy aside, which was exercised under the pope. The corruption is not
reformed, being by an other authority maintained: the Canon says: Cum quid una
via prohibetur alieni, ad id alia non debet admitti; That which is forbidden
one way, ought not to be admitted an other. The corruptions of the
Ecclesiastical state, as by the papal supremacy, are not now practiced, so by
his Majesty's princely authority we trust shall be purged: to whom the honor
of this work must be left, not to the Bishops themselves, to chain them with
such bonds (...). p. 44
as may preserve that state from creeping to corruption.

6. That there is yet remaining to Colleges, Cathedral Churches, Bishops,
such sufficent and honorable maintenance, the Ans. to. the Pet. p. 31.
Petitioners, which are unjustly traduced, as impugners of the state, do
therein rejoice and wish together with the continuance good employment of them:
Such as do prey upon the Church tithes and inheritance, and they, which assent
unto them, we hold guilty of great impiety: Ambrose well says in Orat. in
A^xent.
an other case: Naboth vineam non tradidit suam, nos trademus Ecclesiam
Christi: si ille patrum haereditatem non tradidit, ego tradam haereditatem
Christi. i. If Naboth would not forgo the inheritance of his fathers, much
less should any betray the inheritance of the Church.

7. If it be admited, that there were more Ans. to Pet. p. 31.
learned men in this kingdom, then among all the Ministers of the religion in
all Europe beside: that does not prove, that there are no dumb and unlearned
Ministers in the Church. 1. And where will our brethren find so many learned
men, if they exclude all those preachers which desire reformation, whom at
other times they will hardly afford the name of learning. 2. And it need not to
be marvailed at, if England may compare in number of learned Pastors, with most
reformed countries (though the comparison be too large to set it alone against
all Europe) seeing in this one land there are more parish Churches, which are
occasions of learned Ministers, then in all the Protestant reformed nations. 4.
But considering the whole number of Parishes (which rises to not so few, asten
thousand) as we may compare for learned Ministets, so we fear we exceed them
for unlearned. Scotland has not the third part of that number, nor the tenth
of our maintenance; but there are few Churches which have not a preaching
Minister: therein we wish we could compare with them. 5. As this Church of
England abounds with many learned men; so it would abound much more, for
every learned minister we should have two if that course might be taken which
the humble Petitioners desire: but now as we have many bright shining lamps,
so there are more dim twinkling stars. The third part of the land is darkened
with unpreaching ministers, that we may say with Origin, Alij sunt, quorum pars
aliqua observatur, ut in Revelatione percussa est tertia pars lunae: alij qui
penitus cadunt, ut stellae a draconis cauda Tractat. 30. ^^ Mat.
tractae. Though the dragons tail of Rome (thanks be to God) has not
smitten our stars to the ground, yet a third part of our morn is obscured.

8. And true it is, that as our brethren say, our inferior Clergy (even the
thousand preachers Petitioners, with their fellow laborers, so despised, and
not the dumb idle ministers and Non-residents) have been the most effectual
means to settle the tranquillity of the land, by inducing men's minds unto
piety toward God, loyalty to their King: and to use their own words, as the
Apostle gave his detractors to understand, that he was not inferior to the
chief Apostles; nay, that he labored more then they all. In like case we
doubt not, but a truth may be be averred of our selves even by our selves,
without any ostentation at all, when it is so injuriously impeached, and trodden
under feet, to the high dishonor of God, the disgrace of his Gospel, and to
the slander of this most Christian Commonwealth.

Thus have we answered our brethren for this matter with their own words, but
much more truly without any ostentation of vanity, but in the plain
declaration of verity: and we say with Ambrose: Non est Ambr. ser. 15 in Psalm.
129.
hoc ulla virtutum iactantia, sed vita innocentis assertio, aliud est dignum se
praemia dicere, aliud indignum iniuria. It is not to boast of our virtues, but
to avow our innocence: and one thing it is to say, that we are worthy of
reward, and another, that we are unworthy of injury.

And thus for this time have we ended our just plea, and reply for the truth,
leaving the judgment thereof to your Christian Majesty: wherein to our
knowledge we have maintained nothing which is not consonant to the Scriptures,
and agreeable to the ancient practice of the primitive Church. In handling
whereof, we humbly crave pardon if we have been too tedious. Our intendment was
not so much to confute the gainsayers, as to confirm the truth: and we herein
follow Cyprians counsel; Semel laboravimus, ne alij Ad Fortunat.
semper laborarent. We have taken this pains at once, to ease other of
continual pains: That where they doubt they may be resolved, where they are
wavering, they might be settled, and wherein they have not yet traveled, they
may be further informed.

Now to your excellent Majesty we heartily wish the compassion of David, the
wisdom of Solomon, the faithfulness and zeal of Moses, both tenderly to
pity, wisely to discern, and uprightly to determine these causes and
controversies of the Church (according to these excellent graces of Clemency,
Prudencie, and Piety, wherewith God has enlarged your Princely heart) to the
honor of Christ, the comfort of his Church, your Majesty's immortal renown in
earth, and everlasting reward in Heaven.

FINIS.

