NORTH-VVARD HOE.

Sundry times Acted by the Children of Paul's.

By Thomas Decker, and John Webster.

Imprinted at London by G. ELD. 1607.

ACTVS PRIMVS.
Enter Luke Greene-shield with Fetherstone booted. Feth. ARt sure old Maybery
Innes here to night,


Gree. It Is certain the honest knave Chamberleine that has bin my Informer, my
baud, ever since I knew Ware assures me of it, and more being a Londoner though
altogether unacquainted, I have requested his company at supper.


Feth. Excellent occasion: how we shall carry our selves in this business is
only to be thought upon.


Gree. Be that my undertaking: if I do not take a full revenge of his wives
puritanicall ^oynesse.


Feth. Suppose it she should be chaste,


G^ee. O hang her: this art of seeming honest makes many of our young sons
and heirs in the City, look so like our prentises, -- Chamberlain.


Cha. Hear Sir. Enter Chamberlain.


Gree. This honest knave is called Innocence, is it not a good name for a
Chamberlain? he dwe't at Dunstable not long since, and has brought me and the
two Butchers Daughters there to interuiew twenty times and not so little I
protest: how chance you left dunstable Sir?


Cha. Faith Sir the town droopt ever since the peace in Ireland, your
captains were wont to take their leaves of their London Polecats, (their
wenches I mean Sir) at Dunstable: the next morning when they had broke their
fast together the wenches brought them to ^^^ckly 'ith hole, and so the one
for London the other for Westchester, your only rode now Sir is York York^
Sir.


Gree. True, but yet it comes scant of the Prophesy; Lincoln was, London is,
and York shall-be.


Cha. Yes Sir, it is fullfild, York shall be, that is, it shall be York still,
surely it was the meaning of the prophet: will you have some Cray-fish, and a
Spitchcocke.


Enter Maybery with Bellamont. Feth. And a fat Trout.


Cham. You shall Sir; the Londoners you wot of:


Green. Most kindly welcome -- I beseech you hold our boldness excused Sir.


Bella. Sir it is the health of Trauailers, to enjoy good company: will you
wa^ke.


Feth. Whether Travail you I beseech you.


May. To London Sir we came from Sturbridge.


Bell. I ^el you Gentlemen I have observed very much with being at sturbridge;
it has afforded me mirth beyond the length of five lattin Comedies; here
should you meet a Nor-folk yeoman ful-but; with his head able to ouer-turne
you; and his pretty wife that followed him, ready to excuse the ignorant
hardness of her husbands forhead, in the goose marked number of freshmen; stuck
here and there, with a graduate: like cloves with great heads in a gammon of
bacon: here two gentlemen making a marriage between their heirs over a
wool-pack; there a Ministers wife that could speak false lattine very
lispingly; here two in one corner of a shop: Londoners selling their wares, and
other Gentlemen courting their wives; where they take up petticoates you should
find scholars and towns-mens wives crouding together while their husbands
wear in another market busy amongst the Oxen; it was like a camp for in other
Countries so many Punks do not follow an army. I could make an excellent
description of it in a Comedy: but whether are you trauailyng Gentlemen?


Feth Faith Sir we purposed a dangerous voyage, but upon better consideration
we alterd our course.


May. May we without offense partake the ground of it.


Green. It Is altogether triuial in-sooth: but to pass away the time till
supper, I Will deliver it to you, with protestation before hand, I seek not to
publish every ge^tle-womans dishonor, only by the passage of my discource to
have you censure the state of our quarrel.


Bell. Forth Sir.


Green. Frequenting the company of many merchants wives in the City, my heart
by chance leapt into mine eye to affect the fairest but with all the falsest
creature that ever affection stoopt to.


May. Of what rank was she I beseech you.


Feth. Upon your promise of secrecy.


Bell. You shall close it up like treasure of your own, and your self shall
keep the key of it,


Green. She was and by report still is wife to a most grave and well reputed
Citizen.


May. And entertaind your love.


Green. As Meddowes do April: the violence as it seemed of her affection --
but alas it proved her dissembling, would at my coming and departing be-dew
her eyes with love dropps; O she could the art of woman most feelingly.


Bell. Most feelingly.


May. I should not have liked that feelingly had she been my wife, give us
some sack hear and in faith -- we are all friends; and in private -- what was
her husbands name* -- I Will give you a carouse by and by.


Green. O you shall pardon me his name, it seems you are a Citizen, it would
be discourse enough for you upon the exchange this fort-night should I tell
his name.


Bell. Your modesty in this wives commendation; on sir.


Green. In the passage of our loves, (amongst other favors of greater value)
she bestowed upon me this ^inge which she protested was her husbands gift.


May. The poesy, the poesy -- O my heart, that ring good infaith:


Green. Not many nights coming to her and being familiar with her.


May. Kissing and so forth.


Green. I Sir.


Ma. And talking to her feelingly.


Gre. Pox on it, I lay with her.


May. Good infaith you are of a good complexion.


Green. Lying with her as I say: and rising somewhat early from her in the
morning, I lost this ring in her bed.


May. In my wives bed.


Feth. How do you Sir.


May. Nothing: lettes have a fire chamberlain; I think my boots have taken
water I have such a shudering: in the bed you say;


Green. Right Sir, in Mistress Maiberies sheets.


May. Was her name Maybery.


Green Beshrew my tongue for blabbing, I presume upon your secresy.


May. O God Sir, but where did you find your loosing;


Green. Where I found her falsnesse: with this Gentleman; who by his own
confession pertaking the like inioyment; found this ring the same morning on
her pillowe, and shamed not in my sight to wear it.


May. What did she talk feelingly to him too; I war^^nt her husband was forth
a Town all this while, and he poor man trauaild with hard Eggs in's pocket,
to save the charge of a bait, whilst she was at home with her Plouers, Turkey,
Chickens; do you know that Maibery.


Feth. No more then by name.


May. He Is a wondrous honest man; lets be merry; will not your
mistrisse?-gentlemen, you are tenants in common I take it.


Feth Gree. Yes.


May. Will not your Mistress make much of her husband when he comes home^ as
if no such legerdemaine had bin acted.


Green. Yes she has reason for it, for in some countries, where men and women
have good travailing stomachs, they begin with porredge; then they fall to
Capon or so-forth: but if Capon come short of filling their bellies, to their
porridge again, it is their only course, so for our women in England.


May. This wit taking of long iourneys: kindred that comes in ore the hatch,
and sailing to Westminster makes a number of Cuckolds.


Bell. Fie what an idle quarrel is this, was this her ring?


Green. Her ring Sir.


May. A pretty idle toy, would you would take money for it,


Feth. Green. Money sir.


May. The more I look on it, the more I like it.


Bell. Troth it is of no great value, and considering the loss, and finding of
this ring made breach into your friendship, Gentlemen, with this trifle
purchase his love, I can tell you he keeps a good Table.


Green. What my Mistress gift?


Feth. Faith you are a merry old Gentleman; I Will give you my part in it.


Green. Troth and mine, with your promise to conceal it from her husband.


May. Does he know of it yet?


Green. No Sir.


May. He shall never then I protest ^ look you this ring does fit me passing
well.


Feth. I am glad we have fitted you.


May. This walking is wholesome, I was a cold even now, now I sweat for it.


Feth. Shalls walk into the Garden Luke. Gentlemen we will down and hasten
supper.


May. Look you, we must be better acquainted that is all.


Exeunt Green. and Feth. Green. Most willingly; Excellent, he is heat to the
proof, lets withdraw, and give him leave to rave a little.


May. Chamberlain, give us a clean Towell.


Enter Chamberlain. Bell. How now man?


May. I am foolish old Maybery, and yet I can be wise Maybery too; I Will to
London presently, begone Sir.


Bell. How, how?


May. Nay, nay, Gods precious you do mistake me Master Bellamont; I am not
distempered, for to know a man's wife is a whore, is to be resolved of it, and
to be resolved of it, is to make no question of it, and when a case is out of
question; what was I saying?


Bell. Why look you, what a distraction are you fallen into?


May. If a man be deuorst, do you see, deuorst forma Iuris, whether may he
have an action or no, against those that make horns at him?


Bell. O madness! that the frailty of a woman should make a wise man thus
idle! yet I protest to my understanding, this report seems as far from
truth, as you from patience.


May. Then am I a fool, yet I can be wise and I list too: what says my
wedding ring?


Bell. Indeed that breeds some suspicion: for the rest most gross and open, for
two men, both to love your wife, both to enjoy her bed, and to meet you as if
by miracle, and not knowing you, upon no occasion in the world, to thrust upon
you a discourse of a quarrel, with circumstance so dishonest, that not any
Gentleman but of the country blushing, would have published. I and to name you:
do you know them?


May. Faith now I remember, I have seen them walk muf^^ed by my shop.


Bell. Like enough; pray God they do not borrow money of ^^ twixt Ware and
London: come strive to blow over these ^lowdes.


May. Not a clowd, you shall have clean Moone-shine, they have good smooth
looks the fellows.


Bell. As Iet, they will take up I warrant you, where they may be trusted;
will you be merry?


May. Wondrous merry; lets have some Sack to drown this Cuckold, down with
him: wondrous merry: one word and no more; I am but a foolish tradesman, and
yet I Will be a wise tradesman. Exeunt.


Enter D^ll lead between Leuer-poole, and Chartley, after them Philip
arrested. Phil. Arrest me? at whose suit? Tom Chartley, Dick Leuer-poole, stay,
I Am arrested.


Omn. Arrested?


1. Ser. Gentlemen break not the head of the peace; its to no purpose, for
he is in the laws clutches, you see he is fangd.


Doll. Vds life, do you stand with your naked weapons in your hand, and do
nothing with em? put one of em into my fingers, I Will tickle the pimple-nosed
varlets.


Phil. Hold Doll, thrust not a weapon upon a mad woman, Officers step back into
the Tavern, you might ha taken me ith street, and not in the Tavern entry,
you Cannibals.


Ser. We did it for your credit Sir.


Chart. How much is the debt? Drawer, some wine.


Enter Drawer. 1. Ser. Four score pound: can you send for Bail Sir? or what
will you do? we cannot stay.


Doll. You cannot, you pasty-footed Rascals, you will stay one day in hell.


Phil. Four score pounds draws deep; farewell Doll, come Serieants, I Will step
to mine Uncle not far off, here-by in Pudding lane, and he shall bail me:
if not, Chartly you shall find me playing at Span-counter, and so farewell.
Send me some Tobacco.


1. Ser. Have an eye to his hands.


2. Ser. Have an eye to his legs. Exeunt.


Doll. I Am as melancholy now?


Chart. Villainous spiteful luck, I Will hold my life some of these sawsie Drawers
betrayed him.


Draw. We sir! no by Gad Sir, we scorn to have a Judas in our company.


Lever. No, no, he was dogd in, this is the end of all dyeing.


Doll. This is the end of all whores, to fall into the hands of knaves. Drawer,
tie my shoe pry thee: the new knot as thou see this: Philip is a good honest
Gentleman, I love him because heel spend, but when I saw him on his Fathers
Hobby, and a brace of Punkes following him in a coach, I told him he would run
out, have done boy?


Draw. Yes forsooth: by my troth you have a dainty leg.


Doll. How now good man rogue.


Draw. Nay sweet Mistress Doll.


Doll. Doll! you reprobate! out you Bawd for seven years by the custom of
the City.


Draw. Good Mistress Dorothy; the pox take me, if I touched your leg but to a
good intent.


Doll. Prate you: the rotten toothd rascal, will for six pence fetch any
whore to his masters customers: and is every one that swims in a Taffatie
gown Lettis for your lips? vds life, this is rare, that Gentlewomen and
Drawers, must suck at one Spiggot: Do you laugh you unseasonable puck-fist?
do you grin?


Chart. Away Drawer: hold pry thee good rogue, hold my sweet Doll, a pox a
this swaggering.


Doll. Pox a your gutts, your kidneys; mew: hang ye, rooke: I Am as melancholy
now as Fleet-streete in a long vacation.


Lever. Melancholy? come we will ha some muld Sack.


Doll. When begins the te^me?


Chart. Why? have any suites to be tried at Westminster?


Doll. My Suits you base ruffian have been tried at Westminster already: so
soon as ever the term begins, I Will change my lodging, it stands out a the way;
I Will lie about Charingcrosse, for if there be any stirrings, there we shall have
'em: or if some Dutchman would come from the States! oh! these Flemmings pay
soundly for what they take.


Lever. If thou't have a lodging Westward Doll, I Will fit thee.


Doll. At Tyburne will you not? a lodging of your providing? to be cal^d a
Lieutenants, or a Captains wench! oh! I scorn to be one of your Low Country
commodities, I; is this body made to be maintained with Prouant and dead pay?
no: the Mercer must be paid, and Satin gown^ (...) be taken up.


Chart. And gallon pots must be tumbled down.


Doll. Stay: I have had a plot a breeding in my brains -- Are all the
Q^est-houses broken up?


Lever. Yes, long since: what then?


Doll. What then? mary then is the wind come about, and for those poor wenches
that before Christmasse fled Westward with bag and baggage, come now sailing
along the lee shore with a No^therly wind* and we that had warrants to lie
without the liberties, come now dropping into the freedom by Owle-light
sneakingly.


Chart. B^t Doll, what is the plot thou spakst off?


Doll. Mary this: Gentlemen, and Tobacco-stinckers, and such like are still
buzzing where sweet meats are (like Flies) but they make any flesh stink
that they blow upon: I will leave those fellows therefore in the hands of
their Landresses: Silver is the Kings stamp, man Gods stamp, and a woman is
man's stamp, we are not cu^rant till we pass from one man to another.


Both: Very good.


Doll I will therefore take a fair house in the City: no matter tho it be a
Tavern that has blown up his Master: it shall be in trade s^ill, for I know
diverse Tauernes ith Town, that have but a Wall between them and a
hotte-house. It shall then be given out, that I Am a Gentlewoman of such a
birth, such a wealth, have had such a breeding, and so forth, and of such a
carriage, and such quallities, and so forth: to set it off the better, old Jack
Hornet shall take upon him to be my Father.


Lever. Excellent, with a chain about his neck and so forth.


Doll. For that, Saint Martins and we will talk: I know we shall have
Gudgions bite presently: if they do boys, you shall live like Knights
fe^lowes; as occasion serves, you shall wear liueries and wait, but when
Gulls are my winde-falls, you shall be Gentlemen, and keep them company: seek
out Jack Hornet incontinently.


Lever. We will; come Charely, we will play our parts I warrant.


Doll. Do so: --
The world's a stage, from which strange shapes we borrow:
To day we are honest, and rank knaves to morrow. Exeunt.

Enter Maybery, Bellamont, and a Prentice. May. Where is your Mistress,
villain? when went she abroad?


Prent. Abroad Sir, why as soon as she was up Sir.


May. Up Sir, down Sir, so sir: Master Bellamont, I will tell you a strange
secret in Nature, this boy is my wives bawd.


Bell. O fie sir, fie, the boy he does not look like a Bawd, he has no
double chin.


Pren. No sir, nor my breath does not stink, I smell not of Garlic or
Aqua-vitae: I use not to be drunk with Sack and Sugar: I swear not God dam
me, if I know where the party is, when it is a lie and I do know: I was never
Carted (but in harvest) never whipped but at School: never had the Grincoms:
never sold one Maidenhead ten several times, f^^st to an Englishman, then to
a Welshman, then to a Dutchman, then to a pock^e Frenchman, I hope Sir I am no
Bawd then.


May. Thou art a Baboune, and holdst me with tricks, whilst my Wife grafts
grafts, away, trudge, run* search her out by land, and by water.


Pren. Well Sir, the land I Will ferret, and after that I Will search her by water,
for it may be she is gone to Brainford. Exit.


Mayb. Inquire at one of mine Aunts.


Bell. One of your Aunts are you mad?


Mayb. Yea, as many of the twelve companies are, troubled, troubled.


Bell. I Will chide you: go too, I Will chide you soundly.


May. Oh master Bellamont!


Bell. Oh Master Maybery! before your Servant to dance a Lancashire
Horne-pipe: it shows worse to me, then dancing does to a deaf man that sees
not the fiddles: Sfoot you talk like a Player.


Mayb. If a Player talk like a madman, or a fool, or an Ass, and knows not
what he talks, then I Am one: you are a Poet Master Bellamont, I will
bestow a piece of Plate upon you to bring my wife upon the Stage, wud not her
humor please Gentlemen.


Bella. I think it would: yours wud make Gentlemen as fatt as fools: I wud
give two pieces of Plate, to have you stand by me, when I were to write a
jealous man's part: Jealous men are either knaves or Coxcombes, be you neither:
you wear yellow hose without cause.


May. Without cause, when my Mare bears double: without cause?


Bell. And without wit.


May. When two Virginal Iacks skip up, as the key of my instrument goes down!


Bell. They are two wicked elders.


May. When my wives ring does smoke for it.


Bell. Your wives ring may deceive you.


May. O Ma^ster Bellamont! had it not been my wife had made me a Cuckold, it
should never have grieved me.


Bell, You wrong her upon my soul.


May. No, she wrongs me upon her body.


Enter a Seruingman. Bell. Now blew-bottle? what fl^tter you for Sea-pye?


Ser. Not to catch fish Sir, my young Master, your son master Philip is
taken prisoner.


Bell. By the Dunkirks.


Ser. Worse: by Catch-polls: he is encountered.


Bell. Shall I never see that prodigal come home.


Ser. Yes Sir, if you will fetch him out, you may kill a Calfe for him.


Bell. For how much lies he?


Ser. The debt is four score pound, marry he chargde me to tell you it was
four ^core and ten, so that he lies only for the odd ten pound.


Bell. His child's part shall now be paid, this money shall be his last, and this
vexation the last of mine: if you had such a son master Maiberie.


May. To such a wife, twere an excellent couple.


Bell. Release him, and release me of much sorrow, I will buy a Son no more:
go redeem him. Enter Prentice and Maiberies wife.


Prent. Here Is the party Sir.


May. Hence, and lock fast the doors, now is my prize.


Prent. If she beat you not at your own weapon, wud her Buckler were cleft in
two pieces. Exit.


Bell. I will not have you handle her too roughly.


May. No, I will like a Justice of peace, grow to the point: are not you a
whore: never start: thou art a Cloth-worker, and have ^urnd me.


Wife. How Sir, into what Sir, have I turned you?


May. Into a Civil Suite: into a sober beast: a Land-rat, a Cuckold: thou art
a common bedfellow, art not? art not?


Wif. Sir this Language, to me is strange, I understand it not.


May. O! you study the french now.


Wife. Good Sir, lend me patience.


May. I made a fallade of that herb: do see these flesh-hookes, I could
tear out those false eyes, those Cats eyes, that can see in the night: punck I
could.


Bell. Hear her answer for her self.


VVif. Good Master Bellomont,
Let him not do me violence: dear Sir,
Should any but your self shoot out these names,
I would put off all female modesty,
To be revenged on him.

May. Know thou this ring? there has bin old running at the ring since I
went.


Wife. Yes Sir, this ring is mine, he was a villayne,
That stole it from my hand: he was a villayne:
That put it into yours.

May. They were no villaynes,
When they stood stoutly for me: took your part:
And stead of colors fought under my sheets.

Wife. I know not what you mean.


May. They lay with the: I mean plain dealing.


Wife. With me! if ever I had thought unclean,
In detestation of your nuptial pillow:
Let Sulpher drop from Heaven, and nail my body
Dead to this earth: that slave, that damned fury
(Whose whips are in your tongue to torture me)
Casting an eye unlawful on my cheek,
Haunted your thre-shold daily, and threw forth
All tempting baytes which lust and credulous youth,
Apply to our frail sex: but those being weak
The second seige he laid was in sweet words.

May. And then the breach was made.


Bell. Nay, nay, hear all.


Wife. At last he takes me sitting at your door,
Seizes my palm, and by the charm of oaths
(Back to restore it straight) he won my hand,
To crown his finger with that hoope of gold.
I did demand it, but he mad with rage
And with desires unbridled, fled and vowed,
That ring should me undo: and now belike
His spells have wrought on you. But I beseech you,
To dare him to my face, and in mean time
Deny me bed-roome* drive me from your board,
Disgrace me in the habit of your slave,
Lodge me in some discomfortable vault
Where neither Sun nor Moon may touch my sight,
Till of this slander I my soul acquit.

Bell. Guiltless upon my soul.


May. Troth so ^hinke I.
I now draw in your bow, as I before
Supposed they drew in mine: my stream of ielozy,
Ebs back again, and I that like a horse
Ran b^^nd-fold in a Mill (all in one circle)
Yet thought I had go^ fore-right, now spy my error:
Villains you have abused me, and I vow
Sharp vengeance on your heads: drive in your tears
I take your word ya're honest, which good men,
Very good men will scarce do to their wives.
I will bring home these serpents and allow them,
The heat of mine own bosom: wife I charge you
Set out your hauiours toward them in such colors,
As if you had bin their whore, I Will have it so,
I Will candy over my words, and sleeke my brow,
Entreat 'em that they would not point at me,
Nor mock my horns, with this Arm I Will embrace 'em
And with this -- go too.

Wife. Oh we shall have murder -- you kill my heart.


May. No: I will shed no blood,
But I will be revenged, they that do wrong
Teach others way to right: I Will fetch my blow
Fair and a far off and as Feneers use Enter Philip and servant
Tho at the foot I strike, the head I Will bruize.

Bell. I Will join with you: lets walk: oh! here is my Son.
Welcome a shore Sir: from whence come you pray.

Pil. From the house of prayer and fasting -- the Counter.


Bell. Art not, thou ashamed to be seen come out of a prison.


Pil. No Gods my Judge, but I was ashamed to go into prison.


Bell. I am told sir, that you spend your credit and your coin upon a light
woman.


Phil. I ha seen light gold sir, pass away amongst Mercers.


Bell. And that you have laid thirty or forty pounds upon her back in taffaty
gowns, and silk petticoates.


Phil. None but Tailors will say so, I nere laid any thing upon her back: I
confess I took up a petticoate and a raiz'd forepart for her, but who has to
do with that?


May. Mary that has every body Master Philip.


Bell. Leave her company, or leave me, for she is a woman of an ill name.


Phil. Her name is Dorothy sir, I hope that's no il name.


Bell. What is she? what will thou do with her?


Phil. God's Blood sir what does he with her?


Bell. Do mean to marry her? of what birth is she? what are her commings
in, what does she live upon?


Phillip. Rents sir, Rents, she lives upon her Rents, and I can have her.


Bell. You can.


Phil. Nay father, if destiny dog me I must have her: you have often told
me the nine Muses are all women, and you deal with them, may not I the better
be allowed one than you so many? look you Sir, the Northern man loves
white-meates, the Southery man Sallades, the Essex man a Calfe, the Kentishman
a Wag-taile, the Lancashire man an Egg-pie, the Welshman Leekes and Cheese, and
your Londoners raw Mutton, so Father god-boy, I was borne in London.


Bella. Stay, look you Sir, as he that lives upon Sallades without Mutton,
feeds like an Ox, (for he eats grass you know) yet rizes as hungry as an
Ass, and as he that makes a dinner of leekes will have lean cheeks, so,
thou foolish Londoner, if nothing but raw mutton can diet thee, look to live
like a fool and a slave, and to die like a beggar and a knave, come Master
Maiberie, farewell boy.


Phil. Farewell father Snot -- Sir if I have her, I Will spend more in mustard and
vinegar in a year, then both you in beef.


Both. More saucy knave thou. Exeunt.


Actus 2. Scena. 1.
Enter Hornet, Doll, Leuerpoole and Chartly like seruingmen. Horn. AM I like a
fiddlers base violl (new set up,) in a good case boys? is it neat, is it terse!
am I hansome? ha*


Omn. Admirable, excellent.


Dol. An under sheriff cannot cover a knave more cunningly.


Lever. Sfoot if he should come before a Churchwarden, he wud make him
peu-fellow with a Lords steward at least.


Horn. If I had but a staff in my hand, fools wud think I were one of Simon
and Iudes gentlemen vshers, and that my apparel were hired: they say three
Tailors go to the making up of a man, but I Am sure I had four Tailors and a
half went to the making of me thus: this Suite tho it ha bin canuast well, yet
it is no law-suite, for it was dispatched sooner than a posset on a wedding night.


Dol. Why I tell thee Jack Hornet, if the Devil and all the Brokers in long lane
had rifled their wardrob, they wud ha been dambd before they had fitted thee
thus.


Horn. Punck, I shall be a simple father for you: how does my chain show now
I walk.


Dol. If thou were hung in chains, thou could not show better.


Chart. But how fit our blew-coates on our backs.


Dol. As they do upon banckrout retainers backs at Saint Georges feast in
London: but at Westminster, It makes 'em scorn the badge of their occupation:
there the bragging velure-caniond hobbi-horses, praunce up and down as if some
a the Ti^ters had ridden 'em.


Hor. Nay Sfoot, if they be banckrouts, it is like some have ridden 'em: and
there-vpon the Citizens Proverb rises, when he says; he trusts to a broken
staff.


Doll. Hornet, now you play my Father, take heed you be not out of your part,
and shame your adopted Daughter.


Horn. I will look gravely Doll, (do you see boys) like the foreman of a
Jury: and speak wisely like a Lattin Schoolemaister, and be surly and dogged,
and proud like the Keeper of a prison.


Lever. You must lie horribly, when you talk of your lands.


Horn. No shopkeeper shall out lie me, nay, no Fencer: when I hem boys, you
shall duck: when I cough and spit gobbets Doll.


Doll. The pox shall be in your lungs Hornet.


Hor. No Doll, these with their high shoes shall tread me out.


Doll, All the lessons that I ha pricked out for 'em, is when the Wether-cock of
my body turns toward them, to stand bare.


Horn. And not to be saucy as Seruing-men are.


Char. Come, come, we are no such creatures as you take us for.


Dol If we ^aue but good draughts in my peeter-boate, fresh Salmon you sweet
villains shall be no meat with us.


Horn. S^oot nothing mooues my choler, but that my chain is Copper: but it is
no matter, better men than old Jack Hornet have rode up Holburne, with as bad a
thing about their necks as this: your ^ight whis^ler indeed hangs himself in
Saint Martins, and not in Cheape-side.


Doll. Peace, somebody rings: run both, whilst he has the the rope in's hand
if it b^ a prize, hale him, if a man a war, blow him up, or hang him out at the
maine yeards end.


Horn. But what ghost, (hold up my fine Girl) what ghosts haunts thy house?


Doll. Oh! why diverse: I have a Clothiers Factor or two; a Grocer that would
feign Pepper me, a Welsh Gaptaine that lays hard seege, a Dutch Marcha^t, that
would spend all that he is able to make in the low countries, but to take measu^e
of my Holland sheets when I lie in 'em: I hear trampling: it is my Flemish Hoy.


Enter Leuerpoole, Chartly and Hans van Belch. Hans. Dar is vor you, and vor
you: even, twea, dry, vier, and viue skilling, drinks Skellum vysie freese:
nempt, dats v drinck gelt.


Lever. Till our crowns crack again Master Hans van Belch.


Hans. How is it met you, how is it bro? vr^lick?


Doll. Ick vare well God danke you: Nay I Am an apt scholar and can take.


Hans. Datt is good, dott is good: Ick can neet stay long: for Ick h^ben skip
come now upon de vater: O mine schoomen vro, we sall dance lanteera, teera,
and sing Ick brincks to you min here, van: -- wat man is dat vro.


Hor. Nay pray sir on.


H^ns Wat honds foot is dat Dorrothy.


Doll. It Is my father.


Hans. Gotts Sacrament! your vader! why seyghen you niet so to me! mine heart
it is mine all great desire, to call you mine vader ta for Ick love dis schonen
vro your dochterkin.


Hor. Sir you are welcome in the way of honesty.


Hans. Ick bedanck you: Ick heb so ghe founden vader.


Harn. What Is your name I pray.


Hans. Mun nom bin Hans van Belch.


Horn. Hans Van Belch!


Hans. Yau, yau, it is so, it is so, de dronken man is alteet remenber me.


Horn. Do you play the merchant, son Belch.


Hans. Yau vader: Ick heb de skip swim now upon de vater if you endouty, go up
in de little Skip dat go so, and be pulled up to Wapping, Ick sal bear you on
my back, and hang you about min neck into min groet Skip.


Horn. He Says Doll, he would have thee to Wapping and hang thee.


Doll. No Father I understand him, but master Hans, I would not be seen
hanging about any man's neck, to be counted his Jewel, for any gold.


Horn. Is your father living Master Hans.


Hans. Yau, yau, min vader heb schonen husen in Ausburgh groet mine hear is
mine vaders brother, mine vader heb land, and bin full of see, dat is beasts,
cattle


Char. He Is lowzy be-like.


Hans. Min vader bin be grotest fooker in all Ausbrough.


Dol. The greatest what?


Lever. Fooker he says.


Dol. Out upon him.


Han. Yaw yaw, fooker is en groet min here he is en elderman vane City, gots
sacrament, wat is de clock? Ick met stay. A watch.


Hor. Call his watch before you, if you can.


Doll. Here Is a pretty thing: do these wheels spin up the hours! what is a
clock.


Han. Acht: yaw it is acht.


Dol. We can hear neither clock, nor Jack going, we dwell in such a place
that I fear I shall never find the way to Church, because the bells hang so
far; Such a watch as this, would make me go down with the Lamb, and be up
with the Lark.


Hans. Seghen you so, dor it to.


Doll. O fie: I do but jest, for in truth I could never abide a watch.


Han. Gotts sacrament, Ick niet heb it any more.


Exeunt Leuer-poole and Chartly. Dol. An other peale! good father lanch out
this hollander.


Horn. Come Master Belch, I will bring you to the waterside, perhaps to
Wapping, and there i will leave you.


Han. Ick bedanck you vader. Exit.


Doll. They say Whores and bawdes go by clocks, but what a Manasses is this to
buy twelve hours so dearly, and then be begd out of them so easily? heel be
out at heels shortly sure for he is out about the clockes already: O foolish
young man how do thou spend thy time?


Enter Leuer-poole first, then Allom and Chartly. Leur. Your grocer.


Dol^e Nay Sfoot, then i will change my tune: I may cause such leaden-heeld
rascals; out of my sight: a knife, a knife I say: O Master Allom, if you love
a woman, draw out your knife and undo me, undo me.


Allo. Sweet mistress Dorothy, what should you do with a knife, it^ ill meddling
with edge tools, what is the matter Masters! knife God bless us.


Leu. Sfoot what tricks at noddy are these.


Do. Oh I shall burst, if I cut not my lace: I Am so vexed! my father he is rid
to Court: one was about a matter of a 1000. pound weight; and one of his men
like a rogue as he is is rid another way for rents, I looked to have had him up
yesterday, and up to day, and yet he shows not his head; s^^e he is run away,
or r^bd and run thorough; and here was a scriuener but even now, to put my
father in mind of a bond, that will be forfit this night if the money be not paid
Mais^er Allom. Such cross fortune!


Allo. How much is the bond?


Chart. O rare little villain.


Dol. My father could take up, upon the bareness of his word five hundred
pound: and five toe.


Allom. What is the debt?


Dol. But he scorns to be -- and I scorn to be --


Allom. Pree thee sweet Mistress Dorothy vex not, how much is it?


Dol. Alas Master Allom, it is but poor fifty pound.


Allo. If that be all, you shall upon your word take up so much with me:
another time i will ^un as far in your books.


Dol. Sir, I know not how to repay this kindness: but when my father --


All. Tush, tush, it is not worth the talking: Just 50 pound? when is it to be
paid.


Dol. Between one and two.


L^ue. That Is we three.


Allom. Let one of your men go along, and I Will send your fifty pound!


Dol. You so bind me sir, -- go sir: Master Allom, I ha some qu^nces
brought from our house ith Country to preserve, when shall we have any good
Sugar come over? the wars in Barbary make S^ger at such an excessive rate;
you pay sweetly now I warrant, sir do you not.


Al You shall have a whole che^t of Sugar if you please.


Dol. Nay by my faith four or five loves wil-be enough, and I Will pay you at my
first child Master Allom.


Allom. Content in faith, your man shall bring all under one, i will borrow a kiss
of you at parting.


Enter Captain Iy^kins. Dol. You shall sir, I borrow more of you. Ex. Allo.
and Leu.


Chart. Save you Captain.


Dol. Welcome good captain Iynkins.


Captain. What is he a Barber Surgeon, that dressed your lips so.


Dol. A Barber ^ he is may Tailor; I bid him measure how hie, he would make
the standing collar of my new Taffatie Gown before, and he as Tailors will be
saucy and lickerish, laid me ore the lips.


Captain. Vds blood i will lay him cross upon his coxcomb next day.


Dol. You know it is not for a Gentlewoman to stand with a knave, for a small
matter, and so I wud not strive with him, only to be rid of him.


Capt. If I take Master prick-louse ramping so hie again, by this Iron (which
is none a gods Angel) i will make him know how to kiss your blind cheeks
sooner: mistress Dorothy Hornet, I wud not have you be a hornet, to lick at
Cowsherds, but to s^^ng such sh^eds of rascallity: will you sing a Tailor shall
have me my joy?


Dol. Captain, i will be lead by you in any thing! a Tailor! foh.


Capt. Of what stature or sise have you a stomach to have your husband now?


Dol. Of the meanest stature Captain, not a s^ze longer than your se^fe, nor
shorter.


Cap. By god, it is well said: all your best Captain in the Low-cou^tr^es are as
taller as I: but why of my pitch Mistress Dol?


Dol. Because your smallest Arrows fly farthest; ah you little hard-fauord
villain, but sweet villain, I love thee because thou't draw a my side, hang
the rogue that will not fight for a woman.


Cap. Vds blould, and hang him for vrse than a rogue tha^ will slash and cut
for an oman, if she be a whore.


Dol. Pree the good Captain Iynki^s, teach me to speak some welsh, me
thinks a Welchmans tongue is the neatest tongue! --


Cap. As any tongue in the vrld, unless Cramacrees, that is vrse.


Dol. How do you say, I love you with all my heart.


Cap. Mi cara whee, en hellon.


Dol. Mi cara whee, en hel-hound.


Cap. Hell* hound, o mondu, my cara whee, en hellon.


Dol. O, my cara whee en hellon.


Cap. Oh! and you went to writing school twenty score year in Wales, by Sesu,
you cannot have better vttrance, for welsh.


Dol. Come tit me, come tat me, come throw a kiss at me, how is that?


Cap. By gad I kanow not, what your tit mees and tat mees are, but me uatha --
God's Blood I know what kisses be, as well as I know a Welsh hook, if you will go
down with Shrop-sheere cariers* you shall have Welsh enough in your pellies
forty weeks.


Dol. Say Captain that I should follow your colors into your Country how
should I fare there?


Cap. Fare? by Sesu, O there is the most abominable seere! and wider silver
pots to drinck in, and softer peds to lie upon and do our necessary pusines,
and fairer houses and parkes, and holes for Conies, and more money, besides
tosted Sees and buttermilke in Northwales diggon: besides, harpes, and Welsh
Freeze, and Goats, and Cow-heeles, and Metheglin, ouh, it may be set in the
Kernicles, will you ma^ch thither?


Dol. Not with your Shrop-sheire cariers, Captain.


Cap. Will you go with Captain Ienkin and see his Cousen Maddoc upon Ienkin
there, and i will run hedlongs by and by, and batter away money for a new Coach to
iolt you in.


Dol. Bestow your Coach upon me, and two young white Mares, and you shall see
how I Will ride.


Cap. Will you? by all the leekes that are worn on Saint Dauies day I will
buy not only a Coach, with four wheels, but also a white Mare and a stone
horse too, because they shall traw you, very lustily, as if the diuill were in
their arses. Exit. How now, more Tailors -- Meets Phillip.


Phi. How sir; Tailors.


Dol. O good Captain, it is my Cousen.


Enter Leuerpoole at another door. Cap. Is he, I will Cousen you then sir too,
one day.


Phil. I hope sir then to Cousen you too.


Cap. By gad I hobe so, farewell Sidanien. Exit.


Lever. Here Is both money, and sugar.


Dol. O sweet villain, set it up. Exit, and Enter presently.


Phil. Sfoot, what tame suaggerer was this I met Doll.


Dol. A Captain, a Captain: but have escaped the Dunkerks honest Philip?
Philip ryalls are not more welcome: did thy father pay the sho^?


Phil. He pai'd that shot, and then shot pistolets into my pockets: hark
wench: chinck chink, makes the punck wanton and the Baud to winck. Capers.


Chart. O rare music.


Lever. Heavenly consort, better than old Moons.


Phil. But why? why Dol, go these two like Beadells in blew? ha?


Doll. There Is a morrall in that: flea off your skins, you precious Caniballs: O
that the welsh Captain were here again, and a drum with him, I could march
now, ran, tan, tan, tara, ran, tan, tan, sir Philip has thy father any plate
in's house.


Phil. Enough to set up a Gold-smithes shop.


Dol. Can not borrow some of it? we shall have guests to morrow or next day
and I wud serve the hungry rag-a-muffins in plate, tho twere none of mine own.


Phil. I shall hardly borrow it of him but I could get one of mine Aunts, to
beat the bush for me, and she might get the bird.


Dol. Why pree the, let me be one of thine Aunts, and do it for me then. As
I Am virtuous and a Gentlewoman i will restore.


Phil. Say no more it is don.


Dol. What manner of man is thy father? Sfoot i would feign see the witty Monky
because thou say he is a Poet: i will tell thee, what i will do: Leuer-poole or
Chartly, shall like my Gentleman usher go to him, and say such a Lady sends
for him, about a sonnet or an epitaph for her child that died at nurse, or for
some device about a mask or so; if he comes you shall stand in a corner, and
see in what State i will bear my self: he does not know me, nor my lodging.


Phil. No, no.


Doll. Is It a match Sirs? shalls be merry with him and his muse.


Omn. Agreed, any scaffold to execute knavery upon.


Doll. I Will send then my vant-currer presently: in the mean time, march after
the Captain, scoundrels, come hold me up:

Look how Sabrina sunck in the river Seuerne,
So will we four be drunk in the shipwreck Tavern. Exeunt.

Enter Bellamont, Maybery, and Mistress Maybery. May. Come Wife, our two
gallants will be here presently: I have promised them the best of entertainment,
with protestation never to reveal to thee their slander: I will have thee
bear thy self, as if thou made a feast upon Simon and Iudes day, to country
Gentlewomen, that came to see the Pageant, bid them extremely welcome, though
thou wish their throats cut; it is in fashion.


Wife O God I shall never endure them.


Bell. Endure them, you are a fool: make it your case, as it may be many
women's of the Freedom; that you had a friend in private, whom your husband
should lay to his bosom: and he in requital should lay his wife to his
bosom: what treads of the toe, salutations by winckes, discourse by bitings of
the lip, amorous glances, sweet stolen kisses when your husbands backs turn^d,
would pass between them, bear your self to Greeneshield as if you did love
him for affecting you so entirely, not taking any notice of his journey: they will
put more tricks upon you: you told me Greeneshield means to bring his Sister
to your house, to have her board here.


May. Right, she is some cracked demy-culuerin, that has miscarried in service:
no matter though it be some charge to me for a time I care not.


Wife Lord was there ever such a husband?


May. Why, would thou have me suffer their tongues to run at large, in
Ordinaries and Cock-pits; though the Knaves do lie, I tell you Master
Bellamont, lies that come from stern looks, and Satin outsides, and guilt
Rapiers also, will be put up and go for current.


Bell. Right sir, it is a small spark, gives fire to a beautiful woman's
discredit.


May. I will therefore use them like informing kna^es in this kind, make up
their mouths with ^iluer, and after be re^eng'd upon them: I was in doubt I
should have grown fat of late: and it were no^ for law suites: and fear of
our wives, we rich men should grow out of all compass: they come, my worthy
friends welcome: look my wives color rises already.


Green. You have not made her acquainted with the discovery.


May. O by no means: ye see Gentlemen the affection of an old man; I would
feign make all whole again. Wife give entertainment to our new acquaintance,
your lips wife, any woman may lend her lips without her husbands priuity it is
alowable.


Wife. You are very welcome; I think it be near dinner time Gentlemen: I Will
will the maid to cover, and return presently.


Bell. Gods precious why does she leave them? Exit.


May. O I know her stomach: she is but retirde into another chamber, to ease
her heart with crying a little: it has ever bin her humor* she has done it 5.
or 6. times in a day, when Courtiers have been hear, if any thing has bin
out of order, and yet every return laughed and bin as merry: and how is it
Gentlemen, you are well acquainted with this room, are you not?


Gree. I had a dellicate banquet once on that table.


May. In good time: but you are better acquainted with my bed chamber.


Bell. Were the cloth of gold Cushins set forth at your entertainment?


Feth. Yes Sir.


May. And the cloth of T^ssew Valance*


Feth. They are very rich ones.


May. God refuse me, they are lying Rascols, I have no such furniture.


Green. I protest it was the strangest, and yet with-all the happiest fortune
that we should meet you two at Ware, that ever redeemed such desolate
actions: I would not wrong you again for a million of Londons.


May. No, do you want any money? or if you be in debt, I am a hundredth pound
in the Subsidy, command me.


Feth. Alas good Gentleman; did you ever read of the like patience in any of
your ancient Romans?


Bell. You see what a sweet face in a Velvet cap can do, your cittize^s wives
are like Partriges, the hens are better the^ the cocks.


Feth. I believe it in troth, Sir you did observe how the Gentlewoman could not
contain her self, when she saw us enter.


Bell Right.


Feth. For thus much I must speak in allowance of her mode^tie, when I had her
most private she would blush extremely.


Bell. I, I warrant you, and ask you if you would have such a great sin lie
upon your conscience, as to lie with another man's wife.


Feth. In Troth she would.


Bell. And tell you there were maids enough in london, if a man were so
vitiously given, whose Portions would help them to hu^sbands though gentlemen
gave the first onset.


Feth. You are a merry old gentleman infaith Sir: much like to this was her
langwage.


Bell. And yet clipe you with as voluntary a bosom; as if she had fallen in
love with you at some Innes a court revels; and invi^ed you by letter to her
lodging.


Fet. Your knowledge Sir, is perfect without any information.


May. I Will go see what my wife is doing gentlemen, when my wife enters show her
this ring; and twill quit all suspicion. Exit.


Feth. Do hear Luke Greeshield will thy wife by here presently.


May. I left my boy to weight upon her, by this light, I think God prouides;
for if this cittisen had not out of his overplus of kindness proferd her, her
diet and lodging under the name of my sister, I could not have told what shift
to have made; for the greatest part of my money is revolted; we will make more use
of him, the whoreso^ rich Inkeeper of Doncaster her father showed himself a
rank ostler: to send her up at this time a year; and and by the carier to,
it was but a iades trike of him.


Feth. But have you instructed her to call you brother.


Green. Yes and shele do it, I left her at Bosoms Inn, she will be here,
presently. Enter Maybery.


May. Master Greenesheild your sister is come; my wife is entertaining her, by
the mass I have bin upon her lips already, Lady you are welcome, look you
master Greeneshield, because your sister is newly come out of the fresh air,
and that to be pent up in a narrow lodging here in the city may offend her
health she shall lodge at a garden house of mine in Morefeilds where if it
please you and my worthy friend hear to bear her company your several
lodgings and Joint commons (to the poor ability of a citizen) shall be provided.


Feth. O God Sir.


May. Nay no complement your loves command it: shalls to dinner Gentlemen, come
master Bellamont I Will be the Gentleman usher to this fair Lady.


Gree. Here is your ring Mistress; a thousand times, -- and would have willingly
lost my best of maintenance that I might have found you hair so tractable.


Wif. Sir I am still my self, I know not by what means you have grown upon my
husband, he is much deceived in you I take it: will you go in to dinner -- O
God that I might have my will of him and it were not for my husband i would scratch
out his eyes presently. Ex.


Fet. Welcome to London bonny mistress Kate, thy husband little dreams of the
familiarity that has past between thee and I Kate.


Kate. Noe matter if he did: he ran away from me like a base slave as he was,
out of Yorke-shire, and pretended he would go the Island voyage, since I near
heard of him till within this fortnight: can the world condemn me for
entertayning a friend, that am used so like an Infidel?


Fe. I think not, but if your husband knew of this he would be deuorst.


Rat. He were an ass then, no wisemen should deal by their wives as the sale
of ordinance passes in England, if it break the first discharge the workman
is at the loss of it, if the second the Merchant, and the workman jointly, if
the third the Merchant, so in our case, if a woman prove false the first year,
turn her upon her fathers n^ck, if the second, turn her home to her father
but allow her a portion, but if she hold pure mettaile two year and fly to
several pieces, in the third, repair the ruins of her honesty at your
charges, for the best piece of ordinance, may be cracked in the casting, and
for women to have cracks and slaves, alas they are borne to them, now I have
held out four year, does my husband do any things about London does he
swagger?


Feth. O as tame as a fray in Fleet estreete, when their are nobody to part
them.


Ra. I ever thought so, we have notable valiant fellows about Doncaster,
they will give the lie and the stab both in an instant.


Feth. You like such kind of manhood best Kate.


Rat. Yes in troth for I think any woman that loves her friend, had rather have
him stand by it then lie by it, but I pray thee tell me, why must I be quarterd
at this Citizens garden house, say you.


Fe. The discou^se of that will set thy blood on fire to be reue^gd on thy
husbands forhead piece. Ent. Bella. and May. Maybe.


Wif. Will you go in to dinner sir?


Rat. Will you lead the way forsooth?


Wif. No sweet forsothe we will follow you.

O Master Bellamont: as ever you took pity upon the simplicity of a poor
abused gentlewoman: will you tell me one thing.


Bell. Any thing sweet Mistress Mayberrie.


Wife. I but will you do it faithfully?


Bell. As I respect your acquaintance I shall do it.


Wife. Tell me then I beseech you, do not you think this minx is some noughty
pack whom my husband has fallen in love with, and means to keep under my
nose at his garden house.


Bell. No upon my life is she not,


Wife. O I cannot believe it, I know by her eyes she is not honest, why should
my husband proffer them such kindness? that have abused him and me; so
intolerable: and will not luffer me to speak; there is the hellont not suffer
me to speak.


Bell. Fie fie, he does that like a vserer, that will vfe a man with all
kindness, that he may be careless of paying his money, upon his day, and
after-wards take the extremity of the forfature; your jealousy is Idle: say
this were true, it lies in the bosom of a sweet wife to draw her husband from
any loose imperfection, from wenching, from Iealosie, from couituousnes from
crabbednes, which is the old man's common disease, by her politic yealding.


Bell. She may do it from crabednes, for example I have known as tough
blades as any are in England broke upon a fetherbed, -- come to diner,


Wife. I Will be ruled by you Sir, for you are very like mine uncle.


Bell. Suspicion works more mischief grows more strong, To sever ch^st beds
then aparant wrongs. Exit.


ACTVS 3. SAENA 1.
Enter Doll, Chartly Leuerpoole and Phillip. Phil. Come my little Punke with
thy two Compositors to this unlawful painting house, thy pounders a my old
poe^icall dad will be here presently, ^ake up thy State in this chair, and bear
thy self as if thou were talking to thy pottecary after the receipt of a
purgation: look scuruily upon him: sometimes be merry and stand upon thy
pantoffles like a new elected scauinger.


Doll. And by and by melancholicke like a Tilter that has broake his staves
foul before his Mistrisse.


Phil. Right, for he takes thee to be a woman of a great count: hark upon my
life he is come.


Doll. See who knocks: thou shall see me make a fool of a Poet, that has
made five hundred fools.


Lever. Please your new Lady-ship he is come.


Doll. Is he? I should for the more state let him walk some two hours in an
utter room: if I did owe him money, 'twere not much out of fashion; but come
enter him: Stay, when we are in private conference send in my Tailor.


Enter Bellamont brought in by Leuerpoole. Lever. Look you my Lady's a
sleep, ^heele wake presently.


Bell. I come not to teach a Starling sir, God-boy-you.


Lever. Nay, in truth Sir, if my Lady should but dream you had been hear.


Doll. Who Is that keeps such a prating?


Lever. It Is I Madam.


Doll. I Will have you preferred to be a Crier: you have an exlent throat for it:
pox a the Poet is he not come yet?


Lever. He Is here Madam.


Doll. Cry you mercy: I ha cursed my Monkey for shrewd turns a hundred times,
and yet I love it never the worse I protest.


Bell. It Is not in fashion dear Lady to call the breaking out of a Gentlewomans
lips, scabs, but the heat of the Liver.


Dol. So sir: if you have a sweet breath, and do not smell of swetty linen,
you may draw nearer, nearer.


Pel. I am no friend to Garlic Madam.


Doll. You write the sweeter verse a great deal sir, I hau^ heard much good of
your wit master Poet: you do many devises for Citizens wives: I care not
greatly because I have a City Laundresse already, if I get a City Poet too: I
have such a devise for you, and this it is. Enter Tailor. O welcome Tailor: do
but wait till I dispatch my Tailor, and I Will discover my device to you.


Bell. I Will take my leave of your Ladyship.


Doll. No: I pray thee stay: I must have you sweat for my device Master Poet.


Phil. He sweats already believe it.


Dol. A cup of wine there: what fashion will make a woman have the best body
Tailor.


Tay. A short dutch wast with a round cathern-wheele fardingale: a close sleeue
wi^h a cartoose color and a pickadell.


Dol. And what meat will make a woman have a fine wit Master Poet.


Bell. Foul madam is the most light, delicate, and witty feeding.


Dol. Foul say thou: I know them that feed of it every meal, and yet are
as arrant fools as any are in a kingdom of my c^edit: have thou don Tailor?
now to discover my device sir: I Will drinck to you sir.


Phil. Gods precious, we nere thought of her device before, pray god it be any
thing tolerable.


Dol. I Will have you make 12. poesies for a dozen of cheese trenchers.


Phil. O horrible!


Bell. In welsh madam?


Dol. Why in welsh sir.


Bell. Because you will have them seru^d in with your cheese Lady.


Dol. I will bestow them indeed upon a welsh Captain: one that loves cheese
better than venson, for if you should but get 3. or 4. Cheshire cheeses and set
them a running down Hiegate-hill, he would make more have after the^ than after
the best kennell of hounds in England; what think you of my device?


Bell. Fore-god a very strange device and a cunning one.


Phil. Now he begins to eye the goblet.


Bell. You should be a kin to the Bellamonts, you give the same Arms madam.


Dol. Faith I paid sweetly for the cup, as it may be you and some other
Gentleman have don for their Arms.


Bell. Ha, the same weight: the same fashion: I had three nest of them given
me, by a Nobleman at the christing of my son Philip.


Phil. Your son is come to full age sir: and has taken possession of the gift
of his Godfather.


Bell. Ha, thou will not kill me.


Phil. No sir, i will kill no Poet least his ghost write satires against me.


Bell. What Is she? a good common welthes woman, she was borne.


Phil. For her Country, and has borne her Country.


Bell. Heart of virtue? what make I here?


Phil. This was the party you rail^d on: I keep no worse company than your
self father, you were wont to say venery is like vsery that it may be allowed
tho it be not lawful.


Bell Wherefore come I hither.


Dol. To make a device for cheese-trenchers.


Phil. I Will tell you why I sent for you, for nothing but to show you that your
gravity may be drawn in: white hairs may fall into the company of drabs
as well as red beardes into the society of knaves: would not this woman deceive
a whole camp ith Low Countries, and make one Commander believe she only kept
her cabin for him, and yet quarter twenty more in it.


Dol. Pree the Poet what do thou think of me.


Bell. I think thou art a most admirable, brave, beautiful Whore.


Dol. Nay sir, I was told you would rail: but what do you think of my device
sir, nay: but you are not to depart yet Master Poet: wut sup with me? I Will
cashiere all my young barnicles, and we will talk over a piece of mutton and a
partridge, wisely.


Bell. Sup with thee that art a common undertaker? thou that do promise
nothing but watchet eyes, bumbast calves and false peryvvigs.


Dol* Pree the comb thy beard with a comb of black lead, it may be I shall
affect thee.


Bell. O thy unlucky star! I must take my leave of your worship I cannot fit
your device at this instant: I must desire to borrow a nest of goblets of you:
O villainy! I wud some honest Butcher would beg all the queanes and knaves
ith City and carry them into some other Country they would sell better than Beefes
and Calves: what a virtuous City would this be then! mary I think there
would be a few people left int, vds foot, guld with Cheese-trenchers and yokt
in entertainment with a Tailor? good, good. Exit.


Phil. How do Doll?


Doll. Scuruie, very scuruie.


Lever. Where shalls suppe wench?


Doll. I Will suppe in my bed: get you home to your odging and come when I
send for you, o filthy rogue that I am.


Phil. How! how, mistress Dorothy?


Dol. Saint Antonies fire light in your Spanish slops: vds life, ille make you
know a difference, between my mirth and melancholy, you panderly rogue.


Om. We observe your Ladyship.


Phi. The puncks in her humer -- pax. Exit.


Dol. I Will humor you and you pox me: vds life have I lien with a Spaniard of
late, that I have learnt to mingle such water with my Malago, Other's some
scuruie thing or other breeding; how many several loves of Plaiers of
Vaulters, of Lieutenants have I entertained besides a runner a the ropes, and
now to let blood when the sign is at the heart? should I send him a letter
with some Jewel in it, he would requite it as lawiers do, that re-returne a
wood-cock pie to their clients, when they send them a Basin and a Eu^e, I will
instantly go and make my self drunk, till I have lost my memory, live a
scoffing Poet? Exit.


Enter Lep-^rog and Squirill. Frog. Now Squiri^l will thou make us acquainted
with the jest thou promised to tell us of?


Squi. I will discover it, not as a Darby-shere women discouers her great
teeth, in laughter: but softly as a gentleman courts a wench behind an Arras:
and this it is, young Greenesheild thy Master with Greenesheilds sister lie in
my masters garden-house here in More-fields.


Frog. Right, what of this?


Squir Mary sir if the Gentlewoman be not his wife, he commits incest, for I Am
sure he lies with her every night.


Fro. All this I know, but to the rest.


Squir. I will tell thee, the most pollitick trick of a woman, that ere made a
man's face look witherd and pale like the tree in Cuckolds Haven in a great
snow: and this it is, my mistress makes her husband believe that she walks in
her sleep a nights, and to confirm this belief in him, sundry times she
has rizen out of her bed, unlocked all the doors, gone from Chamber to Chamber,
opend her chests, touz'd among her linen, and when he has wakte and mist her,
coming to question why she coniur'd thus at midnight, he has found her fast a
sleep, mary it was Cats sleep, for you shall hear what prey she watched for.


Frog. Good; forth.


Squir. I ouer-heard her last night talking with thy Master, and she promised
him that as soon as her husband was a sleep, she would walk according to her
custom, and come to his Chamber, mar^y she wou^d do it so pu^^^annically, so
secretly I mean that no body should hear of it.


Frog. (...) possible?


Squir. Take but that corner and stand close, and thine eyes shall w^t^ esse it.


Frog. O ^ntollerable wit, what hold can any man take of a woman's honesty.


Squi. Hold? no more hold then of a Bull noynted with Soap, and baited with a
sn^a^e of ^idle^s i^ Staffordshire: stand close I hear her coming. Enter Kate.


Kate. What a filt^y knave was the shoo-maker, that made my slippers, what a
cre^king they keep: O Lord, if there be any power that can make a w^mans
husband sleep s^undly at a pinch, as I have often (...) in foolish Poetry
that the^e is, now, now, and it be thy will, let him dream some fine d^^ame or
other, that he is made a Knight, or a Nobleman, or somewhat whilst I go and
take b^t two kisses, but two kisses from sweet Fetherstone. Exit.


Squi. Sfoot he may well d^eame he is made a Knight: for I Will be hanged i^ she do
^ot d^b him.


Green. Was there ever any walking spirit, like to my wife? what reason should
there be in nature for this* I will question some ^^^^tion: not hear neither:
vdslife, I would laugh if she were in Master Fetherstones Chamber, she would
fright him, Mai^^er Fetherstone, Master Fetherstone.


Within Fether. Ha, how now who calls?


Green. Did you leave your door open last night?


Feth. I know not, I ^^inke my boy did.


Green. Gods light she is there then, will you know the jest, my wife has her
old tricks, I Will hold my life, my wife's in your chamber, rise out of your bed,
and see and you can feel her.


Squi. He will feel her ^ warrant you?


Gree. Have you her sir?


Feth. ^ot yet sir, she is here sir.


Enter Feth^rstone and Kate in his arms. Green. So I said even now to my self
before God la: take her up in your arms, and bring her hither softly, for
fear of waking her: I never knew the like of this before God la, alas poor
Kate, look before God; she is a sleep with her eyes open: prittie little
rogue, I Will wake her, and make her ashamd of it.


Feth. O you will make her sicker then.


Green. I warrant you; would all women thought no more hurt then thou do,
now sweet villain, Kate, Kate.


Kate. I longd for the merry thought of a phesant.


Green. She talks in her sleep.


Kate. And the foule-gutted Tripe-wife had got it, and eat half of it: and my
color went and came, and my stomach wambled: till I was ready to sound, but a
Midwife perceived it, and marked which way my eyes went; and helped me to it,
but Lord how I picked it, 'twas the sweetest meat me thought.


Squi. O pollitick Mistrisse.


Green. Why Kate, Kate?


Kate. Ha, ha, ha, I beshrew your heart, Lord where am I?


Green. I pray thee be not frighted.


Kate. O I am sick, I am sick, I am sick, O how my flesh trembles: oh some of
the Angelica water, I shall have the Mother presently.


Gree. Hold down her stomach good master Fetherstone, while I fetch some.
Exit.


Feth. Well dissembled Kate.


Kate. Pish, I am like some of your Ladies that can be sick when they have no
stomach to lie with their husbands.


Feth. What mischiuous fortune is this: weel have a journey to Ware Kate, to
redeem this misfortune.


Kate. Well, Cheaters do not win all ways: that woman that will entertain a
friend, must as well provide a Closet or Back-doore for him, as a Fether-bed.


Feth. Be my troth I pity thy husb^nd.


Kate. Pity him, no man dares call him Cuckold; for he wears Satin: pity
him, he that will pull down a man's sign, and set up horns, there is law for
him.


Feth. Be sick again, your husband comes.


Enter Greeneshield with a broken shin. Green. I have the worst luck; I think
I get more bumps and shrewd turns in the dark, how does she master Fetherstone.


Feth. Very ill sir; she is troubled with the moother extremely, I held down
her belly even now, and I might feel it rise*


Kate. O lay me in my bed, I beseech you.


Gree. I will find a remedy for this walking, if all the Docters in town can
sell it; a thousand pound to a penny she spoil not her face, or break her
neck, or catch a cold that she may nere claw off again, how do wench?


Kate. A little recouerd; alas I have so troubled that Gentleman.


Feth. None in the world Kate, may I do you any farther service.


Kate. And I were where I would be in your bed: pray pardon me, wast you
Master Fetherstone, hem, I should be well then.


Squi. Mark how she wrings him by the fingers.


Kate. Good night, pray you give the Gentleman thanks for patience.


Green. Good night Sir.


Feth. You have a shrewd blow, you were best have it searched.


Green. A scratch, a scratch. Exit.


Feth Let me see what excuse should I frame, to get this wench forth a town
with me: I Will persuade her husband to take Physic, and presently have a letter
framed, from his father in law, to be deliuerd that morning for his wife, to
come and receive some small parcel of money in Enfield chase, at a Keepers
that is her Uncle, then sir he not being in case to travel, will entreat me
to accompany his wife, we will lie at Ware all night, and the next morning to
London, I Will go strike a Tinder, and frame a Letter presently. Exit.


Squi. And I Will take the pains to discover all this to my master old Maybery,
there has gone a report a good while, my Master has used them kindly,
because they have been over familiar with his wife, but I see which way
Fetherstone looks. sfoote there is near a Gentleman of them all shall gull a
Citizen, and think to go scot-free: though your commons shrink for this be
but secret, and my Master shall intertaine thee, make thee instead of handling
false Dice, finger nothing but gold and silver wagge, an old Seruing-man turns
to a young beggar, whereas a young Prentise may turn to an old Alderman, wilt
be secret?


Leap. O God sir, as secret as rushes in an old Ladies Chamber. Exit.


ACTVS 4. SCENA 1.
Enter Bellamont in his Nightcap, with leaves in his hand, his man after him
with lights, Standish and Paper. Bell. Sir, I Will speak with none.


Seru. Not a plaier:


Bell. No tho a Sharer ball,
I Will speak with none although it be the mouth
Of the big company, I Will speak with none, -- away.
Why should not I be an excellent sta^esman? I can in the writing of a
tragedy, make Caesar speak be^ter than ever his ambition could: when I write
of Pompey I have Pomp^ies soul within me, and when I pe^sona^e a worthy Poet,
I a^ then truly my self, a poo^e vnpreferd scholar.


Enter his Man hastily. Seru, Here Is a ^waggering fellow sir, that speaks not
like a man of gods making, swears he must speak with you and will speak with
you.


Bell Not of gods making what is he? a Cuckold?


Seru* He Is a Gentl^man sir, by his clothes.


Bell. Enter him and his clothes: cl^the^ sometimes are better Gentlemen than
their Masters. Ent. the Captain and the Ser. is this he? Seek you me sir.


Cap. I seek sir, (god please you) for a Sentillman, that talks besides to
himself when he is alone, as if he were in Bed-lam, and he is a Poet.


Bell. So sir it may be you seek me, for I Am sometimes out a my wits.


C^p. You are a Poet sir, are you.


Bell. I Am haunted with a Fury Sir.


Cap. Pray Master Poet shute off this little pot-gun, and I will conjure your
Fu^y: it is well lay you sir, my desires are to have some amiable and amorous
sonnet or madrigall composed by your Fury, see you.


Bell. Are you a lover sir of the nine Muses.


Cap. Ow, by gad out a cry.


Cap. You Are then a scholar sir.


Cap. I ha picked up my cromes in Sesus college in Oxford one day a gad w^ile
ag^e*


Bell. You Are welcome you are very welcome, I Will borrow your Judgment look you
sir, I Am writing a Tragedy, the Tragedy of young Astianax.


Cap. S^^^nax Tragedy is he living can you tell? was not Stianax a M^n-mouth
man?


Bell. O no sir, you mistake, he was a Troyane great Hectors Son.


Cap. Hector was grannam to Cadwallader, when she was great with child, god
vdge me, there was one young Styanan of Mon-mouth sheire was a madder greek as
any is in all England.


Bell. This was not he assure ye: look you sir, I will have this Tragedy
presented in the French Court, by French Gallants.


Cap. By god your Frenchmen will do a Tragedy interlude, poggy well.


Bell. It shall be sir at the marriages of the Duke of Orleans, and Chatilion the
admiral of France, the stage.


Cap. Vds blood, does Orleans marry with the Admiral of France now.


Bell O sir no, they are two several marriages. As I was saying the stage hung
all with black velvet, and while it is acted, my self will stad behind the Duke of
Biron, or some other chief minion or so, -- who shall, I they shall take some
occasion about the music of the fourth Act, to step to the French King, and
say, Sire, voyla, il et votre treshumble seruiteur, le plu sage, e diuin^
espirit, monsi^ur Bellamont, all in French thus poynting at me, or you is the
learned old English Gentleman Master Bellamont a very worthy man, to be one
of your privy Chamber, or Poet Lawreat.


Cap. But are you sure Duke Pepper-noone will give you such good vrdes, behind
your back to your face.


Bell. Oh I, I, I man, he is the only courtier that I know there: but what do
you think that I may come to by this.


Cap. God vdge me, all France may hap die in your debt for this.


Bell I am now writing the description of his death.


Cap. Did he die in his ped*


Bell. You shall hear: suspicion is the Mynion of great hearts, no: I will not
begin there: Imagine a great man were ^o be executed about the 7. hour in a
gloomy morning.


Capt. As it might be Sampson or so, or great Golias that was killed by my
Countriman.


Bell. Right sir, thus I express it in young Astianax.
Now the wild people greedy of their griefs,
Longing to see, that which their thoughts abhord,
Prevented day, and rod on their own roofes.

Cap. Could the little horse that ambled on the top of Paules^ carry all the
people; else how could they ride on the roofes!


Bell. O sir, it is a figure in Poetry, mark how it is followed,
Rod on their own roofes,
Making all Neighboring houses tilde with men; tilde with men ^ist not good.

Cap. By Sesu, and it were tilde all with naked Imen twere better.


Bell. You shall hear no more; pick your ears, they are foul sir, what are
you sir pray?


Cap. A Captain sir, and a follower of god Mars.


Bell. Mars, Bachus, and I love Apollo! a Captain! then I pardon your sir, and
Captain what wud you press me for?


Cap. For a witty ditty, to a Sentill-oman, that I am fallen in with all, over
head and ears in affections, and natural desires.


Bell. An Acrostick were good upon her name me thinks.


Cap. Cross sticks: I wud not be too cross Master Poet; yet if it be best
to bring her name in question, her name is mistress Dorothy Hornet.


Bell. The very consumption that wastes my Son, and the Aim that hung lately
upon me: do you love this Mistress Dorothy?


Cap. Love her! there is no Captains wife in England, can have more love put
upon her, and yet I Am sure Captains wives, have their pellies full of good
men's loves.


Be. And does she love you? has there past any great matter between you?


Cap. As great a matter, as a whole coach, and a horse and his wife are gone too
and fro between us.


Bell. Is she? ifayth Captain, be valiant and tell truth, is she honest?


Cap. Honest? god vdge me, she is as honest, as a Punck, that cannot abide
fornication, and lechery.


Bell. Look you Captain, I Will show you why I ask, I hope you think my
wenching days are past, yet Sir, here is a letter that her father, brought me
from her and enforced me to take this very day. Enter a Servant and Whispers.


Cap. It Is for some love -- song to send to me, I hold my life.


Bell. This falls out pat, my man tells me, the party is at my door, shall she
come in Captain?


Cap. O I, I, put her in, put her in I pray now. Exit Seru.


Bell. The letter says here, that she is exceeding sick, and intreates me to
visit her: Captain, lie you in ambush behind the hangings, and perhaps you
shall hear the piece of a Commedy: she comes, she comes, make your self away.


Cap. Does the Poet play Torkin and cast my Lucraesies water too in hugger
muggers? if he do, Styanax Tragedy was never so horrible bloudy-minded, as his
Commedy shall be, -- Tawsons Captain Ienkins. Enter Doll.


Dol. Now Master Poet, I sent for you.


Bell. And I came once at your Ladyships call.


Dol. My Ladyship and your Lordship lie both in one manner; you have coniur'd
up a sweet spirit in me have you not Rimer?


Bell. Why M^dea! what spirit! wud I were a young man for thy sake.


Dol. So wud I, for then thou could do me no hurt; now thou do.


Bell. If I were a yonker, it would be no Imodesty in me to be seen in thy
company; but to have snow in the lap of June; vile! vile: yet come; garlic has
a white head, and a green stalk, then why should not* I? lets be merry: what
says the diuill to all the world, for I Am sure thou art carnally possessed with
him.


Dol. Thou have a filthy foot, a very filthy cariers foot.


Bell. A filthy shoe, but a fine foot, I stand not upon my foot I.


Cap. What stands he upon then? with a pox god bless us?


Doll. A leg and a Calfe! I have had better of a butcher forty times for
carrying a body! not worth begging by a Barber-surgeon.


Bell. Very good, you draw me and quarter me, fates keep me from hanging.


Dol. And which most turns up a woman's stomach, thou art an old hoary man:
thou have gone over the bridge of many years, and now art ready to drop into a
grave: what do I see then in that withered face of thine?


Bell. Wrinkles: gravity.


Doll. Wretchedness: grief: old fellow thou have be witch me; I can neither
eat for thee, nor sleep for thee, nor lie quietly in my bed for thee.


Cap. Vd^ blood! I did never see a white flea before I will clinge you?


Doll. I was borne sure in the dog days ^me so vnluky; I, in whom neither a
flaxen hair, yellow beard, French doublet, nor Spanish hose, youth nor
personage, rich ^ace nor money cold ever breed a true love to any, ever to any
man, am now besotted, doat, am mad, for the carcas of a man, and as if I were
a baud, no ring pleases me but a deaths head.


Cap. Sesu, are I men so arsy varsy.


Bell. Mad for me? why if the worm of lust were wrigling within me as it does
in others, do think I Would crawle upon thee; wud I low after thee, that art a
common calfe-bearer.


Doll. I confess it.


Cap. Do you, are you a town cow and confess you bear calves.


Doll. I confess, I have bin an Inn for any guest.


Cap. A pogs a your stable-roome; is your Inn a baudy house now?


Doll. I confess (for I ha bin taught to hide nothing from my Suergeon and
thou art he) I confess that old stinking Surgeon like thy self) whom I call
father, that Hornet never sweat for me, I Am none of his making.


Cap. You lie he makes you a punke Hornet minor.


Dol. He Is but a cheater, and I the false die he plays withal, I power all
my poison out before thee, because heareafter I will be clean: shun me not,
loath me not, mock me not, plagues confound thee, I hate thee to the pit of
hell, yet if thou go thither, i will follow thee, run, aid do what thou
can, i will run and ride over the world after thee.


Cap. Cockatrice: you mistress Salamanders that fear no burning, let my mare
and my mares horse, and my coach come running home again and run to an
hospital, and your Surgeons, and to knaves and panders and to the tiuell and
his tame to.


Doll. Fiend art thou raized to torment me.


Bell. She loves you Captain honestly.


Cap. I Will have any man, oman or cilde by his ears, that says a common drab
can love a Sentillman honestly, I will sell my Coach for a cart to have you to
puncks hall, Pridewell, I sarge you in Apollos name, whom you belong to, see
her forth-comming, till I come and tiggle her, by and by, God's Blood I was never
Couzend with a more rascal piece of mutton, since I came out a the Lawer
Countries. Exit.


Bell. My doors are open for thee, be gone: woman!


Doll. This goats -- peezle of thine --


Bell. Away: I love no such implements in my house.


Dol. Do not? am I but an implement? by all the maidenheads that are lost in
London in a year (and that's a great oath) for this trick, other manner of women
than my self shall come to this house only to laugh at thee; and if thou
would labor thy heart out, thou shall not do withal. Exit. Enter Servant.


Bell. Is this my Poetical fury? how now sir!


Ser. Master Maybery and his wife sir ith next room.


Bell. What are they doing sir?


Ser. Nothing sir, that I see, but only wud speak with you.


Bell. Enter 'em: this house will be to hot for me, if this wench cast me into
these sweates, I must shift my self, for pure necessity, haunted with sprites
in my old days!


Enter Maybery booted, his Wife with him. May. A Commedy, a Canterbury tale
smells not half so sweet as the Commedy I have for thee old Poet: thou shall
write upon it Poet.


Bell. Nay I will write upon it ift be a Commedie, for I have been at a most
villainous female Tragedy: come, the plot, the plot.


May. Let your man give you the boots presently, the plot lies in Ware my
white Poet: Wife thou and I this night, will have mad sport in Ware, mark me
well Wife, in Ware.


Wif. At your pleasure sir.


May. Nay it shall be at your pleasure Wife: look you sir, look you:
Fetherstones boy (like an honest crack-halter) laid open all to one of my
prentices, (for boys you know like women love to be doing.)


Bell. Very good: to the plot.


May. Fetherstone like a crafty mutton-monger, persuades Greenshield to be run
through the body.


Bell. Strange! through the body?


May. I man, to take physic* he does so, he is put to his purgation; then sir
what does me Fetherstone, but counterfits a letter from an Inkeeper of
Doncaster, to fetch Greenshield (who is needy you know) to a keepers lodge in
Enfeild-chace* a certain Uncle, where Greenshield should receive money due to
him in behalf of his wife.


Bell. His wife! is Greensheild married? I have heard him swear he was a
batchiler.


Wife. So have I a hundred times.


May. The knave has more wives than the Turk, he has a wife almost in every
shire in England, this parcel Gentlewoman is that Inkeepers Daughter of
Doncaster.


Bell. Has she the entertainment of her forefathers? will she keep all
comers company?


May. She help's to pass away stale Capons, sower wine, and musty prouander:
but to the purpose, this train was laid by the baggage her self and
Fetherstone, who it seems makes her husband a unicorn: and to give fire to^t,
Greensheild like an Arrant wittall intreates his friend, to ride before his
wife, and ^etch the money, because taking bitter pills, he should prove but a
loose fellow if he went, and so durst not go.


Bell. And so the poor Stag is to be hunted in Enfeild^chace


May. No sir, Master poet there you miss the plot. Fetherstone and my Lady
Greensheild are rid to batter away their light commodities in Ware,
Enfeild-chace is to cold for 'em.


Bell. In Ware!


May In dur^^ Ware: I forget my self wise, on with your ryding suite and cry
Northward hoe, as the boy at Powles says, let my Prentice get up before thee,
and m^n t^ee to Ware, lodge in the ^^ne I told thee, spur cut and away.


Wife. Well sir. Exit.


Bell. Stay, stay, what is the bottom of this riddle? why send you her away?


May. For a thing my little hoary Poet: look thee, I smelt out my noble
stincker Greensheild in his Chamber, and as tho my heart stringes had bin
cracked, I wept, and sighd, and thumpd, and thumpd, and rau'd and randed, and
raild, and told him how my wife was now grown as common as baibery, and that
she had hierd her Tailor to ride with her to Ware, to meet a Gentleman of the
Court.


Bell. Good; and how took he this drench down.


May. Like Eggs and Muscadine, at a gulp: he cries out presently, did not I
tell you old man, that sheed win my game when she came to bearing? he railes
upon her, wills me to take her in the Act; to put her to her white sheet, to
be diuorc'd, and for all his guts are not fully scourd by his Pottecary, he is
pulling on his boots, and will ride along with us; lets muster as many as we
can.


Bell. It will be excellent spo^t, to see him and his own wife meet in Ware,
wilt not? I, I, we will have a whole Regiment of horse with us.


May. I stand upon thorns, tell I shake him bith hor^es: come, boots boy, we
must gallop all the way, for the Sin you know is done with turning up the white
of an eye, will you join your forces.


Bell. Like a Hollander against a Dunk^rke.


May. March then, this curse is on all letchers thrown,
They give horns and at last, horns are their own. Exit.

Enter Captain Ienkins, and Allom. Cap. Set the best of your little diminitiue
legs before, and ride post I pray.


Allo. Is it possible that mistress D^ll should be so bad?


Cap. Possible! Should it is more easy for an oman to be naught, than for a
soldier to beg, and that's horrible easy, you know.


Al. I but to connicatch us all so grossly.


Cap. Your Norfolk tumblers are but zanyes to connicatching punckes.


Allom. She gelded my purse of fifty pounds in ready money.


Cap. I will geld all the horses in five hundred Sheires, but I will ride over
her, and her cheaters, and her Hornets; She made a stark Ass of my
Coach-horse, and there is a putter-box, whom she spread thick upon her white
bread, and eat him up, I think she has sent the poor fellow to Gilderland,
but I will marse prauely in and out, and pack again upon all the low countries
in Christendom, as Holland and Zeland and Netherland, and Cleueland too, and I
will be drunk and cast with master Hans van Belch, but I will smell him out.


Allom. Do so and we will draw all our arrows of revenge up to the head but
we will hit her for her villainy.


Cap. I will traw as petter, and as vrse weapons as arrewes up to the head, lug
you, it shall be warrants to give her the whippe deedle.


Allom. But now she knows she is discovered, she will take her bells and fly out
of our reach.


Cap. Fle with her pells! ownds I know a parish that sal tag down all the
pells and sell em to Capten Ienkens, to do him good* and if pelle will fly,
we will fly too, unless, the pell-ropes hang us: will you amble up and down to
master Justice by my side, to have this rascal Hornet in little, and so, to
make her hold her whoars peace.


Allom. I Will amble or trot with you Capten: you told me, she threatened her
champions should cut for her, if so, we may have the peace of her.


Cap. O mon du! u dguin! follow your leader, Ienken shall cut, and Slice, as
worse as they: come I scorn to have any peace of her, or of any onam, but open
wars. E^unt.


Enter Bellamont, Maybery, Greensheild, Phillip, Leuarpoole, Chartley: all
booted. Bell. What? will these young Gentlemen to help us to catch this fresh
Salmon, ha! Phillip! are they thy friends.


Phil. Yes Sir*


Bell. We are beholding to you Gentlmen that you will fill our consort I ho seen
your faces me thinks before; and I cannot inform my self where.


Both, May be so Sir.


Bell. Shalls to horse, hears a tickler: heigh: to horse.


May. Come Switts and Spurs! lets mount our Cheualls: merry quoth a.


Bell. Gentlemen shall I shoot a fools bolt out among you all, because we will
be sure to be merry.


Omn. What is it?


Bell. For mirth on the high way, will make us rid ground faster then if
thieves were at our tails, what say ye to this, lets all practice jests one
against another, and he that has the best jest thrown upon him, and is most
gald, between our riding forth and coming in, shall bear the charge of the
whole journey.


Omn. Content in faith.


Bell. We shall fit one a you with a Cox-combe at Ware I believe.


May. Peace.


Green. Is It a bargen.


Omn. And hands clapped upon it.


Bell. Stay, yonder is the Dolphin without Bishops-gate, where our horses are at
rack and manger, and we are going past it: come cross over: and what place is
this?


May. Bedlam is it not?


Bell. Where the madmen are, I never was amongst them, as you love me
Gentlemen, lets see what Greeks are within.


Green. We shall stay too long.


Bell. Not a whit, Ware will stay for our coming I warrant you: come a spurt
and away, lets be mad once in our days: this is the door. Enter Full-moone.


May, Save you sir, may we see some a your mad-folkes, do you keep em?


Full. Yes.


Bell. Pray bestow your name sir upon us.


Full. My name is Full-moone.


Bell. You well deserve this office good master Full-moone: and what mad-caps
have you in your house,


Enter the Physician. Full. Diverse.


May. Gods so, see, see, what is he walks yonder, is he mad.


Full. That's a Musition, yes he is besides himself.


Bell. A Musition, how fell he mad for Gods sake?


Full. For love of an Italian Dwarf.


Bell. Has he been in Italy then?


Full. Yes and speaks they say all manner of languages.


Enter the Ba^d. Omn. Gods so, look, look, what is she.


Bell. The dancing Bear: a p^itty well-fauourd little woman.


Full. They say, but I know not, that she was a Bawd, and was frighted out of
her wits by fire,


Bell. May we talk with 'em master Ful-moone


Full. Yes and you will; I must look about for I have unruly tenants. Exit.


Bell. What have you in this paper honest friend?


Gree Is this he has al manner of languages, yet speaks none


Baud. How do you Sir Andrew, will you send for some ^quauite for me, I have
had no drink never since the last great rain that fell.


Bell. No that's a lie.


Baud. Nay by gad, then you lie, for all you are Sir Andrew, I was a dapper ^ogue
in Portingall voyage, not an inch broad at the heel, and yet thus high, I
scornd I can tell you to be druncke with rain water then Sir, In those golden
and silver days: I had sweet bitts then Sir Andrew: how do you good brother
Timothy?


Bella. You have bin in much trouble since that voyage.


Baud. Never in bride-wel I protest, as I Am a virgin: for I could never abide
that bride-wel I protest, I was once sick, and I took my water in a basket,
and cary'd it to a doctors.


Phil. In a basket.


Baud. Yes Sir: you arrant fool there was a vrinall in it.


Phil. I cry you mercy.


Baud. The Doctor told me I was with child, how many Lords Knights, Gentlemen,
Citizens, and others promised me to be godfathers to that child: it was not Gods
will: the prentises made a riot upon my glasse-windowes the Shroue-tuesday
following and I miscarried.


Omn. O do not weep.


^aud. I ha cause to weep: I trust Gintlewomen their diet sometimes a
fortnight: lend Gentlemen holland shirts, and they sweat 'em out at tennis: and
no restitution, and no restitution* but I Will take a new order, I will have but
six stewd prunes in a dish and some of mother Walls cakes: for my best
customers are tailors.


Omn. Tailors! ha ha.


^aud. I Tailors: give me your London Prentice; your country Gentlemen are
grown too polliticke.


Bell. But what say you to such young Gentlemen as these are.


Baud. ^oh, they as soon as they come to their lands get up to London, and
like squibs that run upon lines, they keep a Spitting of fire, and cracking
till they ha spent all, and when my squib is out, what says his punke, foh, he
stinckes.

Enter the musition. Me thought this other night, I saw a pretty sight,
Which pleased me much.
A comely country maid, not squeamish nor afraid,
To let Gentlemen touch.
I sold her maidenhead once, and I sold her maidenhead twice,
And I sold it last to an Alderman of York.
And then I had sold it thrice.

Musi. You sing sc^ruily.


Baud. mary muffe, sing thou better, for I Will go sleep my old sleeps. Exit.


Bell. What are you a doing my friend.


Musi. Pricking, pricking.


Bell. What do you mean by pricking?


Musi. A Gentleman like quallity.


Bell. This fellow is some what prouder, and sul^^ner then the other.


May, Oh; so be most of your musitions.


Musi. Are my teeth rotten?


Omn. No Sir.


Musi. Then I am no Comfit-maker, nor Vintner, I do not get wenches in my
drink: are you a musition?


Bell. Yes.


Mu. we will be sworn brothers then, look you sweet rogue.


Gree. Gods so, now I think upon it, a Jest is crept into my head, steal away,
if you love me. Exeunt: musition sings.


Musi. Was ever any merchants band set better I set it: walk I Am a cold, this
white satin is to thin unless it be cut, for then the Sun enters: can you
speak Italian too, Sape^e Italiano.


Bell. Un poco.


Musi. Sblood if it be in you, I Will po^ke it out if you; un poco, come March lie
hear with me but till the fall of the lease, and if you have but poco Italiano
in you, I Will fill you full of more poco March.


Bell. Come on. Exeunt.


Enter Maybery, Greeneshilde, Phillip. Full-moone. Leuerpoole, and Chartely.
Gree. Good Master Mayberie, Philip, if you be kind Gentlemen uphold the jest:
your whole voyage is paid for.


May. Follow it then.


Full. The old Gentleman say you, why he talked even now as well in his wits as
I do my self, and looked as wisely.


Gree. No matter how he talks, but his Pericranion's perished.


Full. Where is he pray?


Phil. Mary with the Musition, and is madder by this time


Ch^er. He Is an excellent Musition himself, you must note that.


May. And having met one fit for his one tooth: you see he skips from us.


Green. The troth is master Full-m^one, diverse trains have bin laid to bring
him hither, without gaping of people, and never any took effect till now.


Full. How fell he mad?


Green. For a woman, look you sir: here is a crown to provide his supper:
he is a Gentleman of a very good house, you shall be paid well if you convert
him; to morrow morning, bedding, and a gown shall be sent in, and wood and
coal.


Full. Nay sir, he must ha no fire.


Green. No, why look what straw you buy for him, shall return you a whole
harvest.


Omnes. Let his straw be fresh and sweet we beseech you sir?


Green. Get a couple of your sturdiest fellows, and bind him I pray, whilst
we slip out of his sight.


Full. I Will hamper him, I warrant Gentlemen. Exit.


Omnes. Excellent.


May. But how will my noble Poet take it at my hands, to betray him thus.


Omn. Foh, it is but a jest, he comes.


Enter Musition and Bellamont. Bell. Perdonate mi, si Io dimando del vostro
nome: oh, whether ^hrunke you: I have had such a mad dialogue here.


Omn. We ha bin with the other mad folks.


May. And what says he and his prick-song?


Bell. We were up to the ears in Italian in faith.


Omn. In Italian; O good master Bellamont lets hear him.


Enter Full-moone, and two Keepers. Bell. How now, Sdeath what do you mean?
are you mad?


Full. Away sir, bind him, hold fast: you want a wench sir, do you?


Bell. What wench? will you take mine arms from me, being no Heralds? let go
you Dogs.


Full. Bind him, be quiet: come, come, dogs, fie, and a gentleman.


Bell. Master Maibery, Philip, master Maibery, vds foot.


Full. I Will bring you a wench, are you mad for a wench.


Bell. I hold my life my comrads have put this fools cap upon thy head: to gull
me: I smell it now: why do you hear Full-moone, let me loose; for I Am not
mad; I Am not mad by Jesus:


Full. Ask the Gentlemen that.


Bell. Bith Lord I Am as well in my wits, as any man in the house, and this is a
trick put upon thee by these gallants in pure knavery.


Full. I Will try that, answer me to this question: loose his arms a little,
look you sir, three Geese nine pence; every Goose three pence, what is that a
Goose, roundly, roundly one with another.


Bell. Sfoot do you bring your Geese for me to cut up.


Enter all. strike him soundly, and kick him. Omn. Hold, hold, bind him master
Full-moone.


Full. Bind him you, he has paid me all, I Will have none of his bonds not I,
unless I could recover them better.


Gre. Have I given it you master Poet, did the Lime-bush take.


Ma. It was his warrant sent thee to Bedlam, old Jack Bellamo^t, and master
Full-ith'moone, our warrant discharges him; Poet, we will all ride upon thee to
Ware, and back again I fear to thy cost.


Bell. If you do, I must bear you, thank you Master Greenshield, I will not
dye in your debt: farewell you mad rascals, to horse come, it is well done;
'twas well done, you may laugh, you shall laugh Gentlemen: if the gudgeon had
been swallowed by one of you it had bin vile, but by Gad it is nothing, for
your best Poets indeed are mad for the most part: farewell good man
Full-moone.


Full. Pray Gentlemen if you come by call in. Exit.


Bell. Yes, yes, when they are mad, horse your selves now if you be men.


May. He gallop must that after women rides,
Get our wives out of Town, they take long strides. Exeunt.

ACTVS 5. SCAENA 1.
Enter old Maybery and Bellamont. May. But why have you brought us to the wrong
Inn? and withal possessed Greenshield that my wife is not in town: when my
project was, that I would have brought him up into the chamber, where young
Fetherstone and his wife lay: and so all his Artillery should have recoild into
his own bosom.


Bell. O it will fall out far better, you shall see my revenge will have a
more neat and unexpected conueyance: he has bin all up and down the town,
to enquire for a Londoners wife, none such is to be found: for I have mewd your
wife up already. mary he he^es of a Yorke-shire Gentlewoman at next Inn, and
that's all the commodity Ware affoords at this instant: now sir, he very
pollitickly imagins, that your wife is ^ode to Puckridge, five mile further,
for says he in such a town where Hosts will be familiar, and Tapsters saucie,
and Chamberlaines worse then thieves intelligencers, they will never put foot out
of Stirrup: either at Pucridge or Wades-mill (says he) you shall find them:
and because our horses are weary, he is gone to take up Post horse: my
counsel is only this, when he comes in, ^aine your self very melancholy,
swear you will ride no far^^er, and this is your part of the Comedy: the
sequeil of the jest shall come like money borrowed of a Courtier, and paid
within the day, a thing strange and unexpected. Enter Greeneshield.


May. Enough, Iha't,


Bell He comes.


Gree. Come gallants, the post horse are ready, it is but a quarter of an hours
riding, we will ^er^it them and ^^ke them in-faith.


Bell. Are they grown pollitick? when do you see honesty covet corners, or a
gentleman that's no thie^e lie in the Inn of a carrier.


May. Nothing has undone my wife, but too much riding.


Bell. She was a pri^ty piec^ of a Poet indeed, and in her discourse would as
many of your Gold-smit^s wives do, d^aw her ^^mily from precious stones, so
wittily, as redder then your Ruby, harder then your Diamond, and so from stone
to stone, in l^sse time then a man can draw on a straight boot, as if she had
been an excellent Lapidary.


Green. Come will you to horse sir?


May. No let her go to the devil and she will, I Will not stir a foot further.


Green. Gods precious is it come to this: persuade him as you are a Gentleman,
there will be ballads made of him, and the burden thereof will be, if you had
rode out 5. mile forward, he had found the fatal house of Braineford
Northward, O hone, hone, hone ononero.


Bell, You are merry sir.


Gre. Like your Citizen, I never think of my debts, when I am a horseback.


Bell. Vou imagine you are riding from your creditors.


Gree. Good infaith: will you to horse?


May. I Will ride no further.


Gree. The^ i will discharge the post-maister: was it not a pretty wit of mine
master Poet to have had him rod into Puckridge, with a horn before him, ha
wast not?


Bell. Good sooth excellent: I was dull in apprehending it: but come since we
must stay: well be merry, chamberlain call in the music, bid the Tapsters and
maids come up and dance, what weel make a night of it, hark you masters, I
have an exellent jest to make old Maibery merry, Sfoote we will have him merry.


Green. Lets make him drunk then, a simple catching wit I.


Bell. Go thy ways, I know a Nobleman would take such a delight in thee.


Green. Why so he would in his fool.


Bell. Before God but he would make a difference, he would keep you in
Satin, but as I was a saying weel have him merry: his wife is gone to
Puckridge, it is a wench makes him mela^choly, it is a wench must make him merry: we
must help him to a wench. when your citizen comes into his Inn, wet and cold,
dropping, e^^her the hostis or one of her maids, warmes his bed, pulls on his
nightcap, cuts his corns puts out the candle, bids him command ought, if he
want ought: and so after master cittiner sleeps as quietly, as if he lay in
his own low country of Holland, his own linen I mean sir, we must have a
wench for him.


Gree But where is this wench to be found, here are all the moveable peticotes of
the house.


Bell. At the next Inn there lodged to night --


Gree. Gods precious a Yorkshire Gentlewoman; I have it, I Will angle for her
presently, we will have him merry.


Bell. Procure some Chamberlain to Pander for you.


Gree. No I Will be Pander my self, because we will be me^rry.


Bell. Will you, will you?


Gree. But how? be a Pander as I am a gentleman? that were horrible, I Will thrust
my self into the outside of a Fawlconer in town here: and now I think on it
there are a company of country plaiers, that are come to town here, shall
furnish me with hair and beard: if I do not bring her, -- will be wondrous
merry.


Bell. About it look you sir, though she bear her far aloof, and her body out
of distance, so her mind be coming it is no matter.


Green. Get old Maibery merry: tha^ any man should take to heart thus the down
fall of a woman, I think when he comes home poor snaile, heel not dare to
peep forth of doors least his horns usher him. Exit.


Bell. Go thy ways, there be more in England wear large ears and horns, then
Stagges and Asses: excellent he rides post with a halter about his neck.


May. How now wilt take?


Bell. Beyond expectation: I have persuaded him the only way to make you merry,
is to help you to a wench, and the fool is gone to pander his own wife
hither.


May. Why heel know her?


Bell. She has been maskt ever since she came into the Inn, for fear of
discovery.


May. Then she will know him.


Bell. For that his own unfortunate wit helped my lasie invention, for he has
disguisd himself like a Fawkner, in Town hear, hoping in that procuring
shape, to do more good upon her, then in the outside of a Gentleman.


May. Young Fetherstone will know him?


Bell. He Is gone into the town, and will not return this half hour.


May. Excellent if she would come.


Bell. Nay upon my life she will come: when she enters remember some of your young
blood, talk as some of your gallant commoners will, Dice and drink: freely:
do not call for Sack, least it betray the coldness of your manhood, but fetch
a caper now and then, to make the gold chinke in your pockets: I so.


May. Ha old Poet, lets once stand to it for the credit of Milkestreete. Is my
wife acquainted with this.


Bell. She Is perfect, and will come out upon her qu, I warrant you.


May. Good wenches infaith: fills some more Sack hear.


Bell. Gods precious, do not call for Sack by any means.


May. Why then give us a whole Lordship for life in Rhenish, with the reuersion
in Sugar,


Bell. Excellent.


May. It were not amiss if we were dancing.


Bell. Out upon it, I shall never do it.


Enter Greensheild disguised, with mistress Greensheild. Green. Out of mine
nostrils tapster, thou smel^t like Guild Hall ^wo days after Simon and I^de,
of drink most horribly, off with thy mask sweet sinner of the North: these
maskes are foiles to good faces, and to bad ones they are like new satin
outsides to lousie linings.


Kat. O by no means sir, your Merchant will not open a whole piece to his best
costomer, he that buies a woman, must take her as she fales: I Will unmask my
hand hears the sample.


Green. Go to then, old Poet I have taken her up already as a pinnis bound for
the straights, she knows her burden yonder.


Bell. Lady you are welcome: you is the old Gentleman and observe him, he is not
one of your fat City chuffes: whose great belly argues that the felicity of
his life consistes in capon, sack, and sincere honesty, but a lean spare
bountiful gallant one that has an old wife, and a young performance: whose
reward is not the rate of a Captain newly come out of the Low-cou^t^ies: or a
Yorkeshiere Atturny in good contentious practice, some angel, no the proportion
of your welthy Citizen to his wench, is, her Chamber, her diet, her physic,
her apparel, her painting, her monkey, her pandar, her every thing. You Will say
your young Gentleman, is your only service that lies before you like a Calves
head, with his brains some half yeard from him, but I assure you, they must
not only have variety of foolery; but also of wenches: whereas your
conscionable gray-beard of Farrington within, will keep himself, to the
ruins of one cast waighting-woman an age: and perhaps, when he is past all
other good works, to wipe out false waightes, and twenty ith hundred, marry
her --


Green. O well bold Tom () we have presedents, for it*


Kat. But I have a husband sir.


Bell. You have, if the knave thy husband be rich, make him poor, that he may
borrow money of this Merchant, and be laid up in the Counter, or Ludgate, so it
shall be conscience in you old Gentleman, when he has seized all thy goods,
to take the horn and maintain thee.


Green. O well bold Tom () we have presedents for it.


Kat. Well if you be not a Nobleman, you are some great valiant Gentleman, by
your bearth: and the fashion of your beard: and do but thus to make the
Citizen merry, because you owe him some money.


Bell. O you are a wag.


May. You are very welcome.


Gree. He is taken, excellent, excellent, there is one will make him merry: is it
any imputation to help ones friend to a wench?


Bell. No more then at my Lords entreaty, to help my Lady to a pretty waighting
woman: if he had given you a gelding, or the reuersion of some Monopoly, or a
new suit of Satin to have done this, happily your Satin would have smelt of
the Pander: but what is done freely, comes like a present to an old Lady,
without any reward, and what is done without any reward, comes like wounds to
a Soldier, very honorably not-withstanding.


May. This is my breeding Gentlewoman: and whether travail you?


Kate. To London sir, as the old tale goes, to seek my fortune.


May. Shall I be your fortune Lady?


Kate. O pardon me sir, I Will have some young landed heir to be my Forrune, for
they favor she fools more then Citizens.


May. Are you married?


Kate. Yes, but my husband is in garrison in the Low Countries, is his Colonels
bawd, and his Captains Iester: he sent me word over, that he will thrive: for
though is apparel lie ith Lumbard, he keeps his conscience in the Mu^ter-booke.


May. He may do his country good service Lady.


Kate. I as many of your Captains do, that fight as the Geese saved the
Capitol, only with prattling: well, well, if I were in some Noblemans hands
now, may be he would not take a thousand pounds for me.


May. No.


Kate. No sir: and yet may be at years end, would give me a brace of hundredth
pounds to marry me to his Bailey, or the Solicitor of his Law suits: whose this
I beseech you?


Enter mistrisse Maybery her hair loose, with the Hostice. Hostice. I pray you
forsooth be patient.


Bell. Passion of my heart, Mistress Maybery. Exeunt Fiddlers.


Green. Now will she put some notable trick, upon her Cuckoldly husband.


May. Why how now Wife, what means this? ha?


Mi. Me. Well, I am very well: o my unfortunate parents, would you had buried
me quick, when you linkt me to this misery.


May. O wife be patient, I have more cause to rail wife.


Misters May. You have, prove it, prove it: where is the Courtier, you should
have taken in my bosom: I Will spit my gall in's face, that can tax me of any
dishonor: have I lost the pleasure of mine eyes, the sweetes of my youth, the
wishes of my blood: and the portion of my friends, to be thus dishonord, to be
reputed vild in London, whilst my husband prepares common diseases for me at
Ware, O god O god.


Be. Prettily well dissembled.


Host. As I am true hostice you are to blame sir, what are you masters: I Will
know what you are before you depart masters, do thou leave thy Chamber in an
honest Inn, to come and inueagle my costomers, and you had sent for me up, and
kissed me and used me like an hostice* twold never have gre^ued me, but to do it
to a stranger.


Kate. I Will leave you sir.


May. Stay, why how now sweet gentlewoman, cannot I come forth to breath my
self, but I must be haunted, rail upon old Bellamont, that he may discover
them, you remember Fetherstone Greensheild.


Mist. May. I remember them, I, they are two as coging, dishonorable dambd
forsworn beggarly gentlemen, as are in all London, and there is a reverent old
gentleman to, your pander in my conscience.


Bell. Lady, I will not as the old gods were wont, swear by the infernal
^tix: but by all the mingled wine in the seller beneath, and the smoke of
Tobacco that has fumed over the vessailes, I did not procure your husband this
banqueting dish of suckket look you behold the parenthesis.


Host* Nay I Will see your face too.


Kat. My dear unkind husband; I protest to thee I have played this knauish part
only to be witty.


Gree. That I might be presently turned into a ma^ter more sodllid then horn,
into Marble


Bell. Your husband gentlewoman: why he never was a soldier


Kat. I but a Lady got him pricked for a Captain, I warrant you, he will answer
to the name of Captain, though he be none: like a Lady thar will not think
scorn to answer to the name of her first husband; though he wear a
Sope-boyler.


Green. Hang of thou diuill, away.


Kat. No, no, you fled me the other day,
When I was with child you ran away,
But since I have caught you now.

Green. A pox of your wit and your singing.


Bell. Nay look you sir, she must sing because we will be merry, what though you
rod not five mile forward, you have found that fatal house at Brainford
Northward, O hone ho no na ne to.


Green. God refuse me Gentlemen, you may laugh and be merry: but I am a
Cockold and I think you knew of it, who lay ith segges with you to night
wild-ducke.


Kat. No body with me, as I shall be saved: but Master Fetherstone, came to
meet me as far as Roistone.


Green. Fetherstone.


May. See the hawke that first stoopt, my phesant is killed by the Spaniell that
first sprang all of our side wife.


Bell. It Was a pretty wit of you sir, to have had him rod into Puckeridge with a
horn before him; ha: wast not;


Green. Good.


Bell. Or where a Citizen keeps his house, you know it is not as a Gentleman
keeps his Chamher for debt, but as you said even now very wisely, least his
horns should usher him.


Green. Very good Fetherstone he comes. Enter Fetherstone.


Feth. Luke Greeneshield Master Maybery, old Poet: Mol and Kate, most hapily
incounterd, vdslife how came you heather, by my life the man looks pale.


Green. You are a villain, and I Will mak't good upon you, I am no seruingman, to
feed upon your reuersion.


Feth. Go to the ordinary then.


Bell. This is his ordinary sit and in this she is like a London ordinary: her
best getting comes by the box.


Green. You are a dambd villain.


Feth. O by no means.


Green. No, vdslife, I Will go instantly take a purse, be apprehended and hanged
for it, better then be a Cockold.


Feth. Best first make your confession sir.


Green. It Is this thou have not used me like a Gentleman.


Feth. A Gentleman: thou a gentleman: thou art a Tailor.


Bell. Ware peaching.


Feth. No sir if you will confess ought, tell how thou have wronged that
virtuous Gentlewoman: how thou laiest at her two year together to make her
dishonest: how thou would send me thither with letters, how duly thou
woudst watch the citizens wives vacation, which is twice a day; namely the
exchainge time, twelve at noone and six at night, and where she refused thy
importunity, and vowed to tell her husband: thou would fall down upon thy
knees, and entreat her for the love of Heaven, if not to ease thy violent
affection, at least to conceal it, to which her pity and simple virtue
consented, how thou tookest her wedding ring from her, Met these two Gentlemen
at Ware: fained a quarrel, and the rest is apparent, this only remains what
wrong the poor Gentlewoman has since received by our intolerable lie; I am
most heartily sorry for, and to thy bosom will maintain all I have said to be
honest.


May. Victory wise thou art quit by proclamation.


Bell. Sir you are an honest man, I have known an arrant thief for peaching
made an officer, give me your hand Sir.


Kate. O ffilthy abominable husband did you all this?


May. Certainly he is no Captain he blushes.


Mi. May. Speak Sir did you ever know me answer your wishes.


Gree. You are honest, very virtuously honest.


Mi. May. I will then no longer be a loose woman, I have at my husbands pleasure
taken upon me this habit of jealousy: I Am sorry for you, virtue glories not in
the spoil but in the victory.


Be. How say you by that goody Sentence, look you sir; you galla^ts visit
cittize^s houses, as the Spaniard first sailed to the Indies, you pretend bying
of wares or selling of lands: but the end proves it is nothing but for discovery
and conquest of their wives for better maintenance why look you, was he a ware
of those broken patience when you met him at Ware, and possessed him of the
downfall of his wife: you are a Cockcold you have pa^derd your own wife to this
gentleman better men have don it, honest Tom (), we have presidents for it, hie
you to London: what is more Catholic ith City then for husbands daily for to
forgive, the nightly sins of their bedfellowes: if you like not that course but
to intend to be rid of her: rifle her at a Tavern, where you may swallow down
some fifty wisacres sons and heirs to old tenements, and common gardens:
like so many raw yeolkes with Muskadine to bed-ward.


Kat. O filthy knave, do compare a woman of my cariadge to a horse.


Bell. And no disparagment; for a woman to have a high forhead: a quick ear, a
full eye, a wide nostrell, a sleeke skin, a straight back, a round hip, and so
forth is most comely.


Kat. But is a great belly comely in a horse sir.


Bell. No Lady.


Kat. And what think you of it in a woman I pray you.


Bell. Certainly, I am put down at my own weapon; I therefore recant the
riflying? no there is a new trade come up for cast Gentlewemen, of peeriwip
making: let your wife set up ith Strand, and yet I doubt, whither she may or
no, for they say, the women have got it to be a corporatio^; if you can you may
make good use of it, for you shall have as good a coming in by hair (tho it
be but a falling commodity) and by other foolish tyring, as any between Saint
Clements and Charing.


Feth. Now you have run your self out of breath, here me: I protest the
gentlewoman is honest, and since I have wronged her reputation in meeting her
thus privately, I Will maintain her: will thou hang at my purse Kate, like a
pair of barbary buttons, to open when it is full, and close when it is empty?


Kat. I Will be diuorc'd by this Christian element, and because thou think thou
art a Cockold, least I should make thee an infidel, in causing thee to believe
an untruth, I Will make thee a Cockold.


Bell. Excellent wench.


Feth. Come, lets go sweet: the Nag I ride upon bears double, we will to London.


May. Do not bite your thumbes sir.


Kate. Bite his thumb!
I Will make him do a thing worse than this,
Come love me where as I lay.

Feth. What Kate!


Kate. He shall father a child is none of his,
O the clean contrary way.

Feth. O lusty Rate. Exeunt.


May. Me thought he said, even now you were a Tailor.


Gre. You shall hear more of that hereafter, I Will make Ware and him stinck ere
he goes, if I be a Tailor, the roagues naked weapon shall not fright me, I Will
beat him and my wife both out ath Town with a Tailors yard. Exit.


May. O Valiant sir Tr^stram; room there.


Enter Philip Leuer-poole and Chartly. Phil. News father, most strange news
out of the Low Countries, your good Lady and Mistress that set you to work upon
a dozen of cheese-trenchers is new lighted at the next Inn, and the old
venerable Gentleman's father with her.


Bell Let the gate^ of our Inn be locked up, closer than a Noble-mans gates at
dinner time.


Omn. Why sir, why?


Bella. If she enter here, the house will be infected: the plague is not half
so dangerous, as a Shee-hornet: Philip this is your shuffling a the cards, to
turn up her for the bottom card at Ware.


Phi. No as I Am virtuous sir, ask the two Gentlemen.


Lever. No in troth sir; she told us, that inquiring at London for you or your
son, your man chalkt out her way to Ware.


Bell. I wud Ware might choke 'em both, Master Maybery, my horse and I will
take our leaves of you? I Will to Bedlam again rather than stay her.


May. Shall a woman make thee fly thy country? stay, stand to her tho she
were greater than Pope Ioane, what are thy brains coniuring for, my poetical
bay-leafe-eater?


Bell. For a sprite a the buttry, that shall make us all drinck with mirth if I
can raize it: stay, the chicken is not fully hatched, hit I beseech thee: So;
come! will you be secret Gentlemen and assisting.


Omn. With brown bills if you think good.


Bell. What will you say, if by some trick we put this little Hornet into
Fetherstones bosom, and marry 'em together.


Omn. Fuh, it is impossible.


Bell. Most possible, I Will to my trencher-woman, let me alone for dealing with
her: Fetherstone Gentlemen shall be your patient.


Omn. How! how?


Bell. Thus: I will close with this country Pedlar mistrisse Dorothy (that
travels up and down to exchange Pinnes for Cunny-skins) very lovingly, she
shall eat of nothing but sweet-meates in my company (good words) whose taste
when she likes, as I know she will, then will I play upon her with this
Artillery, that a very proper man, and a great heir (naming Fetherstone) spyed
her from a window, when she lighted at her Inn, is extremely fallen in love
with her, vows to make her his wife, if it stand to her good liking, even in
Ware; but being (as most of your young Gentlemen are) somewhat bashful, and
ashamde to venture upon a woman.


May. City and suburbs can justify it: so sir.


Bell. He sends me (being an old friend) to undermine for him: I Will so whet the
wenches stomach, and make her so hungry, that she shall have an appetite to
him, fear it not; Greenesheild shall have a hand in it too, and to be
reuengde of his partner, will I know strike with any weapon.


Lever. But is Fetherstone of any means? else you undo him and her.


May. He has land between Foolham and London, he would have made it over to
me: to your charge Poet, give you the assault upon her, and send but
Fetherstone to me, I Will hang him by the gills.


Bell. He Is not yet horst sure, Phillip, go thy ways, give fire to him, and
send him hither with a powder presently.


Phil. He Is blown up already. Exit.


Bell. Gentlemen you will stick to the devise, and look to your plot?


Omnes. Most Poetically: away to your quarter.


Bell. I march, I will cast my rider gallants: I hope you see who shall pay for
our voyage. Exit.


Enter Phillip and Fetherstone. May. That must he that comes here: Master
Fetherstone, O Master Fetherstone, you may now make your fortunes weigh ten
stone of Feathers more then ever they did: leap but into the Saddle now, that
stands empty for you, you are made for ever.


Lever. An Ass I Will be sworn.


Feth. How for Gods sake? how?


May. I would you had, what I could wish you, I love you, and because you shall
be sure to know where my love dwells, look you sir, it hangs out at this sign:
you shall pray for Ware, when Ware is dead and rotten: look you sir, there is
as pretty a little Pinnas, struck sail hereby, and come in lately; she is my
kinse-woman, my fathers youngest Sister, a ward, her portion three thousand;
her hopes if her Grannam dye without issue, better.


Feth. Very good sir.


May. Her Guardian goes about to marry her to a Stone-cutter, and rather than
she will be subject to such a fellow, she will dye a martyr, will you have all out?
she is run away, is here at an Inn in the town, what parts so ever you have
played with me, I see good parts in you, and if you now will catch times hair
that is put into your hand, you shall clap her up presently.


Feth. Is she young? and a pretty wench?


Lever. Few Citizens wives are like her.


Phil. Young, why I warrant sixteen has scarce gone over her.


Feth. Sfoot, where is she? if I like her personage, as well as I like that
which you say belongs to her personage, I Will stand thrumming of Caps no longer,
but board your Pynnis whilst it is hot.


May. Away then with these Gentlemen with a French gallop, and to her: Phillip
here shall run for a Priest, and dispatch you.


Feth. Will you gallants go along: we may be married in a Chamber for fear
of hew and cry after her, and some of the company shall keep the door.


May, Assure your soul she will be followed: away therefore. He Is in the
Curtian gulf, and swallowed horse and man: he will have some body keep the
door for him, she will look to that: I am younger then I was two nights ago,
for this physic. -- how now?


Enter Captain. Allom. Hans, and others booted. Capt, God please you; is there
not an arrant scuruy trab in your company, that is a Sentill-woman borne sir,
and can tawg Weleh, and Dutch and any tongue in your head?


May. How so? Drabs in my company: do I look like a Drab-driuer?


Capt. The Trab will drive you (if she put you before her) into a pench hole.


Allom. Is not a Gentleman here one Master Bellamont sir of your company.


May. Yes, yes, come you from London, heel be here presently.


Capt. Will he? tawsone, this oman, hunts at his tail like your little Goats
in Wales follow their mother, we have warrants here from master Sustice of
this shire, to show no pity nor mercy to her, her name is Doll.


May. Why sir, what has she committed? I think such a creature is in the town.


Capt. What has she committed: ownds she has committed more th^n
man-slaughters, for she has committed her self God please us to everlasting
prison: lug you sir, she is a punke, she shifts her lovers (as Captains and
Welsh Gentlemen and such) as she does her Trenchers when she has well fed
upon it, and that there is left nothing but pa^e bones, she calls for a clean
one, and scrapes away the first.


Enter Bellamont, and Hornet, with Doll between them Greeneshield, Kate,
Mayberies wife, Phillip, Leuerpoole, and Chartley. May. Gods so Master
Fetherstone, what will you do? here is three come from London, to fetch away the
Gentlewoman with a warrant.


Feth. All the warrants in Europe shall not fetch her now, she is mine sure
enough: what have you to say to her? she is my wife.


Cap. Ow! God's Blood do you come so far to fish and catch Frogs? your wife is a
Tilt-boate, any man or oman may go in her for money; she is a Cunny-catcher:
where is my mooueab'e goods called a Coach* and my two wild peasts, pogs on you
wud they had trawne you to the gallows.


Allom. I must borrow fifty pound of you Mistress Bride.


Hans. Yaw vro, and you make me de gheck, de groet fool, you heb mine gelt to:
war is it?


Doll. Out you base scums, come you to disgrace me in my wedding shoes?


Feth. Is this your three thousand pound ward, ye told me sir she was your
Kinswoman.


May. Right, one of mine Awnts.


Bell. Who pays for the Northren voyage now lads?


Gree. Why do you not ride before my Wife to London now? the Woodcocks ith^
Sprindge.


Kate. O forgive me dear husband! I will never love a man that is worse than
hanged, as he is.


May. Now a man may have a course in your Park?


Feth. He may sir.


Doll. Never I protest, I will be as true to thee, as Ware and Wades-mill are
one to another.


Feth. Well, it is but my fate: Gentlemen, this is my opinion, it is better to
shoot in a Bow that has been shot in before, and will never start, than to
draw a fair new one, that for every Arrow will be warping: Come wench we are
joined, and all the Dogs in France shall not part us: I have some lands, those
I Will turn into money, to pay you, and you, and any: I Will pay all that I can for
thee, for I Am sure thou have paid me.


Omn. God give you joy.


May. Come lets be merry, lie you with your own Wife, to be sure she shall
not walk in her sleep: a noise of Musicians Chamberlain.

This night lets banquet freely: come, we will dare,
Our wives to combat in the great bed in Ware* Exeunt.

FINIS.

