THE BLACK ROD: AND THE WHITE ROD. (Justice and Mercy.) Striking, and
Sparing, LONDON.

PSALM. 91. Surely he will deliver thee from the snare of the Hunter. And from
the noisome Pestilence. He will cover thee under his wings, and thou shall be
sure under his Feathers. Thou shall not be afraid of the Pestilence, that
walks in the Dark, nor of the Plague that Destroys at Noonday.

Pugna suum Finem, cum jacet Hostis, habet.

LONDON. Printed by B.A. and T.F. for JOHN COVVPER. 1630.

THE BLACK AND WHITE ROD.
THis World is a Royal Exchange, where all sorts of Men are Merchants: Kings
hold Commerce with Kings, and their Voyages are upon high Negotiations: As, the
dear buying of another Country, with their own Subjects Blood: The
Purchasing of new Crowns, and new Scepters, not satisfied with the old.

And, as Kings, so Princes, Dukes, Earls, Lords, Clergymen, Judges,
Soldiers, have their Trading in particular Marchandizes, and walk every day
for that purpose upon this Old Royal Exchange.

They talk in several Languages, And (like the murmuring fall of Waters) in
the Hum of several businesses: insomuch that the place seems Babell, (a
Confusion of tongues.)

The best, (yet most incertaine) Commodity, which all these Merchants strive
for, is Life: if Health begot into the bargain, He is a Made man, into whose
hands it comes. Yet when these two inestimable Treasures are shipped in one
Bottom, together; There are Winds, and Waves, and Woes, which still fill the
Sails, and hang upon the Tacklings.

What Is the end of this Voyage.

Currit Mercator ad Indos.
To heap up Gold.
The Merchants Name in the Indies, is enrolled.
Nay, though he casts a Girdle about the World, yet, Anchor he must in one
Harbor or another, to come to shore, and Proclaim his Lading on this Ryalta,
this Burse, or this Royal Exchange, And when the Exchange-Bell rings. (his
Passing Bell tolles) That Is the warning-Peece to tell him he must go off, he
must for that time talk there no more of his Transitory Commodities, the
Exchange of this world with him is then done, and Home does he hasten to dine
with Worms.

This Earthly spacious Building, in which we Dwell, (as Tenants only for life)
is likewise a glorious Theater, full of admirable Conueyances and Curiosities;
The Frame or Module of it is round, with a Silver moving Roof (called the
Heavens) to cover it by day, and a Golden Canopy of Stars to Curtain about
it by Night.

In stead of Arras and Tapestrie, (which commonly do now, and ever have
adorned, the old Amphitheaters, this is richly hung round about with the
Element of Air.

The beauties of the Earth are the Stage: Furnished bounteously, and set forth
in all Bravery, with Woods, full of Trees, Gardens full of Flowers, Orchards
full of Fruit, Fields full of standing Corn, (like so many Spears ready for a
Battle) Mountains high in Pride, Valleys sweet in Pleasure.

Our Mothers Womb is the Tyring-house, where we make us ready; And our Cradle,
the Musicke-Roome, for there we are sweetly strung with Innocence. Nothing
(then) puts us out of tune, but a peale of crying, And what is that? Only a
little Note, a little too high; which being mended, the Melody is Heavenly;
for, there is no Concord without Discord.

Upon this goodly Stage, all sorts of People (Men, Women, and Children) are
Actors; Some play Emperors, some, Kings, some Beggars, some Wisemen, some
Fools. The hardest part to play is a good Man: and it is rare to see a long
part given him to study.

On this stage are presented Tragedies, and Comedies; The terriblest Tragedy
is that, of the Soul, fighting to get off (well,) from the Body. The best and
most pleasing Comedy, is that of a white Conscience, and the Peace of Mind.

Some have Plaudits, Showts and Acclamations, and those are such who have
played good parts, and played them Brauely-well. Some go hissed off the Stage.
And that is for want of being perfect in those good parts, which are put into
them.

Some, play very long Parts, (and they are old Men) some, have done in the
midst of the Play, (And they are young Men) some, being but in a Scaene, before
they speak, are out, and lost, (And they are Children.)

Every Actor has his Entrance, every one his Exit: As one comes out, another
goes off, and sometimes meeting on the Stage together, they leave the Stage
together. But in the Conclusion, He that can get Angels to sit, in the
Galleries of Heaven, and clap his action with their Immortal hands, he is the
only Roscius of the time, and one of the best Actors that ever stepped on stage.

The sum, vpshot, and cloze of all, is this* That, as many Men as that walk on
that Royal Exchange, and seem rich, do often break and are laid in Prison:
So in this World; when we appear never so strong in Body, never so stirring in
mind; yet, if health turns Banquerupt once, and that the Sergeant with the
Black Rod, (Sickness) Arrests us; if either Casualties, by Sea or Land, if
losses, vexations, misfortunes or miseries, break our hearts, whether then are
we carried! To our everlasting Prison the Grave.

And so, when in this Magnificent Theater, we have Ietted long on the Stage,
And borne our Heads high; yet, our Parts being done, we are enforced to put
off, our gay borrowed garments, and wrapping our selves in poor
winding-Sheets, Hasten to our own homes, and (still) that is the Grave.

The Grave then, is the Rendez-vouz where we all meet; The Marketplace where
the Drum of Death beats, to have us come together: The Towne-Hall, where all
our brablings are ended: The Castle, to appear at, which at the Assizes, the
Body is bound over, and there it is Cast: In the Field of dead men's Sculs, and
fleshlesse bones, must the great Army of all Mankind muster, on Mount Caluary,
CHRIST lost his life, And in Dust and Ashes must we leave Ours.

We need not read any Books to prove this: Every man holds a Pen in his hand,
to write a story of it.

To pass over the Volumes of the Grave, (filled by Adam and his Children,) in
the first World; And clasping-vp, those likewise which have been ever since,
after the Deluge, in this second World: Let us cast our Eyes only at that
Black Rod, and that white Rod, which from time to time, have first smitten,
and then spared, This Kingdom of Great Britain.

In the Reigns of William the Conqueror, Rufus, and Hen: 1. (his Brother,)
Death walked up and down this Land in strange shapes: Men, Women, and
Children, fell by the Pestilence: So great were the numbers of those who dyed,
that the numbers of the living could harldy bury them. Cattle were stricken in
the Field, Birds dropped from the Air, Fishes, perished in the Waters, Famine
followed, Tillage went to Ruin, so that the Earth, which wont to feed others,
had in the end no meat for her self.

Then, for four Kings together, little mention is made of any devouring
mortality of people by the Pestilence; yet were there blazing Stars,
Earthquakes, Storms of Hayle, which killed Cattle, and beat down Corn: with
the Apparition of Spirits in the Air, in the likeness of strange, ugly Foul,
flying with fire in their Beakes, and doing much mischief to Houses.

But presently after in the Reign of Hen: 3. the Kingdom in general was
torn in pieces, by two Dragons, (Dearth, or want of victuals, and an exceeding
great sweeping Plague.)

So, Edward the second, saw the fall of his people, and the famishing of his
Country by the two forenamed Tyrants.

So, Edw. 3. in his long Reign of fifty years, lamented the loss of his
then warlike Nation, so struck down by a Pestilent Contagion, that many who
had he^l^h in the morning, lay in their Graves at night: Forty Bodies at one
time, crowding in those cold Beds together, for want of more and better room.

Thirteen years after, Death spread his Colors again, and then in that
dismal Battle Henry Duke of Lancaster, his Duchess, and the Earl of
Warwick, fell under the cruel Conquerours hands.

Besides in one year, in a plot of ground, being at that time in Compass,
thirteen Acres, (then called Spittle-Croft, or the Charter House, founded by
Gualter Manny Knight of the Garter, who there lies Intoomb'd,) were buried
50000. Persons, besides those who took up their everlasting lodgings in other
places. In this year, the Black Rod smarted deeply: The Sword of Divine
Justice had a sharp terrible edge, and where it hit, it struck home.

Few of the then following Kings, but had their Subjects snatched from them by
these hot and speeding calamities. We will now, (omitting all the rest) look
only, at these two great Plagues indeed, (fresh, too fresh in our memories)
the first, beginning when Q. Elizabeth left us, and that K. James, took us to
be his people: The second, when K. James took his way to Heaven, and left both
all his Kingdoms, and their mighty Nations, to his Royal Son, our most
gracious Sovereign King Charles, whose years the great Arithmetician of
Heaven, multiply, and bless the numbers, till they be all golden ones. But,
let us now draw our Arrows, to the Mark we aim at; Those two last
Visitations, this Hydra-Sicknesse with so many Heads, The Plague! Why carries
it the Name of Plague? Plaga signifies a stripe, and this Sickness, comes with
a blow, or stripe, given by the hand of Gods Angel, when (as he did to David)
he sends him to strike a people for their sins.

Our sins therefore, were and are the Whirlewinds, breaking open Iehouahs
Armory, and forcing him (the better to keep us from further Rebellion) to
shoot his fiery and consuming indignation against us. He has several sorts of
weapons; several Punishments, for several Offenses.

When Q. Elizabeth departed, and went on her Progress to Heaven; what a Train
followed her! How many thousands of Coffins, waited on her Hearse! It Is fit, at
the Deaths of great Princes, that there should be a great number of Mourners.
And so, at the coming in of new Kings, there is a kind of State to be
observed, that multitudes of the old Subjects, who have done service to their
Country before, should give way to others, to step into their places.

At the Arrival therefore of King James, upon this, his Crowne-Land, God beat
a Path (narrow at first, though it stretched wider) to lead us by the hand as
it were, to this Funeral Ceremony of dying Subjects.

We were at the Coronation of our new King, (King James) not a new Nation, but
the selfsame stiff-necked people we were before. As mighty in our sins, as
in our Multitudes. Room therefore must be made; for our sins were so
Ru^^ianly, and such roaring Boys, they did nothing but iustle one another for
the wall, to try, which sin should have the upper hand.

The Thunderer looking down upon this, was loath, to shoot his Arrows
feathered with Lightning, and headed with Vengeance, utterly to confound the
Mis-dooer. No; Pity stood in his eyes, and Compassion leaned upon his Bosom.
So that spying two Rods lying before him, A White one, and a Black, the Black
he threw by, till he should have time (by compulsion) to use it; And then,
taking up the white Rod, he laid it gently, upon the head only of one, who
forthwith dyed of the Plague: And this was on the thirteenth of January, in the
year 1602. Now almost twenty eight years ago.

There dyed then but one of the Plague! O sparing Mercy! From such a huge Tree
(as London is,) so laden with all sorts of Fruit, but one Apple to drop to the
ground! No more to be shaken down! But one windfall! A Mountainous Quarry of
stony hearts, to have but one poor pibble, dug away!

In the next week (that year) soft Mercy forgot the white Rod too and struck
None, None at all; Not One! In the Week after, four felt the smart: Then 1.
again. Then none again: then 3. then none: then 3. then 2. then 3. then 2.
then 6. then 4. then 4. and then 8. So that in 15. Weeks, which by this time
reached to the end of April, there dyed of the Plague but 39. This was the Rod
of Mercy, the white Rod, the Fatherly Correction! It goes on a little quicker;
for then the Number swelling up, and increasing by Tens, amounted in June (23.
day) to 72. (the highest;) So there dyed in these other 9. weeks, the full
number of 297.

It increased then to hundreds weekly, so that in July there dyed 917. in one
week here. The white Rod, (no amendment in our lives being seen) was for a
time laid by, and the black officer of Death, coming abroad, thousands were
stricken down every week: So that from July 28. to October 13. being 12.
weeks, were buried, twenty five thousand, six hundred and six. Here, the
Divine Justice, sat in her full Throne, roab'd in Scarlet, with a face
threatening Terrors.

But Mercy then stepped in, and held hands with Justice, so that a Retreat was
sounded; The terrible Execution, was not so hotly pursued; The Pestilentiall
Enemy, retired a little, and fell back, yet so; that from October the 20. to
December. the 1. being seven weeks, there dyed 600. and odd, 500. and odd,
400.200.100. and odd still every week. And then abated again to tens, (as at
first it did rise by tens,) the greatest number of the Dead, in December 22.
being only 74.

So that in all these maine Battles, Seidges, Sallyes, Batteries, and
skyrmishes; (Continuing for a whole year together, From December. 23. Anno
1602. to December 21. Anno 1603.
in and about London, (then the most desolate of Cities,) there dyed, of all
Diseases, 38244. Out of which number the Plague challenged, 30578. for her
share: yet the year immediately following, (Give thanks (o noble Troynouant)
give thanks) thou then did freely walk up, and down in health, when all
thy Neighbors and Friends (when all the Shires in England) were mortally
beleaguered by the same furious Enemy.

Now, as when Q. Elizabeth resigned her Crown and Scepter to King James, and
that he fate in the Throne, all these changes were visibly seen: So, when the
Royal Father went to rest, and that his most Princely Son (CHARLES, our
Royal succeeding King, and now gracious Sovereign) was the Top-branch, of the
Tree, (Nay, the Caedar it self,) A second Angel was sent down, to turn over
the Audit-Bookes of our Transgressions.

And finding London (for her part) to be run out, in deep Arrerages, she was
not too suddenly nor too Rigorously called upon, but the Steward of Gods
Court, (Mercy) pointing with her white wand, only at One, set a fine of Death
upon his head, and that party was taken from thence on the sixth of January,
Anno 1624. And this was the first Weeks work of the Plague for that year. It
began at One.

Death then had little to do within the Walls or without, for his Infections,
by the space of 12. weeks following; In which time there dyed no more but 26.
of the Sickness. And then for 11. weeks following the former, it amounted to
480. The other four weeks succeeding them, (wherein they fell by hundreds,)
could show in their Bills, of all Diseases, 3314, out of which the Plague took
1387.

And all these three Reckonings, grew to this last height, from the sixth of
January, Anno 1624. to the 7. of July, Anno 1625. being fully seven and twenty
weeks. But then on the 14. of July, (being the same Month) the dead Marches
began to come in by thousands in a company.

Observe therefore in what dreadful Equipage, the two Armies of both our
Kings, (I mean King JAMES, and King CHARLES,) went along to those fearful
Encounters.

King JAMES. 1603.
28. July. 1728 1496 4. August. 2256 1922 11. August. 2077 1745 18. Aug. 3054
2713 25. Aug. 2853 2539 1. September. 3385 3035 8. September. 3078 2724 15. Sept.
3129 2818 22. Sept. 2456 2195 29. Sept. 1961 1732 6. October. 1831 1641 13.
October. 1312 1146 In all. Plague 29120 25606 King CHRLES. 1625.
14. July. 1741 1004 21. July. 2850 1819 28. July. 3583 2471 4. August. 4517
3659 11. Aug. 4855 4115 18. Aug. 3205 4463 25. Aug. 4841 4218 1. September. 3897
3344 8. September. 3157 2550 14. Sept. 2148 1672 22. Sept. 1994 1561 In all.
Plague. 38788 30876

So, by this Account, there fell in that great overthrow given to King James
his Subjects, for 12. Weeks together, (when they dropped down by thousands) the
full number of twenty nine thousand, one hundred and twenty: The terror and
cruelty of the Plague sweeping from that number, twenty five thousand, six
hundred and six.

But in that lamentable defeature of Bodies, which fell upon us in the reign
of K. Charles, Anno 1624. to the end of that year in 1625. There dyed in all,
(within the Compass of eleven Weeks, thirty eight thousand, seven hundred
fourscore and eight: of which the black Rod of Pestilence smote, thirty
thousand, eight hundred seauenty and six. The difference of the numbers in
those twelve Weeks in King James his Reign, and those eleven in that year of
King Charles, being: 14. thousand, nine hundred, thirty and eight: The latter
exceeding the former (in a few weeks) by so much. The number of all the dead
for those two years of the two Kings, Amounting to one hundred fifty, eight
thousand, five hundred and four.

Now, if within so small a Compass, as a City, and the adjacent places, so
many went out of the world, how many millions, did the whole Kingdom loose!

But note the exceeding, Incomprehensible love of a Father to us his Children;
The mildness and Mercy, of our Judge! On the 22. of December, which ended that
year of 1604. (going on to 1605.) there was struck but one: It began with
one, and ended with one. O just and even Balance, of the Heavenly Compassion!
How much are we in Thanks indebted (for more we are not able to pay) for this
wonderful sparing us, Now, in this third Visitation! In that former years
July, about this time, there dyed 2471. of the Sickness; Now (praised be
Heaven) the greatest number is but sixty seven. Here was a Fall! There is a
Favor.

In the end, this fall from such a great number to one, came to nothing,- (A
Cipher.) And so continued a long time. Heaven held out a Flagge of Truce, and
all was quiet; The Bills proclaimed no such mortal wars; The Sexton opened some
few Graves for common Diseases, to lie in, and for five years together, the
burning Pestilence, had not kindled her fires amongst us

Yet in that interim of years, other calamities afflicted us; Wars eat up
many of our Gallants, the Sea swallowed others; Quarrels took away some, by
the fatal stabbe or desperate fighting in the Field. We have but one door, at
which we come into the World, but a thousand Gates (set wide open) to send us
out of it. For such ill bargains do we make with life, that the Body and the
Soul, being dear Partners, and setting up together, do every day, by many
devises, plots, and conspiracies undo one another.

What one sin, Vice or ill custom, since the Departure of the last great
Sickness is gone out of the Kingdom, or has forsaken the City?

Fasting and Prayer, (whilst Gods Artillery shot off, and battered down the
Walls of our flesh, making breaches into the lives and estates of thousands) Ran
every week to the holy Temples. Much Condoling, there was, much crying for
Mercy, and mercy came down. But where is fasting now, unless with those that
are almost starved with hunger? At how few men's doors sits Charity? Yet are
there great numbers of Religious, Godly, and Faithful Relieuers of the Poor:
But take all this City in a lump together, and how little true Charity, true
Love, true Christianity, true Friendship is there one to another? What cruelty
dwells in our hearts, if we catch a man (by Law) at advantage? How do we grind
his Bones, and gnaw his heart in pieces? How do Tradesmen envy one another?
How do Gentlemen undo themselves and their Posterities by Ryots? How do an
infinite number of Scholars complain of want? How do Soldiers gape after
spoil! What Covetous Farmer, but is glad of a dear year? A dearth of Corn
makes such Cormorants Fat? Is not Pride, (which five years ago showed not her
face in the City, being afraid of the Plague) now to be seen jetting up and
down in every street! Does not the Drunkard that was then, haunt still the
same Tauernes!

The Body is both the Caroach, in which, the Soul (being the Queen of life)
rides, and the Coachman too, that drives her from one place to another, from
one wickedness to a worse; And the Horses, that draw us, are our wild
passions, or our intemperate desires. Our sins with a Dyals motion, lead us
to destruction, in a soft pace, but insensible: Our Ruins steal upon us with
woolly feet, all the time it comes after us, but being overtaken, It smites
home: for, sin is such a Boon companion, it goes to Bed with us, and all
night sits waking, on those very Pillowes, on which we lay our heads: when we
rise, It makes us ready, waytes when we go forth, follows us all day, and is
more servile, more fawning, more flattering then a slave; And never goes in
mourning, till he sees us going to our Graves.

The Soul is the Mistress, the Body the Chambermaid, that rules that
Mistress; if the Soul says, I will rise, and do good to day: O says the
Chambermaid you are young enough, lie longer, take your ease, be merry, and
care for nothing; Twenty years hence you may do these pious deeds, and by
this wicked Council of the Maid, the Mistress pulls back her hand.

Thus from time to time, we defer doing well, and thus from hour to hour,
we headlong run upon our own miseries.

This being perceived by him, whose eye measures all men's Actions. Now again,
(this year) has he opened his Quiver, and is still shooting the black and
dismal Arrows of the Pestilence, both at Country, and City: In many places of
the Country, these darts of Contagion stick up to the very feathers; some
hearts have been struck quite through here in the City, yet nothing to that
Army which fell in the last Plague.

This began in March last, and then, from the eleventh day of March, to the
eighteenth, it rise to four. The total of all that dyed that week, being
153. And of the Christenings 187. So that 34. came into the World more then
went out of it.

Then, the Sickness fell, and at the beginning of April was but one again.
Another Week dyed 2. then 7. then 3. the highest it has since mounted to, in
any one Week (and that was now in August) being 75.

So that in 8. of the greatest Weeks of sickness this Summer, (omitting the
rest) there have dyed of all Diseases, within London (being 97. Parishes within
the Walls,) and the nine out-Parishes, and the Pesthouse 1593.

Of the Plague in those 8. Weeks, 165. to which add 54. of the sickness last
Week, and 67. this Bartholmew week, it makes 286.

Of Children in that short time, 402. of Consumptions some 300.

And to repair these losses and ruins amongst us, observe the numbers of
Children christened, which in those few weeks amount to 1434. out of which
deduct 402. buried, there remains 1032. alive. Then take that Number from the
former 1594. of all diseases, there have for these 8. Weeks but 561. departed
out of the World more than are come into it: Westminster being not reckoned in
this Account, The Burials there being very few, Neither is the greatest number
of dead Bodies formerly set down, so terrible as so to hurt, spartle, and
afflict so mighty and populous a City, as we see it does, but that Country
Towns round about, are infected, and for that cause only are Faires and
Concurses of People forbidden, for fear the Contagion by Throngs meeting
together, (mingled with some infected Persons) should increase.

In the former passages of this years sickness, Note the great Mercy of God
extended to Infants, in calling such a number of them to Heaven, because he
would have that place glorified with some white pure, and unspotted Souls,
snatched from the Society of the wicked.

Oh happy Fathers and Mothers, that are sure you have so many Saints
entertained above, before they could have time to offend their Maker. You weep
for them when you follow them to their Graves, but you should rather call it a
Triumph, for they then are going to a Celestial Coronation. If you but look
upon your Childrens clothes, you call them to mind, and then, beat your
breasts, and tear your hair, but remember, they are clothed in the roabes of
immortality. When you but talk of your little darlings, you tell how
beautiful they were, how well-fauoured, how forward: but now, where they are,
all the beauty of the world is ugliness to that sweetness which they
possess: They have faces and forms Angelical, and are Play-fellowes and
Companions with none but blessed Creatures.

Be glad therefore, that they are rid from the miseries of the World; that
Time never laid foul hands on them; they are free from want, hunger, thirst,
diseases, cold, heat, weeping and wayling, and all other Calamities, which even
rock us in our Cradles; they are well and happy, we left behind them,
miserable.

As therefore here you are counseled, to bear the absence of your little-ones
with patience, so comfort you others, with this, that both their Children and
yours, are gone to that high Star Chamber Office, where their names are
entered into the Book of Life.

Now albeit in so many set Battles of the Pestilence in years before, and in
the light skyrmislies of this Summer, so many have fallen: Yet (blessed be
Heaven) we are a populous Nation still; we have Peace and Plenty, and all
Blessings that Heaven and Earth can bestow upon a people: sing therefore Hymns
unto the Almighty JEHOVAH; send up Sacrifices of Fear, Love and Obedience to
him: Cry to him, as DAVID did, when he numbered his people, and every one say, I
have sinned exceedingly, in that I have done: therefore now LORD I beseech
thee, take away the Trespass of thy Servant, for I have done very foolishly,
And then, though there dye of the people from Dan even to Beer-sheba, seauenty
thousand men, in three days: yet when the Angel, is stretching out his hand
upon Jerusalem to Destroy it, The LORD will repent him of the Evil, and say to
the Angel that destroys the people; 2. Sam. ^4.
It is sufficient, Hold now thine hand. And then the black Warder shall be
thrown down to part Death and our Kingdom from falling into so terrible a
Combat.

But art thou in fear of an Arrest, now that Writs are gone out (from the
King's Bench Office of Heaven,) to Attach several Men's Bodies! Art thou in
doubt to be laid up! In danger to be imprisoned in thy Grave! Has sickness
knocked at thy door! Does she sit on thy Beds side! Has Infection blown upon
thee with her Contagious, noisome and stinking breath! Has the Pestilence,
(Now in this present drooping, and sick-wing'd season) Printed her nails
within thy Flesh, and have thou tokens sent thee to come away!

Fall on thy knees, Call for Mercy, to help thee, Cry out upon thy sins,
send for thy Heavenly Physician, to minister good things to thy Soul, settle
thy mind in peace, shake off the world, look up at Heaven, Thither is thy
Journey, prepare for no voyage else?

Art thou all-spotted over! They are GODS rich Ermines; to Inroabe thee like a
King, and to set a Crown of Glory on thy Head.

Art thou marked with Tokens, and have thou thy Memory! Make use of that
Memory, and seeing those Marks are so set up, That thine eye may shoot at
them and hit them, now draw the last Arrow home, and win the game of thy
everlasting Salvation.

Remember why those Tokens are sent: To make all the have thou can to set
forward, for away thou must: Hug them therefore, as thy Lover; Kiss, and bid
them welcome, th^nke that sweet Token-sender for his gift, and having nothing
(which thou can call thine) to send back to him, leave thy Body with some
Friend in Trust, and bid thy Soul go cheerfully on her journey.

Cheerfully indeed, and with all Alacrity, for now thou art travailing into a
far Country, where all thy Friends are. There, thou shall meet with thy old
Parents, (thy old Father and Mother) ADAM and EVE.

There shall thou see that great Nauigator of the World (NOAH) who in one ship,
carried all the people in the world then living. There will thou find ABRAHAM
and his Son ISAAC; Old JACOB, and his twelve Sons the Patriarchs. MOSES
and AARON will there receive thee into GODS Sanctum Sanctorum; In that glorious
Palace, shall thou behold, all the Kings of ISRAEL, all the Tribes of IVDA,
all the ancient Prophets, all the Apostles, all the Saints and glorious Army of
Martyrs, with branches of Palme-trees in their Hands, and golden Stars
sticking on their foreheads.

Nay, there thou shall see thy Redeemer sitting at the right hand of this
Father; There (face to face) shall thou see GOD himself, attended on by Angels
Archangels, Principalities, and Powers, Cherubins, and Seraphins; And who would
not rejoice, to be setting forward on this blessed Journey, to the end he may
at length come to be a fellow-Citizen, in the Heavenly HIERVSALEM.

All the Kingdoms on the Earth, are not worth the Seeling of that glorious
Chamber of Presence, which is in this Court: This is a Kingdom, where there
are no changes of Kings; No alterations of State: No loss of Peers: No
Wars: No Reuenges: No Citizens flying for fear of Infection: None dying of
Them, that stay, No Women-keepers to rob you of your Goods, nor to hasten you
to your End: In this Celestial Kingdom, there is true Majesty, True Glory,
True Honor, True Beauty, True Peace, True Liberty, True Health: There is all
Life, All Happiness, All Immortality. To this-Kingdome, the King of Heaven and
Earth, call us when it is his Pleasure.

FINIS.

