Wars, War VVarres.

Arma Virumque Cano.

Into the Field I bring,
Soldiers and Battles:
Boeth their Fames I sing.


Imprinted at London for ^. G. 1628.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HVGH HAMERSLEY, Lord Mayor of this Renowned City of
London: And Colonel of the Artillery Garden. THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, AND WORTHY
GENTLEMEN, Sr MAVRICE ABBOT, Knight; and Mr HENRY GARRAVVAY, Shriefes of the
same City.
Honorable Praetor: Worthy Consuls.
THose Titles (taking both Descension and Deriuation from the Ancient Roman,
Praetorian, and Consular Dignities) are happy Honors, in that they are lent
unto you, from the noblest Nation, that ever carried Arms in the World. Your
Places are High, Offices Great; yet give me leave to sit at the Root of your
Glories, (like a Passenger on the way) and to lift up mine eyes to your
spreading Branches, leaving this poor Tablet hid amongst your Leaves,
containing nothing but an Inscription of my Love.

It was some joy to me, to be employed in the Praesentation of your Triumphs,
on the day of your Lordships Inauguration; and it shall be as great a happiness
to me now, if this my second Praesentation, may from your Hands receive a free
entertainment.

What I offered up then, was a Sacrifice Ex officio: Custom took my Bond for
the Performance: And on the Day of Ceremony, I hope the Debt was fully
discharged. This Oblation is voluntary, and shall prosper well enough, if it
meet acceptance. A brave Company of Gentlemen in Arms, were Additions of much
splendour, to that Day, (which of it self was bright enough) to grace your
Lordship, being at this Time their Sole and Worthy Colonel: I come to you now,
speaking still in their Warlike Language. Drums, Fifes, Ensigns, Pikes, and
Shot, Marched before you, to your Gates: Drums, Fifes, Ensigns, Pikes, and
Shot, do now come Marching into your Parlors: I know not how to handle either;
yet I handle all. Trumpets here sound a Charge, yet no noise heard: A Battle
is fought, but without Blood shed: I am no Herald, yet I Cry, Wars, Wars,
Wars: No Soldier, yet my Pen plays the Captain, and Drils a Company of
Verses on Foot, in a Field of white Paper. The Discipline I teach them, is so
Printed in their Memories, that unless their Limbs be torn in pieces, the
World cannot choose but take notice of their Postures. What scorn, other men
(out of Malice, rather than Judgment) shall throw upon these my Martial
darings, I will put by, with an Odi prophanum Vulgus, and not care what Canons
they Plant against me, so I may lie safely Entrenched, Sub Triplici Clipeo, Of
your Three noble Defenses. To which I prostrate, my Love, Labor, and Service:

Resting, Devoted ever To your Lordship, And Worships. THO. DEKKER.

To all Noble Soldiers.
IF (noble Spirits) as well you may, you wonder
How I, who never fired Cannon, speak in Thunder;
Your pardon easly thus unties my Charms.
He that wants legs, may be in love, with Arms.
VVarres, Wars, Wars.
Arma virumque Cano.
Brave Music! hark: The rattling Drum beats high,
And with the scolding Fife, deaffens the sky,
The Brazen Herald in a shrill Tone, tells
We shall have Wars, (ring out for joy, your Bells:)
We shall have Wars, when Kingdoms are at odds,
Pitched Fields those Theaters are, at which the Gods
Look down from their high Galleries of Heaven,
Where Battles, Tragedies are, to which are given
Plaudits from Cannons, Buskind Actors tread
Knee deep in blood, and trample on the Dead:
Death, the grave ^^^ame, of which is writ the story,
Keen Swords the Pens, texting (at large) the glory
Of Generals, Colonels; Captains, and Commanders,
With common fighting Men, (the hardy standers
Against all Hellish Horrors.) Soldiers all,
And Fellows (in that name,) to the General.
O War! thou Shoole where honor takes degrees*
(Nobler then those are bought for Heralds Fees,)
Thou Hiue of Bees industrious, bringing (...)
Thighs laden with rich spoils, which may become
The King of Bees to carry: Thou Refiner
Of drossie states; Mischiefs rare underminer!
Thou great Magi^^^^, whose enchanted rounds
Have spirits, can bind Ambition within bounds.
Thou sovereign Chemist that art sent from heaven,
To cleanse the rancke-world, for to thee is given
The skill of Minerals, ( lead, iron and steel,)
Which can set Realms upright when they do reele.
By a strange Powders help, which strikes it dead,
What e're the Soar be, or how ever Bred.
O teach me ( all unskillful) how to sing
Some of thy Wonders on my vn-tun'd string:
For, my heart danceth sprightly, when I see
( Old as I am) our English Gallantry
(Albeit no silken Down plays with their Chin,
Being fa^d^ like women, yet all man within,)
With new bloomed Roses blushing on each cheek,
To Plough up seas, bright Fame (abroad) to seek,
And ( found) never to leave her, till she sets)
Plumes, rich and glorious in their Burgonets;
Whose acts, the^ breaking forth in generous flames.
Among Turks or Spanish, each his worth proclaims,
Else writes his fair deserts with his own hands,
In bloody letters amongst the Netherlands,
So folly, that their Stories shall be read,
Whilst the proud German Eagle reares a Head.
These men I love, O these! who high Prefer
Before all styles, the name of Soldier:
Which Title in a Diadem being set,
Adds glittring Dyamonds to the Coronet.
O see^ the Armies glorious body mooues,
In whose proud front match up so many Jove's:
As there are Leaders: How the Sun, enuies
That from bright armors, and men's sparkling eyes,
Beams far more dazzling through the air are thrown
Than all those golden Rays, which are his own.
What sight in the world (but Nauies on proud Seas,
Is so stupendous rare? or can so please?
Had Memphis cloz'd her wonders, all in One,
Las! they had lacked that sweet Proportion,
Which a maine Army carries, that can fall
Into all Figures, Geometrical,
At turning of a Hand, to check all storms,
And yet, not Order break, nor loose their Forms.
Faces about, the Captain cries; they do it
In an eyes twinkling, changing scarce a Foot:
Then, as you were; it is done; double your Files,
To note the quickness, Time himself beguiles.
Come up in maine Battalia; up they come*
In a proud dance, to the Music of the Drum:
Divide your selves in Squadrons; fly out in wings;
Now a half Moon; the word (but spoken) brings
Men into decent Postures, fit to fight
Against horse or foot; the left hand, or the Right:
All move like wheels in clockes, some great, some less,
And numerous strings, do but one tune express.
But this is nothing, did they (but thus) still^
O hark! the Fight begins, for loud shoutes fill
Heaven with rebounding Echoes. Trumpets sound
A charge; Drums rattle, noise does noise counfound,
Yet it is all-musicall: Barb'd Horses beat
Their hoofes through madness, and their Riders sweat
With rage, because That moving wall (of Pikes)
They cannot enter, for it guards and strikes,
Yet groves of Pikes, by groves of Pikes are shiuerd
Ten thousand Bullets from iron wombes deliver d,
Fly whurrying in the Air: steel Targets clatter,
Swords clash, whilst Battle-axes, Helmets batter,
The Cannon roares; by thousands, men dye groaning,
But Drums so cheer the rest; none minds their moning:
Gold lacde Buffe-ierkins drop; Feathers look pale,
Whilst tottred de sperue^wes, all storms of Hail
Stand like tough Briers: Heads are for foot-bals tossed:
Arms fly to seek their Masters, yet both lost,
Whose mangled Carcases (besmeet'd in gore;)
Troops of Carbines in Triumph trample over.
Here may you see, hot spirits as fiercely meet,
As Whirle-winds do, whilst rocks or oaks they greet;
Yet by strong tugging when their Flames are spent,
Lie like dear friends (tho into wounds all rent,)
Whose streams gush out so fast, they o^^ are found
Suffering two deaths, and are both killed and drowned.
A thousand windings, and a thousand ways
The General beats (even whilst the ordnance plays)
To win the Wind, the Sun, the Wood, the Hell,
None know what cares the noble Soldier fill.
Black fate! there is dropped a Leader to the ground,
Courage he cries yet (Soldiers) slights the wound;
And though death stare in's face, death him does fear,
To fall (says he) is Fortune de la Guerre.
As when a Ph^^nix, to her deathbed comes,
She buildes a nest of spice, and odorous gummes,
Then in the Suns hot flames, clapping her wings
She burns to Death: out of whose ashes springs
A second Phaenix* So, when Leaders fall,
(E're the last gasp) about them quick they call
Their soldiers, whom they heat with their own fire
To fight it out, who seeing their souls retire
To heavenly Tents: Ten thousand Leaders rise
From them; and, On, a maine On, each man cries,
A farewell vollied loud from one to one,
Thus Epitaph'd; There Is a brave fellow gone.
Nor, (tho a hundred Captains should lie slain)
Run the rest headlong on: 'twere poor and vain,
By quitting others Deaths, to meet their Own,
No, every Soldier when the Dice are thrown
Waits his own Cast and wa^ebe^ his own Game,
The vpshot of all faire-play being true Fame.
For, as young flowers make garlands for the spring,
As Coronets of Lillies, honor bring
To amorous Rivers: As those smells are rare,
Which Summers warm hand throws into the air:
As Incense, from the Tyrannizing Fire
Breaks in sweet clouds and more the flames conspire
To choke her odorous breath, with richer sent
Her Roseall wings fan all the Firmament:
So mooues a Soldier in his constant Sphaere,
His great Desires still burning, sweet and clear.
Nor seeks he blood but high deeds: rather Fame
Than a fought Battle; for a nobler Name
Is graven upon the sword, that is dipped in Oil
Than that in blood, which does all brightness foil
When horror will spare none, it is Law, to Kill:
But Honor says, It Is better save than spill.
Who then with lips profane dare curses lay
On War, who to all Glory beats the way,
Nay to all goodness? Down the Court pride falls,
When He Is in place, Church-Simony, no man calls
To a fat Benefice: Bribery dares not feel
The Lawyers pulse; nor Vsuries golden wheel
Whirle in the City: Country Foxes hide
Their ill got spoils, which War can soon divide.
Break then (thou thunder) that foul bed of snakes.
Which a Luxurious peace, her darling makes,
Dandling the Plump Brood on her wanton knees.
Whose Brains War would beat out, and from the Lees
Rack the pure wine, whose heat should kindle fires
For deeds Heroical. War, more admires
One Bethlem Gabor, or one Spinola,
Than all the brave men on St. George his Day.
But why do I Outlandish coin thus raise,
When our own English stamps deserve more praise!
Give me a stout Southampton and hi^ Son,
A fiery Oxford who toth' Top would run
Of the most dangerous, hottest, high design,
An Essex, which does even himself cut shine
In noble Darings: would I had a Pen,
To set the worths down of the best of Men
The far famed Warwick, Holland, Willoughby,
Whose Acts too high a Pitch for me do fly:
I am no Eagle to behold such Suns,
My humble Muse in her own circle runs.
And that is in thee (O Troynonant:) Old Rome,
Could thou thy gray head, lift up from thy Tomb
Glorious, as when thy Brows were decked with Bays,
Higher in fame, thy Sons thou could not raise,
Then London now can here: Thy Citizens
Had not more honors from the Roman pens
Than ours now me^rit: Like a brazen well
She (should War thunder) up brave spirits can call
To guard her towers and pinnacles, sons here bred,
Under her wing, and by her cherished.
Nor needs she send to Foreign shores for men
To lead her Troops: How many a Citizen
(Stood horror at the Gates) could fairly steer,
And in a rough storm, guide both Van and Rear:
But (above all the rest) why should not I,
The Fames sing of our twice Decemviri,
(Our twenty City Captains,) Bond, Leate, Fen.
(A chief, yet Gound amongst our Aldermen:)
Styles, Williams, Smith, and Andrews, march up here.
Lasher, and Henshaw, in the next Front appear:
Walker and Halsey then, with Rowdon lead
Their Companies stoutly on: lies Milward dead!
No, with a brow vp-reard to the Field He hyes;
Wallers and Langhams Drums, deafning the skies:
Lee, Fen, and Dichfield, come in brave array,
Whilst Wild, and Marshall, strive to win the Day;
Win may they, other notes our Muse must sing,
And to the Sun, play on a louder string*
War and the Sun Compared.
WAr and the Sun are Twins; as the Sun rides
In's chariot (all of flames) which himself guides
Through heaven, the vast earth measuring inon day,
And of all Countries (so) takes full suruay;
Cheering all Nations, which his god-like eyes,
Who sets as he sets; rise as he does rise.
And in a year this princely Bridegroom shines,
Twelve times, in his 12. houses, (the 12 Signs.)
So War holds the whole world in Sovereign awe,
( His not the Common, but the Cannon Law.)
What Kingdoms are not glad to see him ride
On thunder, ( lightning lackying by his side?
Turks, Tartars, Persians, Indians, all adore
The god of War; all dance to hear him rore:
The Pole, Russe, Hungar, Sweue, and yellow Dane,
English, French, Spanish, Dutch, wait on Wars train,
And to such height, their Empires nere had brought,
But for the brave old battles they have Fought.
War and the Sun you see then, may be Twins,
For dey being borne, Wars teeming Birth begins:
Nay, one perpetual motion, they both keep,
The Sun still wakes and War can never sleep.
Last, of the Sun, that he no point may lack,
War has found out a rare new Zodiac,
With signs of selfsame names, in which the Sun
Does in his everlasting Progress run.
War his Zodiac.
1. Aries.
WHen into horned Moons the Squadrons change,
Then the Battalia does in Aries Range:
Here the brave Van comes up, (a Soldiers pride,)
Who dye here, Win a Death that is dignified.
2. Taurus.
WHen like two stiffe-neck'd Bulls, fell Armies meet,
Being goard quite through with wounds, from head to feet,
The bellowing Taurus is a lusty sign,
That soldiers, then, in Scarlet-triumphes shine.
3. Gemini.
HOnor and warlike Anger, single forth,
Troops against Troops, and Wings to show their worth:
Men then with men, their masculine valors try,
Which makes the Battle move in Gemini.
4. Cancer.
HOt grows the Day, the strong, the weaker Beat;
Which seen, the wearied Van with soft Retreat
Gives back; and in this polliticke Retire,
Cancer winnes time to kindle fresher Fire.
5. Leo.
LIghtning and Thunder then, bring up the Rear,
And with it, Death, who plays the Murderer:
Hels Furies are the Marshalls for the Day,
For, Leo roares, and does his fanges display.
6. Virgo.
STill to be Killing, is a Belluine Rage,
The thirst of Vengeance therefore to assuage.
Mercy puts forth a Hand and Prisoners takes,
And then mild Virgo from her Tent awakes.
7. Libra.
AS when two Dragons, breathless through deep wounds,
It Is doubtful, which the others life confounds:
So, twixt two Armies whilst coy Victory houers,
The hopes and fears of both, Libra discouers.
8. Scorpio.
PEl-mell, then to it again; the chaine-shot flies,
And sweepes down lanes of Men; tossing in the Skies
Armors and limbs, to show that Scorpio throws
His rancorous breath forth, poisoning where it goes
9. Sagitarius.
O Thou old English Archer, ( Sagitary)
Now laughed at is the Bow which thou do carry;
Thy gray Goose wing, which once brave battles won,
Hangs loose; for bullets on thy errands run.
10. Capricornus.
WHat Coward flies the field! and wounds does feign,
To save himself out of Wars sulphurous rain,
For a few drops! off is the Pezant borne!
His sign shall be the skipping Capricorn.
11. Aquarius.
WInter now comes, Heavens sluices power out rain;
Or, Fields are standing pooles through Armies slain:
Else, a torn Country swims in her own tears,
And then Aquarius up his Standard reares.
12. Pisces.
But, when Pay slackes; and health with Victuals) ^on,
Soldiers being forced to live on dry poor John;
Ye^, two by two (like sharkes) themselves combine
For booties; Pisces, is this lucklesse Sign.
To All.
THus, Home at last, the Soldier comes,
As vselesse as the Hung-vp Drums:
And (but by Noble hands being Fed,
May beg hard; hardly yet get Bread.
Nulla salus Bello,
THough thus of War, a Paradox I write,
War is a Kingdoms dark and gloomy night,
Ecclipsing all her face: Peace is bright day,
That Sun shine send us, keep^ the ^ight away.
Pacem, te posci nus on nes. Because mention is made before of the City
Captains; their Lieutenants at that time not being in place. Here behold them.

The 20 City Lieutenants.
Captains without Lieutenants are like men
Borne with one hand (the right) Lieutenants then,
Serve for the Left, and when that Right is lame,
The Left works hard to rear an Armies Fame:
In dangers they with Captains cry half parts,
These, are their seconds, nay, are half their hearts:
Lieutenants are the Vshers in Wars school,
Captains, head-masters; and they bear such rule,
As Viceroyes under Kings: Then, under these
(Our twenty London-leaders,) who so please
To reckon their Lieutenants, here they stand,
The Captains them, these honoring their Command.
Bring up your wings, your squadrons then, and files,
And read what Story your own worth compiles.
Lieutenant Tompson comes by order first;
Then Pierce, (a son under Bellona nursed;)
Young lifts his head up in the thickest throng:
Davies, and Hanson, I should do you wrong,
Did not you step in here, and claim your due;
Mannering, and Smart, the next voice cries up you:
Couel, and Adams, walk their warlike Round,
Whilst Parker souldierlike, makes good his ground.
Close to him, Cuthbert labors to win Fame:
Forster, will nothing loose in Wars great Game.
Loud peales of Muskets, Slauey loves to hear;
Midst groves of Pikes does Normington appear:
Cruso's heart dances, when the proud Drum beats;
Trauers cries on; and scorns all base retreates:
Shepherd is like a Lion in the Field;
Gawthorne, for skill and heart, to none will yield:
Manby (though last but one) in worth not least,
With Phillips, marches up with manly breast.
These Chiefes, and these Lieutenants, are the Ring,
Their Troops, the Diamonds, fit to serve a King.
FINIS.

