THE School of Slovenrie: Or, Cato turned wrong side outward.

Translated out of Latin into English verse, to the use of all English
Christendom, except Court and City.

By R. F. Gent.

LONDON Printed by Valentine Simmes dwelling on Adling hill near Bainards
castle at the sign of the white Swanne. 1605.

To all that can write and read and cast account, the Translator.
MAY it please you: To be a fool in Print, is as ordinary, as a fool at an
Ordinary; and therefore it were no good fellowship to break company. It Is a
Proverb, The child that's borne must be kept, though it be a bastard, seeing it is
murder by the law to make away even the unlawfully begotten. If the rugged
cadence of this Verse, and scurrile harshnesse of this subject, do chance to
escape a murdring censure (Quod Dij prius omen in ipsum) If: then the
Translator vows to conclude, that either Signior Malevole his sure of Gum is
fretted out at elbowes, and he put to the naked shift of keeping his chamber
(it is well he has a chamber;) or at least the subject of this Book is
entertained with such abiection, that detraction like your breath-broaker in a
Midsummer vacation can find no subject to work upon. Many a man may Petere
sibi simile, that intends not Procreare sibi simile, may take a snatch and
away, that would be loath to be tied to rack and manger, or pass bills of
soap and candle. It Is my case: Who, though in the minority of my
grammar-schollership, I was induced by those, whom duty might not withstand,
to unmask these Roman manners, and put them on an English face;
notwithstanding, witness my native bashful ignorance, how distant it ever was
from my desires; nay, how I ever feared to be pressed to death, by the public
censure of those, who (as I have heard) have it by Patent to scandalize
whatsoever undergoes the public Press. The truth is, this translation was
half Printed ere I knew who had it: So that Quo fata trahunt, without
prevention or correction the fools bolt must needs be shot. And this is it.
Those which mislike the verse in English, let them read it in Latin (for I
allow no mislikers, unless at least they can read Latin) and then perhaps
thei'le wonder that a man of such wisdom as my Author, being neither borne a
Roman, nor a Naso, should with such confidence of a general applause publish
so elaborate a trifle: from which admiration of yours, I hope your courtesy
will derive a miracle viz. my pardon, especially considering that both Ovid and
Virgill (both Poets Laureat) have been metamorphosed into as indigest and
breathless a kind of verse as this. All that I can say for my Author, is, he
speaks broad English, but by contraries: all for myself, is, it is a Punies
translation only, an orphane, howsoever (fathered upon me, because I taught
him English, yet begotten without my presence, borne before my wit, and
published against my will, unless we may be said to will what we can not
prevent. So fare ye well, and I pray pick as much matter out of this Epistle,
as may be,

Yours in print against his will, R.F. Gent. and no more.

The Preface of Frederike Dedekind to master Simon Bing Secretary of Hassia.
SVch happiness on you (dear friend)
the heavens I pray bestow,
As you for your so virtuous mind
most requisite do know.
If that your matters of more weight
did not your presence crave,
Your counsel and your aid, concerning
this my book I Would have.
My Muse, which whilome in two books
did rusticke faults deride,
I have recalld, and into three,
forthwith will it divide.
And now again, through all the world
I purpose it to send,
If fortune, friends, and you do favor
that which I intend,
Then mark I pray, for unto you
I Will open all the truth,
My mind, my meaning, and intent,
unto well nurturde youth.
Those manners which unseemly are
in these decaying times:
And ancient rude simplicity
I check in jesting rimes:
If this my Book will profit yield
to men of any kind,
And make them weed homebred behavior,
quite out of their mind:
That Is all I want, that is all I crave,
that is the furthest scope
Of all my pains, of all my cares,
of all my furdest hope.
But out alas, how dares my Muse
such good success exspect?
Since bad men's ill conditions
do so the times infect.
I hope, but other men's examples
do me much dismay,
Which have in vain whole ages spent
in counselling that way.
What skill'st too late for to relate
renowned Platoes Books?
And all those lights, and guides, whose loss
poor Greece but hardly brooks,
Which tried indeed, but all in vain,
those vices to amend,
Which did men's minds, by follies means,
in beastly sort offend.
And for our later Latin writers,
did they aught prevail?
Which did so long, with such great pains,
against rusticke vices rail.
Did not sage Tully in his books,
men's duties plainly tell?
And teach both young and old, the means,
to live and die right well?
Yet for all this, what good? what gains?
procured that learned work,
Since vntamde actions well do show,
what in men's minds does lurk:
So did old learned Roterodam
set forth a book of price,
From which, for manners straitest rule,
all youth might take advise,
And yet what profit did he get
by that most worthy book?
Or who did on it, as he ought,
for better counsel look?
Too few do now (God wot) regard
that jewel of such price,
Whenas whole multitudes of men
run headlong unto vice.
I touch not here small common faults,
of a disorderd life,
(Although of these in every place
the world is too too rife)
But let them pass as trifling faults,
and virtues, in respect
Of those great crimes and beastly deeds,
which I will here detect.
For you shall find, if you vncloake
men's manners base and rude,
Many which in Rusticitie,
far pass the multitude.
Put case you find them eating meat,
to stuff them till they burst,
Or quaffing liquor pot by pot,
to quench their drunken thurst.
You Will swear they do no whit respect
the end of their creation,
Nay, (which is more,) you will almost swear
they care for no salvation.
What though their souls were sent from heaven?
as things of peerless price,
Yet thei'le love Reason worse then Folly.
Virtue worse then Vice.
They square their actions by the rule
of beasts of brutish kind,
And to their bellies blind desires,
they captivate their mind.
Their wide stretched guts, beyond the use
of Nature or of need,
In every place, at every time,
vnsatiately they feed.
Pots by the dozens filld to the brims,
into their guts they press,
Whenas (God knows,) their greatest thirst
might well be quenched with less.
If after Gods gifts thus abused,
they here at length would end,
It Were well, but they exspect for faults,
that men should them commend.
And yet this fault, this great offense,
which daily men live in,
By custom and continuance,
goes current for no sin.
But what is the cause I pray, that men
neglecting counsels guide,
Leave Virtues straight and narrow path,
and hold on Vices side?
Why this, bid him that does offend,
in sober quiet talk,
To mend his faults, and in the steps
of virtuous men to walk.
He Will either laugh in pleasant sort,
as if you told a jest,
Or else with scorning scouling looks,
your absence he will request.
But if against his greater faults,
with bitter words you scolde,
He Will tell you that in others faults,
your judgment is too bold.
So that, he which does nowadaies,
precepts of manners give,
May preach, and teach, but all in vain,
men as they list will live.
And so, good men which in this subject
have great study spent,
Have lost their labor, for to follow them,
no man is bent.
And yet example of their fortune,
troubles me no whit,
But that same mark which all they misst,
I Will venture for to hit.
And though to dance after their pipe,
the vulgar sort refuse,
Yet I Will presume to teach them manners,
which they ought to use.
Perhaps I shall be counted rash,
and all my hopes but vain:
And yet I Will hope, perhaps my means
more auditors will gain.
Dame Fortune is unconstant, changing
course each other while:
Then, though on some she frown,
yet she on me may glance a smile.
Tush, no man knows the wages, which
I look for at her hand,
I doubt not but the vulgar sort
my method will command.
Fortune, I Will try thee, for I think
in trial there is no harm;
And god Apollo from ill luck,
my enterprises charm.
What though perhaps I not prevail?
it is but my labor lost,
A few ill verses spent in vain,
and this is all my cost.
But for because austere commands,
and precepts cannot win,
Which say, that all but honesty,
to do, or think, is sin.
I Will try by other means new found,
the selfsame mark to hit,
Refusing all those other ways,
wherein forefathers writ.
Free leave to live disordredly,
unto all sorts I give,
And I command, that in good order,
none presume to live.
Each clown shall see what fits him best,
and what his manners be,
And I affirm, that crafty deeds
with crafty knaves agree.
Perhaps when many see these faults
so fitting their own name,
Such clownish manners from their minds,
thei'le banish quite for shame.
No other means is left behind,
to cure this eating sore,
For being senseless of their faults,
they love them more and more.
Within the mind of sinful man,
vice now has got such root,
As by slight means to weed it out,
it would be little boot.
Yet let us not despair for help,
since this one means is left,
Whereby our minds of vices buds,
may quickly be bereft.
Since to forbid vice will not help,
we will allow vice too;
The common people, that which you
forbid them, often do.
Health most dispaired, healths greatest causer,
sometimes proved is,
And that from which men look for bale,
does often bring forth bliss.
You see the good Physician,
whenas he cannot cure
By medcines might, a sickness great, sprung
from a bod^ impure.
How many ways he seeks, to ease
his patients grievous smart,
By seeking learned phisickes aid,
by labor or by Art.
One while with Poticarie drugs,
he mitigates his pain:
Now he with dust opens his wounds,
now shuts them up again.
One while with mangling salve, he cuts
a member almost dead,
Another while he seares the same,
with iron burning red.
At length when all Machaons art
and phisickes force has done,
(And yet the patient is as sick,
as when he first begun.
He gives him hot preservatives,
to comfort up his heart,
But all in vain, he still is sick,
(diseases master Art.)
At length he comes to contraries,
and alters quite the case,
From hot, to cold, he gives him Antidots
in Cordialls place.
And thus to him he does restore
his unexpected health,
Which he before could not procure,
by physic, friends, nor wealth.
So I perceiving wholesome precepts,
fitting for the mind,
Neglected, and fault-finders works,
to purchase naught but wind.
All that which good men ought to practice,
I forbid them flat,
And all which country clownage
counts current, I bid that.
That so, whereas throughout my book.
I still forbid the good,
The contrary I mean, the bad
I would have understood.
Perhaps while some with greedy mind,
my jesting rimes does view,
He shall behold of his own life,
a looking-glass most true.
And blushing, of his own accord,
when no man does him see,
Will spy his faults, and mend them all,
and give some thanks to me.
But by the way, thou which within
this glass do thus behold
Thine own disordred manners, and
thy life, be not so bold,
As to find fault with me thy friend,
or with my little book,
Which upon thee, as upon all, with
selfsame eyes does look.
If any will assume these faults
as theirs, at the first view,
Know they that they confess themselves
some of the rusticke crew.
Wherefore, unless he purpose
to proclaim himself a clown,
All anger lately taken up,
I wish him to lay down.
Perhaps some severe Catonist
will this my book accuse,
Because I good behavior,
by contraries abuse.
And say that I in common sense,
have made a grievous breach,
Who those things, which to do it is sin,
have thus presumed to teach.
And I confess, within my book
there are bad precepts store,
And I may seem to spur a horse,
which ran too fast before.
But those which look into the worlds
bad nature with good eyes,
I think concerning this my book,
will judge far otherwise.
And find that in this book of mine,
no hurt at all does lurk,
But that a man without much danger,
may pervse this work.
For clownish customs long ago,
have made our minds so bad,
That to our ill behaviors
we can no worser add.
We need not have a master then,
to make us sin the more,
For we without a guide, of vice
can quickly get great store.
Men sin most willingly, and for their
heinous faults seek praise,
And have such persons as will still,
to skies their vices raise.
Whatse're I write, in other men
I often have it seen,
From things often done, the subject of
my book derived has been.
Those faults, which ere I thought to write,
in other men were known:
How can you justly say, that I
devisde them of mine own?
Or by what means should this my book,
make any to be bad,
Unless before from virtues paths,
their minds declined had?
Wherefore I guiltless am of this,
that I should now devise,
Or set new found rusticitie,
before the readers eyes.
If none I profit, (as God knows,)
I mean to profit many,
Yet sure I know that this my book
can bring no hurt to any.
And now at length (my good friend Bing,)
whose favor I esteem,
Thou which the chief of all my friends,
at all my need have been;
Respect these youthful verses, fruits
of an untamed brain,
And let your favor these my lines,
with wonted love maintain.
Be ready now to take tuition
of my book and me,
And let my verse be patronized,
under the name of thee.
Against all the poisned tongues of those,
that would my book defame,
Defend these trifling toys of mine,
under thy worthy name.
In brief, this book with all his faults,
I dedicate to thee,
That by thy hand from after-claps,
it may defended be.
If aught I have, (as sure I have)
let pass in this my book,
Supply the wants I you desire,
as over it you look.
If any thing in this my work,
be added more then should,
Correct it for its masters sake,
for so full feign I would.
And so I being well persuaded,
of your strength and might,
Commit this scepter to your hand,
which is your own by right.
And furthermore, unto your laws,
all such I do subject,
Which this my perfect work, of old
Simplicity respect.
Behold your mighty empire stretches
over sea and land,
And in all kingdoms of the earth,
your kingdom has command.
For this great gift, what benefit
can you repay to me?
Let me be thine, and thou be mine,
that is all I ask of thee.
Keep me thy friend, and with the favor
which thou have begun,
Pursue me, and my heart to thee
for ever thou have won.
Behold thy friend, whom if thou love,
as of him loved thou art,
Thou may command to do thee good,
himself, his goods, his heart.
And if the gods respect my thoughts,
I hope ere long, to send
A greater matter than this trifle,
for thee to defend.
Mean time, because thou of thy self,
deservest to live ever,
The gods preserve thee from all harm, and
grant thee to die never.
A Table of the contents of every Chapter in this Book.
OF modesty to be observed in the morning, in the apparel, the hair, and
making clean of the face and teeth. folio 2 The breakfast, and ordering the
body and looks 4 Of waiting at the table. 9 Behavior at the table before
meat. 13 Of manners in eating. 16 Concerning manners after dinner. 21 The
adorning of the table before supper, and other duties. 26 Of waiting at the
table in supper time. 30 Of the usage of the guests after supper. 35 Concerning
the talking, debating, and wrangling of the guests. 38 Of sending away the
guests, and what is requisite to be done before you go to bed. 42
The second Book.
HOW to prepare himself being invited of an other. 47 Of behavior in eating.
52 Behavior at the table after the first course. 55 As concerning other
precepts of modesty in eating and drinking. 50 Of devouring, laughing,
vomiting at the table, and other such like civilities to be observed. 63 Of
washing the hands after supper, second courses, and how to behave your self
in the company of maids. 67 Concerning exclaiming after supper, goeing out,
and bargaining for the next nights supper. 71 How going drunk home you should
behave your self in the way homeward, after sleep, and the day after. 76 How
to entertain, use, and send away your guests. 89
The third Book.
Behavior at an honest feast in eating brewesse and crab-fish. 87 Of
daintiness of drink, and behavior when you depart. 91 Of scoffs, farting,
hawking, aunswering to a demand, and looking into other men's letters. 95 Of
behavior in other men's houses, diverse-colored parted coats, the adorning of
the beard, the use of papers and books, entertaining friends, and other such
like civilities. 99 Examples of civilitie at the table. 105 Of emptying the
bladder, vomiting, and other such like elegancies of behavior. 112 Of
belching, holding his urine, and such like rudeness. 121 Grobiana, concerning
the behavior of maids. 126
The Author to such as love Civilitie, health:
Give place time-scourging Aristotle, vice-controuling Plato,
Yield learned Tully, deep Erasmus, and fault-finding Cato:
And you which by your tedious works, though to your mickle pain,
Did teach behaviors perfect means, and manners to attain.
This Book, which from a new found School of late time did arise,
Behaviors pure simplicity within it does comprise:
Then young and old that do desire nurture and education,
Peruse this Book each day and hour, with great deliberation.
THE FIRST BOOK OF ancient Simplicity of Behavior. Written by M. Frederick
Dedekinde.
IF thou desire an ancient, harmless, simple life to lead,
And in old, homely, clownish plow-mens perfect steps to tread:
Come hither, and unto my verse lend thine attentive ear,
It may be for thy private use, some profit thou may hear.
Pervse it through, and it no doubt, a way to thee will tell,
How to conform thy manners so, as thou may live right well:
Doubt not a single simple man, thou certainly shall be,
If thou with good advise do mark, the things thou learn'st of me.
Too hard and intricate a thing it is, and far from ease,
So strictly to behave thy self, as all men thou may please:
Those I commend, which scorn to suffer every paltry fool
To weigh their words, and judge their deeds, as Master of a School.
And those which scorn a masters check, and think their own deeds good,
Are right true Troyans, gallant soldiers, brave men by the Rood:
Pine-girted Silvane, country god, thou art most welcome hither,
Concerning country customs, let us two confer together.
The praise of rude simplicity, in country swains we will sing,
Of all my thoughts, of all my words, O Silvane thou art king:
You mountaine-treading gods in woods and fields, I you request,
Declare to me, for countrymen, the life that you think best.
Old Bacchus father, god of wine, best known to drunken crew,
The perfect way of quaffing right, set down before my view:
And thou which of the gut were wont jolly governor to be,
Further me, if I chance to handle all thy rights and thee.
And thou neat god Rusticitie, the greatest of our time,
Be present here, and set thy hands to this my Rusticke rhyme:
It Is no small thing in perfect sort, good manners thus to frame,
Great men, good scholars, have been often times troubled with the same.
Yet by the help of all those gods and goddesses I Will try,
To pass the tedious laborinth, of this simplicity:
O help (friend Bing.) judge of this cause, your aid herein I ask,
For trusting to your help and aid, I vnder-go this task.
If then my Muse with cheerful looks, you kindly do revive,
My vain will be more plentiful, my verse will better thrive.
What modesty is to be observed each morning in the apparel, and making the
hair, the face, and the teeth clean. Chapter. I.
WHose're thou art that hat'st at heart a Masters crabbed charge,
Which reads a Lecture every day of gravitie at large:
Hark hither, come and hear this man, a man of quiet speech,
No thunder-thumping Catonist, you need him not beseech.
My speech is broad, be ruled, and then I Will do the best I can,
Be rudible, and sure I think you will prove a learned man:
Be but a careful and: for and scholar unto me,
And then you will soon excel your Master in simplicity.
What though some crabbed wittall do not like my precepts well,
Yet they can never hurt you, if you mark all that I tell.
When Morpheus drowsy god of sleep, from bed does thee dismiss,
(Which must be just at dinner time, for so my counsel is:)
Thy parents blessing never ask, learn that good point of me,
This is a rule and perfect note, of great civilitie.
Good morrow nor good even to friend nor foe impart too fast:
If they begin, repay no thanks, walk on, you are in haste:
What though you both should use, to both you know it would be but vain,
Then loose no words, for good words past, cannot be called again.
Let fond Hebritians which account, their superstition wealth,
Salute their friends, pray for their foes, and ask them of their health:
It Is vain to have so great a care, of such superfluous things,
This too much care to iocond youth, white hairs and sorrow brings.
When you are up, to stretch your self, deserves mickle praise;
This is prescribed by all that practice physic in our days:
For when your sinews numbed with sleep, cannot perform their work,
This stretching drives away all numbnesse, which in them did lurk.
Being out of bed, let it suffice, to clothe thee in thy shurt,
To stay to put on all thy clothes, with cold thou might thee hurt:
All thy apparel else get up forthwith under thine arm,
Then to the chimney corner run, for there thou may it warm.
What though a maid or married wife, be there before thou come,
Go forward with thy purpose though, as thou would erst have done.
If any man object to thee, that manners thou do lack,
Bid him if he mislike that sight, be gone and show his back.
Let every man give place to thee, thy self give place to none,
What man? why Nature made thee free, then boldly hold thine own.
At length, when thou art well araide, let both thy hose hang down
About thy heels, this only thing will get thee great renown:
For by this secret means, the maids will seek thy love to have,
And every wench thee for her husband, of her friends will crave.
Your reason sir. O sir, there is a special reason why,
I cannot stay to tell it now, I Will tell it by and by.
Simplicity commands, that you forget to trusse your points,
Hard tying is an enemy to belly and to joints.
Lest some men say, you are too hansome, never comb your hair,
As Nature sets it, and bed leaves it, use it so to wear:
Leave plaited hairs, and curled locks, unto the female sex,
And let them use to comb their hair, whom cruel love does vex.
Believe me, not a wench unto thee will affection bear,
If she perceive that thou observ'st such niceness in thy hair:
Who can abide young men that dress themselves as female crew,
A Creetish dame writ to an Amazonian lover true:
It Is praise and credit to have feathers store upon your head,
For thereby men may well perceive, you scorn straw in your bed.
In any case cut not your hair, but let it hang at length,
For it will both keep away the cold, and argue Sampsons strength.
When father Saturn ruled the world, all men did use long hair,
And gloried in it, though now wenches use it most to wear:
Forefathers plain simplicity, is praised in every place,
Then let not us disdain to use it, it is no disgrace.
Thy face and hands too often to wash, is cause of mickle hurt,
Therefore (a Gods name) let them both, have ever store of dirt:
Let other men, that with hands, have care to wash them clean;
But as for washing of my hands, to take no care I mean.
Some nice-controuling mate, will counsel thee to wash thy teeth;
But I say water in the mouth, not with the health agrees:
What though your teeth through o're-much rust, are did to a red hue?
That is a perfect saffron color, it will much credit you.
What other color then this red, has the bright glittering gold,
For which prossessions, tenements, lands, lives, and all are sold?
Then think not, that golds perfect color, does your teeth disgrace,
That color which in few men's purses, in your teeth has place.
The breakefast, the modesty of the eyes, the forehead and the nosthrills:
also of prattling, sneezing, bawdinesse, belching and going, and behavior in
the streets. Chapter II.
WHen your are up, before that sleep has fully left your eyes,
Call for you breakefast presently, mark that in any wise.
Which being got, incontinent, with both hands gripe it round,
Lest if you take not sure fast hold, it slip upon the ground,
At breakefast never use a trencher, wherefore serves your hand?
At dinner time it is far more meet upon such points to stand.
In any case see that the fat run down thy fingers thick,
Which with your tongue as down it runs, you always ought to lick.
As for a ready way at meat, your dinner to devour,
I cannot tell you yet, but you shall hear within this hour.
For first I must instruct you how, your body for to frame,
And all your looks in fittest sort, then briefly of the same.
And first in any case take heed, of too much modesty,
For that does very much abhor; from true simplicity.
Is It not a foolish thing, that young hot bloods should be so nice,
You will be callde a ledden slothful fellow of the wise.
I will that all men with turnde looks, you use for to behold,
For if you look men in the face, they will say you are too bold.
It Is not allowed that tender youth, such gravitie should use,
Wherefore with distort eyes and forehead, every man abuse.
Let such as learn at virtues school, and purpose to be wise,
And seek to live by others praises, care for bashful eyes.
But as for you, we give you leave, each way to roll your eye,
Then use it, for it is a mark of great simplicity.
It Is not amiss though store of wrinckles, do thy forehead plow,
And though your face be full of furrows, we will it allow.
It Is like a plowing heifers face, that many a blow of might
Has borne; or like a savage beast, which against a man does fight:
Even so a valiant gentleman, his countenance should frame,
Which hopes by stratagems in fight, to get renown and fame.
For all those hidden virtues, which man's mind do deck and grace.
Are with a lively portraiture, prefigurd in the face.
To no man speak, but with such words, as may him half affright,
For if thou do, as by a fool, by thee they will set but light.
Wherefore with might and maine, prevent such ill report always,
(And yet I Would with you never try, the means to get true praise.)
The proper use of every tongue, is for to talk apace,
Then let your tongue like a mill-clacke go fast in every place.
It is a custom in some countries, at each nosthrills ends,
To hang great jems and precious stones, such as rich India sends.
Has Fortune in these precious jems, denyde to thee a part?
Take courage though, and hear a friend, that loves thee at his heart,
As ice sikles in winter time, which hang on houses hie
Do grace the roofes, and show full fair to him that passes by;
So snot, which from the nostrils both, like bel-ropes hangs down,
Does grace a youth, which does profess himself a simple clown.
Nature the maker of all things, to deck thy life the more,
Has lent thee, of such ornaments, a most abundant store:
Wherefore, as in all things besides, so in this, keep this mean,
When store of snot is in thy mouth, thy nose then make thou clean:
Do this, but closely now and then, and sure I think, than thee
No man deserves greater praise, for his civilitie.
If when thou lackst an handkerchiefe, thou use thy cloak or hat
To blow thy nose, thou will be known a perfect clown by that:
Or fill thy hand top full with snot, and cast it on the ground.
It is a very seemly thing to hear the same resound,
And let it lie: What need you care? I charge you stir it not,
And let them tread it out, that say you have not store of snot.
I saw a custom in a country where I lately was,
Where hung with cords upon their sleeves a little pretty glass:
You may (if so it please you) take example from that town,
And see your picture in your snot, as it hangs dangling down.
And lest you should lack change of manners, fetch sighs now and then,
And rattle in the nose, this gesture pleases many men:
To fetch great blasts of breath together, argues that you can
Blow down whole towns, and all will say, Oh, he is a valiant man.
When you would sneeze, strait turn your self unto your neibors face:
As for my part, wherein to sneeze, I know no fitter place;
It is an order, when you sneeze, good men will pray for you:
Mark him that does so, for I think he is your friend most true.
And that your friend may know who sneezes, and may for you pray,
Be sure you not forget to sneeze full in his face always.
But when thou hearst another sneeze, although he be thy father,
Say not, God bless him, but, Choke up, or some such matter, rather.
Never be shamefast, never blush for any fault that's past,
Let them do so which, sorry, say, This fault shall be the last.
What though thou speak unseemly words, yet know it is not good
To have thy face and cheeks look red, as they were did with blood.
What though of bawdie beastly words, thou learnst to speak great store,
Why it is a shame that from a child, thou did not so before.
To give each thing that proper name, which it of Nature had,
Is neither in the law of God, nor man, accounted bad.
The reason-wanting multitude, do think those things are base,
Which nature in her secret wisdom, made mankind to grace.
I would not have you from the common speech depart so far,
As against Nature our best guide, unwisely to wage war.
All that which in thy bladder and thy belly lies hid,
To empty whenas thou have need, what man will thee forbid?
Crabbed precise fault-finders, only will not speak each word,
Thinking it is by proper names, to call each thing absurd.
What kind of men are these? true reason soon will prove them mad,
Which will not speak the words, but do the deeds, which is as bad.
If any man do tell you news, which never before you heard,
And presently with ready words, you can him not reward,
Then it is a great decorum, your wide mouth forthwith to stretch,
And so stand still, as though some harmless flies you meant to catch.
If that he tell a jest, which worth your laughter you suppose,
(But laugh not at each trifling thing,) then laugh so loud that those
Which do about their own affairs, walk over-thwart the street,
May tell you that you laugh full loud, when next they do you meet.
And if by laughing your red teeth, some pretty wench espy,
Because that color is the best, she will love you presently.
And if you see she likes you well, then laugh afresh again,
This is of rude simplicity, an argument most plain.
It is a very pretty thing, when you by laughing much,
Do make your mouth by distorture, your very ears to tutch.
Sometimes though no man give you cause, laugh as loud as you can,
For this is a most special sign, of a praiseworthy man.
Often times you shall espy some sober man with looks most grimme,
Which will be angry, thinking that you laugh at none but him.
And this will be exceeding good, and make you laugh the more,
To see a fellow collericke, knowing no cause wherefore.
If now and then you mean to lie, (as who would tell the truth?)
Between each word cough once or twice, this is a trick of youth.
Are not your words in readiness, according to your mind?
Then cough a while, and by this means, perhaps you them may find.
Tut, doubt not man none can perceive whether you cough or no,
It is great cunning, what is true, and what is false to know.
When you have need to cough indeed, you know this trick of old,
To cough into your neighbors face, you well may be so bold.
Let him take half the breath, which from thy winde-pipe thou have got,
T'wil serve him for a cooler well, if that he be too hot.
If he take that in ill part, which thou gav'st to him in good,
What need you care? his force is weak, it well may be withstood.
Whatsoever thou did, thou wilt answer it, where, when and how he can;
Thus thou by great out-braving words, must prove thy self a man.
Tell him, within his currish heart, anger has set her rest,
If that he cannot take that well, which thou did mean in jest;
What would he do (trow,) if he were not, as thou art, a man?
Which no such little trifling jest, with patience suffer can.
Or bid him, if he think thy breath could do him any ill,
That presently for full revenge, he would thy heart blood spill.
When thou have need to belch, never hold it, freely let it out,
Dissemble not, it will not stay, help it away you lowt.
It Is hard to hold it without hurt, if that it seek a vent,
Then let those blasts from forth thy stomach sail, be freely sent.
They le breed diseases infinite, in head, and every part,
As stinking breath which does infect, and the unsavory fart.
Therefore, to shun all hurtes and harms, which thereof soon would breed,
Be not too coy, but belch thy fill, whensoe're thou have need,
If thou desire at any time to walk into the street,
That all thy hat with dirt and dust besprinkled it is meet.
He that regards cleanelinesse, which only women use,
At him let all men mock and scoff, let all men him abuse.
What though thy shoes be doubde with dirt: to make them clean it is vain,
For why you know, do what you can, they must be fowlde again.
A long gown wear, which all the ground may sweep as thou do go,
For so no man the place whereon thou troddest well can know.
The dirt which on thy hem thou getst, as thou do walk along,
Will make the low welt of thy Gown seem to be very strong:
And if a man espy the dirt, when he is far remote,
He Will think you wear a very rich embroydred guarded cote;
Cloth made by silke-wormes paineful Art, from Scythia land does come:
Some strangers give to dearest friends, to others they sell some;
A man would think, that with this cloth, your gown were guarded thick,
If on the hemme, a great way off, he should see dry dirt stick;
Or if you like not these long gowns (as oftentimes we see
As many men, so many minds and manners there will be)
Wear a short coat, which scarce will keep your buttockes out of sight,
Like Noble men, and those which do rejoice in martial fight;
Old sage Erasmus counsel it is, Regard not thine attire.
(The precept of so grave a man, who will not much admire?)
Do as he bids thee then, regard not how thy garments sit,
Whether they be too little, or too big, or very fit.
Let both thy hands behind thy back together always meet;
Whether thou sit, or stand, or walk, in city, or in street.
But lest my Lecture seem too tedious for the multitude,
This Exercise in three short words I purpose to conclude:
Thus I would have thee frame thy life and deeds in any case:
Let this thy manners and behavior be in every place,
That he which sees the good behavior, which thou learnst of me,
May know thou art an expert Scholar, in Simplicity.
The setting on, and taking off the meat, and waiting at the Table. Chap. III.
BEhold; the boy has laid the cloth, and on the Table put
Those cates, which Cookery provides, to fill man's hungry gut:
You're glad of that, that you such dainty dishes shall oresee,
As with your ravenous empty stomach very well agree.
But soft sir, first upon your Masters trencher you must wait;
And afterward, when he has dinde, you shall be served strait:
And yet too ready never be unto your Masters hand,
Unless your help, by word of mouth, he twice or thrice command.
And now sit, your behavior fit I will lay forth at large;
Your only duty is (as you were wont) to mark my charge,
You cannot say my precepts are too subtle for your reach,
And therefore doubt, I shall not learn, the things which I shall teach
My muse is rusticke, and my Muse is easy, homely, plain,
Which being perfectly attainde, can never be lost again.
Whether your service be at home, or out of doors extend:
Whether you serve your master only, or your masters friend,
Your method and your manners eke, must be the self same ever.
And all which you have done before, must be forgotten never.
At dinner when you mean to wait, lay by your clothes all,
So shall you be the lighter for to come at every call.
Have on your hose whenas you wait on them that are at meat;
But let your breast be naked, to be seen of them that eat,
That so your bodies slenderness the strangers may perceave,
And give you praise, which none but fools and mad men ought to leave.
But if, the weather being cold, apparel you do wear,
The same to button, tie, or trusse, be sure that you forbear.
As for those parts which we are bound to hide by natures bands.
My counsel is, that all them parts thou cover with thy hands;
So modest Matrons and wild wenches thou shall please I know,
And shall thy self a pretty stripling unto all men show.
I like not those, which when they wait, must stand on both their feet,
And careful be, that as they stand, their legs may always meet.
To use the right foot and the left by turns I hold it best:
For so, while that you use the one, the other leg may rest.
But if my counsel you will take, never stand on both together;
For that which wants rest and ease, must needs wax weak and lither.
A nimble, stirring, hobling pase in young men I like best:
The scabs, the gowt, and such diseases breed, by too much rest.
Good Smiths do hobble with their feet, as they their bellows blow.
Then since good trades do it allow, why should not thou do so?
Mark that which most men use to do, and scorn to learn of none;
But good behavior, and perfection get of every one.
Be sure, that wheresoever you wayt, your fingers never stand,
But still be fumbling, it is a credit, not to hold your hand.
Praise comes to them by due desert, which something do always:
But slothfulness is a great let to him that seeks praise:
Wherefore be sure in both thy hands, thou always something have,
Lest such as find thee doing nothing, call thee idle knave.
In right hand hold thy trencher still, and let thy left hand hold
Thy breeches, lest they slipping down, thou chance to catch some cold;
Though thou do nothing else, yet let thy finger scratch thine ear,
Or with thy left hand lay at length, thy knotty tangled hair:
Or turn thy hat upon thy finger, or, among the rest,
Find out some pretty pleasing sport, that fits thy humor best.
Or if you would be thought a learned Poet of your friends,
Then lick and gnawe with tongue and teeth, your nails and fingers ends;
They use this action, whom, for thoughts aspiring men admire:
And so do they which Hymns do say, in god Apolloes quire.
Or set your arms up by your side, like to a man of might,
And frown, and by your very looks, they will think you mean to fight.
Do nothing that is fit or meet, unless they you constrain:
For if you do, nor praise, nor price, you will get, you work in vain.
If you perceive a man ill nurturde, mark him presently;
His going, sitting, standing, deeds, mark with a careful eye.
Mark how he eats and drinks, and how his hands he places best;
And if out of his life and manners, you can pick some jest
That's worth the laughing, that's enough, deride him presently.
Be not ashamde, but laugh so long, till that you seem to cry:
And from thy wit, of his behavior, let some quips arise:
It may be, when he sees his faults, he will learn to be more wise
And when thy master shall have greatest store of merry guests;
Then from thy biting budget bring most store of pleasant jeasts:
And this will be an argument of thine exceeding wit.
If each man's sundry humor, thou with biting jeasts can fit.
Perchance at length for second course, some rowme must needs be made;
Then learn this trick, a point most fit, for this thy serving trade:
Art thou an hungry? on a trencher some good bit, lay by,
That is a waiters proper fee, no man will it deny:
Thou have a leather sachell, to what purpose boughtst thou it?
But now and then, for thine own use, to keep a friendly bit.
What though perchance some man epsy thy sachell in thy sleeve;
Take a good courage though, and let not that thy conscience grieve.
But if perchance for this thy trick, he give thee some reproof,
Have something still which thou may freely say for thy behoof.
What sir, when other strangers have their bellies full, at least
Is It any reason that I should go empty from the feast?
What can he say when this he hears? perforce he will surely yield.
Then courage man, for sure from him thou wilt quickly win the field.
If thou setst on a dainty dish of cream filld to the brimme,
Make bread, and meat, and salt, and all, in curds and cream to swim.
When all is gone, and for a voider they do call to thee,
Learn this good point of manners and behavior of me;
Get from thy masters sight; and lest with work thy bones should ache,
Thou setst all on for his, let him remoove all for thy sake:
Say you have waited long enough, and are even starved for meat.
And its a hard case, if that now you may not freely eat.
But if at length with thundering words, your master call his man;
Return, but with as slow a pase, as possible you can:
Haste makes waste, and he which runs, often does catch a fall,
When he which goes a sober pase, does surely best of all.
And when you come, out of its order every dish remove,
When all the sweetest bittes are gone, what man would order love?
Take all at once, a weary man ought not to stand all day.
What fool will go about, when he can go a nearer way?
What though perhaps out of your hands, the meat do chance to fall?
Tush, a small matter, care not for it, it is no fault at all.
In truth, the platters were so heavy, they weighd down mine arm,
If that I had not let them fall, I should have caught some harm:
If that a stronger man than I, had felt the weight of all,
I do not think but that he also, would have let them fall:
And if your master greet you not, with, Take them up I pray:
First look upon them a good while, and then depart away.
And laugh, as though you did rejoice in doing of the same.
And for that fault, its ten to one, that no man will you blame.
But if your master, with a frown, bid you remove them thence;
Look sadly, and he will think that you are sorry for the offense:
If all at once you cannot take, it is good to let some lie,
And after you have placde the other, fetch them presently:
I think not one of all the guests will judge your fault so great,
As for the spilling a few scraps, your master should you beat.
Nay rather, in a merry vain, thei'le laugh and jest at thee,
Which proov'st thy self a perfect Scholar in Simplicity.
Concerning the behavior at the Table, before meat be set on. Chap. IIII.
Hark how thy hunger-pining panch for meat does cry and rore,
And yet to comfort it with food, why hastest thou no more?
Make haste, make haste, and now at length, after thy fast so great,
Prepare thy self most speedily to give thy belly meat.
If any great impediment forbids thee to proceed,
As points, or girdle, thou were best to loose them all with speed:
Although if thou remove all lets, thou will be thought unkind,
Thy doublet thou may well vnbutton, when thou have half dinde.
It Is vain with water (which cannot be clean) to wash thy hands:
How often into cleerest ponds are clods thrown from the lands?
If water which should cleanse our hands, have lumps of dirt in it:
Then surely from our hands it cannot wash the dirt a whit.
Thy nails never cut, but let them grow, it is a comely sight:
Hawks with long nails do catch their meat; yet Lords in them delight:
Or if thou needs wilt cut thy nails, cut them as thou do dine,
Between the first and second course, for then thou have good time.
If any gentleman, at dinner with thee chance to sit,
Be sure to get the highest room, that's for thy credit fit.
If any man chance to presume, to bid thee leave that place,
Yet sit thou still, for if thou rise, twill be a great disgrace.
For when a man is placed aloft, according to his use,
Unto a worse place to be thrust, it is a great abuse.
What reason have thou for to show, thou have so base a mind,
As when thou have a place before, thou will be thrust behind?
Had we not all one father Adam, and one mother Eve?
Shall earth and ashes thrust thee down? at that who would not grieve?
Whenas our Grandsire Adam dig'd, and Grandam Eve span,
Who then I pray amongst us all, was the best gentleman?
Whenas you come too late to dinner, and a stool you lack,
(Stand not in any case, for too much standing hurtes your back.)
By head and shoulders, from his place, thrust out some simple fool,
If to his elder, and his better, he will not yield his stool.
Perchance your knife is foul, with bread which yesterday it cut,
Or in some other dirtie place, perhaps it has been put.
This fault your shoo will quickly mend, if you no whetstone have,
For whet it on your shoo-sole well, and it will shine most brave.
If any man do marvel, that you use so plain a way,
Tell him, that you have used that custom many a summers day.
If when you are sharp set to dine, you nothing have to eat,
And for your hungry belly, you can get no store of meat;
Because the Cook is somewhat long, before he will you serve,
If that you think, unless you eat forthwith, you strait shall sterve:
Be angry strait, for why you have good cause, stamp, stare, and fume,
How dare they on thy patience, base pesants, thus presume?
Ask thou thy meat with angry looks, with choler, and with heat,
And if they will not bring it thee, cry still out, meat, meat, meat.
But if they still deny to come, with angry forehead say,
That thou will beat them every one, if that they thus delay.
Perhaps at length the meat is ready, and they only tarry
For one, which should the meat from thence, unto the table carry.
Then sit thou still, stir not a foot, it is better far to sterve,
Then like a paltry blew-cote knave (that's base) thy self to serve.
Let no man, had he Tullies wit, make thee such folly use,
What? serve thy self? thou never can thine honor more abuse.
Mean time be casting with thy self, which way the time to spend,
Beware on idleness, on which all vices do attend.
Has the scabd-dogge, with tickling itching all thy body bit?
Thou may have means to spend thy time, by over-looking it.
Scratch off the scabs with busy fingers, that is very good,
For so of putrefaction, thou may let out a flood:
Or as our Mettall-mongers do, with their industrious pains,
By digging mountains, rob the earth, of her rich metal veins.
So with thy knife, from out thy body scabs thou may dig store,
And seek diseases which do lack, in every hidden pore.
Then with your unwashed knife to cut your meat, can breed no hurt,
Nor wash your hands, you know that water cannot scowre off dirt.
It Is common for young men, to have great store of lusty lice.
Their names declare their form, they have six feet, be not so nice.
If that your flesh does suffer any hurt by their sharp teeth,
Defer no whit their punishment, that with your health agrees.
But with a courage from your head, strait pull them by the tail,
And for their treason, strait behead them, with your thumbs sharp nail
From forth your bosom take them quick, unto their great disgrace,
And on the table valiantly, their captive bodies place.
It Will be a pretty sight to see, how fast thei'le run away,
To save themselves, and all their kin, from that most bloody day.
Though all things fail thee else, yet sure thou shall find trenchers strong,
To help to drive away the time, which thou do think so long.
O'relooke them well on every side, each corner, and each end,
And if they are not, as they should be, help their faults to mend.
The Trencher-maker in his work, does often make great waste,
Whenas he cannot stay, to finifie each part for haste.
Thou which have time enough, correct those faults in any wise,
With thy sharp knife, which seem not hansome in thy curious eyes.
And when thou have corrected, of each trencher every whit,
Thy Master cannot choose, but praise thy labor and thy wit.
The table-cloth, with pin or knife, to prick, or cut, begin,
No reasonable man I trow, will say this is a sin.
For let the fool your Master know, that he did cause this deed,
In keeping such bad Cooks, as would not give you meat with speed.
It Will make him charge his Cooks, that at the first call they you serve,
And not to let his servants, to sit without meat and sterve.
Perhaps a salt-seller stands by, it is good with that to play,
And strike it with your knife, it will serve to drive the time away.
This by two sundry profits, sure will stand thee in great steed,
For first the noise will make the Cooks, remember thee to feed.
And secondly, unto thine ears, a pretty sound it will send,
Wherefore, above all other tricks, this one I do commend.
If that your master, or your father, leave his knife behind,
For their sakes use it favorably, never be unkind.
With stones, or wood, or keys, be sure you make it blunt and dull,
Lest that it cut too fast as from their sheathes they do it pull.
So when their knife does cut their hands, in carving out a mess,
By that good means which you foresaw, their wound will be the less.
In brief, if that you had almost forgot your points to loose,
And now you have such sudden haste, you cannot will, nor choose,
And that you fear your breeches shall partake your heavy weight,
And all the house you shall perfume, if you depart not straight.
Then rise, and if your fellow needs will know whither you went,
Tell him, to thrust away a knave, that would not pay his rent.
So come again, and without washing either hands or face,
As soon as may be, (as I told you,) get the upper place.
Perchance if you in washing of your hands, had stayed long,
The knaves would soon have parted all your part themselves among.
Your behavior all the while you eat. Chapter V.
When you are set with pottage, first your stomach is unlocked,
Because, before all other meats, you may that best concoct.
And now forsooth you lack a spoone, yet hardely can abstain,
Why then to sup it up with mouth and lips, you must be feign:
Ask but of Nature, our dear mother, and she will lend thee soon,
A pair of lips, which thou may use, better then scoupe or spoone.
Diogenes did scorn a spoone, but from a fountain clear.
Did drink as well out of his hand, as we from pots of beer.
And sure he had no other cause, the spoone for to despise,
But that he saw his ancesters, do so before his eyes.
When as the meat is all set down, according to thy wish,
See that thy right hand wrest and all, be first in every dish.
And if there be a dainty bit, it is good to snatch it strait,
Lest that another for the same, do craftily lay wait.
If thou be wise, observe this course and custom evermore,
So for thy belly, dainty bits, thou ever shall have store.
If that some envious man, do seem for to repine at this,
Love others well, but thy self better, say the proverb is,
Perchance upon the platters furthest side, there lies a bit,
Which thou do very much desire, but can not reach to it.
And if thou sit by no such friend, as strait will help thee to it,
By stretching out thy limbs upon the table, thou may do it,
If any seem offended with thee, tell them it is the fashion,
To set the best meat, to the best men of the congregation.
Now sir, it is a more seemly trick, to turn the platter round,
That by that means, the dainty bits may on your side be found.
The turning of the platter round, in this sort it is best
To hide, and cloak, and in my mind it is a pretty jest.
After this sort, all stars, and the celestial bodies move,
Which daily motion, and perpetual stirring ever love.
Then bid your neighbor speak of plants, so your talk to quite,
He smiling hits you on the ear, yo'are planet-strucken right.
Whenas your friend does on your trencher, dainty wilde-fowle lay,
Strait cover it with both your hands, for fear it fly away.
And though your neighbor never so much, upon you do bestow,
Yet keep it all within your clutches, let not one bit go.
It is no profit for to give thy neighbor any part,
Of those good bits, which thou thy self do love with all thy heart.
And as for him which gave it you, his kindness ne'recommend,
Although he be a man of worship, and your very friend;
Tell him, you were of age enough, your self with cares to fit,
Although from off his trencher he had reachd you never a bit.
After that you have twice or thrice thus answered every friend,
No man from off his trencher dainties unto you will send;
And so hereafter for your self, you where you will may out,
And out of every dainty dish, choose bits for your own gut.
On every side of every dish, be sure you taste and try,
And that which pleases not your mind, for others let it lie:
False objects oftentimes deceive this mortal sight of our,
And that which bears the sweetest show, in taste is often sour:
Wherefore my counsel is, that in thy mouth thou taste aright,
That which does make so fair a show, unto the outward sight.
If that it has a pleasant taste, and like your palate well,
What then you ought to do therewith, I hope I need not tell.
But if the taste which you expected, fit not to your mind;
Then take my counsel, for in it great profit thou shall find:
Into the platter with an angry look you may it cast,
There is no sense that you should eat that meat you cannot taste:
Or keep it, and the best thereof in cleanely sort gnaw round;
For doing this, as I suppose, no fault can well be found.
For why, with tooth and nail, to bite, and scratch, and gnaw your meat,
Is both a seemly thing, and also brings profit great:
For by this means, you spare your knife, which else might loose his edge,
If in your meat there should be bones. O Wisdoms privilege?
That which thou leave, into the platter will thou throw? O wit!
Perchance some other will it take, for a most pleasing bit.
Ill men (as thou art) ever bare such malice in their heart,
That if they have a good thing, thei'le not give their neighbor part.
That which you cannot eat, some greedy got will snatch up strait,
And give you thanks, as if for him you had reserved that bait:
And that his hungry paunch at length may well be cramd with meat,
That which upon your trencher lies, most ravenouslie he will eat.
But yet I think it is a trick more civil, and more fine,
To load thy neighbors trencher with those scraps that lie on thine.
He Will thank you with a joyful heart, for that so royal fare,
And say, he sees (he thanks you) that you mindful of him are;
It Will moove you for to be his friend most faithful and most kind,
And yet a faithful friend, in these bad days is hard to find:
Such meat as thou gav'st to thy friend, when he did none desire,
I think a ful-filld dog, would scorn to give his hungry fire.
When biscuit bread, cimnells, and wine upon the Table stand,
If that thou see the Butler fills it, with a sparing hand,
Hide thou the pot behind thy back, and unto others fill:
And unto no man present give a drop against thy will.
If any one of them be grieved which at the Table are,
Tell him, it is good that every man should for himself have care.
And sir, my counsel is, that you the pot do next time get,
If when you dine abroad, you mean your lips with wine to wet.
Thus, having filld your stomach with the first course at the board,
If that you think the second will some dainty cates afford,
And that you feel your girdle does your swelling belly pinch,
It Is better strait to take it off, than from good meat to flinch:
Think it no shame, or if thou dare not do so, it is thy best,
To pull it off though, for thou well may cloak it with this jest:
Neighbor, you have a pretty gerdle, it shows very fine;
What boot in faith? let me see yours, and you shall strait see mine.
And by this means you may have cause, your gerdle to put off.
Whereas if you had not done so, you might have had a scoff.
And if some bits of new gnawne meat, within your mouth do stick,
Out of the same with hands and nails, it is manners it to pick;
Within the Crocodiles wide jaws, when jagges of flesh do lie,
Some little bird to pull them out, does help her presently.
For while that she her tonguelesse mouth, in widest sort does stretch,
Some sharp billd bird from forth her jaws, the meat for food does fetch:
The seely bird within the beasts wide jaws does walk, and feed,
And has no hurt, because her belly does help the beast at need.
But as for thee, thou needst not this, Nature our mother free,
Foreseeing this, has lent both hands and fingers ends to thee,
Then with thy fingers search thy mouth, or with a knife, or pin:
Since thou have such means of thine own, a birds help scorn herein.
And if from forth thy teeth thou bring a bloody piece of meat,
Lest that it should be lost, it is good forthwith thou should it eat:
Or with your vnwipte knife, from forth the platter take some bit,
Which for your almost halfe-filld stomach you do think most fit.
Your gnawne meat on your neighbors trencher smiling you may lay,
Using these flattring glosing terms, refuse it not I pray.
And if that he accept the meat, which from your teeth you drew,
It Will stir up store of laughter, unto all that merry crew:
And by this means all men will say, your wit is very quick,
And count you for a merry fellow for this cleanely trick.
Some fools (to what intent, who knows?) their knife must needs make clean,
When as to cut a cleanly piece of common bread they mean.
Thou fool, why do thou wipe the fat upon the table cloth?
Who ever knew a senseless fool, to learn good manners loath?
Were not a thing more pleasing, and more welcome to thy tongue,
To wipe it on the common loaf, when thou do cut along?
Perhaps many a hungry man would give thee thanks for that,
Which bread and butter loves at heart, and such things as are fat.
This trick, although there be some show of beastliness in it:
Yet sure of many a dainty dish, it will get thee many a bit,
Whenas your host some dainty cates unto the Table sends,
Which unto you your meat and drinke-consuming gut commends,
Take thou those jewels from thy nose whereof before I told,
I mean thy snot, and in thy hollow palm do thou it hold,
And craftily into the platter, either cast it all,
Or hold it dangling over, so that it may almost fall:
And by this means the company will straitway loathe their meat,
And all the delicates remaining, thou thy self may eat.
A man well known in every place, did often do the same,
Who from an Owl joynd to a Glass did first derive his name.
This Owglasse all in every place, praisde, honored and admirde;
And to relate his pretty prancks, each merry man desirde:
Wherefore his life, and his behavior do not thou refuse,
And then no doubt but times to come, thy merry tricks will use.
Do thou a mean and end of eating now at length require?
And when to know a ready time to leave do thou desire?
Leave eating when thy swelling belly will not let thee speak,
And when thou think with one bit more, thy very guts would break.
I should proceed, and yet more precepts for thy dinner tell,
But it is too late, and I at supper time may do it as well.
Behavior fit to be observed after dinner, and when you are walking. Chapter
VI.
NOw having filled your belly full, with dainty pleasing fare,
Be sure that for your own affairs, you take but little care.
The belly filled with dainty meats, can hardely cares endure,
For careful thoughts, are deadly foes, unto concoction sure.
And care does with diseases, the best bodies often infect;
Wherefore out of thy mind, all care in any case reject.
If that in summer, you your dinners in the fields do keep,
Be sure that forthwith in a baulke, you frame your self to sleep.
There you may lie, until you think, it is almost time to sup,
And then it is time from drowzie sleep, to rowze your spirits up.
And as you lie, to fart and fiste at pleasure, you have leave,
For why you know there is no man by, such tricks for to perceive.
If that you find by trial, that no man a fart can hold,
By good experience so to swear, I think you may be bold.
If that to lie and sleep all day, does not your fancy please,
Because your nimble body, always scorned slothful ease,
Then rise at leisure, and through every street walk up and down,
The doing so, will sure procure both profit, and renown:
For by this walking, thou thy meat, the better may digest;
Among all other rules, Physicians hold this for the best.
As thou did come to dinner with unwashed hands, even so
My counsel is, that from the same with unwashed hands thou go.
It Is better that of dainty meats, thy dirtie hands should smell,
Then of that water, which is drawn, from every dirtie well.
What though your shoes be thick with diet? to purge them it is vain,
For why you know in dirt and dung, they must be fowlde again.
If thou have cause to vomit, as the street thou walkst about,
All which thou can not keep, with wide mouth freely let it out.
Nor care thou though great store of people stand about thee round,
But all that goes against thy stomach, cast it on the ground.
Grave Anthony the same did do, when many did him see,
Yet he was chose in famous Rome, a Consul for to be.
And look how much worlds mirror Rome, our small towns does surpas,
So much to be preferred before thee, good Antonius was.
That which so great a man as he, durst do in such a place,
For thee to do in this small town, can be no great disgrace.
But if this man's example, cannot move thy mind one whit,
Yet if I urge thine own good health, I know thou wilt yield to it.
The learned wise Physicians, their patients hurt to cure,
Prescribe them certain bitter vomits, which they must endure.
Each month one vomit at the least, or more, they ought to use,
A vomit does men's lives preserve, you can it not refuse.
If in a month, one vomits use, can drive all hurts away,
How long shall thou live, if thou vomit twice or thrice a day?
If thou have need to piss, as thou do walk thy friends among,
Unload thy bladder presently, it is ill to keep it long.
What though some honest Matron, or some chaste maid thee perceave,
Yet do not thou in any case, thy former purpose leave.
Respect good manners, but respect thy health a great deal more,
Care while thou may, for health once lost, is hard for to restore.
Men that are careless of themselves, do lose that in one night,
For which they'de give, what not? poor fools, if so they get it might.
If any cloak, or such like garment on thy shoulders be,
What needst thou care which way it hangs, such vain care cast from thee.
Or if you wear a gown, take heed that not your legs it hides,
Lest that it hinder all your pace, your steps, and eke your shides.
Cast it behind with both your hands, that all men so may see,
Your perfect body, and your limbs, and fore parts what they be.
And that which else your gown would cover, it is enough to hide
It with your doublet, and your breeches, laced on every side.
Such sights do please old Matrons very well, I tell the true,
And these are very welcome sights, unto the virgins crew.
For then they le mark your slendernes, and all your nimble joints,
And eke how well your belly is tide, with girdle and with points.
And then forthwith with love of thee, thei'le quite be set on fire,
Which done, each act will more and more inflame their hot desire.
If as you go, some friend or foe, do bid you, sir God speed,
I think to give him a good answer, there is little need.
First look him in the face, and mark with what good mind it was said,
And as you like his, sir God speed, so let it be repaid.
Thou oughtst to bid no man God speed, until that thou have seen,
What his behavior, and his manners, unto thee have been.
For why the wandering multitudes good will, thou needs must lack,
If they perceive thou speakst so friendly unto every jacke.
And by this means, the name of a light fellow thou will have,
Which even now were thought to be a man both wise and grave.
And thus thine honor and thy majesty, will have a fall,
If thou by such familiar terms, do every fellow call.
But if perchance some pretty wench, do stand at any door,
Then which, a fairer in thy life, thou never saw before.
Cast thou upon her all the cheerful loookes thou can devise,
Though she be one, whom never before, thou did behold with eyes.
Then go strait to her, and in this case lay aside all shame,
And with a pleasant smiling look, demand the virgins name.
All that thou think can laughter moove, lay down before her face,
Let nothing seem uncivil, or unseemly in this case.
Among all the things which Nature made in wisdom, for man's use,
Nothing is simply bad, but it from man receives abuse.
If nothing but the crabbed minds of Stoickes, you do tell,
She never will laugh, such sadness will not please her fancy well.
Despise the sharp decrees of Catonists, that are severe,
And lest you tell her Zenoes statutes, you must have a care.
The flattering sect of shameless men, fulfills her fancy fit,
And that which currish Cinickes teach, it is good to tell her it.
When thou have told her all thy mind, and ripped up all thy heart,
And that thou think it is time for thee, now homeward to depart;
Then round about her neck, be sure that thou thine arms do cast,
And till that thou have kissed thy fill, be sure thou hold her fast,
If she reject thy gentle offers, and away would go,
Then kiss her and embrace her both, whether she will or no.
If that she fly, then follow her, and once caught, hold her fast,
Though she dissemble for a while, yet sure she will yield at last.
And call her mistress sweet heart, love, and speak her very fair,
Lest she should think, thy protestations are but wind and air.
Let all the young men of the town, behold your sport and jest,
That all may say, he is a comely fellow I protest.
What other wench so e're you meet, while you do use this sport,
Be sure she taste of the same cup, and use her in this sort.
You can no whit impeach by this, your gravitie and fame;
Nor is there any man, that ought to blame you for the same.
If any wench speak to thee first, thank her not for that deed,
But count her light in speaking first, let that be all her meede.
What though you count your self a praiser of Simplicity,
And by your clownish manners, look to get some high degree.
Yet bear so brave a lofty mind, as all men to despise,
And with a frowning scowling look, on all men cast your eyes.
He which does bear a baser mind, and thoughts which are so low,
Does seem his own perfections, not perfectly to know.
And by this means, he soon may take unworthily disgrace,
Whereas if he would brave it out, all men would give him place.
What every man thinks of himself, that others think its meet,
And he that will not raise himself, may long he under feet.
Then yield to none, but scorn thou all, of none respectfull be,
And think all places, all degrees, are far too low for thee.
If that you meet a man of worth, whom all the people grace,
Whether he be a Magistrate, or Ruler in that place;
Or teach the ruder multitude, to heaven to lift their eyes,
Or for some other honest life, he be accounted wise:
In any case scorn to look on him, when your head is bare,
But let your cap for fear of cold, cover your head and hair.
We all are dust, we all one form, we all one matter have
Both rich and poor shall have alike, whenas they go to grave.
The fatal sister Clotho, neither spares rich nor poor,
Since then we all are like, why should some men be honored more?
Wherefore, wheresoever thou art, give none the way, whosoever he be,
Nay, if he stand upon such points, then make him yield to thee.
When in a common way, thou with thy friend do walk the street,
Take thou the right hand both of him, and all that thou do meet:
But if the way be foul, then mark this order not a whit,
Take thou the clean as for the durtie, let him go in it.
Perchance you have a fart, to send into the world so wide,
Which rumbling in your belly, troubled you on every side;
Then let it forth in every place, and wheresoever you will;
That which our mother Nature made, I think cannot be ill.
If any man for doing so, you are a sloven say,
In this good sort, his vain objections, you well answer may.
Four great diseases will arise, by keeping in your wind,
A giddie head, the cholicke, dropsy, and the crampe unkind.
Physicians do prescribe this rule, amongst their counsels deep,
A rule, which every man that loves his health, should always keep.
Claudius bids that farts and belches, we should never hold,
Lest in presuming on our health, we make our selves too bold.
All that which in this point is said, it tends to this end,
Thy good behavior for to praise thy bad for to defend.
In summer time, whenas the herbs grow greener every day,
With some good talk, the tedious time, it is good to drive away.
When some in sober sort, of weighty matters do entreat,
And prove the land that lives in peace, has sure a blessing great,
Or some one read in history, does orderly declare,
The manners of our ancestors, and customs what they were.
Be sure with trifling matters, that thou cross their purpose quite,
Let others talk of former times, in ours take thou delight.
Old wine, old friends, and eke old faith, may be allowed well,
And yet it is folly to allow, all old things that you tell.
It Is fitter for us younger men, to speak of younger days,
And see if for their good deserts, they may have any praise.
And then begin unto them all, to tell some pretty jest,
Which may enforce great store of laughter unto all the rest.
Tell them what kindenes you of late, did of your love receave;
And thus with stories of her flattring words, the time deceave.
Since none in crabbed words delight, use jests in every place,
And bawdie terms, for these often times, procure a special grace.
O young man, while thy time is fit, in pleasure take thine ease,
If thou thy good companions minds, do purpose for to please;
Rejecting shame, speak any filthy words that may be namde,
No valiant man, but only fainting cowards are ashamde.
This all your yonkers use to do, whenas abroad they walk,
And scorning honest sober words, they fall to shameless talk.
That which all young men use to do, the life that all men lead,
(Since it is sure, the safest course in best known paths to tread.)
The same in every point to imitate I counsel thee,
And say, and do, that which thou think to most will pleasing be.
As long as you of nothing else, but toies and trifles talk,
So long you may have work enough, how far soever you walk.
But if at length, when you have vttred all that e're you meant,
(Although I think your store of words, can hardly soon be spent;)
Then whatsoever another says, be sure you mock and flowt,
As scorning to be over-talkt, by such a clownish lowt.
The adorning the Table before supper, and other such like duties. Chap. VII.
But now sir Phoebus prancing horses to the sea do haste,
There to refresh that strength again, which burning Sol did waste.
And now I think the time draws near, thy supper for to take,
Wherefore go home, that thou in readiness each thing may make.
Bid talk farewell, which stays the belly from his wish for food,
The finest speech unto a gut half ster'vd, can do no good.
Yet will I not in any case, that too much haste thou make,
But with a good advise and counsel, all things undertake.
Sometimes it is good thou should stay out, beyond the pointed time,
For then some other will perform that duty which was thine.
Some other then will lay the cloth, and on thy master tend,
And e're thou comst, of all thy business he will make an end.
If that thy father or thine host, do for thy coming stay,
Thou sure shall get great profit and great credit by that way.
Profit, for why thou both their loves shall try, how great they be;
And is it not credit when thine host or father stays for thee?
And sure I think, for shame their hunger cannot be so great,
As whenas thou art in the fields, they should devour the meat.
When home you come, if that you see that neither man nor maid
Did lay the cloth, and yet it is more then time that it were laid;
Unless thy master thee command, lay thou no cloth at all,
For if thou too officious art, who can thee simple call?
Never labor for great store of wisdom and agilitie,
For neither wit nor virtues deeds can one whit profit thee.
Simplicity great profit brings, this will defend thee still,
At every time, in every place where thou committest ill.
And if in every duty thou do show thy self unfit,
Thy master in his great affairs, will never trust thy wit.
The man that strives to shun the harms, he sees before his eyes,
And he which knows what is fittest for himself, is surely wise.
The man which boasts of his wealth, is often robbed we see,
When those which hide their goods up close, in pleasure still may be.
Such as do of their virtues brag, are often undone thereby,
When those that look like lazy knaves, in quiet still may lie.
That Chicons darling, brave Ulysses, might escape vnspide,
All his exploites under a distaffe he was glad to hide.
And had not wise Ulysses faind himself to have been mad,
In those hot broiles of Trojan wars, he surely perished had.
In like sort thou, if any act or virtue in thee lie,
Be sure thou keep it all so close, that no man may it spy.
Thy master and thy father both, will set great taskes to thee,
If they discry those virtuous parts, which by thee cloak'd should be.
The trenchers and the bread to place, before the guests do sit,
Unless thy master thee command, thou needst not count it fit.
You need not have a care, in what good sort the stools do stand,
Nor need you care to order every thing, with your own hand.
It is not meet that from the loaf, you chip the upper crust,
Which on your masters trencher, for his own mouth place you must.
Your master often forbids, that any good thing should be lost,
Then if his chippings he should loose, it would put him to great cost.
Do only that which thou art bid, but do thou that with speed,
It is not good at any time, to take more pains then need.
Most wretched is that servants case, whose luck it is to have,
A master at whose beck, he must do all that he shall crave.
If he do that which no man bade him, it is a fault most great,
And for it he forthwith is sure, most soundly to be beat.
Which to prevent, a witty youth that well did love his ease,
Did take this order, lest he else his master should displease.
Of all the things he had to do, he forthwith made a bill,
That by this means, his masters mind he better might fulfill.
And having made it by often reading got it all by heart,
Thinking that he by no means then, could from his duty part.
And as for doing other things, he durst not be so bold,
Unless he them within his paper, written did behold.
By chance his master on a time, bade him put out a flame,
Which kindling in a corner of the house, had burnt the same.
He fearing lest he should do more, then in his bill he found,
Stood seeking, till the house was almost burnt unto the ground.
Get such a b ll as this, and then you evermore shall find,
If any business chance to fall out of your slipperie mind.
I told thee many duties fit for dinner time before,
Which lest I spend my time in vain, I will recite no more.
Unto each willing person, all my precepts are but plain,
If by my doctrine they their lives to guide, will take the pain.
For many have so quick a wit, that they my precepts know,
Although my method and my doctrine, no man to them show.
Whenas your master has to supper, neither guest nor friend,
And does for all his household servants, very kindly send;
Forthwith to get the upper place, have always in your mind,
Lest others getting it before, they thrust you down behind.
Its always seen, that he most labor still does undergo,
Which coming after all his fellows, has his place below.
Ho, sir, boy, unlock the door for them that knock so fast,
If they be strangers, ask their arrants, why they make such haste.
Go fetch some bread, and bring the venson pastie in your hands,
And draw some wine out of the tun, which in the corner stands.
Perchance the dog has let a escape, for which he must be gone,
Then lead him out, and when he is sweeter, bring him in anon.
These things must sometimes all be done, by him that sits below,
Wherefore for any other seat, the lowest place for go.
But if perchance, your master makes you only stand and wait,
While all your fellows take their choice, of every pleasing bait.
Then show some token, that this place is yours against your will,
And with such angry words as these, your hungry stomach fill.
Is It any reason that I only, in such servile sort
Should stand and wait, while others eat their meat with pleasant sport?
I see no sense, why only I should stand and wait on thee,
Whenas my fellows are at supper, from such bondage free.
But as the hedge is most gone over, where it lies low,
Because it in that lowness, most humility does show.
So I because I less resist, then others that stand by,
Am quite cast down, and at my masters feet most basely lie,
And thus the more I do obey, the more I still must toil,
I see it is hard for him to rise, that once has took the foil.
It may be, these thy words to moove thy masters heart may seem,
And he will both give thee less to do, and better thee esteem.
And if he sees, in joyful manner that thou part away,
He Will love thee better, and appoint thee lesser taskes each day.
But if he be obdurate still, refuse not then to wait,
Lest he a crooked stick, upon thy shoulders broad make straight.
Simplicity that is too foolish, she in any case,
Lest it procure thee store of stripes, on shoulders, back, and face.
As erst I told thee, so be sure thou never tie thy points,
So may thou as thou serv'st at board, be nimbler in thy joints.
Whether your master and his household, only dine together,
Or else your master store of strangers, has invited thither;
Let all things after one set order, still be done of thee,
And still observe one only kind, of rude Simplicity.
Why should thou strive at any time, more manners for to reach,
Then this my homebred country muse, in simple verse can teach?
Whether you sup at home, or all your curious friends among,
The selfsame manners in both places, unto you belong.
To differ in your actions, cannot choose but breed disgrace,
That which is seemly here, is not amiss in any place.
Waiting at the Table all supper time. Chapter VIII.
WHen all the guests thou have invited for thy masters sake,
Whom he with store of Bacchus liquors, merry means to make.
As thou were wont, so have a care, a trencher to provide,
And let Simplicity in all thy actions be thy guide.
Then be thou careful to observe, all that I said before,
And unto that it is requisite, I add a little more.
Carry your dish so steadfastly, that being filld to the brim,
The bread, the salt, the cloth and all, may in the potrage swim.
What though the pottage spilt, do all the strangers clothes stain,
Yet those that know the profit, could endure it so again.
For why the spice wherewith the Cook did store the pottage well,
Besides the dainty taste, will also yield a fragrant smell.
And by this means, their garments afterward will smell more sweet,
Then e're they could, before they with this hot perfume did meet.
They cannot well forget this kindness, if you have your due,
For always when they smell that spice, they needs must think of you.
If that this deed do seem to make them joyful at the heart,
Then forthwith for to laugh aloude, you know it is your part.
And by this means, the company will surely laugh at thee,
And praise thee for thy good intent, and plain Simplicity.
But if some testie crabbed fellow, liking not this use,
With angry looks do tell thee plain, thou offerst him abuse.
It shall suffice, if with good words, thou lessen his disgrace,
Since hottest anger unto gentle words, often gives place.
Sir, so it is, each mortal man does often times offend
Against his will, and cannot presently his fault amend.
But seeing that his fault is great, he forthwith does repent,
And then lest he should thus despair, he has a pardon sent.
And by this means, I doubt not but his anger you will appease,
What though he were so hot of late? yet thus you may him please.
Or if the fool will needs be angry, rail as fast as he,
I hope the fool was old enough, unto his clothes to see.
Then as you stand, with careful looks mark all that sit at meat,
And mark the quantity, that every man does drink and eat.
Hide not your looks, but unto every man unfold your mind,
For why your master by this means, great profit sure shall find.
For then for shame, each man less bits into his mouth will put,
And leave half that, which else he would have thrust into his gut.
Have neither care nor reverence, of master, man, nor maid,
But all that fits thy fancy best, let that be done and said.
Though all men blame thee, yet if thou do like thy deeds always,
Thou know a man's own guiltless mind, deserves the great st praise.
If any man that's not thy master, do thy service crave.
Strait bid him do it himself, for why thy help he shall not have.
But if thy father or thy master, bid thee do the same,
If then thou giv'st them such an answer, thou art much too blame.
Do that which they command at leisure, always be thou slow,
Lest something thou should hurt or loose, if thou too fast should go.
Be sure to frown, and make such store of faces in that kind,
That all may know, thou go about it with no willing mind.
Perhaps thou see the candle lack a snuffer, that it might
Unto the strangers at the table, cast a better light.
Thou fool, why do thou make such haste to snuff it with thy hand,
Unless thy master twice or thrice at least, do thee command
If thou do put it out, while thou to snuff it do intend,
All that are by, will presently, this cleanely trick commend.
It is a very civil trick, whenas the candle's out,
To let the stinking smoke, ascend their nostrills round about.
If that you dare not put it out quite, lest your master chide,
Yet that the stincke may trouble them, you thus may well provide.
The snuff cut off you on the ground may cast without offense,
A smoakie vapor, will disturb their noses all from thence.
Why should you tread it out? unless they ernestly you pray,
Although they you command, yet scorn their pleasures to obey.
Nay, rather you to leave the snuffers open should presume,
From whence will come a smell, which will again the house perfume.
I think this smell to wives with child, but little good will do,
Though sure it will profit in some sort, both men and women too.
If some one man among the rest do firmly that deny,
And say he will prove the contrary by reasons presently:
And that he may the better prove, that which he does defend,
Does urge the words of men, whose writings all times did commend.
(For Pliny says, the babe which in the mothers womb does lie,
If that the mother feel this smell, immediately does die.)
Then cry aloude, that he against the truth does plainly speak,
And that thou presently, wilt prove his argument but weak.
Nor be ashamed to trouble and disturb the standers by,
But with these words in lofty sort, be sure thou him defy,
I hope good fellow, thou will freely give me leave to speak,
Since thou the laws of modesty, long since thy self did break.
He surely is a wicked man, which seeks by vaunting lies,
To get him credit and renown, before us that are wise.
As I remember, I no place of Plinies can recall,
Wherein he any whit makes mention of these words at all.
For how could he know this? or else put case he did say so,
It Is vain for to believe each word, of every man you know.
For many things unto this day, are extant in his books,
Which he may find to be most false, that wisely in them looks.
If thus you answer his objection, every man will swear,
That surely you a skillful man, and well read scholar are.
The cups being empty, catch them in your hand with wine to fill,
And then in haste fill them so full, that they may almost spill.
It Is good to fill them full at first, lest you more pains should take,
What though your trembling hand spill some? you soon amends may make.
What though the cup being too full, you power some on the ground?
I think if you should use this trick, great fault could not be found.
Or if you dare not give it full, for fear your master brawle,
Then kindly sup off some, as if you drank unto them all.
Or (which is much more civil,) if too much you chance to fill,
Into the flaggon empty some, for fear you should it spill.
For if perchance some durtie drugs, within the cup do lie,
By mingling it with all the wine, it will forthwith clarify.
Perhaps your master on his guests, bestows such store of wine,
That no two cup fulls, grew upon the selfsame kind of vine.
You need not take great care, to know each sundry sort and kind,
But always fill of that, which next unto your hand you find.
What though a man should always mix, all kinds of wine together?
The selfsame earth did bear all wine, which Merchants can bring hither.
The virtues of all sorts of wine, in one cup one might hold,
If all men in this sort, would use to mingle new with old.
As many virtues ioynde in one, do make that one excel,
So diverse wines are of most force, when they be mingled well.
If any man this custom, with some vp-start name abuse,
Tell him, he knows no orders, which the wise Physicians use:
Which would not use to give their patients compound potions still,
Unless they found such mixture good, by Phisickes sacred skill.
The selfsame order must be kept, which I prescribed before,
In that good ale which unto us is brought from Saxon shore.
From Hamburg city on our shore, great store thereof is cast,
Which does both nourish very well, and has a pleasant taste,
Next unto that, Bracket, a kind of happy pleasant beer,
A kind of drink that's made of Hannoveraes water clear.
And Cydar which was brought from thence, where Brunon old was king,
And that good kind of drink which men from Embecke city bring.
Let all these sundry sorts of drink, be mingled well together,
Since only for the dry throats use, they were convaied hither.
If any man entreats you, to fill his empty cup,
All that which in the bottom lies, be sure you strait drink up.
If thou perhaps art drunk to, by some ancient friend of thine,
Which presently, will have thee pledge him in a cup of wine,
At first refuse his gentle offer, after take the cup,
And all the wine that is therein, most boldly drink it up,
As for the cup, in any case let it not empty stand,
And having silld it fresh, restore it to your masters hand,
I do not bid you stir your hat, whenas you pledge your friends;
Or if you will, then only touch it with your fingers ends.
Or if for manners sake, at length to take it off you choose,
Then cast it strait behind your back, as meaning it to loose.
And as you stand expecting carefully your masters will,
As fast as they can drink them off, the empty cups to fill.
If as you fill, from forth your hands, the bottle you let fall,
You shall be thought to be a hansome fellow of them all.
What though your master heerevpon, begin to fume and rage?
Yet with this gentle answer, you his answer may assuage.
Forsooth you ought for this, to blame my drunkenness, not me,
And heerevpon he cannot choose, but pardon give to thee.
If thou perchance espi'st a cup, which void of liquor is,
Which every man does constantly, deny to have been his
Because perhaps some sober man, to escape it so, did think,
And set it by, lest else he should be overcome with drink.
It is great shame, that empty cups should on the table stand,
And it is your fault, if any guest want liquor in his hand.
Then take it strait and drink to him, which for your friend you feign,
And by this means, the use of drinking you will renew again.
Yet do not this, without some cunning trick of craft or other,
For it is a credit nowadaies, to coofin your own brother.
Wherefore be sure to fill the cup whereon you drink, with beer,
The common kind of Saxon drink, which daily we use here.
But for your friend mingle good wine, your strongest beer among,
For why the mixture of these liquors, makes them both more strong.
And by this means, if of this drink you give them but your fill,
The company will all be drunk, when you are sober still.
Or if your masters friends you love not thus for to deceive,
Then of each cup of perfect wine, be sure no drop to leave.
And thus to drunkards haven thou thy shipping first shall take,
And all that halfe-drunke company, most merry thou shall make.
And thus by thy example, thou will make them drink the more,
Because they see such good effects of wine in thee before.
For since that wine stirs up such gallant sporting tricks in thee,
Thei'le all be drunk, that in like sort they all may pleasant be.
The manner how to serve the guests with drink after supper, and how to
prevent them with crafty tricks. Chapter IX.
THat you have done your business well, t'wil make your master think,
If by your means your masters friends, have took good store of drink.
Wherefore let no man of your master offer leave to take,
Before he with his feet do seem, indentures for to make.
And though your master give him leave, at length to go his way,
Yet it is your duty ne'rethelesse, perforce to make him stay.
Nor would I have you fill the cup, at any man's request,
Before he does each drop which in the bottom lies, digest.
Sir, you must drink off every whit, else not a drop I Will fill,
My office binds me thus to do, and that observe I will.
Plain dealing's best, such drops of wine to what end should you spare?
Think you that I of right and justice, have no better care?
Drunkards, have always been the iustest men in every place,
Wherefore I scorn that our old custom, you should now deface.
My master always gives me charge, to give his guests their due,
Which charge I could not choose but break, if I should favor you.
Thus say, and though a thousand times he bid you fill it up,
Fill not a whit, until each drop he drink out of the cup.
This profit thou shall get, if thou do that which I have sed,
Thy guest, will sooner all be drunk, and sooner gone to bed.
And thou may sooner take thy rest, and get again that sleep,
From which thy early rising, does thine eyes so often keep.
Naso, which in such learned sort of flattring love does speak,
Does say that want of sleep does make men's bodies very weak.
Then since sleep does the contrary, be sure thou have a care,
That all thy masters guests betimes, with wine well drunken are.
And by the way hee^e is a trick, which I must teach to thee,
Which surely is a perfect point, of pure Simplicity.
Have you two sundry sorts of guests, at supper in your house,
As here a sort of belly gods, that love the grand carouse.
And here a sort of honest quiet men, that use to play
At Ruff, at Noddie, and at Pinke, to drive the time away:
And has thy master made thee supravisor over all his wine?
Is both his key, his wine, his seller, and his sugar thine?
The strong wine to the clownes, the worse unto the good men give,
And there is good reason, why good men without good wine should live.
Such men as rule the multitude, and weighty causes hear,
Lest they should err by drunkenness, should hate strong wine and beer.
For drunkenness o'recomes our sense, and captivates the mind,
And is the greatest fault, when it in greatest men we find.
Wherefore, lest thou should seem the cause and author of this ill,
Be sure that thou the worst wine, for the best men always fill.
Thou see they love to sit and talk, and pass away the time,
Which prove's that they love honest talk, better then strongest wine.
Thus will they sit and talk all night, forgetting to depart,
Unless thou carefully prevent them with this cunning art,
Give them such tastelesse wine, as thou do use with drugs to mix,
And then thei'le surely strait depart, not liking these thy tricks.
For they will neither for such tappings any money spend,
Now will such tastelesse drugs as those, their stomachs so offend.
But every man to leave that house, will forthwith think it best,
And to his own house, every man will go to take his rest.
Xantip, wife to Socrates, in fame shall ever live,
Who when to certain worthy men, a banquet she did give.
They talked long and learnedly, of things that liked them best,
Including many a weighty matter in a pleasant jest.
When half the night they thus had spent, Xantip malecontent,
Devisde some means, whereby at length their prattling to prevent.
She being well tong'd, both her husband and her guests did chide,
But seeing that they scornde her words, this other means she tried.
She threw the table under feet, and forced them all to go
Incontinent out of her house, whether they would or no.
This I could wish thee eke to do, if they should sit too long,
But this I doubt thou scarce would do, such sober men among.
Wherefore I think with naughty wine, they sooner will leave talk,
And every man will care, unto his proper house to walk.
Perchance it will make them leave their chat, to tell them suddenly,
Where Charles waine is, and other well known candles of the sky.
What though you tell a lie? tush, that's a trifle very light;
Or, that they may be gone to bed, tell them what time of night,
Suppose the Cock has scarce crow'd once, nights coming to declare,
Yet say the stars unto the waters, now descending are.
Or say (what though thou lie?) that each man may his own house see,
Why should their trifling ieasts, disturb thy master thus and thee?
Or if thou will not drive away such grave men in this wise,
Then let them talk, and do what soever is seemly in their eyes.
But leave those wise men all alone, unto the clownes go thou,
Who pleasant ieasts, and store of wine; unto thee will allow.
Mean while, leave those grave Catonists, as men that are forlorn,
And let them sit, (but without wine,) until the next day morn.
Wh n they perceive you scorn them thus, and leave them all alone,
Then sure (if ever,) every man will to his house be gone.
But for the drunkards, men well minded, give them better drink,
Because on nothing but the throat well drenched, they use to think.
As little wisdom as you can, will fit their humors best,
And as for knowledge and good conscience, th y do both detest.
Their heads with matters of importance, seldom troubled are,
And from their minds, I think they always banished carke and care.
They neither care for wife, nor children, nor excess of wealth,
Their only care, is now and then in mirth to drink a health.
God Bacchus frolic feasts, and pleasant wine they still commend,
And all their life in sportive plays and tricks, they use to spend.
For those good fellows at the first, bring forth immediately,
The strongest wine, though under twenty locks and keys it lie.
Such men as these each day and hour, make drunkenness a jest,
And if you bring your strongest wine, the strongest they love best.
Use all thy wit, to make these wel-nie drunken fellows mad,
And though they come too fast before, yet use a spur to add;
And force them thus to run that way, which they before did go,
By giving the stalest wine, which strongest thou do know.
For why, the sooner they be drunk, the sooner thei'le forsake
The house; the sooner thei'le depart, the sooner sleep thei'le take.
The talk, debating, and wrangling of the guests after supper. Chapter X.
Whenas with Bacchus pleasant juice, they have bin liquord well,
Thei'le fall to talk, and every man his sundry tale must tell:
Then all the news that flies abroad, you shall be sure to hear,
And all the miracles that have been done, both far and near.
One tells how gallantly he spent his sportive youthful days,
How ready and how apt he was to sundry kind of plays;
How cunningly his hobbie-horse, in those days he could drive,
And in the Troyan horse how they their battle did contrive.
Another shows some lines, received from his whilome love,
And tells how happy and effectual, all his suites did prove:
And oftentimes, a cause of fetching bitter sighs he will find,
When his prosperity that's past, he calls into his mind.
When he his sweetest days and pleasures past, does thus recall,
He cannot choose, but into store of sighs he needs must fall.
A third will on the the other side, his ill success recite,
While he, (unhappy he) did under Cupids colors fight,
How he was cold and numbe, even in the midst of all his fire:
And how he went through frost and snow, to compass his desire.
And yet for all this, he his purpose never could attain,
But for his prayers and his pains, bad words were all his gain.
Another yonker to the heavens, his sweet hearts praise will tell,
And swear her hair strives with the gold, the saffron does excel.
Her glittring eyes do shine like stars, to them that pass them by,
Venus I think Idaliaes Queen, had not a purer eye.
Her mouth well framde, her face and cheeks in form are very round,
Life-breathing kisses, in her rose-excelling lips are found,
Her white with red, and red with white, so well is inter-linde,
As if the blushing Rose, were to the pale-faced Lilly ioynde:
Her fingers long and slender are, her teates are even so,
Her thighs (sweet thighs,) excel in whitenes the Sithonian snow.
Others perchance in other matters place their chief delight,
And every man will speak of that, which fits his state most right,
The soldier speaks of cruel battles, Mars, and bloody wounds,
The hunts-man which delights in dogs, commends the swiftest hounds.
He that delights in store of fruits, commends most fertile fields,
The shepherd he commends the flock, which most wool to him yields.
The mariner sets forth the winds, and quicke-sands where they be,
And talks to them of raging seas, which never sea did see.
Each man according to his life, does speak of every thing,
The hearing of such news as these, great profit may thee bring.
Some will repeat those tricks, which they have done in all their days,
And for these tricks (though they be faults,) will look to have some praise.
Often have I heard old chancelesse men, with one foot in the grave,
Brag of those vices, which they in their youth committed have.
Those good examples of old men will teach thee, in like sort,
Young heads unto decrepite syres, for counsel should resort.
Be sure thou listen with both ears, unto each word they say,
And in thy careful mind, each matter firmly bear away.
If in the mean time any guest, desire thy helping hand,
And either bid thee fill some wine, or something else command.
Look thou another way, as if his voice thou did not hear,
And with each hand from that ill sound, be sure thou stop each ear.
Ulysses, lest the Sirens songs to death should him entice,
Stopped all his fellows ears with wax, and escaped by that devise.
So lest thou should be forced to go, whither thou have no mind,
Be deaf, and then to hear their talk, thou still may stay behind.
But if without your credites crack, you can no longer stay,
Because he still with lowdest voice prays you to come away,
And yet to hear their trifling talk, you have a great desire,
This favor at his hands, by this means you may well require.
Pray him to stay, but till you hear the end of that one jest,
And then you will come, he cannot choose but grant that small request.
When store of Bacchus drunken juice, into their brain is sent,
And drunkenness in every part, has firmly pitched his tent;
Triumphing, that poor reason from his native seat is gone:
And when the soul is headlong thrust, by force from off her throne,
Great strife, concerning sundry weighty matters will arise,
And every tongue made glib with drink, will talk in diverse wise.
One says, that after death, our souls do live eternally,
And that it is not like, that with our bodies they should die.
They change their place indeed, but enter other subjects tho,
As that soul which was once a man's, into a beast does go.
But this absurd opinion, will of some rejected be,
Which in like judgment, with Pythagoras do not agree.
Others will think, the soul and body both together die,
Even as the hear together with the fire, ends presently.
And that this is impossible, another forthwith says,
Most constantly dispraising those that dare defend this faith.
Another will declare great wonders of another land,
Which in a place, that's far beyond heavens axletree, does stand.
There ^^en have mouths and teeth like dogs, and do on man's flesh feed;
That's false another cries, with monsters Nature never agreed.
Each man brings store of arguments, that he may get the field,
And every man will rather die than to another yield.
Others would against such kings as they, mislike, exception take,
And oftentimes great iarres and wars, by their great words they make,
Some Captains thei'le extol beyond the heavens, and stars with praise,
Others thei'le wish at Stigian lakes, in hell to end their days.
Others will speak quite contrary to these, to move debate,
And those which they so hate, thei'le praise, which they so praise, thei'le
hate.
Others make difference in the days, one black, another white;
Others by making all alike, dash this distinction quite.
Each man will only like of that, which he himself does know,
Iudgeing, that as he thinks, it is meet that every man think so.
Another cannot suffer that, but thus it needs must be,
That he knows what belongs to things, as well as any he.
And then thei'le prove and disproove, all the causes they can get,
And thus their wrangling, wrestling strife, and swaggring will be great.
It may be then from words to bloody blows this strife will lead,
And then insteede of arguments, a naked sword must plead.
As for old Logic, that in this case can no whit suffice,
Which never taught to prove your words, in this so boistrous wise.
Some Aristotle must be found, to print this art anew,
By showing from what secret place, his shining sword he drew.
Be sure that with a lusty courage, thou on one side take,
And by thy counsel and advise, the battle greater make.
Thrust thou thy self into the midst, and all fear cast behind,
Concerning all the matter, freely utter thou thy mind.
In store of stir, and whooping loud, be sure thou pass them all,
And speak so loud, that thou may almost shake thy masters hall.
Boldly give thou the lie, to him which contradicts thee,
Then at thy thunder-thumping words, thei'le all amazed be.
And thus to honor and renown, thou presently shall rise,
And for this wit, the multitude will praise thee to the skies.
But from his hands to whom thou gav'st the lie, be sure thou live,
Lest for that salutation, some wound to thee he give.
The manner how to send away the guests after supper, and what is to be done
before you go to bed, and the conclusion of this first book. Chapter XI.
IF half the night be spent in waging war the guests among,
This injury in any case, must not be took too long.
He which with careful diligence, unto his things will look,
Must have a care, that all his guests with craft be over-tooke.
That banquet, last it never so long can bring to thee no gain,
Although by keeping thee from sleep, it put thee to great pain.
Wherefore to make them all depart, thy wit must find some feate,
Some tricks I have already taught, which here I will repeat.
Perchance some one among the rest, demands what time of night,
Then be thou sure in any case, thou never tell him right.
Perhaps the Cock does tell you plain, it was ten the clock struck last,
Yet be not thou ashamde, to say that it is twelve and past.
Though no man ask, yet tell them this each hour, on thine own head,
That they may know the better, that its time to go to bed.
If neither they respect thy words, nor yet the time that's past.
Then warn them flatly, that each person to his house make haste.
And though your master did not bid you, thus his guests to use,
Yet if you do so, this his credit cannot much abuse.
I doubt not, but your master would himself have said the same,
If that it would not have been prejudicial to his fame.
As soon as they halfe-drunken, do begin to part away,
Set open the door, lest thou should give them any cause of stay.
Set open the doors I say, and freely lend them store of light,
And tell each man which is the way, unto his own house right.
And when each one has took his leave, as fits his humor best,
Be take thee to thy chamber, there at length to take thy rest.
As for the shutting of the doors, it is thy masters right
To shut them all, if that he means they shall be shut that night.
Let him put out the candles all, and eke rake up the fire,
Thy master must go last to bed, that Cato does require.
Or else take thou the candle, for I think that's far more fit,
Whenas thou go to bed, and for thine own use keep thou it;
Lest in the dark, thy legs or feet be hurt by any thing,
The night, before all other times most hurt does soonest bring.
As for your master, he may in the dark more safely go,
Because each corner in the house, he perfectly does know.
Let him a Gods name in the dark, put off his clothes alone,
He Is old enough, as for thy help, be sure thou give him none.
The night is shorter then the day, then sure I think it best,
To have a care, that nothing hinder thine expected rest.
Wherefore prevent the hasting time, by all means that thou can,
Care for thy self, but have no care for any other man.
As for the pots and cups, which still are left upon the table,
To stir them ere tomorrow morn, I think thou art not able.
If all the pots should be remoov'd that night, and purged by you,
After such pains and loss of sleep, what profit would ensue?
Then let them stand, that every man may tell his fellow, here
Was yester night a royal banquet, stuffde with dainty cheer.
For by this means, of those great pleasures they may have a taste,
It Is comfortable to remember pleasures that are past.
Nay which is more, this business thou ever should neglect,
Because no wise man, will such labor and such pains respect.
Next morning, it is my counsel, that thou sleep till just mid-noone,
Left thou should hurt thy brain and wit, if thou should rise too soon.
Nay then, to leave thy sleepie bed, take thou no care at all,
Unless thy father or thy master, twice or thrice thee call.
Mean time, the servants all the pots will place in comely wise,
And quite dispatch thy business, before that thou can rise.
When thou have slept so well, that all thy wine is washed away,
Then rise, whenas the sun has shined brightly half the day.
Such precepts as are fittest for thee, whenas thou do rise,
And all fit manners, we have told before in ample wise.
Be sure that thou in every place, do all of them maintain,
Lest thy forgetfulness, make me repeat them all again.
Many there are, which next their heart do burnt wine wholesome think,
For why (say they,) our senses are restorde by that warm drink.
Do thou the same if for such kind of drink thy purse do care;
For ill with ill, and wine with wine, often times expelled are.
To teach thee more, concerning this thy simple life I meant,
But I must haste, for why mine own affairs do me prevent.
Use thine own wit as much as may be, for thou so may well
By thine own practice, all my words and counsel far excel.
I only slightly touch those precepts, which I give to thee,
Which if I should at large define, too tedious I should be.
Few words will serve, since from thy use great learning thou have had.
Unto my precepts by thy practice, thou may daily add.
For me to put all things in one book, it would be but vain,
Because the greatest place that is, could not that book contain.
How I (poor wretch,) such labor should sustain, I do not know,
It is a burden, greater then my wit can undergo.
For why, no place (though never so wide,) all fools can comprehend.
Because their court is infinite, their number without end.
Cast but your eyes in careful sort, through all the worlds wide round,
And mark each sundry sort of men, that therein can be found.
You still most shameless filthy faults, in every place shall find,
For why alas to rudenes, now no mean can be assignde.
Old age to live by virtues line, have nowadaies no care,
Not shaming by vilde vices, to disgrace their silver hair.
And which is worse, they unto youth such bad examples give,
That they in imitating them, most wickedly do live.
And youth, (such is the wickedness of these inclining days,)
Does think, that living out of order, merits mickle praise.
Who teaches youth to mend their lives, or bids them to forsake
Their former most disorderd life, and better courses take?
Nor man nor woman nowadaies, their credit do respect,
But loving vice most shamelesly, all virtue they neglect.
In times of old, when men by virtue did to honor rise,
Young maids were much commended, for their chaste and shamefaste eyes.
They seldom spoke, and when they spoke, their speech was chaste and pure,
Which of a chaste and pure mind, was an argument most sure.
Now it is a credit for a wench, to have a gadding eye,
And if she cannot keep her way, she is praisde immediately.
Now, it is a credit for a wench, to have her tongue to walk;
And she is thought a clownish wench which cannot boldly talk.
It Is vain to talk of those great men, which are in great account,
And, which in rule and dignity all others do surmount.
Forgetful of all comelines, those things they speak and do,
Which all their minds regardlesse lust most headlong leads them to:
And those which in a kingdom over others rulers are,
Do that themselves, from which they should keep others with great care.
Enter the halles of noble men, pufft up with pomp and pride;
The high built houses of great men, their porches large and wide:
And at your very entering in, such objects you shall see,
I mean such men as you, of souls would judge them void to be:
There drunkenness, and lives beseeming beasts, do rule and reign:
Here gluttony the chiefest rule and empire does obtain:
And in another corner pride does bear the greatest sway,
Which does men's minds from good behavior headlong lead away.
In these and such like steps, the subject multitude does tread,
Which from all virtue to all vice, our minds do captive lead.
I would proceed by these complaints these vices to amend,
But that I am enforced at this time here to make an end:
For why, the rusticke rowt with piercing cries do me command,
To finish that my task, which lately I have took in hand.
The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK of ancient Simplicity of Behavior.
How to behave your self, being invited by another, with what behavior to come
to supper, and how to sit down at the Table. Chap. I.
THus far I have set down, according to my shallow vain,
The means whereby your masters gests with mirth to intertain
But as a servant which as yet, can have no full command,
But is perforce enforced to live, under his masters hand.
But now the means to use your own invited guests and friends,
This second Book in ample sort and manner comprehends.
If then you of your neighbor as a guest invited are,
Learn here, of what good manners you must have a special care.
First, of the boy that comes to bid you, many questions ask,
As, whom he bids, and why his master pointed him that task,
He rather for that purpose should some serving man have got,
Whereby more grace and credit might have fell unto your lot:
What fish, what flesh, his master for that dinner does provide;
And, how much silver, he amongst the Butchers did divide:
What curious cates, and store of sauce, the Cook provides for thee;
What sorts of bread, wherewith thy whining paunch may glutted be:
What kinds of wine the Butler has provided for your taste;
What junkets you shall carry with you, when you part at last:
And whether after meat, there must be dancing in the hall,
Whether his master to that feast did any virgins call.
And ask him, if the guests, the cooks, and cates which thou shall find,
May be supposde, agreeing to your worships stately mind.
Thus having notice of each thing, which that day shall be done,
Entreat the lad, with thanks, to tell his master that you will come.
But if among the number of the guests, you chance to find
Some hateful fellows name, whose actions fit not to your mind;
Then never give your word, that you (God willing) there will be,
Let not all sorts of knaves be mates and fellows fit for thee.
Amongst a crew of crabbed Catonists scorn thou to dine,
Which unto grave severitie do all their words incline:
Wherefore command the boy, to charge his master to prepare
A sort of pleasant sportive youths, which of thy nature are.
And if the cates, which he repeates do not thy stomach please,
Bid him provide thee better meat, thou can not dine with these.
But that thou in particular more perfectly may know,
All which the Cook provides for dinner, ere thou thither go,
Demand thou of the boy, a bill containing all the meat,
Whereof thou at thy neighbors house do mean thy part to eat.
Thus may thou know both what to eat, and what to set aside:
And, for what wines and dainty cates a rowme you should provide.
Take out your bill from out your bag, that hangs at your back,
And mark as well each dish received, as each dish which you lack:
If in your bill you find some boild dish fitting to your mind,
Which was not brought unto your table, but was kept behind,
Because your neighbor bade his Cook reserve it for a friend,
Whose presence doubtless he exspected ere that dinners end.
Strait stamp and stare, fret, rage, and fume, as if that you were mad;
To cloak your anger in this case, I hold it very bad.
There is no sense, your host should offer you such mighty wrong,
In scoffing sort, to make you sit, with empty mouth so long.
When still you thought (well meaning man) they did provide for you
More dainty dishes as you bade them, but it prooves untrue,
Why ceasest thou with piercing voice, to bid them bring away
Those dishes, which thou foundst contained in thy bill to day:
Thou have not this abuse alone, but every stranger there
As well as thou, in this indignity does bear his share.
Though no man bid you speak a word, yet say you speak for all,
If only you had been abusde, they had had no cause to brawle.
Thus having well preparde your self, to supper see you hie,
Whenas you see the time so long expected, draws nie.
As for your neighbor which must go to supper that same way,
Since you can find the way your self, it is vain for him to stay.
Neglect thy business all at home, to supper make thou haste,
It Is better to be there too soon, then for to be the last.
When you into your neighbors house, most boldly entered are,
Lest that you bid, God speed too often, you needs must have a care.
But strait from thence, unto the smoking kitchen go with speed,
To see what dainty dishes they provide, thy paunch to feed.
Nor stay thou longer, but demand some provender to eat,
Resistlesse hunger can be tamde by nothing but by meat.
And after that, require a cup of foming wine to drink,
And by this means, thou shall deceive the lingering time I think.
That when the rest to supper come, thou may be liquord well,
The more thou drinkst, the greater store of pleasant ieasts thou wilt tell.
And all will take thee for a jesting fellow in these days,
A drunkard and a iester, cannot live without his praise.
If thou do stay alone, because the rest no haste do make,
How thou the time may pass away, my counsel thou may take.
With lowdest voice, be sure that thou begin to sing some rhyme,
And let the subject of it be, the praise of pleasant wine.
The sound whereof will spread itself, quite over all the street,
And thou by this means, with great store of company may meet.
For when thy fellows perfectly, do this thy music hear,
They surely will persuade themselves, that supper time draws near.
And every man will haste to hear, thy sweet enchanting voice,
And leaving all their things undone, with thee thei'le eke rejoice.
Or if thou take no great delight, in making such great haste,
When all the rest are set and served, then come thou in at last.
Stay thou at home so long, until they send in post some man,
To pray you for to make all haste, which possibly you can.
Say that you will follow presently, but stir not from that place,
Until they send another man, your company to grace.
Let all the guests for thy sake, from their suppers hindered be,
This is a credit, which should never be refusde of thee.
Thei'le surely think some great affairs, your counsel do require,
And that some man of worship, does your present aid desire.
If having staid a while, they see you come not yet away,
And therefore think you purpose not, to dine with them that day:
And at the last, the Cook unto the table sends the meat,
And every guest, as he likes best, begins thereof to eat.
Then enter thou, when every man is at his supper quick,
And all the places are possessed, because they sit so thick.
With frowning face and lowering looks, be sure to check thine host,
For making such a man as you, so basely kiss the post.
Tell him of this his boldenes, all his chiefest guests among,
It Is hurtefull to forget to punish this reproach too long.
Are these the cates wherewith you said, I entertaind should be?
Is this your love? is this the care you ought to have of me?
But fare you well sir, for a meal the matter is not great,
I hope I still shall live, without your friendship, or your meat.
And having boldly spoke these words, with a resolved heart,
Go forth, as if you to your house would presently depart.
Then strait with cap in hand, your host will to you humbly come,
Desiring you to pardon that, which rashly has been done.
And after he with flattring words, has wooed you half an hour,
Return to meat with smiling looks, ceasing to frown and lowre.
And then perchance each man, will freely rise from off his place,
That they thy kind return, may with the greater credit grace.
Take thou the best place, which for thee thou fittest think to be,
That is thy due, else why did all those strangers rise to thee?
But if when thou returnst, no man will offer thee his place,
And yet thou spi'st a room reserved, some worthy man to grace.
Lest thou be forced to sit behind, take up this room for thee,
It is a rule in every place, first come, first served must be.
It is a proverb which will last, until the day of doom,
He that comes late, must either loose his supper, or his room.
If by the bench thou can not come, then think it is no hurt,
To stain the cloth, the table, or the trenchers, all with dirt.
Climb over the table, break the pots and glasses, spill the wine,
Throw down the platters, if they hinder this intent of thine.
Or with thy feet bemire their clothes, which on the bench do sit,
I think to use them in this sort, cannot be much unfit.
What sense had they to keep that seat from thee, when it was void?
Since for a better man then thee, it could not be emploid.
If any man find fault, because the cloth is spoilde with dirt,
Blame only them, because that they were authors of that hurt.
Though many ere they take their meat, to wash their hands do love,
Yet, that cold fountain water hurts a man, I thus could prove;
Great store of cold, unto the heart that's hot does breed offense;
(Man's heart is therefore hot, because all heat proceeds from thence,)
Into thy hands and fingers, as into each other part,
Come certain spreading hidden veins, which rise from forth the heart.
If thou to put thy fingers in the water, art so bold,
Thy fingers by the waters chillness, are made numbe and cold.
Which chillness by these spreading veins into the heart is sent;
Alas, such nipping cold as this, does much thy heart torment.
Great coldes expel that heat, which we of Nature do receave,
Which once exhausted, we are strait enforced our life to leave.
Wherefore, unless you love in danger of your life to stand,
Abstain to pierce your heart with cold, by washing of your hand.
For if you long to wash your hands, have such exceeding care,
Old age will seize upon your limbs, before you are aware.
And whenas unexpected age, has of you got the field,
Then to his mercy, you your breath, your life, and all must yield.
If any wonder why such niceness you in washing use,
Tell him, this is the cause why you so often to wash refuse.
But if you come before the meat be took from off the fire,
And all the guests before they sup, to wash their hands require:
And every man stands striving, who shall first of all begin,
If thine be fowler then the rest, be sure thou thrust them in.
The best man there can take no hurt, by washing after thee,
Thou art a guest as welcome to thy neighbors house as he.
Thy fingers thou must also wash, thy mouth and eke thy face,
What though thou make the strangers stay? it can breed no disgrace.
When thou have washed enough, and fowlde the water with thy fists,
Then let them with thy dirtie leavings, wash their hands and wrists.
Mean time have thou a care, the chiefest room for to provide,
From whence I think, no sober man will bid thee stand aside.
Or mark what sorts of bread, the boy does on the table put,
Some sorts are better then some other, for thy hungry gut.
One sort is like the suns eclips, as black as is the ground,
Another sort, as white as the Sythonian snow is found.
Then lest thou dine with brown bread, have a care for to provide
Good store of white, which in thy bosom thou may safely hide.
After, when some few men have snatched the white bread for their need,
The rest must be constrainde that meal, on household bread to feed,
When all are served, then at the length bring forth thy bread to light,
All that behold this crafty trick of thee, will judge aright.
Thy witty foresight thei'le admire, and like this pretty part,
And every man will say, that sure a witty man thou art.
And many a man that sees it, will therein thy scholar be,
When he perceives the practice takes such good effect in thee.
What manners and gestures the guest ought to observe in eating. Chapter II.
AS soon as ere thou spi'st some dishes on the table stand,
Be sure that thou before the rest, thrust in thy greedy hand.
Snatch that you like, I told you so before, you know it well,
It is but labor lost, that I again the same should tell.
That which I once have told to you, you never should refuse,
But in each place and company, you boldly must it use.
And whatsoever meat your host unto the boorde does send,
Although you cannot choose, but very much the taste commend;
Yet find therein something or other that mislikes your mind,
And though it can deserve no blame, be sure some fault to find:
This is too salt, and this too fresh, and this is too much roast,
This is too sour, and this too sweet, your cooke's too blame mine host,
And speak so loud, that all may hear thee, which are then in place:
For by this means thou may in jest, the careful cook disgrace.
And by this trick thou will deserve, a civil yonkers name,
And happy is he nowadayes, which can attain such fame.
When every man is at his meat, and no man's tongue does walk,
Be sure that thou with pleasant jeasts do hold them all in talk.
It is not good for him which would be praisde of all men, long
To sit amongst his friends at meat, not using of his tongue.
When thou art set, devour as much as thou with health can eat,
Thou therefore were to dinner bid, to help away his meat.
Thrust in as much into thy throat, as thou can snatch or catch,
And with the gobbets which thou eatst, thy jaws and belly stretch.
If with thy meat thou burn thy mouth, then cloak it craftily,
That others may as well as thou, partake that misery.
To throw thy meat from out thy mouth into the dish again
I dare not bid thee, for it is too clownish, and too plain.
But lest thou should be burnt again, thou shall a medcine know,
Thy burning meat with cooling breath, thou stowtly oughtst to blow:
In little blasts against this heat, no comfort can be found:
Then puff thy cheeks with wind, as if a trumpet thou would sound:
From whence, as if the boystrous winds were from their prison freed,
Let forth great blasts against thy meat to help thee at thy need,
With rumbling noise let store of cooling blasts, break forth their fill:
In like sort as do flames of fire, from Aetnaes burning hill.
If to thy neighbors face thou turn, I will thee much commend,
And store of breath and pottage, to his cheeks be sure to send.
If thus thou do, all will applaude thee, and thy tricks allow,
And often will desire to learn this pretty jest of you.
It is a praise, to have a loving dog on you to wait;
Wherefore, if you are bid to supper, get a puppie strait:
Let him in any case hard by thee, on a cushon sit,
And give him out of every dish, such meat as thou think fit;
To thrust him down from off his seat what guest dares be so bold?
This dog (sir) has a master here that will his deeds uphold.
When you are almost weary, and desire your teeth to rest,
Then, that your puppie make you merry, it is surely best.
And let your dog lick over your lips, with fawning tongue put out,
And eke your hands, with which more meat to reach you are about.
Or catch the fleas which hurt your dog, by all the tricks you can,
And killing them upon your trencher, prove your self a man.
Whenas you eat, stretch wide your iaws, and thrust great gobets down:
Even as the cheeks are stretched with wind, of some song-tuning clown.
It is not meet, that in the dish, you should leave any meat;
That which your host does set upon the board, he would have eat:
It Is better far, to stand in fear of breaking of a gut,
Than leave one bit of that, which is upon the Table put.
If thou some little bit that's somewhat tougher than the rest,
Because thy throat wants liquor, can not very well digest,
Then take some drink, and keep it in your mouths most hollow part,
It Will make your meat from out your mouth into your gut depart.
Out of your mouth, into the cup, some little crummes to send,
Though some will say it is clownish, yet it cannot much offend.
I pray, why is it hurtful, thus to mingle meat with drink?
If they be mingled thoroughly, they nourish more I think.
That meat and drink should thus be joined, Nature her self has said,
For in this world, one thing does still desire another aid.
The bones and scraps, and such things as thou scornst thy self to eat,
Throw down amongst the dogs, how can they live without some meat?
Each dog regarding his own dinner, none will quiet be.
For want of victuals you a pleasant battle there shall see.
Perchance, insteede of dogs, thei'le snap the strangers as they sit,
In such an hurly burly this cannot be much unfit.
Then laugh alowd, whenas thou do under the Table see
Such wars and iarres, which had their first original from thee.
What behavior is to be observed at the Table, after the first course. Chap.
III.
When with the first course you have filld your hungry belly well,
Your gerdle must be loosde, as I before to you did tell;
For thus your meat will of your mouth, his leave the sooner take,
And your concoction yet to come, you may the better make.
Your belly will the sooner rowme for other cates provide,
Which with your unkind gerdle, was before too hardly tide.
And now the boy to take away the trenchers has a care,
To make them clean against the second course he does prepare.
When all the rest defer the time, be sure that in great haste
Thy trencher thou before the rest into the Voider cast.
But now, lest this might senseless seem, i will give my reason why
It is not seemly, that your trencher uppermost should lie.
If when some great man casts his trencher in the lowest place,
Thou cast thine over it, and hurt his trencher; O disgrace!
Know thou not, that the vulgars should lie trodden under feet?
Then, lest thou should seem proud, to lay thy trencher low, it is meet.
Another trencher, though he be a man of high degree,
Stir not, but let him cast it in, else let it lie for thee.
But when clean trenchers come, in snatching be not thou the last,
If at the first the boy unto thee do no trencher cast.
To maids and wives some will for credit the first trencher give;
But do not thou so, if in perfect health thou mean to live.
Thou know men's manners nowadaies sell at the markets rate,
For that which thou did do in kindness, men will give thee hate.
If thou in friendly sort do maids or matrons kindly grace,
It Will be mislikt of some, then trust not every smiling face,
Their husbands will not like of this, but note thee with their eyes,
And think that all this duty from some kindled love does rise.
The choler of a jealous husband which does thee suspect,
Eschew: suspicion, hurt, deceit, and death does often effect:
Then save thy life, and keep thy self from each ensuing wrong,
Lest being once suspected, thou do so remain too long.
If thus the trenchers being laid, the meat comes not away,
Let not your teeth and belly rest, if more meat get you may:
But nimbly fall afresh unto the meat you eat before;
Foul thou new trenchers, though thy fellows cannot eat no more.
When you are at your dinner, cast all shame behind your back;
He that denies this principle, does sure his senses lack.
At length, when all the second course is on the table placde,
Into the best thrust thou thy hand, before the rest in haste:
But wipe thy trencher on the cloth first, be it never so dear,
Unless it were for this intent, why did they place it there?
Namely, to wipe from off each trencher, all the fat away;
And that with it, your hands your mouth and fingers cleanse you may.
This which I once have said unto you, use for to repeat,
Whens'ere that hunger is not banished from your paunch, with meat.
Or if thou be the chief man that does at the Table sit,
And therefore till thou have begun, no man will cut a bit;
Sit still a great while ere thou cut, it will argue majesty,
Whenas thou may be counted light, to fall to presently.
Indeed, if thou no great man were, thy hand might first be in:
But since thou art, until thou art entreated, never begin.
Defer the time, in talking, laughing, or some such like art,
Play with thy trencher, or thy knife, to make thy time depart;
Which while thou do, the company must on thee gazing sit,
Because, until thou have begun, they dare not eat one bit.
Nor let it shame thee, when thy fainting chinne does drop,
Like two strong posts, with both thy hands, the same to underprop,
Lean lazily with one or both thine elbows on the board,
This trick of manners can no cause of shamefastnes afford.
But if this deed unto thy nature does not much arride,
Then have a care, that both thy hands thou in thy codpeece hide,
Thou then may pull them out, whenas the time is near at hand,
Against thy meats invasion of thee, on thy ward to stand.
At length, when as thou see the time, to fall unto thy meat,
Be sure to snatch the dainty bits, it is meet thou should them eat.
Of veale, it is best to snatch the reins, that is the sweetest bit,
Wherefore, I think unto thy stomach, that agrees most fit.
As for the Wolfe-fish, gluttons hold the tail to be the best;
But of the buble fish, the head is sweeter then the rest.
Thou art the chief man, then with these be sure thy self to grace,
To snatch them have a care, and on thy trencher them to place.
Take them alone, keep them alone, devour them all alone,
As for thy neighbor, though he longs for some, yet give him none.
If that thy knife be blunt, thou do exspect some loss to bear,
Because it will not serve thy turn, as if it sharper were.
But some there are, which use their knives sharp edge with stones to waste,
Lest it it be too sharp, it chance to cut the meat too fast.
What though your knife in teeth and edge, like to a saw should be?
Yet sure I doubt not but this trick, with reason would agree.
For if when you at dinner are your neighbor sends in
A roasted goose, which has a very fat and tender skin.
Good store thereof thy mangling knife, will to thy trencher bring,
Which of the vulgar sort, is thought a very dainty thing.
This duty can your knife perform, having a mangling edge,
And eke excuse all faults, which they against you can allege.
That you the better may the store of meat received digest,
To keep good store of liquor still, I count it always best.
And when another in his hand, does hold the pot to drink,
Demand it from him, and he cannot say thee nay, I think.
If he deny to give it, till his thirst be quenched at full,
Then from thy neighbors mouth in haste, presume the pot to pull.
And having caught it once again, be sure to hold it fast,
If it depart, it will not unto thee return in haste.
Then though the rest desire to drink, and humbly thee request
To drink thy self, and then restore the pot unto the rest.
Regard them not, but though they should be raving mad for drink,
Yet keep the pot, and use it when thy self most fit do think.
With sounding cries, be sure thy self alone to fill the house,
Men are most eloquent, when they have drunk a full carouse.
Let none but thee disturb the guests, which at the table sit,
To suffer others voices to be heard I count unfit.
That others should, or drink, or cry, thou would be very loath,
But as for thee, be sure that thou be cunning found in both.
And when you drink, to wipe your lips, and cleanse your snottie nose,
Are trifling things, it is not meet that you take care for those.
Why should thou of such light affairs as these, take any care?
They must be greater matters, which of thee regarded are.
All which you know, unto the selfsame belly to pertain,
Why should you wipe away, as if their league you did disdain?
Whether it be flesh, drink, bread, fat, or whatsoever beside,
Let it into thy stomach pass, through thy throat so wide.
Or if you love sometimes to wipe your dirtie mouth a whit,
The cleanest table cloth, is for that purpose sure most fit.
Let that thy brains ill excrements in friendly sort receave,
And all the fat that's on thy lips, be sure on it to leave.
Others delight to take the sleeve of their new shifted shirt,
And on that blow their nose, and from their mouths wipe off the dirt.
If that you think it is a cleanely trick, the same to use,
For my part, I for cleanelinesse, the same will not refuse.
When thou have drunk thy fill, although he do it not demand,
Yet let the pot before thy neighbors trencher always stand.
Lest that it hinder thee, when thou some dainty bit should eat,
And make thy right hand lack the room, wherein to cut thy meat.
Reach it again for thine own use, when thou see fittest time,
And water all thy jaws and throat, with pleasant tasting wine.
But if thy neighbor knows as well as thou, that trick to use,
And setting it before thy trencher, does it often refuse.
Then either with a cheerful voice, tell him you are not dry,
And so return it kindly, to his own hands presently.
Or rather, into fretting rage and anger forthwith break,
And all the thundering words thou can devise, be sure to speak.
Why should you offer me your drink, when as I do not thirst?
You rather should have let it stood, whereas I placed it first.
Or think you for this, any favor at my hand to get;
Whenas your pot from cutting of my meat, my hand does let?
And if to add some railing speeches unto this you use,
It Is ten to one, he in this sort will not you often abuse.
Yet notwithstanding, it is a comely thing forthwith to drink,
For store of liquor tempers well the meat received, I think.
When all the rest leave drinking, urge them in such valiant wise,
That none presume (for shame,) in sober sort from thence to rise.
Go thou before, and let them follow thee that drinkest best,
It is a credit for thee, to be drunk before the rest.
Then if thou by thy drunkenness, do any fault commit,
They may the sooner and the fitter, freely pardon it.
Modesty in eating and drinking. Chapter IIII.
I Often have seen (the reason of that use, I do not know,)
Diverse which to their neighbors house, will never scot-free go.
Wherefore each man will carry wine at dinner for to drink,
That sort of wine which in his judgment, he the best does think.
One carries wine, brought from the shore of Rhene, that runs so swift,
Another thinks French wine fitter for a friendly gift.
A third will carry wine, that grew on the Pannonian hills;
And all will carry sundry sorts, agreeing to their wills.
If touching this, thou do demand my counsel as a friend,
I will not be the man, that shall this custom much commend.
Faith carry none, but spare cost, if my counsel thou will hear,
Thine host provideth wine I hope, if not, thou may drink beer.
But if without some, thou can not with credit thither go,
Take heed, lest on thy wine thou too much money do bestow.
That wine which thou do know, the worst in all the town to be,
Be sure to carry that, to drink among thy friends and thee.
But when the wine which each man brought, is set upon the board,
Search out forthwith, the best wine which the table can afford.
And get a pot thereof, and set it full behind your back,
And drink thereof alone, whenas you any wine do lack.
It may be feared the dainty wine will hardly come to thee,
By this means, this ensuing hurt may well prevented be.
Then, that thou may be thought a man more pleasant then the rest,
To make them laugh, be sure to tell them many a pretty jest.
With loudest voice, begin to sing some pleasant tuned song,
And of thy love repeat a dittie that's an hour long.
Four sundry humors, unto humane bodies do resort.
Which moove the heart in sundry sort, as learned men report.
For earthly choler does men sad, austere and slothful make,
But anger, rage, and fury, men from fiery choler take.
Of fleame to thee (light fool,) I need not speak as of the rest,
The sanguine which does cause mirth, is of all complexions best.
Wherefore, that thou unto a sanguine may be thought most nie,
With cheerful singing, lift thy chanting voice beyond the sky.
Tell tales of dances, of young wenches, and of pleasant wine,
And with such flattring pleasant trifles, drive away the time.
If any friend does drink to thee, out of a full filld cup,
Ere he has ended scarce his draught, be sure to snatch it up.
Care not, though he perhaps at last, to reach it you did think,
But snatch it, though perhaps a better draught he meant to drink.
Tell him, that man gives twice which gives his gift without delay,
Lest he unto another man, should give the cup away.
When thou at length with much ado, have got both pot and drink,
These three good rules, will teach thee when to leave, thou oughtst to think.
When want of breath, does of thy vital forces thee bereave,
Then in my judgment is it time thy foremost draught to leave.
Unless perhaps (which I commend,) thou do it better love,
To take thy wind, and yet not from thy mouth the pot to move.
Then when a certain watery humor, fills up thine eyes,
And out of them as from a spring, great store of drops do rise.
This is a sign or token, when to leave the second time,
He is too blame that leaves to drink, before he see this sign.
The third, and last, most certain token when thou oughtst to leave,
Which is a sign infallible, it cannot thee deceave;
Is, when the wine is all drunk out, and now the pot is dry;
Then is it time to pull it from thy mouth immediately.
It is mere folly, at thy mouth the empty cup to hold,
Although the cup it self were made of pure Pannonian gold.
When thou from out the cup have sucked each drop of wine at last,
Upon the middle of the board, its good the cup to cast,
That both thy neighbor may perceive it void of wine to be,
And also know, that he therein should forthwith follow thee.
Unless thou do thus, there will strait arise some wrangling brawle;
But with thy most courageous hand thou oughtst to quiet all.
They will not think that thou alone could empty such a cup,
Unless before their face they forthwith see thee drink it up.
Then to the vittailes yet remaining fall with might and maine,
And out of every dish, begin to snatch the best again:
For why, sweet meat does nourish us, and store of Bacchus wine,
If that we use to take them often, a little at a time.
And as thou eatst it is very good great bits of bread to cut,
Which thou may plainly feel, as they into thy mouth are put.
For little birds indeed, the meat must needs be minced small,
Lest eating great bits, they offend their tender throat withal.
But valiant men in this case, from all fear should stand aloof,
Which have a throat that's thick and hard, and a well temperd roof.
When with thy knife a piece of household bread thou meanst to cut,
Be sure thou cut not there, where other men their knives have put,
But cut thou on the other side, perchance thou there may meet
With such a crust, as to thy dainty taste will prove more sweet.
From whence to have a care to cut some sops thou may be bold,
Which having cut, within thy hand be sure them fast to hold,
To dip them in the fat of well spicde pottage every whit:
Or at the least one end of them, I count it very fit.
Which being done, it is meet thou should devour them all in haste,
Unto thy throat this cannot choose but be a pleasant taste.
And having gnawd them, now and then to sop them there again,
Will surely bring great store of praise, of profit, and of gain.
To speak full mouthed, if for thine use it necessary be,
Rather than I Will forbid it, I Will persuade and counsel thee.
For why, if often thou it use, it brings mickle gain,
Which unto thee by this example I will prove most plain.
Demosthenes his eloquence over all the world is known,
Who of that famous city Athens was the flower alone;
A great impediment from perfect speech his tongue did hold,
So that in pleas he could not as he would his mind unfold.
Wherefore he diverse sundry means devised in his mind,
Whereby for his imperfect speech a remedy to find.
Within his lisping mouth he store of little stones did set,
Which, as he walked by the sea side he did daily get.
He had a double fight; the first to tame his lisping tongue,
Which war, unto those little stones he suffered to belong.
For letting always store of stones within his mouth to be,
He thought at length, when they were gone, his speech would be more free:
The second was, he strivde to make his voice be heard the more,
By speaking then whenas the sea most boistrously did rore,
That so he might endure the peoples tumults and their cries,
If any such amongst them while he pleaded should arise.
Without such foolish tricks as these, thou soon shall do as well,
If thou will carefully give ear, to that which I shall tell.
In steed of hard stones, thou thy mouth with bread and meat shall fill,
And rolling that within thy mouth, shall full mouthed speak thy will.
And with thy shreeking cries excel the drunkards lofty voice,
As did Demosthenes excel the Oceans roaring noise.
When thou art almost full, the strangers deeds begin to mark,
Thou had no leisure to such trifling toys before to hark.
And all those deeds, which from thy manners seem to go aside;
My counsel is, that thou in scornful sort do them deride.
Be sure to carpe at all thou can, and scoff at all thou may;
And store of faults (though sometimes false) on others necks to lay.
If thou epsy another knife, which on the back does lie,
As if the edge looked to the heavens, or to the starry sky,
Against it presently be sure the back of thine to strike,
All that behold it will this pretty jest applaude and like.
Some men will tell you presently, from hence how many mile
It is to Rome, by counting on your knifes edge all the while,
I do not much mislike this custom, follow it always,
And sure I think you cannot choose, but merit store of praise.
And yet although I give you leave to others it to use,
I would not wish, that in this sort my knife you should abuse.
For if you do, at sometime I your kindness shall repay,
And punish you as you deserve, for this your crafty play.
Of devouring, laughing, vomiting, and others civilities at the Table. Chap V.
There are more precepts that might prove thee clownish tricks to have
At supper; and that thou never knewst, such manners as are grave:
But by that means, my labor and my care would be too great,
If in this place I all thy sundry duties should repeat.
Although I had the skill which Ovid had in making verse,
Yet could I not, as it deserves, each sundry thing rehearse.
But yet, (although thou of thy self, art better learnd than I,
To teach thee some few needful things, I will presume to try.
That small time which thou spendst with me, think it not spent in vain;
For in that little time perhaps thou may great profit gain.
Both young and old, both men and boys, behavior learn of me,
Since that the sliding time for no man's cause prolongd will be.
To throw down pots upon the table, filld unto the brimme,
So that each thing upon the same in Bacchus juice may swim.
Long custom an continuance, at length, to pass has brought,
That in these days of ours, it must no fault all be thought.
Often times, when young men would be counted pleasant, I have seen
At that same instant, when their hearts full light with wine have been,
That they with good bread would their unprovided fellows hit,
And eke with meat, which they into their hands could closely get.
They do rejoice their youthful hearts with such bad kinds of play,
Whereby they may the lingering times the sooner drive away.
I often have seen such men as were in years, and counsel old,
Which thought no shame to patronize such faults, to be so bold:
What shall the younger men commit, whenas they daily see
Such filthy faults, by old men in their feasts maintaind to be.
I dare not be so bold as unto old men rules to give,
Because their age does privilege them, as they list to live.
But young men, if they will attend, may quickly learn of me,
What manners seemly at their feasts, and what unseemly be.
The bread (as each man knows) does use to have a double crust,
The one whereof, in pureness needs excel the the other must.
The bottom crust is burnt, and full of ashes and of dirt,
There can no good be found, in such vnsav'rie crust, but hurt.
Wherefore, observe the counsel which thou shall receive of me,
With good advise, and men will think thee wondrous wise to be.
From off the whole loaf for thy use, that crust be sure to cut,
On which there are no burnt spots, by the scortching oven put.
For by this crust, your body from much looseness keep you may;
And, if the laske do trouble you, this will it quickly stay.
But if the crust without the crumme you dare not cut for shame,
Although I think your shamefastness will never get you fame:
And you had rather in that place more mannerly to be,
Then have a care that crust and crumme be took alike of thee.
Although if in my perfect paths thou take delight to tread,
And hearken to my verse, which thee to honesty shall lead,
Not cutting any off, without respect, thou all shall eat,
Both good and bad, both foul and clean, both crum and crust is meat:
The greedy panch is also filld with ashes, coals, or dirt,
Wherefore to cut these from thy bread, it is both loss and hurt.
It is a wondrous gift of God to men that mortal are,
If that which they with pains have got, with pains they eke can spare:
Or if thou likst not this, because thou know that at this time,
Thou at another table and another cost do dine:
Then care not, for it is easy at another board to live,
In this case thou most freely without any loss may give.
If any dirt stick on the bread, which may offend thy teeth;
Of any tastelesse bit, which not unto thy tongue agrees:
Cut off a thick piece, crust and crumme, which thou away may throw:
Or on the barking hungry dogs, in friendly sort bestow,
Or chop away that dirty crust which on the loaf did lie,
Its pretty sport to see the chippings what a way thei'le fly.
Perchance thei'le fall into their eyes which at the table sit;
This cunning trick agrees unto their humors very fit.
In diverse places, diverse meats with Almond syrrope swim,
Others are filld with taste-delighting sugar to the brimme.
Next, melted butter is a sauce fitting a dainty mess:
And also grapes, which have great weight endured in the press.
Or, some such sauce to grace the cates, as fine as heart can wish,
Do commonly, wherese're you dine, swim round about the dish.
I spying these, upon my trencher, forthwith did them sweep,
This was an order which my mother always bade me keep.
And having got them, strait into my belly did them send;
Yet (as I can remember) they did never me offend.
If that you think these manners will not to you hurtful be,
My counsel is, that you in this, example take by me.
It sometimes falls out unawares, as you your vittailes eat,
Into your throat, there slips a bone together with your meat:
Which either makes your loosened teeth to smite against your gum,
Or stops the way by which your meat into your throat should come.
What meanst thou man? why do not thou prevent this hurt no more?
Why seek thou no means, thy half lost life for to restore?
Take counsel of thy hands, and holding open thy mouth with one,
With the other, pull from out thy jaws that hurtful sticking bone.
Or having pulld thy teeth out, lay them on a trencher by,
And then the bone will fall from forth thy jaws immediately:
Though others like it not, in no case thou must it refuse,
Such modesty as hurtful is, no wise man ought to use.
And when with store of meat your stomach is refresht at last,
Strait catch the full filld pots within thy greedy hands with haste.
Then having set the pot before you, open it presently.
And lest my counsel should be vain, I Will give my reason why;
Those vapors which are in the cup may thus exhaled be,
Which else perhaps might have been hurtful to thy brain and thee.
Then with the cup in this sort open thou a while may sit,
And talk an hour or two, this practice cannot be unfit.
Thus listening to thy talk, of liquor none perhaps will think,
And then as much as thou think good thou all alone may drink.
At length begin with pleasant looks thy pleasant looks to tell,
And brag that thou in hearts-ease do all men alive excel.
The merry mind, by store of laughter, will it self bewray;
The world affoords no better thing, then merry life this day.
Wherefore be sure that thou of laughter do at all times think,
Whatse'er you do, whether you work, play, sit, stand, eat, or drink.
You so should sometimes laugh, that meat, which in your mouth does lie,
Might suddenly from out the same into the platter fly.
And let it fly, I count better that it should do so
Then that it stop that air which should into the windr-pipe go.
There can be found no perfecter and straighter way to death,
Then for to stop your throat with meat, which strait will stop your breath
But now the time draws nie, wherein the servant haste must make,
That he the cloth and all things else may from the table take.
If then all hunger is not from thy stomach put away;
Make speedy haste, it is not good to make the least delay.
Into thy stomach while thou may, thrust store of meat and drink.
Time stays for no man, then of Time it is good in time to think.
Both eat and drink so much, that thou both drunk and filld may be,
Till when, nor rest, nor quiet must be looked for of thee.
And if of hickets, or of sobs thou use to utter store,
They both are signs which future vomites use to go before.
Let not the newness of the thing seem beastly in thine eyes,
But boldly make all those which hinder thy proceedings, rise.
And casting that which with thy queasie stomach not agrees,
Return unto the table, having slightly washed thy teeth.
And being set, take care again to fill thy belly strait,
And in the rowme of all that's gone, thrust in another bait.
Nature her self which made all things, cannot endure that wrong,
That any thing that's under heaven should thus be empty long.
But, if thou have not time to rise thou have such wondrous haste,
Under the table thrust thy head, and there begin to cast.
Here let thy stomach cast up all which in the same does stick,
Which will be welcome to the dogs, they will it kindly lick.
In brief, upon the table thou may boldly cast thy fill,
If any thing is in thy stomach, that does make thee ill.
Nay, if into the very dish, thou should thy vomit cast,
There Is none so hard, but yet I think he would pardon thee at last.
Nor is it like that vomites should unto them filthy seem,
Which do all drunken gluttony as virtuous deeds esteem.
Yea, some there are (I know them well) which will no stranger love,
Unless that he be drunk indeed, by certain signs he prove.
Wherefore all drunkards will commend thee, if as thou do suppe,
To prove thee drunken, all thy supper thou will vomit up;
Thou shall both please the guests, and him, which has invited thee,
And thou the only credit of that pleasant feast wilt be.
For, by thy vomiting thou shall perceive it was good wine,
Which by thine host was given to thee, and to those friends of thine.
The guests next morning shall have something to their friends to tell,
And thou from all that drunken crew shall bear away the bell.
Of the washing of the hands after supper, the second tables, and what is
fittest to be done among the maids. Chap. VI.
Whenas the cloth is took away, and every pleasing bait,
Clean water for to wash is set upon the table strait.
Sloth is a vice; then, lest thou should be slothful, it is best
To thrust thy hands into the bosom first before the rest:
Then wash thy face and mouth whenas thou think the time most fit,
And water all thy nostrils with the pleasing deaw of it.
When thou have washed, then let the water for thy fellows stand,
Which is made foul enough already by thy dirtie hand.
Let married wives wash after thee, though beautiful they be,
And though the virgin be so fine, yet let her wait on thee.
Clean water from thy filthy hands, will wash the dirt the more,
Than that which has with dirtie hands, been dirtie made before.
Yet oftentimes, you many men shall find to be so neat,
That thei'le not touch the water first, unless you them entreat.
They look that others should begin, and when the rest have done,
Then thei'le begin to wash their hands, and to the basen come.
As thus they stand, (well meaning men) desiring to be last,
Be sure that thou good store of water, do upon them cast.
Take water in thy hand, and cast it boldly in their face,
Sprinkle it in their eyes, their head, or any other place.
That's all the good, which by their manners they shall get of thee,
It Will make them that another time, they wiser men will be.
Amongst a sort of honest folks, one tried this trick of late,
But sped not well, for all the harm returned on his pate.
For thinking certain wives, with water thus to circumvent,
They by their crafty foresight, did his policy prevent.
He scarce could open his eyes to see, the water stopped them so,
And all his brisly beard, with store of water streams did flow.
He being thus disgraced, and loath thus basely there to yield,
Presumed rather to proceed, then thus to loose the field.
He took the basin in his hands, and from him stowtly threw,
As well the basin as the water, among the female crew.
The strangers all laughed merrily, at this so sudden hap,
And every man and woman there began his hands to clap.
Or whenas none to put his hands in first, dares be so rash,
But every man looks when his neighbor does begin to wash,
Because such gravitie, does to the guests great credit get,
And each man thinks such pomp as this, is for his credit fit.
If these their manners do from washing them, too long detain,
Thou may before the rest, great store of praise and credit gain.
If seeing no man all this while, begins to wash his hand,
Thou suffer not the water, longer in that place to stand.
Why should the river water, basely thus usurp that place,
Which was preparde, a better liquor far, the wine to grace?
At length, perchance a banquet to the second board is brought,
The best place here, lest some prevent thee, must of thee be caught.
Those iunckets which are best of all, thou oughtst to snatch up first,
He that comes last into the dish, may chance to find the worst.
Turn round the dish on every side, till thou have found the best,
And having found them, snatch them without shame before the rest.
If that you think that Nature serves all creatures from one well,
You are deceivde, for things in goodness other things excel.
The diverse differences made among men's minds that live,
Is not in vain, since careful nature diverse gifts does give.
But God himself of masters use having a special care,
Provideth greater gifts to give, to them that masters are.
That thus each man in his degree, might thus distinguish these,
And every man might choose those things, which best their humors please.
Use judgment then, and let no rashness in thy deeds be spide,
And for thy self from out each dish, the sweetest bits provide.
It is not needful that from apples, thou should pare the skin,
To do that which may needelesse seem, thou never should begin.
That so thy meat receivde, the better may concocted be,
The paring of the greenest apple, must be eat of thee.
For if too long in paring of thine apple, thou should stay,
The rest which in the platter lies, will soon be snatched away.
And when from forth the dish, to take another it is thy mind,
Thou art prevented of thy purpose, thou not one can find.
Therefore, as long as any bit is left, cease not to eat,
Thou shall not every day perchance, meet with such dainty meat.
Have still a care to leave no bit behind you when you rise,
For if you do, your host will think that you his fruit despise.
He did not therefore set them on, that you should them refuse,
Then if you leave them thus, your careful host you shall abuse.
If when thy self art filld, there still some iunkets do remain,
To bear them in thy sleeve, unto thy house thou shall be feign.
If thou have any children there, thei'le be a welcome thing,
Thei'le call thee loving father, if such knackes to them thou bring.
Though thou no children have, no damage can sustained be,
That which they should have had, till thou art hungry keep for thee.
To crack thy nuts, thy teeth may serve, unless thou rather love
To break thy knife, then such a luckelesse hard attempt to prove.
I often have seen strong sturdie clownes, which with their bended fist,
With one good blow, would cleave a nut as quickly as they list.
The shells would fly against the pots, and into strangers eyne,
And often times would make the pot half cracked, to leake the wine.
Mean time, while this their strength was very much admirde of me,
Because I thought them surely full of fortitude to be.
I in another place, a sort of lusty fellows found,
Stamping upon their nuts, and picking them from off the ground.
Thou may of both these follow either, only spare thy knife,
Lest being conquered by a nut, it chance to loose its life.
The shell upon thy neighbors trencher, thou may kindly set.
And by that deed of charity great credit thou may get.
Thy credit thou may save, and prove thou have a loving heart.
And giving so much to thy friend, that thou no glutton art.
The company thereby may know thou art no greedy guest,
But thou can bar thy throat from meat, whense're thou think best.
Perchance while thou art eating, thou amongst thy meat may find
Some bit, or rather that agrees not to thy dainty mind.
Whether thine apple, rottennes within it does contain,
Or little creeping worms, within thy pears or nuts remain:
Of such like pears and nuts as these, give to thy neighbor store,
Am I deceivde? or did I teach this pretty trick before?
When being full, at last thy stomach does these cates forsake,
Then find out something else, wherein thou more delight may take.
If that a maid a pretty cheerful maid do sit thee by,
A maid which has a bashful look, but yet a rolling eye.
Use many saucy gestures to her, many saucy words,
Such pleasant youthful age as thine, such youthful sport affoords.
Nor can there any thing, make women like thy talk so well,
As if thou unto them, do store of ieasts and trifles tell.
And touch those parts, wherein their greatest joy does use to stand,
Into the virgins bosom eke, be sure to thrust your hand.
And with thy fingers touch the paps, of the delightful maid,
And let thy tributarie kisses, to her lips be paid.
Or if some ring or jewel, thou upon thy finger bear,
Or else some golden copper chain, about thy neck do wear.
Or have a silk sowde garment on, in show and color light,
Or any other thing, wherein thou seemst to take delight.
By all the drifts and means thou can, be sure to show her these,
Commend thy self, and thou thy self begin thy self to please.
She cannot choose, but strait be ravished with the love of thee,
And casting all things else away, or ever thine she will be.
Young maids before all other things, do shining clothes approve,
And glistring gold, will presently procure a virgins love.
Often times with sighs, tell her that thou till death her servant art,
And privately before her view, lay open thy fainting heart.
And that she may perceave, that you for her do daily pine,
As privately as may be, touch her tender foot with thine.
What though she frown? yet drink unto her often at supper tho,
For by this means you shall perceave, whether she will yield or no.
If at the last she pledge thee kindly, then the truth is known,
Follow thy suit, never give her over, for she is thine own.
In brief, of modesty thou needst not have too great a care,
But do those things, which to thy nature best beseeming are.
All faults committed, cloak'd and hid by drunkenness may be,
If thou be drunk, the greatest faults are not unfit for thee.
Cries and tumults after supper, going out, and bargaining for next nights
supper. Chap. VII.
But when at last (which cannot choose but grieve thee at the heart,)
The tender damsel with her mother, homeward does depart.
What business will thou then devise, the lingering time to spend?
Lest this so long prolonged banquet, should thee much offend.
Why this: to those that talk, be sure thy listening ear to lay,
That thou the better may observe, each private word they say.
What though they whisper secretly, their private selves among?
Yet may thou listen, to thy profit it does much belong.
For why, perchance thy neighbor had some hurt of thee to speak,
Then by this sudden coming, this his purpose thou may break.
Concerning whatsoever they talk, be sure thou them molest,
Thus privately to talk at dinner, fits not any guest.
In brief, whats'ere is said or done, while they at dinner are,
To make thy self a party in it, thou must have a care.
In every place, such store of worthy talk be sure to find,
As may be most agreeing to thy praise-deserving mind.
Or, if which loves to talk alowde, among the rowt there is none,
Then it is thy duty ne'rethelesse, to talk alowde alone.
In lowdest sort with shrieking cries, a noise thou oughtst to make,
That all which do behold thee, may by the example take.
Of sundry kinds of words, thou needs must have exceeding choice,
If (as thou do profess,) thou have a Rethoritians voice.
The time will pass, while thou art ripping up another fault,
This is no vice among them whose wits are overcome with malt.
But if thou should approve of such a filthy fault as it,
That thou should be my scholar, I could hardly thee permit.
For why amongst the wicked sort, thou would accounted be,
All which, for ever must be banished from my book and me.
Mary to count your own ill deeds, I like it very well,
And give you leave with cheerful voice, your former faults to tell.
By this you diverse men shall find, which get immortal praise,
By setting to the public view, their own disorderd ways.
Or if thou art ashamde of this, (though I no shame commend,)
Then learn at last this means, whereby the lingering time to spend.
Raise store of strife and wrangling words, concerning trifles small,
If any thou can find, which will vouchsafe with thee to brawle.
With lowdest voice, hold some opinion which thou think best,
What though thy cause be bad* yet let thy voice exceed the rest.
Use thou the lowdest voice thou can, lest if thou should be still,
Thy neighbor should have audience, to do and speak his fill.
If any man entreat thee in more quiet sort to talk,
And not to let thy tamelesse tongue, so freely there to walk;
Then boldly with a wide mouth, into louder speeches break,
Thy tongue is free, no reason then but freely thou should speak.
And alwaeis (though whatse're thou say be very false and vain,)
Yet have a care, that thou thy purpose constantly maintain.
Yield thou thy captive hands to none, to none be counted weak,
Affirm that no man but thy self, one word of truth does speak.
But if some stowter adversary, scorns to leave the field,
Or for thy thundering great bravadoes, scorns an inch to yield:
This great reproach in any case, thou may no longer bear,
But if thou art a man, thy vaunting threatenings let him hear.
In rage and choler leave the table, furiously depart,
Bid none farewell, tell no man to what place thou going art.
For by this means, the company will stand in fear of thee,
And every man will say, that thou the Conqueror shall be.
Or if thou can not thus defend thy self, by force of word,
Then look that at this pintch, thine hand some help to thee afford.
With naked sword, confirm both true and false, both more and less,
Without all fail, this cannot choose but aid thee in distress.
Those arguments, wherein thy crafty foe would thee involve,
Thy naked sword and broken pots, may serve for to dissolve,
If this thou scorn, and idleness does not thy fancy please,
Because a banquet ought not to be posted off with ease;
Upon the table cut a mark, that it may tell thy fame,
And let ingraved letters plainly show the makers name.
So future ages by oblivion cannot thee disgrace,
For every man may know, that thou did banquet in that place.
Or on the chimney with a coal, draw forth thy picture well,
Which picture unto future ages, will thy wisdom tell.
But all this while, I would not have thee to forget thy drink,
But making greater haste thereof, with careful mind to think.
When having drunk each drop of drink, thou leave the tankard dry,
And thou perceavest that thy frind must have it presently:
Before thou give it him, thou oughtst to have a special care,
To see, that with thy hand thou wipe the brimmes, which moistest are.
For why, your hand is always cleaner then your dirtie lip,
Because in purer water often, you use the same to dip.
Sometimes great store of foaming froth, upon the cup does stand,
Which it is thy part to wipe away, most boldly with thy hand.
Then presently, thou oughtst as much as ere thou can to drink,
Or else to give it to some friend, whom thou most fit do think.
And if upon thy neighbors head and face, the froth thou spill,
For my part, I will not be he that shall account it ill.
Some laughter thou shall move thereby, some profit thou shall take,
Or (which thou can not miss,) thou shall some neighbor angry make.
Some men with swelling cheeks, within the pot do use to blow,
It is not hurtful though thou learn, this pretty trick to know.
For when the winds have leave, to wander from their strongest cage,
The air is often infected, by their boistrous rumbling rage.
If any such infectious things, within the pot do lie,
Thy searching breath, will bring it into light immediately.
As thou art breathing, if thou chance to spit into the same,
I know no nearer way, whereby to get renown and fame.
When every man is hard at drink, I count it very naught,
To leave one drop of that, which may be drunk at one good draught.
Philosophers in all their actions, count it very vain,
For that which may be done at once, to take a double pain.
Wherefore drink off the glass, and fill it fresh unto thy hand,
And for thy private use, upon thy trencher let it stand.
And pledge thy friend, once, twice, and thrice, and when he dares again,
Yet never doubt that any loss, thou shall thereby sustain.
The sooner thou art drunk, by taking of the grand carouse,
The sooner thou in reeling sort, may walk unto thy house.
To leave that crew, and go to bed, nere make thou any haste,
Until the clock does prove, that midnight long ago was past.
And though you see that this your stay, from rest your host does keep,
Yet stay the longer, that you may detain him still from sleep.
Yea, though for Gods sake he entreat you from his very heart,
Yet tell him flatly, that you scorn so quickly to depart.
And if you hear that any man is gone unto his bed,
Because that wine had long before (poor man) possessed his head.
Then have a care, that from his bed you straitway call him back,
And make him come perforce, although his garments he do lack.
And then begin afresh, great store of strongest wine to take,
And drink it off, therewith thy self more pleasant for to make.
Then break the pots and windows all, this cannot much offend,
For this next day, the glazier shall have something for to mend.
And make him in that glasses room, thy picture for to place,
Most noble men esteem of this, as of a special grace.
Each man will look upon thine arms, which to thy house does flock,
And think that thou art offspring of some very worthy stock.
Upon the benches and the tables, boldly thou may go:
Nay, which is more, I give thee leave all these to overthrow.
In brief, with forms thrown up and down, thou oughtst the harth to break.
Before one word of thy departure, thou beginst to speak.
But yet be sure in any case, to keep this in thine head,
And have a care to think thereof, before thou go to bed.
To make a league with all thy friends, it is gainefull thing,
And such a league, as may unto thy belly profit bring.
Chiefly, be friends with those which did against to morrow night,
Unto a dainty supper, thee in friendly sort invite.
This pretty trick, with some has often took so good effect,
That I have dinde with those, whose kindenes I did nere expect.
Faith, when infriendly sort at your house shall we merry be?
Or when will you invite to supper, these my friends and me?
Thus I assail him, he replies, come all whense're you dare,
Yet shall be welcome to such cates, as at my cottage are.
To morrow night, if you will come to supper to my house,
You shall be sure of meat enough, and eke a good carouse.
Forthwith I take him at his word, and give him faith and troth,
That I will come, but yet to trouble him, I would be loath,
Observe these manners, and herein example take by me,
And doubtless thou to many banquets, shall invited be.
But if another in this sort, do likewise thee assail,
Be sure to promise nothing, and he cannot thus prevail.
Tell him when thou would have him come, he shall be called of thee,
But now because of other things it cannot fitly be.
At this time (sir,) of certain business I have mighty haste,
And yet I know not certainly, how long the same will last.
Of say your wife at this time cannot all things fit provide,
Because a kind of sickness, makes her in her bed to bide.
Say that she now as patient, in Physicians hands does live,
That they to her a strong purgation, the other day did give.
Tell him, that now a certain laske her belly does offend,
But that you hope ere long, her physic will her body mend,
And then both he and other friends, shall all be welcome thither,
You Will find a day (no doubt) ere long, to laugh and quaffe together.
How to go home after supper being drunk, what tumults to raise in the way,
and at home before you go to bed, and how to behave your self the next day.
Chapter VIII.
When every thing has happened thus, according to thine heart,
Begin with doubled showts and shriekings, homeward to depart.
You need not stay so long, as of your friends your leave to take,
Nor need you thank your host for that good cheer which he did make.
For why your host, whenas he very drunk does you behold,
To keep you thus against your will, dares hardly be so bold.
You need not stay to know your shot, or what your vittailes cost,
To morrow morning you may know such trifles of your host.
It is his duty for to tell you, what you have to pay,
If you perceave that he deferres it, quickly slinke away.
And walking home, be sure to make great clamors in the street,
That every man may know where you have been, that does you meet.
Be sure that not a neighbor near thee, thou permit to sleep,
But with thy stir, thy neighbors from their rest have care to keep.
Mis-call one neighbor, and provoke another unto fight,
If that thou have within thee, either courage, heart, or might.
Those quarrels which amongst you have a long time been forgot
Recall afresh again, when you have took the the other pot.
And when he comes to tame thy tongue, or else to try thy might,
It is thy fairest, presently to take thy self to flight;
Lest in his mad-braind fury, he should split some tender vein,
And thou thereby great loss of blood and danger should sustain.
It often falls out, when by a vein the blood thus fast does run,
The man is forcde to droope and faint, and life is almost done.
The man that would with clubs and stones his neibors window strike
At midnight when the doors are fast, I would not much mislike.
This also would I have thee do, for those that drunken are,
Concerning sober life and manners need not have a care.
But if whenas thou sober were, this fault thou should commit,
To be mine Auditor, I should not think thee very fit.
Committing this, if thou the city watch encounter can,
And they commit thee to the Counter, thou art an happy man.
Thou shall be safe from all thy foes, thus lying in the jail,
Their greatest malice cannot in that place against thee prevail.
What though the Sun be never so hot? it cannot burn thee tho,
Thou shall be safe enough from rain from hail, and eke from snow.
But if thou be so luckie that thou chance to escape the watch,
And no man for these knavish prankes dares venture thee to catch.
At length, when thou with knavish tricks have filld thy longing heart,
By waking of thy neighbors all, then to thy house depart.
And learn what store of bouncing clamours at thy gate to make,
And in what gentle sort thy careful wife thou oughtst to wake.
First have a care, that with so great a noise thou use to rappe,
That all which hear thee, may suppose it is some thunderclap.
Nor take thou rest, until the gate be broke in pieces small,
Because it was not opend to thee, when thou first did call.
Then if at length thy wife be forcde to come down in her smock,
Thinking (well-meaning soul) with speed the doors for to unlock.
And with a, welcome home good husband, does thee entertain,
Because she plainly sees, that thou art in thy drunken vain.
To quite her kindenes, with thy fingers give her boxes store,
And as her careful haste deserves, be sure to beat her sore.
And store of thundering word to word, and weighty blow to blow,
Is this the care she has of thee, to entertain thee so?
Three things, a nut, an ass, a woman without store of blows,
Will nere be fit for any use, for so the proverb goes.
Wherefore, that she the better may thy future charge respect,
Severely for this negligence, thou oughtst her to correct.
And yet this use is fitter far for men of Ciclops race,
Which in Sicilia uncouth harbors have their biding place.
He which in beating of his wife, without desert does boast,
Because he would be thought a valiant man, and rule the roast;
Those marks and limits which I did appoint him, does surmount,
And sure I think, a wicked man I may him well account.
Before thou go to bed, be sure so great a stir to keep,
That all thy servants be constrainde, to rise from out their sleep,
One servant thou with thundering threats, and wrangling words must chide,
Another must both brawling words, and weighty blows abide.
All that which every man has done, while he has dwelt with you,
Now being overcome with drink, you must again renew.
That thee, they as a master may, both honor, love, and fear,
And tremble at each word, which from thee to proceed they hear.
Then at the last, give leave unto thy drowsy pate to sleep,
When all is still, and thou can find no greater stir to keep;
And being laid, there take thine ease as long as ere thou will,
But in such sort, as thou be sure the bed with () to fill.
Thus may thy maids have sheets to wash, to hold them work next day,
Lest thou for nothing to such idle maids should wages pay.
And when next day you from your bed begin to rise at last,
Which must not be until that noone, and dinner time be past.
When by your sleep your store of meat is all digested quite,
And all that store of liquor, which you drunk but yesternight:
Then being ready, to some neighbors house you ought to walk
With him, until your wife provide your dinner, there to talk.
There drive away the lingering time, in eare-delighting chat,
Long talk procures an appetite, then have a care of that,
And that his favor thou may get, and be a welcome guest,
With ready wit, thou oughtst to utter many a pleasant jest.
Recall to mind all that, which by you yesterday was done,
Whenas your senses all, with beer and wine were over-runne.
If any man last night, was too much overcome with drink,
And in the morning of the same, he not one whit does think.
It is thy duty, which did note his manners yesternight,
To publish it before his friends and bring it all to light.
Which thou repeating, some will laugh, others be moved to wrath,
Each man will take it sundry ways, as he his nature has.
Nor whem thou art amongst thy friends, thou should it faulty think.
To brag, that after supper thou took'st greatest store of drink.
It is a credit thus to brag, my head was then so light,
That it could hardly guide my feet, to find mine own house right.
Although they all were pretty well, yet no man found could be,
Which did not in that drunken art, yield cup and kanne to me.
It can be no discredit, but a praise and same, to say,
That thou in drinking from the rest, did bear the bell away.
Or waking just at noone, in haste unto thy wife depart,
Demanding of her meat and drink, to comfort up thine heart.
But first of all, a draught of burnt wine, would do very well,
All giddines and aches this will from thine head expel.
Which having drunk and eat a bit, unto thy bed repair,
And take thy rest until thy wife, thy dinner do prepare.
When all is ready, then I think to rise it will be time,
To recreate thy fainting corpse, with meat and pleasant wine.
And when each dish and pot, is sorted to his pointed place,
Then (as it is a woman's duty,) let thy wife say grace.
To tell those tricks, which were by thee committed yesternight,
How far thy tongue and mind did stray, from reason and from right.
What railing words and weighty blows, of thee she did sustain,
I think a reasonable volume hardly would contain.
She Will tell you what by you was broke to whom you offered wrong,
And of your tricks, will make a story of an hour long.
If this her talk delights thee not, but does thy wrath increase,
Charge her, on pain of thy displeasure, strait to hold her peace.
If then she leave, be thou content, if she proceed to say
Her pleasure, scorning this thy friendly warning to obey:
Then catch whatse're thou find near thy hand, in rage and haste,
And at the varlets head be sure with might the same to cast.
Twill teach her in thy presence that her prating tongue to hold,
And as to speak before her husband, not to be so bold.
More counsel, but for tediousness, I unto thee might give,
Although I know, that of thy self in order thou can live.
If I most common things can tell, I therewith am content,
All sorts and kinds of manners to declare I never meant.
Thou for thy self may diverse good examples soon devise,
Which cannot be misliked much in country farmers eyes.
How to entertain, use, and send away those guests which you have invited.
Chapter IX.
IT is thy part sometimes some guests unto thy house to call,
Lest men should think thy house is naught, or thou have none at all.
Or lest some picke-thanke which does greatly at thy good repine,
Say thou thy neighbors drink do love, but no man tastes of thine.
And when to come to dinner, you your neighbor do entreat,
Take heed lest this (you shall be welcome) you too often repeat.
And so departing from them, for their vittailes take no care,
Because you hope that none will come, you nothing need prepare.
If any come, whose pains and company you do not lack,
This policy may serve to bid him from your house to pack.
It may be as a friend to supper I did you invite,
I scarce can think my self so fond, but I was drunk that night.
If any words which then I spoke in drink, were overheard,
Since they were only words and wind, you must not them regard.
The pot-mate does offend, which much regard of words does make,
That which I spoke in jest, you should not thus in earnest take.
Or that thou may excuse thy self, into this humor break,
That then thou being drunk, in bragging sort those words did speak;
For credit sake, a man may often in public say that thing,
Which after no man can enforce him to effect to bring.
Or say, if now you here should dine, you could not merry be,
For I am sick, you cannot have the company of me:
The beer I drank has raisde such store of vapors in my brain,
That I persuade my self that I shall never drink again.
Or you may lay the fault upon your cursed and crabbed wife,
Which overrules you so, that you are weary of your life.
Wherefore, entreat them heartily at this time to depart,
When you are well, they shall be welcome all, with all your heart.
But sometimes to your kinder friends, more love you must affoorde,
And for their welcome, set a few small dishes on the board.
But always you must have a care, as long as ere you live,
To spend but little coin, on those things which you mean to give,
Why should thou for an other man, such costly dinners make?
There are but few which will to their house, thee to dinner take.
If just at supper time they there upon thee will attend,
Then bid them welcome, if they came not, for them never send.
I see no reason, that to any thou should send a man,
To pray him for to make all haste, which possibly he can.
There is no reason on they guests such service to bestow:
A cause why I this counsel give, I presently will show.
If thus for him you send a man, his coming for to grace,
He Will think he credites you, to come to such a clownish place.
Nay which is more, he will think that you to him beholding are,
And for your cost, to give you thanks, will have but little care.
Defer the time for no man's sake, but if a while he stay,
Regard him not, fall to your meat, and let him keep away.
As soon as ere the meat is ready, down to supper sit,
And fall to such things, as thy wife thinks for thy supper fit.
Let those which linger, either loose their supper, or their place;
And yet they are not offered, either wrong or much disgrace.
What reason had the fool (I pray,) no greater haste to make?
It was his own fault; for thee, as he brewd, so let him bake.
Or when the pointed time is come, give charge to lock the door:
Let no man enter that comes late, he should have come before.
Be sure that thou to no man do, the door once shut, unlock,
But either let them go their ways, or still stand there and knock.
If thou perchance do let them in, then give them neither meat,
Nor water for to wash their hands, nor scarce a cleanly seat,
It Is likely they at home had water, ere they came to thee,
And took their ease before, lest coming they should weary be.
Command thy maid to sweep the house, when every man is come,
Lest they should think it was not swept, they ought to see it done.
When every man is come, and does his supper long exspect,
Begin to make it ready then, and till then it neglect.
Take thou no care at all, to place or order any guest,
But give free leave to every man, to fit where he thinks best.
And then thou shall be sure, that none can well of thee complain,
Though by the lowest room, some wrong he chance for to sustain.
For fear the cates which thou have bought, should any man offend,
It is thy duty, every dish most highly to commend.
Tell them from whence they came, and what a mighty price they cost,
What pains you took to get them first, and after, them to roast.
And tell them how they boiled were, how many sundry ways
You used therein; in brief, neglect not any kind of praise.
And that they may the deerer seem, bid them themselves to prove,
And they shall hardly get such meat, for money or for love.
Then will they like the dishes highly, and commend the taste,
Perceaving that so cunningly, thou them commended have.
And yet I would not have thee counsel any man, to feed
Those which are hungry, of a prompter have but little need.
But being full, they cannot fall afresh to meat again:
For being full, to counsel him to feed afresh, is vain.
To eat thy meat against his will, thou no man oughtst to make,
It is sufficient, if he but by thee example take.
As for thy self, be sure thy teeth be wagging still apace,
This is the only cure whereby thine hunger to deface.
They which to meat, by thine example are not moved at last,
Let them depart with empty guts, a Gods name let them fast.
If thou upon thy neighbors trencher, needs some bit wilt place,
Thou oughtst to do it warily, lest thou thy self disgrace;
That which thou meanst to give, thou oughtst thereof to taste a bit,
Thereby to know the better, if it for thy friend be fit.
By this means, thou the perfect taste thereof thy self may know,
And judge thereby, if thou on such a friend may it bestow.
To give clean trenchers to the strangers is a needelesse thing,
Whenas thy servant to the board, the second course does bring.
They ought to turn their dirtie trenchers, on the the other side,
And wipe them on the cloth, which for that use thou did provide.
Why should you let your servant such great pains in vain to take?
He may do other things, while he the trenchers clean should make.
When all is done, and they have eat as much as ere they will,
Be sure as fast as they can drink it, store of wine to fill.
If any man in drinking, seems to take too long an ease,
Then for his lingering, punish him according as you please.
Make him perforce, to take whatse're thou requisite do think,
In quaffing make him follow thee, and after thee to drink.
And being drunk, refuse not to fall out with any man,
Use railing words, and speak as loud as possibly thou can,
If any one that's drunk, of naughty words does give thee store,
First beat him well and thriftily, then thrust him out of door.
There is no sense, that in thine own house he should thee abuse,
Especially since all therein thou as thou list may use.
I think to come again in haste, he will have little list,
If once or twice in this sort, he has felt thy weighty fist.
But if thou dare not strike him, having of thy self a care,
Because the strangers then thy folks, a greater number are.
Yet break such store of ieasts against him, as thou best do like,
Whenas thou may not with thy fist, be sure with tongue to strike.
If any man offended be, that thou so pleasant art,
Command him strait in angy sort, thine house for to depart.
Why should such frowning angry fellows, thus disturb the rest?
Because forsooth that only he mislikes such pleasant jest.
Thou may be merry with the rest, when he has left thy house,
Only regard that every person take the grand carowse.
With iron bolts and bars make fast the doors with thine own hand,
And have a man which at each door undauntedly shall stand.
Let no man pass, unless their fingers force he love to taste,
Although he give to thee a reason why he has such haste.
This is a policy, by making them endure this pain,
There will be few that wiil be brought to sup with thee again.
And let an empty chamber pot under the board be put,
That every man may there unload his bladder, or his gut:
What though they chance to do the last? it is not much amiss,
This vapor a most pleasing smell unto your nostrels is,
According as your need requires, cast out presently
From forth a casement, all which in the chamber pot did lie.
If thy companions out of it some wine should forthwith drink,
A man might say and swear, that they were merry men I think.
As long as thus their greedy paunch with meat and drink is fed,
Were it all night, I think not one would think upon his bed:
Whenas the day star ginnes to leave the Ocean, not before,
Command thy Porters at the last to open every door,
When thus the day is victor of the darkesome parting night,
Then every man may find his house, not needing any light.
Sleep all the day, though all the rest from rest by work are kept,
Thy wine will all be gone by night, if thou all day have slept.
Use this a while, and when in riches other men do flow
Thou (it is the sweetest life that is) a begging still shall go:
Though many men a careful and a painful life does please,
Yet, if my counsel thou will follow, live thou still at ease.
This store of pinching labor, often makes our joints the less,
And too much care, with great affliction does our hearts oppress.
Yet oftentimes when many men have took this pains and toil,
Before they can obtain their wish, they often receive the foil.
God grant me only that which for my need I shall desire,
And I will take no care at all, nor further wealth require.
Honors and goods, two things whereat the multitude has cought,
Have oftentimes the keepers of them, to destruction brought:
Wherefore, if you be wise, employ your good whenas you may,
Lest having store, you cannot use it, if you make delay.
The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK of ancient Simplicity of Behavior.
The order of this Book, and behavior at an honest feast, in eating brewesse
and crab-fish. Chap. I.
THose precepts which within my former books I did include,
Which cannot hurt thee much, although they make thee somewhat rude.
Have certain bonds in every place, thou may them not commit,
But with some caveats, for certain times are only fit.
But now into the surging seas, my sailing ship is borne,
It now will take a larger course, if it may escape untorn.
Help, help, (friend Bing,) which in Apolloes eyes do gracious live,
That by thine aid, I to the vulgars these my lines may give.
Draw near I say, and help my ship these surging sulkes to pass,
And make my course as swift, as if a Pegasus I was.
You can conduct me with a calm, and very quiet wind,
To aid atleast my fainting wit, let me that favor find.
A few more precepts to the former, in this place I Will add,
Which unto those that love Simplicity, cannot be bad.
My self in reasons paths I cannot very well contain,
For Modesty and Reason, they no whit to me pertain.
Those things to which blind Appetite does lead us, I must tell,
Which without tediousnes, before I could not have done well.
Once more unto my Cuckoe notes, lend thine attentive ear,
Whose're thou art, which simple manners do desire to hear;
Expect to heat that kind of life, which fittest is for thee,
You cannot in that art which you profess, too cunning be.
I doubt not but that store of manners fitting to thy mind,
If carefully thou read this book, thou in the same shall find,
I know, the practice of my precepts will thee homely make,
If in the daily use thereof, thou any pains wilt take.
All kind of manners for all ages will not fitting be,
Then have a care, that diverse sorts be mingled well by thee.
From hence, and thence, and every place, good manners thou must get,
And mix them with thine own, and make them for thy purpose fit.
I do not think it is your duty for to have a care
In what place, or amongst what men, your manners used are.
Whatse're it is which can thy life and manners much commend,
To get the same, it is thy duty all thy force to bend.
Thou needst not have another master, learn of me a while,
I Will teach thee tricks, a thousand crafty merchants to beguile.
Stand you to no man's judgment but your own, when you offend,
Simplicity will in thy greatest danger thee defend.
He which is made at other beckes, in other steps to tread,
Regarding not his future haps, a wretched life does lead.
It may be thou unto some place, as guest invited art,
Where thou amongst a sort of worthy men, must take thy part.
When every dainty dish, to which an appetite you find,
Is placed and all things set in order, to your dainty mind,
Cast shame afide, and into most unseemly speeches break,
Thy tongue is free, why may thou not at all time freely speak?
All sense and pining care, thou oughtst to banish from thy breast,
And boldly snatch such meat and drink, as fits thy fancy best,
With shrieking cries and sundry clamors, pierce the lofty skies,
Refuse not any thing, that seems pleasant in thine eyes.
For when you in your neighbors house, at sportive banquets sit,
To have a care of modest manners, is not very fit.
If any man in dinner time permits his tongue to walk,
Presuming with a pleasant speech, of lofty things to talk;
Begin as gravely as the rest of weighty things to tell,
And have a care, that all the rest in wrangling thou excel.
This custom unto great preferment will thee quickly raise,
For this thy quick and ready wit the strangers will thee praise.
To be more wise then thousands more, thy neighbors will thee deem,
No better means there is to prove a man of great esteem.
There is no fitter time to speak; for when the wine is in,
It adds great eloquence, whereby much credit you may win.
Perchance the Cook does to the board a mess of brewesse bring.
Which doubtless to the stomach is a very pleasing thing.
Then take the broadest smoothest spoone, best fitting to thy mind,
And to that dish before the rest begin a path to find.
The nearest way that I can tell thy belly for to fill,
Is, heap thy spoone so full with sops, that it perforce must spill.
As much as will suffice thy turn, at one time thou may take,
Concerning toys, it is not good such restless toils to make.
All that which in thy spoone at once, thou from the dish did fetch,
At one time thrust into thy mouth, although thy jaws thou stretch.
If any sop amongst the rest does seem to lack some sault,
Most carefully by this means thou may quickly mend that fault.
First fill thy spoone with store of fat and grease-besmiered crust,
Which done, into the salt-seller be sure the same to thrust.
Or (which if thou will boldly do, will for thy credit make,)
With all thy fingers for thy use, thou salt enough may take.
For sure it is impossible, that meat be tasted well,
If salt be wanting, which alone all rancour does excel.
A Crab-fish is a dish agreeing to your stately mind,
Which if at any time, upon the table you shall find,
The smaler and the leaner, unto strangers you must leave,
Your hungry stomach from the great more comfort shall receave.
Yet think not that the great, are always best of all to eat,
This may deceive, for why the small sometimes excel the great.
Then, that the good ones, from the bad, you may the better know,
Observe this rule, which always will the finest fishes show.
Under their tails have care to look, if any eggs you find,
You need not doubt, they are not hurtful to the nicest mind.
Eat these thy self: but if no eggs can there be found to be,
Suspect their goodness presently, they scarce are fit for thee.
Thus scorning them thy self, unto thy friend thou may them give,
By those things which thou scornst to eat, thy poorer friends may live.
Or having searched them thoroughly, take better up at last,
And in their rooms, be sure those bad ones in the dish to cast.
Keep not the finest fish, if of the fore-tolde mark it fail,
It is not wholesome, if it has not eggs within the tail.
My counsel is not, undivided fishes to devour,
Because I think, the very foot would hold you tacke an hour.
To suck up all that's in their belly would do pretty well,
Those parts I think will serve thy turn, which are within the shell.
As for the tail and fore-parts, you some corner must provide,
It is a most convenient place, to keep them by your side.
That so, when every bit of fish is from the platter gone;
Yet thou may have those fore-parts still, when all the rest have none.
And by this means, thou all the rest in eating shall excel,
To take this counsel of a friend, will often do very well.
Forefathers, therefore called this fish a kind of waiting meat,
Because when every man has dinde, you ought the same to eat.
A certain fellow tried of late to put this trick in ure,
But sped not, for a stranger present would not it endure.
This merry stranger, (as he was much given to merriment,)
Devisde this plot, whereby the tothers craft he did prevent.
Seeing the fishes fore-parts by this crafty knave to stand,
Before the the other was aware, he caught them in his hand.
I pray sir, what the cause (quoth he,) that you these parts refuse?
To make the most account of these, we country fellows use.
The fore-pars of this fish were wont in great esteem to be,
What though they be refusde of you? they shall be likde of me.
Thus having said, he broke the meat and made an end of it,
And unto him from whom he snatched it, would not give a bit.
Therefore it is more wisdom, in some secret bag to hide
Both tail and fore-parts, which thou for thy stomach did provide.
For then thou shall be sure, that none can from thee snatch thy meat,
But at thy house, or where thou please, thy self the same may eat.
Not only this, but any thing that's pleasing to thy gut,
In secret sort, thon for thy private use therein may put.
If this mislike thine host, which to his house did thee invite,
Tell him he was to blame, to place these dishes in thy sight.
He is not wise, that will despise the gift of any friend,
If thus he do deny thee meat, why did he for thee send?
I do not love at any feast, to show my self so proud,
As to refuse that meat, which by my neighbor is alowde.
Nay, sure it is my custom rather, like a thankful man
To rid mine host of all the meat, that possible I can.
Notable ways of drinking, and such behavior as must be observed at your
departure. Chapter II.
SOmetimes your host upon his guests, such liquor will bestow,
As in a private vineyard of his own, did lately grow.
If by the smacke, you find the fruit was of a naughty vine,
And therefore not agreeing to so nice a taste as thine.
Be sure this naughty wine, forthwith from off the board to fling,
And bid the Tapster for your drinking better wine to bring.
If he replies, it is of gift, it nothing shall you cost,
Tell him for this, small thanks are due to such a pinching host.
If for the wine already drawn he seem his coin to crave,
Ask him the reason, why such customers such tappings have?
Ask him, if coin be nowadaies so lightly got, he think?
Or is it meet, that silver should be paid for naughty drink?
But if perchance to dine with thee, thou have invited some,
Or else like men that lack their suppers, they unbidden come.
It is thy part to give to them the basest wine thou have,
Such wine is for this purpose best, as lackes both strength and taste.
Perchance some one among the rest will better wine demand,
But it may breed both hurt and loss, to do as they command.
Who knows their purpose? if they mean the shot received to pay?
Or thinking not to pay for this, would scot-free part a way?
If all the things which they have yet received naughty were,
Thy loss will be the less, and thou the better may it bear.
If better wine thou give, they will heap carowse upon carowse:
But give them weaker wine, and then they will soon depart your house.
If unto any friend of yours among the rest you drink,
Take off as much at once, as well will quench your thirst you think.
Until the man to whom you drunk have pledgd you to the full,
Permit him not in any case, the pot from mouth to pull:
Though he protest before them all, that he is scarce so strong,
As while he drinks a beaker dry to hold his breath so long.
Yet, will he, nill he, both by words and blows thou shall be feign
To make him drink it off, that thou thy purpose may attain.
But if he chance to shrike and cry, as loath to be controld,
And force perforce do what you can, his first intent will hold.
In raging fume put foming wine into some empty cruse,
And power it down his neck, because he did your love refuse.
Use this but now and then, and sure he will not be so nice,
But that hereafter he will pledge his friend, once, twice, and thrice.
In self same sort, a certain fellow once did me abuse,
He would not pledge me, wherefore I this self same trick did use:
I got a famous laurel bough, for my deserved praise.
Whense're I use such simple tricks my luck is such always.
Whenas the store of vapors which the foming wine did make,
Are got into thy sacred wit, and there possession take.
Whenas thy sense-bereaved tongue does stamring speeches yield,
And when the mind dispoild of wit, to vice has lost the field.
Then is it time from forth your heart to banish carke and care,
And eke to prove by lofty laughters, that you pleasant are.
Defer no time, it is not good on trifles long to stand,
Take pot or glass filld full with wine, which holding in your hand,
Begin a full carowsing draught, unto some friend to drink,
Who for his skill in drunkards art, dares pledge you as you think.
The drink and eke the brickle glass, although it cost a groate,
Together you for fellowship, may send into your throat.
Though senseless brutish creatures, void of reason and of wit,
(For aught I ever heard,) did never such a fault commit.
Yet some there are, (O times, O manners!) men of wealth and might,
Which in such filthy crimes as these, do take their chief delight.
Think nothing vilde, think nothing base, or vn-beseeming thee,
Which may by men of welthie callings, patronized be.
All that which other men have done, presume to do the same,
If thou desire by deeds of worth to get immortal fame.
Though other men perceaving these thy senseless crimes, refuse
By treading in thy wicked paths, the selfsame faults to use:
Yet must you not in any case, scorn any wicked deed,
But constantly, you must in vices further still proceed.
Command a boy to bring a pot which has a bottom wide,
Which filled, another neighbor to assail you must provide.
When you are drunk, it is a credit stoutly to refuse
Those narrow slender-bellide pots, which sober you did use.
Command such vn-accustomed vessels to be brought to thee,
That at the first draught with the same, thy thirst may quenched be.
Ere you proceed, you ought to fill the basin full with wine:
Which done, you strait must send it down that ravenous throat of thine.
And after that, with careful eye look over all the house,
What other vessels you can find, wherein you may carowse.
Pots, buckets, caldrons, frying-pans, according to your mind,
As also kettles, barrells, pitchers, doubtless you shall find:
Then shall you find cups, kans, and tankards, jackes, and bottles black,
Such necessary tools as these, your neighbor cannot lack.
All these, (if for your purpose them you requisite do think,)
Bring forth of hidden holes, in them your pleasant wine to drink.
If none of these you there can find, and yet you lack a cup,
Out of a dirtie pis-pot, you may drink your liquor up.
And yet I would be very loath that you should drink to me,
That beastly vessel is not fit for any man but thee.
Amongst that rout, can none be found that will you kindly pledge?
Because they all have drunk too much, do they a scuse allege?
Then may you freely brag and boast, that you the victor are,
And from the rest that leave you off, the laurel you shall bear.
Yet would I not, that you are yet proclaim your victory,
But counsel you before you do it, only thus to try:
Provide a funnell, (fie, it is shame such trifles for to show,
Me thinks so wise a man as you this trick before should know,)
Which you to set within their gaping mouths, must be so bold,
If you perceave they are so drunk, that they no pots can hold.
And by the funnells help, have care to liquor every frinde,
Which having finished, of your challenge you may make an end.
At length, when you with meat have stopped your hungry panches cries,
And eke with store of wine, have almost drunk away your eyes;
You need not stay, to give your neighbor thanks with all your heart,
But when you please, not taking leave, you homeward may depart.
When you depart, begin to rail and quarrel with your host,
Let that be all the thanks that you repay for all his cost.
First blame himself, and afterward begin to blame his meat,
It was not fine enough for such brave men as you to eat.
Rail at the Butler, for his not providing better drink,
Find fault with any thing whereof you presently can think.
Each thing was far too base, for those which dined in the place:
Then let them all perceave the marks of anger in thy face.
You hoped that with a greater banquet, he would you receave,
But all your hopes were vain, your purpose he did quite deceave.
I would have scornd for such a banquet to have left my door,
But that I thought of dainty meat, we should have lackt no store.
What though indeed you had no cause, so many faults to find?
Yet speak as constantly, as if you spoke it from your mind.
Thus having grieved with angry words, your careful host at heart,
If you have nothing else to do, you homeward may depart.
And if the morrow after, this your vexed host you meet,
That you may both be friends, you ought most kindly him to greet.
Or if you please, with ieasts begin the simple man to mock,
To make m^nds for yesternight, make him your laughing stock.
Tell him, you never gave him cause of anger, you protest:
If he perchance mislike your words, you spoke them all in jest,
What can he do? for shame, he cannot blame the jesting vain,
Unless he be too currish naturde, he will be friends again.
That very hour of all his quarrel he will make an end,
And think you, as he did before, to be his very friend.
Perchance unto a dainty supper, he will you invite,
With this your witty jesting humor being conquered quite.
How to spread and suffer scoffs and ieasts, farting, spitting, answering to
questions, and looking into other men's letters. Chap. III.
SOme men there are, which in their actions count it always best,
To spread abroad among their neighbors many a biting jest.
And therefore use to carpe at faults, which other men commit,
By this means thinking to declare their merry jesting wit.
But as for you, although your neighbors nose be nere so great,
Yet ought you not his name with naughty speeches to entreat.
If any man makes jests of you, to keep his wit in ure,
I give you leave to speak your worst, you must not this endure.
Let him by certain signs perceave, that thou can angry be,
I think if he perceave thee moved, he will hardly scoff at thee.
If he proceed, and into greater flowting speeches break,
Rather then you will still be wronged, thus boldly to him speak:
Whenas my father lackt a fool wherewith to sport and play,
That so, the better he might drive the lingering time away;
After he many means had tried, at last he found out me,
That I to banish all his careful thoughts, a fool might be.
So sir, if you would have a fool which would your jests abide,
My counsel, is that you some fool on purpose do provide.
If thus you take up every flowter in his jesting vain,
Its very likely, few or none will jest at you again.
If any man with gifts of money, thinks thee to abuse,
Accept such jesting, so that he this custom do not use,
Refuse no kind of jests, which may commodity procure,
Such flowtes as bring, or gain, or profit, you may well endure.
And yet, although some profit by their jests you bear away,
It is your duty word for word, unto them to repay.
Those men which you in loving league, have tide unto your heart,
From love of you till you have vexed them, let them not depart.
With store of sugared promises, their humors you must feed,
And tell them you will succor them, if ere they stand in need.
But yet I would not have thee such a simple fool to be,
As to perform all that which has been promised by thee.
To every man you ought most kingly promises to give,
But never to perform the same, if you in peace would live.
And yet, if you in weighty causes do your friend deceave,
It is a precept which of me you never did receave.
When you at dinner among a sort of honest men do sit,
Or wives and maids, the last whereof is for your purpose fit.
If you have need, from forth your griping belly let you wind,
The scent whereof, the guests will quickly in their nosthrills find.
And lest the strangers should perceave that you have done amiss,
Be sure to cry before the rest, fie, what a stink is this?
Affirm, that in the tender virgins all the fault does lie
And strait a red and blushing color will their faces die.
Those which offend, have commonly this color in their face,
When guilty men begin to blush, it is a sign of grace.
Or if a little dog be me, be sure the same to kick,
As if that his perfumed tail, had causde this beastly trick.
By this means your decreasing credit you may finely save.
And others shall have that reward, which you deserve to have.
That noisome smell without offense the guests must undergo,
Because that none but you do certainly the father know.
Sometimes there from the liver comes an humor like to snot,
Which either rises from some cold or surfeit lately got.
This diverse men with hauks and hems, will from their stomach bring,
And keep it on their tongue, as if it were a precious thing.
And in their mouth this fleamie stuff, they love to roll about,
A pretty while before they will begin to spit it out.
What profit by this beastly trick they get, I do not know,
But in my judgment it does make a very seemly show.
Although if some should see this trick, their meat they would refuse,
Yet this I think a reason is, for which they should it use.
Though never so often in my sight this trick should used be,
Yet sure it should be counted for a welcome sight to me.
And as for my part, I could wish, if I might have my mind,
That I at dinner, store of snot within your mouth might find.
Suppose your father or your master does some question ask,
Or else some stranger calls you, which would set you any task:
Be sure that you unto their questions answer not at all,
Unless your father or your master, twice or thrice do call.
Make answer then, as if from sleep they then had wakned thee,
But such a one, as to their question may no whit agree.
If they demand your answer when you scarcely are awake,
You needs must answer foolishly, because you did mistake.
When you of certain weighty matters purpose for to tell,
Observe this method, which will serve your purpose very well.
You must not talk in foolish wise, nor must your speeh be short,
The longest tedious tatling tales, will make the finest sport.
That you may seem in Rhetorike all others to excel,
Of sundry trifling toys you ought a tedious tale to tell.
In any case your proeme must an hour or two endure,
In which, your auditors good wills you only must procure.
If you no subject have, whereof your future speech to make,
It is no matter, you of me may store of subjects take.
The Roman battles and the credit which they got in fight,
And all the worthy soldiers names and noble deeds recite.
The great exploites of Hanniball and Carthaginian wars
You may repeat, and eke the cause of Troyes unhappy iarres.
Or of the stars and heavenly bodies you a speech may make,
And show from whence the world its first original did take.
Thus having opend all their ears, of trifles make an end,
Beginning at the last unto the purpose to descend.
If any man among the rest does interrupt thy talk,
Against him in this railing sort, permit your tongue to walk.
And art thou not ashamde, thou fool of manners most corrupt,
So great a man as I, so boldly thus to interrupt?
Where were you taught into such shameless boldness for to break,
As not to keep your tongue in awe when wiser persons speak?
If thus your bold presuming friend you use to entertain,
You cannot choose but store of praise and credit you shall gain.
If any man be reading letters which were to him sent,
Although to tell the secrets unto you he never meant.
To stand behind the readers back you ought to have a care,
And read them over as well as he before he be aware.
Unto the King of Macedon, Ephestius called by name,
A certain friend of his presumde of late to do the same.
It was his custom always boldly to commit this thing,
Yet he continued in the love and favor of the king.
And sure I think that no man can thy saucy boldness blame,
Although in immitating him you should perform the same.
Though some men think this use a most unseemly vice to be,
Yet sure it rather for a virtue shall be thought of me.
Those learned men's examples which have lived in former time,
Will plainly prove that this can hardly be so great a crime.
Did not old Tully all his country most entirely love?
As when he was in Rome a Consul he did plainly prove.
To greet his friends with careful letters he did daily use,
And yet to print them every one he never did refuse.
Then why should these our letters which are baser far then they,
From all men's sight and public view be closly kept away?
Behavior when you enter into other men's houses, going into hot-houses, or
baths, diverse colored parted coats, the adorning of the beard, the use of
papers and books, entertaining your friends, and other such like civilities.
Chapter IIII.
Diverse there are which of their credit such account do make,
That they without advise and care will nothing undertake.
If they unto an honest neighbors house invited are,
Softly to knock before they enter they will have a care.
And though the doors stand open, granting entrance unto all,
Yet is it not their use to enter in before they call.
That so their neighbor of their coming may forewarned be,
Lest he should have some secret which he would have no man see.
Thinking to seem well nurturde men by often using it,
And I confess, for honest men it is a custom fit.
But if unto a neighbors house you purpose for to go,
You need not take, or care, or pains, to frame your manners so.
If any gate stand open, rush boldly in upon your friend,
The very name of friendship may from boldness you defend.
If thus you should not make a noise but enter suddenly,
Something perchance which he would have unseen you should espy.
You may procure great store of mirth by entering boldly in,
By giving warning of your coming you his love shall win.
If you into a sweating bath or hot-house chance to come,
Whether you only are a stranger there, or known to some.
If you be chill, to run unto a furnace be so bold,
That so you may both from your hands and feet expel the cold.
Then presently be sure to put your shoes from off your feet,
In spite of which (unhappy man,) the cold did with them meet.
Which having done, against the fire prepare your feet to warm,
That by this means you may eschew the colds outrageous harm.
To put your hose and breeches off, is sure a pleasant thing,
I do it not mislike, because it will great profit bring.
Suppose the air (as often it has) has some infectious smell,
Which will disturb your temperd brain, though it before was well.
That pleasant smell which from your hose and breeches does proceed,
Will quite expel that other smell to help you at your need.
Which having done, the tothers place this will possess and use,
Because the the other did your sense and smelling much abuse.
By this means you the aires unwholesome smells may soon prevent,
This newfound smell will stop the strongnes of the tothers scent.
Think it a trifling thing to labor all men for to please,
He which regards all to please, can never live at ease.
Since none is found so good that he can every man content,
It is thy best to displease all, this labor to prevent.
Why should thou strive to make thy self to all men's humors fit?
It is a toil which cannot choose but far exceed thy wit.
It is in vain against your nature foolishly to strive,
He which attempts impossibilities will never thrive.
At length, when you are forced the furnace and the bath to leave,
Then you of me your trusty friend this counsel shall receave.
That you from all ensuing harm may keep your tender feet,
If you hereafter should with frost and pinching coldness meet.
Thrust store of straw into your shoes to keep your feet from harm,
The straw which lies within your shoes will make them very warm.
And yet unless you put it so that it may all be seen,
T'had been as good, that in your shoes it had not placed been.
This good example, whosoever fears future cold
Will immitate, and for a fruitful precept will it hold.
If any tell thee that to leave thy clownish life it is best,
And for thy plain rusticitie begin at thee to jest.
Such injuries as these, if patiently thou suffer can,
For my part, I shall hardly think thou art a valiant man.
If thou can hardly mend thy self, for thou no weapons have,
(Although it were good, if thou at him a dagger strait would cast.)
Forthwith it is thy duty into raging words to break,
Although no weapons you may use, yet freely you may speak.
Those whom you sharply reprehend in such a raging fume,
Hereafter to abuse you thus they hardly will presume.
I once before forbade thee any scoffings to endure,
And will inculcate it to keep thee in the better ure.
Thy garments having diverse colors better please the sight,
All men in these our days do in variety delight.
Nature herself in diverse things does sundry colors use,
To follow such a guide as Nature do not thou refuse.
The man which follows Natures rules, lives happily they say,
If such a perfect guide you follow you can never stray.
Of such a perfect guide be thou an immitator too,
For she will teach thee what is fit in every place to do.
If you with careful mind the heavenly Rainbow do behold,
You shall perceave how many sundry colors it does hold.
Consider well the forms of plants, the wings of birds which fly,
And all those precious jems which in the Indian lands do lie;
And you shall find that all of these in colors do abound.
And all things else which Nature for the use of man has found.
Also, your garments into diverse pieces for to cut,
Is nowadaies in great account and estimation put.
This must before all other things be used often of thee,
If thou will harken to my verses, or my scholar be.
Like some unwise and senseless block all men will thee deride,
Unless thou use thy hose and dublet finely to divide.
But if in curious manner you your garments use to tear,
So that upon your body you no perfect piece do wear.
A man of noble birth and lineage you may quickly seem,
And all your friends to be a man of credit will you deem.
Or else you will be thought to be a man of Mars, his rowt,
Such men in such apparel use to march the streets about.
Unto what place soever you come, it is a mighty grace,
To have a frowning countenance and eke a crabbed face.
Never laugh at all, but then when you some doleful fight have found,
As some unlucky mastlesse ship, in danger to be drowned.
Those men which do your mourning looks and countenance behold,
Will think that weighty matters do from smiling you withold.
So every man that sees you, will unto you honor give,
Supposing that in honest paths and gravitie you live.
Perchance in public sort some public matters acted are,
When every man both young and old does meet together there,
And then begins some clarke to read the statutes all alowde,
That every precept may be marked, of all the present crowde.
At all such public meetings, thou must also present be,
To hear the news, although perhaps it not concerns thee.
If to regard those great affairs you need not have a care,
It is your duty to disturb all others that are there.
Devise some boystrous sports and plays which thou approovest best,
And with thy shriking cries, be sure to countervaile the rest.
Let thy delight be placde in making others to be staid,
Lest they attentively should hearken unto what was said.
This also cannot choose but purchase most deserved grace,
To have a beard beset with brissels, hiding half your face.
Or let upon thine upper lip, a great muschatoe bide,
Which often will hinder you from opning of your chaps too wide.
By which you oftentimes great help and profit may receive,
You know my careful counsel never yet did you deceive.
Perchance within the dirty pot some filthy thing does lie,
Which by the narrow mouth thereof you hardly can epsy.
Your brisly beard and long muchatoes will its passage stay,
When otherwise the filth would by your chin have escaped away.
The wines bad hue, those hairs will change which on your lips do grow,
So that the pure wine only will into your belly flow.
Besides, those dirtie rotten teeth, which in your mouth have place,
As often as you with laughter gaped, would breed you great disgrace,
But that your beard to hinder this, a means will soon provide,
Which hanging over both your lips, your teeth will quickly hide.
If ever you have cause to speak of any weighty thing,
Your beard unto you presently will praise and credit bring.
Which hanging down upon your breast, you gravely ought to stroke,
And make a stop at every sundry word, which you have spoke.
This in such sort will for thine honor and thy credit make,
That all which see thee, for a grave and wise man will thee take.
If thou at any time do write a letter to thy friend,
Because thy purpose and intent thou unto him must send,
To keep the same from blots and blurres I hold it very vain,
It is no hurt, although the same with store of incke you stain.
The man which in such trifling things such labor will abide,
Forgets the means whereby his own perfections for to hide,
Unless your art and cunning always hid and cloaked be,
What things soever you write, shall hardly be believed of me.
And that your friend more carefully may keep within his mind,
Those things which in your loving letter he does written find,
So carefully your pen and ink to use you shall be feign,
That all your paper you be sure with store of blots to stain.
In self same sort you always ought to use the finest book,
Although another kindly lent it you thereon to look.
If any friend that dwells far off, or kinsman of your own,
Come to your house, which unto him most perfectly is known.
In any case you ought to have a special care of this,
To tell him, not too often, that he very welcome is.
For if he chance to find, that he so welcome is to thee,
It may be feared his often coming troublesome will be,
Yet every time he comes, be sure to give him so much wine,
That being drunk he neither know, what is his name, nor thine,
In better sort an ancient friend you cannot entertain,
Then for to give him wine, until he spew it up again.
When he begins, at last, to be desirous to be gone,
And therefore both his boots, his cloak, his sword and all is on,
Permit him not in any case so soon to part away,
But though he earnestly request you, make him longer stay;
Whether he will or no, constrain him more and more to drink.
This is a sure and certain pledge of kindest love I think.
Concerning such things as are fittest when you go to bed,
In this my Book in ample sort I should to you have read.
But if I all occasions offered should presume to take,
I should such store of matter find that I no end should make,
Remember like thy self in all thy actions for to be,
And thou shall find that only they are rules enough for thee.
From taking either sleep or rest, be sure the rest to keep,
When thou perceav'st that thou can hardly set thy self to sleep:
If any sport thou can invent thy fellows to abuse,
Because it will procure thee praise, thou oughtst the same to use.
As soon as ere thy shoe is took from off thy stinking feet,
Thy nosthrills with a most unwholesome savor it will greet,
Which savor, if into the brain it chances to ascend,
It is incredible how much it will the same offend.
Wherefore, if thou would be supposde a witty man to be,
Have care to set thy shoes a great way from thy bed and thee.
Be sure to have this cunning trick within thy crafty head,
To let thy shoes be always set before another bed.
And let the smell which comes from thence, another nosthrills fill,
Lest such a stinking savor should procure thee any ill.
More store of rusticke practices I unto thee would give,
Whose're thou art which do according to my precepts live;
But that I see that sleep at this time rather is required,
Because thy members all for want of rest are almost tired.
Wherefore, I grant unto thee leave to part unto thy bed,
On it, without, or care, or fear, to rest thy sleepie head.
Mean time such good examples to set down I will proceed,
As thou may always immitate whens'ever thou have need,
From which when you have slept enough, such precepts you may take,
As in your future words and actions for your purpose make.
In all my course which is to come, I nothing else will tell,
But those things which may every day of you be used well.
Sundry sorts of civilities at the Table. Chapter V.
NOt long ago there at a wedding was a costly feast,
To which, a certain stripling was invited as a guest;
Wherefore his start-vps on were put, besmiered all with dirt,
What then? you know a little mire can do but little hurt.
To put a spur upon his heel he also had a care,
To make his horse go faster that he might be sooner there;
And yet do what he could, of all the rest he latest came,
Because his palfray in the hinder leg was somewhat lame.
As soon as he was lite, upon the board he found the meat,
And every stranger by the Bride placed in his proper seat:
For haste he durst not stay, from off his heel his spur to take,
Nor yet to put his start-vps off, he then such haste did make.
But running to the board with both, his coming for to grace,
A certain honest maid vouchsafde to grant to him her place.
It was his fortune next unto another maid to sit,
Although of such unlooked for kindenes he was far unfit.
Forthwith a fat and tender hen before his face was set,
That he although he came too late, his part thereof might get.
He being scarce a skillful man in carving of his meat,
Scarce knowing what was best to leave untouched, and what to eat;
Presumde to take both legs and wings which in the platter lay,
Lest leaving them behind him, they might chance to fly away.
The carkas he upon the virgin thinking to bestow,
By great misfortune chanced on the ground the same to throw.
For which he forthwith blushed for shame; but thinking mends to make,
Began to stoop, from off the ground the carkas for to take.
But out alas he let a fart which made a grievous scent,
As he by stooping down too low, too much his body bent.
For which his fault, he being sorely vexed at the heart,
Leaving his dinner, presently he purposde to depart.
As he was climing over the board his spur the cloth did tear,
And hung so fast, that with him he was forced the cloth to bear.
Those pots and platters which as then upon the table stood,
And all the candles down he cast in this his hasty mood.
Besides, (more haste, less speed,) as he departing was away,
The tablefull of pots and glasses forced him for to stay.
The which with all the other things which on the same he found,
Thus being over-rulde by rage, he cast upon the ground.
As he was going out of doors, he with a servant met,
Which had another dish of meat upon the board to set.
Thus running headlong on his way, by chance against his will,
He made the servant all the meat upon the ground to spill.
In this sort at his neighbors wedding having played his part,
He got upon his halting jade and homeward did depart.
Although by practicing these prancks great profit you may make,
And for your present purpose out of them example take:
Yet must he not be numberd among the vulgar multitude,
Because that he (good man,) was more unfortunate then rude.
And at a certain other time it chanced to betide,
A neighbor for his special friends a banquet did provide.
When every one had took his place, there was among the rest,
A gentlewoman, and a man of worship at the feast.
The stranger as he was a man of manners very grave,
In friendly sort a Carps head to the gentlewoman gave.
She thinking well of this his offer, took that dainty meat,
Beginning of the same according to her mind to eat.
She scornde to search the head, or every corner to pervse,
Because she never knew the meat, she did the same refuse.
Each part for to anotomize she thought it mickle pain,
Especially for that, from which she did exspect no gain.
Wherefore she underneath the table cast the dainty head,
Supposing it was meat wherewith the dogs might all be fed.
When this the woman's foolish deed the stranger did behold,
Not able longer to forbear, to chide her he was bold.
From off the ground the head which she refusde he first did take,
And then in angry sort unto her in this manner spoke.
And are you not ashamde (you fool,) such folly to commit?
It greeves me much to see that you should have so little wit.
This head I as a special favor did on you bestow,
And not to that intent that on the ground you should it throw.
Though thus to open it your self you would not take the pain,
Yet had it been your part to have restorde it me again.
She being overcome with shame, no words at all replide,
But lest she should be mocked the more, was forced her face to hide.
Judge whether of the two seem better mannerd unto thee,
Or whether of the two mislikte or praised most shall be.
A Citizen did on a time with feasting entertain
A mighty Prince and Potentate, with all his pomp and train.
Who coming, was receivde with such store of stately cheer,
As if his palace it had been, nothing was thought too dear.
Great store of dainty flesh and sundry sorts of costly fish
Were sent unto the board; there lackt not any princely dish.
The man suspecting lest his Princes favor he should loose,
From forth the dish among the rest the finest fish did choose.
Which thinking on the Princes trencher hansomely to lay,
The fish by great ill luck from forth his fingers slipped away.
But ere it came to ground, his slipper with the same did meet,
A slipper black as jeate was on the entertainers feet.
Whence having took it, it upon the Princes trencher laid,
And that his fault might seem the less, these words to him he said:
Yet take it (gentle Prince I pray,) the fall did it not hurt,
You know my pantolfe was clean and not besmirde with dirt.
Believe me sir, my servant lately clensde it with a cloth,
I put it on e'ne now, to hurt you I Would be very loath.
These words he said, and earnestly the Prince he did entreat,
To pardon this his small offense, and fall unto his meat.
Another time a gentleman of worship and of fame,
To dinner to a Princes table by inviting came.
The Prince because he thought of him a special care to have,
In friendly sort a piece of dainty meat unto him gave.
The stranger being finely nurturde wondrous haste did make,
The Princes kind and loving proffer speedily to take,
But by a great misfortune he could hardly hold it well,
So that into a cup of wine unluckily it fell.
And as with all the haste he could, he strived to take it thence,
His trembling hand did add unto the first a great offense.
For he with shaking, all the cup of wine did overthrow,
So that both bread and meat upon the board in wine did flow.
With store of blushing purple color, both his cheeks were did,
He was so vexed for his fault, that he his face did hide.
But sure I think some angry gods did cross his good intent,
For being far from clownish fashions, mannerly he meant.
But you by his example store of manners ought to take,
The use whereof will you a rude and simple fellow make.
That which by great ill luck against his will he did commit,
Thou oughtst to study to perform it with a willing wit.
Those things which you on purpose do, will more your name advance,
Then that which you against your will committed have by chance.
I saw another, who because his knife was somewhat ill,
And would not cut his meat apace according to his will.
Not willing for to loose his part this trick he did invent,
Whereby he thought his great ensuing danger to prevent.
He took from forth the dish the biggest bits that he could find,
And all such dainty pieces as were fitting to his mind,
Which having got, to put them underneath his arm was bold,
Because he thought in such a place more firmly them to hold.
From whence according to his stomach he could tear his meat,
Both roast and sod, with tooth and nail, as he desired to eat.
For finding that his knife in those affairs did often fail,
He doubted not but with his hand he quickly should prevail.
But having filld his stomach, he was careful to lay down
Into the dish, all which he left, lest he should seem a clown.
And of his leavings, to his neighbors he would offer part,
Requesting that they would accept them e'ne with all his heart.
I would not have you think, that of my self I this do feign,
To lie when no man does compel me, were but little gain.
The rudest things which in my book I can repeat or tell,
At sundry times in sundry places, often have befell.
Nay, greedy gutlings have committed many a cleanly feate,
Which neither I, nor any other Poet can repeat.
Another time the man and master sat at board together,
Because there was a feast, and they were both invited thither.
And diverse other men of credit were invited there,
Which of the City worthy Magistrates and Rulers were.
While at the table every stranger courtesy did use,
And every man to carve the rest did earnestly refuse;
Each man with careful eye, his neighbors gesture did behold,
But for to give the foremost onset, none durst be so bold.
The servant having sat so long his hunger did him teach,
To stint the quarrel of his guts, some dainty dish to reach.
By your leave now at length, to stay my stomach I Will be bold,
For why to tell the troth (quoth he,) I can no longer hold.
He took a piece of dainty meat, thus having to them said,
And having took it, boldly on his trencher he it laid.
Which when his master had espide, to blush he strait began,
To think that he before the rest should have so bold a man.
Unto his saucy man he many becks and signs did make,
And in a soft and whispring manner many words he spoke.
That he the meat which he had took, into the dish should put,
And let the strangers which were better men before him cut.
The servant when his masters nods and becks he did espy,
Not knowing well the cause thereof or what he meant thereby.
Having a gobbet in his mouth which round about he rold,
It was so big that in his mouth he scarcely could it hold.
He spewd the meat digested all again into the dish,
Thinking thereby to satisfy his masters silent wish.
His master frowning more and more for that he did commit,
He half beside himself as in an ecstasy did fit.
Thus having sat a pretty while, he took the meat at last
From forth the dish, and on the ground he boldly did it cast.
For seeing that his master thus some future harm did threat,
And every stranger else abstaind from touching of the meat,
He thought the meat digested did with poison him infect,
And therefore did some sudden chance of present death exspect.
A country farmer came to dinner to a kinsman dear,
He was unto him both by kindred and acquaintance near:
He very glad of his approach great welcome to him gave,
Assuring him, that all the cheer that might be he should have,
He calls his neighbors presently that they might with him dine,
And promises that no man there shall lack for dainty wine.
They come, and every man does take the place which he thinks fit,
Except his kinsman which will after all the strangers sit,
In brief, from forth his country sheathe his clownish knife he took,
Which being stainde with household bread, did somewhat bluntly look.
Which he espying, strait with spittle did his whittle wet,
Supposing that by this means he the dirt from thence might get.
Then having wipte it on the cloth it shone as bright as day,
So that upon his trencher then, he boldly might it lay,
When unto some the host such bits as he thought best had gave,
He bade the rest to carve themselves if they good meat would have.
And strait the country fellow in the platter did espy
A dainty morsel clad in fat, which by it self did lie.
He being hungry, snatched it as a dainty piece of meat,
And setting it before him, strait began thereof to eat.
His host enforced to blush for shame did into laughter break,
And in that merry vain, unto him in this sort did speak.
Good uncle cast into the platter that unwholesome bit,
I pray restore it, for it is not for your diet fit.
And which agrees unto your stomach, take this piece of me,
Which for your dainty diet I suppose more fit to be.
The countriman replide, good coosen set aside your care,
Those cates which I have chose, according to my stomach are.
That meat which next unto me in the platter I do find,
Although you think it never so bad, it pleases well my mind.
I scarce shall find a sweeter bit in any dainty dish,
And were it worse I were content, such choice I do not wish.
Which having said, before them all the meat he did devour,
Yet had no hurt at all, the man is living at this hour.
Another host by chance at board among gentlemen did sit,
A clownish fool which was for such companions far unfit.
And yet forsooth for all the rest he would a carver be,
Although such neatenes with such clownish life did not agree.
He tore the raines from off the meat, a cleanly trick I trow,
And on a man of worship (as it was meet,) did them bestow.
He thinking them too good a bit refusde the same to have,
And therefore to a man which was his friend, that morcell gave.
He likewise offered to another friend that dainty meat,
But none among them all was found that would that morcell eat.
At length unto the carvers trencher they were turned strait,
But he suspecting that within them there was some deceit.
Half angry with them answered thus, what reason do you find,
That since all others do despise them they should fit my mind?
Which having said, in rage and fume he cast away the meat,
That since the men refusde it so, the dogs the same might eat.
But now a beastly tale I tell, your patience I must crave,
Such things as beastly are, in beastly words you needs must have.
There was a gentleman of late was known to me full well,
But for a certain cause, his name I list not here to tell.
Him many noble men into their company would take,
Because he was a man which many pretty jests could make.
With store of bitter biting jests he any man would strike,
And therefore merry minded men his company did like.
And when he was amongst a crew whose favor he did love,
He many jests would offer, store of laughter for to move.
A sort of youths constrainde him on a table for to clime,
To make their worships merry with some eare-delighting rhyme.
About him many flocks of pleasant yonkers did resort,
To hear his jests, and try if he could make them any sport.
While they were gazing on him thus, he silent still did stand,
Premeditating of the matter which he had in hand.
At length rejecting shamefastnes, his breeches down he put,
And in the presence of them all he emptied there his gut.
Which when it was perceivde of those which on the ground did stand,
Each man began to laugh alowde and eke to clap his hand.
The gentlemen great store of money unto him did give,
This was the loss that he sustainde, because he thus did live.
Let those men now which have refusde to be accounted plain,
Tell me if clownish manners do not store of riches gain.
Other civilities in emptying the bladder, vomiting, and other eleganties of
behavior. Chap. VI.
THe store of urine oftentimes does offer strangers wrong,
Whenas they are constrainde to sit at supper over long.
And therefore some well nurturde fools presume to be so bold,
As longer then is requisite their water for to hold.
But they are senseless fools, their healths and lives to venture so,
And for a little manners sake such loss to undergo.
Thou which a wise man art, should cast such foolish care aside,
That for thy future profit by thy care thou may provide.
Rise thou in dinner time if thou perchance have need to leake,
A Gods name let that passage have which would thy belly break.
If any one among the rest do stop thine enterprise,
Although he be thy very friend, yet force him for to rise.
Or sitting at the table, if you find that you are ill,
Not fearing any, on the ground your urine you may spill.
All sharp, severe, and crabbed manners you must now refuse,
Which of so many faults do plain rusticitie accuse.
Those things which thou by other men's examples used have,
Are just, thou have not been the first, nor shall thou be the last.
A gallant youth which of a worthy lineage did descend,
Unto a banquet was of late invited by a friend.
Upon the board was set such store of taste delighting meat,
As when the gods above do Nectar and Ambrosia eat.
According to his calling every stranger down did sit,
Each choosing such things as he counted for his stomach fit.
This yonker scarce was suffered his horses back to leave,
But he was called presently his place for to receave.
He had no time allowd, his boots from off his legs to take;
Nor (which was woorst of all) his pinching water for to make.
As good luck was, he by a dainty wenches side did sit,
And now began his future pain and trouble to forget.
But hapless he (as nothing which is good can ever last)
His future pain assailed him, his pleasure soon was past;
For being very dry, he store of drink began to gull,
So that before he was aware, his bladder soon was full.
And yet (unhappy he) he durst not from the table rise,
Lest he should seem unmannerly in all the strangers eyes.
Wherefore a great while sundry means and helps he did invent,
Whereby the better this ensuing harm he might prevent.
But still his pains increasing more, he was in such a case,
That he was forcde to take this counsel of the time and place,
Into his boot (which was a wide one) such a thing he put,
That he in little space of all his water freed his gut.
Under the board to hold his hand a while he was compelld,
As if some other weighty thing he in the same had held,
Until his boot was filld up with the urine to the top;
And yet the water powered from the fountain drop by drop.
Mean time the maid which at the table sat unto him near,
Perceiving all, persuaded him to have a valiant cheer,
And strait she took him by the hand, which he so busied had,
Desiring him to tell the reason why he was so sad:
And strait from forth his codpeece he was forcde his hand to bring,
And in the same against his will, his maid-delighting thing.
Look off, look off some other way, you maids, by nature kind,
For fear that such an object make you ever after blind.
This lucklesse yonker being thus surprised in such haste,
Was forcde upon the table store of water for to cast.
In self same sort as when the neighbors water use to fling
Upon an house half burnt with fire, or any other thing.
He came unto that banquet in a most unhappy morn,
And sure I think under a lucklesse plannet he was borne.
Thus being scofft of all, he sat, not daring once to rise,
But in a sad and mournful sort he hid his bashful eyes.
At length, by store of pleasant wine these cares his heart forsook,
And setting shame and fear aside, a courage stowt he took.
In brief, when every man had tipled well, it so did chance,
That every man must after supper lead a wench a dance.
This yonker then, (although this dancing he did hardly love,)
Was forced according to the fiddles sound his legs to move.
Each time that he removed his feet, he shook the massy ground,
And all the house with store of showts and Echoes did resound.
As often as ere this yonker from the ground his legs did pull,
(Having his boots (too big before,) with store of water full:)
So often they forced him to remember that unseemly thing,
And often the fault forgot, they did afresh remembrance bring.
And then afresh each man began at him to laugh and mock,
He was the cause that made himself so base a laughing stock.
As soon as dancing time was past that he might private be,
He found a means whereby from laughter he himself might free.
In midst of all the maids and men which compast him apace,
He put his watery buskins off, the cause of his disgrace.
And gave them to his man, that to the fire he might them bear,
Which quickly would exhaust the vapors that within them were.
His trusty servant by the way espide a bed by chance,
Provided for to rest their bones which in the hall did dance.
Hither the careful servant did his masters buskins bear,
And having made the bed-poste fit, he forthwith hung them there.
And then began the youth to banish care from forth his breast,
Beginning once again to be as iocond as the rest.
But now the time of drowsy midnight had approached nie,
And every stranger made him ready to his bed to hie.
When every man in quiet sort was gone unto his bed,
Therein until the morrow morn to rest his sleepie head.
Amongst the rest there was a fellow of a foolish mind,
Which having eat such meat as hurtful to him he did find.
When all the other strangers did their sleep in quiet take,
He eating overmuch, was troubled with the belly ache.
And therefore was he forced to rise, thinking to walk abroad,
That in the yard, he of his burden might himself unload.
The doors by chance were locked, and therefore he could find no way,
And which was worse then all the rest, he could no longer stay.
In brief, he found the boots upon the bed which there did stand,
The which as soon as ere he felt, he caught them in his hand.
Both hard and soft which hurt his belly, into them he sent,
Which having done, immediately unto his bed he went.
As soon as ere the shining day star began for to appear,
To manifest unto the world that Sols approach was near.
The yonker mindful of the stir which he last night did make,
Began betimes unto his horse himself for to betake.
Providing, on his legs in haste his cleanly boots to pull,
But out alas unhappy man, with dirt the one was full.
What shall he do? if cry, the company will him deride,
Wherefore its best to keep it close and every thing abide.
He must endure it, if hereafter he have any wit,
Unto so bad a crew in haste himself he will not commit.
Suppose thou art a man of credit and of great esteem,
And one which in a city Ruler once or twice have been.
When in a strange and unknown country you arrived are,
It is your best your offices and titles to declare.
Such worship as is requisite they will not to you give,
Unless you brag in what account you in your country live.
But if a means to blaze abroad your name you cannot tell,
And neither any man demands nor knows your worship well:
Then with a most attentive ear, this precept learn of me,
Which if you practice, you in great account with all shall be.
Upon a time, a Doctor to a famous Inn did come,
About the time whenas the world is robbed of the Sun.
And after him there thither came more strangers presently,
It being late, each man forthwith unto his bed did hie.
This Doctor not unto one stranger that was there was known,
And therefore he not once saluted, sadly sat alone.
When all were set to dinner, he was feign to be the last,
And therefore heavily upon the ground his eyes he cast.
He took nor pleasure nor delight with eating of his food,
The store of dainty wines he drunk did him but little good.
To be in honor and account so greatly he did thurst,
That he with care to compass it his heart did almost burst.
Thus having sat awhile, when he with wine was whitled well,
Be this means he occasion took, his calling for to tell:
From off his shaven crown, his Doctors cap he took with speed,
Hoping by means thereof to get some credit at his need.
And hanging it upon a nail which there he did epsy,
Such pleasant words as these, began to speak immediately.
Enough, enough at length of sorrow and of pining care;
It Is time at length to laugh and quaffe with those which merry are.
There hang the Doctor which the crabbed lessons used to read,
Mirth more befits this pleasant crew, this is no time to plead.
Then lest my Doctors name should hinder all my future sport,
And tell me, that it fits not me among roysters to resort:
The title of a Doctor for a while I Will lay aside,
And take it up when I into my native country ride.
When all the strangers in the house the Doctor did behold,
Each man began to think that with him they had been too bold.
And rising, asked pardon of him for that great disgrace,
Intreasing him, as was his due, to choose the highest place.
And every one began a cup of wine to him to drink,
And thus the Doctor got his grace and honor due I think.
When you with any place of public credit graced are,
Or when the City on your neck has laid the public care,
Within thy lofty mind be sure to lodge disdain and scorn,
Because thou know that unto fame and honor thou art borne.
If to abuse thy calling thou do any man permit,
I cannot choose but think, that thou have almost lost thy wit.
I will repeat, although I almost am ashamde to tell,
When great disgrace unto a learned scholar once befell,
When many tedious toils in diverse places he had passt,
By learning he was made a master of his Art at last:
And therefore he with speed into his native country rid,
To see his ancient kinsmen and acquaintance how they did.
And after in that pleasant journey he a day had spent,
Being both weary and be-nighted, to an Inn he went,
Within the self same Inn a maid that night her lodging took,
A maid which had a shining beauty, yet a bashful look.
Their supper being ready made, when every thing was fit,
The scholar by the selfsame virgins side did chance to sit.
Forthwith a lofty kind of pride the scholars mind possessed,
And he desired to be bolder far then all the rest.
He thought it reason that the greatest stranger he should seem,
And so did, for most of them did highly him esteem.
One man there was among the rest which greatly disallowd
In secret sort, that any scholar should be thought so proud.
For having in another place his fellow lately been,
He knew the scholar, and his pride he often before had seen.
Having a wit which he before in diverse jests had tried,
He practisde diverse means whereby the scholar to deride;
Still noting all the foolish tricks which in him he could find,
His only purpose was to make him leave his naughty mind.
The scholar not regarding well this crafty fellows drift,
Because his head did itch, his hand unto the same did lift.
And with his hand his itching head in tender sort did scratch,
From which a cause of great abuse the the other strait did catch.
And then intending certainly his lofty thoughts to break,
Unto him presently these unexpected words did speak:
I pray sir tell me, if as yet those lice about you be,
Which, as you know, upon your body I did lately see?
And is it possible that you no remedy should have,
By that same medicine which to you the Poticarie gave?
Why sure the man I speak of, makes an ointment very well,
And has as many powrefull salves as any man can sell.
These words as if they had been truth he soberly did speak,
And though they were but faind, he into laughter did not break.
The scholar being thus disgraced, was forced to part away,
And putting up this great abuse had not a word to say.
Anger and shame did so his lofty swelling heart confound
His mind which lately pierced the skies, was then upon the ground.
His learned Logic could not then his fading fame defend,
Nor could he be revenged for this discredit of his friend.
By this discredit and ill luck you may example take,
Lest some man in the selfsame sort a fool of you should make.
And if you see a man which unto credit loves to mount,
Which of his neighbors and his friends is held in great account.
It Will be a means, whereby thou may thine own preferment get,
If thou in lower estimation can this peacocke set.
At meat among many gallants once a carter chancd to sit,
And took from forth each dish, such meat as did his stomach fit.
One only cup there was, and every man drunk of the same,
According as in order due, unto his course it came.
At length it came unto the carters course to take a sip,
Which doing, in his course he quite forgot to wipe his lip.
And therefore all the greasy fat which on his lips did cleave,
Within the pot in comely sort he was constrainde to leave.
Which thing when some espide, they did not like it very well,
And yet were loath the country fellow of his fault to tell.
But strait among themselves a statute they did soon invent,
Whereby the like committing of this fault they might prevent.
He which hereafter should infect the wine within the pot,
Should all alone for punishment discharge the future shot.
The Carter, when he saw they did a law against him devise.
Summond his wits, and crossed their purpose in this crafty wise.
The next time that to drink a sip unto his course it came,
Turning the botome to the skies, he tipled off the same.
Which having done, unto the yonkers in this wise he spoke,
You cannot say that I (well meaning man,) your law have broke.
What filth can any of you all find swimming in the pot,
When there is no wine? if you will accuse me, I Will discharge the shot.
Thus did the Carter cosen them without their statutes breach,
And by his over-seeing wit, their craft did overreach.
A common officer was once on an Embassage sent,
And from a needy country to a wealthy king he went.
His bisnes was some naughty wine unto the king to give;
But he which always did before in simple manners live,
As soon as ere the person of the King he did epsy,
In trembling sort for fear of him began alowd to cry.
Thus standing, of his embassage had not a word to say,
But (as the lamb does from the woolfe) would feign have run away.
The King perceiving him to tremble, thus unto him said,
Take courage man, I give thee leave to speak, be not afraid.
At length th'embassador from off his head his hatte did take,
And simply rolling it upon his thumb, a leg did make;
And taking courage, soon could speak as fast as ere he list,
Wherefore he thus began his speech, when all the hall was whist:
Good morrow worthy Prince, which in this place art held so dear,
Attentively such words as I shall speak, vouchsafe to hear.
The Merchants of our country for a truth to us report,
That you (thrice noble King) have store of wine of every sort,
And that among good fellows night and day you love to be,
And eke that you will quaffe and drink as long as you can see;
They therefore hoping thus to make you their unfeigned friend,
Presumed to your majesty this pleasant wine to send.
Such naughty wine as this is, since no better we can get,
We are constrainde to quench our thirsts in great esteem to set,
But seldom thou have tasted this, thou glutted art with thine;
Accept it then, not every man has such a cup of wine.
Which having said, from forth a bag the wine he quickly took,
Entreating him most heartily upon the same to look.
By chance, as thus he reached it forth, he in the same did spy
Some dust, or little straw which on the top thereof did lie,
And thinking upon many shifts whereby to take it out,
His careful eyes in evry corner he did cast about;
By chance as thus he looked about him with a careful mind,
A pair of cleanely snuffers on a table he did find.
Which having thus espide, on points he durst no longer stand;
But thinking they were therefore made, he caught them in his hand;
And boldly with a nimble hand he put them in the cup,
Wherewith from the same the dust and strawes he fished up.
Then to the smiling king he drunk a draught with all his heart,
And without taking leave, into his country did depart.
More drunken tricks concerning wine I would not here repeat,
But that a crew of drunkards earnestly do me entreat.
I long to make an end, and yet so instantly they crave,
That force perforce two other tricks of drunkards you must have.
Such store of sundry wines upon a time a drunkard drank,
That no two kinds amongst them all grew on the selfsame bank.
Each sundry kind within his belly began to pitch its field,
No wine there was among them all which would allegiance yield.
These civil wars the drunkards steepie mind did hardly please,
And therefore thus he began to speak being not well at ease.
I wonder what should be the cause my gots are at such strife,
I never felt such civil war before in all my life.
Tell me, you raging wines, which in me such a tumult keep,
What is the cause that you disturb your master in his sleep?
I charge you, either presently your selves to reconcile,
And lay aside those arms which you have used so long a while.
Or else from forth my bellies bounds I will you banish quite,
I Will spew and belch you up again unless you leave your fight.
Which having said, they venturde still to trouble him again,
Then he a man which scornde to seem to threaten them in vain.
Those wines, in drinking of the which his silver he had spent,
From forth into the empty air from out his belly sent.
Whereby his banished rest unto his guts he did restore,
The battle ceasde, and he was troubled with their strife no more.
If such like fits at any time presume to trouble thee,
Follow but this example and thou quickly shall be free.
If so it chance to thee as unto one it once befell;
Thou well may brag invomiting thou all men shall excel.
Which while as briefly as I can, I do to thee repeat;
If thou will but attentive be, thy profit shall be great.
A sort of good companions once for store of wine did call,
And drunk thereof so largely, that they took no rest at all.
Amongst the rest a beastly knave of belches vtterd store,
A sign which future vomiting does always go before;
Another which was by, from off his head did take his hat,
Promising if he wanted, he should have the use of that.
If thou perchance have need to vomit, this I will thee lend,
And fill it if thou can (quoth he,) because thou art my friend.
Which having said, the fellows stomach began to rise in haste,
So that into the same, great store of wine and meat he cast.
And strait his hat began with meat and wine to overflow,
This was a pleasant smell for him that held the hat I trow.
As soon as ere he saw his hat was spoild therewith indeed,
He thought he would not so give over, but further did proceed.
And on his honest neighbors head presumde the hat to place,
And strait the vomit ran about his shoulders and his face.
Each man began to clap his hands which did the fellow see,
This pleasant trick to all their homours fitly did agree.
The man which vomited, therewith was pleased at the heart,
And after they were all made friends, they homeward did depart.
Farting and belching of Orators, holding your water, and other such like
clownishnes. Chap. VII.
THus far concerning duties when at banquets you do sit,
And now I Will tell those things which are for other places fit.
An Orator unto a foreign country late did go,
Which both in eloquence and counsel did abound and flow.
Before a mighty Princess and a sort of virgins kind,
This eare-inchanting Orator must utter all his mind.
Wherefore obtaining leave to speak, such grace with them he found,
Before he would begin he gravely looked upon the ground.
Which having done, as soon as to begin his speech he meant,
In comely sort for manners sake his knees he gravely bent:
And being full of courtesy, he chancde to bend too low,
And unawares into the air he let a fart to go:
But notwithstanding not a whit ashamed at the deed,
Unto his purpose which he had in hand he did proceed.
Each one dissembling made as if the fart they had not heard,
Except one maid, which all their manners with her laughter marred:
Who while she strivde out of her laughing vain her self to put,
Unhappy she her tender buttockes close she did not shut.
And therefore let a fart, whose pleasant sound was somewhat sharp:
If you had heard it, youlde ha thought t'had been a tuned harp,
He being mindful of his own fault, from his speech did break,
And took occasion in this wise unto the maids to speak;
Proceed in order every one of you (fair Nymphs) proceed,
To give your wind free passage, it will help you at your need.
And when it comes unto my turn to do the same again,
I Will do my best to let another, though my self I strain.
Then strait the maid began to blush seeing her fault was spide,
Her cheeks were did as red as blood, and she her face did hide:
The other maids with store of laughter did their bodies shake,
And thus the Rethoritian of his speech an end did make.
But, for we have begun to speak of learned men indeed,
We will not leave our first intent, but in the same proceed.
Another time there to a princes stately palace came,
An Orator, which by his wit purchasde immortal fame,
With store of costly silks and stately robes he was attirde.
He was a man whom all his country honored and admirde.
As soon as might be he was sent for to the princes hall,
And there had license to pronounce his speech before them all:
Strait into many lofty words he boldly began to break,
And with a stately swelling voice, he thundering words did speak.
But he was forcde by belching every sentence to repeat,
Which was a sign what kinds of cates he yesterday did eat:
It was a fault which from his childhoode he did always use,
And though he labord nere so much, he could it not refuse.
The prince which did attentively behold him, marked the same;
And angry, marveld that he durst presume so much for shame;
And yet he cloakt his wrath, and would into railing break:
But with a pleasant look unto him thus began to speak:
Most learned man, it grieves me not thine eloquence to hear,
For unto it with all my heart I lent my listening ear;
But for because more weighty matters do my presence crave,
The residue thereof to morrow willingly we will have.
Mean time the King devised many policies to use,
Whereby the Rethoritians utterance he might abuse.
As soon as ere the morrow came, the Scholar he did call,
To make an end of his begun Oration in the hall.
By chance a base and simple man was thither sent for too,
Which for a little silver any beastly trick would do:
He was so well a practisde man in farting, that he could
Let farts at any man's commandment whensoere he would.
As soon as ere he came, the king in friendly manner said,
There is a certain feate to do, wherein we lack thine aid.
A Doctors coat and cap upon him he did quickly place,
And told him all things which were fit in such a crafty case:
The Rethoritian spoke as he the day before had done;
And at the end of every sentence, he to belch begun.
The Doctor also not forgetting his enjoined art,
Began at end of every belch most decently to fart.
What shall the Rethoritian do? he first began to chide,
The Doctor for his beastliness which quickly was espide,
Thus thinking to proceed in railing at him for the same,
He thought upon his own offense, and then he blushed for shame.
Which when the King espide, he into laughter strait did break,
And to the blushing Rethoritian thus began to speak:
This Doctor also unto us from foreign countries came
To make a speech: he is a man of great renown and fame.
And as it is your use to belch at every sentence end,
Which in your country as a credit all perhaps commend.
To fart in like sort this our Doctor counts a royal thing;
And as a custom from his country hither does it bring.
Which having said, the Rethoritian strait his leave did take,
Enforced in the middle of his speech an end to make.
A man began to tell a tale of news and manners past,
The Preface of the which, was like an hour or two to last.
To which, one man among the rest gave his attentive ear,
As being willing that which he recited for to hear.
Mean time his bladder was so full, no more it could sustain,
(The keeping of the urine, often breeds mickle pain)
But (foolish man,) the present tale so much he did effect,
That he durst hardly stir, lest he the story should neglect,
By chance he had a little purse made of a Squirrels skin,
Which lately he provided had, to keep his money in.
He thought it better this his purse with urine for to fill,
Then loosing of that pleasant story, so to want his will.
He knew that urine held too long, did often danger bring,
And therefore carefully prevented such a future thing.
Not long a go, a Doctor which in learning well was taught,
By this means, most unluckily unto his end was brought.
Amongst a sort of gallant maids he in a coach did ride,
Encompassed with store of bashful maids on every side.
Not many hours amongst the youthful virgins he had sat,
Talking of chaste virginity, and such like harmless chat.
But that his bladder being filld with urine to the brim,
Some speedy passage privately it did demand of him.
And yet to stir from forth the coach he would not take the pain,
Thinking it better any pain or peril to sustain,
He was so chaste, that rather then he would trouble maid or wife,
He thought it better far to stand in danger of his life.
At length, his bladder with such store of urine was ore-lade,
That all his bowels burst, and so the water passage had.
And he within a day or two was forced his life to leave,
This was the profit which by shamefastnes he did receave.
Wherefore, lest thou the like incur, refuse not any thing,
Rather then thus thy self in danger of thy life to bring.
I think it good the tale which follows to recite to thee,
Because it is a tale which argues great Simplicity.
Of late, a clown which all the tricks of former times did know,
And livde therein, for these our days can none so simple show,
Came to an ancient friend of his whom long he had not seen,
And when that store of friendly talk had passed them between;
At length they came (as strangers use) to couple hand in hand,
It is a right on which old friends do often use to stand.
But first to make his nostrels clean, the clown would be so bold,
And all the snot which thence he took he in his hand did hold,
And then his ancient friend he boldly by the hand did take,
Saying, lo, heeres a sign how much of thee (my friend) I make.
The cause why thus he did, was this, he in great fear did stand,
Lest that perhaps the tothers fist should hurt his tender hand.
Wherefore to ease his palm with soft and tender fleame he meant,
That he thereby the future blow the better might prevent.
A thousand such like tricks as these I could to thee repeat,
The practice of the which would make thy fame and credit great,
But that I know this little book of mine too long would be,
If all things which my self have seen I should recite to thee.
If by thy wit the things which I have told thou practice can,
I doubt not but thou soon wilt prove a rude and simple man.
Flaccus himself desires in precepts brevitie to find,
That so they may be kept the better in the Scholars mind;
And yet those precepts which are writ in the end of this my book,
Since they be few, you ought upon them carefully too look:
The simple life of country farmers which the field do plow,
And all their rusticke tricks must be esteemed dear of you.
Those things which other curious Critickes do exhort thee to,
Neglect them all, with gravitie you nothing have to do:
If some men you can cross, and stir up laughter unto some,
You need not care for any more, your duty you have done.
And now (well nurturde youth) I bid thee kindly to farewell,
And think on all those wholesome rules which I to thee did tell.
Grobiana, or concerning fitting virgins, both at home and abroad, in banquets,
and diverse other places. Chapter VIII.
ME thinks already I have said enough of manners rude,
And therefore willingly this present book I would conclude.
But that the tender virgins do so earnestly entreat,
That some few precepts for their use, I also would repeat.
What shall I do? consent or no? whether will prove the best?
To do as they require, or contradict their just request?
The last I will not do; attend, attend, you virgins all,
Behold a man which is preparde and ready at your call.
Some precepts I will give, whereby your manners for to frame,
They shall be few, but you shall reap great profit by the same.
It is not need for your instruction many tricks to tell,
You are so prone, that all men you in clownish tricks excel.
Nature her self, which scorns the help of any others trade,
Unto all kinds of vice your sect most tractable has made.
Yet notwithstanding that which unto me Apollo told,
Since all I speak is true, to tell it you I dare be bold.
You maids which neither modest, honest, nice, nor bashful are,
Approach, and for your profits of my precepts have a care.
When through a public city streets to wander you desire,
(For my part, I am not enforced to look to your attire.)
Permit your wandering gadding eyes in every place to be,
So that before, behind, on every side, you all may see.
The mind which nere committed any trespass may be bold,
Each man, each thing in every corner, freely to behold.
And with a brazen forehead, look the prowdest in the face,
Let those look down which for offense have suffered some disgrace.
With both your hands in comely sort hold up your coats you may,
If as you walk, you chance to enter any dirtie way.
Let both your knees and eke your milke-excelling thighs be spide,
But go no further; parts which higher are you ought to hide.
By this means, many yonkers hearts and favors you shall have,
And some will of your parents for their wedded wife you crave.
What though perchance your stockings are bespotted all with dirt,
Yet if I should espy them, I should think it little hurt.
It argues that about your business diligent you are,
And of the thing which you have took in hand, you have a care.
This maid about her buisnes with such care and foresight goes,
That she can scarce find idle time to rub her durtie hose.
To show your bosom unto all, and eke your naked breast,
Because it is a very comely sight, I hold it best.
Your tender dugges and snow-white neck must be beheld of all,
Which when some wenching youth espies, in love with you he will fall,
I neither will so senseless nor so bashful ever be,
But that I will desire a maid in such a case to see.
Those lovely parts which may be seen of all men, all will love,
But no man chooses hidden things, before he do them prove.
As thus you walk to take your pleasure in the dirtie street,
If with a wench which your acquaintance was, you chance to meet.
You need not with good morrow, nor good den begin to speak,
But bluntly into talk of diverse weighty matters break.
Maids and great mishaps there are, which many men oppress,
Which they (poor souls,) are forced to bear with patience ne'rethelesse.
Their parents hard and crabbed sensure often they must abide,
With cruel words, and bitter taunts, their daughters often they chide.
Their cursed and crabbed mistress, makes them oftentimes to weep,
When she their tender necks in choler churlishly does keep.
And young men also do their trusty lovers often deceave,
When promising to marry them, alone they do them leave.
Of these, and such like things, to her be sure thy plaint to make,
That use of tongue which Nature gave thee, freely thou may take.
Your sect has store of eloquence, its weakness to defend,
That gift to woman-kinde I think great Jove himself did send.
Then since it is your gift to talk, have something still to say,
With trifling matters it is good to drive the time away.
For ten hours space at least your talk begun had need to last,
By no means you must cease till then, although you have great haste.
Mean time, (although when maids lack words it is a strange event,)
If you perchance lack words wherewith the time for to prevent.
The tricks and acts of other men begin for to repeat,
Of such things you shall matter have, all day for to entreat.
What rules and precepts to their folks your neighbors use to give.
As also in what order they themselves do use to live.
What meat your neighbors board affoords, what drink he most does drink,
What store of cattle he does keeepe, how rich he is you think.
These things, and such as these, and many an hundred thousand more,
If you lack things whereof to talk, will yield you matter store.
Speak boldly any thing of any man that him may vex,
You have a privilege thereto, by reason of your sex.
And yet if with your words you any honest man defame,
I would not have you say that I was author of the same.
By this time you have ceasde from prating with your loving friend,
Begin at length rejecting trifles homeward for to bend.
As home you go, with pears, with nuts, with apples you shall meet,
Which men and women use to sell to those that walk the street.
You for a penny or three halfe-pence may as many buy,
As will your dainty costardmonging stomach satisfy.
As you go homeward in the street you may them boldly eat,
No man I think will blame a maid for eating of her meat.
If any chance to mock thee, tell them they are all thine own.
Thou paidst for them, not one by him upon thee was bestowne.
Mean time perchance unto the city Players there are come,
Which round about the town proclaim their Play by sownd of drum.
Unto the vulgars store of feats and active tricks they will show,
That they upon them to maintain them, something may bestow.
Many profane and base, both words and actions they will have,
Which are mislikte of such as are of life and manners grave.
And yet it is thy duty unto every word to hark,
And all their gestures and their actions carefully to mark.
To all their wanton words, you your attentive ear must give,
According unto that you hear, hereafter you must live,
Whether you naughty words do hear, or beastly sights do see,
To blush at either of them both is not beseeming thee.
For one which for some great offense has suffered some disgrace,
You will be thought, if blushing colors are within your face.
Let nothing in your cheeks a red unseemly color raise,
Keep still this rule, there can be found no nearer way to praise.
All men will think that you the way to vice did never know,
If in your gestures you no sign of blushing use to show.
But if you use to laugh alowd as if that you were mad,
All men will think that of my Book the practice you have had.
Think it not any great disgrace to make thy self a mate,
At such like feasts as old and young do use to celebrate.
But if thou will give ear unto my precepts, and to me,
At such like banquettings as these thou present often shall be.
For among a sort of youths whose wits are sharp with store of beer,
Great store of things convenient for thy purpose thou may hear;
Which to thy simple life thou may apply I tell thee plain,
Amongst such men in such like places, clownishnes does reign.
I tell you maid, it is no trifle closely for to spy
Those vices which in young men's manners closely use to lie.
When wine does rule them, all their secret counsels you may find,
Wine is a great betrayer and bewrayer of the mind.
Perchance there at the present feast will also drunken be,
Thy love, thou then may know the affection which he bears to thee:
And that his meaning and intent thou may the better prove,
Thou oughtst to have a care to sit the next unto thy love.
When he is drunk, to all his deeds and words thou oughtst to hark,
And with a careful eye how many pots he drinks, to mark.
Perchance the wine and you may urge him promise for to make,
That very shortly for his loving wife he will you take.
If he consent, love domineering over the captive boy,
You must not hide your love too long, nor must you be too coy.
Begin to drink a cup of wine unto him for his sake,
Thy good example will enforce the youth more wine to take.
And having took the cup, be sure to drink off every drop,
Although the wine be strong and old, and filld unto the top.
Entreat thy love to pledge thee; then begin thy cup to fill,
And tell him that you drank it off, to purchase his good will:
If then for manners sake thy love begin to thee again,
You cannot shun it, kindly it to take you shall be feign.
And at one draught, because your lover does the same desire,
You ought to drink it off, for so your youthful years require.
Inchaunted with thy kindenes then his love he will impart,
Which he so long in secret sort, had nourisht in his heart.
And then by many public signs his love he will betray,
Which from you he so long before in jest had kept away.
Then heel begin to hold your tender dugs within his hand,
And range in all those snowie vales which round about them stand.
Which while he does, in loving sort you ought to sit at ease,
I know this likes you well, and therefore cannot me displease.
It is no hurt to me; and yet thus much you ought to know,
If this you suffer, you your credites crack must undergo:
Your credit and your honest name may quickly both be lost:
But to repair them both again, a greater price twill cost.
When thus your love is surely drunk, you ought of him to know,
With fawning words what gifts he means upon you to bestow.
He needs must yield, for with a double wound he gins to pine,
The one with love of thee, the other store of strongest wine,
Though many gifts he give, and also promise greater store,
Yet be not thou ashamed still to ask him more and more.
Though many great rewards he give thee, never be content;
Tell him he spares, and all his goods on other maids are spent,
And yet sometimes that greater gifts of him you may procure,
To send some little gift or token unto him be sure.
I purpose not in this my Book to teach you Ovids art,
My scope is nothing like, my precepts do from him depart.
If you to scoff or mock your faithful lover have a mind.
I tell you plain in my book no such counsel you shall find.
But if you with a careful mind Pelignus verses read,
Heel teach you perfectly in these my rusticke lines to tread.
In former times it was accounted as a special grace,
A garland made of sweetest flowers in your head to place:
But since that this no other maids but country vulgars did,
To set such garlands on your head I flatly you forbid.
Indeed the former simple ages did the same approve;
But these our latter times do other finer garments love.
Such things as are too vulgar, are of us dispraised quite,
The world does nowadayes in newer fashions more delight.
Wherefore, hang you a garland on your nose in pleasant wise,
That it may cover almost half your forehead and your eyes.
But lest you should suppose my counsel foolish for to be;
Attend, and you a reason of my counsel strait shall see.
Thus much you know, the garland that you wear must needs be made,
Of finest herbs and flowers sweet, which will not quickly fade.
You may delight your tender nosthrils with the pleasant smell;
And of your brain twill also be accepted very well,
That smell into the empty air with current passage goes,
Unless your garland made of flowers, hang upon your nose.
Be not ashamed always in your arms a whelp to bear,
Wherewith you may both sport and play, whense're you idle are.
When in your belly you have any painful rumbling fart,
Which does begin (unhappy wench) to grieve thee at the heart.
The same you boldly ought into the empty air to send,
Which with its gripes and pinchings did your bowels much offend.
Perchance the smell thereof offends some person in that place,
Beginning shamelesly the maker of it to disgrace.
Your little dog to save your credit then is very fit,
Blame only him, as if that he your trespass did commit.
Say that it was he, and none but he, that did the air perfume;
To contradict you in this case, there is no man dares presume.
Twixt fleas and women there was strife ere since the world begun
Ane will (I think) continue also, till the same be done:
The crafty flea in little holes and corners still does he;
And in the night (which is her day) she pricks your tender thigh.
And into women's tender skins her biting beak she will thrust,
Where she will feed upon them, till she ready be to burst.
This pain does in the night from sleep the maidens so awake,
That they are forede for aid themselves unto their arms to take.
Wherefore, if any such like foe thy tender skin offend,
Betake thee to thy weapons strait thy body to defend.
Whether it be at home that she presumes thee to assail,
Or against you when you are abroad hopes better to prevail,
You need not care though never so many men be standing by,
Which will your cruelty against the nimble flea espy.
But having cast off all your clothes, seek you your secret foe,
That he the punishment which he deservde may undergo.
In valiant sort from forth his lurking den the captive bring,
Let no man there beg pardon for his life for any thing.
The rest perceiving this your cruelty will have a care,
Lest feeding on your tender skin they also taken are.
It is impossible that you in rest should ever live,
Unless his deaths wound unto some one enemy you give.
But now lest you should think some precepts wanting for to be,
A trick which thou must immitate I must propound to thee.
A public meeting once there was, within an ancient town,
And many weighty matters heard, fore men of great renown.
Hither a certain woman came their orders for to know,
Desiring to have notice how each matter there did go.
When she with great attention had many hours past
Her belly filld too full with meat, began to ache at last.
The meat which she digested had, began of her to crave,
That if she lovde her health, with speed some passage it might have.
She taking in the matters handling pleasure at the heart,
Having so good a place, was loath from forth it to depart,
By chance she had a bag, wherein great store of books there was,
Because she was an holy maid, and given much to mass;
Into the which her bellies grief she presently did put,
And staid to hear all matters ended, having easde her gut.
If you will take my counsel, you this trick shall often pervse,
Perchance there will occasion come when you the same shall use.
But (foolish as I am) the lingering time what need I spend?
Since all which is to come behind, in three words I might end.
Those wholesome precepts which I lately unto yongmen gave,
To serve your turn whenas you lack you may them also have:
But yet I dare not say that all their precepts will be fit,
But take the best, as for the worst, to others them commit.
Exspect, nor love, nor praise, of those which wise and honest are,
And as for pleasing crabbed Sophisters, take you no care.
But as your Tutor I command, be always sure to live,
And have a care unto my yoke your captive neck to give.
My self the straightest way that is, to modesty will lead,
You cannot err, nor go amiss, if in my steps you tread.
A greater store of precepts yet to you repeat I might,
In practice of the which, you could not choose but take delight.
But that my muse me to my bed to rest my self does send,
Commanding me of this my moral book to make an end.
Wherefore farewell, If by my book you any profit take,
I ask no more but this, defend it for its Authors sake.
The Authors conclusion to Master Simon Bing, wherein he shows all the intent
and practice of this present work.
THis raging sea (most dear friend Bing,) with good success at last,
Helped by thy friendly Pilots hand, my tattred ship has past:
If to the waters mercy I had trusted all alone,
I know my ship had long ago with waves been over-throwne.
But your exspected kindenes without faintnes did me lead,
Enticing me with fearelesse heart, in paths unknown to tread.
I think that you unto my ship a gentle hand did send,
By whose conducture this my boat obtainde its hoped for end.
My ship at length has found the haven which she did desire,
And now in quiet from such boistrous waters will retire.
Although perhaps I nothing got, but labor for my pain,
And cannot as I would, the mark at which I aimde attain.
Yet is your favor ne'rethelesse, the fault my self commit,
All the defect which can be found, is in my slender wit.
But since it can no better be, with this I am content,
That I have hit the mark as well as I to hit it meant.
Wherefore the ship with all the sails I dedicate to thee,
That by thy care from after-claps it may defended be.
Lest any swelling storms should hurt it being torn and weak,
Or future tempests by their raging blasts, the same should break.
For what availes it to have caught the long desired shore?
Or to have escaped those gulfes which safely we have passed over?
Unless your wonted love and kindenes do me still pursue,
And I hereafter also may enjoy the love of you.
Although my ship at haven stands, yet when the winds do blow,
The raging waves which rise, my ship may quickly overthrow.
But your good will may as an anchors vnremoved stay
My wavering ship from all mischances when it lies at bay.
To take tuition of my verse, of thee I humbly crave,
And (gentle Bing,) be sure of it unfeigned care to have,
If that the matter and the method be but liked of thee,
I hope of no man else my pains can much misliked be.
It may be, few or none at all, will much esteem my verse,
Because in civil sort my jests I use not to rehearse.
Some men perchance will therefore not my painful labors love,
Because forsooth my verses do not store of laughter move.
What though some other think my verses loathsome, base, and vile?
Because forsooth they are not written in a lofty style.
Will therefore every man condemn my labor and my pain?
Is both my care, my time, and toil consumed all in vain?
I cannot tell, I look for better fortune; for I know,
Though this my work will unto some both base and loathsome show
Yet some there are I know, which will my painful work applaude,
And it is as much as I desire of some to merit laud.
Within my book no praise-deserving precepts written are,
Nor any salves which from the mind have force to banish care.
And yet unless that my conjecture does me much deceive,
He which pervseth well this book, some profit may receive.
Manners which clownish are, I have set down in clownish wise,
Which I have set in careful sort before the vulgars eyes.
Most of the tricks which I have writ, my self before did see,
The rest, a trusty friend of mine repeated unto me.
And some thereof, (it is no shame to tell the naked truth,)
My self (as I was apt thereto,) committed in my youth.
Among all the precepts which my book contains, there is not one,
Whose author (be they never so clownish,) is to me unknown.
They much pervse my book, (if any man such pains will take,)
Doubtless this gain (if nothing else,) they shall be sure to make.
I know some pretty cleanly trick or other he shall read,
Wherein he knows that he himself before did often tread.
When he espies some trick agreeing to his manners fit,
Which in a youthful merry vain he whilome did commit.
The blushing red which in his visage to and fro will pass,
Will make him think, that of that fault he whilome guilty was.
And lest hereafter such a blush his reading should offend,
He will have better care his life and manners to amend.
And for because in mirth and pleasant manner I have writ,
Such things as I supposed for my present purpose fit.
I doubt not but some sorts of men will very thankful be,
And sure I think for all my pains so much they owe to me.
But thou which movedst me to write, (for only for thy sake,
And no man's else (friend Bing,) I did this labor undertake.)
Shall for the mentioning hereof, have an eternal fame,
And all the future times will daily think upon thy name.
Each man which does peruse this book, to thee will render praise,
Because from dark oblivions rage, thou only did it raise.
And though the readers still should render store of thanks to you,
Yet could they not to such a patron render more then due.
For doubting whither such a trifle I abroad should send,
Which I at idle times a while before had rashly pend.
Knowing it was no work whereon the learned ought to look,
Because the Muses every one were absent from my book.
He having seen the work before, persuaded me at last,
From forth my mind such abject thoughts and causeless fear to cast.
And boldly at the length, to bring my Poem into light,
That others also for their use and profit read it might.
I knowing that in friendly sort he counseled for the best,
Agreed to publish it according to my friends request.
Wherefore as long as any shall accept of this my pain,
As long as this my book in use and credit shall remain.
So long Bings name shall live inspight of black oblivious blot,
The name of him in future time shall never be forgot.
The hidden sparks of virtue which inclosde in him do lie,
Do merit that their masters name and fame should never die.
The Muses all, and those which of them favorites do prove
He holds in great account, and most entirely them does love.
Those which to virtue and to learning all their minds will give,
He does promote and gives them riches wherewithal to live.
But nowadaies, to find a learned scholar it is hard,
So few there are which such a jem as learning do regard.
Rather then learning, any other kind of life thei'le choose,
They love in base maechanicall Arts their youthful age to loose.
All means they try, and all too few their riches to provide,
They pass the richest Lydian king in scorn, disdain, and pride.
The mark which each man nowadaies desires for to hit,
Is most abundant store of wealth and riches for to get.
And therefore, oftentimes they catch a most deserved fall,
By running whetherse're the gods of riches do them call.
Mean time, those holy Nimphs which on Pernassus hill do keep,
For want of suitors, ever unfrequented sit and weep.
But thou which love learning, wilt not such abuse permit,
That goddesses should unfrequented without succor sit.
Those which are learned thou do love, because thou learned art,
All aid and favor which thou can to them, thou do impart.
Proceed, proceed, as thou beginst thy bounty to declare,
And as thou do, of painful scholars still to have a care.
So in this world eternal fame and credit you shall gain,
And in the world to come, a full reward you shall attain,
There can no straighter paths be found nor any nearer ways
Then these, whereby to merit store of everlasting praise.
Wherefore proceed to love the learned as thou have begun,
And have a care to cherish them as always thou have done.
Continue long my friend, and with a kind and loving look,
Vouchsafe for to accept my gift, this little merry book.
If Fortune and the Gods above upon my purpose smile,
You shall have better fruits then these within this little while.
The end of the last book of Grobianus and Grobiana.

