WORK FOR Armorours: OR, The Peace is Broken.

Open wars likely to happin this year 1609: God help the Poor, The rich
can shift.

Sauit toto Mars impius Orb. Written by THOMAS DEKKER.

IN DOMINO CON^^^DO


LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter dwelling in Poules Churchyard at the
sign of the Pide bull, near S. Austins gate* 1609.

The chief things contained in this Book.
The preparation of two mighty Armies to come into the field.
Their leaders names.
Their Discipline.
The place of Battle.
The manner of their weapons.
The Evils that follow both Armies.
To the Worthy deseruer of that Ancient and honorable Title, Sir THOMAS HEVVET
Knight.
SIR THOMAS,
YOu shall behold drawn (on this paper) certain Plat-formes of ground, upon
which two mighty, and (almost) invincible Armies are this present Summer to
join Battle: Here you may know what Trenches they cast up, what
fortifications they raise, what Rampires, what Parapets, what Counterscapes,
etc. Let it not appear strange, that from the Regiment of knights Military, I
make choice of you, to be a Chief in ^e best of these armies (you being no
professed Warrior.) But I my self serve on the one side, and the World marks
you out to be an able Commander in the other. Before the Allarum be struck
up, behold I offer my self (and all the forces which I lead) into your hands.
With the Pen, (a most dangerous piece of Artillery) do I use to come into the
field: That shall be discharged to do you all the Honor it may, and I be
ready, in any service fitting such a soldier, to Fight.

Yours under the Colors of your Love, Thomas Dekker.

To all that either have been, or still are the professors of Arms* And to all
those that, to win Fame, have now an intent or desire to follow the Wars.
SOVLDIERS,
ANd to a Name more full of ancient Honor, or of more Honorable worth, I
cannot speak: You have for a long time scarce made saving voyages into the
Field: So far as the Red Sea (of blood) have you venturde, and yet instead of
Purchasing Glory, have brought home nothing but Contempt and Begg^ry, or
atleast little or no money. The Hollander and the Spaniard have been (and I
think still are) your best Lords and Masters: If ever Captains did pray,
they have prayed for them only. Cutlers and Armorers, have got more by them
within these few years, then by any four Nation (besides them) in
Christendom all their whole lives. But for this Beyond Sea quarrel, the people
of this utmost end of the world (if all the Fence Schools had been put down
too) had (I think) forgotten how to handle their weapons. The Low Countries
therefore have (in Renown) gone beyond kingdoms of higher Fame, only for
thus repairing and keeping open those old and Ruinated Temples of Bellona,
which had been shut up in these latter Ages, and stood despised because
defaced. Yet even those Dutch wars, have been unto you that served in them,
but as wares in these dead times are to Merchants and Tradsemen: you were the
richer for having them in your hands, but you had not such hot doings, as you
desired. You came often to the cracking of crowns, but never to the true
cutting of throats: your Commanders had too much of the Martial Theoricke,
your soldiers too little of the Practicke. But be of good courage, the wind
shifts his point, better days are coming up, the sick world lies on the
Mending hand: For in this present year of 1609 drums will be struck up, and
colors spread, under which you may all fight, and all have good pay: Forsake
therefore the towns where you lie ingarison'd (during this Abstinence from
war) leave your drinking there, sithence here you may be in action, and
drink healths in blood; The battle is expected, the place appointed, the
General's well known, the Armie's leauying, their munition preparing: If you
desire either to be Voluntaries, or to be Pressed, give your names presently: for
this is the Muster-booke, Farewell.

T. D.

Wars.
THe purple whip of vengeance, (the Plague having beaten many thousands of me^,
women, and children to death, and still marking the people of this City,
(every week) by hundreds for the grave, is the only cause, The miseres that a
Plague brings to Men
that al her Inhabitance walk up and down like mourners at some great solome
funeral, the City her self being the Chief mourne^s. The poison of this
Lingering infection, strikes so deep into all men's hearts, that their cheeks
(like cowardly Soldiers) have lost their colors* their eyes, (as if they were
in debt, and durst not look abroad,) do scarce peep out of their heads; and
their tongues (like physicians ill paid) give but cold comfort. By the power of
their Pestilent Charms, all merry meetings are cut off. All frolic assemblyes
dissolved, and in their circles are raised up, the Black, Sullen and Dogged
spirits of Sadness, of Melancholy, and so (consequently) of Mischief* Mirth
is departed, and lies dead and buried in men's bosoms, Laughter dares not look
a man in the face; Jests, are (like Music to the Deaf, not regarded:
Pleasure it self finds now no pleasure, but in Seghing, and Bewailing the
Miseries of the Time. For (alack) what string is there (now) to be played upon
whose tench can make as merry? Play Houses, Play Houses stand empty.
stand (like Tauernes, that have cast out their Masters) the doors locked up,
the Flagges (like their Bushes) taken down, or rather like Houses lately
infected, from whence the affri^ed dwellers are fled, in hope to live better in
the Country. The Players themselves did never work till now, there Comodies
are all turned to Tragedies, there Tragedies to Nocturnals, and the best of
them all are weary of playing in those Nocturnall Tragedies. Think you to
delight your Poets walk in melancholy.
selves by keeping company with our Poets? Proh Dolor! their Muses are more
Sullen then old Monkeys, now that money is not stirring, they never Plead
cheerfully, but in their Term times, when the T^o-peny Chents, and Penny
Stinkards swarm together to here the Stagerites: Playing vocations (...) dant
proce^es neque hi^riones.
are Diseases now as common and as hurtful to them, as the Foul Evil to a
Northen Man, or the Pox to a French man. O Pitiful Poetry, what a lamentable
prentiship have thou served, and (which is the greatest spite) caust not yet be
made Free! no, no, there is no good doings in these days but amongst Lawyers,
amongst Vintners, in Bawdy houses and at Pimlico. There is all the Music,
(that is of any reckning) there all the meetings, there all the mirth, and
there all the many. To walk every day into the fields is wearisome; to drink
up the day and night in a Tavern, loathsome: to be ever rydiug upon that
Beast with two Heads, Letchery) most damnable, and yet to be ever idle, is as
detestable. ^nauum (...) ot^ ^rpus.


What merry Gale shall we then wish for? unless it be to Ferry over the
Hellespont, and to cross from Sestus to Abidus, that is to say, from London to
the Bear Garden? The company of the Bears hold together still; they play
their Tragi-Comaedies ^he Bears are ^dly put ^wne.
as lively as ever they did: The pide Bull here keeps a tossing and a roaring,
when the Red Bull dares not stir. Into this I Will of Dogs did I therefore
transport my self, after I had made trial of all other pastimes.

No sooner was I entered but the very noise of the place put me in mind of Hell:
the bear (dragd to the stake) showed ^ris garden an ^age of hell.
like a black rugged soul, that was Damned, and newly committed to the
infernal Charle, the Dogs like so many Devils, inflicting torments upon it.
But when I called to mind, that al their tugging together was but to make sport
to the beholders, I held a better and not so damnable an opinion of their
beastly doings: for the Bears, or the Bulls fighting with the dogs, was a
lively represe^tation (me thought) of poor men going to law with the rich and
mighty. The dogs (in whom I figured the poor creatures) and fitly may I do
so, because when they stand at the door of Dives, they have nothing (if they
have the^ but bare bones thrown unto Poor men co^tending with rich men, are
as dogs fighting with Bears.
them, might now and then pinch the great ones, and perhaps vex them a little
by drawing a few drops of blood from them: but in the end, they commonly were
crushed, and either were carried away with ribs broken, or their skins torn
and hanging about their ears, or else (how great so ever their hearts were at
the first encounter) they (stood at the last) whining and barking at their
strong Adversaries, when they durst not, or could not bite them. At length a
blind Bear was tied to the stake, and in stead of baiting him with dogs, a
company of creatures that had the shapes of men, and faces of christians (being
either Colliers, Carters, or watermen) took the office of Beadles upon them,
and whipped monsieur Hunkes, till the blood ran down his old shoulders: It was
some sport to see Innocence triumph over Tyranny, by beholding Innocence
punished.
those unnecessary tormentors go away with scratchd hands, or torn legs from a
poor Beast, armed only by nature to defend himself against Violence: yet me
^hought this whipping of the blind Bear, moved as much pity in my breast
toward him, as ye leading of poor starued wretches to the whipping posts in
London (when they had more need to be relieved with food) ought to move the
hearts of Citizens, though it be the fashion now to laugh at the punishment.

The last Chorus that came in, was an old Ap^e dressed up in a coat of
changeable cullers (on horseback) ^d he rode No slave li^ the soothing v^ of
fools in their vices.
his circuit with a couple of curres muzled, that like two footmen ran on each
side of his old Apes face, ever and anon lea^ing up toward him and making a
villainous noise with their chappes, as if they had had some great suites to his
Apishues, and that he by the haste he ^ade had no leisure to hear such base
and bashful Petitioners.

The hunny that I sucked out of this weed, was this: That by seeing these, I
called to mind the unfortunate condition of Soldiers and old seruitors, who
when the storms of troubles are blown over, being curbd of means and so
hurying that courage and worth that is in their bosoms, are compeld (by the
vileness of the time) to follow ye heels of Asses with gay trappings, not
daring so much as once to open their lips in reprehension of those apish
beastly and ridiculous vices, upon whose monstrous backs they are carried up
and down the world, and they are flattered only for their greatness, whilst
those of merit live in a slavish subjection under them.

No pleasure thus, nor any place being able to give perfect contentment to the
mind: I left swimming in those common sensual streams, wherein the world
has been Nulla est sincera ^oluptas.
so often in danger of being drowned, and waded only in those clear brooks,
whose waters had their currents from the springs of learning. I spent my hours
in reading of Histories, and for the laying out of a little time, received
larger interest then the greatest usurers do for their money. By looking on
those perspectiue glasses. I beheld kingdoms and people a far off, came
acquainted with their Excellence of Histories.
manners, their policies, their government, their risings, and their
downefalles: was present at their battles, and (without danger to my self)
unless it were in greeuing to see States so overthrown by the mutabilitie of
Fortune, I saw those Empires utterly brought to subu^rsion, which had been
terrors and triumphers over all the nations upon earth. The back of Time
which was next to mine eye, (because he was gone from me) was written full of
Tragical wonders: but the hinder part of his reverend head was bare and made
bald by men's abusing it. O Histories! you sovereign balmes to the bodies of
the dead, that preserve them more fresh then if they were alive, keep ye fames
of Princes from perishing, when marble monuments cannot save their bones from
being rotten, you faithful entelligensers, between Kingdoms and Kingdoms,
your truest counselors to Kings, even in their greatest dangers! Have thou an
ambition to be equal to Princes! read such books, as are the Chronicles of
Ages, gone before thee: there there may thou find lines drawn (if virtue be
thy guide) ^t quae mox imitere legas. Discitur hinc nulles (...) is obsistere
c^sus.
to make thee parallel with the greatest Monarch: would thou be above him,
there is ye scale of him ascending. Huntst thou after glory? mark in those
paths how others have run, and follow thou in the same course. Art thou ficke
in mind? (and so to be diseased, is to be sick even to ye death) there shall
thou find physic to cure thee. Art thou sad? where is sweeter music then
in reading? Art thou poor? Discitur hinc quantum paupertas sobrea p^ssit.
open those closets, and inualuable treasures are powered into thy hands.

Whilst I dwelt upon the contemplation of this happiness, the dreams of
Infants were not more harmless then my thoughts were, nor the slumbers of a
conscience that has no sting to keep it waking more delicate then the music
which I found in reading: but the sweetest flower has his withering, and every
pleasure his ending. This full Sea had a quick fall, and the day that was
warm and bright in the morning, had frosts and gloomy darkness to spoil the
beauty of it ere it grew to be noone: for on a sudden all the air was filled
with noise, as if heaven had bin angry, and chid the earth for her Villainies,
people rush headlong A Commotion.
together, like torrents running into the sea, full of fury in show, but
loosing the effect of doing violence because they know not how to do it, their
rage and madness burning in them like fire in wet straw, it made a great
stinking smoke, but had no flame. Wildness and afrightment were ill
fauouredly drawn in every face, as if they had all come from acting some fresh
murder, and that at every step they were pursued, arm was cried, and swords
were drawn, but either they had no hearts to strike, or no hands, for (like so
many S. Georges on horseback) they threatened, but gave not a blow, every one
fearing to smite first, least the rest should make that an occasion to kill him
for beginning the quarrel. But at the last drun^nes were heard to thunder, and
trumpets to sound alarums, murmr ran up and down every street, and
confusion did beat at the gates of every City, men met together, and ran in
herds like Dear frighted, or rather like Bears chased, or else seeking for
prey. But what wild beasts (think you) were these that thus kept such a
roaring? it was a people savage and desperate, a nation patchd up (like a
beggars cloak of ye worst pieces) O quantum ^git (...)
that could be gathered out of all nations and put into one. They were more
scattered then the Jews, and more hated, more beggarly then the Irish, and
more uncivil, more hardy then the Switzers, and more brutish: given to drink,
more then the Dutch, to pride more then the French, to irreligion more then the
Italian. They were like the Dunkirkes, a mingle mangle of countries, a
confusion of languages, yet all understanding one another. Such as the people
VVha^ vices are compani on^ (for the most p^) with poverty.
were, such was the Princess whom they followed, she had all their conditions,
and they all hers, seeming to be made for no other purpose then to govern
them, because none else could be bad enough to be their governor. They obeyed
her not for love, nor fear, but made her only great amongst them, because it
was their will to have it so, she (amongst a number of vices, that reigned in
her) having only this virtue of a Prince, not to see her people take wrong.

Into arms therefore as well for her own chastity as defense The quarrel
between money and poverty.
of her subjects does she dote^ine to put her self presently. A faithful and
serious ^tion mad^ I to understand the cause of this sudden and universal
uproar, and by true intelligence (from persons o^ (...) side) found that ye
quarrel was old, the e^ty mortal, the enemies puissant and fierce, many
leagues had been made, and all were broken, Di^is ^um est auri.
no conditions of peace would now be looked upon, open war must be the the
sword to st^ke open wrong.

The fires (kindled by Guizian Leagues) set not France in hotter combustions
then these are likely to prove if the flames in time be not wisely quenched.
The showers of Ciuell wars of France.
blood which once rained down upon the heads of the two kingly families in
England, never drowned more people, Division of the two Houses.
not that brave Roman tragedy acted in our time, at ye battle of Neuport, not
the siege of Bommell, where heads flew from sholders faster then bullets from
the Cannon. No, nor all those late acts of war and death, commenced by
Hispaniolized Netherlanders, able to make up a Chronicle to hold all the world
reading: did ever give rumor cause to Low country wars.
speak so much as the battles of these two mighty enemies (so mortally
falling out) will force her to proclaim abroad, unless they grow to a
reconcilement, to which, by the conjecture of all strangers, that have
travailed into both their dominions, and know the hot and ambitious spirits of
the quarrellers, they cannot easily be drawn: for no one pair of scales being
able to hold two Kings at one time: and this law being engraven on ye very
inside of every Kings crown (because it is the wedding ring of his Empire to
which he is the Bridegroom) that, Nulla fides socijs Regni: omnisque
potestas, Impatiens Consortis erit.

At the stern of a kingdom, two Pilots must not sit, nor principality endure
a partner, and again, that Non capit Regnum duos,

A Kingdom is heaven, and loves not two suns shining in it. How is it
possible, or how agreeable to ye politic grounds of state, that two such
potentates should be united in firm friendship, sithence their quarrel is
derived from an equal claim of soueraignety.

Over Cities is there ambition to be Superiors, yet not together but alone.
and not only over London (the great The chief Cities of Christendom.
Metropolis of England) but also over Paris in the kingdom of France; over
Civil, and Madril in Spain; over Rome in Italy: Francfurt and Colin in high
Germany: Antwerp in Brabant, Elsinor in Denmark, Prage in Bohemia; Craconia in
Poland: Belgrad in Hungary, and so over all the other Capital Cities, that
bewtifies the greatest Kingdoms of The Princes that raise these wars.
Europe. For Signority in these do they contend.

Have you not a longing desire, to know the names of the generals that are to
command these expected armies; and from what countries they come? what forces
march with them? and what warlike Stratagems they st and upon?

I have a little before roughly drawn the picture of one of Poverty and her
Army.
them; the Princess her self being barbarous, needy, of great power by,
reason of her people, but far unable to keep them in pay, or in order, they
themselves (how valiant soever they be) being likewise all together, untrained
and indisciplinable, yet full of courage, and desire to set upon the Enemy.

Whose Army though it consist not of such multitudes, (number being oftentimes
the confusions of battles) yet Money and her Army.
is the Empress, under whose colors they fight, full of riches (which are
the sinews of War) of great command, feared and loved, yea adored as a
Die^y, of a Maiesticall presence of incomparable bewty Such a one, that even
the very Auri sacra sames quid non ^rtalia cogis Pectora.
sight of her is a Charm strong enough to make me venture their lives in the
quarrel of her right.

Kings are to her beholden for she often sends them suplies, and therefore pay
they homage unto her. Her Captains are pollitik and fight rather upon
advantages, then upon equ^lity, her soldiers brave and resolute, hardly drawn
to venture into dangres, but when they are in, a thousand Stratagems use they
to save themselves: what they get they keep, which is one of ye noblest points
belonging to a soulder, for it is more hard to use a victory well after it is
gotten, then it is to get it. The name of this latter Princess, is ye renowned
Empres Argur^on (Money) The name of the former, is that warlike Vi^ago ^amd over
all ye earth, for her hardines, called P^uerty. Now to the intent that ye whole
world (as an indifferent Judge may arbitrate the wrongs done between these two
states, and by that means find out which of them both come into the field we
unjust arms: you shall understand ye Poverty being sundry ways d^eply indebted
to ye kingdom of Money, as having b^ene from time to time relieved by her, and
not being well able to maintain herself in her own d^minions, but that Money
has sent her in provision, it had b^ene neither policy, neither could it stand
with her honor, that Poverty should first break the league, neither indeed
Poor men fall not first out with the rich, but the rich with them.
has she, but has ever had a desire to be in amity rather with ye excellent
Princess; then with any other Monarch whatsoever. But ye golden mines of the
west and east Indies, (over which the other Empress is sole Sovereign,
swelling up her bosom with pride, covetousness, and ambition, as they do her
coffers with treasure, made her to disdain Rich men hate poor men. The poor
may beg.
the miserable poor Queen, and in that height of scorn, to hate the holding
of any confederacy with her, that she on the soddaine, (most treacherously and
most tyrannously) labored by all possible courses, not only to drive the
subjects of Poverty from having commerce in any of her rich and so populous
Cities* but also wrought (by the cruelty of her own O nostri infami^ Saeclis.
ministers, and those about her) to root the name, not only of that
unfortunate and dejected Princess, from the earth, but even to banish all her
people to wander into deserts, and to perish, she cared not how or where.

Hereupon strict proclamation went thundering, up and down her dominions,
charging her wealthy subjects, not to negotiate any longer with those beggars,
that flock daily to her kingdom, strong guards were planted at every gate, to
bar their entrance into Cities, whipping-postes and other terrible engines,
were advanced in every street to send the^ home bleeding new, if they were
taken wandering (like sheep broken out of lean pastures into fat) out of their
own liberties, Constables were chosen of purpose that had Oni^s Diomed^ Equi
Busidis ara. Clementes.
Marble in their hearts; thorns in their tongues, and flintstones (like
pearls) in their eyes, and none could be admitted into the office of a Beadle,
unless he brought a certificate from Paris Garden, that he had been a
Beare-ward, and could play the Bandog bravely in baiting poor Christians at a
stake, better then curres (there) bait the Bull, or then Butchers Mastiues,
when they worry one another.

These peales of small shot, thus terribly going off, the poor Hungarians
(with their pennilesse Princess) did not only not show a foul pair of
heels, to fly to save themselves (as it was to be feared they would have
done, like Sors vbi p^ssim a rerum sub pedibus timor est.
cowardly peasants) but rather they grew desperate, and sticking clos^y, (like
Prentises upon Shrouetwuesday one to another, they vowed (come death, come
devils) to stand against whole bands of brown rusty bille men, though for
their labors they were sure to be knocked down like Oxen Qui nil potest
sperare desperet nihil.
for the slaughter; but a number of Iack-strawes being amongst them, and
opening whole Cades of council in a cause so dangerous, they were all turned
to dry powder, took fire of resolution, and so went off with this thundering
noise, that they would die like men, though they were but poor knaves, and
counted the stinkards and scum of the world: and yet as rash as they were, they
would not run headlong upon the mouth of the Canon; No, but like snailes
pulling in the horns of their fury, they hid their heads for a time, either
(like spies to watch for advantages, or to try if this rotten wheel of Fortune
would turn, and that the broken world could mend, but all the waters of
chastity and goodness being poisoned, of which they both thirsted, and Money
hard to be spoken with.
hoped to drink: and all the ways to come to the presence of Money, at whose
feet they would have fallen, and complained of their wrongs, being likewise
cut off, and none of their threed-bare company, upon pain of death, daring to
stand within ten miles of her Court gates, for fear they should either lift
them off the hinges and steal them quite away, (being all of beaten gold) or
else cunningly in the night time, should file off handfuls (like pin-dust,
thereby to enrich themselves, she being their vowed enemy. It was therefore by
a general voice concluded, that they would all put themselves into arms, and
for that purpose went in swarms to the Court of Poverty, (their good Lady and
mistress) and never gave over balling in their ears, till she had sworn by
her crown, though she had scarce two shillings in her purse, that open war
should presently be proclaimed against that arrogant haughty, ambitious Tyrant
Open war.
Money. Hereupon poverty summoned her council for war, together they came, and
being set, she at large laid open what wrongs and dishonors her enemy had
done to her and her subjects, withal declaring how willing her poor people
Pouerties speech to her council.
were to venture their lives in her quarrel, and that their very fingers
itched to be doing with the rich chuffes, and Usurers, and others that were
servants, or rather slaves to Money, adding moreover, that a number of her
enemies subjects too welknown by the name of Banck-rupts (being a great and
ancient family in her greatest City) have of late The villainy of Bank-routes.
gotten other men's goods into their hands, spending them basely and villanously
in prisons, coloring this their politic theft, by giving out, that they are
subjects to Poverty, albeit they were never suffered to harbor in her
dominions. To clear herself of these, and such like imputations and
dishonorable scandals, as also to let Money know, that she has more right to
those towns and Cities to which she pretends sole claim then Money has
herself, and Dum ciuitas erit, pauperes erunt.
that like a Prince, though her coffers be not so full, nor her forces so able,
she purposes to defend her own title, and not to loose one foot of that
which was left to her by her Ancestors, all of them coming out of old and
ancient houses it is therefore her resolution, to send defiance to her insolent
enemy, Poverty brings any man on his knees.
and to that end (for their aid and Advice, has she thus called them before
her.

Her counselors applauded ye courage of their Princess, and (being first
brought on their knees) gave her reasons to go forward in so just a war. All
of them for the most part being glad, that the Golden age should now come
amongst them, and proudly rejoicing that they should bid battle to so rich an
enemy as Money and her subjects, to have about with whom, they have for a long
time had both a desire, and waited for advantage to pick a quarrel.

Those that were at this time of Pouerties council, were men well beaten to the
world, all of them great travelers, such as had seen many countries: As hardy
as they were wise, it shall not be amiss in this place, to draw the lively
pictures of them, because if any of their own countrymen happen to behold
them, their report may confirm the truth of all that is here related. Their
names are these:

Counselors to Poverty.
Discontent. Pouerties cou^cellors.
Hunger. Sloth. Industry. Despair. Carelessness. Repining. Beggary. Misery.
DIscontent had a grave countenance, somewhat inclining to melancholy,
temperate of speech, and sparing Discontent described.
in diet, not caring either for pleasures or greedy of honors: but (as a man
that is weary of the world for the impieties in it) wishing rather to die then
to live. One thing was noted in him more then in any other Courtier, that in
all his life time, he had never been a reuellor, nor ever courted Afflict^s
gaude^ repoget.
Lady, he seemed indifferent whether the wars went forward or not: yet
inwardly moregreeued at the wrongs of his Prince, then at any injuries that
could be done to himself.

Despair and Carelessness were brothers, and in great favor Despair.
with Pouety (their Princess) she never was well but when one of them was in
her company, yet the wiser sort thought that they did much mischief to the
State. Despair was not beloved by reason of his cruelty: for if he got any
man into his hands, he hung him up presently.

Hunger was one of the best commanders for war, that Hunger.
was in all the Land: a man of almost an invincible stomach, he had
overthrown many armies, and sped most fortunately at the besieging of a Town
or City, where continually he uses to behave himself so valiantly that no
stone wall (of what height or strength whatsoever) is able to hold him out: yet
is he: not accounted so sound a common wealths man as some of the rest, for
that it is imagined, he loves the enemy better then his own country, and if
occasion were offered, would rather fly to Money then serve Poverty (his
Sovereign.) A great transporter of corn he has been from time to time: for
which cause the people hate him in their hearts, and do now and then openly
cry out against him with such clamors, that he has been glad to stop their
mouths. The only good that he does, and indeed the only cause for which the
kingdom loves him, is that when he leads men on in any hot piece of service,
they get such stomachs by seeing how bravely he lays about him, that they
never come off till they be satisfied, victory being as good to them as meat
and drink.

Sloth, by reason that he is troubled with the gout, busies Sloth.
himself little with State matters, he has lain bedridden for many years, and
greeues that any stir should be made in the common wealth he was never either
tilter or trauellor, his body being weak and subject to diseases, which made
him unapt for both.

Repining was the only man, that whetted on both his Repining.
Prince and her subjects to go forward in these wars: for he could by no
means abide either Money or her followers, it fretted him more to see any of
them prosper, then if himself had fallen into the lowest misfortune. He dealt
altogether in Monopolies: for which the people gave him many bitter curses, and
those (I think) keep his body so lean.

Industry, was a goodly personage, a faithful friend to Industry.
his Prince, and a father to his country, a great Lawyer, and a deep scholar,
stout in war, and provident in peace. Poverty (whom he served) did often say,
that two such counselors (as Industry) were able upon their shoulders only to
support any State in the world. In dear years, when the Land had been ready
to sterue, has he relieved it, and turned dearth into plenty: his head is ever
full of cares, not for himself so much as for the people, whom he loves and
tenders as dearly as if they were his kindred: yet stand they not so well
affected to him, because he compelles them to take pains, when it is their
natural inclination (like Drones) to live basely, and to feed upon the bread
that the sweat of other men's brows do earne. A good States man he is, and a
lover of peace, seeking rather to draw Money to be still in league with Poverty,
then to have them thus at defiance one against another.

Beggary, and Misery, are so well known to us, I shall not need to draw
their faces. Beggary. Misery.


These counselors, after many arguments, weighed out to prove the necessity
either of war or peace, at the last concluded upon the former. The drum was
therefore struck up, to try what voluntaries would offer themselves: but few
voluntaries (or none at all) came in. Then went forth a very straight command,
to press not only all masterlesse A press for sol^ier. to serve Poverty.
men, but all others of what condition or profession soever, that lived under
the subjection of Poverty.

The Captains, Lieftenants, Corporals, Serieants, and ^ow country ^ldiers come
^om thence to ^ght under Po^erty here.
the companies that were casheard and cast, upon concluding of the late league
in the low Countries, hearing of these new wars, threw up their old
weather-beaten hattes we torn sethers in them, fetched capers above ground,
danced, swore, drunk tobacko, and Dutch beer, and after they had fallen on
their knees cursing for half a^ hour together, all truces, leagues,
confederacies, and combinations of peace, they bitterly cried out upon the
proud and tyranous government of Money: some of them damning themselves to the
pit of hell, if ever they could but finger her, they would see an utter
confusion and end of her: because for her sake, and upon her golden promises
they had ventured their lives, spent their blood, lost legs and arms, had
been pinched we cold, parched with heat fed upon cabbage, upon roots, and
upon Christmas day (in stead of minched pyes) had no better cheer then
prouant, (moldy Holland cheese, and course brown bread) not a rag to their
backs, yes, rags more the^ they cared for: but not three stiuers among five of
them. They therefore vowed to serve Poverty, to live and dye we her, and with
all their forces to set upon Money, who had made them slaves to the world, not
rewarding the^ to their merit: and thereupon striking up their drum, and sprea
ding their tottered colors which hung full of honor, because it was full of
holes, an^ was indeed no bigger, nay scarce so big, as the flagge of a
Playhouse, away they came (troopewise) with bag and baggage marching, and were
received (as old soldiers should be) at the hands of Poverty, she sweating by
her birth, and the fame of her Ancestors (who were well known far and near)
that she would never forsake their company, but stick to them even to the
death.

The business thus successefully thriuing at the first, gave encouragement to
all to have it set forward, so that precepts were forthwith directed to the
Hals of every Company, Hals of every company furnish men on both sides.
who albeit they had furnished the Queen of silver and gold (Money) with
certain voluntary bands of sound approved soldiers: Yet (because they
themselves, that were old grown oaks, cared not how many paltry low bushes
that nestled under their shadows were cut down) they pressed ten times more of
every trade, to fight under the banner of Poverty, than those were that went to
serve her enemy. Yet was it a long time ere the Handicrafts men could be
mustred together: for Carelessenes (one of the former Carelessness
councillors) whose ambition consisted in popular greatness, has the hearts
of most tradesmen in the City.
and had stolen the hearts of the common people, gave them a privy inckling of
the press before it came forth, and wished them to shift for themselves, by
being dispersed, for a time abroad, whose counsel they following, threw by
their tools, neglected their trades, fled from their shops, and spent both
their gettings and their goods in common bowlingallies, dicing houses and
alehouses. But proclamation being made, That upon pain of death they should
all (by such an hour) be ready to come into the field, and fight for Poverty
(their sovereign Lady and mistres.) It is incredible to be spoken, what
infinite multitudes of all occupations, (some young, some old) were in a short
time assembled together.

(...) Scholars hearing of this, fled from the Uniuersities, and made such
have to be in pay with Poverty (whom they had Learning held in contempt.
known a long time) that some of them had scarce put shoes to their seete: The
Queen bestowed very good words upon them, because Scholars had always been
favored by her progenitors, and (upon her bare command) they took such place
under her in the Army, as was suitable to their professions.

Young Gentlemen, that neither durst walk up and down the City, for fear of
Ravens and Kites, that houered to catch them in their tallons, and could get no
entertainment in the court of Money, because they were younger brothers, and
condemned by the verduict of Silkemen and Mercers to be most Desperate
fellows: yet were they all welcome to Poverty.

These younger Brothers were appointed to stand Infans perdus (or the Forlorn
hope) because though they had little ^onger brothers.
to loose but their lives: yet they should win honor, nay perhaps
knighthood, which in these days are better then lands: if fat widows can be
but drawn to nibble at that worshipful bait. And for that purpose did a
goodly troop of knights put themselves (as knights errant) into Arms, in
defense of ye innocent wronged Lady, (Poverty) which Cheualiers, though they
durst not (as some ill-tongd people gave out) show their heads in the City:
yet were they appointed Masters of the field, and had the charge of the most
resolute troops that were to scale the City (If the enemy should cowardly
happen to fly thither) and to ransacke all the Mercers and Goldsmiths shops,
not so much to set free the silks, veluets, plate and jewels imprisond most
cruelly in them, as to undo the old Citizens, and then to marry their young
wives, and so to raise them up to honor in their most knightly posterity.

A regiment of old seruingmen were sworn the guard to Pouerties person, of
whom there was great hope, that they Old Seruingmen the gaurd to Poverty.
would both stand stiffly to her in any danger, and if ye maine battles did
ever join, would be the only Canoneeres to break their ranckes, because they
had such excellent skill in charging and discharging of the great Bombard.

There came in some seven thousand Banckrouts, offering Banckrowtes come to
Pourt but as spies.
their service to the distressed and wronged Princess, who gave them thanks
for their love: yet was she fearful to trust them, because a number in her
own army exclaimed upon them, as the ranckest villains in a common wealth,
and that they had undone them, their wives and children: But the dangers
wherein they now all stood, requiring rather hands to punish the wrongs done
by an enemy, then to rip up old wounds of their own. Those seven thousand had
the ordering of all fire-workes, Mines, and countermines, as being the only
rare fellows for damnable and speedy blowing up of men in any assault.

The vanguard being filled up thus with their troops Masters vnd by servants,
(...)rue in the R(...)areward.
before named, a stout company of honest Householders, (whose servants like
Acteons dogs, had with whoring, dicing, and drinking eaten up their Masters)
came bravely up in the Rear: their wings consisted of schoolemasters,
husbandmen, fencers, Knights of the Post, and such like, who had all vowed by
the cross of their swords, and by the honor of a soldier to die at Pouerties
feet.

It was in the middle of a Term, when the fire of these civil broiles first
began to kindle: but Law having with many hard words on both sides taken up a
number of brabling matters, and for her healths sake being rid into the
country, whereby a great crew of her followers, that were not able with bag and
baggage to march after her in that progress) were ready to give up their
cloakes, (the summer was so hot for them) and because all their practice was
but to set people together by the ears, a number of them therefore upon their
bare knees, begd that they might serve Poverty Poor Attorneys.
in her wars, whereupon certain broken-heeld, gowtie-legd, durty-hamd
pettifoggers, with some lack-latine prowling pennurious country Attorneys were
promoted to be Clerks of Bands, Pandors, Pimpes, and Applesquires Pandors ever
poor.
came thick and threefold, and had the leading of ye Pioners, because they had
deepest skill in digging of Trenches.

The victualers to the Camp, were a company of doublechind polt-footed,
stincking-breathd Bauds, who with pewter ^audes seldom ^ich.
bottles of Aqua vitae at their girdles, rings with deaths heads on their fore
fingers, and old stitchd hats, out of fashion on their heads, came along with
the bag and baggage, and were ready if any poor soldier fainted, to put life
into him again by a sip from their bottles, and to lift up his spirits.

The whole Army being thus leuyed, Poverty was found to be one hundred thousand
strong in the field, whom martialling in the best order of war, they marched
forward we full resolution, either to take Money and her subjects prisoners, or
else never to come out of the field, so long as they and Poverty (their
mistress and powrefull commander) could be able to hold life and soul
together.

The Preparation, strength, and stratagems of the second Army.
NO treason was ever so secretly contrived, so cunningly carried, nor so
resolutely attempted: but either in the very growing up it has been
discovered, or the head of it cut off, where it was at point to come to the
full ripeness. The works of Princes are great, and require many hands to
finish them, and a number of engines cannot be set, going so closely, that no
ear shall hear them: Jove may talk in his big voice of thunder as soon and
not be understood, as a kingdom may call up her own subjects with the iron
tongue of war, and not awaken those people that are her neighbors. The eyes
of a true State do never sleep, Princes are quickest of hearing, the blows
that foreign enemies give, are broken for the most part: because the weapon is
always seen and put by, otherwise they would cut deep, and draw blood, where
(by such prevention) they scarce give bruises.

This merciless tyrant therefore (Poverty) could not kindle such fires of
vprores, and civil mischiefs, but that the flames (like burning beacons)
armed her enemies with safety, even as they put them into fear. Her ragged
troops were more apt to betray themselves and their proceedings, then
polliticke to betray the foe into any danger. With swift wings therefore did
the news of this invasion fly abroad into all countries, and at last alighted
before that glorious and most adored Empress (Money) whom nearest it
concerned, because all the arrows of their envy and intended malice were shot
at her bosom.

The drom of war beat in her ear, not in the dead of night, when her
glories and beauties were darkened and eclipsed, but when she was seated in the
throne of all her pleasures (which a whole world was rifled and travailed over
to maintain in height and fullness) when her palate The life of a sensual
man.
surfeited on the variety of dishes and delicacy of feeding, when her body
shone brighter then the sun it self, who (in his lusty heat begot her)
struck an amazement into those that beheld her, by the splendour of those
maiesticall roabes which she wore: when music went into her ear in ten
thousand several shapes, when her walks were perfumed, her sports varied
every hour, when her cheeks were dimpled with laughters at her iesters, her
Parasites, her Pandors, and all the rest of those servile soothing Apes, that
in pide colors wait upon and show tricks to fate the appetite of that Lord
of flesh and blood, the black Prince of the world, her husband. Then, even
then, in the full sea of all these iollities, pompes, and whorish ceremonies,
the only bewitchers of mankind, came sailing in, the news of a sudden
insurrection, and an unexpected invasion, by that common, fatal, and barbarous
spoiler of so many kingdoms, infamous amongst al nations by that beggarly name
of Poverty.

These news (upon the first arrival) did no more move the great Indian
Empress (Money) then the bleating of a sheep terrifies the king of forests
(the Lion.) Money was rich, strong in friends, held league with Princes, had
whole countries at her beck, nations were her slaves, no people but did love
her. On the contrary side, Poverty (her enemy) had sinall revenues, fewer
friends, a world of followers, but none of any reckoning, except a few
Philosophers, Alchemists, etc. She held many towns, and was obeyed in most
kingdoms but how? as thieves are obeyed by true men, for fear, and because
they cannot otherwise choose, her own strength therefore being so good, and
her enemies fuller of spite then of power, she only laughed at the thunder of
her threats, and resolved that her pleasure should spread larger sails.

But her council being provident, careful, and jealous of their own estates,
wisely considering the dangers that a weak enemy (being desperate, and having
little to loose) Riches make men cowards,
may put the best fortefied kingdom to, and the most valiant nation did in the
end, with one consent fall on their knees, most humbly entreating their
Sovereign Mistress to give over her reuellings, maskes, and other
Court-pleasures for a time, and that as well for the safety of her own royal
person (to take heed of them: for many plots were now, and had oftentimes bin
laid) as also for themselves, whose lives and liberties wholly depended on her,
either to leuy present forces, which should meet this beggarly Monarch in the
field, and so utterly to drive her out of the kingdom, or else to give the
rich men of her Empire leave to make strict and severe laws to take away the
lives of that wretched and scattered people that follow Poverty in these
commotions, wheresoever or whenever they take them meddling in any of her
wealthy dominions.

These words brake forth with such lighning, that Money stampd for very anger,
that so base an enemy should put her subjects into fear. Their vigilance
awaked her, and like a good Prince that would loose her life rather then her
subjects should perish, she began (with the Eagle) to shake her royal wings,
and to be roused out of her late golden slumbers, and securities, that ^ay upon
her like enchantments.

To their requests she yielded, and thereupon to fortify her kingdom against
all the shot of Villainy and Vengeance, she summoned those of her council
together, whom she Counselors to Money.
know to be most faithful and most serviceable in a business of this nature,
state and importance. Her counselors names were these.

Counselors to Money.
Covetousness. Parsimony. Deceit. Providence. Monopoly. Violence. Usury.
Covetousness was an old wretched lean faced fellow, Covetousness
that seldom sleep'd: for his eyes (though they were great, and suncke at
least two inches into his head) never stood still, but rolled up and down,
expressing a very envious longing greediness to enjoy every thing that they
looked upon. He never pared his nails, and being often asked the reason why,
he always answered, that he saved them for his heir, for being cut off,
after he himself was dead, they might be put to sundry good thrifty purposes,
as to make horns (being thinly scraped) for a Scriueners lantern to write by
a nights, or to nocke arrows, etc. He kept not so much as a Barber, but
shaued his own head and beard himself, and when it came to wey a pound, he
sold it to a Frenchman to stuff tennis balls. Money (his Sovereign) cared
not so much for him, as he did for her, she could make him do any vile office
how base soever; but because he was Covetous men are slaves to that which is a
slave to them.
saucy, and would often check her for taking her pleasures, seeking to
restrain her of her liberties, she hated him, and was never more merry then
when one brought her news once that Covetousness lay a dying. Yet was he well
beloved af the best Citizens, and never rode through the city but he was staid,
and feasted by many Aldermen, and wealthy Commoners, few Courtiers loved him
heartily, but only made use of him, because he was great, and could do much
with Money (their empress.)

Providence was but of mean birth, the ladder by which Providence.
he climbd to such high fortunes, as to be a councellor to Money, being made by
himself, much given to study, yet no great scholar, as desiring rather to be
free of the City, then to serve a long threed-bare Prentiship in the
Universities. He is rarely seen in Minerals, and distillations, and will draw
Aurum potabile, or fetch quicksilver out of horsedung, he will grow rich, and
be in time the head warden of a company, though he were left by his friends but
three shillings three pence stock to set up, such another he was as
Whittington, a very cat shall raise him if he be set vpont, He is the best that
writes Almanackes in these times, and where the rest write whole Calenders of
lies for bare forty shillings a year, (seruingmens wages) he foreseeing what
will happen, buies up all the commodities of one or two Countries at one
bargain, when he knows they will be dear, and so makes up his own mouth,
and for it, gets much favor at the hands of Covetousness his elder brother.

Parsimonie is kinsman to those two that go before, he is Parsimonie.
not up yet: for he uses to lie a bed till afternoon, only to save dinners,
when he rises (which will be presently) the motion shall be shown and
interpreted to you.

Monopoly is a very good man where he takes, that is to Monopoly.
say, 9. manner of ways.

Deceit looks a little a squint, yet is of deeper reach then Deceit has
many great friends in the City.
any of the rest: for he does oftentimes fetch over Covetousness himself. He
is great in Lawyers books, and tradesmen not only love him, but their youngest
wines, think themselves highly happy, if at a running at Tilt, at a mask or a
play at Court, or so (as he often does) he will but voutchsafe to place them
(and the sports done) he commonly sends them home lighted. He has more
followers then the 12. Peers of France, he studies Machiauell, and has a
french face.

Violence has borne many great offices, and Money has Violence. Might
ouercomes right.
done much for him. He purchases lands daily: but loses men's hearts, some of
the richer sort follow him and love him: yet he cannot go thorough the
streets, but the common people curse him, he reads Law as men read Hebrew
(backward) and never makes o^e Law, but he breaks two. Of all men, he cannot
abide a Justice of Peace, yet oftentimes is he seen at the Sessions: many of
his Ancestors have been Traitors, and by that means were still cut off before
they were old men, the Nobility hate him, Nullum violentum perpetuum.
he is a mere martial man.

Usury was the first that ever taught Money to comm't Usury.
incest with Gold and Silver, her nearest kinsmen Brokers are now their Baudes,
and keep the doors till the letchery A Broker is an Usurers Baude.
of ten in the hundred be sated: he has made many a man, but how? to be
damned, he is a great housekeeper, for thousands in the City live upon him,
and would hang themselves but for his saving them. There is no more conscience
in him then in Tavern faggots, yet young gentlemen pray for him daily that he
may be fetched quick to hell. He is an insatiable feeder: for a Scriuener and
he will eat up four men at a breakefast, and pick them to the bare bones. He
loves not a Preacher, because he frights him out of his wits: for he never
hears any of them talk to him but he thinks himself damned. He has no
skill in Arithmeticke, but only in the rule of Interest. He is the Devils
Tole-taker, and when he dies, lies buried with his ancestors in the widest
vault of hell.

These were the counselors whom Money assembled together, to consult upon hers
and their own safeties, from the base assaults of their wild and desperate
enemy: who being solemnly set in their due places and the Queen of Riches her
self being advanced up into her imperial chair, Parsimonie (who by this time
was gotten up and ready) took upon him to be speaker for all the rest.

This Parsimonie is a nasty batcheller of fourscore, one that never went
trussed (to prevent hanging) to which Parsimony.
end he will not be at charges of a pair of garters (though they were but
woollen lists) fo(...)re of temptation, his breches once were velvet, when his
great grandfather wore them, and three-piled, but the pox of any pile can be
seen there now, unless between the clifts of his buttocks, to save a penny,
he will damn half his soul, he wears clothes long, and will sooner alter
his religion ten times, then his doublet once, his hatte is like his head, of
the old block, he buies no gloves but of a great a pair, and having worn
them two days he quarrels with the poor Glouer that they are too wide, or
too ill stitched, and by base scolding and lorldly words gets his money again,
and the wearing of so much leather for nothing. He will be known by a pair of
white pumpes some 16. or 20. years, only by repairing their decayed
complexion we a piece of chalk. This whining Parsimonie (that for a supper of
16. pence will budge and slip his neck out of the collar from his own father)
and that vows never to marry, because he will not spend so much as may keep a
child, stood up so well as he could stand with his crinckling hammes, and
knowing that it was high time for him to bestirre his stumps, thus shot his
bolt after much stammering, coughing and hemming, silence being first cried,
which accordingly was given him.

The Oration which Parsimonie made before his Empress.
O Sacred Money! Queen of Kingdoms, Mistres Praises of Money.
over the mines of Gold and Silver, Regent of the whole world. Goddess of
Courtiers, Patroness of Scholars, Protectresse of Soldiers, Fortress of
Citizens, and the only comfort to Saylors. Me seems good and fit,
(brightest-facde Lady) sithence that bold and saucie beggar, with her
pennurious sunneburnt troops, armed only with short troncheons under their
arme-pits, and most commonly walking in threadbare Plimoth cloakes, have made
their impudent and contagious insurrection, that you (at whose feet lie
Crowns to tread upon) being Queen Mother of the west and east Indies, do
presently give over your needless expenses and open houshkeeping in the
Country, where your swarming enemies lie in ambushes to attach you upon the
least issuing forth, and betake yourselfe to the close safety of the City,
where your seame-rent and white bitten foes dare not (within gunshot approach,
to be further sure of which, and least any spies should be sent to look into
the strength and wealth of that your principal and most secure fortress, we
have ordained that through every ward (for your happy safety, and their utter
terrifying) there be erected one sound, sufficient, and well painted whipping
post, the very sight of which will not only scarre them, worse then the
scowting face of a Serieant being seen peeping through a red lettice, frights a
young gallant, but also in time drive the whole band of Tatterdemalions from
post to pillar. Dixi.

No sooner was Dixi sounded, but the maine points of this Parsimonions oration,
came back again like an echo from all the rest of the voices there present.
All their breath blew one way, all their councels were directed and went only
by this compass. Money weighing (in the upright scales of her judgment) their
wise and thirsty opinions, found them not half a grain too light, and
therefore very royally yielded to whatsoever they consulted upon, whereupon
sudden order was given, and all speedy preparation made for the entertainment
and receiving of Money into the City, whose presence all the Citizens day and
night thirsted to behold.

To set down all the devices, the intended merriments, the shows, the
ceremonies, the diligence of workmen for standings and scaffoldings, the
inerplicable joy of Poets, who did nothing but pen encomious Gratulatorie to
bid her welcome, drinking healths in rich malago to the honor Diu^a humanague
pulchr^s. Diuitiis parent.
of her, and their mistresses, (the nine Muses) and on the other side, to point
to the life, the several glad faces, gestures and action of the players, who
had pined for her absence a long and tedious vacation: or to tell what dressing
up of howses there were, by all the neat dames and Ladies within the freedom,
what starching of ruffes, what poaking, what stiffning of falls, what painting
of cheeks and lips, as if they had been ye two leaued gates of a new chose
Alderman, are able (if they were set down at large) to add a third volume to
our English Chronicles. Time at length turned up his Glass, and the Holliday
(so gapingly looked for (was come.

Diuisum imperium cum Jove, Nummus habet, had Jove been Money entertained into
the City. And by whom Mercers.
bidden to dinner to the Guyld hall on Simon and Iudes day, he could not have
had more welcomes given him then Money had. Oh! with what ^cund hearts did the
Citizens receive her? The Mercers swore by their maydenhead, that all their
polliticke pent-houses should be clothed in cloth of silver, and so they were.
The silkemen guarded their Silkemen.
very posts with gold lace, and thereupon ever since, the fashion of larding
suites with so much lace is come up: But above all, the Company of the
Goldsmiths received her Goldsmiths.
with the greatest honor, and she again to pay their loves home, did as much
or more honor them: for they spread all their stalles with green cotton, and
so adorned their shoppes, that they looked like a spring garden, in which grew
flowers of gold, set in such order, and comely equipage, it would have ravished
any poor man's eye to behold them. Here (in the very midst of the row) she
allighted from her Chariot, staid a pretty space, and enriched both the
shopkeepers and their wives with her presence, cheapning of 2. or 3. of them
some of their fairest jewels, the beauty of their faces being of far richer
value then the costliest jewels there, and more worth (being rightly
estimated) then the best stone in the whole row, and by this her staying at
their stalles, heaped on their heads this grace besides. All her chosen
Courtiers came hereby acquainted with their delicate wives, and ever after
their husbands had of them perpetual custom. At last mounting again into her
Chariot she rode on: being as richly attended as her self was glorious, Desert
and Learning ran by her side as her footeme^, Bounty guided the horses that
drew her, Lust, Epicurisme, He is wise enough thathath wealth enough.
Pride, and Folly, were 4. Querries of the Stable, and had much ado to lead
a goodly-coloured fat beast called Sensuality, that (for more state) went
empty by, Money never riding on the back of that spotted Panther, but only
for speed and to ride away.

Beauty, Honesty, Youth and Pleasure, came in a Caroach behind her, as her
waiting women. Any thing to be had for money.


Old Age (her Treasurer) rode bare-headed before her: Thrift carried the privy
purse: Riot (a smooth-faced Ganimed) slept in her lap, whose cheek she would
so often kiss, that he grew proud and careless of her favors. What a world
it was to see men (whose backe-bones were almost Old men most greedy of money
when money and they are upon parting foru^r.
grown compass, because their eyes should still be fixed upon their graves)
running more greedily after her, then after Physicians, to take off those
diseases that hang most sp^efully upon Age.

Some ran out of the Church to see her, with greater devotion following her all
the way that she went, then the former deity they worshipped. Some for money
will sell religion.


Young men did only cast a glaunce at her, and staid not long in her fight,
other women pleased them better, if they were young Courtiers, they had their
Mistresses, Riches are young men's Harlots.
if Merchants men, their masters maids, that go fine by weight and measure,
imitating in dark corners, their masters profession: if Seruingmen, the
waiting wenches do commonly fit them a peniworth in this state Magnificence
and royalty this Empress arriues in the very heart of the City, a strong guard
being planted about her, Trenches, Bulwarks and Fortifications (invincible as
walls of Iron) being cast, raised up, and manned against the assaults of her
tottred enemies, who brake like so many wild Irish, and are left without the
City, only to rub their backs against the walls. Presently (for more
defense) were all the gates shut, the Porcullises let down, double locks How
careful rich men are of their wealth.
put to making, thick bars to hammering, and all ye subtilties which the wit
of man could possibly find out, were put in practice to keep Money safe within
the City. To second which provident courses proclamations went presently forth
to banish all those that were like to be of Pouerties company, for fear they
should revolt in time of most need, whereupon many thousands, with bag and
baggage, were compelled to leave the city, and cling only to the Suburbs. In
whose rooms Money entertaines rich strangers Strangers.
of al nations, having those (that should be) these she puts into office, and
trains them up for Soldiers, to be nearest about her, because she sees they
come well provided and armed out of foreign countries: and therefore dares
trust their diligence against those her halfe-shirted enemies, ye rather
because they cannot abide to see a beggar amongst them, especially if he be of
their own nation.

The fires of this dissension growing hotter and hotter Poverty lays siege to
the City.
on both sides, were more likely to flame more fiercely then to be quenched by
the aproach of Poverty and her ragged regiments, who by her scoutes
understanding that the golden Idol (which so many fools kneel to) was
carried and kept close within the walls of the City, being as the Pollodium
was to Troy, thither she marches with all speed, but perceiving all places of
entrance barred up, she pitcheth her tents round about the Suburbs, planteth
her artilery against the walls, leuelleth her great ordnance upon the very
wickets of the City gates, and by the sound of trumpet, did often summon Money
to appear in her likeness, and not to hide her proud and cowardly head.
Parlies were nine or ten times called on the Forreners part that dwelt Rich men
are deaf, and can not hear poo^ men's crics.
without, but no answer returned from those ye slept within the Free-dome.

Which scornful disdain being taken in snuff by the poor snakes (who
already began to shiuer with cold) Poverty, (their Ringleader) quickened the
chillness of there frozen spirits, by the heat of a brave resolution newly
kindled in her own blood: for calling Scatter-good her own Herald, that still
rides before her, when any tempest of war Scatter-good sent to money.
is toward, him she charge upon his life and allegiance, to go to the
walls, and boldly to throw in her name, a proud defiance in the very face of
Money, telling her, that for the safety of lives (which ly in the balance of
war) she desires that two only may arbitrate the quarrel in a Monarchy,
They that have nothing envy those that are wealthy.
and that therefore Poverty challenges Money to leave the City if she dare,
and hand to hand to grapple with her. Scatter-good (because he was known to be
an Herald) was admitted to have a sight of Money, and upon first presenting
himself, very stoutly delivered his Ladies defiance.

Money was noted to change color, and to look exceeding pale, all the while
the challenge was breathing forth, either for very anger, or extreme fear,
but those that knew her qualities swore it was with anger, and the conclusion
justified their oath, for on a soddaine shaking her golden tresses Money gives
men courage.
with a maiesticall bravery, she defied that base defiance in regard the sender
was of slavish and beggarly condition. Her self being high-borne, of blood
royal, of Noble descent, the other a penurious fugitive, a mere canting Mort,
traitor to all kingdoms, corrupter to all learning, and mother of none but
such as are burdensome to every Commonwealth. They both standing therefore
upon so unequal bases, Money may by the law of Arms, refuse the combat, and
in plain terms did so, disdaining to defile her glorious hands upon so
wretched and infamous an enemy, but with a full oath swore and vowed to weary
Poverty and all her lank-bellied army, by driving them quite from the gates of
the City, or else to hold her and them play within so long, till she and her
suncke-eyed company, famish and dye under the walls. And for that purpose,
albeit she her self swim in pleasures and in plenty, and though ye earth opens
her womb liberally, pouring forth her blessing to all thankful creatures, yet
will she (only to undo them and punish their carkases with pennury and famine,
s^d her precepts into every shire, to all rich Farmers, Landlords, and
Graziers; that they (by expr^sse commandment from How scarcity of victuals
grows in the Land.
her and her Lords, upon their allegiance and love they owe to Money, and as
they are her slaves, vassailes and subjects, cause hard times to be made, only
to pinch the poor Hungarians, and to disable their sallow facd Empress from
once approaching the walls. These words she vttred with indignation, and high
color in her cheeks, and having eased the greatness of her wrath, commanded
the messenger away: yet ere he went (to show that a true Prince when he
wrastleth hardest with his own passions, should be careful still of his
renown, fame and honors, she bestowed a golden chain on Scatter-good, which
Poverty took from him, as scorning to see any favors (given by her enemy)
worn by any of her subjects, especially her household servants.

Scarce was the Herald turned out at the City gates but the glorious mother of
Plenty, checking her own great spirit, for giving her enemy so much cause to
triumph over her as to proclaim her a coward, was half mad with rage at her
own folly, and in that heat of blood, charged her droms to strike up, her
colors to be spread, her armies to be put in array, and the gates of the City
to be set wide open for (in a brauado) she vowed to issue forth, and bid
battle to the beggarly Tartarians that beleagerd her. But her council (wiser
then so) kept her in perforce, doubling the guards about her, and inch^nting
her ear with all the bewitched tunes of music to cast her into a slumber
till these storms in her were at quiet, which if they had not done, but had
pitched the field, as she once determined, it is by many probabilities)
thought, that Poverty had had a great hand ^uer her, and would have put her to
the worst. They therefore locked her up, as it were by Iron force, compelling
her against her freeborn nature and condition, to be directed by them, and to
lie close for a time, till noble advantage should call her into action: and
making present use of her own former speeches, a common council was called:
where by the general head it was ordered that Hard-heartednesse should have
the keys of the City in keeping, his office and charge being, not to suffer
Money to go out of the gates, though she herself in proper person commanded
it, and was further ordained that precepts should presently be drawn, into all
Shires, Countries and Cities. The tenor of which precepts follows.

By the Queen of Gold and Silver.
TO all and Singular our Shires, Countries, Cities, Corporations, Towns,
Villages Hamblets, etc. by what name or title soever, to whom these presents
shall come, and to all you our obedient Subjects, Slaves and Vassailes,
commonly styled by the names of Money-mongers, viz. rich Farmers, young
Landlords, Engrossers, Graziers, Forestallers, Hucksters Haglers, etc. with
all the residue of our industrious, hearty and loving people, in all or any of
these our shires or places formerly recited, either now resident, or at any
time or times hereafter to be resident, greeting.

These are to will and require you upon especial and express commandment
delivered in our own person, Covetousness of ^ich Farm^s makes the country
poor, and the people ^o pi^e.
and as you will answer the contrary at your utmost perrils. First that you
(the said rich Farmers) by your best power, means, sleights, policies,
by-waies, and thrifty endeavors, cast all the nets you can, to get all manner
of grain that grows within your reach, and being so gotten to advance, raise,
and heighthen the prices of them, work upon the least inch of advantage, make
use of all seasons, hot, cold, wet, dry, foul or fair, in one rainy week
your wheat may swell from four shillings the bushel, to six shillings, seven
shillings, nay eight shillings. Sweep whole How corn ri^h in prise, and
makes dear the markets.
markets before you, as you pass through one town, if you find the corn
(like men's consciences, and women's honesties) low-prized, and sell the same in
other towns when the price is enhanced. Let the times be dear, though the
grounds be fruitful, and the Markets kept empty though your barnes (like
Cormorants bellies) break their butten-holes, and rather then any of Pouerties
soldiers, who now range up and down the kingdom, besieging our Cities, and
threatening the confusion, spoil and dishonor both of you and us, should have
bread to relieve them. I charge you all upon your allegiance, to hoord up your
corn till it be musty, and then bring it forth to infect these needy
Barbarians, that the rot, scuruy, or some other infectious pestilent disease,
may run through the most part of their enfeebled army: Or if I, who may
command, may persuade you, let mice and rats rather be feasted by you, and
fare well in your garners, then the least and weakest amongst Pouerties starued
infantery, should get but one mouthfull, let them leap at crusts, it shall be
sport enough for us and our wealthy subjects about us, to laugh at them whilst
they nibble at the bait, and yet be choked with the hook.

Next, we will and command, that you the young Cruelty of Land-l^ds i^ racking
of rents is the undoing of ma*ny householders.
Landlords, who have cause to go dancing to Church after your old rotten
fathers funerals, with all might and main stretch your rents, til the heart
strings of those that dwell in them be ready to crack in sunder. Rack your
poor neighbors, call in old leases, and turn out old tenants, those which
your forefathers have suffered quietly to enjoy their livings, and thereby to
raise fat commodities to themselves, and beggar families: Change you their
copy, cancel their old evidences, race out all works of charity, undo them
in a minute, that have stood the storms of many an Age, make the most of your
riches, and the least of such poor snakes. When you let your land, carry many
eyes in your head, look into every acre, into every bush, every ditch, every
turfe, wey every blade of grass to the full, that those who take it, may save
nothing by it no not so much as shall keep a blackbird, or a sparrow, turn
forty pence an acre, into forty shillings, and laugh at the simplicity of your
forefathers, make bitter jests upon your dead Gaffers, now you are made
gentlemen of the first head, though it be by their digging in muck-hils, and in
your Queanes company pity the capacity of the kerzy stockingd VVhoresons, for
not having so much wit to raise profit as you their sons have, nor had ever
the means to spend it so fast.

Thirdly our high pleasure is, that all you Engrosers of what name soever, buy
up the prime and pride ^ow butter and ^ese grow (...).
of all commodities, that done, keep them in your hands, to cause a dearth,
and in the time of deerenes, mark them with what price you list. First and
principally, I charge you, as you love me, and for my only sake, who have ever
been good Lady to you all, that in times of plenty you transport your corn,
butter, cheese and all needful commoditiess into other countries, of purpose
to famish and impouerish these hated whining wretches, that lie upon the hands
of your Own. Hire warehouses, Vaults under ground, and cellers in the City,
and in them imprison all necessary provision for the belly, till the long
nails of famine break open the doors, but suffer not you those treasured
victuals, to have their free liberties till you may make what prey you please
of the buyers and cheapners. At which time I will prepare a certain people
that shall give you your own asking, and buy up all you bring by the great,
who shall afterward sell it deerer then it was bought, by three parts, of
purpose to choke this starueling scallion-eaters, whose breath is stinking in
my nosthrils, and able to infect a quarter of the world. The people whom thus I
promise to have in a readiness, are well known what they are, some call them
Huksters or Haglers, but they are to Hagglers.
me as honest Purueyers and Takers, and these politic smooth faced Harpyes,
shall out of a dearth raise a second deerenesse.

These and such like omitting my precepts, to Bakers, Bakers.
whose upright dealing is not now to be weied, no, nor stood upon, are the
effects of my pleasure, which on your allegiance to me your Empress, I
strictly command you to observe and put in practice.

No sooner was this precept drawn, but it went polt into ye country, no sooner
was it read there, but the world was Every man pi^ cheth the poor.
new molded, yet some say it never looked with a more illfauoured face. The
Farmers clapped their hands, Braziers went up and down fhrugging their
shoulders, Landlords set all the Scriueners in the country to work to draw
leases, conueiances, defeisances, and I know not what, in three market days,
dearth was made Clearke of the maket, the rich Curmudgeons made as though they
were sorry; but the poor Husbandman looked heavily, his wife wrang her hands,
his children pined, his hyndes grumbled, his lean ouer-wrought Iades bit on
the bridle. They, who were in favor with Money, and were on her side, sped well
enough; but Pouerties people were driven to ye wall, or rather down into the
kennell: for corn skipt from four to ten shillings a bushel, from ten to
twelve shillings, stones of beef began to be precious, and for their price had
been w^rne in rings, but that the stone cutter spoiled them in the grinding.
Mutten grew to be dear, two crowns a buttocke of peefe, and half a crown a
wholesome breast of mutton, every thing (to say truth) riz, except desert and
honesty, and they could find nothing to rise by.

Poverty was somewhat grieved, (but little dismayed) at these tyrranous,
Godless and base proceedings of her enemy, because she herself and most of
her army, have been old Seruitors to the wars, and been familiarly
acquainted with Emptiness and Necessity, casting therefore all her troops
into several rings, she went from one to one, and in the midst of each,
councelled them all not to be disheartened, but with her to endure what
miseries soever, sithence she would venture foremost and fardest in any danger
that could come upon them. She told them by way of encouragement, that whereas
Money (their daring enemy) brags that she is the daughter to the Sun, and
Dueene of Poverty com^orteth her fol^owers.
both the Indies. It is not so: for she is but of base birth bred, and begotten
only of the earth, whom she cannot deny to be her mother: and albeit it cannot
be gainsayed, but that by her griping of riches into her hands, she is owner of
many fair buildings, parkes, forests, etc. Yet does she oftentimes so far
forget her high birth, (whereof she vainly boasts and those beauties of
which a company of old Misers, Churles, and penny-fathers are with dotage
enamoured, that now and then (like a base common harlot) she will lie with a
Cobbler, a Car-man, a Collier, nay with the Devils own son and heir, a very
damned broker, with these will she ly whole years together, they shall handle
her, embrace her, abuse her, and use her body after any villainous manner to
satisfy their insatiable lust, whereas on the contrary part, quoth she, I that
am your leader, famous over all the world, by my name and style of Poverty,
under whose ensigns, full of rents, as tokens of service and honor, you all
are now come to fight, am well known to be a Princess, neither so dangerous,
nor so base as Money shows herself to be. Money makes all service done to her
a very bondage in them that do it: those whom she fanours most, are her only
slaves; but Poverty gives all her subjects liberty to range whither they list,
to speak what they list, and to do what they list, her easist impositions are
Faeupertatemque ferendo, ^ffecere len^m nec iniqua mente ferendo.
burdens, but the burdens which I throw upon any, grow light by being borne.
Who has been the Foundresse of Hospitals but I? who has brought up Charity
but I? am not I the mother of Almes-deedes, and the only nurse of Devotion? do
not I inspire Poets with those sacred raptures that bind men, how dull and
brutish soever, to listen to their powerful charms, and so to become regular?
Et laris et full^ d^ paupertas impuley audax us versus face^em.
do not I sharpen their invention, and put life into their verse? And whereas
Money vaunts and bears her head high, by reason of her glorious and gallant
troops that attend her, you all know, and the whole world can witness with you,
that Kings, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Aldermen, with infinite others that were
her dearest and wantonnest minions, have utterly forsaken her and her
lascivious pleasures, only to live with Poverty (your Queen) though now she
be a little derected in the eye of the world, though not in her own worth.

Thus she spoke, and her speeches kindled such fires of resolution in the
hearts of her soldiers, that the Allarum was struck up, Ordnance planted for
Battery, scaling Ladders made ready, and all the instruments of terror and
death put in tune, which were set to be played upon at the assault of a City.
They that kept their dens like Foxes in their holes, slept not, hearing such
thundering: but armed themselves with as brave resolution to defend, as the
other had to invade.

It was excellent music (considering how many discords there were) to hear
how every particular reg^nent No trade loves one another.
in Pouerties Camp, threatened to plague the Gold-finches of the City, and to
pluck their feathers, if ever they made a breach. Tailors swore to tickle the
Mercers, and measure out their Sattins and veluets without a yard before their
faces, when the prowdest of them all should not dare to say Bo to a Tailors
Goose. Shoomakers, had a spite to none but the rich Curriers, and swore with
their very awle, to flea off their skins (and the Tanners) over their ears,
like old dead rabbets. Every soldier pricked down one Goldsmiths name or
another, or else the sign in stead of ye name, as the Goat, the Unicorn, the
Bull, the Heart. etc. swearing damnable oaths to piss in nothing but silver,
in mere scorn, because he had oftentimes walked by a stall, when his teeth
has watered at the golden bits lying there: yet could not so much as lick his
lips after them. There was one little d^arfish Cobbler with a bald pate, and a
nose indented like a scotch saddle, who took bread and salt, and praid God it
might be his last, if he ran not over all the fine dames that withstoode him,
in black revenge that he never had their custom in his shop, because it
could never be found out or seen, that any of them did ever tread her shoe
awry. And thus as they without shot their terrible threatenings into the air,
so did those within, laugh to think how they should domineere over the
shake-rags, if ye The Ci^ty be^eged.
wars might but cease.

All this while were trenches cast up of a great height by the Poldauies, to
save them from shot of the walls, whilst Pouerties Pioners had digd at least a
quarter of a mile under the earth, and the mine with gun powder to blow up one
quarter of the City: But this being quickly descryed, was as speedily
prevented by a countermine, so that all that labor took not such fire as was
expected: yet went the Artillery off on both sides, wild fire flew from one
to another, like squibs when Doctor Faustus goes to the devil, arrows flew
faster then they did at a catte in a basket, when Prin^ Arthur, or the Duke of
Shordich struck up the drum in the field, many bullets were spent, but no
breach into Moneys quarters could be made: they that fought under her cullers
were very wary, polliticke, strong, and valiant, Tutum carpit in* anis Iter
yet would they not venture forth but on great advantages, because they had
something to loose, but Pouerties wild Bandetti, were desperate, careless of
danger, greedy of spoil, and durst have torn the devil out of his skin to
have had their wills of Money, but Night (like a surly constable) commanding
them to depart in peace, and to put up their tools. This assault (which was
the first) gave over, every Captain retyring to his place, the Desperueines
(of Prodigal heirs meet soonest with Poverty.
Pouerties side) coming off at this time with the most loss.

Few attempts were after made to any purpose: only certain young prodigal
Heirs, who (as voluntaries) maintained themselves in service under Money, were
appointed to be light-horsemen for discovery of the enemies forces (as she lay
encamped) who now and then in a few light skirmishes had the honor to issue
forth, and to set upon the Assailants that beleagured the City: but Poverty
still drove them either in to their own shame, or else had them in execution
(even in despite of the City forces) and put them ever to the worst.

The Gold-beaters (who knew themselves on a sure ground within the walls)
lingered of purpose, and would never bring it to a battle, only to weary the
adversary, whom they meant to undo by delay, because she could not hold out
long for want of victuals. They within cared not though ten thousand devils
amongst them, so Money (their mistress) whom they worshipped as a God, would
not leave their company, and the rascoll Dear that (without the walls) were
every hour hunted out of breath, vowed to eat up one another, before they
would raise ye Seige, and be hanged up like Dogs (at the City gates) for they
were now accounted no better then dogs, but they would have their peniworths
out of Money for a number of wro^gs which by her means they had endured, when
she has seen them and their children ready to starve, yet scornd to relieve
their necessities. Thus both their stomachs being great, and as well the
defendants as the assailents resolutely confirmed to stand upon their guard,
and to stay the utmost of any misery that could wait upon a lingering war:
behold the rich-plumde estridges, who had most feathers on their backs, and
least cause to murmr, began Dead terms and times that are cold in doings,
pinch the rich as well as the poor.
to mutiny amongst themselves, the imprisoning of Money (their sole
sovereign) so close within stony battlements, did not show well: they were
loyal subjects to her, and would free both her and themselves, unless she
might use her sports and princely pleasures, as she had wont, Mercers had their
shops musty, and their silks moldie for want of customers, Goldsmiths had
their plate hid in cellors, where it lay most richly, but looked more
pitifully and with worse color, then prisoners lying in the hole.
Haberdashers had more hats then they could find heads to wear them, if they
had been such arrant blocks them selves to have given their wares away,
trades had no doings, all the men were out of heart by being kept in, and all
the women ready to be spoiled for want of walking to their Gardens: Every one
spent and spent, but who tasted the sweetenes? In stead of selling their wares,
they plied nothing now but getting of children, and scowring of pieces. In
stead of what do you lack? was heard Arm, Arm, Arm. This geere was to be
looked into, and therefore they desired their gracious Empress (Money) not to
lie lasing thus in a chamber, but either that she would be more stirring, that
they (her Subjects might have better stirrings too, and (opening the City
gates) to fight it out bravely, or else they vowed there were at least ten
thousand) whose names stood now in her Muster book) that shortly if this world
lasted, would shut up their doors, show her a fair pair of heels, and from
her fly into the hands of Poverty their enemy.

Upon the neck of this, came likewise a supplication from certain troops of
Uintners without the Bars, Inkeepers, common Uictuallers and such like, who
played ye iackes on both sides, and were indeed Neuters, a linsey-wolsey
people, that took no part, but stood indifferent between Money, and Poverty,
the tenor of which petition presents it self thus to the world.

The pitiful Petition of Vintners, Victuallers, Inkeepers, etc. without the
Bars:
To the great Empress of old men's hearts, and young men's pleasures, yclipped
Money.
HVmbly sueth to your current Excellency, your A supplication from the
inhabitants of the Suburbs.
vncustom'd drooping Suppliants, the Vintners, and Innekeepers, and others of
the Ale-draperie, that are bard out of the City: Whereas through the extreme
deadness of time and term, we all run backward in our condition, having great
rents to pay, and greater scores, which will never be paid, guests now being
glad if they can make us take chalk for cheese, our wines lying dead upon our
hands, and complaining for want of good doings: we our selves making many
signs to passengers, but few coming at us, and hanging up new bushes, yet
having only beggars hansell, trimming our rooms for no better men then
Barbers and Tailors, a rapierscarce being seen in a velvet scabert within 40.
yards of our precincts. -- Quis talia fando,
Myrmidonum, Dolopumue, aut duri miles Vlissi Temperet a lachrimis!
O Neither the Mermaide, nor the Dolphin, nor he at mile-end green, can when
he list be in good temper when he lackes his mistres (that is to say Money.)

May it therefore please thee (O thou pay-mistresse to all the fiddlers that
should haunt our howses, if thou would put them in tune) to send (at least)
some of thy Harpers to sound their nine-penic music in our ears, but we
rather humbly beg it, that thou would enrich us with thy Angellike-presence,
be no longer percullized up in the City, visit the subburbes, against thy
coming all her cawseies shall be paued and made even, how broken soever her
conscience be left and vnmended. Our houses stand empty, as if the plague were
in them, only for want of thee, our Drawers cannot be drawn to any goodness,
nor our Hostlers to deal honestly with horse or man, only by reason of thee:
Issue therefore forth amongst good fellows, that will sooner fight for the^,
then those snudges and miserable cormorants that now feed upon thee.

This lamentable supplication (together with the fear of a mutiny amongst her
soldiers) so wrought with the Empress, that (clean against the pers^uasion of
her council) she determined to leave the City, and to march into the ^ield:
hereupon her Army Royal was set in order, to the intent she might take a full
view of all her Colonels, Generals, Captains and men of war. She went from
squadron to squadron, not so much delighting her own eyes (...) beholding so
many thousands ready to fight in her defense, as they were greedy to enjoy her
presence, which with brave encouragement lifted up the deadest spirit, all
swore to follow her, none to leave her, or if any did, a curse was laid upon
him to die a beggar.

The first regiment consisted of Courtiers, some of them being Lords (who came
very well provided) some Knights, Money takes 2 view of all her army. Lords,
Knights, Lawyers.
(but most of the valiant knights that were true soldiers indeed, served in the
other army (Conncellors at Law gave directions where to encampe, what ground
was best to defend themselves and annoy the foe, by what tricks and stratagems
to circumuent her, how to lead the Troops on, how to come off, and by plain
demonstration showed how easy it was to put Poverty to her shifts, and to
have her and her troops in execution, if Money would be pleased to say the
word, and for that purpose they made orations to set the armies together by the
ears, which accordingly took effect, Attorneys were very busy, and served as
Clerks to Aturnies.
the Bands, running up and down from one rank to another expressing a kind
of puzzled and dizzie distraction in all their businesses.

But that which made the best show of all, was a lane of Brokers come well
armde.
Brokers, who handled their Pieces passing well, and were old dog at a mark,
they had skill in any weapon, Musket, Caliuer, Petronel, Harguibusse, a Crock,
Po^lax, Holbert, Browne-bill, Pike, Dimilance, sword, Bow and arrows, nothing
came amiss to them, and which was most strange they fought by the Book, at a
breach none so forward as they, they had been at the ransacking of many a
house, and would undertake to undo all the troops that were led by Poverty.
These Brokers were armed with thrumd cappes, (but they should have had
Murrions) and those they ^ore to keep their wits from taking cold: for they
had all devilish heads, and were suited in spark of velvet Iackets with out
sleeves, tust taffatie breeches, c^ose to them like Irish Stroozes, Satin
doublets with sagging bellies, as if bagpuddins had bumbasted them, and huge
dutch Ald^mens sleeves, a^ed strongly with back pieces of canuas, dugeon
daggers instead of Pistols hanging by their sides, ^ine peird silk stockens on
their legs, tied up smoothly with caddis garters, all which had been taken as
spoils from the other Army.

The Inuader understanding that the quarrel would be decided in a pitched
field, and that cracked crowns would be both given and taken on either side,
grew exceeding joyful: and therefore calling for Sharker (one of her boldest
and wittiest Heralds) him she sent to Money, to know where the Rendeuous should
be made for both armies to meet in, and what piece of ground should be best
famous to posterities by their battle. Money took advice upon this, most of
her old beaten Captains, labored earnestly to have it at Bagshot, but all the
gallants cried baw waw at him that named Bagshot, so that for a quarter of an
hour, none could be heard to speak, there was such a Baw wawing. The Herald
Sharker, in name of his Mistress, who sent him, requested it might be at
beggars bush. But every soldier swore that was a lowzy place, and so for a day
or two, it rested uncertain and undetermined.

In which Interim, a murmuring went up and down that not only Pouorty had
maintained this terrible Siege Famine and the plague come along with Poverty to
besiege the City.
against the City, but that Dearth also, Famine and the Plague, were lately
joined with the same Army, besides many strange and incurable diseases were
crept into the camp, that followed Money: for Riot her minion, was almost
spent, and lay in a consumption. A hundred in a company were drowned in one
night in French bowls: five tunes as many more were tormented with a terrible
gnawing about their consciences. All the Usurers in the Army had hung
themselves in chains, within less then three hours, and all the Brokers,
being their Bastards, went crying up and down, The Devil, the Devil, and
thereupon because they should not disquiet the rest of the Soldiers, they were
fetched away. These and such other unexpected mischifes, put Money into many
fears, doubts and Nulla saius bello pacem te poscimus omnes.
distractions, so that she inwardly wished that these unlucky wars had either
nener been begun, or else that they were well ended, by the conclusion, if it
might be, of some honorable peace.

And as these storms of misery fell upon Money and her troops, so was the
army of Poverty plagued as much, or more on the other side: nothing could be
heard amongst the Soldiers but cries, complaints, cursings, blasphemies,
Oaths, and ten thousand other black and damned spirits, which ever hawnted
them and their General herself. Want pinched them in the day, and wildness
and rage kept them waking and raueing all the night. Their souls were
desperate, their bodies consumed, they were weary of their lives, yet compelled
to live for further miseries, and nothing did comfort them but a foolish hope
they had to be revenged upon Money. So that so many plagues, so many diseases,
so many troubles and inconueniencies following both the armies (by means of
the tedious Siege) a perpetual truce, league and confederacy was A Truee.
confirmed by Money and Poverty, and the counselors on either part: that in
every Kingdom, every Shire, and every City, the one should have as much to do
as the other: that Pouerties subjects should be ever in a readiness (as the
Switzers are for pay) to fight for Money, if she craved their aid, and that
Money again should help them whenever they did need: and that sithence they
were two Nations so mighty and so mingled together, and so dispersed into all
parts of the world, that it was impossible to sever them. A law was presently
enacted, that Fortune should no longer be blind, but that all the Doctors and
Surgeons should by waters, and other m^s help her to eyes, that she maight see
those upon whom she bestows her blessings, because fools are served at her
doalewith riches, which they know not how to use, and wise men are sent away
like beggars from a misers gate with empty wallets.

The Armies hereupon brake up, the Siege raised, the The Siege is raised.
City gates set wide open. Shopkeepers fell to their old, What do you lack:
The rich men feast one another (as they were wont) and the poor were kept
poor still in policy, because they should do no more hurt.

FINIS.

