O per se O.

OR A new Crier of Lantern and Candlelight.

Being an Addition, or Lengthening, of the Bell-mans Second Night-walke.

In which, are Discovered those Villainies, which the Bell-man (because he went
in the dark) could not see: now laid open to the world.

Together With the shooting through the arm used by counterfeit Soldiers: The
making of the great Soar, (commonly called The great Cleyme:) The Mad-mens
marks: Their phrase of Begging: The Articles and Oaths given to the
Fraternity of Roagues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars at their Meetings.

And last of all, A new Canting-Song.



Printed at London for John Busbie, and are to be sold at his shop in S.
Dunstans Churchyard in Fleete-street. 1612.

To my own Nation.
Readers,
AFter it was proclaimed abroad, that (under the conduct of the Bel-man of
London) new Forces were (once more) to be leauied against certain Wild and
barbarous Rebels, that were up in arms against the tranquillity of the
Weale-publicke: It cannot be told what numbers of voluntaries offered themselves
daily to fight against so common, so bold, so strange, and so dangerous an
enemy. Light horse men came in hourly with discovery where these Mutiners lay
entrenched: delivering (in brief notes of intelligence) who were their
Leaders, how they went armed, and that they served both on horse and foot:
only their Strengths could not be discried, because their Numbers were held
infinite. Yet instructions were written, and sent every minute by those that
were favorers of Goodness, showing what military discipline the Foe used in
his battles, and what Forts (if he were put at any time to flight) he would
retire to; what stratagems he would practice, and where he did determine to lie
in Ambuscado. They that could not serve in person, in this Noble quarrel, sent
their Auxiliary Forces, well armed with Counsel. So that the Bel-man (contrary
to his hopes) seeing himself so strongly and strangely seconded by friends,
does now bravely advance forward, in maine battalion. The day of encounter is
appointed to be in this Michaelmas Term: the place, Paul's Churchyard,
Fleetstreete, and other parts of the City. But before they join let me give
you note of one thing, and that is this.

There is an Usurper, that of late has taken upon him the name of the Bel-man,
but being not able to maintain that title, he does now call himself the
Bel-mans brother, his ambition is (rather out of vainglory then the true
courage of an experienced Soldier) to have the leading of the Van, but it
shall be honor good enough for him (if not too good) to come up with the Rere.
You shall know him by his Habiliments, for (by the furniture he wears) he will
be taken for a Beadle of Bridewell. It is thought he is rather a Nevvter then a
friend to the cause: and therefore the Bel-man does here openly protest that
he comes into the field as no fellow in arms with Him.

Howsoever it be struck, or whosoever gives the first blow, the victory
depends upon the valor of you that are the Wings to the Bel-mans army, for
which conquest he is in hope you will valiantly fight, sithence the quarrel is
against the head of monstrous abuses, and the blows which you must give are in
defense of Law, Justice, Order, Ceremony, Religion, Peace, and that honorable
title of Goodness.

Saint George* I see the two Armies move forward: and behold, the Bel-man
himself first charge upon the face of the Enemy, Thus:

A Table of all the matters that are contained in this Book.
Chap. 1. Of Canting. Chap. 2. 1 What matters were tried at a Term that was
in Hell. 2 The proceedings of that Court. 3 A Counsel held in Hell about the
Bel-man. 4 A messenger sent from thence with instructions.
Chap. 3. Of Gull-groping. How Gentlemen are cheated at Ordinaries. To furnish
which feast, these Guests are bidden, viz. The Leaders. The Forlorn Hope. The
Eagle. The Wood-pecker. The Gull. The Gull-groper.

Chap. 4. Of Ferreting. How Gentlemen are undone by taking up commodities.
Which Tragedy has these five Acts, viz. A Tumbler. Pursenets. A Ferret.
Rabbet-suckers. A Warren.

Chap. 5. Of Hawking. How to catch Birds by the Book. Which is done with these
five Nets, viz. A Falconer. A Lure. A Tercell-Gentle. A Bird. A Mongril.

Chap. 6. Of Iackes of the Clocke-house. Chap. 7. Of Ranckeriders. How
Inne-keepers and Hackney men are sadled. To make whom go a round pace, you
must have A Colt. A Snaffle. A Ring. Prouander.

Chap. 8. Of Moone-men. Chap. 9. The infection of the Suburbs. Chap. 10. Of
Iynglers. The villainy of Horse-coursers. Who consists of -- Iynglers. Drouers.
Goades. skip-iackes.

Chap. 11. Of Jack in a Box, or a new kind of cheating, teaching how to change
gold into silver: unto which is added a Map, by which a man may learn to
travel all over England, and have his charges borne. Chap. 12. The Bell man's
second Nights walk, in which he meets with a number of Monsters that live in
darkness.
Lantern and Candlelight. OR The Bel-mans second nights walk.
Of Canting. How long it has been a language: how it comes to be a language:
how it is derived: and by whom it is spoken. CHAP. 1.
WHen all the World was but one One language through all the world at the
beginning.
Kingdom, all the people in that Kingdom spoke but one Language. A man could
travel in those days neither by Sea nor Land, but he met his Countrymen, and
none others. Two could not then stand gabling with strange tongues, and
conspire together (to his own face) how to cut a third man's throat, but he
might understand them. There was no Spaniard (in that age) to brave his enemy
in the rich and lofty Castilian: no Roman Orator to plead in the Rethoricall
and Fluent Latin: no Italian to court his Mistressa in the sweet and amorous
Tuscane: no Frenchman to parley in the full and stately phrase of Orleans no
German to thunder out the high and rattling Dutch: the unfruitful crabbed
Irish, and the voluble significant Welsh, were not then so much as spoken of:
the quick Scottish Dialect (sister to the English) had not then a tongue,
neither were the strings of the English speech (in those times) untied. When
she first learned to speak, it was but a broken language: the singlest and the
simplest words flowed from her utterance; for she dealt in nothing but in
Monosillables, (as if to have spoken words of greater length would have cracked
her voice) by which means her Eloquence was ^^rest yet hardest to learn, and
so (but for necessity) not regarded amongst Strangers. Yet afterward those
noblest languages English tongue comparable to the best.
lent her words and phrases, and turning those Borrowings into Good husbandry,
she is now as rich in Elocution, and as abundant, as her prowdest and
beststored neighbors.

Whilst thus (as I said before) there was but one Alphabet of Letters for all
the world to read by: all the people that then lived, might have wrought upon
one piece of work in countries far distant a sunder, without mistaking one
another, and not needing an Interpreter to run between them. Which thing
Nymrod (the first Idolater) perceiving, and not knowing better how to employ so
many thousand millions of Subjects as bowed before him: a fire of Ambition
burned within him, to climb up so high that he might see what was done in
heaven. And for that purpose, workmen were summoned from all the corners of
the Earth, who presently were set to build the tower of Building of Babel.
Babell. But the Maister-workman of this great Universe, (to check the
insolence of such a saucy builder) that durst raise up pinnacles equal to his
own (above) commanded the selfsame Spirit, that was both bred in the Chaos,
and had maintained it in disorder, to be both Surueyor of those works, and
Comptroller of the Laborers. This Messenger Confusion described.
was called Confusion. It was a Spirit swift of sight, and faithful of
service. Her looks wild, serrible and inconstant: her attire carelessly loose,
and of a thousand several colors. In one hand she gripped an heap of
storms, with which (at her pleasure) she could trouble the waters: in the
other she held a whip, to make three Spirits that drew her to gallop fast
before her: the Spirits names were Treason, Sedition; and War, who at every
time when they went abroad; were ready to see Kingdoms in an vproare. She
road upon a Chariot of clouds, which was always furnished with Thunder,
Lightning, Winds, Rain, Haile-stones, Snow, and all the other Artillery
belonging to the service of Divine Vengeance: and when she spoke, her voice
founded like the roaring of many Torrents; voysterously struggling together, for
between her jaws did she carry 1000000 tongues.

This strange Linguist stepping to every artificer that Beginning of Languages.
was there at work, whispered in his ear: whose looks were there-vpon
(presently) (...) with a strange distraction: and on a sudden, whilst every
man was speaking to his fellow, his language altered, and no man could
understand what his fellow spoke. They all stared one upon another, yet none of
them all could tell wherefore, so they stared. Their tongues went, and their
hands gave action to their tongues, yet neither words nor action were
understood. It was a noise of a thousand sounds, and yet the sound of the noise
was nothing. He that spoke knew he spoke well: and he that heard, was mad
that the other could speak no better. In the end they grew angry one with
another, as thinking they had mocked one another of purpose: so that the Mason
was ready to strike the Bricklayer, the Bricklayer to beat out the brains of
his Labourer: the Carpenter took up his Are to throw at the Caruer, whilst the
Caruer was stabbing at the Smith, because he brought him an Hammer, when he
should have made him a Chizzell: He that called for Timber had stones laid
before him: and when one was sent for Nails, he fetched a Tray of Mortar.

Thus Babel should have been raized, and by this means Babell fell. The Frame
could not go forward, the stuff was thrown by, the worke-men made holy day.
Every one packd up his Tools to be gone, yet not to go the same way that he
came, but glad was he, that could meet another whose speech he understood:
for to what place soever he went, others (that ran madding up and down)
hearing a man speak like themselves, followed only him: so that they who when
the work began were all Contrymen, before a quarter of it was finished,
fled from one another, s from enemies and strangers. And in this manner did men
at the first make up nations: thus were words coined into Languages, and out of
those Languages have others been molded since, only by the mixture of nations
after Kingdoms have been subdued. But I am now to speak of a People and a
Language, of both which (many thousands of years since that Wonder wrought at
Babell) the world till now never made mention: yet confusion never dwelt more
amongst any Creatures. The Bell-man (in his first Voyage which he made for
Discoueries) The Bell man's first Book.
found them to be savages, yet living in an Island very temperate, fruitful,
full of a noble Nation, rarely governed. The Laws, manners, and habits of
these Wild-men are plainly set down, as it were in a former painted Table. Yet
least happily a stranger may look upon this second Picture of them, who never
beheld The first. it shall not be a miss (in this place) to repeat over
again, the Names of all the Tribes, into which they Diu^de themselves, both
when they Serve abroad in the open fields, and when they lie in garrison within
Towns and walled Cities.

And these are their Ranckes, as they stand in order, viz.
RVfflers. Vpright-men. Hookers, alias Anglers. Roagues. Wild Roagues.
Priggers of Prancers. Pallyards. Fraters. Prigges. Swadders. Curtals. Irish
Toils. Swigmen. Iarkmen. Patri-coes. Kitchin-Coes. Abraham-men, Mad Tom, alias
of Bedlam. Whip-Iackes. Counterfeit Crankes. Dommerats. Glymmerers.
Bawdy-Baskets. Autem Morts. Doxies. Dells. Kinchin-Morts.
Into thus many Regiments are they now divided: but in former times (above
four hundred years now past) they did consist of five Squadrons only.

viz. 1 Cursitors, alias Vagabondes. 2 Faytors. 3 Robardsemen. 4 Draw-latches.
5 Sturdy Beggars.

And as these people are strange both in names and in their conditions, so do
they speak a Language (proper only to themselves) called canting, which is
more strange. Of canting.
By none but the soldiers of These tottred bands, is it familiarly or usually
spoken, yet within less then foure-score How long, Canting has bin used. The
first canter hanged.
years (now past) not a word of this language was known. The first Inuentor
of it, was hanged, yet left he apt scholars behind him, who have reduced that
into Method, which he on his deathbed (which was a pair of gallows) could
not so absolutely perfect as he desired.

It was necessary, that a people (so fast increasing, and so daity practicing
new and strange Villainies, should borrow to themselves a speech, which (so
near as they could) none but themselves should understand: and for that cause
was this Language, (which some call Pedlers French) How canting grew to be a
language.
Invented, to the intent that (albeit any Spies should secretly steal into
their companies to discover them) they might freely utter their minds one to
another, yet avoid the danger. The language therefore of canting, they study
even from their Infancy, that is to say, from the very first hour, that they
take upon them the names of Kinchin Coes, till they are grown Rufflers, or
Vpright-men, which are the highest in degree amongst the^.

This word canting seems to be derived from the latin verb (canto) which
signifies in English, to sing, or to make a sound with words, that is to say,
to speak. And very aptly may canting take his deriuation a cantando, from
singing, because amongst these beggarly consorts that can play upon no better
instruments, the language of canting is a king of music, and he that in such
assemblies can cant best, is counted the best Musician.

Now as touching the Dialect or phrase it self, I see not that it is grounded
upon any certain rules; And no marvel if it have none, for sithence both the
Father of this new kind of Learning, and the children that study to speak it
after him, have been from the beginning and still are the Breeders and
Norishers of al base disorder, in their living and in their Manners: how is it
possible, they should observe any Method in their speech, and especialy in such
a Language, as serves but only to utter discourses of villainies?

And yet (even out of all that Irregularity, vnhansomnesse, and fountain of
Barbarism) do they draw a kind of form: and in some words, (as well simple
as compounds) retain a certain salt, tasting of some wit, and some Learning.
As for example, they call a cloak (in the canting tongue) a Togeman, and in
Latin, Toga signifies a gown, or an upper garment. Pannam is bread: and Panis
in Lattin is likewise bread, cassan is cheese, and is a word barbarously coynde
out of the substantive caseus, which also signifies cheese. And so of others.

Then by joining of two simples, do they make almost all their compounds. As
for example: Nab (in the canting The Dialect of Canting.
tongue) is a head, and Nab-cheate, is a hat, or a cap: Which word cheat,
being coupled to other words, stands in very good stead, and does excellent
service: For a Smelling cheat, signifies a Nose: a Prat-ling cheat, is a
tongue Crashing cheates, are teeth: Hearing. cheates are Ears: Fambles are
Hands: and there upon a ring is called a Fambling chete. A Muffling chete,
signifies a Napkin. A Belly chete, an Apron: A Grunting chete, A Pig: A
Cackling Chete, a Cock or a Capon: A Quacking chete, a ducke: A Lowghing
chete, a Cow: A Bleating chete, a Calfe, or a Sheep: and so may that word be
married to many others besides.

The word Coue, or Cofe, or Cuffin, signifies a Man, a Fellow, etc. But differs
something in his property, according as it meets with other words: For a
Gentleman is called a Gentry Coue, or Cofe: A good fellow is a Been Cofe: a
Churl is called, a Quier Cuffin; Quier signifies naught, and Cuffin (as I said
before) a man: and in Canting they term a Justice of peace, (because he
punishes them belike) by no other name then by Quier cuffin, that is to say, a
Churl, or a naughty man. And so, Ken signifing a house, they call a prison, a
Quire Ken, that is to say, an ill house.

Many pieces of this strange coin could I show you, but by these small
stampes, you may judge of the greater.

Now because, a Language is nothing else, then heaps of words, orderly wouen
and composed together: and that (within so narrow a circle as I have drawn to
my self) it is impossible to imprint a Dictionarie of all the Canting phrases:
I will at this time not make you surfeit on too much, but as if you were walking
in a Garden, you shall openly plurke here a flower, and there another, which
(as I take it) will bemore delightful then if you gathered them by handfulls.

But before I lead you into that walk, stay and hear a Canter in his own
language, making Rithmes, albeit (I think) those tharmes of Poesy which (at
the first) made the barbarous tame, and brought them ciuillity, can (upon these
savage Monsters) work no such wonder. Yet thus he sing^ (upon demand whether
any of his own crew did come that way) to which he answers, yes (quoth he.)

Canting rithmes.
ENough with bowsy Coue maund Nace,
Tour the Patring Coue in the Darkeman Case,
Docked the Dell, for a Coper meke,
His watch shall feng a Prounces Nab-chere,
Cya^^m, by Salmon, and thou shall pek my Iere,
In thy Ga^, for my watch it is nace gere.
For the been bowse my watch has a win, etc.
This short Lesson I leave to be constraued by him that is desirous to try his
skill in the language, which he may use by help of the following Dictionary;
into which way that he may more readily come, I will translate into English,
this broken French that follows in prose. Two Canters having wrangled a while
about some idle quarrel at length growing friends, thus one of them speaks to
the other. viz.

A Canter in prose.
STowe you been Cofe; and cut benar whiddes and bing we to Rome vile, to nip
a boung: so shall we have lowre for the bowsing ken, and when we beng back to
the Dewese a vile, we will filch some Dudes, off the Ruffmans, or mill the Ken
for a lagge of Dudes.

Thus in English.
Stowe you been cofe: hold your peace good fellow,
And cut bena^ whiddes: and speak better words.
And bing we to Romevile: and go we to London.
To nip a boung: to cut a purse.
So shall we have lowre: so shall we have money.
For the bowsing Ken, for the Ale house.
And when we bing back: and when we come back.
To the Dewse-a-vile: into the Country.
We will filch some dudes: we will filth some clothes,
Off the Ruffmans: from the hedges,
Or mill the Ken: or rob the house,
For a lagge of Duddes: for a bucke of clothes,
Now turn to your Dictionary.
ANd because you shall not have one dish twice set before you, none of those
Canting words that are englished before, shall here be found: for our intent is
to frast you with variety.

The Canters Dictionarie.
AVtem, a church. Autem-mort, a married woman. Boung, a purse. Board, a
shilling. Half a Board, six pence. Bowse, drink. Bowsing Ken, an Alehouse.
Been, good. Beneship, very good: Bufe, a Dog. Bing a wast, get you hence.
Caster, a cloak. A Commission, a shirt. Chates, the Gallows. To cly the
Ierke, to be whipped. To cut, to speak. To cut been, to speak gently. To cut
been whiddes, to speak good words, To cut quier whiddes, to give evil
language. To Cant, to speak. To couch a Hogshead, to lie down a sleep.
Drawers, Hosen. Dudes, clothes. Dark man's, the night. Dewse-a-vile, the
country, Dup the Giger, open the door. Fambles, hands. Fambling Chete, a King.
Flag, a Goat. Glasiers, eyes. Began, a mouth. Gage, a Quart pot. Grannam, Corn.
Gybe, a writing. Glymmer, fire. Gigger, a door. Gentry Mort, a Gentlewoman.
Gentry cofes Ken, a Noblemans house. Harman beck, a Constable. Harmans, the
Stocks. Heave a bough, rob a Booth. Iarke, a Seal. Ken, a House. Lage of
Dudes, a Bucke of Clothes. Libbege, a Bed. Lowre, money. Lap, Butter, Milk, or
Whay. Libkin, a House to lie in. Lage, Water. Light-mans, the day. Mynt, Gold.
A Make, a Halfe-penny. Margery prater, a Hen. Mawnding, asking. To Mill, to
steal. Mill a Ken, rob a house. Nosegent, a Nun. Niggling, companying with a
woman. Pratt, a Buttocke. Peck, meat. Poplars, Pottage. Prancer, a Horse.
Prigging, Riding. Patrico, a Priest. Pad, a way. Quaromes, a body. Ruff-peck,
Bacon. Roger, or Tib of the Buttry, a Goose. Rome-vile, London. Rome-bowse,
Wine. Rome-mort, a Queen. Ruffmans, the woods, or bushes. Ruffian, the
Devil. Stampes: legs. Stampers? shoes. Slate: a sheet. Skew: a cup.
Solomon: the mass. Stuling ken: a house to receive stolen goods. Skipper: a
barn. Strommel, straw. Smelling chete, an Orchard or Garden. To scowre the
Cramp-ring: to wear boults. Stalling: making or ordeyning. Tryning: hanging.
To twore: to see. Wyn: a penny. Yarum: milk.
And thus have I builded up a little Mint, where you may coin words for your
pleasure. The payment of this was a debt: for the Belman at his farewell (in
his first Round which he walked) promised so much. If he keep not touch, by
tendering the due Sum, he desires forbearance, and if any that is more rich in
this Canting commodity will lend him any more, or any better, he will pay his
love double: In the mean time, receive this, and to give it a little more
weight, you shall have a Canting song, wherein you may learn, how This cursed
Generation pray, or (to speak truth) curse such Officers as punish them.

A Canting song.
THe Ruffin cly the nab of the Harman beck,
If we mawnd Pannam, lap, or Ruff pecke,
Or poplars of yarum: he cuts, bing to the Ruffmans,
Or else he swears by the light-mans,
To put our stamps in the Harmans.
The ruffian cly the ghost of the Harmanbeck,
If we heave a booth we cly the Ierke.
If we niggle, or mill a bowsing Ken,
Or nip a boung that has but a win,
Or dup the giger of a Gentry cofes ken,
To the quier cuffing we bing,
And then to the quier Ken, to scowre the Cramp-ring,
And then to the Trin'de on the chutes, in the lightmans
The Bube and Ruffian cly the Harman beck and harmans.
Thus Englished.
THe Devil take the Constables head,
If we beg Bacon, Butter-milke or bread,
Or Pottage, to the hedge he bids us hie,
Or swears (by this light) ith stocks we shall lie.
The Devil haunt the Constables ghoast,
If we rob but a Booth, we are whipped at a poast.
If an Alehouse we rob, or be taken with a Whore,
Or cut a purse that has just a penny and no more,
Or come but stealing in at a Gentleman's door,
To the Justice straight we go,
And then to the Iayle to be shackled: And so,
To be hanged on the gallows ith day time: the pox
And the Devil take the Constable and his stocks.
We have Canted (I fear) too much, let us now give ear to the Bel-man, and
hear what he speaks in english.

THE BEL-MANS SECOND Nights walk. CHAP. II.
IT was Term time in hell (for you Qui fixit leges pretio atque refixit.
must understand, a Lawyer lives there as well as here:) by which means don
Lucifer (being the justice for that County, where the Brimstone mines are) had
better doings and more rapping at his gates, then all the Doctors and
unpericall Quack-saluers of ten Cities have at theirs in a great plague time.
The hall where these Termers A description of the Hall, where matters are tried
in Hell.
were to try their causes, was very large and strongly built, but it had one
fault, it was so hot that people could not endure to walk there: Yet to walk
there they were compelled, by reason they were drawn thither upon orcasions,
and such iustling there was of one another, that it would have grieved any man
to be in the thronges amongst me. Nothing could be heard but noise, and nothing
Hine exauditur gemitus, etc.
of that noise be understood, but that it was a sound, as of men in a kingdom,
when on a sudden it is in an uproar. Every one brabled with him that he walked
with, or if he did but tell his tale to his Council, he was so eager in the
very delivery of that tale, that you would The Judge of the Court. Haec
Radamanthus habet durissima regna; Castigatque ditque dolos, subigitque sateri,
etc.
have sworn he did brabble: and such gnashing of teeth there was when
adversaries met together, that the fyling of ten thousand Sawes cannot yield a
sound more horrible. The Judge of the Court had a devilish countenance, and as
cruel he was in punishingthose that were condemned by Law, as he was crabbed
in his looks, whilst he sat to hear their trials.

But albeit there was no pity to be expected at his hands, yet was he so
upright in justice, that none could ever fasten bribe upon him, for he was
ready and willing to hear the cries of all comers. Neither durst any Pleader
(at the infernal Bar) or any officer of the Court, exact any Fee of
Plaintiffes, and such as -- impios vinclis perpetuis domant.
complained of wrongs and were oppressed: but only they paid that were the
wrong dooers, those would they see dambd ere they should get out of their
fingers, such fellows they were appointed to vex at the very soul.

The matters that here were put in suit, were more then could be bred in
twenty Vacations, yet should a The customs and condition of the Court.
man be dispached out of hand. In one Term he had his Judgment, for hear
they never stand upon Returns, but presently come to Trial. The causes
decided here are many; the Clients that complain many; the Counselors (that
plead till they be hoarse,) many; the Attorneys (that run up and down,)
infinite; the Vnde nunquam quum semel venit potuit auerti.
Clerks of the Court, not to be numbered. All these have their hands full; day
and night are they so plagued with the bawling of Clients, that they never can
rest.

The Inck wherewith they write, is the blood of Coniurers: they have no Paper,
but all things are engrossed in Parchment, and that Parchment is made of
Scriueners skins flead off, after they have been punished for Forgerie:
their Standishes are the Seuls of Usurers: their Pens, the bones of
unconscionable Brokers, and hard-hearted Creditors, that have made dice of
other men's bones, or else of perjured Excecutors and blind Ouer-seeers, that
have eaten up Widows and Orphans to the bare bones: and those Pens are
made of purpose without Nebs, because they may cast Incke but slowly, in
mockery of those, who in their life time were slow in yielding drops of pity.

Would you know what actions are tried here? I will What matters are tried be
fore the Devil.
but turn over the Records, and read them unto you as they hang upon the Fyle.

The Courtier is sued here, and condemned for Ryots.

The Soldier is sued here, and condemned for murders.

The Scholar is sued here, and condemned for Heresies.

The Citizen is sued here, and condemned for the Citiesinnes.

The Farmer is suedcheere upon Penal Statutes, and -- Quique arma secuti impia.
-- Epulaeque ante ora paratae, -- furiarum maxima iuxta accubat, and manibus
prohibet contingere mensas.
condemned for spoiling the Markets.

Actions of battery are brought against Swaggerers, and here they are bound
to the peace.

Actions of Waste are brought against Drunkards and Epicures, and here they
are condemned to beg at the Grate for one drop of cold water to cool their
tongues, or one crum of bread to stay their hunger, yet are they denied it.

Harlots have process sued upon them here, and are condemned to Howling, to
Rottenness and to Stench. No Acts of Parliament that have passed the Heaven.
Vpperhouse, can be broken, but here the breach is punished, and that severely,
and that suddenly: For here they stand upon no demurres; no Audita Queraela can
here be gotten, no writs of Errores to Reuerse Judgment: here is no flying
to a court of Chancery for releef, yet every one -- Exercenter paenis,
eternumque malorum. Supplicia expendunt.
that comes hither is served with a Sub-poena. No, they deal altogether in
this Court upon the Habeas Corpus, upon the Capias, upon the Ne exeat Regnum,
upon Rebellion, upon heavy Fines (but no Recoueries) upon writs of Out-lary,
to attache the body for ever, and last of all upon Executions after Judgment,
which being served upon a man is his everlasting undoing.

Such are the Customs and courses of proceedings in the Offices belonging to
the Prince of Darkness. These hot doings has he in his Terme-times. But
upon a day when a great matter was to be tried between an Englishman and a
Dutchman, which of the two were the fowlest Drinkers, and the case being a long
time in arguing, by reason that strong evidence came in reeling on both sides,
(yet it was thought that the Englishman would carry it away, and cast the
Dutchman) on a sudden all was staid by the sound of a horn that was heard at
the lower end of the Hall. And every one looking back (as wondering at the
strangenes) room, room, was cried and made through the thickest of the
crowde, for a certain Spirit, in the likeness of a Post, who made away on a
little lean Nagge up to the Bench where indge Radamanth with his two grime
Brothers (Minos and Aecus) sat. This Spirit was an intelligencer sent by
Beelzebub of Batharum, into some Countries of christendom, to lie there as a
Spy, and had brought with him a packet of letters from several Leigiers that
lay in those Countries, for the service of the Tartarian, their Lord and
Master. Which packet being opened, all the Letters (because they concerned the
general good and state of those low Countries in Hell) were publicly read.
The contents of that Letter that stung most, and put them all out of their law
cases, tended to this purpose.

That whereas she Lord of the Fiery Lakes had his Ministers in all kingdoms
above the earth, whose A letter against the Bel-man.
Offices were not only to win the subjects of other Princes to his obadience,
but also to give notice when any of his own sworn household, or any other that
held league with him should revolt or fly from their allegiance: also discover
from time to time all plots, conspiracies, machinations, or underminings, that
should be laid (albeit they that durst lay them should dig deep enough) to
blow up his great Infernal City: so that if his Horned Regiment were not
suddenly mustred together, and did not ^^stely bestirre their cloven stumps,
his territories would be shaken, his dominions left in time unpeopled, his
forces looked into, and his authority which he held in the world, contemned
and laughed to scorn. The reason was, that a certain fellow. The Child of
Darkness, a common Night-walker, a man that had no man to wait upon The
Bel-man.
him but only a Dog, one that was a disordered person, and at midnight would
beat at men's doors, bidding them (in mere mockery) to look to their
candles, when they themselves were in their dead sleeps: and albeit he was an
Officer, yet he was but of Light-carriage, being known by the name of the
Bel-man of London, had of late not only drawn a number of the Devils own
kindred into question for their lives, but had also (only by the help of the
lanthorn and candle) looked into the serrets of the best trades that are taught
in hell, laying them open to the broad eye of the world, making them infamous,
odious, and ridiculous: yea, and not satisfied with doing this wrong to his
diuelship, very spitefully has he set them out in print, drawing their
pictures so to the life, that now a horse-stealer shall not show his head, but
a hailter with the Hang-mans noose is ready to be fastened about it: A Foyst,
nor a Nip shall not walk into a Fair or a Playhouse, but every tracke will
cry, look to your purses: nor a poor common Rogue come to a man's door, but
he shall be examined if he can cant. If this Baulling fellow therefore have
not his mouth stopped, she light Angels that are coynd below, will never be able
to pass as they have done, but be naild up for counterfeits, Hell will have no
doings, and the devil be no body.

This was the lyking of the Letter, and this Letter drove them all to a
Nonplus, because they knew not how to answer it. But at last advice was
taken, the Court brake up, the Term was adiournd, (by reason that the Hell
hounds were thus Plagued) and a common counsel in hell was presently called
how to redress these abuses.

The Sathanicall Sinagogue being set, up startes the Father of Hell and
damnation, and looking very terribly, with apaire of eyes that stared as wide
as the mouth gapes at Bishops-gate, fetching four or five deep sighs (which
were nothing else but the Smoke of fire and brimstone boiling in his stomach,
and showed as if he were taking Tobacco, which be oftentimes does) told his
children and servants (and the rest of the citizens that dwelt within the
freedom of Hell, and sat there before him upon narrow low forms) that they
never had more cause to lay their heads together, and to grow politicians. He
and they all knew that from the corners of the earth, some did every hour in a
day creep forth, to come and serve him: yea, that many thousands were so
bewitched Huc omnis turba
with his favors, and his rare parts, that they would come running quick to
him: his dominions (he said) were great, and full of people, Emperors, and
Kings, (in infinite number) were his slaves, his court was full of Princes, if
the world were denided (as some report) but into three Innumerae gentes
populsque.
parts, two of those three were his: or if (as others affirm) into four
parts, almost three of that four he had firm footing in.

But if such a fellow as a treble voic'd Bel-man, should be suffer to pry into
the infernal Mysteries, and into those black Acts which command the spirits
of the Deep, and having sucked what knowledge he can from them, to turn it all
into poison, and to spit it in the very faces of the professors, with a
malicious intent to make them appear ugly, and so to grow hateful and out of
favor with the world, if such a coniurer at midnight should dance in their
circles, and not be driven out of them, Hell in a few years would not be worth
the dwelling in. The great Lord of Limbo did therefore command all his black
guard that stood about him, to bestirre them in their places, and to defend the
court wherein they lived: threatening (besides) that his curse, and all the
plagues of stinking Hell should Graucolentis Auerni.
fall upon his officers, servants, and subjects, unless they either aduiz'd
him, how, or take some speedy order themselves to punish that saucie
intelligencer, the Bel-man of London. Thus he spoke, and then sat down.

At last, a foolish Devil rose up, and shot the bolt of his advice, which flew
thus far: That the Black-dogge of Newgate should again be let loose, and a
far off, follow the Bauling Bel-man, to watch into what places he went, and
what deeds of darkness (every night) he did. Hinc risus! The whole
Synodicall assembly, fell a laughing at this Wise-acre, so that neither he, nor
his black Dog durst bark any more.

Another, thinking to cleave the very pin with his arrow, drew it home to the
head of Wisdom (as he imagined) and yet that lighted wide too. But thus shot
his counsel, that the Ghosts of all those Thieves, Cheaters, and others of
that damned crew, (who by the Bel-mans discovery, had been betrayed, were
taken and sent westward) should be fetched from those fields of Horror, where
every night they walk, disputing with Doctor Story, who keeps them company
there in his corner Cap: and that those wry neckt spirits should have charge
given them to haunt the Bel-man in his walks, and so fright him out of his
wits. The Devil for all his roaring went away neither with a Plaudite, nor
with a hiss. Others stepped up, some pronouncing one verdict, some another: But
at the last, it being put into their Diulish heads, that they had no power over
him further then what should be given unto them, it was concluded and set down
as a rule in Court, that some one strange Spirit, who could transport himself
into all shapes, should be sent up to London, and scorning to take revenge upon
so mean a person as a Bel-ringer, should thrust himself into such companyes
(as in a warrant to be signed for that purpose) should be nominated: and being
once grown familiar with them, he was to work and win them by all possible
means to fight under the dismal and black colors of the Grand Sophy (his
Lord and Master) the fruit that was to grow upon this tree of evil, would be
great, for it should be fit to be served up to Don Lucifers Table, as a new
banqueting Dish, sithence all his other meats, (though they fatted him well)
were grown stale.

Hereupon Parmersiell the Messenger was called, a Pasport was drawn, signed,
and delivered to him, with certain instructions how to carry himself in his
travel. And thus much was openly spoken to him by word of mouth.

Fly Pamersiel with speed to the great and populous city in the West: wind
thy self into all shapes: be a Dog (to ^awne,) a Dragon (to confound,) be a
Dove (seem innocent,) be a Devil (as thou art,) and show that thou art a
Iorniman to hell. Build rather thynest amongst willowes that bend every way,
then on tops of Oaks, whose hearts are hard to be broken: Fly with the
Swallow, close to the earth, when storms are at hand, but keep company with
Birds of greater tallants, when the weather is clear, and never leave them
till they look like Ravens: creep into bosoms that are buttond up in satin
and there spread the wings of thine infection: make every head thy pillow to
lean upon, or use it like a Mill, only to grind mischief. If thou meetst a
Dutchman, drink with him: if a Frenchman, stab: if a Spaniard, betray: if an
Italian poison: if an Englishman do all this.

Haunt Tauerns, there thou shall find prodigalls: pay thy twopence to a
Player, in his gallerie may thou sit by a Harlot: at Ordinaries may thou
dine with filken fools: when the day steals out of the world, thou shall
meet rich drunkards, under welted gowns search for threescore in the hundred,
hug those golden villains, they shine bright, and will make a good show in
hell, shricke with a cricket in the brew house, and watch how they conjure
there: Ride up and down Smith-field, and play the Jade there: Visit prisons,
and teach Iaylors how to make nets of Iron there: bind thy self Prentice to
the best trades: but if thou can grow extreme rich in a very short time
(honestly) I banish thee my kingdom, come no more into hell, I have red thee a
lecture, follow it, farewell.

No sooner was farewell spoken, but the spirit to whom all these matters were
given in charge, vanished: the cloven footed Orator arose, and the whole
assembly went about their damnable business.

Gul-groping. How Gentlemen are cheated at Ordinaries. CHAP. III.
THe Devils foote-man was very nimble of his heels (for no wilde-Irish man
could out-runne him, and therefore in a few hours, was he come up to London:
the miles between Hell and any place upon earth, being shorter then those
between London and Saint Albones, to any man that travels from hence thither,
or to any Lacky that comes from thence hither, on the Devils errands: but to
any other poor soul, that dwells in those low countries, they are never at an
end, and by him are not possible to be measured.

No sooner was he entered into the City, but he met with one of his Masters
daughters, called Pride, dressed like a Merchants wife, who taking acquaintance
of him, and understanding for what he came, told him, that the first thing he
was to do, he must put himself in good clothes, such as were suitable to the
fashion of the time, for that here, men were looked upon only for their
outsides: he that had not ten-pounds-worth of wares in his shop, would carry
twenty marks on his back: that there were a number of sumpter-horses in the
city, who cared Auser imur cultu, Gemmis aureque tegnutur omnia.
not how coursely they fed, so they might were gay trappings: yea, that some
pied fools, to put on satin and velvet but four days in the year, did
oftentimes undo themselves, wives and Children ever after. The spirit of the
Devils Buttery hearing this, made a leg to Pride for here counsel, and
knowing by his own experience that every Tailor has his hell to himself,
under his Shop-board, (where he dammes new Satin) amongst them he thought to
find best welcome, and therefore into Burchin-lane he stalks very mannerly,
Pride going along with him, and taking the upper hand.

No sooner was he entered into the ranks of the Linen Burchin-lane described.
Tailors at first were called Linnen-Armorers. Serieants.
Armorers, (whose weapons are Spanish needles) but he was most terribly and
sharply set upon, every prentise boy had a pull at him: he feared they all
had bin Serieants, because they all had him by the back: never was poor
devil so tormented in hell, as he was amongst them: he thought it had been
Saint Thomas his day, and that he had been called upon to be Constable, there
was such bauling in his ears, and no strength could shake them off, but that
they must show him some suites of apparel, because they saw what Gentlewoman
was in his company (whom they all knew,) Seeing no remedy, into a shop he
goes, was fitted bravely, and beating the price, found the lowest to be
unreasonable, yet paid it, and departed, none of them (by reason of their
crowding about him before) perceiving what customer they had met with, but now
the Tailor spying the devil, suffered him to go, never praying that he would
know the shop another time, but looking round about his warehouse if nothing
were missing, at length he found that he had lost his conscience: yet
remembering himself, that they who deal with the devil, can hardly keep it,
he stood upon it the less.

The fashions of an Ordinary.
THe Stigian traveler being thus translated into an accomplished gallant, with
all acoutrements belonging (as a ^ether for his head, gilt rapier for his
sides, and new boots to hide his polt foot, for in Bed-lam he met with a
shoemaker, a mad slave, that knew the length of his last) it rested, only that
now he was to enter upon company suitable to his clothes: and knowing that
your most selected Gallants are the onely-tablemen that are played with all at
Ordinaries, into an Ordinary did he most gentleman like, convey himself in
state.

It seemed that all who came thither, had clocks in their bellies, for they all
struck into the dyning room much aabout the very minute of feeding. Our
Caualier had all the eyes (that came in) thrown upon him, (as being a
stranger: for no Ambassador from the devil ever dined amongst them before,)
and he as much took especial notice of them. In observing of whom and of the
place, he found, that an Ordinary was the only Randeuouz for the most
ingenious, most terse, most trauaild, and most fantastic gallant: the very
Exchange for news out of all countries: the only Booke-sellers shop for
conference of the best Editions, that if a woman (to be a Lady) would cast away
herself upon a Knight, there a man should hear a Catalogue of most of the
richest London widows: and last, that it was a school where they were all
fellows of one Form, and that a country gentleman was of as great coming as
the proudest Justice that sat there on the bench above him: for he that had
the grain of the table with his trencher, paid no more then he that placed
himself beneath the salt.

The devils intelligencer could not be contented to fill his eye only with
these objects, and to feed his belly with delicate cheer: but he drew a
larger picture of all that were there, and in these colors.

The voider having cleared the table, Cards and Dice (for the last Mess) are
served up to the board: they that are full of coin draw: they that have
little, stand by and give aim: they shuffle and cut on one side: the bones
rattle on the other: long have they not plaide, but oaths fly up and down the
room like haile-shot: if the poor dumb Dice be but a little out of square,
the pox and a thousand-plagues break their necks out at window: presently
after, the four knaves are sent packing the same way, or else (like heretics)
are condemned to be burnt.

In this battle of Cards and Dice, are several Regiments and several
Officers.

They that sit down to play, are at first called Leaders.

They that loose, are the Forlorn Hope.

He that winnes all, is the Eagle.

He that stands by and Ventures, is the Wood-pecker.

The fresh Gallant that is fetched in, is The Gul.

He that stands by, and lends, is the Gul-groper.

The Gul-groper.
THis Gul-groper is commonly an old Mony-monger, who having trauaild through
all the follyes of the world in his youth, knows them well, and shunnes them
in his age, his whole felicity being to fill his bags with gold and silver:
he comes to an Ordinary, to save charges of housekeeping, and will eat for
his two shillings, more meat then will serve three of the guard at a dinner,
yet swears he comes thither only for the company, and to converse with
trauailers. It is a Gold-Finch that sildome flies to these Ordinary Nests,
without a hundred or two hundred pound in twenty shilling pieces about him.
After the tearing of some seven pair of Cards, or the damning of some ten
bail of Dice, steps he upon the Stage, and this part he plays. If any of
the Forlorn Hope be a Gentleman of Means, either in Esse, or in Posse, (and
that the old Fox will be sure to know to half an Acre) whose money runs at
a low ebb, as may appear by his scratching of the head, and walking up and
down the room, as if he wanted an Ostler: The Gul-groper takes him to a side
window and tells him, he is sorry to see his hard luck, but the Dice are made
of women's bones, and will cozen any man, yet for his fathers sake (whom he
has known so long) if it please him, he shall not leave off play for a
hundred pound or two. If my young Estrich gape to swallow down this metal (as
for the most part they are very greedy, having such prouander set before them)
then is the gold powered on the board, a Bond is made for repaiment, at the next
quarter day, when Exhibition is sent in: and because it is all gold, and cost
so much the changing, the Scriuener (who is a whelpe of the old Mastiues own
breeding) knows what words will bite, which thus he fastens upon him, and in
this Net the Gull is sure to be taken (howsoever:) for if he fall to play
again, and loose, the hoary Goat-bearded Satyr that stands at his elbow,
laughes in his sleeue: if his bags be so recovered of their Fallingsicknes,
that they be able presently to repay the borrowed gold, then Monsieur
Gul-groper steals away of purpose to avoid the reccipt of it; he has fatter
Chickens in hatching: it is a fayrer mark he shootes at. For the day being
come when the bond grows due, the within named Signior Auaro, will not be
within: or if he be at home, he has wedges enough in his pate, to cause the
bond to be broken, or else a little before the day, he feeds my young Master
with such sweet words, that surfeiting upon his protestations, he neglects
his payment, as presuming he may do more But the Law having a hand in the
forfeiture of the bond, lays presently hold of our young Gallant with the help
of a couple of Serieants, and just at such a time when old Erra Pater (the Jew)
that lent him the money, knows by his own Prognostication, that the Moon
with the silver face is with him in the waine. Nothing then can free him out of
the phangs of those bloudhounds, but he must presently confess a judgment,
for so much money, or for such a Manor or Lordship (three times worth the bond
forfeited) to be paid, or to be entered upon by him, by such a day, or within so
many months after he comes to his land. And thus are young heirs coozend of
their Acres, before they well know where they lie.

The Wood-pecker.
THe Wood-pecker is a bird that sits by upon a perch too: but is nothing so
dangerous, as this Vulture spoken of before. He deals altogether upon
Returns, (as men do that take three for one, at their coming back from
Jerusalem, etc.) for having a Jewel, a Clock, a ring with a Diamond, or any
such like commodity, he notes him well that commonly is best acquainted with
the Dice, and has ever good luck: to him he offers his prize, rating it at
ten or fifteen pound, when happily it is not worth above six, and for it he
bargains to receive five shillings or ten shillings (according as it is in
value) at every hand, second third, or fourth hand he draws: by which means
he perhaps in a short time, makes that yield him forty or fifty pound, which
cost not half twenty. Many of these Merchant venturers sail from Ordinary to
Ordinary, being sure always to make saving Voiages, when they that put in ten
times more then they, are for the most part loosers.

The Gull.
NOwifeither The Leaders, or The forlorn Hope, or any of the rest, chance to
hear of a young Fresh Water soldier that never before followed these strange
war, and yet has a Charge newly given him (by the old fellow Soldado Vecchio
his father, when Death had shut him into the Grave) of some ten or twelve
thousand in ready money, besides so many hundreds a year: first are Scoutes
sent out to discover his Lodging: that known some lie in ambush to note what
Apothecaries shop he resorts too every morning, or in what Tobacco shop in
Fleet Street he takes a pipe of Smoke in the afternoon: that fort which the
Puny holds, is sure to be beleaguerd by the whole troop of the old weather
beaten Gallants: amongst whom some one, whose wit is thought to be of a better
block for his head, than the rest, is appointed to single out our Nouice, and
after some four or five days spent in Complement, our heir to seven hundred
a year is drawn to an Ordinary, into which he no sooner enters, but all the
old ones in that Nest flutter about him, embrace, protest, kiss the hand,
Conge to the very garter, and in the end (to show that he is no small fool,
but that he knows his father left him not so much money for nothing,) the young
Cub suffers himself to be drawn to the stake: to flesh him, Fortune and the
Dice (or rather the False Dice, that coozen Fortune, and make a fool of him
too) shall so favor him, that he marches away from a battle or two the only
winner. But afterward, let him play how warily soever he can, the damned Dice
shall cross him, and his silver crosses shall bless those that play against
him: for even they that seem dearest to his bosom, shall first be ready, and
be the foremost to enter with the other Leaders into conspiracy, how to make
spoil of his golden bags. By such ransacking of Citizens sormes wealth, the
Leaders maintain themselves brave, the Forlome hope, that drooped before,
do'es now gallantly come on. The Eagle feathers his nest, the Wood-pecker pickes
up his crumbs, the Gul-groper grows fat with good feeding: and the Gul
himself, at whom every one has a Pull, has in the end scarce feathers enough
to keep his own back warm.

The Post master of Hell, seeing such villain to go up and down in cloakes
lined clean through with Velvet, was glad he had such news to send over, and
therefore sealing up a letter full of it, delivered the same to filthybearded
Charon (their own Water-man) to be conuaied first to the Porter of Hell, and
then (by him) to the Master Keeper of the Devils.

Of Ferreting. The Manner of undoing Gentlemen by taking up of commodities.
CHAP. IIII.
HVnting is anoble, a manly, and a healthful exercise, it is a very true
picture of war, nay it is a war in it self, for engines are brought into the
steid, stratagems are contrived, ambushes are laid, onsets are given, allarums
struck up, brave incounters are made, fierce assailings are resisted by
strength, by courage, or by policy: the enemy is pursued, and the Pursuers
never give over till they have him in execution, then is a Retreat sounded,
then are spoils divided, then come they home wearied, but yet crowned with
honor and victory. And as in battles there be several manners of fight: so in
the pastime of hunting, there are several degrees of game.

Some hunt the Lion, and that shows as when subjects Hunting of the Lion, etc.
rise in Arms against their King. Some hunt the Unicorn, for the treasure on
his head, and they are like covetous men, that care not whom they kill for
riches. Some hunt the spotted Panther, and the freckled Leopard, they are such
as to enjoy their pleasures regard not how black an infamy sticks upon them:
All these are barbarous and unnatural Huntsmen, for they range up and down
the deserts, the Wilderness, and the Mountains, Others pursue the long-liued
Heart, the courageous Stag Hunting of the Bucke.
or the nimble footed Dear: these are the noblest hunters, and they exercise
the Noblest game: these by following the Chase, get strength of body, a free
and vndisquieted mind, magnanimity of spirit, alacrity of heart, and an
vnwearisomnesse to break through the hardest labors: their pleasures are not
insatiable, but are contented to be kept within limits, for these hunt within
Parkes enclosed, or within bounded Forests. The hunting of the Hare teaches
fear to be bold, and puts Hunting of the Hare.
simplicity so to her shifts, that she grows cunning and provident: the
turnings and cross windings that she makes are embleames of this life's
uncertainty: when she thinks she is further from danger, it is at her
heels, and when it is nearest to her, the hand of safety defends her. When
she is wearied and has run her race, she takes her death patiently,
thereby to teach man to make himself ready, when the grave gapes for him.

All these kinds of hunting are abroad in the open field, but there is a close
City hunting, only within the De magno preda petenda grege.
walls, that pulles down Parkes, lays open Forests, destroys Chaces, wounds
the Dear of the land, and makes such havoc of the goodliest Herds, that by
their wills, (who are the rangers,) none should be lest alive but the Rascals.
This kind of hunting is base and ignoble. It is the meanest, yet she most
mischievous, and it is called Ferreting. To behold a course or two at this, did
the light-horseman of Hell one day leap into the saddle.

Citie-Hunting.
THis Ferret-hunting has his Seasons as other What persons follow the game of
Ferret-hunting.
games have, and is only followed at such a time of year, when the Gentry of
our kingdom by riots, having chased them selves out of the fair revenues and
large possessions left to them by their ancestors are forced to hide their
heads like Conies, in little caves, and in unfrequented places: or else being
almost windelesse, by running after sensual pleasures too fiercely, they are
glad Dolor ac volupt as inuicem cedunt.
(for keeping themselves in breath so long as they can) to fall to
Ferret-hunting, that is to say, to tak up commodities.

No warrant can be granted for a Bucke in this forest, but it must pass
under these five ha^nds.

1 He that hunts up and down to find game, is called, The tragedy of
Ferret-hunting divided into 5. acts.
the Tumbler. 2 The commodities that are taken up are called Pursenets. 3 The
Citizens that selles them is the Ferret. 4 They that take up are the
Rabbet-suckers. 5 He upon whose credit these Rabbet-suckers run, is called
the Warren.
How the Warren is made.
AFter a rain, Conies use in come out of their Holes, and to sit nibling on
weeds, or any thing in the cool of the evening, and after a reueling, when
younger brothers have spent all, or in gaining have lost all, they sit plotting
in their chambers, with necessity, how to be furnished, presently with a new
supply of (...). They Nam illa omnes arts perdecet, vbi quem attigit.
would take up any commodity whatsoever, but the^^ names (...) in too many
texted letters all ready in Mercers and Soriueners books: upon a hundred
pounds worth of Roasted beef they could find in their hearts to venture, for
that would away (...) of a hand: but where shall they find Butcher, or a
Cook, that will let any (...) so much upon the score for flesh only Suppose
therefore that four of such loose-fortuned gallants were tied in one knot, and
knew not how to fasten themselves upon some wealthy citizen. At the length it
runs into their heads, that such a young Nouice (who daily serves to fill up
their company) was never entangled in any city limebush: they know his present
means to be good, and those to come to be great: him therefore they lay upon
the Anuill of their wits, till they have wrought him like wax, for himself as
well as for them, to do any thing in wax, or indeed till they have won him Dum
spectant oculi lasos; leduntur and ipsi.
to slide upon this Ice, because he knows not the danger) he is easily
drawn: for he considers within himself that they are all gentlemen well
descended, they have rich fathers, they wear good clothes, have bin gallant
spenders, and do now and then (still) let it fly freely: he is to venture
upon no more rocks than all they, what then should he fear? he therefore
resolves to do it, and the rather because his own exhibition runs low, and
that there lack a great many weeks to the quarter day, at which time, he
shall be refurnished from his father. The Match being thus agreed upon, one of
them that has been an old Ferret-monger, and knows all the tricks of such
Hunting, seeks out a Tumbler, that is to say, a fellow, who beats the bush for
them till they catch the birds, he himself being contented (as he protests and
swears) only with a few feathers.

The Tumblers Hunting dry-foote.
THis Tumbler being let loose, runs Snuffing The nature of a London Tumbler.
up and down close to the ground, in the shoppes either of Merrers,
Gouldsmithes, Drapers, Haberdashers, or of any other trade, where he thinckes
he may meet with a Ferret: and the upon his very first course, he can find
his game, yet to make his gallants more hungry, and to think he wearies
himself in hunting the more, he comes to them sweating and swearing that the
City Ferrets are so coaped (that is to say, have their lips stitched up
close) that he can hardly get them open to so great a sum as five hundred
pounds, which they desire. This heache being chewd down Nil habit inf^lix
paupertae durius in se, Quam quod ridicules homines facit.
by the Rabbet-suckers almost kills their hearts, and is worse to them then
dabbing on the necks to Connies. They bid him if he cannot fasten his tieth
upon plate or Cloth, or Silks, to lay hold on brown paper or Tobacco,
Bartholmew babies, Lute stringes or Hobnailes, or two hundred pounds in Saint
Thomas Onions, and the rest in money; the Onions they could get wenches enough
to cry and sell them by the Rope, and what remains should serve them with
Mutton. Upon this, their Tumbler trottes up and down again. And at last
lighting on a Citizen that will deal, the names are received, and delivered
to a Scriuener, who enquiring whether they be good men and true, that are to
pass upon the life and death of five hundred pounds, finds that four of the
five, are winde-shaken, and ready to fall into the Lords hands: marry the
fist man, is an Oak, and there is hope that he cannot be hewed down in haste.
Upon him therefore the Citizen buildes so much as comes to five hundred
pounds, yet takes in the other four to make them serve as scaffolding, till
the Frame be furnished, and if then it hold, he cares not greatly who takes
them down. In all have, are the bonds sealed and the commodities delivered,
And then does the Tumbler fetch his second carreere, and that's this.

The Tumblers Hunting Counter.
THe wares which they fished for being in the hand of the five shauers, do now
more trouble their wits how to turn those Wares into ready money, then before
they were troubled to turn their credits into wares. The Tree being once more
to be shaken, they know it must loose fruit, and therefore their Factor must
barter away their Merchandise, tho it be with loss: Abroad into the City he
Sails for that purpose, and deals with him that sold, to but his own
Commodities again for ready money; He will not do it under. 30 l. loss in
the Hunored: other Archers bows are tried at the same mark, but all keep
much about one scantling: back therefore comes their Carrier with this news,
that no man will disburse so much present money upon any (...) whatsoever.
Only he met by good fortune with one friend (and that friend is himself) who
for 10 l. will procure them a Chapman, marry that chapman will not buy unless
he may have them at 30. l. loss in the Hundred: ^u^h, cry all the Sharers,
(...) these (...) Curmudgions, give that (...) your friend 10. l. for his
pains, and ^etch the rest of the money: within an hour after, it is brought,
and powered down in one heap upon a tavern table; where making a goodly show
as if it could never be spent, all of them consult what see the Tombler is to
have, for Hunting so well, and conclude that less then 10 l. they cannot give
him, which 10. l. is the first told out. Now let us cast up this Account: In
every 100. l. is Dedit hanc contagio labem, et Dabit in plures.
lost 30. which being 5. times 30. l. makes 150. l. that Sum the Ferret puts up
clear besides his ouer-prising the wares: unto which 150. l. lost, ad 10. l.
more, which the Tumbler guls them off, and other 10. l. which he has for his
voyage, all which makes 170. l. which deducted from 500. l. there remains
only 330. to be divided amongst 5. so that every one of the partners shall
have but 66. l. yet this they all put up merrily, washing down their losses
with Sack and Sugar, whereof they drink that night profoundly.

How the Warren is spoiled.
Whilst this weather lasts lasts, and that there is any grake to nibble
upon, These Rabbet-suckers keep to the Warren wherein they fatned: but the
cold day of repaiment approaching, they retire deep into their Caves; so that
when the Ferret makes account to have five before him in chase; four of the
five lie hidden, and are stolen into other groun us. No marvel then if the
Ferret grow fierce and tear open his own jaws, to suck blood from him that
is left: no marvel if he scratch what woolhe can from his back: the Pursnets
that were Set, are all taken up and carried away. The Warren therefore must be
Searched, That must pay for all: over that does he range like a little Lord.
Sargeants, Marshals-men, and Baliffes are sent forth, who lie scowting at every
corner, and with terrible paws haunt every walk. Inconelusion the bird that
these Hawks sly after, is seazd upon, then are his feathers plucked, his
estate looked into, then are his wings broken, his lands made over to a
stranger: then must our young son and heir pay 500. l. (for which he never had
but 66. l.) or else lie in prison. To keep himself from which, he feales to
any bond, enters into any statute, morgageth Infelix viris excidit ipse suis.
any Lordship, Does any thing, Sales any thing, yeews to pay any thing. And
these City storms (which will wet a man, till he have never a dry thried
about him, tho he be kept never so warm) fall not upon him once or twice: But
being a little way in, he cares not how deep he wades: the greater his
possessions are, the apter he is to Grandia permultos tenuantur Flumina riues.
take up and to be trusted: the more he is trusted, the more he comes in debt,
the farther in debt, the nearer to danger. Thus Gentlemen are wrought upon,
thus are they Cheated, thus are they Ferreted, thus are they Undone.

Fawlconers. Of a new kind of Hawking, teaching how to catch Birds by Books.
HVnting and Hawking are of kin, and therefore it is Hawking.
sit they should keep company together: both of them are noble Games, and
Recreations, honest and healthful, yet they may so be abused that nothing can
be more hurtful. In Hunting, the Game is commonly still before you, or (...)
hearing, and within a little compass: In Hawking, the game flies far off,
and oftentimes out of sight: A Couple of Rookes therefore (that were birds of
the last feather) conspired together to leave their nest in Facies ron omnibus
^na, ^ec diuersatamem.
the City, and to flutter abroad, into the Country: Upon two lean hackneies
were these two Doctor doddipols horst, Ciuilly suited, that they might carry
about them some badge of a Scholar.

The devils Ranck-ryder, that came from the last Cityhunting, understanding
that two such Light-horsemen were gone a Hawking, posts after, and ouer-takes
them. After some ordinary highway talk, he begins to question of what
profession they were? One of them smyling scornfully in his face, as thinking
him to be some Gul, (and * indeed such fellows take all men for Gulles, who
they Qui nisi quod ipsi faciunt, nihilrectum putant.
think to be beneath them in quality) told him they were Falconers. But the
Foxethat followed them, seeing no properties, (belonging to a Falconer) about
them, smelt knavery, took them for a pair of mad rascals, and therefore
resolved to see at what these Falconers would let fly.

How to cast up the Lure.
AT last on a sudden says one of them to him, Sir, The first Noate.
we have Sprung a Partridge, and so fare you well: which words came stammering
out with the haste that they made, for presently the two Forragers of the
Country, were upon the Spur: Plutoes Post seeing this, stood still to watch
them, and at length saw them in maine gallop make toward a goodly fair place,
where either some Knight, or some great Gentleman kept; and this goodly house
belike was the Partridge which those Falconers had sprung. He being loath to
loose his share in this Hawking, and having power to transform himself as he
listed, came thither as soon as they, but beheld all (which they did)
invisible. They both, like two Knights Errant, alighted at the Gate, knocked,
and were let in: The one walks the Hackneyes in an outward Court, as if he had
been but Squire to Sir Dagonet. The other (as boldly as S. George, when he
dared the Dragon at his very Den) marches undauntedly up to the Hall, where,
looking over those poor creatures of the house, that wear but the bare
Blew-coates (for Aquila non capit Muscas) what should a Falconer meddle with
files? he only salutes him that in his eye seems to be a Gentleman-like
fellow: Of him he asks for his good Knight, or so, and says that he is a *
Gentleman come from London on a Et qua non fecimus ipsi, vix ea nostra voeo:
business, which he must deliver to his own Worshipful Ear. Up the stairs
does brave Mount Dragon ascend; the Knight and he encounter, and with this
staff does he valiantly charge upon him.

How the Bird is Caught.
SIr, I am a poor * Scholar, and the report of your Sen stos fuit ille
Caducus Frange Puer Calamos and manes desere Musas. Quid nisi Monstra legis?
virtues has drawn me hither, venturously bold to fix your worthy name as a
patronage to a poor short discourse, which here I dedicate (out of my love) to
your noble and eternal Memory: this speech he vtters barely.

The Hawking pamphleter is then bid to put on, whilst his Miscellane Maecenas,
opens a Book fayrely aparreld in Vellom, with gilt-fillets, and foure-penny
silk ribbon at least, like little streamers on the top of a March-pane Castle,
hanging dandling by at the four corners: the title being superficially
suruaid, in the next leaf he sees that the Author he, has made him one of
his Gossips, for the Book carries his Worships name, and under it stands an
Epistle just the length of a Hench-mans grace before dinner, which is long
enough for any Book in conscience, unless the writer be unreasonable.

The Knight being told before hand, that this little sunbeame of Phoebus
(shining thus briskly in print) has his Mite or Atmy waiting upon him in the
outward court, thanks him for his love and labor, and considering with
himself, what cost he has been at, and hold far he has ridden to come to
him, he knows that Patrons and Godfathers, are to pay scot and lot alike, and
therefore to cherish his young and tender Muse, he gives him four or six
Angles, inuiting him either to stay breakefast, or if the sun-diall of the
house points toward eleauen, then to tarry dinner.

How the Bird is dressed.
But the fish being caught (for which our Heliconian Angler threw out his
lines) with thanks, and legs, and kissing his own hand, he parts. No sooner
is he horst, but his Hostler (who all this while walked the iades, and
travails up and down with him (like an undeserving plaier for half a share)
asks this question, Strawes or not? Strawes cries the whole sharer and a
half, away then replies the first, fly to our nest: This nest is never in the
stultus quoque munere gaudet.
same town but commonly a mile or two off, and it is nothing else but the next
Tavern they come to. But the Village into which they rode being not able to
maintain an Iuybush, an Alehouse was their Inn: where advancing themselves
into the fairest Chamber, and bespeaking How Birds are dressed after they be
caught.
the best cheer in the town for dinner, down they sit, and share before they
speak of any thing else: That done, he that ventures upon all he meets, and
discharges the paper Bullets, (for to tell truth, the other serves but as a
sign, and is merely nobody) begins to discourse, how he carried himself in
the action, how he was encountered: how he stood to his tackling, and how well
he came off: he calls the Knight, a Noble fellow, yet they both shrug, and
laugh, and swears they are glad they have Guld him.

More arrows must they shoot of the same length that this first was of, and
therefore there is Truncke full of Trinckets, that is to say, their budget of
Books is opend again, to see what leaf they are to turn over next, which
whilst they are doing, the Ghost that all this space haunted them, and hard
what they said, having excellent, skill in the black art, that is to say, in
picking of locks, makes the door suddenly fly open (which they had closely
shut. At his strange entrunce they being somewhat aghast, began to shustle away
their books, but he knowing what cards they plaide withal, offered to cut,
and turned up two Knaves by this trick: my Masters (quoth he) I know where you
have bin, I know what you have done, I know what you mean to do, I see now
you are Fakoners indeed, but by the (and then he swore a danuiable oath)
unless you teach me to shoot in this Birding piece, I will raise the Village,
send for the Knight whom you boast you have guld, and so disgrace you: for your
money I care not.

The two Free-booters seeing themselves smoaked, told their third Brother, he
seemed to be a gentleman and a boon companion, they prayed him therefore to
sit down with silence, and sithence dinner was not yet ready, he should hear
all.

This new kind of Hawking (quoth. one of them) which you see us use, can afford
no name unless 5. be at it. viz.

1 He that casts up the Lure is called the Falconer. 2 The Lure that is cast up
is an idle Pamphlet. 3 The Tercel-Gentle that comes to the Lure, is some
Knight, or some gentleman of like quality. 4 The Bird that is preied upon, is
Money. 5 He that walks the horses, and hunts dry-foote is called a Mongrell.
The Falconer and his Spaniell.
THe Falconer having scraped together certain small parings of wit, he
first cuttes them hansomely in pretty pieces, and of those pieces does he
patch up a book. This book he priuits at his own charge, the Mongrell
running up and down to look to the workmen, and bearing likewise some part
of the cost, (for which he enters upon his half share.) When it is fully
finished, the Falconer and his Mongrell, or it may be two Falconers join in
one,) but howsoever, it is by them devised what Shire in England it is best to
forage next: that being set down, the Falconers ^ea(...) either with ^
Herald for a note of all the Knights and Gentlemen's names of worth that dwell
in that circuit, which they mean to ride, or else by inquiry, get the chiefest
of them, printing of so many Epistles as they have names, the Epistles
Dedicatory being all one, and vary in nothing but in the titles of their
patrons.

Having thus furnished themselves, and packed up their wares, away they trudge,
like tinckers, with a budget at Strange hawking.
one of their backs, or it may be the circle they mean to conjure in shall
not be out of London, especially if it be Tearme-time, or when a Parliament is
holden (for then they have choice of sweete-meats to feed upon. (If a gentleman
seeing one of these books Dedicated only to his name, suspect it to be a
bastard, that has more fathers besides himself, and to try that, does defer
the Presenter for a day or two, sending in the mean time (as some have done)
into Paul's Churchyard amongst the Stationers to inquire if any such work be
come forth, and if they cannot tell, then to step to the Printers: Yet have
the Falconers a trick to go beyond such Hawks too, for all they fly so hie:
and that is this: The books lie all at the Printers, but not one line of an
epistle to any of them (those bug-beares lurk in Tenebris) if then the Spy
that is sent by his Master, ask why they have no dedications to them,
Mounsier Printer tells him, the author would not venture to add any to them
all, (saving only to that which was given to his Master, until it was known
whether he would accept of it or no.

This satisfies the Patron, this fetches money from him, and this Cozens five
hundred besides. Nay there be other Bird-catchers, that use stranger
Quaile-pipes: you shall have fellows, four or five in a country, that buying
up any old Book (especially a Sermon, or any other matter of Divinity) that
lies for wast paper, and is clean forgotten, ad a new printed Epistle to it,
and with an Alphabet of letters which they carry about them, being able to print
any man's name (for a Dedscation) on the sudden travail up and down most
Shires in England, and live by this Hawking.

Are we not excellent Falconersnow (quoth three half shares?) excellent
villains, cried the devils Deputy: by this the meat (for dinnet came smoking
in, upon which they fell most firannically, yet (for manners sake) offering
first, to the Balife of Beelzebub the upper end of the table, but he fearing
they would make a Hawk, or a Buzzard of him too, and report they had ridden
himlike an Ass, as they had done others, out a doors he flung with a
vengeance as he came.

O sacred Learning why do thou suffer thy seven leaued tree, to be plucked
by barbarous and most unhallowed hands? Why is thy beantifull Maiden-body,
polluted like a strumpets, and prostituted to beastly and slanish Cur ego si
neque ignoreque Poetae salutor.
Ignoraike? O then Base-broode, that make the Muses harlots, yet say they are
your Mothers? You Thieves of Wit, Cheators of Art, Traitors of schools of
Learning: murderers of Scholars: More worthy you are, to undergo the Roman
Furca, like slaves, and to be branded in the forehead deeper then they that
forge Testaments to undo Orphants: Such do but rob children of goods that may
be lost: but you rob Scholars of their Fame, which is deerer then life. You
are not worth an Inuectiue, not worthy to haue-your names drop out of a
deserving pen, you shall only be executed in Picture, (as they use to handle
Malefactors in France) and the picture (though it were drawn to be hung up in
another place) shall leave you impudently arrogant to your selves, and
ignominiously rioiculeus to after ages: in these colors, are you drawn.

The true picture of these Falconers.
-- There be Fellows Proh superi quantum pectora caeca Noctis Habe^t.

Of course and common blood; Mechanicke knaves,
Whose (...) buried then in graves:
And indeed (...) earthy, whose creation.
Was but to give a Boot or Shoe good fashion.
Yet these (shrowing by the Apron and the Awle)
Being druncke with their own wit, cast up their gall scribimus indocti;
doctique

Only of yncke: and in patchd, beggarly Rimes,
(As full of foul corruption, as the Times)
From town to town they strowle in soul, as poor
As the are in clothes: yet these at every door,
Their labors Dedicate. But (as at Faires)
Like Pedlars, they show still one sort of wares
Unto all comers (with some filde oratlon)
And thus to give books now is an occupation. Miserum est aliorum incu^bere
famae.

One book has seven score patrons: thus desert
Is cheated of her due: thus noble art
Gives Ignorance (that common strumpet) place,
Thus the true scholars name grows cheap and base, etc.
Iacks of the Clock-house. A new and cunning drawing of money from Gentlemen.
CHAP. VI.
THere is another Fraternity of wandering Pilgrims who merrily call themselves,
Iackes of the Clocke-house, and are very near allied to the Falconers, that
went a Hawking before. The Clarke of Erebus set down their names too in his
Tables, with certain brief notes of their practices: and these they are.

The Jack of a Clocke-house goes upon Screws, and his office is to do nothing
but strike: so does this noise, (for they walk up and down like Fiddlers)
travail with Motions, and whatsoever their Motions get them, is called
striking.

Those Motions are certain Collections, or witty Inventions, sometimes of
one thing, and then of an other (there is a new one now in town, in praise of
the Union.) And these are fairly written and engrossed in Vellum, Parchement,
or Royal paper, richly adorned with compartiments, and set out with letters
both in gold, and in various colors.

This labor being taken, the Master of the Motion hearkens where such a
Nobleman, such a Lord, or such a Knight lies, that is liberal: having found
one to his liking, The Motion (with his Patrons name fairly texted out, in
manner of a Dedication,) is presented before him: he receives it, and thinking
it to be a work only undertaken for his sake, is bounteous to the giver,
esteeming him a Scholar, and knowing that not without great travail, he has
drawn so many little straggling streams into so fair and smoothe a River:
whereas the Work is the labor of some other (copied out by stealth) by an
impudent ignorant fellow, that runs up and down with the Transcripts, and
every Alehouse may have one of them (hanging in the basest drinking room) if
they will be but at the charges of writing it out. Thus the liberallitie of a
Nobleman, or of a Gentleman is abused: thus learning is brought into scorn and
contempt: Thus men are cheated of their bounty, giving much for that (out of
their free minds) which is common abroad, and put away for base prices. Thus
villainy sometimes walks alone, as if it were given to Melancholy, and
sometimes knaves tie themselves in a knot, because they may be more merry, as
by a mad sort of Comrades whom I see leaping into the Saddle, anon it will
apeare.

Rank Riders, The manner of Cozening Inne-keepers. Post-masters and
Hackney-men. CHAP. VII.
THere is a troop of Horsemen, that run up and down the whole kingdom,
they are ever in a gallop, their business is weighty, their iournyes many,
their expenses great, their Innes every where, their lands no where: they have
only a certain Free-holde called Tyborne, (situate near London, and many a
fair pair of Gallows in other Countries besides,) upon which they live very
poorly, till they dye, and dye for the most part wickedly, because their lives
are villainous and desperate. But what race so ever they run, their they end
it, there they set up their rest, there is their last bait, whether soever
their journey lies. And these horsemen have no other names but rank Riders.

To furnish whem forth for any journey, they must have Riding suits cut out of
these four pieces.

1 The Inne-keeper or Hackney-man, of whom they have horses, is called, A Colt.
2 He that never alights off a rich Farmer or country Gentleman, till he have
drawn money from him, is called, The Snaffle. 3 The money so gotten, is The
Ring. 4 He that feeds them with money is called, The prouander.
These Ranck-riders (like Butchers to Rumford market) sildome go under six or
seven in a company, and these Careeres they fetch. Their pursses being warmely
lined with some purchase gotten before, and they themselves well booted and
spurred, and in reasonable good outsides, arrive at the fairest Inn they can
choose, either in Westminster, the Strand, the City, or the Suburbs.

Two of them who have clothes of purpose to fit the play, carrying the show of
Gentlemen, the other act their parts in blew coats, as they were their
Seruingmen, though indeed they be all fellows. They enter all durted The
manner of Brideling a Colt.
or dustied (according as it shall please the high way to use them) and the
first bridle they put into the Colts mouth (that is to say, the Inkeepers) is
at their coming in to ask alowde if the footeman be gone back with the
horses? it is answered yes. Here, the Ranck-riders lie three or four days,
spending moderately enough, yet abating not a penny of any reckoning, to show
of what house they come: in which space their counterfeit followers learn what
countryman the master of the house is, where the Hostlars and Chamberlaines
were borne, and what other country Gentlemen are guests to the Inn: which
lessons being presently gotten by heart, they fall in study with the general
rules of their knauerie: and those are, first to give out, that their Master
is a Gentleman of such and such means, in such a shire (which shall be sure to
stand far enough from those places where any of the house, or of other guests
were borne,) that he is come to receive so many hundred pounds upon land
which he has sold, and that he means to Inn there some quarter of a year
at least.

This Brass money passing for current through the house, he is more observed
and better attended, is worshipped at every word: and the easier to break and
bridle the Colt, his Worship will not sit down to Dinner or supper, till the
Master of the house be placed at the upper end of the board by him.

In the middle of Supper, or else very early in the following morning, comes
in a counterfeit footeman, sweatingly delivering a message, that such a Knight
has sent for the head-Maister of these Rancke-ryders, and that he must be
with him by such an hour, the journey being not above twelve or fourteen
miles. Upon delivery of this message, (from so dear and noble a friend) he
swears and chafes, because all his horses are out of Town, curses the
sending of them back, offers any money to have himself, his cousen with him,
and his men but reasonably horst. Mine host being a credulous Ass, suffers
them all to get up upon him, for he prouides them horses, either of his own
(thinking his Guest to be a man of great account, and being loath to loose him,
because he spends well) or else sendes out to hire them of his neighbors,
passing his word for their forthcomming within a day or two, Up they get and
away Gallop our Ranck-riders, as far as the poor Iades can carry them.

The two days being ambled out of the world, and perhaps three more after
them, yet neither a supply of Horsemen or Foote-men, (as was promised) to be
set eye upon. The lamentable In-keeper (or Hackney man, if he chance to be
Sadled for this journey too) loose their Colts teeth, and find that they are
made old arrant Iades: Search, then runs up and down, like a Constable
half out of his wits (upon a Shroue-tuesday) and hue and cry follows after,
some twelve or fourteen miles off, (round about London) which was the
farthest of their journey as they gave out. But (alas!) the horses are at
pasture fourscore or a hundred miles from their old mangers: they were sold
at some blind drunken theeuish fair, (there being enough of them in company to
save themselves, by their Toll-booke,) the Seruing-men cast off their
blew-coates, and cried, All fellows: the money is spent upon wine, upon
whores, upon fiddlers, upon fools, (by whom they will loose nothing) and the
tide being at an ebb, they are as ready to practice their skill in
horse-manship to bring Coltes to the saddle in that Town, and to make Nags run
a race of threescore or a hundred miles of from that place, as before they did
from London.

Running at the Ring.
THus, so long as Horseflesh can make them fat, they never leave feeding. But
when they have beaten so many highways in several countries, that they fear
to be ouer-taken by Tracers, then (like Soldiers coming from a Breach) they
march fair and softly on foot, lying in garrison, as it were, close in some
out towns, till the foul Rumor of their Villainies (like a stormy durty
winter) be blown over: In which time of lurking in the shel, they are not idle
neither, but like snailes, they venture abroad tho the law has threatened to
rain down never so much punishment upon them: and what do they? they are not
bees, to live by their own painful labors, but Drones that must eat up the
sweetness, and be fed wilh the earnings of others: This therefore is their
work. They carelessly inquire what gentleman of worth, or what rich Farmers
dwell within five, six or seven miles of the Fort where they are insconc'd
(which they may do without suspicion) and having got their names, they single
out themselves in a morning, and each man takes a several path to himself:
one goes East, one West, one North, and the other South: walking either in
boots with wandes in their hands, or otherwise, for it is all to one purpose.
And note this by the way, that when they travel thus one foot, they are no
more called Ranck-riders but Ttrowlers, a proper name given to Country plaiers,
that (without Sockes) trot from town to town upon the bare hoof.

Being arrived at the Gate where the Gentlemen, or Farmer dwells, he boldly
knockes, inquiring for him by name, and steps into speak with him: the
servant seeing a fashionable person, tells his Master there is a Gentleman
desires to speak with him: the master coms and salutes him, but eying him
well, says he does not know him: No Sir, replies the other (with a face bold
enough) it may be so, but I pray you Sir, will you walk a turn or two in your
Orchard or Garden, I would there confer: Having got him thither, to this tune
he plays upon him.

How the snaffle is put on.
SIr, I am a Gentleman, borne to better means then my present fortunes do
allow me: I served in the field, and had command there, But long peace (you
know Sir) is the Cancker that eats up Soldiers, and so it has me. I lie
here not far off, in the Country, at mine Inn, where staying upon the
dispatch of some business, I am indebted to the house in moneys, so that I
cannot with the credit of a Gentleman leave the house till I have paid them.
Make me sir so much beholden to your love as to lend me fortye or fifty
shillings to bear my horse and my self to London, from whence within a day or
two, I shall send you many thanks, with a faithful repayment of your courtesy.

The honest Gentleman, or the good natured Farmer beholding a personable man,
fashionably attired, and not carrying in outward coullors, the face of a
cogging-knaue, gives credit to his words, are sorry that they are not at this
present time so well furnished as they could wish, but if a matter of twenty
shillings can stead him, he shall command it, because it were pity any
honest Gentleman should for so small a matter miscarry. Happily they meet with
some Chapmen that give them their own asking; but howsoever, all is fish that
comes to net, they are the most conscionable market folks that ever rode
between two paniers, for from forty they will fall to twenty, from twenty to
ten, from ten to five: nay these Mountibanekes are so base, that they are not
ashamed to take two shillings of a plain Husbandman, and sometimes six pence
(which the other gives simply and honestly) of whom they demanded a whole
fifteen.

In this manner do they dig silver out of men's purses all the day, and at
night meet together at the appointed Rendeuouz, where all these Snaffles are
loosed to their full length, the Ringes which that day they have made, are
worn. The Prouender is praised or dispraised, as they find it in goodness,
but it goes down all, whilst they laugh at all.

And thus does a Common Wealth bring up children, that care not how they
discredit her, or undo her: who would imagine that Birds so fair in show,
and so sweet in voice, should be so dangerous in condition-but Kanens think
carryon the daintiest meat, and villains esteem most of that money which is
purchased by baseness.

The Vnder-Shriffe for the county of the Cacodemons, knowing into what
arrerages these Rank-riders were run, for horseflesh to his master, (of
whom he farmed the office) sent out his writs to attach them, and so narrowly
pursued them, that for all they were well horst, some he sent post to the
gallows, and the rest to several iayles: After which, making all the have he
possibly could to get to London again, he was way-layd by an army of a strong
and new found people.

Moone-men. A discovery of a strange wild people, very dangerous to Towns and
Country Villages. CHAP. VIII.
A Moone-man, signifies in English, a madman, because the Moon has greatest
domination (above any other Planet) ouet the bodies of Frantic persons. But
these Moone-men (whose Images are now to be carved) are neither absolutely mad,
nor yet perfectly in their wits.) Their name they borrow from the Moon,
because as the Moon is never in one shape two nights together, but wanders up
and down Heaven, like an Anticke, so these changeable-stuffe-companions never
tarry one day in a place, but are the only, and the only base Runnagats upon
earth. And as in the Moon there is a man, that never stirs without a bush of
thorns at his back, so these Moone-men lie vndes bushes; and are indeed no
better then Hedge creepers.

They are a people more scattred then Jews, and more hated: beggarly in
apparel, barbarous in condition, beastly in behauior, and bloody if they
meet advantage. A man that sees them would swear they had all the yellow
Iawndis, or that they were To^^y, Moors bastardes, for no Red-oaker man caries
a face of a more filthy complexion, yet are they not borne so, neither has the
Sun burnt them so, but they are painted so, yet they are not good painters
neither: for they do not make faces, but mart faces. By a by-name they are
called Gypsies, they call themselves Egiptians, others in mockery call them
Moone-men.

If they be Egiptians, sure I am they never descended from the tribes of any of
those people that came out of the Land of Egypt: Ptolomy (King of the
Egiptians) I warrant never called them his Subjects: no nor Pharao before him.
Look what difference their is between a ciuell citizen of Dublin, and a
wild Irish Kerne, so much difference there is between one of these
counterfeit Egiptians and a true English Beggar. An English Rogue is just of
the same livery.

They are commonly an army about foure-score His order in marching on foot or
serving upon horse.
strong, yet they never march with all their bags and baggages together, but
(like boot-halers) they forage up and down countries, 45. or 6. in a company.
As the swizer has his wench and his Cock with him when he goes to the wars,
so these vagabonds have their harlots with a number of little children
following at their heels: which young brood of Beggars, are sometimes carried
(like so many green geese alive to a market) in payres of pameres, or in
dosters like fresh-fish from Kye that comes on horseback, (if they be but
infants.) But if they can stradle once, then as well the she roagues as the
heeroagues are horst, seven or eight upon one jade, strongly pineond, and
strangely tied together.

One Shire alone and no more is sure still at one time, to have these
Egiptian-tice swarming within it, for like flocks of wild geese, they will
evermore fly one after another: let them be scattred worse then the quarters of
a traitor are after he is hanged drawn and quartred, yet they have a trick
(like water cut with a sword) to come together instantly and easily again: and
this is their policy, which way soever the formostranckes lead, they stick up
small boughs in several places, to every village where they pass, which
serve as ensigns to waft on the rest.

Their apparel is old, and phantasticke, tho it be never so full of rents: the
men wear scarfes of Callico, or any other base stuff, hanging their bodies
like Morris-dancers, His Furniture.
with bells, and other toys, to entice the country people to flock about
them, and to wounder at their fooleries, or rather rancke-knaueryes. The women
as ridiculously attire themselves, and (like one that plays, the Rogue on a
Stage) wear rags, and patched filthy mantles uppermost, when the under
garments are hansome and in fashion.

The battles these Out-lawes make, are many and His man's of fight.
very bloody. Whosoever falls into their hands never escapes alive, and so
cruel they are in these murders, that nothing can satisfy them but the very
heart blood of those whom they kill. And who are they (think you) that thus
go to the pot? Alas! Innocent Lambs, Sheep, Calves, Pigges, etc.
Poultrie-Ware are more churlishly handled by them, then poor prisoners are by
keepers in the counter in the Pouitry. A goose coming amongst them learnes to be
wise, that he never will be Goose any more. The bloody trage dies of al these,
are only acted by the women, who carrying long knives or Skeanes under their
mantles, do thus play their parts: The Stage is some large Heath: or a
Firre-bush Common, far from any houses: Upon which casting themselves into a
King, they enclose the Murdered, till the Massacare be finished. If any
passenger come by, and wondering to see such a coniuring circle kept by Hell
hounds and demand what spirits they raise there: one of the Murderers steps to
him, poisons him with sweet words and shifts him off, with this lie, that one
of the women is fallen in labor: but if any made Hamlet hearing this, smell
villainy, and rush in by violence to fee what the tawny. Devils are doing,
then they excuse the fact, lay the blame on those that are the actors, a
perhaps (it they see no remedy) deliver them to an officer, to be had to
punishment: But by the way a rescue is surely laid, and very valiantly (tho
very villanously) do they fetch them off, and guard them.

The Cabbines where these Land-pyrates lodge in the night, are the Out-barnes
of Farmers and Husbandmen, (in some poor Village or other) who dare not deny
them, for fear they should ere Morning have their thatched houses burning
about their ears: in these Barnes, are both their Cooke-rooines, their Supping
Parlors, and their Bed-chambers: for there they dress after a beastly manner,
what soever they purchased after a theeuish fashion: sometimes they eat
Venison, and have Gray-hounders that kill it for them, but if they had not,
they are Hounds themseiues and are damnable Hunters after flesh: Which
appears by their vgly-faced queanes that follow them, with whom in these
barnes they lie, as Swine do together in Hogsties.

These Barnes are the beds of Incests, Whoredoms His qualities whilst he lies
entrenched.
Adulteries, and of all other black and deadly-damned Impieties; here grows
the cursed Tree of bastardie, that is so fruitful: here are written the Books
of all Blasphemies, Swearings and Curses, that are so dreadful to be read. Yet
the simple country people will come running out of their houses to gaze upon
them, whilst in the mean time one steals into the next Room, and brings away
whatsoever he can lay hold on. Upon days of pastime and liberty, they Spread
themselves in small companies amongst the Villages: and when young maids and
batchelers (yea sometimes old doting fools; that should be beaten to this
world of villainies, and forewarn others (do flock about them, they then
profess skill in Palmestry, and (forsooth) can What pieces of desperate service
he ventures upon.
tell fortunes, which for the most part are infallibly true, by reason that
they work upon rules, which are grounded upon certamty: for one of them will
tell you that you shall shortly have some evil luck fall upon you, and within
half an hour after you shall find your pocket picked, or your purse cut.
These are those Egiptian Grasshoppers that eat up the fruits of the Earth, and
destroy the poor corn fields: to sweep whose swarms out of this kingdom,
there are no other means but the sharpnes of the most infamous and basest
kinds of punishment. For if the ugly body of this Monster be suffered to grow
and fatten it self with mischiefs and disorder, it will have a neck so
Sinewy and so brawny, that the arm of the law will have much a do to stricke
of the Head, sithence every day the members of it increase, and it gathers new
ioints and new forces by Priggers, Anglers, Cheators, Morts, Yeomens Daughters
(that have taken some by blows, and to avoid shame, fall into their Sins)
and other Servants, both men and maids, that have been pilferers, with all
the rest of that Damned Regiment, marching together in the first Army of the
Bel-man, who running away from their own Colors (which are bad enough) serve
under these, being the worst. Lucifers Lansprizado that stood alooft to behold
the mustrings of these Hell Hounds took delight to see them Double their Fyles
so nimbly, but held it no policy to come near them (for the Devil himself
durst scarce have done that.) Away therefore he gallops, knowing that at one
time or other they would all come to fetch their pay in Hell.

The infection of the Suburbs. CHAP. IX.
THe Infernal Promoter being wearied with riding up and down the Country, was
glad when he had gotten City over his head, but the City being not able to
hold him within the freedom, because he was a Forrener, the gates were set
wide open for him to pass through, and into the Suburbs he went. And what
saw he there? More Ale houses than there are Tauernes in all Spain and
France. Are they so dry in the Suburbs? Yes, pockily dry. What saw he besides?

He saw the doors of notorious Carted Bawdes, (like Hell gates) stand night
and day wide open, with a pair of Harlots in Taffata gowns (like two painted
posts) Noctes atque dies patet atri Ianua Ditis.
garnishing out those doors, being better to the house then a Double sign:
when the door of a poor Artificer (if his child had died but with one Token
of death about him) was close ram'd up and Guarded for fear others should have
been infected: Yet the plague that a Whorehouse lays upon a City is worse,
yet is laughed at: if not laughed at, yet not looked into, or if looked into
Wincked at.

The Tradesman having his house locked up, loses his customers, is put from
work and undone: whilst in the mean time the strumpet is set on work and
maintained (perhaps) by those that undo the other: give thanks O wide mouthed
Hell! laugh Lucifer at this, Dance for joy all you Devils.

Beelzebub keeps the Register book, of all the Bawdes, Panders and Curtizans:
and he knows, that these Suburb sinners have no lands to live upon but their
legs: every prentice passing by them, can say, There sits a whore: Without
putting them to their book, they will swear so much themselves: if so, are
not Counstables, Churchwardens, Bayliffes, Beadels, other Officers, Pillars and
Pillowes to all the villainies, that are by these committed? Are they not
parcell-Bawdes to wincke at such damned abuses, considering they have whippes
in their own hands, and may draw blood if they please? Is not the Landlord
of such rentes the Graund-Bawde? and the Dore-Keeping mistress of such a house
of sin, but his Vnder-Bawd? sithence he takes twenty pounds rent every
year, for a vaulting school (which from no Artificer living by the hardness
of the hand could be worth five pound.) And that twenty pound rent, he knows
must be pressed out of petticoates:) his money smells of sin, the very
siluerlookes pale, because it was earned by lust.

How happy therefore were Cities if they had no Suburbs, sithence they serve
but as caves, where monsters are bred up to devour the Cities themselves?
Would the Devil hire a villain to spil blood? there he shall find him. One
to blaspheme? there he has choice. A Pandar that would court a matron at her
prayers? he is there. A cheator that would turn his own father a begging? He
is there too: A harlot that would murder her newborn Infant? She lies in
there.

What a wretched womb has a strumpet, which being (for the most part) barren
of Children, is notwithstanding the only Bed that breeds up these Serpente?
upon that one stalk grow all these mischiefs. She is the Cockatrice that
hatcheth all these eggs of evils. When the devil takes the Anatomy of all
damnable sins, he looks only upon her body. When she dies, he sits as her
Coroner. When her soul comes to hell, all shun that there, as they fly from
a body struck with the plague here she has her dore-keeper, and she her
self is the Devils chamber-maide. And yet for all this, that she is so
dangerous and detestable, when she has croak'd like a Raven on the Eues, then
comes she into the house like a Dove. When her villains (like the mote about a
castle) are rank, thick, and muddy, with standing long together, then (to
purge herself) is she dreind out of the Suburbs (as though her corruption
were there left behind her) and (as a clear stream) is let into the City.

What armor a harlot wears coming out of the Suburbs to besiege the City
within the walls.
Upon what perch then does she sit? what part plays she then? only the
Puritan. If before she ruffled in filkes, now is she more ciuilly attired then
a Mid wife. If before she swaggred in Tauernes, now with the Snaile she
stirs not out of doors. And where must her lodging be taken up, but in the
house of some citizen, whose known reputation, she borrowes (or rather
steals) putting it on as a cloak to cover her deformities. Yet even in that,
has she an art too, for he shall be of such a profession, that all comers may
enter, without the danger of any eyes to watch them. As for example, she will
lie at some Scriueners house, and so under the color of coming to have a
Bond made, she herself may write Nouerint vniuersi. And tho the law threaten
to hit her never so often, yet has she subtle defenses to ward off the
blows. For, if Gallants haunt the house, then spreds she these colors: she
is a captain or a lieutenants wife in the Low Countries, and they come with
letters, from the soldier her husband. If Merchants resort to her, then
hoistes she up these sails, she is wife to the Master of a ship, and they
bring news that her husband put in at the Straytes, or at Venice, at Aleppo,
Alexandria, or Scanderoon, etc. If shopkeepers come to her, with what do you
lack, in their mouths, then she takes up such and such commodities, to send
them to Rye, to Bristow, to York, etc. where her husband dwells. But if the
stream of her fortunes run low, and that none but Apron-men lanch forth
there, then keeps she a polliticke sempsters shop, or she starches them.

Perhaps she is so polliticke, that none shall be noted to How a city puncke
Rangeth.
board her: if so then she sails upon these points of the compass, so soon
as ever she is rig'd, and all her furniture on, forth she lancheth into those
streets that are most frequented: where the first man that she meets of her
acquaintance, shall (without much pulling) get her into a Tavern: out of him
she kisses a breakefast, and then leaves him: the next she meets, does upon
as easy pullies, draw her to a Tavern again, out of him she cogs a dinner,
and then leaves him: the third man, squires her to a play, which being ended,
and the wine offered and taken (for she is on Recusant, to refuse any thing) him
she leaves too: and being set upon by a fourth, him she answers at his own
weapon, sups with him, and drinckes Vpsie Freeze, till the clock striking
Twelve, and the Drawers being drowzy, away they march arm in arm, being at
every foot-step fearful to be set upon by the Band of Halberdiers, that lie
scowting in rug-gownes to cut off such midnight straglers. But the word being
given, and who goes there, with come before the Constable, being shot at them,
they veil presently and come, she taking upon her to answer all the Bil-men
and their Leader. Between whom and her, suppose you hear this sleepy
Dialogue, where have you bin so late? at supper forsooth with my Uncle, here,
(if he be well bearded) or with my brother (if the hair be but budding forth)
and he is bringing me home. Are you married? yes forsooth: what is your
husband? such a Noble-mans man, or such a Justices Clarke, (And then names some
Alderman of London, to whom she persuades herself, one or other of the bench
of brown bills are beholding:) where lie you? At such a man's house: Sic
tenues euanescit in Auras: and thus by stopping the Constables mouth with
sugur-plummes (that is to say,) whilst she poisons him with sweet words, the
puncke vanishes. O Lantern and Candlelight, how art thou made a blind
Ass? because thou have but one eye to see withal: Be not so guld, be not so
dull in understanding: do thou but follow aloof; those two tame Pigeons, and
thou shall find, that her new Uncle lies by it all that night, to make his
kins-woman on of mine Aunts: or if she be not in travel all night, they spend
some half an hour together, but what do they? marry, they do that which the
Constable should have done for them both in the streets, that is to say,
commit, commit.

You Guardians over so great a Princess as the eldest daughter to King Brutus:
you twice twelve fathers and governors over the Noblest City, why are you so
careful to plant Trees to beautify your outward walks, yet suffer the
goodliest garden (within) to be ouer-run with stinking weeds: You are the
proining knives that should loppe off such idle, such unprofitable, and such
destroying branches from the Vine: The beams of your authority should purge
the air of such infection: your breath of Justice should scatter those foggy
vapors, and drive them out of your gates, as chafe tossed abroad by the winds.

But stay: is our walking spirit become an Orator to persuade? no: but the
Bel-man of London, with whom he met in this perambulation of his, and to whom
he betrayed himself and opened his very bosom, (as hereafter you shall
hear,) is bold to take upon him that speakers Office.

Of Ginglers. Or the knavery of Horse-Coursers in Smith-field discovered. CHAP.
X.
AT the end of fierce battles, the only Rendeuouz for lame soldiers to
retire unto, is an Hospital: and at the end of a long Progress, the only
ground for a tired Jade to run in, is some blind country fair, where he may
be sure to be sold. To these Markets of unwholesome Horseflesh, (like so many
Kites to f^ede upon Carrion) do all the Horse-coursers (that roost about the
City) fly one after another. And whereas in buying all other commodities, men
strive to have the best, how great so ever the price be, only the Horsecouser
is of a baser mind, for the worst Horseflesh (so it be cheap) does best go
down with him. He cares for nothing but a fair outside, and a hansome shape
(like those that hyre whores,) though there be an hundred diseases within: he
(as the other) ventures upon them all.

The first lesson therefore that a Horse-courser takes out, when he comes to
one of these Markets, is to make choice of such Nags, Geldings, or Mares,
especially, as are fat, fair, and well-fauor'd to the eye: and because men
delight to behold beautiful colors, and thath some colors are more delicate
(even in beasts) then others are, he will so near as he can, bargain for
those horses that have the daintiest complexion: as the Milke-white, the Gray,
the Dapple-Gray, the Cole black with his proper marks (as the white star in
the forehead, the white heel, etc.) or the bright Bay, with the like proper
^^arkes also. And the goodlier proportion the beast carries or the fayrer
marks or color that he ^eares, are or ^^ght to be watch-words as it were to
him that after^ards buys him of the horse courser, that he be not coozend
with an ouer-price for a had peny-worth, because such Horses (belonging for the
most part to Gentlemen) are seldom or never sold away, but upon some foul
quality, or some incurable disease, which the Beast is fallen into. The Best
colors are therefore the best Cloakes to hide those fa^^ts that most disfigure
a Horse: and next unto color, his Pace does oftentimes deceive and go beyond
a very quick Judgment.

Some of these Horse-hunters, are as nimble Knaves in finding out the
infirmities of a Jade, as a Barber is in drawing of teeth: and albeit (without
casting his water) he does more readily reckon up all the Aches, Crampes,
Crickes, and whatsoever disease else lies in his bones: and for those diseases
seems utterly to dislike him, yet if by looking upon the Dyall within his
mouth, he find that his years have struck but five, six, or seven: and that
he proves but young, or that his diseases are but newly growing upon him, if
they be outward, or have but hair and skin to hide them, if they be inward,
let him swear never so damnably, that it is but a Jade, yet he will be sure to
fasten upon him.

So then, a Horse-courser to the Merchant, (that out of his sound judgment
buys the fairest, the best bred, and the noblest Horses, selling them again
for breed or service, with plainness and honesty,) is as the Cheator to the
fair Gamester: he is indeed a mere Iadish Nonopolitane, and deals for none
but tired, tainted, dull and diseased horses. By which means, if his picture
The picture of a Horse-courser.
be drawn to the life, you shall find every Horse-courser for the most part
to be in quality a coozener, by profession a knau, by his cunning a Varlet, in
fayres a Hagling Chapman, in the City a Cogging dissembler, and in Smith-field
a common forsworn Villain. He will swear any thing, but the faster he
swears, the more danger it is to believe him: In one forenoone, and in seiling a
Jade not worth five Nobles, will he forswear himself fifteen times, and
that forswearing too shall be by Equivocation. As ^ee example, if an ignorant
Chap-man coming to beatethe price, say to the Horse-courser your nagge is
very old, or thus many years old, and reckon ten or twelve: he claps his
hand presently on the buttocke of the beast, and prays he may be damb's if the
Horse be not under five, meaning that the horse is not under five years of
age, but that he stands under five of his fingers, when his hand is clapped
upon him. These Horse-coursers are called Iynglers, and these Iynglers having
laid out theirmony on a company of Iades, at some drunken fair, up to London
they drive them, and upon the Market day into Smithfield bravely come they
prauncing. But least their Iades should show too many horse-trickes in
Smith-field, before so great an Audience as commonly resort thither, their
masters do therefore Schooe them at home after this manner.

How a Horse-courser works upon a Jade in his own Stable, to make him
serviceable for a couzening Race in Smith-field.
THe Glanders in a horse is so filthy a disease, that he who is troubled with
it can never keep his nose clean: so that when such a foule-nosed Jade
happens How a Horse-courser may coozen his chap-man with a horse that has the
Glanders.
to serve a Horse-courser, he has more strange pil^ (then a Pothecarie makes)
for the purging of his head, he knows that a horse with such a quality, is but
a beastly companion to travel upon the high way with any Gentleman.

Albeit therefore that the Glanders have played with his Nose so long, that he
knows not how to mend himself, but that disease being suffered to run upon
him many years together is grown inumcible, yet has our Ingling Mountihancke
Smith-field-rider, a trick to cure him, five or six ways: and this is one of
them.

In the very morning when he is to be rifled away amongst the Gamsters in
Smithfield, before he thrust his head out of his Masters Stable, the Horse
courser tickles his nose (not with a Pipe of Tobacco) but with a good quantity
of the best Neesing powder that can be gotten: which with a quil being blown up
into the Nostrills, to make it work the better, he stands poaking there up and
down with two long feathers plucked from the wing of a Goose, they being dipped
in the juice of Garlic, or in any strong oil, and thrust up to the very top
of his head, so far as possibly they can reach, to make the pore dumb beast
avoid the filth from his nostrils, which he will do in great abundance:
this being done, he comes to him with a new medicine for a sick horse, and
mingling the juice of Bruzed Garlike, sharp biting Mustard, and strong Ale
together, into both the Nostrils (with a Horn) is powered a good quantity of
this filthy Broth, which by the hand being held in by stopping the nostrils
close together, at length with a little neezzing more, his nose will be cleaner
then his Masters the Horse-courser, and the filth be so Artificially stopped
that for eight or ten hours a Jade will hold up his head with the prowdest
Gelding that gallops scornefully by him, and never have need of wiping.

This is one of the Comedies a Common horse-courser plays by himself at home,
but if when he comes to act the second part abroad, you would disgrace him,
and have him hissed at for not playing the Knave well, then handle him thus: If
you suspect that the Nagge which he would Jade you with, be troubled with that
or any other such like disease, gripe him hard about the wesand pipe, close
toward the roof of the tongue, and holding him there so long and so forcibly,
that he cough twice or thrice, if then (after you let go your hold) his
chappes begin to walk as if he were chewing down a Horseleafe, shake hands
with old Mounsier Cauiliero Horse-Courser, but clap no bargain upon it, for his
Jade is as full of infirmity, as the Master Villainy.

Other Gambals that Horse-coursers practice upon Foundred Horses, old Lades,
etc.
SMithfield is the Stage upon which the Mountibanke English Horse-courser
advancing his banner, defies any disease that dares touch his Prancer: Insomuch
that if a horse be so old, as that four legs can but carry him, yet shall he
bear the marks of an Nag not above six or seven years of age: and that
counterfeit badge of youth, he wears thus: The Horse-courser with a small
round iron made very hot, burns two black hoses in the top of the two
out-most teeth of each side the outside of the Horse mouth upon the nether
teeth, and so likewise of the teeth of the upper chap, which stand opposite to
the nether, the quality of which marks is to show that a horse is but young:
but if the jade be so old that those teeth are dropped out of his head, then is
there a trick still to be fumbling about his old chaps, and in that strooking
his chin, to prick his lips closely with a pin or a nail, till they be so
tender, that albeit be were a given horse none could be suffered to look him
in the mouth (which is one of the best Calender to tell his age) but a
reasonable sighted eye (without help of spectacles) may easily discover this
Iugling, because it is gross and common.

If now a Horse (having been a sore Trauailer) happen by falling into a cold
sweat to be Foundred, so that (as if he were druncke or had the staggers) he
can scarce stand on his legs, then will his master, before he enter into
the lists of the field against all comers, put him into a villainous chasing by
ryding him up and down a quarter, or half an hour, till his limbs be
thoroughly heated, and this he does, because so long as he can discharge that
false fire, or that (being so collerickly hatte) he tramples only upon soft
ground, a very cunning Horseman shall hardly find where his shoe wrings him,
or that he is Fowndred. And (to blind the eyes of the Chapman) the
Horse-courser will be ever tickling of him with his wand, because he may not
by standing still like an Ass, show of what house he comes.

If a Horse come into the field (like a lame soldier) Halting, he has not
Crutches made for him, as the soldier has, but because you shall think the
Horses shooemaker has served him like a Jade, by not fitting his foot well,
the shoe shall be taken off purposely from that foot which halts, as though
it had been lost by chance: And to prove this, witnesses shall come in, if at
least twenty or thirty damnable oaths can be taken, that the want of the Shoe
is only the cause of his Halting. But if a Horse cannot be lusty at legs,
by reason that either his hoofes be not good, or that there be Splents, or any
other Eyesore about the nether Joint, the Horse-courser uses him then as
Cheating Swaggerers handle Nouices, what they cannot win by the Dyce, they
will have by Foule-play: and in that foul manner, deals he with the poor
horse, ryding him up and down in the thickest and the durtiest places, till
that dirt, like a ruffled boot drawn upon an ill-fauour'd gowtie leg, cover
the Iades infirmity from the eye of the Buyer.

How a Horse-courser makes a Jade that has no stomach, to eat Lamb-pye.
ALbeit Lamb-pie be good meat upon a table, yet it is so offensive to a horses
stomach, that he had rather be fed a month together with mustie oats, than to
taste it: Yet are not all Horses bidden to this Lamb-pye-Breakefasts, but only
such as are dyeted with no other meat: and those are Dull, Blockish, Sullen,
and heavy footed Iades, When-soeuer therefore a Horse-courser has such a Dead
commodity, as a Lumpish slow Jade, that goes more heavily then a Cow when she
trots, and that neither by a sharp bitte nor a tickling spur he can put him
out of his lazy and dogged pace, what does he with him then? Only he gives
him Lambpie. That is to say, every morning when the Horse-courser comes into
the Stable, he takes up a tough round cudgel, and never leaves fencing with
his Quarter-staffe at the poor Horses sides and buttockes, till with blows
he has made them so tender, that the verry shaking of a bough will be able to
make the horse ready to run out of his wits. And to keep the horse still
in this mad mood, because he shall not forget his lesson, his master will
never come near him, but he will have a fling at him: If he do touch him, he
strikes him: if he speaks to him, there is but a word and a blow: if he do
but look upon him, the Horse flings and takes on, as though he would break
through the walls, or had been a Horse bredde up in Bedlam amongst mad
folks. Having thus gotten this hard lesson by heart, forth comes he into
Smithfield to repeat it, where the Rider shall no sooner leap into the saddle
but the Horse-courser giving the Jade (that is half scarred out of his wits
already) three or four good bangs, away flies Bucephalus as if young Alexander
were upon his back. No ground can hold him, no bridle rain him in, he
gallops away as if the Devil had hired him of some Hackney-man, and scuds
through thick and thin, as if crackers had hung at his heels. If his tail
play the wag, and happen to whiske up and down (which is a sign that he does
his feats of Actiuitie, like a Tumblers prentice, by compulsion and without
taking pleasure in them (then shall you see the Horse-courser lay about him
like a thrasher, till with blows he make him carry his tail to his
Buttockes: which in a Horse (contrary to the nature of a Dog) is an argument
that he has mettell in him and Spirit, as in the other it is the note of
cowardice.

These and such other base iuglings are put in practice, by the Horse-courser;
in this manner comes he armed into the field: with such bad and deceiptfull
commodities does he furnish the markets. Neither steps he upon the devils stage
alone, but others are likewise Actors in the selfsame Scene, and sharers with
him: for no sooner shall money be offered for a Horse, but presently one Snake
thrusts out his head and stings the buyer with false praises of the Horses
goodness: An other throws out his poisoned hook and whispers in the Chapmans
err, that upon his knowledge so much or so much has been offered by four or
five, and would not be taken: and of these Ravens there be sundry nests, but
all of them as black in soul as the Horse-courser (with whom they are yoaked)
is in conscience. This Regiment of Horsemen is therefore divided into four
Squadrons. viz.

1 When Horse-coursers travail to country faires, they are called Iynglers. 2
When they have the leading of the Horse, and serve in Smithfield, they are
Drouers. 3 They that stand by and cony-catch the Chapman, either with
Out-bidding, false-praises, etc. are called Goades. 4 The hoyes, striplings,
etc. that have the ryding of the Iades vy and down, are called Skip-iackes.
Jack in a Box: Or a new kind of Cheating, teaching how to change gold into
Silver: unto which is added a Map, by which a man may learn how to travel all
over England, and have his charges borne. CHAP. XI.
HOw many Trees of Evil are growing in this country, Terramalos homines nunc
educat.
how tall they are, how Mellow is their fruit, and how greedily gathered, so
much ground do they take up, and so thickly do they stand together, that it
seems a kingdom can bring forth no more of their nature, yes, yes, there are
not half so many Rivers in Hell, in which a soul may sail to damnation, as
there are Black Noxia mill modis Laceae. bitur vmbra.
Streams of Mischief and Villainy (besides all those which in our Now-two
Voyages we have ventured so many leagues up, for discovery) in which
thousands of people are continually swimming, and every minute in danger
utterly to be cast away.

The Horse-Courser of hell, after he had durtyed himself Abuses of
race-running glanced at.
with ryding up and down Smithfield, and having his beast under him, gallopped
away amain to behold a race of five miles by a couple of Running-Horses, upon
whose swiftness great sums of money were laid in wagers. In which School
of Horse-manship (wherein for the most part none but Gallants are the
Studients) he construed but strange Lectures of Abuses: he could make large
Comments upon those that are the Runners of those Races, and could teach others
how to loose forty or fifty pound pollitickely in the fore-noone, and in the
afternoon (with the selfsame Gelding) to win a thousand marks in five or
six miles riding. He could tell how Gentlemen are fetched in and made younger
brothers, and how your new Knight comes to be a Cousen of this Race. He could
draw the true pictures of some fellows, that diet these Running-Horses, who
for a bribe of forty shillings can by a false Dye, make their own Masters
loose a hundred pound a race. He could show more crafty Foxes in this
wildegoose chase, then there are white Foxes in Russia, and more strange
Horse-trickes plaide by such Riders, then Banks his curtall did ever practice
(whose Gamballs of the two, were the honester.)

But because this sort of Birds have many feathers to loose, before they can
feel any cold, he suffers them to make their own flight, knowing that
prodigalls do but test at the stripes which other men's rods give them, and
never complain of smarting, till they are whipped with their own.

In every Corner did he find Serpents ingendering: under every roof some
impyetie or other lay breeding: Vix sunt homines hoc nomine dignis, quamque
lupi laeuae plus feritatis habent.
but at last perceiving that the most part of men were by the sorcerie of their
own devilish conditions transformed into Wolves, and being so changed were more
brutish and bloody, then those that were Wolves by nature: his spleen leaped
against his ribs with laughter, and in the height of that joy, resolved to
write the villainies of the world in Folio, and to dedicate them in private to
his Lord and Master, because he knew him to be an openhanded patron, albeit
he was no great lover of scholars.

But having begun one picture of a certain strange Beast, (called Jack in a
Box) that only (because the City had given money already to see it) he
finished: and in these colors was Jack in a Box drawn. It has Jack in a
Box described.
the head of a man (the face well bearded) the eyes of a Hawke, the tongue of a
Lap-wing, which says here it is, when the nest is a good way off: it has the
stomach of an Estrich, and can digest silver, as easily as that Bird does
Iron. It has the paws of a Bear instead of hands, for whatsoever it
fastneth upon it houldes: From the middle downe-wardes, it is made like a
Gray-hound, and is so swift of foot, that if it once get the Start of you, a
whole Kennel of Hounds cannot overtake it. It loves to hunt dry-foote, and can
Scent a Train in no ground so well as the City, and yet not in all places of
the City. But he is best in Scenting between Ludgate and Temple-barre: and
it is thought that his next hunting shall be between Lumbard-streete and the
Gold smithes Row in Cheadeside. Thus much for his outward parts, now you shall
have him vnrip'd, and see his inward.

This Jack in a Box, or this Devil in man's shape, wearing (like a player on
a Stage, good clothes on his His exercise.
back, comes to a Golde-smithes Stall, to a Drapers, a Haberdashers, or into
any other shop where he knows good store of silver faces are to be seen. And
there drawing forth a fair new box, hammered all out of Silver Plate, he
opens it, and powers forth twenty or forty Twentie-shilling-peeces in New
Gold. To which heap of Worldly-Temptation, thus much he adds in words, that
either he himself, or such a Gentleman (to whom he belongs) has an
occasion for four or five days to use forty pound. But because he is very
shortly, (nay he knows not how suddenly) to travail to Venice, to Jerusalem
or so, and would not willingly be disfurnished of Gold, he does therefore
request the Citizen to lend (upon those Forty twenty-shilling-peeces) so much
in white money (but for four, five or six days at most) and for his
good will he shall receive any reasonable satisfaction. The Citizen (knowing
the pawn to be better then Sitiens fugientia captat Flumina: quid rides?
mutato nomine, de te Fabula narratur.
a Bond) powers down forty pound in silver, the other draws it, and leaving
so much gold in Hostage, marches away with Bag and Baggage.

Five days being expired, Jack in a box (according to his Bargain) being a
man of his word, comes again to the Shop or stall (at which he angles for
fresh fish) and there casting out his line with the silver hook, that is to
say, pouring out the forty pound which he borrowed, The Citizen sends in, or
steps himself for the Box with the Golden devil in it: it is opened, and the
army of angels being mustred together, they are all found to be there. The Box
is shut again and set on the Stall, whilst the Citizen is telling of his money:
But whilst this music is sounding, Jack in a Box acts his part in a dumb
show thus; he shifts out of his fingers another Box of the Tame metal and
making, that the former bears, which second Box is filled only with
shillings and being poized in the hand, shall seem to carry the weight of the
former, and is clapped down in place of the first. The Citizen in the mean
time (whilst this Pit-fall is made for him) telling the forty pounds, mi^^eth
thirty or forty shilling in the whole sum, at which the Jack in a Box
starting back (as if it were a matter strange unto him) at last making a
gathering within himself) for his wits, he remembers (he says) that he
said by so much money as is wanting (of the forty pounds) to dispatch some
business or other, and forgot to put it into the Bag again, notwithstanding,
he intreates the Citizen, to keep his Gold still, he will take the white
money home to fetch the rest, and make up the Sum, his absence shall not be
above an hour or two: before which time he shall be sure to hear of him, and
with this the little Devil vanishes, carrying that away with him, which in
the end will send him to the Gallows, (that is to say, his own Gold,) and
forty pound besides of the Shopkeepers, which he borrowed, the other being
Multa petentibus desunt multa.
glad to take forty shillings for the whole debt, and yet is soundly box'd for
his labor.

This Jack in a Box, is yet but a Chicken, and has laid very few Eggs, if
the Hangman do not spoil it with treading, it will prove an excellent Hen
of the Game. It is a knot of Cheators but newly tied, they are not yet a
company. They fly not like Wilde-Geese (in stocks) but like Kites (single) as
loath that any should share in their pray. They have two or three names, (yet
they are no Romans, but errant Rogues) for sometimes they call themselves
Jack in a Box, but now that their infantrie grows strong, and that it is
known abroad, that they carry the Philosophers stone about them, and are able
of forty shillings to make forty pound, they therefore use a dead March, and
the better to cloak their villainies, do put on these Masking suites: viz.

1 This art or sleight of changing gold into silver, is called Trimming. 2
They that practice it, term themselves Sheepe-shearers. 3 The Gold which they
bring to the Citizen, is called Iasons Fleece. 4 The silver which they pick
up by this wandering, is White-wooll. 5 They that are Cheated by Jack in a
Box, are called Bleaters.
Oh Fleete-streete, Fleete-streete! how have thou been trimd, washed, Shaven
and Polde, by these dear and damnable Barbers? how often have thou met with
these Sheepe-shearers? how many warm flakes of wool have they pulled from
they Back, yet if thy Bleating can make the flocks that graze near unto thee
and round about thee, to lift up their eyes, and to shun such Wolves and
Fores, when they are approaching, or to have them worryed to death before they
suck the blood of others, thy misfortunes are the less, because thy
neighbors by them shall be warned from danger.

Many of thy Gallants (O Fleete-streete) have spent hundreds of pounds in thy
presence, and yet never were so much as drunk for it: but for every fortye
pound that thou layest out in this Indian commodity (of Gold) thou have a
Silver Box bestowed upon thee, to carry thy Tobacco in, because thou have ever
loved that costlye and Gentleman-like Smoke. Jack in a Box has thus plaide
his part. There is yet another Actor to step upon the stage, and he seems to
have good skill in Cosmography for he holds in his hand a Map, wherein he
has laid down a number of Shires in England, and with small How to travail
without charges.
pricks has beaten but a path, teaching how a men may easily, (tho not verry
honestly) travel from Country to Country, and have his charges borne; and thus
it is.

He that vnder-takes this strange journey, lays his first plotte how to be
turned into a Brave man, which he finds can be done by none better then by a
trusty Tailor: working therefore hard with him, till his suite be granted, Out
of the City, being mounted on a good gelding he rides, upon his own bare
credit, not caring whether he travel to meet the Sun at this Rising, or at
his going down. He knows his Kitchen smokes in every county, and his table
is covered in every Shire. For when he comes within a mile of the Town, where
he means to catch Quails, setting Spurs to his Horse, away he gallops,
with his cloak off (for in these Beseigings of Towns he goes not armed with
any, his Hatte thrust into his Hose, as if it were lost, and only an empty
pair of Hangers by his side, to show that he had been disarmed. And you must
note, that this Hot-spurre does never set upon any places but only such, where
he knows (by intelligence) there are store of Gentlemen, or wealthy Farmers
at the least. Amongst whom when he is come, he tells with distracted looks,
and a voice almost breathless, how many Villains set upon him, what gold and
silver they took from him, what woods they are fled into, from what part of
England he is come, to what place he is going, how far he is from home, how
far from his fornies end, or from any Gentleman of his acquaintance, and so
lively personates the lying Greek (Synon) in telling a lamentable tale, that
the mad Troianes (the Gentlemen of the town, believing him, and the rather
because he carries the shape of an honest man in show, and of a Gentleman in
his apparel) are liberal of their purses, lending him money to bear him on
his journey, to pay which he offers either his bill or bond (naming his
lodging in London) or gives his word (as he is a Gentleman) which they rather
take, knowing the like misfortune may be theirs at any time.

And thus with the feathers of other birds, is this Monster stuck, making
wings of sundry fashions, with which he thus basely flies over a whole
kingdom. Thus does he ride from Town to Town, from City to City as if he
were a Landlord in every shire, and that he were to gather Rents up of none
but Gentlemen.

There is a Twin-brother to this Falsegalloper, and he cheats Inne-keepers
only, or their Tapsters, by learning first what Countrymen they are, and of
what kindred: and then bringing counterfeit letters of commendations from such
an Uncle, or such a Coozen (wherein is requested, that the Bearer thereof may be
used kindly) he lies in the Inn till he have fetched over the Master or
servant for some money (to draw whom to him he has may hooks) and when they
hang fast enough by the gils, under water Our Sharke dives, and is never seen
to swim again in that River.

Upon this Scaffold; also might be mounted a number Traveling Emperickes.
of Quack-saluing Emperickes, who ariuing in some Country town, clappe up
their Terrible Bills, in the Marketplace, and filling the Paper with such
horrible names of diseases, as if every disease were a Devil, and that they
could conjure them out of any Town at their pleasure. Yet these Beggarly
Mountibanckes are mere Coozeners, and have not so much skill as Horseleeches.
The poor people not giving money to them to be cured of any infirmities, but
rather with their money buying worse infirmities of them.

Upon the same post, do certain straggling Scribbling Strowling schoolemaister.
Writers deserve to have both their names and themselves hung up, in steed of
those fair tables which they hang up in Towns, as gay pictures to entice
Scholars to them: the Tables are written with sundry kinds of hands, but not
one finger of those hands (not one letter there) drops from the Pen of such a
false wandering Scribe. He buys other men's cunning good cheap in London, and
sels it dear in the Country. These Swallows brag of no quality in them so
much as of swiftness. In four and twenty hours, they will work four and
twenty wonders, and promise to teach those, that know no more what belongs to
an A then an Ass, to be able (in that narrow compass) to write as fair and
as fast as a country Vicar, who commonly reads all the Towns Letters.

But wherefore do these counterfeit Masters of that Noble Science of Writing,
keep such a flourishing with the borrowed weapons of other Men's Pens? only
for this, to get half the Birds (which they strive to catch) into their
hands, that is to say, to be paid half the money which is agreed upon for the
Scholar, and his nest being half filled with such Gold-finches, he never
stays till the rest be fledge, but suffers him that comes next, to beat the
bush for the other half. At this Careere the Ryder that set out last from
Smith field, stopped: and alighting from Pacolet (the horse that carried him)
his nextiourney was made on foot.

The Bel-mans second Night-walke. CHAP. XII.
SIr Lancelot of the infernal Lake, or the Knight Errant of Hell, having thus
(like a young Country gentleman) gone round about the City, to see the sights
not only within the walls, but those also in the Suburbs, was glad when he
saw night having put on the vizard that Hell lends Inuidia nigris restibus,
currum insilit Nox.
her (called darkness to leap into her Coach) because now he knew he should
meet with other strange birds and beasts fluttring from their nests, and
crawling out of their dens. His prognostication held current, and the foul
weather (which he foretold) fell out accordingly. For Candlelight had scarce
opened his eye (to look at the City, like a gunner shooting at a mark,) but
fearfully (their feet trembling under them) their eyes suspitiously rouling
from every nooke to nooke round Noctis and erebi progenies sunt Dolus, Metus,
Miseria, Fraus, Querelae etc. (...) 3. De Not. Deorum.
about them, and their heads (as if they stood upon oyled skrewes) still
turning back behind them, came creeping out of hollow trees, where they lay
hidden, a number of couzning Bankrupts, in the shapes of Owls, who when the
Marshall of light, the Sun, went up and down to search the City, durst not
stir abroad, for fear of being houted at and followed by whole flocks of
undone creditors.

But now when the stage of the world was hung in black, they ietted up and
down like proud Tragedians. O what thanks they gave to Darkness! what Non
verenda, verenda, etc.
songs they balladed out in praise of Night, for bestowing upon them so
excellent a cloak, wherein they might so safely walk muffled* Now durst they,
as if they had been Constables, rap alowd at the doors of those to whom they
owed most money, and brave them with hie words, tho they paid them not a penny.

Now did they boldly step into some privileged Tavern, and there drink
healths, dance with Harlots, and pay both Drawers and Fiddlers after midnight
with other men's money, and then march home again fearelesse of the blows that
any showlder-clapper durst give them. Out of another nest flew certain
Murderers and Thieves in the shapes of Skreech-owles, who, being set on by the
Night, did beat with their bold and venturous fatal wings at the very doors,
whereas in former times, their villainies had entered.

Not far from These, came crawling out of their bushes a company of grave and
wealthy Lechers, in the shapes of Glowe-wormes, who with Gold, Iyngling in
their pockets, made such a show in the night, that the doors of Sapiens in
munera venit adultor, Praebuit ipsa sinus. Neo polisti metuunt Deos nec hos
respcere Deos opinor.
Common Brothelryes flew open to receive them, tho in the day time they durst
not pass that way, for fear that noted Currizans should challenge them of
acquaintance, or that others should laugh at them to see white heads growing
upon green stalks.

Then came forth certain infamous earthy minded Creatures, in the shapes of
Snailes, who all the day time hiding their heads in their shells, least boys
should with two fingers point at them for living basely upon the prostitution
of their wives bodies, cared not now, before candlelight to shoot out their
largest Horns.

A number of other monsters, like These, were seen (as the sun went down)
to venture from their dens, only to engender with Darkness: but
candle-lights eyesight growing dimmer and dimmer, and he at last falling stark
blind, Lucifers Watchman went stumbling up and down in the dark.

How to weane Horses.
EVery door on a sudden was shut, not a candle stood peeping through any
window, not a Vintner was to be seen brewing in his Cellor, not a drunkerd to
be met reeling, not a Mouse to be heard stiring: all the city showed like one
Bed, and al in that Bed were soundly cast into a sleep. Noise made no noise,
for every one that wrought with the hammer was put to silence. Yet
notwithstanding when even the Devil himself could have been contented to take
a nap, there were few Inkeepers about the town but had their spirits walking.
To watch which spirits what they do, our Spy, that came lately out of the
Lowercountries, stole into one of their Circles, where lurking very closely, he
perceived that when all the guests were profoundly sleeping, when Carriers were
soundly snorting, and not so much as the chamberlain of the house The knavery.
of Hostlars.
but was laid up, suddenly out of his bed started an hostler, who having no
apparel on but his shirt, a pair of slipshooes on his feet, and a Candle
burning in his hand, like old Ieronimo, stepped into the stable amongst a
number of poor hungry Iades, as if that night he had been to ride poast to
the Devil. But his journey not lying that way till some other time, he neither
bridled nor sadled any of his fourefooted guests that stood there at rack and
manger, but seeing them so late at supper, and knowing that to ouereate
themselves would fill them full of diseases, (they being subject to above a
hundred and thirty already) he first (without a voyder) after a most unmannerly
fashion took away, not only all the Prouander that was set before them, but
also all the hay, at which before they were glad to lick their lips. The
poor Horse looked very rufully upon him for this, but he rubbing their teeth
only with the end of a Candle (in steed of a Corrall) told them, that for
their Iadish tricks it was now time to weane them: And so wishing them not to
be angry if they lay upon the hard boards, considering all the beds in the
house were full, back again he stole to his Couch, till break of day: yet
fearing least the sun should rise to discover his knavery, up he started,
and into the stable he stumbled, scarce half awake, giving to every Jade a
bottle of hay for his breake-fast, but all of them being troubled with the
greazy toothache, could ear none; which their masters in the morning espying
swore they were either sullen or else that prouender pricked them.

This Hostler for this piece of service was afterward preferred to be one of
the Grooms in Belzebubs stable.

Another Night-peece drawn in sundry colors.
SHall I show you what other bottomes of mischief Plutos Beadle saw wound upon
the black spindels of the Night, in this his privy search? In some streets
he met Mid-wiues running, till they sweat, and following them close at heels,
he spied them to be let in, at the back doors of houses, seated either in
blind lanes, or in by-gardens: which houses had rooms builded for the purpose,
where young Maids, being big with child by unlawful Fathers, or young wives
(in their husbands abscence at sea, or in the wars) having wrastled with
batchilers Matronaque rara pudica est.
or married men, till they caught falls, lay safely till they were delivered of
them. And for reasonable sums of saepe solent auro multa subesse mala.
money, the bastards that at these windows crept into the world, were as closely
now and then sent presently out of the Pectora tantis obsessa malis.
world, or else were so unmannerly brought up, that they never spoke to their
own parents that begot them.

In some streets he met servants, in whose breast albeit Non sunt ictu serienda
leui.
the arrows of the plague stuck half way, yet by cruelll masters were they
driued out of doors at midnight and conuaid to Garden-houses, where they
either died before Quisprodere tanta relatis Funera.
next morning, or else were carried thither dead in their coffins, as tho they
had lien sick there before and there had dyed.

Now and then at the corner of a turning he spied servants purloying fardels
of their masters goods, and delivering them to the hands of common strumpets.

This door opened, and Lust with Prodigality were heard to stand closely
kissing: and (wringing one another by the hand) softly to whisper out four or
five goodnights till they met abroad the next morning.

A thousand of these comedies were acted in dumb show, and only in the
private houses: at which the Devils messenger laughed so loud that Hell heard
him, and for joy rang forth loud and lusty Plaudities. But being driven into
wonder why the night would fall in labor, and bring forth so many Villainies,
whose births she practiced to cover (as she had reason) because so many
watchmen were continually called and charged to have an eye to her doings, at
length he perceived that Bats (more ugly and more in number then these) might
fly up and down in darkness: for tho with their Letherne Wings they should
strike the very bills out of those Watchmens hands, such leaden plummets were
commonly hung by sleep at all their eyelids, that hardly they could be awakned
to strike them again.

On therefore he walks, with intent to hasten home, as having filled his
Table-Bookes with sufficient notes of intelligence. But, at the last, meeting
with the Bel-man, and not knowing what he was, because he went without his
Lantern and some other implements: for the man in the Moon was up the most
part of the night, and lighted him which way soever he turned, he took him
for some churlish Hobgoblin, seeing a long staff on his neck, and therefore
to be one of his own fellows. The Bel-ringer Smelling what strong scent he
had in his nose, soothed him up, and questioning with him how he had spent his
time in the city, and what discovery of Land-villanies he had made in this
Island voyage: tho Mariner of hell, opened his chart, which he had lined with
all abuses, lying either East, West, North, or South: he showed how he had
pricked it, upon what points he had saild, where he put in: under what height
he kept himself: where he went a shore, what strange people he met: what
land he had discovered, and what commodities he was laden with from thence.
Of all which the Bel-man drawing forth a perfect Map, they parted: which Map
he has set out in such collors as you see, tho not with such cunning as he
could wish: the pains are his own, the pleasure, if this can yield any
pleasure, only yours, on whom he bestows it: to him that embraces his
labors, he dedicates both them and his love: with him that either knows not
how, or cares not to entertain them, he will not be angry, but only to Him
says thus much for a farrewell. -- Si quid Nouisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti: Si non, His vtere mecum,


Here ends the Bel-man.
O per se O.



LONDON: Printed for John Busbie, and are to be sold at his shop in
Fleetestreet in S. Dunstans Churchyard. 1612.

O, per se O.
ANd so Good Morrow (Goodman Bel-man of London:) your Night-piece is drawn,
and my Day-worke is now to begin. Let my morning therefore I pray you be your
midnight, and now when all others rise to go to their labors, (who could
scarce sleep by reason of the noise you made with your Clapper) get you to
your bed, and dream upon your pillow upon some new discovery. In that Map of
Villainies, which you have drawn in Print already, I like the handling of your
Pensill, but not the laying on of your colors: they are smooth enough, but you
have not given them their true Sweetning, Heightning, and Shadowing. But I
cannot blame you, because nocte latent mendae, Women, Horses and Colors are
not to be chosen by candlelight: and you (Gaffer Bell-man) having no better
guide, it is a wonder you stumbled no wore, considering you walked in the dark.
If therefore by my spectacles (being clearer then yours) I have discovered more
nests of Blacke-birds, (I mean more Villainies of the Devils own hatching)
then ever flew to your ^^st, and were sold afterward to sing in Shops in
Paul's Churchyard, it ought not to raise up your collar an inch higher for all
that, sithence in both our Land-discoueries our sails are hoysted up only to
do good to the Commonwealth, and because the Notes which I sing may appear
to be of mine own setting, and not either borrowed or stolen from any other.
You shall know that serving (in the late Queens time) many years together in
the office of an High-Constable, in that County, wherein I now dwell, I drew
from the examination of such lewd persons as came before me, the truth of all
those villaynes which here I publish.

In the mustring of this damned Regiment, I found, that whether they were
Roagues taken in Romboyles (that is to say, in Watches or Wards) by the Petty
Harman Beck, (who in their Company, signifies a petty Constable) or whether
they were such as in the Canting tongue are called Mawnderers (of begging or
demanding,) whether they lived in Bowsing Kennes (Alehouses) or what other
course thread of life soever any of them all spunne, it was ever wound in a
black bottom of the most pernicious making up that the Devil could teach
them: insomuch that albeit the very Sunbeams could possibly have written
down the discovery of any gross villainies, by them committed, they would as
easily venture upon damning, in denial of it with oats, as if there had been
no hell for such offenders.

For my better painting forth these Monsters, I once took one of them into my
service (being a sturdy, biglimde young fellow) of him I desired some knowledge
in their gibrish, but he swore he could not Cant, yet his Roague-ship seeing
himself used kindly by me, would now and then shoot out a word of Canting,
and being thereupon asked why with oaths he denied it before, he told me,
that they are sworn never to disclose their skill in Canting to any
Householder, for if they do, the other Mawnderers or Roagues, Mill them (kill
them,) yet he for his part (he said) was never sworn, because he was a
Clapperdogeon, that is to say, a Begger-borne. This Clapperdogeon staid with
me so long as he durst, and then bingd a waste in a darkmans, stool away
from me in the night time. So that what intelligence I got from him, or any
other trained up in the same Rudiments of Roaguery, I will briefly, plainly,
and truly set down, as I had it from my Devilish Schoolemaister, whom I call
by the name of O per se O.

Of him I learned, that the cause why so many of this wicked Generation wander
up and down this Kingdom is, the free command, and abundant use they have of
Women: for if you note them well, in their marching, not a Tatterdemalion
walks his round, (be he young, be he old) but he has his Mort, or his
Doxie at his heels, (his Woman, or his Whore) for in hunting of their
Rascall-deere this Law they hold, when they come to strike a Do, if she will
not wap for a wyn; let her Trine for a make, if she will not -- O per se O for
a penny, let her hang for a halfe-penny.

And this liberty of Wenching is increased by the almost infinite numbers of
tippling houses, called Bowsing Kennes, or of Stalling Kennes, that is to say,
houses where they have ready money for any stolen goods: unto which nests,
birds fly of the same feather, that the owner is of: for if the Ale-seller, be
a Horse-stealer, a Cutpurse, a Robber by the High way, a Cheater, etc. of the
same coat are his guests. These houses are the Nurseries of Roagues and
Thorues: for how could they bestow cloakes, sheets, shirts, and other garments
being stolen, if they had not Stalling Kennes to receive them? Why should
Grunters (Pigges) go whining out of the world, having their throats cut by
Roagues, if they had not Bowsing Kennes to eat them in? In the Ceremony of
whose ragged Assemblies, the Bell-man a little mistook himself, for Driggers,
Filchers and Cloyers being all (in English) Stealers, use neither roastmeate,
nor spits in their Feastings, as he furnishes them, but when they entend to
strike a hand, they levy their damnable troops in the day, but they sally
forth, and share the spoils in the night. For some one sturdy hell-hound above
the rest, undertakes to be the Miller) that is to say, the Killer:) I hope this
can be no disgrace to any honest Miller, who is no thief with a false Hopper)
And this Killer brings to the flaughter-house of the Devil (viz. a Bowsing
Kenne) a Bleating Chete, (a Sheep) Another, Mils a Crackmans, breaks a hedge,
and that wood heates the Oven, whilst the Sheep is dressed, cut in pieces,
and put into earthen Pots, made for the purpose to bake their victuals in. The
Ouens mouth being thus dawbed up, out fly the little Devils (more dambde then
the Oven) either to break an house some two or three miles off, or to do as
bad a Villainy. The piece of Service being performed, a Retraite is sounded,
and about midnight they return merrily, fall to their good-cheare manfully,
and then divide their spoils of stolen shirts, smockes, or any thing else,
most theeuishly. In which Partnership the Host and Hostess are chief sharers,
but such subtle shopkeepers are these Habberdashers of the Devils small
Wares, that they never set out to sell, but when the coast is clear, and that
(as thieves do among Brokers) the Hue and Cries throat be stopped that went
balling after them: for about a seuennight after, (when all is hushd) to the
Stalling Kenne goes the Duds for Loure, to the theeuing house are the stolen
clothes sent roundly for money: which being told out and divided, away fly
these Ravens scatteringly, the next prey that they light upon, being ever at
some Fair, or else a market.

And now that we talk of Fayres, let my pen gallop over a few lines, and it
shall bring you (without spurring) swiftlier into Glocesser-shire, then if you
rode upon Pacolet: there if you please to alight near Tewksbury, at a place
called Durrest-Fayre, (being kept there upon the two Holy-Roode days) you
shall see more Roagues, then ever were whipped at a Carts-arse through London,
and more Beggars then ever came dropping out of Ireland. If you look upon
them, you would think you lived in Henry the sixth time, and that Jack Cade,
and his rebellious rag-amuffins were there mustring. Dunkirke cannot show such
sharkes. The wild Irish are but flocks of wilde-Geese to them. And these
swarms of Locusts come to this lowste Fair, from all parts of the Land,
within an hundred miles compass. To describe the Boothes is lost labor, for
let the Hangman show but his wardrop, and there is not a ragge difference
between them. None here stands crying, What do you lack? for you can ask
for nothing that is good, but here it is lacking. The Buyers and Sellers are
both alike, tawnie Sunne-burnt Rasealds, and they flock in such troops, that
it shows as if hell were broke loose. The Shoppe-keepers are Thieves, and the
Chap-men Roagues, Beggars and Whores: so that to bring a purse-full of money
hither, were madness: for it is sure to be cut.

But would you know what Wares these Merchants of Eele-skinnes utter? only
Duds for the Quarrons, that is to say, clothes for the body, which they have
pilfered from hedges or houses. And this filthy Fair begins before day, and
ends before nine in the same morning: at which breaking up, they do not
presently march away with their bags and their baggages, but he who is
chosen the Lord of the Fair, (who is commonly the lustiest Rogue in the whole
Bunch) leads his ^ottered foote-men and foote-women from Alehouse, to
Alehouse, where being armed all in Ale-of-proofe, and their Ben Bowse (the
strong Liquor) causing them to have Nase Nabs (drunken Coxecombes) up fling
they the Cannes, down go the Boothes, about ^^ye broken Iugges: here lies a
Rogue bleeding, there is a ^ort cursing, here a Doxie stabbing with her knife:
and thus this Fair which begins merrily, ends madly: for Knaves set it up,
and Queanes pull it down.

Yet to meet at this assembly, (how far off soever they be) they will keep
their day, though they hoppe thither upon one crutch: and it is for seven
causes that thus they bestirre their stumps to be at this vpsitting, which are
these, viz.

1 Every one as his Roague-shippe is of bulk, or can best swagger, desires to
be chosen Lord of the Fayrs: or if he loose his Lord-ship, yet to be a
Retayner at least, and to fight under his tottered colors.

2 To meet with the Sister-hood and Brotherhood of Whores and Wallet-mongers.

3 To share such money as is taken for (Duds and Cheates won) clothes and
things stolen.

4 To know how the world goes abroad, what news in the Deusuile, (the
Country, and where is Benship, (Good) or where (Quire) Naught.

5 To be Bowsie (drunken) for company.

6 To bandy their tawny and weather-beaten forces of Mawderers (being of their
own Fraternity) against any other troop of Mountibankes, at any other Fair
or Market, where the lowesi Randeuouz is to be made.

7 Lastly, to enact new warm orders, for fresh stealing of clothes, etc. with
all manner of Armor for the body, but especially, Stamps (Shoes) because
(being Beggars) they are seldom set on horseback.

These are the seven halters that draw these Hell Hounds to this Fair, for
the least of which seven, they will venture a hanging.

The Fair is broken up, and because it is their fashion at the trushing up of
their packes, to trudge away merrily, I will here teach you what O per se O is,
being nothing else but the burden of a Song, set by the Devil, and sung by his
Quire: of which I will set no more down but the beginning, because the middle
is detestable, the end abominable, and all of it damnable*

Thus it sounds:

Will thou a begging go,
O per se, O. O per se, O.
Will thou a begging go?
Yes verily, yea.
Then thou must God forsake,
and to stealing thee betake.
O per se, O. O per se, O.
Yes verily yea, etc.
This is the Music they use in their Libkens (their lodgings) where thirty
or forty of them being in a swarm, one of the Master Devils sings, and the
rest of his damned crew follow with the burden: In which midnight
Catter-wallings of theirs, nothing is heard but cursing and profanation, and
such swearing, as if they were all Knights of the Post. Jews did never
crucify Christ with more dishonor, then these Rakehels, who with new invented
fearful oaths tear him in pieces: and no marvel, for most of those who
are Beggars borns, are never Christened: besides, they have in their Canting, a
word for the Devil, or the plague, etc. as Ruffin for the one, and Cannikin
for the other: but for God they have none: only they name him, but it is not
in reverence, but abuse: all their talk in their nasty Libk^ns, (where they
lie like Swine) being of nothing, but Wapping, Nigling, Prigging, Cloying,
Filching, Cursing, and such stuff. Who therefore would pity such impostors,
whose faces are full of dissembling, hearts of villainy, mouths of curses,
bodies of soars (which they call their great Cleymes) but laid upon their
flesh by cunning* whose going Abram (that is to say naked) is not for want of
clothes, but to stir up men to pity, and in that pity to coozen their
devotion: now whereas the Bel-man (in his privy search) found out the nests of
these Screech-Owles, pulling off some of their feathers, only to show their
ugliness, but for want of good and perfect eye sight, not ^^eaing off their
skins, as I here purpose to do, and so to draw blood. I will finish that
which the Bell-man (by being ouerwatchd) left lame, and show those abuses naked
to the world, which he never discovered.

First therefore shall you behold the Abram-man in his true colors, his right
shape, his own rags, and then shall you hear the phrase of his Mawnd or
Begging.

Next him comes marching the Counterfeit Soldier, with his Mawnding note too.
At his tail follow Ben-feakers of Iybes, (that is to say) Counterfeiters of
Passe-ports.

Then Dommerars.

Then Clapperdogeons in their true abiliments, and their true beggarly
Rhetoric they use in begging.

Then will I show you how they hang together in Fraternities, and what Articles
of Brotherhood they are sworn too: with a note (as good as any Roagues mark
they carry about them) how to know these Knots of Knaves, or these
Brother-hoods, their Names, their Libkins, or Lodgins, their Stawling Kennes,
to which all stolen goods are brought. And lastly, to show you that even in
their mirth they are Devils, you shall hear their true Canting Songs now used
among them.

In setting down all which hidden villainies, (never till this day discovered)
you shall find a mixture not only of all those detestable subtilties, used in
making those Soars which eat into their flesh, but also the tricks and
medicines they have (without help of Surgeons) to cure them. I will besides (in
their descriptions) here and there stick words and phrases of their gibbrish
or beggarly language, giving them the stamp presently of true English, which
labor I take of purpose to procure delight to the Reader.

Of the Abram, his description.
THe Abram Coue, is a lusty strong Rogue, who walks with a Slade about his
Quarrous (a sheet about his body) Trining, hanging to his hammes,
bandeliere-wise, for all the world as Cut-purses and Thieves wear their
sheets to the Gallows, in which their Tru^s are to bury them: oftentimes
(because he scorns to follow any fashions of Hose,) he goes without
breeches, a cut Ierkin with hanging fleeues (in imitation of our Gallants,) but
no Sa^tin or Chamblet elbowes, for both his legs and arms are bare, having
no Commission to cover his body, that is to say, no shirt: A face staring like
a Sarasin, his hair long and filthily knotted, for he keeps no Barber: a
good Filch (or Staff) of grown Ash, or else Hazell, in his Famble (in his
Hand) and sometimes a sharp stick, on which he hangs Ruffe-pecke (Bacon.)
These, walking up and down the Country, are more terribly to women and
Children, then the name of Raw-head and Blo^dy-bones, Robbin Good Fellow, or
any other Hobgobling Crackers tied to a Dogs tail, make not the poor Curre
run faster, then these Abram Ninnies do the silly Villages of the Country,
so that when they come to any door a begging, nothing is deuyed them.

Their Marks.
SOme of these Abrams have the Letters E. and R. upon their arms: some have
Crosses, and some other mark, all of them carrying a blew color: some wear
an iron ring, etc. which marks are printed upon their flesh, by tying their
arm hard with two strings three or feure inches asunder, and then with a
sharp Awle pricking or raizing the skin, to such a figure or print as they
best fancy, they rub that place with burnt paper, piss and Gunpowder, which
being hard rubd in, and suffered to dry, sticks in the flesh a long time
after, when these marks fail, they renew them at pleasure. If you examine
them how these Letters or Figures are printed upon their arms, they will tell
you it is the Mark of Bedlam, but the truth is, they are made as I have
reported.

And to color their villainy the better, every one of these Abrams has a
several gesture in playing his part: some make an horrid noise, hollowly
sounding: some whoope, some hollow, some show only a kind of wild distracted
ugly look, uttering a simple kind of Mawnding, with these addition of words
(Well and Wisely.) Some dance, (but keep no measure) others leap up and
down, and fetch Gambals, all their actions show them to be as drunk as
Beggars: for not to belie them, what are they but drunken Beggars? All that
they beg being either Loure or Bouse, (money or drink.)

Their Mawnd, or Begging.
THe first begins Good Vrship. Master, or good Vrships Rulers of this place,
bestow your reward on a poor man that has lain in Bedlam without Bishops-gate
three years, four months, and nine days, And bestow one piece of your small
silver toward his fees, which he is indebted there, the sum of three pounds,
thirteen shillings, seven pence, halfe-penny, (or to such effect,) and has
not wherewith to pay the same, but by the good help of Vrshipfull and well
disposed people, and God to reward them for it.

The second begins: Now Dame, well and wisely: what will you give poor Tom
now? one pound of your sheep feathers to make poor Tom a blanket: or one
cutting of your Sow side, no bigger then my arm, or one piece of your Salt
meat to make poor Tom a sharing horn: or one cross of your small silver
toward the buying a pair of Shoes, (well and wisely:) Ah, God bless my good
Dame (well and wisely) give poor Tom an old sheet to keep him from the cold,
or an old dublet, or Ierkin of my Masters, God save his life.

Then will he dance and sing, or use some other Anticke, and ridiculous
gesture, shutting up his counterfeite Puppet-play, with this Epilogue or
Conclusion, Good Dame give poor Tom one cup of the best drink, (well and
wisely,) God save the King and his Counsel, and the Governor of this place,
etc.

Of Counterfeit Soldiers.
THese may well be called Counterfeit Soldiers, for not one (scarce) among the
whole Army of them, ever discharged so much as a Caliner: nothing makes them
Soldiers but old Mandilions, which they buy at the Broakers. The weapons they
carry are short Crabtree Cudgels: and these, (because they have the name of
Soldiers,) never march but in troops two or three in a company: of all sorts
of Roagues these are the most impudent and boldest, for they knock at men's
doors, as if they had serious business there, whereas the door being opened
to them, they begin this parle.

Their Mawnding.
GEntle Rulers of this place, bestow your reward upon poor Soldiers, that are
viterly maimed and spoiled in her Majesty's late wars, as well for Gods
cause as her Majesty's and yours. And bestow one piece of your small silver upon
poor men, or somewhat toward a meals meat, to succor them in the way of
truth, etc. for Gods cause.

These Fellows go commonly hurt in the left arm, beneath the elbow, having a
Iybe ierked, (that is to say, a Passeport sealed) with license to depart the
colors, (under which if you rightly examine them, they never fought,) yet
wheresoever the wars are, and how far off soever, thus can they wound
themselves at home.

Their making of their Soars.
TAke unslaked lime and Soap, with the rust of old iron: these mingled
together, and spread thick on two pieces of leather which are clap upon the
arm, one against the other: two small pieces of wood (fitted to the purpose)
holding the leathers down, all which are bound hard to the arm with a Garter:
which in a few hours fretting the skin with blisters, and being taken off, the
flesh will appear all raw, then a linen cloth being applied to the raw
blistered flesh, it sticks so fast, that upon plucking it off, it bleedes:
which blood (or else some other,) is rubd all over the arm, by which means
(after it is well dried o^) the arm appears black, and the soar raw and
reddish, but white about the edges like an old wound: which if they desire to
heal, a brown paper with butter and ware being applied, they are cured: And
thus (without weapon) do you see how our Mawndering Counterfeite Soldiers
come maimed.

Of placing their Soars.
THe Soldier has his Soar always on his left arm, (unless he be
left handed, for then because of the better use of that hand it is upon the
right) betwixt the elbow and the wrest, and is called by the name of Soldiers
Mawnd.

When a Soar is placed on the back of the hand, and that he says he was
hurt by an horse, then it is called Foote-mans Mawnd.

When the soar is above the elbow, as if it were broken, or hurt by falling
from a Scaffold, it is called Masons Mavvnd. And thus the altring the place of
the soar alters the Mawnd.

Of these counterfeit Soldiers, some of them being examined, will say they
were lately Seruing-men, but their Master being dead, and the Household
dispersed, they are compelled to this baseness of life for want of means.
Some of them can play the Abram, (be mad Toms,) or else beg Rum Mawnd
(counterfeit to be a Fool) or else that his tongue is tied, and cannot speak,
and such like.

Of Ben-feakers of Iybes.
THey who are Counterfeiters of Passeports, are called Ben-feakers, that is to
say, Good-Makers: and these makers (like the Devils Hackney-men) lie lurking in
every Country, to send his Messengers p^ste to hell. The best Passeports that
ever I saw, were made in S.-shire, with the hand of one M. W. subscribed unto
them. There was another excellent Ben-feaker about P. a Town in G.-shire. In
S. dwelt another, who took two shillings and sire pence (two Bordes and sire
Winnes,) or two Bordes and a Flagge, for every Passeport that went out of his
beggarly Office: he counterfeited the Seal of L. D.

Of these Ben-feakers I could say much more, if I would be counted a blabbe:
but now the very best of them are made in L. to carry men from thence unto W.

How to know counterfeite Passe-ports.
THe Seals of Noblemen, Gentlemen, Justices, or any other who have authority
to use Seals, are graven in Silver, Copper, or some hard stuff: and those
things which are so graven seal the Arms or such like with sharp edges, and
with a round circle enclosing it, as if it were cut with an instrument of
Steel, and it makes a neat and deep impression: but these counterfeit
Ierkes (or Seals) are graven with the point of a knife, upon a sticks end,
whose roundnesse may well be perceived from the circle of a common turnde
Seal: these for the most part bearing the ill favored shape of a Buhars Nab,
or a Prancers Nab (a Dogs head, or a Horses,) and sometimes an Unicorns, and
such like: the Counterfeit Ierke having no Circle about the edges. Besides, in
the Passeport you shall lightly find these words, viz. For Solomon says; Who
gives the poor, lends the Lord, etc. And that Constables shall help them to
lodgings: And that Curates shall persuade their Parishioners, etc.

Another note is, let them be in what part of the Land soever they will, yet
have they an hundred miles to go at least: every one of them having his Doxie
at his heels. And thus much of Ben-feakers.

Of Dommerars.
THe Bell-man took his marks amiss in saying that a Dommerar is equal to
the Cranke, for of these Dommerars I never met but one, and that was at the
house of one M. L. of L. This Dommerars name was W. he made a strange noise,
showing by fingers acrosse, that his tongue was cut out at Cha^ke-hill. In his
hand he carried a stick, about a foot in length, and sharp at both ends,
which he would thrust into his mouth, as if he meant to show the show of his
tongue. But in doing so, he did of purpose hit his tongue with the stiche to
make it bleed, which filling up his month, you could not for blood perceive
any tongue at all, because he had turned it upwards, and with his stick
thrust it into his throat. But I caused him to be held fast by the strength of
men, until such time that opening his teeth with the end of a small cudgel, I
plucked forth his tongue, and made him speak.

Of Clapperdogeons.
A Clapperdogeon is in English a Beggar borne: some call him a Pallyard: of
which sorts there are two: first, Natural: secondly, Artificial. This fellow
(above all other that are in the Regiment of Roagues) goes best armed against
the cruelty of Winter: he should be wise, for he loves to keep himself
warm, wearing a patched Castor (a Cloak) for his upper roabe: under that a
Togmans (a Gown) with high Stampers (shoes) the soles an inch thick pegged,
or else patches at his Girdle, ready to be clapped on: a great Scue (a brown
dish) hanging at his girdle, and a tassell of Thrummes to wipe it. A brace of
greasy Night-caps on his head, and over them (least he should catch a knauish
cold) a hat, (or Nabcheate,) a good Filch (or Staff) in his hand, having a
little iron pegge in the end of it: a Bugher (a little Dog) following him,
with a smugge Dorie, attyred fit for such a Roaguish Companion. At her back
she carries a great pack, covered with a patched Saueguard, under which she
conueyeth all such things as she filcheth: her skill sometimes is to tell
Fortunes, to help the diseases of Women or Children. As she walks, she
makes bals or shirtstrings, (but now commonly they knit) and wears in her hat
a needle with a thread at it. An excellent Angler she is: for when her Coue
mawnds at any door, if any Poultrie-ware be picking up their crummes near
them, she feeds them with bread, and has a thread tied to a hooked pin,
baited for the nonce, which the Chickin swallowing is choked, and conveyed
under the Castor: Chickins, linen or woollen, or any shing that is worth the
catching, comes into her net.

Under this Banner of the patched Clapperdogeon, do I levy all Pallyards, as
well those of the great Cleyme, (or Soars,) as others, whom I term
Artificial Clapperdogeons, albeit they are not Beggersborue.

Of their Mawnd.
THis Pallyard (or Artifieiall Clapperdogeon, who carries about him the great
Cleyme) to stir compassion up in peoples hearts, thus acts his part: He
slides to the earth by his staff, and lying pittiously on the ground, makes a
fearful horrid strange noise, through an hoarse throat uttering these
lamentable tunes: Ah the vrship of God look out with your mereifull eyne, one
pitiful look upon sore, lame, grieved and impudent (for impotent) people,
sore troubled with the grievous disease, and have no rest day nor night by the
Canker and Worm, that continually eats the flesh from the bone: for the
Vrship of God bestow one Cross of your small silver; to buy him salve and
ointment, to case the poor wretched body; that never takes rest: and (...) to
reward you for it in heaven. These Pallyards walk two or three together, and
as one gives over this note, the second catches it at the rebound, using the
selfsame howling and grunting, which ended, they say the Lords Prayer, and in
many places the Aue, never ceasing till something be given them.

How they make their great Soars, called the great Cleyme.
THey take Crow-foote, Sperewort, and Salt, and bruising these together, they
lay them upon the place of the body which they desire to make sore: the skin
by this means being fretted, they first clappe a linen cloth, till it stick
fast, which plucked off, the raw flesh has Rats-bane thrown upon it, to make
it look ugly: and then cast over that a cloth, which is always bloody and
filthy, which they do so often, that in the end in this hurt they feel no
pain, neither desire they to have it healed, but with their Doxies will
travel (for all their great Cleymes) from Fair to Fair, and from Market to
Market, being able by their Mawnding to get five Bordes (that is, five
shillings) in a week, in money and Corn. Which money they hide under blew and
green patches: so that sometimes they have about them, six pound or seven
pound together.

The Clapperdogeons that have not the great Cleyme, are called Farmarly Beggars.

Of their Fraternities.
THere is no lusty Rogue, but has many both sworn Brothers, and the Morts
his sworn Sisters: who vow themselves body and soul to the Devil to perform
these ten Articles, following, viz.

Articles of their Fraternities.
1 THou shall my true Brother be, keeping thy faith to thy other Brothers (as
to my self) if any such thou have. 2 Thou shall keep my counsel, and all
other my brothers, being known to thee. 3 Thou shall take part with me, and
all other my brothers in all matters. 4 Thou shall not hear me ill spoken of
without revenge to thy power. 5 Thou shall see me want nothing, to which thou
can help me. 6 Thou shall give me part of all thy winnings whatsoever. 7
Thou shall not but keep true pointments with me for meetings, be it by day or
night, at what place soever. 8 Thou shall teach no Householder to Cant, neither
confess any thing to them, be it never so true, but deny the same with oaths.
9 Thou shall do no hurt to any Mawnder, but with thine own hands: and thou
shall forbear none that disclose these secrets. 10 Thou shall take Clothes,
Hens, Geese, Pigs, Bacon, and such like, for thy Winnings, where-euer thou
can have them.
How to know their Brotherhoods.
When at the end of a Town, wherein a Fair or Market is kept, you see an
assembly of them together chiding and brawling, but not fighting, then those
Coues are sworn brothers. If likewise two Doxies fall together by the ears,
whilst the Roagues themselves stand by and fight not, that also is a
Brotherhood: for it is one branch of their Laws to take part with their
Doxies in any wrong.

Of their Names.
EVery one of them has a peculiar Nicke-name, proper to himself, by the which
he is more known, more inquired after by his brothers, and in common
familiarity more saluted, then by his own true name: yea, the false is used
so much that the true is forgotten. And of these Nicknames, some are given to
them for some special cause: as Olli Compolli, is the By-name of some one
principal Rogue amongst them, being an Abram, being bestowed upon him,
because by that he is known to be the head or chief amongst them: In like
manner these Sir-names following belong to other Grand Signiors and Commanders,
viz. Dimber Damber, and Hurly Burly, General Nurse, The Hye Shreue, The High
Constable, and such like: and some Nicke-names are either upon mockery, or upon
pleasure given unto them: as The Great Bull, The little Bull, and many other
such like. The great Bull is some one notable lusty Rogue, who gets away all
their Wenches: for this Great Bull (by report) had in one year, three and
twenty Doxies, (his Iockie was so lusty) such liberty have they in sinning,
and such damnable and most detestable manner of life do they lead.

As the men have Nicke-names, so likewise have the Women: for some of them are
called The white Ewe, The Lamb, etc. And (as I have heard) there was an Abram,
who called his Mort, Madam Wap-apace.

Of their Libkins or Lodgings.
AS these fugitive Vagabonds have Nicke names to themselves, so have they
Libkins, or Lodgings, and places of meeting: as one of the meeting places (as I
have heard) bring a Sheepe-cote, is by the Quest of Roagues who nightly
assemble there, called by the name of Stophole Abbey: so likewise another of
their Lodgings is called by the same name. Then have they others, as the blew
Bull, the Prancer, the Bulls belly, the Cowes vdder, the green Arbor, the
blasing star, etc. Such like By names give they also to their Stawling
Kennes: and note this, that after a robbery done, they lie not within twelve
miles at the least of the place where they do it, but having eaten up their
stolen mutton (baked as aforesaid (away they trudge through thick and thin,
all the havens of hell into which they put in, being always for the most part
of an equal distance one from another: for look howfarre as the one Stophole
Abbey stands from the other, and just so far is the Bulls belly from the Cowes
vdder, and so of the rest: so that what waysoeuer these night Spirits do take
after they have done their deeds of darkness, they know what pace to keep,
because (what storms soever) fall) they are sure of harbor, all their
iourneyes being but of one length. Yet dare they not but let their Morts and
their Doxies meet them at some of these places, because how cold soever the
weather be, their female furies come hotly and smoking from thence, carrying
about them Glymmar in the Prat (fire in the touch-bore) by whose flashes
oftentimes there is Glymmar in the Iocky, (the flaske is blown vpto) of which
dangerous and deadly skirmishes the fault is laid upon Seruing-men, dwelling
thereabouts, who like Free-booters are so hungry of flesh, that a Doxie (if
she have a smug face) cannot peep out, but she is taken up for Hawkes-meate.
And it is no wonder, there is such stealing of these wild Buckes, because
there is such store of them: nor is it a marvel there is such store, sithence
he is not held worthy to walk, or to be counted one of the four and twenty
Orders, but to be banished (as a silly Animal and a stinckard) from all good
fellowship, society, and meetings at Fayres, Markets, and merry Bowsing
Kennes, who when the Trumpet sounds, (that is to say, when the Cuckoe sings)
thrusts not out his head like a Snayle out of his shell, and walks not abroad
about the Deusuile (the Country) with his spirit of Lechery and theeuing, (his
Doxie) at his heels.

Why the Staff is called a Filch.
THus much for their Fraternities, Names, Lodgings, and Assemblies, at all
which times every one of them carries a short staff in his hand, which is
called a Filch, having in the Nab or head of it, a Ferme (that is to say, a
hole) into which upon any piece of service, when he goes a Filching; he puts
a hoake of iron, with which hook he angles at a window in the dead of night,
for shirts, smockes, or any other linen or woollen: and for that reason is the
staff termed a Filch. So that it is as certain that he is an Angler for
Duds, who has a Ferme in the Nab of his Filch, as that he is a thief, who
upon the highway cries stand, and takes a purse. This Staff serves to more
uses, then either the Crosse-staffe or the Jacobs, but the uses are not so good
nor so honest: for this Filching-staffe being artificially handled, is able now
and then to mill a Grunter, a bleating Cheat, a Redshanke, a Tib of the
Buttry, and such like, or to Fib a Coues Quarrons in the Rome-pad, for his
Loure in his bung, that is to say, to kill a Pigge, a Sheep, a Ducke, a Goose,
and such like, or to beat a man by the highway for the money in his purse.
And yet for all these base villainies and others, of what blackenesse soever
they be, you shall at every Assizes and Sessions, see swarms of them boldly
ventering amongst the Prisoners: one cause of their tempting their own danger
so, is, that being sworn brothers in league, and partnerts in one and the same
theeuery, it behooues them to listen to the Prisoners confession (which they
do secretly) and so to take their heels, if they spy a storm coming.
Another cause is, to learn what time-twigges caught the Bird in the Cage, and
how he was entangled by the Justice in his examination, that thereby he abroad
may shun the like: but the Devil is their Tutor, Hell their School,
Theeuery, Roaguery and Whoredom the Arts they Study, before Doctor Story they
dispute, and at the Gallows are made Graduates of Newgate and other Gaoles,
(the Hang-mans Colleges.) To shut up this feast merrily, (as sweet meats are
best last,) your last dish which I set before you, to digest the hardness of
the rest, is a Canting Song, not fained or composed as those of the Bel-mans
were, out of his own brain, but by the Canters themselves, and sung at their
meetings.

The Canting Song.
1
BIng out bien Morts, and toure, and toure,
bing out bien Morts and toure:
For all your Duds are bingd awaste,
the bien Coue has the loure.
2
I met a Dell, I viewde her well,
she was benship to my watch:
So she and I, did stall and cloy
what ever we could catch.
3
This Doxie dell, can cut bien whids,
and wap well for a win:
And prig and cloy so benshiply,
all the Dewse-auile within.
4
The boil was up, we had good luck,
in frost, for and in snow:
When they did seek, then we did creep,
and plant in ruffe-mans low.
5
To Stawling Kenne, the Mort bings then,
to fetch loure for her cheates:
Duds and Ruffe-pecke, rumboild by Harman beck,
and won by Mawnders feats.
6
You Mawnders all, stow what you stall,
to Rome-coues watch so quire:
And wapping Dell, that niggles well,
and takes loure for her hire.
7
And Iybe well Ierkt, tick rome comfeck,
for back by glymmar to mawnd:
To mill each Ken, let coue bing then,
through ruffe-mans lague or launde.
8
Till Cramprings quier, tip Coue his hire,
and quier kens do them catch:
A canniken; mill quier Cuffen,
so quier to ben coues watch.
9
Bein darkmans then, bouse, mort and ken,
the bien coue's bingd a wast:
On chates to trine, by Rome-coues dine,
for his long lib at last.
10
Bingd out bien morts, and toure, and toure,
bing out of the Rome-vile:
And toure the coue, that cloyde your duds,
upon the chates to trine.
FINIS.
Thus for satisfaction of the Readers, Englished.
1
Go forth (brave girls) look out, look out,
look out I say (good Connies)
For all your clothes are stolen (I doubt)
mad shauers share the monyes.
2
I met a Drab, I likde her well,
(my bowls did fit her alley:)
We both did vow to rob pell-mell,
and so abroad did sally.
3
This bowncing Trull can rarely talk,
a penny will make her --:
Through any town which she does walk,
naught can her filching escape.
4
The house being raizde aside we stepped,
and through the mire did wade:
To avoid Hue and Cry, to a hedge we crept,
and under it close were laid.
5
Toth' Broakers then my hedge-bird flies,
for stolen goods bringing coin:
Which (tho the Constable after hies)
our tricks away purloyne.
6
You mawnding rogues, how you steal beware
for privy search is made:
Take heed thou to, (thou hackney-mare)
whone'er art ridden, but paid.
7
A License got with counterfeit Seal
to beg (as if undone
By fire) to break each house, and steal,
over hedge and ditch then run.
8
Till Shackels soundly pay us home,
and to the Iayle compel us:
Ill may the Justice ever thrive,
so cruel to Good Fellows.
9
Sweet Punck, beere-house, and beer, good night,
the honest Roague's departed
To hanging, (by the Justice spite)
to his long home he is carted.
10
Away sweet Duckes, with greedy eyes,
from London walk up Holbourne:
Sue him who stole your clothes: he flies
with hempen-wings to Tybourne.
FINIS.

