THE SHOMAKERS Holiday. OR The Gentle Craft.

With the humorous life of Simon Air, shoemaker, and Lord Mayor of London.

As it was acted before the Queens most excellent Majesty on New years day
at night last, by the right honorable the Earl of Notingham, Lord high
Admiral of England, his servants.



Printed by Valentine Sims dwelling at the foot of Adling hill, near Bainards
Castle, at the sign of the White Swanne, and are there to be sold. 1600.

To all good Fellows, Professors of the Gentle Craft; of what degree soever.
Kind Gentlemen, and honest boon Companions, I present you here with a merry
conceited Comedy, called the Shoomakers Holyday, acted by my Lord Admiralls
Players this present Christmasse, before the Queens most excellent Majesty.
For the mirth and pleasant matter, by her Highness graciously accepted; being
indeed no way offensive. The Argument of the play I will set down in this
Epistle: Sir Hugh Lacie Earl of Lincoln, had a young Gentleman of his own
name, his nere kinsman, that loved the Lord Majors daughter of London; to
prevent and cross which love, the Earl caused his kinsman to be sent Coronell
of a company into France: who resigned his place to another gentleman his
friend, and came disguised like a Dutch Shoemaker, to the house of Simon Air
in Tower street, who served the Mayor and his household with shoes. The
merriments that passed in Eyres house, his coming to be Mayor of London,
Lacies getting his love, and other accidents; with two merry Three-mens songs.
Take all in good worth that is well intended, for nothing is purposed but
mirth, mirth lengthneth long life which, with all other blessings I heartily
wish you.

Farewell.

The first Three-mans Song.
O the month of May, the merry month of May,
So frolic, so gay, and so green, so green, so green:
O and then did I, unto my true love say,
Swate Peg, thou shall be my Summers Queen.
NOw the Nightingale, the pretty Nightingale,
The sweetest singer in all the Forests quier:
Intreates thee sweet Peggie, to hear thy true loves tale,
Lo, yonder she sits, her breast against a brier.
But O I spy the Cuckoo, the Cuckoo, the Cuckoo,
See where she sits, come away my joy:
Come away I prithee, I do not like the Cuckoo
Should sing where my Peggie and I kiss and toy.
O the month of May, the merry month of May,
So frolike, so gay, and so green, so green, so green:
And then did I, unto my true love say,
Sweet Peg, thou shall be my Summers Queen.
The Second Three-mans Song.
This is to be sung at the latter end. COld's the wind, and wet's the rain,
Saint Hugh be our good speed:
Ill is the weather that brings no gain,
Nor helps good hearts in need.
Trowle the boll, the jolly Nut-browne boll,
And here kind mate to thee:
Let Us sing a dirge for Saint Hughes soul,
And down it merrily.
Down a down, hey down a down,
Hey derie derie down a down,
Close with the tenor boy:
Ho well done, to me let come,
King compass gentle joy.
Trowle the boll, the Nut-browne boll,
And here kind etc as often as there be men to drink.
At last when all have drunk, this verse.
Cold's the wind, and wet's the rain,
Saint Hugh be our good speed:
Ill is the weather that brings no gain,
Nor helps good hearts in need.
The Prologue as it was pronounced before the Queens Majesty.
AS wretrhes in a storm (expecting day)
With trembling hands and eyes cast up to heaven,
Make Prayers the anchor of their conquered hopes,
So we (dear Goddess) wonder of all eyes,
Your meanest bassalls (through mistrust and fear,
To uncke into the bottom of disgrace,
By our impersit pastimes) prostrate thus
On bended knees, our sails of hope do strike,
Dreading the bitter storms of your dislike.
Since then (unhappy men) our hap is such,
That to our selves our selves no help can bring,
But needs must perish, if your saint-like cares
(Locking the temple where all mercy sits)
Refuse the tribute of our begging tongues.
Oh grant (bright mirror of true Chastity)
From those life-breathing stars your sun-like eyes,
One gracious smile: for your celestial breath
Must send us life, or sentence us to death.
A pleasant Comedy of the Gentle Craft.
Enter Lord Mayor, Lincoln. Lincoln. MY Lord Mayor, you have sundry times
Feasted my self, and many Courtiers more,
Seldom, or never can we be so kind,
To make requital of your courtesy:
But leaving this, I hear my cosen Lacie
Is much affected to your daughter Rose.

L. Mayor. True my good Lord, and she loves him so well, That I mislike her
boldness in the chase.


Lincol. Why my lord Mayor, think you it then a shame, To join a Lacie with an
Otleys name?


L. Mayor. Too mean is my poor girl for his high birth,
Poor Citizens must not with Courtiers wed,
Who will in silks, and gay apparel spend
More in one year, then I am worth by far,
Therefore your honor need not doubt my girl.

Lincoln. Take heed my Lord, advise you what you do,
A berier vnthrist lives not in the world,
Then is my cosen, for I Will tell you what,
It Is now almost a year since he requested
To travel countries for experience,
I furnished him with coin, bills of exchange,
Letters of credit, men to wait on him,
Solicited my friends in Italy
Well to respect him: but to see the end:
Scant had he iornied through half Germany,
But all his coin was spent, his men cast off,
His bills imbezeld, and my jolly coze,
Ashamed to show his bankerupt presence here,
Became a Shoemaker in Wittenberg,
A goodly science for a gentleman
Of such descent: now judge the rest by this.
Suppose your daughter have a thousand pound,
He did consume me more in one half year,
And make him heir to all the wealth you have,
One twelve month's rioting will waste it all,
Then seek (my Lord) some honest Citizen
To wed your daughter to.

L. Mayor. I thank your Lordship,
Well Fore, I understand your subtlety,
As for your nephew, let your lordships eye
But watch his actions, and you need not fear,
For I have my daughter far enough,
And yet your cosen Rowland might do well
Now he has learned an occupation,
And yet I scorn to call him son in law.

Lincoln. I but I have a better trade for him,
I thank his grace he has appointed him,
Chief colonel of all those companies
Mustred in London, and the shires about,
To serve his highness in those wars of France:
See where he comes: Louel what news with you?

Enter Louell, Lacie, and Askew. Louell. My Lord of Lincoln, it is his highness
will,
That presently your cosen ship for France
With all his powers, he would not for a million,
But they should land at Deep within four days.

Linc. Go certify his grace it shall be done: Exit Louell.
Now cosen Lacie, in what forwardness
Are all your companies?

Lacie. All well prepared,
The men of Hartfordshire lie at Mile end,
Suffolk, and Essex, train in Tuttle fields,
The Londoners, and those of Middlesex,
All gallantly prepared in Finsbury,
With frolike spirits, long for their parting hour.

L. Mayor They have their impressed, coats, and furniture,
And if it please your cosen Lacie come
To the Guild Hall, he shall receive his pay,
And twenty pounds besides my brethren
Will freely give him, to approve our loves
We bear unto my Lord your uncle here.

Lacie. I thank your honor.


Lincoln. Thanks my good Lord Mayor.


L. Ma. At the Guild Hal we will expect your coming, Exit.


Lincoln. To approve your loves to me? no subtlety
Nephew: that twenty pound he does bestow,
For joy to rid you from his daughter Rose:
But cosens both, now here are none but friends,
I would not have you cast an amorous eye
Upon so mean a project, as the love
Of a gay wanton painted citizen,
I know this churl, even in the height of scorn,
Does hate the mixture of his blood with thine,
I pray thee do thou so, remember coze,
What honorable fortunes wayt on thee,
Increase the kings love which so brightly shines,
And gilds thy hopes, I have no heir but thee:
And yet not thee, if with a wayward spirit,
Thou start from the true byas of my love.

Lacie. My Lord, I will (for honor (not desire
Of land or livings) or to be your heir)
So guide my actions in pursuit of France,
As shall add glory to the Lacies name.

Lincoln. Coze, for those words here is thirty Portugues
And Nephew Askew, there is a few for you,
Fair Honor in her loftrest eminence
Stays in France for you till you fetch her thence,
Then Nephews, clap swift wings on your dissignes,
Be gone, be gone, make haste to the Guild Hall,
There presently I Will meet you, do not stay,
Where honor becomes, shame attends delay. Exit.

Askew. How gladly would your uncle have you gone?


Lacie. True coze, but I Will ore-reach his policies,
I have some serious business for three days,
Which nothing but my presence can dispatch,
You therefore cosen with the companies
Shall hasse to Dover, there I Will meet with you,
Or if I stay past my prefixed time,
Away for France, we will meet in Normandy,
The twenty pounds my Lord Mayor gives to me
You shall receive, and these ten portugues,
Part of mine uncles thirty, gentle coze,
Have care to our great charge, I know your wisdom
Has tried it self in higher consequence.

Askew. Coze, al my self am yours, yet have this care,
To lodge in London with all secrecy,
Our uncle Lincoln has (besides his own)
Many a jealous eye, that in your face
Stares only to watch means for your disgrace.

Lacie. Stay cosen, who be these?


Enter Simon Air, his wife, Hodge, Firk, Jane, and Rafe with a piece. Air.
Leave whining, leave whining, away with this whimpring, this pewling, these
blubbring tears, and these wet eyes, I Will get thy husband discharged, I warrant
thee sweet Jane: go to.


Hodge. Master, here be the captains.


Air. Peace Hodge, hushed ye knave, hushed.


Firke Here be the caualiers, and the coronels, master.


Air. Peace Firke, peace my fine Firke, stand by with your pishery pasherie,
away, I am a man of the best presence, I Will speak to them and they were Popes,
gentlemen, captains, colonels, commanders: brave men, brave leaders, may it
please you to give me audience, I am Simon Air, the mad Shoomaster of
Towerstreete, this wench with the mealy mouth that will never tire, is my wife I
can tell you, here is Hodge my man, and my foreman, here is Firke my fine firking
iourneyman, and this is blubbered Jane, al we come to be suitors for this honest
Rafe keep him at home, and as I am a true shoemaker, and a gentleman of the
Gentle Craft, buy spurs your self, and I Will find ye boots these seven years.


Wife. Seven years husband?


Air. Peace Midriffe, peace, I know what I do, peace.


Firk. Truly master cormorant, you shall do God good service to let Rafe and his
wife stay together, she is a young new married woman, if you take her husband
away from her a night, you undo her, she may beg in the day time, for he is as
good a workman at a prick and an awle, as any is in our trade.


Jane. O let him stay, else I shall be undone.


Firke. I truly, she shall be laid atone side like a pair of old shoes else,
and be occupied for no use.


Lacie. Truly my friends, it lies not in my power,
The Londoners are pressed, paid, and set forth
By the Lord Mayor, I cannot change a man.

Hodge. Why then you were as good be a corporal, as a colonel, if you cannot
discharge one good fellow, and I tell you true, I think you do more then you
can answer, to presie a man within a year and a day of his marriage.


Air. Well said melancholy Hodge, gramercy my fine foreman.


Wife. Truly gentlemen, it were il done, for such as you, to stand so stiffely
against a poor young wife: considering her case, she is new married, but let
that pass: I pray deal not roughly with her, her husband is a young man and
but newly entered, but let that pass.


Air. Away with your pisherie pasherie, your pols and your edipolls, peace
Midaffe, silence Cisly Bumtrincket, let your head speak.


Firke. Yea and the horns too, master.


Air. Too soon, my fine Firk, too soon: peace scoundrels, see you this man?
Captains, you will not release him, well let him go, he is a proper shot, let
him vanish, peace Jane, dry up thy tears, they will make his powder darkish,
take him brave men, Hector of Troy was an hackney to him, Hercules and
Termagant scoundrelles, Prince Arthurs Round table, by the Lord of Lutgate,
nere fed such a tall, such a dapper swordman: by the life of Pharo, a brave
resolute swordman, peace Jane, I say no more, mad knaves.


Firk. See, see Hodge, how my master raues in commendation of Rafe.


Hodge. Raph, thart a gull by this hand, and thou go.


Askew. I am glad (good master Air) it is my hap
To meet so resolute a soldier.
Trust me, for your report, and love to him,
A common flight regard shall not respect him.

Lacie. Is thy name Raph?


Raph. Yes sir.


Lacie. Give me thy hand,
Thou shall not want, as I am a gentleman:
Woman, be patient, God (no doubt) will send
Thy husband safe again, but he must go,
His countries quarrel says, it shall be so.

Hodge Thart a gull by my stirrup, if thou do not go, I will not have thee
strike thy gimblet into these weak bessels, prick thine enemies Rafe. Enter
Dodger.


Dodger My lord, your uncle on the Tower hill,
Stays with the lord Mayor, and the Aldermen,
And does request you with all speed you may
To hasten thither. exit Dodger.

Askew Cousin, lets go.


Lacy, Dodger run you before, tell them we come,
This Dodger is mine uncles parasite,
The arrantst varlet that e re breathd on earth,
He sets more discord in a noble house,
By one days broching of his pickethanke fales,
Then can be salu'd again in twenty years,
And he (I fear) shall go with us to France,
To pry into our actions.

Askew. Therefore coze,
It shall behooue you to be circumspect,

Lacy. Fear not good cosen: Raph, hie to your colors.


Raph. I must, because there is no remedy,
But gentle master and my loving dame,
As you have always been a friend to me,
So in mine absence think upon my wife.

Jane. Alas my Raph.


Wife. She cannot speak for weeping.


Air. Peace you cracked groates, you mustard tokens, disquiet not the brave
soldier, go thy ways Raph.


Jane. I I, you bid him go, what shall I do when he is gone?


Firk. Why be doing with me, or my fellow Hodge, be not idle.


Air. Let me see thy hand Jane, this fine hand, this white hand, these pretty
fingers must spin, must card, must work, work you bembast
cotten-candle-queane, work for your living with a pox to you: hold thee Raph,
here is five sixpences for thee, fight for the honor of the Gentle Craft, for
the gentlemen Shoomakers, the courageous Cordwainers, the flower of S. Martins,
the mad knaves of Bedlem, Fleetstreete, Towerstreete, and white Chapel,
crack me the crowns of the French knaves, a pore on them, crack them, fight,
by the lord of Ludgate, fight my fine boy.


Firke. Here Rafe, here is three two pences, two carry into France, the third
shall wash our souls at parting (for sorrow is dry) for my sake, Firke the
Basa mon cues.


Hodge. Raph, I am heavy at parting, but here is a shilling for thee, God send
thee to cramme thy slops with French crowns, and thy enemies bellies with
bullets.


Raph. I thank you master, and I thank you all:
Now gentle wife, my loving lovely Jane,
Rich men at parting, give their wives rich gifts,
Jewels and rings, to grace their lilly hands,
Thou know our trade makes rings for women's heels:
Here take this pair of shoes cut out by Hodge,
Sticht by my fellow Firke, seam'd by my self,
Made up and pinckt, with letters for thy name,
Wear them my dear Jane, for thy husbands sake,
And every morning when thou pull'st them on,
Remember me, and pray for my return,
Make much of them, for I have made them so,
That I can know them from a thousand mo.
Sound drum, enter Lord Mayor, Lincoln, Lacy, Askew, Dodger, and soldiers,
They pass over the stage, Rafe falls in amongst them, Firke and the rest cry
farewell, etc. and so Exeunt. Enter Rose alone making a Garland. Here sit thou
down upon this flowery bank,
And make a garland for thy Lacies head,
These pinkes, these roses, and these violets,
These blushing gilliflowers, these marigoldes,
The fair embrodery of his coronet,
Carry not half such beauty in their cheeks,
As the sweet countnaunce of my Lacy does.
O my most unkind father! O my stars!
Why lowrde you so at my nativity,
To make me love, yet live robbed of my love?
Here as a thief am I imprisoned
(For my dear Lacies sake) within those walls,
Which by my fathers cost were builded up
For better purposes: here must I languish
For him that does as much lament (I know) enter Sibil.
Mine absence, as for him I pine in woe.

Sibil Good morrow young Mistress, I am sure you make that garland for me,
against I shall be Lady of the Harvest.


Rose Sibil, what news at London?


Sibil Noue but good: my lord Mayor your father, and master Philpot your
uncle, and master Scot your coosin, and mistress Frigbottom by Doctors Commons,
do all (by my troth) send you most hearty commendations.


Rose Did Lacy send kind greetings to his love?


Sibil O yes, out of cry, by my troth, I scant knew him, here a wore scarffe,
and here a scarf, here a bunch of feathers, and here precious stones and
jewels, and a pair of garters: O monstrous like one of our yellow silk
curtains, at home here in Old-ford house, here in master Bellymounts chamber,
I stood at our door in Cornehill, looked at him, he at me indeed, spoke to
him, but he not to me, not a word, mary guy thought I with a wanion, he passt
by me as proud, mary foh, are you grown humorous thought I? and so shut the
door, and in I came.


Rose O Sibill, how dest thou my Lacy wrong?
My Rowland is as gentle as a lamb,
No dove was ever half so mild as he.

Sibil Mild? yea, as a bushel of stamped crabs, he looked upon me as sour as
veriuice: go thy ways thought I, thou may be much in my gaskins, but
nothing in my neatherstockes: this is your fault mistress, to love him that
loves not you, he thinks scorn to do as he is done to, but if I were as you,
I Would cry, go by Ieronimo, go by, I Would set mine old debts against my new
driblets, and the hares foot against the goose giblets, for if ever I sigh when
sleep I should take, pray God I may loose my mayden-head when I wake.


Rose Will my love leave me then and go to France?


Sibill I know not that, but I am sure I see him stalk before the soldiers,
by my troth he is a propper man, but he is proper that proper does, let him go
snicke-vp young mistress.


Rose Get thee to London, and learn perfectly,
Whether my Lacy go to France, or no:
Do this, and I will give thee for thy pains,
My cambricke apron, and my romish gloves,
My purple stockings, and a stomacher,
Say, will thou do this Sibil for my sake?

Sibil Will I quoth a? at whose suite? by my troth yes, I Will go, a cambricke
apron, gloves, a pair of purple stockings, and a stomacher, I Will sweat in
purple mistress for you, i will take any thing that comes a Gods name, O rich, a
Cambricke apron; faith then have at up tails all, I Will go, Iiggy, Ieggy to
London, and be here in a trice young mistress. Exit.


Rose. Do so good Sibill, mean time wretched I
Will sit and sigh for his lost company. Exit.

Enter Rowland Lacy like a Dutch Shoemaker. Lacy. How many shapes have gods
and kings deuisde,
Thereby to compass their desired loves?
It is no shame for Rowland Lacy then,
To clothe his cunning with the Gentle Craft,
That thus disguisde, I may unknown possess,
The only happy presence of my Rose:
For her have I forsook my charge in France,
Incurd the Kings displeasure, and stirred up
Rough hatred in mine uncle Lincolnes breast:
O love, how powerful art thou, that can change
High birth to bareness, and a noble mind,
To the mean semblance of a shooemaker?
But thus it must be: for her cruel father,
Hating the single union of our souls,
Has secretly conveyed my Rose from London,
To bar me of her presence, but I trust
Fortune and this disguise will further me
Once more to view her beauty, gain her sight.
Here in Towerstreete, with Air the shoemaker,
Mean I a while to work, I know the trade,
I learned it when I was in Wittenberge:
Then cheer thy hoping sprites, be not dismaide,
Thou can not want, do fortune what she can,
The Gentle Craft is living for a man. exit.

Enter Air making himself ready. Air. Where be these boys, these girls,
these drabbes, these scoundrels, they wallow in the fat brewisse of my bou^tie,
and I lock up the crumbs of my table, yet will not rise to see my walks
cleansed: come out you powder-beefe-queanes, what Nan, what Madge-mumble-crust,
come out you fat Midriffe-swag, belly-whores, and sweep me these kennels,
that the noisome stench offend not the nose of my neighbors: what Firke I
say, what Hodge? open my shop windows, what Firke I say. Enter Firke.


Firke. O master, is it you that speak bandog and bedlam this morning, I was in
a dream, and muzed what mad man was got into the street so early, have you
drunk this morning that your throat is so clear?


Air. Ah well said Firke, well said Firke, to work my fine knave, to work,
wash thy face, and thou t be more blessed.


Firke. Let them wash my face that will eat it, good master send for a sowce
wife, if you will have my face cleaner.


enter Hodge. Air. Away slouen, auaunt scoundrell, good morrow Hodge, good
morrow my fine foreman.


Hodge. O master, good morrow, yare an early stirrer, heeres a fair morning,
good morrow Firke, I could have slept this hour, heeres a brave day toward.


Air. O haste to work my fine foreman, haste to work.


Firke. Master I am dry as dust, to hear my fellow Roger talk of fair
weather, let us pray for good leather, and let clownes and plowboyes, and those
that work in the fields, pray for brave days, we work in a dry shop, what
care I if it rain? enter Eyres wife.


Air. How now dame Margery, can you see to rise? trip and go, call up the
drabs your maids.


Wife. See to rise? I hope it is time enough, it is early enough for any woman to
be seen abroad, I marvel how many wives in Towerstreet are up so soon? Gods
me, it is not noone, here is a yawling.


Air. Peace Margerie, peace, where is Cisty Bumtrinket your maid? she has a
privy fault, she fartes in her sleep, call the queen up, if my men want
shooethreed, i will swinge her in a stirrup.


Firke. Yet that's but a dry beating, here is still a sign of drought. enter
Lacy singing.


Lacy. Der was even bore van Gelderland, Frolic u^ byen,
He was als dronck he cold nyet stand, vpsolce se byen,
Tap eens de canneken drink scheue mannekin.

Firke. Master, for my life yonder is a brother of the Gentle Craft, if he bear
not saint Hughes bones, I Will forfeit my bones, he is some vplandish workman, hire
him good master, that I may learn some gibble, gabble, twill make us work the
faster.


Air. Peace Firke, a hard world, let him pass, let him vanish, we have
iourneymen enough, peace my fine Firke.


Wife. Nay, nay, y are best follow your man's council, you shall see what will
come on t: we have not men enough, but we must entertain every butter-boxe: but
let that pass.


Hodge. Dame, fore God if my master follow your counsel, heel consume little
beef, he shall be glad of men and he can catch them.


Firke. I that he shall.


Hodge. Fore God a proper man, and I warrant a fine workman: master farewell,
dame adieu, if such a man as he cannot find work, Hodge is not for you. offer
to go.


Air. Stay my fine Hodge.


Firke. Faith, and your foreman go, dame you must take a journey to seek a
new iorneyman, if Roger remove, Firke follows, if S. Hughs bones shall not be
set a work, I may prick mine awle in the walls, and go play: fare ye well
master, God buy dame.


Air. Carry my fine Hodge, my brisk foreman, stay Firke, peace pudding
broth, by the lord of Ludgate I love my men as my life, peace you gallimafrie,
Hodge if he want work I Will hire him, one of you to him, stay, he comes to us.


Lacie. Eoeden dach meester, end v vro oak.


Firke. Nayis if I should speak after him without drinking, I should choke, and
you frind Oak are you of the Gentle Craft?


Lacie. Yaw yaw, Ik bin den skomawker.


Firke. Den skomaker quoth a, and hark you skomaker, have you al your tools,
a good rubbing pin, a good stopper, a good dresser, your four sorts of awles
and your two balls of wax, your paring knife, your hand and thumb-leathers,
and good S. Hughs bones to smooth up your work.


Lacie. Yaw yaw be niet vor veard, Ik hab all de dingen, voour mack shoes groot
and clean.


Firke. Ha ha good master hire him, heel make me laugh so that I shall work
more in mirth, then I can in earnest.


Air. I care ye friend, have ye any skill in the mystery of Cordwainers?


Lacie. Ik weet niet wat you seg ich vestaw you niet.


Firke. Why thus man, Ich verste v niet quoth a.


Lacie. Yaw, yaw, yaw, ick can dat well done.


Firke. Yaw, yaw, he speaks yawing like a Jack daw, that gapes to be fed with
cheese curdes, O heel give a villainous pull at a Can of double Beer, but Hodge
and I have the vantage, we must drink first, because we are the eldest
iourneyman.


Air. What is thy name?


Lacy. Hans, Hans, Meulter.


Air. Give me thy hand, the art welcome, Hodge entertain him, Fyrk bid him
welcome, come Hans, run wife, bid your maids, your Crullibubs, make ready my
fine men's breakefasts: to him Hodge.


Hodge. Hans, thou art welcome, use thy self friendly, for we are good fellows,
if not thou shall be fought with, were thou bigger then a Giant.


Fyrk. Yea and drunk with, were thou Gargantua, my master keeps no cowards,
I tell thee: he, boy, bring him an heele-blocke, heers a new iourneyman.


Enter boy. Lacy. Oich wersto, you Ich moet even halue dossen Cans betaelen:
here boy nempt dis skilling, tap eens freelicke.


Exit boy. Air. Quick snipper snapper, away Fyrk, scowre thy throat, thou
shall wash it with Casulian licour, come my last of the fiues, give me a Can,
have to Enter boy. thee Hans, here Hodge, here Fyrk, drink you mad Greeks, and
work like true Trojans, and pray for Simon Air the Shoemaker: here Hans, and
thou art welcome.


Fyrk. Lo dame you would have lost a good fellow that will teach us to laugh,
this beer came hopping in well.


Wife. Simon it is almost seven.


Air. Is It so dame clapper dudgeon, is it seven a clock, and my men's
breakefast not ready? trip and go you sowst cunger, away, come you mad
Hiperboreans, follow me Hodge, follow me Hans, come after my fine Fyrk, to
work, to work a while and then to breakfast. Exit.


Fyrk. Soft, yaw, yaw, good Hans, though my master have no more wit, but to
call you before me, I am not so foolish to go behind you, I being the elder
iourneyman. exeunt.


Hollowing within. Enter Warner, and Hammon, like hunters. Hammon. Cosen, beat
every brake, the game's not far,
This may with winged feet he fled from death,
Whilst the pursuing hounds senting his steps:
Find out his high way to destruction,
Besides, the millers boy told me even now,
He saw him take sail, and he hallowed him,
Affirming him so embost,
That long he could not hold.

Warner. If it be so,
It Is best we trace these meddowes by old Ford.

A noise of hunters within, enter a boy. Hammon. How now boy, where is the dear?
speak, sawst thou him?


Boy. O, yea I saw him escape through a hedge, and then over a ditch, then at my
Lord Majors pale, over he skipt me and in he went me, and holla the hunters
cride, and there boy there boy, but there he is a mine honesty.


Ham. Boy God amerey, cosen lets away,
I hope we shall find better sport to day. exeunt.

Hunting within, enter Rose, and Sibill. Rose. Why Sibill will thou prove a
forrester?


Sibill. Upon some no, forrester, go by: no faith mistress, the dear came
running into the barn through the orchard, and over the pale, I wot well, I
looked as pale as a new cheese to see him, but whip says goodman pinne-close,
up with his fiaile, and our Nicke with a prong, and down he fell, and they upon
him, and I upon them, by my troth we had such sport, and in the end we ended
him, his throat we cut, flead him, vnhornd him, and my lord Mayor shall eat of
him anon when he comes.


Horns sound within. Rose. Hark hark, the hunters come, you are best take heed
They Will have a saying to you for this deed.

Enter Hammon, Warner, huntsmen, and boy. Ham. God save you fair ladies.


Sibil. Ladies, O gross!


War. Came not a bucke this way?


Rose. No, but two Does.


Ham. And which way went they? faith weel hunt at those


Sibill. At those? upon some no: when, can you tell?


War. Upon some, I.


Sibill. Good Lord!


War. Wounds then farewell.


Ham. Boy, which way went he?


Boy. This way sir he ran.


Ham. This way he ran indeed, fair mistress Rose,
Our game was lately in your orchard seen.

War. Can you advise which way he took his flight?


Sibil. Follow your nose, his horns will guide you right.


War. Thart a mad wench.


Sibill. O rich!


Rose. Trust me, not I,
It is not like the wild forest dear,
Would come so near to places of resort,
You are deceived, he fled some other way.

War. Which way my suger-candie, can you show?


Sibill. Come up good honnisops, upon some, no.


Rose. Why do you stay, and not pursue your game?


Sibill. I Will hold my life their hunting nags be lame.


Ham. A dear, more dear is found within this place.


Rose. But not the dear (sir) which you had in chase.


Ham. I chased the dear, but this dear chaceth me.


Rose. The strangest hunting that ever I see,
But where is your park?

She offers to go away. Ham. It Is here: O stay.


Rose. Impale me, and then I will not stray.


War They wrangle wench, we are more kind then they


Sibill. What kind of heart is that (dear heart) you seek?


War. A heart, dear heart.


Sibil. Who ever saw the like?


Rose. To loose your heart, is it possible you can?


Ham. My heart is lost.


Rose. Alack good gentleman.


Ham. This poor lost heart would I with you might find.


Rose. You by such luck might prove your heart a hind.


Ham. Why Luck had horns, so have I heard some say.


Rose. Now God and't be his will send Luck into your way.


Enter L. Mayor, and servants. L. May. What M. Hammon, welcome to old Ford.


Sibill. Gods pittikins, hands off sir, heers my Lord.


L. Mayor. I hear you had ill luck, and lost your game.


Hammon. It Is true my Lord.


L. Mayor. I am sorry for the same.
What gentleman is this?

Hammon. My brother in law.


L. Mayor. Y are welcome both, since Fortune offers you
Into my hands, you shall not part from hence,
Until you have refresht yout wearied limbs:
Go Sibel cover the board, you shall be guest
To no good cheer, but even a hunters feast.

Hammon. I thank your Lordship: cosen, on my life
For our lost venisou, I shall find a wife. exeunt.

L. Mayor. In gentlemen, I Will not be absent long.
This Hammon is a proper gentleman,
A citizen by birth, fairly allide,
How fit an husband were he for my girl?
Well, I will in, and do the best I can,
To match my daughter to this gentleman. exit.

Enter Lacie, Skipper, Hodge, and Firke. Skip. Ick sal you wat seggen Hans, dis
skip dat comen from Candy is al wol, by gots sacrament, van sugar, ciuet,
almonds, cambrick, end all dingen towsand towsand ding, nempt it Hans, nempt
it voz v meester, daer be de bills van laden, your meester Simon Air sal hae
good copen, wat seggen you Hans?


Firk. Wat seggen de reggen de copen, slopen, laugh Hodge laugh.


Lacie. Mine lieuer brother Firk, bringt meester Air lot den sign un
swannekin, daer sal you find dis skipper end me, wat seggen you brother Firk?
doot it Hodge, come skipper. exeunt.


Firke. Bring him quoth. you, heers no knauerie, to bring me master to buy a ship,
worth the lading of 2 or 3 hundred thousand pounds, alas that's nothing, a
trifle, a babble Hodge.


Hod The truth is Firk, that the merchant owner of the ship dares not show his
head, and therefore this skipper that deals for him, for the love he bears to
Hans, offers my master Air a bargain in the commodities, he shall have a
reasonable day of payment, he may sell the wares by that time, and be an huge
gainer himself.


Firk. Yea, but can my fellow Hans lend my master twenty porpentines as an
earnest penny.


Hodge. Portegues thou would say, here they be Firke, hark, they gingle in
my pocket like S. Mary Queries bells.


enter Air and his wife. Firke. Mum, here comes my dame and my master, she will
scold on my life, for loytering this Monday, but all is one, let them al say what
they can, Monday's our holyday.


Wife. You sing sir sauce, but I beshrew your heart,
I fear for this your singing we shall smart.

Firke. Smart for me dame, why dame, why?


Hodg. Master I hope yowle not suffer my dame to take down your iourneymen.


Firk. If she take me down, I Will take her up, yea and take her down too, a
button, hole lower.


Air. Peace Firke, not I Hodge, by the life of Pharao, by the Lord of Ludgate,
by this beard, every hair whereof I value at a kings ransom, she shall not
meddle with you, peace you bumbast-cotten-candle Queen, away queen of Clubs,
quarrel not with me and my men, with me and my fine Firke, I Will firke you if you
do.


Wife. Yea, yea man, you may use me as you please: but let that pass.


Air. Let it pass, let it vanish away: peace, am I not Simon Air? are not
these my brave men? brave shoomakers, all gentlemen of the gentle craft? prince
am I none, yet am I nobly borne, as being the sole son of a Shoemaker, away
rubbish, vanish, melt, melt like kitchen stuff.


Wife. Yea, yea, it is well, I must be called rubbish, kitchen stuff, for a sort of
knaves.


Firke. Nay dame, you shall not weep and wail in woe for me: master I Will stay
no longer, here is a vennentorie of my shop tools: adue master, Hodge farewell.


Hodge. Nay stay Firke, thou shall not go alone.


Wife. I pray let them go, there be mo maids then mawkin, more men then
Hodge, and more fools then Firke.


Firke. Fools? nails if I tarry now, I would my guts might be turned to
shoo-thread.


Hodge. And if I stay, I pray God I may be turned to a Turk, and set in
Finsbury for boys to shoot at: come Firk.


Air. Stay my fine knaves, you arms of my trade, you pillars of my
profession. What, shall a tittle tattles words make you forsake Simon Air?
auaunt kitchinstuffe, rip you brown bread tannikin, out of my sight, move me
not, have not I taken you from selling tripes in Eastcheape, and set you in my
shop, and made you hail fellow with Simon Air the shoemaker? and now do you
deal thus with my Iourneymen? Look you powder beef queen on the face of
Hodge, heers a face for a Lord.


Firke. And heers a face for any Lady in Christendom.


Air. Rip you chitterling, auaunt boy, bid the tapster of the Bores head fill
me a doozen Cannes of beer for my iourneymen.


Firke. A doozen Cans? O brave, Hodge now I Will stay.


Air. And the knave fills any more then two, he pays for them: a doozen Cans
of beer for my iourneymen, hear you mad Mesopotamians, wash your livers with
this liquour, where be the odd ten? no more Madge, no more, well said, drink
and to work: what work do thou Hodge? what work?


Hodge. I am a making a pair of shoes for my Lord Majors daughter, mistress
Rose.


Firke. And I a pair of shoes for Sybill my Lords maid, I deal with her.


Air. Sybil? fie, defile not thy fine workemanly fingers with the feet of
Kitchinstuffe, and basting ladies, Ladies of the Court, fine Ladies, my lads,
commit their feet to our apparelling, put gross work to Hans; yarke and
seame, yarke and seame.


Fyrk. For yarking and seaming let me alone, and I come toot.


Hodge. Well master, all this is from the bias, do you remember the ship my
fellow Hans told you of, the Skipper and he are both drinking at the swan? here
be the Portigues to give earnest, if you go through with it, you can not choose
but be a Lord at least.


Firke. Nay dame, if my master prone not a Lord, and you a Lady, hang me.


Wife. Yea like enough, if you may loiter and tipple thus.


Firke. Tipple dame? no, we have been bargaining with Skellum Skanderbag: can
you Dutch spreaken for a ship of silk Cipresse, laden with sugar Candy.


Enter the boy with a velvet coat, and an Aldermans gown. Air puts it on.
Eire. Peace Firk, silence tittle tattle: Hodge, I Will go through with it, heers a
seal ring, and I have sent for a guarded gown, and a damask Casock, see where
it comes, look here Maggy, help me Firk, apparreline Hodge, silk and satin
you mad Philistines, silk and satin.


Firk. Ha, ha, my master will be as proud as a dog in a dublet, al in beaten
damask and velvet.


Air. Softly Firke, for rearing of the nap, and wearing threadbare my
garments: how do thou like me Firke? how do I look, my fine Hodge?


Hodge. Why now you look like your selfmaster, I warrant you, there is few in
the city, but will give you the wall, and come upon you with the right worshipful.


Firke. Nails my master looks like a threadbare cloak new turned, and dressed:
Lord, Lord, to see what good raiment both? dame, dame, are you not enamoured?


Air. How say thou Maggy, am I not brisk? am I not fine?


Wife. Fine? by my troth sweet heart very fine: by my troth I never likte thee
so well in my life sweet heart. But let that pass, I warrant there be many
women in the city have not such handsome husbands, but only for their
apparel, but let that pass too. Enter Hans and Skipper.


Hans. Godden day mester, dis be de skipper dat heb de skip van marchandice de
commodity ben good, nempt it master, nempt it.


Air. Godamercy Hans, welcome skipper, where lies this ship of marchandice?


Skip. De skip ben in rouere: dor be van Sugar, Cyuet, Almonds, Cambricke, and
a towsand towsand tings, gotz sacrament, nempt it mester, yo sal heb good copen.


Firk. To him master, O sweet master, O sweet wares, prunes, almons,
suger-candy, carrat roots, turnups, O brave fatting meat, let not a man buy a
nutmeg but your self.


Air. Peace Firke, come Skipper, I Will go abroad with you, Hans have you made
him drink?


Skip. Yaw, yaw, it heb veale ge drunck.


Air. Come Hans follow me: Skipper, thou shall have my countenance in the
City. Exeunt.


Firke. Yaw heb veale ge drunck, quoth a: they may well be called butter-boxes,
when they drink fat veale, and thick bear too: but come dame, I hope you will
chide us no more.


Wife. No faith Firke, no perdy Hodge, I do feel honor creep upon me, and
which is more, a certain rising in my flesh, but let that pass.


Firke. Rising in your flesh do you feel say you? I you may be with child,
but why should not my master feel a rising in his flesh, having a gown and a
gold ring on, but you are such a shrew, youl'e soon pull him down.


Wi. Ha, ha, prithee peace, thou make my worship laugh, but let that
pass: come I Will go in Hodge, prithee go before me, Firke follow me.


Fi. Firke does follow, Hodge pass out in state. Exeunt.


Enter Lincoln and Dodger. Li. How now good Dodger, what is the news in France?


Dodger. My Lord, upon the eighteen day of May,
The French and English were preparde to fight,
Each side with eager fury gave the sign
Of a most hot encounter, five long hours
Both armies fought together: at the length,
The lot of victory fell on our sides,
Twelve thousand of the Frenchmen that day did,
Four thousand English, and no man of name,
But Captain Hyam, and young Ardington,
Two gallant Gentlemen, I knew them well.

Lin. But Dodger, prithee tell me in this fight,
How did my cozen Lacie bear himself?

Dodger. My Lord, your cosen Lacie was not there.


Linc. Not there? Dog. No, my good Lord.


Lin. Sure thou mistakest,
I saw him shipped, and a thousand eyes beside
Were witnesses of the farewels which he gave,
When I with weeping eyes bid him adieu:
Dodger take heed.

Dodger. My Lord I am advised,
That what I spoke is true: to prove it so,
His cosen Askew that supplide his place,
Sent me for him from France, that secretly
He might convey himself hither.

Lin. Is It even so.
Dares he so carelessely venture his life,
Upon the indignation of a King?
Has he despised my love, and spurned those favors,
Which I with prodigal hand powered on his head?
He shall repent his rashness with his soul,
Since of my love he makes no estimate,
I Will make him wish he had not known my hate,
Thou have no other news?

Dodger. None else, my Lord.


Lin. None worse I know thou have: procure the king
To crown his giddie brows with ample honors,
Send him chief Colonel, and all my hope
Thus to be dashed? but it is in vain to grieve,
One evil cannot a worse relieve:
Upon my life I have found out his plot,
That old dog Love that fawnd upon him so,
Love to that puling girl, his fair cheek't Rose,
The Lord Majors daughter has distracted him,
And in the fire of that loves lunacie,
Has he burnt up himself, comsum'd his credit,
Lost the kings love, yea and I fear, his life,
Only to get a wanton to his wife:
Dodger, it is so.

Dodger. I fear so, my good Lord.


Lincoln. It is so, nay sure it cannot be,
I am at my wits end Dodger.

Dodger. Yea my Lord.


Lin. Thou art acquainted with my Nephews haunts,
Spend this gold for thy pains, go seek him out,
Watch at my Lord Majors (there if he live)
Dodger, thou shall be sure to meet with him:
Prithee be diligent. Lacie thy name
Lived once in honor, now dead in shame:
Be circumspect. exit.

Dodger. I warrant you my Lord. exit.


Enter Lord Mayor, and master Scotte. L. Ma. Good master Scot, I have been
bold with you,
To be a witness to a wedding knot,
Betwixt young master Hammon and my daughter,
O stand aside, see where the lovers come.

Enter Hammon, and Rose. Rose Can it be possible you love me so?
No, no, within those eie-bals I epsy,
Apparent likelihoods of flattery,
Pray now let go my hand.

Hammon. Sweet mistress Rose,
Misconstrue not my words, nor misconceiue
Of my affection, whose devoted soul
Swears that I love thee dearer then my heart.

Rose. As dear as your own heart? I judge it right.
Men love their hearts best when they are out of sight.

Hamond. I love you, by this hand.


Rose. Yet hands off now:
If flesh be frail, how weak and frail's your vow?

Hamond. Then by my life I swear.


Rose. Then do not brawle,
One quarrel loses wife and life and all,
Is not your meaning thus?

Hamond. In faith you jest.


Rose. Love loves to sport, therefore leave love you are best.


L. May. What? square they master Scot?


Scot. Sir, never doubt,
Lovers are quickly in, and quickly out.

Ham. Sweet Rose, be not so strange in fansying me,
Nay never turn aside, shun not my sight,
I am not grown so fond, to fond my love
On any that shall quit it with disdain,
If you will love me, so, if not, farewell.

L. Ma. Why how now lovers, are you both agreede?


Ham. Yes faith my Lord.


L. Mayor. It Is well, give me your hand, give me yours daughter.
How now, both pull back, what means this, girl?

Rose. I mean to live a maid.


Ham. But not to die one, pawse ere that be said. aside.


L. May. Will you still cross me? still be obstinate?


Hamond. Nay chide her not my Lord for doing well,
If she can live an happy virgins life,
It Is far more blessed then to be a wife.

Rose. Say sir I cannot, I have made a vow,
Who ever be my husband, it is not you.

L. May. Your tongue is quick, but M. Hamond know,
I bade you welcome to another end.

Ham. What, would you have me pule, and pine, and pray,
With lovely lady mistress of my heart,
Pardon your servant, and the rimer play,
Railing on Cupid, and his tyrants dart,
Or that I undertake some martial spoil,
Wearing your glove at turney, and at tilt,
And tell how many gallauts I unhorsed,
Sweet, will this pleasure you?

Rose. Yea, when wilt begin?
What louerimes man? fie on that deadly sin.

L. Mayor. If you will have her, I Will make her agree.


Ham. Enforced love is worse then hate to me,
There is a wench keeps shop in the old change,
To her will I, it is not wealth I seek,
I have enough, and will prefer her love
Before the world: my good lord Mayor adieu,
Old love for me, I have no luck with new.

Exit. L. Ma. Now mammet you have well behau'd your self,
But you shall curse your coins if I live,
Whose within there? see you connay your mistress
Straight to the old Forde, I Will keep you straight enough,
Fore God I would have sworn the puling girl,
Would willingly accepted Hammons love,
But banish him my thoughts, go minion in, exit Rose.
Now tell me master Scot would you have thought,
That master Simon Air the shoemaker,
Had been of wealth to buy such merchandise?

Scot. It Was well my Lord, your honor, and my self,
Grew partners with him for your bills of lading,
Show that Eyres gains in one commodity,
Rise at the least to full three thousand pound,
Besides like gain in other merchandise.

L. Mayor. Well he shall spend some of his thousands now
For I have sent for him to the Guild Hal, enter Air.
See where he comes: good morrow master Air.

Air. Poor Simon Air, my Lord, your shoemaker.


L. Mayor. Well well, it likes your self to term you so,
Now M. Dodger, what is the news with you?

Enter Dodger. Dodger. I Would gladly speak in private to your honor.


L. Mayor. You shall, you shall: master Air, and M. Scot,
I have some business with this gentleman,
I pray let me entreat you to walk before
To the Guild Hal, I Will follow presently,
Master Air, I hope ere noone to call you Shiriffe.

Air I would not care (my Lord) if you might call me king of Spain, come
master Scot.


L. Mayor. Now master Dodger, what is the news you bring?


Dod. The Earl of Lincoln by me greets your lordship
And earnestly requests you (if you can)
Inform him where his Nephew Lacie keeps.

L. Mayor. Is not his Nephew Lacie now in France?


Dodger. No I assure your lordship, but disguisde Lurkes here in London.


L. Mayor. London? is it even so?
It may be, but upon my faith and soul,
I know not where he lives, or whether he lives,
So tell my Lord of Lincoln, lurch in London?
Well master Dodger, you perhaps may start him,
Be but the means to ris him into France,
I Will give you a dozen angels for your pains,
So much I love his honor, hate his Nephew,
And prithee so inform thy lord from me.

Dodger. I take my leave. exit. Dodger.


L. Mayor. Farewell good master Dodger.
Lacie in London? I dare pawn my life,
My daughter knows thereof, and for that cause,
Denide young M. Hammon in his love,
Well I am glad I sent her to old Forde,
Gods lord it is late, to Guild Hall I must hie,
I know my brethren stay my company. exit.

Enter Firke, Eyres wife, Hans, and Roger. Wife. Thou go too fast for me
Roger.


Firke. I forsooth.


Wife. I pray thee run (do you hear) run to Guild Hall, and learn if my
husband master Air will take that worshipful vocation of M. Shiriffe upon him,
hie thee good Firke.


Firke. Take it? well I go, and he should not take it, Firk swears to
forswear him, yes forsooth I go to Guild Hall.


Wife. Nay when? thou art too compendious, and tedious.


Firke. O rare, your excellence is full of eloquence, how like a new cart
wheel my dame speaks, and she looks like an old musty ale-bottle going to
scalding.


Wife. Nay when? thou will make me melancholy.


Firke. God forbid your worship should fall into that humor, I run. exit.


Wife. Let me see now Roger and Hans.


H. I forsooth dame (mistress I should say) but the old term so sticks to the
roof of my mouth, I can hardly lick it off.


Wife. Even what thou will good Roger, dame is a fair name for any honest
christian, but let that pass, how do thou Hans?


Hans. Me tanck you vro.


Wife. Well Hans and Roger you see God has blessed your master, and perdie if
ever he comes to be M. Shiriffe of London (as we are al mortal) you shall see I
will have some odd thing or other in a corner for you: I will not be your back
friend, but let that pass, Hans pray thee tie my shoe.


Hans. Yaw it sal vro.


Wife Roger, thou know the length of my foot, as it is none of the biggest,
so I thank God it is handsome enough, prithee let me have a pair of shoes
made, cork good Roger, wooden heel too.


Hodge. You shall.


Wife. Art thou acquainted with never a fardingale-maker, nor a French-hoode
maker, I must enlarge my bumine, ha ha, how shall I look in a hoode I wonder?
perdie odly I think.


Roger. As a catte out of a pillorie, very well I warrant you mistress.


Wife. Indeed all flesh is grass, and Roger, can thou tell where I may buy
a good hair?


Roger. Yes forsooth, at the poulterers in Gracious street.


Wi. Thou art an ungracious wag, perdy, I mean a false hair for my periwig.


Roger. Why mistress, the next time I cut my beard, you shall have the shauings
of it, but they are all true hairs.


Wi. It is very hot, I must get me a fan or else a mask.


Rog. So you had need, to hide your wicked face.


Wi. Fie upon it, how costly this world's calling is, perdy, but that it is
one of the wonderful works of God, I would not deal with it: is not Firke
come yet? Hans be not so sad, let it pass and vanish, as my husbands
worship says.


Hans. Ick bin vrolicke, lot see you so.


Roger. Mistress, will you drink a pipe of Tobacco?


Wife. O fie upon it Roger, perdy, these silthie Tobacco pipes are the most
idle slauering bables that ever I felt: out upon it, God bless us, men look
not like men that use the^.


Enter Rafe being lame. Roger. What fellow Rafe? Mistres look here, Ianes
husband, why how, lame? Hans make much of him, he is a brother of our trade, a
good workman, and a tall soldier.


Hans. You be welcome brother.


Wife. Pardie I knew him not, how do thou good Rafe? I am glad to see thee
well.


Rafe. I would God you saw me dame as well,
As when I went from London into France.

Wife. Trust me I am sorry Rafe to see thee impotent, Lord how the wars have
made him Sunburnt: the left leg is net well it was a fair gift of God the
infirmity took not hold a little higher, considering thou came from France:
but let that pass.


Rafe. I am glad to see you well, and I rejoice
To hear that God has blessed my master so
Since my departure.

Wife. Yea truly Rafe, I thank my maker: but let that pass.


Rog. And sir Rafe, what news, what news in France?


Rafe. Tell me good Roger first, what news in England?
Haw does my Jane? when did thou see my wife?
Where lives my poor heart? she will be poor indeed
Now I want limbs to get whereon to feed.

Roger. Limbs? have thou not hands man? thou shall never see a shoemaker want
bread, though he have but three fingers on a hand.


Rafe. Yet all this while I hear not of my Jane.


Wife. O Rafe your wife, perdie we know not what is become of her: she was here
a while, and because she was married grew more stately then became her, I
checked her, and so forth, away she flung, never returned, nor said bih nor
bah: and Rafe you know ka me, ka thee. And so as I tell ye. Roger is not Firke
come yet?


Roger. No forsooth.


Wife. And so indeed we heard not of her, but I hear she lives in London: but
let that pass. If she had wanted, she might have opened her case to me or my
husband, or to any of my men, I am sure there is not any of them perdie, but
would have done her good to his power. Hans look if Firke be come.


Exit Hans. Hans. Yaw it sal vro.


Wife. And so as I said: but Rafe, why do thou weep? thou know that
naked we came out of our mothers womb, and naked we must return, and
therefore thank God for all things.


Roger. No faith Jane is a stranger here, but Rafe pull up a good heart, I
know thou have one, thy wife man, is in London, one told me he saw her a
while ago very brave and neat, we will ferret her out, and London hold her.


Wife. Alas, poor soul, he is overcome with sorrow, he does but as I do,
weep for the loss of any good thing: but Rafe, get thee in, call for some
meat and drink, thou shall find me worshipful toward thee.


Rafe. I thank you dame, siuce I want lims and lands,
I Will to God, my good friends, and to these my hands.

exit. Enter Hans, and Firke running. Fyrke. Run good Hans, O Hodge, O
mistres, Hodge. heave up thine ears, mistress smugge up your looks, on with
your best apparel, my master is chosen, my master is called nay condemned by
the cry of the country to be shiriffe of the City, for this famous year
now to come: and time now being, a great many men in black gowns were asked
for their voices, and their hands, and my master had al their fists about his
ears presently, and they cried I, I, I, I, and so I came away, wherefore
without all other grieve, I do salute you mistress shrieue.


Hans. Yaw, my mester is de groot man, de shrieue.


Roger. Did not I tell you mistress? now I may boldly say, good morrow to your
worship.


Wife. Good morrow good Roger, I thank you my good people all. Firke, hold up
thy hand, here is a three-peny piece for thy tidings.


Fyrk. It Is but three half pence, I think: yes, it is three pence, I smell the
Rose.


Roger. But mistress, be ruled by me, and do not speak so pulingly.


Firke. It Is her worship speaks so, and not she, no faith mistress, speak me
in the old key, too it Firke, there good Firke, plie your business Hodge,
Hodge, with a full mouth: I Will fill your bellies with good cheer til they cry
twang.


Enter Simon Eire wearing a gold chain. Hans. See mine lieuer brother, here
count my meester.


Wife. Welcome home master shrieue, I pray God continue you in health and
wealth.


Air. See here my Maggy, a chain, a gold chain for Simon Air, I shall make
thee a Lady, here is a French hood for thee, on with it, on with it, dress thy
brows with this flap of a shoulder of mutton, to make thee look lovely: where
be my fine men? Roger, I Will make over my shop and tools to thee: Firke, thou
shall be the foreman: Hans, thou shall have an hundred for twenty, be as mad
knaves as your master Sim Air has bin, and you shall live to be Sheriues of
London: how do thou like me Margerie? Prince am I none, yet am I princely
borne, Firke, Hodge, and Hans.


Al^. I forsooth, what says your worship mistress Sheriff?


Air. Worship and honor you Babilonion knaves, for the Gentle Craft: but I
forgot my self, I am bidden by my Lord Mayor to ^^ner to old Foord, he is gone
before, I must after: come Hodge, on with your trinkets: now my true (...), my
fine Firke, my dapper Hodge, my honest Hans, some device, some odd crochets,
some morris, or such like, for the honor of the gentle shooemakers, meet me
at old Foord, you know my mind: come Madge, away shut up the shop knaves,
and make holiday. exeunt.


Firke. O rare, O brave, come Hodge, follow me Hans,
We Will be with them for a morris dance. exeunt.

Enter Lord Mayor, Air, his wife, Sibill in a French hood, and other servants.
L. Mayor. Trust me you are as welcome to old Foord, as I my self.


Wife. Truly I thank your Lordship.


L. Ma. Would our bad cheer were worth the thanks you give.


Air. Good cheer my Lord Mayor, fine cheer, a fine house, fine walls, all
fine and neat.


L. Mayor. Now by my troth I Will tell thee master Air,
It does me good and al my brethren,
That such a madcap fellow as thy self
Is entered into our society.

Wife. I but my Lord, he must learn now to put on gravity.


Air. Peace Maggy, a fig for gravity, when I go to Guildhal in my scarlet
gown, I Will look as demurely as a saint, and speak as gravely as a Justice of
peace, but now I am here at old Foord, at my good Lord Majors house, let it go
by, vanish Maggy, I Will be merry, away with flip flap, these fooleries, these
gulleries: what hunnie? prince am I none, yet am I princly borne: what says my
Lord Mayor?


L. Mayor. Ha, ha, ha, I had rather then a thousand pound,
I had an heart but half so light as yours.

Air. Why what should I do my Lord? a pound of care paies not a dram of debt:
hum, lets be merry whiles we are young, old age, sack and sugar will steal
upon us ere we be aware.


L. Ma. Its well done mistress Air, pray give good counsel to my daughter.


Wife. I hope mistress Rose will have the grace to take nothing that's bad.


L. Ma. Pray God she do, for in faith mistress Air,
I would bestow upon that peevish girl
A thousand Marks more then I mean to give her,
Upon condition sheed be ruled by me,
The Ape still crosses me: there came of late,
A proper Gentleman of fair revenues,
Whom gladly I would call son in law:
But my fine cockney would have none of him.
You Will prove a cockscombe for it ere you die,
A courtier, or no man must please your eye.

Air. Be ruled sweet Rose, thou art ripe for a man: marry not with a boy, that
has no more hair on his face then thou have on thy cheeks: a courtier, wash,
go by, stand not upon pisherie pasherie: those silken fellows are but painted
Images, outsides, outsides Rose, their inner linings are torn: no my fine
mouse, marry me with a Gentleman Grocer like my Lord Mayor your Father, a
Grocer is a sweet trade, Plums, Plums: had I a son or Daughter should marry
out of the generation and blood of the shoe-makers, he should pack: what, the
Gentle trade is a living for a man through Europe, through the world.


Anoyse within of a Taber and a Pipe. Mayor. What noise is this?


Air. O my Lord Mayor, a true of good fellows that for love to your honor,
are come hither with a morrisdance, come in my Mesopotamians cheerely.


Enter Hodge, Hans, Raph, Firke, and other shooe-makers in a morris: after a
little dancing the Lord Mayor Speaks. Mayor. Master Air, are al these
shoe-makers?


Air. Al Cordwainers my good Lord Mayor.


Rose. How like my Lacie looks yond shoemaker.


Haunce. O that I durst but speak unto my love!


Mayor. Sibil, go fetch some wine to make these drink,
You are al welcome.

All. We thank your Lordship.

Rose takes a cup of wine and goes to Haunce. Rose. For his sake whose fair
shape thou representst, Good friend I drink to thee.


Hans. It be dancke good frister.


Eyres Wife. I see mistress Rose you do not want judgment, you have drunk to
the properest man I keep.


Firke. Here be some have done their parts to be as proper as he.


Mayor. Well, urgent business calls me back to London:
Good fellows, first go in and taste our cheer,
And to make merry as you homeward go,
Spend these two angels in beer at Stratford Boe.

Air. To these two (my mad lads) Sim Air ads another, then cheerely Firke,
tickle it Haunce, and al for the honor of shoemakers.


All go dancing out. M. Come master Air, lets have your company. exeunt.


Rose. Sibil What shall I do?


Sibill. Why what is the matter?


Rose. That Haunce the shoemaker is my love Lacie,
Disguisde in that attire to find me out,
How should I find the means to speak with him?

Sibill. What mistress, never fear, I dare venture my maidenhead to nothing, and
that's great odds, that Haunce the Dutchman when we come to London, shall not
only see and speak with you, but in spite of al your Fathers policies,
steal you away and marry you, will not this please you?


Rose. Do this, and ever be assured of my love.


Sibil. Away then and follow your father to London, left
your absence cause him to suspect something:
To morrow if my counsel be obayde,
I Will bind you prentise to the gentle trade.

Enter Jane in a Semsters shop working, and Hamond muffled at another door, he
stands aloof. Hamond. Yonder Is the shop, and there my fair love sits,
She Is fair and lovely, but she is not mine,
O would she were, thrice have I courted her,
Thrice has my hand been moistened with her hand,
Whilst my poor famisht eyes do feed on that
Which made them famish: I am unfortunate,
I still love one, yet no body loves me,
I muse in other men what women see,
That I so want? fine mistress Rose was coy,
And this too curious, oh no, she is chaste,
And for the thinks me wanton, she denies
(...) cheer my cold heart with her sunnie eyes:
How prettily she works, oh pretty hand!
Oh happy work, it does me good to stand
(...) to see her, thus I often have stood,
In frostie euenings, a light burning by her,
Enduring biting cold, only to eye her,
One only look has seemed as rich to me
As a kings crown, such is loves lunacie:
Muffeled I Will pass along, and by that try
Whether she know me.

Jane. Sir, what is it you buy?
What is it you lack sir? callico, or lawne,
Fine cambricke shirts, or bands, what will you buy?

Ham. That which thou will not sell, faith yet I Will try:
How do you sell this handkercher?

Jane. Good cheap.


Ham. And how these ruffes?


Jane. Cheap too.


Ham. And how this band?


Jane. Cheap too.


Ham. All cheap, how sell you then this hand?


Jane. My hands are not to be sold.


Ham. To be given then: nay faith I come to buy.


Jane. But none knows when.


Ham. Good sweet, leave work a little while, lets play.


Jane. I cannot live by keeping holliday.


Ham. I Will pay you for the time which shall be lost.


Jane. With me you shall not be at so much cost.


Ham. Look how you wound this cloth, so you wound me.


Jane. It may be so.


Ham. It Is so.


Jane. What remedy?


Ham. Nay faith you are too coy.


Jane. Let go my hand.


Ham. I will do any task of your command,
I would let go this beauty, were I not
In mind to disobey you by a power
That controlles kings: I love you.

Jane. So, now part.


Ham. With hands I may, but never with my heart,
In faith I love you.

Jane. I believe you do.


Ham. Shall a true love in me breed hate in you?


Jane. I hate you not.


Ham. Then you must love.


Jane. I do, what are you better now? I love not you,


Ham. All this I hope is but a woman's fray,
That means, come to me, when she cries, away:
In earnest mistress I do not jest,
A true chaste love has entered in my breast,
In love you dearly as I love my life,
I love you as a husband loves a wife.
That, and no other love my love requires,
Thy wealth I know is little, my desires
Thirst not for gold, sweet beauteous Jane what is mine,
Shall (if thou make my self thine) all be thine,
Say, judge, what is thy sentence, life or death?
Mercy or cruelty lies in thy breath.

Jane. Good sir, I do believe you love me well:
For it is a seely conquest, seely pride,
For one like you (I mean a gentleman)
To boast, that by his love tricks he has brought,
Such and such women to his amorous lure:
I think you do not so, yet many do,
And make it even a very trade to woo,
I could be coy, as many women be,
Feed you with sunshine smiles, and wanton looks,
But I detest witchcraft, say that I
Do coustantly believe you, constant have.

Ham. Why do thou not believe me?


Jane. I believe you,
But yet good sir, because I will not grieve you,
With hopes to taste fruit, which will never fall,
In simple truth this is the sum of all
My husband lives, at least I hope he lives,
Pressed was he to these bitter wars in France,
Bitter they are to me by wanting him,
I have but one heart, and that hearts his due,
How can I then bestow the same on you?
Whilst he lives, his I live, be it nere so poor,
And rather be his wife, then a kings whore.

Ham. Chaste and dear woman, I will not abuse thee,
Although it cost my life, if thou refuse me,
Thy husband pressed for France, what was his name?

Jane. Rafe Damport.


Ham. Damport, here is a letter sent
From France to me, from a dear friend of mine,
A gentleman of place, here he does write,
Their names that have bin slain in every fight.

Jane. I hope deaths scroll contains not my loves name


Ham. Cannot you read?


Jane. I can.


Ham. Beruse the same,
To my remembrance such a name I read
Amongst the rest: see here.

Jane. Aye me, he is dead:
He Is dead, if this be true my dear hearts slain.

Ham. Have patience, dear love.


Jane. Hence, hence.


Ham. Nay sweet Jane,
Make not poor sorrow proud with these rich tears,
I mourn thy husbands death because thou mournst.

Jane. That bil is forgde; it is signde by forgerie.


Ham. I Will bring thee letters sent besides to many
Carrying the like report: Jane it is too true,
Come, weep not: mourning though it rise from love
Helps not the mourned, yet hurtes them that mourn.

Jane. For Gods sake leave me.


Ham. Whither do thou turn?
Forget the deed, love them that are alive,
His love is faded, try how mine will thrive.

Jane. It Is now no time for me to think on love,


Ham. It Is now best time for you to think on love, because your love lives not.


Jane. Though he be dead, my love to him shall not be buried:
For Gods sake leave me to my self alone.

Ham. I would kill my soul to leave thee drowned in moan:
Answer me to my suit, and I am gone,
Say to me, yea, or no.

Jane. No.


Ham. Then farewell, one farewell will not serve, I come again, come dry these
wet cheeks, tell me faith sweet Jane, yea, or no, once more.


Jane. Once more I say no, once more be gone I pray, else will I go.


Ham. Nay then I will grow rude by this white hand,
Until you change that cold no, here i will stand,
Til by your hard heart

Jane. Nay, for Gods love peace,
My sorrows by your presence more increase,
Not that you thus are present, but al grief
Desires to be alone, therefore in brief
Thus much I say, and saying bid adieu,
If ever I wed man it shall be you.

Ham. Oh blessed voice, dear Jane I Will urge no more,
Thy breath has made me rich.

Jane. Death makes me poor. exeunt.


Enter Hodge at his shop board, Rafe, Firk, Hans, and a boy at work. All. Hey
down, a down, down derie.


Hodge. Well said my hearts, plie your work to day, we loytred yesterday, to
it pell mel, that we may live to be Lord Majors, or Aldermen at least.


Firke. Hey down a down derie.


Hodge. Well said in faith, how say thou Hauns, does not Firke tickle it?


Hauns. Yaw mester.


Firke. Not so neither, my organe pipe squeakes this morning for want of
licoring: hey down a down derie.


Hans. Forward Firk, tow best un jolly yongster hort I mester it bid yo cut me
un pair va^pres vor mester ieffres boots.


Hodge. Thou shall Haims.


Firke. Master.


Hodge How now, boy?


Firke Pray, now you are in the cutting vain, cut me out a pair of
counterfeits, or else my work will not pass current, hey down a down.


Hodge Tell me sirs, are my coosin M. Priscillaes shoes done?


Firke Your coosin? no master, one of your auntes, hang her, let them alone.


Rafe I am in hand with them, she gave charge that none but I should do them
for her. (...)


Firke Thou do for her? then (...) that she loves not: Rafe, thou n(...) in
faith I would have yearkt and (...) down a down derry, this geere w(...)


Hodge How say thou Firke? were (...) Ford?


Firke How merry? why our buttockes went Iiggy ioggy like a quagmyre: well sir
Roger Oatemeale, if I thought all meal of that nature, I would eat nothing
but bag puddings.


Rafe Of all good fortunes, my fellow Hance had the best.


Firke It Is true, because mistress Rose drank to him.


Hodge Well, well, work apace, they say seven of the Aldermen be dead, or very
sick.


Firke I care not, I Will be none.


Rafe No nor I, but then my M. Air will come quickly to be L. Mayor. Enter
Sibil.


Firke Whoop, yonder comes Sibil.


Hodge Sibil, welcome in faith, and how do thou mad wench?


Firke Sib whore, welcome to London.


Sibil Godamercy sweet Firke: good Lord Hodge, what a delitious shop you have
got, you tickle it in faith.


Rafe God a mercy Sibil for our good cheer at old Ford.


Sibil That you shall have Rafe.


Firke Nay by the mass, we had tickling cheer Sibil, and how the plague
do thou and mistress Rose, and my L. Mayor? I put the women in first.


Sibil Well Godamercy: but Gods me, I forget my self, where is Haunce the Fleming?


Firke Hark butter-boxe, uowe you must yely out some spreken.
(...)od gone Frister.
(...)me to my young mistress, to pull

(...) (...)le fro, vare ben your mistress?
(...) our London house in Cornewaile
(...) serve her turn but Hans?
(...) come Hans, I stand upon needles.

Hodg. Why then Sibil, take heed of pricking.


Sibill. For that let me alone, I have a trick in my budget, come Hans.


Hans. Yaw, yaw, ic sall meet yo gane.


Exit Hans and Sibill. Hodge. Go Hans, make haste again: come, who lacks work?


Firke. I master, for I lack my breakfast, it is munching time, and past


Hodge Is It so? why then leave work Raph, to breakfast, boy look to the
tools, come Raph, come Firke. Exeunt.


Enter a Serningman. Ser. Let me see now, the sign of the last in Towerstreet,
mas yonder is the house: what haw, whoes within?


Enter Raph. Raph. Who calls there, what want you sir?


Seru. Marry I would have a pair of shoes made for a Gentlewoman against to
morrow morning, what can you do them?


Raph. Yes sir, you shall have them, but what lengths her foot?


Seru. Why you must make them in all parts like this shoe, but at any hand
fail not to do them, for the Gentlewoman is to be married very early in the
morning.


Raph How? by this shoe must it be made? by this, are you sure sir by this?


Seru. How, by this am I sure, by this? art thou in thy wits? I tell thee I
must have a pair of shoes, do thou mark me? a pair of shoes, two shoes,
made by this very shoe, this same shoe, against to morrow morning by four a
clock, do understand me, can thou do it?


Raph. Yes sir, yes, I, I, I can do it, by this shoe you say: I should know
this shoe, yes sir, yes, by this shoe, I can do t, four a clock, well,
whither shall I bring them?


Seru. To the sign of the golden ball in Watlingstreete, enquire for one
master Hamon a gentleman, my master.


Raph. Yea sir, by this shoe you say.


Seru. I say master Hammon at the golden ball, he is the Bridegroom, and
those shoes are for his bride.


Raph. They shall be done by this shoe: well, well, Master Hammon at the golden
shoe, I would say the golden Ball, very well, very well, but I pray you sir
where must master Hammon be married?


Seru. At Saint Faiths Church under Paul's: but what is that to thee? prithee
dispatch those shoes, and so farewell.


exit. Raph. By this shoe said he, how am I amasde
At this strange accident? upon my life,
This was the very shoe I gave my wife
When I was pressed for France, since when alas,
I never could hear of her: it is the same,
And Hammons Bride no other but my Jane.

Enter Firke. Firke. Snailes Raph thou have lost thy part of three pots, a
countrieman of mine gave me to breakfast.


Rafe I care not, I have found a better thing.


Firke A thing? away, is it a man's thing, or a woman's thing?


Rafe Firke, do thou know this shoe?


Firke No by my troth, neither does that know me? I have no acquaintance with
it, it is a mere stranger to me.


Rafe Why then I do, this shoe I durst be sworn
Once covered the instep of my Jane:
This is her size, her breadth, thus trod my love,
These true love knots I pricked, I hold my life,
By this old shoe I shall find out my wife.

Firke Ha ha old shoo, that were new, how a murren came this ague fit of
foolishnes upon thee?


Rafe Thus Firke, even now here came a seruingman,
By this shoe would he have a new pair made
Against to morrow morning for his mistress,
That's to be married to a Gentleman,
And why may not this be my sweet Jane?

Firke And why may not thou be my sweet Ass? ha, ha.


Rafe Well, laugh, and spare not: but the truth is this.
Against to morrow morning I Will provide,
A lusty crew of honest shoomakers,
To watch the going of the bride to church,
If she prove Jane, I Will take her in dispite,
From Hammon and the devil, were he by,
If it be not my Jane, what remedy?
Hereof am I sure, I shall live till I die,
Although I never with a woman lie. exit.

Fir. Thou he with a woman to build nothing but Cripple-gates! Well, God sends
fools fortune, and it may be he may light upon his matrimony by such a device,
for wedding and hanging goes by destiny.


exit. Enter Hauns, and Rose arm in arm. Hans. How happy am I by embracing
thee,
Oh I did fear such cross mishaps did reign,
That I should never see my Rose again.

Rose. Sweet Lacie, since fair Opportunity
Offers her self to further our escape,
Let not too ouer-fond esteem of me
Hinder that happy hour, invent the means,
And Rose will follow thee through all the world.

Hans. Oh how I surfeit with excess of joy,
Made happy by thy rich perfection,
But since thou paist sweet intrest to my hopes,
Redoubling love on love, let me once more,
Like to a bold facde debtor crave of thee,
This night to steal abroad, and at Eyres house,
Who now by death of certain Aldermen,
Is Mayor of London, and my master once,
Meet thou thy Lacie where in spite of change,
Your fathers anger, and mine uncles hate,
Our happy nuptials will me consummate.

Enter Sibill. Sib Oh God, what will you do mistress? shift for your self,
your father is at hand, he is coming, he is coming, master Lacie hide your
self in my mistress, for Gods sake shift for your selves.


Hans Your father come, sweet Rose, what shall I do?
Where shall I hide me? how shall I escape?

Rose. A man and want wit in extremity,
Come, come, be Hauns still, play the shoemaker,
Pull on my shoe.

Enter Lord Mayor. Hans Mas, and that's well remembered.


Sib Here comes your father.


Hans. Forware metresse, it is un good skow, it sal vel dute, or ye sal neit
betallen.


Rose. Oh God it pincheth me, what will you do?


Hans. Your fathers presence pincheth, not the shoo.


L. May. Well done, fit my daughter well, and she shall please thee well.


Hans. Yaw, yaw, ick weit dat well, for ware it is un good shoo, it is gi mait van
neits leither, se ener mine here.


Enter a prentice. L. May. I do believe it, what is the news with you?


Prent. Please you, the Earl of Lincoln at the gate is newly lighted, and
would speak with you.


L. May. The Earl of Lincoln come speak with me?
Well, well, I know his errand: daughter Rose,
Send hence your shoemaker, dispatch, have done:
Sib, make things handsome: sir boy follow me.

Exit. Hans. Mine uncle come, oh what may this portend?
Sweet Rose, this of our love threatens an end.

Rose. Be not dismayed at this what ere befall,
Rose is thine own, to witness I speak truth,
Where thou appoints the place I Will meet with thee,
I will not fix a day to follow thee,
But presently steal hence, do not reply.
Love which gave strength to bear my fathers hate,
Shall now add wings to further our escape.

exeunt. Enter L. Mayor, and Lincoln. L. May. Believe me, on my credit I
speak truth,
Since first your nephew Lacie went to France,
I have not seen him. It seemd strange to me,
When Dodger told me that he staide behind,
Neglecting the hie charge the King imposed.

Linc. Trust me (sir Roger Otly) I did think
Your counsel had given head to this attempt,
Drawn to it by the love he bears your child.
Here I did hope to find him in your house,
But now I see mine error, and confess
My judgment wronged you by conceuing so.

L. Mayor Lodge in my house, say you? trust me my Lord,
I love your Nephew Lacie too too dearly
So much to wrong his honor, and he has done so,
That first gave him advise to stay from France.
To witness I speak truth, I let you know
How careful I have been to keep my daughter
Free from all conference, or speech of him,
Not that I skorne your Nephew, but in love
I bear your honor, least your noble blood,
Should by my mean worth be dishonored.

Lin. How far the churles tongue wanders from his heart,
Well, well sir Roger Otley I believe you,
With more then many thanks for the kind love,
So much you seem to bear me: but my Lord,
Let me request your help to seek my Nephew,
Whom if I find, I Will straight embarke for France,
So shall my Rose be free, your thoughts at rest,
And much care die which now dies in my breast.
Enter Sibill.
Sibill. Oh Lord, help for Gods sake, my mistress, oh my young mistress.


L. Ma. Where is thy mistress? what is become of her?


Sibill. She Is gone, she is fled.


L. Mayor Gone? whither is she fled?


Sibill. I know not forsooth, she is fled out of doors with Hauns the
Shoemaker, I saw them scud, scud, scud, apace, apace.


L. Mayor Which way? what John, where be my men? which way?


Sibil I know not, and it please your worship.


L. mayor Fled with a shoemaker, can this be true?


Sibil Oh Lord sir, as true as Gods in heaven.


Linc. Her love turned shoemaker? I am glad of this.


L. ma. A fleming butter bore, a shoemaker,
Will she forget her birth? requite my care
With such ingratitude? skornd she young Hammon,
To love a honnikin, a needy knave?
Well let her fly, I Will not fly after her,
Let her starve if she will, she is none of mine.

Linc. Be not so cruel sir.


Enter Firke with shoes. Sibil I am glad she is escaped.


L. Ma. I Will not account of her as of my child:
Was there no better object for her eyes,
But a foul drunken lubber, swill belly,
A shoemaker, that's brave.

Firke. Yea forsooth, it is a very brave shoe, and as fit as a padding.


L. Ma How now, what knave is this, from whence come thou?


Firke No knave sir, I am Firke the shoemaker, lusty Rogers chief lusty
iorneyman, and I come hither to take up the pretty leg of sweet mistress
Rose, and thus hoping your worship is in as good health as I was at the
making hereof, I bid you farewell, yours Firke.


L. Ma. Stay stay sir knave.


Linc. Come hither shoemaker.


Firke It Is happy the knave is put before the shoemaker, or else I would not
have vouchsafed to come back to you, I am moved, for I stir.


L. Ma. My Lord, this villain calls us knaves by craft.


Firk. Then it is by the Gentle Craft, and to call one knave gently, is no harm:
sit your worship merry: Sib your young mistress I Will so bob then, now my master
M. Air is Lord Mayor of London.


L. Ma. Tell me sir, whoes man are you?


Firke I am glad to see your worship so merry, I have no maw to this geere, no
stomach as yet to a red peticote.


Pointing to Sibil. Lin He means not sir to woo you to his maid,
But only does demand whose man you are.

Firke I sing now to the tune of Rogero* Roger my fellow is now my master.


Lin Sir, know thou one Hauns a shoemaker?


Firk Hauns shoemaker, oh yes, stay, yes I have him, I tell you what, I speak
it in secret, mistress Rose, and he are by this time: no not so, but shortly are
to come over one another with, Can you dance the shaking of the sheets? it is
that Hauns, I Will so gull these diggers.


L. Ma Know thou then where he is?


Firke Yes forsooth, yea marry.


Lin Can thou in sadness?


Firke No forsooth, no marry.


L. Ma Tell me good honest fellow where he is,
And thou shall see what I Will bestow of thee.

Firke Honest fellow, no sir, not so sir, my profession is the Gentle Craft, I
care not for seeing, I love feeling, let me feel it here, aurium tenus, ten
pieces of gold, genuum tenus, ten pieces of silver, and then Firke is your man
in a new pair of strechers.


L. Ma. Here is an Angel, part of thy reward,
Which I will give thee, tell me where he is.

Firke. No point: shall I betray my brother? no, shall I prove Judas to Hans? no,
shall I cry treason to my corporation? no, I shall be firkt and yerkt then,
but give me your angel, your angel shall tell you.


Lin Do so good fellow, it is no hurt to thee.


Firke Send simpering Sib away.


L. Ma Huswife, get you in.


exit Sib. Firke. Pitchers have ears, and maids have wide mouths: but for
Hauns prauns, upon my word to morrow morning, he and young mistress Rose go to
this geere, they shall be married together, by this rush, or else turn Firke
to a firkin of butter to tanne leather withal.


L. Ma. But art thou sure of this?


Firke Am I sure that Paul's steeple is a handful higher then London stone? or
that the pissing conduit leakes nothing but pure mother Bunch? am I sure I am
lusty Firke, Gods nails do you think I am so base to gull you?


Linc. Where are they married? do thou know the church?


Firke I never go to church, but I know the name of it, it is a swearing
church, stay a while, it is: I by the mas, no, no, it is I by my troth, no nor
that, it is I by my faith, that that, it is I by my Faithes church under Paul's
cross, there they shall be knit like a pair of stockings in matrimony, there
they will be in conie.


Lin. Upon my life, my Nephew Lacie walks
In the disguise of this Dutch shoemaker.

Firke Yes forsooth.


Linc. Does he not honest fellow?


Firke No forsooth, I think Hauns is no body, but Hans no spirit.


L. Ma. My mind misgiues me now it is so indeed.


Lin. My cosen speaks the language, knows the trade.


L. Ma. Let me request your company my Lord,
Your honorable presence may, no doubt,
Refrain their headstrong rashness, when my self
Going alone perchance may be oreborne,
Shall I request this favor?

Linc. This, or what else.


Firke Then you must rise betimes, for they mean to fall to their hey pass,
and repasse, pindy pandy, which hand will you have, very early.


L. Ma. My care shall every way equal their haste,
This night accept your lodging in my house,
The earlier shall we stir, and at Saint Faithes
Prevent this giddy hare-braind nuptial,
This traffic of hot love shall yield cold gains,
They ban our loves, and we will forbid their baines.

exeunt. Linc. At Saint Faithes church thou say.


Firke Yes, by their troth.


Linc. Be secret on thy life.


Firke Yes, when I kiss your wife, ha, ha, here is no craft in the Gentle Craft,
I came hither of purpose with shoes to sir Rogers worship, whilst Rose his
daughter be coniecatcht by Hauns: soft now, these two gulles will be at Saint
Faithes church to morrow morning, to take master Bridegroom, and mistress
Bride napping, and they in the mean time shall chop up the matter at the Sauoy:
but the best sport is, sir Roger Otly will find my fellow lame, Rafes wife going
to marry a gentleman, and then heel stop her in steed of his daughter; oh
brave, there will be fine tickling sport: ^^^t now, what have I to do? oh I
know now a mess of shoomakers meat at the wool sack in I vie lane, to cozen
my gentleman of lame Rafes wife, that's true, alack, alack girls, hold out
tacke, for now smockes for this tumbling shall go to wrack. exit


Enter Air, his Wife, hauns, and Rose. Air This is the morning then, stay my
bully my honest Hauns, is it not?


Hans This is the morning that must make us two happy, or miserable, therefore
if you


Air Away with these iffes and ands Hauns, and these et caeteraes, by mine
honor Rowland Lacie none but the king shall wrong thee: come, fear nothing, am
not I Sim Air? Is not Sim Air Lord mayor of London? fear nothing Rose, let
them al say what they can, dainty come thou to me: laughest thou?


Wife Good my lord, stand her friend in what thing you may.


Air Why my sweet lady Madgy, think you Simon Air can forget his fine
dutch Iourneyman? No vah. Fie I scorn it, it shall never be cast in my teeth,
that I was unthankful. Lady Madgy, thou had never couerd thy Saracens head
with this french flappe, nor laden thy bumme with this farthingale, it is trash,
trumpery, vanity, Simon Air had never walkte in a red petticoate, nor wore a
chain of gold, but for my fine Iourneymans portigues, and shall I leave him?
No: Prince am I none, yet bear a princely mind.


Hans My Lord, it is time for us to part from hence.


Air Lady Madgy, lady Madgy, take two or three of my pie-crust eaters, my
buffe-ierkin varlets, that do walk in black gowns at Simon Eyres heels,
take them good lady Madgy, trippe and go, my brown Queen uf Perriwigs, with
my delicate Rose, and my jolly Rowland to the Sauoy, see them linckte,
countenance the marriage, and when it is done, cling, cling together, you
^amborow Turtle Doves, I Will bear you out, come to Simon Air, come dwell with
me Hauns, thou shall eat minede pies, and marchpane. Rose, away cricket,
trippe and go, my Lady Madgy to the Sauoy, Hauns, wed, and to bed, kiss and
away, go, vanish.


Wife Farewell my lord.


Rose Make haste sweet love.


Wife Sheede feign the deed were done.


Hauns Come my sweet Rose, faster than Dear we will run.


They go out. Air Go, vanish, vanish, auaunt I say: by the lord of Ludgate,
its a mad life to be a lord Mayor, its a stirring life, a fine life, a
velvet life, a careful life. Well Simon Air, yet set a good face on it, in
the honor of saint Hugh. Soft, the king this day comes to dine with me, to see
my new buildings, his majesty is welcome, he shall have good cheer, delicate
cheer, princely cheer. This day my fellow prentises of London come to dine
with me too, they shall have fine cheer, gentlemanlike cheer. I promised the
mad Cappidosians, when we all served at the Conduit together, that if ever I
came to be Mayor of London, I woould feast them al, and I Will doot, I Will doot by
the life of Pharaoh, by this beard Sim Eire will be no flincher. Besides, I have
procurd, that upon every Shrouetuesday, at the sound of the pancake bell: my
fine dapper Allyrian lads, shall clap up their shop windows, and away, this is
the day, and this day they shall doot, they shall doot: boys, that day are you
free, let masters care, and prentises shall pray for Simon Air. exit.


Enter Hodge, Firke, Rafe, and five or six shoomakers, all with cudgels, or
such weapons. Hodge Come Rafe, stand to it Firke: my masters, as we are the
brave bloods of the shooemakers, heirs apparent to saint Hugh, and perpetual
benefactors to all good fellows* thou shall have no wrong, were Hammon a king
of spades, he should not delue in thy close without thy sufferaunce: but tell
me Rafe, art thou sure it is thy wife?


Rafe Am I sure this is Firke? This morning when I strokte on her shoes, I
lookte upon her, and she upon me, and sighed, askte me if ever I knew one Rafe.
Yes said I: for his sake said she (tears standing in her eyes) and for thou
art somewhat like him, spend this piece of gold: I took it: my lame leg, and
my travel beyond sea made me unknown, all is one for that, I know she is mine.


Firke Did she give thee this gold? O glorious glittering gold; she is thine
own, it is thy wife, and she loves thee, for I Will stand toot, there is no woman
will give gold to any man, but she thinks better of him than she thinks of
them she gives silver to: and for Hamon, neither Hamon nor Hangman shall wrong
thee in London: Is not our old master Eire lord Mayor? Speak my hearts.


All Yes, and Hamon shall know it to his cost.


Enter hamon, his man, Jane, and other. Hodge Peace my bullies, yonder they
come.


Rafe, Stand toot my hearts, Firke, let me speak first.


Hodge No Rafe, let me: Hammon, whither away so early?


Hamon Unmannerly rude slave, what is that to thee?


Firke To him sir? yes sir, and to me, and others: good morrow Jane, how do
thou? good Lord, how the world is changed with you, God be thanked.


Hamon Villains, hands off, how dare you touch my love?


All villains? down with them, cry clubs for prentises.


Hod. How, my hearts touch her Hamon? yea and more than that, we will carry her
away with us. My masters and gentlemen, never draw your bird spittes,
shooemakers are steel to the back, men every inch of them, al spirit.


All of Hamons side Well, and what of all this?


Hodge I Will show you: Jane, do thou know this man? it is Rafe I can tell thee:
nay, it is he in faith, though he be lamde by the wars, yet look not strange,
but run to him, fold him about the neck and kiss him.


Jane Lives then my husband? oh God let me go,
Let me embrace my Rafe.

Hamon What means my Jane?


Jane Nay, what meant yon to tell me he was slain?


Ham. Pardon me dear love for being misled,
It Was rumord here in London thou were dead.

Firke Thou see he lives: Less, go pack home with him: now M. Hamon,
where is your mistress your wife?


Seru. Swounds M. fight for her, will you thus lose her?


All Down with that creature, clubs, down with him.


Hodge Hold, hold.


Ham. Hold fool, sirs he shall do no wrong,
Will my Jane leave me thus, and break her faith?

Firke Yea sir, she must sir, she shall sir, what then? mend it.


Hodge Hark fellow Rafe, follow my counsel, set the wench in the midst, and
let her choose her man, and let her be his woman.


Jane Whom should I choose? whom should my thoughts affect?
But him whom heaven has made to be my love,
Thou art my husband and these humble weeds,
Makes thee more beautiful then all his wealth,
Therefore I will but put off his attire,
Returning it into the owners hand,
And after ever be thy constant wife.

Hodge. Not a ragge Jane, the law's on our side, he that sowes in another man's
ground forsets his harvest, get thee home Rafe, follow him Jane, he shall not
have so much as a buske point from thee.


Firke Stand to that Rafe, the appurtenances are thine own, Hammon, look not
at her.


Seru. O swounds no.


Firke Blew coat be quiet, we will give you a new liuerie else, we will make
Shroue Tuesday Saint Georges day for you: look not Hammon, leare not, I Will
Firke you, for thy head now, one glance, one sheep eye, any thing at her,
touch not a ragge, least I and my brethren beat you to clowtes.


S. Come master Hammon, there is no striving here.


Ham. Good fellows, hear me speak: and honest Rafe,
Whom I have injured most by loving Jane,
Mark what I offer thee: here in fair gold
Is twenty pound, I Will give it for thy Jane,
If this content thee not, thou shall have more.

Hodge. Sell not thy wife Rafe, make her not a whore.


Ham. Say, will thou freely cease thy claim in her,
And let her be my wife?

All No, do not Rafe.


Rafe Sir Hammon Hammon, do thou think a Shoemaker is so base, to be a
bawd to his own wife for commodity, take thy gold, choke with it, were I
not lame, I would make thee eat thy words.


Firke A shoemaker sell his flesh and blood, oh indignity!


Hod. Sir, take up your pelf, and be packing.


Ham I will not touch one penny, but in liew
Of that great wrong I offered thy Jane,
To Jane and thee I give that twenty pound,
Since I have faild of her, during my life
I vow no woman else shall be my wife:
Farewell good fellows of the Gentle trade,
Your mornings mirth my mourning day has made. exeunt

Firke Touch the gold creature if you dare, ya're best be trudging: here Jane
take thou it, now lets home my hearts.


Hod. Stay, who comes here? Jane, on again with thy mask.


Enter Lincoln, L. Mayor, and servants. Linc. Yonder Is the lying varlet mocked
us so.


L. Ma. Come hither sir.


Firke. I sir, I am sir, you mean me, do you not?


Linc. Where is my Nephew married?


Firke Is he married? God give him joy, I am glad of it: they have a fair day,
and the sign is in a good planet, Mars in Venus.


L. Ma Villain, thou toldst, me that my daughter Rose,
This morning should be married at Saint Faithes,
We have watched there these three hours at the least,
Yet see we no such thing.

Firke Truly I am sorry for it, a Bride's a pretty thing.


Hodge Come to the purpose, yonder is the Bride and Bridegroom you look for I
hope: though you be Lords, you are not to bar, by your authority, men from
women, are you?


L. Ma See see my daughters maskt.


Linc. True, and my Nephew.
To hide his guilt, counterfeits him lame.

Firke Yea truly god help the poor couple, they are lame and blind.


L. Mayor I Will ease her blindness.


Lin. I Will his lamenes cure.


Firke Lie down sirs, and laugh, my fellow Rafe is taken for Rowland Lacy, and
Jane for mistress damask rose, this is al my knavery.


L. Mayor What, have I found you minion?


Linc. O base wretch,
Nay hide thy face, the horror of thy guilt,
Can hardly be washed off: where are thy powers?
What vattels have you made? O yes I see
Thou foughtst with Shame, and shame has conquered thee.
This lamenesse will not serve.

L. Ma. Unmaske your self.


Lin. Lead home your daughter.


L. Ma. Take your Nephew hence.


Rafe. Hence, swounds, what mean you? are you mad? I hope you cannot enforce
my wife from me, where is Hamon?


L. Ma. Your wife.


Lin. What Hammon?


Rafe Yea my wife, and therefore the prowdest of you that lays hands on her
first, I Will lay my crutch cross his pate.


Firke To him lame Rafe, here is brave sport.


Rafe Rose call you her? why her name is Jane, look here else, do you know her
now?


Lin. Is this your daughter?


L. Ma. No, nor this your nephew:
My Lord of Lincoln, we are both abusde
By this base crafty varlet.

Firk Yea forsooth no varlet, forsooth no base, forsooth I am but mean, no
crattie neither, but of the Gentle Craft.


L. Ma. Where is my daughter Rose? where is my child?


Lin. Where is my nephew Lacie married?


Firke Why here is good laid mutton as I promised you.


Lin. Villain, I Will have thee punished for this wrong.


Firke Punish the iornyman villain, but not the iorneyman shoemaker. Enter
Dodger.


Dodger. My Lord I come to bring unwelcome news,
Your Nephew Lacie, and your daughter Rose,
Early this morning wedded at the Sauoy,
None being present but the Lady Mairesse:
Besides I learnt among the officers,
The Lord Mayor vows to stand in their defense,
Against any that shall seek to cross the match.

Lin. Dares Air the shoemaker uphold the deed?


Firk Yes sir, shoomakers dare stand in a woman's quarrel I warrant you, as
deep as another, and deeper too.


Dod. Besides, his grace, to day dines with the Mayor,
Who on his knees humbly intends to fall,
And beg a pardon for your Nephews fault.

Lin. But I Will prevent him come sir Roger Oteley,
The king will do us justice in this cause,
How ere their hands have made them man and wife,
I will disioyne the match, or loose my life. exeunt.

Firke Adue monsieur Dodger, farewell fools, ha ha, Oh if they had staide I
would have so lambde them with ^^outes, O heart, my codpeece point is ready to
fly in pieces every time I think upon mistress Rose, but let that pass, as my
Lady Mairesse says.


Hodge This matter is answered: come Rafe, home with thy wife, come my fine
shoomakers, lets to our masters the new lord Mayor and there swagger this
shroue Tuesday, i will promise you wine enough, for Madge keeps the seller.


All O rare! Madge is a good wench.


Firke And I Will promise you meat enough, for simpring Susan keeps the larder,
I Will lead you to victuals my brave soldiers, follow your captain, O brave,
hark, hark.


Bell ringes. All The Pancake bell rings, the pancake bell, tri-lill my hearts.


Firke Oh brave, oh sweet bell, O delicate pancakes, open the doors my
hearts, and shut up the windows, keep in the house, let out the pancakes: oh
rare my hearts, lets march together for the honor of saint Hugh to the great
new hall in Gracious street corner, which our Master the new lord Mayor has
built.


Rafe O the crew of good fellows that will dine at my lord, Majors cost to day!


Hodge By the lord, my lord Mayor is a most brave man, how shall prentises be
bound to pray for him, and the honor of the gentlemen shoomakers? lets feed
and be fat with my lords bountye.


Fir. O musical be still! O Hodge, O my brethren! there is cheer for the heavens,
venson pastimes walk up and down piping hot, like sergeants, beef and
brewesse comes marching in dry fattes, fritters and pancakes comes trowling in
in wheel barrowes, hens and orenges hopping in porters baskets, colloppes
and eggs in scuttles, and tartes and custardes comes quauering in in malt
shouels.


Enter more prentises. All Whoop, look here, look here.


Hodge How now mad laddes, whither away so fast?


I. Pren. Whither, why to the great new hall, know you not why? The lord Mayor
has bidden all the prentises in London to breakfast this morning.


All Oh brave shoemaker, oh brave lord of incomprehensible good fellowship,
whoo, hark you, the pancake bell rings. Cast up caps.


Firke Nay more my hearts, every Shrouetuesday is our year of Jubilee: and when
the pancake bell rings, we are as free as my lord Mayor, we may shut up our
shops, and make holiday: I Will have it called, Saint Hughes Holiday.


All Agreed, agreed, Saint Hughes Holiday.


Hodge And this shall continue for ever.


All Oh brave! come come my hearts, away, away.


Firke O eternal credit to us of the gentle Craft, march fair my hearts, oh
rare. exeunt.


Enter King and his train over the stage. King Is our lord Mayor of London
such a gallant?


Noble man One of the merriest madcaps in your land,
Your Grace will think, when you behold the man,
He Is rather a wild ruffin than a Mayor:
Yet thus much I Will ensure your majesty,
In all his actions that concern his state,
He is as serious, provident, and wise,
As full of gravity amongst the grave,
As any mayor has been these many years.

King I am with child til I behold this half cap,
But all my doubt is, when we come in presence,
His madness will be dashed clean out of countenance.

Noble man It may be so, my Liege.


King Which to prevent,
Let some one give him notice, it is our pleasure,
That he put on his woonted merriment:
Set forward.

All On before. exeunt.


Enter Air Hodge, Firke, Rafe, and other shoemakers, all with napkins on their
shoulders. Air Come my fine Hodge, my jolly gentlemen shooemakers, soft, where
be these Caniballes, these varlets my officers, let them al walk and wait
upon my brethren, for my meaning is, that none but shoomakers, none but the
livery of my Company shall in their satin hoodes wait upon the trencher of
my sovereign.


Firke O my Lord, it will be rare.


Air No more Firke, come lively, let your fellow prentises want no cheer,
let wine be plentiful as beer, and beer as water, hang these penny pinching
fathers, that cramme wealth in innocent lamb skins, rip knaves, anaunt, look
to my guests


Hodge My Lord, we are at our wits end for room, those hundred tables will not
feast the fourth part of them.


Air Then cover me those hundred tables again, and again, til all my jolly
prentises be feasted: avoid Hodge, run Rafe, friske about my numble Firke,
carowse me fadome healths to the honor of the shoomakers: do they drink lively
Hodge? do they tickle it Firke?


Firke Tickle it? some of them have taken their licour standing so long, that
they can stand no longer: but for meat, they would eat it and they had it.


Air Want they meat? where is this swag-belly, this greasy kitchinstuffe
cook, call the varlet to me: want meat! Firke, Hodge, lame Rafe, run my tall
men, beleager the shambles, beggar al East-Cheape, serve me whole oxen in
chargers, and let sheep whine upon the tables like pigges for want of good
fellows to eat them. Want meat! vanish Firke, auaunt Hodge.


Hodge Your lordship mistakes my man Firke, he means their bellies want meat,
not the boords, for they have drunk so much they can eat nothing.


Eneer hans, Rose, and Wife. Wife Where is my Lord.


Air How now lady Madgy.


Wife The kings most excelent majesty is new come, he sends me for thy honor:
one of his most worshipful Peers, bade me tell thou must be merry, and so forth:
but let that pass.


Air Is my Sovereign come? vanish my tall shoomakers, my nimble brethren,
look to my guests the prentises: yet stay a little, how now Hans, how looks
my little Rose?


Hans Let me request you to remember me,
I know your honor easily may obtain,
Free pardon of the king for me and Rose,
And reconcile me to my uncles grace.

Air Have done my good Hans, my honest iorneyman, look cheerely, I Will fall
upon both my knees till they be as hard as horn, but I Will get thy pardon.


Wife Good my Lord have a care what you speak to his grace.


Air Away you I slington whitepot, hence you happerarse, you barley pudding full
of magots, you broyld carbonado, auaunt, auaunt, avoid Mephostophilus: shall
Sim Air leave to speak of you Lady Madgie? vanish mother Miniuer cap,
vanish, go, trip and go, meddle with your partlets, and your pishery
pasherie, your flewes and your whirligigs, go, rub, out of mine alley: Sim Air
knows how to speak to a Pope, to Sultan Soliman, to Tamburlaine and he were
here: and shall I melt? shall I droope before my Sovereign? no, come my Lady
Madgie, follow me Hauns, about your business my frolic free-booters: Firke,
friske about, and about, and about, for the honor of mad Simon Air Lord Mayor
of London.


Firke Hey for the honor of the shoomakers. exeunt.

A long flourish or two: enter King, Nobles, Air, his wife, Lacie, Rose: Lacie
and Rose kneel.
King Well Lacie though the fact was very foul,
Of your renolting from our kingly love,
And your own duty, yet we pardon you,
Rise both, and mistress Lacie, thank my Lord Mayor
For your young bridegroom here.

Air So my dear liege, Sim Air and my brethren the gentlemen shoomakers shall
set your sweet majesty's image, cheek by iowle by Saint Hugh, for this honor
you have done poor Simon Air, I beseeth your grace pardon my rude behavior,
I am a handicrafts man, yet my heart is without craft, I would be sorry at my
soul, that my boldness should offend my king.


King Nay, I pray thee good lord Mayor, be even as merry as if thou were among
thy shoomakers, It does me good to see thee in this humor.


Air Say thou me so my sweet Dioclesian? then hump, Prince am I none, yet
am I princely borne, by the Lord of Ludgate my Liege, I Will be as merry as a pie.


King Tell me infaith mad Air, how old thou art.


Air My Liege a very boy, a stripling, a yonker, you see not a white hair on
my head, not a gray in this beard, every hair I assure thy majesty that
sticks in this beard, Sim Air values at the king of Babilons ransom, Tama
Chams beard was a rubbing brush toot: yet I Will shave it off, and stuff tennis
balls with it to please my bully king.


King But all this while I do not know your age.


Air My liege, I am six and fifty year old, yet I can cry humpe, with a
sound heart for the honor of Saint Hugh: mark this old wench, my king, I
dauncde the shaking of the sheets with her six and thirty years ago, and
yet I hope to get two or three young Lord Majors ere I die: I am lusty still,
Sim Air still: care, and cold lodging brings white hairs. My sweet
Majesty, let care vanish, cast it upon thy Nobles, it will make thee look
always young like Apollo, and cry humpe: Prince am I none, yet am I princely
borne.


King Ha ha: say Cornwall, did thou ever see his like?


Noble man Not I, my Lord.


Enter Lincoln, and Lord Mayor. King Lincoln, what news with you?


Linc. My gracious Lord, have care unto your self,
For there are traitors here.

All Traitors, where? who?


Air Traitors in my house? God forbid, where be my officers? I Will spend my
soul ere my king feel harm.


King Where is the traitor? Lincoln.


Linc. Here he stands.


King Cornwall, lay hold on Lacie: Lincoln, speak:
What can thou lay unto thy Nephews charge?

Linc. This my dear liege: your grace to do me honor,
Heapt on the head of this degenerous boy,
Desertlesse favors, you made choice of him,
To be commander over powers in France,
But he.

King Good Lincoln pry thee pawse a while,
Even in thine eyes I read what thou would speak,
I know how Lacie did neglect our love,
Ran himself deeply (in the highest degree)
Into vile treason.

Linc. Is he not a traitor?


King Lincoln, he was: now have we pardned him,
It Was not a base want of true valors fire,
That held him out of France, but loves desire.

Linc. I will not bear his shame upon my back.


King Nor shall thou Lincoln, I forgive you both.


Lin Then (good my liege) forbid the boy to wed
One, whose mean birth will much disgrace his bed.

King Are they not married?


Linc. No my Liege.


Both We are.


King Shall I divorce them then? O be it far,
That any hand on earth should dare untie,
The sacred knot knit by Gods majesty,
I would not for my crown disioyne their hands,
That are conioynd in holy nuptial bands,
How say thou Lacy? would thou loose thy Rose?

Hans Not for all Indians wealth, my sovereign.


King But Rose I am sure her Lacie would forgo.


Rose If Rose were asked that question, sheed say, no.


King You hear them Lincoln.


Linc Yea my liege, I do.


King Yet can thou find ith heart to part these two?
Who seeks, besides you, to divorce these lovers?

L. Ma. I do (my gracious Lord) I am her father.


King Sir Roger Oteley, our last Mayor I think,


Nob The same my liege.


King Would you offend Loves laws?
Well, you shall have your wills, you sue to me,
To prohibit the match: Soft, let me see,
You both are married, Lacie, art thou not?

Hans I am, dread Sovereign.


King Then upon thy life,
I charge thee, not to call this woman wife.

L. Ma. I thank your grace.


Rose O my most gracious Lord!

kneel
King Nay Rose, never woo me, I tell you true,
Although as yet I am a batchellor,
Yet I believe I shall not marry you.

Rose Can you divide the body from the soul,
Yet make the body live?

King Yea, so profound?
I cannot Rose, but you I must divide:
Fair maid, this bridegroom cannot be your bride.
Are you pleased Lincoln? Oteley, are you pleased?

Both Yes my Lord.


King Then must my heart be easde,
For credit me, my conscience lives in pain,
Til these whom I deuorcde be joined again:
Lacy, give me thy hand, Rose, lend me thine.
Be what you would be: kiss now: so, that's fine,
At night (lovers) to bed: now let me see,
Which of you all mislikes this harmony?

L. Ma. Will you then take from me my child perforce?


King Why tell me Oteley, shines not Lacies name,
As bright in the worlds eye, as the gay beams
Of any citizen?

Linc. Yea but my gracious Lord,
I do mislike the match far more than he,
Her blood is too too base.

King Lincoln, no more,
Do thou not know, that love respects no blood?
Cares not for difference of birth, or state,
The maid is young, well borne, fair, virtuous,
A worthy bride for any gentleman:
Besides, your nephew for her sake did stoop
To bare necessity: and as I hear,
Forgetting honors, and all courtly pleasures,
To gain her love, became a shooemaker.
As for the honor which he lost in France,
Thus I redeem it: Lacie, kneel thee down,
Arise sir Rowland Lacie: tell me now,
Tell me in earnest Oteley, can thou chide?
Seeing thy Rose a lady and a bryde.

Lord Mayor. I am content with what your Grace has done.


Linc. And I my liege, since there is no remedy.


King Come on then, at shake hands, I Will have you friends,
Where there is much love, all discord ends,
What says my mad Lord Mayor to all this love?

Air O my liege, this honor you have done to my fine iourneyman here, Rowland
Lacie, and all these favors which you have shown to me this day in my poor
house, will make Simon Air live longer by one dozen of warm summers more then
he should.


King Nay, my mad Lord Mayor (that shall be thy name)
If any grace of mine can length thy life,
One honor more I Will do thee, that new building,
Which at thy cost in Cornehill is erected,
Shall take a name from us, we will have it called,
The Leaden hall, because in digging it,
You found the lead that covers the same.

Air I thank your Majesty.


Wife God bless your Grace.


King Lincoln, a word with you.


Enter Hodge, Firke, Rafe, and more shoomakers. Air How now my mad knaves?
Peace, speak softly, yonder is the king.


King With the old troop which there we keep in pay,
We will incorporate a new supply:
Before one summer more pass ore my head,
France shall repent England was injured.
What are all those?

Hans All shoomakers, my Liege,
Sometimes my fellows, in their companies
I siude as merry as an empror.

King My mad lord Mayor, are all these shoomakers?


Air All Shooemakers, my Liege, all gentlemen of the Gentle Craft, true
Trojans, courageous Cordwainers, they all kneel to the shrine of holy saint
Hugh.


All God save your majesty all shoomakers


King Mad Simon, would they any thing with us?


Air Mum mad knaves, not a word, I Will doot, I warrant you. They are all
beggars, my Liege, all for themselves: and I for them all, on both my knees do
entreat, that for the honor of poor Simon Air, and the good of his brethren
these mad knaves, your Grace would vouchsafe some privilege to my new Leden
hall, that it may be lawful for us to buy and sell leather there two days a
week.


King Mad Sim, I grant your suite, you shall have patent
To hold two market days in Leden hall,
Mondayes and Fridayes, those shall be the times:
Will this content you?

All Jesus bless your Grace.


Air In the name of these my poor brethren shoomakers, I most humbly thank
your Grace. But before I rise, seeing you are in the Giving vain, and we in
the Begging, grant Sim Air one boon more.


King What is it my Lord Mayor?


Air Vouchsafe to taste of a poor banquet that stands sweetly waiting for
your sweet presence.


King I shall undo thee Air, only with feasts,
Already have I been too troublesome,
Say, have I not?

Air O my dear king, Sim Air was taken unawares upon a day of shrouing which
I promised long ago to the pren tises of London: for andt please your Highness,
in time past

I bare the water tanker (...) my coat
Sits not a whit the world (...) my back:
And then upon a morning some mad boys,
It was Shrouetuesday eeune as it is now,
Gave me my breakefast, and I swore then by the stopple of my tankerd, if ever
I came to be Lord Mayor of London, I would feast all the prentises, This day (my
liege) I did it, and the slaves had an hundred tables five times covered, they
are gone home and vanished: yet add more honor to the Gentle Trade, taste of
Eyres banquet, Simon's happy made.


King Air, I will taste of thy banquet, and will say,
I have not met more pleasure on a day,
Friends of the Gentle Craft, thanks to you al,
Thanks my kind Lady Mairesse for our theere,
Come Lords, a white lets revel it at home,
When all our sports, and banquetings are dome,
Wars most right wrongs which frenchmen have begun.

Exeunt. FINIS.

