Satiro-mastix. OR The vntrussing of the Humorous Poet. As it has bin
presented publicly, by the Right Honorable, the Lord Chamberlain his
Servants; and privately, by the Children of Paul's. By Thomas Dekker.

Non recito cuiquam nisi Amicis idque coactus*

LONDON, Printed for Edward White, and are to be sold at his shop, near the
little North door of Paul's Church, at the sign of the Gun. 1602.

Dramatis personae.
1. William Rusus. 2. Sir Walter Terill. 3. Sir Reesap Vaughan. 4. S.
Quintilian Shorthose. 5. Sir Adam Prickshast. 6. Blunt. 7. Crispinus. 8.
Demetrius Fannius. 9. Tucca. 10. Horace. 11. Asinius Bubo. 12. Peter Flash. 13.
Caelestine. 14. Mistress Miniuer. 15. Ladies.
Ad Detractorem.
Non potes in Nugas dicere plurameas,
Ipse ego quam dixi. -- Qui se mir antur, in illo^
Virus habe: Nos hae nouimus esse nihil.
To the World.
WOrld, I was ^nce resolved to be round with thee, because of know it is thy
fashion to be round with every body: but the wind shifting his point, the
Vein turned: yet because thou will sit as Judge of all matters (though for thy
labor thou wear'st Midasses ears, and ar^ Monstrum horrendum, inform: Ingens
cui lumen ademptum; whose great Poliphemian eye is put out) I care not much if
I make description (before thy Universality) of that terrible Poetomachi^,
lately commenced between Horace the second, and a band of leane-witted
Poetasters. They have bin at high words, and so high, that the ground could
not serve them, but (for want of Chopins) have stalk'^ upon Stages.

Horace haled his Poetasters to the Bar, the Poetasters vntruss'd Horace: how
worthily either, or how wrongfully, (World) leave it to the Jury: Horace
(questionles) made himself believe, that his Burgonian wit might desperately
challenge all comers, and that none durst take up the foyles against him: It Is
likely, if he had not so bel^iu'd, he had not bin so deceived, for he was
answered at his (...) weapon: And if before Apollo himself (who is Coronator
Poetarum) an Inquisition should be taken touching this la^entable (...)
murdering of Innocent Poetry: all mount Helicon (...)

I could here ((...) with the feather of my pen) wipe off other ridiculous
imputations: but my best way to answer them, is to laugh at them: only thus
much I protest (and swear by the diuinest part of true Poesy) that (howsoever
the limbs of my naked lines may be and I know have have bin, tortured on the
rack) they are free from conspiring the least disgrace to any man, but only
to our new Horace; neither should this ghost of Tucca, have walked up and down
Poules Churchyard, but that he was raiz'd up (in print) by new Exorcismes.
World, if thy Hugenes will believe this: do, if not, I care not: for I
dedicate my book not to thy Greatness, but to the Greatness of thy scorn:
Defying which, let that mad Dog Detraction bite till his teeth be worn to the
stumps: Envy feed thy Sn^kes so fat with poyso^^ill they burst: World, let all
thy Adders shoot out their Hidra-headed-forked Stinges, Ha, Ha, Nanci; if none
will take my part, (as I desire none) yet I thank thee (thou true Venusian
Horace) for these good words thou give me: Populus me sibylat at mihi
plaudo. World farewell.

Malim Conuiuis quam placuise Cocis.
Ad Lectorem.
IN steed of the Trumpets sounding thrice, before the Play begin: it shall not
be amiss (for him that will read) first to behold this short Comedy of
Errors, and where the greatest enter, to give them in stead of a hiss, a
gentle correction.

In letter C. Page. 1. for, Whom I adorned as Subjects: Read, Whom I adored as,
etc.

In Letter C Pa. 3. for, I Will strate thence poor: Read, I Will starve their poor,
etc.

In Letter C Pa. 6. for, her white cheeks with her dregs and bottom: Read,
her white cheeks with the dregs and, etc.

In the same Page, for, Strike off the head of Sin: Read, Strike off the swollen
head, etc.

In the same Page, for, that of five hundred, four hundred five Read, that of
five hundred: four.

In Letter G. pa. 1. for, this enterchanging of languages: Read, this
enterchange of language.

In Letter L. pa. 5. for, And stinging insolence should: Read, And stinking
insolence, etc.

The Vntrussing of the Humorous Poet.
Enter two Gentlewomen strewing of flowers. 1 COme bedfellow come, strew apace,
strew, strew: in good troth it is pity that these flowers must be trodden under
feet as they are like to be anon.


2 Pity, alack pretty heart, thou art sorry to see any good thing fall to the
ground: pity? no more pity, then to see an Innocent Mayden-head delivered up
to the ruffling of her new-wedded husband. Beauty is made for use, and he that
will not use a sweet soul well, when she is under his fingers I pray Venus he
may never kiss a fair and a delicate, soft, red' plump-lip.


1. Amen, and that is torment enough.


2. Pity? come fool fling them about lustily; flowers never dye a sweeter
death, than when they are smoother'd to death in a Lovers bosom, or else paue
the high ways, over which these pretty, simpring, ietting things, called
brides, must trippe.


1. I pray thee tell me, why do they use at weddings to furnish all places
thus, with sweet herbs and flowers?


2. One reason is, because it is -- o a most sweet thing to lie with a man.


1. I think it is a O more more more more sweet to lie with a woman.


2. I warrant all men are of thy mind: another reason is, because they stick
like the scutchions of madame chastity, on the sable ground, weeping in their
stalks, and wincking with their yellow-sunke eyes, as loath to behold the
lamentable fall of a Maydenhead: what senceles thing in all the house, that is
not now as melancholy, as a new set-vp Schoolmaster?


1. Troth I am.


2. Troth I think thou mournst, because thou have mist thy turn, I do by the
quiver of Cupid: you see the torches melt themselves away in tears: the
instruments wear their heart stringes out for sorrow: and the Silver Ewers
weep most pitiful Rosewater: five or six pair of the white innocent
wedding gloves, did in my sight choose rather to be torn in pieces than to be
drawn on; and look this Rosemary, (a fatal herb) this dead-mans nose-gay,
has crept in amongst these flowers to decke^ th'nuisible coarse of the Brides
Maydenhead, when (oh how much do we poor wenches suffer) about eleven or
twelve, or one a clock at midnight at furthest, it descends to purgatory, to
give notice that Caelestine (hey ho) will never come to lead Apes in hell.


1. I see by thy sighing thou will not.


2. If I had as many Mayden-heads, as I have hayres on my head I Would venture
them all rather then to come into so hot a place; prethy strew thou, for my
little arms are weary.


1. I am sure thy little tongue is not.


2. No faith that is like a woman bitten with fleas, it neuerlyes still: ^ye vpont,
what a miserable thing it is to be a noble Bride, there is such delays in rising,
in fitting gowns, in tyring, in pinning Rebatoes, in poaking, in dinner, in
supper, in Revels, and last of all in cursing the poor nodding fiddlers, for
keeping Mistress Bride so long up from sweeter Revels; that, oh I could never
endure to put it up without much bickering.


1. Come thou art an odd wench, hark, hark, music? nay then the Bride's up.


2. Is she up? nay then I see she has been down: Lord ha mercy on us, we women
fall and fall still, and when we have husbands we play upon them like Virginal
Iackes, they must rise and fall to our humors, or else they will never get any
good strains of music out of us; but come now, have at it for a mayden-head.


strew. As they strew, enter Sir, Quintilian Shorthose with Peeter Flash and
two or three s^uingmen, with lights. Sir quin. Come knaves, night begins to be
like my self, an old man; day plays the thief and steals upon us; O well
done wenches, well done, well done, you have covered all the stony way to
church with flowers, it is well, it is well, there is an Embleame too, to be made out
of these flowers and stones, but you are honest wenches, in, in, in.


2. When we come to your years, we shall learn what honesty is, come
pew-fellow.


Exeunt. Sir quin. Is the music come yet? so much to do! Is It come?


Omnes. Come sir.


Sir quin. Have the merry knaves pulled their fiddle cases over their
instruments ears?


Flash. As soon as ere they entered our gates, the noise went, before they came
nere the great Hall, the faint hearted villiacoes sounded at least thrice.


Sir quin. Thou should have revived them with a Cup of burnt wine and sugar;
sir, you, horse-keeper, go, bid them curry their strings: Is my daughter up
yet?


Exit. Flash. Up sir? she was seen up an hour a go.


Sir quin. She Is an early sturrer, ah sir.


Flash. She Will be a late sturrer soon at night sir.


Sir Quint. Go too Peeter Flash, you have a good sudden flash of brain, your
wits husky, and no marvel, for it is like one of our Comedians beards,
stillith stubble: about your business, and look you be nymble to fly from the
wine, or the nymble wine will catch you by the nose.


Flash. If your wine play with my nose Sir, I Will knocke's coxcombe.


Sir quin. Do Peeter, and wear it for thy labor; Is my Son in Law Sir
Walter Terell ready yet?


Omnes. Ready sir.


Exit another. Sir Quin. One of you attend him: Stay Flash, where is the note of
the guestes you have invited?


Flash. Here Sir, I Will pull all your guestes out of my bosom; the men that will
come, I have crossed, but all the Gentlewomen have at the tail of the last
letter a prick, because you may read them the better.


Sir quint. My spectacles, light, light, knaves: Sir Adam Prickshaft, thou have
crossed him, heel come.


Flash. I had much a do sir, to draw Sir Adam Prickeshaft home, because I
told him it was early, but heel come.


Sir quint. Justice Crop, what will he come?


Flash. He took physic yesterday sir.


Sir quint. Oh then Crop cannot come.


Flash. O Lord yes, sir yes 'twas but to make more room in his Crop for your
good cheer, Crop will come.


Sir quint. Widow M^neuer.


Flash. She Is pricked you see sir, and will come.


Sir quint. Sir Vaughan ap Rees, oh hee^s crossed twice, so, so, so, then all
these Ladies, that fall downewardes here, will come I see, and all these
Gentlemen that stand right before them.


Flash. All will come.


Sir quint. Well said, here, write them out again, and put the men from the
women; and Peeter, when we are at Church bring wine and cakes, be light and
nimble good Flash, for your burden will be but light.


Enter sir Adam a light before him. Sir Adam Prickeshaft God morrow, god
morrow: go, in, in, in, to the Bridegroom, taste a cup of burnt wine this
morning, twill m^ke you fly the better all the day after.


Sir Adam. You are an early styrrer Sir Quintilian Shorthose.


Sir qui. I am so, it behoues me at my daughters wedding, in, in, in; fellow
put ou^ thy torch, and put thy self into my buttery, the torch burns ill in
thy hand, the wine will burn better in thy belly, in in.


Flash. Ware there, room for Sir Adam Prickeshaft: your Worship --


Exit. Enter Sir Vaughan and Mistress Mineuer. Sir quin. Sir Vaughan and Widow,
Mineuer, welcome, welcome, a thousand times: my lips Mistress Widow shall bid
you God morrow, in, in, one to the Bridegroom, the other to the Bride.


Sir Vaughen. Why then Sir quiontilian Shorthose, I will step into mistress
Bride, and Widow Mineuer, shall go upon M. Bridegroom.


Mineu. No pardon, for by my truly Sir Vaughan, I Will ha no dealings with any M.
Bridegroomes.


Sir quin. In widow in, in honest knight in.


Sir Vaug. I will usher you mistress widow.


Flash. Light there for sir Vaughan; your good Worship --


Sir Vaug. Drink that shilling Ma. Peeter Flash, in your guts and belly.


Fla. I Will not drink it down sir, but I Will turn it into that which shall run
down, oh merrily!


Exit Sir Vaughan. Enter Blunt, Crispinus, Demetrius, and others with Ladies,
lights before them. Sir quin. God morrow to these beauties, and Gentlemen, that
have Vshered this troop of Ladies to my daughters wedding, welcome, welcome
all; music? nay then the bridegroome's coming, where are these knaves here?


Flash. All here sir.


Enter Terill, Sir Adam, Sir Vaughan, Celestine, Mineuer, and other Ladies and
attendant. (...) ^lights. Teri. God morrow Ladies and fair troops of
gallants, that have deposed the drowzy King of sleep, to Crown our train with
your rich presences, I salute you all;

Each one share thanks from thanks in general.

Cris. God morrow M. Bridegroom, mistress Bride.

Omnes. God morrow M. Bride groom.

Ter. Gallants I shall entreat you to prepare,
For Maskes and Revels to defeat the night,
Our Sovereign will in person grace our marriage.

Sir quin. What will the king be here?

Ter. Father he will.

Sir quin Where be these knaves? More Rose-mary and gloves, gloves, gloves:
choose Gentlemen; Ladies put on soft skins upon the skin of softer hands; so,
so: come mistress Bride take you your place, the old men first, and then the
Batchelors; Maids with the Bride, Widows and wives together, the priset's at
Church, it is time that we march thither


Ter. Dear Blunt at our return from Church, take pains to step to Horace,
for our nuptial songs; now Father when you please.


Sir quin. Agreed, set on, come good Sir Vaughan, must we lead the way?


Sir Vau. Peeter you go too fast for Mistress pride: so, gingerly, gingerly; I
muse why Sir Adam Prickeshaft sticks so short behind?


Sir quin. He follows close, not too fast, hold up knaves,
Thus we lead youth to church, they us to graves.

Exeunt. Horrace sitting in a study behind a Curtain, a candle by him
burning, books lying confusedly: to himself. Hor. To thee whose forehead
swells with Roses,
Whose most haunted bower
Gives life and sent to every flower,
Whose most adored name incloses,
Things abstruse, deep and divine,
Whose yellow tresses shine,
Bright as Eoan fire.
O me thy Priest inspire.
For I to thee and thine immortal name,
In-in-in golden tunes,
For I to thee and thine immortal name --
In-sacred raptures flowing, flowing, swimming, swimming:
In sacred raptures swimming,
Immortal name, game, dame, tame, lame, lame, lame,
Pux, has, shame, proclaim, oh --
In Sacred raptures flowing, will proclaim, not --
O me thy Priest inspyre!
For I to thee and thine immortal name,
In flowing numbers filled with spright and flame,
Good, good, in flowing numbers filled with spright and flame.

Enter Asinius Bubo. Asini. Horace, Horace, my sweet ningle, is always in
labor when I come, the nine Muses be his midwiues I pray Jupiter: Ningle.


Ho. In flowing numbers filled with sprite and flame, To thee.


Asini. To me? I pledge thee sweet Ningle, by Bacchus quassing boule, I thought
thou had drunk to me.


Hor. It must have been in the divine lycour of Pernaessus, then in which, I
know you would scarce have pledged me, but come sweet rogue, sit, sit, sit.


Asini. Over head and ears y^aith? I have a sacke-full of news for thee, thou
shall plague some of them, if God send us life and health together.


Hor. Its no matter, empty thy sack anon, but come here first honest rogue,
come.


Asini. Is It good, Is It good* pure Helicon ha?


Hor. Dam me ift be not the best that ever came from me, if I have any
judgment, look sir, it is an Epithalamium for Sir Walter Terrels wedding, my
brains have given assault to it but this morning.


Asin. Then I hope to see them fly out like gunpowder ere night.


Hor. Nay good rogue mark, for they are the best lines that ever I drew.


Asin. Here Is the best leaf in England, but on, on, I Will but tune this Pipe.


Hor. Mark, to thee whose forehead swells with Roses.


Asin. O sweet, but will there be no exceptions taken, because forehead and
swelling comes together?


Hor. Push, away, away, its proper, besides it is an elegancy to say the fore
head swells.


Asin. Nay an't be proper, let it stand for Gods love.

Her. Whose most haunted bower,
Gives life and sent to every flower,
Whose most adored name incloses,
Things abstruse, deep and divine.
Whose yellow tresses shine,
Bright as (...) fire.

Asini. O pure, rich, there is heat in this, on, on.

Hor. Bright as Eoan fire,
O me thy Priest inspire!
For I to thee and thine immortal name -- mark this.
In flowing numbers filled with spryte and ^^ame.

Asini. I mary, there is spryte and flame in this.

Ho^. A pox, a this Tobacco.

Asin. Wod this case were my last, if I did not mark, nay all is one, I have
always a consort of Pypes about me, mine Ingle is all fire and water; I marked,
by this Candle (which is none of Gods Angels) I remember, you started back at
sprite and flame.


Hor. For I to thee and thine immortal name,
In flowing numbers filled with sprite and flame,
To thee Loves mightiest King,
Himen o Himen does our chaste Muse sing.

Asin. There Is music in this;

Hor. Mark now dear Asinius.
Let these virgins quickly see thee,
Leading out the Bride,
Though their blushing cheeks they hide,
Yet with kisses will they fee thee,
To untie their Virgin zone,
They grieve to lie alone.

Asini. So do I by Venus.


Hor. Yet with kisses will they fee thee, my Muse has marched (dear roagu^) no
^arder yet: but how is it? how is it? nay prithee good Asini^s deal plainly, do
not flatter me, come, how? --


Asin. If I have any judgment:


Hor. Nay look you Sir, and the^ follow a troop of other rich and labored
conceits, oh the end shall be admirable! but how is it sweet Bubo, how, how?


Asini. If I have any Judgment, it is the best stuff that ever dropped from thee.


Hor. You ha seen my Acrosticks?


Asi. I Will put up my pypes and then I Will see any thing.


Hor. Thou Have a Copy of mine Odes to, have not Bubo?


Asi. Your odes? O that which you spoke by word a mouth at th'ordinary, when
Musco the gull cried Mew at it:


Hor. A pox on him poor braineles Rooke: and you remember, I told him his wit
lay at pawn with his new Satin suit, and both would be lost, for not fetching
home by a day.


Asi. At which he would fai^e ha blushed but that his painted cheeks would not
let him.


Hor. Nay sir the Palinode, which I mean to stitch to my Revels, shall be
the best and ingenious piece that ever I swet for; stay rogue, I Will fat thy
spleen and make it plumpe with laughter.


Asi. Shall I? faith Ningle, shall I see thy secrets?


Hor. Puh my friends.


Asi. But what fardle's that? what fardle's that?


Hor. Fardle, away, it is my packet; here lies intoomb'd the loves of Knights
and Earls, here it is, here it is, here it is, Sir Walter Terils letter to me,
and my answer to him: I no sooner opened his letter, but there appeared to me
three glorious Angels, whom I adorned, as subjects do their Sovereigns: the
honest knight Angles for my acquaintance, with ^uch golden baits -- but why
do laugh my good rogue? how is my answer, prithee, how, how?


Asi. Answer, as God judge me Ningle, for thy wit thou may answer any
Justice of peace in England I warrant; thou writ'st in a most goodly big hand
too, I like that, and readst as leageably as some that have bin saved by their
neck-verse.


Hor. But how do like the Kinghts inditing?


Asi. If I have any judgment; a pox o^t, here is worshipful lines indeed,
here is stuff: but ^^ra Ningle, of what fashion is this knights wit, of what
block^?


Asi. Why you see; well, well, an ordinary Ingenuity, a good wit for a knight,
you know how, before God I am haunted with some the most pittyfull dry gallants.


Asini. Troth so I think; good pieces of lantskip, show best a far off.


Hor. I, I, I, excellent sumpter horses, carry good clothes; but honest rogue,
come, what news, what news abroad? I have heard a the horses walking a^^h top
of Paul's.


Asi. Hay? why the^ Captain Tucca rayles upon you most preposterously behind
your back, did you not hear him*


Ho. A pox upon him: by the white and soft hand of Minerua, I Will make him the
most ridiculous: dam me if I bring not's humorath stage: and -- scu^uy lymping
tongued captain, poor grea^ie buffe lerkin, hang him: it is out of his Element
to traduce me: I am too well ranckt Asinius to be stabbed with his dudgion wit:
sir, I Will compose an Epigram, upon him, shall go thus --


Asi. Nay I ha more news, there is Crispinus and his Iorneyman Poet Demetrius
Faninus too, they swear they will bring your life and death vpon'th stage like a
Bricklayer in a play.


Hor. Bubo they must press more valiant wits than their own to do it: me ^th
stage? ha, ha, I Will starte thence poor copper-lace workmasters, that dare play
me: I can bring (and that they quake at) a prepared troop of gallants, who for
my sake shall distaste every unsalted line, in their ^^y-blowne Comedies


Asi. Nay that^s certain, i will bring 100. gallants of my rank


Hor. That same Crispinus is the silliest Dor, and Faninus the slightest
cob-web-lawne perce of a Poet, oh God! Why should I care what every Dor does
buz. Incredulous ears, it is a crown to me. That the best judgments can
report me wronged.


Asi. I am one of them that can report it:


Hor. I think but what they are, and am not moved.
The one a light ^^^^ptuous Reueler,
The other, a strange arrogating puff,
Both impudent, and arrogant enough.

Asin. S'lid do not Cri^^cus Revel in these lines, ha Ningle ha?


Knocking. Hor. Yes, they are mine own.


Cris. Horrace.


Them. Flaccus.


Cris. Horrace, not up yet;


Hor. Peace, tread so^tly, hyde my Paper; who is this so early?

Some of my rookes, some of my guls?

Cris. Horrace, Flac^us.


Hor. Who Is there? st^ay, tread softly: Wat Terill on my life: who is there? my
gown sweet rogue, so, come up, come in.


Enter Crispinus and Demetrius. Cris. God morrow Horrace.


Hor. O, God save you gallants.


Cris. Asinius Bubo well met.


Asin. Nay I hope so Crispinus, yet I was sick a quarter of a year a got of a
vehement great tooth-atch: a pox o^t, it bit me vi^ye, as God same la ^ knew
it was you by your knocking so soon as I saw you; Demetrius Fannius, will you
take a whiffe this morning? I have tickling gear now, here is that will play
with your nose, and a pype of mine own scowring too.


Them. I, and a Hodgshead too of your own, but that will never be scowred
clean I fear.


Asin. I burnt my pype yesternight, and it was never used since, if you will it is
at your service gallants, and Tobacco too, it is right pudding I can tell you; a
Lady or two, took a pype full or two at my hands, and praizde it for the
Heavens, shall I fill Flannius?


Them. I thank you good (...) for your love,
I fildome take that Physic, it is enough
Having so much fool to take him in snuff.

Hor. Good Bubo read some book* and give us leaue^ --

As. Leave have you dear Ningle, marry for reading any book I Will take my death
vpout (as my Ningle says) it is out of my Eleme^t: no faith, eue^ since I felt
one hit me ith teeth that the greatest Clerks are not the wisest men, could I
abide to go to School, I was at As in present^ and left there: yet because
I Will not be counted a worle fool then I am, I Will turn over a new leaf.


Asiniu^ (...) and takes Tobaeco. Hor. To see my fate, that when I dip my pen
In distilde Roses, and do strive to dreine,
Out of mine Ink all gall; that when I wey
Each syllable I write or speak, because
Mine enemies with sharp and searching eye*
Look through and through me, caruing my poor labors
Like an Anotomy: Oh heauen^ to see,
That when my lines are measured out as straight
As even Paralels, it is strange that still,
Still some imagine they are drawn aw^y.
The error is not mine, but in their eye,
That cannot take proportions.

Cris. Horrace, Horrace,
To stand within the shot of galling tongues,
Proves not your gilt, for could we write on paper,
Made of these turning (...) of heaven, the clouds,
Or speak with Angels tongues* yet wise men know,
That some would sha^e the head, tho Saints should sing,
Some snakes (...), because they reborne with stings.

Hor. It Is true.

Cris. Do we not see fools laugh (...) heaven and mock
The Makers workmanship; be not you grieved
If that which you molde fair, upright and smooth,
Be skrwed a wry, made crooked, lame and vile,
By racking coments, and calumnious tongues,
So to be bit it raukcles not: for innocence
May with a feather brush off the foulest wrongs.
But when your d^stard wit will strike at men
In corners, and in riddles fold the vices
Of your best friends, you must not take to heart,
If they take off all gilding from their pills,
And only offer you the bitter Coare.

Hor. Crispinus.

Cri. Say that you have not sworn unto your Paper,
To blot her white cheeks with her dregs and bottom
Of your friends private vices: say you swear
Your love and your aleageance to bright virtue
Makes you descend so low, as to put on
The Office of an Executioner,
Only to strike off the head of sin,
Where ere you find it standing,
Say you swear;
And make damnation parcel of your oath,
That when your lashing iestes make all men bleed;
Yet you whip none. Court, City, country, friends,
Foes, all must smart alike; yet Court, nor City,
Nor foe, nor friend, dare winch at you; great pity.

Them. If you swear, dam me Faninus, or Crispinus,
Or to the law ( Our kingdoms golden chain)
To Poets dam me, or to Players dam me,
If I brand you, or you, tax you, scourge you:
I wonder then, that of five hundred, four hundred five,
Should all point with their fingers in one instant
At one and the same man?

Hor. Dear Faninus.

Them. Come, you cannot excuse it.

Hor. Hear me, I can --

Them. You must da^be on thick colors then to hide it.

Cris. We come like your Physicians, to purge
Your sick and dangerous mind of her disease.

Them. In troth we do, o^t of our loves we come,
And not revenge, but if you strike us still,
We must defend our reputations:
Our pens shall like our swords be always sheathed,
Unless too much prou^^^^, (...) i^ then
They draw blood of you, blame us not, we are men:
Come, let thy Muse bear up a smoother sail,
It Is the easiest and the basest Art to rail,

Hor. Deliver me your hands, I love you both,
As dear as my own soul, prove me, and when
I shall traduce you, make me the scorn of men.

Both. Enough, we are friends.

Cri. What reads Asinius?

Asi. By my troth here is an excellent comfortable book, it is most sweet
reading in it.


Them. Why, what does it smell of Bubo?


Asi. Mas it smells of Rose-leaues a little too.


Hor. Then it must needs be a sweet book, he would feign perfume his ignorance.


Asi. I warrant he had wit in him that penned it.


Cris. It Is good yet a fool will confess truth.


Asi. The whoorson made me meet with a hard style in two or three places as I
went over him.


Them. I believe thee, for they had need to be very low and easy Styles of wit
that thy brains go over.


Enter Blunt and Tucca. Blun. Where Is this gallant? Morrow Gentlemen: what is,
this devise (...) yet Horace?


Hor. Gods so, what mean you to let this fellow dog you into my Chamber?


Blun. Oh, our honest Captain, come, prithee let us see.


Tuc. Why you bastards of nine whoores, the Muses, why do you walk here in
this gorgeous ga^le^y of gallant inventions, with that whooreson poor lyme and
hayre-rascall? why --


Cris. O peace good Tucca, we are all sworn friends,


Tuc. Sworn, that Judas yonder that walks in Rug, will dub you Knights ath
post, if you serve under his band of oaths, the copper fact rascal will for a
good supper out swear twelve dozen of graund Iuryes.


Blun. A pox ont, not done yet, and bin about it three days?


Hor^. By Jesus within this hour, save you Captain Tucca.


Tuc. Dam thee, thou thin bearded Hermaphrodite, dam thee, I Will save my self
for one I warrant thee, is this thy Tub Diogines?


Hor. Yes Captain this is my poor lodging.


Asin. Morrow Captain Tucca, will you whiffe this morning?


Tuc. Art thou there goats pizzel; no goda^ercy Caine I am for no whiffs I,
come hither sheep-skin-weauer^s ^foote thou lookst as though thou had begged out
of a Iayle: draw, I mean not thy face (for it is not worth drawing) but draw
near: this way, martch, follow your commander you scoundrell: So, thou must
run of an errand for me Mephostophiles.


Hor. To do you pleasure Captain I will, but whether


Tuc. To hell, thou know the way, to hell my fire and brimstone, to hell;
do stare my Sar^en^-head at Newgate? do gl^ate? I Will march through thy (...)
gu^s, for shooting iestes at me.


Hor. Dear Captain but one word.


Tuc. Out bench-whistler out, i will not take thy word for a dagger Pie: you
browne-bread-mouth stinker, i will teach thee to turn me into Banks his horse,
and to tell gentlemen I am a Iugler, and can show tricks.


Hor. Captain Tucca, but half a word in your ear.


Tuc. No you starved rascal, thou't bite off mine ears then, you must have
three or four suites of names, when like a lousy Pediculous vermin thou have but
one suite to thy back: you must be called Asper, and Criticus, and Horace, thy
tytle's longer a reading then the Style a the big Turks: Asper, Criticus,
Quintus, Horatius, Flacu^s.


Hor. Captain I know upon what even bases I stand, and therefore --


Tuc. Bases? wud the rogue were but ready for me.


Blun. Nay prithee dear Tucca, come you shall shake --


Tuc. Not hands with great Hunkes there, not hands, but I Will shake the
gull-groper out of his tan'd skin.


Crisp. and Deem. For our sake Captain, nay prithee hold.


Tuc. Thou wrongst here a good honest rascal Crispinus, and a poor varlet
Demetrius Fanninus (brethren in thine own trade of Poetry) thou say
Crispinus Satin dublet is Reauel'd out here, and that this penurious sneaker
is out at elboes, go two my good full mouthed ban-dog, I Will ha thee friends
with both.


Hor. With all my heart captain Tucca, and with you too, I Will lay my hande^
under your feet, to keep them from aching.


Omnes. Can you have any more?


Tuc. Say thou me so, old Coal come? do it then; yet it is no matter neither,
I Will have thee in league first with these two rowly powlies: they shall be thy
Damons and thou their Pithyasse; Crispinus shall give thee an old cast Satin
suite, and Demetrius shall write thee a Scene or two, in one of thy strong
garlic Comedies; and thou shall take the guilt of conscience for ^^and swear
it is thine own old lad, it is thine own: thou never yet fels't into the hands
of satin, did?


Hor Never Captain I thank God.


Tuc Go too, thou shall now King Gorboduck, thou shall, because I Will ha thee
damned, I Will ha thee all in Satin: Asper, Criticus, Quintus, Horatius, Flaccus,
Crispinus shall do it, thou shall do it, heir apparent of Helicon, thou shall
do it.


Asi. Mine Ingle wear an old cast Satin suite?


Tuc. I wa^er-fate your Ningle.


Asi. If he carry the mind of a Gentleman, he will scorn it at's heels.


Tuc. Mary muffe, my man a ginger-bread, wilt eat any small coal?


As^. No Captain, wod you should well know it, great coal shall not fill my
belly.


Tuc. Scorn it, do scorn to be arrested at one of his old Suit^s?


Hor. No Captain, I Will wear any thing.


Tuc. I know thou will, I know thou art an honest low minded Pigmey, for I ha
seen thy shoulders lapt in a Plaiers old cast Cloak, like a Sly knave as
thou art: and when thou ranst mad for the death of Horatio: thou borrowedst a
gown of Roscius the Stager, (that honest Nicodemus) and sentst it home lousy,
did not? Responde, did not?


Blun. So, so, no more of this, within this hour --


Hor. If I can sound retreat to my wits, with whom this leader is in
skirmish, I Will end within this hour.


Tuc. What wut end? wut hang thy self now? has he not writ Finis yet Jack?
what will he be fifteen weeks about this Cockatrices egg too? has he not
cackeld yet? not laid yet?


Blum. Not yet, he swears he will within this hour.


Tuc. His wits are somewhat hard bound: the Puncke his Muse has sore labor
ere the whore be delivered: the poor saffron-cheeke Sunburned Gypsy wantes
Physic; give the hungrie-face pudding-pye-eater ten Pills: ten shillings my
fair Angelica, they' make his Muse as yare as a tumbler.


Blu. He shall not want for money if heel write.


Tuc. Go by Ieronimo, go by; and here, drop the ten shillings into this
Basin; do, drop, when Iacke^ he shall call me his Moecen^^: besides, I Will dam
vp's Ouen-mouth for railing at's: So, i^t right Jack? is it sterling? fall off
now to the vauward of yonder four Stinkers, and ask alowde if we shall go?
the Knight shall defray Jack, the Knight when it comes to Summa totalis, the
Knight, the Knight. --


Blu. Well Gentlemen, we'll leave you, shall we go Captain? good Horrace make
some have.


Ho^. I Will put on wings.


Asin. I never saw mine Ingle so dashed in my life before.


Cris. Yes once Asinius.


Asi. Mas you say true, he was dashed worse once going (in a rainy day) with a
speech to the Tilt-yard, by Gods lyd has called him names, a dog would not put
up, that had any discreation.


Tuc. Hold, hold up thy hand, I ha seen the day thou did not scorn to
hold up thy golles: there is a Soldiers Spur-royall, twelve pence: Stay,
because I know thou can not write without quick-^^^uer; up again, this goll
again, I give thee double presse-money: Stay, because I know thou have a noble
head, i will divide my Crown, o royal Porrex, there is a teston more; go, thou
and thy Muse munch, d^e, munch; come my dear Mandrake, if Skeldring fall not
to decay, thou shall flourish: farewell my sweet Amadis de Gaul, farewell.


Hor. Dear Captain.


Tuc. Come Jack.


Them. Nay Captain stay, we are of your band.


Tuc. March fair then:


Cri. Horace farewell, adue Asinius


Exeun^. Asi. Ningle lets go to some ^auerne, and dine together, for my
stomach rises at this scuruy leather Captain.


Hor. No, they have choakt me with mine own disgrace, Which (fools) i will spit
again even in your face.


Exeunt Enter Sir Quintilian Shorthose, Sir Adam, Sir Vaughan, Mineuer with
seruingmen. Sir quinti. Knaves, Varlets, what Lungis, give me a dozen of
stools there.


Sir Vau. Sesu please us all in our five senses a piece, what mean ye sir
Kintilian Sorthose to stand so much on a dozen stools, here be not preeches
inuffe to hyde a dozen stools, unless you wisse some of us preake his sins.


Sir quin. I say sir Vaughan no shinne shall be broken here* what lungis, a
chair with a strong back, and a soft belli^, great with child; with a
cushion for this reverend Lady.


Mineu. God never gave me the grace to be a Lady, yet I ha been worshipped in my
conscience to my face a thousand times, I cannot deny sir Va^ghan, but that I
have all implements, belonging to the vocation of a Lady.


Sir Vaughan. I trust mistress Mineuer you have all a honest oman should have?


Min. Yes perdie, as my Coach, and my fan, and a man or two that (...) turn,
and other things which I Would be loath every one should see, because they shall
not be common, I am in manner of a Lady in one point.


Sir Vaug. I pray mistress Mineuers, let us all see that point for our better
understanding.


Mi^^ For I ha somethinges that were fetched (I am sure) as far as some of the
Low Countries, and I paid sweetly for them too, and they told me they were
good for Ladies.


Sir qui. And much good do it thy good heart fair widow with them.


Min. I am fair enough to be a Widow, Sir Quintilian.


Sir Vaug. In my soul and conscience, and well favored enough to be a Lady:
here is sir ^^ntilian Sorthose, and here is sir Adam Prickshaft, a sentleman
of a very good brain, and well headed: you see he shootes his bolt sildome,
but when Adam lets go, he hits: and here is sir Vaughan ap Rees, and I
believe if God sud take us all from his mercy, as I hope he will not yet; we
all three love you, at the bottom of our bellyes, and our hearts: and
therefore mistress Mineuer, if you please, you shall be knighted by one of us,
whom you fall desire to put into your device and mind.


Min. One I must have sir Vaughan.


Sir qu^n. And one of us thou shall have widow.


Min. One I must have, for now every one seeks to crow over me.


Sir Vaug. By Sesu and if I find any crowing over you, and he were a cock
(come out as far as in Turkeys country) it is possible to cut his comb off.


Min. I muse why sir Adam Prickshaft flies so far from us.


Sir Adam. I am in a brown study, my dear, if love should be turned into a
beast, what beast he were fit to be turned into.


Sir quinti. I think Sir Adam an Ass, because of his bearing.


Min. I think (saving your reverence) Sir Adam a puppy, for a dog is the most
loving creature to a christian that is, unless it be a child.


Sir Ad. No, I think if love should be turned away, and go to serve any
beast, it must be an Ape, and my reason --


Sir Vaugh. Sir Adam, an Ape? there is no more reason in an Ape, than in a very
plain Monkey; for an Ape has no tail, but we all know, or it is our duty to
know, love has two tails; In my sudsment, if love be a beast, that beast is a
bunce of Reddis; for a bunce of Reddis is wise meat without Mutton, and so is
love.


Mi. There Is the yawning Captain (saving your reverence that has such a sore
mouth) would one day needs persuade me, that love was a Rebato; and his reason
was (saving your reverence) that a Rebato was worn out with pinning too often;
and so he said love was.


Sir Vaugh. And Master Captain Tucca said wisely too, love is a Rebato
indeed: a Rebato must be poaked; now many women wear Rebatoes, and many that
wear Rebatoes --


Sir Adam. Must be poakt.


Sir Vau. Sir Adam Prickshaft has hit the cloute


Masicke Sir qui. The Music speaks to us, we'll have a dance before dinner.


Enter Sir Walter Terrill, C^elestine, Blunt, Crispinus, and Demetrius, every
one with a Lady. All. The King's at hand.

Ter. Father the King's at hand.
Music talk louder, that thy silver voice,
May reach my Sovereigns ears.

Sir Vaug. I pray do so, Musitions bestir your singers, that you may have us
(...)


Sir quin. His Grace comes, a Hall (...), where be my men? blow, blow your
cold (...) they sweat; tickle them till they sound again.


Blun. Bent go meet his Grace.


All. Agreed.


Sir Vaug. Pray all stand bare, as well men as women: Sir Adam is best you hide
your head for fear your wise brains take key-colde: on before Sir Kintilian;
Sentlemen fall in before ^he Ladies, in seemly order and fashion; so this is
come^ye.


Enter Trumpets sounding, they go to the door, and meet the King and his
Train, and whilst the Trumpets sound the King is welcomed, kisses the Bride,
and honors the Bridegroom in dumb show. King. Nay if your pleasures shrink
at sight of us,
We shall repent this labor, Mistress Bride
You that for speaking but one word to day*
Must loose your head at night; you that do stand
Taking your last leave of virginity;
You that being well begun, must not be Maid:
Win you the Ladies, s^the men will woo,
Our self will lead my blushing Bride with you.

Sir Vaughan. God bless your Majesty, and send you to be along King William
Rufus over us, when he sees his times and pleasures.


King. We thank you good Sir Vaughan, we will take your meaning not your
words.


Sir quint. Loud Music there.


Sir Vou. I am glad, our Majesty will take any thing at my hands; my words ^
trust in Sesu, are spoken between my soul and body together, and have neither
Felonies nor treasons about them, I hope.


Kin. Good words Sir Vau^han, I prithee give us leave.


Vaug. Good words sir Vaughan? that's by interpertation in english, you^r best
give good words sir Vaughan: god and his Ansells bless me, what ails his
majesty to be so tedious and difficult in his right minds now, I hold my
life that file rascall-rymer Horace has puzd and puzd above a hundred merry
tales and lyce, into his great and princely ears: by god and he use it, his
being Phoebus priest cannot save him, if he were his Sapline too i would prease
upon his coxcomb: good lord bless me out of his majesty's celler: King
Williams, I hope it is none offenses to make a supplication to god a mighty for
your long life: for by shesu I have no meaning in it in all the world, unless
rascals be here that will have your grace take shalke for she is, and unless
Horace has sent ly^e to your majesty.


King Horace, what is he sir Vaughan?


Vaugh; As hard-fauourd a fellow as your majesty has seen in a summers day:
he does pen, an't please your grace, toys that will not please your grace; it is
a Poet, we call them Bardes in our Country, singes ballads and rymes, and I
was mighty sealous, that his Ink which is black and full of gall, had
brought my name to your majesty, and so lifted up your hye and princely collar.


King I neither know that Horace, nor mine anger, If as thou say our high and
princely choler Be up, we will tread it down with daunces; Ladies Loose not
your men; fair measures must be tread, When by so fair a dauncer you are lead.


Vaugh. Mistress Miniuer:


Min Perdie sir Vaughan I cannot dance.


Vaugh. Perdie by this Miniuer cappe, and acording to his masesties leave too,
you sall be put in among these Ladies, and dance ere long I trest in god, the
saking of the seetes.


They dance a strain, and whilst the others keep on, the King and Celestine
stay. Kin. That turn fair Bride shows you must turn at night,
In that sweet dance which steals away delight.

Cae^. Then pleasure is a theife, a fit, a fever:

Kin. True, he^s the thief, but women the receiver.

Another change; they fall in, the rest go on. Kin. This change sweet Maid,
says you must change your life,
As Virgins do.

Cael. Virgins nere change their life,
She that is wiu'd a maid, is Maid and wife.

Kin. But she that dies a Maid; --

Cael. Thrice happy then.

Kin. Leads Apes in hell.

Call. Better lead Apes then men.

At this third change they end, and she meets the King. Kin. Well met.

Cael. It Is overtaken.

Kin. Why fair sweet?

Cael. Women are overtaken when they meet;

Kin. Your blood speaks like a coward,

Cael. It were good,
If every Maiden blush, had such a blood.

Kin. A coward blood, why whom should maidens fear?

Cae. Men, were Maids cowards, they would not come so nere,
My Lord the Measure's done, I pleale my duty.

Kin. Only my heart takes measure of thy beauty.

Sir quin. Now by my hose I swear, that is no deep oath,
This was a fine sweet earthquake gently moved,
By the soft wind of whispring Silks: come Ladies,
Whose joints are made out of the dancing Orbs,
Come, follow me, walk a cold measure now;
In the Brides Chamber; your hot beautie's melt,
Take every one her fan, give them their places,
And wave the Northern wind upon your faces.

Celestin^ and all the Ladies doing obeisance to the King, who only kisses
her, Exeunt, Short-hose manning them, the Gallants stand aloof. Kin. Sir
Walter Terrill.

Ter. My confirmed Liege

Ki. Beauty out of her bounty, thee has lent,
More then her own with liberal extent.

Ter. What means my Lord?

Kin. Thy Bride, thy choice, thy wife,
She that is now thy fadom, thy new world,
That brings thee people, and makes little subjects;
Kneel at thy feet, obey in every thing,
So every Father is a private King.

Ter. My Lord, her beauty is the poorest part,
Chiefly her virtues did endowe my heart.

Kin. Do not back-bite her beauties, they all shine,
Brighter on thee, because the beams are thine,
To thee more fair, to others her two lips
Show like a parted Moon in thine Eclipse;
That glaunce, which lovers among themselves devise,
Walks as invisible to other eyes:
Give me thine ear.

Cri. What means the King?

Them. It Is a quaint strain.

Ter. My Lord.

Kin. Thou dare not Wat.

Ter. She is too course an object for the Court.

Kin. Thou dare not VVat: let to night be to morrow,

Ter. For she is not yet mine own.

Kin. Thou dare not Wat*

Ter. My Lord I dare, but --

King. But I see thou dare not.

Ter. This night.

King. Yea, this night, tush thy mind repaires not,
The more thou talk of night, the more thou dare not;
Thus far I tend, I wod but turn this sphere,
Of Ladies eyes, and place it in the Court,
Where thy fair Bride should for the Zodiac shine,
And every Lady el^e sit for a sign.
But all thy thoughts are yellow, thy sweet blood
Rebels, thou art jealous Wat; thus with proud revels
To emmulate the masking firmament,
Where Stars dance in the silver Hall of heaven,
Thy pleasure should be seasoned, and thy bed
Relish thy Bride, But, but thou dare not VVat.

Ter. My Loord I dare.

Kin. Speak that again.

Ter. I dare.

Kin. Again kind VVat, and then I know thou dare.

Ter. I dare and will by that joint holy oath,
Which she and I swore to the book of heaven.
This very day when the surueying Sun,
Riz like a witness to her faith and mine,
By all the loyalty that subjects owe
To Majesty, by that, by this, by both,
I swear to make a double guarded oath,
This night untainted by the touch of man,
She shall a Virgin come.

Kin. To Court?

Ter. To Court.
I know I took a woman to my wife,
And I know women to be earthly Moons,
That never shine till night, I know they change
Their Orbs (their husbands) and in sickish hearts,
Steal to their sweet Endimions, to be cured
With better Physic, sweeter diet drinks,
Then home can minister: all this I know
Yet know not all, but give me leave O King,
To boast of mine, and say that I know none;
I have a woman but not such a one.

Kin. Why, she is confirmed in thee; I now approve her,
If constant in thy thoughts who then can move her?

Enter Sir Quintilian. Sir qui. Wilt please your Highness take your place within,
The Ladies attend the Table.

Kin. I go good Knight; Wat thy oath.

Ter. My Lord,
My oath's my honor, my honor is my life,
My oath is constant, so I hope my wife.

Exeunt. Enter Horace in his true attire, Asinius bearing his Cloak. Asi. If
you fly out Ningle, here is your Cloak; I think it raine^ too.


Ho. Hide my shoulders in it.


Asi. Troth so thou had need, for now thou art in thy Pee and Kue; thou have
such a villainous broad back, that I warrant thou art able to bear away any man's
ie^^es in England.


Hor. It Is well Sir, I ha strength to bear yours me thinks; fore God you are
grown a piece of a Critist, since you fell into my hands: ah little rogue,
your wit has picked up her crum^ pretty and well.


Asi. Yes faith, I find my wit a the mending hand Ningle; troth I do not
think but to proceed Poetaster next Commencement, if I have my grace
perfectly: every one that confer with me now, stop their nose in merriment
and swear I smell somewhat of Horace; one calls me Horaces Ape, another
Horaces Beagle, and such Poetical names it passes. I was but at Barbers last
day, and when he was rencing my face, did but cry out* fellow thou makst me
(...) too long, and says he says hyee, Master Asinius Bub^, you have eene
Horaces words as right as if he had spit them into your mouth.


Hor. Well, away dear Asinius, deliver this letter to the young Gallant
Drus^, he that fell so strongly in love with me yesternight.


Asin. It Is a sweet Muske-cod, a pure spic^d-gull, by this feather I pity
his Ingenuities; but have writ all this since Ningle? I know thou have a good
running head and thou listest.


Hor. Foh come, your great bellied wit mu^^ long for every thing too; why you
R^oke, I have a set of letters ready starcht to my hands, which to any fresh
suited gallant that but newly enters his name into my roll, I send the next
morning, ere his ten a clock dream has rize from him, only with claping my
hand to it, that my Nouice shall start, ho and his hair stand an end, when he
sees the sudden flash of my writing; what you pretty Diminitiue rogue, we
must have false fires to amaze these spangle babies, these true heirs of Man
Ius^ice Shallow.


Asi. I wod always have thee saw^^ a fool thus.


Hor. Away, and, stay: here be Epigrams upon Tucca, divulge these among the
gallants; as for Crispinus, that Crispin-asse and Fannius his Play-dresser; who
(to make the Muses believe, their subjects ears were starved and that there
was a dearth of Poefie) cut an Innocent Moore in the middle, to serve him in
twice; and when he had done, made Poules-worke of it, as for these Twynnes
these Poet-(...):

Their Mimicke tricks shall serve
With mirth to feast our Muse, whilst their own starve.

Asin. Well Ningle I Will trudge, but where is the Randeuow?


Hor. Well thought off, marie at Sir Vaughans lodging the Welsh knight, I
have composed a loue-letter for the gallants worship, to his Rosamond: the
second, Mistress Miniuer, because she does not think so soundly of his ^ame
English as he could wish; I ha gulled his Knight-ship here to his face, yet
have given charge to his wincking understanding not to perceive it: nay Gods
so, away dear Bubo.


Asi. I am gone.

Exit.
Hor. The Muses birds the Bees were hiu'd and fled,
Us in our cradle, there by prophesying;
That we to learned ^ares should sweetly sing,
But to the vulger and adulterate brain,
Should loath to prostitute our Virgin strain.
No, our sharp pen shall keep the world in awe,
Horace thy Poesy, wormwood wreathes shall wear,
We hunt not for men's loves but for their fear.
Exit.
Enter Sir Adam and Miniuer. Min. O Sir Adam Prickshaft, you are a the bow hand
wide, a long, yard I assure you: and as for Suitors, truly they all go down
with me, they have all one flat answer.


Sir Adam. All Widow? not all, let Sir Adam be your first man still.


Enter Sir Quintilian. Sir quin. Widow, art stolen from Table? I Sir Adam,
Are you my rival? well, fly fair you are best;
The King's exceeding merry at the banquet,
He makes the Bride blush with his merry words
That run into her ears; ah he is a wanton,
Yet I dare trust her, had he twenty tongues,
And every tongue a Style of Majesty,
Now Widow, let me tell thee in thine ear,
I love thee Widow, by this ring; nay wear it.

Mineu. I Will come in no rings pardie, I Will take no gold.

Sir Ada. (...)

Enter Sir Vaughan and Peter Flash. Sir Vau. Master Peter Flash, I will grope
about Sir Quintilian, for his terminations touching and considering you.


Flash. I thank your Worship, for I have as good a stomach to your Worship as
a man could wish.


Sir Vau. I hope in God a mighty, I shall fill your stomach Master Peter: What
two upon one Sentlemen; Mistress Miniuer, much good do it you Sir Adam.


Sir quin. Sir Vaughan, have you dined well Sir Vaughan?


Sir Vau. As good seere as would make any hungry man (and a were in the vilest
prison in the world) eat and he had any stomach: One word Sir Quintilian in
hugger mugger; here is a Sentleman of yours, Master Peter Flash, is tesirous
to have his blew coat pulled over his ears; and --


Flash. No Sir, my petition runs thus, that your worship would thrust me out
of doors, and that I may follow Sir Vaughan.


Sir Van. I can tell you Master Flash, and you follow me I go very fast, I
think in my conscience, I am one of the lightest knights in England.


Flash. It Is no matter Sir, the Flashes have ever bin known to be quick and
light enough.


Sir quin. Sir Vaughan, he shall follow you, he shall dog you good Sir Vaughan.


Enter Horace walking. Sir Vau. Why then Peter Flash I will set my four marks
a year, and a blew coat upon you.


Fla. God a mercy to your worship, I hope you shall never repent for me.


Sir Vau You bear the face of an honest man, for you blush passing well Peter,
I will quench the flame out of your name, and you shall be christened Peter
Salamander.


Peter Flash. The name's too good for me, I thank your worship.


Sir Vau. Are you come Master Horace, you sent me the Coppie of your letters
countenance, and I did write and read it; your wits truly have done very
valliantlie: it is a good inditements, you ha put in enough for her ha you not?


Hor. According to my instructions.


Sir Van. It Is passing well, I pray Master Horace walk a little beside your
self, I will turn upon you incontinent.


Sir quin. What Gentleman is this in the Mandilian, a soldyer?


Sir Vau. No, tho he has a very bad face for a soldier, yet he has as
desperate a wit as ever any Scholar went to cuffes for; it is a Sentleman Poet,
he has made rimes called Thalamimums, for M. Pridegroome, on vrd widow.


Sir qui. Is this he? welcome Sir, you name? pray you walk not so stately,
but be acquainted with me boldly; your name Sir?


Hor. Quintus, Horacius, Flaccus.


Sir Quint. Good Master Flappus welcome.


He walks up and down. Sir Vau. Mistress Miniuer, one vrde in your corner
here; I desire you to break my arms here, and read this Paper, you shall
feel my minds and affections in it, at full and at large.


Mini. Iletreceiue no Love libels perdy, but by word a mouth.


Sir Vaughan. By Sesu it is no libell, for here is my hand to it.


Mini. I Will ha no hand in it Sir Vaughan, I Will not deal with you.


Sir Va^. Why then widow, I Will tell you by word a mouth my devices.


Mi. Your devices come not near my mouth Sir Vaughan perdy, I was upon a time
in the way to marriage, but now I am turned a the other side, I ha sworn to lead
a single and simple life.


Sir Adam. She has answered you Sir Vaughan.


Sir Vau. It Is true, but at wrong weapons Sir Adam; will you be an Ass Mistress
Miniuers?


Min. If I be you shall not ride me.


Sir Vaug. A simple life! by Sesu it is the life of a fool, a simple life!


Sir qui. How now Sir Vaughan?


Sir Vaugh. My brains has a little fine quawme come under it, and therefore
Sir Adam, and Sir Quintilian, and mistress Miniuer caps God bo'y.


All. Good Sir Vaughan.


Sir Vaugh. Master Horace, your inventions do her no good in the
Universalities; yet here is two shillings for your wits; nay by Sesu you
shall take it if it were more: yonder bald Adams, is put my nose from his joint;
but Adam I will be even to you: this is my cogitations, I will indite the
Ladies and Miniuer caps to a dinner of Plumbes, and I shall desire you M.
Horace, to speak or rail; you can rail I hope in God a mighty.


Hor. You mean to speak bitterly:


Sir Vaughan. Right, to spitte bitterly upon baldnes, or the thinnes of hair;
you ^all eat down Plumbes to sweeten your mouth, and here is a good Ansell
to defend you: Peter Salamander follow me.


Flash. With hue and cry and you will Sir.


Sir Vau. Come M, Horace, I will go pull out the Ladies.


Ho. And I Will set out my wits, Baldnes the Theme? My words shall flow hye in a
silver stream.


Exeunt. Enter Tucca brushing off the crumbes. Tuc. Where Is my most costly and
sump^uous Sho^^hose^*


Sir Quint. Is the King risen from table Captain Tucca?


Tuc. How? risen? no my noble Quintilian, kings are greater men then we Knights
and Cauallie^s, and therefore must eat more then lesser persons; Godamercy
good Dives for these crummes: how now? has not Friar Tucke dined yet? he falls
so hard to that Oyster-pye yonder.


Sir quin Oyster-pye Captain? ha ha, he loves her, and I love her and fear
both shall go without her.


Tuc. Do love her, my finest and first part of the Mirror of Knighthood?
hang her she looks like a bottle of ale, when the cork flies out and the Ale
fomes at mouth, she looks my good button-breech like the sign of Capricorn,
or like Tiborne when it is covered with snow.


Sir quin. All Is one for that, she has a vizard in a bag, will make her look
like an Angel; I wod I had her, upon condition, I gave thee this chain manly
Tucca.


Tuc. I? say thou so Friskin? I have herath hip for some causes, I can sound
her, she^ll come at my beck.


Sir quin. Wod I could sound her too Noble commander.


Tuc. Thou shall do it; that Lady ath Lake is thine Sir Tristram, lend me thy
chain, do, lend it, I Will make her take it as a token, I Will lincke her unto
thee; and thou shall wear her glove in thy Worshipful hat^e like to a leather
broo^h; Nay and thou mistrusts thy collar, be tied in it ^^ill.


Sir quin. Mi^^rust Captain no here it is, give it her if she will take it, or
wear it thy self, if she will take me, I Will watch him well enough too.


Tuc. No more, Il^ shoot away yonder Prickshaft, and then belabour her, and
fly you after yonder Cucko: do here me my noble Gold^n^h: --


Sir qui. No more.


Tuc. How do^ thou my smug Belimperia? how do thou? hands off my little bald
Derricke, hands off: hark hither Susanna, beware a these two wicked Elders,
shall I speak well or ^ll of thee?


Min. Nay, eene as you please Captain, it shall be at your choice.


Tuc. Why well said, my nimble Short-hose.


Sir quin. I hear her, I hear her.


Tuc. Art angry father time? art angry because I took mother-Winter aside?
I Will hold my life thou art struck with Cupids Birde-bolt, my little prick
shaft, art? do love that mother Mumble-crust, do thou? do long for that
whim-wham?


Sir Ada. Wod I were as sure to lie with her, as to love her.


Tuc. Have I found thee my learned Dunce, have I found thee? If I might ha my
will, thou should not put thy spoone into that bumble-broth (for indeed I Would
taste her my self) no thou should not; yet if her beauty blind thee, she is
thine, I can do it, thou heardst her say eene now, it should be at my choice.


Sir Ada. She did so, work the match and I Will bestow --


Tuc. Not a silk point upon me, little Adam she shall be thy Eeue, for
less then an Apple; but send, be wise, seud her some token, she is greedy,
she shall take it, do, send, thou shall stick in her (Prickeshaft) but fend.


Sir Adam. Here Is a purse of gold, think you that will be accepted?


Tuc. Go to, it shall be accepted, and twere but silver, when that
Flea-bitten Short-hose steps hence: vanish too, and let me alone with my
Grannam in Gutter-Lan^ there, and this purse of gold do, let me alone.


Sir quint. The King, gods Lord, I do forget the King;
Widow, think on my words, I must be gone
To wait his rising, I Will return anon.

Sir Ad. Stay Sir Quintilian, I Will be a waiter too.


Sir quinti. Widow we will trust that Captain there with you.


Exeunt. Tuc. Now, now, mother Bunch how do thou? what do frown Queen
Gwyniuer? do wrinckle? what made these pair of Shittle-cockes here? what
do they fumble for? I Will ha none of these Kites flutering about thy carks, for
thou shall be my West Indyes, and none but trim Tucca shall discover thee.


Min. Discover me? discover what thou can of me.


Tuc. What I can? thou know what I can discover, but I will not lay thee open
to the world,


Min Lay me open to the world?


Tuc. No I will not my moldie decayed Chari^g-crosse, I will not.


Mi. Hang thee patch-pannell, I am none a thy Charing-crosse: I scorn to be
Cross to such a scab as thou makst thy self.


Tuc. No, it is thou makst me so, my Long Meg a Westminster, thou breedst a fcab,
thou --


Min. I? dam thee filthy Captain, dam thy self.


Tuc. My little devil a Dow-gate, I Will dam thee, (thou know my meaning) I Will
dam thee up; my wide mouth at Bishops-gate.


Min. Wod I might once come to that damming.


Tuc. Why thou shall, my sweet dame Annis a clear thou shall, for I Will drown
my self in thee; I, for thy love, I Will sink, I, for thee.


Min. So thou will I warrant, in thy abominable sins; Lord, Lord, how many
filthy words have thou to answer for.


Tuc. Name one Madge-owlet, name one, I Will answer for none; my words shall be
forth coming at all times, and shall answer for them selves; my nimble
Cat-a-mountaine: they shall Sislie Bum-trincket, for I Will give thee none but
Sugercandie words, I will not Pusse: goody Tripe-wife, I will not.


Min. Why do call me such horrible ungodly names then?


Tuc. I Will name thee no more Mother Red^cap upon pain of death, if thou will
Grimalkin, Maggo^ a-pye I will not.


Min. Wod thou should well know, I am no Maggot, but a mere Gentlewoman borne.


Tu. I know thou art a Gentle, and I Will nibble at thee, thou shall be my
Cap-a-maintenance, and I Will carry my naked sword before thee, my reverend Lady
Lettice-cap.


Mi. Thou shall carry no naked swords before me to fright me, thou --


Tuc Go too, let not thy tongue play so hard at hot-cockles; for, Gammer
Gurton, I mean to be thy needle, I love thee, I love thee, because thy teeth
stand like the Arches under London Bridge, for thou't not turn Satyr and bite
thy husband; No, come my little Cub, do not scorn me because I go in Stag,
in Buffe, here is velvet too; thou see I am worth thus much in bareveluet.


Min. I scorn thee not, not I.


Tuc I know thou do not, thou shat see that I could march with two or three
hundred linkes before me, look here what? I could show gold too, if that
would tempt thee, but I will not make my self a Gold-smithes stall I; I scorn
to go chained my Lady ath Hospital, I do; yet I will and must be chained
to thee.


Min. To me? why Master Captain, you know that I have my choice of three or
four pair of Knights, and therefore have small reason to fly out I know not
how in a man of war.


Tuc. A man a war? come thou know not what a worshipful focation it is to be
a Captains wife: three or four pair of Knights? why do hear
Ioane-a-bedlam, I Will enter into bond to be dubbed by what day thou will* when the
next action is laid upon me, thou shall be Ladified.


Min. You know I am offered that by half a dozen.


Tuc. Thou shall little Miniuer, thou shall, I Will ha this frock turned into a
foote-cloth; and thou shall be carted, drawn I mean, Coacht, Coacht, thou
shall ride Iigga-Iogge; a Hood shall flap up and down here, and this
shipskin-cap shall be put off.


Mini. Nay perdie, I Will put off my cap for no man's pleasure.


Tuc. Wut thou be proud little Lucifer? well, thou shall go how thou will
Maide-marian; come, busse thy little Anthony now, now, my clean Cleopatria;
so, so, go thy ways Alexis secrets, thou have a breath as sweet as the Rose,
that grows by the Beare-garden, as sweet as the proud'st head a Garlic in
England: come, wut march in, to the Gentle folks?


Mini. Nay truly Captain you shall be my leader.

Tuc. I say Mary Ambree* thou shall march foremost,
Because I Will mark how broad thou art in the heels.

Mini. Perdie, I will be set ath last for this time.

Tuc. Why then come, we'll walk arm in arm,
As tho we were leading one another to Newgate.

Enter Blunt, Crispinus, and Dem^trius, with papers, laughing. Cri. Mine Is of a
fashion, cut out quite from yours.

Them. Mine has the sharpest tooth, yonder he is.

Blu. Captain Tucca.

All hold up papers. Tuc. How now? I cannot stand to read supplications now

Cris. They Are bitter Epigrams composed on you By Horace.

Them. And dispersed amongst the gallants In several coppies, by Asinius Bubo.

Tuc, By that live Eele? read, Lege Legito, read thou ^acke.

Blu. Tucca's grown monstrous, how? rich? that I fear,
He Is to be seen for money every where.

Tuc. Why true, shall not I get in my debts, nay and the rogue write no better
I care not, farewell black Jack farewell.


Cri. But Captain, here is a nettle.

Tuc. Sting me, do.

Cri. Tucca's exceeding tall and yet not hye,
He fights with skill, but does most vilye lie.

Tuc. Right, for here Ilye now, open, open* to make my adversary come on; and
then Sir, here am I in's bosom: nay and this be the worst, I shall hug the
poor honest face-maker, I Will love the little Atheist, when he writes after my
commendation, another whip? come yerke me.


Them. Tucca will bite, how? grown Satiricall,
No, he bites tables, for he feeds on all.

Tuc. The whoreson clouen-foote devil in man's apparel lies,
There stood above forty dishes before me to day,
That I nere touched, because they were empty.

Min. I am witness young Gentlemen to that.

Tuc. Farewell stinckers, I smell thy meaning Screech-owle, I do tho I stop my
nose: and Sir Poet, we'll have thee untrust for this; come, mother
Mum-pudding, come.


Exeunt. Trumpets sound a flourish, and then a sennate: Enter King with
Calestine, Sir Walter Terrill, Sir Quintilian, Sir Adam, Blunt and other Ladies
and attendants: whilst the Trumpets sound the King takes his leave of the
Bridegroom, and Sir Quintilian, and last of the Bride. Kin. My song of
parting does this burden bear;
A ki^^e the Ditty, and I s^t it here.
Your lips are well in tune, strung with delight,
By this fair Bride remember soon at night:
Sir Walter.

Ter. My Liege Lord, we all attend,
The time and place.

Kin. Till then my leave commend.

They bring him to the door: Enter at another door^ Sir Vaughan. Sir Vau.
Ladies* I am to put a very easy suite upon you all, and to desire you to fill
your little pellies at a dinner of plums behind noone; there be Suckets, and
Marmilads, and Merchants, and other long white plummes that feign would kiss
your delicate and sweet lips; I indite you all together, and you especially
my Lady Pride; what do you say for your selles? for I indite you all.


Cael. I thank yo^ good Sir Vaughan, I will come.


Sir Vau. Say Sentlewomen will you stand to me too?


All. We Will sit with you sweet Sir Vaughan.


Sir Vau. God a mighty please your faces, and make your peauties last, when
we are all dead and rotten: -- you all will come.


1 Lady. All will come.


Sir Vau. Pray God that Horace be in his right wits to rail now.

Exit.
Cris. Come Lady, you shall be my dancing guest.
To tread the maze of music with the rest.

Them. I Will lead you in.

Dicach. A maze is like a doubt:
It Is easy to go in, hard to get out.

Blum. We follow close behind.

Philoca. That measure's best.
Now none marks us, but we mark all the rest.

Exeunt. Exeunt all saving Sir Quintilian, Caelestine, and Sir Walter Terrill.
Ter. Father, and you my Bride; that name to day,
Wife, comes not till to morrow: but omitting
This enterchanging of Languages; let us think
Upon the King and night and call our spirits
To a true reckoning; first to Arm our wits
With complete steel of Judgment, and our tongs,
With sound attillery of Phrases: then
Our Bodies must be motions; moving first
What we speak: afterward, our very knees
Must humbly seem to talk, and suit out speech;
For a true furnished Cortyer has such force,
Though his tongue faints, his very legs discourse.

Sir quin: Son Terrill, thou have drawn his picture right,
For he is noe full-made Courtier, nor well strung,
That has not every joint stuck with a tongue.
Daughter, if Ladies say, that is the Bride, that is she,
Gaze thou at none, for all will gaze at thee.

Cael. Then, o my father must I go? O my husband
Shall I then go? O my self, will I go?

Sir quin. You must.

Ter. You shall.

Cael. I will, but give me leave,
To say I may not, nor I ought not, say not
Still, I must go, let me entreat I may not.

Ter. You must and shall, I made a deed of gift,
And gave my oath unto the King, I swore
By thy true constancy.

Cael. Then keep that word
To swear by, O let me be constant still.

Ter. What shall I cancel faith, and break my oath?

Cael. If breaking constancy thou breakst them both.

Ter. Thy constancy no evil can pursue.

Cael. I may be constant still, and yet not true.

Ter. As how?

Cae. As thus, by violence detained,
They may be constant still, that are constrained.

Ter. Constrained? that word weighs heavy, yet my oath
Weighes down that word; the kings thoughts are at odds,
They are not even ballanst in his breast;
The King may play the man with me; nay more,
Kings may usurp; my wife's a woman; yet
It Is more then I know yet, that know not her,
If she should prove mankind, twere rare, fie, fie,
See how I loose my self, amongst my thoughts,
Thinking to find my self; my oath, my oath,

Sir quin. I swear another, let me see* by what,
By my long stocking, and my narrow skirtes,
Not made to sit upon, she shall to Court.
I have a trick, a charm* that shall lay down
The spirit of lust, and keep thee vndeflowred;
Thy husbands honor saved, and the hot King,
Shall have eno^gh too* Come, a trick, a charm.
Exit^
Cae^. God keep thy honor safe, my blood from harm.

Ter. Come, my sicke-minded Bride, I Will teach thee how,
To relish health a little: Taste this thought,
That when mine eyes served loves commission,
Upon thy beauties I did seize on them.
To a Kings use; cure all thy g^iefe with this,
That his great seal was graven upon this ring,
And that ^ was but Steward to a King.

Exeunt. A banquet set out: Enter Sir Vaughan, Horace, Asinius Bubo, Lady
Petula, Dicache, Philocalia, Mi^tris Miniuer and Peter ^^lash. Sir Vaugh.
Ladies and Sentlemen, you are almost all welcome, to this swe^t nuncions of
Plums.


Dicach. Almost all ^ir Vaughan: why to which of us are you so niggardly, that
you cut her out but a piece of welcome.


Sir Vaugh. My interpretations is that almost all are welcome, because I
indicted a brace or two more that is not come, I am sorry my Lady Pride is not
among you.


Asi. Slid, he makes hounds of us Ningle, a brace quoth a?


Sir Vaug. Peter Salamanders draw out the pictures of all the joint stools,
and Ladies sit down upon their wodden faces.


Flash. I warrant Sir, I Will give every one of them a good stool.


Sir Vau. Master Horace, Master Horace, when I pray to God, and desire in
hipocrit^es that bald Sir Adams were here, then, then, then begin to make you
ra^les at the poverty and beggarly want of hair.


Hor. Leave it to my iudg^ment.


Sir Vau. M. Bubo sit there, you and I will think upon our ends at the Tables:
M. Horace, put your learned body into the midst of these Ladies; so it is no
matter to speak graces at nuncions, because we are all past grace since dinner.


Asini. Mas I thank my destiny I am not past grace, for by this hand full of
Carrawaies, I could never abide to say grace.


Dica. Mistress Miniuer, is not that innocent Gentleman a kind of fool?


Min. Why do you ask Madam?


Dicach. Nay for no harm, I ask because I thought you two had been of
acquaintaine.


Min. I think he is within an Inch of a fool.


Dicach. Madam Philocalia, you sit next that spare Gentleman, wod you heard
what Mistress Miniuer says of you.


Philo. Why what says she Madam Dicache.


Dica. Nay nothing, but wishes you were married to that s^all timber'd gallant.


Philo. Your wish and mine are twins, I wi^^ so too for Then I should be s^re
to lead a merry life.


Asini. Yes faith Lady, I Would make yo^ laugh, my bolts now and then should be
soon shot; by these com^its, weed let all slide.


Petu. He takes the sweetest oaths that ever I heard a gallant of his pitch
swear; by these Comfits, and these Carrawaies, I warrant it does him good to
swear.


Asin. Yes faith it is meat and drink to me.
I am glad Lady Petula (by this Apple) that they please you.

S^r Vau. Peter Salamanders wine, I beseech you Master Asinius Bubo, not to
swear so deeply, for there comes no fruit of your oaths; here Ladies, I
put you all into one corners together, you shall all drink of one cup.


Asi. Peter I prithee fill me out too.


Flash. I Would fling you out too and I might ha my will, a pox of all fools.


S^r Vau. Mistress Miniuers, pray be lusty, wod Sir Adams Prickshaft stuck by
you.


Hor. Who, the balde Knight Sir Vaughan?


S^r V^u The same M. Horace, he that has but a remnant or parcel of hair, his
crown is clipped and pared away; me thinks it is an excellent quallitie to be
balde; for and there stuck a nose and two nyes in his pate, he might wear two
faces under one hood.


As^. As God save me la, if I might ha my will, I Would rather be a balde Gentleman
then a hairy; for I am sure the best and tallest Yeomen in England have balde
heads: me thinks hair is a scuruie lousy commodity.


Hor. Bubo, herein you blaze your ignorance.


Sir Vau Pray stop and fill your mouths, and give M. Horace all your ears.


Hor. For* if of all the bodies parts, the head
Be the most royal: if discourse, w^t, Judgment,
And all our understanding faculties,
Sit there in their high Court of Parliament,
Enacting laws to sway this humorous world:
This little I Will of Man: needs must that crown,
Which stands upon this supreme head, he fair,
And held inualuable, and that crowne's the Hair:
The head that wants this honor stands awry,
Is hare in name and in authority.

Sir Vau. Hemeanes balde-pates mistress Mini^ers.

Hor. Hair, it is the roabe which curious nature weaues,
To hang upon the head: and does adorn,
Our bodies in the first hour we are horn:
God does bestow that garment: when we dye,
That (like a soft and silken Cano^^^)
Is still spread over us; ^n spite of death
Our hair grows in our grave, and that alone
Looks fresh, when all our other beauty's gone.
The excellence of Hair, in this shines ^l^ere,
That the four El^ments take pride to wear
The fashion of it: when Fire most bright does burn,
The flames to golden locks do strive to (...)*
When her lascivious arms the Water hurles,
About the shoares wast, her sleeke head she curles:
And rorid clouds being sucked into the Air,
When down they melt, hangs like fine silver hair.
You see the Earth (whose head so often it sho^ne)
Frighted to feel her locks sorudely ^orne,
Stands with her hair an end, and (thus afraid^)
Turns every hair to a green naked blade.
Besides, when (struck with gr^efe) we long to dye,
We spoil that most, which most does beau^^fie,
We r^nd this Head-tyre off. I thus conclude,
Colors set colors out; our eyes judge right,
Of vice or virtue by their opposite:
So, if fair hair to beauty ad such grace,
Baldnes must needs be ugly, vile and base.

Sir Vau. True M. Horace, for a bald reason, is a reason that has no hairs
upon it, a scuruy scalded reason.


Mi. By my truly I never thought you could ha picked such s^range things out of
hair before.


As^ni. Nay my Ningle can tickle it, when he comes to it.


Min. Troth I shall never be enameld of a bare-headed man for this, what shift
so ever I make.


S^r Vaug. Then Mistress Miniuer S. Adams Prickshaft must not hit you; Peter
take up all the clothes at the table and the Plums.


Enter Tucca and his boy. Tuc. Save thee my little worshipful Harper; how do
ye^ my little cracknels? how do ye?


Sir Vau. Welcome M. Tucca, sit and shoot into your belly some Sugar pellets.


Tuc No, Godamercy Cadwallader, how do you Horace?


Ho. Thanks good Captain.


Tu. Where Is the Sering thou carriest about thee? O have I found thee my
scowring-sticke; what is my name Bubo?


Asini. Wod I were hanged if I can call you any names but Captain and Tucca.


Tuc. No Fye'st, my name's Hamlet revenge: thou have been at Parris garden have
not?


Hor. Yes Captain, I ha plaide Zulziman there.


Sir Vau. Then M. Horace you plaide the part of an honest man.


Tuc. Death of Hercules, he could never play that part well in's life, no
Fulkes you could not: thou call'st Demetrius Iorneyman Poet, but thou putst up
a Supplication to be a poor Iorneyman Player, and had been still so, but
that thou could not set a good face upon it: thou have forgot how thou amblest
(in leather pilch) by a play-wagon, in the high way, and took'st mad Ieronimoes
part, to get service among the Mimickes: and when the Stagerites banished thee
into the I Will of Dogs* thou turn'dst Ban-dog (villainous Guy) and ever since
bitest, therefore I ask if thou have been at Parris-garden, because thou have
such a good mouth; thou ba^tst well, read, lege, save thy self and read.


Hor. Why Captain these are Epigrams composed on you.


Tuc. Go not out Farding Candle, go not out, for trusty Damboys now the deed
is done, I Will pledge this Epigram in wine, I Will* yallow i^, I, yes.


Sir Vau. God bless us, will be drunk with nittigrams now.


Tuc. So, now arise sprite ath Buttry; no Herring-bone I Will not pull thee out,
but arise dear Echo rise, rise devil or I Will con^ure thee up.


Min. Good Master Tucca lets ha no coniuring here.


Sir Vau. Vddes blood you scald gouty Captain, why come you to set
encombrances here between the Ladies.


Tuc. Be not so tart my precious Metheglin, be not (my old whore a Babylon, sit
fast.)


Min. O Jesus it I know where abouts in London Babylon stands.


Tuc. Feed and be fat my fair Calipolis, stir not my beauteous
wriggle-tailes, I Will disease none of you, I Will take none of you up, but only
this table-man, I must enter him into some filthy sincke point, I must.


Hor. Captain, you do me wrong thus to disgrace me.


Tuc. Thou think thou may be as saucy with me as my Buffe Ierkin to sit
upon me, do?


Ho. Dam me, if ever I traduced your name,
What imputation can you charge me with?

Sir Vau. Sblud, I, what co^putations can you lay to his ^^^ge? answer, or by
Se^u I Will canuas your coxcombe Tucky.


Min. If they draw sweet hearts, let us shift for our ^elues.


Tuc* My noble swaggerer, I will not fall out with thee, I cannot my mad
Cumrade* find in my heart to shed thy blood.


Sir Vau. Cumrade by Sesu call me Cumrade again, and i will Cumrade ye about the
sins and shoulders; ownds, what come you to smell out here? did you not dine
and feed horribly well to day at dinner, but you come to munch h^ere, and give
us winter-plummes? I pray depart, go marse, marse, marse out a doors.


Tuc. Adieu Sir Eglamour, adieu Lute-stringe, Curtin-rod, Goose-quill; here,
give that full-nos'd Skinker, these rimes; and hark, I Will tagge my Codpeece
point with thy legs, spout-pot I Will empty thee.


Asin. Do threaten me? Gods lid I Will bind thee to the good forbearing.


Sir Vau. Will you amble Hobbyhorse, will you trot and amble?


Tuc. Raw Artichocke I shall sauce thee.

Exit.
Min. I pray you Master Tucca, will you send me the five pound you borrowed on
me; O you cannot hear now, but I Will make you hear me and feel me too in
another place, to your shame I warrant you, thou shall not conny-catch me for
five pounds; he took it up Sir Vaughan in your name, he swore you sent for it
to Mum withal, it was five pound in gold, as white as my kercher.


Sir Vaughan. Ownds, five pound in my name to Mum about withal.


Min. I, to Mum withal, but he plays mum-budget with me.


Sir Vau. Peter Salamander, tie up your great and your little sword, by Sesu
I Will go sing him while it is hot, I Will beat five pound out of his leather pilch:
Master Horace, let your wits inhabit in your right places; if I fall
sansomely upon the Widow, I have some cossens Garman at Court, shall beget you
the reuersion of the Master of the Kings Revels, or else be his Lord of
Mis-rule now at Christmas: Come Ladies, whoreson Straggling Captain, I Will pound
him.


Exeunt. Manet Horace and Asinius. Hor. How now? what ail'st tho^, that thou
look'^t so pay?


Asin. Nay not^ing, but I am afraid the Welsh Knight has given me nothing but
purging Comfits: this Captain* sticks pockily in my stomach; read this
scroule, he says they are rimes, and bid me give them you.


Hor. Rimes^tis a challenge sent to you.


Asin. To me?


Hor. He says here you divulged my Epigrams.


Asin. And for that dares he challenge me?


Hor. You see he dares but dare you answer him?


Asin. I date answer his challenge, by word of mouth, or by wr^ting, but I
scorn to meet him, I hope he and I are no^ Para^els.


Hor. Dear Bubo, thou shall answer him; our credites
Lie pawned upon thy resolution,
Thy valor must redeem them; charge thy spirits,
To wait more cl^se, and near thee: if he kill thee,
I Will not sur^iue; into one Lottery.
We'll cast our fates; together live and dye.

Asi. Content, I owe God a death, and if he will make me pay't against my
will, I Will say it is hard dealing.


Exeunt Enter Sir Adam, Tucca, with two pistols by his sides, his boy laden
with swords and bucklers. Tuc. Did Apolloes Freeze gown watch man (boy, do
hear Tu^kie-co^kes tail have an eye behind, least the enemieassault (...)
R^re-ward) on proceed Father Adam; did that same tiranicall-tongu'd
rag-a-muffin Horace, turn baldpates out so naked?


Sir Ad. He did, and whipped them so with nettles, that
The Widow swore that a bare-headed man,
Should not man her: the Lady Petula
Was there, heard all, and ^olde me this.

Tuc. Go too.
Thy gold was accepted, it was, and she shall bring thee into her Paradise,
she shall small Adam, she shall.


Sir Ada. But how? but how Capten?


Tuc. Thus, go, cover a table with sweet meats, let all the Gentlewomen, and
that same Pasquils-mad-cap (mother Be there) nibble, bid them bite: they will
come to gobble down Plummes; then take up that pair of Basket hiltes, with my
commission, I mean C^^spinus and Fannius; charge one of them to take up the
Bucklers, against that hayre-monger Horace, and have about or two, in defense
of balde-pates: let them crack every crown that has hair on it: go, let
them lift up baldenes to the sky, and thou shall see, twill turn Miniuers
heart quite against the hair.


Sir Ada. Excellent, why then M. Tucca --


Tuc. Nay, wh^r, nymble Prickshaft; whir, away, I go upon life and death,
away, fly Scanderbag fly.

Exit.
Enter Asinius Bubo, and Horace aloof. Boy. Arm Captain, arm, arm, arm,
the foe is come down.


Tucca offers to sho^t. Asi Hold Capten Tucca hold, I am Bubo, and come to
answer any thing you can lay to my ch^rge.


Tuc. What, do summon a parlie my little Drum-sticke? it is too late; thou
see my red flag is hung out, I Will fill thy guts with thine own carrion
carcas, and then eat them up instead of Sawsages.


Asin. Use me how you will; I am resolute, for I ha made my Will.


Tuc. Wilt fight Turke-a-ten-pence? wilt fight then?


Asini. Thou shall find I Will fight in a Godly quarrel, if I be once fired.


Tuc. Thou shall not want fire, I Will ha thee burnt when thou will, my cold
Cornelius: but come: Respicefunem; look, thou ^eest; open thy self my little
Cutlers Shop, I challenge thee thou slender Gentlem^n, at four sundry
weapons.


Asi. Thy challenge was but at one, and I Will answer but one.


Boy. Thou shall answer two, for thou shall answer me and my Capten.


Tuc. Well said Cockrell out-crowe him: art hardy noble Huon* art Magnanimious?
licke-trencher; look, search, least some lie in ambush; for this man at Arms,
has paper in's belly, or some friend in a corner, or else he durst not be so
cranke.


Boy. Capten, Capten, Horace stands sneaking here.


Tuc. I smelt the foule-fisted Morter-treader, come my most damnable fastidious
rascal, I have a suite to both of you.


Asi. O hold, most pitiful Captain hold.


Hor. Hold Capten, it is known that Horace is valliant, and a man of the sword.


Tuc. A Gentleman or an honest Citizen, shall not Sit in your pennie-bench
Theaters, with his Squirrell by his side cracking nuttes; nor sneake into a
Tavern with his Mermaid; but he shall be Satyr'd, and Epigram'd upon, and his
humor must run vpo'th Stage* you will ha Eu^ry Gentleman in's humor, and Every
Gentleman out on's humor: we that are heads of Legions and Bands, and fear
none but these same shoulder-clappers, shall fear you, you Serpentine rascal.


Hor. Honored Capten.


Tuc. Art ^ot famous enough yet, my mad Horastratus, for killing a Player, but
thou must ea^e men alive? the friends? Sir wilde-man, thy Patrons? thou
Anthropophagite, thy Mecaenas^^s?


Hor. Captain, I Am sorry that you lay this wrong.
So close unto your heart: dear Captain think
I writ ^ut of hot blood, which (now) being cold,
I could be pleased (to please you) to quaffe down,
The po^son'd Ink, in which I dipped your name.

Tuc. Say thou so, my Palinodicall rimester?

Hor. Hence forth I Will rather breath out S^l^ecismes
(To do which I Would as soon speak blasphemy)
Than with my tongue or pen to wound your worth,
Believe it noble Capten; it to me
Shall be a Crown, to crown your acts with praize,
Out of your hate, your love I Will strong lie raize.

Tuc. I know now th^ast a number of these Quiddits (...) bind men to the peace:
it is thy fashion to (...) Ink in every man's face; and then to craule into his
bosom, and damn thy self to w^p^t off again: yet to g^ue out abroad, that he
was glad to come to composition with thee: I know Monsieur Mac^iauell it is one a
thy rules; My long-heel'd Troglodite, I could make thine ears burn now, by
dropping into them, all those hot oaths, to which, thy self gau's^ volun^^rie
^^re, (when thou wast the man in the Moon^) that thou would never squib out
any new Salt-p^t^r Ie^^^^ against honest Tucca, nor those Maligo-tasters, his
Poetasters; I could Cino^^phal^s, but I will not, yet thou know thou have
broke those oaths in print, my excellent infernal.


Ho. Capten.


Tuc. Nay I smell what breath is to come from thee, thy answer is, that there is
no faith to be held wi^h Heritickes and Infidels, and therefore thou swear'st
any thing: but come lend m^e thy hand, thou and I hence forth will be
Alexander and Lodwicke, the G^mini: sworn brothers* thou shall be Peritho^s
and Tucca Theseus; b^t ^le leave thee ^th lurch, when thou make thy voyage
into hell: till then, ^hine^assure^ly.


Hor. With all my soul dear Capten.


Tuc. Thou Wilt shoo^^ thy quilles at me, when my terrible backe's turned for
all this, wilt not Porcupine? and bring me and my Heliconistes into thy
Dialogues to make us talk madlie, wut not Lucian?


Hor. Capten, if I do --


Tuc. Nay and thou do, horns of Lucifer, the Parce^l-Poet^ shall Sue thy
wrangling Muse, in the Court of Pernassus, and never leave hunting her, till
she plead in Forma P^uperi: but I hope th'a^t more grace: come: friends,
clap^h^ndes it is a bargain; am^able Bubo, thy fist ^ust walk ^oo: so, I love
thee, now I see thou art a little Hercules, and wilt fight; I Will S^icke thee now
in my company like a sprig of Rosemary.


Enter Sir Reesap Vaughan and Peter Flash* Fla. Draw Sir Rees he is yonder shall
I upon him?


Sir Vau. Upon him? go too, go too Peter Sal^mander; hold, in Gods name
hold; I will kill him to his face, because I mean he shall answer for i^;
being an eye-witnes; one vrde Capten Tucky.


Tuc. I Will give thee ten thousand words and thou will, my little Thomas
Thomasius.


Sir Va^ By Sesu, it is best you give good vrdes too, least I b^ate out your
tongue, and make your vrde nere to be taken more; do you hear, five pounds,
five pounds Tucky.


Tuc* ^hou shall ha five, and five, and five and thou wantst money my Job.


Sir Vau. L^aue your fetches and your fegaries, you tough leather-Ierkins;
leave your quandaries, and tricks, and draw upon me you are best: you
conny-catch Widow Miniuer-caps for five pounds, and say it is for me to cry Mum,
and make me run up and down in dishonors, and discredites; is it not true, you
winke-a-pipes rascal? is not true?


Tuc. Right, true, guilty, I remember't now; for when I spoke a good word to
the Widow for thee my young Sampson --


S^r Vau. For five pounds you cheating scab, for 5. pounds, not for me.


Tuc. For thee o Caesar, for thee I took up five pounds in gold, that lay in
her lap, and said I Would give it thee as a token from her: I did it but to smell
out how she stood affected to thee, to feel her; I, and I know what she said,
I know how I carried away the gold.


Sir Vau. By Sesu, I ha not the mercy to fall upon him now: M. Tucky, did
widow Miniuers part quietly from her gold, because you lied* and said it was
for me?


Tuc. Quietly, in peace, without grumbling; made no noise, I know how I tempted
her, in thy behalf; my little Trang do.


Sir Vau. Capten Tucky, I will pay back her 5. l. (unless you be damned in lies)
and hold you, I pray you pocket up this; by the cross a this sword and dagger,
Capten you shall take it.


Tuc. Do swear by daggers? nay then I Will put up more at thy hands then this.


Flash. Is the fray done si^?


Sir Vau. Done Peter, put up your s^eeter.


Tuc. Come hither, my soure-fac'd Poet; fling away that beard-brush Bubo,
casheere him and hark: Knight attend: So, that raw-head and bloudy-bones Sir
Adam, has fee'd another brat (of those nine common wenches) to defend baldnes
and to rail against hair: he will have a ^ling at thee, my noble Cock-Sparrow.


Sir Vau. At me? will he ^ling the cudgels of his wit ^t me?


Tuc. And at thy button-c^p too; but come, I Will be your leader you shall stand,
hear all, and not be seen; cast off that blew coat away with that flawne,
and follow, come:

Exit.
Hor. Bubo, we follow Captain.


Sir Va Peter, leave coming behind me, I pray any longer for you and I must
part Peter.


Flash. Sounds Sir, I hope you will not serve me so, to turn me away in this
case.


Sir Vau. Turn you into a fools coat; I mean I will go solus, or in
solitaries alone; ounds y-are best give better words, or I Will turn you away
indeed; where is Capten Tucky? come Horace; get you home Peter.


Flash. I Will home to your cost, and I can get into the Wine-Seller.

Exit.
Hor. Remember where to meet me.


Asin. Yes I Will meet; Tucca should ha found I dare meet.

Exit.
Ho. Dare defend baldnes, which our conquering Muse
Has beaten down so flat? Well, we will go,
And see what weapons their weak wits do bring;
If sharp, we'll spread a large and nobler wing;
Tucca, here lies thy Peace: war roares again;
My Sword shall never cut thee, but my pen.
Exit.
Enter Sir Adam, Crispinus, Fannius, Blunt, Miniuer, Petula, Philocalia and
Dicace. Ladies, Thanks good Sir Adam.

Sir Ada. Welcome red-cheekt Ladies,
And welcome comely Widow; Gentlemen,
Now that our sorry banquet is put by,
From s^^aling more sweet kisses from your lips
Walk in my garden: Ladies let your eyes
Shed life into these flowers by their bright beams,
Sit* Sit h^ere's a large bower, here all may hear,
Now good Crispinus let your praize begin.
There, where it left off Baldnes.

Cris. I shall win.
No praise, by praising that, which to deprave,
All tongues are ready* and which none would have.

Bin. To prove that best, by strong and armed reason,
Whose part reason fears to take, cannot but prove,
Your wit's fine temper, and from these win love.

Min I promise you has almost converted me, I pray bring
forward your bald reasons M. Poet.

Cri. Mistress you give my Reasons proper names,
For Arguments (like Children) should be like,
The subject that begets them; I must strive
To crown Bald heads, therefore must baldlie thrive;
But be it as it can: To what before,
Went armed at table, this force bring I more,
If a Bare head (being like a dead-mans scull)
Should bear ^p no praise else but this, it sets
Our end before our eyes; should I despair,
From giving Baldnes higher place then hair?

Mini. Nay perdie, hair has the higher place.

Cr^. The goodliest and most glorious strange-built wonder,
Which that great Architect has made, is heaven;
For there he keeps his Court, It is his Kingdom,
That Is his best Masterpiece; yet it is the roof,
And Sel^^ng of the world: that may be called
The head or crown of Earth, and yet that is balde,
All creatures in it balde; the lovely Sun,
Has a face sleeke as gol^e; the full-cheekt Moon,
As brigh^ and smooth as silver: nothing there
Wears dangling locks, but sometime blazing Stars,
Whose fla^ing curles se^ realms on fire with wars.
Descend more low; look through man's fiue-folde sense,
Of all, the Eye, bears greatest eminence;
And yet that is balde, the hairs that like a lace,
Are sticht unto the (...), borrow those forms,
Like Pent-houses to save the eyes from storms.

Sir Ad^m. Right* well said.

Cris. A head and face ore-g^owne with Shaggie dross,
O, it is an Orient pearl hid all in Moss,
But when the head's ^ll naked and vncrown'd,
It is the worlds Globe, even, smooth and round;
(...) i^ (...) which (...),
Shootes her last Arrow: what man ever lead
His age (...) with a staff; but had a head
Bare and vncouer'd? he whose years do rise,
To their full height, yet not balde, is not wi^e.
The Head is Wisdoms house, (...) but the thatch,
Hair? It Is the basest stubble; in scorn of it,
This Proverb sprung, he has more hair then wit:
Mark you not in derision how we call,
A head grown thick with hair, B^sh-naturall?

Min. By your leave (Master Poet) but that Bush-naturall, is one a the
trimmest, and most intanglingst beauty in a woman.


Cris. Right, but believe this ( pardon me most fair)
You would have much more wit, had you less hair:
I could more weary you to tell the proo^^s.
(As they pass by) which fight on Baldnes side,
Then were you taskt to number on a head,
The hairs: I know not how your thoughts are lead,
On this strong Tower shall my opinion rest,
Heads thick of hair are good, but balde the b^st,

Whil^t this Paradox is in speaking, Tucca Ent^rs with Sir Vaughan at o^^
door, and s^cretly places him: then E^it and brings in Horace muffled,
placing him: Tucca sits among them. Tuc. Thou Art within a hair of it, my sw^^t
Wit whe^^^r will tho^? my delicate Poetical Fury, th'a^t hit it to a hair.


Sir Vaughan steps out. Sir Vau. By your favor Master Tucky, his balde reasons
are wide above two hayres, I besees you pardon me Ladies, that I thrust in so
malepartly among you, for I did but much hee^e, and see how this cruel Poet
did handle bald heads.


Sir Ad. He gave them but their due Sir Vaughan; Widow did he not?


Mi^i. By my faith he made more of a balde head, than ever I shall be able: he
gave them their due truly.


Sir Vaugh. Nay vds blood, their due is to be a the right hair as I am, and
that was not in his fingers to give, but in God a Mighties: Well, I will hyre
that humorous and fantastical Poet Master Horace, to break your balde pate
Sir Adam.


Sir Ada. Break my balde pate?


Tuc. Do hear my worshipful block-head?


Sir Vaug. Patience Captain Tucky, let me absolve him; I mean he shall prick,
prick your head or sconce a little with his goose-quils, for he shall make
another Thalimum, or crosse^tickes, or some Polinoddyes, with a few
Nappy-grams in them that shall lift up hair, and set it an end, with his
learned and hearty commendations.


Hor. This is excellent, all will come out now.


Dica. That same Horace me thinks has the most ungodly face, by my Fan; it
looks for all the world, like a rotten russet Apple, when it is bruiz'd: Its
better then a spoonefull of Sinamon water next my heart, for me to hear him
speak; he soundes it so in the nose, and talks and randes for all the world,
like the poor fellow under Ludgate: oh fie upon him.


Min By my troth sweet Ladies, it is Cake and pudding to me, to see his face
make faces, when he reads his Songs and Sonnets.


Hor. I Will face some of you for this, when you shall not budge.


Tuc. Its the stinckingst dung-farmer -- foh upon him.


Sir Va^. Foh? oundes you make him vrse than old herring: foh? by Sesu I
think he is as tidy, and as tall a Poet as ever drew out a long verse.


Tuc. The best verse that ever I knew him hacke out, was his white necke-verse:
noble Ap Rees thou would scorn to lay thy lips to his commendations, and
thou smeldst him out as I do, he calls thee the burning Knight of the
Salamander.


Sir Vaugh. Right, Peter is my Salamander; what of him? but Peter is never
burnt: how now? so, go too now.


Tucca. And says because thou Clipst the Kings English.


Sir Vaughan. Oundes mee^ that is treason: clip? horribl^ treasons, Se^u hold
my hands; clip? he baits mouse-trappes for my life.


Tucca. Right little Twinckler, right: he says because thou speak no
better, thou can not keep a good tongue in thy head.


Sir Vaug. By God it is the best tongue, I can buy for love or money.


Tuc. He shootes at thee too Adam Bell, and his arrows sticks here; he
calls thee bald-pate.


S^^ Vaugh. Oundes make him prove these intollerabilities.


Tuc. And asks who shall carry the vineger-bottle* and then he rimes to it,
and says Prickshaft: nay Miniuer he cromplesthy Cap too; and --


Cir. Come Tucca, come, no more; the man's well known, thou needst not paint
him, whom does he not wrong?


Tuc* Mary himself, the ugly Po^e Boniface, pardons himself, and t^erefore
my indgement is, that presently he be had from hence, to his place of
execution, and there be Stabbed, Stabbed, Stabbed.


He stabs a^ him. Hor. Oh gentlemen, I am slain, oh s^^ue art hyt'd to murder
me, to murder me, to murder me?


Ladi^s. Oh God!


Sir Vaugh. Ounds Capten you have put all Poetry to the dint of sword, blow
wind about him: Ladies for our Lords sake you that have smocks, tear off
pieces* to shoot through his oundes: Is he dead and buried is he? pull his
nose, pinch, rub, rub, rub, rub.


Tu. If he be not dead, look here; I ha the Stab and pippin for him: if I had
killed him, I could ha pleased the great fool with an Apple.


Cris. How now? be well good Horace, here is no wound;
You Are slain by your own fears; how do thou man?
Come, put thy* he a^t into h^^ place again;
Thy out-side's neither peir'st, nor Inside ^laine.

Sir Vau. I am glad M. Horace, to see you walking.


Ho. Gentlemen, I am black and blewe the breadth of a groate.


Tuc. Breadth of a groate? there is a teston, hide thy infirmities, my scuruy
Lazaru^, do, hide it, least it prove a scab in time: hang thee desperation,
hang thee, thou know* I cannot be sharp set against thee: look, feel (my
light-vptailes all) feel my weapon.


Mi. O most pitiful a^ (...) as my great thumb.


Sir Vau. By Sesu, as blunt as a Welsh bag-pudding.


Tuc. As blunt as the top of Poules; it is not like thy Aloe, Cicatrine tongue*
bitter: no* it is no s^abber* but like thy goodl^ and glorious nose, blunt,
blunt, blunt: do roar bulchin? do roar? thou have a good roun^iuall voice to
cry Lantern and Candlelight.


S^r Va^. Two vrds Horace about your ears: how ch^nce it passes, that you bid
God b^yg^ to an ^one^t trade of building Symneys, and laying down Brickes, for
a worse handicraftnes* to make nothing but rai^es; your Mu^e leanes upon
nothing but filthy rotten ^ailes, such as stand on Poules head, how chance?


Hor. Sir Vaughan.


Sir Va. You lie s^r varlet sir ^^llaine, I am sir Salamanders, ounds, is my
man Master Peter Salamanders face as vrse as mine? Sentlemen, all and Ladies,
and you say once or twice Amen, I will lap this little Silde, this Booby in his
blankets again.


Omn^^. Agreed, agreed. Tuc. A blanket, these cracked Venice glasses shall
fill him out, they shall toss him, hold fa^t wag^ tai^es: so, come, in, take
this bandy with the racket of patience, why when? do flampe mad Tambe^laine,
do^t ^tampe? thou think thou have Mortar under thy (...), do^^*


L^^^es. Come* a ^andy ho.

Hor. O hold most sacred beauties.

Sir Vau. Hold, ^^lence, the puppet-teach^^ speaks.

Ho. Sir Vaughan, noble Capten, Gentlemen,
Crispinus, dear De^^et^^us o r^deeme me,
Out of this infamou^ -- by God by l^su --

Cri. Nay, swear not so good Horace, now these Ladies,
Are made your ex^^utioners: prepare,
To suffer like a galla^^, not a coward;
I Will try t'vnloose, their hands, impossible.
Nay, women's (...) ar^ implacable.

Hor. Why, would you make me thus the ball of scorn?


Tuc. I Will tell thee why, because th^a^t en^^ed A^^lons of assault and battery,
against a company of honorable and worshipful Fathers of the law: you
wrangling ra^call, law is one of the pillars ath land, and if thou be bound
to it (as I hope thou shall be) thou't proo^e a skip-lacke, thou't be whipped.
I Will tell thee why, because thy sputtering chappes yelpe, that Arrogance, and
^mpudence, and Ignorance, are the essential parts of a Courtier.


Sir Vau. You remember Horace they will puncke, and pincke, and pumpe you, and
they catch you by the coxcombe: on I pray, one lash, a little more.


Tuc. I Will tell thee why because thou ^ryest ptrooh at worshipful Citizens,
and cal'^^ them Flat-caps, Cuckolds, and banckrupts, and modest and virtuous
wives punckes and cockatrices. I Will tell thee why, because thou have arraigned two
Poets against all law and conscience; and not content with that, have turned
them amongst a company of horrible black Frye^s.


S^^ Vau. The same hand still, it is your own another day, M. Horace,
admonitions is good meat.


Tuc. Thou art the true arraigned Poet, and should have been hanged, but for
one of these part-takers, these charitable Copper-lac'd Christians* that fetched
thee out of Purgatory, (Players I mean) Theaterians pouch-mouth*
Stage-walkers; for this Poet, for this, thou must lie with these four wenches,
in that blancket, for this --


Hor. What could I do, out of a just revenge,
But bring them to the Stage? they envy me
because I hold more worthy company.

D^me. Good Horace, no; my cheeks do blush for thine,
As often as thou speakst so, where one true
And nobly-vertuous spirit; for thy best part
Loves thee, I wish one ten, even from my heart.
I make account I put up as deep share
In any good man's love which thy worth earnes,
As thou thy self; we envy not to see,
Thy friends with Bays to crown thy Poesy.
No, here the gall lies, we that know what stuff^
Thy very heart is m^de of; know the sta^ke
On which thy learning grows, and can give li^e
To thy (once dying) baseness; yet must we
Dance Antickes on your Paper.

Hor. ^a^nius.

Cri. This makes us angry, but not envious,
No, were thy warpt soul, put in a new molde,
I Would wear thee as a Jewel set in gold.

Sir Vau. And Jewels Master Horace, must be hanged you know.


Tuc. Good Pagans, well said, they have sowed up that broken seame-rent lie of
thine, that Demetrius is out at Elbowes, and Cri^pinus is fallen out with Satin
here, they have; but b^oate-herring do hear?


Her. Yes honored Captain, I have ears at will.


Tuc. Is It not better be out at Elbowes, then to be a bondslaue, and to go all
in Parchment as thou do?


Hor^ce. Parchment Captain? it is Pe^petuana I assure you.


Tuc. My Perpetual pantaloone true, but it is waxt over; thou art made out of Wax;
thou must answer for this one day; thy Muse is a ^^gler, and wears clothes
upon best-be-trust: thou art great in some bodies books for this* thou know
where; thou would be out at Elbowes, and out at heels too, but that thou
lay^st about thee with a Bill for this, a Bill --


Ho. I confess Capten, I followed this suite hard.


Tuc. I know thou d^d^^, and therefore whilst we have Hiren here, speak my
little dish-washers, a verdit Pissekitchins.


Omnes. Blancket.


Si^ Vau. Hold I pray, hold, by Se^u I have put upon my head, a fi^e device,
to make you laugh, it is not your fools Cap Master Horace, which you covered
your Poetasters in, but a fine trick, ha, ha* is iumbling in my brain.


Tuc. I Will beat out thy brains, my whoreson hansome dwarf, but i will have it out
of thee.


Omnes. What is it good Sir Vaughan?


Sir Vau. To conclude, it is after this manners, because Ma. Horace is ambition,
and does conspire to be more hye and tall* as God a migh^^e made him, we will
ca^ry his terrible, person to Court, and there before his Masestie Dub, or what
you call it, dip his Muse in some licour, and christen him, or dye him, into
colors of a Poet.


Omne^. Exceilent.


Tuc. Super Super-excellent Reuellers go, proceed you Masters of Art in
kissing these wenches, and in daunces, bring you the quiuering Bride to Court,
in a Mask, come G^umboll, thou shall Mum with us; come, dog me skneakesbill.


Hor. O thou my Muse!


Sir Vau. Call upon God a mighty, and no Muses, your Muse I warrant is
otherwise occupied, there is no de^ling with your Muse now, therefore I pray
marse, marse, marse, oundes your Moose?


Exeunt. C^^* We shall have sport to see them; come bright beauties,
The Sun stoops low, and whispers in our ears,
To hasten on our Mask, let us crown this night,
With choice composed wreathes of sweet delight.

Ex^unt. Enter Te^^ill and Caelestine sad^y, Sir Quintllian stirring and
mig^^ng a cup of w^ne. Ter. O Night, that Dies the Firmament in black,
And like a cloth of clouds do stretch thy limbs;
Upon the windy Tenters of the Air:
O thou that hang'st upon the back of Day,
Like a long mourning gown: thou that art made
Without an eye, because thou should not see
A Lovers Revels: nor participate
The Bride-groomes heaven; o heaven, to me a hell:
I have a hell in heaven, a blessed curse;
All other Bride-groomes long for Night, and tax
The Day of lazy sloth; call Time a Cripple,
And say the hours limpe after him: but I
Wish Night for ever banished from the sky,
Or that the Day would never sleep: or Time,
Were in a swound; and all his little Hours,
Could never lift him up with their poor powers.
Enter Caelestine. But backward runs the course of my delight;
The day has turned his back, and it is night:
This nigh^ will make us odd; day made us eeuen,
All else are damb'd in hell, but I in heaven.

Cae. Let loose thy oath* so shall we still be eeuen.

Ter. Then am I damb'd in hell, and not in heaven.

Cael. Must I then goe^tis easy to say no,
Must is the King himself, and I must go;
Shall I then go? that word is thine; I shall,
Is thy command: I go because I shall;
Will I then go? I ask my self; o ill,
King, says I must; you, I shall; I, I will.

Ter. Had I not sworn.

Cael. Why did thou swear?

Ter. The King
Sat heavy on my resoluion,
Till (out of breath) it panted out an oath.

Cael. An oath? why, what is an oath? it is but the smoke,
Of flame and blood; the blister of the spirit,
Which rizeth from the Steame of rage, the bubble
That shootes up to the tongue, and scaldes the voice,
(^or oaths are burning words) thou ^wor'st but one,
It Is frozen long ago: if one be numbered,
What Countrymen are they? where do they dwell*
That speak naught else but oaths?

T^r. ^hey're men of hell.
An oath? why it is the traffic of the s^ule,
It Is law within a man; the seal of faith,
The bond of every conscience; unto whom,
We set our thoughts like hands: yea, such a one
I swore, and to the King: A King contains
A thousand thousand; when I swore to him,
I swore to them; the very hairs that guard
His head, will rise up like sharp witnesses
Against my faith and loyalty: his eye
Would ^^raight condemn me: argue oaths no more,
My oath is high, for to the King I swore.

Enter Sir Quintilian with the cup. Cae. Must I betray my Chastit^? So long
Clean from the treason of rebelling lust;
O husband! O my ^ather! if poor ^,
Must not live chaste, then let me cha^ly dye.

Sir Quint. I, here is a charm shall keep thee chaste, come, come,
Old Time has left v^ but an hour to play
Our part^; b^gin the ^ceane, who shall s^eake first?
Oh, I, I play the King, and Kings speak fir^;
Daughter stand thou here, thou Son Terrill there,
O thou standst well thou I^an'st against a poast,
(For thou't be po^ed off ^ warrant thee:)
The King ^ill hang a horn about ^hy n^cke,
And make a poast of thee; you stand w^ll both,
We need no Prologue, the King entering first,
He Is a most gracious Prologue: mary then
For the Cata^^rophe, or Epilogue,
There Is one in cloth of Silver, which no doubt,
Will please the hearers well* when he steps out;
His mouth is filled with words: see where he stands;
He Will make them clap their eyes besides their hands.
But to my part; suppose who enters now*
A King, whose eyes are set in Silver; one
That blusheth gold, speaks Music dancing walks,
Now gathers nearer* takes thee by the hand,
When straight thou think, the very Orb of heaven,
Mooues round about thy fingers, then he speaks,
Thus -- thus -- I know not how.

Cael. Nor I to answer him.

Sir Quint. No girl? know thou not how to answe^ him?
Why then the field is lost, and he rides home,
Like a great conqueror; not answer him?
Out of thy part alread? y foylde the Scene?
Disranckt the lines? disarmed the action?

Ter. Yes yes, true chastity is tongued so weak,
It Is overcome ere it know how to speak.

Sir qui. Come, come, thou happy close of every wrong,
It Is thou that can dissolve the hardest doubt;
It Is time for thee to speak, we are all out.
Daughter, and you the man whom I call Son,
I must confess I made a deed of gift;
To heaven and you, and gave my child to both:
When on my blessing I did charm her soul,
In the white circle of true Chastity,
Still to run true, till death: now Sir if not,
She forfeyts my rich blessing, and is Fined
With an eternal curse; then I tell you,
She shall dye now, now whilst her soul is true.

Ter. Dye?

Cael. I, I am deaths echo.

Sir quin. O my Son,
I am her Father; every tear I shed,
Is three score ten year old; I weep and smile
Two kind of tears: I weep that she must dye,
I smile that she must dye a Virgin: thus
We joyful men mock tears, and tears mock us.

Ter. What speaks that cup?

Sir quin. White wine and poison.

Ter. Oh:
That very name of poison, poisons me;
Thou Winter of a man* thou walking grave,
Whose life is like a dying Taper: how
Can thou define a Lovers laboring thoughts?
Wha^ Sent have thou but death? what taste but earth?
The breath that purles from thee, is like the Steame
Of a new-open'd vault: I know thy drift,
Because thou art traveling to the land of Graves,
Thou couetst company, and hither bringst,
A health of poison to pledge death: a poison
For this sweet spring; this ^lement is mine,
This is the Air I breath; corrupt it not;
This heaven is mine, I bought it with my soul,
Of him that selles a heaven, to buy a soul.

Sir quin. Well, let her go; she is th^^e thou cal'st her thine,
Thy Element, the Air thou breathe; thou know
The Air thou breathe is common, make her so:
Perhaps thou't say; none but the King shall wear
Thy night-gowne, she that laps thee warm with love;
And that Kings are not common: Then to show,
By consequence he cannot make her so,
Indeed she may promoote her shame and thine,
And with your shames, speak a good word for mine*
The King shining so clear, and we so dim,
Our dark disgraces will be seen through him.
Imagine her the cup of thy moist life,
What man would pledge a King in his own wife?

Ter. ^ She dye^* that sentence poisons her: O life!
What slave would pledge a King in his own wife?

Cael. Welcome, o poison physic against lust,
Thou wholesome medicine to a constant blood;
Thou rare Apothe carry that can keep,
My chastity preserved, within this box;
Of tempting dust, this painted earthen pot,
That stands upon the ^^all of the white soul,
To set the shop out like a flatterer,
To draw the customers of Sin: come, come,
Thou art no poison, but a dyet-drinke,
To moderate my blood: White-innocent Wine,
Art thou made guilty of my death? oh no,
For thou thy self art poisoned, take me hence,
For Innocence, shall murder Innocence.

Drinks Ter. Hold, hold, thou shall not dye, my Bride, my wife,
O stop that speedy messenger of death;
O let him not run down that narrow path,
Which leads unto thy heart; nor carry news
To thy remoouing soul, that thou must dye.

Cael. It Is done already, the Spiritual Court,
Is breaking up; all Offices discharged,
My soul remooues from this weak standing house,
Of frail mortallity: Dear Father, bless
Me now and ever: Dearer Man farewell,
I jointly take my leave of thee and life,
Go, tell the King thou have a constant wife.

Ter. I had a constant wife, I Will tell the King;
Until the King -- what do thou smile? art thou
A Father?

Sir quin. Yea smiles on my cheeks arise,
To see how sweetly a true virgin dy^s.

Ent^r Blunt, Crispinus, Fannius, Philocalia, Dicache, Petula, lights before
them. Cris. Sir Walter Terrill, gallants are all ready,

Ter. All ready.

Them. Well said, come, come, where is the Bride?

Ter. She Is going to forbid the Banes again.
She Will dye a maid: and see, she keeps her oath.

A^l the men. Fair Caelestine!

Ladies. The Bride!

Ter. She that was fair,
Whom I called fair and Caeles^ine.

Omnes. Dead!

Sir quin. Dead, sh's deaths Bride, he has her maidenhead.

Cri. Sir Walter Terrill.

Omnes. Tell us how.

Ter. All cease,
The subject that we treat of now is Peace,
If you demand how: I can tell: if why,
Ask the King that; he was the cause, not I.
Let it suffice, she is dead, she kept her vow,
Ask the King why, and then I Will tell you how:
Nay give your Revels life, tho she be gone,
To Court with all your preparation;
Lead on, and lead her on; if any ask
The mystery, say death presents a mask,
Ring peales of Music, you are Lovers belles,
The loss of one heaven, brings a thousand hels.

Exeunt. Enter an armed Sewer, after him the service of a Banquet: the King at
another door meets them, ^hey Exeunt. Kin. Why so, even thus the Mercury of
(...)*
Vshers th'ambrosiate banquet of the Gods,
When a long train of Angels in a rank,
Serve the first course, and bow their Crystal knees,
Before the Silver table; where Jove's page
Sweet Ganimed filles Nectar: when the Gods.
Drink healthes to Kings, they pledge them; none but Kings
Dare pledge the Gods; none but Gods drink to Kings.
Men of our house are we prepared?

E^ter S^ruants. Ser. My Liege,
All wait the presence of the Bride.

Kin. The Bride?
Yea, every senceles thing, which she beholdes,
Will look on her again, her eyes reflection,
Will make the walls all eyes, with her perfection:
Observe me now, because of Maskes and Revels,
And many nuptial ceremonies: Mark,
This I create the Presence, here the State,
Our Kingdoms seat, shall sit in honors Pride,
Like pleasures Queen, there will I place the Bride:
Be gone, be speedy, let me see it done.
Exeunt, A King in Love, is Steward to himself,
And never scorns the office, my self buy,
All glances from the Market of her eye.

Soft Music, chair it set under a Canopi^. Kin. Sound Music, thou sweet
suitor to the air,
Now woo the air again* this is the hour,
Writ in the Calender of time, this hour,
Music shall spend, the next and next the Bride;
Her tongue will read the Musicke-Lecture: Wat
I love thee Wat, because thou art not wise;
Not deep-read in the volume of a man,
Thou never sawst a thought, poor soul thou think,
The heart and tongue is cut out of one piece,
But thou art deceau'd, the world has a false light,
Fools think it is day, when wise men know it is night.

Enter Sir Quintilian. Sir quint. My Liege they are come* a mask of gallants,

Kin. Now -- the spirit of Love vshers my blood.

Sir quin. They come.
The Watchword in a Mask is the bold Drum.

Enter Blunt, Crispinus, Demetrius, Philocalia, Petula, Dicache, a^l maskt, two
and two withlights like ma^kers: Caelestine in a chair. Ter. All pleasures
guard my King, I here present,
My oath upon the knee of duty: knees
Are made for Kings, they are the subjects Fees.

King. Wat Terrill* thou art ill suited, ill made up,
In Sable colors, like a night piece dyed,
Come thou the Prologue of a Mask in black;
Thy body is ill shapt; a Bridegroom too?
Look how the day is dressed in Silver cloth,
Laid round about with golden Sunne-beames: so
(As white as heaven) should a fresh Bridegroom go.
What? Caelestine the Bride, in the same task?
Nay then I see there is mystery in this mask.
Prithee resolve me Wat?

Ter. My gracious Lord,
That part is hers, she acts it; only I
Present the Prologue, she the mystery.

Kin. Come Bride, the Scene of blushing entered first,
Your cheeks are settled now, and past the worst; Vn^asks her
A mystery? oh none plays here but death,
This is deaths motion, motionles; speak you,
Flatter no longer; thou her Bridegroom; thou
Her Father speak.

Sir quint. Dead.

Ter. Dead.

Kin. How?

Sir quin. Poisoned.

King. And poisoned?
What villain durst blaspheme her beauties, or
Profane the clear religion of her eyes.

Ter. Now King I enter, now the Scene is mine,
My tongue is tipped with poison; know who speaks,
And look into my thoughts; I blush not King,
To call thee Tyrant: death has set my face,
And made my blood bold; hear me spirits of men,
And place your ears upon your hearts; the day
(The fellow to this night) saw her and me,
Shake hands together: for the book of heaven,
Made us eternal friends: thus, Man and Wife,
This man of men (the King) what are not kings?
Was my chief guest, my royal guest, his Grace
Graced all the Table, and did well become
The upper end, where sat my Bride: in brief,
He tainted her chaste ears; she yet unknown,
His breath was treason, tho his words were none.
Treason to her and me, he dared me then,
(Under the covert of a flattering smile,)
To bring her where she is, not as she is,
Alive for lust, not dead for (Chastity:
The resolution of my soul, out-dar'd,)
I swore and taxt my faith with a sad oath;
Which I maintain; here take her* she was mine,
When she was living, but now dead, she is thine.

Kin. Do not confound me quite; for mine own guilt,
Speaks more within me then thy tongue contains;
Thy sorrow is my shame: yet herein springs,
^oy out of sorrow, boldness ont of sham^;
For I by this have found, once in my life,
A faithful subject, thou a con^tant wife.

Cae^. A constant wife.

Kin. Am I confounded twice?
Blasted with wonder.

Ter. O delude we not.
Thou art too true to live again, too fair
To be my Caelestine, too constant far
To be a woman.

Cael. Not to be thy wife,
But first I plead my duty, and salute
The world again.

Sir quin. My King, my Son, know all,
I am an Actor in this mystery,
And bear the chiefest part. The Father I,
It Was I that ministered to her chaste blood,
A true somniferous potion, which did steal
Her thoughts to sleep, and flattered her with death:
I called it a quick poisoned drug, to try
The Bride-groomes love, and the Brides constancy.
He in the passion of his love did fight,
A combat with affection; so did both,
She for the poison strove, he for his oath:
Thus like a happy Father, I have won,
A constant Daughter, and a loving Son.

Kin. Mirror of Maidens, wonder of thy name,
I give thee that art given, pure, chaste, the same
Here Wat: I would not part (for the worlds pride)
So true a Bridegroom, and so chaste a Bride.

Cri. My Liege, to wed a Comicall event,
To presupposed tragic Argument:
Vouchsafe to exercise your eyes, and see
A humorous dreadful Poet take degree.

Kin. Dreadful in his proportion or his pen?

Cris. In both, he calls himself the whip of men.

Kin. If a clear merit stand upon his praise,
Reach him a Poets Crown (the honored Bays)
But if he claim it, wanting right thereto,
(As many bastard Sons of Poesy do)
Race down his usurpation to the ground.
^rue Poets are with Art and Nature Crowned.
But in what molde so ere this man be east;
We make him thine Crispinus, wit and judgment,
Shine in thy numbers, and thy soul I know,
Will not go armed in passion against thy foe:
Therefore be thou our self; whilst our self (...),
But as spectator of this Scene of wit.

Cri. Thanks royal Lord, for these high honors done,
To me unworthy, my minds brightest fires
Shall all consume themselves, in purest flame,
On the Alter of your dear eternal name.

Kin. Not under us, but next us take thy Seat,
" Arts nourished by Kings make Kings more great,
Use thy Authority.

Cris. Demetrius.
Call in that self^-creating Horace, bring
Him and his shadow forth.

Them. Both shall appear,
" No black-tyed star must stickein virtues Sphere.

Enter Sir Vaughan. Sir Va. Ounds did you see him, I pray let all his Masesties
most excellent dogs, be set at liberties, and have their freedoms to smell him
out.


Them. Smell whom?


Sir Vaugh. Whom? the Composer, the Prince of Poets, Horace, Horace, he is
departed: in Gods name and the Kings I sarge you to ring it out from all our
ears, for Horaces body is departed: Master hue and cry shall -- God bless
King Williams, I cry you mercy and ask forgiveness, for mine eyes did not
find in their hearts to look upon your Majesty.


Kin. What news with thee Sir Vaughan?


Sir Vau. News? God it is as vrse news as I can desire to bring about me: our
vnhansome-fac'd Poet does play at bo-peepes with your Grace, and cries
all-hidde as boys do.


Officers. Stand by, room there, back, room for the Poet.


Sir Va. He Is reprehended and taken, by Sesu I rejoice very near as much as if
I had discovered a Newfound Land, or the North and East Indies.


Enter Tucca, his boy after him with two pictures under his cloak, and a
wreath of nettles: Horace and Bubo pu^'d in by the horns bound both like
Satyrs, Sir Adam following, Mistress Miniuer with him, wearing Tuccaes chain.
Tuc. So, tug, tug, pull the mad Bull in by the horns: So, bait one at that
stake my place-mouth yelpers, and one at that stake Gurnets-head.


King. What busy fellow's this?


Tuc. Save thee, my most gracious King a Hearts save thee, all hats and caps are
thine, and therefore I veil: for but to thee great Sultane Soliman, I scorn
to be thus put off or to deliver up this sconce I wud.


Kin. Sir Vaughan, what is this jolly Captains name?


Sir Va. Has a very sufficient name, and is a man has do^ God and his Country
as good and as hot Service (in conquering this vile Monster-Poet) as ever did
S. George his horseback about the Dragon.


Tuc. I sweat for it, but Tawsoone, hold thy tongue Mon du, if thou't praise
me, do it behind my back: I am my weighty Sovereign one of thy grains, thy
valliant vassaile; ask not what I am, but read, turn over, unclasp thy
Chronicles: there thou shall find Buffe-Ierkin; there read my points of war; I
am one a thy Mandilian-Leaders; one that enters into thy royal bands for thee;
Pantilius Tucca; one of thy Kingdoms chiefest quarrellers; one a thy most
faithful -- fie -- fie -- fie --


Sir Vau. Drunkerds I hold my life.


Tuc. No whirligig, one of his faithful fighters; thy drawer o royal Tamor
Cham.


Sir Vau. Go too, I pray Captain Tucca, give us all leave to do our business
before the King.


Tuc. With all my heart, shi, shi, shi shake that Beare-whelp when thou wut.


Sir Vau. Horace and Bubo, pray send an answer into his Masesties ears, why
you go thus in Ouids Morter-Morphesis and strange fashions of apparel.


Tuc. Cur why?


Asini. My Lords, I was drawn into this beastly suite by head and shoulders
only for love I bare to my Ningle.


Tuc. Speak Ningle, thy mouth's next, belch out, belch, why --


Hor. I did it to retire me from the world;
And turn my Muse into a Timonist,
Loathing the general Leprozie of Sin,
Which like a plague runs through the souls of men:
I did it but to --

Tu. But to bite every Motley-head vice by the nose, you did it Ningle to play
the Bug-beare Satyr, and make a Camp royal of fashion-mongers quake at your
paper Bullets; you Nastie Tortois, you and your Itchy Poetry break out like
Christmas, but once a year, and then you keep a Reuelling, and Araigning, and
a Scratching of men's faces, as tho you were Tyber the long-tail'd Prince of
Rattes, do you?


Cri. Horace.


Sir Vaughan. Silence, pray let all v^des be strangled, or held fast between
your teeth.


Cri. Under control of my dread Sovereign,
We are thy Judges; thou that did Arraigne,
Art now prepared for condemnation;
Should I but bid thy Muse stand to the Bar,
Thy self against her would give evidence:
For flat rebellion against the Sacred laws,
Of divine Poesy: herein most she mist,
Thy pride and scorn made her turn Sat^rist,
And not her love to ver^ue (as thou Preachest)
Or should we minister strong pills to thee:
What lumpes of hard and indigested stuff,
Of bitter Sa^irism, of Arrogance,
Of Self-love, of Detraction, of a black
And stinging Insolence should we fetch up?
But none of these, we give thee what is more fit,
With stinging nettles Crown his stinging wit.

Tuc Well said my Poetical huckster, now he is in thy handling rate him, do
rate him well.


^ Hor. O I beseech your Majesty, rather then thus to be neted, I Will ha my
Satyrs coat pulled over mine ears, and be turned out a the nine Muses
Service.


Asin. And I too, let me be put to my shifts with mine Ningle.


Sir Vau. By Sesu so you shall M. Bubo; flea off this hairie skin M. Horace,
so, so, so, untruss, untruss.


Tuc. His Poetical wreath my dapper puncke-fetcher.


Hor. Ooh --


Tu. Nay your oohs, nor your Callin-^es cannot serve your turn; your tongue
you know is full of blisters with railing, your face full of pockey-holes and
pimples, with your fiery inventions: and therefore to preserve your head from
aching, this Biggin is yours, -- nay by Sesu you shall be a Poet, though not
Lawrefyed, yet Nettlefyed, so:


Tuc. Sir stincker, you are but vntruss'd now, I owe thee a whipping still,
and I Will pay it: I have laid rods in Piss and Vinegar for thee: It shall not
be the Whipping (...) Satyr, nor the Whipping of the blinde-Beare, bnt of a
counterfeit lugler, that steals the name of Horace.


Kin. How? counterfeit? does he usurp that name?


Sir Vau. Yes indeed ant please your Grace, he does sup up that abominable
name.


Tuc. He does O King Cambises, he does: thou have no part of Horace in thee
but's name, and his damnable vices: thou have such a terrible mouth, that thy
beard's afraid to peep out; but, look here you staring Leuiathan, here is
the sweet visage of Horace; look perboylde-face, look; Horace had a trim
long-beard, and a reasonable good face for a Poet, (as faces go now-a-dayes)
Horace did not skrue and wriggle himself into great Men's famyliarity,
(impudentlie) as thou do^st: nor wear the Badge of Gentlemen's company, as thou
do thy Taffetie sleeves tackt too only with some points of profit: No,
Horace had not his face puncht full of Oylet-holes, like the cover of a
warming-pan: Horace loved Poets well, and gave Coxcombes to none but fools;
but thou love none, neither Wisemen nor fools, but thy self: Horace was a
goodly Corpulent Gentleman, and not so lean a hollow-cheekt Scrag as thou art:
No, here is thee Copy of thy countenance, by this will I learn to make a
number of villainous faces more, and to look scuruily vpon'th world, as thou
do.


Cr^. Sir Vaughan will you minister their oath?


Sir Vau. Master Afinius Bubo, you shall swear as little as you can, one oath
shall damme up your Innocent mouth.


Cris. Any oath Sir, I Will swear any thing.


Sir Va. You shall swear by Phoebus (who is your Poets good Lord and Master,)
that heere-after you will not hyre Horace, to give you poesies for rings, or
hand-kerchers, or knives which you understand not, nor to write your
Loueletters; which you (in turning of a hand) set your marks upon, as your
own: nor you shall not carry Lattin Poets about you, till you can write and
read English at most; and lastly that you shall not call Horace your Ningle.


Cris. By Phoebus I swear all this, and as many oaths as you will, so I may
trudge.


Sir Vau. Trudge then, pay your legs for Fees, and be dissarg'd.


Tuc. Tprooth -- run Red-cap, ware horns there.


Exit Asi. Sir Va. Now Master Horace, you must be a more horrible swearer, for
your oath must be (like your wits) of many colors; and like a Brokers book
of many parcels.


Tuc. Read, read; th'inuentory of his oath.


Hor. I Will swear till my hair stands vpan end, to be rid of this sting, oh
this sting.


Sir Vau. It Is not your sting of conscience, is it?


Tuc. Upon him: Inpri^is.


Sir Vaugh. Inprimis, you shall swear by Phoebus and the half ^ s^^re M^ses
lacking one* not to swear to hang your self, if you thought any Man, Ooman or
Silde, could write Plays and (...), as well-fauo^^'d ones as your self.


Tuc. Well, said, have brought him toth gallows already?


Sir Vaugh. You shall swear not to bumbast out a new Play, with the old
lynings of Iestes, stolen from the Temples Revels.


Tuc. To him old Tango.


Sir Va. Moreover* you shall not sit in a Gallery, when your Comedies and
Enterludes have entered their Actions, and there make vile and bad faces at
every line, to make Sentlemen have an eye to you, and to make Players afraid
to take your part.


Tuc. Thou shall be my Ningle for this.


Sir Vau Besides you must for swear to venture on the stage, when your Play is
ended, and to exchange curtezies, and complements with Gallants in the Lords
rooms, to make all the house rise up in Arms, and to cry that is Horace,
that is he, that is he, that is he, that pens and purges Humors and diseases.


Tuc. There boy, again.


Sir Vau. Secondly, when you bid all your friends to the marriage of a poor
couple, that is to say: your Wits and necessities, alias dictus, to the rifling
of your Muse: alias, your Muses vp-sitting: alias a Poets Whitson-Ale; you
shall swear that within three days after, you shall not abroad, in
Booke-binders shops, brag that your Vize-royes or Tributorie-Kings, have done
homage to you, or paid quarterage.


Tuc. I Will bussethy head Holofernes.


Sir Vaugh. Mo^eouer and Inpri^is, when a Knight or Sentlemen of vrship, does
give you his passe-p^^t, to travail in and out to his Company, and gives you
money for Gods sake; I trust in Sesu, you will swear (tooth and nail) not to
make sealde and wry-mouth Iestes upon his Knighthood, will you not?


Hor. I never did it by Parnassus.


Tuc. Wut swear by Parnassus and lyetoo, Doctor Doddipol?


Sir Va. Thirdly, and last of all saving one, when your Plays are misse-likt
at Court, you shall not cry Mew like a Pusse-cat, and say you are glad you
write out of the Courtiers Element.


Tuc. Let the Element alone, it is out a thy reach.


Sir Vau. In brieflynes, when you Sup in Tauer^es, amongst your betters, you
shall swear not to dippe your Manners in too much sauce, nor at Table to fling
Epigrams, Embleames, or Play-speeches about you (like Hayle-stones) to keep
you out of the terrible danger of the Shot, upon pain to fit at the upper
end of the Table, a'th left hand of Carlo Buffon: swear all this, by Apollo
and the eight or nine Muses.


Hor. By Apollo, Helicon, the Muses (who march three and three in a rank) and
by all that belongs to Pernassus, I swear all this.


Tuc. Bear witness.

Cris. That fearful wreath, this honor is your du^,
All Poets shall be Poet-Apes but you;
Thanks ( Learnings true Mecoenas, Poesies king)
Thanks for that gracious ^are, which you have lent,
To this most tedious, most rude argument.

Kin. Our spirits have well been feasted; he whose pen
Draws both corrupt, and clear blood from all men:
(Careless what vein he pricks) let him not rave,
When his own fides are struck, blows, blows, do crave.

Tuc. Kings-truce, my noble Hearbe-a-grace; my Princely sweet-William, a boon
-- Stay first, Is It a match or no match, Lady Furniuall Is It?


Sir Ad. and Sir quint. A match?


Mini. I, a match, since he has hit the Mistress so often in the fore-game, we'll
eene play out a rubbers.


Sir Ada Take her for me.


Sir quin. Take her for thy self, not for me.


Sir Vau. Play out your rubbers in Gods name, by Sesu I Will (...) boule more in
your Alley, Iddow.


Sir Quint. My Chain.


Sir Adam My Purse.


Tuc. I Will Chain thee presently, and give thee ten pound and a purse: a boon
my Liege: -- dance o my delicate Rufus, at my wedding with this reverend
Antiquary; is it done? ^ut thou?


Kin. He glue thee Kingly honor: Night and Sleep,

With silken Ribands would tie up our eyes,
But Mistress Bride, one measure shall be led,
In scorn of Mid-nights have* and then to bed.

Exeunt. Epilogus:
Tucca. GEntlemen, Gallants, and you my little Swaggerers that fight low: my
tough hearts of Oak that stand to it so valliantly, and are still within a
yard of your Capten: Now the Trumpets (that set men together by the ears) have
left their Tantara-rag-boy, let us part friends. I recant, bear witness all you
Gentle-folkes (that walk in the Galleries) I recant the opinions which I held
of Courtiers, Ladies, and Citizens, when once (in an assembly of Friars)
Irailde upon them: that Heretical Liber^^ne Horace, ta^ght me so to mouth it.
Besides, it was when stiff Tucca was a boy: it was not Tucca that railde and
roared then, but the Devil and his Angels: But now, Kings-truce, the Capten
Summons a parlee, and delivers himself and his prasing company into your
hands, upon what composition you will. Are you pleased? and I Will dance Friskin
for joy, but if you be not, by 'th Lord I Will see you all -- here for your two
pence a piece again, before I Will loose your company. I know now some be come
hither with cheeks swollen as big with hisses, as if they had the toothache:
vds-foote, if I stood by them, I Would be so bold as -- entreat them to hiss in
another place. Are you aduiz'd what you do when you hiss? you blow away
Horaces revenge: but if you set your hands and Seals to this, Horace will
write against it, and you may have more sport: he shall not loose his labor,
he shall not turn his blanke verses into wast paper: No, my Poetasters will
not laugh at him, but will untruss him again, and again, and again. I Will tell you
what you shall do, cast your little Tucca into a Bell: do, make a Bell of me,
and be al you my clappers, upon condition, we may have a lusty peale, this
cold weather: I have but two legs left me, and they are both yours: Good night
my two penny Tenants God night.


FINIS.

