The Belman of London. BRINGING TO LIGHT THE MOST NOTORIOVS Villainies that are
now practiced in the Kingdom. Profitable for Gentlemen, Lawyers, Merchants,
Citizens, Farmers, Masters of Housholdes, and all sorts of servants to mark,
and delightful for all men to read.

Lege, Perlege, Relege.

The third impression, with new aditions.



Printed at London for Nathaniell Butter. 1608.

A Table of the principal matters contained in this Book.
A Discovery of all the idle Vagabonds in England: their conditions: their
Laws amongst themselves: their degrees and orders: their meetings and their
manners of living, both men and women.

A discovery of certain secret villainies, which borrowe to themselves the
names of Laws.

AS Cheating Law. Vincents Law. Courbing Law. Lifting Law. Sacking Law. Five
Iumpes at Leap-frog. Bernards Law. The black Art. Prigging Law. High Law.
Figging Law.


The poor BELMAN of London, To all those that either by office are sworn to
punish, or in their own love to virtue, wish to have the disorders of a state
amended, humbly dedicateth these his discoueries.
AT your Gates the Belman of London beats, to awaken your eyes, to look back
after certain Grand and common abuses, that daily walk by you, keeping aloof
(in corners) out of the reach of Law. It must be the hand of your a^thoritie
that must fetch in these Rebels to the weale-publike, and your arm that must
strike them: I choose you as Patrons, (not to my book) but to defend me from
those Monsters, whose dens I break open in this my discovery. More dangerous
they are to a State, then a Civil war, because their vilanies are more
subtle and more endu^ing. The Belman not withstanding has plaide the Owl
(who is the Emblem of wisdom) for sleeping in the day, as abhorring to behold
the impie^ies of this last and worst age of the world: In the night therefore
has he stolen forth, and with the help of his Lantern and Candle (by which
is figured circumspection) has he brought to light, that brood of mischief,
which is ingendered in the womb of darkness. Amonstrous birth is it, and
therefore worthy to be looked at: from monstrous parents does it proceed, and
therefore the sight of it to be fearful. But of such rare temper are your
eyes, that (as if they had sunne-beames in them) they are able to exhale up all
these contagious breaths which poison a kingdom, and so to spe^se them into
thin air, that they shall utterly vanish, and be no more offensive. In this
black shore of mischief have I sailed along, and been a faithful discouerer
of all the creekes, rocks, gulfes and quicksands, in and about it: Be you
therefore as second adventurers, and furnish men armed with Justice, and well
furnished in all points, with a desire to conquer these Savages, and send them
to set strong and fearful footing amongst them. It shall be honor to your
felues, and them, and a rich benefit to the Republik wherein you live. For my
own part I vow, that as I dedicate these my labors to your hands, so will I
deuote my life to the safety of my Country, in defending her from these
Serpents: I will waste out mine eyes with my candles, and watch from midnight
till the rising up of the morning: my Bell shall ever be ringing, and that
faithful servant of mine (the Dog that follows me) be ever biting of these
wild beasts, till they be all driven into one heard, and so hun^ed into the
toiles of the Law. Accept therefore of this Night-prize (my Grave and worthy
Patrons) drawn rudely, and presented bouldly, because I know the colors laid
upon it, are not counterfeite as those of borrowd beauties: but this is a
picture of Villainy, drawn to the life, of purpose that life might be d^awne
from it. None can be offended with it but such as are guilty to themselves,
that they are such as are inrold in this Muster book, for whose anger, or
whose stab, I care not. At no man's bosom do I particularly strike, but only
at the body of Vice in General: if my manner of Fight (with these dangerous
Masters of the Ignoblest Science that ever was in any kingdom) do get but
plau^e, the Belman shall shortly bid you to another Prize, where you shall see
him play at other kind of weapons.

Devoted night and day yours, The Belman of London.

THE Bel-man of London. Discoueing the most notable villainies now in the
Kingdom.
THe world at the first was made of nothing and shall a the last be cousumed to
nothing. The fashion of it is round, for as a Circle is the most perfect figure,
So this, the rarest and most absolute frame, that ever the Creator made. It was
indeed (excepting that which was like himself) his Master piece.

In this great world did he place a little world (and as the lesser wheels in
a clock being set a going, give motion to the greatest, and serve them as
guides) So that little world (called man) does by his Art, office and power,
control the greater: yet is there such a harmony in both their motions, that
though in quantity they differ far, they agree in quality: and though the
one was made somewhat before the other, yet are they so like, that they seem
to be instruments belonging to one Engine. For man is made up by the mixture of
four complections, Blood, Phlegm, Choler, and Melancholy* The world is a
ball made up of four Elements, Water, Air, Earth, and Fire, yea these very
Elements have likewise parts in him. The world is circular, So is man, for let
him stand upright and extend forth his arms to the length, A line drawn from
his navel to all the utmost limits of his body, makes his body Orbiculer. And
as man has four ages, Infancy, Childhood, Youth and old age: so has the
world, in which four measures of time are filled out, the Risinges and
fallings, the growings up and the witherings both of the one and the other.

The infancy of the world was the golden age (not so called because men had at
that time more gold then they have now, Description of the 4 ages of the world.
(for not to deceive you, there was (then) not a piece of gold stirring) but
as this sacred metal is the purest that the earth can bring forth, so the
golden age was the best of all the four and the most blessed: For then all the
earth was but one garden, where (without planting) grew all sorts of trees,
Golden age.
which (without grafting) carried all sorts of fruits: the ground was not
wrinckled with ^urrowes, for there were then no Plough-men to misuse her
beauty: the Sea was not rugged, for there were then no Ships to bruise her body:
there were no countries, for there were no Kings: all the world was but one
Land, and all the people in it but one Nation: who knew not how to obey any,
because none amongst them had a desire to commau^d: their houses were y^
shadowy couerings of trees, and their statelyest buildings were graven bows,
Justice in those days had eyes, and Pity ears, for none could complain of
wrong and not be relieved, nor any cry out for want, who were not satisfied:
Oppression was either then not borne, or if she were in the world she had no
hands to strike, or if she did strike, the blows were no other then such as
when with a sword we cut the water, they did no harm. The Law (in this golden
time) got no gold: there were neither Counselors to plead, nor Atturneys to
plodde up and down: the name of a Fee-taking was not known: there were no
Clyents, and therefore no Courts kept, neither Term nor Uacations: what a
merry world was this? The frozen nails of winter, nor the pestilent scorching
breath of Summer did not then destroy the fruits of the earth: there was no
Autumn, for there was no year; the whole year^ was but one month, and that
month was ever, nay, it was a continual Spring, so that man (the Emperor of
earth) grew proud, insolent, and saucy: the fullness of this happiness making
him swell into such a disdain of the gods, that he preferred the vizeroy-ship
of this lower kingdom (bestowed upon him by them) and the pleasures upon which
he surfeted here, before those felicities which they enjoyed above. Whereupon
as men in these days, so did the Gods in those, hold up to themselves that
Golden age: they took it away from mortals, because they were unworthy of it,
And on a sudden changed it into white money, so that the Golden age became the
Silver.

As those two mettalls (of Gold and Silver) are in dgrees of baseness one to
another, So were those two ages in degrees of Badnes. The Silver age The silver
age
was worse then the former: the change of mettalls brought in the change of
manners: for now men pluckd feathers from the wings of Ambition, and with those
plumes labored to fly one above another: their Brains now wrought day and
night how to frame tools to cut down trees, of those trees to build houses,
of those houses to set up Cities, of those Cities to raise Kingdoms, and
from those Kingdoms to derive souerainties. In this Siluer-Cradle of the
world, Arts were borne, and Trades put to nursse Time having now got silver
hairs on his head (but as yet it was not balde) provided himself of a sickle
and a glass full^of sand: with the one did he teach men how to divide the
Seasons, into quarters, months, weeks, days and hours: with the other, how
to cut down Corn: For four Princes did now by course rule the year: 4*
seasons of the year.
two of them mild, two of them cruel: two of them were liberal, full of
mirth, full of majesty, full of beauty: the other two were hard favored,
dogged, addicted to melancholy, to diseases, to hate mankind, to hurt the
earth, and to rob both of all, that the former two had given to them. This
Siluer-age of the world, was the worlds Childehood, and therefore like a child
it grew wayward and inconstant: It was apt to fall out, and soon to be
pleased: as you may see the whel^s of Lions wanton at first and ready to play
even with infants, and not to harm them, with whom afterward armed men dare
not encounter, So in this second play upon the great Theater of the world,
men showed like shepherds (Simple) they had power to do hurt, but not a will
to do it: a care they had more to provide for themselves, then to injury
others. If this siluerthred of man's life had still been spun, man had lived in
a reasonable happiness, But the Fates (envious ever of his good) cut it off: and
at the last, instead of this silver mask which the world wore, The Brazen age.
did she (being turned strumpet) put on a Brazen-face. Having that on, she grew
impudent lascivious and lustful, yet was she not altogether past modesty, but
fell into the company of Vices, and so at length into a love of them, being
rather deceived with the goodly shapes they carried, then delighted with their
doings.

This was the lusty age of the world, when men knew their strengthes, and had
desire to try them: their veins were full of blood and itched to be let out:
but war was not yet begotten, and as in a civil kingdom* when Sedition is
devising plots how to set the state in an uproar, she looks wildely, walks
distractedly, and speaks ambiguouslie: her very face serving as a Calender,
wherein men may read what storms shall follow, the time when they shall fall,
or how, or where, is not set down. So at this brazen and third round table of
the world (who in her bosom was hatching us countries) did men sit with
countenances, wherein were engraven the pictures of troubled thoughts, which
told that mischiefs were apt to breed there, though to be borne in another
Age. The winds did now but begin to shake the earth: the shipwreck which it
should suffer, was to be afterward: so long therefore as the world rested upon
this brazen pillar, men did but whet their swords: there was an Iron gate to be
opened, at which War should issue ^oorth, and then was the time to strike.

Quickly therefor was this circle of Brass broken in pieces, The Iron age
the glass of this Third age was soon run out, and in the place of it was
the Iron age turned up, the Iron age is that wherein we live: it is the old age
of the world that must bring the world to a grave: it is the last of four, and
the worst of four: it is the ba^est, yet the prowdest. In this Iron bed of
Time what unnatural ingenderings, what preposterous birthes have there been?
Devotion has lain with Hypocrisy, Zeal with Coldness, justice with
Par^ialitie, Valor with Fury, Learning with Pride, Pride with Ambition,
Ambition with Treason, and Treason with Murder.

In this bed was Avarice borne, monstrous in shape, and devilish in conditions:
her fingars are hooks, which Usurers still are fyling to keep more sharp
then Tailors needles. In one hand she holds a lime-bush, in the other a net,
a company of old rednosd fellows (of all trades some) spredding Birdlime
continually upon the one, and with strong Cords still peecing up the other.
She whispers every morning in a Lawyeres ear, what she says none knows,
but some think she teaches him his prayers: she goes attired like a Brokers
wife, for her apparel is made of several parcells, which by violence she has
torn from sundry backs: She feeds upon gold as the Estredge does upon
Iron, and drinks silver faster down her crane-like throat than an English
Cockatrice does Hipocras.

With this ill-fauoured hag came envy into the world: they both are twins,
and both look like Staruelings: in bodies they somewhat resemble one another,
but differ in minds, for the one couets to have all to herself, the other
cares for nothing: but pines away to the bare bones, with very grief and
madness, to see another enjoy any thing.

The last of these two furies (Envy) was begotten by a player, and that makes
her so lean: the other by a Dutch Burger, and that makes her have such a belly.
Now was the time (whilst this Yron-milles of mischief were going) for war to
set at the Anuile, whilst swords, Bills, Pole-axes, Partisans, Guns etc. were
forged to destroy mankind: for till this rustie Iron world came up, there was
not an Armorer to be had for love or money. Presently upon this, private
quarrels were first picked, which afterward burst out into open maine battles,
those battles haus drawn whole kingdoms into faction, and those factions
like so many fyres, have set the whole world in a combustion, but because
Nations were so divided one from another by the Seas (which lay like bars
between them) Covetousness and Ambition laid their hands together, and
invented ships:

Now was the Reverend Oak (the King of the Forest) who had stood so many
years unshaken and vndishonoured, laid groueling on the ground: the
mountains that before were glad to be his foot-stooles, and were even proud
when he stood upright on their backs, did now send forth groans at the
report of his fall.

His Oaken brows must notwithstanding be vncrownd: his aged body dismantled
of his roabes, yea his very heart cleft spitefully in sunder, whilst his strong
and tough ribs be pulled from his sides, to make a Pageam that shall dance on the
Waters.

And not the O^ke alone felt the misery of these great strokes, but the tal
Firrhe Tree was compeld likewise to leave the woo^s, where proudly he had stood
so many years, and like a Slave to follow a Sail, which w^y soever it should
lead him. With these wooden Castles (which ^loated up and down like so many
Towns, or rather like so many little Cities full of People) was the Kingdom
of the Waves bes^eged, her Crystal Walls batterd, and her treasury rif^ed:
The scaly Citizens being terrif^ed with this boldness of mankind, as having
never seen any creatures but themselves to venture into their dominions,
complained to the mona^ch of the Deeps, who in revenge of this presumption, did
not only stick Rocks in the playnest paths of his Kingdom, to make those
inuadors stumble at them and so to fall headlong into Hell, But also consulted
and conspired with the Winds* to be ever working their overthrow.

Neither was the Earth (which never before felt bruises) free from the blows
and wounds even of those to whom she gave nourishment.

The World being all turned thus to Iron, men's hearts were made of the same
metal, and like unnatural children misusde the Mother of us all, mangling
her bosom, cutting open her veins, and ripping up her very bowels, compelling
her not only to give them common food to sustain them, and fruits and
flowers to satisfy their lust and pleas^res, But thinking that the Golden and
silver worlds were hid in her e^trals, even amongst those do they barbarously
rake to find riches: For this cause the Earth that at the beginning was unto
us as a Mother, shows herself now as a stepd^me, her bre^^s out o^ which
flowed (once) nothing but milk and honey to nourish us, swells now with rank
poison to destroy us.

But (alas) these moales are but small warts on the cheeks of this Iron World,
the great blemishes that make it seem ugly are not yet discovered.

Entering ther^ore into a con^emplation of y^ changes of Time, how all things
that are under the Moon are as variable as her looks are: how Goodness grows
crooked, and has almost lost her shape: how Virtue goes poorly and is not
regarded: how Villainy ^ettes in silks, and like a God adorde: And when I
consider how al y^ pleasures of this life are but as Childre^s dreams, how all
the glories of the world are but artificial fireworks that keep a blazing
for a time, and yet dye in stinking smoakes and how all the labors of man are
like the toyling of the winds, which strive to cast up heaps of dust, that in
the end are not worth the gathering. Then even then do I grow weary of my
self* then am I neither in love with the beauty of the Sun, neither stand I
gazing at the ^auncing of the stars: I neither wonder at the (...) measures
of the clouds, the nimb^e galliards of the Water, (...) the wanton trippings
of the wind (...) delighted when the earth dresses up her h^ad with flowers, I
wish my self a Bea^t, because men are so bad that Beasts do excel them in
goodness, and abhor all company, because the best is but tedious, the worser
loathsome, both are the destroyers of time, and both must be maintained with
cost.

Since then, that in the Noblest streams there are such Whirlepooles to
swallow us up, such rocks that threaten danger (if not Ship-wracke,) and such
Q^icke-s^nds to make us sink: who would not willingly take down all the
sails of his ambition, and cast anchor on a safe and retired shore, The praise
of the country l^^e.
which is to be found in no place, if not in the Country: O blessed li^e I
pattern of that which our first Parents led, the state of Kings (now) being
but a sla^erie to that of theirs.

O school of contemplation! O thou picture of the whole world. drawn in a
little compass! O thou Prospectiue glass, in whom we may behold upon earth,
all the frame and wonders of heauen^ Now happy ((...) thrice happy) is he that
not playing with his wings in the Golden flames of the Court, nor setting his
foot into the busy throngs of the City, nor ^unning up and down in the
intricate mazes of the Law, can be content in the winter ^o sit by a country
fire, and in the summer to lay his head on the green pillowes of the earth,
where his sleep shall be soft slumbers, and his wakings pleasant as golden
dreams. Have thou a desire to rule, get up to the mountains, and thou shall
see the greatest trees stand trembling before thee to do thee reverence, those
may thou call thy Nobles: thou shall have ranckes of Oaks on each side of
thee, which thou may call thy Guard: thou shall see willowes bending at
every blast, whom thou may call thy flatterers: thou shall see valleys
humbled at thy feet, whom thou may term thy slaves. Would thou behold
battles? step into the fields, there shall thou see excellent combats
between the standing Corn and the Winds. Art thou a tyrant and delightest in
the fall of Great ones? muster then thy haruesters together, and down with
those proud Summer Lords, when they are at the highest. Would thou have
Subsidies paid thee? the Plow sends thee in Corn, the M^dow gives thee her
pasture, the Trees pay custom with their fruit, the Ox bestows upon thee his
labor, the Sheep his wool. Do thou call for music? No prince in the world
keeps more skilful mus^tians: the Birds are thy consort, and the wind
instruments they play upon, yield ten thousand tunes. Art thou addicted to
studdie, Heaven is thy Lybrarie, the Sun, Moon and Stars are thy Books, and
teach thee Astronomy: By observing them, thou make Almanackes to thy self,
that serve for all seasons. That great Uolumne is thine Ephem^^ides, out of
which thou may calculate the predictions of times to f^llowe: yea, in the
very clouds are written lessons of Divinity for thee, to instruct thee in
wisdom: the turning over their leaves, teach thee the variations of seasons,
and how to dispose thy business for all weathers. If the practice of Physic
delight thee what Aphorisms can all the Doctors in the world set down more
certain? what rules for good diet can they draw out more singular? what
medicines for health can they compound more restoratiue? what virtues can all
their extracted Quintessens^s instill into our bodies more soueraign, than those
which the earth of her own bounty bestows for our preservation, and whose
working powers are daily experimented in beasts for our example? O you plants
of the fields, and you flowers of the garden (natur^s Apothecaries, and Earths
Chirurgians!) your stalks are slender, yet you your selves are the chiefest
pillars that uphold man's life: what clearnes does the sight receive only in
beholding you? what comfort does the Sense of smelling find only in your
Sauors? and how many that have had half their bodies in their graves, have
been brought back again only by your sacred I^ces? Who therefore would not
consume his youth in the company of these creatures, that have power in them to
keep off old age longer then it would, or when old age does come, are able to
give it the liuelihood and vigor of youth? who would not rather sit at the
foot of a hill tending a flock of sheep, then at the heline of Authority
controuling the stubborn and unruly multitude? Better^ it is in the solitary
woods, and in the wild fields, to be a man among beasts then in the midest
of a people^ City, to be a beast among men. In the homely village art thou
more safe, then in a fortified Castle: the stings of Envy, or the Bullets of
Treason, are never shot through those thin walls: Sound healths are drunk out
of the wholesome wooden dish, when the cup of gold boyles over with poison.
The country cottage is neither battred down with Cannon in time of war, nor
pestred with clamorous suits in time of peace. The fall of Cedars that tumble
from the tops of Kingdoms, the Ruin of great houses, that bury families in
their overthrow, and the noise of Shipwracks, that beget even shrikes in the
hearts of Cities, never send their terrors thither: that place stands as safe
from the shocke of such violent storms, as the Baytree does from lightning.

The admiration of these bewties made me so enamoured, and so really in love
with the inheritor of them, that the flames of my affection were (in their
burning) only carried thither. So that in stead of paued streets, I trod the
unbeaten paths of the fields, the ranks of the trees were to me as great
buildings, Lambs and skipping Kids, were as my merry companions, the clear
fountain as my cups of wine, roots and herbs as the table of an Ordinary,
the Dialogues of birds as the Scenes of a play, and the open empty meadows as
the proud and populous City. Thus did I wish to live, thus to dye: and h^uing
wandered long (like a Timonist) hating men because they dishonored their
creation. At length fortune led me by the hand into a place so curiou^lie built
by nature, as if it had been the Palace where she purposed none should lie
but her self: It was a Grove set thick with Trees, which grew in such order,
that they made a perfect circle, insomuch that I (...) in fear, it was kept by
Fayries, and that I was brought into it by e^chantment. The branches of the
Trees (like so many^handes) reached over one to another and in their
embracements held so fast together, that their boughs made a goodly green
roo^e, which being touched by the wind, it was (...) to beh^ld so large a
see^ing to move: upon every branch sat a consort of singers, so that every
Tree showed like a Music room. The floor of this summer house was pa^ed al
over with yelow-field ^lowers, and with white and red dazies, upon which the
(...) casting but a wanton eye, you would have sworn the one had been nails
of Gold, the other studdes of enamel^ed S^^uer. Amazed I was when I did but
look into this little Paradise, and afraid to enter, doubting whether it were
some hallowed ground or no, for I could find no path that dyrected me to it:
neither the foot of any man, nor the hoof of any beast had beaten down the
Grass: for the blades of it stood so hie and so even, as if their lengthes had
been given them by one measure. The melodye which the birds made, and the
varieties of all sorts of fruits which the trees promised, with the pretty
and harmless murmuring of a shallow stream, running in windings through the
midst of it (whose noise went like a chime of Bells, charming the eyes to
sleep) put me in mind of that Garden whereof our great Grandsire was the
keeper, I even wept for sorrow to think he should be so soolish, as to be
driven from a place of such happiness, and blamed him in my mind for leaving
such a president behind him because by his fall we lost his felicity, and by
his frailty all men are now apt to undo themselves and their posterity through
the inticements of women.

Into this Gro^e therefore at last I did venture, resolving ^o make it the
Temple where my thoughts should spend themselves i^ fruitful contemplati^n: I
purposed to divide the day into acts, as if the ground had been a stage, and
that the life which there I meant to lead, should have been but as a play. Some
of my hours should have run out in Speculation of the admiral
workemanshippe of Heaven and of the orders which the Celestial bodies are
governed by: Some of my hours should have carried me up and down the earth,
and have shown unto me the qualities and proportions of the creatures that
breed upon it: at another time would I have written Satyrs against the
imp^etie of the world: At another I would have chaunted Roundelayes, in honor
of the Country life. The rest of my time should have fetched in provision for
my body. These were appointed to be my Acts in this goodly The^ter: the
Music betw^ene were the Singers of the Wood, the audience such as Orphe^s
plaide unto, and those were Mountains and Trees who (unless the whispering
winds troubled them with their noise) would have been v^ris attentive. But
whilst I setting forth to run this Goal, behold, ^asting up mine eye, I
espied a far off certain clouds of smoke* whose vapors ascended up so
black and thick into the Element, as if the sighs of hell had burst the
bowels of the earth, and were flying up toward heaven, to pull down more
vengeance.

Before I saw this, I belee^ed that this place had been fr^e from all resort,
desirous therefore to learn who they were that neighboured so nie and in a
solitari^ wood, (that stood so far from inhabited buildings) I stepped forward
and came to the place which (what by nature and what by Art) was so fenced
about with Trees, quick set hedges and bushes, which were grown so high (that
but for the sm^ak) it was not possible to imagine how a house could there be
builded, there was but o^path leading to it, which (after much searching and
many turnings) being found, boldly we^^ I on, and arrived at a homely Cottage:
the very door of it put me in mind of that poor (...) of good Ba^cis and
Philaemon, where a God was a guest* for it was so low, that even a dwarf might
have seemed a tall man, entering into it, so much would it have made him s^oope.
This house stood not like Great men's places, always shut, but wide open, as if
bounty had been the porter, and being within, it (...) Hospitality dwelt
there, and had given you welcome. For there was a Table ready covered, with
fair linen, nut-browne round trenchers lay in good order, with bread and
salt, keeping their state in the middle of the board. The room it self was
not sumptuous but hansome, of indifferent bigness, but not very large: the
windows were spread with herbs, the chimney dressed up with green boughs, and
the floor strewed with bulrushes, as if some less were that morn to be
married: but neither saw I any bride or bridegroom, nor heard I any music,
only the next room (which was the kitchen, and into which I went) was there
as much stirring, as commonly is to be seen in a Booth, upon the first day of
the opening of a Fair. Some sat turning of spits, and the place being all
smoaky, made me think on hell, for the joints of meat lay as if they had been
broyling in the infernal fire: the turne^spits (who were poor tott^red
greasy fellows) looking like so many heedeuills, Some were basting and seemed
like fiends pouring scalding oil upon the damned: others were myncing of
pyemeat, and showed like hangmen cutting up of quarters, whilst another whose
eyes glowed with the heat of the fire, stood poaking in at the mouth of an
Oven, torturing souls as it were in the ^urnace of Lucifer. There was such
chopping of herbs, such tossing of Ladles, such plucking of Geese, such
scalding of Pigges, such singing, such scolding, such laughing, such swearing,
and such running too and fro, as if Pluto had that day bidden all his friends
to a feast* and that these had been the Cooks that dressed the dinner.

At the last espying an old nimble-tongd beldam who seemed to have the command
of the place, to her I stepped, and in fair terms requested to know the name
of the dwelling, why this great cheer was provided, and who were the Guests,
for as yet I saw no body but this Baud of the Black Guard. Instead of her
tongue, her eyes (that had started back a good way into her head, as if they
durst not look out) made me an answer. I perceived by her very countenance,
that I was not welcome, which afterward she confirmed in words, telling me the
place was not for me, the Feast was for others, and that I must instantly be
gone, for that a strange kind of people were that day to be merry there. No
Rhethoricke that I could use, had power to win her to discover who these Guests
should be, till at the length a Bribe prevailing more then a Parlee, she told
me I should be a Spectator of the Comedy in hand, and in a private gallerie
behold all the Actors, upon condition I would sit quietly and say nothing.
And for that purpose was I conuaied into an upper loft, where (unseen) I might
(through a wooden Latice that had the prospect of the dining room) both see
and here all that was to be done or spoken.

There lay I like a Scoute to discover the coming of the expected enemy, who
was to set upon this good chear^, and to batter down the walls of hot Pies
and Pasties. Mine eyes even aked with staring toward the door, to spy when
these states should enter, ducking down with their heads like so many Geese
going into a Barn. At length (with bag and baggage) they came dropping in
one after another, sometimes three in a company, sometimes five, now more, now
less, till in the end the great Hall was so full that it swarmed with them. I
know you wonder, and have longing thoughts to know what Generation this is,
that lived in this hospitable familiarity: but let me tell you they are a people
for whom the world cares not, neither care they for the world: they are all
freemen, yet scorn to live in Cities: great travelers they are and yet never
from home, poor they are, and yet have their diet from the best men's tables:
They are neither old Seruingmen (for all I say they are poor) that have been
courtiers, and are now past carrying of cloakebags: nor young gallants that have
served in the low Countries, (albeit many of them go upon wodden legs) nor
hungry scholars, that all their life time have kept a wrangling in the
schools, and in the end are glad to teach Children their Horne-bookes: neither
are they decayed Poets, whose wits like a fools Land, hold out but a twelve
month, and then they live ppon the scraps of other men's invention: no nor
players they be, who out of an ambition to wear the best Ierkin (in a
Strow^ing company) or to act great parts, forsake the stately and our more
then Roman City stages, to travel upon the hard hoof, from village to
village for cheese and butter-milk: neither are they any of those terrible
noises (with third bare cloakes) that live by red lattises and Iuy-bushes,
having authority to thrust into any man's room, only speaking but this, Will
you have any music? Neither are they Citizens that have been blown up
(without Gunpowder) and by that means have been free of the Grate at Ludgate,
some five times: no, no, this is a Ging of goodfellowes in whom there is more
brotherhood: this is a Crew that is not the Damned Crew (for they walk in
Satin) but this is the Ragged Regiment: Uillaines they are by birth, Varlets
by education, Knaves by profession, Beg gars by the stattute and Rogues by act
of Parliament. They are the idle drones of a Country, the Caterpillars of a
common wealth, and the Aegiptian lice of a Kingdom. And albeit that at
othertimes their attire was sitting to their trade of living, yet now were they
all in hansome clean linen, because this was one of their Quarter dinners:
for you must understand, that (as afterward I learnt by intelligence) they
hold these solemn meetings in four several seasons of the year at least,
and in several places to avoid discovery.

The whole assembly being thus gathered together, One amongst the rest, who
took upon him a Seniority over the rest, charg^d every man to answer to his
name, to see if the Jury were full: the Bill by which he meant to call them
being a double Iug of ale (that had the spirit of Aqua vitae in it, it smelt so
strong) and that he held in his hand: Another standing by with a toast, Nutmeg
and Ginger, ready to cry Vous auez as they were called, and all that were in the
room having single pots by the ears which like Pistolls were charged to go
off so soon as ever they heard their names. This Ceremony being set abroach,
an O-yes was made: But he that was Rector Chory (the Captain of the
Tatterdemalions) spying one to march under his colors, that had never before
served in those lousy wars, pawsed awhile (after he had taken his first
draught, to taste the dexterity of the liquor) and then began (Justice like)
to examine this Younger Brother upon Interrogatories?

The first question he demanded, was, if he were stalled to the Rogue or no?
the poor H^ngarin answered yes, he was: then was he asked by whom he was
stalled, and where, and in what manner of complement it was done? to which
question the nouice having not so much beggarly knowledge as might make a
learned reply, forthwith did the wicked Elder o^^maund the young Slauonians
that stood about him, to (...) him that was so unskillful in the Rudiments of
Rogerie) of his best garment, and to carry it presently to the Bows^ng Ken
(that was to say to the tap-house) and there to pawn it for so much strong Ale,
as could be ventured upon it. Thus the chief Rag^a-muffen gave in charge, the
rest obayed and did so, whilst the other suffered himself to be stripped, and
durst not resist their base authority.

This done, the Grand Signior called for a Gage of Bowse, which belike
signified a quart of drink, for presently a pot of Ale being put into his hand,
he made the young Squier kneel down, and pouring the full pot on his pate,
uttered these words.

I do stall thee to the Rogue, by virtue of this sovereign English liquor, so
that hence forth it shall be lawful for thee to Cant (that is to say) to be a
Vagabond and beg, and to speak that pedlers French, or that Canting language,
which is to be found among none but beggars: with that, the stalled Gentleman
rose, all the rest in the room hanging upon him for joy, like so many dogs
about a Bear, and leaping about him with shoutes like so many mad men.

But a Scilence being proclaimed, all were hushed, whilst He that playde the
Master Devils part amongst these Hellhounds, after a shrug or two given, thus
began to speak to him that was new entered into the damned f^aterniti^. Brother
Beggar (quoth he) because thou art yet but a mere freshman in our College, I
charge thee to hang thine ears to my lips, and to learn the orders of our
house, which thou must observe, upon pain either to be beaten with our cudgels
the next time thou art met, or else to be stripped out of any garments that are
worth the taking from thee. First therefore (being no better then a plain
ordinary Rogue, marry in time thou may rise to more preferment amongst us)
thou art not to wander up and down all countries, but to walk only like an
Vnderkeeper of a Forest, in that quarter which is allotted unto thee: Thou art
likewise to give way unto any of us that have borne all the offices of the
Wallet before thee, and upon holding up a finger to avoid any town or
country Uillage, where thou (...) we are forraging to victual our army that
ma^ch along with us. For (my poor Villiaco) thou must know, that there are
degrees of Superiority and Inferioritie in our Society, as there are in the
proudest company. We have amongst us some eighteen or nineteen several
offices for men, and about seven or eight for women: The cheifest of us are
called Vpright-men (O my dear Sun-burnt-brother, if all those that are the
Chiefest men in other companies were Vpright-men too, what good dealing would
there be in all occupations? The next are Rufflers: then have we Anglers, but
they sildome catch Fish till they go up westward for Flounders: then are there
Rogues (which liuerie thou thy self wearest) next are wild Rogues, then
Priggers, then Palliards, then Fraters, then Tome of Bedlams band of mad caps,
otherwise called Poor Toms flock of Wildegeese (whom here thou see by his
black and blew naked arms to be a man beaten to the world) and those wild
geese or hairebraines are called Abraham-men: in the next squadron march our
brave Whip-iacks, at the tail of them come crawling our counterfeit Crankes:
in another troop are Gabling Domerers then Curtals follow at their heels, and
they bring along with them strange Enginers, called Iri^h-toyles: After whom
follow the Swigmen, the Iarkmen, the Patricoes, and last the Kinchincoes.
These are the totterd Regiments, that make up our maine army. The victuallers
to the Camp are women, and of those some are Glymerers, some Bawdy-baskets,
some Autem-morts: others Walking-Morts: some Doxies, lothers are Dels, the last
and least are called Kinchin-morts, with all which Comrades, thou shall in thy
beggarly perregrination, meet, converse, and be drunk, and in a short time
know their natures and roguish conditions without the help of a Tutor. At
these words the victuals came smoking into the hall to be set upon the
board, whereupon the whole swarm squatted down, being as uncivil in manners.
as unhandsome in apparel, only the Vhrightmen and Rufflers had the grain of
the board given them, and sat at upper end of the table: the rest took there
trenchers as they happened into their hands, yet so, that every knave had his
queen close by his side.

The table being thus furnished both with Guests and meat^, instead of Grace,
every one drew out a knife, rapt out a round oath, and cried Proface you mad
Rogues, and so fell to. They fed more hungerly, then if they had come from the
seege of Jerusalem: not a word was heard amongst them for a long time, only
their teeth made a noise, as if so many Mils had been grinding. Rats going to
the assault of a Holland cheese could not more valiantly lay about them: nay my
Lord Majors Hounds at the dog-house being bidden to the funeral banquet of a
dead horse, could not pick the bones cleaner. At length when the platters
began to look lean, and their bellies grew plumpe, then went their tongues:
But such a noise made they, such a confusion was there of beggarly tales, some
gabling in their Canting language, others in their own, that the scoulding at
ten conduits, and the gossipping of fifteen bake-houses was delicate music
to it. At the length, drunken healths reeled up and down the table, and then
it would have made a Physician himself s^cke, but to have looked upon the
waters that came from them. The whole room showed a far off (but that there
was heard such a noise) like a dutch piece of Drollery, for they sat at table
as if they had been so many Antickes: A Painters prentice could not draw worse
faces then they themselves made, besides those which God gave them: no, nor a
Painter himself vary a Picture into more strange and more ill-fauourd
Gestures, than were to be seen in the action of their bodies: for some did
nothing but weep and protest love to their Morts, another swore daggers and
knives to cut the throat of his Doxye, if he found her tripping: Some slept
being drowned so deep in Ale-drags, that they slauered again: others sung
bawdie songs, another crew devised curses upon Justices of Peace,
Head-boroughs and Constables, grinning their teeth so hard together for anger,
that the grating of a saw in a stone-cutters yard, when it files in sunder the
ribs of marble, makes not a more horrible noise, In y^ end, one who took upon
him to be speaker to the whole house (bidding the French and English pox on
their yelping throats) cried out for silence, telling them it was his turn
(according to the Customs of their meeting) to make an Oration in praise of
Beggerie, and of those that profess the trade: Hereupon (as i^ an Owl had
happened amongst so many birds) all their eyes did presently stare upon him:
who thus began.

My noble hearts, old weather-beaten fellows, and brave English Spirits, I am
to give you that which all the land knows you justly deserve (a Roguish
commendation) and you shall have it, I am to give Beggars their due praise, yet
what need I do that, sithence no man (I think) will take any thing from them
that is their due. To be a Beggar is to be a Brave man, because it is now in
fashion for very brave men to Beg: but what a Rogue am I to build up your
honors upon examples? Do we not all come into the world like arrant Beggars,
without a rag upon us? do we not all go out of the world like Beggars,
saving only an old sheet to cover us? and shall we not walk up and down in
the world like Beggars, with old blankets pind about us? yes, yes, we will,
roared all the Kennell as though it had been the Dogs of Paris Garden: Peace
cries the Penilesse Orator, and with a Hem proceeds.

What though there be Statutes to burn us ith ears for Rogues? to ^indge us
ith hand for Pilferers? to whip us at post^ for being Beggars, and to shackle
our heels ith Stocks for being idle Uagabonds? what of this? Are there no
other Statutes more sharp then these to punish the rest of the Subjects, that
scorn to be our companions? what though a prating constable or a red nosde
Beadle say to one of us, sir Goodman Rogue, if I serud you well I should see
you whipped through the Town: Alas, alas, silly Animalles, if all men should
have that which they deserve, we should do nothing but play the executioners
and tormenters one of an other.

A number of Tailors would be damnd for keeping a Hell under their Shop board:
all the Brokers would make their Wills at Tyborne, if the searching for stolen
goods which they have received, should like a plague but once come amongst
them: yea if all were served in their right kind, two parts of the land
should be whipped at Bridewell for letcherie, and three parts (at least) be
set ith stocks for drunkenness. The life of a Beggar is the life of a Soldier:
he suffers hunger and cold in winter, and heat and thirst in summer he goes
lowu^e, he goes lame, he is not rega^ded, he is not rewarded: here only
shines his glory, The whole kingdom is but his walk, a whole city is but
his parish in every man's kitchen is his meat dressed, in every man's seller lies
his Beer, and the best men's pursses keep a penye for him to spend.

Since then the profession is ancient (as having been from the beginning) and
so general, that all sorts of people make it their last refuge: Since a
number of Artificers maintain their houses by it, Since we and many a thousand
more live merrily with it, let us my bra^e Tawny-faces, not give up our
patched cloaks, nor change our coppies, but as we came beggars out of our
mothers belties, so resolve and set up your staves upon this, to return like
beggars into the bowels of the earth. Dixi.

Scarce was the word Dixi belched out of his rotten Alylnnges, but all the
Bench-whistlers from one end to the other, gave a ringing Plaudite to the
Epilogue of his speech, in s^nge of approbation: whereupon they rose up as
confusedly as they sat down, and having paid so far as their purses would
stretch for what they had devoured, making Oes in chalk for the rest when they
met there next, and every man with his More being assigned to their quarter,
with order given, at what following Faires to shake hands, and what Ale-bush to
tipple, with Items like wise given where, to strike down Geese, where to
steal Hens, and from what hedges to fetch sheets, that may serve as pawnes,
away they departed.

Turba Grauis paci, placidaeque inimica Quieti. No sooner were their backs
turned, but I that all this while had stood in a corner (like a watching
Candle) to see all their vilanies, appeared in my likeness; and finding the
Coast to be perfectly clear, none remaining in the house but the Hostess to
these Guestes, her did I summon to a second parlee. The spirit of her own
malt walk^ in her brain-pan, so that what with the sweetness of gains which
she had gotten by her mercha^t Uenturers, and what with the fumes of drink,
which (like a lusty gale to a windmill) set her tongue in going, I found her
apt for talk, and taking hold of this opportunity, after some entreaty to
discover to me what these Vpright-men, Rufflers and the rest were, with their
several quallities and manners of life. Thus she began.

An Vpright-man.
YOu shall understand then (quoth she) that the chiefest of those that were my
Table-men to day, are called Vprightmen, whose Picture I will draw to the life
before you: An Vpright-man is a sturdie Big-bonde Knave, that never walks but
(like a comaunder) with a short trunche^n in his hand, which he calls his
Filchman. At markets, Faires, and other meetings, his voice among Beggars is of
the same sound that a Constables is of: it is not to be contrould, He is free
of all the shires in England, but never stays in any place long, the reason
is, his profession is to be idle, which being looked into, he knows is
punishable, and therefore to avoid the whip he wanders. If he come to a Farmers
door, the alms he begges is neither meat nor drink, but only money: if any
thing else be offered to him, he takes it with disdain and lays it under a
hedge for any that comes next: but in revenge of this, if he spy any geese,
hens, duckes, or such like walking spirrits haunting the house, with them he
coniures about midnight, using them the next morning like traitors, either
behedding them or quartering them in pieces: for which purpose, this band of
Vpright-men sildome march without five or six in a company, so that country
people rather give them money for fear then out of any devotion. After this
bloody massacre of the poor innocent pullen, the Actors in their bloody
Tragedy, repair to their Stalling-kennes, and those are tippling houses, which
will lend money upon any stolen goods, and unto which none but such guests as
these resort: there the spits go round, and the cannes walk up and down:
there have they their Morts and their Doxies, with whom (after they have Bowsed
profoundly) they lie (in stead of Featherbeds upon litters of clean st^aw) to
increase the Generations of Rogues and Beggars: For these upright men stand so
much upon their reputation, that they scorn any More or Doxie should be seen
to walk with them; and indeed what need they care for them, when he may
command any Doxie to leave another man and to lie with him; the other not
daring to murmr against it. An upright man will seldom complain of want,
for whatsoever any one of his profession does steal, he may challenge a share
in it, yea and may command any inferior Rogue to fetch in booty to serve his
turn. These carry the shapes of soldiers, and can talk of the Low Countries,
though they never were beyond Dover.

A Ruffler.
THe next in degree to him is called a Ruffler: the Ruffler and the Vp-right-man
are so like in co^idtions, that you would swear them Brothers: they walk with
cudgels alike, they profess arms alike, though they be both out at elboowes,
and will swear they lost their limbs in their Countries quarrel, when either
they are lame by diseases, or have been mangled in some drunken quarrel: These
commonly are fellows that have stood aloof in the wars, and whilst others
fought, they took their heels and ran away from their Captain, or else they
have been Ser^ingmen, whom for their behavior, no man would trust with a
livery: if they cannot spend their days to their minds by their own begging
or robbing of Country people that come late from Markets (for upon those they
most usually excersise their trade) then do they compel the inferior subjects
of their common wealth (as Rogues, Palliards, Morts, Doxies etc) to pay tribute
unto them. A Ruffler after a year or two takes state upon him, and becomes an
Vpright-man (but no honest man.)

An Angler.
AN Angler is a limb of an Vpright-man, as being derived from him: their
apparel in which they walk is commonly freize Ierkins and gally flops: in the
day time they Beg from house to house, not so much for relief, as to spy what
lies fit for their ne ts, which in the night following they fish for. The Rod
they angle with, is a staff of five or six foot in length, in which within
one inch of the top is a little hol^ boared quite through, into which hole they
put an iron hook, and with the same do they angle at windows about midnight:
the draught they pluck up, being apparel, sheets, couerlets, or whatsoever
their iron hooks can lay hold of: which prize when they have gotten, they do
not presently make sale of it, but after four or five days, or according as
they suspect inquiry will be made after it, do they bring such goods to a
Broaker (traded up for the purpose) who lends upon them half so much money as
they be worth, which notwithstanding serves the Angler a while for spending
money, and enritehes him that buys it for a long time after.

A Rogue.
A Rogue is known to all men by his name, but not to all men by his
conditions: no Puritan can dissemble more then he, for he will speak in a
lamentable tune, and crawle along the streets, (supporting his body by a
staff) as if there were not life enough in him to put strength into his legs:
his head shall be bound about with linen, loathsome to behold, and as filthy
in color as the compl^xion of his face: his apparel is all tattered, his
bosom naked, and most commonly no shirt on: not that they are driven to this
misery by mere want, but that if they had better clothes given them, they
would rather sell them to some of their own fraternity then wear them, and
wa^der up and down in that pitteous manner, only to move people to compassion,
and to be relieved with money, which being gotten, at night is spent as merrily
and as lewdely, as in the day it was ^onne by cou^terfeit villainy. Another sect
there be of these, and they are called Sturdy Rogues: these walk from country
to country under ^ol^ur of traveling to their friends, or to find out some
kinsman, or else to deliver some letter to one Gentleman or other, whose name
he will have fairly endorsed on paper, folded up for that purpose, and
hansomely sealed: others use this shift, to carry a certificate or pasport
about them, with the hand and seal of some Justice to it, giving notice how he
has bin whipped for a Uacabond, according to the laws of the Realm, and that
he is now to return to such a place where he was borne, or dwelt last, by a
certain day limited, which is sure to be set down long enough, for all these
writings are but counter^eit, they having amonst them (of their own Rank)*
that can write and read, who are their Secretaries in this business. These
fellows have fingers as nimble as the Vpright-man, and have their Wenches and
meeting places, where whatsoever they get, they spend, and whatsoever they
spend is to satisfy their lust: some of this ^roode are called Curtalls,
because they wear short Cloakes: their company is dangerous, their lives
detestable, and their ends miserable.

A wild Rogue.
THe Tame Rogue begets a Wild Rogue, and this is a spirit that cares not in
what circle he rises, nor into the company of what Devils he falls: In his
swaddling clouts is he marked to be a villain, and in his breeding is
instructed to be so: The mother of him (who was delivered of her burden under
a hedge,) either traveling with him at her back, or else leading him in her
hand, and will rather endure to see his brains beaten out, than to have him
taken from her, to be put to an honest course of life, So envious they are and
so much do they scorn any profession but their ownet: hey have been Rogues
themselves and* disdain that their Children should be otherwise. These
Wilde-Rogues (like Wild geese) keep in flocks, and all the day loyter in the
fields, (if the weather be warm) and at Brick-killes, or else disperse
themselves in cold weather, to Rich-mens doors, and at night have their
meetings in barnes or other out-places, where (twenty or more in a company)
they engender male and Female, every one catching her whom he does best
fancy, the stronger and more sturdie keeping the weaker in subjection: their
language is bawdy talk, damned oaths, and plots where to filtch the next
morning, which they perform betimes: rising as early as the Sun, and
enioyning their punckes to look out for cheates, to make their meeting at
night the merrier.

A Prigger of Prancers.
A Prigger of Prancers is a horse-stealer, for to Prig, signifies in the
Canting language to steal, and Prancer signifies a horse. These walk (in
frieze or leather Ierkins) with a wand in their hands, watching in what pasture
any horses are fit for their turn, and those within three or four nights
after are co^ueyd away at the least 60. miles from the place: if they meet the
owners in their ground, they have shifts to avoid his suspicion by feyning
they have lost their way to such a Town. These Hackney men that let out
horses, will request service at Gentlemen's houses, their skill being to keep a
Gelding well, and if they get entertainment, they stand to their word, for they
keep the Gelding so well, that his Master shall never find fault with any
disease he has, unless it be that he had the dizzinesse in his head, which
made him reele out of his stable to be sold forty miles off at a Fair. These
have their female spies that survey Meadows and Closes, and long only for
horse^flesh.

A Palliard.
A Palliard comes next into my mind, and he likewise is called a Clapperdugeon:
his upper Garment is an old cloak made of as many pieces patchd together, as
there be villainies in him: this Palliard never goes without a Mort at his
heels whom he calls his wife. Being either in the street of a City or in a
Country village* they divide themselves, and beg alms at several doors, but
whatsoever is gotten (be it bread, cheese, malt or wool) they sell it to some
Rogue or other, and with the money are merry at a Bowsing Ken. A Palliard
carries about him (for fear of the worst) a Certificate (under a Ministers
hand, with the Parishes name, which shall be sure to stand far enough) where
this Mort and he were married, when all is but forged: many Irishmen are of
this lousy Regiment, and some Welchmen: And the better either to draw pity
from men, as also to give cullor to their lame wandering, with Sperewort or
Arsenick will they in one night poison their Leg, be it never so sound, and
raise a blister, which at their pleasure they can take off again.

A Frater.
A Frater is a brother of as damned a brood as the rest: his office is to
travel with a long wallet at his back, and a black box at his girdle,
wherein is a pattent to beg for some Hospital or Spittle house: many of which
pattens (especially if they be in paper or Parchment without the Great Seal)
are counterfeit, And those that are not so, serve the bearers of them but as
instruments to play the knaves by: for though they get never so much, the poor
creatures for whom they beg, receive little of it, they lie soaking with a
Doxie in a tippling house, whilst the spittle wretches are ready to starve for
sustenance at home: let country women returning from markets if they be alone,
and in a dangerous place, take heed of these Proctors, for they have the art
to unhorse them, and a conscience to send them packing without any penny in
their purses.

A Quire-bird.
YOur Quire-birds are such as have sung in such Cages as Newga^e, or a Country
Jail, and having their belles given them to fly, they seek presently to
build their nests under some honest man's roof, not with intent to bring him in
any profit, but only to put themselves into money or apparel (though it be
by fitching) and then they take their flight.

An Abraham-man.
OF all the mad Rascals (that are of this wing) the Abraham-man is the most
fantastic; The fellow (quoth this old Lady of the Lake unto me) that sat
half naked (at Table to day) from the Girdle upward, is the best Abraham-man
that ever came to my house, and the notablest villain: he swears he has
been in Bedlam, and will talk frantickly of purpose: you see pinnes ^^uck in
sundry places of his naked flesh, especially in his arms, which pain he
gladly puts himself too (being indeed no torment at all, his skin is either so
dead with some foul disease, or so hardened with weather: only to make you
believe he is out of his wits,) he calls himself by the name of Poor Tom,
and coming near any body cries out Poor Tom is a cold. Of these
Abraham-men, some be exceeding merry, and do nothing but sing Songs,
fashioned out of their own brains, some will dance, others will do nothing
but either laugh or weep, others are Dogged, and so sullen both in look and
speech that spying but a small company in a house, they boldly and bluntly
enter, compelling the servants through fear to give them what they demand,
which is commonly bacon, or something that will yield ready money. The
Vpright-man, and the Rogue are not terribler enemies to pou^trie ware, then
poor Tom is: neither does any man shift clean linen oftener then he does his
wenches.

A Whipiack.
THen there is another sort of nimble fingred knaves, and they are called
Whipiacks: who talk of nothing but fights at Sea, Piracies, drownings and
shipwracks, traveling both in the Shapes and names of Mariners, with a
counter^eit License to beg from town to town, which license they call a Gybe,
and the Seals to it Iarkes. Their color of wandering from Shire to shire
(especially along the Sea ^oastes) is to harken after their Ship that was
overthrown, or for the merchandise stolen out of her, but the end of their
land voyages is to rob Booths at faires, which they call heauing of the Booth*
These Whipiacks will talk of the Indies, and of all countries that lie under
heaven, but are indeed no more but freshwater Soldiers.

A counterfeit Crank.
BAser in habit, and more vile in condition then the Whipiacke, is the
Counterfeit crancke: who in all kind of weather going half naked, staring
wildely with his eyes, and appearing distracted by his looks, complaining
only that he is troubled with the falling sickness: Albeit you give them
clothes they will wear none, but rather wish those rags which they have hanging
about them should be made loathsome by mire, or their naked bosom and Arms to
appear full of bruses, and to be bloody with falling, thereby to kindle in men
the greater compassion: to cause that foaming in their mouths (which is
fearful to behold by the standers by) they have this trick privily to convey
a piece of white soape into one corner of their Jaws, which causes the froth
to come boiling forth. These Crancks have likewise their meetings, and their
wenches at command.

A Dummerar.
Equal to the Cranke in dissembling is the Dummerar, for as the other takes
upon him to have the falling sickness, so this, counterfeits Dumbnes, but
let him be whipped well, and his tongue (which he doubles in his mouth and so
makes a horred and strange noise instead of speech) will walk as fast as his
hands do, when he comes where any booty is.

A Iacke-man and a Patrico.
ANd because no common wealth can stand without some Learning in it. Therefore
are there some in this School of Beggars, that practice writing and reading,
and those are called Iackmen: yea, the Iackman is so cunning sometimes that he
can speak Latin: which learning of his liftes him up to aduancment, for by
that means he becomes Clark of their hall, and his office is to make
counterfeit licenses, which are called Gybes, to which he puts seals, and
those are ^earmed Iarkes. This Iack-man (for his knowledge) is hail fellow
well met with a Patrico, who amongst Beggars is their priest, every hedge
being his parish, every wandering Harlof and rogue his parishioners: the
service he says, is only the marrying of couples, which he does in a wood
under a tree, or in the open field, and the solemnity of it is thus: The
parties to be wedded, find out a dead horse, The Ceremony of marying Roagues
under a heddge.
or any other beast, and standing one on the one side, and the other on the
other, the Patrico bids them to live togethe till death them part, and so
shaking hands, the wedding dinner is kept at the next Ale house they stumble
into, where the music is nothing but knocking with Cannes, and their dances
none but drunken Brawles.

An Irish Toil.
IN this ^orrest of Wild men, the safest Toils to pitch is the Irish Toil,
which is a net so strougly and cunningly wouen together, that they who go a
hunting with it, catch the Commonwealth, and Connycatch the subjects: for an
Irish Toil is a sturdy vagabond, who scorning to take pains that may make him
sweat, stalks only up and down the Country with a wallet at his back, in
which he carries, laces, pins, points and such like, and under color of
selling such wares, both passes to and fro quietly, and so commits many
villainies as it were by warrant.

A Swigman.
LIke unto him in conditions is a Swigman or peddler, carrying a pack behind
him in stead of a Wallet: their trades are all one, saving that the Swigman is
somewhat better in behavior, though little differing in honesty. They both
stand in fear of the Vpright-man, and are forced oftentimes to pay him toale
out of their packes.

A kinchin Coe.
THe last rank of these Run-agates is filled up with Kinchin Coes; and they are
little boys, whose parents (having been Beggars) are dead, or else such as
have run away from their Masters and in stead of a trade to live by, follow
this kind of life to be lows^e by. These Kinchins, the first thing they do is
to learn how to Cant, and the only thing they practice is to creep in at
windows or Celler doors.

Thus have I opened unto you half the nest of this generation of Uipers, now
will I discover the other half, wherein ^its a brood of Serpents, as
dangerous and as loathsome as these: of which the young ones and the least are
called Kinchin-Mor^* and those are Girls of a year or two old, which the
Morts (their Mothers) carry at their backs in their slates (which in the
Canting tongue are sheets) if they have no children of their own they will
steal them from others, A kinchin. Mort.
and by some means disfigure them, that by their parents they shall never be
known. A Dell.
The second bird of this feather is a Del, and that is a young wench, ripe for
the act of Generation, but as yet not spoiled of her maidenhead: these Dels
are reserved as dishes for the Vpright-me^, for none but they must have y^
first taste of them, and after the Vpright-men have defloored them, (which
commonly is when they are very young) then are they free for any of the
brotherhood* and are called Dels no more, but doxies. Of these Dels some are
termed Wilde-dels, and those are such as are borne and begotten under a hedge:
the other are young wenches that either by death of parents, the villainy of
Executors, or the cruelty of Masters or Mistresses fall into this infamous
and damnable course of life. When they have gotten the title of Doxies, then
are they common for any, A Doxi^.
and walk for the most part with their betters, (who are a degree above them)
called Morts* but whenever an Vprightman is in presence,^ the Doxie is only
at his command. These Doxies will for good victuals or a small piece of
money, prostitute their bodies to seruingmen if they can get into any
convenient corner about their Masters houses, and to ploughmen in Barnes,
Haylo^ts or stables: they are common pick-pockets, familiars with the baser
sorts of cut-purses, and oftentimes secret murderers of those infants which
are begotten of their bodies. These Doxies have one special badge to be
known by, for most of them go working of laces and ^hirt strings, or such
like stuff, only to give color to their idle wandering.

Of Morts there be two kinds, that is to say, a vvalking mort and an Autem
Mort: A walking Mort.
the Walking Mort is of more antiquity than a Doxie, and therefore of more
knauerie: they both are unmarried, but the Doxie professes herself to be a
maid, (if it come to examination) and the Walking mort says she is a widow,
whose husband dyed either in the Portugal voyage, was slain in Ireland or the
Low countries, or came to his end by some other misfortune, leaving her so many
small infants on her hand in debt, whom not being able by her honest labor to
maintain, she is compelled to beg. These Walking Morts travel from Country
to country, making laces upon staves, and small purses, and now and then white
vallance for beds: Subtle queanes they are, hard hearted, light fingerd,
cunning in dissembling, and dangerous to be met if any Ruffler or Rogue be in
their company. They fear neither God nor good laws, but only are kept in awe
by the Vpright-men, who often times spoil them of al they have, which to
prevent, the Walking Morts use this policy, they leave their money (sometime
five shillings, sometimes ten shillings) in several shires, with some honest
farmers wife or others, whom they know they may trust, and when they travel
that way again, at half years end, or a quarters, fetch it to serve their
turns, but dare ^euer go in good clothes, least the Vpright-men either strip
them into rags, or else stark naked, as they use to do.

An Autem Mort, An Autem mort.
is a woman married, for Autem in the Beggr^ language is a Church: these Morts
seldom keep with their husbands, but are from them sometimes a month or two,
yet never walk they without aman in their company, and boys and girls at
their heels of ten or twelve years old, whom they imploye at windows of
houses in the night time, or early in the mornings, to pilfer any thing that is
worth the carrying away (which in their tongue) they call Nilling of the Ken.
These Autem Morts walk with wallets on their shoulders, and Slates (or sheets
at their backs, in which they use to lie. Their husbands commonly are
Rufflers, Vpright-men, or Wild Rog^es, and their companions of the same breed.

There is another Parrot (in this Bird-cage) whose feathers are more ^leeke, A
Bawdy basket*
and tongue more smoothe than the rest, and she is called a Baudy Basket, these
Baudy baskets are women that walk with baskets or Cap-cases on their arms,
wherein they have laces, pinnes, needles, white Inckle, tape, round white silk
Girdles, and such like: these will buy Cony Skins, and in the mean time steal
Linen or pewter: they are fair spoken, and will seldom swear whilst they
are selling their wares, but lie with any man that has a mind to their
commodities The Vpright-men and these hold such league together, that
whatsoever they have is common to them both, and oftentimes will they with
money relieve one another.

The self same Truce is taken between the Vpright-men and the damaunders of
Glimmer, Demaunders of Glimmer*
that is to say, those who travel up and down with licenses to beg, because
their houses have been consumed with fire, for Glimmer (in Canting) signifies
fire. These Glimmering Morts are so tender hearted, y^ they shed tears if they
make but mention of their losses, and tell a lamentable story how the fire
destroyed their barnes, stables etc. all that they speak being mere lies: they
likewise carry wallets at their ^ackes, and are only attended upon and
defended by the Vpright-men, who never walk along with them through any town,
but keep aloof.

And these (quoth the Hostess of the Beggars) are al or the cheifest (both
He-Deuils and Shee-deuils) that dance in this large circle. I have brought you
acquainted with their names, their natures, their tradings, and their
traf^^cke: if you have a desire to know more of them, you shall find whole
congregations of them at Saint Quintens, y^ Three-cranes in the vintry, Saint
Tibs and at Knapsbury, which four places are four several barnes within one
miles compass near London, being but Nick^names given to them by the
Vpright-men, In those Innes do they lodge every night; In those do Vpright-men
lie with Morts, and turn Dells in Doxies (that is to say ravish young wenches)
whilst the Rogue is glad to stand at reuersion and to take the others leauings.
In Midlesex likewise stand four other Harbors for them, namely, Draw the
pudding out of the fire (which is in the parish of Harrow on the Hill) The
cross keys (which is in Cranford parish ( Saint Iulians (which is in
Thistleworth parish) And the house of Pity in Northall Parish. The Kings
Barn near Darford, and Ketbrooke near Blackheath, are likewise houses of
good receipt for them: In all Shiers have they such Innes as these; and in all
of them and these recited, shall you find some times 40. Upright men together,
ingendring beggars with their Morts. No sin but is here committed without
shame, Adultery is common amongst them, Incest but laughed at, Sodomy made a
jest: At these Havens do they cast anchor boldly because none are by to bar
their entrance; yea those that are owners of these Barnes and Backhouses, dare
not but give welcome to these Unruly Guestes; for if they should not, they
would at one time or other set fire of their houses, or by bloody and
treacherous practices take away their lives. For this cause sir (quoth she) am I
glad to look smilingly upon them, and to play y^ Hostess because my abiding
stands so far from company; yet I protest (quoth she) I hate y^ sight of them
as knowing them to be hell hounds, and have made discovery of their deuilish
conditions, because you may teach others how to avoid them: and howsoever you
may be drawn peradventure to publish these abuses to the world (said she) yet
I pray you conceal my name, the publishing of which may cost me my life.

By this time, the fumes of Ale which had distempered her brains, and set her
tongue a going were dispersed; so that both her looks and speech showing that
she did not now dlssemble, but uttered these things unfeignedly, I gave her
many thanks for her Discovery, counseled her to change her discomfortable
Lodging, and to dwell in a place more inhabited (which she promised to do) and
away I went. A thousand cogitations kept me company as I traveled alone by my
self: sorry I was to hear that in those places where Innocence and Simplicity
should be borne, so much and such ugly Villainy should be nourished, yet was I
glad that I came to the knowledge of their evils, because the dressing of such
wounds in a common wealth, is the curing of them.

Looking therefore with more pearcing eyes into the Country-life, I began to
hate it worse then (before) I loved it, I fell to dispraise it faster then ever
I did commend it. For I found it full of care, and full of craft: full of
labor, and yet full of penury; I saw the poor husbandman made a slave to the
rich farmer, the farmer racked by his landlord: I saw that covetousness made
dear years when she had fullest barnes; and to curse plenty for being
liberal of her blessings. I had heard of no sin in the City but I met it in
the village; nor any Vice in the tradesman, which was not in the ploughman. All
places therefore being haunted with evil Spirrits, I forsook the fields and
the Mountains* and took my journey back again to the city whose customs
(both good and bad) I desired to be acquainted with. It was my fortune to
travel so late, that the Moon had climed up to the very top of Midnight,
before I had entrance into the gates of the City, which made me make the more
have to my lodging, But in my passage I first heard (in some good distance
before me (the sound of a bell, and then of a man's voice, both whose tunes
seemed at that dead hour of the night very doleful: On I hastened to know
what noise it should be* and in the end found it to be the Belman of London.
The sound of his Voice at the first put me in mind of the day of Judgment; Men
(me thought) starting out of their sleeps, at the ringing of his bell, as when
they are to rise from their graves at y^ call of a trumpet: But when I approached
near unto him and beheld a men with a lantern and can^le in his hand, a long
staff on his neck, and a dog at his tail, I supposed verily, because the
Moon shone somewhat dimly, that the man in the Moon had lept down from
heaven, and (for have) had left his bush of thorns behind him. But these
imaginations vanishing, as fast as they were begotten, I began to talk to my
Bel-man, and to ask him why with such a Iangling and balling, and beating at
Men's doors, he went about to waken either poor men that were ouer-wearied
with labor, or sick men that had most need of rest? he made answer unto me,
that the Ringing of his Bell, was not (like an Allarum in a town of Garrison)
to fright the ^^habitants, but rather it was musiqu^ to charm them faster with
sleep: the Bearing at their doors assured those within, that no thieves were
entered, nor that false servants had wilfully or negligently suffered the doors
to stand open, to have their masters robbed, and that his crying out so loud, was
but like the shrill Good morrow of a Cock, to put men (that had wealth enough)
in mind of the time how it slideth away, and to bid those that are full of
bustnesse to be watchful for their due hours when they were to rise. He called
himself therefore the Centinell of the City, the watchman for every ward,
the honest Spy that discovered the prentizes of the night, and that as a
lantern in the poope of a Ship, was a guide or comfort to seamen in most
pitchy darkness, so was his walking up and down in the night time, a
prevention to the City oftentimes of much and many dangerous fires. I liked
well that thus he praised himself, because in those praises lay the
commendation of an honorable, civil, and politic government. And so far
dealt I with him that in the end he brought me acquainted with his office,
as well as he knew it himself, and discovered unto me the properties of his
walks, as how far his bounds reached; what mad hobgoblings he oftentimes
encountered with, what mischiefs he now and then prevented, what knaueries he
was now and then an eye witness to, and to what secret villainies (brought to
bed in darkness) he was compeld to be (though not the midwife) yet a gossip,
present at the labour^ and delivery. Of all which I having a longing desire to
get the true pictures, and persuading him that he was bound by his place, by
his conscience* and by the laws of common humanity to lay open such plots as
were so dangerous to the common wealth whereof the was a member, he yielded at
the length to discover all that he knew, and for that purpose not only carried
me home to his lodging where he gave me the notes and names of sundry abuses
begotten in the dead of night, but also went up and down the City with me all
the next day, showing me the very doors and signs at which they dwelt, and
the very faces of those that are the Devils Factors in those low country
commodities of Hell: I learnt much by the Bell-mans intelligence, but more
afterward by my own observation and experience; what merchandise I stored my
self with by both Voyages, here do I unlade, and what profit soever arises
by the traficke of them, shall if you please be wholly yours. And for that the
Lading was of sundry commodities, I will deliver them forth in their several
parcells, as I received them.

Of cheating Law.
ALL Vices mask themselves with the vizards of Virtue: they borrowe their
names, the better and more currantly to pass without suspicion: for murder will
be called Manhood, Drunkenness is now held to be Physic, Impudence is
Audacitie, Riot good fellowship etc. So are these Villains (whose faces I mean
to discover) painted^ouer with fresh orient colors, because their looks may
be more pleasing, and less suspected to have craft underneath them. And for
that purpose have their K^aueries gotten the names of Arts or Laws, as the Act
of such a thing or such a law, not that they are institutions set down by
law for the good of men, or of a commonwealth: but as the Law is grounded
upon reason, and has Maxims of Justices, upon which she builds al her
Policies whereby she gouerns kingdoms: So these newfound Laws of the Devils
invention, are grounded upon Mischeife and are nothing else but certain Acts
and Rules drawn into heads (in an assembly of damned Wretches) for the utter
undoing of Men, and confusion of a Weale-publike.

Of all which Laws, the Highest in place, and the Highest in perdition is the
Cheating Law, or the art of winning money by false dyce: Those that practice
this study call themselves Cheaters, the Dice Cheaters, and the money which they
purchase Cheates: borrowing the term from our common Lawyers, with whom all
such casuals as fall to the Lord at the holding of his Leetes, as Waifes,
Straies, and such like, are said to be Escheated to the Lords use, and are
called Cheates. This sort of gamsters, were at first a few in number, (the art
being odious) they were poor (as being hated and driven from all good men's
company.) But now, there are so many professed Cheaters, and so many that give
countenance to their occupacion, that they might make an army sufficient to
give the Turk a battle: now are they not hungry thread bare knaves, but
gallants that ruffle in silks, and are whorried through the streets in
Coaches, their purses being full of Crowns, and their fingers being held up
able to command the proudest Curtizan. Yea, to such a rancknes has custom
brought this vice, and to such a boldness, that in the most noble assemblies,
at the best Ordinaries where your only gallants spend afternoones, and in your
most civil meetings of Merchants, your welthiest Citizens, if they fall to
play with Dice for any round sums of money, it is now grown to a fashion to
have some one or other to take up the Cheaters weapons, and (without all
respect of honesty, friendship or society) to beat all comers.

A Cheater plays his Masters prize at 14. several weapons, and those weapons
are these.

The names of false Dice.
A Bale of bard sincke Dewces. A Bale of Flat sin^ke Dewces. A Bale of Flat
sice Aces. A bale of bard sice Aces. A Bale of Bard cater-treas. A bale of
Flat-Cater-Tre as. A bale of Fullams. A bale of light Graniers. A bale of
Langrets, contrary to the vantage. A bale of Gordes, with as many High-men as
Low-men for passage. A bale of Demies. A bale of Long-Dice for even andod. A
bale of bristles. A bale of Direct contraries.
These are the 14 devilish hooks, by which the Cheater angl^s for other men's
money, he cares not in what River, he makes no conscience with what bait, so
he may have good draughes to maintain himself in ryots, and his whore in
rich apparel, that's the white he shootes at Neither does he let all these
arrows fly at one mark nor in all weathers, But some he shootes in one game,
some in another, and as he finds what fools are in his company, so does he
bestow his bolts. To set down all the Legierdemai^^e of this handy-craft,
would peradventure instruct some il minded persons in y^ villainy, which is
published only to have others shun it: I will therefore show you a few of their
iugling tricks (tha^ are Graduates in the art) and by the shape of them, judge
the rest, for all are alike.

A Langret is a Die which simple men have seldom heard of, and hapily never
seen (but to their cost) It is (to the eye of him that is but a Nouice) a good
and square Die, yet it is cut longer upon the Cater and Trea, then upon any
other point, and is for that cause called a Langret: these Langrets are also
called Bard Cater Treas, because in the running, the longer end will commonly
(of his own sway) draw downwards, and turn either Sice, Sink, Dewce or Ace
upwards on the board; y^ principal use of them is at Nouum. For so long as a
pair of bard Cater Treas be walking, so long can you cast neitheir 5. nor 9.
unless it be by great chance, that the roughnes of the Table, or some other
stop force them to stay, and to run against their kind; for without Cater
Trea, 5. or 9. you know can never come. Here some may imagine, that by this
means he y^ has the first Dice in his hand, may strip all that play at the
Table of their money; but this must be their help. An odd diecalled a Flat
Cater Trea, (and no other number) is to be ready at hand, for granting the Trea
and Cater to be always upon the one die, then is there no chance upon the
other die, but may serve to make 5 or 9. and so cast forth and lose all.

The Cheater therefore marketh well the Flat, and bends a great part of his
study to learn when he is abroad, for so long as that is stirring, he will
never cast at much: the shift which a Cheater is driven to, in conueying the
Flat in and out, is a notable cunning, and in their trade is called Foysting;
which is nothing else but a fleight to carry Dice easily in the hand so often
as the Foyster lists; so that when either he or his partner casts the Dice,
the Flat comes not abroad till he has made a Great hand, otherwise the Flat is
still sure to be One, unless the Cheater of purpose suffers the silly Nouices,
with whom he plays, to cast in a hand or two to give them courage and to live
in hope of winning.

The damnable Oaths and Quarrels that wait at the table of Gamesters, are
occasion that many men forbeareto venture money in those sports, who otherwise
would play* the Cheater therefore (being a cunning obseruer in all fashions)
will seldom swear (if he have gotten a Gul into his company whom he is loath
to anger for fear he loose him) and as seldom swagger, but will rather put up
an open wrong, then by a foolish braule to break off the company and so hinder
himself and his consort of purchase: But if he swear, you would take him for
a puritan, for his oaths are Of honesty, Of troth, by Saint Martin. etc. And
take this note, that when he swears affirmatively, he means always the
contrary. As for example, if I say unto you when the Dice come to your hands,
Of honesty cast at al, my meaning is, you shall cast at the table, or else at
very little: or if when one being stripped out of all his money, offer to pawn a
Ring or a Jewel, and I swear by Saint Martin I think it is fine gold, then
do I mean that it is pure copper, and so of the rest: He that is drawn in to
venture his money, is (amongst this cursed brotherhood of Cheaters) termed a
Cosen, and is handled so kindly, as if he were a Cosen indeed: if he once set
in a foot, and that they fall to Hunt him* then all the craft is to make the
Cony sweat, that is to say, so wisely to handle him, that he may have a desire
more and more to play and to keep company; yet so warily to increase this
appetite in him that he Smoke not the Cheater, which is, that he smell not
what knauerie is bent against him and so slip the collar like a Hou^d, and
shake off the company for ever.

At the taking up of a Cosen, the first Veny that a Cheater gives him, is to
learn before he play what store of Bit he has in his Bay, that is, what money
he has in his purse, and whether it be in great Cogges or small: that is in
gold or silver, and at what game he will soonest stoop; for that being known,
his humor is fed, and he is choked with the meat he loves best. For some that
will not play a groat at Nouum, will loose a hundred pound at Hazard, and he
that will not loose a shilling at Dice, will play away his patrimony at Cards:
for which cause the Cheater furnishes himself for all voyages, but especially
prouides for fine Cheates, and to atchieue which with more ease, he acquaints
himself with Dice-makers, that work in corners, (U^rlets they are that are
Factors to the devil, and for money will exchange their souls in a bale of
Dice) These Dice makers, arm the Cheater with the foresaid 14 weapons, and
then he is a Cheater complete.

One notable policy is (as a Rule) set down in this School of cheating, and
that is, A Cheater never discovers the secrets of his Art to any, unless it
be to such a one who being left by his parents rich in money and possessions,
has to the music of square rafling bones danced so long, that he has danced
himself into the company of beggars, and is brought to such want and misery,
that he would leave no stone unturned to find a penny under it. Such a wretch
is instructed in those Villainies, by which he himself has been wrought to
infamy: the poison y^ once he swallowed does he now cast up to kill others with
it. Neither does the Cheater bestow this learning upon his young Scholar, out
of a commiseration of his low estate, but only to make use of him, even in the
height of his extremity. His lorny man therefore does he make him, and because
the Cheater is happily a man so noted in all companies, that few or none will
venture money where he plays, the Nouice is taught to play his scholars
prize, whilst the other stands by and looks on, yet so, that the Cheater has
the sweetness of the gains. The Nouices employments then, are amongst his rich
Kindred, Countrymen, or acquaintance to find out Cosens; whom he must by one
trick or other get to a Tavern, or inuit them to ^ supper, at the end of
which, the Cheater lays about him to draw them to play, and secretly lends his
Pupil money to maintain game, both their wits working how to cheat those that
are in the company. We have been to long at Dice, let us now fall to Cards.

Of Barnards Law.
DIce and Cards are Twins, idleness was the father of them, Desire of gains
the mother, Honest Recreation says she was their Nursse, and ought to have the
bringing of them up: but howsoever, the Devil makes them now his adopted
Children: and no wonder, for they are like in conditions, as being both (like
him) full of deceit: if there be cousnage in tripping of a die, there is the
like craft in shufling and sorting of a pair of ^ardes: insomuch, that what
game soever is on foot, He that is marked out to be the looser (by the
Synodycall assembly and Fathers oath Barnards Law, is sure never to depart a
winner.

To speak of all the sleights used by Cart-players in all sorts of Games, would
but weary you that are to read, and be but a thankles and unpleasing labor
for me to set them down. Omitting therefore the deceipts practiced (even in the
fairest and most civil companies) at Primero, Sannt, Maw, Tromp, and such like
games, I will only lay open the villainies of a base kind of people, that
travel up and down the whole land, sometimes in the habit of Gentlemen,
sometimes of Seruingmen, sometimes of Grasiers, Farmers and plain fellows,
maintaining themselves only by the cozenage they use in Cardplaying: which
kind of play of theirs, they call The Barnards Law.

To act which knauish Comedy of Wily-begily, 5. Persons are required: and those
are, 1 The Taker. 2 The Cozen. 3 The Verser. 4 The Barnard. 5 The Rutter.


These are the players: now shall you hear their parts.

1 The Taker, is he that by some fine invention fetch^ht in the man whom they
desire to draw into Gaming.

2 The Cozen is the party that is taken.

3 The Verser, is a fellow more grave in speech and habit, and seems to be a
landed man his part is to second what the taker begins, and to give countenance
to the act.

4 The Barnard is the chief player, for he counterfeits many parts in one, and
is now a drunken man, anon in another humor, and shifts himself into so many
shapes, only to blind the Cozen, and to feed him with more delight, the more
easily to beguile him.

5 The Rutter is as arrant a knave as the rest, his part is discharged when he
has begun a fray with his own shadow, whilst the rest that have made a
younger Brother of the poor Cozen, steal out of sight. Now to the country it
self: The Prologue of which if it go off well, there is good hope all shall
end well: All the cunning thereof is how to begin, and to do that, the Taker
studies his part at his fingers ends. The Stage on which he plays his
prologue is eitherin Fleet Street, the Strand, or in Paul's, and most commonly
in the afternoon, when Country Clyents are at most leisure to walk in those
places* or for dispatching of their business, travel from Lawyer to Lawyer,
through Chancerie lane, Holborne, and such like places.

In this heat of running to and fro, if a plain Fellow well and cleanely
apparelled, either in home-spunne Russet or Freeze (as the season requires)
with a side pouch at his girdle, happen to appear in his rusticall likeness.
There is a cousen says one. At which word out flies the Taker, and thus gives
the onset upon my old Penny-father. Sir, God save you: you are welcome to
London, how do all our good friends in the Country? I hope they be well: the
Russetting amazed at these salutations of a stranger, replies: Sir, all our
friends in the country are in health, but pra'y pardon me, I know you not
believe it: No (answers the Taker) are you not a Lancashire man, or o^ such a
country? if he says yes, then the fish nibbles and he gives him more line to
play with: if he say no, then the Taker has about with another weapon, and
swears soberly, In good sooth sir I know your face, and am sure we have been
merry together, I pra'y (if I may beg it without offense) bestow your name upon
me, and your dwelling place. The innocent man, suspecting no poison in this
gilded cup, tells him presently his name and abiding, by what Gentleman he
dwells. etc. which being done, the Taker for thus interrupting him in his way,
and for the wrong in mistaking him for another) offers a quart of wine: if the
Cozen be such an ass to go into a Tavern, then he is sure to be Unckled,
but if he smack my Taker, and smell Gunpowder trains, yet will not be blown
up, they part fairly, and then to the Verser goes the Taker, discovering what
he has done, and delivers the man's name, country, and dwelling to the Verser,
who boldly stepping to him, or crossing the way to meet him full in the face,
takes acquaintance presently of him, salutes him by his name, inquires how such
and such Gentlemen do, that dwell in the same town by him, and albeit, the
Honest Hobnaile-wearer, can by no means be brought to remember this new
friend, yet will he nill he, to the Tavern he swears to have him, and to
bestow upon him the best wine in London.

Diverse other pullies (if these two fail) have they to draw simple men into
their company, as by dropping a shilling in the open way, which being taken up
in the Countrie-mans sight, must be spent in wine, because he shall have his
half part, or by entreating him to step into a Tavern till the Verser have
writ a word or two into the Country, which he must carry to his friends,
offering the Cozen a shilling for his pains. But the conclusion of all is,
that if they think his bag is well lined with silver, to the Tavern by one
subtle hook or other, they will pull him, where being set with the Verser,
and the Taker, and wine called for: In comes the Barnard stumbling into the
Room, as if it were by chance, seeming to be half drunk: and crying the
company mercy for being so bold with them, they modestly answer no hurt is
done, and ask him if he will drink with them? he takes their offer, and
swears to pay for a pint of Wine, which they by no means will suffer.

But the Barnard telling them he has money for what he calls, and using phrases
fit for a drunken man, out flies some 20. or 40. Angels on the board, which he
puts up presently again and says, seeing they will not suffer him to pay for
a pint, he will play at cards for it with any one of them at a new game
which he learnt but now, with the loss only of a pot of Ale. The rest of his
consort (making as though what they do is to be rid of him are content to
play for a pint and no more. The Taker or the Verser is the man must play with
him, the Cards are fetched, Mumchaunce or Decoy is the game: the first wager is
wine, the second two pence in money, from two pence they rise to a shilling
from that to a pound, and having drawn some good store of gold from the
Barnard, the Cozen (allured with the sweetness of gain, and hope of winning,
seeing the other half drunk, as he imagines) is offered to be half in
whatsoever is won: he stoops to this lure, but the bush is so well beaten by
these subtle fowlers, that in the end, all the birds are flowne out of the
Cozens hand, and he has not one pennye left him in his purse: if then he
smell the knauerie, and fall to calling for a Constable, swearing the drunken
rascal has cozened him (for the Barnard you must know carries away all the
money) then enters the Rutter, who picking some idle quarrel either in the
room, or at the street door, the couey of the cheat ^s take their flight in
the mean time, and that (with the sharing of the purchase in another Tavern)
is the Epilogue to their commedie, but the first entrance to the poor
countrimans Tragedy.

These Comedians strowte likewise up and down the country in the habites of
Seruingmen, and silly fellows, haunting Brainford, Kingston, Croyden, Rumford,
and such other places nearest London upon the Market days only, and at the
end of market, when Butchers, grasiers and others whom they think to be stored
with money are on their way home, then will one of this crew overtake them in
ryding, and light at some town of purpose to mend his girt, to remove a shoe
of his horse, or upon any other excuse, entreating the company (with whom he
is newly acquainted) to stay and drink a pot with him in the mean time. And in
these country voyages do they sail by other points of the compass, the
winds are not so boisterous, nor the Seas so rough as the former, for here is
there neither one that plays the drunkard nor any that swaggers, but these
deuilish Masquers, pass under these names at such meetings. viz. 1 The party
that fetches in the gul, (whose feathers they mean to pluck) is not called
the Taker, but the Setter 2. He that seconds him, keeps his first title, and
is called the Verser. 3 He that loses his money, not a Cozen but a cony. 4 H^
that comes in, and before counterfeited the drunken Barnard, is now sober and
called the Barnacle.

Sometimes likewise this Card-cheating, goes not under the name of Barnards
Law, but is called Bat-fowling, and then the Setter is the Better, the fool
that is caught in the net, the Bird, the Tavern to which they repair to work
the Feate is the Bush, the wine the Strap, and the Cards the Limetwigs.

Thus have I discovered a strange Art, by which Conyes are caught after a new
manner of hunting, and Cozens found out that were never of the kindred before.
Thus the honest farmer simply going about his business, is stripped of that
money, which should further his Law-sutes, and so perhaps is overthrown; Thus
the Seruingman being sent with his Lords treasure, is cheated and turned out of
service: Thus the prentice having his Masters wealth in his hand, is robbed (by
tame thieves) and in the end driven to run away or to dye in prison. Thus the
Gentleman coming new to his land is made a beggar: thus the Merchant is
undone. Thus all men are abused. Thus the commonwealth is dishonored by
feeding such vipers in her womb, that cannot live but by gnawing out of her
bowels.

Vincents Law.
THe Dycing Cheater, and the cozening card-player, walk in the habites of
Gentlemen, and carry the faces of honest men. So likewise do those that are
students in the Vincents Law: whose Inn is a bowling Alley, whose books are
bowls, and whose law-cases are lurches and rubbers. The pastime of Bowls, is
now grown to a common exercise, or rather a trade, of which some of all
companies are free, the sport is not so common as the cozenage used in it,
which to have it live with credit and in a good name, it is called the Vince^ts
law.

In this Law they which play booty are the Bankers. He that betteth is the
Gripe. He that is cozened is the Vincent. The gains gotten is called Termage.
The Bankers are commonly men apparelled like honest and substantial Citizens:
who come into the Bowling Allies for a rubbers or so, as though it were rather
for sport, then for any gains, protesting they care not whether they win or
loose: which carelessnes of theirs is but a shadow to their pretended knavery:
whilst they are crying Rub, rub, rub and a great one, In come the spectators
dropping one by one, and stand leaning over a Rail to behold them; of which
oftentimes some simple men that never saw common Bowling Ally before, may
perhaps be of the number, and is brought in of purpose by one of their own
Brotherhoode to be rid of his money: if such a young bird happen amongst them,
and do once but chirp, that's to say either take or offer any lay, they all
harken to his note, especial^y if he sing shrilly, that's to say be deep: if
there be good store of Lookerson, then are there certain old soakers, whose
office is to do nothing but listen for bettes either even or od: and these are
called Gripes; which Gripes will refuse no Lay, if the ^ds may grow to their
advantage, for the Gripes and the Banckers are sworn brothers to the devil
(their father in law) and the bowls have such virtue in them that their
biasses will directly run* as the Gripes have placed their Bets. the Banckers
(albeit they so play as if they minded nothing but their own game) yet have
still an ear how the lays are made, and according to that level do they
throw their bowls, so that be sure the bowlers play booty: for suppose 7. be
up for the game, and that the one side has 3. the other none, then the Vincent
(who is the Nouice that stands by, and is not acquainted with the tallents of
these Gripes, nor feels not when they draw blood of him, no nor does not so
much as carry an evil thought of the bowlers that they should play booty,
looking so gravely and so like to honest men) he poor colte, seeing three to
none, beegins to grow lusty, and to offer odds on that side which is fairest
for the game: what ods says the Gripe? 3. to one cries the Vincent: no says
the Gripe it is more, and with that the Bankers are come to four for none,
then the Vincent offers to lay four to one: I take six to one says the Gripe,
I lay it cries the Vincent: and so they make a bet of six crowns, shillings,
or pence, as the Vincent is of ability to lay: and thus will sundry take their
ods of him: On then go the Bankers with the game and win another cast which is
five for none; at this fools fortune of his, the Vincent grinnes for joy,
scratches his elbowe, and is so proud, that no ground about the Alley can hold
him, thinking verily both by the ods and goodness of the play, it is
impossible for his ^i^e to loose, and therefore (being now foole-hardy) he
takes and lays bets freelye: all eyes greedily marking the event of this
storm; At the length on a sudden, the Sun begins to shine on the other
side that were none, and they win perhaps so long till they come to three or
five, and still as their luck altars, diversity of bets are laid; till at
last they are five for five: and then the Gripe comes upon the Vincent, and
offers him ods, which if the Vincent fasten upon, he loses all, for upon what
side soever the Gripe lays, that side ever wins, how great soever the odds be
at first on the contrary part, so that the cosenage grows in at playing
booty. This sour banquet to the Vincent is seasoned with sweet meats to the
Bankers and y^ Gripes, who at night meet in some Tavern, and share the money
gotten by this base means, which money they call Termage.

Now to shadow the villainy the more, the Banker that wins and is a forehand
with the game, will lay frankly that he shall win, and will bet hard, and
lay great ods, but with whom? either with them who play with him that are as
crafty knaves as himself, or else with the Gripe, and this makes the Vincent
to stoop to the blow the sooner. Besides, if any honest men that hold
themselves skillful in bowling, offer to play any set match against these
common bowlers, if these Bankers fear to have the worst and suspect the others
play to be better than theirs, then have they a trick (in watring of the
alley) to give such a moisture to the bank, that he who offers to strike a
bowl with a shore, shall never hit it whilst he lives, because the moisture
of the Bancke hinders the proportion of his Aiming. Many other practices there
are in Bowling, tending to cozenage, but the greatest and grosest is Booty, in
which the deceit is so open and palpable, that I have seen men stone blind
offer to lay bets frank^y, although they could see a bowl no more then a post,
only by hearing who plaide, and how the old Gripes had made their lays.

Thus, sports that were invented for honest recreation, are by the wicked
abusing of them, turned to men's confusion: And not only in these games before
rehearsed, but also in those that are both more laudable, and more lawful. For
in the Tenniscourt cheating has a hand, yea and in shooting, which is the
noblest exercise of our English Nation, arrows do now and then fly with
false feathers. Since then that all kind of Gaining serves but as gulphes to
devour the substances of men, and to swallow them up in beggerie, my counsel
is utterly either to refrain such pastimes, or if men are of such spirits that
they must needs venture their money, then to be very provident how they play,
and to be cho^se of their company. Now let us turn over the volumes of other
Laws, enacted in the Parliament of these Devils.

The Black Art.
Having waded thus far in these puddles of damned impiety, it shall not be
amiss to go on, and search even to the bottom and farthest shore of them:
to effect which the sooner, we must now deal in the Black Art. It is not
that Black Art, by which men conjure up spirits, and raise Devils in Circles,
to tell where money is hid, or whether goods that are stolen are conuaied; But
this Black Art, is to fetch away money where it lies, and to raise up a fiend
in a rich Mercers or Goldsmithes shop at midnight without the gibrish of a
staring Coniurer. This Black art works in darkness, as well as the other: it
deals with the Devil as the other does, and is as unlawful as the other is:
it you will needs (in a word) know the mystical meaning of this black Art,
it is called in English Picking of Locks, and this Engine of mischeife turns
upon these five wheels, viz.

The Picklocke is called a Charm. He that watches if any body come is the
Stand. The tools that do the business are called Wresters. Picking of the
lock is called Farsing. The gains gotten is Pelferie.
Now albeit that two persons only are employed in this undermining of a door,
viz the Charm and the Stand, yet the burglarie is committed by other hands,
which are in a readiness to receive the goods (when the house is entered) and
to convey them in parcells away. The Charm (who is the master of this black
Art, goes like a coniurer, with a number of keys and wrests like so many
Pentacles) about him, which he calls picklocks, and for every sundry fashion
they have a sundry term, but being ignorant of their words of Art, I omit
them, only assuring you thus much, that the Charm has such cunning, and such
dexterity in opening of a lock (and that without any great noise) that no
ward whatsoever (be it never so doubled) but flies back at his Iugling with
it. Some have their instruments from Italy made of steel, some are made here
in England by Smiths that are partners and pertakers in their villainous
occupations. But howsoever, the trade of Lockpicking may well be called the
Black-Art, for none study it, but those that for other men's goods have fold
their very souls to the Devil.

The Curbing Law.
THe Black Art and the Curbing Law, are grounded both upon the self same
positions: for the Black Art teaches how to break open a lock, the Curbing
Law how to hook goods out of a window; they both are workers in Iron, both are
begotten in Idleness, both live by villainy, and both die by infamy* A smith is
the maker and setter up of these two trades the hangman is the utter vndoer of
them. This Curbing Law spreads it self into four maine branches.

He that hooks is called the Curber. He that plays the spy is the Warpe. The
Hook is the Curb. The goods are called Snappings. The Gin to open the window
is a Tricker.
The office of the Curber is for the most part betimes in the mornings (at the
discharging of a watch) to be up more early then a noise of shrugging fiddlers;
and the husbandry which he follows, is in the day time to watch what shops or
windows stand fittest for his trade, which if he find easily to be opened,
then the cony is in the pursuit without much ^retting: But i^ he must take
pains for his living, out come his Trickers, and then) as if he were a brother
of the Black-Art) does he with those Iron engines, cut a bar of Iron in
sunder, in such sort that scarce the standers by shall hear him. The window
being thus open, and that he has good hope to meet with fat Snappings, (or
rich purchase) the warp bustles to play his part and watches with cats-eyes in
the dark, looking (like one a squint, or as if he stood to catch Hares) two
ways one to spy who comes, the other to note what comes out at the window:
to carry which away he is furnished with a long Cloak. But first must the
Curber play his prize, and that is with an Iron about nine foot in length, at
whose end (being crooked) are three Tynes turned contrary, so that they catch
every way, if any snappings be within their reach. This hook or Curb is made
with joints like an Angling rod, and in the day time is conveyed into the form
of a truncheon, and worn like a walking staff till night, when it is put to
do other service. Whatsoever the Curber with his angle fishes for and takes,
the warp bears it away, and he delivers it either to a Broker or some bawd
(for they all are of one feather,) of which Receivers they have as present
money for it, as if they traded with mercha^ts. Then is there (belonging to this
faculty) a Diuer, and he is just in the nature of a Curberf, or as the one
practices his villainy with a hook, so the Diuer works his iugling feats by
the help of a boy (called a Figger) whom he thrusts in at a casement, being so
well studied that he has the principles of the Black Art, and can pick a lock
if it be not to much cross warded: this Figger delivers to the Diuer what
snappings he finds in the shop or chamber.

The Prigging Law.
BEing weary with going thus far on foot, let us now (sithence we have
overtaken a horseman) get up and ride along with him. Yet now I look upon him
well, it is more safety and butter policy to let him ride by himself, for
he rides circuit with the Devil, and Dericke must be his host, and Tyborne
the June at which he will light. This ranckrider is of the family of Kinghts
e^^ant, or of those wandering Rogues that march in the first files of my book,
his name is a Prigger, deriuing his title from his practice, which is called
the Prigging Law, whose grounds are the cleanly and cunning staaling of horses.

This Prigging Art runs into six rivers, all of them falling into one
stream, and all of them flowing from one head.

He that steals the horse is called the Prigger. The horse is called a Prancer.
The seller away of the stolen horse is a Martar. The Tolling house is called
Alhallowes. The tiller is the Rifler. The sureties at the toll-booke are called
Querries. A Prigger on foot is called Trayler.
The Prigger if he be a lance-man (that is to say, one that is already horst)
then rides he in state, atte^ded by followers, who are either like his servants
in liueries, or in the hat it of gentlemen, or most commonly in the shapes of
Drouers: in this equipage do they walk up and down medowos and pastures or
other enclosed grounds, as if their purpos^ were to buy cattle, whereas their
eyes are only busled in noting horses, that are worth the stealing. and
whether their heels are fettred with horse^locks or no. The first circle being
drawn in the day time, the next night following our Priggers fall to
coniuring, and by the spells of the Black Art, pick open the Tramelles or
locks, and then like Battes or Owls away they fly over hedge and ditch out of
those quarters. The owners in the morning may smell out their footesteps and
see which way they are rid post but unless either the Devil himself either
went with a candle and lantern before them, the Priggers would never be
found, or else carried them on his back, and bid them to hold fast by his
horns whilst he gallopped, it were not possible to overtake them, For this
policy they use, if the Prigger steal a horse in York-shiere, he sels him in
Surrey, Kent or Sussex; and their martars (so called of hunting Mort^ or
Faires) who receive them at the Priggers hands, chop them away in some blind
faires or other after they have kept them a month or two, til the breath of
the Hue and Cry be blown over.

If the horse be of any value and much inquired after, or carry such brands or
eare-marks about him, that they cannot put him off without danger, then do
these Prigges brand him with a crosse-brand on the former, or take away his
eare-marke, and so keep him at hard meat till he be perf^ctly recovered, or
else will they sell him in Cornewal or Wales, if he be fetched out of
Cumberland, Lincolneshire, Norfolk or S^ffolke. But if the horse be openly
colou^ed and without Brandes, then have they shifts to spot them so strangely,
that a man shall hardlye know his own horse if he meet him as to mark a
black-horse with saddle-spots, or to star him in the forehead, and change his
tail, the secrets of which are not fit in print to be discovered, least laying
open the abuse, I should teach some how to practice it.

This is the life of the Prigger, who travels up and down the whole kingdom
upon his Gelding of 20* and 40. pound price, and is taken for a man of good
worth, by his outward show, being (amongst his own fraternity of
horse-stealers) called a Prigging lance-man. But he that borrowes a ^ag out of
another man's pasture, and cares not so he may get money for him, how he puts
him away, only to supplye his wants, is called a Trayler: These Traylers trot
upon the hoof, and are footmen, mean in apparel, though not mean in their
theeuing trade: you shall have them attired like plain country grans, walking
(like our threadbare gallants in Poules) in boots without spurs, and sometimes
without boots, long staves on their necks, and black buckram bags at their
backs, as if they were Lawyers Clients, and carried letters up and down: But
those buckram bags are the horses wardrobe: In those bags do these sneaking
Traylers put saddle, bridle, spurs, stirrops, and stirrup leathers, all this
hackney household stuff being made so quaintly, that the deep slop of a hose
is able to hide it: for the saddle is fashioned without any tree (yet has it
cantle and bolsters) but artificially quilted together with cloth and bu^bast,
and with such ^oldes that it may easily be wrapped up in a little room: the
stirrops go with vices and ginnes, that one may put them into a pair of
gloves, so likewise do the spurs, and then a little white leather head-stall
and reins, with a small scottish brake or snaffle, all of them so neately
framed, that a small bag will contain them. And look how the Lance-man rides
post when he fits upon his prey, so when the Trayler, is in the Saddle, away
he gallops as if every Jade of seven nobles price ^ were a winged Pegasus,
selling him as far off from the place where he stole him, as possibly he
can.

Now because these Priggers though they break the law in one point, yet they
make it whole in another, and very orderly come to the Toll-booke, bringing
two of their own religion) ciuilly attired (fitting the place) who not only
affirm but offer to depose that they know the horse to be his own that sels
it; yet are these caitifes no better then old knights of the post that will
periure themselves for pots of Ale, and never s^w perhaps either the Prigger,
or the Prancer before: these wicked Elders, having for villainies bin banished
out of Westminster Hall, or for their periuries stood and lost their ears on
the pillorie, retire themselves into the country, and profess this kind of
life, being by the horse-stealers called (though they are far unworthy of so
good a mame) Querries: leaving whom (with the horsemen their good Lord and
Masters) either to an amendment of manners, or to the mercy of the Hangman,
who must teach them to ride his wooden curtal, let us, because we are now
lifting them out of the sadd^e, turn over a new leaf, and read a lecture in
the Lifting law.

The Lifting Law.
THe Lifting Law, is not the Law of Porters, who live by lifting, and cry to
another, lend me your hand, when honestly they are to carry a barthen for a
penny, and safely to deliver it to the owner back again: but this Law
teaches a kind of lifting of goods clean away. In such liftings are three
sorts of Leauers used to get up the baggage. viz:

He that first steals the parcel is called The Lift. He that receives it is
the Marker. He that stands without and carries it away, is the Santar.
The goods thus purchased, is called Garbage, which Garbage is sometime plate
or Jewels, sometimes pieces of velvet, sometimes cloakes or Lawyers gowns,
sometimes one thing sometimes another.

The practitioners of this lifting Law, take several degrees; for some of them
(and they are the Punies) are but base Rogues, that live by lifting quart pots,
platters, and such (...) out of Tippling houses, under color of spending two or
three Pots of Ale. These are the Rascallitie of this Heard. But the G^ntleman
Lifter walks with his Marker at his heels, as if he were a Country
Gentleman of 500. a year, and coming into a Mercers or goldsmiths shop,
presently casts by his cloak (to color his intents) the Marker standing
bare-headed not far from him his worship then calls for a bolt of Satin,
Ueluet, cloth of gold or silver; or any of the richest commodities: and not
liking the pile color or brack, his eye must have the choice of more, the
Marker in mean time whilst the Mercer is busy and turns his back, has the
Garbage thrust toward him by the Lifter, and conueies it under his cloak, the
Sentar who walks in the street, passing then in great haste by the door, is
called back by the Marker, as if he were such a Gentleman's, Knights, or
Noble-mans servant: but the Sentar swears he cannot stay, the Marker tells him
he must needs have one word with him, and so stepping along with him some part
of the way, secretly conueies the Garbage to the Sentar.

Other Lifts there are, that haunt Noble-mens houses, at Marriages or solemn
Reuelings in Christmas, and the Hals of companies when they make Feasts, at
which times they lift away Goblets or other pieces of Plate, na^ery, or any
thing worth the ventring for.

Others ply Counselors Chambers, that are well clyented, and sit down in the
outer rooms like country men, having black boxes by their sides, and papers
in their hand: but their attendance is not for counsel, nor to pay any fees,
but to Lift away G^wnes or Cloakes, by the rules of their own Law. The like
pair of Indentures do they draw in shops, between Scriueners and themselves.

Another more cunning then all these Liftings, is when in an evening, a
Batfowler walks up and down the streets, and counterfeits that he has let
fall a Ring, a Jewel, or a piece of Gold, requesting some Prentice (when there
is but one in the shop) ^o lend him his candle a while to find his losses, who
simply does so but the Lifter poring a good while and not meeting with his ring
lets the candle in the end slip out of his fingers, and whilst the prentice
steps in to light it again, the Sentar or he himself steals what^ garbage
they can finger, and are gone in the mean time.

You have another kind of Lifter, or more properly a cunning night-shifter,
and it is thus. You shall have a fellow, that is an evening or might time, or
sometime at noone days, as he likes the company, and sorts his opportunity,
that will wilfully drop sometime a spoone, other while a ring, or else some
piece of coined money, as the likeness of gold and silver and so spurning it
before them in the view of others, to the end they should cry half part, which
he taking hold of, says, nay by my tr^th, what will you give me and take it
all? and so some greedy ^ool^s offer thus much, thinking it gold, which the
Lifter takes, as knowing it counterfeit, and so are they cunny-cought.

Then is there a kind of Lift; who like a Iugler does all his ^eates of
himself not caring for the help of others, he goes ^ttired like a
S^ruingman, booted and spurd and dirtie as if he had new ridden: his haunts are
the best towns in the country upon market days, but most commonly Faires:
the birds he watches for are Knights, esquires, or Gentlemen that light at the
greatest Innes, whether most resort is, who shall no sooner come from horse
but this Lifter is ready to hold his stirrup, or to walk his horse as
officiouslie as if he wore his cloth: So that to the Guest he seems to be ^ne
to be belonging to the house and to the servants of the house he appears to
be a follower of the Gentleman newly alighted. But the guest being departed
from his Inn to the town, or into the Fair, back comes this counterfeit Blew
coat, running in all have for his Masters cloake^bag or portmantua, and calr
to the ostler or Chamberlain by his dame to deliver it, because some things
must be taken out for his Knight or the Gentleman his Master, that are in it.
The prey is put (hereupon) into the vultures tallants, and away flies he
presently to his n^st, to feed and fat his ravenous gorge with the garbage
which he has gotten.

But what nests think you they fly to? marry to the house either of some
not^rious trebble-chind ba^de (in whose beds commonly these Serpents lie
lurking (who keeps a tippling house, and brings up young Trugs (under the the
color of filling Ca^s) that are Harlots to the Lifts, or else to the shops of
certain brokers, who traffic only in this kind of merchandise and by bills of
sale (made in the name of Robin-goodfellow and his crew) get the goods of
honest Citizens into their hands, either detaining them so long in their chests
till they be no more sought after, or else so altring them that the Owners shall
hardly know them. Thus the Lift and his mates prepare the lime^wigs and catch
the bird, but the Bawd and Broker eat the flesh and give the other only the
feathers.

The High-Law.
ALl this while have I read unto you the beggarly Law, and base common Laws of
Villainy, by which the Outlawes of a kingdom, and Outcasts of a well governed
Commonwealth, maintain their damnable courses. Now must you cast up your eyes
and look aloft, if you have a desire to behold the picture of the High Law:
which takes that name from the high exployts that are acted by it: the
Scholler^ that learn it are called High Lawyers; yet they never walk to
Westminster to plead, though oftentimes they are called to the Bar, but then
it is to have them to Hold up their hands, that the hangman may tell them their
fortune. All the former laws are attained by wit, but the High Law, stands both
upon Wit and Manhood. For the High Law is nothing else but taking a pursse by
the High-way-side, so that to be a good practitioner in this Law* a man needs
no more but a bold stern look, a good heart, and a good sword: the cases that
he is to plead upon, is only Stand and deliver, Al travelers are so beaten
to y^ trials of this law, that if they have but rode over Shooters Hill, or
Salisburie-plaine, they are as perfect in the principles of it, as if they had
been 7. years in the company of High Lawyers. The Counsel a High Lawyer gives
is common, but his sees are unreasonable, for he strips his Clients of all. The
motions which he makes are both in Term and out of Term; I shall not need
therefore to open any of his Cases, But only will tell you thus much, y^ this
high law is comprehended in five Volumes, viz.

The th^efe chat commits the Robbery, and is chief clarke to Saint Nichela^,
is called the High Lawyer. He that sets the watch is a Scripper. He that
stands Centinell and does watch, is an Oak. He that is robbed, is the Martin.
When he yields, it is called Stooping.
All the shires in England have seen these High law matters tried, and
therefore if any would know them or the professors of them to a hair* let him
but step into the Old Bailey at any Sessions, and he shall hear more.

The Sacking Law.
THe companion of a Thief is commonly a Whore; it is not a^isse therefore, to
pinneon them together: for what the thief gets the str^mpet spends. The trade
of these Tale-bearers goes under the name of the sacking law; and rightly may
it be called sacking, for as in the sacking of a City, all the villainies in
the world are set abroach, so when a Harlot comes to the sacking of a man's
wealth and reputation (for she bes^edgeth both together) she leaves no
stratagem unpracticed to bring him to confusion. Westminster and Holborn have
chambers full of these students of the Sacking law. In Clerken well, they had
wont and are still well cliented: White Friars is famous for their meeting: The
Spittle flourishes with the young fry that are put to it to learn it. Sacks
come to these Mils every hour, but the Sacking-Law empties them faster then a
Miller grindes his bushels of corn. He that has a lust to practice this Law,
must be furnished with these five books. viz.

The Baud, who if she be a woman is called a Pandaresse. The Apple-squire, who
is to fetch in wine. The Whore who is called the commodity. The Whore-house,
which is called a Trugging place.
These five Authors are so well known, and have bin so turned over leaf by
leaf, that every man (almost) that lives in sight of the smoke of the
City, has them at his fingers ends, or if he cannot, it is an easy matter
to find them by a Table. I will only refer you to the suburbs. But there is
a second part of this Sacking-Law, and that inst^ucts Punckes to attire
themselves neately in summer euenings, and about ten or eleven of the clock at
night to walk up and down the most peopled streets of the City, very
soberly and gingerly, till the wine (by one Gull or other) be offered, which
with a little entreaty she takes; but being in the midst of their bowls, or
perhaps the silly cony being trained home to a lodging, where he falls to
Nibling; in comes a Ruffian with a drawn rapier, calls the Punck (as she is)
damned whore, asks what Rogue that is, and what he does with his wife? The
conclusion of all this counterfeit swaggering being a plot betwixt this
panderly ruffian and the whore to geld the silly fool of all the money he has
in his purse, and sometimes to make him (rathe^ then his credit should be
called into question) to seal a bill or bond for other sums of money at such
and such days, and so send him packing, when he has paid too dear for a bad
dish of meat which he never tasted* the base Applesquier and his young
mistress, laughing to see what a woodcocke they pulld, and sharing the
feathers betwee^e them. But when such comedies (of the Sacking law) as these,
are plaide* then the Actors have other names then are set down before, and
these they be: The whore is then called the Traffic. The man that is brought
in, is the Simpler. The Ruffian that takes him napping is the Crosbiter.


The Figging Law.
THe Parliament of these hel-hounds, it seems will soon break up, for they
stand now only upon the lest law; which they call Figging Law: in making of
which law two persons have the chiefest voices, that is to say the Cutpurse
and he Pickpocket, and all the branches of this law reach to none but them and
such as are made free denizens of their incorporation. This Figging Law (like
the body of some monstrous and terrible beast) stands upon ten feet, or rather
lifts up proudly ten Drago^-like he^ds: the names of which heads are these. viz.

He that cuts the purse is called the Nip. He that is half with him is the
Snap, or the Cloyer. The knife is called a Cuttle-bung. He that pickes the
pocket is called a Foist. He that faceth the man is the Stale. The taking of
the purse is called Drawing. The spying of this villainy is called Smoking or
Boiling. The purse is the Bung. The money the Shells. The act doing is called
Striking.
This Figging Law has more quirkes and quiddities in it then any of the
former; it is as dangerous to meddle with as the High-Law* in pleading whose
cases men are at daggers drawing: the scholars of this Art are cunning
Sophisters, and had need to have more eyes then two in one head, because the
Arguments they hold, and their bold villainies which they practice are argued
upon and justified to his teeth, with whom they contend. The Foyst and the Nip
(that is to say the Pocket di^er and the cut pursse) are pewfellowes together
and of one religion, but differ in some points. A purse well lined is the wet
Eele they both bob for, but they strive to catch it by the tail after several
fashions. For the Nip^works with his knife, the Foyst with his hand: the Nip
cuts the purse, the Foyst draw^ the pocket: both their occupations are taught
them by the Devil, yet they both brag of the excellency of them and are ready
sometimes to stab one another, about defending which is best for the Foist
counts himself the better man, and therefore is called (by the livery of his
company) a gentleman Foist and so much scorns the title of a cut pursse, that
he wears not a knife about him to cut his own meat, le^t he be held in
suspicion to be a Nip, which he esteems the ba^est office in the whole Army of
Cheaters.

These scholars of the Figging law, are infinite in number, their College is
great, their orders many, and their degrees (which ar^ given to them by the
Seniors of the house) very ancient but very abominable.

The language which they speak is none of those which came in at the confusion
of Tongues, for neither infidel nor Christian (that is honest) understands it,
but the Dialect is s^^h and so crabbed; that seven years study is little
enough to reach ^o the bottom of it, and to make it run off glib from the
tongue: by means of this Gibrish, they know their own nation when they meet,
albeit they never saw one another before; and* ^o conformable are they to the
ordinances of the Brotherhoode, that whatsoever y^ wicked Elders amongst them
shall prescribe, Actum est, it is a law, and they will not break it, yea ^ot the
proudest of them dare be so bold as to exercise his Art in any other place but
in those that are appointed to him, nor once presume to set his foot into
another walk, but by license of the Signiorie.

For that purpose therefore, (as if a whole kingdom were theirs) they allot
such countries to this Band of Foists, such towns to those, and such a City
to so many Nips: whereupon some of these Boote-halers are called Termers, and
they plye Westminster Hal: Michaelmas Term is their harue^^* and they sweaf in
it harder then reapers or hay makers do at their works in the heat of summer*
no Counselor* Attorney, Pettifogger nor Solliciter is up earlyer then they:
nor at the Hall sooner then they: when C^yents begin to come crowding in,
watermen ply not their fares more nimbly then the Nips, and Foists bestir
themselves to pick up their shells; the hal and the old palace are their
Hiues* and they work in them like Bees: the Exchequer Chamber, Star Chamber,
King's Bench and Common Pleas and Chancerie are the beds of flowers, to which
they fly humming too and fro continually to suck the honey of gold and silver.
If a poor Clyent do but stand by his Lawyer, whilst he is pleading, and
draws out his pursse to pay his fees for counsel, or to the Court for
dispatch of his business, these furies are sure to be at his elbow, watching
(with Hawks eyes) on which side he puts up his pursse, to that sid^ they fly,
and if their tallents can but touch it, it is their own. Others of them have
all the flesh and fish markets allowed them for their walks, as Cheape-side,
East-cheap, the shambles, both Fishstreets, the Stocks, and the Borough in
Southwarke, in which places these faithful Stewards of Lucifers household,
cheapon all commodities, only to note what money wives or servants that come
to buy, have in their purses, and where they put it up, which being well
observed, the Stall plies his market, and follows him or her (whose silver is
condemned) till they come to a press of people: then does the Stall keep a
t^rusting and a Iustling, whilst in the mean time the Foist is either in their
pocket, or the Nip has the pursse sa^t by the strings. Others haunt Alehouses
only, and the Beare-garden: some have their precinct lying in the walks of
Poules, their hours of meeting there being between 10 and 11. the strokes they
strike being sometimes in the middle I Will, if it be in Term time, when the walks
are full, but most commonly at the doors of the Church, which they will choke,
and strive for passage, whilst another does the ^eat. At running at Tilt, the
L. Majors day, any great shooting, any fray, any solemn arraignment, or
execution, is better to these Hell Hounds, than a quarter day is to a Landlord,
or then five Sessions are to the hangman. Yea so feareles are these Devils to
be thrown headlong and quick into the pit of damnation, that even in Gods own
house and the sacred Temple (do they desperately commit their villainies,
standing most devoutly with eyes elevated up to heaven before the preacher,
where the press of people is thickest, whilst their hands are nibling in
honest men's pockets for their purses, who are careless of such worldly matters
there, as not mistrusting that any so bad-minded dare enter into so holy a
place. These Nips and Foists go oftentimes cleanely away with the shells which
they get, but oftentimes are they d^gged by certain fellows (called Cloyers)
who hang upon them like Burres, and are more troublesome then waspes: for no
sooner is a Bung drawn, but the Cloyer steps in for his Tenth, which he calls
Snappage, if the Nip deny Snappage, the Cloyer forthwith Boyles him, that is
bewrayes him or seaseth on his cloak.

You must understand likewise, that both of Nips and Foists there are two
sorts, for there be City Nips and country Nips whose office is to haunt
nothing but Faires: these country nips neuercome into London to do any piece
of service, but a^ Bartholmewtide only. Between these two sects is mortal
enmity, for if the City Foist spy one of the country Foists in london, he
forthwith labors and lays wait to smoke or Boil him, the like does the
country Nip or Foist by him of the City. There are also women Foists and Nips
as well as men, but far more dangerous then (...) men: All the troops of
both sexes being subject to the disci^^ne of the Grand Nips and folsts, and
from whom, the better to ^^ceiue directions both what to do, and what
quarters to keep (^or they shift their walks according to the pleasure of the
chief rangers, they have a certain house, sometimes at one end of the town,
sometimes at another, which is their hall; at this Hall the whole company do^
meet very orderly: by which means whenever any notable or workmanlike
strok is stricken, though it were as far as the North-borders, yet ^an the
rest of the Fig-b^ie^ here resident in London, tell by whom this worthy Act
was plaide.

At this solemn meeting in their Hall, they cho^se Wardens, and Steward: the
Wardens office is to establish wholesome Laws to keep life in their rotten
common wealth, and to a^signe out to every man his Stations. The treasurers
office is very truly (though he be an arrant theete) to render an account of
such moneys as are put into his hands upon trust: for of every purse (that is
cleanely conveyed and has good store of Shells in it) a ratable portion is
delivered (in Banck as it were) to the Treasurer, to the intent that when any
of them is taken and cast into prison, a Flag of truce may presently be hung
out, and composition offered to the wronged party, thereby to save a brother
of the society from riding westward. This had wont to be an order amongst
them: But now the Under keepers of Newgate, (if complaint be made to them for
the loss of any pursse, tha^e a trick to get a warant, into which warrant
they put the names of nine or ten of the most notorious Foists and Nips that
are free of their Jail (which they call Whittington College) and thos^ Nips
or Foists do the Iaylors nip, till the money perhaps double) be restored,
albeit not one of them that are specified in the warrant were guilty of the
fact: This trick does greatly impouerish the tradesmen of this mystery, and
may in time utterly overthrow the Students of the Figging Law.

The five Iumpes at Leape-frog.
THe whole volume of these detestable Laws is now read over ^to catch a heat
therefore after so long fitting, let us exercise our selves awhile at a new
play, called the five Iumps at Leape-frog. The property of the game at
Leape-frog, is (as every prentice and Carter knows) for one man to stoop, to
let another come over him, so in these Iumpes the running Cheaters sweat only
to make a man stoop so low, that they may break his back, and then they
ride over his misery with laughter.

The first Iump is called Horse-coursing, and that is done thus: A fellow in
good clothes and with an honest face to the eye, hires of a carier an Nag to
ride along with him to Cambridge, Oxford Norwich, or any great town of trade:
but let the journey be never so long, this Rider will end it in a forenoone at
most, for whilst the Carier is busy about his teeme on the way, and looking to
his charge, my horsecourser steps a^ide into some by-lane, and lights at some
paltrie town near the city where he will lie, till he have in (capons and
wine) eaten up the cariers beast alive; and then departs on foot, sending the
poor man word where his prancer stands at rack and manger, who if he will have
him must disburse forty shillings or three pound for his Iades diet. The
Hackney-men of Rochester have been oftentimes come over with this Iump at
Leap-frog and know the game well, for a man cannot name it but they are ready
to give it a curse.

The second Iump is called carrying of stones, and that is performed in this
manner: A crew of sharking companio^s (of which there be sundry consorts lurking
about the subburbs of this City) being driven out of means, by leading base
and idle lives, or else by their riotous expenses amongst whores, practice to
live upon the ^ee-s^^ple of their wits; and having amongst them all some little
money left (which they call their Shooinghorne) they seek out some blind
victualing house, or Cooks house, without the bars, whose Host (if it be
possible) is either an ass easy to be ridden, or else a common drunkard. In
this Colts house will they sit ^arowsing half cannes day and night, and pay
royally at first for what they call, that shooing-horne of theirs drawing the
Host and Hostess on to believe they shall be made for ever by these guests:
who to gull the poor Goosecap the better, draw all their acquaintance they can
to y^ house, never either drinking or feeding, but mine Host must sit at the
bords end like a Magnifico in pomp, with his ale^dropt greafie doublet shining
by candle light, as if it were an old rustie Armor scuruily scowred. But when
these Horse-leeches have sucked their guts full, or rather the pitifully
complaining Hosts guts empty, y^ he finds by his scores he can trust no more,
then do they at one time or other talk of state matters, or of religion when
the goodman of the house can scarce stand on his legs v^der his own roof,
and trip him in some words, which the next day (being told of it, and the words
justified to his face) he knows he dares not answer; with which hook holding
his nose to the grindstone, they write their mind in great round Oes of chalk,
behind a door, which Oes they call stones: the weight of them being such,
that look how many shillings they make, so many times the wretched Hostess
cries O, as groaning under the burden. Now Sir, of these Oes, twenty shillings
make a load, and ten pound make a barge-full: which when they have well
frughted, these Dunkerks h^yst sail and to Sea again, they go in another
vessel to find another Brazeeleman, y^ is to say, into another tippling house
to find another Jade whom they may all saddle and get up upon: if their last
host follow them with a Bailiffe or a Sergeant, they only hold up a finger,
naming a Purseuant and cry Mum, no more mine Host, you wot what, which words
are of more power to blow him away, then if you firde him thence with trains
of gunpowder. By means of this Iump, some Victualers have leaped clean out of
doors, and with the fall have been ready to lie in the streets.

The third Iumpe is called Fawning those that leap at it are Fawneguests, and
that is done in the edge of an evening, when a Cheater meeting a stranger in
the dark and taking him for another, gets the stranger by some slight to a
Tavern, where calling for two pintes of sundry wines, the drawer setting the
wines down with two cups, as the custom is, the Iumper tastes of one pint
(no matter which) and finds fault with the wine, saying it is too hard, but
rose water and sugar would send it down mecrily, and for that purpose takes up
one of the cups telling the stranger he is well acquainted with the Boy at the
Bar, and can have two penny worth of Rosewater for a penny of him, and so
steps from his seat, the stranger suspecting no harm, because the Fawne-guest
leaves his cloak at the end of the table behind him. But this Iump coming to
be measured, it is found that he that went to take his ris^ng at the bar,
has stolen ground and out-leaped the other more feet then he can recover in
haste, for the cup is leaped away with him, for which the woodcock that is
taken in the sprindge, must pay fifty shillings or three pound, and has
nothing but an old thredbare cloak not worth 10 greats to make amends for his
losses.

The fourth Iump is called Fooletaking, and that is done several ways,
sometimes by setting a couple of subtle rogues to ^^ng ballads on a stall, till
a number of people pr^sse about them to buy their trash, and then their purses
being discovered, are quickly in the nips fingers. Others are Foole-taken by
letting chambers to fellows like seruingmen, in the name of such an esquire,
or such a Knight, or such a captain new come from the low countries, bringing
in a trunck exceeding heavy, and crambd full of brick-bats, which is left in
the hired chamber, and five times the value of it li^ted away in stead of it.
With this ^ump many maid servants, and their wealthy Masters have been
ouer-reached by count^rfeit kinsmen that have brought a cheese or a gammon of
Bacon to the poor wench, claiming kindred of her whether she will or no, and
afterward being (for his cheese and bacon) invited to the Citizens table hane
in the night time taken away plate, or other commodities in exchange of his
white-meats.

The fifth Iump is called Spoone-meat, and that is a mess of knauerie served in
about Supper time in the edge of an evening likewise, It is done thus: A silly
fellow in show, attired like a clown, spurns (being near some candle that
sta^ds on a stall) a paper before him, in which is wrapped up a spoone, taking up
which and looking on it by the light, and making it known (by his loud talking
and wo^dring what he has found) that he took it up by chance, people flock
about him, and imagine it is a silver and gilt spoone, for it looks very
fair, but he seeming to be an innocent c^xcombe, kn^wes not h^ says, what he
should do with such a gew-gawe: whereupon every one is catching at it, and
offers him money for it, he wishes he had rather found money then such a babble,
for he eats not his pottage in plate; in the end, some For amongst all the
Cubbes that stand about him, whispers in his care, to have it from all the rest
and thrusts a crown privily into his hand. The Iumper takes it* and sneakes
away, the other gets home as fast as he can, longing till he call his wife, all
his household and neighbors about him, to show what a pen^worth he met with,
but the guilt spoone coming to be tried of what metal he is made, the poor
man's money proves copper, and he himself is laughed at for a Coxcombe.

How long shall I sail upon these godless waters? Is it not time to get a
shore? Is it not fit that I should now sound a retreat and not weary my pe^ in
the ex^ecution of such base and barbarous minded Caitiffes? What a battle
have I undertaken? and with what an ignoble enemy? to contend with whom, is an
act inglorious, and to conquer whom (but that they are open and professed foes
to the Republic, to honesty, to civility, and to all humanity) were as much
dishonor as by them to be overcome. Who would imagine that a Kingdom so
fertile in all sorts of wholesome discipline, there should grow up such rank
and such pestilent beds of hemlocke? that in the very heart of a state so
rarely governed and dieted by good laws, there should breed such loathsome and
such vlcerous impostumes? that in a City so politic, so civil, and so
severe, such ugly, base and bold impieties dare show their faces? What an Army
of insufferable Abuses, defestable Vices, most damnable Vilanies, abhomiable
Pollutions, inexplicable mischeifs, sordid inquinations, horible and
Hel-hound-like-perpetrated flagitious enormities have been here mustred
together? under what deuilish commanders are they conducted? what colors of
damnation do they fight under, what dismal Ensinge do they spread? what forces
do they bring into the field? how full of courage they are? how full of
cunning? how politic are the Ringlead^rs of these Faries? how resolute are all
the troops? what strange armor have they (of subtlety, and desperate boldness)
to encounter and set upon their opposites? what Artillery have they to batter
down, Order, Law, Custom, plain dealing, and all the good guards and
defenses of Government? What remains therefore (in an assault so dangerous
to a Common wealth, and so hotly and daily prosecuted) but that Justice her
self must come into the field, leading with her all her forces? That the
Triple Body of the state may knit all their Nerves together and sit in
Counsel, setting down stratagems and laws how to race for ever (out of so
noble a Kingdom) such Rebels to the peace and honor of it? That the Reverend
Judges may out of a detestation of the lives of these monsters, lock up their
eyes and ears from pity, when any of these Savages are caught and brought
before them: That all inferior ministers of Justice, may be vigilant, faithful
and severe in haunting them into Gaoles, that are the fittest toils for them
to fall into, and that the hangman may not lie lazing and complain for want of
work, so many infected bodies being to be found in every corner of the Land,
whom no medicine can cure, but the physic which he bestows upon him at the
Gallows? Where I leave them, as to the ^hauen in which they must all cast
Anchor, if Dericks Cables do but hold and unless they am^nd. Give thanks to
the Belman of London, if either profit or pleasure be gained by this Discovery.

Operis Peroratio. A short Discourse of Canting, which is the Langguage spoken
by all the Ragged Regiment, that serve under the colors of the Belman.
THus ha^h our Belman (like a faithful and watchful Centinell) wall^t his
reund: An army of a most strange people has he mustred together: In their
true colors of villainy has he drawn these Free-booters* their habits, their
behauiours and their properties, are to the life discovered: yet all this is
but a dumb picture. It shall not be amiss therefore it I give speech unto it
by lending it a tongue. In doing which you may perceive how polliticke a
Commonwealth these Out-lawes of the Kingdom maintain among themselves, in
devising not only strange and subtle Stratagems to uphold them in a base and
idle licentious kind of life, but also in inue^ting a language which none
understand but those that are Students in their dambd Art, the better to cover
their villainies, when they (in their talk) practice to set them abroach.

My purpose notwithstanding in this is not to bestow upon you so liberal and
full a discourse, as this matter does require, but only at this time to give
you a taste of that which in a second part of this book shall (God willing) be
more amply discovered. In which second part, our Bell man of London shall bring
to light a number of more notable enormities (daily hatched in this Realm)
then ever have yet bin published to the open eye of the world. These are small
spots, the other are the great blemishes, or rather the Vlcerous sores that
make the body of kingdom appear ugly and deformed. A larger net shall then
be spread, and more dangerous serpents shall fall into the snare, to the intent
that their stings may be pulled out, and all their poison may be drawn from
them, to make those that as yet know not how infectious they are, be afraid to
approach or to be in sight of such devouring Monsters. But because I will not
have them borne before their time (being yet but in the shell) least by that
means they miscarrie in their brood, and so you should be deceived in your
expectation: let us in the mean time stand with attentive ears, and listen to
an Vprigh^-man, whom I epsy ready to encounter with a Wilde-Roague. And this
is their Dialogue.

A short Dialogue between an Vp-right-man and a Rogue in the Canting-language.
The Upright Cofe Canteth to the Rogue.
1 Vpr. Been lightmans to thy quarrones: in what lipken have thou lipped in
this darkmans? whether in a libbege, or in the Strummell?


2 Rog. I couched a Hogshead in a Skipper this darkmans.


3 Vpr. I tower the strummell tryne upon the ^^bchett and tog^an.


4 Rog. I say by the Solomon I will lage it off with a gage of been bowse: then
cut to my nose watch.


5 Vpr. Why? have thou any lowre in thy bung to bowse?


6 Rog. But a flag, a win, and a make.


7 Up. Where is the ken that has the been bowse?


8 Rog. A been Mort, hereby at the sign of the prauncer.


9 Up. I cut, it is quire bowse, I bowsd a flag the last darkmans.


10 Rog. But bowse there a board and thou shall have benship: tower ye, yonder
is the ken* dup the Giger, and mawnd that is benship.


11 Up. This bowse is as good as Rome bowse* now I tower that been bowse makes
nase nabs, mawnd of this Mort, what been pecke is in her ken?


12 Rog. She has a cackling chese, a grunting chief, ruff, peck, Cassan; and
poplars of yarum.


13 Vpr. That is beneship to our watch; now we have well bowsd, let us strike
some chete: yonder dwells a quire cuffen, it were benship to ^ill him.


14 Rog. Nay, bing we a wast to the hye pad, the ruffmans is by.


15 Vpr. So may we happen on the Harmans, and cly the Ia^ke, or to the quire
ken, and scowre quire crampinges, and so to trymming on the chetes.


16 Rog. The Ruffian cly thee, farewell and betrinde.


This is their phrase, this the Rhethoricke of our English Rogues and this
(upon advice or ocasion) they varrie, putting out some words, and in their
stead inuenting others more new. This was none of the language that was spoken
at the confusion of tongues, but this is a mere confusion in it self. And
because you have no Dictionaries to give you the English of these words, you
shall have the self same companions speak the same Dialogue in their own
natural language.

The Vpright-man speaks to the Rogue.
1 Vpr. GOod morrow to thy body, in what house have thou lain all night? in a
bed or in the straw?


2 Rog. I slept in a barn this night?


3 Vpr. I see the straw hang upon thy cap and coat.


4 Rog. I swear by the Mass I will wash it off with a quart of good drink,
and then talk to me what thou will.


5 Vpr. Why? have thou any money in thy pursse?


6 Rog. But a groate, a penny, and a half penny.


7 Vpr. Where is the house that has the good drink?


8 Rog. It Is a good wench hereby at the sign of the horse.


9 Vpr. I say it is small and scuruie drink, I drunk a groat^ here last night.


10 Rog. But drink there a shilling and thou shall have very good, see, yonder
is the house, open the door and call for the best.


11 Vpr. This drink is as good as wine, now I see that good drink makes a
drunken head: ask of this wench what meat she has in the house?


12 Rog. She has a Hen, a Pig, bacon, cheese, and milke-pottage.


13 Vpr. That's very good for us now we have drunk, lets steal somewhat?
yonder dwells a churlish cormorant, twere a good deed to rob him.


14 Rog. So we may chance to sit in the stocks, and be either whipped, or had
to prison, and there be shackled with bolts and Fetters, and then to be hanged
on the gallows.


15 Vpr. The devil take thee, farewell and he hanged.


More of this Canting, with other matters of more worthy note shall be handled
by our Belman at his second walking up and down the City.

FINIS

