THE SECOND PART OF THE HONEST WHORE, WITH THE HVMORS of the Patient Man, the
Impatient Wife: the Honest Whore, persuaded by strong Arguments to turn
Curtizan again: her brave refuting those Arguments.

And lastly, the Comicall Passages of an Italian Bridewell, where the Scaene
ends.

Written by THOMAS DEKKER.

LONDON, Printed by Elizabeth All-de, for Nathaniel Butter. An. Dom. 1630.

THE HONEST WHORE.
Actus primus, Scaena prima.
Enter at one door Beraldo, Carolo, Fontinell, Astolfo, with Seruingmen, or
Pages attending on them; at another door enter Lodouico, meeting them.
Lodouico. GOod day, Gallants.

Omnes. Good morrow, sweet Lodouico.

Lodo. How do thou Carolo.

Carolo. Faith, as Physicions do in a Plague, see the World sick, and am well
my self.


Fontinell. Here Is a sweet morning, Gentlemen.

Lod. Oh, a morning to tempt Jove from his Ningle Ganimed, which is but to give
Dary Wenches green gowns as they are going a milking; what, is thy Lord
stirring yet?


Astolfo. Yes, he will not be horst this hour, sure.

Bercaldo. My Lady swears he shall, for she longs to be at Court.


Carolo. Oh, we shall ride switch and spur, would we were there once.


Enter Bryan the Footeman.
Lod. How now, is thy Lord ready?

Bryan. No so crees sa me, my Lady will have some little Tyng in her pelly
first.


Caro. Oh, then they will to breakefast.

Lod. Footman, does my Lord ride y'th Coach with my Lady, or on horseback?


Bry. No foot la, my Lady will have me Lord sheet wid her, my Lord will sheet
in de one side, and my Lady sheet in de toder side.

Exeunt.
Lod. My Lady sheet in de toder side: did you ever here a Rascal talk so like
a Pagan? Is It not strange that a fellow of his star, should be seen here so
long in Italy, yet speak so from a Christian?

Enter Anthonio, Georgio, a poor Scholar.
Aslol. An Irishman in Italy! that so strange! why, the nation have running
heads.

Exchange Walk.
Lod. Nay Carolo, this is more strange, I ha bin in France, there is few of them:
Mary, England they count a warm chimny corner, and there they swarm like
Crickets to the creuice of a Brew House; but Sir, in England I have noted one
thing.


Omnes. What Is that, what is that of England?

Lod. Mary this Sir, what is he yonder?

Bert. A poor fellow would speak with my Lord.

Lod. In England, Sir, troth I ever laugh when I think on it: to see a whole
Nation should be marked in the forehead, as a man may say, with one Iron: why
Sir, there all Costermongers are Irishmen.


Caro. Oh, that is to show their Antiquity, as coming from Eve, who was an
Apple-wife, and they take after the Mother.


Omnes. Good, good, ha, ha.

Lod. Why then, should all your Chimny-sweepers likewise be Irishmen? answer
that now, come, your wit.


Caro. Faith, that is soon answered, for S. Patricke you know keeps Purgatory,
he makes the fire, and his Countrymen could do nothing, if they cannot
sweep the Chimnies.


Omnes. Good again.

Lod. Then, Sir, have you many of them (like this fellow) (especially those of
his hair) Footmen to Noblemen and others, and the Knaves are very faithful
where they love, by my faith very proper men many of them, and as active as the
clouds, whirre, hah.


Omnes. Are they so?

Lod. And stout! exceeding stout; Why, I warrant, this precious wild Villain,
if he were put to it, would fight more desperately then sixteen Dunkerkes.


Asto. The women they say are very fair.

Lod. No, no, our Country Bona Robaes* oh! are the sugrest delicious Rogues.


Asto. Oh, look, he has a feeling of them.

Lod. Not I, I protest, there is a saying when they commend Nations: It goes,
the Irishman for his hand, Welshman for a leg, the Englishman for a face, the
Dutchman for beard.


Fron. I faith, they may make swabbers of them.

Lod. The Spaniard, let me see, for a little foot (I take it) the
Frenchman, what a pox has he? and so of the rest.
Are they at breakfast yet? come walk.

Ast. This Lodouico, is a notable tounged fellow.

Fron. Discourses well.

Berc. And a very honest Gentleman.

Asto. Oh! he is well valued by my Lord.
Enter Bellafront with a Petition.
Fron. How now, how now, what is she?

Bert. Let Us make toward her.

Bella. Will it be long, sir, ere my Lord come forth?

Ast. Would you speak with my Lord?

Lod. How now, what is this, a Nurses Bill? has any here got thee with child,
and now will not keep it?


Bolla. No sir, my business is unto my Lord.

Lod. He Is about his own wife now, he will hardly dispatch two causes in a
morning.


Asto. No matter what he says, fair Lady, he is a Knight, there is no hold to
be taken at his words.


Fro. My Lord will pass this way presently.

Bert. A pretty plumpe Rogue.

Ast. A good lusty bouncing baggage.

Bert. Do you know her?

Lod. A pox on her, I was sure her name was in my Tablebooke once, I know not
of what cut her dye is now, but she has been more common then Tobacco: this is
she that had the name of the Honest Whore.


Omnes. Is this she?

Lod. This is the Blackamore that by washing was turned white: this is the
Birding Piece new scowred: this is she that (if any of her religion can be
saved) was saved by my Lord Hipolito.


Asto. She has been a goodly creature.

Lod. She has bin! that is the Epitaph of all Whores, I Am well acquainted with
the poor Gentleman her Husband, Lord! what fortunes that man has ouerreached?
She knows not me, yet I have been in her company, I scarce know her, for the
beauty of her cheek has (like the Moon) suffered strange Eclipses since I
beheld it: but women are like Medlars (no sooner ripe but rotten.)

A woman last was made, but is spent first,
Yet man is often proved, in performance worst.

Omnes. My Lord is come.
Enter Hypolito, Infaeliche, and two waiting women.
Hip. We ha wasted half this morning: morrow Lodouico.

Lod. Morrow Madam.

Hip. Let Us away to Horse.

Omnes. I, I to Horse, to Horse.

Bela. I do beseech your Lordship, let your eye read e're this wretched Paper.


Hip. I Am in have, pray the good woman take some apter time.

Insae. Good Woman do.

Bell. Oh las! it does concern a poor man's life.

Hip. Life! sweet heart? Seat your self, I Will but read this and come.


Lod. What stockings have you put on this morning, Madam? if they be not
yellow, change them; that paper is a Letter from some Wench to your Husband.


Infae Oh sir, that cannot make me jealous.
Exeunt.
Hip. Your business, sir, to me?

Ant. Yes my good Lord.

Hip. Presently sir; are you Mathaeos wife.

Bela. That most unfortunate woman.

Hip. I Am sorry these storms are fallen on him, I love Mathaeo.
And any good shall do him, he and I.
Have sealed two bonds of friendship, which are strong
In me, how ever Fortune does him wrong;
He speaks here he is condemned. Is It so?

Bell. Too true.

Hip. What was he whom he killed? Oh, his name's here; old lacomo, son to the
Florentine lacomo, a dog, that to meet profit, would to the very eyelids wade
in blood of his own children. Tell Mathaeo, the Duke my father hardly shall
deny his signed pardon, 'twas fair fight, yes if rumors tongue go true, so
writes he here.

To morrow morning I return from Court;
Pray be you here then. I Will have done sir straight:
But in troth say, are you Mathaeos wife?
You have forgot me.

Bell. No, my Lord.

Hip. Your Turner,
That made you smooth to run an even byas,
You know I loved you when your very soul
Was full of discord: art not a good wench still?

Bell. Vmph, when I had lost my way to heaven, you shewedit:
I was newborn that day.
Enter Lodouico.
Lod. S'foot, my Lord, your Lady asks if you have not left your Wench yet?
When you get in once, you never have done: come, come, come, pay your old
score, and send her packing, come.


Hip. Ride softly on before, I Will oretake you.

Lod. Your Lady swears she will have no riding on before, without ye.


Hip. Prithee good Lodonico.

Lod. My Lord pray hasten.

Hip. I come: to morrow let me see you, fare you well: commend me to Mathaeo:
pray one word more: Does not your father live about the Court?


Bell. I think he does, but such rude spots of shame
Stick on my cheek, that he scarce knows my name.

Hip. Orlando Friscabaldo, Is It not?

Bell. Yes my Lord.

Hip. What does he for you?

Bell. All he should: when Children
From duty start, Parents from love may swerve.
He nothing does: for nothing I deserve.

Hip. Shall I join him unto you, and restore you to wonted grace?


Bell. It is impossible.
Exit Bellaf.
Hip. It shall be put to trial: fare you well:
The face I would not look on I sure then 'twas rare,
When in despite of grief, it is still thus fair.
Now, sir, your business with me.

Ant. I am bold to express my love and duty to your Lordship in these few
leaves.


Hip. A Book!

Ant. Yes my good Lord.

Hip. Are you a Scholar?

Ant. Yes, my Lord, a poor one.

Hip. Sir, you honor me.
Kings may be Scholars Patrons, but faith tell me,
To how many hands besides has this bird flowne,
How many partners share with me?

An. Not one in troth, not one: your name I held more dear,
I Am not (my Lord) of that low Character.

Hip. Your name I pray?

Ant. Antonio Georgio.

Hip. Of Millan?

Ant. Yes my Lord.

Hip. I Will borrow leave
To read you over, and then we'll talk: till then
Drink up this gold, good wits should love good wine,
This of your loves, the earnest that of mine.
How now, sir, where is your Lady, not gone yet?
Enter Bryan.
Bryan. I fart di Lady is run away from dee, a mighty deal of ground, she
sent me back for dine own sweet face, I pray dee come my Lord away, wut tow
go now?


Hip. Is the Coach gone?
Saddle my Horse the sorrel.

Bryan. A pox a de Horses nose, he is a lowsy rascally fellow, when I came to
gird his belly, his scuruy guts rumbled, di Horse farted in my face, and dow
know, an Irishman cannot abide a fart, but I have saddled de Hobbyhorse, di
fine Hobby is ready, I pray dee my good sweet Lord, wit tow go now, and I
will-runne to de Devil before dee?


Hip. Well, sir, I pray lets see you Master Scholar.

Bry. Come I pray dee, wut come sweet face? Go.
Exeunt. Enter Lodouico, Carolo, Astolpho, Bercaldo.
Lod. Gods so, Gentlemen, what do we forget?

Omnes. What?

Lod. Are not we all enjoined as this day, Thursday is it not? I as that day to
be at the Linnen-drapers house at dinner?


Car. Signior Candido, the patient man.

Asto. Before Jove, true, upon this day he is married.

Berc. I wonder, that being so stung with a Waspe before, he dares venture
again to come about the eaues amongst Bees.


Lod. Oh it is rare sucking a sweet Hony-combe; pray Heaven his old wife be
buried deep enough, that she rise not up to call for her dance, the poor
Fiddlers Instruments would crack for it, she would tickle them: at any hand lets
try what mettle is in his new Bride, if there be none, we'll put in some; troth
it is a very noble Citizen, I pity he should marry again, I Will walk along, for
it is a good old fellow.


Caro. I warrant, the Wives of Millan would give any fellow twenty thousand
Ducats, that could but have the face to beg of the Duke, that all the Citizens
in Millan might be bound to the peace of patience, as the Linnen-draper is.


Lod. Oh fie upon it, 'twould undo all us that are Courtiers, we should have no
who with the wenches then.

Enter Hipollito.
Omnes. My Lord's come.

Hip. How now, what news?

Omnes. None.

Lod. Your Lady is with the Duke her Father.

Hip. And we'll to them both presently, whoe's that?
Enter Orlaudo Friscobaldo.
Omnes. Signior Friscabaldo.

Hip. Friscabaldo, oh! pray call him, and leave me, we two have business.


Car. Ho Signior! Signior Friscabaldo.
The Lord Hipollito.
Exeunt.
Orla. My Noble Lord: my Lord Hipollito! the Dukes Son! his brave Daughters
brave Husband! how does your honored Lordship! does your Nobility remember so
poor a Gentleman as Signior Orlando Friscabaldo! old mad Orlando!


Hip. Oh sir, our friends! they ought to be unto us as our Jewels, as dearly
valued, being locked up, and unseen, as when we wear them in our hands. I
see, Friscabaldo, age has not command of your blood, for all Times sickle has
gone over you, you are Orlando still.


Orl, Why my Lord, are not the fields mowen and cut down, and stripped bare, and
yet wear they not pide coats again? tho my head be like a Leeke, white: may
not my heart be like the blade, green?


Hip. Scarce can I read the Stories on your brow,
Which age has writ there, you look youthful still.

Orla. I eat Snakes, my Lord, I eat Snakes.
My heart shall never have a wrinkle in it, so long as I can cry
Hem with a clear voice.

Hip. You are the happier man, sir.

Orla. Happy man! I Will give you (my Lord) the true picture of a happy man; I was
turning leaves over this morning, and found it, an excellent Italian Painter
drew it, If I have it in the right colors, I Will bestow it on your Lordship.


Hip. I stay for it.

Orla. He that makes gold his wife, but not his whore,
He that at noonday walks by a prison door,
He that 'ith Sun is neither beam nor moate,
He that is not mad after a Petticoate,
He for whom poor men's curses dig no grave,
He that is neither Lords nor Lawyers slave,
He that makes This his Sea, and That his Shore,
He that in's Coffin is richer then before,
He that counts Youth his Sword, and Age his Staff,
He whose right hand carues his own Epitaph,
He that upon his death-bead is a Swan,
And Dead, no Crow, he is a happy man.

Hip. It Is very well, I thank you for this Picture.

Orla. After this Picture (my Lord) do I strive to have my face drawn:

For I am not covetous,
Am not in debt,
Sit neither at the Dukes side,
Nor lie at his feet.
Wenching and I have done, no man I wrong,
No man I fear, no man I fee;
I take heed how far I walk, because I know yonder is my home.
I would not die like a rich man, to carry nothing away save a winding sheet:
But like a good man, to leave Orlando behind me.
I sowed leaves in my Youth, and I reap now Books in my Age.
I fill this hand, and empty this, and when the bell shall toll for me, if I
prove a Swan and go singing to my nest, why so?
If a Crow! throw me out for carrion, and pick out mine eyes,
May not old Friscabaldo (my Lord) be merry now! ha?

Hip. You may, would I were partner in your mirth.

Orla. I have a little,
Have all things;
I have nothing; I have no wife, I have no child, have no chick, and why should
not I be in my Iocundare?

Hip. Is your wife then departed?

Orla. She Is an old dweller in those high Countries,
Yet not from me,
Here, she is here: but before me, when a Knave and a Queen are married, they
commonly walk like Serieants together: but a good couple are seldom parted.


Hip. You had a Daughter too sir, had you not?

Orla. Oh my Lord! this old Tree had one Branch, (and but one Branch growing
out of it) It was young, it was fair, it was straight; I prumde it daily,
dressed it carefully, kept it from the wind, helped it to the Sun, yet for all
my skill in planting, it grew crooked, it bore Crabs; I hewed it down,

What Is become of it, I neither know, nor care.

Hip. Then can I tell you what is become of it;
That Branch is witherd.

Orl. So 'twas long ago.

Hip. Her name I think was Bellafront, she is dead.

Orlando. Ha? dead?

Hip. Yes, what of her was left, not worth the keeping,
Even in my sight was thrown into a Grave.

Orl. Dead! my last and best peace go with her, I see deaths a good
trencherman, he can eat course homely meat, as well as the daintiest.


Hip. Why, Friscabaldo, was she homely?

Orla. O my Lord! a Strumpet is one of the Devils Vines; all the sins like so
many Poles are stuck upright out of hell, to be her props, that she may spread
upon them. And when she is ripe, every Slave has a pull at her, then must she be
pressed. The young beautiful Grape sets the teeth of Lust on edge, yet to taste
that lickrish Wine, is to drink a man's own damnation. Is she dead?


Hip. She Is turned to earth.

Orla. Wod she were turned to heaven; Vmh, is she dead! I am glad the world has
lost one of his Idols; no Whoremonger will at midnight beat at the doors; In
her grave sleep all my shame, and her own; and all my sorrows, and all her
sins.


Hip. I Am glad you are wax, not marble; you are made
Of man's best temper, there are now good hopes
That all these heaps of
Ice about your heart,
By which a fathers love was frozen up,
Are thawed in these sweet showers fetched from your eyes,
We are never like Angels till our passion dies,
She is not dead, but lives under worse fate,
I think she is poor, and more to clip her wings,
Her Husband at this hour lies in the Iayle,
For killing of a man, to save his blood,
Join all your force with mine: mine shall be shown,
The getting of his life preserues your own.

Orla. In my daughter you will say! does she live then?
I am sorry I wasted tears upon a Harlot, but the best is I have a handkercher
to drink them up, soap can wash them all out again.

Is she poor?

Hip. Trust me, I think she is.

Orla. Then she is a right Strumper; I never knew any of their trade rich two
years together; Siues can hold no water, nor Harlots hoord up money; they have
many vents, too many sluices to let it out; Tauernes, Tailors, Bawds, Panders,
Fiddlers, Swaggerers, Fools and Knaves, do all wait upon a common Harlots
trencher: she is the Gallypot to which these Drones fly: not for love to the
pot, but for the sweet sucket within it, her money, her money.


Hip. I almost dare pawn my word, her bosom gives warmth to no such Snakes;
when did you see her?


Orla. Not seventeen Summers.

Hip. Is your hate so old?

Orla. Older; it has a white head, and shall never dye till she be buried,

Her wrongs shall be my bedfellow.

Hip. Work yet his life, since in it lives her fame.

Orla. No, let him hang, and half her infamy departs out of the world: I hate
him for her; he taught her first to taste poison; I hate her for her self,
because she refused my Physic.


Hip. Nay but Friscabaldo.

Orl. I detest her, I defy both, she is not mine, she is.

Hip. Hear her but speak.

Orl. I love no Marcmaides, I Will not be caught with a quaill pipe.

Hip. You Are now beyond all reason.

Orl. I am then a Beast. Sir, I had rather be a beast, and not dishonor my
creation, then be a doting father, and like Time, be the destruction of mine
own brood.


Hip. Is It dotage to relieve your child being poor?

Orl. Is It fit for an old man to keep a whore?

Hip. It Is charity too.

Orl. It Is foolery; relieve her!
Were her cold limbs stretched out upon a Beer,
I would not sell this dirt under my nails
To buy her an hours breath, nor give this hair,
Unless it were to choke her.

Hip. Fare you well, for I Will trouble you no more.
Exit.
Orl. And fare you well sir, go thy ways, we have few Lords of thy making,
that love wenches for their honesty; Las my Girl! art thou poor? poverty
dwells next door to despair, there is but a wall between them; despair is
one of hells Catch-poles; and lest that Devil arrest her, I Will to her, yet she
shall not know me; she shall drink of my wealth, as beggars do of running
water, freely, yet never know from what Fountains head it flows. Shall a
silly bird pick her own breast to nourish her young ones, and can a father see
his child starve? That were hard; The Pelican does it, and shall not I. Yes, I
will victual the Camp for her, but it shall be by some stratagem; that knave
there her husband will be hanged I fear, I Will keep his neck out of the nooze
if I can, he shall not know how.

Enter two Seruing-men.
Orl. How now knaves, whither wander you?

1. To seek your Worship.

Orl. Stay, which of you has my purse, what money have you about you?


2. Some fifteen or sixteen pounds, sir.

Orl. Give it me, I think I have some gold about me; yes, it is well; leave my
Lodging at Court, and get you home. Come sir, tho I never turned any man out of
doors, yet I Will be so bold as to pull your Coat over your ears.


1. What do you mean to do sir?

Orl. Hold thy tongue knave, take thou my Cloak, I hope I play not the paltry
Merchant in this bartring; bid the Steward of my house, sleep with open eyes
in my absence, and to look to all things, whatsoever I command by Letters to
be done by you, see it done. So, does it sit well?


2. As if it were made for your Worship.

Orl. You proud Varlets, you need not be ashamed to wear blue, when your
Master is one of your fellows; away, do not see me.


Both. This is excellent.
Exeunt.
Orl. I should put on a worse suite too; perhaps I will.
My Vizard is on, now to this mask. Say I should shave off this Honor of an
old man, or tie it up shorter; Well, I will spoil a good face for once. My
beard being off, how should I look? even like

A Winter Cuckoo, or vnfeatherd Owl;
Yet better lose this hair, then lose her soul.
Exit. Enter Candido, Lodouico, and Carolo. Lodouico other Guests, and Bride
with Prentises.
Cand. O Gentlemen, so late, you are very welcome, pray sit down.


Lod. Carolo, did ere see such a nest of Caps?

Asto. Me thinks
It Is a most civil and most comely sight.

Lod. What does he 'ith middle look like?

Asto. Troth like a spire steeple in a Country Village ouerpeering so many
thatcht houses.


Lod. It Is rather a long pike staff against so many bucklers without pikes;
they sit for all the world like a pair of Organs, and he is the tall great
roaring pipe'ith midst.


Asto. Ha, ha, ha, ha.

Cand. What Is that you laugh at, Signiors?

Lod. Troth shall I tell you, and aloude I Will tell it,
We laugh to see (yet laugh we not in scorn)
Amongst so many Caps that long Hat worn.

Lodo. Mine is as tall a felt as any is this day in Millan, and therefore I
love it, for the block was cleft out for my head, and fits me to a hair.


Cand. Indeed you are good obseruers, it shows strange.
But Gentlemen, I pray neither contemn,
Nor yet deride a civil ornament;
I could build so much in the round Caps praise,
That love this hye roof, I this flat would raise.

Lod. Prithee sweet Bridegroom do it.

Cand. So all these guests will pardon me, I Will do it.

Omnes. With all our hearts.

Cand. Thus then in the Caps honor,
To every Sex and state, both Nature, Time,
The Countries laws, yea and the very Clime
Do allot distinct habits, the spruce Courtier
Iets up and down in silk: the Warrier
Marches in buffe, the Clown plods on in gray:
But for these upper garments thus I say,
The Seaman has his Cap, pared without brim,
The Gallants head is featherd, that fits him;
The Soldier has his Murren, women ha Tires;
Beasts have their head-peeces, and men ha theirs.

Lod. Proceed.

Cand. Each degree has his fashion, it is fit then,
One should be laid by for the Citizen,
And that is the Cap which you see swells not hye,
For Caps are Emblems of humility;
It is a Citizens badge, and first was worn
By The Romans; for when any Bondmans turn
Came to be made a Freeman: thus 'twas said,
He to the Cap was called; that is, was made
Of Rome a Freeman, but was first close shorn,
And so a Citizens hair is still short worn.

Lod. That close shauing made Barbers a Company,
And now every Citizen uses it.

Cand. Of Geometricke figures the most rare,
And perfect'st are the Circle and the square,
The City and the School much build upon
These figures, for both love proportion.
The City Cap is round, the Scholars square.
To show that Government and learning are
The perfect'st limbs in the body of a State:
For without them, all is disproportionate.
If the Cap had no honor, this might rear it,
The Reverend Fathers of the Law do wear it.
It Is light for Summer, and in cold it sits
Close to the scull, a warm house for the wits;
It shows the whole face boldly, it is not made
As if a man to look on it were afraid,
Nor like a Drapers shop with broad dark shed,
For he is no Citizen that hides his head.
Flat Caps as proper are to City Gowns,
As to Armors Helmets, or to Kings their Crowns.
Let then the City Cap by none be scornd,
Since with it Princes heads have been adornd.
If more the round Caps honor you would know,
How would this long Gown with this steeple show?

Omnes. Ha, ha, ha: most vile, most ugly.

Cand. Pray Signior pardon me, 'twas done in jest.

Bride. A cup of claret wine there.

1. Wine: yes forsooth, wine for the Bride.

Car. You ha well set out the Cap, sir.

Lod. Nay, that is flat.

Long. A heaith.

Lod. Since his Cap's round, that
The Bride hits the Prentice on the lips. Shall go round. Be bare,
For in the Caps praise all of you have share.

Lod. The Bride's at cuffes.

Cand. Oh, peace I pray thee, thus far off I stand, I spied the error of my
servants, she called for Claret, and you filled out Sack; that cup give me,
it is for an old man's back, and not for hers. Indeed 'twas but mistaken, ask
all these else.


Omnes. No faith, 'twas but mistaken.

1. Nay, she took it right enough.

Cand. Good Luke reach her that glass of Claret.
Here, Mistress Bride, pledge me there.

Bride. Now I Will none.
Exit Bride.
Cand. How now?

Lod. Look what your Mistress ails.

1. Nothing, sir, but about filling a wrong glass, a scuruy trick.


Cand. I pray you hold your tongue, my servant there tells me she is not well.


Omnes. Step to her, step to her.

Lod. A word with you: do ye hear? This wench (your new wife) will take you
down in your wedding shoes, unless you hang her up in her wedding garters.


Cand. How, hang her in her garters?

Lod. Will you be a rame Pidgeon still? shall your back be like a Tortoys
shell, to let Carts go over it, yet not to break? This Shee-cat will have
more lives then your last Pusse had, and will scratch worse, and mouze you
worse: look toot.


Cand. What would you have me do, sir?

Lod. What would I have you do? Swear, swagger, brawle, fling; for fighting
it is no matter, we ha had knocking Pusses enough already; you know, that a woman
was made of the rib of a man, and that rib was crooked. The Moral of which is,
that a man must from his beginning be crooked to his wife; be you like an
Ora^ge to her, let her cut you never so fair, be you sour as vinegar; will
you be ruled by me?


Cand. In any thing that is civil, honest, and just.

Lod. Have you ever a Prentices suite will fit me?

Cand. I have the very same which my self wore.

Lod. I Will send my man for it within this half hour, and within this two hours
I Will be your Prentice: the Hen shall not ouercrow the Cock, I Will sharpen your
spurs.


Cand. It will be but some jest, sir.

Lod. Only a jest: farewell, come Carolo:
Exeunt.
Omnes. We Will take our leaves, Sir, too.

Cand. Pray conceit not ill of my wives sudden rising. This young Knight, Sir
Lodouico, is deep seen in Physic, and he tells me, the disease called the
Mother, hangs on my wife, it is a vehement heauing and beating of the Stomach,
and that swelling did with the pain thereof crampe up her arm, that hit his
lips, and brake the glass: no harm, it was no harm.


Omnes. No, Signior, none at all.

Cand. The straightest arrow may fly wide by chance.
But come, we'll cloze this brawle up in some dance.
Exeunt. Enter Bellafront and Matheo.
Bell. Oh my sweet Husband, were thou in thy grave, and art alive again? O
welcome, welcome.


Mat. Do know me? my cloak prithee lay't up. Yes faith, my winding sheet
was taken out of Lauender, to be stuck with Rosemary, I lackt but the knot
here, or here; yet if I had had it, I should ha made a wry mou^h at the world
like a Playse: but sweetest villain, I am here now, and I will talk with thee
soon.


Bell. And glad am I thou art here.

Mat. Did these heels caper in shackles? A my little plumpe rogue, I Will bear
up for all this, and fly hye. Catzo Catzo.


Bell. Matheo?

Mat. What say, what say? Oh brave fresh air, a pox on these Grates and
gingling of Keys, and rattling of Iron, I Will bear up, I Will fly hye wench, hang
Toss.


Bell. Matheo, prithee make thy prison thy glass,
And in it view the wrinkles, and the scarres,
By which thou were disfigured, viewing them, mend them.

Mat. I Will go visit all the mad rogues now, and the good roaring boys.


Bell. Thou do not hear me?

Mat. Yes faith do I.

Bell. Thou have been in the hands of misery, and taken strong Physic, prithee
now be sound.


Mat. Yes. S'foot, I wonder how the inside of a Tavern looks now. Oh when
shall I bizle, bizle?


Bell. Nay see, thou art thirsty still for poison, come, I will not have thee
swagger.


Mat. Honest Apes face.

Bell. It Is that sharpened an axe to cut thy throat.
Good Love, I would not have thee sell thy substance
And time (worth all) in those damned shops of Hell;
Those Dycing houses, that stand never well,
But when they stand most ill, that foure-squared sin
Has almost lodged us in the beggars Inn.
Besides (to speak which even my soul does grieve)
A sort of Ravens have hung upon thy sleeue,
And fed upon thee: good Mat. (if you please) so base as
Scorn to spread wing amongst these;
By them thy fame is speckled, yet it shows
Clear amongst them; so Crows are fair with Crows.
Custom in sin, gives sin a lovely dye.
Blackness in Mores is no deformity.

Mat. Bellafront, Bellafront, I protest to thee, I swear, as I hope my soul,
I will turn over a new leaf, the prison I confess has bit me, the best man
that sails in such a Ship, may be lowsy.


Bell. One knockes at door.

Mat. I Will be the Porter: they shall see, a Iayle cannot hold a brave spirit,
I Will fly hye.

Exit.
Bell. How wild is his behavior! oh, I fear
He Is spoyld by prison, he is half damned comes there,
But I must sit all storms: when a full sail his
Fortunes spread, he loved me: being now poor,
I Will beg for him, and no wife can do more.
Enter Matheo, and Orlando like a Seruingman.
Mat. Come in pray, would you speak with me, sir?

Orl. Is your name Signior Matheo?

Mat. My name is Signior Matheo.

Orl. Is this Gentlewoman your wife, sir?

Mat. This Gentlewoman is my wife, sir.

Orl. The Destinies spin a strong and even thread of both your loves: the
Mothers own face, I ha not forgot that, I Am an old man, sir, and am troubled
with awhoreson salt rhew me, that I cannot hold my water. Gentlewoman, the last
man I served was your Father.


Bell. My Father? any tongue that sounds his name,
Speaks Music to me: welcome good old man.
How does my father? lives he? has he health?
How does my father? I so much do shame him,
So much do wound him, that I scarce dare name him.

Orl. I can speak no more.

Mat. How now old Lad, what do cry?

Orl The rhewme still, sir, nothing else; I should be well seasond, for mine
eyes lie in brine: look you, sir, I have a suite to you.


Math. What is it my little white pate?

Orl. Troth, sir, I have a mind to serve your Worship.

Mat. To serve me? Troth, my friend, my fortunes are, as a man may say --


Orl. Nay look you, sir, I know when all sins are old in us, and go upon
Crutches, that Covetousness does but then lie in her Cradle; It Is not so with
me. Letchery loves to dwell in the fairest lodging, and Covetousness in the
oldest buildings, that are ready to fall: but my white head, sir, is no Inn
for such a gossip. If a Seruingman at my years be not stored with biscuit
enough, that has sailed about the world to serve him the voyage out of his
life, and to bring him East-home; Ill pity but all his days should be fasting
days: I care not so much for wages, for I have scraped a handful of gold
together; I have a little money, sir, which I would put into your Worships
hands, not so much to make it more.


Mat. No, no, you say well, thou say well; but I must tell you: How much is
the money, say thou?


Orl. About twenty pound, Sir.

Mat. Twenty pound? Let me see: that shall bring thee in, after ten per centum,
per annum.


Orl. No, no, no, sir, no; I cannot abide to have money engender: fie upon this
silver Lechery, fie; if I may have meat to my mouth, and rags to my back, and
a flock-bed to snort upon, when I die, the longer liver take all.


Mat. A good old Boy, in faith, if thou seruest me, thou shall eat as I eat,
drink as I drink, lie as I lie, and ride as I ride.


Orl. That Is if you have money to hire horses.

Mat. and Front. What do thou think on it? This good old Lad here shall
ser^e me.


Bell. Alas, Matheo, will thou load a back
That is already broke?

Mat. Peace, pox on you, peace, there is a trick in it, I fly hye, it shall be
so, Front. as I tell you: give me thy hand, thou shall serve me in faith:
welcome: as for your money --


Orl. Nay, look you sir, I have it here.

Mat. Pesh, keep it thy self, man, and then thou art sure it is safe.


Orl. Safe! and 'twere ten thousand Ducats, your Worship should be my
cash-keeper; I have heard what your Worship is, an excellent dunghill Cock, to
scatter all abroad: but I Will venture twenty pounds on's head.


Mat. And did thou serve my Worshipful Father-in-law, Signior Orlando
Friscabaldo, that mad man once?


Orl. I served him so long, till he turned me out of doors.

Mat. It Is a notable Chuffe, I ha not seen him many a day.

Orl. No matter and you never see him: it is an arrant Grandy, a Churl, and as
damnd a cutthroat.


Bell. Thou villain, curb thy tongue, thou art a Judas,
To sell thy Masters name to slander thus.

Mat. Away Ass, he speaks but truth, thy father is a --

Bell. Gentleman.

Mat. And an old knave, there is more deceit in him then in sixteen Poticaries:
it is a Devil, thou may beg, starve, hang, damn; does he send thee so much
as a cheese?


Orl. Or so much as a Gammon of Bacon,
He Will give it his Dogs first.

Mat. A Iayle, a Iayle.

Orl. A Jew, a Jew, sir.

Mat. A Dog.

Orl. An English Mastiffe, sir.

Mat. Pox rot out his old stinking garbage.

Bell. Art not ashamed to strike an absent man thus?
Art not ashamed to let this vild Dog bark,
And bite my Father thus? I Will not endure it;
Out of my doors, base slave.

Mat. Your doors! a vengeance? I shall live to cut that old rogues throat, for
all you take his part thus.


Orl. He shall live to see thee hanged first.
Enter Hipollito.
Mat. Gods so my Lord, your Lordship is most welcome, I Am proud of this, my
Lord.


Hip. Was bold to see you.
Is that your wife?

Mat. Yes sir.

Hip. I Will borrow her lip.

Mat. With all my heart, my Lord.

Orl. Who Is this, I pray sir?

Mat. My Lord Hipollito: what is thy name?

Orl. Pacheco.

Mat. Pacheco, fine name; Thou see, Pacheco, I keep company with no
Scondrels, nor base fellows.


Hip. Came not my Footman to you?

Bell. Yes my Lord.

Hip. I sent by him a Diamond and a Letter,
Did you receive them?

Bell. Yes my Lord, I did.

Hip. Read you the letter?

Bell. Over and over it is read.

Hip. And faith your answer?

Bell. Now the time's not fit,
You see, my Husbands here.

Hip. I Will now then leave you,
And choose mine hour; but ere I part away,
Hark, you remember I must have no nay.
Matheo, I will leave you.

Mat. A glass of wine.

Hip. Not now, I Will visit you at other times.
You Are come off well then?

Mat. Excellent well, I thank your Lordship: I owe you my life, my Lord; and
will pay my best blood in any service of yours.


Hip. I Will take no such dear payment, hark you Matheo, I know, the prison is a
gulf, if money run low with you, my purse is yours: call for it.


Mat. Faith my Lord, I thank my stars, they send me down some; I cannot
sink, so long as these bladders hold.


Hip. I will not see your fortunes ebb, pray try.
To starve in full barnes were fond modesty.

Mat. Open the door, sir.

Hip. Drink this, and anon I pray thee give thy Mistress this.

Exit.
Orl. O Noble Spirit, if no worse guests here dwell,
My blue coat sits on my old shoulders well.

Mat. The only royal fellow, he is bounteous as the Indies,
what is that he said to thee, Bellafront?

Bell. Nothing.

Mat. I prithee good Girl?

Bell. Why I tell you nothing.

Mat. Nothing? it is well: tricks, that I must be beholden to a scald
hot-liuerd gotish Gallant, to stand with my cap in my hand, and veil bonnet,
when I ha spread as lofty sails as himself, wud I had been hanged. Nothing*
Pacheco, brush my cloak.


Orl. Where is it, sir?

Mat. Come, we will fly hye.
Nothing? there is a whore still in thine eye.
Exit.
Orl. My twenty pounds flies high, O wretched woman,
This varlot's able to make Lucrece common.
How now Mistress? has my Master dyed you into this sad color?


Bell. Fellow, be gone I pray thee; if thy tongue itch after talk so much,
seek out thy Master, thou art a fit instrument for him.


Orl. Zownes, I hope he will not play upon me?

Bell. Play on thee? no, you two will fly together,
Because you are rouing arrows of one feather.
Would thou would leave my house, thou never shall
Please, me weaue thy nets never so hye,
Thou shall be but a spider in mine eye.
Thou Art rank with poison, poison temperd well,
Is food for health; but thy black tongue does swell
With venom, to hurt him that gave thee bread,
To wrong men absent, is to spurn the dead.
And so did thou thy Master, and my Father.

Orl. You have small reason to take his part; for I have heard him say five
hundred times, you were as arrant a whore as ever stiffned tiffany neckcloathes
in water-starch upon a Saturday 'ith afternoon.


Bell. Let him say worse, when for the earths offense
Hot vengeance through the marble clouds is driven,
Is It fit earth shoot again those darts at heaven?

Orl. And so if your Father call you whore, you will not call him old knave:
Friscabaldo, she carries thy mind up and down; she is thine own flesh, blood,
and bone; troth Mistress, to tell you true, the fireworkes that ran from me upon
lines against my good old Master, your father, were but to try how my young
Master, your Husband loved such squibs: but it is well known, I love your
father as my self; I Will ride for him at midnight, run for you by Owle-light;
I Will dye for him, drudge for you; I Will fly low, and I Will fly hye (as my Master
says) to do you good, if you will forgive me.


Bell. I am not made of marble: I forgive thee.

Orl. Nay, if you were made of marble, a good Stonecutter might cut you: I hope
the twenty pound I delivered to my Master, is in a sure hand.


Bell. In a sure hand I warrant thee for spending.

Orl. I see my young Master is a madcap, and a bonus socius, I love him well,
Mistress: yet as well as I love him, I Will not play the knave with you; look you,
I could cheat you of this purse full of money; but I am an old Lad, and I
scorn to cunny-catch: yet I ha been Dog at a Cony in my time.


Bell. A purse, where had it?

Orl. The Gentleman that went away, whisperd in mine care, and charged me to
give it you.


Bell. The Lord Hipollito?

Orla. Yes, if he be a Lord, he gave it me.

Bell. It Is all gold.

Orl. It Is like so: it may be, he thinks you want money, and therefore
bestows his alms bravely, like a Lord.


Bell. He thinks a silver net can catch the poor,
Here Is bait to choke a Nun, and turn her whore.
Will thou be honest to me?

Orl. As your nails to your fingers, which I think never deceived you.


Bell. Thou to this Lord shall go, commend me to him,
And tell him this, the Town has held out long,
Because (within) 'twas rather true, then strong.
To sell it now were base; Say it is no hold
Built of weak stuff, to be blown up with gold.
He shall believe thee by this token, or this; if not, by this.

Orla. Is this all?

Bell. This is all.

Orl. Mine own Girl still.

Bell. A Star may shoot, not fall.
Exit Bellafront.
Orl. A Star? nay, thou art more then the moon, for thou have neither
changing quarters, nor a man standing in thy circle with a bush of thorns.
Is It possible the Lord Hipollito, whose face is as civil as the outside of a
Dedicatory Book, should be a Muttonmunger? A poor man has but one Ewe, and
this Grandy Sheepe-biter leaves whole Flocks of fat Weathers (whom he may
knock down) to devour this. I Will trust neither Lord nor Butcher with quick
flesh for this trick; the Cuckoo I see now sings all the year, though every
man cannot hear him, but I Will spoil his notes; can neither Loue-letters, nor
the Devils common Pick-lockes (Gold) nor Precious Stones make my Girl draw up
her Percullis: hold out still, wench.

All are not Bawds (I see now) that keep doors,
Nor all good wenches that are marked for Whores.
Exit. Enter Candido, Lodouico like a Prentice.
Lod. Come, come, come, what do ye lack, sir? what do ye lack, sir? what
is it ye lack, sir? is not my Worship well suited? did you ever see a Gentleman
better disguised?


Cand. Never, believe me, Signior.

Lod. Yes: but when he has bin drunk, there be Prentices would make mad
Gallants, for they would spend all, and drink, and whore, and so forth; and I
see we Gallants could make mad Prentices. How does thy wife like me? Nay, I
must not be so saucy, then I spoil all: pray you how does my Mistress like me?


Cand. Well: for she takes you for a very simple fellow.

Lod. And they that are taken for such, are commonly the arrantest knaves: but
to our Comedy, come.


Cand. I shall not act it, chide you say, and fret,
And grow impatient: I shall never do it.

Lod. S'blood, cannot you do as all the world does? counterfeit.


Cand. Were I a Painter, that should live by drawing nothing but Pictures of an
angry man, I should not earne my colors; I cannot do it.


Lod. Remember you are a Linen Draper, and that if you give your wife a yard,
she will take an ell: give her not therefore a quarter of your yard, not a nail.


Cand. Say I should turn to Ice, and nip her love now it is but in the blood.


Lod. Well, say she is nipt.

Cand. It will so ouerchange her heart with grief,
That like a Cannon, when her sighs go off,
She in her duty either will recoyle,
Or break in pieces and so dye: her death,
By my unkindness might be counted murder.

Lod. Dye? never, never; I do not bid you beat her, nor give her black eyes,
nor pinch her sides: but cross her humors. Are not Bakers arms the skales of
Justice? yet is not their bread light? and may not you I pray bridle her with a
sharp bit, yet ride her gently?


Cand. Well, I will try your pills, do you your faithful service, and be
ready still at a pinch to help me in this part, or else I shall be out clean.


Lod. Come, come, I Will prompt you.

Cand. I Will call her forth now, shall I?

Lod. Do, do, bravely.

Cand. Luke, I pray bid your Mistress to come hither.

Lod. Luke, I pray bid your Mistress to come hither.

Cand. Sir, bid my wife come to me: why, when?

Luke. Presently, sir, she comes.
-- within --
Lod. La you, there is the echo, she comes.
Exit Bride.
Bride. What is your pleasure with me?

Cand. Mary wife,
I have intent, and (you see) this stripling here,
He bears good will and liking to my trade,
And means to deal in Linen.

Lod. Yes indeed, sir, I would deal in Linen, if my Mistress like me so well
as I like her?


Cand. I hope to find him honest, pray good wife look that his bed and
chamber be made ready.


Bride. You Are best to let him hire me for his maid? I look to his bed? look
to it your self.


Cand. Even so
I swear to you a great oath.

Lod. Swear, cry Zoundes.

Cand. I will not, go to wife, I will not,

Lod. That your great oath?

Cand. Swallow these gudgeons.

Lod. Well said.

Cand. Then fast, then you may choose.
You know at Table
What tricks you played, swaggerd, broke glasses! Fie,
Fie, fie, fie: and now before my Prentice here
You make an ass of me; thou, (what shall I call thee?)

Bride. Even what you will.

Lod. Call her arrant whore.

Cand. Oh fie, by no means, then she will call me Cuckold, sirrah, go look
to the shop: how does this show?


Lod. Excellent well, I Will go look to the shop, sir. Fine Cambricks, Lawnes,
what do you lack.

Exit Lodouico.
Cand. A cursed Cowes milk I ha drunk once before,
And 'twas so rank in taste, I Will drink no more.
Wife, I Will tame you.

Bride. You may, sir, if you can,
But at a wrestling I have seen a fellow
Limbd like an Ox, thrown by a little man.

Cand. And so you will throw me. Reach me (Knaves) a yard.

Lod. A Yard for my Master.

1. Prent. My Master is grown valiant.

Cand. I Will teach you fencing tricks.

Omnes. Rare, rare; a prize.

Lod. What will you do, sir?

Can. Mary, my good Prentice, nothing but breathe my wife.

Bride. Breathe me with your yard?

Lod. No, he will but measure you out, forsooth.

Bride. Since you will needs fence, handle your weapon well,
For if you take a yard, I Will take an ell.
Reach me an ell.

Lod. An ell for my Mistress.
Keep the laws of the Noble Science, sir, and measure weapons with her; your
yard is a plain Heathenish weapon; it is too short, she may give you a
handful, and yet you will not reach her.


Cand. Yet I ha the longer arm, come fall to it roundly,
And spare not me (wife) for I Will lay't on soundly.
If over husbands their wives will needs be Masters,
We men will have a law to win't at wasters

Lod. It Is for the breeches, is it not?

Cand. For the breeches.

Bride. Husband I am for you, I Will not strike in jest.

Cand. Nor I.

Bride. But will you sign to one request?

Cand. What Is that?

Bride. Let me give the first blow.

Cand. The first blow, wife, shall I? Prompt?

Lod. Let her ha'te.
If she strike hard, in to her, and break her pate.

Cand. A bargain. Strike.

Bride. Then guard you from this blow,
For I play all at legs, but it is thus low.
She kneeles. Behold, I am such a cunning Fencer grown,
I keep my ground, yet down I will be thrown
With the least blow you give me, I disdain
The wife that is her husbands Sovereign.
She that upon your pillow first did rest,
They say, the breeches wore, which I detest.
The tax which she imposed upon you, I abate you,
If me you make your Master, I shall hate you.
The world shall judge who offers fairest play;
You win the breeches, but I win the day.

Cand. Thou winst the day indeed, give me thy hand,
I Will challenge thee no more: my patient breast
Played thus the Rebel, only for a jest:
Here Is the rank rider that breaks Colts, it is he
Can tame the mad folks, and cursed wives.

Bride. Who, your man?

Cand. My man? my Master, tho his head be bare,
But he is so courteous, he will put off his hair.

Lod. Nay, if your service be so hot, a man cannot keep his hair on, I Will
serve you no longer.


Bride. Is this your Schoolmaster?

Lod. Yes faith, wench, I taught him to take thee down: I hope thou can take
him down without teaching; you ha got the conquest, and you both are friends.


Cand. Bear witness else.

Lod. My Prentiship then ends.

Cand. For the good service you to me have done,
I give you all your years.

Lod. I thank you Master.
I Will kiss my Mistress now, that she may say,
My man was bound, and free all in one day.
Exeunt. Enter Orlando, and Infaelice.
Infae. From whom say thou?

Orla. From a poor Gentlewoman, Madam, whom I serve.

Infae. And what is your business?

Orla. This, Madam: my poor Mistress has a waste piece of ground, which is her
own by inheritance, and left to her by her mother; There Is a Lord now that
goes about, not to take it clean from her, but to enclose it to himself, and
to join it to a piece of his Lordships.


Infae. What would she have me do in this?

Orla. No more, Madam, but what one woman should do for another in such a
case. My Honorable Lord, your Husband would do any thing in her behalf, but
she had rather put her self into your hands, because you (a woman) may do
more with the Duke your Father.


Infae. Where lies this Land?

Orl. Within a stones cast of this place; my Mistress, I think, would be content
to let him enjoy it after her decease, if that would serve his turn, so my
Master would yield too: but she cannot abide to hear that the Lord should
meddle with it in her life time.


Infae. Is she then married? why stirs not her Husband in it?


Orl. Her Husband stirs in it under hand: but because the other is a great
rich man, my Master is loath to be seen in it too much.


Infae. Let her in writing draw the cause at large:
And I will move the Duke.

Orl. It Is set down, Madam, here in black and white already: work it so,
Madam, that she may keep her own without disturbance, grieuance, molestation,
or meddling of any other; and she bestows this purse of gold on your Ladyship.


Infae. Old man, I Will plead for her, but take no fees:
Give Lawyers them, I swim not in that flood,
I Will touch no gold, till I have done her good.

Orl. I would all Proctors Clearkes were of your mind, I should law more
amongst them then I do then; here, Madam, is the survey, not only of the
Manor it self, but of the Grange house, with every Meadow pasture,
Plough-land, Cony-borough, Fish Pond, hedge, ditch, and bush that stands in it.


Infae. My Husbands name, and hand and seal at arms to a Loue-letter? Where
had thou this writing?


Orla. From the foresaid party, Madam, that would keep the foresaid Land out
of the foresaid Lords fingers.


Infae. My Lord turned Ranger now?

Orl. You Are a good Huntresse, Lady, you ha found your Game already; your Lord
would feign be a Ranger, but my Mistress requests you to let him run a course
in your own Park, if you will not do it for love, then do it for money; she has
no white money, but there is gold, or else she prays you to ring him by this
token, and so you shall be sure his nose will not be rooting other men's
pastures.


Infae. This very purse was wouen with mine own hands,
This Diamond on that very night, when he
Untied my Virgin girdle, gave I him:
And must a common Harlot share in mine?
O^d man, to quit thy pains, take thou the gold.

Orl. Not I, Madam, old Seruingmen want no money.

Infae. Cupid himself was sure his Secretary,
These ^^nes are even the Arrows Love let flies,
The very Incke dropped out of Uenus eyes.

Orla. I do not think, Madam, but he fetched off some Poet or other for those
lines, for they are parlous Hawks to fly at wenches.


Infae Here Is honied poison, to me he never thus writ,
But Lust can set a double edge on wit.

Orla. Nay, that is true, Madam, a wench will whet any thing, if it be not too
dull.


Infae. Oaths, promises, preferments, Jewels, gold,
What snares should break, if all these cannot hold?
What creature is thy Mistress?

Orl. One of those creatures that are contrary to man; a woman.


Infae. What manner of woman?

Orl. A little tiny woman, lower then your Ladyship by head and shoulders, but
as mad a wench as ever unlaced a petticote: these things should I indeed have
delivered to my Lord your Husband.


Infae. They are delivered better: Why should she send back these things?


Orl. Ware, ware, there is knavery.

Infae. Strumpets like cheating gamesters will not win
At first: these are but baits to draw him in.
How might I learn his hunting hours?

Orl. The Irish Footman can tell you all his hunting hours, the Park he hunts
in, the Do he would strike, that Irish Shackatory beats the bush for him, and
knows all; he brought that Letter, and that Ring; he is the Carrier.


Infae. Know thou what other gifts have past between them?


Orl. Little S. Patricke knows all.

Infae. Him Ise examine presently.

Orl. Not whilst I am here, sweet Madam.

Infae. Be gone then, and what lies in me command.
Exit Orl. Enter Bryan.
Infae. Come hither sir, how much cost those Satins, and cloth of Silver,
which my husband sent by you to a low Gentlewoman yonder?


Bry. Faat Sattins? faat Siluers, faat low Gentlefolkes? dow pratest dow
know not what, yfaat la.


Infae. She there, to whom you carried letters.

Bry. By dis hand and bod dow say true, if I did so, oh how? I know not a
letter a de Book yfaat la.


Infae. Did your Lord never send you with a Ring, sir, set with a Diamond?


Bry. Never, sa crees sa me, never; he may run at a towsand rings yfaat, and
I never hold his stirrup, till he leap into de saddle. By S. Patricke, Madam,
I never touch my Lords Diamond, nor ever had to do, yfaat la, with any of his
precious stones.

Enter Hipollito.
Infae. Are you so close, you Bawd, you pandring slave?

Hip. How now? why Infaelice? what is your quarrel?

Infae. Out of my sight, base varlet, get thee gone.

Hip. Away you rogue.

Bry. Slawne loot, fare de well, fare de well. Ah marragh frofat boddah breen.

Exit.
Hip. What, grown a fighter? prithee what is the matter?

Infae. If you will needs know, it was about the clock: how works the day, my
Lord, (pray) by your watch?


Hip. Lest you cuffe me, I Will tell you presently: I am near two.


Infae. How, two? I am scarce at one.

Hip. One of us then goes false.

Infae. Then sure it is you,
Mine goes by heavens Dial, (the Sun) and it goes true.

Hip. I think (indeed) mine runs somewhat too fast.

Infae. Set it to mine (at one) then.

Hip. One? it is past:
It Is past one by the Sun.

Infae. Faith then belike,
Neither your clock nor mine does truly strike,
And since it is uncertain which goes true,
Better be false at one, then false at two.

Hip. You Are very pleasant, Madam.

Infae. Yet not merry.

Hip. Why Infaelice, what should make you sad?

Infae. Nothing my Lord, but my false watch, pray tell me,
You see, my clock, or yours is out of frame,
Must we upon the Workman lay the blame,
Or on your selves that keep them?

Hip. Faith on both.
He may by knavery spoil them, we by sloth,
But why talk you all riddle thus? I read
Strange Comments in those margines of your looks:
Your cheeks of late are (like bad printed Books)
So dimly charactred, I scarce can spell,
One line of love in them. Sure all is not well.

Infae. All is not well indeed, my dearest Lord,
Lock up thy gates of hearing, that no sound
Of what I speak man enter.

Hip. What means this?

Infae. Or if my own tongue must my self betray,
Count it a dream, or turn thine eyes away,
And think me not thy wife.
She kneeles.
Hip. Why do you kneel?

Infae. Earth is sins cushion: when the sick soul feels her self growing
poor, then she turns beggar, cries and kneeles for help; Hipollito (for
husband I dare not call thee) I have slolne that Jewel of my chaste honor
(which was only thine) and given it to a slave.


Hip. Hah?

Infae. On thy pillow adultery and lust have sl^pt, thy Groom
Has climbed the unlawful tree, and plucked the sweets,
A villain has usurped a husbands sheets.

Hip. God's Death, who, (a Cuckold) who?

Infae. This Irish Footman.

Hip. Worse then damnation, a wild Kerne, a Frogge, a Dog: whom I Will scarce
spurn. Longed you for Shamocke? were it my fathers father (heart) I Will kill
him, although I take him on his deathbed gasping 'twixt heaven and hell; a
shag-haired Cur? Bold Strumpet, why hangest thou on me? think I Will be a Bawd
to a Whore, because she is Noble?


Infae. I beg but this,
Set not my shame out to the worlds broad eye,
Yet let thy vengeance (like my fault) soar hye,
So it be in darkened clouds.

Hip. Darkened! my horns
Cannot be darkened, nor shall my revenge.
A Harlot to my slave? the act is base,
Common, but foul, so shall thy disgrace:
Could not I feed your appetite? oh women
You were created Angels, pure and fair;
But since the first fell, tempting Devils you are,
You should be men's bliss, but you prove their rods.
Were there no women, men might live like gods:
You ha been too much down already, rise,
Get from my sight, and henceforth shun my bed,
I Will with no Strumpets breath be poisoned.
As for your Irish Lubrican, that spirit
Whom by prepostrous charms thy lust has raised
In a wrong Circle, him I Will damn more black
Then any Tyrants soul.

Infae. Hipollito?

Hip. Tell me, did thou bait Hawks to draw him to thee, or did he bewitch
thee?


Infae. The slave did woo me.

Hip. Two wooes in that Skreech-owles language? Oh who would trust your
corcke-heeld sex? I think to sat your lust, you would love a Horse, a Bear,
a croaking Toade, so your hot itching veins might have their bound, then the
wild Irish Dart was thrown. Come, how? the manner of this fight.


Infae. 'Twas thus, he gave me this battery first. Oh I
Mistake, believe me, all this in beaten gold:
Yet I held out, but at length this was charmed.
What? change your Diamond wench, the act is base,
Common, but foul, so shall not your disgrace:
Could not I feed your appetite? Oh Men,
You were created Augels, pure and fair,
But since the first fell, worse then Devils you are.
You should our shields be, but you prove our rods.
Were there no Men, Women might live like gods.
Guilty my Lord?

Hip. Yes, guilty my good Lady.

Infae. Nay, you may laugh, but henceforth shun my bed,
With no whores leauings I Will be poisoned.
Exit.
Hip. O're-reach'd so finely? It Is the very Diamond
And Letter which I sent: this villainy
Some Spider closely weaues, whose poysond bulk
I must let forth. Who Is there without?

Servant. My Lord calls.
-- within. --
Hip. Send me the Footman.

Ser. Call the Footman to my Lord.
Bryan, Bryan. Enter Bryan.
Hip. It can be no man else, that Irish Judas,
Bred in a Country where no venom prospers,
But in the Nations blood has thus betrayed me.
Slave, get you from your service.

Bry. Faat meanest thou by this now?

Hip. Question me not, nor tempt my fury, villain,
Could thou turn all the Mountains in the land,
To hills of gold, and to give me; here thou stayest not.

Bry. I faat, I care not.

Hip. Prate not, but get thee gone, I shall send else.

Bry. I, do predy, I had rather have thee make a scabbard of my guts, and let
out all de Irish puddings in my poor belly, den to be a false knave to de I
faat, I will never see dyne own sweet face more. A mawhid deer a gra, fare de
well, fare de well, I will go steal Cowes again in Ireland.

Exit.
Hip. He Is damned that raised this whirlewind, which has blown

Into her eyes this jealousy: yet I Will on,
I Will on, stood armed Devils staring in my face,
To be pursued in flight, quickens the race,
Shall my blood streams by a wives lust be bard?
Fond woman, no: Iron grows by strokes more hard,
Lawless desires are seas scorning all bounds,
Or sulphur which being ram'd up, more confounds,
Struggling with mad men, madness nothing tames,
Winds wrestling with great fires, incense the flames.
Exit. Enter Matheo, Bellafront, and Orlando.
Bell. How now, what ails your Master?

Orl. Has taken a younger brothers purge, forsooth, and that works with him.


Bell. Where is his Cloak and Rapier?

Orl. He has given up his Cloak, and his Rapier is bound to the Peace: If you
look a little higher, you may see that another has entered into hatband for
him too. Six and four have put him into this sweat.


Bell. Where Is all his money?

Orl. It Is put over by exchange: his doublet was going to be translated, but
for me: if any man would ha lent but half a ducket on his beard, the hair of
it had stuffed a pair of breeches by this time; I had but one poor penny, and
that I was glad to niggle out, and buy a holly-wand to grace him through the
street. As hap was, his boots were on, and then I dustied, to make people
think he had been riding, and I had run by him.


Bell. Oh me, how does my sweet Matheo?

Mat. Oh Rogue, of what deuilish stuff are these Dice made off? of the parings
of the Devils corns of his toes, that they run thus damnably.


Bell. I prithee vex not.

Mat. If any handy-crafts man was ever suffered to keep shop in hell, it will be
a Dice-maker; he is able to undo more souls then the Devil; I played with mine
own Dice, yet lost. Ha you any money?


Bell. Las I ha none.

Mat. Must have money, must have some, must have a Cloak, and Rapier, and
things: will you go set your limetwigs, and get me some birds, some money?


Bell. What limetwigs should I set?

Mat. You will not then? Must have cash and pictures: do ye hear, (frailty)
shall I walk in a Plymouth Cloak, (that is to say) like a rogue, in my hose
and doublet, and a crabtree cudgel in my hand, and you swim in your Sattins?
must have money, come.


Orl. Is It bedtime, Master, that you undo my Mistress?

Bell. Undo me? Yes, yes, at these riflings
I have been too often.

Mat. Help to flea, Pacheco.

Orl. Fleaing call you it?

Mat. I Will pawn you by the Lord, to your very eyebrows.

Bell. With all my heart, since heaven will have me poor,
As good he drowned at sea, as drowned at shore.

Orl. Why hear you, sir? in faith do not make away her Gown.

Mat. Oh it is Summer, it is Summer; your only fashion for a woman now, is to be
light, to be light.


Orl. Why, pray sir, employ some of that money you have of mine.


Mat. Thine? I Will starve first, I Will beg first; when I touch a penny of that, let
these fingers ends rot.


Orl. So they may, for that is past touching. I saw my twenty pounds fly hie.


Mat. Know thou never a damned Broker about the City?


Orl. Damned Broker? yes, five hundred.

Mat. The Gown stood me in above twenty Ducats, borrow ten of it, cannot live
without silver.


Orl. I Will make what I can of it, sir, I Will be your Broker,
But not your damb'd broker: Oh thou scuruy knave,
What makes a wife turn whore, but such a slave?
Exit.
Mat. How now little chicke, what aylest, weeping
For a handful of Tailors shreds? pox on them, are there not silks enough at
Mercers?


Bell I care not for gay feathers, I.

Mat. What do care for then? why do grieve?

Bell. Why do I grieve? A thousand sorrows strike
At one poor heart, and yet it lives. Matheo,
Thou art a Gamester, prithee throw at all,
Set all upon one cast, we kneel and pray,
And struggle for life, yet must be cast away.
Meet misery quickly then, split all, sell all,
And when thou have sold all, spend it, but I beseech thee
Build not thy mind on me to coin thee more,
To get it would thou have me play the whore?

Mat. 'Twas your profession before I married you.

Bell. Vmh? it was indeed: if all men should be branded
For sins long since laid up, who could be saved?
The Quarter day's at hand, how will you do
To pay the Rent, Matheo?

Mat. Why? do as all of our occupation do against Quarter days; break up
house, remove, shift your lodgings, pox a your Quarters.

Enter Lodouico.
Lod. Where Is this Gallant?

Mat. Signior Lodouico? how does my little Mirror of Knighthood? this is
kindly done in faith: welcome by my troth.


Lod. And how do, frolic? Save you fair Lady. Thou look smug and
bravely, Noble Mat.


Mat. Drink and feed, laugh and lie warm.

Lod. Is this thy wife?

Mat. A poor Gentlewoman, sir, whom I make use of a nights.


Lod. Pay custom to your lips, sweet Lady.

Mat. Borrow some shells of him, some wine, sweet heart.


Lod. I Will send for it then in faith.

Mat. You send for it? Some wine I prithee.

Bell. I ha no money.

Mat. S'blood, nor I: What wine love you, Signior?

Lod. Here, or I Will not stay, I protest; trouble the Gentlewoman too much?

Exit Bellafront. And what news flies abroad, Matheo?

Mat. Troth, none. Oh Signior, we ha been merry in our days.


Lod. And no doubt shall again.
The Divine powers never shoot Darts at men
Mortal, to kill them.

Mat. You say true.

Lod. Why should we grieve at want?
Say the world made thee her Minnion, that
Thy head lay in her lap, and that she danced thee
On her wanton knee, she could but give thee a whole
World: that is all, and that all is nothing; the worlds
Greatest part cannot fill up one corner of thy heart.
Say, the three corners were all filld, alas!
Of what art thou possessed, a thin blown glass:
Such as by Boys is puffed into the air.
Were twenty Kingdoms thine, thou would live in care:
Thou could not sleep the better, nor live longer,
Nor merrier be, nor healthfuller, nor stronger.
If then thou want, thus make that want thy pleasure,
No man wants all things, nor has all in measure.

Mat. I am the most wretched fellow: sure some lefthanded Priest christened me,
I am so unlucky: I am never out of one puddle or another, still falling.

Enter Bellafront, and Orlando.
Mat. Fill out wine to my little finger.
With my heart in faith.

Lod. Thanks, good Matheo.
To your own sweet self.

Orl. All the Brokers hearts, sir, are made of flint, I can with all my
knocking, strike but six sparks of fire out of them, here is six ducats, if
you will take them.


Mat. Give me them: an evil conscience gnaw them all, moths and plagues hang
upon their lousy wardrobs.


Lod. Is this your man, Matheo? An old Seruingman.

Orl. You may give me the other half too, sir:
That Is the Beggar.

Lod. What have there, gold?

Mat. A sort of Rascals are in my debt, (God knows what) and they feed me
with bits, with crummes, a pox choke them.


Lod. A word, Matheo: be not angry with me,
Believe it that I know the touch of time,
And can part copper (tho it be gilded over)
From the true gold: the sails which thou do spread,
Would show well, if they were not borrowed.
The sound of thy low fortunes drew me hither,
I give my self unto thee, prithee use me,
I will bestow on you a suite of Satin,
And all things else to fit a Gentleman,
Because I love you.

Mat. Thanks, good Noble Knight.

Lod. Call on me when you please,
Till then farewell.
Exit.
Mat. Have angled? have cut up this fresh Salmon?

Bell. Wudst have me be so base?

Mat. It Is base to steal, it is base to be a whore:
Thou't be more base, I Will make thee keep a door.
Exit.
Orl. I hope he will not sneake away with all the money, will he?


Bell. Thou see he does.

Orl. Nay then it is well. I set my brains upon an upright Last; tho my wits be
old, yet they are like a witherd pippin, wholesome. Look you, Mistress, I told
him I had but six ducats of the (Knave) Broker, but I had eight, and kept
these two for you.


Bell. Thou should have given him all.

Orl. What, to fly hie?

Bell. Like waves, my misery drives on misery.
Exit.
Orl. Sell his wives clothes from her back? does any Poulterers wife pull
chickins alive? He Riots all abroad, wants all at home; he Dices, whores,
swaggers, swears, cheates, borrowes, pawnes: I Will give him hook and line, a
little more for all this.

Yet sure in the end he will delude all my hopes,
And show me a French trick danced on the ropes.
Exit. Enter at one door Lodouico and Carolo; at another Bots, and Mistress
Horsleach; Candido and his wife appear in the Shop.
Lod. Hist, hist, Lieutenant Bots, how do, man?

Car. Whither are you ambling, Madam Horsleach?

Horse. About worldly profit, sir: how do your Worships?

Bots. We want tools, Gentlemen, to furnish the trade: they wear out day and
night, they wear out till no mettle be left in their back; we hear of two
or three new Wenches are come up with a Carrier, and your old Goshawke here is
flying at them.


Lod. And faith, what flesh have you at home?

Horse. Ordinary Dishes, by my troth, sweet men, there is few good in the City; I
am as well furnished as any, and tho I say it, as well custom'd.


Bots. We have meats of all sorts of dressing; we have stewed meat for your
Frenchmen, pretty light picking meat for your Italian, and that which is rotten
roasted, for Don Spaniardo.


Lod. A pox on it.

Bots. We have Poulterers ware for your sweet bloods, as Dove, Chickin, Ducke,
Teale, Woodcocke, and so forth: and Butchers meat for the Citizen: yet Muttons
fall very bad this year.


Lod. Stay, is not that my patient Linen Draper yonder, and my fine young smug
Mistress, his wife?


Car. Sir Grannam, I Will give thee for thy fee twenty crowns, if thou can
but procure me the wearing of yon velvet cap.


Hos. You Would wear another thing besides the cap. You Are a Wag.


Boss. Twenty crowns? we'li share, and I Will be your pully to draw her on.


Lod. Do It presently; we'll ha some sport.

Horse. Wheel you about, sweet men: do you see, I Will cheapen wares of the man,
whilst Bots is doing with his wife.


Lod. To It: if we come into the shop to do you grace, we will call you Madam.


Bots. Pox a your old face, give it the badge of all scuruy faces, a Masque.


Cand. What is it you lack, Gentlewoman? Cambricke or Lawnes, or fine Hollands?
Pray draw near, I can sell you a pennyworth.


Bots. Some Cambricke for my old Lady.

Cand. Cambricke? you shall, the purest thread in Millan.

Lod. and Car. Save you, Signior Candido.

Lod. How does my Noble Master? how my fair Mistress?

Cand. My Worshipful good Servant, view it well, for it is both fine and even.


Car. Cry you mercy, Madam, tho masked, I thought it should be you by your man.
Pray' Signior, show her the best, for she commonly deals for good ware.


Cand. Then this shall fit her, this is for your Ladyship.

Bots. A word, I pray, there is a waiting Gentlewomon of my Ladies: her name is
Ruyna, says she is your Kinswoman, and that you should be one of her Aunts.


Wife. One of her Aunts? troth sir, I know her not.

Bots. If it please you to bestow the poor labor of your legs at any time, I
will be your conuoy thither?


Wife. I am a Snaile, sir, seldom leave my house, if it please her to visit me,
she shall be welcome.


Bots. Do you hear? the naked troth is: my Lady has a young Knight, her
son, who loves you, you are made, if you lay hold vpont: this Jewel he sends
you.


Wife. Sir, I return his love and Jewel with scorn; let go my hand, or I
shall call my husband. You are an arrant Knave.

Exit.
Lod. What, will she do?

Bots. Do? they shall all do if Bots sets upon them once, she was as if she
had professed the trade, squeamish at first, at last I showed her this Jewel,
said, a Kuight sent it her.


Lod. Is It gold, and right stones?

Bots. Copper, Copper, I go a fishing with these baits.

Lod. She nibbled, but wud not swallow the hook, because the Cunger-head her
husband was by: but she bids the Gentleman name any afternoon, and she will
meet him at her Garden house, which I know.


Lod. Is this no lie now?

Bots. Dam me if --

Lod. Oh prithee stay there.

Bots. The twenty crowns, sir.

Lod. Before he has his work done? but on my Knightly word, he shall pay't
thee.

Enter Astolpho, Beraldo, Fontinell, and the Irish Footman.
Asto. I thought thou had been gone into thine own Country.


Bry. No faat la, I cannot go dis four or tree days.

Ber. Look thee, yonder is the shop, and that is the man himself.


Fon. Thou shall but cheapen, and do as we told thee, to put a jest upon him,
to abuse his patience.


Bry. I faat, I doubt my pate shall be knocked: but sa crees sa me, for your
shakes, I will run to any Linen Draper in hell, come preddy.


Omnes. Save you Gallants.

Lod. and Car. Oh, well met!

Cand. You Will give no more you say? I cannot take it.

Horse. Truly I Will give no more.

Cand. It must not fetch it. What wud you have, sweet Gentlemen?


Asto. Nay, here is the Customer.
Exeunt Bots and Horsl.
Lod. The Garden-house you say? we will boult out your roguery.


Cand. I will but lay these parcels by -- My men are all at Custom House
vnloding Wares, if Cambricke you wud deal in, there is the best, all Millan
cannot sample it.


Lod. Do you hear? 1. 2. 3. S'foot, there came in 4. Gallants, sure your wife
is slipped up, and the 4th. man I hold my life, is grafting your Warden tree.


Cand. Ha, ha, ha: you Gentlemen are full of Jest.
If she be up, she is gone some wares to show,
I have above as good wares as below.

Lod. Have you so? nay then --

Cand. Now Gentlemen, is it Cambricks?

Bry. I predee now let me have de best wares.

Cand. What Is that he says, pray 'Gentlemen?

Lod. Mary he says we are like to have the best wares.

Cand. The best wares? all are bad, yet wares do good, And like to Surgeons,
let sick Kingdoms blood.


Bry. Faat a Devil pratest tow so, a pox on dee, I preddee let me see some
Hollen, to make Linen shirts, for fear my body be lousy.


Cand. Indeed I understand no word he speaks.

Car. Mary, he says, that at the siege in Holland there was much bawdry used
among the Soldiers, tho they were lousy.


Cand. It may be so, that is likely, true indeed,
In every garden, sir, does grow that weed.

Bry. Pox on de gardens, and de weeds, and de fools cap dear, and de cloutes;
hear? do make a Hobbyhorse of me.


Omnes. Oh fie, he has torn de Cambricke.

Cand. It Is no matter.

Asto. It frets me to the soul.

Cand. So do not me.
My Customers do often for remnants call,
These are two remnants now, no loss at all.
But let me tell you, were my Servants here,
It would ha cost more. -- Thank you Gentlemen,
I use you well, pray know my shop again.
Exit.
Omnes. Ha, ha, ha; come, come, let us go, let us go.
Exeunt. Enter Matheo (brave) and Bellafront.
Mat. How am I suited, Front? am I not gallant, ha?

Bell. Yes, sir, you are suited well.

Mat. Exceeding passing well, and to the time.

Bell. The Tailor has played his part with you.

Mat. And I have played a Gentleman's part with my Tailor, for I owe him for the
making of it.


Bell. And why did you so, sir?

Mat. To keep the fashion; It Is your only fashion now of your best rank of
Gallants, to make their Tailors wait for their money, neither were it wisdom
indeed to pay them upon the first edition of a new suite: for commonly the
suite is owing for, when the lynings are worn out, and there is no reason then,
that the Tailor should be paid before the Mercer.


Bell. Is this the suite the Knight bestowed upon you?

Mat. This is the suite, and I need not shame to wear it, for better men then
I would be glad to have suites bestowed on them. It Is a generous fellow, -- but
-- pox on him -- we whose Pericranions are the very Limbecks and Stillitories
of good wit, and fly hie, must drive liquor out of stale gaping Oysters.
Shallow Knight, poor Squire Tinacheo: I Will make a wild Cataine of forty such:
hang him, he is an Ass, he is always sober.


Bell. This is your fault to wound your friends still.

Mat. No faith, Front, Lodouico is a noble Slauonian: it is more rare to see him
in a woman's company, then for a Spaniard to go into England, and to challenge
the English Fencers there. -- One knockes, -- See -- La, fa, sol, la, fa, la,
rustle in Silks and Satins: there is music in this, and a Taffety Petticoate,
it make both fly hie, -- Catzo.

Enter Bellafront, after her Orlando like himself, with four men after him.
Bell. Matheo? it is my Father.

Mat. Ha, Father? It Is no matter, he finds no tatterd Prodigals here.


Orl. Is not the door good enough to hold your blue Coats? away, Knaves.
Wear not your clothes threadbare at knees for me; beg Heavens blessing, (not
mine.) Oh cry your Worship mercy, sir, was somewhat bold to talk to this
Gentlewoman, your wife here.


Mat. A poor Gentlewoman, sir.

Orl. Stand not, sir, bare to me; I ha read often
That Serpents who creep low, belch ranker poison
That winged Dragons do, that fly aloft.

Mat. If it offend you, sir? it is for my pleasure.

Orl. Your pleasure be it, sir; vmh, is this your Palace?

Bell. Yes, and our Kingdom, for it is our content.

Orl. It Is a very poor Kingdom then; what, are all your Subjects gone a
Sheepe-shearing? not a Maid? not a Man? not so much as a Cat? you keep a good
house belike, just like one of your profession, every room with bare walls,
and a halfe-headed bed to vault upon (as all your bawdyhouses are.) Pray who
are your Vpholsters? Oh, the Spider. I see, they bestow hangings upon you.


Mat. Bawdy House? Zounds sir --

Bell. Oh sweet Matheo, peace. Upon my knees
I do beseech you, sir, not to arraigne me
For sins, which heaven, I hope, long since has pardoned.
Those flames (like lightning flashes) are so spent,
The heat no more remains, then where ships went,
Or where birds cut the air, the print remains.

Mat. Pox on him, kneel to a Dog?

Bell. She that is a Whore,
Lives gallant, fares well, is not (like me) poor,
I ha now as small acquaintance with that sin,
As if I had never known it; that, never bin.

Orl. No acquaintance with it? what maintains thee then? how do live then?
has thy husband any Lands? any Rents coming in, any Stock going, any Ploughs
iogging, any Ships sailing? have thou any Wares to turn, so much as to get a
single penny by? yes, thou have Ware to sell, Knaves are thy Chapmen, and thy
Shop is Hell.


Mat. Do you hear, sir?

Orl. So sir, I do hear, sir, more of you then you dream I do.

Mat. You fly a little too hie, sir.

Orl. Why, sir, too hie?

Mat. I ha suffered your tongue, like a bard Cater tra, to run all this while,
and ha not stopped it.


Orl. Well, sir, you talk like a Gamester.

Mat. If you come to bark at her, because she is a poor rogue; look you,
here is a fine path, sir, and there, there the door.


Bell. Matheo?

Mat. Your blue Coats stay for you, sir.
I love a good honest roaring Boy, and so --

Orl. That Is the Devil.

Mat. Sir, sir, I Will ha no Jove's in my house to thunder Auaunt: she shall live
and be maintained, when you, like a keg of musty Sturgeon, shall stink. Where?
in your Coffin. How? be a musty fellow, and lousy.


Orl. I know she shall be maintained, but how? she like a Queen, thou like a
Knave; she like a Whore, thou like a Thief.


Mat. Theife? Zounds Thief?

Bell. Good dearest Mat. -- Father.

Mat. Pox on you both, I Will not be braued: New Satin scorns to be put down
with bare bawdy Velvet. Thief?


Orl. I Thief, thou art a Murderer, a Cheater, a Whore-monger, a Pot-hunter, a
Borrower, a Beggar --


Bell. Dear Father.

Mat. An old Ass, a Dog, a Churl, a Chuffe, an Usurer, a Villain, a Moth, a
mangy Mule, with an old velvet foot-cloth on his back, sir.


Bell. Oh me!

Orl. Varlet, for this I Will hang thee.

Mat. Ha, ha, alas.

Orl. Thou keep a man of mine here, under my nose.

Mat. Under thy beard.

Orl. As arrant a smell-smocke, for an old Mutton-munger, as thy self.


Mat. No, as your self.

Orl. As arrant a purse-take. as ever cride, Stand, yet a good fellow, I
confess, and valiant, but he will bring thee to the Gallows; you both have robbed
of late two poor Country Pedlers.


Mat. How Is this? how is this? do thou fly hie? rob Pedlers? bear witness
Front, rob Pedlers? my man and I a Thief?


Bell. Oh, sir, no more.

Orl. I Knave, two Pedlers, hue and cry is up, Warrants are out, and I shall
see thee climb a Ladder.


Mat And come down again as well as a Bricklayer, or a Tyler. How the
vengeance knows he this? If I be hanged, I Will tell the people I married old
Friscabaldoes Daughter, I Will frisco you, and your old carkas.


Orl. Tell what thou can; if I stay here longer, I shall be hanged too, for
being in thy company; therefore, as I found you, I leave you.


Mat. Kneel, and get money of him.

Orl. A Knave and a Queen, a Thief and a Strumpet, a couple of Beggars, a
brace of Baggages.


Mat. Hang upon him. I, I, sir, fare you well; we are so: follow close -- we
are Beggars -- in Satin -- to him.


Bell. Is this your comfort, when so many years
You ha left me frozen to death?

Orl. Freeze still, starve still.

Bell. Yes, so I shall: I must: I must and will.
If as you say I Am poor, relieve me then,
Let me not sell my body to base men.
You call me Strumpet, Heaven knows I am none:
Your cruelty may drive me to be one:
Let not that sin be yours, let not the shame
Of common Whore live longer then my name.
That cunning Bawd (Necessity) night and day
Plots to undo me; drive that Hag away,
Lest being at lowest ebb, as now I am,
I sink for ever.

Orl. Lowest ebb, what ebb?

Bell. So poor, that (tho to tell it be my shame)
I am not worth a dish to hold my meat;
I am yet poorer, I want bread to eat.

Orl. It Is not seen by your cheeks.

Mat. I think she has read an Homely to tickle to the old rogue.


Orl. Want bread? there is Satin: bake that.

Mat. S'blood, make Pasties of my clothes?

Orl. A fair new Cloak, stew that; an excellent gilt Rapier.


Mat. Will you eat that, sir?

Orl. I could feast ten good fellows with those Hangers.

Mat. The pox you shall.

Orl. I shall not (till thou beggest,) think thou art poor;
And when thou beggest, I Will feed thee at my door,
As I feed Dogs, (with bones) till then beg,
Borrow, pawn, steal, and hang, turn Bawd.
When thou art no Whore, my heart strings sure
Would crack, were they strained more.
Exit.
Mat. This is your Father, your damned -- confusion light upon all the
generation of you; he can come bragging hither with four white Herrings (at's
tail) in blue Coats without roes in their bellies, but I may starve ere he
give me so much as a cob.


Bell. What tell you me of this? alas.

Mat. Go trot after your Dad, do you capitulate, I Will pawn not for you, I Will
not steal to be hanged for such an hypocritical close common Harlot: away,
you Dog -- Brave in faith! Vds foot, Give me some meat.


Bell. Yes, Sir.
Exit.
Mat. Goodman slave, my man too, is galloped to the Devil athe the other side:
Pacheco, I Will checo you. Is this your Dads day? England (they say) is the only
hell for Horses, and only Paradise for Women: pray get you to that Paradise,
because you are called an Honest Whore; there they live none but honest whores
with a pox: Mary here in our City, all our sex are but foot-cloth Nags: the
Master no sooner lights, but the man leapes into the saddle.

Enter Bellafront.
Bell. Will you sit down I pray, sir?

Mat. I could tear (by the Lord) his flesh, and eat his midriffe in salt, as I
eat this: -- must I choke -- my Father Friscabaldo, I shall make a pitiful
Hog-louse of you Orlando, if you fall once into my fingers -- Here Is the
sauorest meat: I ha got a stomach with chasing. What Rogue should tell him of
those two Pedlers? A plague choke him, and gnaw him to the bare bones: come
fill.


Bell. Thou sweatest with very anger, good sweet, vex not, alas, it is no fault
of mine.


Mat. Where did buy this Mutton? I never felt better ribs.


Bell. A neighbor sent it me.
Enter Orlando.
Mat. Hah, neighbor? foh, my mouth stinkes, you whore, do you beg victuals
for me? Is this Satin doublet to be bumbasted with broken meat?

Takes up the stool.
Orl. What will you do, sir?

Mat. Beat out the brains of a beggarly --
Exit Beliafront.
Orl. Beat out an Asses head of your own; away, Mistress. Zownds, do but touch
one hair of her, and I Will so quilt your cap with old Iron, that your coxcombe
shall ache the worse these seven years for it: Does she look like a roasted
Rabbet, that you must have the head for the brains?


Mat. Ha, ha: Go out of my doors, you Rogue, away, four marks trudge.


Orl. Four marks? no, sir, my twenty pound that you ha made fly hie, and I
am gone.


Mat. Must I be fed with chippings? you are best get a clapdish, and say you are
Proctor to some Spittle-house. Where have thou been, Pacheco? come hither my
little Turkycocke.


Orl. I cannot abide, sir, to see a woman wronged, not I.

Mat. Sir, here was my Father-in-law to day.

Orl. Pish, then you are full of Crowns.

Mat. Hang him, he would ha thrust crowns upon me, to have fallen in again,
but I scorn cast-cloathes, or any man's gold.


Orl. But mine: how did he brook that (sir?)

Mat. Oh: swore like a dozen of drunken Tinkers; at last growing foul in
words, he and four of his men drew upon me, sir.


Orl. In your house? wud I had bin by.

Mat. I made no more ado, but fell to my old lock, and so thrashed my blue
Coats, and old crabtree-face my father-in-law, and then walked like a Lion in
my grate.


Orl. Oh Noble Master!

Mat. Sir, he could tell me of the robbing the two Pedlers, and that warrants
are out for us both.


Orl. Good, sir, I like not those crackers.

Mat. Crack halter, wut set thy foot to mine?

Orl. How, sir? at drinking.

Mat. We'll pull that old Crow my Father: rob thy Master. I know the house,
thou the servants: the purchase is rich, the plot to get it easy, the Dog will
not part from a bone.


Orl. Plucked out of his throat then: I Will snarle for one, if this can bite.


Mat. Say no more, say no more, old cole, meet me anon at the sign of the
Shipwreck.


Orl. Yes, sir.

Mat. And do hear, man? -- the Shipwreck.
Exit.
Orl. Thou Art at the Shipwreck now, and like a swimmer
Bold (but inexpert) with those waves do play,
Whose dalliance (whorelike) is to cast thee away.
Enter Hipollito and Bellafront.
Orl. And here is another Vessel, (better fraught,
But as ill manned) her sinking will be wraught,
If rescue come not: like a Man of war
I Will therefore bravely out: somewhat I Will do,
And either save them both, or perish too.
Exit.
Hip. It is my fate to be bewitched by those eyes.

Bell. Fate? your folly.
Why should my face thus mad you? alas, those colors
Are wound up long ago, which beauty spread,
The flowers that once grew here, are withered.
You turned my black soul white, made it look new,
And should I sin, it never should be with you.

Hip. Your hand, I Will offer you fair play: When first
We met in the Lists together, you remember
You were a common Rebel; with one parlee
I won you to come in.

Bell. You did.

Hip. I Will try
If now I can beat down this Chastity
With the same Ordnance; will you yield this Fort,
If with the power of Argument now (as then)
I get of you the conquest: as before
I turned you honest, now to turn you whore,
By force of strong persuasion?

Bell. If you can,
I yield.

Hip. The allarm's struck up: I Am your man.

Bell. A woman gives defiance.

Hip. Sit.

Bell. Begin:
It Is a brave battle to encounter sin.

Hip. You men that are to fight in the same war,
To which I Am pressed, and plead at the same bar,
To win a woman, if you wud have me speed,
Send all your wishes.

Bell. No doubt you are heard, proceed.

Hip. To be a Harlot, that you stand upon,
The very name's a charm to make you one.
Harlot was a Dame of so divine
And rauishing touch, that she was Concubine
To an English King: her sweet bewitching eye
Did the Kings heart strings in such loue-knots tie,
That even the coyest was proud when she could hear
Men say, Behold; another Harlot there;
And after her all women that were fair
Were Harlots called, as to this day some are:
Besides her dalliance, she so well does mix,
That she is in Latin called the Meretrix.
Thus for the name; for the profession, this,
Who lives in bondage, lives laced, the chief bliss
This world below can yield, is liberty:
And who (than whores) with looser wings dare fly?
As Iunoes proud bird spreads the fairest tail,
So does a Strumpet hoist the loftiest sail.
She Is no man's slave; (men are her slaves) her eye
Moves not on wheels screwd up with Iealowsie.
She (Horst, or Coacht) does merry iourneys make,
Free as the Sun in his gilt Zodiake:
As bravely does she shine, as fast she is driven,
But stays not long in any house of Heaven:
But shifts from Sign, to Sign, her amorous prizes
More rich being when she is down, then when she rizes.
In brief, Gentlemen haunt them, Soldiers fight for them,
Few men but know them, few or none abhor them:
Thus (for sport sake) speak I, as to a woman,
Whom (as the worst ground) I would turn to common:
But you I would enclose for mine own bed.

Bell. So should a husband be dishonored.

Hip. Dishonored? not a whit: to fall to one
(Besides your husband) is to fall to none,
For one no number is.

Bell. Faith, should you take
One in your bed, would you that reckoning make?
It Is time you sound retreat.

Hip. Say, have I won,
Is the day ours?

Bell. The battaile's but half done,
None but your self have yet sounded alarmes,
Let us strike too, else you dishonor arms.

Hip. If you can win the day,
The glorie's yours.

Bell. To prove a woman should not be a whore,
When she was made, she had one man, and no more,
Yet she was tied to laws then, for (oven than)
It Is said, she was not made for men, but man.
Anon, to increase earths brood, the law was varied,
Men should take many wives: and tho they married
According to that Act, yet it is not known,
But that those wives were only tied to one.
New Parliaments were since: for now one woman
Is shared between three hundred, nay she is common;
Common? as spotted Leopards, whom for sport
Men hunt, to get the flesh, but care not for it.
So spread they Nets of gold, and tune their Calls,
To inchaunt silly women to take falls:
Swearing they are Angels, (which that they may win)
They Will hire the Devil to come with false Dice in.
Oh Sirens subtle tunes! your selves you flatter,
And our weak sex betray, so men love water;
It serves to wash their hands, but (being once foul)
The water down is powered, cast out of doors,
And even of such base use do men make whores.
A Harlot (like a Hen) more sweetness reapes,
To pick men one by one up, then in heaps:
Yet all feeds but confounding. Say you should taste me,
I serve but for the time, and when the day
Of war is done, am casheerd out of pay:
If like lame Soldiers I could beg, that is all,
And there is lusts Rendez-vous, an Hospital.
Who then would be a man's slave, a man's woman?
She Is half starn'd the first day that feeds in Common.

Hip. You should not feed so, but with me alone.

Bell. If I drink poison by stealth, is it not all one?
Is It not rank poison still? with you alone!
Nay say you spide a Curtezan, whose soft side
To touch, you would sell your birthright for one kiss,
Be racked, she is won, you are sated: what follows this?
Oh, then you curse that Bawd that toald you in,
(The Night) you curse your lust, you loath the sin,
You loath her very sight, and ere the day
Arise, you rise glad when you are stolen away.
Even then when you are drunk with all her sweets,
There Is no true pleasure in a Strumpets sheets.
Women, whom Lust so prostitutes to sale,
Like Dancers upon ropes; once seen, are stale.

Hip. If all the threads of Harlots lives are span,
So coorse as you would make them, tell me why
You so long loved the trade?

Bell. If all the threads
Of Harlots lives be fine as you would make them,
Why do not you persuade your wife turn whore,
And all Dames else to fall befere that sin?
Like an ill husband (^ho I knew the same,
To be my undoing) followed I that game.
Oh when the work of Lust had earned my bread,
To taste it, how I trembled, lest each bit,
Ere it went down, should choke me (chewing it?)
My bed seemed like a Cabin hung in Hell,
The Bawd Hells Porter, and the lickorish wine
The Pander fetched, was like an easy Fine,
For which, me thought I leas'd away my soul,
And oftentimes (even in my quaffing bowl)
Thus said I to my self, I am a whore,
And have drunk down thus much confusion more.

Hip. It is a common rule, and it is most true,
Two of one trade never love; no more do you.
Why are you sharp against that you once professed?

Bell. Why doat you on that, which you did once detest?
I cannot (seeing she is wouen of such bad stuff)
Set colors on a Harlot base enough.
Nothing did make me, when I loved them best,
To loath them more then this: when in the street
A fair young modest Damsel I did meet,
She seemed to all a Dove (when I passed by)
And I (to all) a Raven: every eye
That followed her, wont with a bash full glance
At me, each bold and ieering countenance
Darted forth scorn: to her (as if she had bin
Some Tower vnvanquished) would they veil,
Against me swollen Rumor hoisted every sail.
She (crowned with reverend praises) passed by them,
I (tho with face maskt) could not escape the hem,
For (as if Heaven had set strange marks on Whores,
Because they should be pointing stocks to man)
Dressed up in ciuilest shape a Curtizan.
Let her walk Saint-like, notelesse, and unknown,
Yet she is betrayed by some trick of her own.
Were Harlots therefore wise, they would be sold dear:
For men account them good but for one year:
And then like Almanackes (whose dates are gone)
They are thrown by, and no more looked upon.
Who Will therefore backward fall, who will lanch forth
In Seas so foul, for ventures no more worth?
Lusts voyage has (if not this course) this cross,
Buy never so cheap, your Ware comes home with loss.
What, shall I sound retreat? the battaile's done:
Let the world judge which of us two have won.

Hip. I!

Bell. You? nay then as cowards do in fight,
What by blows cannot, shall be saved by flight.
Exit.
Hip. Fly to earths fixed Center: to the Caves
Of everlasting horror, I Will pursue thee,
(Tho laden with sins) even to Hells brazen doors.
Thus wisest men turn fools, doting on whores.
Exit. Enter the Duke, Lodouico, and Orlando: after them Infaelice. Carolo,
Astolfo, Beraldo, Fontinell.
Orl. I beseech your Grace (tho your eye be so piercing) as under a poor blue
Coat, to cull out an honest Father from an old Seruingman: yet good my Lord
discover not the plot to any, but only this Gentleman that is now to be an
Actor in our ensuing Comedy.


Duke. Thou have thy wish, Orlando, pass unknown,
Sforsa shall only go along with thee,
To see that Warrant served upon thy Son.

Lod. To attach him upon felony, for 2. Pedlers: is it not so?

Orl. Right, my Noble Knight: those Pedlers were two Knaves of mine; he fleeced
the men before, and now he purposes to flea the Master. He will rob me, his
teeth water to be nibbling at my gold, but this shall hang him by the gills, till
I pull him on shore.


Duke. Away: ply you the business.

Orl. Thanks to your Grace: but my good Lord, for my Daughter.


Duke. You know what I have said.

Orl. And remember what I have sworn: She Is more honest, on my soul, then one
of the Turks Wenches, watched by a hundred Eunuchs.


Lod. So she had need, for the Turks make them whores.

Orl. He Is a Turk that makes any woman a Whore, he is no true Christian I Am
sure. I commit your Grace.


Duke. Infaelice.

Infae. Here, sir.

Lod. Signior Friscabaldo.

Orl. Frisking again, Pacheco?

Lod. Vds so, Pacheco? we will have some sport with this Warrant: it is to
apprehend all suspected persons in the house: Besides, there is one Bots a
Pander, and one Madam Horsleach a Bawd, that have abused my friend, those two
Coneyes will we ferret into the pursenet.


Orl. Let me alone for dabbing them o'th neck: come, come.


Lod. Do ye hear, Gallants? meet me anon at Matheos.

Omnes. Enough.
Exeunt Lodouico and Orlando.
Duke. The old Fellow sings that note thou did before,
Only his tunes are, that she is no Whore,
But that she sent his Letters and his gifts,
Out of a Noble Triumph over his Lust,
To show she trampled his Assaults in dust.

Infae. It Is a good honest servant, that old man.

Duke. I doubt no less.

Infae. And it may be my husband,
Because when once this woman was unmasked,
He leueld all her thoughts, and made them fit:
Now he would mar all again, to try his wit.

Duke. It may be so too, for to turn a Harlot
Honest, it must be by strong Antidots,
It Is rare, as to see Panthers change their spots.
And when she is once a Star (fixed) and shines bright,
Tho 'twere impiety then to dim her light,
Because we see such Tapers seldom burn.
Yet it is the pride and glory of some men,
To change her to a blazing Star again,
And it may be, Hipollito does no more.
It cannot be, but you are acquainted all
With that same madness of our Sonne-in-law,
That dotes so on a Curtizan.

Omnes. Yes, my Lord.

Car. All the City thinks he is a Whoremonger.

Ast. Yet I warrant, he will swear, no man marks him.

Ber. It Is like so, for when a man goes a wenching, is as if he had a strong
stinking breath, every one smells him out, yet he feels it not, tho it be
rancker then the sweat of sixteen Bearewarders.


Duke. I doubt then you have all those stinking breaths,
You might be all smelt out.

Car. Troth my Lord, I think we are all as you ha bin in your youth when you
went a Maying, we all love to hear the Cuckoo sing upon other men's Trees.


Duke. It Is well yet you confess: but Girl, thy bed
Shall not be parted with a Curtizan -- it is strange,
No frown of mine, no frown of the poor Lady,
(My abused child, his wife) no care of fame,
Of Honor, Heaven or Hell, no not that name
Of Common Strumpet, can affright, or woo
Him to abandon her; the Harlot does undo him,
She has bewitched him, robbed him of his shape,
Turned him into a beast, his reason's lost,
You see he looks wild, does he not?

Car. I ha noted new Moons
In's face, my Lord, all full of change.

Duke. He Is no more life unto Hipollito,
Then dead men are to living -- never sleeps,
Or if he do, it is dreams; and in those dreams
His arms work, -- and then cries -- Sweet -- what is her
Name, what is the drabs name?

Ast. In troth, my Lord, I know not,
I know no drabs, not I.

Duke. Oh, Bellafront!
And catching her fast, cries, My Bellafront.

Car. A drench that is able to kill a Horse, cannot kill this disease of
Smock-smelling, my Lord, if it have once eaten deep.


Duke. I Will try all Physic, and this Medicine first:
I have directed Warrants strong and peremptory
(To purge our City Millan, and to cure the outward
Parts, the Suburbs) for the attaching
Of all those women, who (like gold) want weight,
Cities (like Ships) should have no idle freight.

Car. No, my Lord, and light wenches are no idle freight,
But what is your Graces reach in this?

Duke. This (Carolo.) If she whom my Son doates on,
Be in that Master-booke enrold, he will shame
Ever to approach one of such noted name.

Car. But say she be not?

Duke. Yet on Harlots heads
New Laws shall fall so heavy, and such blows shall
Give to those that haunt them, that Hipollito
(If not for fear of Law) for love to her,
If he love truly, shall her bed forbear.

Car. Attach all the light heels in the City, and clap em up? why, my Lord? you
diue into a Well unsearchable: all the Whores within the walls, and without the
walls? I would not be he should meddle with them for ten such Dukedomes; the
Army that you speak on, is able to fill all the prisons within this City, and
to leave not a drinking room in any Tavern besides.


Duke. Those only shall be caught that are of note,
Harlots in each street flow:
The fish being thus in the net, our self will sit,
And with eye most severe dispose of it. -- come, Girl.

Car. Araigne the poor Whore.

Ast. I Will not miss that Sessions.

Font. Nor I.

Ber. Nor I,
Tho I hold up my hand there my self.
Exeunt. Enter Matheo, Orlando, and Lodouico.
Mat. Let who will come (my Noble Shauileir) I can but play the kind Host, and
bid vm welcome.


Lod. We'll trouble your house (Matheo) but as Dutchmen do in Tauernes
(drink, be merry, and be gone.)


Orl. Indeed if you be right Dutchmen, if you fall to drinking, you must be
gone.


Mat. The worst is, my wife is not at home; but we'll fly hie (my generous
Knight) for all that: there is no Music when a woman is in the consort.


Orl. No, for she is like a pair of Virginals,
Always with Iackes at her tail.
Enter Astolfo, Carolo, Beraldo, Fontinell.
Lod. See, the Couy is sprung.

O(...). Save you Gallants.

Mat. Happily encounterd, sweet bloods.

Lod. Gentlemen, you all know Signior Candido, the Linen Draper, he that is
more patient then a brown Baker, upon the day when he heates his Oven, and has
forty Scolds about him.


Omnes. Yes, we know him all, what of him?

Lod. Wud it not be a good fit of mirth, to make a piece of English cloth of
him, and to stretch him on the Tainters, till the threads of his own natural
humor crack, by making him drink healths, Tobacco, dance, sing bawdy songs,
or to run any bias according as we think good to cast him?


Car. 'Twere a Morris dance worth the seeing.

Ast. But the old Fox is so crafty, we shall hardly hunt out of his den.


Mat. To that train I ha given fire already; and the hook to draw him hither,
is to see certain pieces of Lawne, which I told him I have to sell, and indeed
have such: fetch them down, Pacheco.


Orl. Yes, sir, I Am your Water-spanniell, and will fetch any thing: but I Will
fetch one dish of meat anon, shall turn your stomach, and that is a Constable.

Exit. Enter Bots vshering Mistress Horsleach.
Omnes. How now? how now?

Car. What Gally-foist is this?

Lod. Peace, two dishes of stewed prunes, a Bawd and a Pander. My worthy
Lieutenant Bots; why, now I see thou art a-man of thy word, welcome; welcome
Mistress Horsleach: Pray Gentlemen, salute this reverend Matron.


Horse. Thanks to all your Worships.

Lod. I-bade a Drawer send in wine too: did none come along with thee (Grannam)
but the Lieutenant?


Horse. None came along with me but Bots, if it like your Worship.


Bots. Who the pox should come along with you but Bots?
Enter two Uintners.
Omnes. Oh brave! march fair.

Lod. Are you come? that is well.

Mat. Here Is Ordnance able to sack a City.

Lod. Come, repeat, read this Inuentory.

1. Uint. Imprimis, a pottle of Greek wine, a pottle of Peter sa meene, a
pottle of Charnico, and a pottle of Ziattica.


Lod. You Are paid?

2. Uint. Yes Sir.
Exeunt Vintners.
Mat. So shall some of us be anon, I fear.

Bots. Here Is a hot day toward: but zounds, this is the life out of which a
Soldier sucks sweetness, when this Artillery goes off roundly, some must drop
to the ground: Cannon, Demy-cannon, Saker, and Basalisk.


Lod. Give fire, Lieutenant.

Bots. So, so: Must I venture first upon the breach? to you all, Gallants: Bots
sets upon you all.


Omnes. Its hard (Bots) if we pepper not you, as well as you pepper us.

Enter Candido.
Lod. My noble Linen Draper! Some wine: Welcome old Lad.


Mat. You Are welcome, Signior.

Cand. These Lawnes, sir?

Mat. Presently, my man is gone for them: we ha rigged a Fleet, you see here,
to sail about the world.


Cand. A dangerous Voyage, sailing in such Ships.

Bots. There Is no casting over board yet.

Lod. Because you are an old Lady, I will have you be acquainted with this
grave Citizen, pray bestow your lips upon him, and bid him welcome.


Horse. Any Citizen shall be most welcome to me: -- I have used to buy ware at
your shop.


Cand. It may be so, good Madam.

Horse. Your Prentices know my dealings well; I trust your good wife be in good
case: if it please you, bear her a token from my lips, by word of mouth.


Cand. I pray no more forsooth, it is very well, indeed I love no sweet meats:
-- She Has a breath stinkes worse then fifty Polecats. Sir, a word, is she a Lady?


Lod. A woman of a good house, and an ancient, she is a Bawd.


Cand. A Bawd? Sir, I Will steal hence, and see your Lawnes some other time.


Mat. Steal out of such company? Pacheco? my man is but gone for em:
Lieutenant Bots, drink to this worthy old fellow, and teach him to fly hie.


Omnes. Swagger: and make him do it on his knees.

Cand. How, Bots? now bless me, what do I with Bots? no wine in sooth, no
wine, good Master Bots.


Bots. Gray-beard, Goats pizzle: it is a health, have this in your guts, or
this, there: I will sing a bawdy song, sir, because your vergis face is
melancholy, to make liquor go down glib: will you fall on your maribones,
and pledge this health, it is to my Mistress, a whore?


Cand. Here Is Ratsbane upon Ratsbane: Master Bots, I pray, sir, pardon me: you
are a Soldier, press me not to this service, I am old, and shoot not in such
pot-gunnes.


Bots. Cap, I Will teach you.

Cand. To drink healths, is to drink sickness: Gentlemen, pray rescue me.


Bots. Zounds, who dare?

Omnes. We shall ha stabbing then?

Cand. I ha reckonings to cast up, good Master Bots.

Bots. This will make you cast em up better.

Lod. Why does your hand shake so?

Cand. The palsy, Signiors, danceth in my blood.

Bots. Pipe with a pox, sir, then, or I Will make your blood dance --


Cand. Hold, hold, good Master Bots, I drink.

Omnes. To whom?

Cand. To the old Countess there.

Horse. To me, old Boy? this is he that never drunk wine: once again to it.


Cand. With much ado the poison is got down,
Tho I can scarce get up; never before
Drank I a whores health, nor will never more.
Enter Orlando with Lawnes.
Mat. Have bin at Gallows?

Orl. Yes, sir, for I make account to suffer to day.

Mat. Look, Signior: here is the Commodity.

Cand. Your price?

Mat. Thus.

Cand. No: too dear: thus.

Mat. No: O fie, you must sly higher: yet take em home, trifles shall not make
us quarrel, we'll agree, you shall have them, and a penniworth, I Will fetch
money at your shop.


Cand. Be it so, good Signior, send me going.

Mat. Going? a deep bowl of wine for Signior Candido.

Orl. He wud be going.

Cand. I Will rather stay, then go so: stop your Bowl.
Enter Constable and Bilmen.
Lod. How now?

Bots. Is It Shroue-tuesday, that these Ghosts walk.

Mat. What Is your business, Sir?

Constable. From the Duke: you are the man we look for, Signior, I have Warrant
here from the Duke, to apprehend you upon felony for robbing two Pedlers: I
charge you in the Dukes name go quickly.


Mat. Is the wind turned? well: this is that old Wolf, my Father-in-law:
seek out your Mistress, Sir.


Orl. Yes, Sir: as shafts by piecing are made strong,
So shall thy life be straightned by this wrong.
Exit.
Omnes. In troth we are sorry.

Mat. Brave men must be crossed, pish, it is but Fortunes Dice rouing against me:
Come, sir, pray use me like a Gentleman, let me not be carried through the
streets like a Pageant.


Constable. If these Gentlemen please, you shall go along with them.


Omnes. Be It so: come.

Constable. What are you, sir?

Bots. I, sir? sometimes a figure, sometimes a cipher, as the State has
occasion to cast up her accounts: I Am a Soldier.


Constable. Your name is Bots, is it not?

Bots. Bots is my name, Bots is known to this Company.

Constable. I know you are, Sir: what is she?

Bots. A Gentlewoman, my Mother.

Constable. Take em both along.

Bots. Me? Sirrr.

Billmen. And Sirrr.

Constable. If he swagger, raise the street.

Bots. Gentlemen, Gentlemen, whither will you drag us?

Lod. To the Garden house. Bots, are we even with you?

Constable. To Bridewell with em.

Bots. You will answer this.
Exeunt.
Constable. Better then a challenge, I have warrant for my work, sir.


Lod. We Will go before.
Exeunt.
Constable. Pray do.
Who, Signior Candido? a Citizen of your degree consorted thus, and reuelling
in such a house?


Cand. Why, sir? what house I pray?

Constable. Lewd, and defamed.

Cand. Is It so? thanks, sir: I Am gone.

Constable. What have you there?

Cand. Lawnes which I bought, sir, of the Gentleman that keeps the house.


Constable. And I have warrant here, to search for such stolen Ware: these Lawnes
are stolen.


Cand. Indeed!

Constable. So he is the Thief, you the Receiver: I Am sorry for this chance, I must
commit you.


Cand. Me, sir, for what?

Constable. These Goods are found upon you, and you must answer't.


Cand. Must I so?

Constable. Most certain.

Cand. I Will send for Bail.

Constable. I dare not: yet because you are a Citizen of worth, you shall not be
made a pointing stock, but without Guard pass only with my self.


Cand. To Bridewell too?

Constable. No remedy.

Cand. Yes, patience: being not mad, they had me once to Bedlam,

Now I Am drawn to Bridewell, loving no Whores.

Constable. You will buy Lawne? --
Exeunt. Enter at one door Hipollito; at another, Lodouico, Astolfo, Carolo,
Beraldo, Fontinell.
Lod. Yonder Is the Lord Hipollito, by any means leave him and me together: Now
will I turn him to a Madman.


Omnes. Save you, my Lord.
Exeunt.
Lod. I ha strange news to tell you.

Hip. What are they?

Lod. Your Mare's in the pound.

Hip. How Is this?

Lod. Your Nightingale is in a Limebush.

Hip. Ha?

Lod. Your Puritanicall Honest Whore sits in a blue gown.

Hip. Blue Gown!

Lod. She Will chalk out your way to her now: she beats chalk.


Hip. Where, who dares?

Lod. Do you know the Bricke-house of Castigation, by the River side that
runs by Millan: the School where they pronounce no letter well but O?


Hip. I know it not.

Lod. Any man that has borne Office of Constable, or any woman that has fallen
from a Horse-load to a Cart-load, or like an old Hen that has had none but
rotten eggs in her nest, can direct you to her: there you shall see your
Puncke amongst her back-friends, there you may have her at your will, for there
she beats Chalk, or grindes in the Mill, with a whip deedle, deedle, deedle,
deedle; ah little monkey.


Hip. What Rogue durst serve that Warrant, knowing I loved her?


Lod. Some Worshipful Rascal, I lay my life.

Hip. I Will beat the Lodgings down about their ears
That are her Keepers.

Lod. So you may bring an old house over her head.

Hip. I Will to her --
I Will to her, stood armed Fiends to guard the doors.
Exit.
Lod. Oh me! what Monsters are men made by whores?
If this false fire do Kindle him, there is one Faggot
More to the bonfire, now to my Bridewell Birds,
What Song will they sing?
Exit. Enter Duke, Carolo, Astolfo, Beraldo, Fontinell, three or four Masters
of Bridewell: Infaelice.
Duke. Your Bridewell? that the name? for beauty, strength,
Capacity and form of ancient building,
(Besides the Rivers neighborhood) few houses
Wherein we keep our Court can better it.

1. Master. Hither from foreign Courts have Princes come,
And with our Duke did Acts of State Commence,
Here that great Cardinal had first audience,
(The grave Campayne,) that Duke dead, his Son
(That famous Prince) gave free possession
Of this his Palace, to the Citizens,
To be the poor man's warehouse: and endowed it
With Lands to the value of seven hundred mark,
With all the bedding and the furniture, once proper
(As the Lands then were) to an Hospital
Belonging to a Duke of Sauoy. Thus
Fortune can toss the World, a Princes Court
Is thus a prison now.

Duke. It Is Fortunes sport:
These changes common are: the Wheel of Fate
Turns Kingdoms up, till they fall desolate.
But how are these seven hundred Marks by the year
Imployde in this your Worke-house?

1. Master. War and Peace
Feed both upon those Lands: when the Iron doors
Of wars burst open, from this House are sent
Men furnished in all Martial Complement.
The Moon has through her Bow scarce drawn to the head,
(Like to twelve silver Arrows) all the Months,
Since 1600. Soldiers went aboard:
Here Providence and Charity play such parts,
The House is like a very School of Arts,
For when our Soldiers (like Ships driven from Sea,
With ribs all broken, and with tatterd sides,)
Cast anchor here again, their ragged backs
How often do we cover? that (like men)
They may be sent to their own Homes again.
All here are but one swarm of Bees, and strive
To bring with wearied thighs honey to the Hiue.
The sturdy Beggar, and the lazy Lowne,
Gets here hard hands, or laced Correction.
The Vagabond grows stayed, and learnes to 'bey,
The Drone is beaten well, and sent away
As other prisons are, (some for the Thief,
Some, by which undone Credit gets relief
From bridled Debtors; others for the poor)
So this is for the Bawd, the Rogue, and Whore.

Car. An excellent Teeme of Horse.

1. Master. Nor is it seen,
That the whip draws blood here, to cool the Spleen
Of any rugged Bencher: nor does offense
Feel smart, or spiteful, or rash evidence:
But pregnant testimony forth must stand,
Ere Justice leave them in the Beadles hand,
As Iron, on the Anuill are they laid,
Not to take blows alone, but to be made
And fashioned to some Charitable use.

Duke. Thus wholsom'st Laws spring from the worst abuse.

Enter Orlando before Bellafront.
Bell. Let mercy touch your heart strings (gracious Lord)
That it may sound like music in the ear
Of a man desperate, (being in the hands of Law.)

Duke. His name?

Bell. Matheo.

Duke. For a robbery? where is she?
Exit Bell. and one of the Masters of Bridewell.
Bell. In this House.

Duke. Fetch you him hither --
Is this the Party?

Orl. This is the Hen, my Lord, that the Cock (with the Lordly comb) your
Sonne-in-law would crow over, and tread.


Duke. Are your two Servants ready?

Orl. My two Pedlers are packed together, my good Lord.

Duke. It Is well: this day in Judgment shall be spent,
Vice (like a wound launc'd) mends by punishment.

Infae. Let me be gone, my Lord, or stand unseen;
It Is rare when a Judge strikes, and that none dye,
And it is unfit then, women should be by.

1. Master. We Will place you, Lady, in some private room.

Infae. Pray do so.
Exit.
Orl. Thus nice Dames swear, it is unfit their eyes
Sold view men carved up for Anatomies,
Yet they will see all, so they may stand unseen,
Many women sure will sin behind a Skreene.
Enter Lodouico.
Lod. Your Son (the Lord Hipollito) is entered.

Duke. Tell him we wish his presence. A word Storsa:
On what wings flew he hither?

Lod. These, I told him -- his Lark whom he loved, was a Bridewell Bird, he is
mad that this Cage should hold her, and is come to let her out.


Duke. It Is excellent: away, go call him hither.
Exit. Lod. Enter one of the Governors of the House, Bellafront after him with
Matheo, after him the Constable. Enter at another door, Lodouico and
Hipollito: Orlando steps forth and brings in two Pedlers.
Duke. You are to us a stranger (worthy Lord)
It Is strange to see you here.

Hip. It is most fit,
That where the Sun goes, Attomyes follow it.

Duke. Attomyes neither shape, nor honor bear:
Be you yourselfe, a Sunne-beame to shine clear.
Is this the Gentleman? Stand forth and hear your accusation.

Mat. I Will hear none: I fly hie in that: rather then Kites shall seize upon
me, and pick out mine eyes to my face, I Will strike my tallons through mine own
heart first, and spit my blood in theirs: I am here for shriuing those two
fools of their sinful pack: when those Iack-dawes have cawde over me, then
must I cry guilty, or not guilty; the Law has work enough already, and
therefore I Will put no work of mine into his hands, the Hangman shall have it
first, I did pluck those Ganders, did rob them.


Duke. It Is well done to confess.

Mat. Confess and be hanged, and then I fly hie, is it not so? that for that a
gallows is the worst rub that a good Bowler can meet with: I stumbled against
such a post, else this night I had played the part of a true Son in these
days, undone my Father-in-law, with him wud I ha run at leapefrogge, and come
over his gold, tho I had broke his neck for it: but the poor Salmon Trout is
now in the Net.


Hip. And now the Law must teach you to fly hie.

Mat. Right, my Lord, and then may you fly low; no more words, a Mouse, Mum,
you are stopped.


Bell. Be good to my poor husband, dear my Lords.

Mat. Ass, why should thou pray them to be good to me, when no man here is
good to one another?


Duke. Did any hand work in this theft but yours?

Mat. O, yes, my Lord, yes: -- the Hangman has never one Son at a birth, his
Children always come by couples: Tho I cannot give the old dog, my Father, a
bone to gnaw, the Daughter shall be sure of a Choke-peare. -- Yes, my Lord,
there was one more that fiddled my fine Pedlers, and that was my wife.


Bell. Alas, I?

Orl. O everlasting, supernatural superlatiue Villain!

Omnes. Your wife, Matheo?

Hip. Sure it cannot be.

Mat. Oh, Sir, you love no quarters of Mutton that hang up, you love none but
whole Mutton; she set the robbery, I performed it; she spurred me on, I galloped
away.


Orl. My Lords.

Bell. My Lords, (fellow give me speech) if my poor life
may ransom thine, I yield it to the Law,
Thou hurt'st thy soul (yet wipest off no offense)
By casting blots upon my Innocence:
Let not these spare me, but tell truth: no, see
Who slips his neck out of the misery,
Tho not out of the mischief: let thy Servant
That shared in this base Act, accuse me here,
Why should my Husband perish, he go clear?

Orl. A god Child, hang thine own Father.

Duke. Old fellow, was thy hand in too?

Orl. My hand was in the Pie, my Lord, I confess it: my Mistress I see, will
bring me to the Gallows, and so leave me; but I Will not leave her so: I had
rather hang in a woman's company, then in a man's; because if weshould go to hell
together, I should scarce be letten in, for all the Devils are afraid to have
any women come amongst them, as I am true Thief, she neither consented to this
felony, nor knew of it.


Duke. What fury prompts thee on to kill thy wife?

Mat. It Is my humor, Sir, it is a foolish Bag-pipe that I make my self merry
with: why should I eat hempe-seed at the Hangmans thirteene-pence halfe-penny
Ordinary, and have this whore laugh at me as I swing, as I totter?


Duke. Is she a Whore?

Mat. A sixe-penny Mutton Pasty, for any to cut up.

Orl. Ah, Toad, Toad, Toad.

Mat. A Barbers Citterne for every Seruingman to play upon, that Lord, your
Son, knows it.


Hip. I, sir, am I her Bawd then?

Mat. No, sir, but she is your Whore then,

Orl. Yea Spider, do catch at great Flies?

Hip. My Whore?

Mat. I cannot talk, sir, and tell of your Reins, and your fees, and your
whirligigs, and devices: but, my Lord, I found em like Sparrowes in one nest,
billing together, and bulling of me, I took em in bed, was ready to kill him
was up to stab her --


Hip. Cloze thy rank Jaws: pardon me, I am vexed,
Thou art a Villain, a malicious Devil,
Deep as the place where thou art lost, thou lie,
Since I am thus far got into this storm,
I Will through, and thou shall see I Will through untouched.
When thou shall perish in it.
Enter Infaelice.
Infae. It Is my cue
To enter now: room, let my Prize be played,
I ha lurked in Clouds, yet heard what all have said,
What Jury more can prove, she has wronged my bed,
Then her own husband, she must be punished;
I challenge Law, my Lord, Letters, and Gold, and Jewels
From my Lord that woman took.

Hip. Against that blacke-mouthed Devil, against Letters, and Gold,
And against a jealous Wife I do uphold,
Thus far her reputation, I could sooner
Shake the Appenine, and crumble Rocks to dust,
Then (tho Jove's shower rayned down) tempt her to lust.

Bell. What shall I say?
He discouers himself.
Orl. Say thou art not a Whore, and that is more then fifteen women (amongst
five hundred) dare swear without lying: this shall thou say, no let me say it
for thee; thy Husband's a Knave, this Lord's an honest Man; thou art no Puncke,
this Lady's a right Lady. Pacheco is a Thief as his Master is, but old Orlando
is as true a man as thy Father is: I ha seen you fly hie, sir, and I ha seen
you fly low, sir, and to keep you from the Gallows, sir, a blue Coat have I
worn, and a Thief did I turn, mine own men are the Pedlers, my twenty pound
did fly hie, sir, your wives Gown did fly low, sir: whither fly you now,
sir? you ha escaped the Gallows, to the Devil you fly next, sir. Am I right,
my Liege?


Duke. Your Father has the true Physician played.

Mat. And I am now his Patient.

Hip. And be so still, it is a good sign when our cheeks blush at ill.


Constable. The Linen Draper (Signior Candido)
He whom the City terms the Patient man,
Is likewise here for buying of those Lawnes
The Pedlers lost.

Infae. Alas good Candido.
Exit. Constable.
Duke. Fetch him: and when these payments up are cast,
Weigh out your light Gold, but let us have them last.
Enter Candido, and Constable.
Duke. In Bridewell, Candido?

Cand. Yes, my good Lord.

Duke. What make you here?

Cand. My Lord, what make you here?

Duke. I Am here to save right, and to drive wrong hence.

Cand. And I to bear wrong here with patience.

Duke. You ha bought stolen Goods.

Cand. So they do say, my Lord,
Yet bought I them upon a Gentleman's word,
And I magine now, as I thought then,
That there be Thieves, but no Thieves Gentlemen.

Hip. Your Credit's cracked being here.

Cand. No more then Gold
Being cracked which does his estimation hold.
I was in Bedlam once, but was I mad?
They made me pledge Whores healths, but am I bad,
Because I Am with bad people?

Duke. Well, stand by,
If you take wrong, we will cure the iniurry.
Enter Constable, after them Bots, after him two Beadles, one with Hemp, the
other with a Beetle.
Duke. Stay, stay, what is he? a prisoner?

Constable. Yes, my Lord.

Hip. He seems a Soldier?

Bots. I am what I seem, Sir, one of Fortunes Bastards, a Soldier, and a
Gentleman, and am brought in here with Master Constables band of Bilmen,
because they face me down that I live (like those that keep Bowling-alleyes)
by the sins of the people, in being a Squire of the body.


Hip. Oh, an Apple-squire.

Bots. Yes, sir, that degree of scuruy Squiers, and that I am maintained by the
best part that is commonly in a woman, by the worst players of those parts, but
I am known to all this company.


Lod. My Lord, it is true, we all know him, it is Lieutenant Bots.


Duke. Bots, and where ha you served, Bots?

Bots. In most of your hottest Services in the Low Countries: at the Groyne I
was wounded in this thigh, and halted upon it, but it is now sound. In Cleueland
I mist but little, having the bridge of my nose broken down with two great
stones, as I was scaling a Fort: I ha been tried, Sir, too, in Gelderland, and
escaped hardly there from being blown up at a Breach: I was fired, and lay in the
Surgeons hands for it, till the fall of the leaf following.


Hip. All this may be, and yet you no Soldier.

Bots. No Soldier, sir? I hope these are Services that your proudest Commanders
do venture upon, and never come off sometimes.


Duke. Well, sir, because you say you are a Soldier,
I Will use you like a Gentleman: make room there,
Plant him amongst you, we shall have anon
Strange Hawks fly here before us: if none light on you,
You shall with freedom take your flight:
But if you prove a Bird of baser wing,
We Will use you like such Birds, here you shall sing.

Bots. I wish to be tried at no other weapon.

Duke. Why, is he furnished with those in p^yments?

1. Master. The Pander is more dangerous to a State,
Then is the common Thief, and tho our laws
Lie heavier on the Thief, yet that the Pander
May know the Hangmans ruff should fit him too,
Therefore he is set to beat Hemp.

Duke. This does savor
Of Justice, basest Slaves to basest labor.
Now pray, set open Hell, and let us see
The Shee-Deuils that are here.

Infa. Me thinks this place
Should make even Lais honest.

1. Master. Some it turns good,
But (as some men whose hands are once in blood,
Do in a pride spill more) so, some going hence,
Are (by being here) lost in more impudence:
Let it not to them (when they come) appear,
That any one does as their Judge sit here:
But that as Gentlemen you come to see,
And then perhaps their tongues will walk more free.

Duke. Let them be marshalled in: be couerd all,
Fellows, now to make the Scene more Comicall.

Car. Will not you be smelt out, Bots.

Bots. No, your brauest whores have the worst noses.
Enter two of the Masters: a Constable after them, then Dorathe^ Target, brave,
after her two Beadles, the one with a wheel, the other with a blue Gown.
Lod. Are not you a Bride, forsooth?

Dor. Say ye?

Car. He wud know if these be not your Bridemen.

Dor. Vuh, yes, sir: and look ye, do you see the Bride-laces that I give at
my wedding, will serve to tie Rosemary to both your Coffins when you come from
hanging-Scab*


Orl. Fie, Puncke, fie, fie, fie.

Dor. Out you stale stinking head of Garlic, foh, at my heels.


Orl. My head's cloven.

Hip. O, let the Gentlewoman alone, she is going to shrift.

Ast. Nay to do penance.

Car. I, I, go Puncke, go to the Cross and be whipped.

Dor. Mary mew, mary muffe, mary hang you goodman Dog: whipped? do ye take me
for a base Spittle whore? in troth Gentlemen, you wear the clothes of
Gentlemen, but you carry not the minds of Gentlemen, to abuse a Gentlewoman of
my fashion.


Lod. Fashion? pox a your fashions, art not a whore?

Dor. Goodman Slave.

Duke. O fie, abuse her not, let us two talk,
What might I call your name, pray?

Cor. I Am not ashamed of my name, Sir, my name is Mistress Doll Target, a
Western Gentlewoman.


Lod. Her Target against any Pike in Millan.

Duke. Why is this wheel borne after her?

1. Master. She must spinne.

Dor. A coorse thread it shall be, as all threads are.

Ast. If you spin, then you will earne money here too?

Dor. I had rather get half a Crown abroad, then ten Crowns here.


Orl. Abroad? I think so.

Infae. Do thou not weep now thou art here?

Dor. Say ye? weep? yes forsooth, as you did when you lost your Maidenhead:
do you not hear how I weep?

Sings.
Lod. Farewell Doll.

Dor. Farewell Dog.
Exit.
Duke. Past shame: past penitence, why is that blue Gown?

1. Master. Being stripped out of her wanton loose attire,
That Garment she puts on, base to the eye,
Only to cloth her in humility.

Duke. Are all the rest like this?

1. Master. No, my good Lord.
You see, this Drab swells with a wanton reyne,
The next that enters has a different strain.

Duke. Variety is good, let us see the rest.
Exit Master.
Bots. Your Grace sees I Am sound yet, and no Bullets hit me.

Duke. Come off so, and it is well.

Omnes. Here Is the second Mess.
Enter the two Masters, after them the Constable, after him Penelope
Whore-hound, like a Citizens wife, after her two Beadles, one with a blue
Gown, another with Chalk and a Mallet.
Pen. I'ha worn many a costly Gown, but I was never thus guarded with blue
Coats, and Beadles, and Constables, and --


Car. Alas fair Mistress, spoil not thus your eyes.

Pen. Oh sweet sir, I fear the spoiling of other places about me that are
dearer then my eyes; if you be Gentlemen, if you be men, or ever came of a
woman, pity my case, stand to me, stick to me, good sir, you are an old man.


Orl. Hang not on me, I prithee, old Trees bear no such fruit.


Pen. Will you bail me, Gentlemen?

Lod. Bail thee, art in for debt?

Pen. No -- is my Judge, sir, I am in for no debts, I paid my Tailor for this
Gown, the last five shillings a week that was behind, yesterday.


Duke. What is your name, I pray?

Pen. Penelope Whore-hound, I come of the Whore-hounds. How does Lieutenant
Bots.


Omnes. A ha Bots.

Bots. A very honest woman, as I Am a Soldier, a pox Bots ye.

Pen. I was never in this pickle before, and yet if I go amongst Citizens
wives, they ieere at me: if I go among the Loose-bodied Gowns, they cry a pox
on me, because I go ciuilly attyred, and swear their trade was a good trade,
till such as I am took it out of their hands: good Lieutenant Bots, speak to
these Captains to bail me.


1. Master. Begging for bail still? you are a trim gossip, go give her the
blue Gown, set her to her chare, work Huswife, for your bread, away.


Pen. Out you Dog, a pox on you all, women are borne to curse thee, but I shall
live to see twenty such flat-caps shaking Dice for a pennyworth of Pippins:
out, you blue-eyed Rogue.

Exit.
Omnes. Ha, ha, ha.

Duke. Even now she wept, and praid, now does she curse?

1. Master. Seeing me: if still she had staid, this had been worse.


Hip. Was she ever here before?

1. Master. Five times at least,
And thus if men come to her, have her eyes wrung, and
wept out her bail.

Omnes. Bots, you know her?

Bots. Is there any Gentleman here, that knows not a
Whore, and is he a hair the worse for that?

Duke. Is she a Citty-dame, she is so attyred?

1. Master. No, my good Lord, that is only but the veil
To her loose body, I have seen her here
In gayer Masking Suits, as several Sawces
Give one Dish several Tastes, so change of Habits
In Whores is a bewitching Art: to day she is all in
Colors to besot Gallants, then in modest black,
To catch the Citizen, and this from their Examinations
Drawn, now shall you see a Monster both in shape
And nature quite from these, that sheds no tear,
Nor yet is nice, it is a plain ramping Bear,
Many such Whales are cast upon this Shore.

Omnes. Let Us see her.

1. Master. Then behold a swaggering Whore.
Exit.
Orl. Keep your grownd, Bots.

Bots. I do but trauerse to spy advantage how to arm my self.

Enter the two Masters first, after them the Constable, after them a Beadle
beating a Basin, then Catyryna Bountinall, with Mistress Horsleach, after them
another Beadle with a blue head guarded with yellow.
Cat. Sir, when I cry hold your hands, hold, you Rogue- Catcher, hold: Bawd,
are the French Chilblaines in your heels, that you can come no faster? are not
you (Bawd) a Whores Ancient, and must not I follow my Colors?


Horse. O Mistress Katherine, you do me wrong to accuse me here as you do,
before the right Worshipful: I am known for a motherly honest woman, and no
Bawd.


Cat. Mary foh, honest? burnt at fourteen, seven times whipped, six times
carted, nine times duck'd, searched by some hundred and fifty Constables, and
yet you are honest? Honest Mistress Horsleach, is this World, a World to keep
Bawds and Whores honest? How many times have thou given Gentlemen a quart of
wine in a gallon pot? how many twelue-penny Fees, nay two shillings Fees, nay,
when any Ambassadors ha been here, how many half crown Fees have thou
taken? how many Carriers have thou bribed for Country Wenches? how often have I
rinst your lungs in Aquauitae, and yet you are honest?


Duke. And what were you the whilst?

Cat. Mary hang you, Master Slave, who made you an examiner?


Lod. Well said, belike this Devil spares no man.

Cat. What art thou prithee?

Bots. Nay what art thou prithee?

Cat. A Whore, art thou a Thief?

Bots. A Thief, no, I defy the calling, I am a Soldier, have borne Arms in
the Field, been in many a hot Skyrmish, yet come off sound.


Cat. Sound with a pox to ye, ye abominable Rogue! you a Soldier? you in
Skirmishes? where? amongst pottle pots in a Bawdy House? Look, look here, you
Madam Wormeaten, do not you know him?


Horse. Lieutenant Bots, where have ye been this many a day?


Bots. Old Bawd, do not discredit me, seem not to know me.


Horse. Not to know ye, Master Bots? as long as I have breath, I cannot forget
thy sweet face.


Duke. Why, do you know him? he says he is a Soldier.


Cat. He a Soldier? a Pander, a Dog that will lick up six pence: do ye
hear, you Master Swines snout, how long is it since you held the door for me,
and cried to it again, no body comes, ye Rogue you?


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha, you are smelt out again, Bots.

Bots. Pox ruin her nose for it, and I be not revenged for this -- vm ye Bitch.


Lod. Dee ye hear ye Madam? why does your Ladyship swagger thus? you are very
brave, me thinks.


Cat. Not at your cost, Master Cods-head,
Is any man here bleare-eyed to see me brave?

Ast. Yes, I am,
Because good Clothes upon a Whores back
Is like fair painting upon a rotten wall.

Cat. Mary muffe Master Whoremaster, you come upon me with sentences.


Ber. By this light has small sense for it.

Lod. O fie, fie, do not vex her.
And yet me thinks a creature of more scuruy conditions
Should not know what a good Petticoate were.

Cat. Mary come out,
You Are so busy about my Petticoate, you will creep up to my placket, and ye
cood but attain the honor, but and the outsides offend your Rogueships, look
of the lining, it is Silk.


Duke. Is It Silk it is lined with then?

Cat. Silk? I Silk, Master Slave, you wud be glad to wipe your nose with the
skirt on it: this it is to come among a company of Cods-heads that know not how
to use a Gentlewoman.


Duke. Tell her the Duke is here.

1. Master. Be modest, Kata, the Duke is here.

Cat. If the Devil were here, I care not: set forward, ye Rogues, and give
attendance according to your places, let Bawds and Whores be sad, for I Will sing
and the Devil were a dying.

Exeunt.
Duke. Why before her does the Basin ring?

1. Master. It is an emblem of their reuelling,
The whips we use lets forth their wanton blood,
Making them calm, and more to calm their pride,
In stead of Coaches they in Carts do ride.
Will your Grace see more of this bad Ware?

Duke. No, shut up shop, we will now break up the fair,
Yet ere we part -- you, sir, that take upon ye
The name of Soldier, that true name of worth,
Which, action not vain boasting best sets forth,
To let you know how far a Soldiers name
Stands from your title, and to let you see,
Soldiers must not be wronged where Princes be:
This be your sentence.

Omnes. Defend your self, Bots.

Duke. First, all the private sufferance that the house
Inflicts upon Offenders, you (as the basest)
Shall undergo it double, after which
You shall be whipped, sir, round about the City,
Then banished from the Land.

Bots. Beseech your Grace.

Duke. Away with him, see it done, Panders and Whores
Are Citty-plagues, which being kept alive,
Nothing that looks like goodness ere can thrive.
Now good Orlando, what say you to your bad Sonne-in-law*

Orl. Mary this, my Lord, he is my Sonne-in-law, and in law will I be his
Father: for if law can pepper him, he shall be so parboild, that he shall
stink no more in the nose of the Commonwealth.


Bell. Be yet more kind and merciful, good Father.

Orl. Do thou beg for him, thou precious man's meat, thou? has he not beaten
thee, kicked thee, trod on thee, and do thou fawn on him like his Spanniell?
has he not pawnd thee to thy Petticoate, sold thee to thy smock, made ye
leap at a crust, yet woodst have me save him?


Bell. Oh yes, good sir, women shall learn of me,
To love their husbands in greatest misery,
Then show him pity, or you wrack my self.

Orl. Have ye eaten Pigeons that you are so kinde-hearted to your Mate? Nay,
you are a couple of wild Bears, I Will have ye both baited at one stake: but as
for this Knave, the Gallows is thy due, and the Gallows thou shall have, I Will
have justice of the Duke, the Law shall have thy life, what, do thou hold
him? let go his hand: if thou do not forsake him, a Fathers everlasting
blessing fall upon both your heads: away, go, kiss out of my sight, play thou
the Whore no more, nor thou the Thief again, my house shall be thine, my meat
shall be thine, and so shall my wine, but my money shall be mine, and yet when
I die, (so thou do not fly hie) take all, yet good Matheo, mend.

Thus for joy weeps Orlando, and does end.

Duke. Then hear, Matheo: all your woes are stayed
By your good Father-in-law: all your Ills
Are clear purged from you by his working pills.
Come Signior Candido, these green young wits
(We see by Circumstance) this plot has laid,
Still to provoke thy patience, which they find
A wall of Brass, no Armour's like the mind;
Thou have taught the City patience, now our Court
Shall be thy Sphere, where from thy good report,
Rumors this truth unto the world shall sing,
A Patient man's a Pattern for a King.
Exeunt.
FINIS.

