The deceyte of women. to the instruction and ensample of all men, young and
old, newly corrected.

depiction of Woman with whip sitting astride man, as if he were a horse

Prologue.
TAke on thy way thou little book
And fear not for no manner blame
For though these women look a crook
Take thou thereof hardly no shame
For they that be good, without deceyte
With this will not be grieved
But they that for false lovers wait
Besode their husbands, be soon meued
They that be good and not infecte
For all that is said / need not to care
For in this book they be not elect
Wherefore do thou not spare.
To show of the lewd, and their demeanor,
Throughout this book, where ever it be
There came never good, of their behauour
Experience daily ye may se
Of women married many one
Which were right lewd, and will not be known
This book right plainly makes mention
For diverse of their husbands, were overthrown
Through their false wyles, and art mischeuous
yet the good women herein be not named
Wherefore to them it is nothing grievous
That they be fauty, be somewhat blamed
Vyrgyll complayneth here and Hercules also
For all their will great power and strength
Sampson strong, with many worthies mo
Have been begiled through women at length.
Finis.
When the creator of al things had create and made heaven and earth of naught
and all that is they in save man. Than made he upon the syxte day of earth, our
first father Adam in ye camp of Damasco, and he gave unto him life, and made
him lord and inherit our of all things that were creat upon earth. And also
ye knoledge and understanding with the propertyes and virtues of all things
and to each thing his proper name Than the lord took from him the place where
he was made and set him in Paradyse terrestre, that he should in herit it. And
ye lord sent into Adam a sleep and than took a rybbe of him and made thereof
a woman. And And wha^ Adam awoke and found the woman by him he said. These
bones been of my bones, and this flesh is of my flesh. And God gave
commandment to the^ both and said eat of all the fruytes of Paradise, but
touch not: the tree the which stands in the mids.

How the Serpent deceived Eve, and how she forthwyth deceived Adam.
When that the Lord had given the commandment / than the old serpent the
devil practiced how that he might make him disobedient for he knew the
strength of the man and so he thought for to deceive the woman for she is of
much febler nature to wtstande temptacion; and so he found the woman alone
about the tree, than said the serpent to eve where fore has the Lord for
byden you to eat of ye fruit of knowledge of good and evil? Than said Eve,
we should peradventure dye. The serpent said no not so, but ye shall be like
gods knowing good and evil, therefore take the fruit and eat thereof. and
she saw that the apple was so fair to se, and so she took the apple and eat
there of and gave it forth to her husband Adam yt which also eat thereof. as
one that would not dysplease his wife and yet nevertheless he was one of the
wisest me^ that ever was upon earth saving only the son of god. And when that
they had eaten of the Apple, than were both their eyes opened. and the saw
that they were naked, and thus was the most wysest and fairest man of the
world deceived of his wife.

But whether ye Eve were to blame or no that Adam was deceived that is in the
great wysdum and predestynacyon of almighty god, for ye secret was closed in
ye consistory of the holy trinity that the son of god should ones die for the
love of man, and the death of the Son of god should have an occasion wherefore
that he should dye.

For because that the erthly paradyse, is the place of all erthly pleasures and
is received to be the worthyest and the most precyouse place of the world,
and for as much as the woman is shaped and made in that place and the man in
the camp of Damasco, therefore some women have an opinion and say that they be
better than ye me^ and will be men's masters as it fortuneth, yet now a days
in the world. But they allegate not the words that god spoke to the woman
after that the commandment was broken, and said, ye shall bear your children
with pain and woe ye shall be under the power of your husband, and he shall be
your master, and shall have Lordshyp over you. And tha^ the man must se that
the woman have that at shall be nedeful and necessary for her, for god has
commanded men to work when that he said, in the sweat of thy labor thou
shall eat thy bread, but alas there is now adays much people, yt which
obeys not the commandment. Also the man shall know the ordenaunce of god,
and how that he has made the woman out of the mids of the man, and not of
the head, betokening that she shall not be the master of the man, and also he
has not made her of a side and set little regard by her / but he has made her
out of ye mids to the helpyng of man and that man and wife shall live with
one accord and one will in the state of wedlock, and shall be two souls and
one body, the which god has so ordained to the salvation of oursoules,

depiction of woman waving at two men
A new deceyte of a woman in Henegow, of late days.
IN the City of Valencie^ was a mighty rich man the which was receyuer of
the country of Henegowe, and dwelte in an end of the city beside in a fair
house yt which house had many places and ways to pass throughout to diverse
streets. And so there was one gate that was the way in to an out street, in
the which street dwelt a good simple man the which had a very fair woman to
his wife, and the receyuer went often times out at the gate for the amorouse
sight of that lovely woman so that he was taken with her love / and made such
acquayntaunce with her love / that at last she consented to him, in so much yt
he lacked nothing but time and place. And so past forth and the receyuer
desired often times this simple man and his wife to dinners and suppers, in so
much that the receyuer and he were great friends, and so he had this poor
simple man always at his will and pleasure. And so it fortuned upon a time
that this simple man should go to a castle, the which was.iii. myte from
Valencyen and so he took his journey thetherwardes and commanded to his wife
the keeping of the house the which she was very glad, and showed the receyuer
thereof, and he also was very glad thereof, and toward night the back gate was
unlocked, and there the prenely came through to the receyuer, and he ioningly
received her and she went with him into his house, for to make better
acquayntaunce with him, where as al things stood ready of al sorts, and
plentye of wine, and so they past forth the evening making good there, and
gave and received many a friendly kiss. And in making of this chere came ye
good man from his journey, and came by the receyuers daore, and saw that there
was much light in the chamber, and because that ye good man of the house and he
were good friends, he knocked boldly at ye door and so the receyuer demanded
who was there, and the good man answered, your friend, and his wife incontinent
hard and knew the voice of her goodman, than was she fo sore aghast and afraid
that she could skant speak, and she wist not what she should do.

How that the receyuer did comfort his lover.
When the receyuer saw yt the woman was so afraid be said my love come by and
by to bed for I shall cover you that no man shall se you. And thus they lay
arm in arnie, with her back toward thee door and the good man was let in,
and came in the chamber where he found the table well arrayed and well be set
with good meat, and drink and saw the receyuer lie with his lover in the bed
the goodman saying this, was in doubt and said to the receuer, what hoar have
ye there with you in the badde, and with that the good man was set at the table
where he eat and drank, and made good chere. But the good man having some
suspeccion rose from the table and came before the bed of the receyuer, and said
I must see this woman ones ere that I depart and he lift up the clothes
where his honest wife lay under, but the receyuer did let him and the good
poor man saying this, he would feign have lift up the couerlet and the shete
with force, wherewyth the receyuer his friend, was half an gey, for they made
a compacte together, that he should show her hinder part and her back to him
the which was so fair and so white. And when this was done that he had seen
her so behind, he said that he never see a fayrer woman as pertaining the
hinder part and swore that he never saw hind castle so like his wyfes ars.
For if I knew not that my wife were honest and that she were now at home: I
would say that it were she, and with that she was covered again, and the
receyuer rebuked him, and said, why do ye say such things by your wife, and
such dyhosty by her, and so at last he is departed from thence, taking his
leave of the receiver, and bad him good night, with his concubine, And he
desired heartily that they would let him go home through the back gate, but
they made an excuse and said that the keye was lost, and so he must go a great
way about, and the receivers servant went with him home ward, and kept him
with talking so long as he could. And the good woman rose and plucked on her
hose^ and cast her gown upon her arm, and so she was let out at the back
gate, and she came incontinent home to her house, and so abode the coming of
her good man the which came from his journey. And when yt he came before his
house he saw that there was yet light in it and knocked at the door, and his
wife went with a brom and swept the house, and she asked who was there, and he
said: I am he thy husban, and she said thou art not my husband for my husband
is not in the town, nevertheless he knocked again, and said I am thy
husband, his wife answered and said go from my door, for I know well the
voice of my husband. And also it is not my husbands custom for to come and
knock this late at the door. And so at the third time he said so much yt
she knew him, for he was sore amoued, and laid upon the door as though he
would have broken it in pieces, ^ so at last she let him in, and she set her
hands on her side and said thou noughty knave this haste thou done for to
prove me, and I tell thee yt thou art not worthy for to have so honest a wife.
The good man saw yt he had wrong he spoke feendly to his wife and said I
beseech ye ge^tyl wife be content, For of great necessity I must needs return
again, for I have forgotten the principal letter yt I went for, But his wife
would not be content and said yt he ca^ from the tavern and from the shows
and she cursed the hour that ever she was married to him, The poor simple man
when he saw yt his wife was to angry (thinkyng him self to be the occasion
thereof) came to his wife bare head with his cap in his hand and said, my most
trewest wife I beseech thee if I have myssayd or my soon any thing against
thee: I beseech the for the love of god forgive it me, For I com from a place
where that I had good cheer, and there as I thought that I had seen thee and
through thee I was sore moue^ and without cause, and I am very sorry for it,
therefore I beseech thee forgive it me and so at last she was some what content,
but she said you humanetly caytife thou come from thine hores and there you
have seen their lewdnes, and now wilt cast thy good wife in cheteth there wych.
The good man answered alas good wife say not so, and I beseech ye speak no more
thereof but forgive it me, and I will never do so again as long as I live.
Now after this time has the good wife gone oftentimes through the back gate
with less sorrow and dread without the knowledge of the simple man her husband
(the which never knew no more thereof after that day) as it is showed me. Thus
ye may hear how that men be oftentimes deceived by their wyfes.

How the patriarche Loath was deceived by his two daughters.
depiction of Lot with two daughters

THat time when Loath was departed out of Sodom with his wife and his two
daughters: tha^ the Ange^l commanded him that what so ever he heard that he
should not look backwarde the which commandment Lothes wife brake, and so
she remained there standing and was tra^sfygured into the Image of a salt
stone, there to remain for ever. Than went Loath into a small City called
Segor, the which through the prayer of this Loath was spared for a wyhle, and
remaynyned standing so long as Lot was therein, but Loath seeing that they would
not leave their foul sin, would not abide no longer therein, and so he fled
from thens, and in continent the city was also destroyed, and so Loath was in a
speluncke or cave of an hill (there about) with his two daughters, and they had
with them meat and drink, and thus being there, the elder daughter said to
her sister. Our father is old, and there be no me^ upon the earth that we may
have conversation withal after the manner of the world therefore come and let us
make our father drunk with wine and let us golye with him to the end yt we may
keep the seed of our father. And so at even they gave their father wine to
drink: and so the elder daughter went and lay with her father Loath, but Loath
knew not of his daughter, nor when that she rose up again, and the next night
they made their father drunk again, and than the younger daughter went and lay
by him, but Loath knew not when that he was by her, nor when that she arose
from him, and both the daughters conceived of their father, and the elder
daughter bare a son the which was called Moas and he was the father of the
Moabices. And the younger bare a son called Amon, that is as much to say, the
son of my people, and was the father of the Amonytes, and thus was Loath
deceived of his daughters with the wine but for to say the truth it was no
deceyte, for it was through love and for the generation, and multyplying of
the world, for they thought that there had been no more people in the world and
that there had been no more in the world but they, for they knew none otherwise,
and therefore they made not their father drunk through decyte to obtain their
flesshelye lusts, like as now many a man ye has a fair wife ye which
drinks the wine with merchants, and with priests and so they make their
husbands good chere and make them drunk so that they fall aslepe, and than
they go a sporting with the woman in venus pastaunce. But so did not Loths
daughters, for they did it in a good intent and for a good purpose, howbeit
there was great dysceyte done.

A new deceyte fortuned of late in England.
THere was in England in the City of London a proctour of the Arches, the
which was an old man, and had to his wife a fair young gentilwoman. And this
proctour had among his servants one that was a merry and a fair young man,
the which was his principal clarke ye wrote for him. This clarke through the
daily prese^s of his masters wife, set his love upon her, and spoke so often
and so louyngly to her, that her heart also was set afyre with the love of him,
in so much that she loved him above all men, and she consented to him in all
things that he desired of him, and so they used their lovely pastyme as often
as they would, Upon a time they spoke together and took counsel how they
might best obtain and do their pleasure together without any dread or sorrow
of enuyous to^ges or knowledge of her husband, the which was so^what ialeous of
his wife. And than he found a suttel craft, for ever he was as seruysable to
his master as he was to his mastres And when that the clarke saw that he stood
well in the favor of his master, tha^ he thought to blind ye ialousy of his
master, and so upon a time he came a fore him and wept very bytterly, whereof
his master had great maruayle and said beloved son show to me what thou
aylest, for I will help thee if it be in my power. Than said the clarke, God
thank you good master for that have I not deserved, and the cause is so
shameful that I ^a^e not show it you nor let it be known, well said the
master show it me hardyle without any dread, for I will keep it as secret as
thou wylt thy self. Tha^ said the clarke, my beloved master every man
thinks (and you your self perchance) that I am a man as a another man is,
and for to live with women in bodily pleasure as other does, but alas I am not
so, for I have not where with, and he had covered his preuy members with a little
thing with shepes flesh, and he had steyken up his preuy member toward his
navel ward as far as he could, and tha^ he showed it to his master, the
which saw nothing but a clean void place, and it was to see to: as though
that he had nothing there, and tha^ the clarke said, my beloved master there
is no man that knows this but you only, And therefore for the true service
that I have done to you I require you, that it will please you to do so much
for me as to help me in to su^ cloister or abbey where that I may have my
meat and drink and that I may serve god for I am not mete to be in the world
and with that he began bytterlye to weep and so he blinded the eyes of his
master, and by cause that he thought that he was a true servant to him his
master counseled him that he should not goo to no abbay nor cloister, and
said that he him self would provide for him, and that he should remain
still with him and so his master entreated him with so fair promyses: that
the clark promised him for to serve him to do him pleasure yet a certain
years, whereof his master was very glad, for he could endyte and write very
well and could ordeyne all other things belongyng to his office as well as
him self. And for because that he did trust his master and had showed and
opened to him all his secrets: his master thought that he would not keep his
own secrets from him but opened his heart to his servant in likewise and
said to him, I am sorry for thine impediment that god has sent to the,
therefore I have great pity on ye, but one thing I shall give the to know for
you may do me good service therein, you know well yt I have a fair young
wife, ye which is somewhat light hatred and quick spirited, and ye know well yt
I am an old man and not very lusti, and therefore perchance I might be ye
occasion ye young lusty fellows should come and prove her for to bring her to
dishonestye, and therefore I will betake her in thy keeping, and I require thee
that thou take so heed to her that I may have no occasion to be ialous or
amoued against her, Tha^ ye clarke prayesed his maystres maruaylosly well and
said yt she was thereto to good and to honest, and he promised his master yt
would keep and take good head to her, and show him if he find her in any
suspect place, like as a good servant was hou^d to do, And of this was ye
master glad, and let al sorrow pass and so went about his busynes, co^mau^ding
his house and his wife to the keeping of his clark, and inco^tine^t the servant
went to his maistres (the which was commanded to him) and told her all, how
that his master was deceived: and that that he was wont to do before with
fear and dread, that did he now with a fre will and with a free heart, And
oftentimes as his master rode forth: he left his Clarke at whom for to keep
his maistres, And wha^ yt his wife rode out to pilgrymage or to weddinges or to
any other festes, than he had lever that his clarke had been with his wife tha^
any of his other maidens, and thus had the clarke good fortune and chance for
his master never knew thereof. And who that said ought thereof: let them say
what they would, and thought evermore that he knew well contrary, but his good
wife knew it much better, and thus was the poor man foul deceived of his
wife.

depiction of Jael hammering nail into the head of Sisera
How the woman Iahell deceived the great Captain Sysara.
THe captain Sysara had great puysance of men of war, and was a great enemy
against them of Israel, he had in his battle.ix.C. great Charettes the
which were beset on both sides with sithes, such as they have for to ma whay
and Corn wythal, with the which he did great morther among the people of
Israel. And when that he had persued the children of Israel.xx. year with
war, than upon a day there came the propheresse Deelbora, to Barache (the
captain of Israel) and said rise up this is thy day, in the which the Lord
shall deliver Sysaram into thy hands, and so she and Barache went out with.x.M
men, Sysara heard that the people came upon hun, he was afraid and lept from
his charet, and fled away a foot. And thus as he fled the woman Iahel met him
and said, Lord come with me and go to my house for thy sauegarde, and he went
with her, and than he said I dye for thurst. And Iahel heryng that gave him
milk to drink. And Sisara was very weary in so much that he fell a sleep. And
Iahell took a great nail and set it upon the temple of his head and drove the
nail cross wise thorough his head, and so she kylde him. Now behold the
captain the which all the power of Israel could not subdewe, and one only
woman has won him with her deceyte.

A deceyte done in Artoys of a late time.
depiction of knights on horseback approaching women

IN the Erldome of Artoys was a man of great power, ye which had a fair young
gentilwoma^ to his wife and lived very lovingly to gether, This knight had lost
in a battle one of his ears and his lord and captain that was above him was
duke of Burgon and earl of Artoys the which had made peace and concord with
all the other kings and lords in thrystendome, And for because that man said
that this knight was a devout man. Upon a time he thought that he would not
led his life in making of good chere and ever to live in Welthe, and also
coniectured in his mind that it was not the way of saluacyo^. And so upon a
time he made his vow to the land of Pruysse for to help to defend the
christen faith with the men and Lords of the country, And shortly after he
took his leave of the Duke and of his lords and gentylmen, and of his good
wife, and so rode his way, with proper compeny according to his estate, till
that he came in Pruyse where as he was right nobly received, and there he did
many noble feats of war against the infydeles, in so much that his name
was spread through all the world And so it fortuned in the mean time whyl that
he was out of his country, and his wife being a fair young gentyl woman, the
which lay alone: it fortuned upon a time there cames a young proper gentylman
the which wooed her for to lie with her and so he desired her that he might
have the keeping of the City and be her, husbands liuetenant, the which
within a short time and with a lyttel labor, consented to him. And when that
her husband had been certain years forth, he took his leave of the lords of
Pruyse, and is returned again homwardes, sore longing for to rest in the
sweet arms of his fair wife. And so it fortuned upon the last night that he
lay but.iii. mile from his own castle where as he dwelt, longing sore all
the night for his good wife (the which was very besy with an other) and he
was ye first up in the morning and took his horse, and rode all alone in
great haste, and with a feruente desire toward his castle, to thentent that
he might yet find his wife upon her bed, and he to warm him by her sweet dsyes
which thought full little upon his coming, and he rode so fast that he came
before day to his castle, and when that he came he found the utter court open.
and there he left his horse standing and went so forth boted and spored to
fore his wives chamber where that she lay and had her pastauns with another
man, and the lord drew his sword and knocked at the chaumber door, whereof
his wife and the keeper of the City marheyled sore who that it might be and the
wife axed who was there, and the lord answered I am here, what sleep ye yet?
open ye door The wife knowing well the voice was sore amasyd and said to her
lover, that he should incontinent rise and clothe him, the which he did by and
by. And the wife faried so long till that he knocked again and said open
quikly. Tha^ said his wife alas my husband is far from hens, I beseech god
send him well home again. Than said the lord by my knyghthod, woman I am he,
and know ye me not. The woman said when that it shall please my husband to com
home, he will give me good knowledge before by sum of his servants to the end
that I may mete him and bid him welcome home with his cosins and his next
kynred, and so I may honorably receive him as it pertayneth to a Lord, Than
said the lord what mean ye, shall I stand long here will ye not know your
husband? and forthwyth he named his name and when that her lover had clothed
him she bad hyme that he should come and stand by her behynd the door. Than
said the woman, alas good husband if it be you I require you ye you forgive
it me. The lord said I am content, than said the woman I will come and let you
in if I had a candell light. And for a truth when that ye knocked at the door
I had a marvelous good dreine of you, what was that said the lord, she
answered. My lord I dremed that ye were come home and that ye spoke with me,
and me thought that ye saw as clearly with your blind eye, as ye did with the
other eye. The lord said I would it were so. Than said the woman I believe yet
that it is so, what said the lord, be ye folly she that ye believe me not the
woman, said let me prove for my mind sake, and with that she opened the door
and held a candell burnying in her hand. And the poor lord suffered his wife
to hyde his eye with her hand and with the other hand she held the Candell
before his blind eye and said lord I beseech you tell me the truth whether
ye do se with your other eye orno, the lord said no by my knighthode, and
with that his leuetenaunt of the town went be hind him out at the door so
pryeuely that the lord perceived him not, And then said the woman, now se I
well that my dreme is but deceyte but thanked be god that ye be here. And than
she took him in her arms and kyssed him many times and her lord told her how
that he had left his company behynd, and how that he rose before them and rode
his way to thend that he might yet find her a bed Than said the woman for a
truth yet ye be a good man Than wet he to the hot house and bathed and washed
him, and than forthwyth went to bed to his lady with great solace and
pleasure. And thus was the lord deceived of his wife, the which he took yet
for a good honest woman for it lay dead, and was so secretly kept that mi lord
knew never thereof. And if my lord had biden at home peradventure the woman
had never fallen to that mysgydinge, for they never could perceive, but that
she gydede her self well and honestelye all here life before Now take example
by this, for it is a common proverb carre from home, nere thy harm.

The deceyte of Iudyth that won Holyfernus.
depiction of Judith with severed head of Holofernes

THe king Holofernus beseged the City of Bethulien with a hundred and.xx.m.
footeme^, and.xx.M horsemen so strongly yt there was no drink to be gotten in
the City but that they must drink the bludde of bestes. The wydow Judith
seeing this: took great pity on the people, and prayed mekely to God for grace
and for to be delivered out of captyuitie, and for to obtayn the victory of
their enemies, and then she went into her chamber and arrayed her with her best
array very rychelye (for she was fair and comely of person) and God made her
more fayrer. And she took with her a maid and went to the gate of the City
where yt the Lords stood, and she said to them. Pray unto the lord god for
grace for me, that it will please him that I may obtain my purpose. And she
went out of the City, where she was taken and brought to fore Holofernus by
his servants, and than she said to Holofernus I am come for to put my life in
thy hand and that I may be preserved thorough thee for the City must come
shortly into thy hands, and so by that men as she obtained his grace, and
what that she desired of him she had it. And so she desired of him yt she might
go even and morning to the mountains yt she might pray there to her god for
him. And tha^ he gave commandment to all his lords that where soever yt the
woman Judith would go, ye they should let her go fre and no man say her nay,
and upon the fourth day Holofernus made a costly dinner for his lords, and said
to his cha^berlen. Vaago? Tell ye Hebrw woman the she come to me, ye which he
did, and he said to Judith. O ye ge^tilwoma^ dread not to go in, to my lord
Holofernus for he requires you ye ye will be merry and drink the wine with him.
Tha^ said Judith who am I, that I shoulde^not be obedyent to my Lord. All that
shall please my lord, if he think it good, I will be glad to do. And all that
shall please him, shall be good for me as long as my life shall endure. Than
Iudyth rose up secretly and arrayed her rychely and went so forth within to
Olephernus and she stood before him. Than was Olefernus heart troubled, and
brenned in the love of her, and so he thought that he would sleep by her the
same night and was very merry and droncke more wine that night than he had done
all his life time to fore, and so fell a sleep upon his bed And Iudyth was only
alone with him in his chamber and her maid stood without and kept the door
and at the beds head honge his sword, and she drew the sword out of the
shethe, and took him by the hear and lift up his head and so cut it of and
put it into a lether bagge^ and took it to her maid and so brought it into the
city of Bethulyen, and when that it was publyshed and known that their king
Olephernus was dead, they went all away, and so the City was delivered out of
captyuitie and bondage. O behold how the great and mighty prince, the which
could not be overcome with all their craft, how he was won through the
lovely words and deceyte of a woman, the which many a thousand men did
repent, and lose their life therefore, who is it that can take heed of the
deceyte of women, except he do utterly abstain their company, for they be so
false and so full of deceyte, that all the head that a man can take is to little.

A new deceyte done of late in France.
IN France was a gentilman of great puysaunce, the which entyerly loved a
young fair gentilwoman being married, which gentylwoman loved him no less
than he did her, And therefore the gentylman made oftentimes his co^playnt to
his lover of the great dolours and pains yt he suffered for her sake, and she
hearing him so pyteously complain: conforted him the best that she could,
saying to him, I am always ready and at your pleasure: but I can not be at
your desire and will because of my husband. For ye know well that I must be
obedient and evermore be ready at my husbands will and pleasure. Alas (said the
gentilman) if there be no means for to shorte^ my great pains I wot not what
to do. Than said the gentilwoman with a fervent desire to her lover: Come to
night at one or two a clock and knocked at my chamber door. For I will find
such means that I will depart from my husband except some fortune do let me.
The gentilma^ heryng this: was conforted and was glad, and so departed from
her, and abode ye hour that she had poynted him, and so the young gentylwoman
sat all the night and had many fantasyes and sat musing and was very sad for
she wist not what should fortune her, but her chance and fortune was that her
husband him self gave the occasion and cause, that her heaviness was turned to
myrthe, for her husband saw a male lyenge in the chamber in the which male was
his wifes clothes and for by cause that he saw that his wife sat in heuines:
he demanded what ye male did in the chamber. and wherefore that it was not
brought into his place where it was wont to lie. Than said his wife well husband
I require you be not angry for our chamberlain shall take them out for therein is
part of my clothes. Than said her husband my semes that the male is over
little for to put your clothes in without crokynge for they be large and long.
The gentyl woman said the male is great enough, the lord said my semes nay,
well said the gentle woman if it please you I will lay with you a dosen of
teuen shertes against a satyn kertyll, that we will put you in the male as ye
be, for all that the male is solytle. The lord said I hold ye that ye do
not. Than said the hand maid, we shall see who shall win it Than he drew
the clothes out of the male, and then the mayde^ took him and made such shyft
that she put him in the male to his man hode to. and all that were there laughed
and had good sport at it, and so playenge and mocking with him they bonnde
him fast in the male and so brought him into a little out chamber far from
his own chamber, and they cried all, we have won it, and for that he could
cry or call abode all that night there, and in short time after that he was
put in the male came the gentylwomans lover the which she had apeynted pryuily
by her, of whom he was louyngly received, and the up and told him what was
fortuned, and how she had put her husband in the male, and showed him that all
things was well and therefore (said she) ye shall remain this night by me, and
keep my husbands place. And thus be^ these two lovers gone to bed together and
louynglye have helsed and kyssed each other laboring so sore that they both
did sweet in obtaining their lovely purpose. And in the morning this gentyl
woman and her lover departed heuely from each other and she went unto the out
chamber where her husband lay and cried full loud let me out, for my semes ye
mock and gest with me. Than said the gentylwoman alas good husband be ye here
yet? now of troth I knew it not, for yesternight I commanded my chamberlin
that she should lose the male and let ye out. and one of my chamberlyns said
that ye were losed and that ye were hastily send for, for certain causes, and
said that ye would not com home as this night and when I herd that I went to
bed and slepte for I went that it had been so. Than said her husband to her I
beseech you let me out, for I trow I have been here long enough. And so this
gentil wife unloosed the male and her husband exept out and was almost lame with
lieng, and than she took him in her arms and kissed him swetely and prayed him
hertely that he would not be angry with her. Than sa^id her good husband I know
well it is not your fault, but the chamberleyns shall repent it, and than he made
his moan and said that they had him in dirisio^ and mocked with him, and also
the most grief was yt he had lost his reuen shertes. And for this he shall
never know without a myschaunce fall that this book come to his hand for to
read, the which God forbid. Amen.

In old deceyt how the Prince Naboth was killed, of the foul woman Iesabel
depiction of King Ahab with Jezabel

THe King Achab, king of Israel dwelt in Syry, and had to his wife the
mischeuous woman Iesabel the which pursued holy prophets in all that she
might. And this king Achab had by him in his garden a great prince called
Naboth, the which Naboth had a goodly vinyard by this king Achabs house, yt
which the king entyerly desired, and said to Naboth I beseech thee let me have
thy Vynyarde, and Naboth would not forgo his Viniarde, where upon this king
Achab went and laid him in the bed and turned his face to the wall and would
another eat nor drink. His wife Iesabell seeing this: demanded what him ayled?
Than he said my lover Naboth has said to me nay, that he will not sell to me
his vineyard. Than Iesabel caused the prince Naboth to be stoned to death. And
than came Iesabel a gain to her king saying, Rise up and drink and make good
cheer, and take the Vynyarde to thee, for Naboth is dead. And when that Achab
heared this: hearose up and did enherit the Vinyarde. Here may ye see how that
the good prince Naboth has lost his life thorough the myscheuous woman
Iesabell. But the blood of Naboth was avenged upon Achab him self. For Helyas
said to him. There that the dogs have lycked the blood of Naboth: there
shall they also lycke thy blood. And the dogs shall eat the flesh and body of
the mischeuous woman Iesabel. And it fortuned in short time after, for she was
stoned to death in a little out street and there she remained lying till the
time that the words of Helyas were fulfilled. O most myscheuous women take her
ensample, for God is a ryghtwyse Judge. for he says in the Gospel, with what
measure ye mete out wythall, with the same measure shall be measured in with
all, again, like as it fortuned to the cursed woman Iesabell, as it is
written. Therefore ye women, let be your disceyte, and than ye shall not be
deceived, for what God says that is nolye.

A new deceyt done of late.
THere was a wedded woman, yt which was of light co^tenau^ce, and much more
lighter of heart for small labor and expensis would obtain her grace and favor
if one had sought upon her for love for she was so gentyl and so fre herted.
And so it fortuned upon a time she thought for to have two young men upon one
day, and yt the one should not know of ye other, for she had appointed each
upon a certain hour, that was, the one at.viii. a clock, and the other
at.ix. And so in the morninge the good man arise up from his wife and clothed
him and went and woke his wife, and asked her if she would not arise, and she
answered ye know well that I am half acrased, and have not slept of all the
night, therefore I cannot arise yet. And so her husband let her lie and wear
his way into the city to work, and in the mean while his wife was not idle,
for as soon as the clock had smytten.viii. there cave the yongma^ the which
she had appointed the day before, and he knocked at the door and by and by he
was let in and hastily unclothed him and went to bed to her, and so they two
lay so long together passing the time till that another sued and came knocking
at the door. Than said the woman, alas there is my hasband: than said the
yongman where shall I hyde me yt your husband find me not, for if he find me
it would cost us both our lives. The woman said, take your clothes and go up in
the chamber and be there still and secret till that my husband be gone, and so
the yongma^ did as the woman gave hi^ counsel and sat still in the chamber the
which was very old and full of holes. And than she lept lustly from her bed
(knowing well enough yt it was not her husband yt knocked at ye door) and let
ye other young man in, yt which she had appointed at.ix. a clock, and by and by
he did of his clothes, and went to bed to this lusty trull (for she was good
enough and there had come.iiii. such) and besely went and plowed Venus
ground, and there ocupyed the lusts of the flesh, so long til she had weried
hi^ But he that sat above in the chamber and saw yt, I reken he was not very
well pleased, for he knew right well that it was not her husband, and so he
wist not whether it were best to speak or to hold his peace And so they lay so
long a bed til that her husband came knocked at the door and by and by she
perceived yt it was her husband and than she wist not what shyfte to make nor
where she should hyde him, but bad him yt he should lie between the bed and the
wall and she took the clothes and the couerlet and caft the^ upon him. And wha^
her husband was com he be thought him that he had heard mo than one in his
house, and wha^ that he saw the bed so cast out of order, he maruayled for it
seemed not as though there had layn a sick woman, but a though there had been a
fyghtyng and a battle for stones, for it looked more lyker a boulting trough,
than a sick womans bed. Tha^ said her husband out thou my scheuous whore,
where is that knave that has lain with the, if I find him ye shall both
repent it by gods body, and with that he caughte the couerlet and the clothes
in his hand, and than he said, how properly is this gere done, for his bed
showed as though here had line.ii. Than said the woman be my troth I am sure
thou art droncke all tedye, that thou raylest thus upon me, and call me hoar
and thou know right well that I am none, but alas I am to true to such a
Cocold and rebald as thou art and I am sorry that I have been so long so true to
the, seeing that thou never found no dyshonest in me. This poor man west not
what to say when that he hard his wife, say such words and begone for to chyde
him so, ye he might be glad that he had no stripes. And so the good man (as it
was best for him) held his prace, and said mekely My gentyl wife, I beseech
thee be content, for I love not to chyde, and he that is here above ones shall
pay for all, but he mente our lord that he would have account of it ones. But
he that sat above in the chamber and heard al: he wend that he had meant him
and that he had thretened him. Than said the young man, my friend, it is enough
that I pay the half, for he that lies beside the bedsted may well pay the
other half, for he is as well culpable as I, Than had the man great marvel
and thought ye god had spoke to him, and he that lay beside the bed will not
what to do, for he knew nothing of the other that was above in the chamber,
but he was bold and rose up, and the other came down out of the chamber. And
when they saw each other they went together from thens and none of them both
that paid for their lyinge, nor yet for their bed hyre, and thus the man was
troubled, and she made her husband believe that the one was a doctor of
physyke the which came to see her water, and the other was a Surgyn that came
to let her blood and to chafe her veins, and so she pleased her husband, for all that she had made him cokcolde, ye pretty trulles that love to carry stones:
learn this pretty conceyt against ye be sick.

An old deceyte of Vergilius.
depiction of Virgil in basket

VYrgyll was a very wise and expert man, and was a master of many diverse
sciences ye which (as some men say) the deuel had learned him, and also he was
a wise man of council* in so much that ye Emperor chose him to be one of the
lords of his counsel. This Vyrgyl did many meruay else with Nicromaci for he
made a garden wherein were al manner of trees of al fruit and fruytes, and what
time that he would / there they found ever more ripe fruit, fair flowers and
sede And also there was in the garden all manner of birds, the which song,
night and day. And this garden had no enclosing but only the light that shone
over it, and yet there could nobody come in. Also he had made in Rome an Image
of great light, the which might not fall And they of Rome might not open not her
door nor wi^dow, but they must needs se the Image. And who soever had seen that
image, ye day he should have had no pleasure for to have done the works of
the flesh, of the which the women of Rome went and showed Vyrgilius, the
which at last cast down the Image, and tha^ the women had their pleasure
again. Also this Virgilius had made in the mids of Rome to the profit of
the commen people, a lamp of glass the which shone and lyghted all Rome over
and over, in so much that there was never so small a street but it was as light
of that lamp as though there had been two torches burning, and some men say it
stood well.iii.C. year. And not fer from thens in an other place he had made a
man of copper with a bow in his hand, poyntynge with his atowe to the Lamp.
And so it fortuned upon a time the daughters of Rome went a sporting in an
evening, and there came one of the maidens of Rome the which smote upon the
string of the bow with her finger, and so the arow sprung louse, and shot the
lamp in pieces the which was great pitye, And upon an other time Vyrgilius
did put out all the fire that was in Reine, that no man could get fire but
only at one woman's ars, the which had deceived him, and none could light
an others fire, but that each house myste go upon the Markete place and
fetch his fire, at that woman's ars. This Virgyl for all that he was so wise,
and a master of all scyences yet not wythstandynge he was deceived of women.
Upon a time he set his love upon a fair gentylwoman the which was of noble
progeny, and made such means that it came to her knowledge, and when that she
knew that: she bethought her how she might deceive him, and than she said to
him that it were very petilous for to begin such a thing, for a man comes
lightly in the bound of love, but he cannot come so lightly out again. But
well-beloved Vyrgil for to please you and that ye may have your pleasure, so
come to night to fore my house when every body is gone to sleep: and I will let
down a basket out the chamber wyndow and there ye shall sit in, and so I will
draw you up into my chamber, of the which Vyrgyll was very glad, and said
that he would do so, when it was night: Vyrgil came to fore this gentylwomans
house, the which stood in the market place, and in the myddle of Rome. And so
wha^ that Vyrgil was come: she let the basket down to the earth, And Vyrgyl
went and sat in it, and than she drew him up till that he came to the middle of
the house, and when that he was.xl. foot from her window she made the cord
fast, and let him hang so in the basket, and said now men shall see thy
iniquity, and how thou would have layne by me, and there he remained
hangyng still in the basket till the next day, to his reprofe before all men,
the which he avenged after ward upon her. And thus was he deceived to his
utter confusion. And also Vyrgill made to the profit of the Romans (to the^de
that they might have short law and that every man might incontinent know
whether his cause were true or false) by the craft of Nycromancy a Lion of
brass, and who that put his hand in the throat of the lion, and swore that
his cause was true, and good and his oath being false lost his hand. And who
that swore a true oath: drew his hand again, without dread or peril. And
so it fortuned upon a time, that Vyrgyll said to his wife that she had to do
with a gentylman the which she forsook, and said that it was not so, and said
that she would take the law at the Lion, and so when this was done, and the
day appointed that she should be judged by the Lion, and come to her answer
than she found the means that the gentylman (her lover, was clothed in fools
clothyng, and so he went with her to the place where the Lion stood, and there in
ye presence of them all that was there: put her hand in the lions throat, and
there she did swear that she had no more to do with that man that she was
blamed for: than with the fool that stood there present, and so the woman drew
her hand out again without any hurt, yet nevertheless Vyrgyl knew well that she
had to do with the man of the which she was suspect with. Than was Vyrgyll
wroth, and destroyed the Lion, in so much that never after that day was no
justice done with the Lion. Here may ye se how the master Virgilius that was
so wise and so crafty in all things: and yet he was deceived of a woman, ye of
more then of one, as is rehearsed before

A new deceyte done of late.
THere was a lady beyond ye sea, which was a wedowe. This lady had a fair
gentilwoman for her chamberlen, that did lie with her. And it fortuned upon a
time that a lusty young gentylman did see his love upon this young woman, the
which was the fairest and the most goodliest of stature yt was in that
country, and she was so beautiful and so virtuous yt she lay by her lady, and
the gentylman often times did talk and comen with this gentylwoman, and opened
his heart and showed to her all his intent, and spoke so lovingly to her: that
also her heart was set in the love of him, and so she consented to him to be
ready at al times, yt it should please him, but they wist not how nor by what
means that they might come together. And so upon a time she came unto the
gentilma^ and said, ye know well that I lie by my lady, the which is great
honor to me, and I may not leave her except I should be utterly shamed and yet
I would well that you had your desire, and also I will gladly be at your
commandment and pleasur in all things that ye will desire of me, if that we
may do it secretlye, and also I will show you my mind, and what I will do. My
lady has a little dog, as ye know well yt which she loves well, and must
ever lie in her chamber and to night I will lock it without the chamber, and
will leave the next chamber open, and when that ye think that my lady is in bed,
com secretly into the chamber and lock the chamber door and there ye shall
find the little dog, the which knows you well, and take him by the ears
and shake him that he may cry loud, and when my lady shall hear him. she
shall know the voice, and the^ incontinent she shall cause me to rise, for to
let the dog in, and than I will come secretly to you, but I pray you fail
not, for if ye do, I will never speak with you a again, Than said the
gentylman, O my most trusty and gracyous lover, I will thank you heartily of
your gracyous and lonely words, and be ye sure that I will not fail, and so
the gentylman abode his time, and came unto ye place that was appointed
according to his promise. And so the little dog thought to have gone into the
ladies chamber as it was wont to do, and for by cause that the chamber door
was locked. he abode in the chamber that was next unto the ladies. And so the
lady is gone to bed, and her chamberlaen with her, and the lusty gentilman is
come into the next chamber, and went upon hand and foot for to seek the dog,
and at last he found him, and has made him cry out a loud and so the lady
heard the dog cry, and thought that he would come in, and said to her
gentylwoman the cha^berleyn that she should arise and let the dog in, for me
semes that he is in the next chamber, and she said I will do it gladly, and
so she arose and came to the door in her smock, and the gentilman came and
met her, and when that he saw that she was so gracyous and so goodlye of
person, he was so galdde that he lost all his power, and failed, and it was
not in his power to do her swerely, and groped her round breestes, and all
that he could do perteyninge to love, but the flesshly operacion excepted,
and so the gentylman returned again without comfort and yet he would gladly
have kept her: but she durst tarry no longer, and so the Lady went her may and
shytte the door again, and the Lady demanded her if she had let in the
dog, and she said nay, for she could not find it. The lady said well
let him alone, and so the chamberlayne was sore agreued, but he took courage
unto him and said, if yt my lover came again, for all that she is so fair. I
would give her better knowledge that I am a man, and so he caught the dog by
the ears again, and made him for to cry, that the Lady heard it, and so the
Lady caused her chamberlayn for to rise, and also the third time she arose and
came for the dog, but the pore gentylma^ had not her power nor strength for
to break one spear And when that she saw that there would come nothing she went
away into her chamber, and he perceived her Than said the chamberlayn for to
recompense him of his great pain, and for to please the lady, away thou
noughtye ape as thou art, for thou shall not come this night in the house,
thou foul ill favored beast, and with that she did shyt the camber door, And
the lady demanded to whom that she spoke, and she said that it was to the
other dog, the which has done me great pain in seking of him, for he had
hyd him under the benche, and when that I had found him he would not arise,
for all that I could do to him. I would feign have had him in, but he would
not ones lyftre up his head, and therefore I have left him without, and so she
locked the door with great spyte to fore his face The Lady said my daughter
that is well done, And thus was the gentylman deceived:

A deceyte how that Sampson was deceived of his wife.
depiction of Delilah cutting the hair of Samson

SAmpson being a strong young man came to Tha^nats where that he saw one of the
daughters of the philystins, the which he desired to have to his wife And when
that he came to fore the Vinyarde of the City there came a young Lion tonnyng
to him, which he killed. And in short time after as he came from his father and
mother, it fortuned that he came again to the place where that he had killed
this Lion, and so he found in the mouth of the Lion, a swarm of Bees. And wha^
that his wedding should be, there came.xxx. yonglings to his feast. And Sampson
said to them I will give to yon a ryddle, and if that ye can asoyle it win.vii.
days after my feast: I will give to you.xxx. silke^ points, and as many cotes,
and if that ye assoyle not my ryddle: ye shall lose as much. Than said the
yonglinges show to us your ryddle. Then said Sampso^ of the etet is mete gone
out, and of the strong is come su^ten^s. And so they could not assoile that
riddle, and tha^ they came to his wife and said, desire your husband, that he
show to you the ryddle and what it sygnifieth. And if that ye will not we will
set thy house and thy fathers in fire. And than she went to her husband Sampson
wiping and making her move to him, and said I pray you show to methe solucyon
of the ryddle, and what ye mean with all, or else I say that ye love me not.
Sampson answered and said I would not geu^nother father nor mother to know
what it me^t, and should I tell it you* And so his wife wept and made great
lamentacyon.vii, days after he feast of their weddyng. And upon the seventh
day she croudled Sa^pson so sore, yt he showed it her, and she forth with shows
it to the yonglynges, yt which said to Sa^pson, what is shorter than heavy, and
what is stronger tha^ a Lion. Than said Sa^pson, if my ^tesshe ^alfe had not
ben: ye had not soyled my riddle. Near ye may see how Sampson was deceived
through ye, weping and lame^tacion of a woman, and after ye Sampso^ ca^u^t^ his
wife for to have done as he was wont to do, which his father had forbode hi^,
and said to Sa^pso^ I had went ye would have killed her, and therefore I have
betake her to another husband. Tha^ was Sa^pson wreth and did great mischef to
the philystens. And so the philistens s^eyng that Sa^psons wife was the cause
of that myschef tha^ went ye philistens and set her fathers house in fire (the
father and the daughter being in the house) and so did burn them both. And
after that he enterely loved a woman that dwelt in the valy of Soreth, whose
name was Dalida. And so the chief head prince of the Phylystens came to Dalida
and said we require the that thou wylt deceive Sampson, and demand of him
wherein yt the strength of Sampson is, to the end that we may conquer him.
And if that ye do it: each of us shall give to you ^.c.M. syluerpence. And so
Dalida sought the occasion to deceive him and Sampson caused him self.iii.
times to be bound through the petition of Dalida with.iii. manner of ba^des, but
ever more he brake the ba^des and over came his enemies.iii. times. And wha^
that Dalida had seen all this: She came to Sa^pson with sweet flatteryng words
and said, O my dear beloved Sa^pson ye say that ye do ^ore me and your heart
thinks it not, for ye have denied to me.vi. times, for ye would not show me
where that your strength testeth. And so she troubled Sa^pso^ many a day unto
the time that she brought him to his death, And so at last Sa^pson showed his
wife the truth and said, if my head were shave: tha^ were all my strength and
power gone, Than Dalida sent word to the Phylystens, and she caused Sampson for
to sleep in her lap, and she called to her a barbeur, and he did shave of all the here of Sampsons head and tha^ she thrust him from her and his power and
might was gone from him, And than cried Dalida, Sampson Sampson, the phylistens
ben come upon thee, Tha^ he arose out of his slope and was incontinent as a
prisoner, and his eyes were put out and so by that means he was killed, Now
behold ye men, be the young and old, heave that the strange Sampson was
deceived of the false woman Dalida, who is yt may believe the sweet and
flatteryng words and the bitter mourning and weping of women,

A new deceyte done of late.
depiction of man on horse

There was a gentylman yt which was very bold in the fears of wars, and
entyerly loved a yerge fair Lady, and had so oftentimes co^munycacyo^ with
her: that she consented to him in all things that he would desire of her, And
wha^ yt he had done his will a certain time with her: tha^ went he into spain
with his lord for to keep war and in the mean while yt he was abse^t: his
lover was married to an old knight the which knew right well ye other man, but
this old knight knew not yt he was his wyfes paramour, but at last it ca^ to
his knowledge, of yt which he was not well content, And so it fortuned yt in
short time after, her paramour came home again, and by chance in an euenyng
ca^ to ye castle where yt his sweeting was, and the old knight made him good
cheer, for he was of his old acquaintau^ce, but it was half against his
heart. And in ye mean while yt ^he old knight went about for to make al things
^^dy for to welcome his gest withal: he sat and talked with his lover his pretty
fool yt he was wont for to play with a^^ and desired of her for to have the old
freendshypp yt he was went to have in time paster that she was wedded: she
denied him and said that it was not possible for to have place and time
suffycient. Than said her gest, O my dear beloved os^is, if it please you ye
may do ^eso^ freendshyp, for your husband shall know nothing there of, wha^ that
he is a bed and a stepe that ye come and vysit me in my chamber, or in any
other place where that it shall please you, or if ye please I will come to you,
then she said it may not be so, for my husband is very soon awake, and I
should have great dread and sorrow, and also he never waketh, but he does feel
after me, and wha^ that he misseth me: than he will think what there is to do.
Tha^ he demanded, what does he more? More quod she: nothing, but turns him
again, for if he com ones in a month that is much to him, for it is but fely
for to fable with you, for if it came I would take it with all my heart, Than
said he, I beseech the my sweet love make it so that I may ly with the to
night. Than she answered and said, I know a remedy, I have a serving maid to
the which I will show my secret, and with her I will take counsel. And so
incontinent she called her and said, my beloved maid, ye must now help me in
a matter, for I trust you best for to keep my preuytie, Tha^ said the maid,
what yt shall please you I will be glad for to do. Tha^ said her lady to her,.
This knight I love above all men, and I would be sorry that he should depart
from hens, except I had spoke preuelye with him and it is not possible that I may
speak secretly with him without that ye will be so good as to keep my place by my
husband in my bed this night, for it is his custom wha^ yt he waketh to feel
after me, and than he lays him to sleep again, but I pray what so every
do ye may not speak one word but suffer all that he does to you for I know
of a very certain that ye shall be without sorrow or dread for any thing that my
husbond thy master will do, Than said the young lustly maiden to her Lady,
your commandment I will be glad to do it, So soon as they had supte: there
wence all and walked abroad and the lady showed her paramour how that her maid
should keep her place by her husband for ye night of the which the knight was
maruailous glad, And so after that when they had drunk, they went all to bed
and the knight went into his chamber where yt he should lie the which was
gorgeously ordained, and there the table was beset with suckettes, confectes,
and other costly things and of the best wine that might be got, And so
incontinently the old knight and his lady has both unclothed them, and went
to bed and my lady did put out the candell, and the maid stood preuely by the
bed side, and wha^ the candell was out: she went to bed to her master, and so
lay with him, and my lady went incontinent to him yt abode her coming, and
about.iii, a clock before day: the old knight did turn him, and he groped for
his wife, and thought yt she had layne by him and so laid his hand upon her
breasts, and he felt that they were hard and round and tha^ incontinent he
knew yt it was not his wife, for her breasts were not so round nor so hard:
Tha^ he took her in his arms and gave her a kis with that ye longed thereto; Al
his business was hard for him, for she was a maid, And so the poor maid
durst not speak one word for sauinge of her maystres honesty, when this was
done: he began to call to him that lay by his wife, and said how, how,
syrknyght of whens be ye? speak once to me: The knight hearing this: was fore
amassed, and my lady was whole aghast, but they held their pace, Than he called
again, how my gest where be ye speak to me, Than said the knight what is your
will sir, Than said he a ha sir I will ever be glad of this exchange, the
knight said what exchange good sir: Mary for an old hoore, to have a yo^g
proper maid for so have ye served me of the which I thank you and so this
gest with his wife knew not what to say, And also ye poor maid was hole ashamed,
as well for the dyshhonestie of her lady, as for her own dishonestie and
mayde^hode, the which she had lost so pyteously, and so departed from thens,
and after had wept bytterly therefore, and the strange knight is departed from
thence without any thanks geuynge to any body, nor said not once adewe, but left
the lady in great sorrow and dread, and so the strange knight came never there
after that, but how that the lady bid, and what chance she had: of that I had
notinges, and therefore and can write no more thereof.

An old deceyte done in old time
depiction of Hercules brandishing sword

HErcules the worthy champion was a man of great renown, and was the
bastard of King Iupyter, and of the Queen Alcumena, This Hercules when that
he lay yet in the cradel: he strangled and killed two great serpents yt would
have killed him, the which his stepmother Juno had brought to him. This
Hercules overcame a mighty great greek, yt which was called Phylotes, yt which
afterward beca^ Hercules servant And through the informacion of Juno his
stepmother (the which would well that he had been dead) went into a forest or
heth of Neemy; and there he ouercam.iii. Lio^s with great power and strength.
This Hercules took his journey into the city of Molosen, and fetched again the
fair Proserpina Orpheus wife, the which king Pluto had stolen, and he fought
against the porter Cerberus, which was a mighty great Greek, but hercules
ouercam him and bound him hand and fore, and overcome.iii.C. cytiesens of
Molosyn, the which would have taken Proserpina from him. This Hercules overcame
the great mo^ster of leerne, the upper part like a man, and: iether part like a
sergent, by the which mo^ster no man might pass without that he went with, iii.C.
or mostrong me^ of arms And his food was the flesh of me^ and the ^with he
lived And he overcame the king C^cus, the which was a fers tyrant and
oppressed all the people of that country, and upon a night he had stolen
away Hercules Oxen in Italy, and Cacus had eyed them tail to tail and so
brought the^ into the cave where that he dwelt, to thend yt they should not
find ye footing of the^, for the footyng of the oxen did she wall ways from
the cave ward where that he dwelt. Also he conquered the great mo^nster of the
sea ^afore Troy, the which they must have given every day for his dinner a
(...) a sheep, and yt contained so long till the lot fell upon the kings
daughter, the which he delivered, and subdued the great monster, and delivered
the City of Troy, and also he was a great iuster, for where that he heard yt
there were any great Lord, or king that was a tyrant, or an oppresser of the
people? thither would be go, and aue^ture his life, and pursue the^ to death,
Ha good lord if yt an infidel has done such things (yt which had no hope
of ye life eternal) through love of justice, how much the more should every
christ lord fight for the true justice, and that same to exalt, the which
knows well the great reward that is promised them of the lord celestyall?
Upon a time Hercules took his journey toward his own country, of Ycoyien
with his wife Megera, and her hand maid And also he came into the land of
Tassalian where that he must pusse over the water with the ship, and the
ship was so little that it could not carry the^ all over at ones, and so
Hercules remained and went not over with the ship, and the fery man beheld
Dianira, and when they came to land: the fery man took Hercules wife and
would have run away with her, and Hercules seeing that: took his bow and
shot over the water toward Nessums the fe^y man, and shot the arow in Nessums
side* in so much that he felt that he must dye, and than he said to Dianira,
Ye be a fair woman, and therefore I require you take compassion upon me, for
your husband Hercules is not true, for he loves other beside you. Hold take
this box for therein is such a thing that when that ye anoint therwyth his
shert, and that he put it upon his body: than shall all the strange love
depart from him. And upon a time Hercules subdued the king Prycus, the which
had many daughters, and among them there was one that was the fairest, the
which he entyrely loved above all the other and her name was Yole, and Hercules
said to her Yole take me as your friend, for so must it be, for the gods have
given to me this chance. And wha^ that yole herd this that she must do him
freendshyp, the which had oppressed and conquered her father, than fell Yole in
a swound and in great sorrow. And than Hercules betook Yole in the keeping of,
xii, men, that she should not escape him, And Hercules desired her that she
would be his wife, yt which at last she consented, and so Hercules lay by her
and accomplished his pleasure so long with her that he holy forgot his wife
Dianira, Dianira heard of this and so she wrote a letter to him, remembering him
of ye great love that was wont to be between them, and to know if that should
be so lost and forgotten, and that he, the which all the world did dread,
would so suffer him self to be overcome of a strange woman, And wha^ Hercules
hadred this letter he was not well content and was ill apayde thereof, in so
much ye none durst com by him nor also the fair Yole, And so Hercules being
in he up fantasy, devised him self home he might best forget the fair yole,
and so he took his way and Journey to the mount Oaths on pilgrimage, and for
to do Sacryfice: to the God Appollo, and in the way met with hi^ Lucas
chamberlyn of Dianira* and when that Dianira knew that, than she took one of
Hercules shertes, the which was ouerstryken with the poison that Nessu^s had
given to her and sent it to Hercules, for to put on, knowing no otherwise but
that the strange love should therwyth have departed from him, as Nessums made
her to believe, And than Hercules had made a great fire for to do sacrifice
unto the God Appollo with an heart that Hercules had taken tunnyng, And Lucas
gave to him the sherte and for because that he s^et so sore through the great
anguyshe and hard sorrow he took the shert of Lucas and put it on, and wha^
that the shert was warm upon him, it cleued so cast to his body, and he felt
such great pain that he wiste not what to do and would have drawn of the
shert again, but he could not but drew it of by great pieces from his body
with the skin and the flesh to the bone, in such wise that one might have
seen his bowels. And so hercules saw and knew well that he must dye, than
Hercules said to Philotes tell Yole and all her friends (with habundau^ce of
teres) of the miserable death of Hercules. Tha^ wayled Yole so bytterly that
her heart did brast and died for sorrow. when that Dianira heard tell of the
death of Hercules* and how that it was through the shert the which she had
sent him* she took a knife and kilde her self for sorrow. And thus was the
valiant Hercules shamefully deceived of a woman, nevertheless it was without
the knowledge of the woman, though tha^ the woman wss the causer thereof.

A new deceyte of late done in the City of Tours.
depiction of people seated at table, eating

IN the City of toures there was a merchant of great power the which had
desired upon a friday his paison and other mo of his lovers and freedes to dine
with him and had promised the^ a certain great fysshe, the which was called a
pyke. and cost him two shyllinges, beside the other small fysshes, as Carpes,
Bremes and pykerel, and other such small fisshes, This merchants wife loved
well a certain friar and wha^ the husband had brought home the pyke, his wife
took it privily and sent it to the friar, by a Cobblers wife, the which knew
all her secrets, and told her yt she should show the friar, that she would
come yt night and make merry with him, and remain with him all that night and
help for to eat the Pyke, Tha^ was the Friar maruaylous glad and said, if
there be any good wine for to get for money I will provide us some, and we will
teach the Pike for to swym therein, Than went the good Friar musyng in him
self and thought how that he would cherishe this merchants wife, And about,
xii a clock the good man came home with his gestes, the which he had desired
for to eat of the pyke, and brought them into the kitchyn for to see the great
pyke yt he had bought, and said to his wife show to my gestes what a great
pyke that I have bought, what Pyke said his wife? Mary said he the great pyke
that I sent home with the other fysshes, The good wife said yt she had seen
no pyke, I think yt ye dreme, for here is a great carpe, ii, pykerels and,
iiii, Bremes, with other river fysshes but as for the pyke, I have not seen,
why (said her husband) ween ye that I dreme? Than said the person and the
other gestes we believe that is not so for ye be very suttell and deceytfull,
Than said his wife by my troth, I suppose that he mocked with you, for I have
seen no pyke of al this year, and therefore I think that he had dremed of a
pyke, Than said the goodman I promise you, it shabe a dear pyke for you And so
he took a staff and would have beaten his wife, but his gestes took him from
her with force and did as much as they could, for to make the peace, and went
from thence with the person for to make merry, And than his wife desired one of
the neighbors (a young wedow) to dyne with her, and when she was com to her
she said, O my beloved neighbor I beseech you do one thing for me, and I will
reward you well therefore. Than said the wedow what soeur please you I will be
glad for to do. Tan said that woman, my hushande is marvelous hot upon his
business, for he has troubled me so muched the night past, that I should not be
able to abide it this night, and therefore I require you hartly that ye will do
so much as to keep my place to night, yt which the wedow consented gladly.
And so when the good man had dyned he went pryuely and got him su^ rods, which
he laid at his beds feet, for there with he would have chastised his wife in the
night as he was wont to do, forth* knows well her husbands mind, for he
cannot home to supper but abode so long out till he thought yt his wife were to
bed. But she caused her neybour to unclothe her and to keep her place for her
for that night and commanded her that when her husband came home yt she should
not speak to him, and his wife put out all the fite yt was in the house. And
wha^ this was done she commanded her neybour, yt as soon as her husband did
rise in ye morning yt she should go her way home to her own house which she did
promise so for to do. And than went his good wife to the graye freres cloystet
for to help to eat the good Pyke with the friar, like as she had sent him
word, and for her pardon, like as she was wont to do, and so made good there
and drunk the wine merely with the friar. And so when it was night her
husband came home and thought to have light a candell, but he found no fire.
He seeing that went preuily to bed, and slept almost till it was day light, and
tha^ he arose preuely and took the rods and cast up the clothes and did beat
his neibour yt the blood ran down of al sides. But his poor neybour durst not
speak one word. And so at last he let her alone and went his way out. And than
the poor wedowe (his nedghboure) arose up and went her way home to her own
house al morning, and complaynyng of her mischaunce, and cursed her neighbor,
and the time that ever she came there. And in short time afterca^ his wife home
from the freres, and came in her chamber, and saw yt it was al to be strawed with
the rods, and saw yt the shetes were al bloody, and tha^ she perceived well yt
her neighbor had suffered penance. And incontinent she went and made the
chamber clean, and made her bed and laid on a clean pair of shetes and went
to bed, and lay there till her husband came home, and when yt he ca^ in the
chamber he found his wife a bed fast a sleep and said, ha ladi will ye not
arise yet why (said she) is it day I wist not that ye were up for I lay and
dreamed, and that has caused me for to lie so long a bed, I believe yt ye
dreamed of the Pyke, for I gave you a good remembrance thereof. Tha^ said his
wife, I have no remembrance of you nor of the Pyke, Tha^ said he, is it al
ready forgotten, how so said his wife, who should remember dreams. Than said
her husband is that a dream, for to beat a handful of rods to peers upon thy
body, And also I wot well yt the shetes will testify whether it be so or not.
Tha^ said his wife, I wot not what ye mean, but I wot well yt ye gave me a
fre^dly kiss to day morning and so left me sleping Than said her husband, I
maruayle of that, let me see the shetes, and tha^ she showed to him the clean
shetes that she had laid new upon the bed, and showed her naked body all hole
and clean, and so when her husband saw that the shetes were clean, and her
body hole he wist not what to say, and so he was full of fantasyes and said of a
truth (wife) I had went yt I had beten you well to day mourning, but I see
well it is not so, and therefore I wot not what to say. Than said his wife put
that fa^tasyes out of your mind, for ye may se that ye have not touched me,
for ye have dremed, like as ye dremed yesterday of the Pyke. Than said her
husband Now I know well that ye said the truth, and therefore I beseech you
for the love of God forgive it me, for now I know well that I said not the truth
yesterday of the Pyke. And most of all I am ashamed that I spoke so to you in
the presence of the worshypfull men, and specially in the presence of our
parson, and therefore I require thee forgive it me. And than his wife said I
forgive you gladly, but I pray you be not so hasty another time. Than said he,
My beloved wife it shall never be so more. And so what that he heard or saw
after that: he thought all that he had dremed of it. And thus was the good man
deceived of his wife, and thought that he had dremed of the Pyke. And she went
and made good there with this Friar, and evenings and mornings they were
together. and this merchant man was a little Ialouse. And when he spoke a word
to his wife: Than said she peace fool thou dremest of the Pyke. And so this
Marchaunte was deceived of his wife indede.

An old deceyte done in old time.
depiction of King Solomon

THat time when Dauyd was departed out of the world: than was Salomo^ his
son made king of Israel in his fathers stead, and he put his trust in
phararo the king of Egypt and took his daughter, and brought her into the City
of David, Upon a time Salomo^ made sacrifice and offered to Gybeo^.a.M
Offerynges or sacryfices, that were burned, And tha^ our lord made reuelacion
to him in his sleep and said, Ask what thou will, I shall give it to thee.
Than said Solomon, I am yet but young, and I know not my self which is good or
ill, and Solomon thy servant requires of the worthy heart, that he may know
this people, and understand what is good and ill. Than said our lord for as much
as ye have not desired long life, nor riches nor your enemies evil fare, but
for a skillful perseuerau^ce,: therefore I give to thee according to thy words
and desire, first a skillful heart, in so much that no^ like unto thee has not
been to fore thee, nor after thee shall none arise that shall have such a wit as
thou have, And also I give to thee that, that thou have not desired, that is
riches and honor, that there has been none a monge the kings like unto thee.
And Solomon builded well.xx. year upon the house of god, and of the house of the
king, and he had thereto.ixx.m. laboryng me^ yt bare the burdens, and.lxxx M.
workmen that laid stones and such other officers and.iii.m. and.iiii.c.
rulers and overseers to govern the workmen, And the king Solomon was greater
in riches and in wisdom than were all the kings that were upon earth, And all
the people of the world desired for to see Solomon, and for to hear of his
wisdom that God had given to him, and every man brought to him honorable
gifts, as gold, silver, iewelis, and costely raiment, harneys, and sweet
smelling herbs, and horses and mules. But Solomon loved well outlandy she
women, as the daughter of Pharao, the Moabites, the Amonytes, and the Edomytes,
the which the lord of Israel had forboden saying beware go not to them and let
them not come to thee for of a suetti they will cause thee to bow thy heart to
their god And yet Solomon went to them with great love. And he had.vii.C, women
to his wyfes, and, iii,c. co^cubines, and his wives caused him to apply his
heart to strange gods, in so much yt his heart could not be whole with the
lord god, as ye heart of his father David was, And so Solomon and Amoche went to
the god of zydon and to Meicon the god of the Amoytes, and he builded a house
Chamos the God of the Moabites, upon the mount yt lies before Jerusalem, and
Moloch god of the Amonites, and Solomon caused all his outlandy she wives to
offer frankense^ce to their god. And therefore god took wrath upon him and
departed his kingdom. Now behold how the most wysest Solomon was deceived of
the women, and how his heart was separated from the lord God. Alas who may with
stand the deceyte, the flateryng, and the weepyng of women.

depiction of two men and a woman

A new deceyt done of late at Danswyke in Pruyse.
Upon a time it fortuned in the worthy City of Danswyke: that two young
merchants went walkyng together to ward a place called artus gardeyn, which
stood in the market place, and as they went walkyng: there came a young lusty
fair gentyl woman the which met them, and her maid waiting upon her for they
came fro the church, and so one of the young me^ beheld this gentil woman, and
said, without aduyseme^t to his companion, by my troth there goes a fair we
man by us, if that I might lie one night by her, I would spend.l. nobles, the
maid (hearing ye word) said unto her mastres, harken mastres what one of
those men says, one of the men that passes by us said to his companion that
he would give.l, nobles that he might lie one night with you, The wife turned
and looked back ward, and saw that he was a lusty young man, and said unto her
maid, abide a little till he be departed from his fellow, and than ask him if it
please him to come to night to our house, he shall be welcome and yet for all
that her husband was in the street. The maid did like as her mastres had
commanded her, and she went unto the young merchant when he was departed fro
his fellow and said to him gentyl young man will ye yet abide by the words that
ye said when the gentylwoman came by you? yes said ye young merchant yet will I
abide by my word if I may obtain my purpose of yt woman. Than said the maid,
if it please you to obtain your purpose: tha^ com to night to her house when
the clock has smytten.vii. For it is the manner in Danswyke yt the most part
of all the marchaunte men have supped at.vii a clock, and than they go to
Artus gardeyn to drink and there to take there recreacyon. and sometime to make
bargains with their merchandise, so that it is fomtyme late in the night ere
that they com home. And thus went this gentilwomans husband to Artus gardeyn
at.vii. of the clock after supper, and tha^ the young merchant came home to
the wife of the house, and she brought him above in a fair chamber, where she
had arrayed a costly bed after the goodlyest manner, and there they enbrased each
other with many a freendly kys, and there was given the ernest penny upon their
marchaundyse. And in short time after the young man did give her the.l. nobles
whereof she sent one of them for wine and laid a way the resydue of the money
and kept it secretly, and than they drunk the wine and made good chere, and
one began to the other like as Venus children should do, and so they went to bed
together, and there she took him in her arms with great love: seking the
flowers of nature in the sweet rose gardeyne: and in the mean while the maid
lay looking out at the window for a spy, waiting the coming of her master,
as her mastres had commanded her. For she knew well of the marchaundyse that
was made between the merchant and her mastres. And so wha^ the clock
smote.xi. in the night: than came her master home, and incontine^t the maid
perceued him and ran to her mastres, which by and by came down and went to
bed in her own chamber, and when her husband came to his chamber: his wife lay
and routed as though she had been fast a sleep, and so he put of his clothes
and went to bed to his wife, and she spoke in her sleep (as he thought) and
said, alas husband why do ye a wake me so hastily out of my sleep I lay and
slepte sweetly, ye said her husband, ye know well that I must come to bed, and
so in short time after she longed for to have been above again, for to renew
the good pastaunce, and so she found a subtyl means to begyle her husband and
said, good husband I have so great lust to sleep, that I wot not what to do,
and also I have such a tumblyng in my belly, that I must needs go to the preuy
house, and I am afraid that I should fall aslepe upon the preuy, and than she
arose up from her husband, and did set before the bed a basyn and a stycke in
it, and said my best beloved husband, if that I fall a sleep upon the preuy.
I pray you than knock upon the basyn that I may with the noise thereof awake,
And her husband promised her that he would do her request, and than she went
again above where she was joyfully received, for he thought it very long till
that she came and her husband had dronk well in so much, that incontinent he
fell aslepe, and slept till in the morning at.iiii. a clock, and than he starte
out of his sleep and groped round about the bed: but he found not his wife,
of the which he was a frayde and lept from the bed and smote upon the basyn in
so much that incontinent his wife came running and made her complaint and said,
alas good husband, I have suffered very great could, for I have sit all this
night sleapyng there upon the preuy and I dread sore that I shall get a great
sickness after this cold. And so she went to bed to her husband and lay there
till it was five of the clock in the mornyge. And than arose her husband for to
go hear mass and for to do such things as he had for to do. And when that
her husband was gone out, she went incontinent above to her other lover, and
there she remained till that the clock smote.viii. for than it was lefull for
them to arise and so depart without the knowledge of any body saving only the
maid. And so it fortuned when yt they were departed this youg merchant would
take his journey toward his house, that was in the city of Lubeck in Saxo^ and
took his horse and went thetherwardes. And upon the same day this woman's
husband rode out of the city of Danswyke toward ye city Lubecke and so wha^
that he had ryden a while upon his journey: he looked up and saw a horse man
ride before him and when that he had seen him: he desired gladly for to have
company, and rode the faster till that he had over taken the other man that
rode before him, and so when he had over taken him they rode together, and than
the elder man said to the young merchant I pray you tell me some news or else
of your chances for to short our way wythall. Than said the young merchant
there is no chance fortuned to me and therefore I can tell none. Than said the
merchant I have maruayle of yt, for in the city of Danswyke the young
merchaunt men get many strange chau^ces, for the marchaunces be comenly old
men, and have for the most part young lusty wyfes the wyhche have more work
in their shoppes than their husbands may well away with all, in so much that
they borowe now and than a lofe of you or of such other. Than said the
merchant by cocks bones there is a pretty chance fortuned to me of late of a
Merchants wife, and so he up and told him all the story of the woman and how
it was brought to pass, and of the maid, and of the basin, like as is
expressed before, The good man heard him tell his tale and was not well content
thereof in his mind and thought in him self, that al chose things were
fortunate to him self but he laughed therewith. And when that they had rydon a
little forther: the merchant held still with his horse, and said, alas it is
wrong with me for I should ride to Lubeck for money, and I have forgot te^ my
pryncipall oblygacyo^ yt I should require my money wythall, and therefore I must
needs return home wards again, and if ye have no great business: I require you
that ye will bear me company to my house, and I will pay for your costs and
for your horse, and make you the best chere that I can, Tha^ said the young
merchant, if I can do you any pleasure: I will be glad to beat your
commandment. And so they took their journey back ward again and rode home
and came in at the back side of the merchants house, and came in at the horse
stable, so yt the young man knew not the house and than they went forth into the
house, whereas they found ye good wife syttyng, the which he beheld and knew
well in so much that he was astonyed and said to him self. Alas what have I
done, for it is not well now, but if I had kept my teth before my tongue: tha^
had I done well but there is no remedy it is done, and that yt is said: cannot
be called again, for it is said, and so must it be. And when that they were
with the wife, than said her husband, wife take money and go to market and bye
us some good meat, for I bring here with me a good friend, the which I will
make good there to night. But god knows the wife was not well content with that
friend to com in such manner. But not wstandyng ye wife must obey the
commandment of her husband. And wha^ it was night: the meat was ready, than
the good man took his gest and set them down at the table, and there they
were well but the wife went about the house and came not to supper, in so much
yt her husband was amoued with her and bad her that she should come and sit
by him, the which she did at ye last, and was sore ashamed. The good man made
his geast the best chere yt he could: and drunk each to other plenty of wine.
And so when that the supper was done and the meat taken from the table: than
he commanded his servant and one of the maidens to depart out of the chamber,
and the other maid that knew of the bargain: remained still in the chamber,
and than he caused the chamber door to be locked, and said with a loud voice,
Is here no honestly? for he that byteth his nose of, shameth his fate, and so
it is with me, for if I shame my wife: I shame my self. And than he said to
his wife. My wife ye be to costly for to be my wife if ye ca^ wyn one night.l.
nobles: for tha^ would I hastily or i^ short time spend al my goods. The wife
said that is not true, than was her husband angri and said. Gothy ways and
fetch me hither the money, for God has sent me enough and also I will have no
such money in my house. Tha^ the wife went with a moved mined, and did fetch
the money and laid it to fore her husband upon the table, and he took it and
cold it, and there was.xlix. nobles. And tha^ he demanded the yo^g man
saying, is this thy money? no said the young man but it was once my money. Than
said his host, put it in thy purse. Than the host had yet some silver money
that was remaining of the noble, yt was changed for the wine. And tha^ said
the host, yet not withstanding ye labor must be paid, what shall I give thy
wife for her labor? Than said the young man mine host, that I put to your good
judgment. Than said the host, she shall have for her part a pair of shows
and a pair of Slippers, and the maid that kept the watch shall have a pair
of slyppers, and the mynstrell that playde upon the basyn at the fockynge shall
have for his part a pot of wine, And so the host gave each his money the
which they must receive. And than John John the boste that was mynstrell gave
his part first of all and sent for the wine and drunk and made good chere,
and that that yet remained of his money: he gave it again to the young man
and said, hold take this and make good there therwyth to night, and go to
morrow where it please you, I require you that ye come here no more. And if ye
have found any good fortune: I pray you be secret of your tongue and make no
words of it for that yt is done: must so remain for there is none other
remedy. And so the young man rode the next morning his way and was very glad
of his chance. Now ye may see what that women can brewe. Now be hold ye
rich men of great power, and also young men the which have taken upon you
great business and take a good head hardely of false and subtle women. But alas
who is it that can take heed? for scripture faith that a man shall seldo^ find
an honest woman, or a worthy woman. For there stands written. Mulietem forte^
quis inuentet? procul hic. etc. who is that, yt may find a strong honest woman
or a substancy all honest woman, far from hence or at the end of the world.
Thus every man that will be sure: he may abstain the face of women and the
conuersacyon, their company, and being with them.

An old deceyte done of old time.
depiction of man with head of John the Baptist

THe servants of Herod were sent forth: and have take saint John and
brought him to ye gayle and there set him fast in prison for Herodias sake. And
Herodias laid against him many things and would have beheded him, but they
could not bring it to pass, and Herod drad John, for he knew well that he was
a Prophet and a holy man, and took great heed to him and was obedient to him
in many causes, and also he hero him gladlye. And so it fortuned upon a day yt
he madi a great supper for his gentyles and principal states of Galyle. Than
came in the daughter of Herodyas and dau^ced of the which king Herod and they
that were at his table took great pleasure therein. And incontinent said king
Herod to Herodias daughter and said, desire of me what it please you and I will
give it you. and with that he swore an other and said, what soever that ye will
desire: I will give it you, ye to half my realm to, tha^ said her mother to
her, desire and ask the head of John baptyst And than incontinent she went to
the king, in great have, and said, I will that ye give to me incontinent the head
of John baptyst in a platter Tha^ was the king very sord wfull and so for his
oath sake, and for the company that were at his table: he would not that she
should desire in vain but gave to her her desire, And incontinent the king
sent the hangman to the prison, and caused him to head John baptyst and brought
ye head in a platter and gave it the daughter, and the daughter gave it
forthwyth to her mother. Now behold how yt ye holy prophet John baptyst lost
his head and life through the cause and falsed of the mischeuous woman Herodias
Behold what myschyef and what maruaylous things that women can bring to pass,

A new decyte done of late of a Ialowsy man that would not very well trust his
wife.
depiction of flower

THere was in Italy a well learned man the which had a fair young flower to
his wife. This man had for the most part red all the practyces of the women
how that they were wont to deceive their husbands and therefore he would not
well trust his wife, and also he thought that he would take good heed, and to
be well ware that he would not be deceived with such deceyte and that
perchance that his wife would spyn ill yarne like as many wives had served
their husbands before And so he abode in his ialousy well.iii. or.iiii. year in
so much that his wife might never be out of his presence but al ways she must
be by him, without that she went to the church for to here mass, and
incontinent to come home again. And always when she went to church she had an
old woman by her, as it is the manner in Italye, the which took heed to her.
And so it fortuned upon a time that a young lustye man hard tell of the rule
and how that the fair gentyl woman was troublede of her husband with the fore
named ialousy, And so yt fortuned upon a time that this young lusty man came
and met with this fair gentylwoman, and spoke to her secretly saying or
telling to her his good will and intent and made his complaint with heavy
sighs to her that she married such a Ialouse man. And he said to her that he
loved her above all the women that were in the world, and showed her what that
he would do for her love, and said if that it pleased you I will write it to you
in a letter, for because that I may talk nolenger with you, if I wist that my
simple service that comes out of a good free heart should not be disdained nor
put beside but accepted, and that my labor be not spente in vain, and that my
hand be not idle occupyde. And when the gentilwoman heard these words of the
yo^ge gentyl man and marked them well how that they were made with a good will
and with great desire. And for because that ye old trotte stood so nygh by
her: she gave the young man no good answer nor yet no loving token, but she
was content and desired with good heart and mind for to see the letter and
for to read it. Than the young man took his leave with a glad chere for the
fair gentylwoman gave him a freendly farewell. And so when he was departed:
the old trotte that stood behind her, demanded what he would with her: Than
answered her mastres and said he brought me tidinges of my mother, of the
which I am very glad, for she is yet in good health and is merry thanked be
god. And so they went homewarde, And the next day when the gentyl woman went to
church: her lover came and met with her and had made a freendlye and a loving
letter the which he put preuely in her hand that the old trotte knew nothing
thereof, And wha^ she was secretly alone: she opened the letter and did read
how depelye that he was taken in the love of her and without that she would
show grace to him: he should suffer death, and desired her hertely that it
might remain secretly, and that his love might grow in her like as the love
of her did grow in him. And when the gentle woman had red his letter: she
took compassyon upon him for her hette brenned in the love of him, and would
gladly have spoken with him, to the end that his love should not have been
unrewarded, but she was so sharply watched that she could not speak to him,
for she might not go one foot out of her house, but wha^ that she went unto
church and tha^ had she avoid totheles whore that took head to her and never
went from her. This young man the next day did clothe him in an other taymence
and came and met with the gentylwoman the which knew him well, and she passed
so nygh by him: that she took him her letter in his hand so privily that no
body saw it, and he lovingly received it and dylygently read it, in the which
he found whole contracte and co^pacte in so much that they lacked nothing
but time and place And so he was very glad of the confortable letter that he
had of her. And so he went to a good friend of his which dwelt in the way as
shewent to churchward, and showed her all the bondage of his heart how he was
set in the love of her, desiring her that she would help him in his cause,
and in time coming for to do as much for her gain, and so she promised him
for to help him as much as lay in her power for to do, when he heard that:
he thanked her and said be ye content that I may speak privily with her in
your house: yea said the wife, speak with her as long as it pleases you if
it please her for to come in my house, for I will be glad to show you all
the pleasure that I can. Than was the young man very glad and wrote a letter to
his lover in which letter was contained this following. O my most fairest and
gracious lover and comfort of my heart, ye hope of my intent and mind, the
which has so strongly caught my heart in the snare of your love, for ye be
among al women the most gracius the most comliest and one that nature has not
forgotten, please it you to wit how that I your worthy servant have a
secret friend the which knows you well. And so she knows what a foul
vyllayne that ye have to your husband she dwells in the way as ye go to
church ward (...) and with your license I will be there in ye one for mere
cha^bers in strange clothes yt no body shall know me, and I will have by me a
kettell of water mingled with ashes and wha^ yt ye come thereby, I will pore it
upon your clothes And when ye be thus fouled? ye shall take it scornefully, and
go into ye house for to make you clean, and than ye shall send your keeper home
for other raiment, and in the mean season we will talk together of our love,
wha^ she had red this letter: she wrote to hi^ again yt she was content with al
such things as he had written to her. And the next day as she should go to ye
church ward: her typet, her rail, her gown, and al her clothes were al
arrayed with ashes and water, and than was this gentilwoma^ angry and sore
amoued, and so went into ye house as if she had been ashamed, but it was but
her countenance, and tha^ her keeper took a knife and scraped her gown, as
she thought it best. Then said the gentyl woman (no no) let it alone for we do
labor in vain, for it will not be incontinent clean. And therefore seeing
there is no remedy: run quyckly home and fetch me another gown: a typet, and
a tail, and come quickly again, yt we lose not our mass. And thus is the old
trotte gone home for other clothes, and incontinent ye gentyl woman went above
to her sweet heart, of the which she was lovingly receyned, and kissed her
sweetly, and lovingly embraced each other, and there was love by love, and
there love spoke to love a long time together. And when her keeper came home
without her maistres: tha^ her master demanded of her where she had left his
wife. Than said the old trot gent: I master we have had a great mysfortune,
and so she up and told him all yt was fortuned: and therefore I ^u^ for another
gown, and for another typpet for my mastres is ashamed for to goo so in the
street. Than said her master is it of a truth? her keeper said sir it is as I
have showed you. Than said her master goo to thy mastres, for I know well
what it is. For I have read of much deceyte, myschefe and many subtle ways
that woman have to begyle their husbands wythal, but this subtyl means I
never saw nor red before this time. And therefore he fell in great melancholy and
dyed in short time after, for because that he had studied so long in vain and
for because that he was so falselye deceived and by such subtle means. And
therefore every man take heed to his wife and beware of deceytfulnes.

depiction of Hercules brandishing sword
An old deceyte done in old time.
THe strong and worthy Hercules was overcome in all his power and strength
through the love of a young maid, the fair Yole yt kings daughter of Calido
ny in ye which the worthiest of the world could not ouercom and bring hi^ to
shame. This king her father had promised Hercules that his daughter Yole should
be his wife, the which in short time after he repented, of the which Hercules
was very wroth, and took war against the king and overcame him, and took
all the country with the fair yole the which he so entyrely loved. But yole
the which thought more upon the death of her father than on the love of
Hercules under a color of false love and with subtle means smylyng and with
flatteryng words: has drawn Hercules to such great love, yt she caused him
for to do what it pleased her and so she has caused him for to do lay a way
his iron staff, wherewith he was wont for to rule the strong mosters and
beasts wythall. She caused him for to lay a way the lions skin and caused
him to be clothed with soft clothes of sylke, she caused him for to were a crown
of to semary upon his head, and golden tynges upon his fyngers, his rough here
was kembed and after the best manner trymmed, and set a crown upon his head and
other costly ornaments such as the maidens and women did were. She caused his
toughe berde to be anointed with costlye oil of Cypres,

This yole was well feene in deceit and thought in her self that it was more
laudable to deceive such a gross strong man with aduoutry, than to kyl him
with the sword of myschyef, and so to revenge her fathers death yet (to the
dishonor of ye worthy Hercules, she caused him for to give him self to wome^s
busynes and ydlenes, in so much that he went and sat among the women and
told ryddels and fortunes as the children did, and fate and spon yarne at the
dystaffe as the women did.

Now behold how the worthy Hercules is brought to femynyne works thorough the
deceyt of yole to his utter confusyon, the which was wont to be so manly in all
his fears. Now behold, what myschyefe, what maruayles and what folly shites
that the false and subtle women can bring to pass, yea that seems impossible
for to be, that can they do and bring to pass.

depiction of man next to woman who is in bed
A new deceyte done of late.
IN the Ereledom of Henegou dwelt a rich marehau^t the which had a fair
honest young woman to his wife, which merchant was most part from home for
because of his marchaundyse, the which is not good for young women for women
be nyce and slypper, and specially wha^ they seldom see yt they love, for than
lightly truneth there mind. Like as it fortuned with this merchants wife,
for the long being forth of her husband was the cause that her heart was set a
fire in the love of an other young man, with the which she had had long her
pastyme secretly. And this marchaunte had an uncle the which dwelt over against
him and saw every night when the merchant was out of town, an other came to
his house and saw him goo out in the morning again. And so when his uncle
had seen this many times / he went and showed the merchant what rule that
his wife kept when he was from home about his profyt, for wha^ he rode in
cold and in rain, his wife lay with an other young man dalieng in the bed,
when the merchant heard of this, he was not well content and so it fortuned
upon a tune the merchant was at home and shortly made him ready and caused his
horse to be sadled, and said that he would ride a great journey, and yt it
would be long ere that he came again, and so he gave his wite charge of his
house, and that she should se that all things were well and in good order. And
in the morning erly the marchu^t took his journey and rode forth, and in the
evening when it was somewhat dark he came home into the city again, and set
his horse in a stable by and by, and than came to his uncles house for to know
ye troth, and for to watch ye wower to whom his wife had send word that
her husband was out of the town. And when that the clock had smytten.ix. the
young man ca^ walkyng up and down before the merchants house, watyng if
there came any body to the door, and so the young man went walking up and
down to and fro.ii. or.iii. times before the merchants house. The merchant
seeing that, boldly went forth on his uncles house and came to the young man and
said, My mastres said that ye shall go with me here behynd in the barn and
there ye shall abide for a season, for perchance that our master come again,
and so he took the young man and brought him preuely to the barn and locked
the door fast yt he could not come out. And than he went out at the bake side
and came home again to his uncles house, and said ye mouse is in the trap what
is now best to be done? Than said his uncles wife, go and fetch her
friends, that they may see what an honest wife yt ye have. And then the
merchant went and fet his wives father and mother and her two brothers and two
of her systers, and caused them al for to come to his uncles house, and there
he showed unto them what a false hoar yt he had to his wife and how that he
had locked her wower in the barn that he could not come out, and there
desired her friends that they would help to kill the false knave, the which
they all together yt were present promised for to do. And the mean while that
the merchant went for to get her friends together, the gentyl woman his wife
went out and walked too and fro, for to look for her lover and so as she
went up and down, she came to fore the barn unknown to her that her lover
was there, and when that he heard that there was one about the barn, he
encouraged him self and said, who is there? the gentyl woman (his wife being
al a frayde a^swered and said I am here your lover, how came ye hither? The
yongma^ said, your servant brought me hither, and said yt ye said yt I should
tarry here, for perchance yt your husbond should come to night again. Alas said
his wife, yt is not so, I am afraid it has been my husband. Tha^ said the
yongema^, let me out or else I will break the barn, Tha^ said yt ge^tilwoma^ I
require yt do not so, for tha^ were I utterly dishonested and utterly shamed
for ever, and she could not let him out for she had not the key, and so she
went shortly into the house and there she found a bu^del of old keys, and
among ye same keys she found a key yt opened the barn door, and so she let
out her lover, and in the same barn she went and set an ass for to save her
honesty, and than locked the barn fast again, and with a kiss they departed
from the^s and went to his rest And when that all her friends were assembled
in his uncles house than they took with them burning torches and other
lyghtes, and so they came before the merchants door with halberdes and
swords and knocked at the door, and incontinent the gentylwoma^ let them in
and maruayled greatly and said, O my friend, what meneth this yt ye come so
late here by night. And inco^tine^t the merchant her husband took his fist
and beat her that her nose and mouth ran a blood, and said thou whore thou
shall know anon wherefore. And so forth they went al together to the barn and
there they stood with halberdes and naked swords for to kill the young man with
all. And the merchant said to his wife unlock the barn. The gentylwoman
said, I never had the key, the key has evermore be^ with your keys. And tha^ he
fet his keys and unlocked the barn. And wha^ the ass saw all the light: he
cried very dredfully, in so much yt they were afraid, and saw yt it was an ass
that stood there of the which the friends were sore amoued and said, you art a
foul knave and a ribalde and a dishonester of women and falls lieng traitor,
and if he had not ron a way: her two fysters would have killed him. And the
merchant seeing yt was whole ashamed and wist not what to say, but sought for
grace and mercy. And so after that: they led their life in peace and
concord, And the betrayer was ever more hated and so if one see and know any
such things, let him hold his peace and be still, and let gods water go
over gods land and than ye shall have no mysse thank.

The conclusyon,
I Should have written much more of the deceit of women, for there was ye
without number in the pen And for because that it should not be to redyous for
the reder, and that the women should not be dysco^tent, and also it is against
my own heart, for the conversation of the women is so sweet, so lovely and so
delectable to behold, for without women may none be full made, further, there
as is no women is none made. Also beside yt (as we find written, the face and
beauty of the women kyndeleth the heart of man. Therefore all ye good honest
women, and vyrgins be not myscontent, for yt I have written here is of the
untrue and noughty hariots, the which seek nothing but good chere, and
concupysce^ce of the flesh, the which is the way to hell, from the which our
mercyful lord Jesus Christ defend us. Amen,

FINIS,
Imprynted at London in Paul's Church yard at the sign of the Lamb, by
Abraham Vele,


