DIALOGICALL Discourses of SPIRITS and DEVILS. Declaring their proper essence,
natures, dispositions, and operations: their possessions, and dispossessions:
with other the appendantes, peculiarly appertaining to those special points.
Very conducent, and pertinent to the timely procuring of some Christian
conformity in judgment: for the peaceable compounding of the late sprung
controversies concerning all such intricate and difficult doubts.

By JOHN DEACON. JOHN WALKER.
Preachers.

If there shall arise among you, a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and give
thee a sign or wonder: and the sign or wonder which he have told thee come
to pass, saying: Let us go after other gods which thou know not, and let us
serve them. Thou shall not hearken to the words of that prophet, or to that
dreamer of dreams: for, the Lord your God proves you, to know whether ye love
the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul.

Deuteronomy. 13. 1. 2. 3. If any shall say unto you, Lo here is Christ, or there is
Christ; Believe them not therefore, for there shall arise false Christ's, and
false Prophets, and shall show great signs and woonders: so that if it were
possible, they should deceive the very elect.

Matthew. 24. 23. 24. Aug. De Trinitate. Quisquis audit, vel legit, vbi pariter
certus est, pergat mecum: vbi pariter haesitat, quaerat mecum: vbi errorem suum
cognoscit, redeat mecum: vbi meum, reuocet me. Ita ingrediamur simul charitatis
viam: tendentes ad eum, de quo scriptum est, quaerite faciem eius semper.

That is,

Whosoever hears, or reads, where he is persuaded with me, let him proceed
with me: where he is doubtful, let him inquire with me: where he acknowledges
his error, let him return with me: where he espieth mine, let him recall me.
So shall we walk jointly together, in the way of charity: going foreward
toward him, of whom it is written, Seek ye his face evermore.

Propugnaculum vitae patientia.

LONDINI, Impensis Geor. Bishop. 1601.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable and righteous Judges, Sir THOMAS EGERTON knight, Lord
Keeper of the great Seal of England: Sir JOHN POPHAM knight, Lord chief
Justice of England: Sir EDMUND ANDERSON knight, Lord chief Justice of the
common Pleas: and Sir WILLIAM PERIAM knight, Lord chief Baron of the
Exchequer, with other the most reverend Judges of the common Laws of England:
I. D. and I. W. do heartily wish all saving knowledge in Jesus Christ.
RIGHT Honorable Lords, you may not possibly be ignorant of the late-bred
broils not long since brewed and broached at Nottingham, by means of Summers
his supposed possession and dispossession: especially, those selfsame broils
being eftsoons revived since, and now also (by what privilege we wotte not)
so publicly reported in Print, as their flying rumors do mightily
overrun the whole Realm, yea, even to the uttermost borders thereof. We
two, did undoubtedly assure our selves that the holy regard of Religion; of
loyal obedience to her Majesty's Princely prerogative: of the public peace of
the Church: of due reverence to her Majesty's positive Laws: of dutiful
submission to the definitive sentence of Justice: of common humanity toward
the persons of men: yea, and of a careful continuance of their honest
reputations; would something have restrained, if not utterly inhibited the
parties (especially convicted) from the untimely attempting of any such
unorderly course, as now (by their newly published Pamphletes) they have most
undutifully blazed abroad. And therefore, the Christian care of that their
hoped moderate carriage, has caused us hitherto even purposely to suppress
this following Treatise, which (almost three years since) we had even carefully
^ompyled, as a christian counter-checke to al such unwonted occurrents: yea,
and this our former* suppressing thereof, proceeded (we assure you) from a
felow-like fear of procuring untimely disgrace, and of adding affliction to
the principal parties themselves. Esteeming it much better, to bury our
precedent labors in the grave of forgetfulness: then (by any their needless
publishing) to procure a present disturbance, or to hatch a subsequent broyle
in the Church, by pestering the same with such impertinent, obscure and
needless paradoxes, as in their books are broched abroad. Howbeit, perceiving
the principal parties, with other their underhand favorites (as it were in a
settled pertinacie) not only to hold all those their former fantastical toies
with tooth and nail, but (which more is) thus preposterously, and (perhaps
also with the secret support of their underhand Favorites) thus undutifully to
pursue the same with such public disgrace of public persons, notwithstanding
any the precedent countermaunds, or definitive determinations of public
authority: we verily thought, and our own conscience did witness against us in
the presence of God: that we might justly be deemed too too irreligious toward
the Lord: disloyal to her Majesty's Princely prerogative: overmuch careless
of public peace: exceeding remiss concerning the positive Laws of our land:
most derogatorious to the definitive sentence of justice: monstrous inhumane
toward the persons of men: yea, altogether careless of our honest
reputations: if that light, which the Lord in mercy (we hope) has revealed
unto us, Math. 5. 11.
should now any longer Lie buried under a bushel, and not rather be set on a
candlestick, for the better enlightening of all in the house concerning these
intricate and hidden mysteries. More especially now at this present, when the
fearful infection of those their factious proceedings, so universally, and so
dangerously over spreads it self: not unlike to the fretting Gangrena, 2.
Tim. 2. 17.
or incurable Canker.

Experienced Antiquaries (right honorable Lords) do very well know, to what
dangerous heads such si^ly beginnings, have (by careless negligence) grown in
continuance of time: and therefore, even the very primarie appearances of
every such fearful occurrent, would be the more warelie and more wisely nipt
in the head, yea, and the streaming courses thereof the more heedfully
intercepted and stopped in time, for fear of ouerflowing the young buds of our
holy Religion. For these special respects we have now proffered our labors
to public view, and do very humbly importune your Honors patronage, and
favorable protection for them: so far forth especially as they fully accord
with the infallible truth of the Scriptures.

We protest (right Honorable Lords) that we our selves (in penning this
Treatise) did even purposely resolve with our souls, to banish all partial
and private respects from out of our breasts: as may (by the matter and method
thereof) very plainly appear to any indifferent Reader. Yea we wholly
devoted our selves, to pen only such special points as other writers report
and record in their several works; and which in our own consciences (before
the presence of God) we are hitherto persuaded are undoubtedly true: desiring
with all our hearts to be better and more fully informed (wherein we happily may
err) by the holy endeavors of such as the Lord has in mercy enlightened
with a more sincere and sanctified knowledge concerning these points. The
special motives for our thus dedicating to your good Honors, all jointly
together this published Treatise: are these that follow in order.

1 First, your wisdoms having heretofore, very orderly enquired, into, and
iudicially determined the undoubted truth of those the aforesaid occurrents: we
verily persuaded our selves, that as you are therefore the most able, so would
you be also the more willing, to approve, or disprooue of our labors herein,
according to those your former proceedings, and the holy directions of the
eternal God.

2 The adverse parties themselves, having (partly by their published Pamphlets,
and partly also, by their private solicitours) very often, and earnestly
labored, either all, or the most of your Honors to some favorable regard of
their languishing cause: we in like manner (esteeming your wisdoms the most
competent Judges herein) do therefore refer the due trial of our travels,
much rather to your Honors, then to any her Majesty's high Commissioners in
Ecclesiastical causes: partly, because, they (being themselves esteemed but
parties herein, and openly challenged of unequal proceedings) might happily be
deemed by the adverse part but incompetent Judges: and partly, for that your
good Honors especially, being every way free from such exception, may
therefore, become the more willing to hear and determine the truth of these
matters.

3 Moreover, considering eftsoons with our selves, that, those often, and
earnest solicitings of parties on both sides (they arguing especially the
controuerted causes with such flat oppositions) might happily but breed in your
Honorable breasts, some scruple of conscience about the undoubted truth of such
intricate questions: we did therefore account it our bounden duty, to yield
your good Honors our holiest supplies, for the better enlightening of your
present judgments in the hidden mysteries of those cloudie occurrents.

4 Lastly, your good Honors next under her supereminent highness, enjoying a
primarie subordinate power concerning the authentical hearing and determining
of such and so shameful disorders as do daily discover themselves in those
disordered persons, who seek (in such a malcontented humor) to uphold, and
maintain those quaint matters in question: we were the rather induced to
tender our travels to your Honorable protections. That so, your good Honors (by
your approved authority) might, the more authentically command the adverse
parties themselves, forthwith to desist from their former factious courses,
and humbly submit to the truth of the Treatise, it being substantiallie
sound: or otherwise, in more dutiful sort to address their holiest endeavors
to some sounder, and honester manner of answering, then hitherto they have
showed to the world.

We look every hour (right Honorable Lords to be notoriously branded with
the black coal of unchristian reproaches, such and so scandalous are the
cankred mouths of some clamorous companions: who (not unlike to the benumming
Torpedo) do purposely endeavor by their intoxicated and most slanderous
reuilings, to astonish the very hands of so many as presume to put pen to
the paper, against any their irregular practices. Seeing therefore it is
utterly impossible the Leopard should alter his spots, Ier. 13. 23.
we do assuredly expect when their Pulpits shall ring out, and their night
crowing Pamphlets proclaim to the world, that such two, are quite fallen from
the brethren and their cause, they know not well what: that they are become
Apostates, reuolters, backsliders, formalistes, and such as fawn on the state:
and this only, for that we favor not forsooth, these their Cabalisticall
conceits and fantastical fooleries. Well, whatsoever they prate, we will
undergo it with patience, 1. Cor. 4. 3. 4.
not passing one pin, to be judged of them, or of any man's judgment else:
no, we judge not our own selves. For, we know nothing by our own selves: and
yet are we not thereby justified: but he that judges us both is the Lord. And
as for that their odious name of Formalists: wherewith especially they sport
themselves most in branding their brethren, we regard not therein their
virulent reuilings one rush: having (in a more mature deliberation)
experimented long since, the grave council of Drusius to sound very sutablie
with the sacred Scriptures, saying thus, Esto potius cauda Leonum, quam caput
Vulpium. Hoc est, da operam, vt potius sis postremus inter viros generosos:
quam primus inter callidos versipelles. Ioh. Drusij Adag. 2. Haras in libro
Auoth. In Sanhedrin. edit. Basiliens: cap. 10.
Be thou rather the very tail of Lions, then the head of Foxes. That is, do
thou give thy endeavor, to be rather the last, or the lowest among noble, and
gentillike persons: then the first, or the highest, among that base crew of
crafty undermining companions, and here we have set down our rest.

Having hitherto (right Honorable Lords) very briefly displaied our maine
purpose concerning the first penning and publishing of this following Treatise:
we do now (in all humble submission) refer our selves and our suits to your
approved considerations, and your good Honors to the almighty his holy
directions, in this one and all other your judicial proceedings. So be it.

Your good Honors very humbly a^ command in the Lord: and the Lord his
vnwoorthiest on earth, JOHN DEACON. JOHN WALKER.


To the godly affected Reader, I. D. and I. W. do heartily wish the howerly
increase of a true saving knowledge, by the revelation of Jesus Christ. So be
it.
GOod Christian Reader, we do (in this following treatise) present to thy
public consideration, our private opinion concerning the undoubted possession
and dispossession of Devils. Assuring our selves to gain forthwith thy holy
approbation herein: so far forth especially, as thou perceiuest the same to
fall forth pat in every point with the infallible truth of the Lord. The
original occasion of this our lately attempted enterprise: did primarily
proceed from those late unwonted occurrents which accidentally fell forth in
our country, about the supposed possession and dispossession of Summers. An
accident (we do freely confess) no less notoriously known throughout the
whole land then diversely entertained, according to the variable and diverse
affections of men. The maine argument of the treatise it self, is a matter (we
assure thee) not rashly resolved upon, but seriously held and maintained (by
the one of us especially) for many years past: as five hundred yet living are
able to witness, and the other of us also (in an experimented knowledge) both
can and does testify the same by these presents. For the very first news of
this newly supposed rare accident, recalling us both afresh to some serious
consideration of our former set studies: did so diversely affect our minds with
a diverse and contrary judgment (the one very constantly auouching, the
other no less confidently impugning that falsely pretended action) as we both
became resolute (with tooth and nail) to try forth the certain truth or
untruth at the least, of our sundry conceits concerning the matter in
question. Yea, and (which more is) we so deeply devoted our selves to the
timely support of those our several opinions: as no one labor (how loathsome
soever) was yrkesome unto us, which tended that way, but in the least show of
appearance. For what one Library was vnransackt, or learned brother
vnconferred withal wheresoever we came: to further us both in those several
points we severally held? What one journey was refused, or present toil
unattempted, to try forth the sound truth of such flying reports as ran all
abroad: and all this for the more enabling, and the better furnishing of us to
that our former determined skirmish? What sundry and often recourses the one
to the other? What intercourse of writings? What mutual conferences? What hot
disputes? What arguings? What answerings? What replies, and reioynders: or ever
we could fitly accord about the several questions propounded between us? And
(which is more to be considered) the contention it self concerning these
matters, Act. 15. 37. 38.
it became no less violent then that between Paul and Barnabas, about the
having of John Mark in their company: in so much as we eftsoons departed
asunder the one from the other. Howbeit that only wise God, who turns the
infirmities of his servants to the furtherance of his glory, he did so
moderate our minds concerning the action in hand, as we both of us fully
resolved to stand fast to our tacklings: and thereupon also (by an
interchangeable covenant) did forthwith conclude to continue this newly
attempted controversy, Cicero.
until (by the very sway of truth) the one be enforced, dare manus, to hold
forth the hand, and submit to the other. And herein also we found every
hour, the favorable assistance of Gods holy spirit for the timely suggesting
of many strange and unwonted matters, which have not hitherto been usually
heard of concerning the question it self. With these many meditations and
several conferences we were wholly taken up, till the very truth it self (as
we verily believe) began (after many debatings and bickerings) to break forth
like the sun in his strength, 1. Cor. 1. 10. 11.
Whereupon also, we eftsoons began to speak both of us but one and the
selfsame things: and (which more is) being now knit together in one mind and
one judgment concerning these several matters, we determined forthwith to
put down in writing, whatsoever had deliberately passed between us. Purposing
withal to use the private contemplation of these our primarie labors; as a
provoking sharp ^pur to prick us eftsoons an end unto the timely
undertaking of the like private conference, in some other matters else of like
weighty importance. That (being by this means sequestered quite from all
secular cares) we might the more freely employ our whole minds to such secret
meditations as should further the timely discharge of our several duties.
Perceiving moreover by the timely dispatch of this one intricate matter: that
two conscionable ministers conioyning their studies (being both of them
industrious and bent wholly in heart, Eccles. 1. 12. 13.
to search and to find forth wisdom by althings that are done under heaven)
might (by such mutual endeavors) very easily accomplish many profitable
works for themselves and some others. Howbeit, for the putting over of these
our private labors to the public veiw of the world, Reasons for the hitherto
suppressing of this present treatis^.
that (we assure thee) was never in our thoughts at the first: no, we did fully
resolve to keep these our conferences, from the sight of all others, save
only our selves, for these following reasons.

First, we were greatly discouraged from the publication hereof in an only
regard of our proper imperfections, for the skillful determining of such
intricate doubts: acknowledging our manifold wants to be such and so great, as
we were mightily afraid to put the due trial of our skill upon terms. And for
this cause we durst not attempt the tendering of our own, but hourly expected
from some others of more maturity; a book better balanced, for the timely
encou^tring with such late bred broiles as concerned especially those unwonted
occurrents.

Secondly, our said purpose for publishing this treatise, was also eftsoons
nipt in the head; by often recounting the newfangled niceness of this present
age: wherein, nothing almost, is now pleasing to any (especially the curious
companions) but that which (being every way concluded first in scholasticall
form) is also, very finely flourished over with a Ciceronian vernish. And
therefore perceiving these our labors to come short of such reckoning: we
verily persuaded our selves, that, this plain coin of ours, would hardly
pass with those cinicall censurers, for current good payment.

Thirdly, the maturity and ripeness of many ministers, and others among whom
we converse: was not the least stoppage unto us. For, we are not ignorant, that
men (now a days) being very acute in conceit, and too too much ready (with
eagle-like eyes) to pry exactly into any thing published in print: are every
way able, and apt enough also to censure (so sharply as may be) the published
labors of others, how lazy or leaden-heeled soever in laying forth their own
proper talents to the greatest advantage.

Fourthly, our compassionable care to profit, and our exceeding great
loathenesse to prejudice the parties them selves, or to aggrauate (with the
weight of one finger) the present afflictions of those whom this treatise of
ours more especially concerns: has hitherto forestalled our purpose from
publishing our present labors. Being in very great fear that these our
precious balmes (how sovereign soever) would rather break their heads, Psalm.
141. 5. Luc. 10. 34.
then bind up their bleeding wounds: the physical composition of our oil and
our wine, it is so untoothsome a triacle to their distempered humor, and
unsavory taste.

Lastly, we have thus long been held back from making our conferences common to
others, in an especial regard of that christian conceit which we have hitherto
had of their christian conformity to a more dexterity: together with the
needlesnes (as we thought) in publishing any other new matter concerning this
argument. Both, because authority it self had seized upon them long since: and
for that also the printed report of the commissioners judicial proceedings
against them, might (as we verily thought) have been fully sufficient (for many
respects) to quiet their passionate spirits, and to calm the turbulent
tempests arising from thence. For, if the good man of God (he having a far
better cause and calling then these men, 2. Chro. 15. 13. 14.
to persist and hold out in his purpose attempted) did notwithstanding, very
duetifully submit to Amaziah his princely command concerning his silencing: we
verily persuaded our selves, that Qu^ene Elizabeth's authentical commission
concerning ecclesiastical persons and causes, (in due regard of their duties
to God and her Majesty) might have enioined them, both to lay their hand on
their mouth, and to put a present end to their further proceedings, in a
practice especially so directly opposite to her princely prerogative so
authentically debated, and the same so iudicially also determined. Lo, these
(in effect) were the maine reasons them selves which hitherto with held us
both, from profering our labors to the public veiw of the world.

If happily it seem strange unto any, that we should now so suddenly desist
from such a determined purpose; it may please them to consider afresh, that,
for as much as some malefactors (notwithstanding their palpable crimes) in a
malcontented humor, do covertly undermine and nibble in corners, the
honorable credit of her Majesty's high commission: therefore busy must needs
have a band. And, in that only respect (besides the importunities of such as
have eftsoons considerately perused the work) we also our own selves have
had our latter cogitations, Reasons, for the now publishing of this present
treatise.
concerning some seasonable manifestation thereof at this present, and that
more especially for these following reasons.

First, our hearty true zeal to the glory of God, the same also entermingled
eftsoons with some christian care for many poor ignorant souls, as also,
with an unfeigned love of that truth, Tertul. in Apologetico.
quae nihil veretur nisi absco^di, which fears nothing more deeply, then to
be fearfully entombed in the gulf of forgetfulness: do, even peremptorily
provoke us both, to proceed recto pectore, with all integrity and uprightness
of heart, in the now publishing of this our intended enterprise.

Secondly, we are so much the more willingly drawn to exhibit our travels to
public view: by how much we do now very plainly perceive, that, our
Antagonists printed opinion, concerning the perpetuity of such supernatural
and miraculous operations in these days of the Gospel: does fearfully shake,
and very shrewdly undermine the certeinty and undoubted assurance of that
sacred religion which we all jointly profess. For, if our said religion
stands perpetually in need to be eftsoons confirmed afresh, by the
extraordinary seal of any such extraordinary or miraculous actions? How then
should we certainly know when the undoubted assurance thereof is certainly
and sufficiently confirmed unto us? Since that thing which eftsoons admits
such essential supplies: does implicatiuely import some manner of
imperfection, in some show at the least.

Thridly, we were also the rather persuaded thereto, in an especial regard of
that fearful effect which must necessarily succeed so absurd a conceit. For
this their pestilent opinion which concerns the working of miracles in these
days of the Gospel, what does it else (in effect) but injuriously put upon
faithful professors, Math. 24. 23. 24.
the lively cognizance, Luc. 17. 31.
the liuerie or badge of that Antichristian brood, 2. These. 2. 9. 10.
to whom the unwonted accomplishment of such lying signs and woonders (by the
special permission of God) does peculiarly and properly appertain from time
to time. And therefore, that any true professor of the Gospel, should now
appropriate that self same power to himself which only is proper to
Antichrist: (...): Hieron. de illustribus.
aut Plato Philonissat, aut Philo Platonissat: either the Protestant he plays
kindly the Papist, or the Papist he plays correspondently the Protestant at
least: for in this special point, the one is not apparently discerned from the
other.

Fourthly, we were now the more forward that way, because this their
pestiferous opinion, does offer directly a very shrewd check to such other
very reverend Preachers, as either cannot or dare not (upon any the like
extraordinary occasion) adventure (hand over head) upon any the like
exordinarie course. For had not these preposterous practices with a provident
circumspection been warily prevented in time: surely, the vulgar sort (whose
shallow reach concerning especially such intricate cases, Lucianus.
neque coelum neque terram attingere potest, and whose censure herein is like
to herb John in the pottage) they would (notwithstanding their wants
whatsoever) vno ore, with one mouth (as it were) have cried forth thus, M.
Darel, M. Darell, he is (...), the only D^uiner of signs and of woonders: his
ministry shall have my only applause. Yea, and (which more is) the very
country Dames they would with their tatling toongs have told it in Gath, 2.
Sam. 1. 20.
that M. Darel alone he has Delphicum gladium, Aristotoleles.
the double edged Delphicall sword: both to guard the good Christian, and to
girde up the Devil in a corner. As for our silie Sir John he is (...),
Aristophanes.
Asinus portans mysteria, an ass in a friars cowle, a cipher in Algurisme: or
rather, a leaden sword in a silver scabbard. And thus the whole country they
would (in continuance of time) very fearfully have fallen unto the Corinthian
factions, 1. Cor. 3. 4. 7.
some holding of Paul, and some of Apollos: where as it is the Lord alone who
gives the increase.

Fifthly, an apparent necessity for the now publishing of this or some other
like treatise, very apparently breaks forth to the view of the world: in an
especial regard of the great inconvenience, or rather the most palpable
absurdity ensuing so absurd an opinion. For, if that with such other supposed
miraculous actions, are now (as them selves very fondly avouch) effected by the
only virtue and power of the true justifying faith: what wonderful scruple of
conscience might that so absurd a conceit procure to such silly poor souls,
as (being eftsoons persuaded of their justifying faith) can at no hand effect
the like admirable actions? Considering especially, that one and the selfsame
faith, cannot possibly but have (in some measure at least) the very selfsame
effects.

Sixthly, we are now the more foreward in publishing these our late labors
abroad to the world; as well, to intimate our hearty desires for the timely
satisfying of others, about the fearful possessions, and dispossessions of
devils, as also (if this our proper opinion be deemed but doubtful) to procure
from some others of better ability, a more absolute censure, or judicial
determination concerning these so intricate and doubtful occurrents.

Seventhly, we do now the rather exhibit these our present conferences to the
consideration of all: that we might (by this means) more especially make
known to the world, our christian care for the timely recovery of the
principal parties them selves: who (having hitherto, Jude 22.
but lightly regarded the christian compassions of such as have carefully
sought their christian conversion) must now (of necessity) be saved with fear,
Jude 23.
through a more violent withdrawing of them from the fire, according to
Ben-Sirah his sacred advise, saying thus as follows. (...), Ben-Sirah in suis
prouerbijs. Item, citatum inuenies in Medras Mesle.
idest. Sapientem nutu; et stultum fuste. Correct the wise with a nodde: and,
the unwise with a club. Signifying thereby unto us, that, whereas all manner of
lenity is forthwith to be used toward those that are tractable: the knottie
or knurrie hard logs, do crave strong iron wedges, and many hard strokes to
bring them in good order.

Eighthly, we were also the more willing in this our determined purpose, the
rather to put some present good end (if we possibly might) to the indirect
dealings, and preposterous proceedings of such as have preposterously taken
upon them those preposterous practices. Who (being by all outward appearance of
truth, and perhaps in their own conscience to) very iudicially convinced for
gross malefactors: do notwithstanding all this very malapertly endeavor to
manage their own contradictorie courses, against the authentical
countermaunds of her Majesty's lawful authority. Eccles. 10, 20. 1. Pet. 2.
13. 17.
Yea, and this also with most apparent deprauings, disgracings, reuilings and
tauntings. Moreover, with lying, with cogging and circumuenting devises.
Whereas Lady truth, the more simple she is, the more shining she is: at no
hand affecting any such bumbasted brauados, to support or bear up her
unanswerable edicts, how base or how simple soever in outward appearance.

Ninthly, we were lead in like manner to this late public proceeding, in an
especial regard of our wonderful lothnes that so many palpable untruths, and
such pestiferous opinions (as in those their published Pamphlets and printed
Apologies are broached but lately abroad, to the dangerous bewitching and
desperate enchanting of many poor ignorant unstable souls) should so pass
underhand in the public veiw of tagge and ragge, without the timely
controlement of any: or run abroad (as they do) from hand to hand for good
current payment, or ever they be tried with the touchstone of truth, and
before they be thoroughly waighed with the approved waights of the sanctuary:
or not having upon them some discretiue stamp or discerning censure at least.

Lastly, our loyal obedience, and conscionable duties toward the timely
upholding of the Magistrates authentical authority and credit, which these
men (in all the rest, more especially, in that their very last undutiful
deprauing Pamphlets) like petie young presses, vnderminingly have published in
print, without any her Majesty's authentical privilege: was not (we assure
thee) the least motive in duty, (howsoever the last in degree) to this our
lately pretended purpose. The premises therefore exactly considered, and the
reasons themselves being duly perpended in a more dutiful regard of her
Majesty's supereminent authority over al persons and causes in Christ: we doubt
not at all, but that (notwithstanding our former resolutions concerning the
respective suppressing of these our private endeavors) the wiser sort, will
very willingly dispense with their publishing now at this present especially:
wherein (it may shrewdly be feared) the wild trees of the Forest do
covertly combine themselves of a very set purpose to make the proud
bramble-bush some mighty Magnifico in their secret assemblies. Judge. 9. 8. etc.
These occasions considered with a right respect, we doubt not at all, but,
that this our now published Treatise, will be deemed as a word delivered in
due season: to so many especially, as do sincerely affect the glory of God:
as do (with a provident circumspection) endeavor to propagate the Gospel of
Christ: Psalm. 122. 6. 7.
briefly, as do conscionablie pray for, and dutifullie pursue that
prosperity of Jerusalem, Psalm. 85. 10. 11.
wherein righteousness and peace have kissed each other. As for the rest, we
weight every hour when their lavish toongs will be lashing abroad, and their
intemperate pens will be Printing in corners, King Achab his peremptory
proclamation against us: exclaming in their outrage, and crying unto us, 1.
King. 21. 20.
Have you found us, 1. King. 22. 8.
O our enemies, have you found us indeed. And will you in no wise prophecy any
other but evil unto us?

Well, whatsoever will be the issue of that their intemperate humor, all their
exceptions (how virulent soever) they must be such (we are sure) as concern
either our persons: or our cause at the least.

Their exceptions against our persons, they must respectiuelie concern, either
our skill in learning: or, our carriage of life. Touching any our great skill of
learning, we both know, and do freely confess (as before) that we are (even in
our own eyes) minimi Apostolorum, the very last and the least of ten
thousand: that we were borne out of due time, 1. Cor. 15. 8. 9.
and are utterly unworthy the neme of public preaohers. Howbeit, by the grace
of God, we are that we are, and his graces (we hope) they were not bestowed
upon us in vain. Besides all this, the more unskillful we be for such public
writing, the more able our adversaries are (with their exceeding great skill)
to answer whatsoever we write.

As for our carriage of life, their exceptions that way, they must have a more
special relation, either to our precedent: or to our now present practices at
least.

Our precedent practices (when they were at the woorst) they were none other
then those that do ordinarily attend upon the corrupt nature of men: and
therefore howsoever they themselves (in any Pharisaicall conceit of their own
proper strength) may happily imagine themselves to be able to stand, Luc. 18. 9.
11. 12.
let them (if they be wise) beware least they fall. Howbeit, if for any matters
past (either truly known, 1. Cor. 10. 12.
or uncharitably suspected) the vile venim of their venomous spirits would
swell their cankred hearts in sunder, unless (after their accustomed manner
with all men) they should (...), Beza annotat. in Math. 1. 19.
expose our persons to public reproaches: we will very willingly undergo
whatsoever disgrace the Lord (for this cause) allotteth unto us. And (which
more is) we will with patience endure, 2. Sam. 16. 9. Aristophanes.
that these furious dead dogs do (...). Canem excoriatam excoriare: stay
afresh our newly flaine carcasses, and add affliction to our affliction.
Assuring our selves that our gracious God who gives them this leave to curse
poor David afresh (so soon as proud railing Shimei has spit forth his
venomous spite to the full, 2. Sam. 16. 9. 10. 11. 12.
and vented the uttermost force of his limited fury) he will then (in a great
mercy) behold our afflictions this day, and bestow some present new blessing
upon us.

Touching any our now present practices (howsoever the common calumniatours of
men may happily measure the proportion of our steps, by their own proper
footings, and so ouerreache us a large inch at the least) we do here in the
honor of Gods holy name (with the protestation of our hearts) very freely
acknowledge, that, albeit we our own selves do know more by our selves then
all the world else: yet (we praise our good God) we do (at this present) know
nothing by our selves that may make us afraid to confront the very holiest of
them all to their face; 1. Cor. 4. 4.
though (notwithstanding all this) we are not therefore justified in the
presence of him who judges the heart. In the mean time, we think it some part
of brotherly duty, to forewarne all those our calumnious accusers of this;
namely, that if they still make it their special glory to undergo the
gung-farmers office, or if they do still take a singular pleasure to be
rifling and raking in every man's channel even up to their elbowes: may happily
(in the end) defile their fair fingers, and procure a foul savor to their
own proper persons. And therefore we do friendly advise them, to desist from
those cullion-like courses in time: or if (because antiquum obtinet Crito)
their tatling toongs must needs he tampring that way in corners at least: then,
let them begin first (as we say) ab ipso lare, Aristides. Math. 7. 5.
to be holy at home: let them first make a Saint of their own proper shrine:
yea let them first pull forth the beam from their own, or ever they
entermeddle with the little moate in their poor^ brothers eye. Otherwise, they
should show them selves very like to the slouenly barber, who (being to to
curious in cutting, in washing and in trimming of others) has no care at all
how deformedly he seems him self. Or, like to the curious eye, which very
readily espieth the least spot that may be in any one member (...) body: but,
beholds not the foul ugly blemishes it has in it self. Briefly, else
should they declare themselves to be the hundred eied Argos in other men's
matters: but, the one eied polyphemus in their proper affairs: according to
the old rustic verses saing thus.

In rebus proprijs ijt Argus in Polyphemum.
Rebus in alterius, transit Polyphemus in Argum.
Proud Argus, he plaieth Polyphemus at home:
Polyphemus plaieth Argus abroad like a mome.
Briefly, let them withal assure them selves, In Gemara cap. 6.
that howsoever we two do determine with Drusius and say, Item in Glossa
Thalmudica.
Audire praestat, quam dicere maledicta: It is much better to here evil of our
selves, then to speak any evil of another) yet, eftsoons it so comes to
pass, vt, qui pergit quae vult dicere, quae non vult audiet, that he which
takes pleasure to speak what he please, he must now and then be content to
hear what he would not: according to our english proverb which says: In
Elie, id est, in the height of his pride.
qui mock at mockabitur: he that mocketh others in Elie, shall be mocked him
self at Abbington. And all this (in the just judgment of God) is but lex
talionis, At Abington, id est, on the gallows that Northhamptonshire feolons
are hanged upon.
the rendering of like for like.

Their exceptions more especially concerning our cause, they are such as
respect either the matter it self, or our manner of handling the same.

The matter it self whatsoever, we do freely offer to their public view and
are very well willing the truth thereof; be tried down to the branne. In the
trial whereof, if happily it fall forth to be either hay, or straw, or
stubble, 1. Cor. 3. 12. 13.
and so by consequence become utterly unfit for the building in hand: we are
content that the same be forth with rejected of all, as a roauing rapsody
unworthy the reading.

Touching our manner of handling the cause, their exceptions that way must
necessarily be such as concern the very form it self: or our order in
following the same.

First for the form it self, the same (you see) is Dialogicall: the which
form (we are sure) is no less ancient then authentically approved of all,
and therefore we know no one reason as yet, why we also our selves may not
justly challenge the privilege thereof if we please. If any may happily
imagine we have purposely propounded to our selves this dialogizing manner of
dealing of a very set purpose: to the end, that by such a prosopopoeia, or
faining of persons, we might gain greater liberty to propound what seems
good to our selves, and to girde at whose persons we please: our answer is
this, that, the speakers produced in this present discourse, they are such as
directly concern the matters in question: and therefore, no man may justly be
offended thereat, but he only that is tainted with those erroneous absurdities,
which under that name, are so covertly touched. Neither may any be justly
grieved, that we have put down many more objections, then our adversaries
would ever have made: for therein, we have rather furthered, then foundered
the free passage of their cause whatsoever. Yea, much more for mannaging their
cause, is propounded by us, then has hitherto been heard from themselves, or
from any their favorites: although we have purposely ploughed with their hey
four from time to time, Judge. 14. 18.
that we might be the more ready in reading their riddle. And therefore, they
have no reason to be grieved against us for any thing, unless happily for
this: namely, for that (to spare them a labor) we have framed them their
answer aforehand, and buttoned up their lips, or ever they begin to speak.

Lastly, for our order in following the cause: we wotte not well what to
answer, before we hear what they object. In the mean time, this we plainly
protest; that if we have been to brief: it was because we principally
effected thy ease. If we have been too tedious: the more was our toil. If we
have been to soft: it was in regard of thy holy sincerity. If we have been
something too sharp: it was in respect of the parties unsavory taste. If we
have been to mild: it was purposely done to break ( with Goats blood) their
Adamant hearts. If we have been too bitter: that bitterness proceeds not from
our manner of handling, but is only in the bad matter of their humor,
apprehending the same. If we have been too remiss in our answers: it was,
because we found themselves over retchlesse in all their replies. If we have
been too rough in reproouing: it was only, because experience has taught
us, that the restie dull Jade, does stand in most need of the roughest rider
of all, to curry his coat. Briefly, 1. Cor. 9. 22.
whatsoever we have been: for their own, and thy sake we have been the same,
as knows best the searcher of all hearts. For as we have set down nothing but
that, which (before God) we are hitherto persuaded is true: so have we labored
with all our endeavors, to draw thee and them to the timely participation
thereof. And therefore, let matter and manner be what it will be: let us find
this effect, and we desire no favor at all in their answer. Only, this is
all we require for the present: namely, that the Answerer would put down his
own name to his answer: that so, we our selves in replying, and they in
impugning, may mutually know our proper Antagonists, which we hold a very
dutiful, an upright, and honest proceeding. Otherwise, we may justly imagine,
that they do either distrust their own cause: or stand in some fear of
discredit concerning the same. This course (gentle Reader) if happily our
night-birds refuse, and yet notwithstanding will covertly flutter their wings,
and keep a vengeable coil in Conuenticles and corners, like the Owl in an
Iuie bush that dares not endure the birds of the day: then (for thy further
satisfaction herein) do thou eftsoons propound to the parties themselves and
their favorites whatsoever, these following Queres.

1 Let it first be enquired, Queres, concerning the public privilege, for
Printing, and publishing Books.
whether our gracious Queen Elizabeth has absolute authority from God (for
the timely preventing of errors, of schisms, and of factions, as also, for
the happy continuance of public peace) to establish in any her princely
Dominions an uniform order; that, no one Book, Pamphlet, or Paper whatsoever
shall be published in Print, before the same be exactly reuiewed by some
special persons deputed thereunto, and have also a public privilege from
under their hands for such public passage?

2 Whether all true hearted subjects (even in conscience toward God and her
Majesty) be not very strictly bound to a precise observation of such an
established order: and that therefore, when any erroneous or offensive opinion
shall pass from the Press with public privilege; whether the party
himself who espieth and desires presently to encounter therewith, be not
(before he shall publikelie proceed to such public encounter) bound in
conscience and duty, first to intimate that error to public authority: that
by such intimation, either the author of the error may be made to retract it,
or the party enforming, at least may obtain a special Commission for some
orderly proceeding in the public confutation thereof.

3 Lastly, whether such, and so many Books, pamphlets, or papers whatsoever,
as heretofore, or hereafter do covertly pass underhand from the Press in a
contrary course: be not (in an especial regard of that authentical order)
very highly displeasing to God, and greatly derogatorious to her Majesty's
prerogative royal, concerning all persons and causes in Christ: and whether
those Books, pamphlets, or papers so disorderly published abroad, are not (for
such undutiful disorder) to be justly esteemed of all true hearted subjects,
such dangerous libels as do insolently encounter with, and directly undermine
her Majesty's princely pre-eminence: and that therefore, the very authors
themselves, they are to be reputed and punished as pestiferous Libellours
against public authority?

When the maine parties them selves, or the malcontented papists, whom (as
miracle-mongers) we have throughout our whole treatise even purposly matched
together, and endeavored (with one and the selfsame stone) to beat down for
iangling blacke-birds both at a clap. When as they (we say) or any one of them
all have fully resolved thy mind concerning these Quaeres: then let them (in
Gods holy name) very freely proceed in their answer and spare not.

Otherwise, if (in an only distrust of their cause) they shall yet cover their
weakness, and excuse their not answering for want of authority: it shall be
their best, either humbly to submit themselves to her Majesty, or all jointly
together (with the proscribed Apollonits before Apollo his golden tables) very
pitifully to bewail the irrecouerable subversion of their seducing oracles,
through the manifestation and mighty power of the Gospel, crying thus: (...).
Eugubinus, de perenni Philosop. lib. 3.

Heu tripodes lugete, perit praesagus Apollo, i.
Ay me alas tripodes, perishes presager Apollo.


These things thus dispatched in order, it follows now very fitly in place
to unfold unto thee the whole platform observed throughout the whole work.

First, therefore we have alphabetically put down the seueuerall names of the
several authors, whose several authorities are purposely by us produced: to
the end that whosoever will, may (by knowing their names) make diligent
inquiry into all the quotations, and see whether we of our selves have
propounded any one point, which some others of antiquity have not before us
directly pointed unto.

Then next, we have placed in order the several arguments of each several
Dialogue: to the end that such and so many good souls as (being persuaded of
some points) are yet very doubtful concerning some other: might (if they
please not to peruse the whole) make their special choice of that which they
chiefly affect.

In like manner, we have methodically prefixed before the maine treatise it
self, a brief Analysis or summarie resolution of all the whole tractate: and
all this of very set purpose to propound to thy view (at a blush) the whole
body of the Book, and the very strict order it self, which (albeit the
whole be divided into Dialogicall Discourses) we have precisely observed
throughout the whole work.

After all this, we have put down the maine discourse in a Dialogicall form,
and purposely produced six such several speakers therein, as should by their
several significant names, supply whatsoever might tend to the timely
effecting of an absolute tractate concerning such matters.

For first, Philologus signifies a Lover of talk: and represents such
persons as trudge to and fro; tatling these news without any regard or due
search into the soundnes thereof.

Then next Pneumatomachus, signifies a fighter or contender against the
essential being of Spirits: and represents those Swinish Saduces of old, and
those godles Atheistes now in our days, who hold there are neither Spirits nor
Devils.

Then thirdly, Lycanthropus, signifies a man essentially transformed to a
wolf: and represents such persons as do hold (with tooth and nail) the
transformation of devils.

Then fourthly, Exorcistes signifies a coniurour or caster forth of spirits
and devils: and represents those persons that do hold (in these days of the
Gospel) a real, or actual possession of devils at the least.

Then fifthly, Physiologus signifies a discourser of natures secrets, or a
natural philosopher: and represents such persons as (by the only light of
reason) are able to discover the gross and palpable absurdities, ensuing such
fantastical and absurd opinions.

Then lastly, Orthodoxus signifies one of an approved or upright judgment:
and represents all such illumined divines and others, as are able by the sway
of reason, the authority of writers, and plain evidence of scripture to
censure the objections, and very soundly to set down the infallible truth. Al
these are introduced as actours in these our discourses: the which also we have
purposely divided into eleven several dialogues. And this, partly, for an ease
to thy memory by avoiding that intricate, that endless and tedious toil,
which otherwise would have wearied thy spirits: if (without intermission) thou
had been entirely tied to the whole treatise it self. And partly also, to
point forth unto thee the principal matters which are principally handled
throughout the whole work.

Lastly, we have in the end of the book, summarily also annexed a table of all
the principal points, the special matters, the several syllogismes, and the
sundry expositions of such places of scripture, as are any way pertinent to the
maine purpose it self: that, by the only direction thereof, thou may find
forth (with a trice) whatsoever thou wishest to see concerning such rare and
unwonted occurrents.

And now (gentle Reader) least happily the curious sort should cry out and say,
Quid de pusillis tam^magna prooemia? What needs so great a cry for so little
wool? we will therefore no longer withhold thee from the treatise it self.
Beseeching the God of peace, to give thee peace always, by all means. Grace
be with all them that love the Lord Jesus to their immortality. Even so: come
Lord Jesus. So be it: Amen.

Thine ever in the Lord, I. D. I. W.

The names of the several Authors.
A
AVlerius Augustinus. Ambrosius. Athanasius. Aries Montanus. Author de eccles.
dogm. Andreas Hierosolomit. Alexander Aphrodisaeus. Augustine. Marloratus.
Amandus Polanus. Albertus Magnus. Andreas willet. Auicenna. Aetius. Aristides.
Aristoteles. Adamus Hill. Aristophanes.
B
BAsilius Magnus. Beda presbyter, Bernardus. Benedictus Pererius. Benedictus
Aretius. Bee-hyue. Bristow. Ben-Sirah.
C
CYprianus. Cyrillus. Caietanus. Coelius Rhodiginus. Cardanus. Cassianus.
Carolus Magnus. Concilium Acquirense. Concilium Ancyranum. Concilium
Bracharense. Concilium Lateran. Cicero.
D
DRusius. Damascenus. Dionysius. Destructorium vitiorum. Decretalia. Didimus
Alexandrinus.
E
EPiphanius. Eusebius. Eucherius. Erasmus Rhoterodam. Erasmus Sarcerius.
Emanuel Tremelius. Edwardus Dearing. Eugubinus.
F
FRacastorius. Franciscus Georgius. Fulgentius. Franciscus Titelman.
G
GRegorius. Gregorius Magnus. Gregorius Naziansen. Gregorius 1. Romans Gilbertus
Longolus. Glossa ordinaria. Gryllandus. Gemnasius. Gratianus. Georgius Ioyns.
Georgius Alley. Georgius Gifford.
H
HVgo Etherianus. Hilarious. Hieronimus. Hieronimus Zanchius. Henricus
Bullinger. Hyppocrates. Horatius. Hermes Trismegistus. Hugo Cardinalis.
Harmonia confessionum. Henricus Iaakob. Hortus sanitatis.
I
Josephus. Isidorus. Iacobus Pamelius. Johannes Brentius. Johannes Drusius.
Johannes Chrysostomus. Johannes Caluinus. Johannes Piscator. Johannes
Auenarius. Johannes Ferus. Johannes Wierus. Johannes Wulcurio. Johannes
Bromyard. Johannes King. Johannes Bodin. Justinius Martyr. Julius Scaliger.
Johannes Darel. Johannes Gorraeus.
L
LAmbertus Danaeus. Leonardus Culmanus. Leonardus Fuchsius. Laurentius
Codmanus. Lauaterus. Leuinius L^mnius. Ludulphus. Lucas Lossius. Legenda aurea.
Lucianus.
M
MArtinus Bucerus. M. in historijs. Methodius. Michael Psellus. Marcilius
Ficinius. Malmesburius. Malleus mallificarum. Marcus Vigerius. Moses Barsephus.
Moses Pellacherus.
N
NIcephoras. Nicholaus Lyra. Nicholaus Hemingius. Nichol. Selneccerus.
Narration of Darel.
O
OTho Casmannus. Origines.
P
PAulus Frisius. Patricius. Paulus Aegenitus. Paulus Burgensis. Petrus
Martyrus. Petrus Lambertus. Petrus Thyreus. Philosophus. Pellicanus. Philippus
Barough. Plinius. Plutarchus. Pompanatius. Prosper. Proclus. Pythagoras.
R
R. D. Kimhi. Rodulphus Gualterus. Robertus Rollocus. Reginaldus Skotus.
Rhemish Testament. Robertus Pontus. Ruffinus.
S
SEbastianus Martyr. Stenchus Eugubinus. Strabus. Sanhedrin editio Basiliens.
T
TErtullianus. Thomas Aquinas. Theophylactus. Theodoretus. Theodorus Beza.
Theupolus. Timotheus Brichtus. Tatianus. Thomas Cooperus.
W
WOlfgangus Muscul. Wilel. Minatensis. Wilelmus Fulke. Wilelmus Perkins.
X
Xantis Pagninus.
Z
Zozomenus.
FINIS.
The several arguments of the several Dilogues following in order.
The first Dialogue. page 1. The Argument. 1 THat there are essential Spirits
and Devils, as appears plainly, from their essential creations, and
effectual operations. Their spiritual and substantial being. The second
Dialogue. page 31. The Argument. 2 THe power of Spirits and Devils. Their
possession, what it is with the several parts thereof. And whether the Devil
does essentially enter into the possessed man's mind or not? The third
Dialogue. page 64. The Argument. 3 WHether Spirits and Devils do essentially
enter into the possessed man's body, or not? And, whether for that purpose,
they have peculiar to themselves, their true natural bodies. The fourth
Dialogue. page 99. The Argument. 4 WHether Spirits and Devils can assume to
themselves true natural bodies? What bodies they are said to assume? And, how
those Scriptures are to be understood, which be for this purpose produced? The
fifth Dialogue. page 165. The Argument. 5 WHether Spirits and Devils can
essentiallie transform themselves into any true natural body? And how those
Scriptures are to be understood, which many produce for that purpose? The sixth
Dialogue. page 131. The Argument. 6 OF actual possession, what it is? And
whether Spirits and Devils (in these days of the Gospel) do now actually
possess either the mind or the body: by any extraordinary afflicting or
vexing? The seventh Dialogue. page 199. The Argument. 7 COmmon experience what
it is? Whether the actual possession of Spirits and Devils, especially that
supposed in the young man at Mahgnitton may be proved thereby? And of the
Devil his power of obsession. The eight Dialogue. page 232. The Argument. 8 OF
the undoubted true force, for the timely subduing of this the forenamed power
of the Devil. Whether any created means may therein prevail? And, whether
prayer and fasting have any power in themselves to effect such a work? The
ninth Dialogue. page 263. The Argument. 9 WHether prayer and fasting be
established by Christ, as a perpetual ordinary means for the powerful
expelling of Spirits and Devils? Whether the power therein be a vocal or a
personal power? Or, whether a true justifying faith (apprehending some
supernatural power of God) does effect that work? The tenth Dialogue. page
304. The Argument. 10 WHether a miraculous faith (apprehending the power of God
for the powerful expelling of Devils) be yet still continued? what a true
miracle is? And whether the working of miracles be now fully determined in the
true Churches of Christ? The eleventh Dialogue. page 339. The Argument. 11 A
summarie recapitulation of all the premises, very concludentlie repeating and
proouing the precedent purpose: with a patheticall persuasion to subscribe to
the undoubted truth thereof.
A brief Analysis, or summarie resolution of this present treatise: the same
affoording unto us
Certain Dialogicall discourses: declaring especially 1. that there be spirits
and devils: this proved from 1. Their essential creation. 2. Their effectual
operation.
2. What we have to consider in them: namely, 1. Their power the same being a
power either 1. Of possession, and this also is, either 1. Real, the same
being, either Mental. 1. essentially in the mind Corporal, 1 essentiallie in
the body, by their assuming of true natural bodies. their tra^sforming of true
bodies.

2. Actual, this also either by a mental, afflicting and grieuing. a
corporal, tormenting and vexing.

2. Of obsession which stands either in an outward assaulting and
circu^uenting. inward suggesting and tempting.

2. The subduing of that power by a power 1. Immediate, and this in Christ. 2.
Mediate by others, this, either Apostolical, having from Christ a power over
devils. Ecclesiastical it being in the church either Primitive, wherein the
continuance of that power. Successiue, wherein the compass of that power,






DIALOGICALL discourses, of SPIRITS and DEVILS.
The first Dialogue.
THE ARGUMENT.
That there are essential Spirits and Devils, as appears plainly by their
creation, and operation* Their spiritual and substantial being.

The speakers names.
PHILOLOGVS. LYCANTHROPVS. PNEVMATOMACHVS. PHYSIOLOGVS. ORTHODOXVS. EXORCISTES.
Philologus. WHat Lycanthropus? and you master Pneumatomachus, my old
companions? well met at this present. From whence come you? and whether walk
you so fast, if a man may be bold to enquire the same at your hands: without
offending your persons, or hindering your business.


Lycanthropus. We come even now from that famous city Mahgnitton, my good
friend Philologus: and are presently traveling toward the Island of Eirtwab
with speed, upon very special and urgent business: concerning the glory of
God and the good of his Church.


Philologus. What news from Mahgnitton I pray you?


Lycanthropus. News sir? the strangest news I assure you that has been heard
of this hundred years.


Philologus. What news is that?


Lycanthropus. Of a young man there. Who being reallie possessed with a Devil:
was very strangely, or rather miraculously delivered by prayer and fasting.


Philologus. How strange news soever the same seems to us, very certain it
is, Math. 17. 21. Marc. 9. 29.
as appeeres in the Gospel: that Devils have been driven forth by prayer and
fasting. Howbeit, that the Devil should now in these days of the Gospel, have
a real possession in any: is greatly doubted of the most, and very flatly
denied of some.


Lycanthropus. The real possession of Devils may justly be called in question,
if Pneumatomachus his opinion be canonized for current: who very confidently
avouches, that there are neither Spirits nor Devils at all. Which being so:
how should there be a real possession of Devils in any?


Philologus. Very true: for Devils must first be, before they can have a real
possession in men. But, Pneumatomachus he holds (I am sure) no such opinion:
unless it be for argument sake.


Pneumatomachus. Yes, I am very confident therein I assure you. And about that
point, my neighbor Lycanthropus and my self: have held a hot dispute all the
way we have come. But, being neither of us satisfied with the others reply, we
jointly concluded to refer the whole decision of these controversies, to
master Orthodoxus his determination: promising each other, to rest satisfied
herein, upon his resolute judgment, and thereupon, we are now traveling
toward the Island of Eirtwab, for that selfsame purpose.


Philologus. Such conferences I assure you are both-commendable and
comfortable, especially in travel: for they do sharpen the wit, delight the
mind, and make the journey seem short and sweet. And herein withal, you are
worthy great praise, both because you do pass forth the time in profitable
talk as you travel: and for that also (being loath to loose the fruit of your
conference, you do so friendly and so freely, refer your selves to the
judgment of such as are able, and willing to determine your doubts. Howbeit,
our meeting is wrought (I perceive) by the special providence of God. For this
I dare tell you for truth, that master Orthodoxus, he is not even now in the
Island of Eirtwab, but newly removed into the confines of Eibrad: entending
this winter to soiourne there, with one master Physiologus his faithful
friend, of very purpose to confer with the Exorcist himself that cast forth
the spirit, for the benefit of which conference, I also am now traveling
thither my self. And therefore if it please you, I shall not only be glad of
your companies: but will very carefully conduct you the way.


Pneumatomachus. With all my heart, if Lycanthopus consent to the same.


Lycanthropus. Else should I dissent from the singular providence of God.


Philologus. Well then, let us leg it a little. And, do tell me as we
travel (I pray you) the strange manner of the yoongman his handling, in that
fearful possession.


Pneumatomachus. Ah Philologus, Act. 17. 18.
your ears (I perceive) they are itching after some tidings-bringer of new
found Devils. 2. Tim. 4. 3.
Howbeit because my neighbor Licanthropus has been, and is now over
credulous concerning such Legerdemaines, I do leave the relation wholly to him:
who shall (for publishing these unwonted wonderments) have the whole glory, or
shame, to himself alone.


Licanthropus. As I hunt after no glory: so, I hope I shall reap no reproach
at all for reporting these news. The rather, because my maine purpose in
publishing them, is, and shall be for none other respect in the world: but, to
lay open the Devils inueterate malice, man's miserable condition by nature, the
extraordinary faith of the Exorcist, and the singular mercy and power of God.


Philologus. All these (I assure you) are holy respects. But, relate the manner
of his passions I pray you in order.


Lycanthropus. Withal my heart. And (to my remembrance) they were eftsoons
upon him in this following order. 1 There seemed to run along his leg,
These passions are apparent in Dorel his Apology.
and thence into his toe, belly, throat, tongue, cheek, eye, and other parts, a
lump sometimes bigger, or lesser then an egg, being soft. 2 The lump being
in his leg, it was heavy, and inflexible like iron. 3 He had such
extraordinary strength, that sometimes three, four, five, six or more, were
scarce able to rule him. 4 When four or five struggled with him, so as they
were wearied, he did not sweat, pant, or change color. 5 He wallowed, gnashed
with his teeth, stared with his eyes, and foamed at his mouth excessiuely:
having neither eat nor drunk all the day before. 6 There seemed to run under
the couerlet where he lay, as it were kitlings: to the number of four or five.
7 His face and his mouth were fearfully distorted: one lip toward one ear,
and the other lip toward the other ear. 8 His face was turned directly
backward, not moving his body at all. 9 His neck doubled under him. 10 His
body doubled, his head between his legs, suddenly plucked round, like a
round brown loaf: he was cast up like a ball from the bed, three or four
times together half a yard high. 11 Being cast into the fire, where he lay
sometimes against the walls and iron bars in the chimney with great violence:
he received no appearance of hurt at all. 12 His body seemed to be extended to
the height of the tallest man: when once he endeavored to hang himself. 13 He
told of diverse things done in his absence, without notice given by any person.
14 There were strange speeches uttered by him in his fits, in a strange voice:
as, that he was his, that he was God, Christ, and a king, that he made
baptism. I will use William Summers his tongue and members for three days, Ego
sum rex, ego sum Deus. That there was no God, that he was king and prince of
darkness. And, in saying the Lords Prayer, he could not say, Lead us not into
temptation, but, Lead us into temptation. Also, before Master Darel had seen
him, he said Darel comes, Darel comes, he will have me out, but, I will come
again: for, Nottingham and Burton, are jolly towns for me. 15 Being recovered
out of his fits, he knew not what he had said or done. 16 In his fits, strange
smells were in the place where he lay: sometimes like brimstone, sometimes very
sweet. 17 There was a strange knocking perceived about his bed in his fits:
both his hands and feet being held immovable. 18 He did cry hideously,
sometimes like a bull, bear, swine: and in a small voice impossible to be
counterfeited. 19 His legs would be crooked with his false, and remain
unflexible. 20 He spoke in a continued speech, his mouth being wide open, his
tongue drawn into his throat: neither his lips nor chaps moving. 21 He spoke a
quarter of an hour, his mouth being shut close. 22 In his fits, his pulses and
temples did not beat: he lay for dead, and as cold as ice. 23 His eye was
black, and changed color in his fits.


These, and sundry other passions, at sundry times appeared in him, which I
remember not now: but these which I have told you, are certainly reported by
sundry persons of good account and credit, being eye witnesses thereof
themselves.


Pneumatomachus. The persons reporting these news may be of good account and
credit I grant: but Lycanthropus? how can your self so confidently report any
thing from them for certain truth: since themselves (as your speeches import)
do only but speak of things as it seemed to be?


Lycanthropus. Howsoever they seemed to them: the news (I assure you) was
strange unto me.


Philologus. Trust me, these are strange and wonderful news indeed.


Lycanthropus. Not so strange (I assure thee) as true.


Philologus. God grant they may work in every of us, an holy reverence and
fear of his majesty. But, come on (I pray you) and cheer up your selves:
for, we are now (in a manner) at our iourneies end.


Pneumatomachus. I do heartily rejoice to hear of that news: being even
toiled, and tired out with the newfangled news of my neighbor Lycanthropus.
But what three persons are those, that come yonder walking this way?


Philologus. If I be not fowlie deceived it is master Orthodoxus, master
Physiologus, and the Exorcist also himself, who cast out the Devil: they are
even the same. This falls forth pat for our purpose: we have now very fit
opportunity to confer of these points to the full.


Lycanthropus. Blessed be God for this special providence and favor.


Orthodoxus. God bless you good brethren, and prosper your journey.


Philologus. God bless you also good master Orthodoxus: and the rest of your
company.

What, my old friend Philologus? what make you in these quarters? and whether
wander you so fast with these good companions?


Philologus. Good sir? we are even now (I hope) at the furthest. For our
coming into these quarters, is (upon special occasion) to confer with your
self and the rest of this company, about the marvelous woonders befallen at
Mahgnitton of late: concerning a young man possessed there.


Orthodoxus. See, see the strange nature of man? we were co^ferring even now,
about the transforming of Devils: Howbeit, all the world (I fear me) will
shortly become transformed Athenians. Act. 17. 21.
For every man now, does give himself wholly to the hearing or telling of
news. Notwithstanding you are all heartily welcome: and this I tell you here
by the way, that, we also our selves, are now in debating those matters.


Lycanthropus. Good sir? then pardon us we pray you, for interrupting your
talk: and we will walk here apart by our selves, attending your leisure.


Physiologus. Nay not so: for, neither is the matter it self so secret, nor we
so earnest upon it, but that (if it so please master Orthodoxus, and this
other companion) you may all be jointly pertakers of our mutual conference:
and so much the rather, because you are come (as it seems) for that selfsame
purpose.


Exorcistes. I am very well willing, if master Orthodoxus thinks good.


Orthodoxus. With all my heart. And seeing it has pleased our good God to bring
us so fitly together, let us (for more ease to our selves) shroude us here
under the shade along this bank: where we may have the benefit of the running
stream to recreate our eyes and senses, and (in so solitary a place) very
fitly confer of our matters, without the discovery of neighbors, or any the
interruption of travelers.


Physiologus. Well sir, first place your self where you please; and you shall
see us quickly come clustring about you.


Orthodoxus. Come then let us sit closely together. Howbeit, before we begin
our conferrence (to the end the same may be every way comformable to the will
of God, and comfortable also unto our selves) Let us all join together in
hearty prayers, and say.

O Lord our God, the fountain of life, the welspring of grace, and the only
infuser of all spiritual knowledge: Behold us here at this present (we humbly
beseech thee) in that acceptable beauty of thy son our Savior wherein thou
so highly delightest, and for whose sake, thou can not but be well pleased
with every of us. Grant dear father, that, as thou have ordained him to be
the true light which lightneth every one that comes into the world: so, he may
graciously enlighten our hearts, who do naturally sit here in darkness, and in
the shadow of death. Remove from our gross and senseless souls, al those
palpable clouds of ignorance, error and unbelief, which seek to foreclose
our saving knowledge in Jesus Christ. Pluck (we pray thee) from our
uncircumcised eyes, those thick and foggie seals of natural corruption,
which do (at this present) so fearfully dim, and dazel our dark
understandings, as, we are utterly unable to discern aright, the hole some
things of thy holy law. And grant we beseech thee yet further, that, this our
intended conferrence concerning the timely discovery of these hidden mysteries
of Satan, sin, and iniquity: may directly tend to the glory of thy great
name, the good of thy Church, the unfolding of error, the manifestation of
truth, the confusion of Satan, the triumph of our conquering Christ, and the
everlasting salvation of all our souls: through Jesus Christ our only Lord and
Savior.


Altogether. So be it Lord Jesus: even so, Amen.


Orthodoxus. Well: now (in Gods name) declare briefly and plainly what you
desire to know concerning the possessed man at Mahgnitton?


Philologus. First sir (or ever you enter upon the particular discourse of the
possessed himself) our desire is, to hear whether there be any spirits or
Devils to possess men at all: the rather, because there is one in our
company, Act. 23, 8.
who, very confidently avouches, that, there are neither Angels nor Spirits.


Physiologus. Who is he? and what is his name?


Pneumatomachus. I am the man if it please you: and my name is Pneumatomachus.


Physiologus. Your name was given I suppose: to express your nature. For,
Pneumatomachus, is as much to say, as a despiter of spirits: or rather, it
signifies one, who flatly opposes himself to the essential spirits and
powers of God. Howbeit (by that time Master Orthodoxus has fully confuted
your foul and palpable errors) I doubt not, but, you will, both be ashamed of
your gross understanding, and desirous to exchange your odious name.


Pneumatomachus. By your patience (good sir) it argues in you a contentious
nature, to stand deskanting thus upon names: which are but bare notions of
things, when you have said what you can.


Physiologus. And, good sir (by your License) if so be your inward nature be
the thing it self whereof your outward name does give us the notion: then (out
of doubt) your very name (how bare a notion soever) must needs argue in you
an erroneous mind.


Pneumatomachus. Err I confess I may, but dwell in an error I will not: If
once I be brought to perceive it.


Orthodoxus. Gods name be blessed for this so good a beginning. Go to then,
seeing you make it a Question whether there be spirits and Devils or no, it
shall not be amiss, first to demonstrate plainly unto you, that there be
Spirits and Devils: and then next, to declare, what we have more especially to
consider of them. This I take it, will be a very plain course, and such also,
as comprehends fully the limits and bounds of our conferrence.


Physiologus. No doubt, it comprehends fully, whatsoever may fall forth
concerning our present purpose.


Exorcistes. The order is such as no man dislikes.


Philologus. I think even the same. What say you P^eumatomachus.


Pneumatomachus. I dislike not the order. But sir? how prove you there be
Spirits and Devils?


Orthodoxus. I prove it first from their essential creation: and then next,
from their effectual operation.


Pneumatomatichus. How first from their essential creation?


Orthodoxus. Because they were essentially created of God. For the Lord God
(creating the whole host of heaven) created Angels and Spirits among the rest
of celestial creatures, to be of principal account in that heavenly host.
Now then, Angels and Spirits, they being such excellent creatures of God: we
need not to doubt of their essential being. The rather, because every
creature else (how contemptible soever) being once created, it has an
essential substance: and if the basest of all, then much more the Angels, they
being (indeed) such excellent creatures.


Pneumatomachus. Well, go to, how next from their effectual operations.


Orthodoxus. Thus, their operations have been, and now are apparently evident
to all the world; whether we respect the Lord, or his church. So that for any
to doubt of their essential being, is to call in question the sunshine at
midday: and as well may he deny their operations whatsoever.


Pneumatomachus. Good sir, is this your substantial proouing of Angels and
Spirits: I deny that the Lord God ever created any Angels at all: and then to
what purpose do you urge their supposed operations?


Orthodoxus. Since you so confidently deny both Spirits and Devils, tell me
what you imagine those to be, which we generally hold for Spirits and Angels.


Pneumatomachus. Sir, Iohannis Caluini opuscula, contra Libertinos. c. 12. fol.
179. G. Alley in his poor man's library. fol. 123. Master Perkins upon the
Creed, fol. 73.
I take those your supposed spirits for none other matters at all, but the good
or evil motions and affections arising in men: as also, those your imagined
Angels, I hold them to be nothing else but the sensible signs or tokens of
Gods unspeakable power.


Orthodoxus. You do then conclude (it should seem) that our faith (concerning
those matters) is grounded altogether upon bare supposals, and idle
imaginations of wandering brains. I like well your plainnes in laying open your
mind: although I allow not your pestiferous opinions, iumping so pat, with the
Parepateticall and Sadusaicall sort. Josephus de Antiquit. Iud. lib. 20.
Magister in historijs.
Who (flatly denying either Angel or Spirit) do confidently avouch that there
is nothing immortal in man, which is a very dangerous gulf of hell that
deuoureth and swaloweth up all sound divinity and sincere knowledge of God.
For first, by opposing your self against all the essential spirits and powers
of the Lord, what do you else in effect, but implicatiuely reject the
essential being of the holy Ghost? and then next, Ioh. 4. 24. 1. Cor. 3. 16.
you do also (by consequence) very flatly deny that there is any God at all:
for what (I pray you) is God, but a Spirit?


Pneumatomachus. Nay sir (howsoever I oppose my self to the catholic opinion
of Spirits and Devils) I do confidently avouch and confess that there is one
true everliving God, of an incomprehensible, invisible and spiritual essence:
distinguished into the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. And moreover
(concerning men and my self) I do with like confidence, very clearly
acknowledge, that every of us also are essentiallie endued with spiritual and
immortal souls.


Orthodoxus. You cannot faithfully and finally hold these infallible truths
from your heart: but you must and will presently banish those other palpable
errors from out of your breast. For, Exodus 7. 12.
even as Aaron his rod devoured forthwith the counterfeite rods of all the
Egyptian Sorcerers: so surely, these your confessed truths (concerning the
essential spirits and powers of the Lord) being faithfully held from the heart
will in the end (I doubt not) be another Aaronicall rod, to confute and
confound those other Sadusaical sorceries wherewith the Devil has so
dangerously bewitched your soul.


Lycanthropus. Very true, if he be not to opinionate therein.


Pneumatomachus. Sir, howsoever I have been hitherto opinionate in this
special point, I am notwithstanding very loath that reason should be ouerruled
by will, or that the holy truth of God should give place unto error: and
therefore proceed (I beseech you) in the timely unfolding of this hidden
mystery.


Orthodoxus. With very good will: wherein also (for your speedier conceiving of
that which is spoken) we will first lay open the original fountain from
whence this error floteth abroad: and then next (having fully answered your
arguments) we will directly prove unto you, both Spirits and Devils.


Exorcistes. A very excellent order. For there by first you shall clear our
judgments: and then next you shall the more fully confirm us in the
infallible truth.


Lycanthropus. That is certainly so. But what thinks Pneumatomachos?


Pneumatomachus. I acknowledge no less: and do promise withal, to give an
attentive ear to whatsoever is spoken.


Orthodoxus. Well then, to proceed therein accordingly, this I dare boldly
affirm, that your Parepatetical opinion, or rather, that this your Sadusaicall
sorcerie concerning the non being of Spirits and Devils: proceeds directly
from a two-folde false ground. Namely, first, from the natural corruption of
your proper mind: and secondly, from a careless misconstruing of some
certain places of Scripture. Both which said false grounds, albeit I could
and might well relate them my self: yet (because the first is rather
Philosophical then Divine) I do purposely put over the prosecuting thereof (as
of al other like points) to this my good brother, if it please him to travel
therein: reserving the latter to entreat of my self.


Physiologus. Since it is your good pleasure to have it so, I will gladly give
my endeavor to satisfy the man, so it seems him good.


Pneumatomachus. With all my heart: if first you will tell me who you are, and
what is your name.


Physiologus. I am (I assure you) a friend to the truth: and my name is
Physiologos.


Pne^matomachus. In very good time be it spoken. But may I be bold (by the way)
to ask you a question without offense?


Physiologus. Propound at your pleasure: and ask what you please.


Pneumatomachus. Was not your name also purposely given, to purport unto us
your proper nature? For, Physiologus (you say) is your name: which (unless I
be fowly deceived) is as much to say; as a babbler or pratler of natural
Philosophy: or, it signifies rather some notable discourser of natural
causes. I hope you are none of those cogging companions of whom the Apostle
does wish us beware: Col. 2. 8.
who go purposely about to spoil men with Philosophy and vain deceit?


Orthodoxus. Nothing less. For the man (I assure you) is both a sound
Philosopher: and a sincere Divine: Neither would I have you once to imagine,
that Paul does there purposely oppose himself to all true Philosophy, whether
natural, or moral, no: but reprooueth rather, that false and counterfeit
Philosophy, which (having only an appearance of truth, and not the substance
of truth it self) is cunningly foisted in by cogging companions, to spoil and
deceive men's minds of the truth indeed. For otherways, all true Philosophy
is the special gift of God, and a principal help to Divinity: so far forth
especially, as she is made a submissiue Moderatour in natural causes, and not
a commanding Mistres over Divinity. Then I assure you, she comes in her
natural kind: and thrice happy is he that has a true insight into her,
according to that old accustomed saying: Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere
causas.
The wight that could all causes skan:
Might count himself an happy man.


Now then, such a Philosopher is this, and therefore, be bold upon my warrant)
to harken freely unto him, concerning the first ground of your error.


Pneumatomachus. I credit your words: let him therefore proceed in his purpose.


Physiologus. The first ground of this (as of all errors else whatsoever) does
undoubtedly arise (as you heard) from the natural corruption of your proper
mind. And, this may more plainly appear, if I first show you what the Mind
is: and then, tell you how the same is corrupted. The Mind, is that reasonable
faculty or power of the soul; whereby the natural man perceives, knows,
and discerns all intelligible things. By which words it is plain, that, the
proper end and office of the Mind, is especially to perceive, to know, and
discern things. And, this office also it accomplisheth by the help of no
bodily Organon, but only by it self alone: unless happily the senses do
sometime assist the intellectiue virtue therein. The Mind therefore it
differs (you see) from the Will. For, the Mind, only perceives and knows
a thing: the Will, it makes free choice, either to pursue, or eschew the thing
that is known. Now then, the Mind (in a mere natural man) is easily
corrupted by reason of the fantasy, through whose only help, the aforesaid
knowledge of things intelligible is conveyed and offered unto it. For, the
fantasy, it being that interior sensitive knowledge which (by the middle
ventricle of the brain) receives into it self a very deep impression of
the sundry kinds of sensible things either present, or absent, and laboring
also to draw forth from those several kinds of sensible things, the like
sensible kinds in conceit: it cannot otherwise possibly be, but that the said
fantasy (not being able to transcend beyond the se^sitiue knowledge of
natural and corporal substances) must needs offer the mind such sensible
notions as her special o^iect affoords. And, hereby also it comes to pass,
that, the mind eftsoons is deceived in perceiving, knowing, and discerning
aright of every intelligible thing: more especially, if the said fantasy at
any time endeavors to draw forth from some sensible things, an imaginary
conceit of some intelligi^le matter. For then, the understanding or mind
(being mightily misled by the fantasy) must needs be deceived in perceiving
and discerning such a matter; it being supernatural, spiritual, and heavenly:
and surmounting the compass of humane reason. As for example. The mind of a
mere natural man, being at any time desirous to perceive and discern aright
of God, of Angels, or Devils: it looks forthwith to receive from the
fantasy or interior sensitive knowledge, some certain notions concerning
these matters. Which said fantasy, receiving an impression, only of sensible
things from the exterior senses themselves, and having in her naturally, no
impression at all of any the aforesaid supernatural, spiritual, and heavenly
matters: therein, she affoordeth the mind, either, no notions at all, or none
other (at least) then only such, as she reeeiueth herself from corporal,
sensible, and mere natural objects. Whereupon, the mind (being still
desirous to perceive and discern the aforesaid supernatural matters, and
having thereof (I say) no notions at all, or, deceivable notions at least)
she forthwith concludes, either, that there are neither God, nor Angel, nor
Devil: or, none other at least, then such as she has notions of in an
imaginary conceit, arising only upon a sensible knowledge from corporal,
sensible, and natural objects. That is, the said fantasy, receiving some
sensible knowledge from the sense of the ear, Genesis 17. 1.
that God is an almighty and magnificent Lord of hosts, Isa. 6. 3.
it imagines forthwith, some sensible or corporal potentate; and thereupon,
receiving an impression of some such sensible thing in conceit: the mind by
and by (from such sensible notions) concludes, that God is some almighty,
supereminent, and sensible potentate in deed: having all princes and powers
subjected unto him. Again, the said fantasy, having received by the ear as
before, a like sensitive knowledge, that the Seraphims (shadowing the throne of
grace) have six wings apiece, Isa. 6. 2.
to fly, and to cover themselves withal, it forthwith supposes some
sensible creature: and thereupon (receiving as before, a sensible impression of
some such sensible thing in conceit) the mind eftsoons resolves, that Angels
(if there be any) are none other but fiery and winged creatures. To be short,
the fantasy having received by the ear, as before, that the Devil is a
terrible tormenting Termagant, 2. Pet. 2. 4, Jude. 6.
chayned up under darkness, and taking an impression of some such sensible
thing in conceit: the mind straight way supposes, that, infernal spirits (if
there be any at all) are undoubtedly some black, grim, griesly ghostes, having
goggled eyes, fearful claws, with two cloven feet: Thus then, you see how
the mind in a mere natural man (receiving but bare fantastical notions of
sensible things in conceit) is too too corrupted in judgment: and therefore,
has naturally, no power in it self, to perceive, to know and discern aright
of any supernatural, spiritual, or heavenly matters.


Pneumatomachus. From hence you would seem to infer, that, the mere
natural man is utterly unable (by natural reason) to conceive foundly and
rightly of spiritual causes.


Orthodoxus. Very true. For, Iam. 3. 15.
as that wisdom which is from below, is but earthly, 1. Cor. 2. 14.
sensual, and devilish: so surely, the natural man, he cannot possibly
perceive the things of the spirit of God, for, they are but foolishnes to him.
Neither can he know them at all: for, they are spiritually discerned. And, this
spiritual discerning of things, is no natural, but a supernatural work of
faith which does not arise from sensible notions: but, from a supernatural
knowledge infused spiritually into the enlightened soul, Heb. 11. 1.
and which also (being grounded on things that are hoped for) is an undoubted
true evidence of things unseen. Otherways, faith could be no faith at all: as
one very fitly affirms saying. The divine operation (if it may possibly be
comprehended by reason) is nothing admirable: neither can that faith find any
merit, Gregorius in Homil. 26. super Euang.
whereunto humane reason affoords an experiment.


Philologus. How now Pneumatomachus, what say you to these matters?


Pneumatomachus. By that which is spoken I do plainly perceive the very
first ground of all gross and palpable errors: namely, the gross conceiving
of spiritual matters according to that natural knowledge which naturally
arises from mere sensible and natural notions.


Exorcistes. You have conceived aright: but how is your heart affected therewith.


Pneumatomachus. It is affected (I hope) as it ought to be. For surely, this I
must needs confess to my shame, that, hitherto I have adjudged nothing either
possible in nature, or credible in action: which could not absolutely be
comprehended by humane reason. And, 1. Cor. 1. 20.
this (now I perceive) is that worldly wisdom which the word accompteth
foolishnes with God. But, do show me (good Master Orthodoxus) the other
ground also of these gross opinions.


Orthodoxus. With very good will. The other ground of your errors arises (I
assure you) from a careless misconstruing of some such places of scripture, as
do attribute to God, and to spirits a corporal form: as eyes, ears, hands,
feet, bodies, wings and such like. Which said places (your self understanding
them carnally) do seem to import unto you at a blush; that God and spirits
have visible forms and corporal substances. And thereupon, you do rashly
conclude, that spirits and Devils must necessarily be even such as your self
by those places suppose: or none at all. But now, because you your own self
(with your corporal eyes) did yet never behold any such corporal Devils as
you by those Scriptures have grossly imagined: therefore you do flatly
resolve with your self, that there are neither spirits nor Devils at all.


Pneumatomachus. Why? what other thing else should those corporal forms,
attributed to spirits and Devils in the sacred scriptures import; but, either
that Devils and spirits are visible substances, if those scriptures say true:
or that there are (at the least) neither spirits nor Devils at all, as I have
hitherto held.


Orthodoxus. That the scriptures say true, being truly understood; no true
hearted Christians may dare to deny. That there are also both spirits and
Devils (though in truth and in substance they have no such visible forms as
those places of Scripture do literally import) shall be proved anon. In the
mean time, this I must tell you for truth, that, those scriptures which
attribute to God, and spirits, a corporal form, as eyes, ears, hands,
feet, bodies, wings and such like; may (at no hand) be expounded literally;
but must rather be metaphorically, and spiritually understood of us. So that,
(by any those corporal forms) we may not grossly conceive in God, or in
spirits, such corporal members, Gregorius in morali^us. Item, in libr^ de
collatione patrum.
appertaining especially to their essential being: but, we must spiritually
understand ^hereby, those their supernatural virtues, operations and actions,
which (by such corporal forms) are metaphorically commended to our humane
capacities. And without doubt, such a carnal misconstruing of scriptures, was
the only maine cause which made the silly old monks in elder times, to fall
fearfully into the palpable error of the Anthropomorphites: who (by
understanding such scriptures literally) did groslie attribute to God, such
humane actions and passions as are proper to men.

The holy scriptures then I perceive, they may not be interpreted hand over
head: neither are they in every place to be opened literally.


Orthodoxus. Nothing less, for, so should you fall into a thousand
absurdities. And therefore, unless you will purposely show your self a
swinish Saducee, or impudently make your self known a monkish
Anthropomorphite: be now ashamed (I beseech you) of this palpable grossenes,
and hold confidently with the catholic church, that there are essential
spirits and Devils.


Philologus. Pneumatomachus? how goes the matter?


Pneumatomachus. That which has been hitherto spoken, does sufficiently set
forth a twofold ground of erroneous opinions. Howbeit, this my opinion
concerning the non being of Angels or spirits, appears not (for any thing
heard as yet:) to be erroneous at all. And, I yet verily think (as before)
that Devils are none other thing else, but those good, or evil motions in men,
which do maruellously comfort, or afflict their minds.


Orthodoxus. Think you so as you say? Genesis 3. 1.
Go to then, tell me (I pray you) what was the Serpent that tempted our
grandmother Euah in Paradise? 11. Cor. 3. 3.
Was that any good, or evil motion in Euah? If so, then tell me further,
whether you think that motion was within, or without her: If within her, how
came the temptation then from the Serpent, and from without her altogether?
But, if it came from without her, how should then the temptation be justly
accounted any motion of hers: since the same cannot truly be said to arise from
within her? Again, if you take Devils to be but the good, or evil motions in
men: what think you that tempter was, Math. 4. 1. 3.
who tempted Christ in the wilderness? Was it (think you) any motion in Christ?
Luc. 4. 2. 3.
If yea: then, whether was it an evil, or a good motion? An evil motion you
may not avouch it to be: because, Christ being free from all sin, could not
possibly have in him any evil motion at all. As also, it were very absurd to
affirm it a good motion: for, how could that motion be good, which tempted
Christ unto evil? Moreover, if you take Devils for the good, or evil motions
in men, what think you then that Legion was, Math. 8. 28.
wherewith the two men were possessed? Marc. 5. 9.
Could the motions of men crave leave, and enter into a whole heardship of
Swine? Luc. 8. 30.
And, what became of those motions, when they were cast forth by our Savior
Christ? Were they drowned together, with the Swine in the Sea? If so, what then
became of the men themselves from whom (as you dream) those motions arose?
Were they dead all the while their minds were bereft of their motions? For,
the mind (you know) is in perpetual motion. Or, if those men (all the while,
and ever after their motions, were cast forth and drowned in the Sea) remained
still in their lively estate: it should seem that Spirits and Devils are some
other essential powers, then the bare motions and affections arising in men.
Briefly, if Devils be nothing else, but the good, or evil motions in men; what
think you those tormentours to be, which vex and torment men in Hell, Math.
25. 41* 46.
with the Devil and his Angels? Yea, and do tell me (I pray you) what goes
to Hell: the good, or evil motions? If only the evil, what then must become
of those other which were good in the man? For, since none in this life can
possibly be either so good, or so evil, but that they have in them both good,
and evil motions, it cannot otherways be, but that, either the good, and
evil motions in men, must (after this life) be monstrously confounded
together; or else, if the good motions go roundly to Heaven, and the evil
unto hell: then, the body and soul must be divided, part unto heaven, and
part unto hell, like an indiuiduum vagum, or, some little new nothing that hangs
in the air. To be short, if man, with his good, and evil motions together,
goes forthwith, either wholly to heaven, or wholly to hell: how then should his
joys, or his torments be either absolute or endless? Because, look how fast
his good motions do minister comfort unto him: so fast (at the least) his
evil motions will afflict and torment him.


Phylologus. Surely Pneumatomachus, this opinion (I see) is so absurd and so
sottish: as, even a sucking babe would blush to be taynted therewith.


Lycanthropus. A sucking babe blush? yea, it is such a stale ridiculous jest,
as might make even a mad man to hide his head in a corner.


Pneumatomachus. Very true: and I also my self, am now ashamed thereof.
Notwithstanding, how soever it is certain that spirits and Devils be more then
the good or evil motions in men; it appears yet (for any thing heard) that
those your supposed Angels, are nothing at all but the sensible tokens, or
signs of Gods power.


Orthodoxus. What mean you by the sensible tokens, or signs of Gods power.


Pneumatomachus. I understand thereby, those extraordinary judgments of God
which demonstrate unto us, the incomprehensible majesty and might of his
power. Such (I mean) as was the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha: the
extraordinary speech of Baalams Ass: the wonderful overthrow of the Assyrian
host, and such other besides.


Orthodoxus. Your error concerning this point undoubtedly consists herein:
namely, in confounding the cause of those judgments with the effect it self.
For, howsoever those the aforenamed judgments may truly be said to be the
sensible signs, and effects of the extraordinary power of God: yet can you at
no hand deny, but that the Lord also himself effected those extraordinary
judgments, by some extraordinary wonderful means, namely by the appointed
ministry and execution of his heavenly Angels. As for example, howsoever the
extraordinary overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrha, was a sensible sign and
effect of the extraordinary power of God: very certain it is, Genesis 19. 13.
that the two Angels sent forth from the Lord for the execution of that power,
they were also the isntrumental means that effected the same. Numb. 22. 27.
28.
Again, howsoever the fall and of speech Balaam his ass, was some
extraordinary effect and sign of Gods power: yet was it the Angel with his
sword drawn in his hand, 2. King. 19. 35.
who extraordinarily accomplished the same. Briefly, howsoever that fearful
massacre, so miraculouslie made upon the hundred eighty and five thousand of
Saneheribs army, was an extraordinary and sensible sign of Gods wonderful
power: Aug. de cognitione verae vitae cap. 6.
yet was it the Angel of the Lord, who extraordinarily effected the same that
selfsame night. By all which you see it very apparent, Danaeus in Enchir.
August. cap. 57. page 193.
that (whatsoever your self surmize to the contrary) the scriptures they set
forth unto us essential Angels or spirits, as the extraordinary executioners
of those sensible signs or tokens of the extraordinary power of God.


Pneumatomachus. Surely good sir, I should soon be persuaded to that which you
speak: were I not mightily withheld by an unanswerable argument.


Orthodoxus. What argument I pray you is that?


Pneumatomachus. This, namely, for that Moses in the history of the creation
(entreating compendiouslie of all those works of God which in six days
before the Saboth were perfectly finished) makes no mention at all of the
creation of Angels, spirits, or Devils. Whereupon it follows, that (if any
such be) they must needs be uncreate, and eternal: or created (at least)
before, or after the worlds creation.


Orthodoxus. Thus you reason. There is in the history of Moses no express
mention of the creation of Angels: therefore, if any such be, they are either
uncreate, or not created within the six days.


Pneumatomachus. So I reason indeed.


Orthodoxus. Then I must tell you, your argument is faulty, and halteth down
right, neither has it any such certain consequence as you seem to set down:
else, how say you to this that I make? There is in the history of Moses no
express mention of the creation of Lions or Bears: therefore, if any such be,
they are either uncreate, or not created within the six days.


Pneumatomachus. That follows not. For, Genesis 1. 24. 25.
howsoever Lions or Bears, be not expressly mentioned there: yet is their
creation implicatiuely contained within that six days work, wherein God
created the earth, and all the creatures therein.


Orthodoxus, Very true. And thus you your self at unawares have answered this
your unreasonable argument. For howsoever Angels and spirits are not expressly
mentioned in Moses his history: yet, Genesis 1. 7. 8.
is their creation implicatiuely comprehended in that second days work,
wherein God created the heavenly firmament, with all the whole host above the
same, among whom the Angels and spirits have special pre-eminence.


Pneumatomachus. You say some thing unto it.


Orthodoxus. Something say you? such a something I assure you, as is able to
batter your unanswerable argument to nothing. Howbeit (for further answer)
this I do confidently oppose to that which you falsely infer, Hieron,
Zanchius deoperibus Dei. lib. 2. cap. 5.
namely, that Angels and spirits are neither eternal nor uncreate: but such
essential powers of God as had their first beginning and being, Theodorelus
quest. 3. super Genes.
by the work of creation. Neither were they formed or made before the first
created matter of this visible world: neither yet after the accomplished works
of this visible world. Gennadius, Otho Casmannus Angelographiae part. 1. cap.
5. page 107. Psalm. 33. 6.
Yea, and thus much I do further affirm, that they were not created before,
but jointly together with that celestial firmament, which we commonly call
the heaven of the blessed.


Pneumatomachus. How prove you them creatures created by God?


Orthodoxus. This may plainly be proved from most infallible and apparent
places of Scripture: especially that in the Psalms: Psalm. 148. 2. 5.
where David (inuiting and sommoning all sorts of people to sing praises to
God) says also of the Angels: praise ye him al ye his Angels, praise ye him
all ye his power. And therewithal, he gives this reason, saying: for, He
spoke the word and they were made, he commanded, and they were created. And
hereunto also accords that which the Apostle speaks saying: Col. 1. 16.
by him were all things created which are in heaven and in earth, things
visible, and invisible: whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers, all things were created by him, and for him, By all
which it is clear, that the very Angels are creatures: and created also by God.


Exorcistes. Yea, but when, or in what day created he them?


Orthodoxus. This I confess, is a more difficult question, then that it may
well be answered by any expres words set down in the sacred scriptures: Genesis 1.
1. 2. Psalm. 148. 2. 3. Heb. 1. 7. Revel. 4. 11. Psalm. 33. 6. Revel. 10. 6. Genesis
2. 1. 2.
although yet, by the Scriptures themselves, by probable reasons, and by the
authority also of ancient Fathers, some certeintie may be determined
concerning this point.


Pneumatomachus. How first by the Scriptures themselves?


Orthodoxus. The Scriptures declare, that they were undoubtedly created all
within the six days: as to allege one or two out of many. Psalm. 33. 6.
First David he says, By the word of the Lord were the heavens made: and all
the host of them by the breath of his mouth. Again, Revel. 10. 6.
the Angel in the Revelation, swears by the Lord, Who created the heaven, and
the things that are therein, and the earth, and the things that are therein,
and the sea, and the things that are therein. In both which places you see,
how the holy Ghost (speaking of the creation of all things) does first set
down the continents themselves, namely the heavens, the earth, and the sea:
and then next, the things contained in them. Showing by this selfsame order,
that the heavens, the earth, and the sea, were first created themselves: and
then the creatures contained in them. But the heavens, the earth, and the sea,
were all of them created within the six days: and therefore also the host of
heaven, and all the creatures in the earth, and the sea, were every of them
created within the six days. Genesis 2. 1. 2.
For Moses says flatly, that even in those six days, all the works of the
Lord were fully finished: and that God ceased the seventh day from all his
labors. Thus then you see it plainly demonstrated by sundry places of
Scripture: that the Angels also were all created within the works of those
six days creation.


Pneumatomachus. Well, and how prove you the same by probable reasons?


Orthodoxus. I prove it thus. Patricius lib. de essentia, and ente.
1. The Angels they are either created, or uncreated: but not uncreated:
therefore created. They cannot possibly be uncreated substances: for then,
they should also be infinite. Howbeit, Angels they are finite creatures, for
their actions are finite: yea, and then also their power, it is finite. But if
they be of a finite power, then also of a circumscriptible essence. Moreover,
it shall plainly appear anon in place convenient, that Angels are finite
creatures, and definitiuely also in some certain place: which thing can not
possible accord to any uncreated essence at all. And therefore Angels they are
not uncreated substances.

2 Secondly I prove it thus. If Angels be uncreated, then are they eternal:
but not eternal, therefore, not uncreated. That they are not eternal it is
very apparent. For, then should they be such as have neither beginning, nor
end of their essence: as also, their essence or nature it self, should then be
such, as has nothing in it either first, or last. But this agrees only to
God himself, and not to any creature in heaven, or in earth. And therefore if
there be Angels then were they created; and if created, then created no doubt
within the six days as was showed before. And thus much for the proof of
this point, by probable reasons.


Pneumatomachus. Well. Let us hear next the testimony of fathers concerning
this Question.


Orthodoxus. Withal my heart. Methodius in sermon. de resurrect. lib. 2. tom. 1.
Epiphanius lib. 2. tom. 2.
Wherein also (for breuities sake) I will only but rehearse their names, and
refer you to the consideration of their several treatises. The authors be
these. Methodius, Epiphanius, Athanasius, Augustine, Eucherius, Theodoretus,
and Damascenus. All these do very confidenly avouch upon special occasions,
Athanasius, de beatit, fi^ij Dei. Aug. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 11. cap. 5.
and, against the Manicheis, the Priscillianists, and other such heretics:
that the Angels whatsoever were the undoubted workmanship of God, howsoever
their creation is not apparently laid forth in the sacred Scriptures. Yea,
Eucherius, de creat. Angel. Theodoretus, de dijs, and Angelis, lib. 3.
The Councels of Laterane and Bracha both, do jointly determine, that the
Angels are created of God, and are not eternal: in so much, as if any shall
hold the contrary, they conclude him accursed of God. Thus then, you see it
apparently evident by Scripture, Damasc. de orth. fide lib. 2. cap. 3.
by reasons, and the testimonies also of sundry fathers: that Angels and
spirits (being finite creatures of God) were undoubtedly created within the
six days. Conc Lat. magn. Can. 1.



Pneumatomachus. But in what day of those six were they created? Conc.
Brachor. council. primum. cap. 5.



Orthodoxus. Touching the very day it self, there is some difference in
judgment among the Divines: Magist sentent. lib. 2. did. 2.
some hold they were created the first day, and some the second. But, whether
of both, is not certainly concluded: although it may probably be gathered,
August. in libro de trinitate.
they were (in very deed) created the secondday, thus. That they were created
before the third day, may plainly be proved by the words of the Lord unto Job,
Job. 38. 4. 5. 6. 7.
saying. Where were thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? Declare if
thou have understanding. Magist. sentent. lib. 2. did. 2. Beda in Job. 38. 7.
Strabus, Job. 1. ^. and 2. 1.
Who has laid the measures thereof if thou know? Or who has stretched the
line over it? Where upon are the foundations thereof set? Or, who laid the
corner stone thereof? When the stars of the morning praised me, and all the
sons of God rejoiced? The Lord in that place (by the sons of God)
understands the Angels and spirits: affirming moreover, that, even they also
did celebrate his name with praise, so soon as he had laid the earthes
foundation. Genesis 1. 10.
Now the earth (Moses says) was made the third day: and therefore, if the
Angels on that day sang praises to God, it follows necessarily, they were
then created before: for, how should they sing praises before their creation?
But, it is unlikely they were the first day created: because, Genesis 1. 1. 2. 3.
4. 5.
nothing on that day was created (says Moses) but the confused Chaos from
whence the rest of the creatures were orderly formed: and that primarie light,
which separated the night from the day. If follows therefore, that they were
all created the second day, together with that celestial firmament: under
whose name is also contained that supreme heaven, which is called the third
heaven, paradise, or the heaven of the blessed. And this thing also is yet more
plainly expressed by the words of our Savior Christ, who says that the
kingdom of heaven was prepared for the elect, Math. 25. 34.
(...), from the worlds foundation: that is, after the Lord, upon the very
first day had created the Chaos aforesaid, then by and by, from out of that
Chaos, Genesis 1. 6. 7. 8.
was brought the firmament (as Moses affirms) which the Lord God prepared for
all the elect. By all this it is evident, that Angels and Spirits, they are
essential creatures of God, created also within the six days: and so (by
consequence) your unanswerable argument, is answered (you see) to the full.


Pneumatomachus. I acknowledge no less. But sir, (having laid down the main
grounds of my error, and answered directly my arguments) it remains by
promise, that now likewise you produce your own reasons, to prove plainly
unto me, both spirits and Devils.


Orthodoxus. Very true. And therefore (having first removed the old rubbish
which ouerturned the rule of your reason) it comes now very fitly in place,
to show further unto you, that, the Angels of God (whether good or evil) are
truly essential and substantial spirits: as may plainly appear by these
following reasons, and first, from their sundry names attributed unto them thus:

1 Names, Hieronimus Zanchius, de operibus Dei, lib. 2. cap. 2.
they are the signs and notions of things. Which names, when they signify any
thing, properly subsisting of it self: then, that thing also it self is a
substance no doubt. But the Angels, they are set forth by sundry names, which
do signify substances. Math. 25. 41.
For, first they be called Angels, that is to say, messengers: but, a
messenger, or a minister appointed, cannot but be a subsistence. Also, they are
called (...)* that is, intellectual powers: but, that which has understanding
and knowledge, is undoubtedly a substance. Zach. 3. 2.
Briefly, they be called Satan, that is an adversary, Math. 4. 1. 5.
also Devils, that is accusors also, strong armed men, also the God of this
world, Luc. 11. 21.
the princes and powers of the air, the governors of this world, 2. Cor. 4.
4. Ephesians. 2. 2. and, 6. 12.
murderers, roaring lions, the dragon, the old serpent, and so forth. All which
several names, do undoubtedly signify a thing subsisting; Ioh. 8. 44. 1. Pet.
5. 8. Revel. 12. 7. 9.
wherein is a power, from whence proceeds an action: and therefore, there are
essential spirits and Devils.

2 Again, if spirits and Devils were only but the secret motions and
affections of men, then undoubtedly, so many famous actions as the Scriptures
record, and the same also externally to the outward senses, could in no wise
accord unto them: but the consequent is false, for the Scriptures apparently,
and without any trope, do celebrate their office, and record their sundry
actions, namely, that they stand before God, serve him, execute his precepts
and judgments, that they do daily, assault, tempt, torment, circumuent, and
seek to devour us, and so forth. But, how should these, or any one of these
actions, be possibly performed of such as are not in (deed) true substances?

3 Again, things created in them selves and not in an other subject, yea, and
so, as they subsist of them selves alone, those things undoubtedly have a true
subsistence. But, spirits and Devils, they are so created (no doubt) as they
subsist in them selves, neither are they inherent, or inexistent, in any other
subject whatsoever: and therefore spirits and Devils, they have undoubtedly a
true subsistence.

4 Again, whatsoever living creature is endued with reason, understanding, and
will, that must needs be some thing of it self subsisting: but, spirits and
Devils, they are living creatures endued with reason, understanding, and will:
and therefore, somethings (no doubt) of themselves subsisting.

5 Again, nothing can possibly persist in the truth, nor nothing can fall
from their first estate, unless the same be some essence subsisting of it
self, and pertaker also of understanding, and will. But, some of the Angels
do persevere in the truth, and some again, have fallen from the same: and
therefore, Angels and spirits, are some essences subsisting of themselves, and
pertakers also of understanding and will.

6 Again, if spirits and Devils, were only but the evil motions, and
affections arising in men, it should be absurd, either to distinguish their
numbers, or to express their several actions: but the consequent is false, as
all that fear God will confess, and therefore also the antecedent it self.

7 Again, whatsoever does speak, assault, suggest, tempt, afflict, torment,
and circumuent, to devour, that must necessarily be a subsistence. But
spirits and Devils do so, for they spoke to Euah, Genesis 3. 1.
they assaulted Achab, and suggested an untruth into all his prophets, 1. King.
22. 22.
they tempted Christ, they afflicted and tormented Saul, Math. 4. 1.
they made Judas to hang himself, they seek to winnowe and fan men, 1. Sam.
16. 14.
yea and to circumuent all the children of God to destruction: Math. 27. 5.
and therefore, spirits and Devils, Luc. 22. 31.
2. Cor. 2. 11.
must necessarily be some subsistence.

8 Again, if Angels and spirits be only but accidental affections, 1. Pet.
5. 8.
and no true substances in deed, then, neither shall we after this life, Math.
22. 30.
be any true substances, for, the scriptures affirm, that after the
resurrection, we shall be like to the Angels in heaven. Now then, if Angels and
spirits be not true substances in deed, shall we also cease to be substances?

9 Again, Aristotle, he proves this world to be perfect, for that it
consistes of all those things which can be desired therein, or which may in any
wise appertain to the perfection thereof. Howbeit, to the perfection of the
whole, there is required therein, three several sorts of substances: the first
invisible, the second visible, and the third partly invisible and partly
visible. The second sort, namely the visible substances, are the heavens, the
elements, and all things made of the elements. The third sort, namely the
substances, partly invisible, and partly visible, are men who consist of a
soul and body together, the soul invisible, and the body visible. Now then,
if Angels, who are of themselves invisible, should not be substances, then
should there be wanting to the world, invisible substances: and so, the world
should be imperfect. But the world, it is perfect, as all, both Philosophers
and Divines do affirm. And therefore Angels they be substances invisible and
spiritual.

10 Lastly, common experience (from the beginning of the world to this present
hour) has apparently approved unto us, that there be Angelical spirits and
Devils: and therefore not to be denied of any, unless he will show himself a
swinish Saduce, or some monkish Anthropomorphite, as was showed before. And
thus have you briefly heard my several reasons, which prove unto you both
spirits and Devils.


Pneumatomachus. Sir, by that which you have spoken, I am now thoroughly
persuaded, that Angels are indeed essential and spiritual substances.
Howbeit, this one thing does trouble me greatly: namely, that (seeing all
Angels were equally created according to the true image of God) no one of them
all may truly be said to be evil.


Orthodoxus. You do well in delivering your doubts, but, go to, frame your
argument.


Pneumatomachus. I frame it thus. Timoth. Brichtus in animaduers. Physica.
A thing created to the image of God, cannot be, nor may not be said to be
evil. But all Angels and spirits were (in the beginning) created all alike to
the image of God: therefore no Angel or spirit either can be, or may be said
to be evil. Now sir, if none of them can, or may be said to be evil: how
should there be any Devils at all?


Orthodoxus. Very true as you say, if that which you seem to conclude were
as truly concluded. Howbeit, I answer thus. First concerning your proposition
I say. That, so far forth as any thing created to Gods image has truly
that image, keeps and loses it not: so far forth, and so long, any such
thing may not truly be said to be evil. Now next to your assumption I
answer thus. All those Angelical spirits so created of God, they did not
retain and hold falt that true image of God wherein they were first created:
but willingly rejected and fled from the same. And therefore I distinguish
thus. The Harmony of co^fessions, 58. Confessio Belgia articl. 12. Confessio
Franc. artic. 7.
Angels created in the beginning according to the true image of God, did either
persevere in that original integrity: or else, they wilfully fell from the
same. The one sort are finally confirmed in that selfsame goodness wherein
they were first created, and therefore, good Angels: the other sort loosing
their first goodness, are hardened in that selfsame evil whereinto they first
fell, and therefore evil Angels. So then, to imagine that the evil Angels
also notwithstanding their euilnes, must still show forth that selfsame
image of God from which they fearfully fell: is nothing else in effect, but to
confound the forms of their distinguished kinds. For it is one thing to be
created good; and another thing, still to retain that selfsame goodness. The
one is past: the other is present. And the vanity of that childish conceit
may be made evident by the like reason thus. All men are created in Adam to the
image of God. But Atheists and ungodly ones are men: therefore Atheistes and
ungodly ones, they show forth the image of God. Here is more in the
conclusion, then was put in the premises. For this only should follow,
namely, that Atheistes in as much as they are men, were first created according
to the image of God: but in that they are now fallen, they do resemble the image
of the Devil.


Pneumatomachus. Sir, my judgment concerning these points, is now (I praise
God) so clearly enlightened, as my neighbor Lycanthropus and my self may well
be at one: being both fully resolved (I hope) in that self same controversy
which we held so hotly as we came from Mahgnitton.


Lycanthropus. If you be therein at one with your self: you are also at one
with me. For, I was resolved before, and your self now confesfesseth: that
there are essential spirits and devils.


Pneumatomachus. Yea, I do freely confess it from my very heart.


Physiologus. I am right glad to hear so good a beginning.


Exorcistes. And even so am I, I assure you.


Orthodoxus. Gods name be blessed for this special grace.


Lycanthropus. So be it. But sir? as there will be tide after tide, all the
while the Seas themselves do ebb and flow: so surely, so long as men have in
them their boiling affections, 1. Cor. 1. 10.
so long no doubt, the dispatch of one controversy, Iam. 4. 1.
will be but the beginning of another, as we see here by present experience.
For, at our very first meeting, my friend Phylologus affirmed flatly, that
(howsoever there be granted essential spirits and Devils) their possession (in
these days of the Gospel) is denied of some, and doubted of many.


Philologus. I said so in deed.


Orthodoxus. This false forth very fit for the next main point, Namely, what
we have to consider concerning spirits and Devils. Howbeit, because (it may be)
you grow faint by reason of travel: Let us here break off (and after we have
refreshed our bodies) make speedy recourse to this present place: and so enter
a fresh on the matter.


Physiologus. Sir, we do willingly attend your good pleasure: if it pleases
the rest of our company.


Lycanthropus. It pleases us woonderous well. For the motion (I assure you) is
such, as I would have made mine own self: but for giving offense.


Orthodoxus. Let us then arise and depart.


The end of the first Dialogue.
The second Dialogue.
THE ARGUMENT.
The power of Spirits and Devils, their possession, what it is: and whether the
Devil does essentially enter into the possessed man's mind, or not?

The speakers names.
PHILOLOGVS. LYCANTHROPVS. PNEVMATOMACHVS. PHYSIOLOGVS. ORTHODOXVS. EXORCISTES.
Philologus. GOod Sirs? We three have long expected your coming: howbeit, you
are heartily welcome.


Lycanthropus. Phylologus (I perceive) is wholly upon the matter.


Pneumatomachus. Pardon the man, he is pained (you see) like to a traveling
woman, that wants only a midwife.


Physiologus. What is the opinion (I pray you) that troubles his patience?


Lycanthropus. This Sir. He says, that howsoever there be granted essential
spirits and Devils, yet, their possession (in these days of the Gospel) is
denied of some: and doubted of many.


Philologus. I said so in deed. And, although I dare not flatly deny: yet, I
also do much doubt it my self.


Physiologus. Your name I perceive, is Philologus: which in signification, is
as much to say, as a man that delights or loves to talk. You propound not
this opinion of purpose (I hope) to declare unto us, that you have a name given
you, very fitly resembling your nature: namely, that you are but a talkatiue
person, or one that takes great pleasure to hear himself speak in these
points?


Philologus. No truly, I propound the same in simplicity of heart, showing you
plainly what my self suppose: and desiring resolution wherein I do doubt.


Physiologus. Wherefore doubt you that Devils have possession in men?


Philologus. Because I suppose it impossible in nature: and, incredible also in
all sound Divinity.


Lycanthropus. What Philologus? Is it supernatural for the Devil to possess
a man? Math. 8. 28.
Do not the scriptures in every place speak plainly of the possessed with
Devils? Marc. 1. 32.
of the entering of Devils into men? Math. 12. 45.
of casting them forth? Marc. 9. 25.
of the Devil that entered into the heart of Judas? Luc. 22. 3.
of the Devil that filled Ananiah his heart with a lie, and a thousand such
places? Ioh. 13. 27.
All which, so apparently and so plainly approoueth this point: Act. 5. 3.
that (for any to doubt thereof) were but to call into question, the sunshine
at midday.


Philologus. I neither hold in supernatural, for the Devil (in some sort) to
possess a man: neither doubt I of that truth which those Scriptures import. I
only suppose, that the matter it self is not so grossly to be understood, as
some (from those places) would seem to conclude: wherein, I do freely submit
to master Orthodoxus his censure. And therefore, object what you can for your
self: and, let him resolve us both in the point.


Lycanthropus. Content, if it please him to take the pains.


Orthodoxus. With very good will, and so much the rather, because it falls
forth fit for our next general purpose; namely, what we have especially to
consider in spirits and Devils.


Lycanthropus. What have we especially to consider in them?


Orthodoxus. Having proved directly, that there be Spirits and Devils: we have
now next, to consider in them, two principal things. The first concerns
their power over men: the second respects the timely subduing of that self
same power.


Lycanthropus. What mean you by their power over men?


Orthodoxus. I understand thereby, Martinus Bucerus, in Marc. 1. 23.
that Dominion, or rule which the very Devils themselves (by the just
judgment of God) do (in all outrage) even exercise over the natural offspring
of Adam: and, which is undoubtedly most wonderful, respecting both body and
soul. Howbeit, this their appointed power is determinate, Ioh. 12. 31. and 16.
11.
finite, Ephesians. 2. 2. and 6. 12.
and limited certainly within it own special bounds: Math. 12. 29.
albeit the Devil (in an especial regard thereof) be called the prince of
this world: Luc. 11. 12.
the God of this world: the prince of airie powers: and that strong armed man
which keeps his house in peace, till some stronger invade him. And, this
their said power is twofold. Namely, either their power of possession: or,
their power of obsession.


Lycanthropus. What is your opinion (I pray you) concerning the possession of
Devils: in these days of the Gospel?


Orthodoxus. My opinion therein, shall be showed at large: after your self
have first opened unto me, what you do mean, by the Devil his possession in
man.


Lycanthropus. By the Devil his possession in man, Luc. 11. 22.
I understand his essential and violent entering into him, Tho. Aquinas 2. 2.
q. 136. artic. 2. fol. 275 Erasm. Sarcereus in Luc. 11. 20. 21.
as men, by force and arms do enter an house: and so, inherently possesses,
and peaceably enjoys that self same person, as his proper possession, and
peculiar dominion, appointed unto him of God. For, possession (you know) it
imports a peaceable dominion.


Orthodoxus. That, possession imports a peaceable dominion, we do never
deny. But where prove you such an essential possession as your self
speaks of, in all the Scriptures? Nay, where find you these words (
possession, or possessed) peculiarly appropriated to the Devil over men:
throughout the whole Bible, in the old, or new testament.


Lycanthropus. Where find I the words ( possession, or possessed) appropriate
to Devils, throughout the whole Bible? Surely, wheresoever the Evangelist
Matthew does handle those matters, there he usually, and purposely puts down
those self same words. As for example, Math. 4. 24. and 8. 16. and 8. 28. and
8. 33. and 9. 32.
he says, they brought many to Christ that were possessed with Devils. Again,
he healed many that were possessed with Devils. Again, there met him two
possessed with Devils. Again, they told the people what was become of the
possessed with Devils. Again, they brought unto him, a dumb man possessed with
a Devil. Yea, and in every place else, where like occasion is offered, he
uses like speech: which argues evidently, that the Devil has an essential
possession in men.


Orthodoxus. Arguing (as you do) from a deceivable ground, you cannot
possibly collect from thence, any certain conclusions: concerning especially
your cause in Question. For, this I assure you of, that, in no one of those
places which your self have recited, neither, in any other text else
throughout the whole Bible, is there any one word in the Original, that
imports an essential possession applied to Devils: I mean, that (by any one
Lexicon) may possibly bestretched to signify any such essential inherencie of
Devils in the bodies of men, howsoever it has pleased the English translator
to thrust in the same.


Lycanthropus. The English translatour, he has thrust in no more I hope: then
the original text will bear.


Orthodoxus. Yes, howsoever your self do absurdly collect from the English
translation, an essential possession of devils: I assure you of this, there is
no one word throughout the original, inte^ding such purpose. And, very
certain I am, that, if the holy Ghost had ever but purposed to put down such
an essential possession of Devils, as you would bear us in hand: he wanted
not his proper words or terms to express the same either in the Hebrew or
Greek, in which two languages, the canonical scriptures themselves, were
primarily indighted by the spirit of God. For, first concerning possession: the
Hebrews they use (for the most part) two special words to express the same.


Lycanthropus. What is the first word they use for possession?


Orthodoxus. The first word is achuzzah, (...), id est, (...). and (...), id
est, apprehendit* apprehensum, detinuit, obtinuit, retinuit. Hinc, (...), vt
Nomb. 31. 30. (...), id est, apprensum, captum.
which arises from the radical verb, achaz: that is, to hold, to apprehend,
to detain, or retain the thing apprehended: to obtain very firmly, or
strongly. Hereof comes, the nowne, achuz: which properly signifies, that
special part of the inheritance which is taken, apprehended, or held by a
special right. As appears in Nombers, saying: But of the half of the
Israelites (which went not to war) thou shall take one (achuz) that is one
apprehended, possessed, or taken out of fifty. In like manner from the
aforesaid radical word (achaz) is derived the nowne, achuzzah: which properly
imports such a detension, Item, (...), possessio, apprehensio, detentio quae
tenetur a possidentibus, vt Nomb. 32. 5. (...), id est, (...), in possessionem
apprehension, or possession, as is peculiarly possessed of the possessours
themselves, as very plainly appears in Nombers, by the Rubenits petition
put up unto Moses, saying thus. If we have found grace in thine eyes, let this
land be given to thy servants (laachuzzah) that is, for a peculiar possession,
and bring us not over Jorden. The very self same use of this word, appears
also in Ioshuah, saying thus. Now return ye, Josh. 22. 4. (...) id est, (...).
ad terram possessionis vestrae. Psalm. 2. 8. (...) id est, (...). in
possessionem tuam.
and go to your tents, achuzzathchem, that is, to the land of your proper
possession: or to that land which you peculiarly apprehend, possess and hold.
Again in the second Psalm, the holy Ghost puts down that self same word, to
the self same purpose, saying thus: Desire of me, and, I will give thee the
heathen for thine inheritance; and the utmost part of the earth:
vaachuzzatheak, that is, for thy possession, or thy peculiar apprehension and
right. In these and infinite other places of scripture, the holy Ghost (you see)
entending purposely to speak of any matter of possession: he uses a very fit
and significant word for that self same purpose. And therefore, if he had ever
purposed to put down any such essential possession of Devils, as you dream
of: he wanted not words for the same. Although notwithstanding, this I must
tell you withal, that if he had borrowed this word from the Hebrews for such
a supposed purpose: Yet could not the same have imported any such an essential
inherencie in the bodies of men, as you bear us in hand, but had signified
only, an apprehending, an holding, a firm detayning, or possessing of a
thing, and no more.


Lycanthropus. Well, yet in the new testament (it may be) the Greek text, has
for that Hebrew word achaz: some word in the Scriptures importing such an
essential possession.


Orthodoxus. It may be it has not: and, how then? that it has not, it is
very apparent. For, from this Hebrew word, achaz: the Grecians (by an
inuersion, or turning of letters) do purposely derive the Greek verb Scheo:
(...), id est, teneo, (...), id est, apprehendo. (...), id est, detinut, (...),
id est, contine^item, (...), inde (...). Aristophanes. Luci^nus. Math. 19. 22.
M^rc. 10. 22. Act. 2. 45. and 5. 1. 1. These. 4. 4.
which signifies to apprehend, or hold. And thereof comes, metascheo: which
signifies to apprehend, or lay fast hold upon. Also, kateschon: which
signifies to detain. Also, ischanao: which signifies to retain, or to hold.
Again, they use eftsoons the word ctema: which properly signifies a
possession: albeit that men captiuated and taken in wars, are also called,
ctemata: that is, such persons as are made bondslaues, or held in a slavish
thraldom or bondage. This word ctema, is ordinarily observed in the new
testament, to set forth possessions by: as appears in sundry places.
Neither of these words is used of the holy Ghost, to express that your
pretended possession of Devils: which if they had been indeed, yet (unless to
apprehend, to hold, to contain, to detain, to retain, or keep fast, be but
one, and the same with these your supposed essential possessions) you cannot
congruently conclude from thence, any essential inherencie of Devils, in the
bodies of men.


Lycanthropus. Well, be it so: but what is that other word which the Hebrews
do use for possessions?


Orthodoxus. The other word which they commonly observe for such purpose,
(...), id est, (...), id est possedit, occupauit, habuit in dominio, and
potestate sua. hinc, (...), id est, possessio.
is, iereshah: arising from the radical word, iarash: that is, to possess
certain bounds or territories, to hold in his proper right dominion, or power:
to obtain by special right, to inherit, etc. Properly, it signifies the
challenging of something peculiar to a man's self, the same being primarily
obtained by his proper coin, by a lawful succession, or proper dominion: as a
thing that was conquered by war, or some other such means. Neither is such a
possession as the word, iareshah imports to be only understood of grounds, or
of territories: but the same also, is usually spoken of such servants, or men,
(...), id est efflagitatio contentiosa. (...), id est, concessit, vel
potestatem dedit.
as are brought into bondage. It has a special affinity with two other
Hebrew words: namely, aresheth: which signifies a contentious, importunity, or
an earnest begging of something: and, rashah, which signifies to grant, or
give power. Because, to possess a man, is, so to employ him, withal his
faculties, possessions, and treasures: as if he were altogether, but an exiled
person, or a poor man destitute of succor, being utterly eiected from his
proper bounds, and peculiar territories. For the sense of this word, iarash;
you may see in sundry places: especially, Ierem. 49. 1. (...) Nomb. 24. 18.
(...), id est, (...), i. (...), id est (...), i. possessio.
in Jeremy. Hereof comes (as I told you before) the word, iereshah: that is, a
possession: and thereby, is signified properly, any thing whatsoever, that has
been subdued by the party possessing the same, as appears in Nombers. Also,
from the word iarash, is derived the nowne, ierushah: which signifies
properly, such a possession as some does peculiarly possess. And, this word,
is so taken, but thrice in the Bible. Howbeit, Isa. 14. 24.
when this word, ierushah, is applied to the heart: Abd. 1. 17.
then, it betokens properly, Job. 17. 11.
those selfsame cogitations or thoughts, which the mind it self does
peaceably possess: as appears in Job, Job. 17. 11. (...), id est,
possessiones cordis mei. vide Tremel. in Job. Job. cap. 17. 10. and Franciscus
vatabal. ibid. Deuteronomy. 33. 4. (...) i. (...). Exodus 6. 8. Ezech. 11. 4. and 25.
4. and 33. 25. and 36. 2.
where he says. My days are passed away, my cogitations are violently taken
from me: I mean (morashe lebabi) the possessions of my heart. That is, those
happy and comfortable cogitations which my soul in a good conscience, by the
blessing of God, did challenge to it self by a peculiar right or possession. In
like manner, from, iarash, arises the word, morashah: which signifies
properly, such a kind of possession as people enjoy by a certain peculiar
right, as appears in Deuteronomie, where the people say thus: Moses commanded
us a law, morashah kehillath Iaakob. I mean, a peculiar inheritance for the
congregation of Iaakob: That, is, such an inheritance, as shall pass, by an
hereditarie right or possession, among the house of Israel, from generation to
generation. The like use of this word morashah, does evidently appear by those
several quotations of scripture; which we have purposely put down in the
Margin. By all which it is very apparent, that, albeit the holy Ghost should
have purposely used any one of these Hebrew words to express your pretended
possession of Devils: yet could you not have concluded from thence any such an
essential inherencie of Devils in the bodies of men, as you would bear us in
hand.


Licanthropus. But, does not the Greek word, which the Septuagint uses to
express the word, iarash; import so much?


Orthodoxus. Nothing less I assure you. (...), and (...), id est, termino, and
determino. (...), id est terminus. (...), id est, definitio, vel constitutio.
For, from that word iarash: arises, orizo, and orixomai: which signifies, to
bound, or determine the territories, and possessions of land. From thence also
is derived these following nownes: namely, orion, and orismos: which
signifies, a bondarie, a definition, or constitution. Also, this word,
exorizo, that is, to exterminate, or to disherite. Also, exorismos: which
betokenth an exile, (...), id est, extermino, and exhaeredito. (...), i.
exilium. (...), possessio, vel haereditas. Math. 5. 5. and 10. 9. Act. 1. 18.
and 5. 1. 1. Cor. 6. 9. and 7. 30. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 4.
or banishment. From whence also arises very fitly, the inheriting, or
dishinheriting: or rather (if you please) the possessing, and dispossessing of
heirs. The Gretians in like sort they use another word, called cleronomia;
which signifies properly, an inheritance, or rule of possessions. Briefly,
albeit, the holy Ghost (in the new testament) has sundry words to set out the
possession of things as appears by the places put down in the Margin: yet,
could no one of them all have fitted your turn, or possibly have extended it
self to this your pretended purpose. By all the premises then, it is very
apparent, that, if the holy Ghost had ever determined to establish your
supposed essential possession of Devils: he wanted not proper and significant
words to express his said purpose. Albeit notwithstanding, if he had
purposely put down any one of these words either Hebrew or Greek to import a
possession unto us: yet would no one of them all (in any congruent speech)
have ever been able to avouch that essential inherencie of Devils in the
bodies of men, which your self would fondly conclude from our English
translation, without any warrant at all from the original text.


Lycanthropus. Though none of the Evangelists have precisely put down in any
one of those places, no such word at all, as may properly express the
essential possession of spirits and Devils: perhaps yet, they have some other
word else equivalent therewith in sense.


Orthodoxus. Perhaps no: and, without al peradventure they have not. For, the
very word it self, which the holy Ghost observes in every of those your
quoted Scriptures, (...). Iam. 3. 15. Erasmus, in Math 4. 24. Hugo Cardinal.
Math. 4. 24. Gualter ibid. Moses Pellach. in Mat. 17. 16. Beza, ibid. Arct^us,
in Marc. 5.
is Daemonizomenoi: which with all true interpretours, both Latin, Italian,
French, and English, is ordinarily and usually translated Demoniakes: that is,
men Diuillished, I mean actually afflicted, tormented, or vexed with Devils.
But no one of them all did ever translate it thus; namely, men essentially
possessed with Devils inherently in them. Yea, this very word Daemonizomenos,
is not only so translated, but, is so also understood of the most judicial,
and soundest Divines. For not any one of them all, do understand the same of
essential possessions: but, every of them do take it to signify only, some
such extraordinary actual affliction, vexation, or torment, as Satan himself
(by the special appointment of God) does effectiuely inflict upon men for a
time. Mart. Bucerus in Math. 1. 23. Iohannis Caluini. in Math. 4. 24. and 8.
16. and 9. 32. Aug. Marlorat. in Act. 10. 38. Gualter, in Math. 12. 22. Theod.
Beza in Math. 8. 16.
If you happily do call the truth of that which I speak into question, let
their several writings be exactly considered, and then tell me, whether any
one of them all do understand by Demoniakes, any such persons as are
essentially possessed with a Devil inherently in them, as your self very fondly
imagine: and not such rather, as (by the extremity of those their actual
torments) are become outragiouslie furious, cruel, and quite out of order.
Thus then, by all the premises it is very apparent (you see) that, neither by
a proper significant term, nor by any other word else equivalent therewith,
neither yet by the translations of learned Interpretours, or the exquisite
judgment of soundest Divines, you may from those your quoted scriptures, (in
any possible or congruent order) undertake to conclude (as you do) the
essential possession of spirits and Devils: but, must necessarily take them
only for such Demoniakes, or diuellished persons, as are actually afflicted,
tormented, or vexed by Satan.


Lycanthropus. Why then should the translatour so presumptuously put down the
word possession: if no such thing be apparent in all the original?


Orthodoxus. That there is no such matter there (as your self supposes) you
have sufficiently heard before. Erasm, annot at. in Math. 4. 24.
Neither did the translatour himself (as it seems) intend any such essential
possessions, but only an actual vexation by Satan: howsoever he did to
carelessly put down the word possession: as a word more familiar amongst us.
No surely, it is certain, the Evangelist himself, he never intended such
essential possessions by the word Daemonizomenoi: but only an actual
affliction, vexation or torment. And therefore the other two Evangelists Mark
and Luke (reporting with Mathewe, those selfsame stories, concerning the
aforesaid Demoniakes) they use not the word possessed at all. But, Math. 8.
28. Marc. 5. 2. Luc. 8. 27.
those whom Mathewe intituleth Demoniackes, Mark terms, a man having an
unclean spirit: and Luke, he says there met Christ, a man who had a Devil
a long time. Making it a matter merely indifferent, and alone in effect, to be
a Demoniacke, and to have a Devil, or an unclean spirit: as for the word
possessed, they never use it, neither is the same found throughout the
original, applied to Devils. And undoubtedly, these words ( possession, or
possessed) being carelessly thrust into the text hand over head by our English
translators: is not the least occasion, that the whole world (by a common
received error from hand to hand) has been so universally possessed with
many gross errors concerning the Devil his supposed possession in man.
Moreover, whereas you boldly affirm, that the Evangelist Matthew, in every
place else, where like occasion is offered, does usually observe the selfsame
phrase; Math. 15. 22.
that is not so. For (speaking of the woman of Canaans Demoniacke daughter) he
says not, have mercy on me, for my daughter is pitifully possessed: but, my
daughter is miserably vexed with a Devil.


Exorcistes. What then I pray you, does your self understand by the Devil his
power of possession?


Orthodoxus. By the devil his power of possession, I understand, that his
tyrannical dominion which (by a peculiar propriety, according to the purpose
of God) he does exercise over some special persons, in afflicting, tormenting,
and tempting both inwardly, and outwardly: so farforth especially, as his
commission permittes him.


Philologus. Give me leave (good sir) to interrupt you a little. For, either my
wits are wyld, or, Lycanthropus and your self, have both (at unawares)
concluded one and the selfsame thing, concerning the devil his possession in
man: surely, for my own part, I perceive in your speeches no difference at al.


Orthodoxus. If your wits were wyld, you would then imagine, as the dronken
man does, that, what one thing soever you behold at a blush, were undoubtedly
twain: whereas you rather conclude, that, two distinct matters, are but one
and the same. And therefore, your wits (it should seem) are, rather worn to
the stumps, then wyld: being unable to discern the difference between our two
speches, the difference it self, being so apparently evident. For, whereas
Lycanthropus very confidentlie avouches a substantial entrance of the Devil
into man, as it were with force and arms, to conquer and keep a possession:
I (delivering briefly my mind, concerning the Devil his possession in man)
spoke only of his afflicting, tormenting, and vexing of man. Howbeit, for
further clearing the Question, we must here distinquish the Devil his supposed
possession, thus: namely, it is either a real, or an actual possession.


Lycanthropus. What is the real possession?


Orthodoxus. The real possession, is supposed to be some essential,
substantial, or personal entrance of the Devil into man, for a more
effectual executing of that his tyrannical force and violence upon him. And,
this supposed possession (how incredible soever) is thought to be twofold:
namely, either a mental, or corporal possession.


Lycanthropus. What mean you by mental possession?


Orthodoxus. Some understand thereby, that selfsame propriety, right or
dominion whereby the Devil does really, and essentially enter into, and
inherently dwell in the possessed man's mind, during the whole term of that
his tyrannical dominion. Now then, the matter of possession it self being
thus far discovered, I would gladly learn of Lyca^thropus, after what manner
he imagines the Devil to have a possession in man? Whether really, or
actually? My meaning is, whether he holds the Devil to have a personal
possession in man: or, a possession rather, by some powerful effect.


Lycanthropus. I am confidently persuaded, that the Devil has a very real,
essential, substantial, or corporal possession in those whatsoever, whom he
fully possesses.


Orthodoxus. I thought even so: and therefore, was driven to distinguish the
supposed possession of Devils as I did. Notwithstanding since you so confidently
ascribe unto Devils such a real and personal possession: Do tell me yet
further, whether you hold, that the Devils do really and substantially enter
into the mind alone, or into the body alone, or into the body and mind
together?


Exorcistes. Sir, let me freely afoord my opinion (I pray you) concerning this
special point.


Orhodoxus. Speak freely, and spare not.


Exorcistes. I am verily persuaded, that the Devil (if he have any real
possession at all) has only mental possession: my meaning is, that he does
substantially possess the mind alone.


Orthodoxus. What is your reason?


Exorcistes. My reason is this. Seeing the mind it self, and it only is that
wherein motion consists, and seeing the body is but the minds organon or
instrument, having naturally in it self no motion at all, or, no further
motion at most, then for those only actions wherein the said mind (whose
organon it is) imployeth the same: Haec Ambrosius super Lucam.
It seems reasonable, that therefore, the devil must really and
substantially, first possess the mind it self, or ever he can possibly bring
the body, unto any disordered actions, or, Luc. 22. 3. Ioh. 13. 27.
cause it to accomplish any his devilish attempts. And, even so the Evangelist
John, he expounds himself concerning the devil his possessing of Judas. For,
where he affirms that Satan (after the soppe) did enter into Judas: that
possession or entrance into him he shows before, to be nothing else in
effect, Ioh. 13. 2.
but, a putting into Judas his heart, to betray his master. Demonstrating
plainly unto us, that the devil himself, did first enter substantially into
Judas his heart or mind: before he could bring his body or tongue to attempt
the intended treason.


Orthodoxus. Your plain demonstration, does plainly demonstrate the contrary
to that which you seem to conclude: and the very text which you quote, does
even cut the throat of your childish opinion, or Cabalisticall fantasy
concerning Satan his sopposed substantial possession. For, Ioh. 13. 2.
seeing that Satan (in possessing Judas) did only but put the intended treason
into Judas his heart: it does plainly appear, that, the devil had in him no
substantial possession at all, but only, an actual, or powerful possession.
Psalm. 41. 9. Act. 4. 28.
By which said powerful possession, the devil (according to God his
determinate council) did but actually suggest, and effectually thrust the
intended treason into Judas his heart. Besides that, if the devil (as your
self, does imagine) must first, essentially enter into the mind of a man,
before he can bring the body it self to accomplish any his enterprises: it
follows consequently, that every man then, is essentially possessed of the
devil in his mind at the least, because every man (more or less) does
actually effect many devilish actions. And thus you may see your reason is too
too absurd, or rather no reason at all, to conclude the mental possession of
devils.


Physiologus. Sir, as your self have plainly satisfied Exorcistes his place
of scripture, and therewithal fully overthrown his supposed mental
possession: so, let me now answer I pray you, that very point of his argument,
from whence (though falsely) he would seem to enforce his dangerous
inferre^ce. Thus he reasons. The body of man, is but a bare organon of the
mind, to put only in action the minds conceipte: therefore, the Devil must
first conquer and fully possess the mind it self, before he can bring the
body unto any disordered actions. This I suppose is his argument: and, from
hence he would also implicatiuely conclude, that therefore, the Devil has no
power of him self, either to tempt, or torment any man outwardly in his
body, before he has first subdued and maistered his mind by a real possession.


Exorcistes. That in deed is my inferrence, and so I conclude.


Physiologus. This then I must tell you for truth, that (howsoever you seem in
show) you are nothing in substance: because neither is your inferrence sound,
nor your conclusion current. For, howsoever I do freely confess, there can be
no actual accomplishment of the work of sin, before the mind it self (being
first convict) be made to consent yet does it not follow, but that
(notwithstanding all this) a man may outwardly be tempted to sin, and
tormented also of Satan, though inwardly, the mind it self be never subdued.
And, although it be undoubtedly true, Iam. 1. 14. August. super Genes. and
Lyram. cap. 11. Lyra in Genes. cap. 3. 1.
that every man (being tempted) is enticed and drawn by his own
concupiscence, namely, by the concupiscible faculty of his proper mind: yet,
this is also as certainly true, namely, that, even the concupiscible faculty
also it self, is first set a work by means of the fantasy, or interior
sensitive power. Which said sensitive power (receiving an impression of such
sensible things as are offered unto her from the exterior obiectes of the
exterior senses) does forthwith set the concupiscible faculty a work, and
makes it to lust after those sensible things in conceipte. As for example,
whenever the devil entendeth to work man's mind to his mischeauous purpose,
he first makes an assault upon that which we call the sensitive faculty; (...).
and (by offering some deceaueable object unto the exterior senses) endeavors
to circumuent the senses them selves, Caluinus, in Genesis 3. 6.
and, so he bewitcheth the mind. And, even after this sort he seduced the
ears, and the eyes of Euah her self: telling her confidentlie, they should
know good and evil, Genesis 3. 6.
making her also believe, that the forbidden fruit was fair to behold, and
thereby subdued her sensitive faculty. And, because the delight of the
exterior senses, is to little or no purpose without the desire of the mind: the
devil therefore proceeds next to encounter with that which we call the
concupiscible faculty, (...).
namely, that, by which we are earnestly alured to affect those sensible
things, wherein the interior sensitive faculty so highly delights. And
hereupon also (by a false persuasion of good) he enticed Euah to covet that
fruit forbidden: Genesis 3. 5.
and so conquered likewise, her concupiscible faculty. And, because it is to
little or no purpose at al, that, the concupiscible faculty (being filthelie
deceived by a false persuasion of good) should affect the tentation, unless the
understanding also approve of the same: the devil therefore, he labors next,
to conquer that principal power of the mind, which we call the intellectiue
faculty. (...).
And, this also he endeavors to do, by discrediting that selfsame truth
whereupon the intellectiue faculty should fully and finally resolve it self,
notwithstanding any the forenamed deceaueable alurements from the sensitive or
concupiscible faculty arising against it. And, even after this sort he also
prevailed with Euah: Genesis 3. 4.
falsifying that infallible truth of God, which told her they should die the
death, and so overcame her intellectiue faculty. And, because it is to little
or no purpose, though the sensitive, the concupiscible, and intellectiue
faculties also be severally taynted, so long as the mind it self with a
valorous power withstands the tentation: the devil therefore, he laboreth
lastly, to leauie his uttermost force against that which we call the irascible
faculty, (...).
that I mean, wherewith we should mightelie withstand any his mischievous
purposes, according to the true direction of the intellectiue faculty it
self. And therefore, this irascible faculty he eftsoons assaulteth afresh,
by suggesting a false suspicion of some falsely supposed envy or malice of
God, in giving that rule whereupon the understanding relieth. And, even by this
selfsame means, Genesis 3. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
he cunningly circumuented our Grandmother Euah: telling her confidentlie, that
God forbade them not to taste of that fruit, as being evil in it self, but, of
a purposed malice to withhold them both from a more happy estate, Caluinus, in
Genesis 3. 5.
and so, (having fully vanquished her irascible faculty) he then forthwith
effected the sin to the full. Thus then, by all the premises it is very
apparent, that, those sundry tentations wherewith satan assaulteth men's minds,
they do ordinarily arise, first, from external alurements, and so proceed (by
degrees) to the mind it self: and that therefore, we need not imagine any
such mental possession for Satan, before he can bring the body of man to those
disordered actions, which tend to the full accomplishment of any his
mischievous purposes. For, Tho. Aquin. 2. 2. q. 35. art. 1. fol. 123. per modum
appetibilis: non per modum suggerentis.
by such mental possession, he might truly be said to tempt men rather by
some appetible means, then by any suggesting manner at all: which were absurd
to imagine, but very ridiculous for any one to avouch.


Lycanthropus. This sets forth the subtle proceedings of Satan, in tempting
men unto sin: but concludes nothing against his mental possession.


Orthodoxus. It fully concludes the point for which especially the same was
propounded: namely, that Satan he needs not first to enter essentially into
the possessed man's mind, before he can possibly bring the body it self unto
his slavish subjection. And in very deed, I see not to what purpose we should
yield him any mental possession at all?


Lycanthropus. Do you confidently hold; that the devil has no mental
possession in any?


Orthododoxus. I hold this for an infallible truth; namely, that the devil
does not essentially enter into any man's mind.


Pneumatomachus. What reasons have you for this your opinion?


Orthodoxus. I have manifold reasons to induce me unto it.


Philologus. Let us hear your reasons I pray you?


Orthodoxus. With very good will. And for a plainer proceeding, I will first
briefly put down the reasons themselves: and then prosecute them at large as
occasion is offered.


Lycanthropus. We like well your order: and therefore lay down your reasons.


Orthodoxus. My reasons are these. 1. First, no such mental possession may
possibly be proved from the written word.

2 The devil himself, as also man's mind, are every of them both,
intellectual powers, created of God for other more special ends, then that
supposed mental possession: it being no purposed end of God apparently
revealed in all the scriptures.

3 They are both of them spiritual substances, the one not being (by nature)
more subtle, more slender, or more thin then the other, neither yet, of more
capabilitie, or more apt to contain then the other: whereby it might of that
other be made the more capable.

4 There is nothing in heaven or in hell of power to penetrate, Psalm. 7. 9.
Act. 1. 24.
or to enter into the spirits of men, save only the eternal creator of
spirits.

5 By auouching the devil to be inherently in the possessed man's mind, we do
fearfully derogate from the Deity of the holy Ghost, and very dangerously
darken the miraculous operations of that sacred spirit: Ioh. 14. 16. 17.
whose peculiar office it is, by an unspeakable and admirable action,
(repletiuely) to inhabit and dwell in our hearts for ever.

6 If the devil does essentially enter into the very substance it self of the
possessed man's mind: then necessarily there must be, either a confusion of
substances, which to hold were absurd, or else a rending and separation of
substances at least, Diuulsio sieve distinctio subctantiarum.
called properly a vacuum, which were folly to imagine, but madness for any to
avouch.

7 If the evil Angels (in the execution of judgments) do enter essentially
into any man's mind: then also the good Angels (in the execution of mercies)
they do enter essentially into some man's mind. But the latter is false, and
therefore also the first.

8 If the mind be wholly in the whole body, Tota in toto, and tota in qualibet
part.
and wholly also in every part: also, if it alone be the first substantial
form and act of a natural body: how then may the devil be possibly
inherent. in the possessed man's mind, but either there must be a penetrating
of spiritual dimensions, or two distinct substances together at once in one and
the selfsame subject, or, two substantial forms in one and the same natural
body at least: all which are absurd.

9 If the devil be essentially inherent in the possessed man's mind: Penetratio
dimensionum. Simul and semel.
then is he so, either dimensiuely, or repletiuely, or definitiuely at the
least, or not at all. But not dimensiuely, for, so only are corporal
substances circumscribed in place: whereas the devil, he is only a spiritual
essence, and therefore, not dimensiuely local, as are corporal substances.
Neither can he be in the possessed man's mind repletiuely, for so only is God,
who only is of infinite and incircumscriptible being: and therefore
repletiuely fills each place whatsoever, whereas the devil is only a finite
and circumscriptible creature, comprehended after a sort, in one peculiar
place. And therefore he must necessarily be in the possessed man's mind
definitiuely, or not at all. Which although it be so, yet can we not thereby
conclude any substantial inherencie, but a being there determinately, and in
an only conceit.

10 Lastly, if the possessed man's mind be essentially a place for the devil:
then is it, either a common place, and so capable of many substances together,
or, a proper place, and so, absolutely able to circumscribe the devil his
essential being: for, a place is the circumscription of an essential
substance. And then also the devil, he must needs be a moveable body, yea and
the possessed man's mind (in that selfsame respect) must also become an
immovable body: otherways, progressus in infinitum.
there would be a progress in endlesnesse, which thing ever nature it self
does abhor. Or else, if neither a common, nor proper place, then necessarily
an imaginary place, or no place, at al: which, though it be granted, does not
conclude any real possession. For, an imaginary place, is only a place in
conceit: and so, by consequence, the devil he has only in man an imaginary
possession. Now then, al these the aforenamed reasons, do make me to hold for
infallible truth; that the devil does never essentiallie enter into any man's
mind.


Pneumatomachus. Your reasons I assure you, they satisfy me to the full: but,
what says Lycanthropus concerning this point?


Lycanthropus I say and hold (as before) that the devil (in so many at least
as are subjected unto him) has undoubtedly an entire and absolute possession;
yea, even in their very minds or hearts.


Orthodoxus. No such mental possession, may possibly be proved from the written
word.


Lycanthropus. Yes, Math. 12. 45.
the very scripitures themselves they plainly avouch, that the devil enters
and dwells in man: that he entered into the heart of Judas: Luc. 11. 26.
that he filled Ananiah his heart, and so forth. What other thing else may be
collected from thence; but, Luc. 22. 3.
Ioh. 13. 27.
Act. 5. 3.
that the devil has really in man, a mental possession?


Orthodoxus. You rely too much upon the bare letter it self, and that is the
only thing which deceaueth your judgment. For, albeit the bare letter does
say that the devil enters into, and dwells in man: Non formaliter, sed
effectiue.
that he entered into Judas his heart, and filled Ananiah his heart with guile:
yet, that self same entrance, that dwelling, and that filling of the heart,
Lyrain Lucam, cap. 9. 15. Ioh. 13. 2.
must not be formally, but effectiuely understood. As for example, the Devil
(in very deed and in truth) may truly be said to enter into the very heart of
a man: because, he powerfully suggesteth, and effectually works in man's
mind, Act. 5. 3.
his purposed mischiefs. Again, the devil may truly be said to dwell in the
heart, because, by the efficacy of his working power, 2. Tim. 2. 28.
he holds man's mind as a captiuated prisoner at his own will and pleasure.
Even as also, the Lord, he is said likewise to dwell in our hearts by faith: not
that he essentially inhabiteth there, but, by reason of the effectual working
of his mighty power.


Lycanthropus. You may expound at your pleasure: but I verily believe that the
devil has essentially in some, a mental possession.


Orthodoxus. Are not the devils, as also men's minds, intellectual powers,
created of God for other special purposes, then that which your self does
imagine? Prove by the word that the Lord in creating of them, did ever
propound to himself such a mental possession, then you say something unto it.


Philologus. Notwithstanding all this, if the devil has in man any real
possession at all: me thinks then, because he is a spirit, he should first
really possess the spirit of man.


Orthodoxus. The devil I confess is a spirit, and therefore he principally
affects man's spirit: and yet does it not follow, that therefore, he
substantially enters into the spirit of man, neither is there any sense in
such sequel. Johannes Ferus in Matheum, lib. 2. cap. 8. fol. 1 33.
For the devil himself, as also man's spirit were either of them both created
of God; and therefore, not uncreate, but created spirits of God. Neither is the
one by nature, more subtle, more slender, or more thin then the other:
neither yet, of more capabilitie, or more apt to contain then the other,
whereby it might of that other be made the more capable, August. de definit.
ecclesiasticorum dogm.
as was showed before. No surely that is a property, only peculiar to the
divine substance it self. Neither is any thing else in heaven or in hell, of
power to penetrate, or to enter into either an humane, or Angelical spirit,
but, that only eternal spirit, Psalm. 7. 9.
Act. 1. 24.
and almighty creator of all things of whom it is truly affirmed, that he
alone searches out, tries, understands, and knows the minds of all men.
Moreover, if the devil does substantially enter into, Zanch in Ephesians, cap. 1.
verse. 13. page 47. col. 1.
Ioh. 14. 16.
M. Perkins upon the Creed. fol. 405.
and really possess the mind of a man: then, what difference concerning that
point, between the holy Ghost and the devil? Or how is the deity of the
holy Ghost himself, by such unspeakable, or admirable action made apparent
unto us? For, even therefore is the holy Ghost declared to be true God:
because he is able repletiuely and by special operation, Job. 14. 17.
to dwell in man's spirit for ever, according to the testimony of our Savior
saying, he dwells with you, and shall be in you. By all which it is very
apparent, that (unless you dare deifie the Devil, and make him matchable with
God himself in divine essence, operation, and knowledge) you cannot, nor may
not affirm, that the devil does substantially possess and inhabit the minds
of men.


Philologus. Nay sir, I am I assure you, so sarre of from, either deifying the
devil, or making him in essence, operation, or knowledge any ways matcheable
with God: as I had rather utterly to deny him all manner of possession, then
avouch any thing at all that may import such an inferrence.


Lycanthropus. Well yet, I cannot be persuaded, but, that the devil has a
mental possession in some respect.


Orthodoxus. He has so indeed. Isidor. de sum. bono, lib. 3.
Otherways, it were to little or no purpose for him to deal with the body:
unless he could therewithal accomplish (in some sort) the minds consent.
Howbeit, that the devil does substantially possess the mind, can never be
proved: and the contrary, by me has been plainly declared. Notwithstanding, I
do freely confess, that the devil has an actual, or powerful possession
concerning man's mind: so far forth especially, as tendes to the effectual
tormenting and tempting thereof, other possession he has none at all, as shall
be showed hereafter. Johannes Ferus in Matheum, lib. 2. cap. 8. fol. 133.
Whereas therefore, the devil is said to enter into, or to possess the mind
of a man; that is to be understood, only according to his effectual working
with the body it self. And, in this self same respect, the possessed man's
mind may truly be said to be silde with the devil; as the drunkards are
said to be filled with wine. For, the very substance of the wine does not
substantially enter into the very substance it self of the drunken man's
mind, Nic. Selneccer. in Act. cap. 17. fol. 234.
because, then there would be a violent rending and separation of substances,
as was showed before: but only the fuming efficacy or power of the wine,
(binding the veins and sinnewes, and stopping up the secret passages of the
vital spirits) is that which oppresses the mind it self, being peculiarly
seated in her proper place. The very self same thing may be said, concerning
the devil his mental possession. For, the devil himself (touching his
essential being) does nor essentially enter into the very essence it self of
the possessed man's mind, Nich. Selneccer. in Act. cap. 17. fol. 234.
because, then there would be a penetrating of spiritual dimensions, and so,
two distinct substances should be (together and at at once) in one and the
self same place, which were absurd to affirm, Johannes Bromyard, in summa
predicat.
A. 18. act. 1.
as was showed before: but, the devil (by his only effectual power)
tormenting and tempting the sensible parts of man, does, so mightily disorder
the sensitive faculties, and so maliciously forestall the true notions and
passages to a found understanding, as even the mind it self, it cannot but be
maruellously distracted, during the whole term of that his tyrannical
dominion. And this is all in effect, that I yet see or can say concerning the
devil his mental possession.


Philologus. This sir, is enough I assure you, and that which does satisfy me
to the full: but what says Lycanthropus concerning this point?


Lycanthropus. Howsoever you seem to be satisfied, me think yet in all
reason, that the devil should have essentiallie in some, a mental possession.


Physiologus. Since you rely so much upon natural reason, go to Lycanthropus,
let me argue this point to the full?


Lycanthropus. Take leave, and argue as pleases your self.


Physiologus. You remember (I hope) how Master Orthodoxus has sufficiently
showed before, Aug. de cognitverae vitae cap. 6.
that angels and devils are substantial creatures, and not any fantastical
imaginations, as was handled at large in our former discourse concerning that
point.


Lycanthropus. I remember it well: and do truly believe the same to be so.


Physiologus. Well then, since you hold spirits and devils for substantial
creatures: do now tell me whether you take them for spiritual, or corporal
substances?


Lycanthropus. I know not what substances they are, whether spiritual or
corporal: devils I am certain they be, very pestilent devils: yea, such
dangerous devils as undoubtedly have a real possession in man.


Physiologus. If you dare credit the Scriptures, I will tell you God willing,
what creatures they are.


Lycanthropus. I credit the Scriptures: or else it were shame.


Physiologus. This then I avouch unto you for certain, Augustinus, in Psalm.
104. 4.
that Angels and Devils are Spirits by nature: and Angels by office. That they
are not creators, Andr. Hyperius de method Theol. lib. 2. page 273.
Fulgent. in libro de fi^e, ad Petrum, cap. 3. (...)non sunt: sed, (...). Aug.
ad Orosium. Quest. 17. Basil. in psalm. 44. Homil. 11.
but creatures created by God. Neither did they all issue out of one, as all
men by propagation were procreated from Adam: but were all jointly together,
and forthwith created. Neither is one in another (as in the trinity, the
father is in the son, and the holy Ghost in both) for then they should be of
one and the self same substance: whereas they are only of like substance, one
to another. Albeit, they were created I confess, in a most absolute estate of
substance, but yet, only created. For, there is not one of them an infant, a
young one, or an old one: neither come they to perfection by little and
little, or grow up by nutriment and exercise: but, do continually retain that
self same estate of subsistence which they ever enjoyed from their first
creation. By this then you see what creatures they are.


Lycanthropus. This proves them essential creatures, which was proved
before: howeit, I have nothing as yet, from the sacred Scriptures, concerning
their peculiar substance.


Physiologus. Yes, Danaeus, in Enchir. Aug. cap. 6. fol. 202.
I avouched them to be by nature, essential spirits. And this I say further,
that Angels and devils are immortal and spiritual substances. That they are
so, it is apparent in sundry places of scripture. 1. King. 22. 21. 22.
Marc. 5. 2. 8.
Math. 12. 43.
Luc. 11. 24.
Math. 12. 45.
Luc. 11. 26.
Ephesians. 2. 2. and 6. 12.
I will says the devil, be a lying spirit in the mouth of Achab his
prophets, Again, Christ cast out an unclean spirit. Again, the unclean
spirit walks through dry places. Again, he takes to him seven other
spirits. Again, we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against spiritual
wickednesses, and so forth. All these, and sundry such places do demonstrate
unto us the truth of this matter. Now then, I reason thus. The scriptures
deliver unto us, not corporal, but spiritual devils: therefore, devils are
not corporal, but spiritual substances. I follow it thus. Danaeus, in Enchir.
August. cap. 59 fol. 179. Luc. 24. 39.
Bodies and spirits are opposed the one to the other: therefore they cannot
possibly be one and the same, for, as a body is not a spirit: so, neither is
a spirit, a body, because a spirit has not flesh and bones as a body has.


Lycanthropus. This I hold for an infallible truth.


Physiologus. You acknowledge (you say) the devils to be spiritual substances.
Well, go to then, tell me whether you hold them not likewise for finite
creatures: and therefore also, circumscriptible and local?


Lycanthropus. I do: Iul. Scaliger. Exercitat. 359. sect. 3.
for none but God alone can be infinite and incircumscriptible.


Physiologus. Seeing you do freely confess the devils to be spiritual
substances, finite, and local, before we come to speak of their possession or
placing, do tell me: whether you take not that man's mind, into the which (as
you say) he does really enter, to be for the time of his present possession,
the very receptacle or place, that circumscribeth the devil: Greg. Magnus,
lib. 2. Moral.
and, whether the devil also himself (concerning his essence) be not for that
time, wholly, and substantiallie comprehended therein?


Lycanthropus. Yes, the very mind it self (for that present possession) must
needs be the receptacle wherein the devil is wholly, and substantially
contained.


Philologus. Fie, fie Lycanthropus, this is too too absurd. For by this means
you make the mind of a man to be greater in muchnes, in substance, or
essential being, then the spirit of the devil: else, how should the devil
be possibly comprehended therein? since that which is less, can at no hand
include or contain the greater.


Lycanthropus. Nay, that is no necessary sequel: because, the devil for that
present, may contract, diminish, or lessen his substantial being.


Physiologus. This your imagined ( may do) can conclude no certeintie of doing
at all. Neither do we dispute what the devil either may, or is able to do:
but what in deed, and in truth he does truly accomplish. Howbeit, to use few
words in a long matter, and plain terms in a doubtful case, this I avouch
for truth; that the devil neither can contract, nor possibly may diminish his
substantial being at all. Eccles. 39. 28.
For, as he is a spiritual creature, created for vengeance: so has he for
that selfsame respect, an essence and form especially proper unto himself
alone, yea, and the same so peculiarly appointed unto him, as he himself
cannot possibly augment, diminish, or any ways alter the same, but must needs
be contented therewith, as with that which the only wise God has in wisdom
especially ordained and assigned unto him: Romans 16. 27.
yea, even as peculiarly, as he has appointed to every of us our proper
substances, without any power at all to alter the same.


Lycanthropus. Tush, let man's mind be what may be, whether bigger, or less in
proportion then the spirit of the devil, I pass not a pin: this I
constantly hold, that the same is the very receptacle or place of abode for
the devil, during all the whole time of his real possession.


Physiologus. Since you will needs have man's mind the very habitacle or place
for the devil his real possession: go to then, tell me what kind of place you
hold it to be? Whether do you take it to be a common, or proper place?


Lycanthropus. What mean you by a common place?


Physiologus. That, wherein many substances are, or may be at one and the
selfsame time. Such as is the heaven, the earth, a temple, an house and such
like: al which may truly be said to be common places, for that, many
substances may jointly be placed in them al at once. As for example. Some
thing may truly be said to be contained within the celestial firmament,
because it is in the fire: in the fire, because it is in the air: and in the
air also, because it is in the earth. For, al and every of these, at one and
the selfsame time are jointly comprehended with in the firmament, or cope of
heaven.


Lycanthropus. Then, I do hold man's mind for no common; but, the devil his
peculiar place of abode for the present.


Physiologus. If you hold man's mind for the devil his peculiar place, then must
his said mind be able, Greg. Magnus, lib. 2. Moral.
absolutely and fully to circumscribe the devil his essential being. For, a
place is the circumscription of an essential substance. And, by this you may
plainly perceive, how (at unawares) you are grosely ouertake^ with that
palpable absurdity, which Phylologus (not long since) enforced upon you.
Namely, that the mind of man (it being as you falsely suppose, the peculiar
place of the devil) must necessarily (if so we may speak) be larger in
muchnes and proportion, then the spirit of the devil. For, howsoever, neither
spirits nor devils (they being no corporal substances stretched out by
Dimensions, or by any massy huge matter) may truly be said to be in a place
commensuratiuelie, Danaeus, in Enchir. Aug. cap. 57. fol. 193.
or dimensiuelie: notwithstanding all this, both spirits and devils (they being
finite and circumscriptible substances) may truly be said to be in a place
definitiuelie, or determinatelie. Spirits therefore and devils, being (as your
self does suppose) definitiuelie, (though not dimensiuelie) in the possessed
man's mind: his said mind (concerning the essential being thereof) must
determinately and definitiuely exceed in proportion and muchnes, the spirit of
the devil. Howbeit, since (in any case) you will needs make the possessed
man's mind, the peculiar place of the devil for the present: do tell me I pray
you, Whether you account his said mind, to be a very corporal, or only an
imaginary place?


Lycanthropus. Even, a very corporal place for the present.


Physiologus. If you account the possessed man's mind, Zanchius in Ephesians. cap. 4.
10. page 273.
a very corporal place of the devil: the devil then him self, he must needs
be a moveable body: because, a corporal place is that wherein a moveable body
both moves, and cease to move. Augustinus.
Howbeit, the devil (you have heard) he is only a spiritual essence, and no
moveable body: and therefore, it is very absurd you should affirm the
possessed man's mind to be a corporal place for the devil. And, that (which is
much more absurd) the possessed man's mind it self (it being properly in
perpetual motion) should (by this means) be made also an immovable body:
since it is one special condition of a corporal place, to be of it self
immovable. Because, a corporal place is none other thing else, but the
interior superficies of a body, containing the thing placed therein: and the
superficies is only an accident in the predicament of quantity. Howbeit
accidents (we know) they are not moved of them selves, or by their proper
motion: but only by accident. I mean, by the motion of some other: namely, by
that selfsame subjected moveable body, whereunto it is peculiarly and
properly inherent. Otherways, if a corporal place should (by any local
motion) be moved of it self, then, of that selfsame mooueable place,
Quicquid per se mouetur: in loco mouetur.
there must needs be another place: because, whatsoever is moved of it self,
the same is moved in a place. Progressus in infinitum.
And so, by consequence, there would be a progress in endlesnes: which thing
even nature it self does abhor. By all the premises then, you may plainly
perceive, how gross and absurd a thing it is, for your self to avouch that
the possessed man's mind should be for the present, the corporal place of the
devil: and therefore, you are necessarily enforced to make it an imaginary
place, or no place at all.


Lycanthropus. What mean you by an imaginary place?


Physiologus. That self same receptacle, wherein any thing is understood to be
imaginarily or spiritually, and not dimensiuely or corporally. As for example:
Angels, spirits, devils, souls separate from bodies, as also immateriall
accidents: all these we imagine to be in a place, whereas yet, they occupy no
corporal place, neither do they supply or fulfill any place at all.


Lycanthropus. An imaginary place then, I perceive by your speech, is (in deed
and in truth) no place at all. Nay sir, I may at no hand avouch the possessed
man's mind to be but an imaginary place of the devil: for, so should I
utterly overthrow his real, and substantial being in man.


Physiologus. And yet, even such a place you must assign him you see,
concerning his real possession in man, or no place at all. For, besides those
corporal places which we handled even now, there is ordinarily and naturally
no place to be found.


Lycanthropus. Why then do the scriptures avouch in plain terms, that, the
devil enters and dwells in man: if he have in man, no substantial or real
possession?


Physiologus. The meaning of those terms would be easily understood, if you
were once thoroughly acquainted with that ordinary doctrine which respects
those three manner of ways whereby any thing is said to be in a place.


Lycanthropus. What manner of ways are those?


Physiologus. First, Nich. Selnec. in Act. 17. 18. fol. 233. page 2.
the manner of corporal substances, is to be in a place circumscriptiuely,
Otho Casman. Angelographiae pars. 1. cap. 7. Quest. 2.
commensuratiuely, dimensiuely, or locally: that is, even so, and in such sort,
as the interior superficies, or parts of the place containing, do yield place
to the magnitude, or exterior parts of the thing placed therein. Secondly, the
manner of spiritual substances, is to be in a place imaginarily,
determinately, or definitiuely. Danaeus. in Enchir. Aug. cap. 57. fol. 193.
Aug. de spiritu, and anima* cap. 18.
For, although spiritual essences are no corporal matters stretched out by
dimensions: yet notwithstanding (being finite and circumscriptible substances)
they may determinately or definitiuely, and by propriety of substance, be
said to be so in a place, as, for that selfsame instant they cannot possibly
be said to be any where else. Because, one finite substance situate in sundry
and diverse places at once: cannot be one and the same. Thirdly, and lastly, the
manner of God his being alone, is to be in every place indefinitiuely,
repletiuely, or replenishingly. Both, because his almighty power is every
where effectually working: and for that also his divine essence or substance is
at all times, and for ever, in every place present. Now then, by all the
premises you may plainly perceive, after what manner of sort the devil (if any
at al) has a possession or place in man. Not circumscriptiuely,
commensuratiuely, dimensiuely, not locally: for, that manner of placing
appertains especially to corporal substances, and the devil has only a
spiritual essence. Neither yet indefinitiuely, repletiuely, or replenishingly:
for that, manner of placing does properly and peculiarly belong unto God, who
is only of an infinite and incomprehensible being, whereas the devil is a
finite and circumscriptible creature. And therefore the devil himself
(consisting of a circumscriptible and finite substance) must needs be but
determinately or definitiuely in one only place at once: and so, by consequence
must have only an imaginary possession, or place in man, and not any
substantial possession in him at all.


Physiologus. Lycanthropus? so far as I can perceive, this our conceited
opinion concerning the supposed mental possession of devils, will fall flat to
the ground.


Lycanthropus. I fear me even so. Howbeit, good master Orthodoxus, let me ask
you this question. If it be true indeed, that devils do not essentially enter
into the possessed men's minds: how then should they possibly hurt them?


Orthodoxus. I will answer this question, by asking you another thus. If it be
certainly true, that good Angels do not essentially enter into godly men's
minds; how then should they possibly help them?


Lycanthropus. I know not what to answer I assure you.


Orthodoxus. I think even so: and yet the reason of both, is one, and the
same. For howsoever the good and evil Angels, Hortus sanitatis tract. de
Animal. cap. 49.
do propound to themselves quite contrary ends in all their operations: yet,
their manner of working is always alike. Namely, whether they help us, or
hurt us, they do evermore work after an invisible, insensible, and spiritual
manner. Now then, that good Angels do undoubtedly help men, it is apparently
evident: Hebr. 1. 14.
For they are all ministering spirits: sent forth for their sakes who shall be
heirs of salvation. Genesis 18. 2.
That Abraham, Isaak, Iaacob, Israel, the virgin Marie, Genesis 22. 11.
and many others were sundry ways succored by Angels, Genesis 28. 12.
the scriptures record: but, that the Angels entered substantially into the
minds of any one whom they helped, Exodus 12. 23.
is no where to be found. Neither is it to be doubted at all, Luc. 1. 26.
but that the Lord God as largely imploieth the ministry of good Angels in
comforting the godly, by the manifestation of his mercies: as he uses the
ministry of evil Angels in afflicting the ungodly, by the declaration of his
justice. And yet can it not be found throughout all the whole Bible, that the
Lord ever helped any one of the godly, by the ministry of his good Angels
essentially entering into their minds: and therefore it were mere madness to
imagine that he should afflict any the ungodly, by the ministry of evil
Angels, really and substantially inherent in their minds. Very true it is,
Psalm. 7. 9.
that the almighty creator of spirits, Act. 1. 24.
he being only of power to penetrate the spirits of men and of Angels, can,
and does himself, inwardly comfort the godly, even in that selfsame eternal
love wherewith he created them all, Act. 17. 18.
and in whom alone they do live, move, and have also their being: but that
therefore, any his Angels should be also invested with such an absolute
internal power of helping or hurting, through an essential entering into the
very hearts and minds of his people, that may justly be doubted, the same
being no where revealed unto us throughout the scriptures.


Lycanthropus. Yes, Aug. in Genes. ad literam, lib. 8. cap. 25.
Augustine very flatly affirms that the good Angels of God (so often as they
are willing to help and to comfort the godly) they do essentiallie mingle then
selves with their minds. And, Zach. 1. 9. and 2. 3.
this also he proves from Zachary, saying, the Angel that spoke in me. Which
argues plainly, that, the good Angel was reallie in Zachary: else, how
should he speak in him at al?


Orthodoxus. Augustine he affirms no such thing for certain: but only
supposes it so. Whereupon it is evident, that, this your affirmation, being
builded upon bare supposals, supposes no certeintie in that which you say. And
as for the place of zachary, your Augustine I assure you, he does over
curiously unfold the perspicious manner of speaking among the Hebrews them
selves: who eftsoons for, Danaeus, in Enchir. Aug. cap. 59. fol. 200.
(...) that is to say in me, do translate it mecum, or ad me: that is, with me,
or to me. And therefore, for the Angel that spoke in me, they read it thus, the
Angel that spoke with me, or to me. Howbeit, ignorance in the Hehrewe tongue,
has caused many of the old fathers very fowlie to err, and to decline from
the true sense of the scriptures.


Lycanthropus. If it be in the original, thus, the Angel that spoke in me: Why
translate you it thus, the Angel that spoke with me, or to me?


Orthodoxus. Because, as well the elegancy, as the propriety of the language it
self must be duly respected. Although yet, such a provident respect must be
used in both, as the true sense and purpose of the place (according to the
proportion of faith) be warelie and wisely observed. Otherwise, if you so
stricktlie rely on the letter, how then understand you the Apostle Paul,
speaking thus? you seek experience of Christ, that speaks in me. 2. Cor.
13. 3.
Dare you avouch that Christ spoke ever essentiallie in the person of Paul? Or,
spoke he not rather ministeriallie in him? And therefore, whereas the Apostle
says, you seek experience of Christ who speaks in me: that must be
expounded thus, of Christ, who speaks by me, or thorough me. So then, by this
you may plainly perceive, that, Augustine (from that place of Zachary,) has
little or no help to support your idle supposal. And, to the end you may the
better consider how authentically he avouches that uncertain conceit: it
shall not be amiss to answer Augustine, Aug. in Genes. ad literam, lib. 8.
cap. 25.
by Augustine himself, both in the very same book and else where besides.
Wherein he flatly affirms, that, the angels do outwardly help us by certain
visible apparitions or sights which they propose and offer before our eyes.
Those selfsame apparitions having not only an apt resemblance of natural
bodies: Aug. libro de anima and spiritu, cap. 23. and 25.
but which also are subjected under their Angelical authority and power. Thus
the, Augustine (you see) is so variable in himself concerning this point: as,
no certainty can be concluded of that which he speaks.


Lycanthropus. By this one shift you may easily shift over what truth soever
the holy fathers affirm.


Ort^odoxus. I never yet sought to shake of any truth by shifts. Neither do I
prejudice Augustine, or any of the fathers, by viewing, and rejecting their
variable opinions: for so Augustine (in his latter Retractions) often times
rejects himself. Danaeus in Enchir.
August. cap. 59. fol. 200. Cyprian, in prologo super sermon.
And, howsoever Augustine, or your self do dream in this point, very
certain I am (as was showed before) that the good Angels of God (in their
orderly execution of any peculiar office appointed by God) were never
essentially mingled with the minds of the godly. No verily, but, in all their
ambassages they do, either manifest themselves by seeing and hearing, or,
assist us eftsoons by some other sensible means: howbeit, they at no hand do
help us by any real commixture of their proper substances together with ours.
No, Wisd. 11. 17.
that God of order, who orders all things in number, in weight, and in
measure, having decreed no such course at all: would at no hand permit such
confusion of substances, nor endure such shameful disorder among any his
creatures in heaven, or in earth.


Lycanthropus. Tell me then, by what means they do hurt men?


Orthodoxus. Not by any essential possession, Ephesians. 2. 2.
1. King. 22. 21.
1. Chro. 21. 1.
2. These. 2. 9. 10.
Revel. 16. 14.
2. Cor. 12. 8.
Luc. 22. 31.
1. Pet. 5. 8.
2. Cor. 2. 11.
or real commixture of themselves with men's minds: but, by that selfsame
effectual power, which even now works mightily in the disobedient children.
By the efficacy also of which working power, they become lying spirits in the
mouths of false prophets: they work lying woonders, in all deceiueablenes of
unrighteousness: they buffet men's minds with fearful tentations: they
endeavor to sifte, and to winnowe men's souls as men winnow wheat: Math. 12.
43.
Luc. 11. 26.
Marc. 9. 25.
Math. 12. 22.
Math. 9. 32.
Job. 2. 7. 8.
Act. 3. 2.
Luc. 13. 16.
Heb. 2. 4.
Job. 1. 7. and 2. 2.
1. Pet. 5. 8.
they circumuent them with wiles: they make men unclean: they possess them by
deafenes, they strike them with blindenes: they subdue them through dumbnes:
they overcome them by lamenesse: yea, and even bind them as it were with
diseases, a long time together. Briefly, the devil having power over death, by
the efficacy of that power, he does vex and torment men within, and without;
compassing over the earth; and running like a ramping and roaring lion,
continually about to devour.


Lycanthropus. Yea, but how should they possibly either hurt or devour;
having in men no real possession?


Orthodoxus. You do ouer-grosly conceive of the matter; and with as good reason
might ask me, how an enemy should possibly hurt the captain which keeps
an hold: he having in the said captain, no real possession? Howbeit, this
(me think) you might know by experience, that, notwithstanding the want of
real possession, the enemy may many ways hurt the said captain: as, by
giving him bribes to betray the hold: by assaulting, by battring, by
undermyning, by pyning, by wounding, yea, and by slaying some of his soldiers
before his face. All these, and many more annoiances, the enemy may offer the
captain, though not essentially inherent in the captain himself: yea, and by
the dispatching of these, he cannot choose but vex and torment the captain
himself, even as if he had really and substantially possessed his person.
After the selfsame manner deals Satan, with such as he is said to possess,
For, albeit he does not substantially enter into the possessed man's mind,
which is as it were a grand-captaine over the body: yet for all this, the
devil, that sworn adversary of man, by devising, procuring, applying, and by
ministering many strange sicknesses, diseases, and deaths to the body, he does
no less violently vex and torment the mind it self, then if he were
essentially entered therein. Yea, and all these the forenamed annoiances he
effects at his own will and pleasure. Partly, August. de diuinat, daemonium.
for that he is of long experience in mischief; having bin a practitioner
therein, from the beginning of the world. Partly thorough a more easy manner of
knowing things, he being very sharp sighted, Aug. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 9. cap.
22.
and thoroughly acute: not needing those means which earthly men need, to
understand, and to find forth the natures, effects, and causes of things. And
partly also, by reason of the excellency of their proper nature, they being
most speedily carried from place to place: being of infinite power in
comparison of us: and being also of such an exquisite knowledge, as, eftsoons
they undertake (by observing events, and by conferring of causes) to conjecture
the timely success of many their mischeiuous enterprises. By all the
premises then, it is very apparent, that the devil, he has such an
effectual power permitted unto him, as he needs not essentiallie enter man's
mind, to accomplish any his devilish enterprises.


Lycanthropus. If devils enter not essentiallie into the possessed man's mind:
how should they possibly incline, or bow his said mind to their purpose?


Orthodoxus. Touching the enclining of minds, if we speak herein according to
truth, God alone is properly said to work in the minds of men, and to incline
their wills which ways he please: although yet, spirits and devils, they may
also be considered as helpers herein, howbeit such helpers no doubt, as do
rather move by external reasons, then incline at al by internal actions. And
even so, 1. King, 22. 21.
the lying spirit, in the mouth of Ahab his prophets: was after a sort, 1.
Chro. 21. 1.
an helper to God. Concerning therefore the enclining of minds, we must here
distinguish between the interior efficient, who only is God: and the
exterior agent, namely, spirits and devils. Again, the means whereby the
exterior agent does work, is twofold. The first is the external object of the
mind, it being apprehended of the understanding for good, and effectually
offered also unto the will. For, every faculty of the mind, is especially
moved by his proper object: not only offered, but apprehended also effectually.
The other external means enclining the mind, is seated in those affections and
passions that are placed in the sensitive appetite, namely, lust, anger, love,
and such like, by which also, the will (after a sort) is inclined to something.
Now then, spirits and devils they are able by external objects, to stir up
affections and passions in the sensitive appetite. Non simpliciter. Pro. 21. 1.
Howbeit, not simply and absolutely as God, who is said to have the hearts of
kings in his hand, and who also is able alone, Secundum quid.
to incline man's will effectually, to whatsoever he please: but, after a sort,
and so far forth also, as they by external reasons are able (like councillors)
to persuade the will unto something. For, they cannot possibly compel the will,
the same (by nature) rejecting al manner of compulsion: although yet, (by
persuading and alluring) they may (after a sort) be said to incline and to
move the mind. Now then this their enclining, you see it consists not in any
essential possession, but only in an effectual operation, whereof we will
discourse to the full, when we come to entreat of actual possession. In the
mean time, do now cease for shame to avouch any longer the mental possession
of devils.


Lycanthropus. Well sir, howsoever you deny the mental possession of devils: I
doubt not but they may have a corporal possession in men?


Orthodoxus. This point will require a large discourse. And therefore let us
here give over a time till after our supper: and then (if you please) we will
confer thereof for an hour or two.


Physiologus. Your motion is good: and we willingly yield.


Orthodoxus. Then let us in Gods name, arise and depart, to my house to a
scholars repast.


Philologus. The Lord be blessed, for that which he sends.


Lycanthropus. We will willingly attend upon you.


The end of the second Dialogue.
The third Dialogue.
THE ARGUMENT.
Whether Spirits and Devils do essentially enter into the possessed man's body?
And whether, for that purpose, they have peculiar to themselves, true natural
bodies?

The speakers names.
PHILOLOGVS. LYCANTHROPVS. PNEVMATOM'ACHVS. PHYSIOLOGVS. ORTHODOXVS.
EXORCISTES.
Orthodoxus. Having seated our selves in order, I would very willingly know
what it is that Lycanthropus requireth-concerning the corporal possession of
devils.


Physiologus. Good sir, he is old enough to express his own mind: let him
therefore speak for himself.


Lycanthropus. Yea sir, I am of age I hope, to tell my own tale: howsoever, I
mean not to make you my Proctor.


Physiologus. If you would, I were like to speak very sparingly in so badde a
cause; unless you could happily corrupt my conscience with a left handed bribe.


Lycanthropus. Howsoever your self may happily stand in some need of a
proctorly bribe: my cause, it stands in no need of bribe-pursing Proctor.


Orthodoxus. I like not these girding quippes: for howsoever they demonstrate
some sharpness of wit: they argue much want of a charitable patience:
Besides that, they are nothing to the purpose we come for: and therefore good
Lycanthropus, go directly to work, and tell me what you desire to know,
concerning the corporal possession of spirits and devils.


Lycanthropus. My desire is to know, whether spirits and devils do essentially
enter into the bodies of men?


Orthodoxus. For answer hereunto, it shall not be greatly amiss, first, to
show what the corporal possession of devils is supposed to be: and then next,
to declare mine own opinion concerning that point.


Lycanthropus. What I pray you, is the corporal possession?


Orthodoxus. It is that whereby the devil is supposed of some, even really and
essentially to enter into, and substantially, and inherently to dwell in the
possessed man's body: during the whole term of that his tyrannical dominion
over the man, whom he, so really, and personally possesses.


Lycanthropus. This supposed possession of devils, I suppose is undoubtedly
sound: but what is your own opinion concerning this point.


Orthodoxus. My opinion is this: namely, that the devils never had any such
real possession in men: but only an actual possession.


Lycanthropus. Conclude you then, that the devils have in men, no corporal
possession at all?


Orthodoxus. If by corporal possession, you do mean, that the devils
essentially enter into, and inherently dwell in the possessed man's body: I see
then, no reason at all, but, that I may boldly conclude it. Neither do I
perceive, how your self should ever be able to contradict the infallible truth
thereof. For very certain I am, that no such essential possession; is any
where extant in all the Bible.


Lycanthropus. Oh, yes sir, in every place of the Bible almost, especially
there, where those matters are handled: it is said, the devils entered into
them: Math. 12. 45.
that they enter in, and dwell there: that Christ charged the devil to come
out of the child, Marc. 9. 25.
and to enter no more into him and so forth. All which places do plainly
demonstrate, that the devils have really, a corporal possession in men at the
least.


Orthodoxus. I see no such matter, demonstrated from any of those places.


Lycanthropus. No do? What I pray you can be more plain then this? come out,
Marc. 9. 25. (...).
and enter no more into him. Is there not a most plain opposition between
entering into: and going out from? And, are not the words in the original: and
enter no more into him? What can be more plain I beseech you?


Orthodoxus. That there is an apparent opposition between entering into, and
going out from, I freely confess, the words also in the original I plainly
approve: Revel. 3. 20. (...).
although yet, I grant from thence no real possession. Else, how understand
you this place in the Apocalypse: where the Lord says, and I will enter in
unto him. What now? because the holy Ghost there uses the very selfsame word
of entering into: must we therefore thus grossly imagine, that the Lord God, he
also essentially enters into the hearts of so many as open unto him by faith
and repentance? that were too too absurd. Also, where it is said, that, (...).
Ioh. 13. 27.
after Judas received the soppe, then Satan entered into him. Albeit, the very
selfsame word of entering into, be used here also, yet may we at no hand
conclude, that therefore, the devil had in him an essential possession: no,
for the holy Ghost else where does otherways expound himself, Ioh. 13. 2.
(...).
saying, that the devil had now darted, or thrust into Judas his heart to betray
his master. Making the entering of the devil into Judas his heart, to be
nothing else but a suggesting, or thrusting of the intended treason into him,
as was showed before. Whereupon, it is very apparent you see, that, this going
out, and this entering in of the devil, may not so grossly be understood of any
real or substantial possession: but only of an effectual, and powerful
operation.


Lycanthropus. Nay sir by your patience there is more to be understood
therein; Math. 12. 45. (...).
then only an effectual operation. For, the Evangelist says thus: and,
entering in, they do dwell there. Now then, dwelling in a place; you know it does
not only presuppose an essential entrance into that selfsame place: but,
concludes withal, a real possession there, where the party possessing does
really inhabit.


Orthododoxus. Howsoever you insist upon the bare words of entering, and
dwelling: yet, no real possession, but only, an effectual operation must be
understood thereby. Otherways, what think you of this place, Ioh. 14. 23.
where our Savior says. If any man love me, he will keep my word, and my
father will love him: and we will come unto him, and dwell with him. Now then, to
use your own reason, dwelling in a place you know, it does not only
presuppose an essential entrance into that selfsame place: but concludes
withal, a real possession there, where the party possessing does really
inhabit. And so, by consequence, if we strictly tie our selves unto words:
then, the father, and the son both do really and essentially inhabit in the
hearts of so many as observe the word, which, how absurd it is to avouch, your
self may consider. Besides that, if you so strictly do tie your self to the
observation of words: how understand you this scripture? The good Spirit of the
Lord departed from Saul: 1. Sam. 16. 14.
and, an evil Spirit of the Lord came upon him. 1. Sam. 18. 10.
Would you have us to imagine fromhence: that king Saul himself was really
possessed with an evil spirit, or a devil?


Lycanthropus. Yea, what other thing else?


Orthodoxus. Then may we by the same reason conclude, that Saul also before
that time, was really possessed with the good spirit of God. For, 1. Sam. 10. 6.
10.
when Samuel anointed him king it was said in like sort, that the spirit of
the Lord should come upon him: Again, that the spirit of the Lord it came upon
Saul. Yea, then may we likewise conclude that David also himself, he was
really possessed with the good spirit of God: 1. Sam. 16. 13.
for it is said, that after David was anointed, the spirit of the Lord came
upon him. Now then, tell me I pray you, whether you think that Saul and David
were really possessed with the good spirit of God: and that the spirit did
essentially enter into them?


Lycanthropus. I understand it even so, I assure you.


Orthodoxus. Why man (besides the absurdity arising thence) the very letter
it self imports a quite contrary sense to that which you seem to insert.
For, the words of the text are not thus, the spirit of the Lord entered into
them: but, the spirit of the Lord came upon them both. Howbeit, whether it had
been, the spirit of the Lord entered into them, or came upon them, it is al one
in effect: and may in no wise, be understood of any essential possession, but
of an effectual operation of that spirit of God, whether good or evil. For, in
every of those places, (...)I^siliuit, arri^iebat, requieuit, irruens,
prosperauit.
the word, in the original, is tsalac. Which Jerome translates, leaped upon
them: Lyra, he has, entered forciblie upon them: Pagnine, he has, rested upon
them: Tremellius, he has, rushing upon them: Montanus, he has, prospered upon
them. None of al these, howsoever they differ in terms: they dream not you
see, of any real possession at al. Yea, and the word tsalac also it self (if
we respect the native signification) is properly to be translated thus.
Johannes Auenarius. Lexic. Hebraic.
The spirit of the Lord prevailed, had prosperous success, did happily
proceed, or prospered greatly in Saul, and in David: al which, has relation
to the efficacy, and not to the essence of the spirit at all. Otherwise, if
notwithstanding all this, your self will needs understand in that place an
essential entrance, or real possession: the gross absurdity thereof may more
plainly appear, by the conference of this one, with some other places of
scripture, where the selfsame word is also in use. Genesis 14. 56.(...)
As first, where Eleazar says unto Laban, hinder you me not: since the Lord
bath prospered my journey. Would you expound it thus, hinder me not: since the
Lord has caused my journey, Psalm. 1. 3. (...)
very really, and essentially to enter into me? Again, where it is said, that
whatsoever the godly man does it shall prosper. Should we translate it thus:
the godly men's ways shall substantiallie enter into him. Psalm. 25. 4. (...)
Again, where the holy ghost says unto Solomon, prosper thou with thy
glory. Should we expound it thus: let thy glory substantiallie and reallie
possess thy person. Briefly, where Jeremy complains thus, why do the ways
of the wicked prosper: Ierem. 12. 1. (...)
must we imagine, that the ways of the wicked do enter essentiallie into
their bodies and souls? that were to to absurd. And yet, in such a strict
tying of our selves to the word we may (by as good reason) enterprete these
places thus, as those other of Saul and of David: the holy ghost using
especially in every of them al, but one and the selfsame word.


Exorcistes. If the scriptures be so intricate concerning these points: what
ways were we best to take for the understanding of them aright?


Orthodoxus. You must not be haled hedlong an end with an inueterate opinion,
received hand over head, from hand to hand, without further search or due trial
of the truth of the matter: but, must very hartelie pray, and most
conscionablie depend upon the holy spirit of God, for a true understanding and
wisdom herein. For, seeing the proper nature of spirits and devils, is not
(in the sacred scriptures) so exactly and so plainly set down, as that
thereby we may certainly know them even as they are in their proper and
essential being: we must therefore, most humbly endeavor our selves, very
faithfully to embrace, and constantly to believe the true sense of the
scriptures concerning these points: yea, even in such simple sort as the holy
spirit of God, Nomb. 27. 16.
who is the Lord of all spirits, has set down the same. Always remembering
this; that spirits and devils, they are in the scriptures evermore spoken of,
as of spiritual substances: howsoever, for the only help of our slender
capacities, they be sometimes more groslie expressed by parables and metaphors,
and, in a more sensible or corporal manner then otherways they are in
themselves. Nomb. 24. 2.
And therefore, whereas it is said, that the spirit of the Lord came upon
Balaam, Judge. 3. 10.
Othoniel, Gedeon, Judge. 10. 34.
Iphthah, Sampson, Saul, David, Azariah, Ezechiel and others. Moreover, Judge.
11. 29.
where it is said, Judge. 14. 6.
that the Lord separated the spirit of Moses, 1. Sam. 10. 6.
and put in upon the seventy Elders: again, that the spirit of Eliah was
double upon Elisha: 1. Sam. 16. 14.
that Caleb had a spirit far differing from the rest of the Israelites: 1.
Sam. 16. 13.
and that Daniel, he had a more excellent spirit then all the rest: 2. Chro.
15. 1.
yet, that selfsame entrance into, Ezech. 11. 5.
that resting upon, Nomb. 11. 17. 25.
that multiplying, that doubling, and that excellency of the spirit is not to
be understood of any real, 2. King. 2. 9.
or essential possession; but of an effectual and powerful operation of that
selfsame spirit, Nomb. 14. 24.
concerning the special work for which it was sent. Dan. 5. 11. 12.
So as, although the spirits of the Lord (whether good or evil) are said to be
given by proportion and number: yet, not the substance or quantity, but the
condition or quality of the spirit it self must be always presupposed and
meant thereby, which is a point that I would have you especially to consider
throughout our whole conference concerning spirits and devils.


Lycanthropus. This I confess is a very good caution concerning the
condition, quality, and operation of spirits. Howbeit for any thing hitherto
heard, I can at no hand be persuaded; but that the devil (albeit man's mind be
free) does really and essentiallie enter into the possessed man's body.


Physiologus. Go to, imagine that this your supposall were every way sound;
and then do tell me withal, what the devil does in the possessed man's body.


Lycanthropus. What does he there? very untowardly I warrant you: for, even in
that selfsame body, and by the help of that body he does effectually
accomplish and execute those his preposterous actions,


Physiologus. Preposterous actions indeed: for the devil to appropriate to
himself, the peculiar organon of the possessed man's soul. Do you imagine, the
Lord ever propounded any such end to himself in the creation of bodies? Or do
you suppose the Lord ever granted so large a commission: or, that the devil
himself ever received such an absolute power concerning the bodies of men?
But, go to, what becomes of the soul or spirit, all the while the devil
himself is really inherent in the possessed man's body? Remains the soul
still in that body as in her proper habitation appointed of God, till the day
of her utter dissolution by death? Or, is it for the whole time of the devil
his being in that body, utterly exiled and thrust out from the same?


Lycanthropus. Naie, the soul is not even then, secluded or shut out from the
body at al, but continues and lies therein like a subdued prisoner, fast
bound hand and foot: yielding over to the devil (for that present) his whole
interest concerning the body, and endures perforce his inexorable, and
tyrannous cruelty.


Physiologus. But, tell me I pray you, is not the soul or the mind of a man
an incorporall substance, or a spirit equally diffused and spread throughout the
whole body, and every part thereof according to powers and proportion not
Arithmeticall, but Geometrical: so as all the members of the body it self
does effectually fulfill their peculiar offices accordingly. They being the
proper instruments of that selfsame mind or spiritual substance, furdering
freely the organicall operation thereof, and excecuting readily whatsoever the
mind shall give them in charge? And that therefore, this selfsame body,
being thus utterly deprived (as you say) for the present, Iam. 2. 26.
of the souls organicall operation, is in effect, but dead to the soul:
because wheresoever is an utter privation of the souls operations, concerning
the body, Phil. 1. 23.
there, the life of that man is for the present dissolved. Hold you all this
for a truth?


Lycanthropus. Yea, I may not deny any part thereof.


Physiologus. Seeing then you do flatly conclude, that the mind or spirit of
man is the first substantial form or action in a living body, and the
original or primarie cause of all effects whatsoever performed duly therein,
as being that only whereby we do live, perceive, desire, are moved in place,
and do also understand: how is it possible, that the soul or mind of a man,
being naturally in perpetual motion, should at any time lie idle in her body,
it being the proper Organon of the soul, peculiarly appointed unto it by God,
yea, even unto the very dissolution thereof? Or, how should the said soul or
mind lie bound like a prisoner, in her proper body: and not execute
effectually those selfsame operations and powers, which are peculiarly
appropriated unto it for the special service of that selfsame body?


Lycanthropus. What mean you by the proper operations of the soul or mind?


Physiologus. I understand thereby, all those peculiar actions which do
necessarily succeed the powers of the mind, as proper effects peculiarly
appertaining unto it. Otherways, this peculiar power of the mind (it being a
mean between the substance and operations of the mind, are the only
efficient cause of the said minds operations) should be utterly in vain, and
to no purpose at all; unless the peculiar effects of that selfsame power, did
undoubtedly, and immediately succeed the same. Howbeit, these selfsame effects
cannot possibly succeed the said power of the mind: so long at the least, as
the Devil himself (really possessing the body) does wholly and absolutely take
up the said body with the members thereof, to accomplish his mischievous
purposes. As for example, all the operations of the mind, are either
organical, or animal. The organical operations, they are those several actions
which the mind can in no wise accomplish but in the body it self, and by all
the several members thereof, as by the proper instruments, for that purpose
peculiarly appointed unto it. Namely, the nutritive, augmentatiue, and
generatiue operations, appertaining especially to the vegetative life: also the
faculty of seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling, handling, and of common sense:
moreover, the imaginatiue, the memoratiue, the concupiscible, irascible, and
motive faculties, being all attendant upon the sensitive life. Now then, these,
and every of these are the organical operations of the mind, yea and such
also as the mind cannot possibly effect but in her own body, and by all the
parts thereof, as by the peculiar instruments appointed of God. And therefore,
how should the possessed man's mind, (his body it self being thoroughly
surprised and taken up (as you say)* by the Devil) at any hand accomplish
either all, or any one of these organical operations?


Lycanthropus. As the mind her self cannot but be in perpetual motion: so
surely (being forcibly restrained from these her organical operations) she must
(for the present) be feign, to put in execution, and to practice as she may,
her animal operations.


Physiologus. The animal operations, they are such special actions, as the
mind of it self both can, and may effectually accomplish without the body:
namely, those three essential powers of the reasonable soul, called the
understanding, affection, and will. Whereof, the two last are fitly termed the
intellectiue appetite: whereas the organical affections (arising only from out
of the heart, the liver, and entralles) are called the sensitive appetite. But,
for as much as these animal operations, all the while the mind it self is
seated in her proper body (are) by the order of God (appointed to be the
directours) and moderatours of all the organical operations: I ask you, by
what means the mind may accomplish her appointed duty concerning the
direction and moderation of those her organical actions, so long as the Devil
himself does really and wholly take up the said body, with her several
parts, to become the unhappy instruments of his Devilish attempts?


Lycanthropus. I see no possible help, but that the mind it self must give
place to the Devil for a time.


Physiologus. Give place for a time; for how long I beseech you? Put case this
man be really possessed of the devil for seven years together, or more, and
that in the mean time he should die before the devil be dispossessed of his
body, which (for any thing known to the devil) he may very well do: for his
days are determined which he cannot possibly pass. Now then, the soul it
self being surprised by death, and so, separate from the body it self,
before she recover her pristinate power concerning the said body, or any the
organicall actions appertaining unto it: to whom, must those the disordered
actions (wrought in the body all the whole time of the devil his real
possession therein) be imputed I pray you? Whether to the possessed man's mind,
or to the devil himself, that possesses his body? And whether of both must
yield an account unto God, for those several actions of the sinful body?


Lycanthropus. The very soul it self is answerable, I take it, for those
sinful actions.


Physiologus. But, seeing sin it self, is only a voluntary transgression
of the law of God: how holds it with equity, that the soul should be
answerable for those selfsame organicall actions, which she did never
voluntarily assent unto, accomplish, affect, or approve?


Lycanthropus. Because the animal operations of the soul, they being
appointed by God to direct and to moderate the organicall operations of the
body: did fail in doing that duty.


Physiologus. How should she possibly accomplish that her appointed duty
concerning the direction and moderation of those organicall operations: she
being before very violently and absolutely dispossessed of the body it self,
by whom those organicall actions should have been wrought according to her
proper, and only directions? Besides that, the peculiar actions of the
understanding, affection, and will are mere animal, respecting either the
mind it self: or the mind and body together. Touching the mind it self,
her animal operations are only to understand, to affect, and to will. These
animal operations, they are such as the mind her-selfe both may, and does
effectually accomplish without the body, and being quite separate from it. And
also, she has her animal motions, whereby she is locally moved without the
body: and being quite separate from it. Ioh. 11. 35. 44.
For, so the soul of Lazarus (his body being dead four days in the grave)
did locally move, and return, yea, by such a non organicall or animal
motion, the very souls of the saved, and damned: are (at this present)
continually moved. The animal operations respecting the mind and body
together, they are the dutiful applying of the understanding, affection, and
will to an orderly direction, and circumspect moderation of all the organical
actions. To the timely discharge of which duty, the mind especially is bound;
so long as she is naturally inherent, or peculiarly predominant over the body.
Else, she is freely exempt from all charge of the body: and has then her
animal operations wherein her office does wholly and only consist. And, even
as in the mind, so also in the body there be some such mere corporal actions
and motions: as the body it self both may, and does also accomplish without
any direction or moderation of the mind. As for example. The dead carcass of
a man being quite separate from the soul, it has notwithstanding her
corporal dimensions, figure, situation, and habit: yea, and is locally
moved, either downwards by a natural motion, or else upwards, or overthwart
by a violent motion. Yea, and all these corporal operations and motions the
body has, and may also accomplish by herself alone, without any her souls
direction, moderation, or guidance: they being especially such actions and
motions, as appertain not to the mind at all. Now then, as the soul has
some such animal operations peculiarly appropriate to it, as it may well, and
does effectually accomplish without the body, being freely separate from it,
and therefore, no reason the body it self should any ways be answerable for
those peculiar actions of the mind, whereunto she was no ways assistant: so
surely, the body it has, and may have some such corporal actions and motions
peculiarly appropriated, or violently enforced upon it, as it may, and does
also effect without any the direction, moderation, or consent of the soul, it
being quite separate from it, or from any the directions thereof at the least,
and therefore, it is absurd to imagine that the soul should be brought to
account for any those peculiar actions or motions of the body which it never
directed the body unto, nor never gave consent to the same in any respect.


Lycanthropus. I know not which ways to answer your speech: howbeit, very
certain I am the devil has really in man a corporal possession at least.


Physiologus. How do you know it for certain, since the devil is only a
spirit, of a spiritual substance, simply and absolutely without all mixture
of corporal matter: and therefore, he needs no such real possession in any
man's body.


Lycanthropus. He needs no such real possession in any man's body I confess,
in regard of his own essential being: Howbeit, respecting more especially,
the timely execution of his tyrannical tormenting of bodies, there is
necessarily required in the parties possessed, an essential possession at
least.


Physiologus. Why man, as the Lord God in the very first creation did
constitute spirits and devils, essentiallie absolute in their own proper
beings, without any apparent necessity of such an essential mixture with
humane bodies: so surely, you are never able to prove from the word, that the
infinite wise God, did ever propound to himself in the creation of bodies,
any one purpose at al concerning such essential possession of spirits and
devils. Neither are you able to show by the scriptures, that, the devil did
ever receive so large a commission from God, concerning men's bodies. For, very
certain it is that the devil did earnestly entreat, and the Lord (for many
respects) did purposelie permit as much scope to the devil, concerning Jobs
body, as any man's body besides, either before him, or after him: and yet did
the devil never beg, Job. 1. 11. 12.
nor the Lord never grant any further power at al concerning the body of
Job, Job. 2. 5. 6.
then only an actual afflicting, but not any essential possessing at al.
Besides that, the whole man ( body and soul) was preordained by the secret
purpose of God, to be for ever, the lively image of his absolute majesty,
respecting especially the perfection and holiness thereof, yea, and (which more
is) to be also a perpetual habitacle, and glorious temple for his sacred
spirit: and therefore it is incredible that the foreseeing wisdom of God,
would ever permit any such essential possession to spirits and devils as
should not only, most beastly pollute and deface his own image, but (which
more is) even reallie (as it were) transform the habitation of his holy
spirit, into a filthy cage of unclean spirits, a most stinking stie for
satan him self, and a most horrible dungeon for damned devils.


Lycanthropus. Why sir? this metamorphosis or change, was primarilie effected
in the persons of Adam, Genesis 2. 27.
and Euah, who being both created according to the image of God concerning body
and soul, did, not only quite loose the said image of God: but (which more
is) did presently put upon them, Math. 12. 29.
the very image of the devil, Luc. 11. 21.
who is called the strong armed man; and they are now become that dwelling
house of his, which he possesses and keeps in peace.


Physiologus. The image of God, Ephesians. 4. 24.
it was not lost in Adam and Euah as touching the essence; but concerning
only the perfection, the sanctity, and holiness thereof. Neither did they
essentiallie, but only actuallie put upon themselves the image of satan.
Neither did that strong armed man the devil at any time, essentially, but only
effectively possess or keep them in peaceable possession, as an house for
himself. And therefore, either you must necessarily acknowledge the devil to
have an essential possession not only in some few, but, even in Adam
himself, and al his posterity: or else, you must grant, that, that possession
which the devil has in any, it is only an actual possession. Howsoever the
latter be true, the first you may never acknowledge for shame. Because, if the
Lord created the members of our bodies for these two only respects, namely,
that they should be for ever, the lively organons of our own proper souls,
and the express images of him their Lord and creator: it is unlikely, that
satan should ever have power (through the permission of God) to frustrate those
former effects, by assuming our bodies essentiallie unto himself, and by
applying them so forcibly to his slavish service in an vnuoluntarie action,
whether they will themselves, or not.


Lycanthropus. Why may not the Devil for a time, essentially usurp the
possessed man's body, to accomplish therein his Devilish actions?


Physiologus. The question is not, what the Devil may do, but whether he does
so essentially usurp upon the possessed man's body; as your self does
absurdly imagine. Hermes Trismegistus, in suo^periandro.
For, if an humane soul, be only made capable of an humane body: then also,
an humane body, it is only made capable of an humane soul. But, the first (in
all reason) is undoubtedly true: and therefore also the latter, and so (by
consequence) there can be no essential possession of spirits and Devils.


Lycanthropus. Why sir, Math. 12. 29. Luc. 11. 21.
the scripture says, that the strong armed man possesses his house in peace.


Physiologus. That must only be understood of an actual, and of no essential
possession at all. I prove it thus. Satan so possesses, as Christ inuadeth
his house: Luc. 11. 22.
But, Christ inuadeth only effectiuely, and not essentially: therefore, Satan,
he possesses only effectiuely, and not essentially. Besides that, if Satan
essentially and inherently dwells in the possessed man's body: what then (for
the present) becomes of the soul? and, who must become accomptable to God, for
those corporal actions which are wrought in the possessed man's body, as was
showed you before, the man, or the Devil? If the man, how can it stand with the
justice of God to punish those things in a man, whereunto he was violently
enforced and drawn against his own will? If the Devil: then should something
be effected in the possessed man's body which nothing concerns himself.
Briefly, you cannot possibly propound to your self, any one necessary use or
end for such an essential entering of Devils into the bodies of men.


Lycanthropus. Oh yes sir, it is needful for this special end; namely, that
they might thereby, the more fitly afflict and torment such persons as the Lord
in judgment, has committed unto them.


Physiologus. All this, may as fitly, as fully, and as effectually be effected
by an only actual possession, as shall be showed hereafter: in the mean time
you shall never be able to prove your imagined real possession of Devils while
you have any breath. For, if Spirits and Devils, be (in deed and in truth) in
the possessed man's body, then are they so, either as the part in the whole: or
as the whole in the part: or as the special in the general; or as the general,
in the special: or as the accident in the subject: and form in the matter: or,
as the efficient, in the effect: or, as the intention in the end: or as the
thing placed, in the place at the least. But, he is not in the possessed man's
body, according to any of these respects: therefore, not essentially or
personally in the possessed man's body at all.


Lycanthropus. Though not according to any the former respects: yet are they in
the possessed man's body (as we say) autoprosopos; I mean, (...)
even personally: not putting any other quality in the body which it had not
before, but only moving and stirring the said body (with the several parts)
to such extraordinary operations, as (by the provident disposing of God) are
permitted them to accomplish thereby.


Physiologus. He is in the possessed man's body you say, Sidicimus eos reuera,
atque adeo (...) adesse, and inesse: esset hoc, vel hypostatice, vel
formaliter, quod est absurdum.
only as a mouer, and stirrer up of the same to some extraordinary operations:
this is too too absurd. For then he must be in that body either as one
hypostatically joined with that man in his essence, which hypostatical union is
only proper to Christ: or else, formaliter (as the Schoolmen do call it) to
give an essential form to those the intended operations: and so, there should
be in the selfsame subject, two essential forms at once, which is too too
absurd. For Devils being incorporal spirits, are also invisible, impalpable,
insensible: yea, such spiritual creatures as cannot possibly be discerned by
corporal sense: such a substance I mean, as can neither be seen, nor felt,
nor handled, nor possibly perceived by corporal or sensible means? And
therefore, how should your self be able to judge, or the possessed man
certeinlie know when the devil is really, and substantially inherent within his
body, as a moouer to such operations,


Lycanthropus. The same is very apparently perceived, by the devil his
violent rending and tearing: Math. 8. 28. Marc. 9. 18. Luc. 8. 29.
and such other unnatural and preposterous actions.


Physiologus. This perceiuance or knowledge is given neither to you, nor the
possessed himself by any means of the devil his essential being within him;
but by reason of his effectual working in the possessed man's body. By which
said effectual working, that selfsame rending and tearing, with other like
unnatural and preposterous actions may effectually be wrought in the man:
though the devil does never essentially enter into the possessed man's body,
or any part thereof. Even as also, the efficacy and heat of the sun may
effectually be perceived and felt both outwardly and inwardly: and yet, the
very substance of the sun it self never essentially inherent in any man's
body. And thus, at unawares you do fully overthrow you idle supposall of an
essential and real possession: concluding withal, that the devil has only
an actual or powerful possession, whereof also hereafter we will confer to
the full.


Lycanthropus. Stay here a while I beseech you: me think you are somewhat
ouerswift in gathering upon me. For, albeit I do freely confess that spirits
and devils are spiritual substances, and therefore, not sensibly perceived or
felt of us by any corporal or sensible means: yet do I not hold them for
such absolute and simple substances, but that they have also their proper
bodies peculiarly appropriate to them, though of another nature, and far
different also from ours. And therefore, the devils entering into the possessed
man's body with those their own bodies: they may (by means of their said
bodies) so violently work in the possessed maus body, as that, their
essential being therein, may easily be discerned of others, and very
sensibly also perceived of the possessed himself.


Physiologus. A man had need to be swift in gathering: when he lights upon
one so lavish in laying abroad. For besides your conclusion here, against your
own cause, you do flatly descent a fresh from that we concluded before in our
first conference concerning the essence of spirits and devils. Where I telling
you that the Scriptures deliver unto us not corporal, but spiritual devils:
that spirits and bodies are opposed the one to the other, and therefore cannot
possibly be one and the same: thereupon we concluded, that spirits and devils
are not corporal, but spiritual substances, all which you held then for an
infallible truth. Howbeit, being here driven to a straight, you do now either
ignorantly forget: or purposely pervert the very truth you affirmed before.
For, now you say plainly that devils have also their proper bodies: peculiarly
appropriated unto them. What is this else, but to say, and unsay: and to turn
with every wind, not unlike to the wavering Weathercocke?


Lycanthropus. I denied them to be corporal substances, in comparison of our
gross and elementarie bodies: when yet notwithstanding, I do simply hold, and
confidently avouch them to have also their bodies.


Physiologus. Make plain your meaning; and tell us whether you hold them to
have their proper, or assumed bodies?


Lycanthropus. Even proper and peculiar bodies, created for them.


Physiologus. Go to then, every created body, is either celestial: or
elementarie. Whether of both these think you, is proper to Devils?


Lycanthropus. Surely I think they have celestial bodies.


Physiologus. Very well. But I pray you consider this also, that the devils,
if they have corporal bodies: then also, they have their corporal motions.
Now, every natural motion, we do know is either circuler, or elementarie:
The circuler motion for celestial bodies; the elementarie motion, for
elementarie bodies. Whereupon it follows, that, if devils (as you say) be
endued with celestial bodies: then also, those their celestial bodies, must
naturally follow the circuler motion. On the other side, the possessed man (you
know) he has an elementarie body: and therefore, his said body it must and
will naturally follow the motion of that element, whereof it does chiefly
consist.


Pneumatomachus. What infer you hereof, I beseech you.


Physiologus. Thus much I infer: namely, that Lycanthropus his opinion,
concerning the real possession of devils, does draw after it, many gross and
palpable absurdities. As for example. If the devil (as you your self do
confidentlie hold) has a celestial body, then, how should he really and
essentiallie enter into the elementarie body of an earthly man, or possibly
make any personal abode in the possessed man's belly: since the devil, having as
you say, a celestial body naturally attending and following the circuler
motion, he cannot be long from that natural motion, but must eftsoons mount
aloft to that celestial heaven whereon his supposed body consists, to follow
his circuler motion, and then, what will become I beseech you, of the possessed
man's body? Again, if a spirit or devil, having as you hold a celestial
body, should essentially enter into the elementarie body of a terrestrial
man: then surely, for the whole time of that real possession, there must be
both in the devil, and the man, either no motion at al, which were absurd to
imagine, or else, in the one, or in both a supernatural motion, and so, by
consequence, that real possession should be very miraculous, which were now
in these days of the Gospel, incredible to hear. For, the devil, he being
(as you say) really, essentially, yea, and corporally also in man, that man
having an elementarie body which naturally attendes the elementarie motion;
and the devil he having a celestial body, which must naturally follow the
circuler motion: how can the body of man converse with the body of the devil,
it following naturally the circuler motion, but that selfsame circuler motion
must needs be in the possessed man's body a supernatural motion? Or, how
should the body of the devil be really inherent in the possessed man's body,
and so follow therein the elementarie motion; but that selfsame elementarie
motion also, must needs be a supernatural motion in the devil his body? And
so, by consequence: a miracle in the one, or in both. Again, Job. 1. 7.
if the devils (what bodies soever they have, whether celestial or elementary)
do (as appeeres in the word) move every way, Job. 2. 2. 1.
upward and downward, on the right hand and left, before and behind Pet. 5. 8.
us: If the devils (as the Platonists affirm) can very easily stretch out
their bodies into what bigness they please, Theupolus, in Academic,
contemplat. lib. 6.
or contract them into what smalenesse they list, and can vary in them (as
their pleasures) whatsoever color or figure they fancy: Mich. Psellus, de
operatione daemonuum, cap. 8. Marsilio Ficino interpret, tom. 2. page 19. 39.
briefly, if the devils (as Psellus reports) have such bodies as are every
day tortured with griefs, and tormented with material fires: surely, it were
very absurd, to suppose that a celestial body, is (in any sort) fit for any
the precedent matters, but far opposite to them, and therefore much more
absurd to imagine that devils have celestial bodies.


Philologus. Surely Lycanthropus, Ephesians. 2. 2.
if devils be endued as you say with their peculiar bodies, Ephesians. 6. 12.
I would rather imagine them to have airie, then celestial bodies: Chrysostom.
in 1. ad Thessal. homil. 11.
because the Apostle, he calls them airie spirits, and, as Chrysostom says,
the whole air is replenished throughout with devils.


Physiologus. Howsoever Paul or Chrysostom affirm there be devils in the
air, that does not conclude, that therefore, the devils they have airie
bodies: which opinion is much more absurd then the other before. Petr. Martyr.
loc. com. 9. sect. 13. Corpus homogenium.
For first, that the devils should have airie bodies: it is utterly impossible.
Because the air is (as we commonly say) a body of one and the selfsame
kind; so as, every part of air, is air: neither can any reason be rendered,
why this part of the air should be more the body of a devil, then another,
and so, the whole air should be a continued body of devils. Besides that, an
organicall body consisting jointly of distinct members, must have bones,
synowes, veins, arteries, flesh, and must also receive some proportion, shape,
or figure: all which are impossible to be made of the air. Again, the air is
inconstant, and continues not long in a place: and therefore, by ascribing to
the devil an ayrie body, Omne alterabile, est corruptibile, 1. de generatione.
we might rather conclude him a runnagate land-leaper, then an inherent
landlord in any man's body. Briefly, if the devil has an ayrie body, then
also, his said body is subject to corruption, and dissolution, for, the air
is a corrupt and dissoluble body: and so, by consequence the devils should be
mortal as touching their ayrie bodies. And thereupon, either they must have new
bodies made them a fresh, when those other be dissolved: or we must else
believe also a resurrection of the bodies of devils, all which you may see, is
very absurd.


Lycanthropus. But Augustine he holds the contrary. For, therefore says he,
Aug. Genes. ad literam, lib. 3.
is the body of a Devil incortuptible, because, in the air and fire there is
an active force, as also in the water and earth, a passive force: and so by
consequence, the body of a Devil being airie, is rather active, then passive.


Physiologus. By Augustines leave, this accords neither with sound
Philosophy, Otho Casman, Angelograph, part prima, cap. 3. page 66.
nor yet with common experience. For, with the Philosophers, the air is rather
passive then active; because his proper quality is thought to be liquide.
Howbeit, heat and cold are said to be active: but dryness and humiditie,
passive qualities. Moreuer, it has been proved by manifest and daily
experiments: that the air is both passible, and corruptible, and may easily be
corrupted and changed. And therefore, if the Devils have airie bodies, they are
subject to corruption and dissolution: and so by consequence, the Devils, they
should be endued with mortal bodies, as was affirmed before.


Lycanthropus. But, Mich. Psellus, de operatione Daemonum cap. 11. ibid. cap. 8.
many (for all this) do flatly avouch that the Devils have either fiery, or
aierie, or waterie, or earthly bodies: yea, such bodies as can feel, and be
felt, both hurt, and be hurt, in so much as they lament when they are
stricken, and being put to the fire, are burnt. And that, they themselves
continually burn in such sort, ibidem cap. 9.
as they leave ashes behind them: as has been manifestly proved in the
borders of Italy.


Physiologus. If you lend you ears to the opinion of the Platonists, or but
listen a while to the dotages of dreaming Psellus, they will fill your head
full of these and such other Italian tales: wherein, it were more ease for a
man to believe them, then to run into the borders of Italy, to reprove them
of falsehood. Howbeit, 2. Pet. 3. 10. 11. 12.
if Devils in deed, Petr. Martyr. loc. com. 9. sect. 13.
should have elementarie bodies, they could not be eternal. For, the elements,
they have in them both heat and cold, dryness, and moisture: yea, such active
and passive qualities both, as, by contending together continually, must needs
(in the end) be utterly dissolved. And therefore these toys which the
Platonistes and Psellus do tattle abroad, (...).
are matters that cleave together like thombe-roppes of sand: having in them no
soundnes of truth. Besides that, their Philosophy herein, Regiuald Skolt in
his discovery of Witches. lib. 17. cap. 3. fol. 494.
is very improbable: for, if the Devil be earthie, he must needs be palpable;
if he be palpable, he must needs kill the man into whom he really enters.
Also, if he be of earth created, then must he be visible, and vntransformable
concerning that point: for, Gods creation cannot be annihilated by any devise
of the creature. So as, although it were granted, that the Devils might add
to their being, either matter or form: yet, very certain it is, they cannot
possibly diminish or alter the substance whereof they consist. As, not to be
spiritual: or, to relinquish and leave earth, water, fire, air, or this or
that element whereof they were first created and made. But, howsoever they
imagine of water, of air, or of fire: very certain I am, that the earth must
always be visible and palpable, yea, and the air must be always invisible,
and fire must be hot, and water must be moist. And, of these three latter
bodies, especially of water and air: no shape nor form can naturally be
exhibited to mortal men's eyes, by any possible means of the creature.


Lycanthropus. Well yet, for any thing heard, I can hardly be persuaded, but,
that Devils have their proper and peculiar bodies.


Orthodoxus. I have forborne a long time to speak; in hope that Physiologus
and your self would have grown to some issue concerning this point. But, since
you persist in your fond opinion: do tell me what it is that makes you imagine
the Devils to have also their bodies?


Lycanthropus. This especially persuades me unto it: Bernard. in cant. cantic.
sermon. 5.
I find in the scriptures four sorts of spirits. Namely, first a divine
spirit, which only is God: who, although he be a spirit: yet has he no need of
a body, Petr. Martyr. loc. com. 9. sect. 14.
touching either his being, or his working. The second are Angelical spirits,
namely Angels and Devils, who, albeit they need no bodies at all, Oath. Casman.
Angelograph. par. 1. cap. 3. page 72.
in respect either of their being, or of their proper actions, yet need they
their bodies, in communicating their actions unto us. The third are humane
spirits: who, in regard of their essential being do need no bodies, for,
they really exist and live, being disioined asunder from their bodies. Although
yet, concerning their organical actions appertaining especially to the
vegetative and sensitive life, they at no hand may want their proper bodies.
The fourth and last sort, are brutish spirits: which, neither can be, nor do
any thing at al without their bodies. By all which it is clear, that of these
four sorts of spirits, the divine spirit alone (the omnipotent God I mean) he
needs no body: all the rest, they have al need of, and do also enjoy their
own bodies, for the use of themselves and of others, and this, either to
help, or to hurt. And, for these selfsame respects; the very devils also
themselves do stand in need of their bodies.


Orthodoxus. By this your distribution of spirits it does plainly appear,
Petr. Martyr, loc. com. 9* sect. 14.
that spirits and devils they need no bodies at al, touching either their
being, or working. For first, they have their essential being, without any
body, in as much as they are spiritual substances: and then next, they need
also no bodies concerning their proper actions, for, they love, they hate, they
affect, they do will, and understand without any help of bodies at al.


Lycanthropus. I speak not now of their proper, but of their ministerial
actions: which they cannot possibly accomplish without their peculiar bodies.


Orthodoxus. And, I understand it also of their ministerial actions; which they
may and do eftsoons accomplish by assumed bodies: without any their peculiar
bodies at all. And heerin also I speak only of good Angels: but go to,
proceed in framing your argument.


Lycanthropus. I frame it thus. Ministers, Bernard. in cant. cantic. sermon. 5.
Heb. 1. 14.
they cannot possibly accomplish their appointed ministry to those that live
in the body, without having a body. But, the Angels are all ministering
spirits for such saved ones as live in the body: therefore, they cannot
possibly accomplish their ministry to them, without having a body.


Orthodoxus. I vnframe it thus. The truth of your proposition, is only
particular, having special relation to some certain kind of ministry: and
therefore, it does not, nor cannot so generally conclude as you would have it
to do. Because Angels or spirits they may, and do eftsoons undergo some
certain offices without any assistance of an external body: yea, even all
their offices whatsoever, they might and could well undertake without any body
at all, if it so seemed good to the Lord. Howbeit, some other offices again,
they do execute in bodies: not because there is otherways in themselves a
defect for that work, but, for their sakes only to whom they are sent. Neither
is it of any necessity, that the Angels (for some special respects) should
always consist upon, and have peculiarly unto them their own proper bodies:
because (for such special respects) they may, and have eftsoons assumed to
themselves some other bodies from else where. Howbeit, what need of assuming of
bodies at all, if Angels and spirits be always endued with their proper and
peculiar bodies? No surely, then to assume, where no assuming of bodies in
deed: but rather a stretching out, a rending, and dissoluing of substances,
which is too too absurd, as was told you before.


Lycanthropus. I wonder you are so peremptory in denying this point: I having
not only the Philosophers (as you heard even now) but ecclesiastical fathers
both old, and new on my side?


Orthodoxus. Your philosophers, they shoot fair and far off, as you also
have heard even now. You say you have fathers both old and new on your side:
let us see first whether your old fathers do come any nearer the mark.


Lycanthropus. First, Origin, in libro, (...).
Origin, he flatly affirms that spirits and devils are endued with their
proper bodies.


Orthodoxus. Origin (if that book be his own) is not to be regarded
concerning this question: because, therein he does nothing but play the
Platonist, iumpingfull patte with Psellus in every point. And therefore he
deserves none other answer then that which was given to those other before.
Let us hear more authentical fathers, or end the discourse.


Lycanthropus. Hilarie, Hilarious, in Math. cap. 5.
he says there is nothing which in it own substance and in respect of
creation is not corporal. And therefore spirits and devils, they having their
substance, and (being created) are also corporal.


Orthodoxus. Hilarie, he says so indeed; but gives no one reason of saying so.
(...) ipse dixit.
It is not enough for your self to cry out and say, Hilarie, he speaks it:
unless Hilarie also does prove what he speak, which he does not in the place
you allege. He only propounds the matter without any proof: and may easily
be answered thus. The soul of man it has her substance, and was also created
and yet incorporall. For, or ever it was infused into the body, and after the
dissolution thereof, it does substantially exist, and is also immortal:
accomplishing continually her animal operations. Neither needs she an humane
body in any respect of her proper essential being: but only in regard of her
organicall operations, as was showed before. And therefore Hilarie he helps
you nothing at all.


Lycanthropus. Tertullian very plainly affirms Angels and spirits to have
their peculiar bodies. Tertul. in libro decarne Christi.



Orthodoxus. Whatsoever Tertullian says there, concerning this question, the
Schoolmen, they do excuse and qualify his speech on this sort. They say that
Tertullian by the name of body, understands only the spiritual substance
of Angels and nothing else: And this he does (say they) in an only regard of
the simplicity of that people with whom he dealt: who held, that nothing
could possibly exist in nature, without a body. Tertullian therefore, in that
only regard, did purposely call the substances of spirits and devils by the
name of a body.


Lycanthropus. Yea, Tertul. contra Prax. page 409.
but Tertullian avouches further, that God himself is also a body: and
therefore, much more that spirits and devils they have their bodies. His words
be these. Who will deny God himself to be a body: although God (indeed) be a
spirit?


Orthodoxus. This is so far from confuting, as it rather confirms that
qualification which the Schoolmen do make. Namely, that by the word ( body)
Tertullian understands nothing but the spiritual and simple substance of
spirits and devils. Besides that, Hieron. Zanchius de operibus Dei, lib. 2.
cap. 3. page 62*
it is one thing to be a body: and another to have a body. Tertullian says
only that God is a body: he says not there, that God has a body.


Lycanthropus. Notwithstanding all this, he says elsewhere, Tertul. libro De
anima.
that spirits and devils are corporal: his reason is because the souls of men
are also corporal.


Orthodoxus. Herein his poverty bewraieth it self, being constrained as you
see, idem, per idem.
to beg his cause: wherein also he would prove, the same by the same, namely,
corporal spirits, by corporal souls. Howbeit, we have proved before, and do
here affirm it a fresh: that the souls of men, they are incorporal, and
therefore by consequence, spirits and devils they are not corporal, but
spiritual substances. Besides all this, Aug. Genes, ad literam, lib. 7. cap. 9.
and 12. and 21.
Augustine very flatly affirms, that the incorporall, do differ fully from
corporal substances, and denies withal, that whatsoever is created, the same
is a body: yea, he sharply reprehendeth and derideth Tertullian, Et lib. 10.
ibid. cap. 24 and 25.
for auouching the souls of men to be corporal. And, in the end he thinks it
too too absurd, Danaeus, Enchir. August. cap. 59. page 179
to hold that a reasonable soul should be a body in any respect: because the
same is only and altogether incorporall. And thus you may plainly perceive by
Augustine: how unfitly Tertullian does fit your turn.


Exorcistes. But Augustine himself elsewhere very flatly affirms, Aug. de
trinit. lib. 2. cap. 7. Ibidem lib. 3. cap. 1.
that all reasonable creatures are corporal substances: yea, and that even the
intellectual creatures, namely, Angels, spirits, and devils, Et in Genes, ad
lit. lib. 11. cap. 30.
are every of them also corporal powers; howsoever they subsist not of flesh
and blood.


Orthodoxus. How Augustine agrees with Augustine, your self may plainly
perceive: and therein also may wisely consider what credit consists in such
variety. But that your Augustine may also receive his answer: let us hear
his argument whereby he would prove spirits and devils to be corporal
substances.


Lycanthropus. He reasons thus. We do therefore affirm the intellectual
powers to be corporal substances, Aug. de spiritu, and anima, libr. 18.
only because they are circumscribed with place: even as humane souls are
also enclosed with bodies.


Orthodoxus. This is his argument. Whatsoever is circumscribed with place, that
same is corporal: but spirits and devils they are circumscribed with place,
therefore, spirits and devils they are corporal. I answer, the proposition is
faulty, and halteth down right. For, Iul. Scaliger. Exercit. 359. sect. 5.
the localitie of spirits and devils does not simply depend upon a body which
after it own manner, I mean circumscriptiuely and sensibly is (no doubt) in a
place: but it arises properly, from the finitouesse, and dimensiuenesse of the
angelical nature it self. Which said angelical nature being created of God,
is therefore but finite, and circumscribed also with those her own terms
which are competent and proper unto her. And therefore, the intellectual
powers, they are in a place, because they be finite substances: although yet,
they are in a place but definitiuely or determinately. So then, spirits and
devils you see, they are undoubtedly in a place, because they be local: but,
they are therefore said to be local, not because they be corporal as Augustine
imagines, but for that, being finite, they have their muchnesse or quantity
after a sort, I mean, no predicamental, but an intelligible quantity. And
therefore Augustine he speaks soundly you see, against Tertullian: but
proves your purpose nothing at al.


Exorcistes. But, Author de Ecclesiasticis dogmatibus, qui extat in tom. 3. Aug.
the author of the Ecclesiastical opinions writes plainly, that we must
believe nothing to be incorporall or invisible but only God. Who alone is
truly said to be incorporall, because he is every where present, replenishing
al things: and therefore also invisible to every creature, because he is
incorporall. His first argument is framed thus. Whatsoever is incorporall, that
same is every where, because vbiquity is the cause of incorporality. But,
spirits and devils, they are not every where: therefore, spirits and devils
they are not incorporal.


Orthodoxus. The proposition with his prosyllogisme halteth down right, the
same being a deceaueable Elench: making that the cause, which is not properly
the cause in deed. a non causa, vt causa.
For, neither is infiniteness, nor the vbiquity depending thereon, the only
proper cause that any thing is incorporal: but some other thing else. As for
example, an omnipresence, or (if so I may speak) an incorporiety, is truly in
God: howbeit, God is incorporal, not so much in regard of his vbiquity, as
because he is a simple spirit. Angels in like sort, are therefore incorporal in
their proper degree, because they be spirits, but yet created spirits: and they
are therefore local, because they be finite substances. Thus then, your said
author his first argument, afordeth small force (you see) to your present
purpose.


Lycanthropus. But, he argues secondly thus. Whatsoever is incorporal, that
also is invisible: spirits and devils, they are not invisible, therefore also,
not incorporal.


Orthodoxus. First, the assumption is merely false, because it makes spirits
and devils naturally visible: which al men do know to be otherways by common
experience. For, Luc. 24. 39.
who ever has hitherto seen, or could possibly perceive a spirit or devil as
they are in their proper nature. Again, in the proposition he fails as
before, by pretending a cause, a non causa, vt causa.
which is not the cause. For the denying of a corporal or bodily being, is not
the proper cause of inuisibility: but, the absence, the vitiousnesse, the
deprivation or fault of some other thing else which are necessarily required in
the action of seeing. Besides that, by this argument, a man might also deny the
aerie element to be a body or corporal substance: for, who can possibly behold,
or sensibly see the purity of the air it self? Thus then, your old fathers
(you see) they (in deed and in truth) are not interessed at al in that
misbegotten offspring which your self so desirously (but yet fasly) would
father upon them: and therefore, let us now here what better hap with the new?


Lycanthropus. With a very good will. Caelius Rhodig. antiquar. lect. lib. 1.
cap. 20.
First, Rhodiginus he affirms confidently, that spirits and devils have their
proper bodies.


Orthodoxus. How should he so confidently affirm his opinion, not having the
conformity and concord of truth consorting therewith? Besides that, Rhodiginus
he proves his assertion by the bare and only authority of Augustine: the which
auctority and opinion of his, as you have heard it disproued before: so surely
Rhodiginus himself, he does dangerously cross and annihilate it, by opposing
many unavoidable exceptions of scholemen against the same. And therefore,
Rhodiginus his authority, is nothing authentical or current concerning your
question.


Lycanthropus. But Caietanus explaining these the Apostles words, Cateianus de
verbis Apostol^. Ephesians. 2. 2.
( according to the prince of the airie spirits or powers) he is not afraid to
affirm: that it holds best with reason and sound Philosophy, to believe
that spirits and devils are constituted naturally of airie bodies.


Orthodoxus. Does Caietanus say so indeed? Oh the wit that abounds in a
Cardinals hat? But, what is his reason I pray you?


Lycanthropus. He has a reason that knockes it dead, namely this. Even as
(says he) the vegetative substance, is found without the sensitive, and the
sensitive without the motive, and an intellectiue without either sensitive, or
motive according to place: so is it credible, that an intellectiue, may be
found without a sensitive, with a motive only according to place, and such
(says he) are spirits and devils.


Orthodoxus. Does Caietanus conclude as you say? Now fair fall his good heart
for his cunning conclusion: surely, he himself alone has stricken the
Popingaie dead. This I confess, is an admirable argument. Howbeit, this I must
tell you, that such manner of arguments, howsoever they may seem at a blush to
give a glimmering show of conueniencie: they have in them, very small force
to convince. And without doubt, if Caietanus his conclusion be canonized
current: it might in like manner be granted, that the sensitive substance is to
be found without the vegetative, and the intellectiue with the sensitive,
without the motive according to place: and so, no one thing shall be wanting,
which may tend to the generality and absoluteness of such kind of couplings
together. Which, when all is done, your opinion (for any thing Caietanus
concludes) is like to lie in the dust.


Exorcistes. Yea, Francisc. Georg. tom. 1. problem. 5474.and 75. Et tom. 6.
probl. 330.and 331. Item, Malleus mallefic. Item, Benedictus Pererius.
but Georgius he affirms plainly, that spirits and devils are not only
corporal and airie substances: but that they have in them also the power of
generation, and can shed forth seed for that purpose. Howbeit, when they come
to a woman (says he) then they do contract, gather together, or thicken their
airie bodies: fashioning them fit for the purpose which they presently
affect, Item, Gryllandus.
yea, and that also their ofsprings are properly Giants. Item, Iacobus Wickerus.



Orthodoxus. Notwithstanding Georgius his impudent and shameless affirmation
of a matter so shameful, Iacobus Wierus, de praefligijs, ^ib. 2. cap. 39.
Sienchus Eugu^inus, de pereni^hilosoph. lib. 6. cap. 32.
I will at no hand be drawn any longer to hear it, much less do I give
credit unto it: and which more is, I will neither defile my tongue, nor infect
your chaste ears with the filthy contagion thereof, it being so impossible in
nature, and so incredible in all sound Divinity. Howbeit, if any of the
learned be further desirous to hear this his gross impudency and foolerie
more fully confuted: Otho Casman. Angelograph. par. 2. cap. 21. page 605.
I refer them over to the learned Treatises of such as have sifted that
offensive argument unto the bran. More especially, Arist. degener animal.. lib.
2. cap. 3.
to the several works of Wierus, Engubinus, Casmannus, Aristotle, Frisiuss,
Scaliger, Cassianus and others: who do every of them so soundly beat down
this your Georgius his gross assertion, Paulus Frisius, Iul. Scaliger.
Cassianus.
as I my self shall not need to deal in it at all.


Lycanthropus. But yet Zanchius, Hyperius, in method. Theol. lib. 2. page 304.
a man of excellent learning, he not only enclineth that way: but holds
withal, this my opinion of corporal spirits.


Orthodoxus. Zanchius, Hieron. Zanch. de operibh. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 3. page 62.
imbraceth the same I confess as the more probable opinion in his conceit:
but what manner of bodies, spirits, and devils should have, he does not
determine. That they have airy bodies: he sees not (he says) how the same
should be proved. But he verily supposes, spirits and devils to have other
manner of bodies then either airie, or celestial bodies: and that the
substance of their bodies is more like to the substance of that heaven of the
blessed, which is properly called the Empyrial or fiery heaven. Thus this
excellent learned man; he does give (among others) his coniecturall opinion
concerning the bodies of spirits and devils. A coniectural opinion I say, very
purposely consonant to that other opinion which himself and some others do
hold about the creation of Angels in that the forenamed, heaven of the blessed.
Howbeit, neither Zanchius, nor any of the rest, do certainly determine this
matter in question.


Lycanthropus. Well, yet Zanchius and the other, they purposely incline to this
my opinion; concerning corporal spirits and devils.


Orthodoxus. Not so. For whereas your self do certainly hold that spirits and
devils are endued with gross and airie bodies: Zanchius, and some others
suppose, they do rather consist of empyriall or fiery bodies as was showed
before, where also I have purposelie put down the special reason of this
their coniecturall opinion. Howbeit, for a further declaration hereof, I do
answer with Gregory, Greg. Nazian, sermon 2. (...). Greg. 1. Roman. tem. 1.
moral. In lob. lib. 2. cap. 2. Bed a, tom. 2. (...), lib. 2* page 314.
Damascenus, cap. (...). Alexander Aphrodisaeus, 12. Metaph. 12. Iul. Scaliger.
Exercitat. 6. and alibi. Item exercit. 359 sect. 2. Otho Casman. Angelograph.
par. 1. cap. 3. page 75.
Beda, Damascene, the Schoolmen, and others: who do all jointly affirm, that
even as the knowledge of spirits and devils (in comparison of our knowledge) is
very excellent and wonderful large, although yet (in comparison of God) the
same is but shallow and short: so surely, those the supposed bodies of
spirits and devils in comparison of our earthly and palpable bodies, may
fitly be said to be spiritual, whereas yet (in comparison of the
omnisufficient, and incircumscriptible spirit of spirits) they may after a
sort, be said to be corporal. And this our censure concerning corporal
spirits; being rightly understood, as it ought to be (that is, being granted
comparatively) may very well stand with the truth. For certain it is that
Angels are not spirits purely simple, as God is most simple: neither are they
infinite and incircumscriptible spirits, as God alone is, but are marshalled
within their proper dimensions and bounds. All which being granted, it does
not thereupon necessarily follow, that therefore Angels, they are not created
incorporall and finite spirits, and such as (after their manner) are limited
definitiuely within their proper dimensions: but this rather folowes thereof,
namely, that therefore spirits and devils they are not most simple, most
infinite, illocal, nor omnipotent powers. For, the specialls do always retain
the common nature of their general, and therein they fitly accord: howsoever,
by reason of some repugnant forms, they do otherways dissent among
themselves. And thus, your Fathers (you see) both old and new, they are fully
answered, concerning their supposed mannaging of this your opinion of corporal
spirits or devils.


Philologus. Are you able Lycanthropus, to reply to his answer?


Lycanthropus. I am utterly unable. But sir, since you so confidently do hold
that spirits and devils are incorporall: let us hear your reasons, and
authorities concerning this point.


Orthodoxus. With very good will my reasons are these. Luc. 24. 39.
First, spirits and devils have not flesh and bones (says Christ) as you see
me to have. Wherein it is very apparent, that, there is one substance of humane
bodies, and another of spiritual powers. Spirits, they have neither flesh nor
bones: therefore, they cannot be comprehended with the sight of the eye, nor
handled by the sense of feeling, both which are proper to the sensible
perceiving of humane bodies. Again, Heb. 1. 7.
the Lord (says the Apostle) has made his spirits his messengers: Psalm. 204.
4.
and his ministers a flame of fire. The which place, albeit David does properly
understand of the operation of winds: yet, for as much as the Apostle applies
the same to the Angels, it is not to be doubted at all, but as the name Spirit,
so likewise a spiritual essence appertains unto them. Again, we read that a
legion of devils, Marc. 5. 9. Luc. 8. 30.
namely, six thousand, six hundred, sixty and six possessed the man in the
Gospel, whom Christ delivered. But, if devils be corporal substances, and do
essentially enter into the body of man, it is utterly impossible that there
should so many be crowded together, and all contained at once within the narrow
corners of an humane body.


Exorcistes. Some do hold, there was (in deed) but one only devil in the
possessed: whose name was Legion.


Orthodoxus. As though it were possible, Math. 8. 28.
that one only devil could be really inherent in two several persons at
once? Besides that, it is very apparent in Mark and in Luke, Marc. 5. 9. 12.
Luc. 8. 30. 33.
that, there was not one but many devils: yea, and Matthew also (exchanging the
name of one into many) he says, the devils besought Christ that they might go
into the heard of swine. Math. 8. 31.



Exorcistes. Sir, I only have showed you what some others do hold: but,
proceed in your purpose.


Orthodoxus. I proceed thus; The spirits or souls of men are incorporall: Aug.
Genes. ad literam, lib. 7. cap. 9.and 12.and 21.
therefore spirits and devils are also incorporall. For, if the reasonable
soul or spirit of a man, be not corporal in any respect, I mean, if it be
neither solid nor palpable as are the earthie and terrestrial bodies, neither
yet subtle or slender as are the airie and celestial bodies: then without
doubt, spirits and devils they are likewise incorporall, Danaeus, in Enchir.
Aug. cap. 59. page 179.
because they also are spirits. For, the nature, and definitions of a spirit
and a body, do altogether, and in every respect differ between themselves.
And thus (besides those Philosophical reasons which Physiologus propounded
before) you have hitherto heard from the Scriptures, such several arguments as
do very plainly conclude the non being of corporal spirits or devils.


Pneumatomachus. Believe me Lycanthropus, before we began this our conference,
I doubted greatly of the essential being of spirits and devils: Howbeit now I
am clear in that point, and by this discourse do farther perceive them to be
admirable and wonderful powers.


Lycanthropus. Very true as you say. But sir, let us hear I beseech you,
your authorities also concerning this point?


Orthodoxus. With very good will. Wherein I assure you, that this our opinion
concerning incorporall spirits and devils, is generally received in the church
of God: approved by the consent of many Divines: and confirmed fully from the
Laterane Council.


Lycanthropus. For the general receite thereof in the Church I make little
doubt: but let us hear now your several authorities.


Orthodoxus. Content. First, Dionysius writes thus. Dionysius, de caelesti
hyerarchia, cap. 2.
We account not (says he) the celestial and deified powers or spirits, to
consist of innumerable feet, or to have a manifold countenance, neither yet,
to be like unto living and corporal creatures: albeit the sacred Scriptures
(in speaking of them) do use these Poetical and fained forms.

Chrysostom, he says, the Seraphimes are called spirits, Chrysostom. in Isa.
cap. 6.
that is, incorporall, and supernatural powers. And a little after, he says,
they be called fiery or flaming creatures; because their substance is most
pure.

Augustine be defines them thus, Aug. de cognit, verae vitae cap. 6.
Angels and devils are spiritual powers, incorporall substances, invisible,
insensible, reasonable, intellectual, and immortal: the good ones, they are
shining and impassible, the evil ones black and passible.

Theodoret, Theodoretus, in Genes. Quest. 36.
he says that God created the universal nature of incorporall substances:
constituting, decreeing, and ordeining their said nature to be intellectual
and also immortal.

Andreas of Jerusalem, Andreas Hierosolymitanus.
he says, that Angels and spirits are all without their bodies.

Gregory also, he says in like sort, Greg. in Ezech. lib. 1. hom. 12.
that spirits and devils they have no flesh.

Isidore, Isidor. de sum. bono lib. 1. cap. 3
he says that Angels and devils, according to their nature: are called spirits.

Damascene, Damascenus, de orthodoxa fide, lib. 2. cap. 3.
he says that Angels and spirits are intellectual substances, evermore
mooueable and free, by the arbiterment of their proper power, incorporall, the
ministers of God, obtaining immortality by grace, not by nature: the
portraiture and bounds of whose substantial being, only the creator of
spirits, he knows himself.

Carolus magnus, Carolus magnus de imag. lib. 3. cap. 20. Marc. Vigerius
Saonensis, Decachordi, ^horda, 1. ca. 18.
he says the essential substance of Angels and devils is immortal: because
they be spirits by nature.

Vigerius Saonensis, he says, that Angels are all of them spiritual
substances without any bodies at all, consisting of understanding and will: and
therefore, they are every of them called Angels as it were by a Christian name.

Culmannus he says, Leonard. Culmannus in disputat. Theolog. par. 1. fol. 15.
Heb. 1. 14. (...). Bernardus, in capite Missus est, homil. 3.
that Angels are not corporal but spiritual substances: because they be
spirits. For a spirit is not a substance consicting of elements, or having
flesh and bones: in which only respect, the Scriptures do call them ministering
spirits.

Briefly, Bernard he says, the very walls are unable to withstand the
Angelical spirits: but that all bodies, (how solid or palpable soever) they
are unto them very penetrable,

Lo, here we have summoned a grand-Iurie, of ancient Fathers: who have all
(with one general consent) given up their verdit, concerning the non being of
corporal spirits and devils. Go to therefore Lycanthropus, what say you them?


Lycanthropus. I say they are all good men and true.


Orthodoxus. Waell, then I hope you will yield this question, namely, that
spirits and devils, they have not material bodies, peculiar to their
essential being: but are altogether simple, and incorporall substances: and
that therefore, their essential being in men, (if the same should be granted)
can never be perceived by corporal sense, and so by consequence, no corporal
possession at all.


Lycanthropus. I yield no such matter unto you.


Orthodoxus. Why man, it was the determination, of that grand-Iurie of Fathers,
whom you acknowledge for good men and true. Whereupon, their verdit was
forthwith authentically recorded: and may not now (by any orderly course) be
reuersed.


Lycanthropus. It may be, they were to inconsiderate and rash in giving their
verdite: and therefore, let us hear your Laterane Council concerning this
matter in question.


Orthodoxus. What man, must the credit of a grand-Iurie of Catholic Fathers be
made to depend upon the approbation of a general Council? Well then, Conc.
Lateran. magnum. Can. 1.
the Laterane Council does flatly confirm, that Angels or spirits, they are
incorporall, created of God: and, were not eternal before al beginnings, but,
created only in time. By all the premises then, you may plainly perceive by
swaie of argument, by plain evidence of Scripture, by authority of Fathers,
yea, and by the whole consent of a general Council, that spirits and devils
are incorporall substances: and, that therefore, if devils do essentially
enter into the bodies of men, as your self do fondly imagine, they enter not
so by any bodies of their own, because they have no bodies at all.


Lycanthropus. Whether devils have bodies, or no bodies, it makes no great
matter: very certain I am, they have a real possession in men, and I prove
it thus. Spirits and devils, they can essentially assume to themselves, true
natural bodies: therefore they can essentially enter into the possessed man's
body.


Orthodoxus. Are you fled on the sudden from the devil his real possessing
of bodies, to his essential assuming of bodies? Can you find no fast footing
to setle your self upon: that you thus plodde hither and thither from point to
point, as a man fearfully distracted, or suddenly fallen in a maze?


Lycanthropus. Yes sir, I have fast footing (I warrant you) for whatsoever I
hold: although yet now, I rather desire to hear what you are able to say,
concerning the devil his essential assuming of true natural bodies.


Orthodoxus. Well, then I perceive your store is not great: being thus
constrained to spend on the stock. Howbeit, because this matter will crave a
longer discourse, then the present time will afford: let us therefore go take
our natural rest, and meet here again betimes in the morning, to discourse
this point to the full.


Physiologus. Your motion is good for us all.


Philologus. Very true as you say. And therefore, we three will repair to our
Innes, to take our rest: and meet you (God willing) to morrow, by six of the
clock.


Orthodoxus. Well then, let us forthwith arise, and depart.


The end of the third Dialogue.
The fourth Dialogue.
THE ARGUMENT.
Whether Spirits and Devils can assume to themselves true natural bodies? What
bodies they are said to assume? and how those Scriptures are to be understood,
which be for this purpose produced.

The speakers names.
PHILOLOGVS. LYCANTHROPVS. PNEVMATOMACHVS. PHYSIOLOGVS. ORTHODOXVS. EXORCISTES.
Philologus. LYcanthropus? I have this night in my sleep, been so strangely
troubled about thy last argument: as, if thou take heed to thy self, I verily
believe thou will give them the foil.


Lycanthropus. I am so persuaded my self: howbeit, if I be conquered therein,
I have another in store that will trouble them more then that by a thousand
fold.


Pneumatomachus. Make much of your arguments against the intended skirmish, and
all little enough: for, you are to encounter with sharp sighted adversaries.


Lycanthropus. Be as sharp as they will: they shall be sure to receive as hot
as they bring. But, behold where they come?


Orthodoxus. What sirs? God give you good morrow. You have prevented our
purpose: which was, to have perused an author or twain before your coming.
Howbeit, since you are all so ready: Go to Lycanthropus, propound your
argument to us.


Lycanthropus. I propound it thus. Spirits and Devils, they can essentially
assume to themselves true natural bodies: therefore, they can essentially
enter into the possessed man's body.


Physiologus. We have hitherto denied, and your self was unable to prove any
real or substantial possession at all: and would you now thus cunningly
insinuate some essential entrance of devils, under the pretense of assumed
bodies? Which assuming of bodies if it should be denied; would perhaps, be as
hard to prove as any the points before.


Philologus. What sir? would you bear us in hand, it were hard to prove that
the devil can assume to himself a body? That was never yet doubted of any:
and dare your self undertake to deny the same?


Physiologus. I undertake no absolute denial thereof: but only do here make
it a Question. Howbeit, since your selves are so resolute concerning this point:
do tell me what body the devil does assume to himself. Whether, a true
natural: or fantastical body?


Pneumatomachus. Surely, a true natural body: or none at all.


Physiologus. If a true natural body, then tell me further, whether it be a
body created before: or, to be newly created?


Lycanthropus. It is a body created before.


Physiologus. If you hold it a body created before, then tell me yet further,
whether you take it to be a living: or dead man's body?


Exorcistes. I take it to be some living man's body, if any at all: else, how
should it possibly serve the devils purpose?


Physiologus. I wonder, you should so grossly imagine an impossible matter.
For, where has the devil received power from the Lord: to dispossess living
souls of their organicall bodies? And, what must become of that living man's
soul: all the while the devil assumeth his body it self, to serve his
mischievous purpose? Moreover, it is very absurd: to suppose that the devil
can possibly assume to himself any living man's body. Because the Lord has so
unchangeably established such an inseparable union between the soul and body
of a living man: as, unless the body and soul be substantially united
together, that man may not truly be termed a living man. And which more is,
the soul and body are so inseparably conjoined by the creation of God: as, no
one creature in heaven or in earth may possibly disioyne them, before the
final separation of life, according to the determinate council and
appointment of God. Briefly, be it supposed that the devil could in deed
assume to himself some living man's body, and could also for the present,
extenuate the same, and transform the substance thereof into spiritual
congellations, Tatianus contra graecos. 4. physic. and 2. de anima. simul, and
semel,
as Tatianus affirms: yet, this is very certain and a general rule, that,
two substantial forms cannot possibly be inherent together and at once, in
one and the self same subject. And therefore, to bring the substantial form
of a devil without feeling, into the substantial body of a man without either
killing or hurting, and which more is, to transform the same into such a
slender and impalpable substance as cannot of the possessed him self be
sensibly perceived or felt, no not at the first entrance into him: it may well
be unlikely, but very certain I am, the same is utterly impossible for all the
devils in hell to accomplish, such hard hap they have, in assuming a living
man's body.


Pneumatomachus. For my part, I rather suppose that the Devil does assume to
himself some deads man's body.


Physiologus. This your supposall is no less absurd then the orher before. For
first, if that body which the Devil does assume, be the body of a dead man
departed long since, then surely, it is an hundred to one, that, that selfsame
assumed body is either eaten with worms, Ioh. 11. 39.
and so, unfit for the service: or is else so putrified with filthy
corruption, as the Devil (by entering into any therewith) must needs poison the
possessed man unto death. Again, if that assumed body, be the body of a dead
man but lately departed this life: the Devil then, by assuming such a newly
departed body, must be supposed to appear in a white winding sheet, as he
was heretofore thought to appear unto Saul, 1. Sam. 28. 14.
in Samuels supposed body with a mantel about him, and must so (for the
present) forsake that his supposed form, which the Poets and Painters do hold
to be griesly and black. Besides that, in supposing the Devil can assume to
himself the body of a man, you do therein very grossly oppose your self to
the blessed Apostle: 1. Cor. 6. 13.
who says most confidently that men's bodies are created for the Lord himself,
and not for infernal Spirits. That, they are the members of Christ, 1. Cor. 6.
15.
not the mansions of Belial: the temples of the holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 6. 19.
not a dungeon for Devils, a stie for Satan, not an habitation for Helhounds.
Briefly, if the Devil does assume to himself, some dead man's body, whether
long since, or but lately departed: Otho Casman. Augelograph. par. 2. cap. 18.
page 528.
we must (by this your supposall) imagine a resurrection of bodies before to
the general judgment, and therein also, must attribute to the Devil, that
absolute power of raising the dead, which only is due and proper to God, and
so, by consequence conclude, that the Devil can accomplish and work true
miracles. Deuteronomy. 32. 39.
Whereas the Lord only is able to take life from the dead, 1. Sam. 26. Psalm.
36. 9. Ioh. 5. 21. Act. 17. 28. Romans 4. 17.
and to restore them again unto life: which is such a miraculous work of the
omnipotent God, as by an infallible consequence approoueth the Deity. Seeing
therefore that by this your supposal you do in effect but Deifie the Devil:
be forthwith ashamed to hold, that Spirits have power to assume to themselves
the body of a man already created, whether dead, or alive.


Lycanthropus. You grant then, that the Devils do assume to themselves some
uncreated body?


Physiologus. I grant no such thing. For, how is it possible, either Devil or
Angel should assume that which is not at all: or that they should take to
themselves, a body not yet existing in nature?


Philologus. Very true. But after the creation of such an essential body: you
do then confess, the Devil may assume such a body?


Physiologus. I confess no such matter: unless you first show me by whom
those selfsame supposed bodies should be essentially created: whether by God:
or the Devil?


Exorcistes. They are surely created by God, or not at all: for the Lord only
alone is the creator of all things.


Physiologus. Though the Lord in deed, be the Creator of all things, yet does
it not necessarily follow, and your self shall never be able to prove, that he
is also the Creator of these things: And, how dare you then so confidently
avouch: that these your supposed bodies for the service of devils, are
essentially created by God?


Exorcistes. God is of infinite power: and therefore may do it.


Physiologus. Your may be, concludes nothing at all. Neither do we dispute
what God either may, or is able to do? but what (in deed and in truth) he does
certainly accomplish. And, albeit the Lord (I confess) be of infinite power,
yet is his said power restrainde to his will: Psalm. 133. 6.
for whatsoever the Lord wills, that does he in heaven and in earth. So then,
unless you can show the Lords word to witness his will concerning such
extraordinary creation of bodies for the service of Satan: whatsoever your
self shall happily imagine that God may do, therein, you must yet give us
leave to doubt of the doing there of in deed.


Lycanthropus. But, why may not the Lord for the execution of justice: create
them such bodies?


Physiologus. First, because the Lord has infinite means besides, and those
also of more excellent majesty for the execution of justice: and therefore, he
stands in no manner of need to have such a patched supply. Secondly, for that
the Lord will never do that; Genesis 2. 2. 3. Exodus 20. 11. and 30. 17. Deuteronomy. 5.
14. Heb. 4. 4.
which may any ways witness against himself. But, for him to create such
essential bodies afresh at the pleasure of the devil, and so often as he
pleases: does derogate greatly from the certainty of that sacred truth which
seals unto us, the certain accomplishment of all his works whatsoever in
six days space, and the undoubted ceasing from all his labors the following
day. Moreover, to hold for infallible truth, that those your supposed bodies
for the service of Satan must in any case be created of God: what do you else
in effect, but thereby conclude the Lord him self to be slauishly subject unto
Satan his accursed command, Math. 4. 3.
in creating him bodies afresh, and so often as seems him good? Pro. 16. 4.
Romans 11. 36. Col. 1. 16.
Briefly since the glory of God is the maine end of all his creation: what one
glory may possibly redounde to the Lord, by creating such your supposed bodies
as (being altogether by Satan abused) are prepared neither to destruction nor
glory? And therefore, it is gross impiety, or rather an horrible blasphemy
for any to hold, that the Lord alone must be the Creator of any such essential
bodies, as your self and some others suppose the devil does assume to his
service.


Lycanthropus. It is certain then, that those assumed bodies are created by
Satan him self.


Physiologus. It is even as certainly so, In legenda aurea.
as that S. Donston did hold the devil fast by the nose with a pair of
pincers, the very first day he appeared unto him in such an assumed body:
wherein Donston served the Devil of trust, and according to his due deserts:
to teach him to be meddling with the work of creation, before he had got a
Commission from God. But, alas, Lycanthropus, are you not highly ashamed, to
hold so maine absurd and horrible impieties, or rather such execrable and
intolerable blasphemies? For, be you thoroughly assured of this, that your
self imagening the devil a creator of bodies, Magist. sentent. lib. 2. did.
7.
you do thereby ascribe unto him a supernatural power: Lucas Lossius, In
Euangelia dominic. fol. 421. Act. 17. 28. Col. 1. 16. Lucas Lossius, in
Euangelia dominic. fol. 505.
and therein also do attribute that unto devils, which only is due unto God,
because creation of substances was never yet granted to man or Angel, much
less unto devils. Besides that, if it were in the power of devils either to
create, or assume to them selves essential bodies at pleasure: it is not then
to be doubted, but that (such and so endless is their malice toward men) we
should shortly have the whole world replenisht with corporal devils, yea, and
their number would far surmount the number of men, Reginald Skot, in his
discovery of witchcraft, lib. 16. cap. 2. page 377.
if all be true that is set down in Salomons notes of coniuration. Wherein are
named seauentie nine principal devils: having every of them under them and at
their command, some ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, sixty,
seauentie, yea, and some of them eighty legions of devils at the least. So
then howsoever your self shall otherways dream of a power in Satan for
assuming of bodies: since they can be no such bodies as are newly created either
by God or the devil: since they can be no bodies created before: since they can
be no bodies of men either dead, or alive: it must necessarily follow, that
those imagined bodies which the devils are supposed to assume to them selves,
they are (in deed and in truth) no true natural bodies.


Lycanthropus. It is like then, that the devils, they do only assume to
themselves but a fantastical body.


Physiologus. And it is like then, that the devils, they have only in men, but
a fantastical possession: which is the very same issue you were brought unto
before, when we discoursed of the mental possession of devils.


Philologus. How now Lycanthropus, are you brought to a nonplus before you
well wiste?


Lycanthropus. I wot not I assure you, which ways to wind my self out from
these windings and turnings: howbeit, for any thing hitherto heard, I will
never believe but that the devil can assume to himself a true natural body.


Orthodoxus. What man? will you with such settled pertinacie dwell in your
opinion: not having sound reason therefore?


Lycanthropus. Yes sir, I have reasons and authorities both support me therein.


Orthodoxus. Let us first hear your reasons?


Lycanthropus. With very good will: wherein first from the like, I do reason
thus. The good Angels of God, they have appeered to men in assumed bodies:
therefore spirits and devils, they may also appear unto men in assumed bodies.


Orthodoxus. Your argument is faulty; the same not consisting of things
essentially alike in every respect. Tob. 8. 3. 2. Pet. 2. 4. Jude, 6. Revel.
20. 1. 2. Otho Casman, Angelograph. par. 2. cap. 5. Quest. 1. page 272.
For, neither have the infernal devils* those heavenly privileges which the
celestial Angels enjoy: neither yet are they equal with them in knowledge and
power. So as, although the good Angels do sometimes assume to themselves
essential bodies: yet does it not necessarily follow, that therefore, the
evil Angels or devils are able to do the like. Again, howsoever the good
Angels have (at some time) assumed essential bodies: yet does it not appeer,
and your self cannot prove, that they created those bodies themselves, but by
the provident power and appointment of God, they had them from else where for
that special service whereunto they were sent. Moreover, there is no sound
consequence in this, viz. Good Angels, they do visible appear unto men in
assumed bodies: therefore evil Angels they do the like. This I say does not
follow: because of the good Angels appearing in visible bodies, we have had
often and manifest experience, but of the evil Angels appearing so, no example
or instance at all can be given. Briefly, your argument is but a deceaueable
Elench, Aposse, ad esse.
from a may be, to the being indeed: whereof no certain conclusion can follow.
For thus you reason. Good Angels have appeared to men in assumed bodies:
therefore spirits and Devils they may also appear unto men in assumed bodies.
This your ( may be) concludes nothing for certain. Whereas you should have
argued thus. Good Angels appear in assumed bodies, therefore spirits and
devils do appear unto men in assumed bodies: but then your consequent would
have been ouer-hard to prove, and besides that, it is the very question it
self. By the premises then it is very apparent, that this your first reason
has in it no reason at all to support your opinion.


Lycanthropus. But, since it is certain that the good Angels do oftentimes
appear in assumed bodies: why should not spirits and devils be able to do the
like?


Orthodoxus. As though, because the omnipotent God does furnish and endowe his
heavenly messengers with sensible bodies, when and so often as seems good to
himself: therefore, every impotent and infernal spirit or devil is able
also, to do the like at their pleasures?


Lycanthropus. Why may not the Lord do as much for spirits and devils?


Orthodoxus. The Lord may do whatsoever he please: that it will be his good
pleasure to do this which you dream of, who can certainly say? His pleasure in
the one has been made apparent unto us by often experience: for the other we
have neither word nor promise, nor example, to my remembrance.


Exorcistes. Yes, Psalm. 78. 49.
there is a plain proof hereof in the Psalms: where David says plainly
that the Lord powered forth the fiercenes of his wrath upon the Egyptians, by
sending his evil Angels among them.


Orthodoxus. What understand you by the evil Angel there?


Exorcistes. Those spirits and devils wherewith they were daily tormented.


Orthodoxus. Consider diligently the story concerning the Egyptian plagues,
Exodus 7. etc. and 8. etc. and 9. etc. (...) mittendo nuncios malorum. Psalm. 78.
49. Tremel. ibid.
and tell me where you find any one devil afflicting them: nay, tell me what one
plague was among them, which was not inflicted upon them by the message and
ministry of Moses and Aaron. And therefore, you are deeply deceived in
mistaking these words, by sending the Angels or messengers of evils. Which
place, Tremellius understands not of spirits and Devils sent among them: but
of Moses and Aaron rather: whom the Lord sent to the Egyptians as his only
Angels, that is, the only messengers and executioners of all those his evils
which were cast upon Egypt. And, this sense is (in my opinion) according to the
purpose, coherence, and scope of the Psalm it self.


Lycanthropus. But, it is as Exorcistes says, in the vulgar translation?


Orthodoxus. It is true, and therefore let it so stand as he says, for evil
Angels: I mean, for spirits and devils. But, now tell me withal, how much this
place does make for the assuming of bodies by spirits and devils? Thus you
reason. The Lord sent his evil Angels among the Egyptians: therefore, spirits
and devils they assume to themselves what bodies they please. This consequent
has in it no sequel at al: and it is quite contrary to the words of the text.
For David says not that the Lord sent his evil Angels essentially into them,
but among them, I mean the Egyptians: which proves nothing for Satan his
assuming of bodies.


Exorcistes. But yet, Genes. 3. 1.
we have a notable example concerning this point, from the devil his tempting
of Euah in the serpent.


Orthodoxus. Well, go to, frame your argument.


Exorcistes. I frame it thus. Satan he did put upon him the body of the
serpent, and spoke very sensibly in that selfsame serpent therefore, spirits
and devils they can and are able to do the like with any body else whatsoever.


Philologus. Master Orthodoxus? this argument I believe will set you hard?


Orthodoxus. Not so hard as you think, by then the ambiguous terms are opened
more plainly. And therefore, do tell me here, what you mean by satan his
putting the serpents body upon him?


Exorcistes. I mean this: namely, that he did really and essentially enter
into the very essence and substance of the serpent it self.


Orthodoxus. Then it must follow by necessary consequence, that the devil
himself did essentially become the serpent in deed: or the serpent essentially
the devil at least, during the whole time of that action.


Lycanthropus. Yea, what else?


Orthodoxus. Do you ask me what else? I ask you for answer, whether your
heart be so deeply bewitched with blindness, as you cannot perceive the
absurdity hereof: it being so apparently evident to all the world? For, is it
possible think you, that the devil should be able utterly to annihilate the
esse^tiall being either of himself, or of any other creature under the
heavens? Or, is it likely that satan can cause himsele to be a devil or no
devil: and the serpent to be a serpent or no serpent, when, and so often as it
pleases himself? If this were certeinely so, what one creature in all the
world could any long time continue in that proper estate wherein it was first
created of God? For, the devil has will and malice enough to do mischief, if
he had but that absolute power to accomplish the same. Moreover, from satan his
assuming of the serpents body alone, you do plainly conclude an absolute
power in devils over all other bodies else whatsoever: and so, from one
particular example you do cunningly gather a general conclusion thus. Satan,
he did essentially assume the body of the serpent: therefore, spirits and
devils can essentially assume what bodies they please. This argument is utterly
untrue in every part. For first, whereas I plainly deny that the devil can so
essentially assume a body, the which thing you should prove: Petitio principij
your self by a pitiful begging of the cause in question, do take it as
granted, and thereupon, would prove the same by the same, Idem, per idem.
attributing also to the devil such an absolute power therein as is utterly
impertinent to any creature, and thereby also you do highly derogate from the
divinity and power of God. Secondly, your argument also is faulty, in that it
concludes more largely then was put down in the premises: namely, from one
particular practice of satan it concludes an absolute power (as was said) over
al bodies whatsoever, which is a deceivable kind of reasoning. For, albeit we
should grant (which will never be proved) that satan had for that once, some
special preuiledge granted from God, and did thereby also, essentially enter
into the very essence of the serpent as your self suppose: yet does it not
follow, that therefore spirits and devils they can also essentially assume to
themselves what bodies they please. Howbeit, to the end we may the more
directly and plainly proceed, do tell me whether it was the devil alone, or
the serpent alone, or the devil and serpent together, that gave the onset upon
Euah in that temptation?


Philologus. It could not be the devil alone: for he is not named at all in
the action.


Orthodoxus. If he be not named at all in the action: how comes he then to be
charged for the principal author in that selfsame action?


Exorcistes. In other places of scripture, Wised. 2. 24. Ioh. 8. 44.
his malice that way is mightily tainted, and himself accused for a murderer
from the beginning: although in the history of Euahs tentation he be not
precisely named any author at all.


Orthodoxus. Yea, but how can those places of Scripture, in any sound reason
impose the blame of the action upon satan himself: if neither absolutely, nor
properly nor historically, nor Allegorically, nor metaphorically, nor any ways
else he be specially named in that very history of Euahs tentation, wherein
the action it self with the several circumstances is fully and plainly
expressed?


Exorcistes. Moses (you know) does not set down the story of the Bible at
large: but only compiles the same in a summary abridgement.


Orthodoxus. But, that action especially being so weighty a matter, was
necessary to be known in every point: and therefore it is not to be doubted,
but that the history concerning the same is so exactly set forth with every
circumstance, as that any man may be able to judge of the principal actors
therein at the least. So then, although the devil in that history be neither
absolutely, nor historically, nor properly expressed by name: yet must we
acknowledge him to be therein allegorically and metaphorically set forth at the
least, or otherways impose no blame upon him at al concerning the action.


Lycanthropus. Yes, even by that selfsame story he is allegorically or
metaphorically set forth in the serpent.


Orthodoxus. Then was it no natural serpent, but the devil himself
metaphorically set forth by the name of a serpent: who gave the onset upon Euah
in that tentation. For, by allegories and metaphors there is evermore some
other thing meant; then that which is literally expressed.


Lycanthropus. But yet for all that, the serpent is said to have tempted Euah.


Orthodoxus. That is, the devil alone metaphorically set forth (as you say) by
the name of a serpent: was he that tempted our grandmother Euah. I prove it
thus. If in that action, the devil himself be not historically and properly,
but allegorically and metaphorically called a serpent, because he is most
crafty and subtle, then undoubtedly, the objection of a serpent is very
inconvenient: but, the antecedent is true, and therefore also the consequent.


Exorcistes. Prove your antecedent.


Orthodoxus. I will. Isa. 11. 6. Am. 4. 1. Math. 3. 7. Luc. 13. 32. Apoc. 12. 3.
4. 5. and 13. 1. 4. 11. and 20. 2.
First (besides that which you grant your self) it is an accustomed thing in
the sacred scriptures to use the names of other creatures in setting forth to
our sense, the intellectual creatures themselves. Hereupon it is, that (in the
Apocalypse) the ( devil by a perpetual allegory) is called a dragon or serpent:
and therefore in this history of Euahs tentation by the like perpetual
allegory he is also called a serpent. Secondly Moses (in that action) does
purposely entitle the devil by the name of a serpent: 2. Cor. 11. 3.
because (by his effectual creeping into the interior senses, as also, by
infecting men's minds with venomous persuasions) he does very lively represent
the nature, disposition, and qualities of the venomous serpent. Genes. 3. 1.
Thirdly, the serpent that tempted Euah in paradise, is there said to be more
subtle then every beast of the field: the which (if Philosophers writings be
true) cannot be truly avouched of the natural serpent. For there are many
other creatures more subtle then she: and therefore, it must needs be meant of
the spiritual serpent. Genesis 3. 1. 3.
Fourthly, Moses does therefore purposely attribute speech to the serpent which
tempted Euah: to the end we (knowing by experience, that speech cannot properly
accord with a natural serpent) might the rather be induced to believe that the
same must metaphorically be understood of the spiritual serpent, Fifthly, Genesis
3. 14. 15.
the punishment inflicted by God, has no conueniencie at all with the
natural; but with that infernal figured serpent the devil. For, neither can
the going upon her belly, nor the eating of dust be any punishment at all to
the natural serpent; because (before the tentation) both those properties were
peculiarly allotted unto her, Serpens, a serpendo, Isidor. de summo bono. lib. 3.
she taking her name from her creeping condition. Neither yet may we imagine
that the said serpent (being of some better form before the tentation) was
then (by the just judgment of God) transformed into a viler proportion, Genesis
1. 25. 26.
property, or shape: she being in the history of the creation accounted among
the creeping creatures. Lastly, Moses he makes no mention at all of the
serpents coming to Euah about that business, nor of her departure after the
action, nor of any one special property whereby she might be essentially
discerned to be (in deed) a true natural serpent, no nor of any manner amaze,
or sudden fear in Euah at her sudden approach and extraordinary speech:
Exodus 4. 3.
whereas yet Moses him self, was afterward horribly afraied at the only
sight of a serpent. So then, by all the premises it is very apparent, that it
was the devil him self and no natural serpent, who set upon Euah in that
tentation, he being only metaphorically set forth by the name of a serpent:
and therefore had no need in that action, essentially to assume to him self
the body of a natural serpent, for the better accomplishment of the intended
business.


Exorcistes. Sir? if by the only name of a serpent, you will needs
metaphorically understand the devil: Genesis 3. 1. 14.
how then should some of the words in that story accord with the nature of
satan? As, where it is said that the serpent was more subtle, and was cursed
above all the beasts in the field: and that she should go upon her belly,
and eat the dust of the earth all the days of her life. Can any of these
things be properly applied to the devil? Was the devil before this, of an
Angelical nature: and must he be marshalled now, with the brute beasts of the
field? Has satan a belly to go upon now: being but lately an incorporall
creature? Feeds the devil now upon the dust of the earth like a creature
that lives by natural nourishment? or, has he the days of his life
determined now: being not long since an immortal substance? These speeches you
see, they cannot be properly applied to the devil: and therefore absurd to say
it was satan, metaphorically let forth by the serpent, who set upon Euah alone
in that tentation.


Orthodoxus. You gallop away with the matter as if you were certainly sure to
get the goal: Tho. Aquin. in 1. part. summa, 1. quest. art. 10. Amand. polanus
in Syllog. These. de verbo Dei Didascalia, page 54. Aug. ad Genesis lib. 11. cap.
1.
but, take heed to your footings for fear of a fall. And seeing you urge me so
strictly with the literal sense, do here tell me I pray you, whether all
things set down in that history, can (in any literal sense) be possibly
applied to a natural serpent? If not, why them should it seem strange unto
any, that the most points in that action be allegorically expounded? Howbeit,
to be silent my self; you shall hear what Augustine and some others do say
concerning these matters. Judge. 9. 8. 9. etc.
When any thing (says he) is found in the Scriptures which cannot (without an
absurdity) be possibly interpreted literally: that thing without doubt, is
spoken figuratively, and must receive some other signification then the bare
letter does seem to import. Gregorius in moralibus.
For (says Gregory,) when the order of the history becomes defective of it
self in the literal sense, G. Alley in his poor man's library, 189. Pet.
Martyr, in Genesis 3. 1.
then, some mystical sense as it were with wide open doors, does offer it
self: yea, and that mystical sense must be received in steed of the literal
sense it self. And therefore (says Peter Martyr,) that malediction or curse
which the Lord did cast on the serpent, must be allegorically vndestood of the
devil: and those things which seem properly to accord to the serpent in deed,
must metaphoricallie be transferred to satan understood in the serpent. Aug. ad
Genes. lib. 11. cap. 9.
And according to this infallible rule, Augustine him self he puts a plain
difference between the Lords speech to Adam and Euah, and that which he gave to
the serpent, affirming the first to be literal, and the other allegorical:
because else (says he) it should seem absurd to offer a vocal speech unto a
brute beast without understanding. Aug. lib. in Genesis contra Manich.
And accordingly he gives an allegorical sense concerning that action, saying:
Only, that temporary punishment of Satan is here set down, Tho. Aquinas 2.
2. quest. 165. artic. 2.
which ought to be a watchword and terror unto us: and not that eternal
vengeance which is reserved for him in Hell against the general judgment. And
therefore, where it is said. Thou art cursed above all the beasts in the
field, there the very brute beasts (to the horrible confusion of satan) are
preferred before him; not in absolute power, but in an especial regard of that
happy continuance and timely conservation of their original nature. For, the
beasts of the field they do not forgo any heavenly happiness which they never
yet had: but they continue forth their course in that selfsame primary estate
which they took at the first. Again, whereas it is said, upon thy belly shall
thou go: Gregor. moral. lib. 20.
the meaning is, that Satan should creepingly prevail against such as are
carried headlong with carnal affections, which is meant by the belly. Again,
where it is said, thou shall eat the dust of the earth all the days of thy
life: the meaning is, that such only as delight in earthly desires, should
become an appointed pray for the devil, while the world does endure, which is
termed the days of his life. By this then you see, that those things in the
story which are thought properly to appertain to the serpent: may yet (in an
allegorical sense) be fitly transferred to the devil understood by the
serpent. The rest of the matters are so pertinent to satan himself, Genes. 3.
1. 4. 5. 15.
as (without great violence done to the text) they may (at no hand be applied
to the natural serpent: and therefore, for any thing hitherto heard, the
devil (in giving the onsette upon Euah) he had no need at all, essentially to
insinuate himself into the body of a serpent, since he might by himself
alone, very sufficiently accomplish that work.


Pneumatomachus. Do you hold it for truth, that the devil (in that action)
did not use the ministry of the serpent at all.


Orthodoxus. What I do hold therein, shall hereafter be heard. Only, (because
your self do so confidently insist upon satan his essential assuming of the
serpents body at his tempting of Euah) I have here (as it were by the way)
very apparently proved, that (for any thing you are able to propound to the
contrary) the devil he might easily effect that work by himself alone,
without any help of the serpent, as you have heard by the former auctorities,
and may yet have the same further confirmed by Cyril him self. Cyril. lib. 3.
contra lulian. Apostat.
Who does flatly affirm, that the serpent was no true and natural serpent in
deed, but only the form and shape of a serpent: under which the devil him
self did talk with the woman, and wherein also he did undergo the curse of
God denounced upon him. And I pray you, what absurdity, impiety, offense, or
inconvenience were it at all for any to hold that Moses (under the person of a
poisoning serpent) did metaphorically set forth the devil himself who
poisoned Euah? Apoc. 12. 9. Math. 3. 7. and 12. 34.
From whence comes it else that the devil is called a viper or serpent, and
his children the generation of vipers? but from that first description which
Moses makes of him in this selfsame action? There are none so gross (I
suppose) as to dream that the devil is a material serpent: nor any so mad,
as to imagine that the wicked are the the generations of snakes and vipers
according to the literal sense? Briefly, let this action concerning Euahs
tentation be conferred exactly with that description and dealing of satan set
down in the Apocalypse; Apoc. 12. 3. 4. 7. 10. 12. 15. 17.
and tell me who will not conclude, but that it was the devil himself
metaphorically set forth by the serpent that tempted Euah. And in
consideration hereof, he is there purposely called not simply a serpent, Apoc.
12. 9. and. 20. 2.
but that old serpent: which name it self is afterward exegetically expounded
by the devil and satan, who deceived the world, and was a murderer from the
beginning.


Philologus. If it was no serpent (as you say) but the very devil himself
that tempted Euah: why then is he not called by his proper name in some part of
the history concerning that action.


Orthodoxus. It was undoubtedly the devil himself that tempted Euah: Tremel.
in Genesis 3. 1. Ioh. Calvin. in Genesis 3. 1. Reginald Skot, in his discovery of
witchcraft, lib. 17. page 537.
whose name (says Tremellius and others) was purposely concealed by Moses, in
an especial regard of the simplicity and rudenes, of that present people, to
whose sle^der capacities he sets forth the matter in form of a Tragedy:
producing the Lord, the serpent, the man, and the woman, as actors therein, to
the end our weak understandings might be the more sensibly informed concerning
that matter. Howbeit, because in the history of the creation there is no
particular mention of Angels or spirits: therefore the proper name of the devil
is here especially concealed, Pet. Mart. in Genesis 1. 1.
and himself is metaphorically described under the serpent, least, they
(hearing in that action, of some spiritual substance unheard off before) might
happily have a window set open to profane curiosity; Tremel. in Genesis cap. 3.
1.
and so, either fall into gross Idolatry, or run with the Maniches, into
the palpable error concerning two sundry beginnings, or creators of things. By
all the premises then it is very apparent, that (notwithstanding the contrary
opinions of some) I should commit no absurdity at all, in auouching that Satan
himself alone gave the onset upon Euah: In Reginald. Skot his discovery of
witchcraft.
having some special reasons, the testimonies of fathers, yea, and the opinion
also it self very authentically priuileged in our English church by public
authority.


Lycanthropus. Notwithstanding your auctorities and reasons whatsoever, I will
never be persuaded that the devil alone did set upon Euah.


Exorcistes. And surely (whether the devil alone or not) I will never believe
it was the serpent alone that did it: both, because serpents and snakes could
never properly speak, Ioh. Calvin. in Genesis 3. 15.
and for that the enimitie which was put between them two and their seed, may
not possibly be understood of the snake and her brood.


Orthodoxus. The common received opinion is, Magist. sentent. lib. 2. distinct.
21.
that it was the devil and serpent together: whereunto also I do willingly
subscribe: Partly, in an especial regard of two other places of Scripture,
which seem to incline to that sense: Isa. 65. 25.
and partly also, 2. Cor. 11. 3.
for that (in the original) the very name of the serpent imports so much,
(...)
she being called, nachash, of nachash, or nichesh, that is, to divine, or to
charm, Signifying thereby, that the devil (according to the very purport of
the name it self) did (as it were) so bewitch, Aug. lib. 14. de ciuitat. Dei,
cap. 11.
and so charm the serpent, as that (through his crafty suggestion) she was
very well able to propound such a divination or soothsaying, Moses Barcephas,
de paradis. lib. cap. 27.
as did presently circumuent and deceive our graundmother Euah. But go to, let
it be granted that the devil and the serpent together gave the onset upon
Euah: and now tell me in what manner they wrought?


Lycanthropus. In this manner. First, the devil he entered essentially into the
serpent: and then after, he used the serpents tongue, to set the temptation an
end.


Orthodoxus. But, how do you certainly know that the devil did essentially
enter into the serpent?


Lycanthropus. How do I know it? even by the apparent effects thereof: for,
how came it to pass that the serpent did speakevnto Euah?


Orthodoxus. Could not the devil apply the serpents tongue to his purpose;
unless he did first essentially enter into her?


Lycanthropus. No, how is it possible he should?


Orthodoxus. Why? how does a minstrill make his pipes to sound what he please?
does he essentially creep first into the bag it self, and then tune the
pipes to his purpose: or does he only dispose the sound by his breath?


Philologus. What, how now Lycanthropus? I believe you have heard such a fit of
mirth, as if you dance after the same but a while: your opinion concerning the
essential assuming of bodies will be driven out of doors.


Lycanthropus. Not so, For howsoever a minstrill might (by his breath alone) be
able to cause the pipes to squeake, yet could he never distinguish the notes
unless with his fingers he kept the several stoppes: howbeit, spirits and
devils are incorporall creatures, having neither fingers nor hands, nor any
member else to frame the words.


Orthodoxus. Well then, thus much yet you confess by the way, that a minstrill
by his only breath may cause the instrument to give forth some sound:
howsoever unable to distinguish the tunes. Go to, what say you to the
trumpeter: 1. Cor. 14. 7.
he uses no help of any one member at all to distinguish the sounds save only
his breath: and yet, only therewith he causes so certain a sound, as every
one that hears him, can tell what is played or sounded. Now then, if it be
possible for a reasonable man, thus to apply a dead instrument at his pleasure
to serve his turn without any essential creeping into it: why should it be
deemed impossible for an intellectual power or devil, to apply to his purpose
the toonge of his living instrument, (the serpent I mean) in the tempting of
Euah, without any essential entering into her at all? And therefore, let us
hear other reasons of more weighty importance or otherwise, put an end to this
present discourse,


Lycanthropus. The Angel he assumed essentially the body of Baalams Ass,
Numb. 22. 28.
and did sensibly speak in that self same body: therefore, spirits and devils
they can also assume essentially such natural bodies, and work in them the
like natural actions.


Orthodoxus. How know you it was an Angel that spoke in the Ass?


Exorcistes. There needs no manner of doubt to be made thereof: for Lyra,
Martyr, Zanchius, Casmannus and many other besides do jointly affirm it.


Orthodoxus. Because those learned men do jointly affirm it, you therefore
imagine their said affirmation to be such a threefold cord as cannot possibly
be pulled a sunder. Eccle. 4. 12.
We are not sworn unto men, but unto the infallible truth of lesus Christ: and
therefore (seeing no one warrant for that their affirmation) I am greatly
induced to doubt of the truth thereof. The reasons why I differ from them, are
these. First, by the very text it is plain, that the Lord himself he opened
the mouth of the ass. Numb. 22. 28.
Secondly, Moses (in that place) puts not down the word Elohim, (...)
which although it signifies God, yet sometimes also it is used for Angels:
(...)
but he has only the word Jehovah there, which word (throughout the
scriptures) is never attributed to any but the Lord himself. And therefore,
since the text does avouch that only Jehovah himself did open the mouth of the
Ass: I see not how any man should dare to affirm that the same was done by
the Angel. Besides that, the very coherence and course of the history does
plainly conclude that the Angel (spoken of there) could not possible do it in
such sort as your self does imagine. Number. ^2. 22. 24. 26.
For, that Angel (standing thrice in the way with a sword drawn in his hand,
to encounter with Balaam who rode on the ass.) could not essentially speak in
the Ass, and essentially also stand in the way, at one, and the selfsame
instant: unless happily you imagine that the Angels they have a peculiar power
to be in sundry places at once. And therefore (whatsoever your self, or those
learned men may affirm to the contrary) I perceive not as yet, how it should
be an Angel that spoke in the Ass: but rather the Lord himself by an
immediate power, Numb. 22. 31.
by which power he opened also the eyes of Balaam himself, before the face of
the Angel.


Exorcistes. Though the Lord himself was the efficient cause of opening the
Asses mouth, yet might he effect that work by the Angels means: and so the
Angel (notwithstanding all this) he might ministeriallie speak in the Ass.


Orthodoxus. What the Lord might have done therein, we all do know: what he
certainly did therein, neither you your self nor any are able to say. In like
manner, the Lord might also by the Angels means have opened the eyes of* Numb.
22. 31.
Balaam: but he did not that, as the text does plainly declare, and therefore
nether the other. Besides this, the Lord (at that very instant) did otherways
employ the Angel three several times in the way, with a sword drawn in his
hand to encounter with Balaam: and therefore, he would not use his ministry
this ways which your self does imagine, neither could the Angel at that
instant time, be essentially inherent in the Asses belly, unless happily you do
hold an vbiquity in Angels, which only is proper to God. But, be it granted
that the Lord, (not immediately) but by means of the Angel did speak in the
Ass: and then, do tell me withal, how and after what sort the Angel effected
that speech.


Lycanthropus. Even by entering essentially, first into the very essence of the
Asses body: and then next, by disposing and tempring her tongue to that special
purpose.


Orthodoxus. If you confidently hold that the Angel did essentially enter into
the very essence of the Asses body: then do you likewise conclude that the
Angel also was essentially converted into the Ass, and that Baalam withal
did ride, and gallop, and spur, and strike, and braule with the Angel all
the while he was upon the Asses back, which were absurd to imagine. But tell
me Lycanthropus, are you still in this mind, that the Angels cannot possibly
speak by the tongue of a brute beast: unless they be before essentially
inherent within their bellies?


Lycanthropus. So do I verily think. Neither may we imagine that the Ass
herself could possibly either frame, or understand such a sensible speech as
was uttered there; because a reasonable speech cannot possibly be framed or
understood of any but of a mind having understanding and reason. Whereupon it
follows necessarily, that the selfsame speech (being so sensible and
reasonable) could not possibly be framed by the Ass: but by the Angel
essentially inherent within the Ass.


Orthodoxus. Well, since you will needs transfer this miraculous and
immediate work from the Lord himself to the means, I mean, to the
ministry of the Angel as your self does suppose: Let it be freely granted
that the Angel (indeed) did frame that sensible speech in the mouth of the
senseless Ass, as by a fit instrument appointed of God for that special
purpose: and yet this I avouch withal, that the Angel did not ministerially
effect that sensible speech by any such essential insinuation as your self
does imagine: but by an only effectual operation, as I have showed before.
Briefly, this sensible speech (if you will needs attribute the same to the
Angel) might, and was also effectiuely accomplished by some powerful
operation of the Angel, without any such needless essential entrance into
the Ass: as by the simile of a minstrill or trumpeter we did illustrate
before. And heereunto also accords the judgment of Lyra: Lyra in Glos. or
ordi^ar. super. Number. 22. 28.
whom your self aleadged of late, saying. Those sensible words were framed,
neither by the Ass alone, nor by the Angel himself essentially inherent
within the Ass: but by an effectual operation or power of the Angel,
directing and disposing the tongue of the Ass to deliver such sensible speech,
for the further confusion of Baalam himself. And therefore, this reason (you
see) is of little, or no force at all: to fortify your fond opinion of the
devil his essential assuming of true natural bodies.


Exorcistes. Though this place does not directly prove, that the devils may
assume and essentially enter into a true natural body, because no such thing
is apparent in this action of the Angel, from whence the proof it self should
be brought: yet does it plainly conclude, that the devil (by means of a true
natural body) may deliver a sensible speech, because some such thing we find
here effected by the good Angel of God.


Orthodoxus. If I should tie you strictly to the words of the text, you could
find no such speech delivered by the Angel at al, but only by the immediate
power of the Lord, who himself alone, did open the mouth of the ass, as was
showed before. Howbeit, you your self (foysting in here by the way this
cunning conceit) do covertly go about (I perceive) to alter the state of our
question which consists only of the devil his essential assuming and
entering into bodies. Pretermitting therefore to discourse here, of the devil
his sensible speaking by the means of a true natural body until we come to
entreat of actual possession: Do now say what you can for the question in
hand, or presently give over the same.


Lycanthropus. Satan he essentially assumed the dead body of Samuel departed,
1. Sam. 28. 14.
yea and appeared and spoke sensibly in that selfsame body: therefore spirits
and devils they can also assume to themselves some natural bodies, and
perform in them such natural actions.


Philologus. Well said Lycanthropus, this argument I verily suppose, will hold
Master Orthodoxus very hard to his pinnes. Those other before were drawn from
the good angels of God, who are able to do more then the devils by much: and
therefore, no sound reason may be concluded from them to the devils, who
wanting like privileges, are also far unequal to them in wisdom and power.
But, this argument which you make now from the person of satan himself I
believe is a toucher, and such a one as is able to drive Master Orthodoxus to
al his shifts.


Pneumatomachus. Believe me sir, it is a soaker in deed: and therefore, what
say you unto it?


Orthodoxus. Being such a toucher as Philologus affirms; I would not
willingly touch it, for fear of being defiled with the folly thereof. And
therefore (letting it lie soaking a while in the suddes of your idle conceits
til the maine force thereof be wasted away with the wetting) I do here tell you
by the way for an answer: It is generally and iudicially determined by the
whole church of God, yea and the marginall note in your bible does likewise
avouch, that it was not Samuel himself that appeared, but the devil forsooth
in Samuels likeness. Which being certeinely so, do now tell me what
substantial consequent can possibly arise from your antecedent, it being so
false and unsound?


Lycanthropus. Let the church and marginall notes conclude what they please: I
have the plain text on my side which says it was Samuel, and unto that will I
stick.


Orthodoxus. You say you will stick to the text. Very well said, hold you fast to
the words of the text: and then tell me which way you will prove it the devil
himself essentially in Samuels body who appeared to Saul? There is no mention
of the devil in all that story: neither does the text say it was Samuels body,
but Samuel himself that appeared.


Exorcistes. Though the devil be not nominally expressed in the story, yet there
be many things in the story it self which do implicatiuely unfold his nature
unto us, 1. Sam. 28. 6.
and which can have relation to none but himself. Exodus 22. 18.
Namely, first the Lord having refused before to give answer to Saul by living
Prophets: Leuit. 19. 31. and 20. 27.
it is unlikely he would answer him now by the dead, Deuteronomy. 18. 10.
having especially forbidden the same by his word. And therefore, not Samuel
himself: 1. Sam. 28. 14.
but the devil in Samuels body appeared to Saul. Act. 14. 15.
Again, he that appeared did suffer himself to be worshipped of Saul, Apoc.
19. 10. and 1. 22. 9.
which thing neither Samuel, nor any good Angel in heaven would have permitted,
and therefore it was the devil in Samuels body. 1. Sam. 28. 19. and 31. 6.
Moreover he which appeared told Saul that, the next day (being slain) he
should be with him: 1. Chro. 10. 13. 14.
but Saul was a reprobate, and could not be with Samuel in heaven, M. Perkins
in his treatise entitled, How far a reprobate may go.
and therefore by all the premises it is very apparent that it could not be
Samuel himself, but must needs be the devil in Samuels body who appeared to
Saul.


Orthodoxus. As though, because some things in the story are hardly
correspondent to Samuel: therefore forsooth it must needs be the Devil and
none other. There be as many other things in that story which at no hand may
be applied to the Devil, but do more fitly accord unto Samuel: and yet dare I
not from thence, so confidently conclude, that therefore it was Samuel himself
that appeered. 1. Sam. 28. 11. 12. 14. 15. 16. 20.
As first, the scriptures throughout that whole story do say it was Samuel
himself, not the Devil in Samuels body: but if it were not Samuel in deed,
the text should report an untruth, and offer great injury to Samuel in naming
the Devil so often by his name. 1. Sam. 28. 15.
Again, he that appeered, complains unto Saul for being wakened: but Devils
(being spirits) do never sleep, and therefore not the Devil, but Samuel
himself appeered to Saul. 1. Sam. 28. 19.
Again, he that appeered, did truly prophecy the death of Saul and his sons
the very next day: but this the Devil could not do, he having no sound
foreknowledge of things: neither would he have done it, for he is a lier and
the father of lying, Ioh. 8. 44.
and therefore, not the Devil but Samuel himself did appear. 1. Sam. 28. 16.
17. 18. 19.
Briefly, he that appeered, told such a tale unto Saul, as the Devil himself
(unless he were mad, or had purposed utterly to overthrow his own kingdom)
would never have told: and therefore, by all the premises it is very apparent
that it was not the Devil, but must needs be Samuel that appeered to Saul.


Exorcistes. Notwithstanding all this, some of the old fathers suppose it was
the Devil that appeered to Saul.


Orthodoxus. They do so: but let them, or some of you show me how he appeered
to Saul?


Lycanthropus. He appeered essentially in Samuels body.


Orthodoxus. The text declares no such thing at all: and it tells us plainly,
it was Samuel himself, not the Devil in Samuels body.


Lycanthropus. You your self alleged even now, the consent of the Church and
the marginall note, to prove it the Devil in Samuels likeness.


Orthodoxus. The likeness of a thing is not the thing it self: and therefore,
if it was the Devil, only in the likeness of Samuel, then not the Devil
essentially in Samuel his body. And so, this example (you see) concludes no
essential assuming of bodies by either spirits or Devils: which was the very
maine point for the which you produced the same.


Lycanthropus. Howsoever you press me with the sway of reason, I do yet
confidently hold it to be the very devil himself in Samuels body.


Orthodoxus. I wonder you will be so confident in impossibilities. 1. Sam. 25. 1.
For Samuel he died in the year of the worlds creation, In Chronograph,
Laurentij Codmanni.
three thousand, sixty, eight, and Saul he was slain in the year three
thousand and seauenty: so that there were full two years and better between
Samuels death, 1. Sam. 31. 4.
and these desperate dealings of Saul. Ioh. 11. 39.
Now then, if Lazarus body (lying but four days dead in the grave) was
subject to stinking: the body of Samuel lying dead three hundred and thirty
days at the least, must much more be subject to corruption and rottenness.
And therefore, how is it possible the devil should essentially assume to
himself the body of Samuel: Math. 24. 31.
it being before consumde in the earth? 1. These. 4. 16.
Surely, this your opinion as it avouches a resurrection of bodies before the
general judgment: Ioh. 5. 21. 28.
so it ascribes to the devil an absolute power of raising dead bodies which
only is proper to God as was showed before, 1. Cor. 15. 22. 38
and the marginall note may tell you withal, that the devil has no power
over the dead. Besides that, if it were Samuels body in deed: then it was so
either with, or against the Lords will. Against the Lords will it could not be,
because he is omnipotent, Romans 16. 20.
and able even to tread down satan under our feet: and with his will, it
would never be, for it is unlikely the Lord should suffer the body of so
blessed a Saint, Jude. 9.
to be defiled at all by the devil especially after his death. August. ad
Simplicianum.
Moreover, how should the death of the godly be justly termed that long lasting
sleep wherein (by the ordinance of God) their bodies must rest till the
general judgment: Item, ad dulcitij quest.
if the devil has power to awaken, Tertul. lib. de anima. Chrysostom. in Math.
and to raise them up at his pleasure? yea, and how can the faith of the godly
(concerning the continuance of their bodies in the dust of the earth) be a
certain faith: Job. 19. 25. 26.
if the devil can essentially assume their said bodies from the earth at his
pleasure: Phil. 3. 20. 21.
Briefly how is it certain that death does dissolve our bodies from s^ne and
corruption, Phil. 1. 23.
and that the blessed which die in the Lord do cease from their labors: Apoc.
14. 13.
if the devil has power to raise up our bodies at pleasure, and can cause them
to labor afresh, and use them as fit instruments in his devilish and sinful
proceedings? And therefore do cease for shame, to hold any longer that it was
the devil in Samuels body who appeared to Saul.


Lycanthropus. If it was not the very true and essential body of Samuel in
deed: what was it I pray you that appeared to Saul?


Orthodoxus. I will tell you what some fathers affirm concerning this matter.
Eccle. 46. 20.
lesus Syrach, lustinus Martyr, Justin. Martyr. contra Trypho^em.
Tertullian, Tertul. in lib. de anima.
Ambrose, Ambr. in Lu^. I. lib. cap. 1.
and Jerome Hieron. in Isa. cap. 7.
they do every of them very confidently conclude that it was not the very true
body of Samuel in deed which appeared to Saul: Decretal. quest. 26. cap. 6.
but only a mere fantasy, deceit and illusion of satan, for the better
effecting of his tyrannous purpose intended to Saul, whom he knew the Lord had
rejected. Yea, the very decretals also, do flatly determine, that it was not
Samuels body at all: but some ghost or fantasy, deceitfully offered to Saul
by satan his devilish devise. Nec mirum. Lauaterus, of walking spirits
There be others again who do as considently hold that it was Samuel
himself miraculously raised up by the power of God, of very purpose to
intercept the witches intent; Aug. ad Simplic. quest. 3. Item, in epistola ad
Felicianu^.
who went about to raise up a devil in Samuels likeness, by such means to
satisfy Saul his importunate and earnest desire. But this her purpose (say
they) was prevented by God: Lyranus in 1. Sam. 28.
who ( refusing to have the truth of that accident delivered by satan,) did
therefore extra ordinarily and miraculously raise up Samuel, Burgensis, in
Replieator. ad Lyram, ibid.
to discover the truth of the matter to Saul. Briefly, there be others who do
verily think it was neither the devil alone, nor Samuel alone, neither yet
the devil and Samuel together: Reginald Skot in his discovery of witchcraft.
nor any fantasy, ghost or other illusion of Satan, but a mere cosinage and
a cosining trick of the witch at Endor. 1. Sam. 28. 11.
Who (pretending an absolute power to have raised up whomsoever Saul should
have named unto her) neither did, nor possible could cause any visible
apparition at all: but only iuggled with Saul him self, he being without, and
she close in her Cel, or playing some legerdemaine at the least behind a
cloth, no sensible vision appearing at all to the King. Thus then, having
briefly delivered men's several opinions concerning this point: you may
deliberately confer them with that which is spoken before, and thereupon
embrace which pleases you best.


Pneumatomachus. Good sir? give us your own censure concerning these sundry
opinions of men.


Orthodoxus. I neither dare, nor will undertake the censuring of any. Only,
if you simply desire to hear what my self (in an only regard of our
question) do esteem of their judgments: then this I must tell you concerning
the first opinion. Namely, that (howsoever it be granted for truth) it serves
not your turn; for, it denies the apparition to be Samuel in deed, but rather
a mere illusion of Satan. Touching the second, it is that (you know) which I
argue against: and therefore (by their leaves) I dissent from the same, till
that which I have said, be considerately answered. As for the last, howsoever
it be new, and therefore may happily seem strange unto some, yet if your selves
(without prejudice, and with a single respect to the truth) would but
deliberately peruse that priuileged discourse to the full: you might happily
perceive it a very probable opinion, how pregnant soever in proof.


Philologus. Nay, that opinion I disclaim above all the rest, for it denies
there was any apparition at all: whereas the text says plainly that Saul knew
it was Samuel, and bowed himself. Is it likely that Saul would bow unto
nothing?


Orthodoxus. He bowed to as much as he saw, which was nothing at all: as may
easily appear if you but carefully examine the confused conference between
him and the Witch. For says she (being laboring alone in her Cell, 1. Sam.
28. 12.
) oh, thou have surely deceived me, 1. Sam. 9. 2.
for thou art Saul: which she might and did know very well, howsoever she
dissembled the same for the present. Well, 1. Sam. 28. 13.
go to (says Saul) be not afraid: for what see thou? As if he should say, I
my self do see nothing as yet, that thou need to fear. 1. Sam. 28. 13.
O yes says the Witch, I see Gods ascending up out of the earth: as though she
had brought up a number of dead saints. 1. Sam. 28. 14.
I do not yet behold any says Saul: but go to, what fashion is he of, for I my
self see no fashion of any appearance: Yes (says the Witch) an old man
comes up lapt in a mantell. 1. Sam. 28. 14.
As though either Samuel had been buried before in his mantel: or the devil
he had had his Weauers and Tailers at hand to have wrought him a new one upon
the sudden. Well, now (says the text) Saul knew it was Samuel: 1. Sam. 28.
14.
that is (by this her description) he thought Samuel had appeared to her,
although he saw nothing himself, and thereupon he bowed to a phantasied
Samuel.


Lycanthropus. But sir? if nothing appeared in truth, how then was the
conference afterward performed to Saul?


Orthodoxus. That was cunningly delivered by the Witch alone in her Cell,
Hyppocrates, Epidem, lib. 5. sentent. 58. Ioh. Goraeus, in definit, medicin.
(...)*
she being a cunning Ventriloquist, as all Pythonistes are: who can very
hideously speak in the bottom of their bellies with an hollow counterfeit
voice, and therein by practice she was very expert.


Philologus. Lycanthropus? we verily thought this last reason would have
stricken all dead: but now being come to the rifling) I perceive it is not
worth a rush. Believe me, I wot not what to say in the matter.


Lycanthropus. Neither do I my self I assure thee.


Orthodoxus. Well then, having answered your arguments concerning the devil
his essential assuming of bodies: Let us now hear your several authorities
if you have any.


Lycanthropus. I have authorities some. Howbeit, either such as are answered
before: or such as do but barely propound without any proof: or such at the
least as your self by your subtle new coined distinction of essentially and
effectiuely, will easily shift over. And therefore, I had as leave they lay
still: as rise up and fall.


Orthodoxus. Let them rise up, or lie still at your pleasure for me. Howbeit,
to the end your self and the rest do not unjustly surmize that I seek to
shift over your forces by subtle distinctions, yea, and those also, such as I
have newly coined my self: I am therefore very well willing the master of
sentences determine this point if it please you to hear him, and so may you
see, the distinction is not new, but renewed.


Exorcistes. You shall do us all a very great favor therein.


Orthodoxus. Mark then, Magister sentent, lib. 2. did. 8. quest. 4.
and you shall hear him at large. This also says he, is worthy due
consideration: namely, Whether spirits and Devils corporal or incorporal, do
substantially enter into the bodies of men, and essentially slip into their
minds: or whether only they are therefore said to enter into men, for that (by
the permission of God) they do exercise in them, the force and effect of their
malice by oppressing and vexing them, or by haling them headlong into sin at
their pleasures. Math. 8. 28. Marc. 5. 1. Luc. 8. 28.
That they enter into men, and (being expelled perforce) go out of them
again, the Gospel does plainly declare: affirming, that Devils (being entered
into some) were cast forth by our Savior Christ. Howbeit, whether they entered
into them substantially, or rather, were said to be in them effectiuely, there
lies the point, Gennadius in definit. Ecclesdogmatum. Aug. de definit.
Orthodox. fidei cap. 46.
and the same is not yet apparent unto us. Gennadius entreating hereof, says
thus. We believe not that the Devils by an effectual operation, do
substantially or essentially enter into the mind: but rather, by an effectual
application, and by a violent oppression are nearly united unto them. For,
essentially to slip into the mind, is only possible for him who alone created
the mind: who (subsisting of his own nature, and being also incorporal) is
capable alone of his creature. Lo hereby (says he) is insinuated unto us,
that serpents and Devils do not essentially slip or enter into the minds of
men. Beda in like manner, Beda in Act. 5. 3.
upon that in the Acts, where Peter said to Ananias, why has Satan filled thy
heart, writes thus: It would be thoroughly considered that nothing can replenish
or fill up the mind of a man substantially, save only the creating Trinity,
who (according to the operation and instinct of his own will) does alone
replenish, and satisfy the mind with all things created. Aug. de spiritu de
anima, cap. 27.
Howbeit, Satan also, he fills the heart of a man, not by entering
substantially into the man, or into any his senses, neither yet by insinuating
himself essentially into his heart: for that power, (if any such be)
appertains only to God: but, by crafty and fraudulent guile, he draws the
mind (through a malicious effect, and by his sugared charms) into a
whirlepoole of evils, and by that means he fills the heart. Thus far he.
Wherein you may plainly perceive, that this Distinction was not newly coined by
me, but concluded of old: and that also I avouch no more in this matter, then
others have affirmed before me.


Philologus. Believe me sir, this iumpeth in every respect so patte with your
proper opinion: as a man might justly imagine the one had begotten the other.
But, are there any more of this mind?


Orthodoxus. Yea, Chrysostom. in Math. 4. 6.
Chrysostom, he says, the Devil compels not by force, nor essentially
touches any, but says only, cast down thy self backward. For suggest he
may, but compel he cannot. And therefore says Lyra, Nich. Lyra, in Marc. 9.
15.
the Devil he is called a deaf and a dumb spirit: not formally, but
effectiuely, in that by a powerful operation, he makes men deaf and dumb.
For, Torment or vengeance says Musculus, Muscul. in Psalm. 23. 4.
is only in Gods hand, and not in the hand of the Devil. The Devil has in
deed a ministry: but no arbitrarie power. Now then, the ministry, it
consists not of an absolute authority: but of a subjected servitude. Gregorius
Moral. llib. 2.
And albeit says Gregory, the depraved will of Satan be ever unjust, yet his
deputed power is never unjust: because, although he has a will of himself,
yet has he his power only from God. And therefore whatsoever he desires to
work unjustly, that (if at any time he effect it) God permits most justly.
So then the Devil ought never to be unjustly feared: because he is unable any
further to deal then he himself is permitted. Briefly, Hermes Trismegistus,
in suo periandro.
Hermes Trismegistus very confidently avouches, that, an humane soul cannot
receive any other then an humane body: neither yet can it light into a body
that wants reason of mind. From whence we may argue thus. If an humane soul
be capable only of an humane body: then also an humane body is capable only
of an humane soul, and so by consequence incapable of an essential Devil: but
the first is true, by Trismegistus his judgment, Reginald Skot in his
discovery of witchcraft page 508.
and therefore also the latter. And in very deed (seeing Satan's assaults are
spiritual) why should we imagine (says Skot) that the Devil who is a spirit
(and therefore invisible and insensible) can be sensibly seen, known,
perceived or felt essentially of a natural man? Or that he should (contrary
to his nature) become corporal: being by Gods appointment, ordained and created
to a spiritual proportion? They that do thus understand things spoken of the
Devil according only to the literal sense; they may as well conclude, Judge. 9.
7. etc.
that trees (in times past) did call a parliament, speak one to another, and
choose them a king by mutual consent. Thus then, these and many others (you
see) do jointly conclude concerning this point.


Physiologus. These are sufficient to satisfy such as are not wilfully wedded
to their wills.


Pneumatomachus. Surely, for my own part, I rest fully ^atisfied.


Philologus. And for my part also I am quite out of doubt. But Lycanthropus,
you told Pneumatomachus and me (in the beginning of this our present discourse)
that, if this argument (taken from the devil his assuming of bodies) would not
suffice to prove an essential possession of devils: you had another in store
that would trouble Master Orthodoxus more then this does, by a thousand fold.
It were good you propounded the same.


Orthodoxus. Very true. And therefore, if you imagine you have something in
store which may make more for your purpose: propound it and spare not.


Lycanthropus. This then it is. Spirits and devils they can essentially
transform themselves into any true natural body: and therefore they can also
essentially enter into the possessed man's body.


Orthodoxus. What? are you fled on the sudden from assuming of bodies, to the
transforming of bodies? your store then I perceive is not great, and it seems
you are almost drawn dry. Howbeit, because the handling of this point will
crave a large discourse: Let us therefore break off for the present. And
having with some small pittance refreshed our selves: then will we confer
hereof to the full til dinner be ready, if you like of the offer.


Pneumatomachus. Sir, we like whatsoever you feel best for your self, and
therefore respect your own health: and we three in the mean time will repair
to our Innes: and after will meet you afresh.


Orthodoxus. Nay surely, as we have jointly joined together in spiritual
repast: so will we not sunder our selves, in our corporal sustenance all the
while our controversy continues. And therefore, if you do like the thin
diet of scholars; let us in Gods name, go all together.


Philologus. It is much to troublesome unto you and chargeable both: but, since
you will have it so, we will all iontly attend on your person.


Orthodoxus. Let us then arise and depart.


The end of the fourth Dialogue.
The fifth Dialogue.
THE ARGUMENT.
Whether Spirits and Devils can essentially transform themselves into any true
natural body? And how those places of Scripture are to be taken, which many
produce for that purpose?

The speakers names.
PHILOLOGVS. LYCANTHROPVS. PNEVMATOMACHVS. PHYSIOLOGVS. ORTHODOXVS. EXORCISTES.
Orthodoxus. Since nature (by the good blessing of God) is something refreshed,
let us now (for a while) keep close in my parlour, with full purpose to
proceed in our conference till dinner be ready: and then after, walk forth in
the air, to recreate our spirits.


Physiologus. With very good will: and therefore linger not the time, but, go
an end in your purpose.


Orthodoxus. Go to then Lycanthropus: repeat your argument.


Lycanthropus. I repeat it thus. Spirits and devils, they can essentially
transform themselves into any true natural body: therefore, they can also
essentially enter into the possessed man's body.


Orthodoxus. Prove your antecedent.


Lycanthropus. What sir? do you flatly deny, that the devil can essentially
transform himself into what body he please? I am fully resolved to hold this
point, whatsoever be said to the contrary.


Orthodoxus. Your unreasonable resolution, is unto us no reasonable conclusion:
neither is the question between us, what you will hold, but what you are able
to prove concerning this point. And albeit I doubt nothing at al, but that you
(for your own part) will hold very much till it comes to the pinch: yet, we
hope you will change your purpose, if once you be made to perceive, that none
but your self are of this opinion.


Lycanthropus. Yes sir, all the world (I am sure) iumpes pat with me in this
point: and very certain I am, I shall gain your consent to the same in the
end.


Orthodoxus. Howsoever you seem confident in the common consent of the world;
your gain (I assure you) is not like to be great, by any such a supposed
grant, as you happily imagine from me.


Lycanthropus. Will you not grant, that devils may essentially transform
themselves into what bodies they please?


Physiologus. Master Orthodoxus? let me answer this point if you please. Come
on Lycanthropus, what is the thing you would have granted unto you?


Lycanthropus. Why this, namely, that devils may essentially transform
themselves into a true natural body.


Physiologus. Such a grant, we may yield you at no hand, because, even
Philosophy her self is flat opposite to it: who will never admit any such a
confused participation of essential forms. For, as essence it self is
impartible, and vndeuidable, or rather a certain incommunicable, and singular
matter: so surely (the essence and unity of things being preserved intier)
essential forms, they cannot possibly be cnumo^icated, transferred, or
passed over from that substance it self whereof they are forms, into any
other substance or matter, to give the same also, an essential form. Because,
not only the constituting, forming, or framing: but even also, the destruction
of substances, does essentially arise from the form it self. And look
whereunto there is given a form convenient, and proportionable to one only
essence: thereunto also must necessarily be given, an undoubted true essence.
Because, a proper form is the principal part of essence. yea, ^orma dat esse.
(and as some learned Philosophers do flatly affirm) it is the whole essence
or nature of the thing it self. And therefore if spirits and devils be (at any
time) essentially transformed into men: then do they forthwith cease (for that
time) to be spirits and devils, and may truly be said to be men.


Lycanthropus. I do not well conceive your meaning.


Physiologus. I will further explain it thus. If there be any such essential
transforming of spirits and devils into men, as your self does imagine: then
undoubtedly, that self same essential transformation, it is, either according
to the body alone, or according to the body and soul together. If, according
to the body alone, then that self same transformed body, it should (at one,
and the self same time) become, both the body of a man, and the body of a
devil: which were to to absurd to imagine. If, according to the body and
soul together, then either the whole man (both body and soul) must be
essentially transformed into the very essence and nature of a devil: or, the
devil, he must needs be essentially transformed into the very natural body
and soul of a man at the least, which none but madmen will ever affirm.
Again, if that essential transformation be effected according to the body
alone, then, howsoever that self same body be not (for the present) the body
of a man, but is wholly transformed into the very essence and nature of a
devil: yet, the soul of that man must either be forced to forsake his own
body, and so bring present death to the body it self, because death, is
nothing else but the dissolution of soul and body; or else, the same soul,
it must necessarily pass from out of it own body, into the very essence of a
devil, and so by consequence, there must needs be a mere confusion of
spiritual substances: or, two essential forms in one and the self same body
at once, (...).
which were absurd to avouch, and utterly impossible by any created power to
be ever effected.


Lycanthropus. Let Phylosophie be opposite, or what she will, very certain I
am, the devil can essentially transform him self into any true natural body.


Physiologus. What man, will you (in deed) oppose your self to true
Phylosophie? then I perceive, you respect not at all the operations and powers
of nature. But go to, let master Orthodoxus hear what one reason you have (in
true divinity) to manage your said resolution.


Lycanthropus. What one reason quoth you? why man, the devil, he can
essentially transform him self into an Angel of light: 2. Cor. 11. 14.
therefore, how much more into any true natural body?


Orthodoxus. You are mightily misled herein, by mistaking the word
metaschemarizetai: (...) Theophil. in ^. Cor. 11. 14. Johannes Calvin ibidem.
Johannes Calvin in Job. 1. 10. Danaeus, in Enchir, Aug. cap. 60. page 202.
That is to say, he transmuted, transfashioned, transfigured, transformed, or
metamorphozed him self into an angel of light. Wherein the Apostle purposes
nothing less, then to prove that the devil is really, essentially, or
substantially incorporated or changed into an Angel of light: for then, he
could (in deed and in truth) be no longer a devil, but must necessarily become
(in deed) an Angel of light. Howbeit, the Apostle he laboreth (by that self
same word) to shadow forth unto us after a sort, the wily practizes, and
cunning proceedings of satan. Who, when he entendeth most deeply to circumuent
and deceive the sons of men: then he pretends the most religious, and the
holiest shows of all. Exposing in all outward appearance, the holy affections,
sincerity, and zeal of the holiest Angels of light. For, Aug. de ciuit. Dei
lib. 2. cap. 26.
unless the malignitie of satan be slightly and cunningly covered his
deceaueable purpose, is seldom, or never effected, This, (I assure you) is the
very true natural sense of the Apostles speech.


Exorcistes. Men may surmize a sense to them selves, and therewithal, may
writhe the Scriptures which way they lust, like a nose of wax. We stick fast
to the plain words of the text, which do tell us plainly, that satan is
transformed into an Angel of light.


Orthodoxus. Barren braind fellows (having naught to say for themselves) they
eftsoons are enforced to writhe the scriptures like a nose of wax, for saluing
their credites. As for my self, I seek no windings or turnings at all, but
(by Gods grace) am ready so soundly to establish the sense I have given: as
your self (with all your endeavor) shall never be able to wrench or to writhe
the same from our purpose, the breadth of one hair. And herein (by the way) I
must thoroughly advise you of the Apostles maine scope concerning that
scripture: which was, to display the crafty preposterous packings of those
counterfeite Apostles, who labored to bring the Apostle his ministry into
public contempt among the Corinthians. And this they endeavored to do, by
preaching freely among the Corinthians without any maintenance at all.
Entending thereby (if Paul likewise continued his former course, of preaching
freely among them) either to weary him out quite for want of maintenance: or,
to make his ministry odious among them at least, if (being driven by
necessity) he should afterward receive a maintenance from them, for the
necessary supply of his present wants. The Apostle (perceiuisg this their
pestilent purpose) he labors very carefully with his own hands, Act. 20. 34.
and (receiving the supply of his wants from other Churches) he accepts of
the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 9. 15.
no penny maintenance. Not because he loved them not, 2. Cor. 11. 13. 14. 15.
but for that he would cut away occasion from those false Apostles who desired
occasion: that they might be found like unto him, in that wherein they rejoice.
As if he should say, these false Apostles who preach freely among you, they go
about (by a wonderful show of holiness) to insinuate themselves into your
favors: and to discredit my ministry by what means they may.
Notwithstanding (howsoever they dissemble their devilish pretense) this I dare
show you for certain, 2. Cor. 11. 13. 14. 15.
that they are (in deed) but deceivable workers, and do cunningly transform
themselves into the Apostles of Christ, Neither, let this thing seem strange
in your eyes, for Satan their master, he also is transformed into an Angel of
light: and therefore, no marvel at all though his ministers do transform
themselves, as though they were the minist^^^ of righteousness. This (I assure
you) is the Apostles maine purpose, and the very apt coherence of all his
speech: from whence I do reason thus: Satan is so transformed into an Angel of
light, as his ministers are transformed into the Apostles of Christ. But, his
ministers are not essentially transformed into the Apostles of Christ:
therefore, neither is Satan essentially transformed into an Angel of light.


Exorcistes. Howsoever you argue the case, we cleave fast to the words of the
text: which flatly avouches unto us the transformation of Satan.


Orthodoxus. Who ever denied him a transformation? the question is only about
the manner thereof. You hold that Satan is essentially transformed: and I
affirm that he is only transformed effectiuely. Now, whether of both have the
truth on their side, that will better appear by the conference of this one,
with some other places of scripture, where the self same word (or a word to
the like effect) is also used. As for example. The Evangelist he says that
Christ in the mount, (...) Math. 17. 2. Marc. 9. 2.
was transfigured among his Disciples: must we hereupon (in an only regard of
that word) very absurdly and grossly imagine that Christ was essentially
changed into some other substance or nature? No, but that he was rather made
there most resplendent in glory. Again, (...) Romans 12. 2.
the Apostle forbids the Romans to fashion themselves to this world: and wills
them withal, to be transformed. But how, essentially into any other substance,
or natural being? Nay not so, but effectiuely into some other more sacred
qualities, by the renouation of their inward mind. Again, we behold (says he)
in a mirror, (...) 2. Cor. 3. 18.
the glory of the Lord with open face: and are transformed into the same image
from glory to glory, as by the spirit of the Lord. Wherein, his meaning is
not, that we are essentially transformed into the very image of God: for, so
should he very shrewdly confirm that folly of the family of love, which
holds that men are deified in God, and that God also, is hominified in men.
But his purpose is, that we (by the operation of the holy spirit) should
proceed and grow (by degrees) from glory to glory, until we be truly
conformed unto the similitude of that same glorious image of God wherein we
were first created. (...)
Neither is the particle (as) purposely put down by Paul, to note the
improprietie: but rather, to express unto us the manner of that transformation,
as if he should say thus. Even as in times past, Moses his face (through that
conference which he had with the Lord in the mount) became resplendent in
glory, like to the shining of a glass by the object of the sun: so surely,
our minds also, they are affected every day with secret grothes of grace, and
do proceed from glory to glory, through the inward familiarity of the holy
Ghost, who works inuisibly in every of us, that selfsame glory, which in
process of time, will be made apparently evident. Briefly, in another place,
and to very like purpose, he uses the selfsame word, saying thus. Now, these
things (brethren) I have transferred, or figuratively put over to my self and
Apollos. (...)1. Cor. 4. 6.
Not meaning that he and Apollos were essentially transformed into the very
substance of those schismatic teachers who troubled the Church of Corinth:
but, that be only (concealing the schismalikes names) did figuratively apply
and put upon himself and Apollos, their persons rather: that so lie might the
more in offensiuely censure their schismatic courses. Now then, by all these
places it is more then apparent, that the words in the text cannot possibly
conclude any essential transforming of Satan, into an Angel of light.


Lycanthropus. Conclude what you please: yet will I at no hand be persuaded,
but that the devil can essentially transform himself into the very
substance of an Angel of light.


Orthodoxus. Even as readily (I warrant you) as the priest can transubstantiate
bread and wine into the very natural body and blood of Christ. If you be able
thoroughly to prove this transformation of devils, you may pleasure the papists
with an unanswerable argument for their popish transubstantiations: and surely,
they should therein be highly beholding unto you. But, until your self and
they do sensibly demonstrate unto us, how two substantial forms may
possibly be inherent ( together and at once) in one and the selfsame subject,
Simul, and semel
and that also, without confusion of substances: say what you can for your
matters, we will believe you alike. In the mean time, let us hear some
sounder reasons concerning this point: or put an end to our speech.


Lycanthropus. Whether the reasons be sound, or unsound, it makes no great
matter. It has been taught for an infallible truth from age to age, that
devils can transform themselves essentially into what substance they please:
and therefore (for my part) I unfeignedly believe and subscribe to the same.


Orthodoxus. Antiquity (how gray headed soever) has no authority at all to
privilege error: Veritati non preiudicet antiquitas.
and therefore, you are over rashly to resolute in settling your faith upon
such an inueterate dottage.


Physiologus. Master Orthodoxus, do rest you a while, and let me argue this
point a little. Come on Lycanthropus, you do believe (you say) that Devils can
transform themselves into what substance they please: what is your reason
hereof?


Lycanthropus. My reason is this. They can form bodies: therefore also they
can transform bodies. To deny them an absolute power herein; were to yield
less unto devils, then we do unto men. For a Taylour (we see) he is able of a
piece of cloth, to form a gown: and able also to transform the same into,
either a cloak, or a coat.


Physiologus. You have forgot (I perceive) what was taught you of late. Aug.
lib. 3. de trinit. cap. 8.
Namely, Danaeus physica^^ christiana, cap. 18.
that the work of creation is only proper to God, and beyond the power of
devil or angel: page 94.
and yet now again, you will have the devil if not a creator of substances,
Psalm. 33.
yet an Artist at least, Job. 26.
very skillful in forming and transforming of gowns and cloakes: Isa, 45.
which I believe would trouble both him and the Tailour, if they had neither
cloth, Act. 17. 24.
nor other stuff to form them upon. But, go to, prove that the devils are
able, essentially to form, or transform true natural bodies.


Lycanthropus. I prove it thus. Exodus 7. 11. 12. and 8. 7.
The devil was able (by the Egiptian sorcerours) to transform their rods into
serpents: and therefore, he is much more able to do the same by himself.


Physiologus. Forbearing a while to answer directly the very point of your
argument, I must tell you this by the way that (through such an inconsiderate
reasoning) you dangerously make the devil, a very free agent, in forming and
transforming of bodies. Howbeit (letting these ouersights slip) do tell me
whether those your supposed serpents (made by the sorcerours) were true
serpents in deed: or serpents only in outward appearance?


Philologus. They were true serpents no doubt.


Physiologus. If serpents without doubt, as you say, then were they such,
either necessarily: or contingently.


Pneumatomachus. Nay, not contingently, but necessarily such: or no serpents at
all.


Physiologus. If necessarily serpents in deed, then, tell me whether they were
such by a natural: or supernatural necessity?


Lycanthropus. What mean you by a natural necessity?


Physiologus. By a natural necessity, I do here understand the necessary
beginning or cause of motion and rest, in every such natural thing as nature
it self is especially inherent in by it self alone, and not by accident. So
that, this natural necessity, is (you see) some certain secret power, not
perceiueable by sense, but by understanding alone: yea, and the same is so
thoroughly instructed of God by a secret instinct, as, it is able (of it self)
to supply an essential being (with other natural faculties) to every
corporal substance: whether element, stone, herb, tree, lion, horse, egle,
woolhe, man, beast, or any other like natural essence. Now then, do tell me
whether they were true serpents in deed, by such a natural necessity?


Lycanthropus. Yea, even by that self same natural necessity.


Physiologus. Then undoubtedly, they were such, either by the orderly or the
unorderly course of nature?


Lycanthropus. Such they were, even by an orderly course of nature.


Physiologus. Then did they also consist upon true and orderly beginnigs:
namely, upon true matter, and form.


Lycanthropus. They consisted of true matter, and form I warrant you.


Physiologus. Do you warrant me? A wise man would even blush for shame, to
avouch such palpable and gross absurdities. Know you not, that the orderly
course of nature in her ordinary producing of living creatures, is only and
altogether by generation? And, dare you then thus boldly affirm, that a sorry
twig or rod of a tree, was such a true natural matter, as that, from thence
might possibly have been produced some natural serpent; in any orderly course
of nature? Again, could any true lively form of a natural serpent, be
possibly given to the twig of a tree: by any possible power of either angel, or
devil? Indeed, the devil, and those his Egyptian sorcerers (if they had so much
spare time at that present (they might then I confess) have cunningly carved
or cut out from a piece of wood, Aug. contra ^elicianum cap. 7.
some lineament all fashion, figure, Damaeus physica christiana, cap. page 58.
proportion, or shape of serpents, and very skilfully have cast the same into a
serpentine color: howbeit, such a formed kind of serpents (both for matter
and form) had only been artificial, and accidentarie, but neither might
that matter nor form of theirs, have truly been said to be natural.


Lycanthropus. Let matter and form be whatsoever it will: true serpents I am
certain they were.


Physiologus. How certain soever you are, they could not possibly be true
serpents indeed, in any orderly course of nature: as you have hitherto heard.
For then also they must necessarily have had their true matter and form very
certain within themselves: and the same also, very absolute and constant by
nature. Even as we see the selfsame matter and form of a dog, an horse, a
bird, a man, or a serpent, which was at the first creation: the same continues
(in an orderly course of nature) certain and constant now at this present, to
the end of the world. But, these your supposed serpents, they had no such true
matter and form at all in themselves: and therefore no true serpents indeed,
in any orderly course of nature.


Lycanthropus. Then were they such in an unorderly course of nature: for, true
serpents I am sure they were.


Physiologus. True serpents (you say) you are sure they were, and yet can you
not possibly show how they should be such, except (as you now confess) by an
unorderly course of nature: which unorderly course is nothing else in effect,
but an error in nature declining from the true matter and form it self in
producing her work. Thus then, you conclude at unawares, that they were no true
serpents indeed, by any orderly course of nature: but, either miracles, or
monsters in nature, preposterouslie, produced in an unorderly course of nature
it self. Howbeit, miracles you may at no hand avouch them to be: because
neither sorcerer not devil could ever work miracles. And, even in that very
point also appeered the difference between Moses his serpent, and theirs: it
being supernaturally effected by the miraculous power of God: theirs being
subtly exhibited by some crafty legerdemaine between them, and the devil.
Neither yet may you justly affirm them any monsters in nature. For then
(howsoever nature her self had failed in producing the work) they should yet
have had in them naturally, their true matter and form of true natural
serpents which they never had: and therefore no monsters at all in nature. So
then, since those your supposed serpents could not possibly be true serpents
indeed, neither by any orderly nor unorderly course of nature: it follows
consequently, that they were not serpents by any natural necessity.


Lycanthropus. Then were they such by some supernatural necessity.


Physiologus. What mean you by that?


Lycanthropus. My meaning is, that they were formed true natural serpents, by
some supernatural and secret work of the devil himself.


Physiologus. You are groslie deceived, for the devil never had supernatural
power: neither could he ever have formed true natural serpents, Aug. de
trinit, lib. 3.
by any supernatural skill whatsoever. Because, a corporal substance (such as
true serpents are) was never at any time so much subjected under the power of
the devil, as that he was absolutely able (of himself) to transpose the said
corporal matter to any true natural form: no surely, such an absolute power
is only, and altogether reserved to God. That the devil himself has no such
supernatural power, I prove it thus. In all such natural bodies as are
compounded of matter and form, neither is the matter by it self, nor the
form by it self, but the whole composition is wholly formed together: and
therefore, the whole is whol^e transformed into the whole. As for example, the
whole air is wholly made fire: Philosophus in libro de generatione.
so soon as the said airs is converted to fire. Besides that, the effect is
evermore like to the agent, and in that selfsame agent, does effectually
preexist at the least. And therefore a natural body compounded of true matter
and form, cannot possibly be produced, but by such an agent, as is, either it
self compounded of the selfsame matter and form: or has otherways, that
whole composition in his own proper power. But, a Spirit, or Devil is only a
simple form, not having in himself, Lucas Lassius, in Euangelia dominicalia,
fol. 505.
any material part of such a bodily substance, neither has he (at any hand)
the same in his proper power: for, the Lord only, and he alone has an absolute
ability of producing such matter and form. And therefore, by any operation of
the Devil there cannot possibly be formed any such a natural body as is
compounded of true matter and form: no, although every thing in nature,
continued entire and sound. But the essential transforming of a rod, into a
very true serpent, does implicatiuely include an essential body compounded of
true matter and form by a natural production: and therefore, impossible the
same should be truly accomplished by any operation of the Devil whatsoever. And
so by consequence, those your supposed serpents compounded of rods, they are
(in deed and in truth) no true serpents at all, but sleights of legerdemaine.


Licanthropus. If they were not true serpents in deed: why then does the
scripture term them serpents?


Physiologus. Because, howsoever no serpents in substance, yet being
undoubtedly such in an outward appeerance: the scriptures do purposely term
them according to the acceptance of Phaaroh and all the Egyptians.


Lycanthropus. Yea, but how could they possibly be seen such in appeerance, not
existing at al in a true bodily substance: or how could Aaron his rod devour
them, they having no essential being at all?


Physiologus. I do freely confess there might (at that present) be seen true
serpents in deed, but withal, I do flatly deny, that the sorcerers rods
were essentially transformed to serpents: which is the very point it self,
that we argue upon. Those rods I say, were not essentially changed into true
natural serpents: but only they seemed such in an outward appeerance.


Lycanthropus. How should there be wrought a transformation in outward
appeerance: and no change in substance at all?


Physiologus. Yes, such an appeerance might easily be performed of Satan, by
sundry means. First, Philosophus de anima, lib. 2.
because (notwithstanding the present remoouing of sensible things, there might
still remain fantasies and imaginations within the head) it may be, that the
very sensible and earnest beholding of Aaron his rod, essentially transformed
to a serpent before, did (by reason of the vndoubtednes) take in the beholders
so deep an impression, as that thereby only (through some local motion of
sensible things remaining in the imaginatiue faculty, together with the
humors themselves wherein they were seated as in their proper subject) there
might still be existing in fantasy, a very lively appeerance of some such
bodily substance as was not subsisting in nature at all. For, much blood
descending before into the sensitive faculty, Philosophus in lib. de some. and
rigil.
there descends withal, many imagined forms, whereby there is forthwith
procured a very lively resemblance of some such things as are not existing at
all. By this means therefore (there being beforehand procured a commotion of
humors, Hyperius, in method, theolog, lib. 2. page 311.
as well in the interior, as exterior senses of all the beholders) the Devil
might both inwardly and outwardly also, apply certain apparent forms to the
very organons of all the senses; even as effectually, as if they had risen only
from outward sensible objects: and (by such a legerdemaine) might cause the
sorcerers rods to seem in appeerance, as though they had been true serpents
in deed. A notable experiment of such deceiving of senses, may fitly be found
forth in a candle of Adders grease: which (all the while it be burning alone in
the night) will cause all the russhes strawed in the parlour, to seem as if
they were crawling snakes.


Lycanthropus. It is incredible, that the external senses of all the beholders,
should (by any such legerdemaine of the Devil) have been so grossly deluded.


Physiologus. Why not they, as well as the senses of all in the parlour
aforesaid? Secondly, the devil might not only delude them thus by some false
resemblance of serpents: but might give them withal, an appearance of true
serpents in deed. For, Lyra in 1. Sanm cap. 16. 23.
howsoever a corporal matter is not so freely and so fully subjected to the
power of the devil, as that he either may, or can possibly transform the same
to some other form from that which essentially it is of it self: yet
notwithstanding, such a corporal matter, Magister sentent. lib. 2. did. 7.
fol. 87.
both may be, and is also so farfoorth in the power of the devil as appertains
to a local motion, this al men do hold. And therefore, M. Perkins in his order
of the causes, 2. com. page 80.
the devils (by their own proper power, and without any perceiuance at all to
humane sense) they might (through some such local motion) take away with a
trice, the sorcerers rods from the ground: and put in their place true natural
serpents, Hyperius, in method. theolog. lib. 2. page 310.
taken by them from else where. And, this undoubtedly they might do in a
moment: through the agility and nimblenesse of their own proper nature. For,
even as the mind of a man (it being a spiritual substance) can easily
accomplish her animal operations, and as it were with a thought: so surely,
the devil (he being also a spiritual essence) he is able much more speedily to
accomplish his spiritual actions, and in far shorter time.


Lycanthropus. As though the devils (so covertly, and with such unspeakable
speed) could convey true natural serpents in place of the rods: but some must
needs have perceived the same?


Physiologus. The devil (you know) he is an invisible creature. Besides that,
this we see plain in our own experience, that a Iuggler (by means of such
local motion, and through the nimble conueiance of his only hand) he can so
slightly, and so cunningly convey one thing in place of another, as the
beholders themselves, they do not only not perceive the legerdemaine: but
(which more is) they are undoubtedly persuaded, that the Iuggler, he has
essentially transformed the first matter in sight, into some other substantial
form. Now then, if a mere mortalman (by the only nimblenesse of hand) can so
easily effect such admirable matters: why should we imagine the same impossible
for spirits and devils?


Pneumatomachus. Well sir: proceed in the pursuit of your purpose.


Physiologus. Lastly, Otho Casman. par. 2. Angelog. cap. 18. page 533
spirits and devils (being naturally nimble and swift, as was showed before)
they might (by a local motion) apply true natural actiues, to natural
passiues: upon which application there would undoubtedly ensue like natural
effects. Hyperius, in method. theolog. lib. 2. page 314.
As for example, wood fitly applied to fire by the hand of a man: fire is
forthwith engendered in the matter of wood. And yet, that fire so engendered, is
efficiently engendered by the fire it self, as by a natural and proper agent:
although yet withal, that selfsame fire, is also ministerially effected by the
very hand applying the same. M. Perkins in his order of causes upon the 2. com.
page 80.
And, even so without doubt, the devils, they might easily apply some natural
matter, preexisting in a near disposition to the form of true serpents, and
withal (subiecting the said matter unto some proper agent) might by such
means engender true natural serpents, and vnperceiueably put them in place of
the rods: whereas yet, those said serpents, so engendered, were efficiently
engendered by some proper agent, although withal, they might truly be said to
be ministerially effected by the sorcerers themselves, as by the very hand of
the devil effecting the same. Even as also the husbandman (by applying and
mixing wheat with earth, may ministerially be said to bring forth the said
wheat himself. Yea, and these things may spirits and devils more easily and
more speedily accomplish then men may possibly do, for many respects. First,
because they understand the power of natural causes, much better then men.
Secondly, they are much more nimble then men, in gathering and applying those
natural causes. Lastly, for that those natural causes so assumed of devils:
may also by them be applied to far greater, and more wonderful effects,
then possibly they can be by men.


Lycanthropus You affirm incredible things. For, how could the devils possibly
find either serpents, or any other matter in a near disposition to serpents:
for that so sudden an ingendring and placing of true serpents in place of the
rods?


Physiologus. I speak not incredibly at al, if you rightly consider (as you
ought) that the devils were especially assisted herein with a towfold power:
namely, with the power of nature: and with the power of obedience.


Lycanthropus. What mean you by the power of nature?


Physiologus. None other thing else, but that divine action of nature, wherein
the Lord God from the worlds beginning, does (of true matter measurably
compounded by a determinate agent, and through a local motion effected also in
time) even voluntarily procreate some certain determinate effects. Now then,
the ordinary assistance of this selfsame natural power, does ordinarily
befall to men, to spirits and devils in all ordinary and natural productions
of forms: so far forth especially, as they (by a natural knowledge) are
able rightly to comprehend, compound, and apply the same. Yea, and the
assistance of this selfsame natural power, was not wanting at all to the
devils, in those their appearances of true natural serpents, as was showed
before.


Lycanthropus. And what mean you by the power of obedience.


Physiologus. I understand thereby, Pet. Martyr in in Genesis cap. 30. 33. fol.
125.
that extraordinary subjection wherein all things (without determination or
repugnancie) do even readily submit to the will of God, as to the only
supereminent sovereign over all causes, forms, and effects whatsoever. This
selfsame power of obedience, not only the Lord himself (immediately, and
with no preexistence of matter almost) does exercise by himself alone even
from the beginning: but even howerly also by holy men, and by good Angels and
devils does administer the same. Hieron. ad vitalem. Non valet natura, contra
naturae dominum.
So that, whenever the Lord commands any strange action (surmounting the
ordinary power and course of nature) to be forthwith effected, then does he
extraordinarily take up the aforenamed persons, as the only fit instruments
of that his divine, and supernatural power. Now then, this power of
obedience, albeit the same does not ordinarily attend upon the pleasure and
beck of men or of devils: yet, the devils undoubtedly they had at that present
(by some secret privilege from God) the extraordinary assistance also
thereof, in those selfsame appearances of true natural serpents. Yea, and
this also according to the secret decree and counsel of God: who (having
predetermined the destruction of Phaaroh) did, by this means harden his heart,
Exodus 7. 13.
and so made a passage to the timely execution of his judgments upon Phaaroh
himself, and all the Egyptians.


Exorcistes. Notwithstanding these two presupposed powers assisting the devil
in those your supposed appearances, me think it is clear by the text it
self, that the Sorcerersrods were truly transformed to serpents: and I argue
it thus. If those rods were no true serpents, but serpents only in an outward
appearance, then is not that true which is set down in the text: Exodus 7. 12.
namely, that the sorcerers, Likewise they cast down their rods, and they
were turned into serpents.


Physiologus. I answer you thus. It is undoubtedly true whatsoever is set
down in the text: and may very well stand with that which I say. For, be it
it supposed, the Sorcerersrods were turned (as you say) into serpents, yet were
they not truly so turned; I mean, they were not existingly, but appearingly
turned into serpents. And this distinction is very fully borne forth by other
words in the text; Exodus 7. 11.
which affirm, that the Egyptian Sorcerers they did (in like manner) by their
enchantments. Where you may plainly perceive the particle of ( likeness)
purposely put down, to set forth the difference: as if he should say, the
Sorcerers they did the very like in show, although not in substance. For mark
I beseech you: there is in that text, both the manner and means of their
working, precisely put down. The manner of their working, was by a likeness of
serpents in an only appearance: the means of effecting that work, was the
Sorcerers enchantments. From which words of the text, I may reason thus. A like
cause argues a like effect. But the Sorcerers enchantments (which are
altogether deceivable, false, and standing only in outward appearance) were
the very efficient cause of that likeness: therefore, the effect, I mean, that
likeness it self, must needs be deceivable, false, and only exist in an
outward appearance. Thus then, the case it self being (by all the premises)
apparently evident: I will now return at the last, to answer your maine or
principal argument, which was this in effect. Satan (by the Egyptian
Sorcerers) transformed rods into serpents: therefore, he is much more able to
do the same by himself. This (I must tell you) is a false and deceivable
argument, Petere principium.
For first, in your antecedent you do shamefullie beg the cause in question
before it be proved: and now, when it comes to the trial, it is not able to
hold the hammering. Again, your consequent also is false, for, therein you do
make the devil a very free and absolute agent, in transforming of bodies as
well without, as with means at his pleasure, which only is a power peculiar
to God: whereas the devils can accomplish nothing in nature, but by natural
causes and means, no more then the Carpenter can frame an house without fit
matter and instruments to work withal. So then, both parts of your argument
being apparently false: you cannot possibly conclude from thence, any power in
the devil, for an essential transforming of bodies.


Lycanthropus. Well sir? Howsoever you pass over this argument, taken from the
sorcerers rods transformed to serpents, and all this (forsooth) by a pretty
distinstion of a thing in existence, and of a thing in appearance: yet have I
one argument more, which you shall never be able to avoid with that cunning
devise.


Physiologus. Let us hear that irrefragable argument: for, hitherto you have
afoorded us none that needs any great cunning in answering.


Lycanthropus. Nebuchad-nezzar (it is very well known) was essentially
transformed into an ox: Dan. 4. 13.
therefore, the devil may easily change himself into any shape whatsoever.


Physiologus. Or ever I come to answer directly your argument, do tell me how
it is certainly known that Nebuchad-nezzer was essentially transformed into an
ox?


Lycanthropus. Josephus writing of the Jewish antiquities, Joseph. de antiq.
Iudaic. lib. 10. cap. 11.
he flatly affirms it so.


Physiologus. Josephus does so I confess. Howbeit, Josephus, he has been so
often discredited and tainted in other points of more weighty importance, as,
the less credit is to be given him in this,: especially, the very words of the
text being otherways evident, and testifying plainly unto us, that
Nebuchad-nezzer he was not essentially transformed at all, either in mind, or
in body.


Lycanthropus. Never go about to make us think so: Dan. 4. 22.
for, the very text, it tells us plainly, he did eat grass like an ox.


Physiologus. It does so in deed: and what of that? will you hereupon infer,
that therefore, he was essentially transformed into an ox? That were a mad
kind of inference. So conies and geese, they do eat grass like an ox: and
yet notwithstanding, they still retain their proper essential being, without
any essential transformings into either oxen, or asses. Besides that, if you
will wilfully insist upon any essential transformation in Nebuchad-nezzer, you
might with more show of sense, and better probability of reason avouch, that
he was transformed rather into an eagle: both, Dan. 4. 30.
because the hairs of his head (says the text) were grown like to an eagles
feathers, and for that also, the very nails of his hands and feet, they were
like to the claws of a bird. And therefore, it would be more consonant (you
see) to conclude, that Nebuchad-nezzer was rather transformed into some foul
having feathers and claws: then, into a beast that has horns and hoofes.
Howbeit, there was in him no corporal transformation at all, but only a changed
mind, for, so says the text: Let his heart be changed from man's nature, Dan.
4. 13.
and a beasts heart be given unto him.


Lycanthropus. If you yield unto him a changed heart: I make no doubt at all of
an altered body. For, if the mind it self which is the first substantial
form in man, be transformed (as you say) to an ox: what other form or being
at all can be given to the body (it being the organical parts of the mind)
but only the form of an ox?


Physiologus. What mean you by Nebuchad-nezzer his heart transformed?


Lycanthropus. I mean thereby, that his very heart it self was essentially
changed into the very heart of a beast: for, so says the text.


Physiologus. The text understands there, Tremel. in Dan. cap. 4. 16.
no real transmutation, or transformation of substance: but only an
alteration, or change of qualities. Robertus Roll^cus, in Dan. 4. 16.
For, there is no doubt at all, but that in Nebuchad-nezzer there still
remained a reasonable heart: George Joy, in his Exposition upon Dan. cap. 4. 13.
howsoever (by the just judgment of God for his pride) he was (for the
determined time) even utterly deprived of all use of reason. Having his said
heart (for the present) so plunged in beastly corruptions, and so wholly
overwhelmed with brutish affections: as that (thereby) he differed nothing at
all from a beast, being more blockish and senseless in humane knowledge, then
the very ox that feeds on grass. So that, how honorable soever before in
princely dignity, yet (having now in him no understanding at all) he is not
unlike to the beasts that perish. Psalm. 49. 20.



Lycanthropus. If there were in his heart no substantial change at all: how
could there possibly be wrought in the same, such altered, or changed qualities?


Physiologus. There is nothing (you know) impossible to God. Math. 19. 26.
By whose eternal decree, the heart of Nebuchad-nezzer was so thoroughly
overtaken and tainted with such an outrageous fury, or madness, as that he
(being utterly deprived of humane sense) did presently depart the Court: very
wildly wandering over the wilderness like to a beast, conuersing (in brutish
manner) among the brute beasts themselves, and leading (for the time) a very
savage and beastly behavior.


Exorcistes. If Nebuchad-nezzer was not essentially transformed at all in body
or mind, but possessed only with fury and madness, it is unlikely his
Courtiers would suffer him then to converse with beasts abroad in the fields,
but would rather have bound him, and kept him up close in the dark; and
therefore, for any thing hitherto heard, he might be essentially transformed
into a beast.


Physiologus. That he was not essentially transformed at all, it is very
apparent by all the premises. Why his own courtiers (perceiving him plainly
deprived of reason) did not bind him forthwith, and keep him up close, but
permitted him to wander wildly abroad, there was very great reason. For first,
the courtiers they knew very well, and all men may see by experience that, the
binding and keeping of a madman close; is so far from appeasing, as it rather
does aggrauate (for the present) his furious humor: and therefore the
courtiers forbore to bind him at all. Besides that, they were the more
especially loath to be led to that course, because (by the revelation of Daniel)
they plainly understood before, that, the lord God had determined his wandering
abroad with the beasts in the field: and therefore, they greatly feared to
intercept the said purpose of God, assuring themselves, that (after the
determined time) he should safely return to his own kingdom again.


Exorcistes. But sir, if he was not essentially transformed at all, how then is
it possible he should so long lie forth naked in the fields in frosts and
deawes; or live any time, with such unnatural diet, or, be preserved (at
least) from the devouring of beasts?


Physiologus. If we but consider this matter by natural reason, Hieron. in
Daniel.
we may find by experience, that many things (in deed) are impossible to a
sound man: which yet, to a furious or mad man are not so impossible. For, fury
is such and so headstrong an humor, as it makes a man to endure and do many
things; which otherways he could not possibly endure. As for example many
madde-men (we see) are well able to continue in the cold dew a long time, and
to be sustained (that while) with crude and raw meats: seeming also unto
themselves, that they are not men, but brute beasts in deed, and thereupon
also, they delight to converse with beasts, and to grow into familiarity with
them, although yet, not essentially transformed into true natural beasts
indeed.


Pneumatomachus. Surely, this seems strange unto me: and I see not the reason
thereof.


Physiologus. The reason is this. Fury has so highly disordered their nature,
and made their minds so beastly affected, as, many things (in that their
disordered state) are possible and delectable to them, which yet (in their
sounder estate) were nothing so. Even as also we see by experience, that very
coals or earth (to many women with child) are a very sweet and delectable
diet, which yet (before then) they did loath and abhor: and all this, by
reason of their disordered nature at that instant time. And, hereupon also it
came to pass that Nebuchadnezzer did grow into such familiarity with beasts:
namely, even by reason of that likeness of nature, which (to his own seeming)
he had with brute beasts, in that his disordered state. Yea, and this also is
the very natural cause, why (at that present) he was not torn and devoured
of beasts: even as also we see by experience, that furious dogs, they do
never hurt madmen, nor natural fools. Howbeit, Nebuchad-nezzer (in his
furious estate and melancholic passion) he was more especially preserved from
the outrage of beasts, through a miraculous providence, and special protection
of God: and therefore, his said preservation (in that selfsame respect) the
less admirable, and wonderful to us. Thus then (the matter it self, being
manifestly apparent) I will now answer your maine or principal argument: Dan.
4. 13.
which was this in effect. Nebuchad-nezzer he was essentially transformed into
an ox: therefore, the devil may easily change himself into any shape
whatsoever. This argument is many ways faulty, and halteth down right. For,
first, your antecedent is utterly false, and a mere begging of the matter in
Question: because Nebuchad-nezzer (as you have hitherto heard) he was not
essentially transformed into an ox: and therefore, this proves nothing at
all for the real transformation of spirits and devils. Secondly, if
Nebuchad-nezzer had been so transformed in deed as your self does imagine:
yet, the sequel of your argument is utterly unsound: because it stands upon
diverse, or rather contrary efficients, namely God, and the devil. The one
having of himself an absolute and indeterminate power, and therefore able of
himself to work what he will, where, when, and howsoever best pleases
himself: and so by consequence he might (if it had so seemed good in his
wisdom) have essentially transformed Nebuchad-nezzer into au ox. The other
(the devil I mean) he has only a finite and limited power, and therefore
utterly unable of himself to accomplish any one work beyond the bounds of
that power: and so by consequence, he cannot possibly transform himself
essentially into any creature whatsoever, without a special power from God.
Lastly, your consequent, it stands only upon ( may be) and so concludes no
certainty at all concerning the Question.


Exorcistes. Well sir? howsoever Nebuchad-nezzer was not essentiallie
transformed into an ox, yet this you consesse, that, for seven years
together, he did utterly want all use of reason: and therefore, I wonder how
so renowned a kingdom could continue all that time without a governor.


Physiologus. This is but extrauagant and wandering speech, though yet the
kingdom (no doubt) it was all that time governed by the princes and nobles,
according to Daniels direction. Who fully assuring them of the king his
undoubted return to the kingdom after those seven years end: the nobles
either they durst not establish any other as king, for fear of being tainted
with treason at his return, or else (honoring him in their hearts for his
former victories) they resolved to expect his happy return with patience.
Howsoever, the Lord who determined the judgment, he also prepared away no
doubt, to the peaceable preservation of Nebuchad-nezzer his kingly dominions.
And therefore muse no more of the matter, but either speak to the purpose in
hand: or, put an end to the conference.


Lycanthropus. Sir, howsoever I am unable to reply upon any thing spoken: I
will never believe, but that spirits and devils can essentially transform
themselves into what bodies they please.


Orthodoxus. I have hitherto endured your weakness in answering to any thing
uttered by master Physiologus: hoping that very shame would have made you
(ere now) to give over the field. Howbeit, perceiving your settled pertinacie in
this your opinion, I cannot but speak: woondring withal, that you should be
so resolute in that, whereof you can yield no one reason at all, but only your
will.


Lycanthropus. Yes sir, it is the general opinion of all men, that the devil
can transform himself into any form whatsoever.


Orthodoxus. Howsoever men, by tradition had received an error hand over head,
Exodus 23. 2.
for not looking thoroughly into it: yet may you not follow a multitude to do
evil, neither agree in a controversy to decline after many, and overthrow
the truth. And very certain I am, that no one sound writer, either old or new
is of your mind: but rather the contrary. As for my self, I never could see
any show of reason tending that way. For the Lord God, as he has endued man,
and every living thing, with their proper nature, substance, form,
constitution, qualities and gifts, and directs their wills, faculties, and
powers accordingly: so has he allotted to spiritual creatures, their own
substance and properties several alone to themselves, and appointed them their
laws and limits, beyond which they cannot possibly pass the breadth of an
hair. And therefore, as it is absolutely against the ordinance of God, that I
should fly like a bird, or swim like a fish, or creep like a worm, or become
another creature in form, to that which by nature I am, insomuch, as if God
would give me leave, I could not possibly do it, for it were flat contrary to
his own ordinance and decree, yea, and even opposite to the natural
constitution of that body which he has created and given me: so is it
undoubtedly incredible, that either a devil should be essentially transformed
into a man, or a man substantially turned into a devil, or that either of
both, should reallie change themselves into any other nature, substance, form,
constitution, quality or gift, then those very same which they have by
creation, yea, or that they should possibly apply those which they have, to
any other end or use then that which God himself naturally decreed, and
directs them unto. Otherwise, either God should be contrary to himself
which is far from him: or else those things must needs be supernatural, and
so, a true miracle in whom soever. Neither yet is Gods omnipotency hereby
qualified: but the devil his impotencie is rather manifested, and more lively
declared. Who has no further power then that which God from the beginning has
appointed unto him: and the same also consonant to his own nature and
substance. The devil (I confess) may well be restrained from his natural
faculties, power, and will: but (being Gods minister) beyond the same he cannot
possibly pass the breadth of a pin, neither yet any other ways, or further
imploie his endeavor, then only in that very work which the Lord (from the
beginning) has enabled him to do. Which is, that he (being himself a spirit)
may vitiate and corrupt the spirit of man, and therein also he is diligent
enough: howbeit for the doing hereof, he cannot substantially alter his form
at all.


Philologus. I have heard many very confidently affirm that the devil has
appeared to them in the likeness of a man, a cock, a catte, or a dog.


Orthodoxus. Yea, but how are those confident affirmers certainly sure, that,
the man, the cock, the catte or the dog, whose likeness they saw in
appearance, was indeed, and in truth either spirit or devil: and not rather
the Legerdemaine of some coniuring Priest, or cousening companion. For, if a
devil can indeed essentially transform himself into the likeness, figure, or
shape of a man, a dog, a catte, a mouse, or a toade* why can he not also
transform, a man, a dog, a catte, a mouse, or a toade into the likeness,
figure, or shape of a devil, since there is a like reason and possibility of
both? Howbeit, we may not believe (says Augustine) that, Aug. de ciuit. Dei,
lib. 8. cap. 18.
a man's body can (by any Art or power of the devil) be transformed into the
lineaments of a beast: much less into the form or substance of any infernal
devil. Besides that, Item, in libro de spiritu and anima, cap. 26.
if spirits and devils may possibly transform themselves into an humane
body: then could not Christ his argument propounded to Thomas, be current and
good, where he says, behold my hands and side, Ioh. 20. 27.
and put thy finger into my hands, and thrust thy hand into my side: and be not
faithless, but faithful. All this (how truly soever delivered by Christ)
could never (in truth) have satisfied Thomas concerning the resurrection of
Christ: if it be true in deed that devils can truly transform themselves into
true natural bodies. For Thomas (remaining unsatisfied) might boldly have
answered thus, oh sir? why do you will me to handle your hands and sides? that
is no certain argument, to demonstrate unto me your rising again from the
dead. Because, spirits and devils (you know) they can truly transform
themselves into true natural bodies: and therefore (notwithstanding such an
experimental, or sensible knowledge) you may rather be some transformed spirit
or ghost to deceive me, then my Lord and my God which came for to save me. Thus
then you see, that (if these essential transformations be concluded for
curra^t) Thomas his incredulity (for any thing heard) might pass uncontrolled.
Ioh. Bodin, de magic. demon. lib. 2. cap. 6. None essentialis forma, id est
ratio, sed figura solum permutatur.



Exorcistes. Though the devil cannot alter his form substantially, yet may he
change the same in shape or figure, I doubt not, and such a distinction has
Bodin, saying: The essential form namely, reason it self, is not changed:
but only the outward shape or figure.


Orthodoxus. Bodin, he strikes it dead no doubt. For, here he makes the devil
a cunning iugler, who (by casting a miste before men's eyes) can give to
spiritual substances, what outward figure and form he please. Howbeit, till
Bodin be able to demonstrate truly unto us, that the devil may have power to
alter essentially a spiritual substance: we will never acknowledge any
possibility of transforming their shape or forms at all.


Exorcistes. Well, Aug. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 18. and cap. 17. 8 18.
yet Augustine subscribes to such transformations.


Orthodoxus. He does I confess. Yea, those, and other like matters are so
common in many of his works, as, I am driven to suspect they were rather
cunningly foisted in by some cunning popish coniuring Priest, to credit his
cosening practices: then carefully inserted by Augustine himself, to set
forth a truth. Howsoever, Cardan. de vanitate rerum, lib. 15. cap. 8.
I say with Cardanus, that, how many of those transformations Augustine says
he has seen with his eyes: so many I am content (for the reverence I owe him)
to give credit unto. All the rest I account but Cabalisticall conceits; and no
better (in effect) then foolish toies to mock an Ape. Yea, and so much the
rather, Aug. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 18.
because Augustine himself affirms those transformations to be but
fantastical: and that they are not according to the verity, but according
only to their outward appearance.


Lycanthropus. Yet, such then according to outward appearance.


Orthodoxus. I allow no such supposed appearances made by devils: G. Gifford in
his Dialogue of Witches. Otho Casman. Angelogr. par. 2. cap. 19. page 561.
because, I find no such power given them by God in all the scriptures. Besides
that, if we admit, that devils may take only but forms, or shapes upon them,
though not the very substance it self of a true natural body: yet then also
Christ his argument made (else where) unto his disciples had not been sound in
every point, Marc. 6. 49. Luc. 24. 39. Tertul. contra Marcion. lib. 3.
saying thus: handle me and see, for a spirit it has not flesh and bones as
you see me to have. Setting down visibility and palpability, as things
opposite to the nature of spirits and devils: reducing his disciples (in
discerning of spirits) to the judgment, first, of their eyes, and then next of
their hands, and arguing thus. Aretius in Luc. 24. 39.
Spirits can neither be seen nor felt: but I may both be seen and felt,
therefore I am no spirit. And then next, he reasons a disparatis, thus. A
spirit it has neither flesh nor bones: but I have both, therefore, no spirit.
Putting down there you see) very apparent and manifest properties to separate
himself in show, from a spirit. And therefore, if spirits and devils have
power by any possible means, to transform themselves but into the only
outward forms and shapes of true natural bodies, though not substantially
transformed in deed: yet could not that which Christ concludes, have soundly
established the disciples faith concerning the true body of Christ. Because
they (by reason of such supposed apparitions) remaining still doubtful; might
have fitly replied thus. Good sir, though spirits and devils have not
substantially flesh and bones, and therefore, no true and substantial bodies:
yet can they truly transform themselves into the outward shapes and forms of
true natural bodies: and so notwithstanding, we may be deceived in an only
outward appearance. These exceptions (you see) the disciples of Christ they
might justly have made: neither (if these transformations be undoubtedly true)
might Christ so sharply have blamed their unbelief.


Lycanthropus. Spirits (I confess) they are not palpable, but only visible:
and therefore, not the seeing (without the handling) might well have satisfied
Christ his disciples.


Orthodoxus. Yea, but (whatsoever you imagine of the other disciples) if you
rightly way, and exactly consider the text it self with the several
circumstances) you may plainly perceive, that the fault of Thomas his
incredulity was secondly bewraied and condemned: Hugo Cardinal. in Iohannem,
cap. 20. 29.
for that the durst neither credit the vewe taken by the other disciples, nor
trust his own eyes concerning the truth of Christ's body. For (says Christ)
because thou have seen (not because thou have felt) thou beleeuest. Ioh. 20. 29.
Also, blessed are they that believe and see not: and not they that believe,
and feel not. Giving thereby to understand, that our corporal eyes may truly
discern between a spirit, and a true natural body: which were not true, if
spirits and devils could possibly transform themselves into any visible shapes
or forms of true bodies, for thereby the sense of seeing might soon be
deluded. And in very deed, it is very erroneous for any to imagine that the
eyes may possibly be deceived, in discerning between spirits and devils, and
true natural bodies: as appears by sundry scriptures. Wherein Christ very
sharply reprooueth his own disciples: Math. 14. 26.
for not crediting the judgment of their own eyes in such a case. Marc. 16. 14.
Which could not (I say) be a certain rule; Luc. 14. 39.
if spirits and devils can truly and essentially transform themselves into
true natural bodies: or but change themselves into the true shapes and forms
of such bodies. And, this (I believe) does break the very neck of those your
supposed transformations of spirits and devils whatsoever.


Lycanthropus. This that you say is undoubtedly true, and yet, still me think
the devil should have power, so to transform himself, either in substance,
or appearance at least: although I my self am unable to render any one reason
thereof.


Orthodoxus. It is very ridiculous (says one) for a man to leave manifest
things, Pompanac. de incantat. c. 2. O quam credula men's hominis, and erectae
fabulis aures.
and such as even by natural reason may soundly be proved: and so, to seek
after unknown things, which, by no likelihood may be conceived, nor yet tried
out by any rule of reason: but, Good Lord, how light of credit is the wavering
mind of man? How unto lies and tales, his ears attentive all they can?


Lycanthropus. Good master Orthodoxus? I am drawn (by the very force of your
speech) into a marvelous perplexity. For when I examine the weight of your
reasons propounded, I am driven to deny the transformation of spirits and
devils: but, so soon as I return to the necessary consideration of my
present distressed estate, then, that former new-bredde conceit is cut in the
neck, and squashed quite.


Orthodoxus. And why so I pray you?


Lycanthropus. Surely sir, See the lively effect a melancholic humor, it
being predominant.
because I my self am essentially transformed into a woolfe: I make no
question, but that devils can also substantially change themselves into any
true natural body.


Orthodoxus. Very true as you say: the one is every way as possible as is the
other.


Lycanthropus. Why, then alas, the Lord be merciful to us: for what man in the
world may possibly be free from their malice?


Philologus. How now Lycanthropus, are you indeed in good earnest? do you
verily imagine you are essentially transformed into a woolfe? now surely, this
is the oddest jest that ever I heard.


Lycanthropus. Nay, nay (alas) it passes a jest: for I find it and feel it
to true by experience.


Physiologus. Well said Lycanthropus, now I perceive your name was not given
you for naught: it being so proportionablie answerable to your fantastical
nature. (...). Auicen. tract. 4. cap. 15.
You are called Lycanthropus: that is, a man transformed to a woolfe: which
name is very fitly derived from the very disease it self that disorders
your brain, called Lycanthropia. Paul. Aeginetus, lib. 3. cap. 15.
Which word, some Physicians do translate Daemonium Lupinum, that is, a
wooluish Demoniacke: others Lupina melancholica, Aetius lib. 6. cap. 11.
Leonardus Fuchsius instit, medec. lib. 3. sect. 3. cap. 11.
and Lupina insania, that is a wooluish melancholy, or a wooluish fury and
madness. And it is nothing else in effect, but an infirmity arising upon such
fantastical imaginations, as do might^ly disorder and trouble the brain.


Lycanthropus. An infirmity say you? It is a very strange and fearful
infirmity, that can so essentially transform a man into a very natural
woolfe? God bless every good man from such kind of infirmities.


Physiologus. Had you lived in such a time, as beasts, and bears, and woolues
were supposed to speak like men: it had been an easy matter (I perceive) to
persuade you that you are a woolfe.


Lycanthropus. Yea, but how are you able to persuade me the contrary?


Physiologus. That may easily be done, by describing briefly unto you, the
very true nature of that the aforesaid diseases, which so fearfully affects
your mind, with these fantastical imaginations and fond conceits.


Lycanthropus. I pray you then describe it plainly unto me.


Physiologus. With very good will. Wherein you must principally consider, that
the very first matter which causes Ly^anthropie, Auleen. tract. 4. de
agritud. capitis, cap. 15. Phil. Barowgh. in method, physic. lib. 1. cap. 27.
cap. 28. fol. 34. Leonard. Fuchs. Instit. Medeci, lib. 3. sect. 3. cap. 11.
or this wooluish Demoniacke: consists in the very selfsame matter or stuff
that makes in any other man else, a melancholic humor, for either of both
are melancholic persons. Howbeit, the peculiar cause it self which more
especially procures Lycanthropie, is either that kind of mela^choly which
arises properly of choler adust: or that which comes of a simple and natural
melancholy. Sometimes also it proceeds of an impostume of blood in the
brain: but very seldom of bloudadust. Now then, that Lycanthropie which
arises only of the abundance of a simple melancholy, as it is (for the most
part) the very woorst of all, and therefore is called Lupina insania, a
wooluish fury or madness: so is it commonly seated in the exterior parts of
the brain, Auicen. tract. 3. de. apostemat. capitis, cap. 1.
and has an operation not unlike to the matter of a desease, called Karabitus,
which is a hot impostume of the head, seated in the very ventricle of the
brain it self, causing choler adust, and the melancholic matter very much
to abound. Whose vaporous humors (vitiating and corrupting the brain,) do
procure the patient unto a very deep sleep. Wherein his fantasy is
fearfully troubled with the daily impression of such fearful and strange
imaginations as do cause the interior spirits of the brain to wax very
wild and fearful: by reason of those black and cloudie representations:
which were received before in the fantasy. And hereof it is, that some
unskillful Physicians, do so rashly ascribe this humorous disease to the
operation of the devil: and that the ignorant people do absurdly imagine the
party thus affected, to be undoubtedly possessed of devils, Howbeit, they
should certainly know, that a cholerike humor (so soon as an extreme adustion
affects the same) is forthwith converted to fury or madness: neither is it
then satisfied with an only simple melancholic affection. Auicen. tract. 4.
de aegritud. capitis, cap. 16.
This disease, it happens to men especially in Autumn through the malitiousnes
of the humors abounding, and eftsoons is increased in the spring, and in
summer: yea, Phil. Earowgh. in method. physic. lib. 1. cap. 27. 28. fol. 34.
and it is then the extremest of all when the north-winde blows, by reason of
the drines thereof. The signs that commonly fall forth in the beginning of
this disease, are these, Otho Casman. Angelograph. par. 2. cap. 18. quest. 6.
page 540.
namely, strange conceits and fears, a pronesse to anger: the party affecting
solitariness, having a fearful swimming and turning about of the brain.
Howbeit, when the disease is once grown to perfection: then there folowes
very fearful and strange effects. Hyperius in method, theolog, lib* 2. page
310.
For, some are afraid the heavens will ouerwhelme them forthwith: some fear
the earth will swallow them quick: some stand in continual dread of thieves:
and others again, that woolues will enter into them. Some imagine themselves
to be devils, birds, and vessels of earth: yea, and that they be truly
transformed into woolues, and therefore they do counterfeit their voices, and
wander about in the fields. This undoubtedly is your present disease: and this
is that which makes you so resolute concerning the supposed possession of
spirits and devils. All which you may plainly perceive, is nothing else in
effect, but a fantastical conceit, occasioned only upon those disordered
humors which hurt and trouble your brain. Ioh. Wierus de praestig. demon.
lib. 4. cap. 23.
That which any further concerns the nature, the causes, the circumstances,
and cure of Lycanthropie: you may see more at large in Wierus his works.


Lycanthropus. This is very strange I assure you, and more then ever I heard:
albeit I have felt the experience thereof in my self.


Physiologus. Not so strange as true: and therefore, forsake your folly in time.


Orthodoxus. I pray you heartily do so, and that so much the rather: by how
much the devil (in working upon that disordered humor) will be ready eftsoons
to abuse you afresh. In consideration whereof, I will show you what the Ancyran
council and others have carefully decreed against such humerous persons,
saying thus. Ancyranum concilium. Gratianus ibid. can. 26. q. 5. August. de
spiritu and anima, cap. 23. Destructorium vitiorum, par. 6. cap. 49. Otho
Casman. Angelograph. par. 2. cap. 19. q. 2. page 540.
Whereas certain graceless women (seduced wholly by satan's illusions) do
verily imagine themselves (for certain hours in the night) to be riding upon
woolues and beasts with Diana the pagane Goddess, and to pass through sundry
countries: through which erroneous conceit, they (being grossly abused) do
verily believe those things to be true, yea, and (in believing the same) do
fearfully straggle from the true saving faith. It appertains therefore to
the ministers (in every their several churches) to publish and confute the
falsehood hereof: and withal, to strengthen the minds of their people against
every such fantastical and fond illusion of satan. Who eftsoons assailing
the minds of humerous women, and (through infidelity) conpling them sure to
himself, deludes their said minds with dreams and visions: making them
sometimes merry, and sometimes sad: showing them sundry persons, both known and
unknown: yea, and leading them dangerous bie-waies to their own destruction.
Thus you see the councels decree against these rouing conceits, wherewith your
self (at this present) is fearefullie tainted: and therefore, forethinke you
thereof in time.


Lycanthropus. Are there then no essential transformations at all?


Orthodoxus. No verily, whatsoever they seem in show, they are but illusions
and sleights of the devil to deceive: and therefore (I advise you to wind your
self from them with speed, for fear of a further mischief. And, because you
shall not imagine this council I give, Anquirense concilium, Gratian, ibid.
can. 26. q. 5.
to be but a dreaming devise of my own: therefore, (besides that which was
spoken before) I will yet further make known unto you, how general councels,
many good writers, yea, Prosper in libello de dono timoris.
and the Popes own canons do all jointly condemn and pronounce this peevish
opinion concerning the supposed transformation of devils, to be impious, absurd
and devilish, and the maintainers thereof to be worse then Infidels,
Destructorium vitiorum par. 6. cap. 49.
saying thus: Whosoever believes that any one creature can be made or changed
into better or worse, or to be transformed into any other shape, or into any
other similitude, Otho Casman. Angelograph. par. 2. cap. 18. q. 6.
by any other then by God himself the creator of all things: without doubt, he
is but an Infidel, and worse then a Pagane. And therewithal, this reason is
rendered. Because (say they) they do therein attribute that power to a
creature: Malmesburij, degestis Anglorum lib. 6.
which only belongs to God the creator of all things. By this you may
plainly perceive, of what reckoning these your supposed transformations have
been in former times.


Philologus. Lycanthropus? your opinion (it appears) is plainly condemned of
all: and therefore, forsake it for shame.


Lycanthropus. So I do I assure you: praising the Lord with all my heart, for
bringing me thus to behold the folly thereof: yea, and am heartily sorry, for
being bewitched therewith so long, being also ashamed now of my odious name.


Physiologus. The Lords name be blessed for this your happy illumination in
Jesus Christ.


Pneumatomachus. Yea, and the Lord grant the like happy success, to our
further proceedings.


Lycanthropus. So be it. But good Master Orthodoxus, I remember full well, how
that (in the beginning of our conference, where we handled the power of spirits
and devils) you spoke of a twofold possession: the one real, the other
actual. The first you have fully confuted: notwithstanding any thing spoken to
the contrary. Howbeit, of the other, the question is ordinary in every man's
mouth: and therefore, I pray you heartily show us your judgment also therein.


Orthodoxus. What (I pray you) is the common opinion of men concerning the same?


Lycanthropus. I here of none that make any doubt of actual possession: yea,
and the Exorcist also who cast out the devil at Magnitton (howsoever he faggeth
with me now, M. Dorel in the title to his Apology.
concerning his first conceit of real possessions) he is very confident (in
the very title of his apology) to avouch the young man to have been actually
possessed of satan.


Exorcistes. I do so in deed, and I make no doubt thereof at all being able (I
hope) to manage the same against all men, yea even to the death.


Orthodoxus. What are you able to manage against all to the death?


Exorcistes. That the devil has, and may have now (even in these days of the
gospel) an actual or powerful possession in men.


Orthodoxus. What man? are you now fled from your idle conceit of essential
possessions, to the supposed actual possessions of spirits and devils: this,
as it argues evidently great want of munition to manage that matter; so it
haleth us perforce to follow your footings awhile, in these your wandering
vagaries, that so (being forcibly beaten from all hope of recovering your
former hold) you may be forced (at the lenght) to yield up the conquest in the
open field. Howbeit, this question (I perceive) does crave a larger discourse
then the present time will afoord: especially, our dinner being now in a
readiness, and staying upon us. Let us therefore (for the present) put an end
to our speech, till we have refreshed our selves with the good blessings of
God: and then afterward walk forth, and confer of this point to the full.


Pneumatomachus. Sir you may account us for bold and impudent guests, that are
thus troublesome and chargeable to you.


Orthodoxus. My ministry is allotted to these kind of troubles, and my
cheer, I account well bestowed upon such sort of guests: therefore, make no
more strangenes, but, arise and go with me,


Philologus. We praise God for your kindness and care concerning our bodies and
souls: and therefore do thankfully accept of your offer, and dutifully attend
on your person.


Orthodoxus. Let us then arise, and depart.


The end of the fifth Dialogue.
The sixth Dialogue.
THE ARGUMENT.
Of actual possession, what it is? And whether the devils now (in these dates
of the Gospel) do actually possess either the mind or the body: by an
extraordinary afflicting or vexing?

The speakers names.
PHILOLOGVS. LYCANTHROPVS. PNEVMATOMACHVS. PHYSIOLOGVS. ORTHODOXVS. EXORCISTES.
Orthodoxus. Having blessed the Lord for his benefits, the choice shall be
yours, whether you will walk forth abroad: or, keep close in my Parlour, and
confer there of the question for one or two hours.


Physiologus. Sir, you remember the Proverb. After dinner sit a while: and
after supper walk a mile. The which, as it accords very fitly with the
rules of Physic: so will it be a furtherance to the maine purpose it self,
which we have in hand.


Orthodoxus. You say very well. Go to therefore Exorcistes proceed in your
purpose: and tell us what you hold concerning this point.


Exorcistes. This I have hitherto, and yet still do confidently hold: That
the devil, even in these days of the Gospel: has an actual possession in
men.


Orthodoxus. Well then (before you produce your proofs) let us first put down
the question it self in it proper terms: that so, we may the better perceive
the very point of your purpose.


Lycanthropus. I pray you proceed in that course.


Orthodoxus. With very good will. For so the matter controuersed between us,
may more fitly be comprehended within the true bounds of an orderly conference.


Philologus. A very convenient course, in my proper conceit.


Pneumatomachus. I am just of your mind.


Exorcistes. Neither know I of any one that dissents from the same. Tell us
therefore, I pray you: what is actual possession?


Orthodoxus. The actual possession, is that effectual working power,
wherewith the devils (by an operative permission of God) do extraordinarily,
and in most wonderful manner afflict, molest, torment, and vex some special
persons (in a special judgment of God) put over unto them, for that special
purpose. Wherein, we have first to observe, the primarie efficient cause:
namely, the special purpose and judgment of God. Then next, the secondary
efficient cause: I mean, the effectual working power of the devil. Thirdly
the material cause: that is to say, the affliction, the torment, and vexation
it self. Fourthly, the formal cause: namely, an extraordinary manner of
working. And lastly, the final cause: I mean, some special purpose of God,
best known to his wisdom.


Lycanthropus. How manifold I pray you, is this actual possession?


Orthodoxus. It is twofold: namely, either mental or corporal.


Lycanthropus. What mean you by the mental-actuall possession?


Orthodoxus. My meaning is not, that the devil does really enter, and
essentially, or inherently dwell in the possessed man's mind, which we denied
before, when we conferred of the real-mentall possession: but, that he does
only actually afflict, and effectiuelie torment the possessed man's mind.


Lycanthropus. What mean you, by actually afflicting the possessed man's mind?


Orthodoxus. By actually afflicting, I understand the effectual and powerful
operation, Gualter. in Math 8. 16. fol. 272.
wherewith the devil (for the present) does so fearfully molest, and so
strangely deprive the possessed man's mind it self, from the present use of
all reason: as he makes him even senseles and wood, very violently to rush
headlong into fire and water, and outragiouslie to run upon desperate
adventures.


Lycanthropus. And what call you the corporal actual possession?


Orthodoxus. I call the corporal actual possession, that inevitable working
power: whereby the devils do actually torment and vex the whole, or some
special part of the possessed man's body.


Lycanthropus. What mean you, by actually tormenting the whole or some part of
the body?


Orthodoxus. My meaning is, that, the devils (for the present) do, either
powerfully disable the whole, or some part of the possessed man's body, from
the orderly accomplishment of their peculiar and ordinary operations appointed
of God, Ioh. 9. 1.
by depriving the said body forthwith of seeing, Marc. 9. 25.
of hearing, of speaking, of walking, Act. 3. 2.
by bowing and bending together: or do otherways, very effectually enable the
said body, or the several parts thereof, with some extraordinary, and
unnatural force, for the fearful effecting of many outrageous, and most
mischievous practices. Namely, Math. 8. 28.
the remaining day and night among graves: the knapping in sunder of chains:
Luc. 8. 26. 27.
a violent rending, and tearing: a tumbling headlong into fires and waters:
Luc. 8. 29.
a scriking, a wallowing, a foaming, Math. 17. 15.
and leaving for dead. Marc. 9. 26.



Pneumatomachus. These actual possessions, are fearful possessions.


Orthodoxus. They are so I confess. But what says Exorcistes to those things
that be spoken?


Exorcistes. Sir, the description which you have made of actual possession,
with those her several kinds: I approve in every point. But, tell me in good
earnest, do you absolutely deny every such actual possession?


Orthodoxus. I do freely acknowledge, that the same was undoubtedly in use in
the days of Christ: howbeit, I do flatly deny any further continuance thereof
now, in this time of the Gospel.


Exorcistes. Men may deny the sunshine at mid-daie: if they could bear us
in hand we were blind.


Orthodoxus. And, men may affirm the moon to be made of a green cheese: if
they could make us believe what they list. Howbeit, affirm what you will: Ioh.
5. 38.
we are commanded to search the scriptures, and to try out your spirit, ^.
Ioh. 4. 1.
before we believe you.


Licanthropus. Good master Orthodoxus, resolve us I pray you in this so
intricate and doubtful a matter: for all men do acknowledge, and my self has
hitherto ever held the actual possession of devils,


Orthodoxus. I do neither respect what the most men acknowledge, nor greatly
regard what your self do hold so long as I have truth on my side. We must not
run after a multitude in the doing of evil: Exodus 23. 2.
nor agree in a controversy to decline after many in overthrowing the truth.
You also held the real possession of devils not long since, which now you
disclaim: and so will you do this other I doubt not before it be long.


Lycanthropus. Very true as you say: and therefore I lay my hand on my mouth.


Exorcistes. Sir, notwithstanding these your cloked insinuations, I make no
question at all, concerning the actual possession of devils, even now in these
days of the Gospel.


Orthodoxus. Why man? The Lord God never purposed, much less has he openly
avouched the perpetuity thereof in any part of his word: therefore, the same
was only temporary, and no way perpetual.


Exorcistes. Yes sir? Math. 10. 7.
a perpetual commission for repelling the actual possession of devils, Marc.
6. 7.
was undoubtedly given by Christ and the same very formally executed also by his
own disciples: Luc. 9. 1. and 10. 9. 17.
as appears plainly in sundry scriptures. Marc. 16. 20. Act. 16. 18.



Orthodoxus. Frame your argument from those places of scripture.


Exorcistes. I frame it thus. The commission given by Christ, for repelling the
actual possession of devils remains perpetual: therefore, the actual
possession it self, remains also perpetual.


Orthodoxus. Prove in your antecedent, the perpetuity of that commission.


Exorcistes. Why sir? there is no one express inhibition thereof in all the
scriptures.


Orthodoxus. Since you so resolutely insist upon the perpetuity of that
commission: I entend to drive you away from that covert, by arguing (from the
tenor of that selfsame commission) against you thus. If that commission given
by Christ for repelling the actual possession of devils, be undoubtedly
perpetual in these days of the Gospel: then the drinking of deadly poison,
Marc. 16. 18.
with warranted safety from all bodily harm, is also perpetual. Good sir? let
us forthwith behold I beseech you in your own person, an experimental
demonstration of this one thing, first: and we will the rather believe you in
all the rest.


Philologus. Master Exorcistes, you were much better (in my simple conceit)
to give over this argument quite: then be forced, thus to demonstrate the truth
thereof to the world.


Exorcistes. Not so. For, the whole contents of that selfsame commission, save
only the expelling of devils: were altogether temporary, and no ways
perpetual.


Orthodoxus. Who dare avouch the perpetuity of that actual possession of
Devils: more then of any the rest? Nay, who would not much rather account both
it, and the rest of those the miraculous operations comprised jointly together
in one and the selfsame commission, to be every of them undoubtedly
determined: because, those temporary officers whereunto they properly
appertained (namely, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, and the seauentie
disciples) are long since determined. Who being every of them extraordinary
officers, Luc. 24. 46. Act. 1. 8.
received (together with the office it self) extraordinary grace and power
from above, to accomplish the same. Ephesians. 4. 13.
Whereas the ministerial functions of Pastor and Doctor (perpetually remaining
to the end of the world) are both of them ordinary functions: and therefore,
to be ordinarily directed, disposed and guided, according to the ordinary
Constitutions, and Cannons contained in the word.


Exorcistes. Notwithstanding the Pastor and Doctor be (in very deed) but
ordinary officers: yet I doubt not at all, but that some certain of them (as
seems good to the Lord) may also be endued with an extraordinary power and
grace for repelling the actual possession of devils.


Orthodoxus. Seeing you stand with such a settled pertinacie in your proper
conceit, I do argue against you a fresh on this sort:

The extraordinary power of casting out devils, was peculiarly appropriated to
Christ himself, and his own disciples: therefore, the said extraordinary
power does not ordinarily appertain to any ordinary ministry succeeding
that primitive age. And, if no extraordinary power for expelling the actual
possession of devils remains perpetual: then, neither the actual possession
it self remains perpetual.


Exorcistes. But, why should that extraordinary power be peculiarly
appropriated to Christ himself, and his own disciples?


Orthodoxus. Because the very maine ends of every such extraordinary and
miraculous work, D. Fulke to the Rhemish testament, in Math. cap. 17. verse.
19. sect. 5.
were to be accomplished especially, and only by them. For first, our savior
Christ being both God and man, but yet utterly unknown to the world: it was
therefore undoubtedly meet, that he especially, and only he himself (by some
such extraordinary and miraculous works as none other might possibl^e do)
Ioh. 15. 24. Math. 28. 19. Marc. 16. 15. Zanchius, in Ephesians. cap. 4. 11. page 178.
should apparently make known to the world, the admirable power of his
Deity. As also, his own disciples, they being extraordinarily and specially
appointed to preach and to plant the Gospel of Christ throughout the whole
world: it was likewise undoubtedly necessary, that, the infallible truth of
such heavenly doctrine so extraordinarily delivered from them, should (in an
especial regard of the strangenes thereof) even by those their extraordinary
actions also (as by the supernatural seals of the Almighty himself (be
perpetually established to the end of the world. In an only consideration
whereof, even, those their peculiar prerogatives (together with an
extraordinary ability in preaching the Gospel) were especially, and only
bestowed on every of them, as very plainly appears in the authentical
tenor of that selfsame commission, saying, Go preach to all people, Math.
10. 7. 8.
and tell them the kingdom of heaven is at hand: heal the sick, cleanse the
leapers, raise up the dead, and cast out devils. Now then, this the aforesaid
commission, with these peculiar graces and powers, being thus extraordinarily
appropriated to the disciples themselves: they proceeded accordingly in an
extraordinary execution thereof, Marc. 16. 20.
and preached the Gospel every where, the Lord working together in every of
them, and, confirming the word with miracles following.


Exorcistes. Sir? Justin. Martyr. contra Triphon. Tertul. de caena domini.
howsoever you seem to determine the extraordinary power for repelling the
actual possession of devils, together with the Disciples days: yet, this I am
certain, that Iustinu^ Martyr, Tertulian, Cyprian, Augustine also, Item in
Apolog. cap. 23.
and the Council concluded at Bracha, do all jointly affirm, that the working
of miracles was very ordinarily practiced in every of their times: yea,
Cyprian. lib. 4. epistola 7.
and it may plainly be gathered from the Ecclesiastical histories, Aug. de
ciuit. Dei, lib. 22. Item Psalm. 65. Council. Bracharense.
that the continuance thereof was found in the Church, for eight hundred years
after Christ at the least.


Orthodoxus. They all write as you say, and the Ecclesiastical histories also
avouch the same: but, Iosep. Antiq. lib. 8. cap. 2.
what infer you thereof?


Exorcistes. I infer from thence, Wilelmus Minatensis, ration. diuinor.
officior.
the actual possession of devils in these days of the Gospel.


Orthodoxus. I perceive no such inference thence: for this I suppose, is your
argument. Justinius Martyr, Cyprian, Tertullian, Augustine, the Council of
Bracha, and Ecclesiastical histories do all jointly avouch the continuance of
miracles for eight hundred years after Christ at the least: therefore the
actual possession also of devils, so long time continued in use. This, as it
follows fair and far of: so surely, it makes nothing at all for that
actual possession which you plead for your self, sixteen hundred years
since the coming of Christ. No surely, it does rather conclude a final
determination thereof, above eight hundred years past at the least. But be it,
that the continuance also of actual possession were jointly avouched by every
of them for eight hundred years after Christ: yet this, as it makes nothing (I
say) for the possession impleaded by you: so are we not necessarily bound to
believe whatsoever they write concerning such matters, we having both
scriptures and probable reasons impugning the same. Again, howsoever Justinius,
Tertulian, Cyprian, Augustine, the Council of Bracha, and Ecclesiastical
histories do all jointly avouch the continuance of actual possession in those
times and places wherein they conuersed: yet no one of them all (how holy or
gracious soever) do challenge such extraordinary power to themselves, or once
write that they dispossessed satan of any one person by him possessed. And
therefore they might be deceived by some false supposall of an actual
possession pretended by others: and so (by consequence) that which they write
concerning those matters, is of so much the less credit, by how much
especially, there have in every age of the Church, D. Fulke to the Rhemish
testament, in Marc. 13. 22. sect. 3.
some seducers sprung up, who (for gain or glory) pretending a special power
from above, for the dispossessing of devils, both might and did also therein
deceive the wisest of judgment. Briefly, we are therein to believe their
writings the less: because there be sundry sorts of diseases in men now
adays, so like to the actual possession of devils, as very few or none can
hardly discern the one from the other. Which falling forth likewise in those
former times, might easily draw those good Fathers into a strange imagination
of some actual possession: there being in truth no such thing at all.


Exorcistes. But tell me in good earnest I pray you, do you confidently deny
unto all men, an extraordinary power for driving forth devils in these days
of the Gospel?


Orthodoxus. Touching any thing hitherto heard I do I assure you. And, for a
further confirmation I argue it further thus. If an extraordinary power for
driving forth devils be now given to any in these days of the Gospel, the
parties then who challenge such power, they must as directly declare that their
special donation by some peculiar privilege from God, as did the disciples of
Jesus Christ: My meaning is, that whosoever will challenge to themselves any
extraordinary power for the working of miracles, they must first testify that
power by their extraordinary graces in preaching the gospel, they themselves
being before but unlettered men: and they must also be able, even as
authentically to avouch for infallible truth whatsoever they preach, as were
the disciples themselves, upon whom was bestowed especially that peculiar
commission, with extraordinary graces and powers to accomplish the same.
Otherwise we may shrewdly suspect some legerdemaine in pretending any
extraordinary seal: Psalm. 45. 1.
where the tongue is not extraordinarily appointed before, the extraordinary pen
of an extraordinary writer. For, seeing all extraordinary offices are fully and
finally determined long since: we make no question, but the extraordinary
graces and powers, attending especially those extraordinary offices, did cease
together with the office it self. And therefore, there remaining now in the
church, Romans 12. 1. etc.
but ordinary officers, 1. Cor. 12. etc.
they (at no hand) may challenge any those extraordinary graces and powers
beyond their reach; 1. Tim. 3. 1. etc.
but must ordinarily attend upon such ordinary canons and rules, Tit. 1. 5. etc.
as the holy spirit puts down for their ordination: Act. 20. 28.
and (in an orderly execution of every such office imposed upon them) they must
by earnest study, Colos. 4. 17.
meditation, 1. Tim. 4. 13. 16.
and prayer, 2. Tim. 4. 1. 2.
except from God an especial blessing upon those their ordinary labors and
travels bestowed. 1. Pet. 5. 1. 2.



Exorcistes. Howsoever the extraordinary offices, and officers are undoubtedly
determined long since, as you seem to avouch: I for my own part, do make no
question at all, but that the devils have now (in these days of the gospel) an
actual possession in some at the least: and that therefore, there is also an
extraordinary power in some, to expel them from that their possession.
Otherways, it were to to absurd, to grant the continuance of such a disease
in the church as the Lord has reserved no remedy for.


Orthodoxus. Thus then you reason. The disease it self is still continued:
therefore, the remedy also thereof is still continued. I answer, your
antecedent is but a pitiful begging of the cause in question. For, P^titlo
principij.
the continuance of actual possession is the very thing we dispute of. We
flatly deny it: and your self (not having hitherto proved the same) would now
by way of entreaty, obtain at our hands a grant thereof.


Exorcistes. I entreat no such favor at all; See Dorel his doctrine, page 31.
but do prove it thus. All other matters else whereupon the miraculous faith
of Christ his disciples did especially work, namely deafness, dumbness,
blindness and such like, have still their continuance in the church of God:
therefore, the actual possession of devils (comprehended in one and the
selfsame commission with them) it also is still continued in the church of God.


Orthodoxus. I answer your antecedent thus. Deafness, dumbness, blindness
and such like, they are not still continued in the church, as things actually
effected by any extraordinary power of the devil, but as matters naturally
arising in men, by reason of some defect or redundancy in nature, or
otherways, by means of some disordered humors, and such like unnatural
accidents. Howbeit, the actual possession we speak of, is no matter naturally
arising in men, but a malady rather, that is actually, and immediately wrought
by the power of the devil himself. And therefore, this (you see) is no sound
consequent vz. Infirmities naturally arising in men, are still of continuance
in the church: therefore, the actual possession of devils, is still of
continuance also. Here is no sequel at all. For, the one, I mean those
natural infirmities, they are but ordinary matters: the other, that is, the
actual possession of devils, was an extraordinary malady, and had an
extraordinary power to repel the same.


Exorcistes. Since you acknowledge the continuance of all save only that of
actual possession: See Paul his doctrine, page 31.
there can be no question of the continuance also thereof, and I prove it
thus. If deafenes, dumbenes, blindness, and such like (being every of them in
Christ's time, the principal matter whereupon the miraculous faith did work)
are yet ordinary diseases continued still in these days of the Gospel, and
are only now cured by Physic, as by an ordinary and natural means
appointed of God: then, the actual passession of devils (it being also in
Christ his time, one principal matter for the miraculous faith to work upon)
it also is now an ordinary infirmity continued still in these days of the
Gospel, and is only now to be cured by fasting and prayer, as by an only
ordinary and natural means appointed of God. But, the first is true in all
experience: and therefore also the latter.


Orthodoxus. Albeit I should grant you the truth of the first in all
experience: yet, your consequent concluded thence, has in it no appearance of
truth, but is undoubtedly an extrauagant and roauing conceit, nothing
concludent in reason, but beyond the bounds and limits thereof. For, howsoever
deafenes, dumbenes, blindenes, and such other occurrents in nature, be every
of them ordinary and natural diseases, and are commonly cured by ordinary
medicines and other Physical helps, as by the ordinary and natural remedies
appointed of God: the actual possession of devils never was, nor is now any
ordinary or natural infirmity, but an extraordinary torment, actually
inflicted upon some, by the extraordinary power of the devil, and therefore
never yet was nor is now any ways curable by ordinary or natural means,
but, by an extraordinary and supernatural work of God. So then, howsoever
your self would seem to make the actual possession of devils (in these days
of the Gospel) but an ordinary, or natural disease, and the supposed cure
thereof by fasting and prayer, to be now but an ordinary and natural remedy,
perpetually established by God in his Church: yet in very deed and in truth,
the disease it self, and the cure also thereof by such means effected, are
both of them extraordinary and supernatural matters, and so by consequence, a
miracle surmounting the compass of all ordinary and natural causes. Unless
happily you imagine that the fasting and prayers performed by Exorcistes, are
mere natural matters, and have in them naturally, some secret natural
vigor, naturally available for the timely expelling of actual possessions:
even as herbs, and physical confections have naturally in them such a
natural operation, as very fitly accords to the timely curing of natural
infirmites. Howbeit, pretermitting the further discourse of this point, till we
come to handle the power of dispossessing the devil: do now object what you
can for the matter in question, or, give me leave to proceed in the rest.


Exorcistes. Proceed I pray you, and spare not.


Orthodoxus. Well then, against the continuance of actual possession I argue
further thus. Whatsoever in it self is perpetually existing, that also in it
self is ordinary and continually working. But the actual possession of
devils (in these days of the Gospel) is in it self neither ordinary nor
continually working: therefore, the actual possession of devils (in these
days of the Gospel) is in it self not perpetually existing.


Exorcistes. I deny your proposition. Because something may be perpetually
existing: which yet is neither ordinary nor continually working: even as we
see by experience, that the brightness and heat of the Sun (though the Sun
it self be perpetually existing) yet, neither is the heat thereof ordinary,
nor the brightness continually working. Not at such times especially as there
is an interposition of clouds between the said Sun and the earth: or when
he which withdraws his force from this our Horizon, and makes his progress
among the Antipodes.


Orthodoxus. How certainly, or vncerteinly soever the Sun may be said to
continue his appointed progress, very certain I am, that the man who
endeavors to follow your footings at every turn, shall be sure to finish his
own progress in an endless laborinth. For, how should the actual possession
of devils by possibly perpetual, and not be ordinary in it self, nor
continually working? Since that which is perpetually existing, must needs in it
self, be ordinary, and continually effecting some manner of work. Besides
that, you your own self (even in your last answer but one) did confidently
conclude the actual possession of devils, to be none other thing now, but an
ordinary infirmity, very ordinarily inflicted upon the church: and the cure
also thereof, is to be ordinarily effected by fasting and prayer, as by the
ordinary means appointed of God. Upon which your assertion, I framed this my
last argument against the perpetuity of actual possession: whereunto you do
now very impudently opposse your self, by denying the very point you
propounded before. Giving us thereby to understand by the way, that (howsoever
you want a liers memory) your tongue would be lavish enough: if your teeth
would but give it the scope, to be ranging abroad.


Exorcistes. I only opposed my self to your mayor proposition, and (besides
our present question, concerning the perpetuity of actual possession) I did
further demonstrate the matter, by giving a fit instance, borrowed from the
brightness and heat of the sun.


Orthodoxus. A very fit instance in deed. For, even by that selfsame
instance wherewith your self would demonstrate your matter: I my self do
also entend to remonstrate the truth of my argument. Whereas therefore you do
freely acknowledge, that the actual possession of devils may (in deed) be
perpetually existing, but yet, neither ordinary, nor continually working:
giving us also an experimental demonstration thereof (as you imagine) from the
material sun, which, howsoever the same in it self be perpetually existing,
yet, neither is the heat thereof ordinary, nor the brightness continually
shining. Mine answer is, that, even as by taking brightness and heat from the
sun, you do (in effect) deny the sun it self to be perpetually existing,
because, heat and brightness are essential qualities inseparably inherent, and
perpetually knit with the sun: so surely, by denying the ordinary and
continual working of actual possession, you do consequently conclude, that
even the actual possession it self is not perpetually existing. Because the
actual possession of devils, all the while it is an actual possession in any
existence: so long (at the least) the same must needs (in it self) be
ordinary, and will effectually perform some actual experiment. Otherways,
how may that be truly termed an actual possession, which does not agere
aliquid: not accomplish (I mean) some one act or other. Notwithstanding all
this, you labor to uphold the likelihood of this your imagined instance, by
two special cautions: the one taken from an interposition of clouds, the
other from the sun his conuersing among the antipodes. To what purpose these
cautions should serve, I perceive not as yet, unless (as it seems by the
purporte of your speech) you would give us a watchword, and thereby illustrate
unto us: that howsoever the actual possession of devils be in it own self
perpetually existing, yet, the same is ( in effect) neither ordinary, nor
continually working. And why so I beseech you? Because the devil (forsooth) at
some one time or other, may happily be playing bo-peepe with the party behind
a couerled: or may bid us here in England farewell for a season, while he go
and converse among the Cannibals. Howbeit, unless you be able directly to
demonstrate unto us, that there may be some odd time or other wherein the
sun it self, neither in this our horizon, nor among the antipodes has his
ordinary course, or is continually shining: do pardon us (I pray you) though
we (in the mean while) begin to imagine, that your wits (by roauing at random
among the antipodes) be turned topsie-turuie, and permit us withal to conclude
as before, that, because the actual possession of devils is in it self,
neither ordinary, nor continually working, therefore the same in it self is
not perpetually existing.


Lycanthropus. Express more plainly unto us, what you mean by the terms of
ordinary: and continually working.


Orthodoxus. My meaning is, that, if actual possession (as the Exorcist
affirms) be now in these days of the Gospel, an infirmity inflicted
perpetually upon the Church, as are also those other diseases contained jointly
with it in one and the same commission: the same undoubtedly (as are all the
rest) would be much more ordinary with us then now it is. I mean, it would
bemuch more frequent and often, at many more times, in many more places, and
among many more persons then we see it to be. Yea, and it would undoubtedly, be
so much more ordinary then any of the rest: Ioh. 1. 7. and 2. 2. 1. Pet. 5. 8.
by how much more maliciously the devil compasses the earth, and goes
continually about, seeking whom to devour. Whereas the actual possession which
Exorcistes pretends, is a thing (now a days) so unwonted, and so rare in
experience, as, very hardly it is heard of in twenty years space. Yea,
Katherine wright says, she never did think she was possessed: but that M.
Dorel would needs persuade her she was so.
and when the same is generally supposed, to be presently apparent in some:
yet, the same even then, is so vncerteinlie known unto men, as, the very
parties themselves, (of their own knowledge) are unable to say they be
possessed of devils, neither (if they were not earnestly persuaded unto it, by
some of the Exorcistes trade) would they ever imagine, any possession at all.
And therefore (howsoever you dream of the perpetuity of actual possession)
the same (you see) cannot truly be said to be ordinary: but rather, an
extraordinary, and supernatural matter, surmounting the order and course of
nature.


Philologus. Surely sir, I am just of your mind, that, if actual possession
were now, as ordinary with devils, as are diseases with men: such and so great
is their malice, we should forthwith have the whole world actually possessed
at least.


Exorcistes. That follows not. For, howsoever the actual possession of devils
be perpetually ordinary in these days of the Gospel: yet is the same no
further effectual then God has appointed.


Orthodoxus. Perceive you not the absurdity of your speech, in auouching a
perpetual action, without an effect? Howbeit because you rely so much upon
the perpetuity of actual possession. I do argue further against you thus.
Whatsoever power our savior Christ has undoubtedly determined long since; no
man may now hold the same in opinion, nor conscionablie avouch the perpetuity
thereof. But that extraordinary power which concerns the actual possession
of devils, Christ has determined long since: therefore that extraordinary
power of actual possession, no man may now hold in opinion, nor con^cionablie
avouch the perpetuity thereof.


Exorcistes. Prove your assumption.


Orthodoxus. I prove it directly, from a proportionable respect of the two
maine ends of such a possession, namely, the declaration of Christ's Deity,
and the confirmation of his glorious Gospel: both which two ends are
determined long since, and therefore, the extraordinary possession of devils
which were especially for those two ends, it also is undoubtedly ceased. The
determination of the latter, (I mean the confirmation of the glorious Gospel)
shall hereafter be handled at large, when we come to entreat of the ceasing of
miracles: in the mean time, this I do boldly avouch, namely, that the
extraordinary possession for the other maine and (namely the declaration of
the glorious deity) is long since by Christ determined.


Exorcistes. When, and where has Christ determined the extraordinary
possession of devils, concerning that special end?


Orthodoxus. Even then, and there, where he tells us plainly, that, now is
the judgment of this world: Ioh. 12. 31.
now shall the prince of this world be cast out. Foretelling directly unto us,
that (immediately after his death and resurrection) the extraordinary, and
actual power of satan's possession, should receive a full, and final
subversion, as a thing now merely superfluous to work upon, for any further
declaration of his glorious Deity.


Exorcistes. Good sir, by your leave, you do greatly mistake the meaning of
that Scripture. For Christ (by the aduerbe of time, or particle (now) does not
precisely, and purposely restrain the final determination of actual
possession, unto any predeterminate or special time: but, thereby does rather
insinuate the perpetual efficacy of that his own effectual working power,
which (by the powerful preaching of his glorious Gospel) should after his
death successively show it self upon Satan, to the very end of the world.


Orthodoxus. I perceive you need no Gentleman usher: for, you can take leave
(without leave) to censure the exposition I give of that Scripture, by
quallifying the literal sense of the particle (now.) Which in that place (you
say) imports no predeterminate or special time: but only has reference
unto the successiue working power of Christ (executed by the powerful preaching
of the gospel) to the end of the world. In deed, I do willingly grant that the
effectual working power of Christ, neither does, nor may possibly determine to
the end of the world: for, he must effectually reign, 1. Cor. 15. 25.
till he has (actually) subjected all his enemies under his feet. But
withal, I do flatly deny the continuance of satan his power of actual
possession to the end of the world: neither may such manner of inference be
possibly enforced from thence. For, what a dalliance is this? Christ his
effectual working power, must successively show forth it self upon satan to
the end of the world: therefore the actual possession of satan, must not, nor
may not determine to the end of the world. As though, if the actual possession
of devils should now finalli^ cease, and determine: the effectual power of
Christ could find nothing at all in satan to work upon. But tell me (I pray
you) had not the devil at the first of all, a power of possession: and a power
of obsession permitted unto him? And was, and is he not industrious enough in
the execution of both from time to time? Let continual experience speak in
this point. Now then, if the effectual working power of Christ has actually,
and fully subdued the first: may therefore the efficacy of that his said power
remain now utterly idle from time to time, notwithstanding any the fiery
assaults or harms which might grow from the latter? I suppose, nothing less.
For, remember you not that old saying? It is as much to keep an hold: Non
minor est. virtus, quam, quaerere, parta tueri.
as was before to win the hold. Hence therefore, it is very apparent, that, as
the effectual working power of Christ, has extraordinarily and actually
showed forth it self upon satan, by suppressing for ever his power of actual
possession: so surely, the efficacy of that his said power, must now
successively show forth it sefe upon satan to the end of the world, by
repelling his power of obsession, I mean by withstanding his outrageous
assaults, his cunning circumuentions, his subtle tentations, and by quenching
the force of his fiery darts for ever, through the powerful preaching of his
glorious gospel. So then, howsoever the continuance of Christ's power be granted
unto you: yet, unless you be able withal, very substantially to prove the
perpetuity of satan his actual possession, you speak nothing at all to the
purpose.


Exorcistes. Sir? howsoever I may seem unable to manage the common sense
which men give of that place: I perceive no reason as yet, of your own
exposition.


Orthodoxus. Let us therefore labor the clearing thereof, by this following
order. First, let us carefully examine those places of scripture: which (both
before, and after the manifestation of Christ in the flesh) do purposely
entreat of his effectual working power upon satan. The next, let us more
exactly analyze that portion of scripture which we propounded even now: to
prove the final determination of satan his power of actual possession. And
then lastly, let us endeavor to confirm our said exposition, by the testimony
of writers, both old, and new. All this being fully effected: the truth of the
matter will break forth (I doubt not) like the Sun in his strength.


Lycanthropus. A very excellent order: I pray you proceed in the same.


Orthodoxus. With very good will. First therefore, concerning those several
scriptures which purposely handle the effectual working power of Christ,
before his manifestation in the flesh: we have to consider, that the Lord God
immediately after the fall of man, did (for the comfort of the godly, and
terror of satan) foretell to them both, Genesis 3. 15.
that, the seed of the woman should bruise the serpents head. In which place, he
precisely puts down one special act, to be actually effected by Christ upon
satan, namely the actual subduing of his actual dominion, understood (in that
place) by the serpents head: and, purposely refers the actual accomplishment
thereof to the future time, saying thus. The seed of the woman ( not does, or
has) but rather ( shall) bruise the serpents head. That is, in process of
time, shall even actually overcome the said power of the devil: having also
therein, a more special relation to the very death of our savior Christ,
understood (in that place) by the brusing of his heel. Now then, from the due
consideration hereof, I do argue thus, namely, that even as, howsoever the
devil may be said to wage war with Christ and his members from time to time,
yet, there was one special time predetermined of God, wherein the said devil
was actually to bruise the heel of our savior, and that undoubtedly was the
very ti^e of Christ his suffering upon the cross, whereupon, the devil
accordingly did put into Judas his heart to betray his master: so surely, Ioh.
13. 2.
howsoever Christ and his members may be said to infringe effectually, the
devil his tyrannical power from time to time to the end of the world, yet was
there one special time foreappointed of God, wherein Christ alone was actually
to break the serpents head, and that undoubtedly, was the very selfsame time
wherein Satan bruised his heel, I mean the very time of Christ's sufferings,
when he said, it is finished.


Exorcistes. Why do you so exactly restrain, the conquest of Christ over
Satan, Apoc. 13. 8.
unto the only time of his sufferings: since he was, the lamb slain from the
beginning of the world?


Orthodoxus. I restrain not the efficacy, but the very act of Christ's
conquest, to the only time of his sufferings. Moreover, although it be truly
said that Christ was the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world; yet,
Ioh. Calvin. in Heb. cap. 9. 26.
that must not be understood of any actual, but of an effectual sacrificing
of Christ, to so many as in all ages and times do apprehend the efficacy of
his said sacrifice by a lively faith, 1. Ioh. 5. 4.
which is the victory whereby they overcome the world. If therefore, you
understand the aforesaid place of an actual sacrificing of Christ, from the
beginning to the end of the world: then surely, your speech is not only, to to
absurd, but withal, it crosses directly the holy Ghost elsewhere: who tells
us plainly, Heb. 9. 26.
that (if an actual sacrificing of Christ be there understood) then Christ
must often have suffered from the worlds foundation. Besides that, it does quite
overthrow the dignity of Christ his priesthood, above the Leuitical
priesthood: which is there set forth by many comparisons thus. The Leuiticall
high priest, Heb. 9. 11. 12. 24. 25.
he sacrificed in a corruptible tabernacle: but Christ in the tabernacle of his
own body. He sacrificed with strange blood: Bulling. in Heb. cap. 9. 26.
but Christ with his own blood. He entered into the sanctuary made with hands:
but Christ into heaven it self. He appeared before the material Arc:
Pelican. in Heb. 9. 25.
but Christ before God his father. He every year once, iterated his
sacrifice: whereas Christ (offering himself but once for all) abolished sin
altogether, as well of the former, Heb. 9. 26.
as of the ages to come. Then (after all this) he renders a reason why Christ
could actually but once be sacrificed; namely, because he could actually but
once be crucified. And in the end he co^fidently concludes, Heb. 9. 27. 28.
that, howsoever Christ was but once actually sacrificed, yet, the virtue and
efficacy of his said sacrifice, did, and does effectually extend it self to
the sins which were before, and to the sins which succeeded his sufferings.
So then (notwithstanding whatsoever you object) you may plainly perceive,
that, even as albeit Christ his said sacrifice has ever been, and ever shall
be effectual from time to time, yet, there was one special time foreappointed
of God, wherein his said sacrifice was actually effected: so surely, that
although the effectual working power of Christ, has been, and is ever
effectual from time to time against the power of actual possession, Pet.
Martyr. in Genesis 3. 15.
yet there was undoubtedly one special time wherein the said power of actual
possession was by Christ actually annihilated, Ioh. Calvin. in Genesis 3. 15.
and that was the very time of Christ his manifestation in the flesh, when as
(by the very force of his sufferings) he brake the serpents head. Hereunto also
the Evangelist Luke very aptly accords saying. Luc. 11. 20. 21.
When a strong armed man keeps his house, the things that he possesses are
in peace: but, when a stronger then he comes upon him, and overcomes him,
he takes from him all his armor wherein he trusted, and deuideth the spoils.
The Evangelist there, Gualt. in Luc. 11. homil. 115.
does allegorically depaint unto us the condition, dominion, and practice of
satan. Mosculus, in Math. 12. 29.
For by the strong armed man, he means the devil. By his house, he
understands generally the world, and more particularly, the parties actually
possessed. D. Hill. in his treatise of Christ his descension, sol. 63.
By peaceable possession, the power and swaie of his tyrannical dominion. By
the stronger, he understands Christ that victorious lion of the tribe of
Judah. H. Iaacob in his treatise of Christ's his sufferings, page 161.
By the binding of him, the irrecouerable weakening of his power of obsession.
By the taking away of the armor wherein he trusted, the utter annihilating of
his power of possession. Lastly, by dividing the spoils, he means the timely
restoration of all poor possessed souls, to the kingdom and service of
Christ, according to that which Christ says, now is the judgment of this
world. Understanding thereby, the judgment of discretion: not the judgment of
damnation, as if Christ should say thus. Now is that selfsame time of the
worlds reformation at hand: Aug. in Ioh. cap. 12. 31. tract. 52.
wherein shall be plainly discerned the chosen servants of God, from the
confounded slaves of Satan. Because, now shall the prince of this world be
actually cast out: Ioh. Calvin. ibid Item, Ioh. 16. 11 Muscul. in Ioh. 16. 11.
by the effectual power of my death and resurrection. Thus then, we have
briefly heard those special scriptures: which do purposely point at the
effectual working power of Christ before his death.


Lycanthropus. Let us hear in like sort, those other scriptures, which do
purposely handle the said effectual power of Christ; now since his death.


Orthodoxus. Content. First therefore, the holy Ghost says thus to the
Hebrews. Heb. 2. 14.
For as much as the children are pertakers of flesh and blood, Christ also
himself took part with them: that he might destroy through death, him that
had power over death, that is, the devil. Wherein, first (you see) he puts
down the incarnation of Christ: Henr. Bulling. in Heb. 2. 14.
and then next, he shows the maine cause of his said incarnation, namely,
that he might destroy the devil. Now then, this same destruction of the
devil, it must in no wise be understood of the essence: but of the actions of
Satan. For, the devil (as touching his essence or* being) still lives, and
live must for ever. Howbeit concerning his actions, I mean his tyrannical
dominion, Aug. in Ioh. cap. 14. 30. tract. 95.
and actual power: he may very fitly be said to be now destroyed. Because,
howsoever satan be accounted a prince of this world, and therefore endeavors
very proudly to dominire over all: Ioh. 12. 31. and 16. 11.
yet, when he came unto Christ, he found nothing at all in him, Ioh. 14. 30. M.
Bucer. in Ioh. 14. 30. Muscul. in Ioh. 14. 30.
that is no such matter of subjection as he happily imagined. Neither could he
possibly have any power over him at all, or, no further power at the most, then
the brusing of Christ his heel, I mean, the crucifying of his flesh. And,
this one work of satan, Aug. in Ioh. 14, 30. tract. 79.
was that which accidentally procured his proper destruction. For, therefore
did Christ take flesh upon him, that, even in the flesh, Item ibid. tract. 95.
he might conquer him who had conquered flesh: Beza annotat. in Hebr. cap. 2.
14.
and through death might destroy him that had power over death, namely, the
devil, as was showed before. And this, as it has reference to the actions,
and not the essence of satan: so shall it give much light to the matter in
hand, Theophil. in Ioh. 12. 31.
if we precisely examine the very word it self which the holy Ghost here
observes. For, he says not, that Christ has abated, infringed, or weakened,
but that he has destroyed the devil: that is, that he has utterly cut off,
exiled, and banished his tyrannical dominion. For, (...), id est,
constringere, exterminare, disperdere.
so much the word tsamath imports, which signifies to chain up, to
exterminate, to drive out, and in such sort to consume a thing, as there
remains no hope at all of any possible recovery. Yea, (...), id est
euacuare, dissoluere, irritum facere,
and the Greek word catargeo, portendeth fully as much. Now then, howsoever
Christ may truly be said to have destroyed the devil: yet, this word (
destruction) has not properly any reference to the essence of satan, for,
therein he lives, and live must for ever, as has been declared. Neither may
it be fitly applied to Satan his power of obssession, which is not yet utterly
destroyed: for thereby, he assaulteth, circumuenteth, and tempts men still to
the end of the world. And therefore, it must necessarily, and more especially
be appropriated to his power of possession, which was not only much maimed,
but utterly destroyed by the death of our Savior: although yet we deny not,
but that this utter destruction, both may be, and is also (in some sort)
understood of the whole dominion and power of the devil whatsoever. All which
his said powers, were so mightily weakened by the sufferings and resurrection
of Christ: as, thereby he shall never be able any more now to hurt the elect.
Because Christ (taking part with them in the flesh) has destroyed through
death, Heb. 2. 14.
him that had power over death, namely the devil. And, hereunto accords that
which the holy Ghost elsewhere avouches, saying, that Christ has appeared, 1.
Ioh. 3. 8.
to loosen, dissolve, or destroy the works of the devil.


Exorcistes. That ( destruction) is to be understood of annihilating the venim
and sting of sin and death: and not of a final determining of satan his
power of actual possession.


Orthodoxus. Herein your speech is derogatorious to the efficacy and dignity
of Christ's death, in that (by restrayning the same as you do, to the only
annihilating of the venomous sting of sin and of death) you utterly exclude
the effectual working power thereof, from the actual determination of satan
his actual possession. For, consider you not what peculiar action therein, the
Scriptures impose upon Christ? First, he has been from the worlds foundation,
peculiarly appointed of God, to be that promised seed which should bruise the
serpents head. Genesis 3. 15.
Then next, he is undoubtedly that stronger man, Luc. 11. 20.
who was to bind the strong armed man: and to divide his spoils. Both which
places, as they plainly import some peculiar action to be performed by Christ:
so do they undoubtedly, bind the actual accomplishment thereof upon his own
person alone, and that also even in the future time. Gal. 4. 4.
Then ( after the fulness of time, our Savior Christ being come in the flesh)
he flatly affirms, Ioh. 12. 31.
that even now shall the prince of this world be cast out. Limitting (you see)
the actual effecting of that selfsame peculiar action (so foretold as before)
unto the present time of his sufferings. Moreover, after the actual
accomplishment thereof by his death, Heb. 2. 14.
the holy Ghost else where affirms accordingly, that he has by death,
destroyed him who had power over death: and again, that Christ has appeared
to destroy the works of the devil. 1. Ioh. 3. 8.
Both which last places of scripture, as they plainly import some special
action effected by Christ in the preter time, as did those other before in the
future time: so surely Christ (after he was come in the flesh) did likewise
alotte the actual performance thereof unto that present time of his death,
wherein he was actually to finish his predetermined conquest over satan
himself. Now then, this said actual accomplishment of some special action
thus actually effected by Christ: must necessarily have a special reference to
the final determination either of Satan his power of possession, or of his
power of obsession. But, not of his power of obsession, for therein he still
assaulteth and tempts men's minds: and therefore, of his power of possession,
as was showed before.


Lycanthropus. Let this suffice for the sense of those several scriptures,
which (both before, and since the coming of Christ) do point forth unto us
his effectual working power upon satan: and now, I pray you analyze that
selfsame scripture you propounded of late, to prove the final determination
of satan his actual possession.


Orthodoxus. Content. Wherein you have to consider first, that, our savior
Christ, in saying, Now is the judgment of this world, Ioh. 12. 31.
now shall the prince of this world be cast out: had an especial regard to
that earnest petition which certain greeks a little before, did personally
put up unto Andrew, Ioh. 12. 20.
saying. Good sir? we also our selves, would gladly see that same Jesus, whom
the world so egerly affects and follows. Ioh. 12. 21.
Andrew no sooner perceived their suit, but he acquainted Phillip therewith:
and, they both together propounded the whole matter to Jesus. Ioh. 12. 22.
Now then Jesus, considering (in the zeal of those greeks) how all nations
affected his preaching and miracles, and came flocking unto him: Ioh. 12. 23.
he answered Andrew and Philip thus. I perceive by all signs, that the very
hour it self is now come, wherein the son of man must be glorified in the
actual manifestation of his effectual power upon satan by his sufferings and
death. Which his said death (I assure you) must now necessarily succeed, to the
actual accomplishment of that actual conquest: a very lively resemblance
whereof you may plainly behold in the wheat corn. Ioh. 12. 24.
Which, unless it does fall into the ground and die, abides alone: but, if it
do die, it brings forth abundance of fruit. And even so, if this body of
mine were once wrapped within the bowels of the earth by the dart of death,
there would undoubtedly spring many more branches from thence: as from that
living root which quickneth many to eternal life. Neither let any be so
dismayed with the sight of my death: as that therefore, they themselves would
not gladly vnde^goe the like shame of the cross. For, whosoever is so taken up
with the love of this life, Ioh. 12. 25.
as he would not (for my sake) be thoroughly willing to put over the same to the
extremest adventures of all: that man (without question) shall loose his life.
Whereas they that (for my sake) do make themselves ready to forgo (if need
so require) their very life in this world: Ioh. 12. 26.
they shall be sure to preserve the same to eternal life. Yea, and even you also
your selves, whom I have especially chosen my ministers, to declare my said
death to the world: if in your said ministry you desire to serve me aright,
you likewise must willingly follow me your Lord and Master, now leading this
dance unto death. For, wheresoever I am; there must my ministers willingly be.
Neither have I any other purpose in suffering death for you: 1. Pet. 2. 21.
but, to give you an example to follow my steps. Wherein if you readily serve
me, assure your selves that, then, my father in heaven will honor you highly.
In deed, this corporal death (I confess) is extremely fearful to flesh and
blood. For, even my very soul (I assure you) is so intollerably tormented with
the terrors thereof, as I would earnestly entreat my father, that the
approaching hour of this my death, might presently pass away: Ioh. 12. 27.
were it not that even therefore I came unto this hour. In consideration of
which my determined death, I will the more earnestly endeavor my self, to
undergo with patience, the whole bickering whatsoever, by crying incessantly
unto my father, Ioh. 12. 28.
and saying: Oh father, glorify thy own name in these my appointed
sufferings. Moreover, to the end you may plainly perceive the fruits of my
prayer: you your selves shall be ear witnesses of my father his answer from
heaven, saying. My son, I have both glorified it before in thy conception, Ioh.
12. 28.
thy birth, thy baptism, thy fasting, thy preaching, and miracles: and I will
now glorify it again, in thy death, and resurrection: because therein shall be
actually effected the final overthrow of satan his kingdom. And, Ioh. 12. 29.
howsoever the people here present may happily imagine this sound from heaven
to be but a thunder, or some voice of an Angel at the most: yet I assure you,
it is the very thundering speech of my father himself. Ioh. 12. 30.
Neither came this voice only because of my self: but for your sakes
especially. To teach you assuredly, that, even now is the judgment, and
reformation of this world: Ioh. 12. 31.
because, even now must the prince of this world be actually cast forth from
thence, as touching his actual possession. Yea, and this so glorious a
conquest over satan: Ioh. 12. 32.
must even now be actually effected by the power of my death wherein, if I were
once lift up from the earth and fastened withal upon the cross: I would then
actually determine the actual dominion of the devil, yea, and would
effectually draw his captiuated prisoners under my princely regiment. Ioh. 12.
33.
Now, all this have I purposely spoken unto you, to show you before hand, what
death I must die: that, so soon as you perceive me to give up the ghost, you
may then certeinely assure your selves, that the whole work of your redemption
from satan, Ioh. 19. 30.
from death* and from hell is actually effected and finished. Thus much for
analyzing the text it self. Wherein you have heard the occasion, coherence,
proceeding, and the orderly conclusion of all the premises.


Lycanthropus. The exposition is plain, in my simple conceit: let us
therefore now hear the testimony of writers for further confirmation thereof.


Orthodoxus. You shall. And first, August. in Euang. Ioh. cap. 12. tract. 52.
to begin with Augustine, he says, that (by the judgment of the world) we
must there understand, not the judgment of damnation, which is reserved to the
last day: but, the judgment of discretion, which consists wholly in
reforming the world by the expelling of Satan. For, the devil (says he)
possessed mankind, and held them guilty of punishment: through the
handwriting of sin. He did dominier in the hearts of Infidels, and drew them
(being deceived and captiuated) to worship the creature: Romans 1. 25.
by forsaking the Creator. Howbeit, through that selfsame faith of Christ
which (by his death and resurrection) was ( actually) established, and through
his precious blood which was shed for remission of sins: a thousand
believers being then ( actually) freed from the power of the devil, were (
effectually) coupled to the body of Christ, and by the operation of his
spirit, became lively members of his mystical body. For, so Christ expounds
himself in the very next words saying, Now is the prince of this world cast
forth. Understanding by the particle (now) that which was then to be done at
his death: not that which he was finally to accomplish at the general
judgment. The Lord therefore foresawe that work, which he knew should be
effected after his death and glorification: namely, that many thousands
throughout the world, should faithfully believe in his death. From whose hearts,
the devil who works effectually in the^ before: should ( actually) be driven
out by Christ's death, Act. 3. 16.
and finally be subdued through faith in his name.


Exorcistes. The devil then (it should seem by your speech) was never driven
forth from the patriarchs, before the passion of Christ.


Orthodoxus. Not so: Apoc. 13. 8.
For Christ was the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world. Neither
speak we in this place of the effectual: but, of the actual conquest which he
made over Satan. August. in Ioh. cap. 12. 31. tract. 52.
Yea, and this I further avouch, that even as the particle (now) in an
especial regard of Christ's actual conquest, respects especially the very
hour of his death: so surely (in some consideration also of Christ's effectual
eonquest) the said particle (now) may likewise have a more speeiall reference
to the very hour it self of that his said death. Because howsoever the
efficacy of that his effectual conquest, has (from the beginning of the
world been always effectual: yet the virtue and power thereof did more
effectually show forth it self at the death and resurrection of Christ, then
ever before. And even thus is that place to be understood which Christ
elsewhere propounds, saying, Ioh. 7. 39.
that the holy Ghost was not yet given: because Christ was not yet glorified.
Not, that the holy Ghost was never given to the fathers before, 2. Pet. 1. 21.
for holy men of God, spoke ever as they were moved by the holy Ghost: but
that he was never so universally, nor so effectually given as after, when he
was in all abundance powered forth upon the Apostles, upon old men and children.
Act. 2. 4. and 2. 17. 18.
Even so, the devil in like manner he was undoubtedly cast forth of the
fathers from time to time by the effectual conquest of Christ: but yet, never
so universally nor so effectually driven forth, as after that actual conquest
of Christ on the cross.


Exorcistes. If the devil be now so universally, and so effectually cast
forth from the faithful as your self do avouch: then the faithful (it
seems) are now free from temptations.


Orthodoxus. That follows not. For, August. ibid. Ioh. 12. 31.
howsoever the devil his actual possession be actually expelled: yet cease
he not still to assault and to tempt the children of God. Aliud est intrinsecus
regnare: aliud forinsecus pugnare.
Howbeit, it is one thing to reign inwardly, and another to assault outwardly.
For the best defenced cities of all, are eftsoons of the enemy besieged: yea
and sometimes very hotly assaulted. Notwithstanding, though the devil does
daily cast forth his fiery darts: Ephesians. 6. 13. etc.
we are spiritually armed with the complete armor of God. 1. Ioh. 2. 1. 2.
Yea, and if at any time we hap to be wounded: the Physicion he is ever at
hand to cure our souls. For, Math. 6. 12.
what pray we for else, when we say, Forgive us our trespasses: Luc. 11. 4.
but only that our wounds may be healed? And what other thing else do we
ask, Math. 6. 13.
when we say, Lead us not into temptation: Luc. 11. 4.
but, that he which besieges, and assaulteth us outwardly, may never break in
upon us on any side, neither yet, by any fraud or force may be able to conquer
a fresh? So then, albeit the devil does practice his policies daily against
us: yet, for so much as he has now no abiding place in that heart where faith is
resiant: he may fitly be said to be both actually, and effectually now cast
forth. Hitherto Augustine.


Exorcistes. Proceed in propounding the rest of your writers.


Orthodoxus. I will. Next therefore for Chrysostom, he says, Now shall the
prince of this world be cast forth: Chrysostom. ibid. Mittetur deorsum.
that is (says he) be tumbled down headlong. For the devil, who (before that
time) did domineir, and bear the whole swaie in the world: shall now be
overthrown, and violently cast forth as it were with a sling, at the passion
of Christ.

Again, Theophilac. in Ioh. cap. 12. 3*.
Theophilact, upon these words ( Now is the judgment of this world) writes
thus. This (says he) does fitly accord with the premises. For, the father
protesting before from heaven, that he would glorify his name again: Christ
shows here, the manner how his said name should be glorified. Namely, when
as (by casting forth the prince of this world) the world should be judged,
that is, revenged of satan. For, this casting forth, is a metaphor, taken from
such as (being justly condemned in judgments) are actually cast forth from
the tribunal seat. Or, by this casting forth may be understood the exiling
of satan into the external darkenesses: because now he has lost his dominion
over the faithful. Neither shall he ever be permitted to reign (as before)
within men, I mean, either in their minds, or their mortal bodies: for I
will (says Christ) now draw all men unto my self. Howbeit, because men cannot
pos^iblie be brought unto me, all the while they are captiuated, and fast bound
by that tyrant: Having therefore thus ( actually) conquered satan, cast him
forth, and broken a sunder the iron bars of his power by my death: I will
now ( effectually) draw all men unto me, in despite of his teeth.

Again, Nich. Lyra in Ioh. 12. 31.
Lyra says thus. Now is the judgment of this world: that is, the judgment
for this world. Because (says he) the world now, by the definitive sentence
of God, and through the power of Christ's death, is ( actually) delivered from
the power of the devil. And therefore it follows, that, now the prince of
this world shall be cast forth by the passion of Christ. By the power of
which passion is set open unto us the gate unto glory, so that the devil can
now no more hinder the saints from the consequution of glory, as he did in
times past: although it be permitted him still to tempte, for the trial and
exercise of all the elect.

Again, Hugo Cardin. in Ioh. cap. 12. 31.
Hugo says thus. Now is the judgment of this world: because (says Christ)
the devil (by my death and passion) being now ( actually) destroyed, many
poor souls shall be delivered from him. And a little after he says. Now
shall the prince of this world be cast forth: that is, be ( actually) driven
out of the hearts of men, by the death and passion of Christ. Again, the master
of the sentences, Petr. Lambert. lib. 2. did. 6.
does plainly avouch, that, the devils, they have not now, the selfsame power
over men: which they enjoyed before the coming of Christ.

Again, Ludulph. de vita Christi. Ioh. 12. 31.
Ludulph says thus. Now is the judgment of this world, (now) that is, even
in this very time of my passion (is the judgment) not of condemnation, but of
discretion. (Of this world) that is, for this world against satan: because, now
shall this world be judged, separated, and delivered from the power of darkness,
that is, from the dominion of the devil. And, this is that judgment of
discretion: whereby very many are plainly discerned, and separated now, from
the power of the enemy. For since the very time of Christ's death: the
faithful believers, are apparently espied from the obstinate infidels. And
then after, he shows the effect of that selfsame judgment which concerns
the world, saying thus. Now, the prince of this world (the devil I mean) who
from Adam, hitherto, has borne the whole swaie in this world: shall be cast
forth, that is, from the elect, and shall loose his power of drawing men after
him any more. After all this, our Savior (says Ludulph) declares the manner
of his death and resurrection, in this sort. And I, if I were once lift up,
would draw all men unto me. As, if he should say thus; That selfsame love
which I show forth by my death: it has in it, a certain attractiue virtue, or
power of drawing men's minds unto me: even as the Adamant stone has in it
self, an hidden force, to draw iron unto it.

Again Bucer says thus. Martin. Bucer. in Ioh. 12. 31.
Things amiss, in judgments, are usually corrected and changed. Now then,
the devil that strong armed man (carefully keeping his palace:) before time
did quietly exercise his tyranny over the world. But being now, to be (
actually) cast forth from the hearts of so many as dedicate their names unto
Christ: this Christ by the very power of his death has ( actually) conquered
his tyranny. And, therefore the holy Ghost says truly, that, now is the
judgment of this world: that is, even now, and forthwith, shall the
reformation thereof, be effected.

Again, Muscul. in Ioh. 12. 31.
Musculus (upon these words, Now is the judgment of this world) says thus.
The Lord (in these words) does seem to unfold the meaning of that heavenly
voice, which spoke thus, a little before. I have glorified my name already:
and, will glorify it again. For, what is it else to illustrate the name of
God, in this world: but, to beat down, and destroy the kingdom of Satan, the
prince of this world? And because this overthrow of Satan, was to be (
actually) effected, by that selfsame death which Christ did then suffer for
the redemption of the world; therefore he says not, there shall be a judgment
of this world: but, now is the judgment of this world. Neither says he the
prince of this world ( shall be) but, now is cast out.

Again, Ioh. Calvin. in Ioh. 12. 31.
master Calvin, upon these words, Now is the judgment of this world: writes
thus. By the word ( judgment) some understand the reformation, and some, the
condemnation of the world: the first accords better with the purpose of
Christ, because the world (by his death) was then to be brought into a lawful
order. For the Hebrew word Mishpat, (...), ^. Iudicium, sententia iudicij.
which is here interpreted judgment: betokens a right, and a lawful
constitution of things. Howbeit, we have to consider, that without Christ there
is nothing in the world but mere confusion. Item, pro mensura, and
dispositione accipitur.
Although therefore, that Christ before (by his preaching and miracles) began
to erect the kingdom of God: yet for all that, his very death it self, was
the true beginning of a rightly compounded state, and the full restoration of
the world. Notwithstanding, this withal would be noted, namely, that the
worlds reformation, it cannot possibly be effected: but the kingdom of satan
must first be abolished, but flesh (and what else soever withstandeth the
justice of God) must first be subdued. Christ therefore pronounces the prince
of this world to be now cast forth: because all dissipation, and deformity
proceeds from him. For, so long as satan does exercise his tyranny: so long,
there does violently break forth all manner of iniquity. So then Satan is no
sooner cast forth, but the world is forthwith recalled from her revolted
estate, to the well ordered kingdom of Christ.

Again Hemingius upon these words, Hemingij Postilla dominic, 4. post pasch.
page 370.
the holy Ghost shall reprove the world of judgment, because the prince of
this world is judged already, says thus. The world that made a mock of Christ,
and willed him ( if he were the son of God) to come down from the cross:
Math. 26. 42.
by the holy ghost who fell upon the disciples at the feast of Pentecost, Marc.
15. 30. 32.
was flatly convinced, that (in so doing) they judged unjustly of Christ. Act.
2. 3. 4.
For, the holy ghost (says Christ) shall then cause them to understand and
perceive in deed, that I (having conquered the devil by my death and
resurrection) do now exercise (by your ministry) an absolute authority over
the world: Math. 10. 20.
in that none are now able to withstand the wisdom which speaks so
effectually in every of you. Luc. 12. 12.
This (says Hemingius) is the very sense of this place: Act. 6. 10.
if especially we refer (as we ought) the fulfilling thereof, to the efficacy
and power of the holy ghost, apparently resting upon the Apostles at the feast
of Pentecost.

To be short, Gualter. in Math. 8. 16. fol. 272.
Gualter, upon these words, they brought unto Christ a Demoniack; says thus.
There were many such (no doubt) in the days of Christ; because, the prince of
this world was not yet cast forth. Who grew so much the more raging mad: by
how much he perceived that fatal hour very nearly approach, wherein, he knew
he must needs be cast forth from the possession which he had so long time
unjustly usurped. Lo Exorcistes, these be the writers which (for the present)
I have purposely produced, to prove the exposition I gave of these words, Now
is the judgment of this world: now shall the prince of this world be cast
forth.


Exorcistes. Whatsoever you say, or whomsoever you produce for proof of your
purpose I pass not: this exposition you give is strange, and something more
then that which has been usually received.


Orthodoxus. Be it so. It overthrows not (you see) but rather confirms the
ordinary received exposition: in that it shows directly, some actual
accomplishment of that actual conquest concerning satan's dominion. Yea, Isa.
49. 8. 9.
and this actual conquest, satan himself so actually felt: Marc. 1. 24.
as he was forthwith enforced to acknowledge the same, saying thus. Ioh.
Brentius in Marc. 1. 24.
Ah, what have we to do with thee o Jesus of Nazareth: art thou come to
destroy us? Not meaning therein satan his essential destruction; but, the
actual annihilating of his actual dominion, Genesis 3. 15.
as has been handled before. And this also according to the determinate
council of God: who had certeinely decreed the actual breaking of the
serpents head by the promised seed of the woman. Heb. 2. 14.
The which promised seed did purposely take flesh and blood: that he might in
the flesh destroy through death, him that had power over death, that is, the
devil, as was showed before.


Exorcistes. Why should you so confidently apply this destruction of Satan, to
the actual determination also of his essential possession: and not rather, to
the only effectual weakening of that his spiritual dominion, as it is
usually expounded of others.


Orthodoxus. Because the holy Ghost (over, and besides the effectual
weakening of Satan his spiritual dominion) speaks directly there, of the
actual accomplishment of something else, by the very act of Christ's death.
The which actual accomplishment of something else, may (at no hand) be
understood, either of the essence of Satan, or of his power of obsession: but
only of that his temporary power of actual possession, as has been handled
at large. Yea, and that selfsame actual determination of Satan his said
temporary power of actual possession, it was so mightily feared, so actually
and so sensibly felt of the devil; as it made him (with a bitter exclamation)
to burst forth and say, Ah, art thou come to destroy us? Marc. 1. 24.
As if Satan should sorrowfully exclaim in this sort. Oh thou the promised
seed that must actually break my head? Thou Jesus of Nazareth: Thou son of
the living God: Thou that by the very act of thy approaching death, art
appointed to destroy me that had power over death? Ah, woe worth thee? Oh,
what have I to do with thee? Art thou come to undertake the actual
destruction of my actual possession? Art thou come now with force and arms to
enter my house, Luc. 10. 21. 22.
to deprive me of this my special armor wherein I trusted, and even actually
to cast me forth of that my palace or house, which I have hitherto possessed
in peace? Yea, and therewithal likewise to weaken my whole spiritual dominion
for ever?


Exorcistes. But, why should you thus precisely apply this destroying of Satan,
to the actual determination also of Satan his temporary power of actual
possession.


Orthodoxus. Because Christ elsewhere so expounds, and applies it himself
saying thus: Luc. 13. 32. 33.
Go you and tell Herod that fox, behold, I cast out devils, and will heal
still to day and to morrow, and the third day I shall be perfected, or will
make an end. As if Christ should have said thus to the Pharisees, you go very
cunningly about to discourage me from doing my duty, by telling me of Herod
his threatening my death. But, know this for a certain, that I am so far off
from fearing the threats of that fox, as I would have you tell him plainly
from me, that (for the whole time I have yet to live) I will be thoroughly
industrious in doing the business I have now in hand, especially in driving out
devils, and in curing diseases; until I have both fully confirmed the glory
of my Deity, and am come to the very period it self of satan his actual
destruction. The which also I am now the more earnestly in hand withal: because
within these three days I must even actually accomplish the same, by my
determined death. And then I shall be perfected, or then I will make an end of
that business. Which perfecting or ending of Christ may in no wise be understood
of Christ his essential being: because that could not be destroyed by death,
Romans 1. 4.
in as much as he was to be quickened again by the mighty power of the father
in his resurrection from death. Ephesians. 1. 19. 20.
Neither could it have reference to the final determination of his office of
mediation: for, therein he still lives, and must live an high priest for ever.
And therefore, it must needs be understood of the actual accomplishment of
that his glorious triumph over satan his actual possession: according to that
he says here, behold I cast forth devils to day and to morrow, and the third
day I shall be perfected, Luc. 13. 32.
or I will make a final end of that special business.


Exorcistes. But, why should you so precisely apply the determination of satan
his power of possession to the very period it self of Christ's death: since
after his said death, it is very apparent there were dispossessions of devils,
by the twelve Apostles, and seventy disciples?


Orthodoxus. There were dispossessions (I grant) effected by them, a time after
Christ his death for confirmation of his glorious Gospel, Erasm. Sarcer. in
Act. 4. 30.
but none at all for the declaration of Christ's deity: no, Christ alone did
fully determine the dispossessions for that special purpose by his own death
and resurrection: which (to that end) was the last miracle for ever, as him
self has avouched saying. Math. 12. 39. 40.
An evil and adulterous generation seeks a sign, Luc. 10. 29. 30.
but no sign shall be given unto it, save the sign of Jonah the prophet. For as
Jonah was three days and three nights in the whales belly: so shall the son
of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth. Lo here he
makes his death and resurrection the last miracle of all, for the glorious
manifestation of his actual power over satan.


Exorcistes. Whatsoever you say, or whomsoever you produce for the proof of
your purpose: the former exposition of the 12 of John, is something more then
that which has been usually received.


Orthodoxus. Well, I do freely confess, that, the spirits of the prophets,
they are authentically subjected to the censure of the prophets. 1. Cor. 14.
30. 31.
If therefore, any thing be revealed to another, let him (in the name of God)
propound the same with pregnant proofs; and my self will forthwith be
silent. In the mean time, I conclude from thence as before, that (seeing our
savior Christ has long since determined the extraordinary power of actual
possession) therefore, none now may possibly revive the opinion of any such
possession: nor yet conscionably avouch the continuance thereof.


Exorcistes. Conclude what you please: but I hold (as before) the actual
possession of devils.


Orthodoxus. What man? will you wilfully oppose your self against unanswerable
reasons, against authority of ancient writers, and (which more is) against the
plain evidence of sacred scriptures?


Exorcistes. If the propounding, and persisting in truth, be deemed a plain
opposition to that which you hold: then (for any thing hitherto heard) I must
constantly dwell in such an opposition, for, 1. Cor. 13. 8.
I may do nothing against the truth, but for the truth.


Orthodoxus. You dwell (you say) in a truth: and yet have you no one color of
truth, to uphold your supposed truth. For, what one probable reason have you at
all: that may make you so confident in this your preposterous conceit?


Exorcistes. Why sir? what better reason, then common experience?


Orthodoxus. Common experience (I confess) will carry a wonderful sway in
any apparent truth. Howbeit, because this point does crave some longer
discourse then the state of our bodies (without some intermission) will be able
to endure: Let us therefore, go take the fresh air for one hour, and then
return to our purpose a fresh.


Physiologus. We like very well of your motion.


Orthodoxus. Come then: arise, and let us depart.


The end of the sixth Dialogue.
The seventh Dialogue.
THE ARGUMENT.
Common experience, what it is? Whether the actual possession of Spirits and
Devils, especially, that your supposed possession in the yoongman at Magnitton,
may be proved thereby: And of the Devil his power of obsession.

The speakers names.
PHILOLOGVS. LYCANTHROPVS. PNEVMATOMACHVS. PHYSIOLOGVS. ORTHODOXVS. EXORCISTES.
Orthodoxus. NOw surely, this fresh air, it has woonderfully revived my
spirits, and made me as apt to any good action, as I was in the morning. Oh how
highly are we beholding to God, for the sanctified use of so singular a
creature?


Physiologus. Sir, not only this one, but all the other creatures of God, they
are comfortable and helpefull unto us, if we had the grace to use them aright.


Orthodoxus. Virtue true as you say: howbeit, this is besides our intended
purpose. Come on therefore Exorcistes, tell us what one reason you have, for
this your confident persisting in so fond a conceit.


Exorcistes. Sir, in the very last speech which passed between us, I told
you, I had common experience, not only to prove the actual possession of
spirits and devils: but also to approve of my own action wrought at Magnitton.


Orthodoxus. What mean you by common experience?


Exorcistes. I do understand thereby, such an experimented knowledge concerning
these matters in question, as has been experienced in every age of the
world, testified of old and young, and approved directly by a general
consent. Such an experience I am certain I have; to confirm me in this my
opinion.


Physiologus. Master Orthodoxus: this point more especially respects my
proper profession: and therefore (if you think it any ease to your self) do
put over the prosecution thereof unto me.


Orthodoxus. With very good will.


Physiologus. Come on then Exorcistes, let us hear the best argument you have
for this your opinion.


Exorcistes. There can be no better argument I hope then common experience.


Physiologus. Indeed (as you say) experience, she is called the schoole-mistres
of fools; and yet, she is not to be accounted a foolish schoole-mistres; but
such a one rather, as (when all other means fail) is able to work wisdom
in the most foolish on earth. Yea, she is such an approved schoole-mistres:
as, even the wisest of all, must be subject unto. And therefore, if you have
her on your side (as you say) you are not unlike to prevail.


Exorcistes. Yes, I have her very sure. For the most in Mahgnitton, and
sundry other besides, are every of them able to testify (in their own
experience) an actual possession in the yoong-man there: as also, in many
others else where.


Physiologus. They are able to testify thus much (you say) in their own
experience. The question is now, whether that their own experience: be a true
experience?


Exorcistes. There needs no question to be made thereof. For the witnesses
eftsoons did see the fellow in his fearful fittes: they viewed his
wallowings, his fomings, his rendings and tearings; they beheld his
senslesnesse, his bowings and bendings together: they perceived his many
outrages, his swounings and dangerous falling in fires: they handled his
stiffenes of limbs, his sundry swellings, and the Kitlings crawling under the
couerlid as he lay in his bed: they heard his roarings, his cryings, with
many strange knockings, and the Devil eftsoons speaking very hideously
within him: briefly they smelt many sudden and unwonted strong savors,
eftsoons very sweet, and sometimes more stinking then brimstone, with sondrie
other very sensible signs of actual possession: yea, and all these very
sensibly in their own experience.


Physiologus. These your supposed sensible signs, they are (I confess) such
sensible demonstrations as may fully suffice to conclude a common experience:
if all were as commonly true, as they are commonly reported abroad.


Philologus. True sir? why (I assure you) they are all extant in Print in a
very authentical narration: and (which more is) in master Exorcistes his
Printed Apology.


Physiologus. I am easily drawn to believe your report: and, Horat. Art. --
pictoribus, atque poetis Quid libet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas.
so much the rather, for that Painters and Poets do challenge a privilege to
print what they please. Howbeit, this is no good argument, they are all extant
in printe: therefore they are all undoubtedly true.


Exorcistes. As you say sir. But these (I assure you) are all avouched for
truths: and that also upon the corporal oaths of sundry discreet and honest
deponents.


Physiologus. For truths as they took them at least: and so, neither their
discretions, their honesties, nor oaths are any thing tainted, though happily
they failed in substance. Howbeit, many others (not of the meaner, or simpler
sort) are otherways fully resolved. Partly, in regard of the very actions
themselves: and partly in an especial respect of Satan, the supposed actor of
them. For first, concerning the actions themselves. How strange soever in a
seeming show, they are no way so strange in truth, but that many things else
(as much, and more strange then they are in show) may ordinarily proceed from
natural experiments, and be admirably effected by active and ingenious
persons: the practice whereof would seem (in these days) if not an actual
possession, yet a cosening trick of some cogging companion at least.


Lycanthropus. I pray you discover some few of those natural experiments.


Physiologus. With very good will. And, this I must tell you before, that,
there is not a man in the world (though never so little imbrued with
Philosophical skill) but he very well knows, there be many hidden virtues
of mere natural things, and those also the howerly effectours of many
admirable actions: which said virtues if a man understood well, and could
skilfully apply them to his purpose pretended, he might undoubtedly accomplish
many unwonted experiments. Yea, there be many maruels in nature, hitherto
unexperienced of any, and (to use Pliny his words) as yet wholly ouershadowed
with natures majesty: which the spirit of all spirits only knows how, and
when to implop at his pleasure. Now then, if any man (covertly practicing the
experiments of these natural causes) did apparently accomplish like admirable
matters, men would commonly account him a Magitian, and very hardly believe he
could possibly effect those rare and strange feats, Aristot. de admirandis
auditionibus.
without the power and help of the devil: whereas yet, they are only mere
natural actions, Plin. historia natural.
and produced wholly from mere natural causes. Of these natural maruels has
Aristotle penned down a most perfect treatise: Proclus, in lib. de sacrificio
and magia.
which notwithstanding, is (by some) ascribed to Theophrastus. Pliny also, he
has some such wonderful matters in sundry of his works, but very many in
his natural history: Aug. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 12. cap. 4. 5.
as may appear plainly to such as exactly peruseth the same. Besides this,
Proclus he also has penned down many, Albert. Magn. lib. 2. Minoralium, cap.
1. 12. 17.
all tending directly to that selfsame purpose. Yea, and which more is,
Augustine himself, Albertus Magnus, Fracastorius, and Ficinus also: they are
none of them inferior herein to any of the others before. Fracastor. in lib.
de Sympath. Ficinus, lib. 4. Theolog Plat. Cardanus, de subtilitate, and
varietate rerum.
To be brief, there are very many such matters dispersed throughout Cardanus
his books concerning the subtletie and variety of things: which I will here
briefly repeat out of Pliny his works.


Pneumatomachus. Do so I heartily pray you: for, therein you shall accomplish
unto us a singular pleasure.


Physiologus. I will spare for no pains, so far forth especially as my
memory serves me: and therefore, hearken attentively to it.


Philologus. Yes sir, Act. 17. 21.
be you sure you shall find us attentive Athenians; in hearing, and reporting
strange news.


Physiologus. Well then, Plin. lib. 2. cap. 96.
this first I must tell you, that very near unto Harpasa, a town in Asia,
there stands an horrible craggy rock or torre, which a man may easily move
with a little touch of one of his fingers: whereas, if he set his whole body
unto that selfsame rock, he cannot possibly stir it the breadth of an hair.

Again, there are other two mountains, very nerely adioining unto the famous
river called Indus. The nature of one mountain, is to draw iron unto it: and
of the other, by all means to reject and put iron from it. In so much as if
any man come on those mountains with nails in his shoes: he cannot (with his
said shoes) be possibly pulled from the one, nor by any means stand on the
other.

Again, Thom. Coper. Thesaurus. Strabo, in Geographia.
very nere unto Babylon, there flows forth from a rock, some certain
natural matter called Naphtha: being a chalkie clay, and of a slimy moist
substance not unlike unto pitch. This said Naphtha (on which side soever a man
shall behold it) has flames of fire ouerflowing the same: which cannot
possibly be quenched but with abundance of water, with vinegar, with alome, or
birdlime.

Again, from Nympheum, the famous promontory or mountain of Proconnesus,
Plin. ibid. cap. 107.
an island in Propontis: there flows forth from the midst of the rock, a
flame which by the drops of rain is kindled, and set on fire.

Again, Plin. ibid. cap. 103.
in Dodona a city of Greece, Jupiter his well, when it is cold as ice, and
has utterly extinguished the flaming fiery faggots: if (after those faggots be
thoroughly quenched) they be presently put into the well again, it kindles them
as fresh as before. Yea, and in the cuntry Illyrium, if clothes be there spread
over a certain coldwell: they are presently burned.

Again, Thom. Coper. Thesaurus. Plin. ibid.
the admirable Aetna, a certain hill in Sicily, now called Gibello monte,
containing in circuit, twenty furlongs, environed with a bank of ashes the
height of a wall, and having in the middle thereof, a round hill of the
selfsame matter and color, with two huge holes therein, fashioned like two
cups: this hill is not (for the strangeness thereof) inferior to any of the
rest. For, from out of those holes do strangely arise, sometime sundry
fearful flames of fire: sometime a horrible smoke: and sometimes are
fearfully blown forth from thence, very burning stones, in infinite numbers.
Moreover, before the said flames of fire do sensibly appear, there is heard
in the ground, a very terrible noice and roaring. And (which is more to be
merueiled) when the smoke and fire is most abundant and fervent: yet, round
about the top of this hill, are always seen snow, and hoary frosts.

Again, Plin. lib. vlt. cap. 4.
the said Pliny makes mention of a stone, called in the Greek tongue Adamas,
and in English a Diamond; which can neither be broken with violence, nor burned
with fire: and yet it may easily be softened and made pliable to any good
purpose, by steeping the same in goats blood a while, being warm. Yea and
(which more is) this Diamond is in nature so opposite unto a certain stone
called Magnes, in english, the Loadestone, as (the same being laid nere to a
needle) it will not suffer the Loadstone to draw the said needle unto it: and
being thrust hard to the Loadstone, it forthwith apprehends, snatcheth up,
and carries the Loadstone quite away with it.

But, of all wonders under the sun, there is none (in my seeming) more
admirable then the Loadstone it self: were not the hidden operation thereof,
so commonly experienced, and known as it is. For, that the same should draw
iron unto it, and, so directly dispose the very point of the mariners needle
toward the south as it does: which of the wisest philosophers could ever as
yet find forth the very true natural reason, and cause thereof?

Howbeit, Aristot. de hist. animalium.
the little fish Echneis (which is commonly called Remora, of staying or
hindering) is of all others the wonder of woonders. Plin. lib. 32. cap. 11.
For of this fish Aristotle he writes, and Pliny reports from his proper
experience, that the same (being but half afoote long, and very like to a
snaile) if she once but cleave to the side of ship (though of very great
burden, and never so fleet under sail) yet the said fish will so strongly
restrain the force of that ship, as she will compel her perforce, to stand
still, notwithstanding the violence of wind or oar: and this with no labor
at al, but only by cleaving upon the side of the ship, as was showed before.
Hitherto Pliny.


Lycanthropus. These I assure yon, are very strange, and admirable actions in
nature.


Physiologus. There are many others as strange as any of these, if we had time
to report them. Moreover, besides these things which want reason, many men also
themselves, have even naturally effected such like admirable actions; as very
few (never seeing them done) will either credit the actours themselves, or
believe them at all, being soundly reported by others: although yet Augustine
he makes it very evident by many examples.


Philologus. Report some few of those examples I pray you.


Physiologus. Content. Aug. de ciui^. Dei lib. 24. cap. 23.
We have heard (says Augustine) the natures of some certain men, very much
unlike to the nature of others, yea, and (for strangenes) every ways
admirable: effecting with their own proper bodies, such wonderful actions,
as none other might possibly do, and (hearing only thereof) will hardly
believe them. For there were some to be seen, who (without stirring their
heads at all) could shake their own ears; either one by it self alone, or
both at once at their pleasure.

Again, there were some others, who not moving their head (where their locks
especially grew) would very easily put down their whole bush of hair to
their forehead: and eftsoons recall it again at their pleasure.

There were some others again, who, of such meats as they had eaten before
(those selfsame meats also, being incrediblie very many and diverse) by often
handling their stomach, from thence would easily bring forth vnconcoctod,
what morsel they thought best at their pleasures.

There were some others again, who (from the very bottom of their belly, and
that also without any slouenly crackings behind) would forthwith procure so
many sundry sounds at their pleasure: as a man would have thought there had
been some singing within them.

Yea, and I also (says Augustine) have seen in my proper experience; a man
that would sweat when he listed himself.

And it is very well known, that many can weep when they please: and power
forth abundance of tears.

Yea and (which more is) there was a certain priest in Calamensis parish, who
(when seemed him good) would deprive himself of all bodily sense, and lie
flat on the ground as if he were dead: insomuch, as when he was pinched,
pricked, or pulled by the hair, he felt nothing at all, yea, and eftsoons
also when the beholders did touch him with candle or fire, he perceived no
manner of grief, neither could they (for all that while) discern any breathing
in him. Thus far Augustine there.

Now then, from all the premises, I may fitly enforce this one inference upon
Exorcistes. Namely, that if all these the precendent matters (how admirable
soever in show) yet were and might well be effected by nature herself, and
only by mere natural means: why then should those your imagined marueiles
wrought at Mahgnitton (for any their supposed strangenes whatsoever, it being
also, so far inferior to many of these) be deemed for any such unspeakable
woonders as could not possible be effected, but, by some supernatural power of
the devil? Yea, and why should you urge such uncertain and doubtful actions:
to conclude a certain experience?


Exorcistes. Nay sir, they were all I assure you, very strange and undoubted
true actions.


Physiologus. But their strangenes whatsoever (you see) cannot certainly
conclude them for truths; since many things more strange may be effected by
nature herself, and by mere natural means, as was showed before. Besides
that, many more strange actions then any were done at Mahgnitton: may, and do
eftsoons accidentally arise from mere natural diseases. Paul. AEginat. lib.
3. cap. 15.
Namely, from disordered melancholy, from Mania, from the Epilepsie, from
Lunacie, Aetius, lib. 6. cap. 11.
from Lycanthropie, from Conuulsions, from the mother, from the menstruall
obstructions, and sundry other outrageous infirmities. Leuinius
For, the animal parts being marvelously affected Lemnius.
with some disordered fantasies arising only upon some falsely supposed
sensible notions, Auicen. tract. 3 de apostemat. capitis, cap. 1.
and the mind being mightelie troubled by means of noisome fumes, black and
gross, vapouring up to the brain like the soote of a chimney: they imagine
themselves to be vexed eftsoons, Ioh. Wierus de praestigijs Demon. lib. 4.
cap. 25.
of some hurtful spirits, and do strongly persuade themselves, that the
devil assaileth their minds, and drives them forthwith into many absurd,
inconvenient, foolish, Leuinius.
and fantastical imaginations. And which more is, Lemnius.
there be many most fearful diseases which happen to maidens and widows, of
the passions of the womb, or from the late fluxion of their natural
euacuations, or when they defer their marriage to long, and then be suddenly
bestowed in marriage: all these do no less hurt and disquiet the poor
patients mind, then if they were actually possessed of Satan. And therefore,
me think it is to to ridiculous, that men of sound judgment will so soon be
ouerswaied with any fantastical conceit: as that (from the only bare
notions of a deceaueable sensitive knowledge) they should (by these only
supposed strange actions) imagine any actual possession of Satan: seeing the
like admirable accidents, both may, and do daily proceed from mere natural
diseases, without any operation or power of the devil.

Moreover, some of those your supposed signs, now extant in print to prove
the pretended actual possession of Satan, they are (in themselves) so absurd,
so supernatural, and impossible: as they are of all wise men derided, and
deemed no better then iuggling devises, to deceive the simpler sort. Now then,
if the greatest part of those your supposed signs, be adjudged untrue, and
concluded unsound: why may not the rest be deemed (in like manner) so
deceitful and false, as they deserve, and are worthy no credit at all?

Briefly, if all those your suggested signs (put lately in print by the
parties themselves, to prove the pretended possession of devils) must needs
be canonized current, and held as infallible oracles from Apollo Pythius at
Delphos: why then should we the rather believe our Savior Christ for any his
miracles, or supernatural operations: since the young man at Magnitton, did
likewise (for his part) accomplish so many extraordinary and admirable
actions, if that which is published in print, may possibly be proved a truth?


Exorcistes. Nay sir, the young man he wrought not those admirable actions, by
any supernatural power of his own: but the devil rather (within him, and by
him) effected the same.

Are you fled to the essential and inherent possession of Satan afresh? I
perceive you are like to the hunted Hare which seuddeth hither and thither, and
stands in fear at every squat. Howbeit, as the untruth of those your
supposed signs of actual possession is ferretted forth in an especial
regard of the actions themselves: so surely the further untruth of those your
supposed signs shall now further appear in an especial respect of satan
himself, whom you make the supposed actour of those your supposed actions:
which is (I assure you) the other maine cause, why most wise men account all
those the aforesaid suggested signs of actual possession, but fine-witted
forgeries, and mere cousoning conceits of cogging companions. Namely, for
that the very devil also himself (whom you make the supposed actour of those
your supposed actions, is utterly unable to accomplish any such actions as are
impossible in nature, and incredible in all sound Divinity.

For first, (concerning an impossibility in nature it self) the devil (as has
been declared, and you know it full well) he is but a finite creature him
self: and therefore his power whatsoever, is so limited and bounded unto him,
as the same may not possibly exceed the appointed territories of his
determined nature. Now then, if his power whatsoever, be paled about, and
hemmed within the natural compass of his essential, and natural being: how
could he, either of him self, or by the young man at Mahgnitton, in any
possibility, effect so many absurd, supernatural, and impossible actions, as
in those books are blazed abroad?

And next (for the impossibility also thereof in all sound Divinity) very
certain I am, Genesis 1. 1. etc.
the devil, he is no creator of substances, no transformer of natures: Romans
4. 17.
nor no worker of miracles. First, that he is no creator of substances, 2.
Cor. 4. 6.
it is apparent in this: namely, for that Jehovah alone is the Creator of all
things. Genesis 1. 3.
He only it is who calls those things which are not, Job. 41. 2.
as though they were. Isa. 44. 24.
He brings light out of darkness, Isa. 42. 8.
he is the author and father of all things: Natura principiorum amat
singularitatem.
and therefore the glory of creation belongs only to him. Moreover this (in
all reason) is very apparent, namely, that the nature of beginnings affects
singularity: insomuch as possibly he could not be singular, Danaeus, physica
christiana, par. 1. fol. 92.
if he should communicate the power of Creation, to any besides himself. Now
then, if spirits and devils be accounted the creatours of substances, Isa. 45.
18.
then must they (in like manner) beheld the quickners, Ioh. 1. 8.
and sustainers also thereof: and so (by consequence) be Gods and Jehovah, Act.
17. 28.
causing things to exist. Colos. 1. 16.
Which, how repugnant it is to all sound Divinity: may plainly appear in
sundry scriptures. Aug. de trinit. lib. 3. cap. 8.
Yea, this is flat opposite to the approved testimony of all the fathers. For,
Damascen. de Orthodox. fide lib. 20.
Augustine, he flatly denies spirits and devils to be Creators of the smalest
creature on earth: yea, even of a flea or a louse. Damascene also, August.
tract. in Ioh. 2. and 3.
he accords thereto. Yea, and Augustine, he backeth this point by a second
supply: affirming, that by whomsoever the glorious Angels were made, A quo
vermes creantur, ab eodem and Angeli.
by him also, the silie worms were created. This then, may fully suffice, to
conclude, the devil, no creator of substances.

Now next, that he is no transformer of natures, it is very apparent, In the
5. Dialog. fol. 77. 78.
in that he cannot possibly transform his own proper nature: no, not so much
as in an outward appearance, as has plainly been proved before.

And as for working of miracles, he is as impotent therein, as in any of the
rest: because he has no supernatural power to accomplish such matters. He may
work strange woonders, Act. 1. 9. 10. 11
as Simon Magus has done: but, George Gifford in his discovery of Witches.
he can effect no supernatural, and miraculous actions: though God give him
leave to show his whole power. So then, Pet. Martyr. in 1. Sam. 28. and loc.
com. 9. fol. 67.
the devil (you see) he has a double bridle put in his mouth: namely, the
bounds of nature: and the will of God. By the one he is unable: and by the
other he may not do more then the appointment of God. The premises therefore
considered, who sees it not utterly incredible in all sound Divinity, that
many of those your supposed actions could be possibly effected of satan: in
such sort at least, as in those your published pamphlets they are falsely
reported.


Exorcistes. The devil, he is able to accomplish great matters.


Physiologus. So much I confess. And therefore (for arguments sake) be it by
the way, supposed (which may never be proved) that the devil, either of
himself, or by the young man at least, was thoroughly able, and did truly
effect such supernatural matters as are published in print: there is then no
doubt but that he can do them again, and as often as he please. For, if he be
any ways able: there is no doubt of his willingness in working of mischief.
That (if he has done them before at Mahgnitton) he is then able to do them
again, my reason is this: namely, for that every art, or action, presupposes
always an essential power in the artist, or actor himself. Your Apology
therefore, reporting (as it does) for infallible truth, that the devil (in the
yoongman at Mahgnitton either did, or could possibly accomplish such impossible
actions: you your self must be able to demonstrate by what possible means he
might possibly effect them, which I verily supposse you cannot possibly do.

For this you may not be ignorant of, that, to every action is required the
faculty and ability of the agent; the aptness of the patient or subject: with
a convenient and possible application of true matter and form.

Now then first for the devil, the supposed agent of those your impossible
actions; he is not omnipotent, but an impotent, a finite and circumscriptible
spirit: and his power whatsoever, it depends upon the analogy and consonancy
of his mind and body, if he had any at all. Howbeit, with his mind he can do
no more but understand and will, and with his body (if he had any at all) he
could accomplish no more then the very bounds and ends of corporal sense would
suffer, and the faculty of his nature extends unto: and therefore his
natural power whatsoever, it cannot possibly stretch forth it self to the
powerful effecting of any such supernatural actions as do infinitely
surmount his natural and finite faculty, his sense, his understanding and
will. So then, here wants (you see) first, the faculty and power of the
efficient it self: for the possible effecting of those impossible actious
wherewith you would manage your pretended actual possession. Whereupon I
infer, that, if no such supernatural power at all may be proved in the devil
his supposed possession: then, no such supernatural actions (in truth) may
possibly proceed from the same, notwithstanding any your printed reports. For,
in all reason, there can be no greater virtue in the thing caused: then is in
the cause it self, or in that which proceeds from the benefit of the cause.
But you (in your printed apology) do make the devil his supposed actual
possession, the principal effi^ient cause of all such supernatural actions as
were ministerially effected (you say) by the young man at Mahgnitton: and
therefore (the said power being finite) you cannot possibly conclude from
thence, any such admirable matters as you would bear us in hand. Neither may
you conscionably persuade us to entertain for sound truth, whatsoever you
report concerning that point: especially, Arist. de anima lib. 2.
if we will credit our own experience and sense vnabused, the rules of
philosophy, and sound divinity.

Now next for any aptness in the young man at Mahgnitton See M. Dorels
Narration, to the 16. objection fol. 4. page 1.
whom (in any wise) you will have the proper patient or subject of those strange
and impossible actions: how should there possibly be found in him any aptness
or inclination at all, to any such supernatural matters, He says, if M. D.
would say or swear that Summers did such things, he was not to be credited.
Because, none by teaching or learning: can practice impossibilities.
he himself being but a mere natural creature: consisting naturally of body
and soul: endued only with mere natural faculties and circumscribed no dout
with mere natural bonds? And therefore, you see it is utterly impossible for
him to have any further aptness or inclination that way: then his natural
faculty extends unto, and may possibly proceed from the very sway and reach
of his own proper nature.

Briefly, concerning some convenient and possible application of true matter
and form, Item, in M. D.
for the orderly effecting of those your supposed supernatural actions: such a
convenient and possible application, is much more impossible then any of the
rest. Apolog. page 10. videlicet, Supernatural, Actions, Strenght, Knowledge.
Both, because no such true matter for those your supposed supernatural
actions, was ever preexisting in nature: and, for that also, the true form it
self, for a convenient and possible application thereof, must needs be
supernatural, The Devil in likeness of a mouse, a black dog.
surmounting by much, the natural power of the devil. And so, (by consequence)
those your printed reports, they are (you see) no sound demonstrations: to
conclude unto us the certain truth of such supposed supernatural His body in
lenght beyond the tallest man. His hands, feet, face, and hair not burnt, he
being in the fire, etc.
actions.


Exorcistes. Why are you so loath to believe that, which so many beheld with
their eyes?


Physiologus. Because I see not how they should possibly behold that with
Kitlings creeping in his bed, etc.
their eyes, which you would have me believe with my heart: contrary to
divinity, to philosophy, to physic, to nature, to law, and to conscience.

1. For first, the working of miracles (in all sound divinity) Divinity.
is ceased long since: neither was the devil ever able to effect any miracle,
whatsoever he pretended in outward appearance.

2. Besides that, Philosophy.
no one reason (in all Philosophy) may possibly be yielded: for the
confirmation of a matter so impossible in reason.

3. Again, Physic.
howsoever the young man was said to use ointments in working his feats: yet,
very certain I am, that no one Physical receipt may (by art) be prescribed
for the possible effecting of such impossible actions.

4. Nether yet may a circumscribed nature, Nature.
at any hand extend herself beyond her own natural bounds: to the admirable
accomplishment of such supernatural matters.

5. Moreover, Law.
because there is nothing possible in Law, which in nature it self is absurd
and impossible; the Judge therefore (notwithstanding any thing confessed before
by the parties) he is not to attend or regard whatsoever those partial
reporters have published in print, or otherways reported to be done by the
devil at Mahgnitton: but, he must strictly examine, and in equity allow rather
of that thing which is substantially proved to have (in deed and in truth) by
him been effected, or which (at the least) might naturally and possibly fall
within the full power of the agent to do.

6. Lastly, Conscience.
whatsoever the yoong-man may happily report concerning the supposed
accomplishment of any such supernatural actions by himself, or the devil: he
is not (in conscience) to be believed therein, whether his judgment be sound
or unsound, I mean, whether he be well, or but wild in his wits. For first, be
it supposed the man were sound in his judgment, yea, and so well in his wits,
as possibly he might be: yet were there no conscience at all, to credit a
cousoning companion, so vnconscionablie auouching such incredible actions. But
if (as may rather be deemed) he was someway intoxicated, or not well in his
wits when he reported such matters abroad: then tell me what conscience, or
what wisdom it were, to credit for infallible truth, the crazie confession of
a crazie weak brain, in matters especially so absurd, and so opposite to the
orderly course of nature? For, L. absent de paenis.
this I take to be Law; namely, that when the error of judgment, or the
blindness of will depends upon some secret disease, L. 2. cum. gloss.
or natural infirmity: the men's actions then (in such kind of cases) are in
all tender compassion to be carefully pitied, but their confessions at no band,
to be conscionablie credited. Because (the mind it self being destitute of
reason) the will (in such a case) could yield no sound consent to the action:
Delictum sine consensu, non potest committi, neque iniuria sine animo
^^siurandi.
neither could any crime be committed without a consent, nor injury effected
but with a mind to do wrong. Yea, and (which more is) be it supposed the yoon
gman at Mahgnitton should very solemnly confess, he had indeed a resolute
purpose to have effected some such supernatural actions as are (by your self)
reported in Print: yet, See M. Dorels Narration, the 2. answer to the 2.
objection, fol. 2. page 2.
for that such a purpose retained in mind (all the while it is vneffected) does
nothing at all to the public or private hurt of any, that selfsame intended
purpose may not justly be esteemed as an offensive action in Law. Much less
then, is an impossible purpose of a crazie weak brain, to be conscionablie
credited, Summers is not to be believed, affirming impossiblities.
how confidently soever the same be reported: because, a sound mind, purposes
nothing but what is possible.


Lycanthropus. Why hold you many of those reported matters; Item, in Apolog.
page 15. Sanae mentis voluntas, voluntas rei possibilis est.
impossible for satan to do?


Physiologus. Because, if devils may possibly bring such impossible matters to
pass at their pleasure: then may they also be causes, or impediments to the
ordinary course of al other natural actions and ordinances appointed by God.
Namely, they may then cause it to hold up, when it should rain, and to rain,
when it should hold up: they may then cause midnight at noonday, and
noone-daie at midnight: yea, and by that means, the divine power it self,
should (after a sori) become serutle to the will of a devil: so as we should
neither eat, nor drink, but by the devil his permission. Howbe^t, to press
you a little, with one only instance of many. This I must tell you, Job. 5. 10.
that (whatsoever some men imagine concerning the devil his supposed power,
Job. 38. 28.
for the raising of showers and tempestuous storms) it is the Lord God alone
who gives Psalm. 135. 7.
us rain in due season. Ierem. 5. 24. and 14. 22.
For, when by the power of the Sun and force of the winds, some certain
exhalations are drawn and lifted up from the earth, Act. 14. 17.
into the middle region of the air: Iam. 5. 18.
the coldness of the air there, does so congeale and thicken those said
exhalations, as forthwith they become clouds: which clouds being eftsoons (
by the heat of the sun dissolved; and by the force of the winds dispersed)
are turned straightwaies, into either rain or hayle: into rain especially, if
by the way, those drops be not frozen, and so turned to hayle. These
circumst^nces conferred with the whole course of the scriptures: it cannot
possibly be brought within the power of a devil, to procure either rain or
fair weather. Now then, if there be no possible power in a devil, to raise up
and procure a tempest of rain, which does seem to our sense, the most
accident all matter under the heavens: then surely, much less is he able by
himself or his substitute, to accomplish any of those impossible actions which
your selves have so confidently reported abroad. And so by consequence, all
those your sensible demonstrations hitherto declared: are very insufficient to
conclude unto us any such approved or common experience.


Exorcistes. Sir, notwithstanding these your Philosophical proceedings, the
matters which fell forth at Mahgnitton (even in an approved experience of all
the beholders) were very apparent signs of an actual possession.


Physiologus. Well sir? how triflingly soever you trauers the matter, these my
Philosophical proceedings (for any thing hitherto heard) might fully suffice
to put your fantastical fooleries to a perpetual non-sute: were you not like
to the ravenous Ferret, which rendeth in pieces whatsoever poor Rabbet does
come in her reach. And therefore it shall not be amiss to cope up your lips a
little, by taking forthwith so strict a course as you shall never be able to
contradict with all your skill: which may in this sort be very fitly effected.
Namely, first, by searching forth soundly, the very true nature of those
things that were done at Mahgnitton: and then next, by laying down some
certain rule of right judgment, to examine them by.


Lycanthropus. Proceed in that course I beseech you.


Physiologus. With very good will* First therefore, concerning the things,
themselves, Danaeu^ in physic christiana. tract. 1. cap. 6. fol. 5.
it may not in reason be denied, but that undoubtedly, they were things either
natural: or not natural at least.

Things natural, I account all those several matters to be, whatsoever, which
God has essentially enabled unto the orderly accomplishment of that selfsame
end whereunto he created them first: it being withal, very natural and
consequent in the things themselves. And of this sort, I esteem all matters
and actions whatsoever; which be naturally consonant and concludent to the
orderly course of nature. Now sir, if your matters at Mahgnitton were al
undoubtedly such, then, either all men in like sort, are naturally tainted with
Satan his actual possession, because all men in their natural actions, do
equally observe the like natural course either more or less: and so, the
whole world besides, which have hitherto wanted your help of prayer and
fasting, should wholly remain in Satan his actual possession. Or (on the
other side) if all men in like sort, be not naturally possessed, then, neither
the yoong-man himself (remaining with them, in one and the selfsame natural
condition) was possessed at all: and so by consequence, you have kept at
Mahgnitton, a greater coil about nothing, then the Grecians ever kept at the
conquest of Troy.


Exorcistes. Nay sir, the matters at Mahgnitton: were rather, things not
natural.


Physiologus. Are you fled so soon, from things natural: to things not
natural? Well; go to then. Things not natural, I reckon all those matters or
actions whatsoever, which have naturally in themselves, no natural ability
for the orderly accomplishment of nature her orderly determined courses:
neither yet, of, or in their own selves are natural and consequent to any
such natural purpose or end. And these not natural things, (...).
are undoubtedly, such as be directly, either against nature, or besides
nature, or above nature at least.

1 Things directly against nature, are all those accidental occurrents (...).
which do altogether withstand those essential properties, this inbred
faculty, yea, and that very natural disposition of the things themselves
(which by the operation of God) were naturally engraffed in every of them: and
which more is, does violently destroy, and even utterly annihilate the proper
essence, or essential being of all those natural things whatsoever. Of this
sort are hanging, killing, poisoning, strangling, and death also it self. Now
then, your matters at Mahgnitton, they may not justly be concluded for things
of this kind; both because the yoong-man himself is yet living and lusty;
and for that, no one of those your supposed supernatural actions, were in
themselves either deadly or mortal.

2. To proceed. (...). Arist. physic. lib.
2. Things directly besides nature, are all those unnatural declining courses
of nature, which, notwithstanding they do not totally and wholly withstand the
orderly force and operation of nature; Aug. Enchir. cap. 87.
yet do they hinder it much: and (by either adding thereunto, Plutarch. de
placit. philosoph. lib. 5. cap. 8.
or by subtracting therefro) do mightily forestall the very true natural
courses thereof. As for example, when (over and besides the orderly parts of
nature) a man has two heads, Hieron. epist. ad vital^m.
two noses, and four hands; or, but one eye, Ni^eph. histor. eccles lib. 12.
cap. 37. and 18. 33.
one arm, one leg, and such like. All these, with many other such unnatural
accidents, are things directly besides nature: whereof sundry approved
writers (especially Hierom himself, and Nicephorus also) have written at large
in their several discourses. Now sir, you may not, and which more is, you dare
not (without blushing) affirm, that any of your matters at Mahgnitton, were
(indeed, and in truth) any such monstrous, or unnatural occurrents: and
therefore, from thence you cannot possibly conclude any actual possession at
all. Or if notwithstanding, you will impudently affirm, that those your said
matters were undoubtedly some of them such monstrous occurrents, and thereupon
infer an actual possession; it must necessarily follow, that either the
yoong-man at Mahgnitton was not possessed at all; or else, that only the
monstrous persons are actually possessed, which were a very absurd and
monstrous opinion.

3. Briefly, (...).
the things directly above nature, are al those matters and actions whatsoever,
which (beyond their own natural force, and rather in, then by the very things
themselves) are estsoones effected: although yet, not by any order and faculty
of nature, but by an extraordinary, and supernatural power of God. As, to
make iron swim, fire to freese, water to burn, the dead to return to life,
and such like. Now sir, if you dare flatly affirm that your matters at
Mahgnitton, were things undoubtedly of this selfsame kind: then must you, not
only very necessarily avouch some supernatural power in the devil and
yoong-man possessed, for the admirable effecting of all those your supposed
supernatural actions: but (which more is) you must very confidently conclude,
that, such an admirable dispossessing of the yoong-man possessed at Mahgnitton,
was undoubtedly, the miracle of miracles.


Exorcistes. Make of it, a miracle, a monster, or, what pleases your self:
possessed I am certain he was.


Physiologus. Possessed you are certain he was: and yet cannot certainly show
in what sort. Howbeit, having hitherto searched forth soundly the very nature
of the things themselves, and finding them in effect to be things neither
natural, nor not natural, and so by consequence, but mere delusions: Let us
notwithstanding, imagine them all for such as you say, and therefore now here
in like manner, Lay down some certain rule of right judgment, to examine
them by.


Lycanthropus. I pray you do so.


Physiologus. Content. The rule of right judgment, is some certain direction,
level, or square, whereby is declared unto us, both what is true, and what is
false: and for which only respect, it is also very fitly termed the rule of
truth. Moreover, this selfsame rule of truth, is either natural: or
supernatural.

The natural rule of truth, is that natural direction, which nature herself
does truly declare; and very sufficiently affoorde unto us. And this
selfsame natural rule of truth is also twofold; namely, either some natural
principles, or universal experience.

The natural principles, are some certain general notions, or universal
directions, very naturally engrafted and known unto men by nature it self:
and which also are so necessarily, so certainly, and so vnchangeablie true, as
whosoever shall dare to call them in doubt, he may justly be termed a madman,
or fool. And these natural principles also, are, either theoricall: or
practical.

The theoricall principles, are all such speculatiue demonstrations, as do
certainly direct and guide the judgment, in a true understanding and knowledge
of things. As for example, twice two, are four. Again, there is one only
truth. Again, the whole is greater then any part thereof. Again, the cause is
not after the effect. Again, there is one only natural motion of a simple
body, and so forth.

The practical principles are such certain and infallible grounds of truth,
as do certainly direct and govern the manners of men. As for example, God is
to be served. Men may not be hurt. Honest things are to be done. Falsehood is to
be fled, and so forth. Now then this natural rule, I mean these natural
principles (whether theoricall, or practical) they can be no competent Judges
to examine and try forth the truth of those your supposed maruels wrought at
Mahgnitton. First, because this selfsame rule (being only but natural, in
what kind soever) cannot possibly extend forth it self to the full compass
and reach of those your admirable actions: many of them especially being so
absurd as they are, so supernatural, and every way so impossible in nature.
Secondly, for that many wise men in the world (no less wise then your self,
yea, and as sufficiently qualified with those selfsame natural principles
whatsoever) are of a far different judgment to yours: and therefore (by
force of this rule) you cannot possibly put down unto us any such infallible
and certain conclusions, as may possibly persuade an actual possession. And
thus much briefly, for that first rule of truth, which arises only from
mere natural principles.


Lycanthropus. Show us in like sort (I beseech you) that other infallible rule
of truth, which proceeds from universal experience.


Physiologus. With very good will. And, because, this is that very loadstone
it self whereunto Exorcistes attends for his special directions in those
supernatural accidents: I will therefore, first unfold the thing it self, and
then next, discover the sundry degrees thereof.


Pneumatomachus. A very excellent order; I pray you proceed.


Physiologus. Content. First then for the thing it self, (...). ex (...).
Auenarius in Lexic. Hebraic.
the same is called in the Hebrew tongue Cheker, that is, a diligent scrutinie,
inuestigation, invention, inquisition, or searching out of a thing to the
bottom. It comes of the Radical word Chakar, which signifies to make
diligent inquiry for a thing to the bottom, to make a profound inquisition,
to gage, very deeply into, and to search down, to the first fountain it
self. In the Greek tongue it is called Emporia: that is, (...). Experientia.
an experience, skill, specialty or proof. In the Latin^ tongue experientia:
that is, an experiment, a due trial, a pattern or president. And, in our
English tongue, we commonly call it a common use, example, or practice. Now
then, all these the aforesaid Etymologies (so fitly consorting in one) as they
do lively portend at a blush, a ^erie admirable, and most certain
demonstratiue rule: so do they teach us withal, that universal experience,
Experience, what it is?
is a perpetual use of things, wherein al men of sound judgment (howsoever
severed by times, and places) do by due experiments prove and know, that they
have evermore received one and the selfsame thing, after one and the selfsame
manner. And that therefore, (...).
it is called a catholic, or common experience. As for example, Fire is hot:
life is one thing: and death is another: wine and pepper, have an inflaming
faculty: snow is white: the heavens are moved circulerly, and so forth.


Lycanthropus. Let this suffice for the thing it self: and now, show us in
like sort, the sundry degrees thereof.


Physiologus. The sundry degrees of an universal experience, are those several
proceedings: (...).
. wherein she grows from step to step, to her full perfection. And these
selfsame degrees are four: namely, aisthesis, hystoria, Epagoge, emporia.

1. Aisthesis, (...).
is the first degree of universal experience, when as by sense (I mean, by
seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting and handling:) there is something very
sensibly perceived. And, this falls effectually forth in all things; either
objected to sense, or propounded by example.

2. Historia is the second degree of experience: (...).
when as from the objected sensible notions, or propounded examples, we do
constitute an observation or rule. For, from one, or a few examples: we may
fitly gather a rule.

3. Epagoge, (...).
is the third degree of universal experience: when as by an orderly induction
we collect and bring in very many examples, and those also, very fitly
according with the former constituted rule.

4. Briefly Emporia, (...).
is the last degree of universal experience: when as we do certainly find by
like perpetual experiments, that all the examples propounded unto us, are
after one and the selfsame manner, and do fully consort themselves, to the
former determined rule. Thus then, you may plainly perceive, that sense,
observation, induction, and the like perpetual experience: do fully constitute
a second infallible natural rule, for the orderly examining and trying forth
of truths. Howbeit, neither may this selfsame natural, or experimental
rule: in any sort be enforced to serve Exorcistes his turn. Because, it in no
wise accords with his supposed actual possession; or with any the admirable
actions arising from thence: whether we respect the very rule it self, or the
several degrees thereof.

For first, concerning the very rule it self. There were then, and are now
many wise and sensible persons besides your selves: some of them severed by
time and place, and many of them conuersing among you, even then and there,
where your supposed actual possession was actually effected, or practiced. Who
do all of them flatly affirm, that, they (for their own parts) neither then,
nor at any time since had any such experimented trials, or approved
experiments of such an actual possession, as your selves have published in
print: and therefore, the experience which you flee unto now for your refuge,
is no catholic or universal experience.

Besides all this, let the matters themselves be yet further examined and tried
forth fully by the several degrees of the universal experience propounded
before: and then tell me, how this selfsame experimental rule, and the
actions that are to be ruled thereby, may possibly accord in one. For first,
concerning sense, how is it possible that any sensible experience (as it were
step by step) should directly proceed from the sensitive knowledge, to the
memory it self, seeing all the objects of sense (arising especially from any
your supposed supernatural actions) were none other thing else, but
deceivable objects and crafty conueiances: and therefore, could not possibly
aford true natural notions, toward the timely effecting of a universal
experience? And next for observation, how is it possible that any infallible
rule for the trial of truths: should be sensibly and soundly collected from
such insensible notions, and unsound examples? Again, concerning induction,
where, or from whence should we possibly collect any other examples, which may,
or can possibly accord with this supposed example of yours: for the further
confirmation of the former infallible rule, constituted (as before) upon
sensual experiments, and sound examples?

Moreover, where is that perpetual consenting experience, wherein all men of
sound judgment whatsoever, have truly found forth by like perpetual
experiments from time to time: that, this one, with all other the approved
examples of actual possession, do mutually concur after one and the
felfesame manner, and fully accord in every point? Now then, since the
universal experience we speak of does not (so much as in outward appearance)
hold any agreement at all, either, with your pretended actual possession, or
with any the supposed actions thereof: you cannot (in any proportion of reason)
either conscionably avouch, or consequently conclude from thence, any approved
experience, to try forth the truth of your matters. Yea, and this I say more,
that, if the experience we speak of here, and your actual possession with
the supposed actions there at Mahgnitton, did so fully accord, and so justly
iumpe together in all outward appearance, as the one might not possibly be
discerned from the other: yet could you not gather from thence, such a certain
rule of right judgment, as might (for the purpose in hand) be able to serve
your turn to the full. Because, that your pretended actual possession, and
the supposed actions arising from thence, are (many of them) supernatural,
absurd, and impossible: whereupon, this experimental or universal experience
being (you may see, when it is at the best) but a mere natural rule) it
cannot possibly compass and square forth unto us, the certain truth of those
your supernatural actions. And therefore, it is utterly in vain for your
self, to rest as you do: upon universal experience for trial thereof.


Exorcistes. Nay sir, I rest not at all, upon any such an experience as
proceeds only from mere natural rules: but, upon a spiritual experience
rather, arising directly from the confirmed canons, and infallible rules of the
word.


Physiologus. Your manner of disputing, is very like (I perceive) to a
maultmilne horse his manner of drawing. For he (being blindfolded before he be
put in his geares) knows none other, but that he goes directly forewards:
when notwithstanding, he keeps only a circuler motion: so surely, your self
(being horribly hood-winked herein with the palpable mask, of a mischeiuous
selfe-conceite) you do verily suppose, that (in this your giddie course of
disputing) you go directly an end, when you follow eftsoons the wild-goose
chase: one while fleeing from scripture to common experience, and (being soon
weary of your part that way) another while retiring from common experience to
the scriptures again, as one that wotteth not well, in what place to fasten
his foot. But, go to man, stick fast to the infallible rule of the scriptures,
and cleave close to the confirmed canons thereof: for, howsoever these natural
rules (laid forth by my self) may not possibly be made pliable to the very
point of your purpose in hand: the sacred scriptures, they are those
supernatural rules, whereunto (by Orthodoxus his help) your supposed
supernatural actions (being soundly current) may well be made suitable, and
sorting in every respect. If therefore your said actions may possibly endure
the hammering and trial of scripture: I warrant you I, they will all be
cannozed current.


Exorcistes. Yes sir, Ierem. 23. 29.
our matters (I assure you) they are very well able to endure the fire and
forge of the word: yea, 1. Cor. 3. 13.
and to be thoroughly balanced with the holy waights of the sanctuary. For,
Heb. 4. 12.
the actual possession we plead for, not only accords in every condition,
with the actual possessions expressed at large in the scriptures: but which
more is, the same is a perpetual infirmity eftsoons falling forth among men,
as was showed before. And therefore, there is no question at all concerning the
certain truth thereof.


Orthodoxus. I perceive you have hardened your forehead against the infallible
truth of the Lord, for, Physiologus having before (by natural philosophy) very
sufficiently showed the apparent disparison between your pretended actual
possession, and the approved actual possessions expressed in the scriptures, and
which more is, my self also having eftsoons (by the sacred canons and rules
of the word) very fully confuted your idle conceit, concerning the falsely
supposed perpetuity of actual possessions: you notwithstanding (being utterly
unable to make any sound reply unto either of both, even by a pitiful begging
of that which you cannot possibly prove) do now afresh, very impudently
insist upon the controuersed question it self, without, either probability of
reason, or show of sense.


Exorcistes. Yes sir, the perpetuity of actual possession, is very apparent in
the sacred scriptures.


Orthodoxus. I doubt not then, but that you would more fully have made known
that selfsame apparancy long ere now. But, go to, be it so as you say. The
perpetuity thereof will then appear unto us, either, by some canon, or counsel
at least contained in the scriptures: which (I verily believe) you will never
be able to show. For, first, the Apostle Paul, he tells the Ephesians (with an
appeal to their conscience) that, Act. 20. 27.
he has showed them the whole council of God that is, so much of Gods counsel
as may any ways concern the saving or killing of souls. But, in all his
authentical epistles, he gives neither canon, nor counsel concerning the
perpetuity of actual possessions: therefore, the perpetuity of actual
possessions, is no such part of Gods counsel, as may any ways concern the
saving, Act. 20. 26.
or killing of souls. If yea, then was not the Apostle himself set free from
their blood in concealing it from them: for, in none of his canonical Epistles
has he discovered the same. If no, then the perpetuity of actual possession
is no part of Gods counsel concerning the saving or killing of souls: because
the same cannot possibly be proved from any of the Apostles authentical
writings. For, the Apostle no doubt, Epistolae Paul^ ad Timotheum, and Titum.
if he had ever intended to put down a Canon concerning the perpetuity of
actual possession, then had he very fit occasion therefore, in all, or some
one of his Epistles to Timothy and Titus: where he purposely handles all
ministerial functions, and precisely puts down all ecclesiastical
constitutions and orders concerning Church discipline. But, in no one of those
his authentical Epistles, is there any one Canon at all apparent, which may
tend in show, to any such purpose: and therefore, the perpetuity of actual
possession, is no such part of Gods counsel, as may in any sort concern the
saving or killing of souls. And as no one Canon: so, neither has the Apostle
himself (in any his Canonical writings) given any one counsel at all,
concerning such matters. No, not even there, where he purposely entreats of the
full power of the devil: and had just occasion (if ever) to have given some
advise at the least, concerning the same. Especially, Ephesians. 2. 2.
there where he calls The prince of the air, that selfsame spirit, which
even now effectually works in the children of disobedience. Also even there
especially, where he affirms, 2. Tim. 2. 26.
all those the disobedient ones, to be strongly ensnared, and fearfully
captiuated of the devil at his pleasure. In these two places (you see) he
purposely entreats of the power of the devil whatsoever. But, in neither of
those places, the Apostle does give any one counsel at all concerning the
perpetuity of actual possession: therefore, the same is no part of Gods
counsel, which may any way concern the saving, or killing of souls.


Exorcistes. Why sir? even in those places of Scripture which your self now
recites, Ephesians. 2. 2. 2. Tim. 2. 26.
the Apostle says plainly, that the devil works effectually in the
disobedient sort: and that those disobedient ones, are ensnared and captiuated
of the devil at his pleasure. These words, if they import not a counsel: yet
are they a watchword at least concerning such matters. For what employ those
words else I beseech you: but an actual possession.


Orthodoxus. They employ an actual power in the devil: but no actual
possession at all. For else, either must all persons whatsoever, be actually
possessed of satan, Ephesians. 2. 1. 3.
because, (before regeneration) it is the natural condition of all men, yea,
even of the Apostles themselves, to be under his power: or you must necessarily
conclude at the least, that only the unregenerate, and reprobate people are
actually possessed of satan, for that the Apostle in those places entreats
only of such. And so (by consequence) the yoong-youth at Notrub; he was not
actually possessed at all, because every man else, and even you your own
selves do generally repute him, a religious, a godly, and a gracious youth.
Moreover, Ephesians. 6. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16.
even in that self same Epistle where the Apostle advises the whole Church at
Ephesus to be every way careful in furnishing themselves with the complete
armor of God, for the better enabling of them against all the assaults of the
devil, and the speedier quenching of all his fiery darts, he gives them
notwithstanding, no counsel at all for using of that their said spiritual
armor against any your supposed actual possessions: and therefore the
perpetuity of actual possession, was no part of Gods counsel, that might any
way concern the saving, or killing of souls. If yea, then the Apostle
himself, he has not so sufficiently, and so fully instructed his Christian
soldiers concerning an absolute use of that their spiritual armor, as in
equity and conscience he ought; and thereupon he is not free from their blood.
Act. 20. 26.
If no, then (without question) a plain nullitie of actual possession, now in
these days of the Gospel, is (by the Apostle his purposed silence therein)
very apparently evident. Besides that, the Apostle Peter, 1. Pet. 5. 8.
stirring up (in like ^ort) the scattered Christians unto a continual and
watchful regard against all the dangerous vagaries the lion-like rampings, and
greedy deuourings of satan: he makes no mention at all of any their watchings
and wardings against your supposed perpetuity of actual possessions. Luc. 22.
31.
As also our Savior Christ (admonishing Peter, and the other Apostles, of
satan his inexorable desire to winow and sift them like wheat) he speaks no
one word of any the extraordinary power of the devil, for actual
possessions. Whereas Paul, Peter, and our Savior himself, had every of them
(in those the forenamed places) very just occasion to have written thereof.
Yea, and some of them also (in some of those places at least) would purposely
have handled your supposed actual possession of devils to the full: if so be
the supposed continuance thereof had been undoubtedly determined in the secret
counsel of God. But no one of them all (in those the forenamed places, or any
where else) do so much as once mention the same: and therefore the perpetuity
of actual possession; is no such part of Gods counsel as may any way concern
the saving or killing of souls.


Exorcistes. Though the perpetuity of actual possessions be not plainly
expressed: yet, why may not the same be covertly implied in some part of the
Scriptures?


Orthodoxus. Because, this your supposed ( may be) cannot certainly conclude
from thence, any such supposed implication at all: and I argue further against
you thus. If the perpetuity of actual pssession, be, either expreslie, or
implicatiuely contained in the Word, then also, the miraculous faith (for
suppressing such actual possession) is either expressly or implicatiuely
contained in the word: but the latter is undoubtedly false, and therefore also
the first.


Exorcistes. Why may not the miraculous faith be avouched perpetual?


Orthodoxus. Because the same was but temporary, and had only her powerful
continuance, so far forth as seemed good to the Lord, Mart. 16. 20.
for an extraordinary sealing up and confirming of the word with miracles
following. But that use has undoubtedly ceased long since: and therefore also
the miraculous faith (attending such temporary use) is undoubtedly ceased.
Howbeit, of this more at large, when we come to handle the means of subduing
the extraordinary power of the devil. In the mean time, I argue the matter
against you thus. All true Christian churches, and the soundest Divines in our
days, do generally conclude a final discontinuance of the miraculous faith,
in these days of the Gospel: and therefore (by consequence) the undoubted
determination of the devil his extraordinary power of actual possession.


Exorcistes. Do you then, very confidently deny all power to the devil: in
these days of the Gospel?


Orthodoxus. I only impugn his supposed extraordinary power, for the
perpetuity of actual possession: I deny not his power of obsession at all.


Exorcistes. Why? what understand you, by his power of obsession?


Orthodoxus. This question (I assure you) is very fitly propounded for having
hitherto handled at large, The devil his power of obsession. What it is?
the devil his power of actual possession: it remains now, to entreat a
little of his power of obsession: wherein we need not to be tedious: the same
being apparently evident: and generally confessed of all men. Now therefore, by
the devil his power of obsession: I do here understand, some certain
predeterminate ability, faculty, or inclination of his spiritual nature, for
the more powerful enabling of his restless endeavors, and insatiable desires
to work our daily destruction: wherein he eftsoons assaulteth, circumuenteth,
encloseth, inuironeth and besieges the servants of God a fresh, with a
purposed mind to devour them quite, were they not very mightily protected by
an invincible power of the Lord. And this his said power of obsession,
consists especially, either in an outward assaulting and vexing: or in an
inward suggesting and tempting at least.


Lycanthropus. What mean you by an outward assaulting and vexing?


Orthodoxus. I understand thereby, all those their external allurements, Math.
4. 2.
encumbrances, molestations, and griefs whatsoever; Job. 1. 15. 18. 19.
wherewith the whole nature of man is wonderfully distressed, disquieted, Job.
2. 7.
and vexed. Partly by worldly authority, examples, promises, 2. Sam. 24. 8.
compulsions, profits, 1. Chron. 21. 1.
pleasures, and so forth: and partly by fleshly affections, inclinations,
dispositions, Math. 4. 8.
delights, attempts, and carnal practices whatsoever they be. 2. Sam 11. 4.
Numb. 25. 3.



Philologus. And what mean you by inward suggestings and temptings?


Orthodoxus. I understand thereby, all those the internal allurements of satan
whatsoever, Luc. 22. 3.
wherewith he endeavors to draw men's minds from their dutiful obedience to
God: Ioh. 13. 2. 27.
by daring or thrusting into them, Iam. 1. 14. 15.
all treacherous and devilish devises, yea, and by kindling within them, all
ungodly motions, affections, 1. King. 22. 22.
lusts, and desires. Now, for the speedy effecting hereof, 2. Chron. 18. 21.
the devils they become lying spirits in the mouths of false Prophets: 2.
These. 2. 9. 11.
they work lying woonders, Revel. 16. 14.
in all deceaueablenes of unrighteousness: they buffet men's minds with fearful
tentations: they endeavor, 2. Cor. 12. 8. Luc. 22. 31.
to fif^e and winow their souls, Math 12 45.
as men winow wheat: they make men unclean, and replenish their hearts with
filthy pollutions, Act. 5. 3.
that thereby they might draw them into open dissimulation with the Job. 1. 7.
and 2. 2.
holy Ghost: Reue^. 2. 10.
they vex and torment men within and without: yea, and (which more is) they so
dangerously ^ncumber men's judgments, Romans 7. 23.
through the Law of their members, rebelling against the Law of their minds,
Romans 7. 24.
as eftsoons they enforce them to distrust their happy deliverance, Phil. 1.
23.
yea, and to desire their present dissolution, to be presently with Christ
himself. Lo, thus much in effect: for the devil his power of obsession.


Lycanthropus. This sir (I assure yon) is a wonderful power: and such as
should forthwith awaken our hearts to a continual watchfulnes. But, tell us
further I pray you, by what means the devil especially effects these
matters?


Orthodoxus. Although the devil has undoubtedly innumerable means to
accomplish his villainies: yet surely, the most principal, for the timely
effecting of his power of obsession: Ephesians. 4. 18.
is an holding men fast in the ignorance of God. Math. 4. 18.
That so, all the while they do carelessly continue in darkness, Luc. 1. 79.
and sit still in the shadow of death: the devil might assault them eftsoons
at his pleasure, Math. 13. 25.
and come upon them at unawares, to accomplish in them his mischievous
purposes. Neither is this holding of men in palpable ignorance, impossible for
satan (by the permission of God) to effect. 2. Cor. 4. 4.
Because the devil himself being the God of this world (and therefore, of an
admirable power) be both can, and does purposely blindfold the minds of all
infidels: least at any time, the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ (the
image of God) should shine forth unto them. 2. Tim 3. 26.
That (having so ensnared and captiuated the men at his pleasure) they might
from thencefoorth, walk on in vanity of their minds. And (which more is)
that their understanding (by this means) being darkened, they might (through
their own ignorance, Ephesians. 4. 17. 18. 19.
and hardness of heart (become aliants and strangers from the life of God: and (
being past feeling) might forthwith give over themselves unto wantonness, to
work all manner of uncleanness, yea, even with insatiable, and greedy
affections.


Exorcistes. Well sir. And how is it possible the devil should accomplish these
fearful effects in any man's mind, but by an actual possession at least?


Orthodoxus. Yes, the devil he well may, and does easily effect all these, with
many other like fearful effects; only, by an actual power, without any
actual possession at all. And this especially, by depriving the world of that
eternal word of life; which was given to enlighten men's souls. He depriues
the world of the word of life, either, by holding it altogether from them: or
otherwise, by hindering the effectual working power thereof at the least.

He holds the word altogether from men, Romans 1. 13.
by forestalling and hindering the timely establishment of faithful Preachers
in every place. 2. These. 2. 18.
Again, if he cannot possibly intercept the Preachers establishment, Math. 9.
32.
then he endeavors eftsoons to hinder (at least) the affectuall working power
of the word, Ioh. 2. 23.
being preached powerfully among them. Ioh. 12. 11. and 34. 3.
And this also, either by working effectually upon the hearers infirmities,
namely, upon their natural blindness, Romans 10. 17.
dumbenes, Isa. 6. 9.
deafenes, as also by making their ears without hearing: or, Zach. 3. 1.
otherways, by practizing all possible resistance against the powerful
preaching, 2. Cor. 12. 7.
and preachers themselves. Howbeit, this his resistance against the power of
the word, 2. Tim. 2. 25, 26. and 3. 8.
and preachers thereof: Jude 9.
is not always effected after one and the selfsame manner. For, sometimes he
uses an inward: and sometimes an outward resistance.

By inward resistance, he labors chiefly, either to make the holy word it
self, unfit for men's minds: and this, Math. 13. 19.
sometimes by stealing the word from out of their hearts: 1 King 22 2.
sometimes by corrupting the purity of the word it self, Math. 13. 25.
through a confused mixture of his cockell and darnell: sometimes, Genesis 3. 3.
by perverting the true purpose and sense of the Scripture it self: Mart. 14.
58.
and sometimes also, by calling in question the certainty and truth of the
word. Luc. 24. 21.
Or if (notwithstanding these the aforesaid means) he cannot possibly make the
holy word unfit for men's minds: then he takes a quite contrary course, and
endeavors to make men's minds (at least) unfit for the word. And this,
partly, Luc. 22. 3.
by entering effectually into their hearts, and so, Ioh. 13. 27.
filling them full of all iniquity: Act. 5. 3.
partly by circumuenting their hearts so violently, Math. 12. 45.
as no preaching at all, may po^^ibly penetrate, or pearce thorough the same:
partly, Act. 8. 22. 23.
by profaning their hearts with the filthy pollutions of profits and
pleasures: and partly also, 2. Tim. 2. 25. 26. and 3. 8. and 4. 14. 15.
by insnaring and captiuating their hearts so powerfully, as they may not
possibly be brought to acknowledge the truth. And this in effect, for his
inward resistance. His outward resistance against the power of the word, and
preachers thereof: is partly by fair means, and partly by foul means.

By fair means first. And this especially, Math. 8. 29.
by making some outward fair show, concerning the holy religion professed:
Marc. 5. 7.
or otherways, by fawning upon the professors themselves, Luc. 8. 28.
with an holy pretense of wishing their good. Act 16. 17.


By foul means also, Math. 16. 22. and 22. 16.
he withstands the power of the word, and preachers thereof. And this
especially, either by sifting and winnowing the professors thereof, as was
showed before: or, Luc. 22. 31.
by entangling and intrapping them by some manner of means: Math. 22. 15.
or by a Iudas-like, Ioh 8 4. 5.
and treacherous betraying of their persons and states: or; by procuring fiery
trials, Luc 22. 3.
persecutions, Ioh. 13. 2.
and troubles against them or, by committing the professors themselves unto
prison: Revel. 12. 3.
or lastly, by an outrageous tortoring, racking, Revel. 2. 10.
tormenting and killing of their bodies outright. Ioh 1. 2.
Lo, these (in effect) are the most principal means, Ioh. 8. 44.
whereby Satan effects his power of obsession: without any actual possession
at all.


Exorcistes. Good sir? I beseech you beware what you do. And so much the
rather, because, this your absolute denial of actual possessions; will open a
wide door unto Atheism, and loozen the reins of our unruly affections, to an
irreligious, licentious, and dissolute carriage. For, let men but once hear
they are free from all bodily danger of devils: and what will they not
forthwith adventure.


Orthodoxus. Nay rather, this your obstinate auouching of actual possession,
it the very high way unto Atheism, to an irreligious behavior, and all
carnal security. For, by making men very idly to gaze (as they do) at an
imagined actual possession of devils, when no such matter (in deed and in
truth) may soundly be proved: what do you else (in effect) but lull the whole
world fast a sleep in the cradell of carnal security? Yea, and (which more
is) by this means you make men forgetful and careless of Satan his
pernicious power of obsession: wherein lies covertly enfolded, a very
pestilent poison, and most deadly confection for body and soul. Neither may
you more fitly pleasure the devil, nor more fully make him beholding unto you
in any thing else: then, in upholding for him (as you do) a falsely imagined
actual possession. For, by this means, the mystery of iniquity, does more
freely and more forciblie work in the minds of men: and the devil may more
easily seduce their souls at unawares: by using at his pleasure, the power
which he has, while the whole world (at their pleasure) so improuidently, and
so carelessly stand musing upon an imagned power which he has not indeed. And,
herein the subtle dealing of Satan, is nothing inferior to the crafty
bird-catcher: who (while the silie poor birds sit prying at, and playing with
the whirligig, or staling before them) does cunningly clap them (up at
unawares) in his net, and nippes them all dead in the head. Howbeit, that which
is spoken may fully suffice, (I perceive) for a caveat herein: you your self
being thus driven (as you are) into a marvelous maze concerning the matters in
question. For these your idle vagaries, and often startings aside from the
purpose propounded: do import a wonderful defect in your skill, or implie a
marvelous distrust in your cause at the least.


Exorcistes. Nothing less I assure you. For, I am resolute (as before) in the
actual possession of devils: which may yet more effectually be proved thus. I
drove out the devil from the yoongman at Mahgnitton: and therefore the
yoongman (no doubt) was actually possessed before.


Orthodoxus. And I disprooue it effectually thus. The yoongman at Maghnitton
was never actually possessed of satan: and therefore, you did not, nor could
not possibly drive forth the devil from him. For, how is it possible you
should dispossess the devil, of that party, whom (indeed and in truth) he
never possessed? Howbeit, this question falls forth very fitly for another
discourse: wherein shall be purposely put down, the very true means for
subduing the power of devils. Notwithstanding, the time now is far spent, and
our Supper does stay on our coming: therefore, Let us go and refresh our
selves with such repast as God sends: and afterward, confer of the point for
an hour or twain if you please. Otherways, I must put over the perfecting of
our present discourse, till some other appointed season: because the next day
(if God will) I must sequester my self to some other more private meditations,
for the Saboth days exercise.


Lycanthropus. And we also our selves must return homewards to morrow upon
urgent occasion. Howbeit, we are all very loath to leave the matter so raw as
it is: and therefore, if it please Exorcistes and the rest of the company, we
will, rather loose an hours sleep or two, then go home unresolved herein.


Exorcistes. I am (for mine own part) very willing thereto: and so much I
dare say for the rest.


Orthodoxus. Let us then arise, and depart.


The end of the seventh Dialogue.
The eight Dialogue.
THE ARGUMENT.
Of the undoubted true force, for the timely subduing of this the forenamed
power of the Devil. Whether any created means may therein prevail? yea, and
whether prayer and fasting, have in them selves, any power, to effect such a
work?

The speakers names.
PHILOLOGVS. LYCANTHROPVS. PNEVMATOMACHVS. PHYSIOLOGVS. ORTHODOXVS. EXORCISTES.
Orthodoxus. THe Lord having in great mercy enabled our bodies a fresh, by his
good blessings bestowed upon us: it shall not be good to trifle the time, but
forthwith go an end in our conference. Come on therefore Exorcistes, repeat,
and prosecute, your lately propounded argument.


Exorcistes. This then it is. I drove forth a devil, from the yoongman at
Mahgnitton: therefore the yoongman he was actually possessed before Else how
could I possibly have driven forth the devil: if he had in the yoongman no
possession at all?


Orthodoxus. I answer you thus as before. The yoongman at Mahgnitton he was
not actually possessed of satan: therefore, you could not possibly drive a
devil from him. For, how is it possible you should actually dispossess the
devil of that man: in whom he was never actually possessea? And thus still, you
may plainly perceive your preposterous hap, in disputing this point. For
(notwithstanding any thing hitherto heard) you are yet as far from the
probable dispatch of your pretended actual possession, as you were at the
first: and will be I warrant you, so long as you insist (as you do) upon the
propounded question it self. (...).
This is nothing else, but to prove the same by the same: the which in all ages
has bin accounted, a reason, without any reason at al. Howbeit, because you
are now fled (as it seems) to your uttermost refuge; I mean, to the
succourlesse shelter of that your weather beaten action pretended to be done at
Mahgnitton: I do verily persuade my self, that (if once you be daunted
therein) you will shortly give over the skirmish.


Exorcistes. Yea sir. When I see you have proved my action at Mahgniton, no
action at all concerning the actual dispossessing of devils: I will then lay
my hand on my mouth, without any further reply to any thing spoken. But, this
I suppose, must not be performed in have.


Orthodoxus. Well, then we will take so much more leisure in performing the
same. And therefore having hitherto, very fully discovered that tyrannical
dominion of devils, which might any way concern their power of possession, or
their power of obsession: we will now proceed next, to an orderly examination
of that superior inevitable working power, whereby the aforesaid actual
possession of devils is undoubtedly conquered, subdued, squashed, and even
utterly annihilated, in comparison of any the precedent poisons thereof. Yea,
and so much the rather, we entend very carefully to follow this our intended
course: because in an only Imagination thereof, there does lie (it should
seem) the very fortress it self, of all those fantastical and idle
conceits, which concern your supposed dispossessing of Satan. And therefore,
having once (by a conscionable discovery of the infallible truth) made known
to your conscience, that, your pretended action which was wrought at
Mahgnition, cannot possibly challenge the approved privilege of any
exordinarie power from the Lord, for the actual dispossessing of devils. I
hope we may confidently conclude from the consideration thereof, an apparent
nullitie of all actual possessions in these days of the Gospel.


Lycanthropus. That is undoubtedly true: and therefore, I pray you proceed.


Orthodoxus. With very good will. First therefore, this said tyrannical
dominion of devils (respecting especially, their temporary power for actual
possession) the same ever was, and is effectually subdued by an only
extraordinary, a supernatural, and supereminent power of the omnipotent,
eternal God. Which selfsame supernatural power, the Egyptian sorcerers were
forcibly constrained to acknowledge for some etsbang-elohim: that is, (...)
some Divine operation or virtue extraordinarily proceeding from the Almighty
Jehovah himself. Exodus 8. 17.
And, because the holy spirit of God, Augustinus Cyri^^us.
is that only essential virtue of the father, and the son together:
therefore, Didimus Alexandr. lib. de spirit. sanct. Hugo Etherianus de
processione spiritus sancti.
that selfsame speech of the sorcerers concerning this power, it is by our
Savior Christ, even purposely interpreted Pneuma, kaidactylos theou: that is,
the spirit and finger of God. Because, that selfsame holy spirit (being an
essential power, equally proceeding from the Father, and Son together) does
(as it were by a finger, or hand) very powerfully distribute some certain
extraordinary gifts, (...).
and graces to some certain peculiar persons: peculiarly appointed of God, for
the actual dispossessing of devils. Math. 12. 28.
And, this said supereminent power of the Lord, Luc. 11. 20.
is twofold: namely, either immediate or mediate. Math. 10. 7. 8.



Exorcistes. What mean you by the immediate power of God? Marc. 6. 7. and 16.
20.



Orthodoxus. I understand thereby, Luc. 9. 1. and 10. 9.
that selfsame divine, supernatural, and supereminent authority of Jesus
Christ the stronger. Marc. 9. 38.
Who, of him self alone, Act. 16. 18.
and without any one instrument or means attending upon him, (...) Isa 9. 7.
is that undoubted el-gibbor, that invincible prevailing power, which does (by
the commanding force of his spiritual scepter) very valiantly vanquish, Math.
12. 29.
overcome, and subdue the actual power of satan the strong armed man: Marc. 3.
27.
notwithstanding he maintained before, Luc. 11. 21. 22.
a peaceable possession over the world. 1. Ioh. 3. 8.



Philologus. And, what mean you by the mediate power of God?


Orthodoxus. I understand thereby, a secondary, or subordinate power of the
almighty Jehovah: Act. 16. 18.
executed by some certain special persons, peculierly appointed by the Lord
him self, to that special purpose. Who ministerially, Hieronimus, Christus
potestatiue sugabat Daemones: Aposto^i nomine eius.
and, in the only name, mediation, and virtue of Jesus Christ: do valiantly
conquer, and actually overcome the actual power of satan's possession. For,
very certain it is, that the son of God, he powerfully expels devils by
his own immediate power: whereas all other besides, they do it ministerially,
in, and by the virtue and power of Christ his name. Howbeit, we have yet to
consider further, that, this same mediate power of the Lord, is also twofold:
namely, Apostolical, and Ecclesiastical.


Exorcistes. What mean you by the Apostolical mediate power?


Orthodoxus. I understand thereby, Math. 10. 7. 8.
that peculier prerogative, or that extraordinary spiritual pre-eminence,
operation, and virtue, Marc. 6. 7.
wherewith the only wise God, Luc. 9. 1.
more especially invested his chosen Apostles themselves, Act. 16. 18.
concerning some extraordinary power for the powerful expelling of devils. And
all this, for the more authentical confirmation of the newly published Gospel,
Marc. 16. 20.
throughout those newly established churchess, wheresoever they came.


Lycanthropus. And, what mean you by the ecclesiastical mediate power?


Orthodoxus. I understand thereby, some extraordinary peculier privilege, or
special grace very extraordinarily bestowed upon the newly established Marc.
9. 38.
churches, over spirits and devils. And this especially, Luc. 10. 9. 17. 18. 19.
for a further more admirable approbation of the newly established Gospel: so
admirably planted among them before, 1. Cor. 3. 6.
by the extraordinary preachers thereof. Wherein, we have to consider further:
that, this selfsame ecclesiastical mediate power, is here, to be considered
in a double respect. Namely, in respect, either of the churches primitive: or
of the churches successiue.


Philologus. How first, in consideration of the churches primitive?


Orthodoxus. The ecclesiastical mediate power (respecting more especially the
churches primitive) was an extraordinary ability, faculty, Luc. 9. 42.
virtue, or force, Luc. 10. 9. 17. 18. 19.
very apparently evident in the 70. disciples, and some other besides. They
having every of them, an extraordinary power from the Lord, Marc. 9. 38.
to subdue the actual possession of devils* during especially that primary age
immediately succeeding the Apostles of Christ And this also, for the more
admirable watering of that selfsame Gospel of salvation: so admirably planted
before, 1. Cor. 3. ^.
by Christ himself and his chosen Apostles.


Lycanthropus. And, how next in consideration of the churches successiue?


Orthodoxus. The ecclesiastical mediate power more especially respecting the
churches successiue, was some certain imagined faculty, ability, or force, in
some certain peculier persons: for the timely expelling of spirits and devils
from out of newly borne infants, before their admission to baptism. Having
also (for that special purpose) their Exorcists and Exorcismes peculierly
appointed thereto. Which said order, or rather disorder of Exorcizing (in as
much as it wants the warrant of the word, and for that also it foisteth very
odly into the church, such new found offices, and officers as never were
planted by Christ:) it was never yet justifiable in the court of conscience,
and we wonder not at all, though the same (being no plant of the almighty his
planting, Math. 15. 13.
) be now plucked up quite by the roots. Lo, these be those several sorts of
Exorcizings which were ever yet practiced in the true church of Christ: since
the very first time the Gospel began to be preached among them. Aretij problem.
Loc. 67. fol. 210 (...).
And, these Exorcizings also, by some others of special account, are
distinquished, or entitled thus; namely, they are, either archicall,
apostolical, ecclesiastical, or infanticall. Howbeit, (respecting perspi^uity
or plainness, and, for that especially they come all to one and the selfsame
period) we do rather, the more purposely retain our own order, rehearsed
before.


Exorcistes. But, tell me I pray you, were there no other sorts of Exorcizings
at any time practiced, but these four which your self have expressed?


Orthodoxus. Yes, there has ever been, and will be to the end of the world a
certain conterfeite, or fained faculty pretended by some: for expelling the
possession and power of the devil: and the same also undoubtedly proceeding
from a preposterous emulation, or rather, (...).
from an apishimitation of that selfsame extraordinary power apparently
evident in the Apostolical or primitive church. For in all ages of the world,
some certain od persons, are wonderfully affected, ^. Cor. 11. 13. 15*
with either glory or gain at the least. These men therefore perceiving how
easy a matter it was, and how glorious a thing with the faithful, for any to
have power over devils; they eftsoons attempted, or at least, they pretended
the selfsame power in themselves. Yea, and which more is, 2. These. 2. 9. 10.
even satan also (for the better enthronizing of himself in the seat of God,
as also, for a more easy establishing of all his dangerous errors) he in like
manner attempted an apish imitation of this the admirable power of the Lord,
for the expelling of devils. And this his pestilent purpose, he might so much
the more easily effect: by how much he plainly perceived that, the miraculous
faith did not necessarily require such special persons only as were upright
with God, and righteous before men. Math. 7. 22.
Perceiving therefore that the very hipocrites also and reprobate wretches (men
fit for his purpose) might fully Act. 19. 13. 14.
participate with that selfsame special power for the admirable expelling of
spirits and devils; as well as the other: Satan himself, he also undertook
that selfsame enterprise, and began by himself and his instruments, to
practice the like. And, this said counterfeit or fained faculty for expelling
the power of spirits and devils; is also foretold. Namely, Satanicall,
Ethnicall, Judicial and Papisticall.


Lycanthropus. What mean you by the Satanicall faculty?


Orthodoxus. That selfsame Thrasonicall brag, or that Spanish-like Brauado,
wherewith the devil adjured our Savior Christ: as though by his great words he
could skar, Tobit. 8. 3.
or by his Exorcizing power he would bind our Savior himself, beyond the
utmost borders of Egypt, Marc. 5. 7.
saying, I adjure, or conjure thee (thou Christ) that thou torment me nothing
at all. Howbeit, his success in that proud enterprise, was not unlike to the
proud Spaniards success in eighty eight: for (notwithstanding any their
magical skill, or Thersites-like vaunts) they were both constrained to get
home by weeping cross, with confusion and shame to themselves.


Pneumatomachus. And what mean you by the Ethnicall faculty?


Orthodoxus. That Satanicall pretended power which Satan did seem to practice
by heathenish persons, as by his organicall instruments for that special
purpose: Ephesians. 2. 11. 12. 13.
howbeit, such as were strangers and forreiners from the Church of Christ.
These men notwithstanding, by christals, by rings, by stones, by herbs, and
such other like fooleries; they would seem to do something in show at the
least.


Philologus. And what mean you by the Judicial faculty?


Orthodoxus. That selfsame Satanicall violence, which the devil also, by
those his pharisaicall organons endeavored to establish and to communicate from
hand to hand, unto all the posterity following. And these Judicial
adiurations, they were so much the more dangerous, by how much the patrones and
professors thereof, did ( in outward appearance at least) more nearly approach
to the Church of God. And, for that also, by an execrable and blasphemous
profaning of that sacred and vnexpresable name of the Lord, tetragrammaton:
they very pestilently pretended the powerful establishment of their pestilent
practices. Yea, and which more is, so soon as the holy name of our Savior
Christ began to be admirably and powerfully published abroad: they eftsoons
also, abused that glorious name, in every of their said exorcismes,
adiurations, or coniuring attempts. Imagining the honorable name of Jesus, to
be much more powerful for that special purpose: then the name tetragrammaton
was ever before. And hereof it came also to pass, that the seven sons of
Sceua the Jew (being stirred up with a like counterfeit Act. 19. 13. 14.
zeal) did thereby undertake to adjure the devils to their cost.


Exorcistes. Not so: for Cyprian very flatly affirms, that the devils gave
place to their said coniurations. Cyprian, in sermon. de bapt.



Orthodoxus. No such matter at all appeeres in the text. Nay, it tells us
rather, Act. 19. 16.
that, the evil spirits ran violently upon those Coniurours, overcame them,
and prevailed against them: insomuch as the Coniurours fled forth of that
house, all naked and wounden. Now, Marc. 9. 38.
these kinds of Exorcismes were very ordinary among many in those days,
Luc. 9. 49.
which were not of the College of Christ: yea, and some of them also but
reprobates. Math. 7. 22.
Which declares plainly unto us, that, the gift of miracles was then
indifferently bestowed upon good and bad: so far off was it, that any holiness
of that instrument effected the work.


Lycanthropus. And, what mean you by the papisticall faculty?


Orthodoxus. That selfsame presupposed Satanicall power which was compounded,
partly of Gentilisme, and partly also of Iudaisme, as a very mingle-mangle, or
hotchpotch of all the Magical sorceries of satan: consolidate fully in one
filthy confection, to the more dangerous deceiving of unstable and ignorant
persons. For first, they had their lygatures, their herbs, their consecrated
verum, their roots, their hol^^ water, their salt, and such other odd
relics, after the manner of the Ethnickes: and observed in every of their
ad^urations, the heathenish Exorcismes, their consecrated christals, their
sacred rites, their magical ceremonies, and coniuring charms. Then next, from
the Jews they had also the sacred names of their God, tetra-grammaton, of
Angels, of Patriarchs, of Christ, of the Apostles and holy Martyrs of God: that
the devil, 2. These. 2. 11. 12*
(by such glorious appearances) might the more grossly delude and bewitch with
strong illusions, the minds of the Infidels. Lo, these in effect are those
other sort of Exorcismes or Coniurations which were covertly brought in by the
cunning of satan: at any time since the Apostolic or Primative age. Now then,
do tell ^et Exorcistes (I pray you) among whether of these sorts of
adiurations you do range or consort, that your supposed dispossessing of satan
from the yoongman at Mahgnitton?


Exorcistes. Not among any of those four last rehearsed: for they are but
Satanicall and devilish, by whomsoever effected.


Orthodoxus. Neither may you presume to consort the same, among any of those
other declared before: for, they were all supernatural, by whomsoever
effected, and continued only in that primative age, See M. Dorels brief
Narration, fl. 5. page ^*
as has been, and shall be apparently proved. Yea, and you your own self
have elsewhere confessed, that the miraculous curing of feauers, palsies,
leprosies, diseases, and that driving out of devils by Christ and his own
Apostles gave credit to the glorious Gospel. Which said Gospel of Christ,
(being already so fully confirmed by the Apostles preaching, Marc. 16. 20.
and these miracles following) must now be entertained by faith, without any
such heathenish expectation, Math. 12. 28. and 16. 1.
or curious requiring of woonders, as the ^uill and adulterous nations do daily
demand. Marc. 8. 11.



Exorcistes. Howsoever you catch hold of any my scattered sentences, Luc. 12.
54.
very certain I am, and five hundred are able to witness: that, I drove forth
a devil from the yoongman there.


Orthodoxus. You are certain, and five hundred are able to witness, that you
bore them in hand you wrought such a feate. But, how is your self, or any one
of those five hundred able to avouch on their oaths, that (indeed and in
truth) you drove forth a devil: since devils are such invisible, and
impalpable spirits, as cannot possibly be discerned by any sensible means.


Exorcistes. I do freely confess there can be no sensible appearances of any
their essential departures from men: because spirits and devils, they are
only of a spiritual, invisible, and impalpable being. Howbeit, that the
yoong-man at Mahgnitton was undoubtedly dispossessed of satan, See M. Dorels
Apology, fol. 10 Marc. 1. 26. and 9. 26.
the signs thereof do confirm, which are, crying aloud, rending sore, and
leaving as dead: these signs were seen and heard at the instant of his
deliverance. And therefore, from thence I do reason thus. Where there was
crying aloud, rending sore, and leaving as dead, there were the undoubted true
signs, of the dispossessing of satan. But in the yoongman at Mahgnitton there
was crying aloud, rending sore, and a leaving as dead: therefore, there were in
the yoongman at Mahgnitton, the undoubted true signs of the dispossessing of
satan.


Orthodoxus. I answer you thus. Where there is crying aloud, rending sore, and
a leaving as dead, there are the undoubted true signs of the dispossessing of
satan. But in mania, in phrenesies, in the mother, in conuulsions, Marc. 1. 26.
and 9. 26.
in Catalepsies, in Epilepsies, and Lunacies, there is crying aloud, rending
sore, and a leaving as dead: therefore in every of the aforesaid diseases, there
are the undoubted true signs of the dispossessing of satan. So the^, by this
(you see) it is very apparent, and you must likewise conclude, that so many as
are sick of the aforesaid diseases, they are actually also possessed of Satan,
because in every of them also, those your supposed infallible signs of
dispossession are very apparent: or else you must be enforced to confess,
that crying aloud, rending sore, and leaving as dead, they are no such
undoubted true signs of the dispossessing of satan, as you would bear us in
hand they be.


Exorcistes. Why man, they are the undoubted true signs, put down by the
blessed Evangelists: to declare the like dispossession performed else where by
our Savior himself. For, Marc. 9. 26.
so soon as Christ had but said to the devil, thou dumb and deaf spirit, I
charge thee come out of the child, then, forthwith the spirit he cried, and
rent the child sore, and came out of him, and the child was as one being
dead, insomuch as many said he is surely dead. See now I beseech you, whether
these be undoubted true signs of the dispossessing of Satan?


Orthodoxus. Well, go to. If we must in any case account them the undoubted
true signs of the dispossessing of satan: then, do tell me (I pray you)
whether we must take them for the precedent, or the subsequent signs of such
dispossessions? I mean, whether we must account them, such undoubted true
signs, as do only preceed, and go before the action it self: or such
rather as do necessarily succeed and follow the same?


Exorcistes. Even for such undoubted true signs as do necessarily succeed the
dispossession it self: otherways how could they be certain signs of a
certain deliverance, the deliverance it self not fully effected? And so,
Marc. 9. 25. 26.
the Evangelist Mark he puts them down as the subsequent signs of that
selfsame action.


Orthodoxus. But yet, the Evangelist Luke, he tells us plainly, Luc. 9. 42.
that, while the child was coming to Christ, and, or ever that Christ began
to adjure or command the devil to depart, the devil he rent and tore the
child. Thereby declaring unto us, that, those cryings aloude, those rendings
and tearings, and that leaving as dead: are rather the undoubted true signs of
Satan his actual possession, then of any his dispossession at all. So then,
howsoever the Evangelist Mark does put down those matters partly preceding,
and partly succeeding the action it self: Very certain I am, it was never
his purpose to have them esteemed as undoubted true signs of every the
dispossessions of Satan whatsoever: but rather, to be taken as the infallible
effects of that selfsame special action, which Christ (at that present)
performed. Otherwise, if these cryings, these rendings, and this leaving as
dead, must necessarily confirm unto us the certainty of every dispossession
of Satan in whomsoever: then, how should we be assuredly persuaded concerning
the certain truth of all other the dispossessions of Satan, in whom, those the
aforesaid signs are not found? Math. 8. 32.
Namely, of those whom Christ performed in the Gergesenes, Marc. 5. 13.
of those which the seventy disciples effected, Luc. 8. 33. and 10. 17.
and of that which Paul accomplished in the Pythonist, with sundry other
besides: for, Acts. 16. 18.
in no one of those the dispossessions of Satan, Marc. 9. 38.
are any of those your undoubted true signs reported, and yet we doubt not at
all of their certain deliverances. The premises therefore considered, we may
very fitly retort your reason upon you thus. In those adiurations whatsoever,
where there was no crying aloude, no rending sore, nor no leaving as dead,
there were no undoubted true signs of any dispossessing of Satan. But in all
the adiurations which concern the aforesaid examples, there was no crying
aloude, no rending sore, nor no leaving as dead: therefore in all the
adiurations which concern the aforesaid examples, there were no undoubted true
signs of the dispossessing of satan. Thus then it is very apparent you see, by
all the premises, that (unless you will purposely fall into palpable
absurdities) you may at no hand avouch, that those cryings, those rendings and
tearings, and that leaving for dead, are the undoubted true signs of the
dispossessing of satan. No, you must rather persuade your self, they were
purposely reported for special and proper effects of that special and proper
action of Christ: and, not considerately put down for perpetual, and
undoubted true signs of all the actual dispossessings of spirits and devils
in whomsoever. Notwithstanding, be it supposed (which will never be proved)
that, your self did undoubtedly drive forth a devil from the yoongman at
Mahgnitton, and that, some cryings aloude, some rendings sore, and some leaving
as dead, were then also the special effects of that your supposed special
action: do here tell us I pray you, after what special manner you effected
the action? Whether only by means: or by a miraculous manner?


Exorcistes. Surely, Psellus, in lib. de daemonibus.
even only by means: and not by any miraculous manner of working at all.


Physiologus. Good Master Orthodoxus, let me argue this matter a little. Come
on Exorcistes, do you hold in good earnest, that devils may be driven forth
from men: and that only by means?


Exorcistes. I am very confident therein I assure you.


Physiologus. Make your mind plain, before we proceed. And tell me (I pray
you) whether spirtts and devils (by very natural, or corporal means) may be
truly dispossessed, and driven from men?


Exorcistes. Yea, even by very natural, or corporal means.


Physiologus. Why man, Petr. Thyraeus, These. 590.
spirits and devils, they are mere spiritual creatures. But, such is the
proper condition of spiritual creatures, that, all corporal matters
whatsoever, they come short thereunto by many degrees: and therefore, we may
boldly conclude, that those corporal or sensible things, can work nothing
efficiently in spirits and devils; can offer no violence at all unto them; nor
possibly expel them from any their actual possessions.


Exorcistes. Yes sir, I am able to demonstrate this matter, by an argument of
comparison, thus. There is one, and the selfsame condition of spirits, Coelius
Rhod. lect. antiq. lib. 1. cap. 29.
and of living men's souls: for they are both of them spiritual essences. But,
even by a mere corporal, or sensible means, may some violence be offered to
living men's souls, yea, they may thereby, eftsoons be separated quite from
their bodies: and therefore, even to spirits also (by means of some corporal
or sensible matter) there may eftsoons, some violence be offered, and they
also may be expelled quite, from their actual possessions in man.


Physiologus. Your argument of comparison, it consists not of such pares as
are equally alike in every respect; no, it halteth down right in that
selfsame point, whereupon it is more especially grounded: and therefore, it
enforces no necessary conclusion upon us at all. For, the condition of
spirits, and of living men's souls (howsoever alike in spiritual essence) it
is utterly unlike, respecting the bodies whereupon they both work. Souls,
they are properly conjoined to their own proper bodies, as the very first
essential form thereof appointed by God: howbeit, spirits (not by any
propriety, but by usurpation rather) they are only actually there, as the
afflictors, or tormentors permitted by God. So then (for those former respects)
the souls of living men, do necessarily require in those their own bodies,
some such certain dispositions and qualities, as the devils themselves (they
being no true essential forms of those bodies) require not at all. And
therefore, spirits or devils, they may actually afflict and torment those
selfsame bodies of men, how unfitly soever they find them: whereas the souls
of men (unless those their said bodies be aptly proportioned and fitted
thereto) they cannot inform them at all.


Exorcistes. Sir, howsoever you enforce a disparison between spirits and
souls, concerning especially their dealings with bodies, and thereby would
frustrate the force of my argument: very certain I am, that spirits or
devils, they may be driven forth from men's bodies, and that only by means.


Physiologus. But, by what means I beseech you? whether, by an uncreated: or
by a created means.


Exorcistes. Not by any uncreated means at all. For how can I possibly
practice that thing which is either uncreated: or not existing in nature?


Physiologus. Then you do flatly conclude that spirits or devils they may
actually be dispossessed, even by a created, or mere natural means.


Exorcistes. Yea, so much I flatly conclude,


Physiologus. This then I must tell you for certain, Mediacreata, ad actiones
supernaturales, effectiue, se non extendunt.
that you do very fondly conclude you wotte not what. For, this is undoubtedly
true, that, no created or natural means whatsoever: may efficiently extend
themselves to any such supernatural actions, as do any way concern the
dispossessing of devils. Because, all such supernatural actions, they proceed
not at all from any power of nature: but from the only power of obedience. By
the only efficacy of which obedientiall power, Quidlibet, ex quolibet.
even any thing, of every thing may easily be effected: although yet, in an
only respect of the mighty Jehovah himself, the sole and only efficient
thereof. For, August. in Genesis 9.
albeit the Saints of the Lord, namely Moses, and many others are said to
effect supernatural actions: yet, Item, de trinitate, cap. 8.
therein we must rightly understand, that only the Lord alone, he works that
by his Saints, which he works by himself. And therefore in saying as you do,
that spirits or devils they may be dispossessed from men, by any created, or
natural means: you do therein, very ignorantly avouch, you wot not well what.


Exorcistes. Yes sir, I wot well what I say: and, am able to demonstrate the
truth thereof, by many examples.


Physiologus. Let us hear your examples, which make for this matter.


Exorcistes. With very good will. Josephus, de Bello Iudaie.
First therefore Josephus very plainly reports, that when Titus and
Vespasian besieged Jerusalem: there was an Exorciste, that time in the host,
who (by a certain stone in a ring) delivered many that were possessed of
Satan. Moreover, Eleazar the Hebrew, (as the said Josephus records) he used
certain Exorcismes which were invented and made by Solomon, for the expelling
of spirits and devils: namely, ringes, roots, herbs, and such other like
sensible matters. But, the stone in the ringe, those roots, and those herbs,
they were only created, and mere natural means: therefore some only
created, and mere natural means, it has, and may have in it self, an
actual power, for the dispossessing of spirits and devils.


Physiologus. Why do you not also allege that which the said Josephus
Josephus, de Antiq. Iudait. Josephus de bello Iudai^. AElianus.
and Aelianus also reports concerning the herb Cynospastus, being otherways
called Aglaphotis, which has (they say) a certain special operation for the
powerful expelling of spirits and devils: for thereby also you might have
borne us in hand, that herbs in times past, have been workers of miracles.


Exorcistes. Well sir, howsoever you would scoff out the matter: do answer
Josephus.


Physiologus. I will. Josephus, he has heretofore so often been tainted in
matters of more weighty importance, as we have the less cause to credit his
pen in these his senseles reports. Besides that let this which he writes
concerning these tryfling toys, be esteemed for certain truths, I mean,
that some such dipossessions were effected in some outward appearance: yet
Wierus, he flatly affirms, Wierus, de praestigijs demon. lib. 4.
that Josephus the Jew, Vespasian the Ethnicke, and Eleazar also the Hebrew:
were every of them woonderfully bewitched with the iuggling sleights of the
devil. Who for the present, did purposely pretend the giving of place to an
imagined virtue in ringes, in roots, in herbs, and in stones: that (by means
of such sundry his illusions) those persons themselves, might the more easily
be brought to repose greater confidence in those tryfling toies, then in the
almighty Jehovah, the only disposer and guider of all things. And for the
furthering of this his devilish endeavor the better, he brought it also to
pass, that all those his said Exorcismes, they were very confidently fathered
upon Solomon himself, in an especial regard of his singular wisdom: that,
by such legerdemaines, he might win the more credit to all those his
sprituall illusions. But seeing it is certainly true, Instrumenta creata, ad
actiones supernaturales, non possunt se effectiue extendere.
that these created instruments could not effectiuely extend forth themselves
to the powerful effecting of any such supernatural effects: what man will be
so wilfully mad, as once to believe, or once to esteem those his tryfling
tales, for infallible truths? Again, since Solomon the very mirror it self
of heavenly wisdom, being usually accustomed (as the Hebrews report) to
dispute of trees and of herbs, 2. King. 4. 33.
from the Cedar of Libanon, to the very Hysope it self, and (which more is)
of beasts, of fowls, of creeping things, and of fishes (in the knowledge of
all which there lies hid from the world, much secret Philosophy for the
admirable effecting of such admirable matters by mere natural means.) If
Solomon (I say) disputing these matters, has left no one monument at all of
any such admirable skill, throughout the whole scriptures recorded: what wight
is so sottishly minded, as once to imagine that wise Solomon himself was the
first inuentour of any such palpable fooleries: or, that he was the author of
any such Magical enchantments, and superstitious Exorcismes, as are so
injuriously, or rather, so blasphemouslie fathered upon him?


Exorcistes. How basely soever you esteem of these means which Josephus
reports: yet, Tob. 8. 2. 3.
what say you to that which good Tobie declares, concerning the perfume made
with the fishes liver; which expelled the devil from out of Sarah the daughter
of Raguel. That perfume (you know) it was only a created, and mere natural
means: therefore, an only created, and mere natural means, it has, and
may have in it, an actual power, for the dispossessing of spirits and devils.


Physiologus. The book of Tobiah, Hieron. in prolog. Galeat.
it is not Canonical, and therefore, not authentical enough, to convince, or
confirm any matter in controversy. But, Otho Casman.
be it supposed Canonical; yet thus then I answer the same. Augelograph. par.
2. cap. 17.
Namely, that the forenamed perfume, so made of the liver, Quest. 10.
it might lessen (in some sort) the present affliction: though, not utterly
expel the devil his possession. For, that perfume, it might be some physical
means to dry up or correct some bad disposition in Sarahs brain, arising
naturally from the variable disposition of the moon it self, over moistning
her brain, and making it more apt for the present apprehending of satan his
intended afflictions. Which said badde humor of hers, being by that means
something alaied, the affliction withal, it would something abate: howbeit,
utterly to expel the devil his possession, it could have no possible power at
all. No, that supernatural action (if any such were) was supernaturally
effected, by a supernatural power in the Angel. Tob. 6. 7.
Who taught not Tobiah by any force of that perfume to expel the devil: but
told him rather before, that so soon as the perfume was kindled, the devil
should forthwith be expelled. Not, that the perfume it self should
effectiuely procure any such supernatural action: but be rather an apparent
demonstration of the admirable effecting thereof. For, even as it is not
undoubtedly necessary that the washing of my hands should be an efficient
cause of the moons eclipse, though the moon it self, at the very time of
my washing be undoubtedly ecclipsed: so, neither was it necessary that the
forenamed perfume, should effectiuely procure of it self, that selfsame
supposed dispossession of satan, howsoever satan (at the very instant it
self) was truly dispossessed. So then, the Angel he taught by that perfume
what should then come to pass: not rendering any one efficient cause, Tob. 8. 3.
why it so came to pass. As also the very text you allege, it tells us
not, that the perfume expelled the power of the devil: but, that it was rather
the Angel himself who cast the devil forth, at the very same time the
perfume was kindled. Now then, what was it I pray you that expelled the devil?
the perfume which rose up from the liver? no, but the Angel that bound him.
And how did he bind him? by any effectual means of that perfume? No, but at
the very same season the liver perfumed, the Angel he bound the devil, in
the utmost borders of Egypt. Giving Tobiah that selfsame perfume as an
infallible sign (but no effectual cause at all) of Sarah her happy
deliverance. Thus then you plainly perceive, that, no created, or mere
natural means, ^ath any efficient power of it self, for the actual
dispossessing of spirits and devils.


Exorcistes. Well sir, howsoever you may justly challenge the authority of
Tobiah, for not being authentical, I have one example from the canonical
scriptures, to confirm the infallible truth of that which I hold herein.
Namely, that admirable action of David: who only but played with his harp, and
the evil spirit of the Lord departed from Saul. Howbeit, that harp, and that
playing of David thereon, 1. Sam. 16. 23.
were only created, and mere natural means: therefore, some only created,
or mere natural means, may have in it naturally, an effectual power for the
dispossessing of spirits and devils.


Physiologus. In deed, if spirits and devils, had their peculier bodies
naturally united unto them, Apuleius.
as Apuleius affirms: saying, that devils are living creatures, constituted
of airy bodies, of passible minds, and in time also eternal: then, there would
be no inconvenience at all, to hold that spirits and devils (by a melodious
sound, or some other such sensible means) might be altered in their actions,
and expelled from men. For, the Platonists, they flatly affirm that devils are
a certain mean, between the intellectual spirits, who are of a pure
spiritual substance: and between men, having bodies constituted of the four
elements. Howbeit, because the sacred scriptures, and catholic faith do
jointly avouch that spirits and devils are of an Angelical nature, and that
(howsoever by malice corrupted) their natural faculties do still remain
absolute in them: we may consequently conclude, that therefore, no sensible
matter, or corporal virtue is able of it self, directly, or indirectly to
effect in them, any such action, they being properly of a spiritual
substance. So that, the devils themselves, they cannot (by any such created or
corporal means) be compelled to any thing: much less may they be violently
expelled from their actual possessions in men. Although yet, I dare not deny,
but that (by a divine and supernatural power whether immediate, or mediate)
they may be dispossessed, or driven from their hold.


Exorcistes. But the very text it self does plainly avouch, 1. Sam. 16. 23.
that, when David did play on his harp: the evil spirit of the Lord departed
from Saul.


Physiologus. My answer is this. It is generally doubted, and, our selves do
flatly deny, that Saul was ever essentially possessed with either spirit or
devil. Howbeit, because you labor with tooth and nail, to prove the
dispossessing of Demoniakes by an only created or mere natural means, and
thereupon also, would threape upon us a supposed essential possession in Saul:
go to, let it for arguments sake be granted (which will never be proved) that
Saul in deed, was so possessed as your self do happily imagine: what then infer
you thereof?


Exorcistes. I infer from thence, his undoubted dispossession: and that also,
by the only bare means of a melodious instrument. For, 1* Sam. 16. 23.
David but played with his harp; and the evil spirit of the Lord departed from
Saul.


Physiologus. Howsoever your self may conceive of the matter, it is doubted of
some, whether the evil spirit did ever depart from Saul: neither is any man
bound to believe the same as a certain truth. For, this is undoubtedly true,
that, a man may be always actually possessed: and yet, not always apprehend
the violent, or actual outrage of satan. Besides that, if Saul had been
dispossessed in deed; yet, that selfsame dispossession was effected, neither
by the inherent holiness of David himself, nor, by any supposed help of his
harp. For, a mere created nature, it has of it self, no possible power to
expel the possession of spirits or devils: as was showed before: no, that is
only an extraordinary and supernatural work of the Lord.


Exorcistes. Yea, 1. Sam. 16. 23.
but the text, it tells us plainly, that, when David once handled his harp:
the evil spirit of the Lord departed from Saul.


Physiologus. That is, the evil spirit, he showed not his outrageous force, as
before in Saul. Understanding thereby, that the torments of Saul (through the
melodious sound of David's harp) they might for the time be something abated:
though the evil spirit it self (if any such there) was not utterly expelled
from Saul himself, and thus much also affirms the text. Namely, that when
David did handle his harp: 1. Sam. 16. 23.
king Saul was refreshed or eased. Yea, and the servants also of Saul, they
accordingly advised him a little before, 1. Sam. 16. 15. 16.
to procure to himself some excellent harper: that, when the evil spirit
should vex him, the said harper might play with his harp. And wherefore I
pray you? to expel the devil? nay, but to ease the king for the present.


Exorcistes. How should the king be eased at all: and, the spirit not expelled
out of his body?


Physiologus. Very well I assure you. For, this we may boldly avouch, namely,
that by means of a melodious sound, or some other like sensible matter, such
as are actually afflicted of Satan, they may have their afflictions, for some
season abated: notwithstanding the actual possession of Satan it self be not
utterly expelled, and this also in a double respect. First, because the action
of all actiues, Philosophus, in 2. de anima.
are evermore actual in a predisposed patient: in such a subject (I mean) as
is proportionably appliable and fitted before, Actus actiuorum, sunt in
patiente praedisposito.
to the orderly apprehension of those selfsame intended actions. For, spirits
or devils, they cannot essentially alter any one quality in a corporal matter,
when, and so often as it pleases themselves: they only may effect some such
kind of thing, Johannes de Bromyard, in summa praedicat. E. 7. 11.
by means of some corporal actiues. And, for that selfsame consideration,
when they would afflict any man with their actual torments: they do eftsoons
respect the natural disposition of some corporal matter, whereupon they may
work their intended effects. Inhabentibus qualitates similimas: facilior fiat
transmutatio.
Knowing this by experience, that, in every such matter as naturally has in
it, the selfsame natural qualities: a transmutation of qualities may more
easily be effected by much. And, hereof also it is, that certain Lunatike
persons are eftsoons very strangely, and diversely afflicted at some one time
more then another: according to the variable disposition of the Moon it self,
as was showed before. Because the Moon being predominant over all moist
bodies, Plinius, in annotat. lib. 2. cap. 19.
and the brain also of man, it being naturally more moist then any part else:
the said brain is therefore more apt at one time, to receive the actions of
Satan then it is at another, Musculus, in Math. 17. 15.
according to the variable dispositions of the Moon it self, Beza, in Math.
8. 16.
being then more effectual in them. ^uen as also we see by daily experience,
that all shel-fish in the seas, Aretius, in Math. 8. 16.
they are at the increase of the Moon, very full: and, eftsoons again, by
the only decrease thereof they become very empty. Caluinus, in Math. 17. 15.
So surely, the devil, he observes those selfsame seasons, Hugo Card. in
Math. 4. 24.
wherein the bodies of men (being weak) are more subject to sicknesses: and,
abuses those times to his pestilent purposes. And therefore, even as by the
only observation of mere natural causes, the devil he may aggrauate his
actual torments in men: so surely (on the other side) by the only bare means
of a melodious harmony, or some other such sensible matter, there may be
procured in the bodies of men, such an apt disposition, as is less subject by
much, to those the operations of Satan. And so, by consequence, those sefesame
afflictions, or torments which were actually inflicted upon them by Satan, they
may very well be abated or lessened: notwithstanding the devil his actual
possession be not utterly expelled.


Lycanthropus. In what respect else may their said torments be abated?


Physiologus. Secondly, this said mitigation of satan his actual torments
inflicted on men, it may very easily be effected also if we but consider aright
as we ought: that, to the actual afflicting of any, Pet. Martyr, in Iudic.
cap. 5.
there is required in the patient, an apt apprehension of the intended
affliction. For, even as delectation or pleasure, is none other thing else but
the conjunction of some convenient active, Item, in loc. com. clas. 3. tit. de
musica and carminibus.
to some convenient passive, with an apt apprehension of the present delight,
in so much, as where there is no such apprehension, there is no delectation:
Pythagoras.
so surely, in affliction or heaviness, which is the conjunction of some
convenient active, to some convenient passive, there must needs be an apt
apprehension of the objected affliction, otherwise, where such apprehension is
wanting, there the affliction is no affliction at all. Whereupon it does
necessarily follow, that, even as that which diminishes the apprehension,
diminishes also the affliction it self: so surely on the other side, that
which increases the apprehension, it increases also the delectation intended.
But, a melodious sound or musical harmony, it draws unto it the minds
attention, and therewithal, retracteth the same from the offered affliction.
And so, by consequence it might very well lessen those torments which satan did
actually inflict upon Saul, in as much as it drew the minds attention unto it,
and withdrew the same (for that present) from any such apprehension of the
torments inflicted: but, by no means in it self, the same might utterly
expel the actual possession of the spirit in Saul, if any such were.


Exorcistes. If those torments actually inflicted by satan, might something be
lessened: then might they also be totally removed. For, seeing that spirits
and devils (as your self does affirm) are unable, (at their own pleasures)
to alter the essential qualities of any true natural matter to serve their
own turn, but must do it by means of some corporal actiues: it follows
consequently, that they are also of themselves unable to afflict any man
actually, but, must do it by means of some such corporal actiues as are able,
very aptly to dispose the passive matter it self, to an apt apprehension of
the afflictiue action in the party possessed. And then, (according to your own
reason a little before) such a disposition (by corporal or sensible means)
may eftsoons be well procured in the body of man, as may make the same body
become utterly unapt for the present, to apprehend any the actual torments of
satan. As for example, the disease called mania, Damascenus, Philosophus, in 4.
Ethic.
which (as Damascene reports) is a perpetual fury, very mightily disposed to
an alienation of mind: and so by consequence, a disease very apt to the speedy
apprehension of any Demoniacall affliction enforced upon it. Auicen. lib. 3.
tract. 4. cap. 17.
And yet notwithhanding, this said Demoniacall passion proceeding thence, Phil.
Barrough, de method. curandi lib. 3. ^^p. 27.
as the same may (by sensible means, and physical medicines) be mightily
abated: so may it (in like manner) be thoroughly and perfitely cured, it being
(as physicians affirm) an infirmity, eftsoons very curable. But, the disease
it self being perfitely cured, that former disposition of the body (which was
naturally inclined to the speedy apprehension of those selfsame Demoniacall
torments so answerable unto it) is in like manner removed or stayed: and so by
consequence, the active affliction of satan, it may be utterly expelled from
men, by an utter expelling before of the passive disposition correspondent
thereto in the party possessed. Now then, if a melodious harmony has in it
self an apparent efficacy, for the present appeasing of passions and greefes
of the mind, and for the timely procuring of present delights (as experience
approoueth, August. in 10* confess.
and Augustine flatly affirms) it follows consequently, that, that
selfsame melodious sound, which (by a sensible, or mere natural quality) did
undoubtedly alter the mental passions in Saul: the same might also quite change
the minds inclination, so farfoorth at the least, as that selfsame disposition
which was naturally inclineable before, to the speedy apprehension of satan his
active affliction was utterly removed, and thereby also, the foresaid
affliction it was thoroughly and perfitely cured.


Physiologus. Well sir. Thus much first, you do fully confess in your answer:
namely, that, by a melodious sound, or some sensible means, there may well be
procured in the bodies, and humors of men, such an apt disposition, as the
torments actually inflicted by satan, may undoubtedly be abated, or lessened.
Howbeit, from thence also, you would further infer: that therefore, those the
said torments actually inflicted by Satan, they may in like manner, be totally
expelled. The reason of which your said inference, is undoubtedly this. Namely,
for that, by an utter remoouing of the passive disposition apprehending those
torments inflicted: the active operation of Satan, is likewise utterly
removed. And so, when the devil (to our seeming) afflicts no more: we must
then be persuaded, that the evil spirit, is undoubtedly departed from thence,
and the party possessed is quite delivered. This (I suppose) is the very
sum of your inference: and the reason also it self, wherewith you would
manage the matter.


Exorcistes. Yea sir, it is wholly the same.


Physiologus. Then, this I must tell you for truth: that your assertion it is
too too absurd, and grounded altogether, upon fantastical and idle conceits.
For, first you imagine there can be no actual possessions at all: unless some
natural disposition, or passion at least, do offer before hand a free passage
thereto. This (I assure you) is utterly untrue, as may plainly appear in the
person of Saul himself, 1. Sam. 9. 2.
of whom we entreat. For (he in all perfection of nature) excelled his
brethren by much; or any man else in that age. He being a goodly young man, and
fair, so as among all the children of Israel, there was none more goodly then
Saul: being also from the shoulders upward much higher then any any in Israel.
Thus then you see, there was no such redundancie of humors, nor no other such
natural defects in Saul's constitution, as might make him the more naturally
disposed to the speedy apprehension of any those actual afflictions which
satan 1. Sam. 16. 14.
inflicted upon him. And yet notwithstanding all this, the text, it tells us
plainly, that the spirit of the Lord departed from Saul: and an evil spirit
was sent from the Lord, to vex him withal. Secondly, you do no less fondly
imagine again, that, the devil he is quite gone and departed: when he does
not apparently and actually afflict the possessed. Math. 11. 29.
The untruth of this idle conceit, Luc. 11. 21. 26.
we need not discover at all: it being more apparently evident, then the
Sunshine at midday. For, the devil, Math. 17. 15.
eftsoons he slippeth aside according to sensual appearance: Marc. 9. 18. 21.
when yet (in deed and in truth) he still continues his actual residence.
Luc. 9. 38. 42.
Yea, this your idle conceit, as it fights directly with the faith of those
Scriptures, which affirm an actual afflicting but by times, See M. Dorels
breife Narrat. in the disposition of William Aldred, the 5. deponent.
and by turns: so does it crack the whole credit of that your falsely
supposed possession in the young man at Mahgnitton, who (as your own self
confesses, and many others can testify) was only afflicted by fittes, and
but at several seasons. Thirdly, you do as fondly imagine, that the parties
(howsoever possessed of satan,) they are never actually afflicted, See M.
Dorels Apology, in page 31.
unless there be naturally in them before, a passive disposition, for the
timely apprehension of the intended actual possession: which is every way more
false and untrue, then any of your other conceits. Because, neither the actual
possession, nor the actual affliction do necessarily proceed from any
affection, or disposition in nature, or from any the absolute power of the
devil: Johannes King, in Ionath. (...).
but, from the only provident appointment, the powerful permission, and
predominant purpose of the only omnipotent God. Who is ergon synergos, that
is, a free, and effectual worker: Communiter author fateor: sed, non nisi boni
fautor.
in the works of all sorts of workers. Commonly, and indifferently (I
confess) an author, in a more common, and more ample signification: howbeit, a
favorer only of good, and a director of all actions whatsoever, to the good of
his children, Job. 1. 12. and 2. 6. and 33. 26.
and glory of his name. As more plainly appears in the person of Job: whom
the devil could no further afflict, then the Lord had appointed. By all that
which is spoken, it is therefore very apparent, that (notwithstanding any
thing hitherto heard) the actual affliction of Saul it might something be
lessened: though the actual possession of satan (if any such there) was still
continued.


Exorcistes. Well sir: I argue it further thus. If a melodious sound may
effectually procure such an apt disposition in the mind of a man as may make
it more able to receive and recover afresh, some supernatural gift, being lost
before: then may it much more procure such an apt disposition in the body of
man, as may even utterly disable the same from the speedy apprehension of any
such natural affliction, as is naturally inflicted by satan. But, the first is
undoubtedly true, as appears in Elisha the man of God, 2. King 3. 15.
who, only by hearing a melodious harmony, recovered forthwith, the
supernatural gift of prophecy: and therefore also, the other (in like manner)
is apparently evident. For, Virtus actiua, quae potest in maius: potest etiam
in minu^.
an active virtue, having an ability in that which is greater: it has much
more ability in that which is less. Yea, and this also very fitly accords
with the text it self, which tells us plainly: 1 Samuel 16. 16.
that when David but handled his harp, the evil spirit departed forthwith
from Saul.


Physiologus. Howsoever your antecedent befitteth your humor, the same I
assure you is utterly untrue. Tremelius, in 2.
For first, the prophet Elisha, he had not utterly lost the supernatural gift
of prophecy, Reg. cap. 3. verse. 15. nota. 10.
as your self very falsely and fondly imagine: howsoever, being something
disquieted in mind (by reason of the wicked kings presence) he perceived
himself unapt for the present, 2. King. 4. 24.
to any such spiritual enterprise. And, for that only respect, he purposely
required that some cunning musition (by playing and singing before him) might
quiet his troubled mind, and quicken his dulled spirits: for his better
enabling afresh, to that so sacred, and so blessed a business. Again, if the
Prophet (as you falsely affirm) had even utterly lost (indeed) that selfsame
supernatural gift: then surely, the sensible sound of a melodious harmony,
had been utterly unable of it self to recover the same. Because, Virtus
creata, ad actus, aut habitus supernaturales; se non extendit.
created virtue, (such as that musical harmony was) it could not effectually
extend it self to the timely apprehension of any such supernatural action, or
habit, as prophesying is. Only, it might be some means to revive, and to
quicken the appaled spirits of the prophet Elisha, for the better preparing of
him to that action: but, again to recover that supernatural gift of prophecy
(being utterly lost) it had been utterly unable. Notwithstanstanding all this,
let us admit your antecedent for current, which will never be proved so: yet,
your consequent, or inference enforced from thence, is too too weakly
confirmed by the rule you allege. Telling us inco^siderately, that any active
virtue, having an ability in that which is greater: it has an ability also
in that which is less. This rule (I assure you) it concludes not your cause,
no, it comes short thereof by many degrees: (...).
in as much as the same is not universally true, but holds only in things
essentially subordinate in one and the selfsame kind, and not else. For, this
is no good consequent: A man is able to beget a man: therefore, he is also able
to beget an ass. Neither is there any sequel in this. A man is able to carry
a great stone: therefore, he is able also to carry a great fire. Thus then,
you may plainly perceive by all the premises, that, the actual affliction in
Saul, it might something be lessened: though yet, the actual possession of
satan, (if any such there) was still continued. And therefore, this the example
of Saul (who was eased a time, by David his handling the harp) it concludes
no absolute dispossessing of spirits and devils, by any created, sensible, or
mere natural means whatsoever.


Exorcistes. Well sir? how lightly soever you esteem of these matters, it is
undoubtedly true, that, my self dispossessed the yoongman at Mahgnitton: yea,
and this, only by means.


Physiologus. By what means I beseech you?


Exorcistes. Even, by the only means of fasting and prayer.


Physiologus. But, whether was it done by your fasting alone, or by your prayer
alone: or, by your fasting and prayer together?


Exorcistes. Not by any means of either alone: but by a mutual concurring of
both, in that selfsame action.


Physiologus. Put case you had attempted the work by your prayer alone: what
then? would your endeavor therein have been void?


Exorcistes. Yea no doubt. For, by that extraordinary exercise of fasting, my
prayer it became the more forcible: and, my spirit was made the more powerful
in the timely performance of that admirable enterprise.


Physiologus. So then, the whole efficacy of that selfsame action (as your
speech does import) it depended especially, and only upon the extraordinary
exercize of your fasting alone: as upon that which gave a power to your prayer,
and which made your spirit the more apt to that enterprise. O absurd, and
senseless opinion? This sauoureth very shrewdly of the Montanists error, who
did attribute so much to their voluntary exercise of fasting and prayer: (...).
Tertullianus, Hieronimus.
as (for that selfsame respect) they invented, their adusting, and drying up
diets, for the more forcible effecting of those there fondly affected fooleries.
Eusebius. hist. eccles. lib. 5. cap. 18. (...).
And were therefore, very fitly termed, temperate and continent persons. So
surely, your self at this present, in this your pretended dispossession of
spirits and Devils, you make your extraordinary exercise of fasting, the only
efficient cause of that selfsame supposed dispossession of the devil at
Mahgnitton. For first you dispossessed him forsooth, by the only means of
fasting and prayer. But, your prayer (you say) it became the more forcible, and
your spirit was made the more apt, by the extraordinary exercise of your
fasting it self: therefore, the extraordinary exercise of your said fasting
it self, Quicquid effici^ tale: idipsum est magis tale.
was the only efficient cause of that selfsame supposed action. For,
whatsoever does make another thing to be such as it is: that same thing no
doubt, is much more so it own self. But, your extraordinary exercise of
fasting, it made your prayer more powerful, and your spirit more apt for that
selfsame dispossessing of Satan: therefore, your said extraordinary exercise
of fasting, it was the only efficient cause of that selfsame dispossessing of
Satan. This, not only mannageth much, the Montanists errors (as was showed
before) but (which more is) it does very shrewdly support the superstitious
and Popish opinions of fasting. Hieron. epist. ad Demetriad. tom. 1.
Who, not only repose to much spiced holiness in the voluntary usage thereof:
but, make it withal, very satisfactorie for sin, and propitiatory, for the
silly poor souls departed to purgatory. Gratian. q. 14. cap. 2. Anima.
Whereas, the same is only a mere humane exercise: Sentent. in 4. Pet.
Martyr, loc. com. class. 3. cap. 10. sect. 23.
not having in it own self, any sanctity, or holiness at all. Besides all
this: that which you say is too to absurd. For, if the only exercise of
fasting, be made an effectual means for dispossessing the devil: then may
the same (in like manner) be made also, an effectual means, for the
effectual suppressing of all those actual sins whatsoever, which the devil
suggests into men. Because, an active virtue, which has an ability in that
which is greater, it has an ability also in that which is less: that less
especially, being essentially subordinate in one and the selfsame kind, as
are the actual sins (suggested by Satan) to Satan himself. And so by
consequence, any other creature else (only but abstayning a time as you did,
from meats and drinks) it may also be made an effectual means to
dispossess the devil himself, and withal, to suppress his devilish
suggestions.


Exorcistes. Nay sir, I make not my exercise of fasting, the efficient cause of
that selfsame admirable action: but, an assistent rather, in the fruitful
performance of that forcible prayer, which forced the devil to depart. Not,
that my said prayer had been unfruitful, without some such special
assistance of fasting joined therewith: but for that (the flesh being thereby
tamed the better) my spirit more fervently performed that selfsame prayer,
which then, and there, dispossessed the devil.


Physiologus. Why were you then so fond to affirm at the first, that (without
the joint exercise of fasting and prayer together) your prayer it self had
been utterly frustrate, concerning especially that special action. Well
then; let us proceed. It was not your exxercise of fasting then; but, your
forcible prayer that forced the devil to depart. But tell me I pray you, do
you not esteem of that selfsame actual possession, as of an extraordinary,
and a mere supernatural matter?


Exorcistes. Yes sir, I dare flatly affirm that the same was entirely and
wholly, a mere supernatural matter. For had the same been any way natural,
it should then have proceeded from some such natural causes, or wantes in the
party himself: as might have been otherways cured by physical helps, and
mere natural means. Whereas this the actual possession in the yoongman
there, (...). See M. Darels Narration, fol. 5. page 2.
it had (as Physicions affirm) somewhat Divine, or supernatural, the same
also incurable by any humane or ordinary skill: and, which could not
otherways be possibly cured, but, by the only ordinary means of fasting
and prayer.


Physiologus. I like well your plainenes. But, tell me yet farther I pray you,
whether your said action of fasting and prayer, for that dispossessing of
Satan: was any other thing else, but a created or mere natural action?


Exorcistes. Nay surely sir, that selfsame action (as it proceeded from me,
and was simply performed by me) it was no other thing else but a mere
natural action. For, how could I possibly practice any uncreated, or
supernatural action: being my self but a created or mere natural agent?


Physiologus. Yea, but the effect which followed of that your said natural
action, I mean, that extraordinary dispossession of satan, it was undoubtedly
(if any at all) a supernatural effect: and so, you absurdly conclude, that, an
only created, or mere natural cause, it may eftsoons ^ffect some
supernatural actions.


Exorcistes. Do make of the matter what pleases your self, very certain I
am, that my prayer alone did effectually drive forth the devil.


Physiologus. Well, be it supposed your very prayer alone, did effectually
drive forth the devil, as you very fondly imagine: wherein (I beseech you)
consisted the efficacy, and force of your prayer? Whether in sound, or in
voice, or in words? If only in sound, why might not then a tabret, or drume,
have also effected, that selfsame admirable action: seeing, as shrill, and as
forcible a sound might have proceeded from them, as could possibly proceed
from your self? Again, if only in voice, why might not a lion, a bull, or a
bear have effected the enterprise: since they had been able, more terriblie to
have roared, bellowed, or brayed forth their voices abroad, then you your own
self? Briefly, if neither in sound nor in voice, but only in words, why might
not then, some prattling Parrat have driven forth that devil: since she also
might well have been taught to prattle forth words, if only bare words
would have borne out the business? But perhaps you would have us imagine, that,
the efficacy of your prayer did only consist in the words of a man: then
must we withal, be thus much persuaded at least, namely, that the very bare
words of a mortal man, albeit they vanish in the air as they are uttered
forth: yet have they in themselves, such a secret force as is able to drive
forth a devil: Oh, here is ^oughtie good stuff; if the world were once
quick.


Exorcistes. You are highly to blame in blazing abroad as you do, such sharp
Satyricall quippes, and gyrding taunts, against my admirable action, wrought at
Mahgnitton. For (by disgracing that wonderful work of the Lord) the holy
exercise of fasting See M Darels Narration, fol. 6. page 1.
and prayer, is shamefully scorned, and brought into public disgrace.


Physiologus. I neither disgrace the holy actions of God, nor scorn at any his
sacred ordinances: no, I more truly esteem, and more sincerely reverence the
holy exercise of fasting and prayer, then you do your self by much. For,
whereas I only approve of the power and practice thereof according to truth:
your self (by profaning the same in such falsely supposed actions) do make the
holy exercise of fasting and prayer to be shamefully scorned of atheistes,
derided of papists, yea, and very shrewdly to be suspected with weakelings. So
that, you your own self (by these your disordered dealings) do rather bring
that holy ordinance of God, into public disgrace.


Exorcistes. Do I bring prayer and fasting into public disgrace; when I use
them only in driving forth devils?


Physiologus. Why man, you confess them but mere natural actions, as they
were performed by your self: and, you have heard it sufficiently proved
before, that, no created or mere natural power, may possibly extend it self
to any such supernatural actions, as is the extraordinary expelling of spirits
and devils. And therefore (by abusing the holy exercise of prayer and fasting
about such fasly supposed possessions of devils) what do you therein (in
effect) but bring them directly into public disgrace; as I told you before.


Exorcistes. What you told me before it makes no matter: I, both know what I
did, and what was my purpose in doing the same.


Physiologus. In deed, it should seem you propounded to your self some
special purpose, flat opposite to the holy ordinance of God: and thereupon
has followed so bad an effect.


Exorcistes. Why sir, See M. Darel^ Apology, in page 32.
has not the Lord established prayer and fasting, as an ordinary perpetual
means for the powerful expelling of spirits and devils? By using the same
therefore (as I did) in that admirable action: I walked therein according to
the holy ordinance of God.


Orthodoxus. I may by no means, any longer endure your palpable untruths: or
rather most blasphemous speeches. For, where has the Lord established prayer
and fasting as an extraordinary perpetual means, for the powerful expelling
of spirits and devils?


Exorcistes. Even in the seauenteene of Matthew, Math. 17. 21. Marc. 9. 39.
and ninth of Mark; where he tells us plainly, that this kind goes not
forth, or can by no other means else be cast out, See M. Darels Narration,
fol. 5. page 2.
but by prayer and fasting.


Orthodoxus. What conclude you from thence?


Exorcistes. This I conclude, See M. Darels Apology, page 32.
and very confidently hold: namely, that (one being possessed) prayer and
fasting is to be used for the casting out of satan: as a means appointed of
God to that special end.


Orthodoxus. Do you hold that in good earnest?


Exorcistes. Yea, See M. Darels Apology, page 32.
in very good earnest. And, this I doubt not, but I am able to prove by the
holy scriptures; and further to confirm the same, by the testimony, of
ancient, and late writers, by the practice also of the primitive church in all
ages, and the good success thereof.


Orthodoxus. Then will I be bound, for one twelve months space, to keep your
kine for nothing. Howbeit, because this point will crave a long discourse* and
I feel my self somewhat weary with sitting; let us, go walk a turn or two
in my parlour. And having revived our spirits by the singing of psalms:
return again to our purpose.


Physiologus. I for my own part, like well of your motion.


Lycanthropus. The same I dare say for all the rest.


Orthodoxus. Arise then, and let us depart.


The end of the eight Dialogue.
The ninth Dialogue.
THE ARGUMENT.
Whether Prayer and fasting, be established by Christ, as a perpetual
ordinary means, for the powerful expelling of devils? Whether the power
therein, be a vocal, or a personal power? Or, whether a true justifying faith
( apprehending some supernatural power of God) does effect that work?

The speakers names.
PHILOLOGVS. LYCANTHROPVS. PNEVMATOMACHVS. PHYSIOLOGVS. ORTHODOXVS. EXORCISTES.
Orthodoxus. BLessed be the name of our God for these sweet recreations: oh,
how they comfort the soul, and refresh the body. Surely, our crazie bodies,
they would soon be infeebled, were they not daily supported by such sanctified
props: yea, and our souls also, they would languish every hour, were they
not eftsoons comforted by such gracious refreshings from God.


Physiologus. It is undoubtedly so as you say: and therefore, how highly are
we bound to extol his merciful kindness?


Orthodoxus. Very true. But come Exorcistes, let us loose no time. Has Christ
established prayer and fasting, for the perpetual expelling of spirits and
devils?


Exorcistes. There is no doubt at all to be made of that matter.


Orthodoxus. I am doubtful thereof I assure you: neither will you be able (I
fear) to clear me of that doubt, so long as I have breath in my body. For,
this I must tell you for certain, that if prayer and fasting be perpetually
appointed by Christ, for the powerful expelling of spirits and devils: then
must we necessarily esteem thereof, as of an holy established ordinance, for
that selfsame purpose.


Exorcistes. Yea, See M. Darels Apology, page 32.
no doubt, it is an holy established ordinance, for that very same purpose.


Orthodoxus. If it be an holy ordinance, perpetually established by Christ, as
you bear us in hand: then has it also an apparent commandment appertaining
unto it, for the authentical approbation of such a perpetual establishment:
and, it has also some certain Canons and rules, concerning out orderly
directions therein. But, no such commandment or canon is any where extant in
all the Scriptures: therefore, prayer and fasting is no perpetual ordinance
established by Christ, to any such special purpose.


Exorcistes. I understand not your argument; it is so obseurely, and so
intricately propounded unto us.


Orthodoxus. It is apparent enough, if you were not wilfully blind: howbeit, I
will repeat, and propound it more clearly thus. If prayer and fasting be such
an established ordinance, then that establishment is apparently expressed in the
Scriptures: but the latter is false: therefore also the first.


Exorcistes. Why sir? Math. 17. 21.
has not our Savior himself put down an express commandment, Marc. 9. 39.
for the perpetual establishment of such an ordinance: See M. Darels
Narration, fol. 5. page 2.
where he tells us plainly, that this kind goes not forth but by prayer
and fasting? What may be more clear then this?


Orthodoxus. Do you call this a clear commandment, for the perpetual
establishment of such an ordinance?


Exorcistes. What may be more clear?


Orthodoxus. You do herein, too to fondly bewray your gross ignorance: and
make clear to the world, your want of judgment, concerning the purpose of
Christ in that place. Which was only to make known the accidental
impediment, in that selfsame action: and, not to put down any essential
commandment concerning the supposed perpetuity of any such sacred ordinance,
as your self do imagine. For, what manner of argument is this that you make?
Math. 17. 21.
This kind goes not forth but by prayer and fasting: Marc. 9. 39.
therefore, from henceforth (says Christ) I do solemnly establish prayer and
fasting, as a perpetual ordidinance, for the powerful expelling of spirits
and devils for ever. This follows fair and far of from the purpose you aim
at.

Again, if the holy ghost in that place, had either expressly, or implicatiuely
intended to put down a commandment for the perpetual establishment of any
such falsely supposed ordinance: then surely, it is not to be doubted at all,
but that (in a matter especially of such sacred importance) he would never have
left us at random, to deal therein as seemed good to our selves, but (in some
other place else at the least) he would have inserted such certain canons and
rules as should more fuly have served for our orderly direction and guidance
therein. Howbeit, Romans 12. 6. etc.
neither in the epistle to the Romans or Corinthians, neither yet, 1. Cor. 12.
28.
in any of those to Timothy or Titus (where all church offices and officers are
handled at lage) does he give any 1. Tim. in all. Tit. in all.
one rule at all, concerning the orderly practice of this your falsely supposed
perpetual ordinance: and therefore, the same is no such ordinance established
by Christ.

Besides that, the apostle Peter, 1. Pet. 5. 8. 9.
having purposely laid open the perpetual vagaries of satan to kill and
devour, he makes no mention at all of prayer and fasting, but only of a
strong faith to resist him withal. Ephesians. 6. 11. 12.
As also, the apostle Paul displaying purposely the complete armor of
christians against the power of the devil whatsoever: he speaks not a word of
prayer and fasting, for the timely withstanding of any his fiery darts. So
then, since ( in all the canonical scriptures) there is neither commandment
nor canon for the timely fortification of any such newfound ordinance: I
wonder you blush not, to brave out the matter (as hitherto you have done) by
pretending the authority of scriptures, the testimony of fathers old and new,
D. Apolog. page 32.
the practice of the church in every age, yea, and the good success thereof,
to manage the matter it self.


Exorcistes. I could prove the same, D. Apolog. page 32.
in such sort as I say.

You could so I confess; if you had wherewith all to do it: but, this
lingering delay in doing the work, does notably declare you a non proficient,
or make your penury that way to apparent at least. For, it is full two years,
since that your thras^nicall vaunt was vented forth: whereas hitherto you have
not set any one of those your brauing huge barrels abroach, to give us so much
as a taste of your further stoare. And therefore, it cannot possibly be, but
that, either you are drawn dry of your proofs before you begin the banquet: or
that they do at the least haerere in calamo, cleave so close to your pen, as
all the power you have, is utterly unable to procure their public passage.
Well sir, whatsoever be the want, we will (in special favor) attend with
patience, your more convenient leisure, for the expected performance of that
your bumbasted and brauing ability, concerning the irrefragable confirmation
of this your imagined ordinance. In the mean time we think it good to give
you an inckling of some one or two of the later writers, whose judgments are
opposite to that which you tell us.

First, Ioh. Calvin. in Math. 17. 21.
Calvin upon those selfsame scriptures, he tells us thus. Whereas Christ
imputes their not prevailing against that devil, to some want of faith in his
own disciples: he teaches us plainly, to ascribe the whole efficacy of
every such miraculous action, to the power of faith, and not to our prayer and
fasting. Showing us therein, how ridiculously the Papists have constituted
their actual fasting alone, as an effectual counterpoyson for the powerful
expelling of Spirits and Devils. Thus far Calvin.

In like manner, Henr. Bullinger in Math. 17. 21
Bullinger upon the selfsame place, he writes thus. These words they are
anagogecally, or ascendingly transferred from that inferior, to a superior
consideration, or, from that one particular, to an universality, thus. The
Lord ( you see) he has delivered this one Demoniak, or he has expelled this
one devil: doubt you not therefore of his further power, for the timely
subduing of the whole kingdom of Satan. He says not thus, the Lord by his
immediate power has driven out this one devil from the child: and therefore,
all spirits and devils, shall from henceforth, be immediately expelled by
prayer and fasting, thereby prescribing a perpetual Canon to Exorcists: no, he
intended not any such matter at all. For, this kind (says Christ) it goes
not forth but by prayer and fasting. Therein, very covertly deducing his
speech from that one particular president, to all manner of arts, impurities,
and tentations of Satan whatsoever: and not to a perpetual establishment of
any such falsely supposed ordinance, for the powerful expelling of spirits, by
prayer and fasting, as your self does falsely and fondly imagine.


Exorcistes. Well, See Rhemish testament in Math. 17. 21. sect. 7.
yet for all this, our Savior Christ does undoubtedly insinuate some secret
force to fasting and prayer, for the powerful expelling of spirits and devils,
even in those selfsame words expressed before: otherwise, he would never have
so precisely put them down in that place. And therefore, the Church from age
to age, in their several Exorcismes, and we also at Mahgnitton, have dealt
according to the sacred Scriptures; in practicing prayer and fasting for the
expelling of devils: because (besides that work of faith, which Calvin and
Bullinger notes) these also (in that place) are jointly required by Christ.


Orthodoxus. Is this a good argument? Christ (by occasion) does mention fasting
and prayer in that place: therefore, he establishes exorcizings by prayer and
fasting, as a perpetual ordinance for the Church to observe. D. Fulke his
answer to the Rhem. testament, Math. 17. 21. sect. 7.
This Jesuitical jest was fitly and fully answered by an excellent Doctor
thus. The popish church (and you also your selves) have to grossly abused the
ignorant people, in making them believe you can cast forth devils: whereas you
have no such power at all. Neither can you by all your prayers and fastings,
conjure out one unclean spirit from a man: unless you have first (like
sorcerers and witches) coniured them in.


Exorcistes. Let it be a Jesuitical jest, or whatsoever you please, I make no
doubt, but that prayer and fasting is an ordinance perpetually established by
Christ: for the powerful expelling of devils.


Orthodoxus. Be it even so as you say. But, do tell me withal I pray you,
whether our Savior Christ has established the same as an ordinance generally
for all to undergo: or, whether he has only imposed the dispatch thereof,
upon some certain special persons?


Exorcistes. I hold it an ordinance belonging indifferently to all, See. M.
Darels Narration, fol. 1. page 1.
both men and women. Yea, and I am fully persuaded that the faithful prayers
of the party and his friends, See M. Darels Apology, page 31. 32.
might well have prevailed with God in this case, though no one preacher at all
had been present: as in the dispossession of Thomas Darling was very apparent.


Orthodoxus. If prayer and fasting (for the powerful expelling of devils) be
an ordinance belonging to all (as you say) then, the undergoing thereof, is
also a duty appertaining to all: and so, the party at Mahgnitton, as also his
parents they failed greatly in doing their duty that way.


Exorcistes. I make no question of that.


Orthodoxus. Very well. But, what warrant had you to undertake the timely
discharge of other men's duties, in a matter especially of such weighty
importance, and so nearly concerning themselves? you are not of this mind I
hope, namely, that it is sufficient for men to discharge their duties, Perse,
aut per alios.
either by themselves, or by others? Neither yet that your self is a second
Atlas, appointed by God to undergo the whole weight of every man's duty: or
that you are able to accomplish at full, any such supposed works of
supererogation, as may fully suffice for the timely dispatch of your own, and
other men's duties?


Exorcistes. No surely, I am free from either of both the opinions.


Orthodoxus. How then comes it to pass, that your self durst so boldly
adventure upon the discharge of that duty, which (as you affirm) did properly
appertain to the party himself, and his parents together: or, why did you
not rather advise and exhort them, to the timely dispatch of the selfsame
duty, which (you say) appertained in duty unto them? Is not this the practice
of a Polypragmaticall mate: yea, and to become a busy body in other men's
matters?


Exorcistes. Nay sir, your collections they are over strict, and, your censures
to sharp concerning my former speeches. For, albeit, I did, and do flatly
affirm, that prayer and fasting (for the powerful expelling of spirits and
devils) is (in deed) a general duty belonging to all the church: yet, I doubt
not, but, that the same notwithstanding, does more specially apperteine to
preachers, and pastors. Math. 7. 6.
For, even as all men are generally bound to pray unto God for their
forgiveness of sins, Luc. 11. 4.
and yet, that general duty, Act. 8. 22.
it does not exclude the ministers or preachers from praying publicly, Act.
8. 24.
for the remission of sins in all: so surely, albeit that prayer and fasting
(for the powerful expelling of 1. These. 5. 32.
spirits and devils) be a general duty enioined generally to all the whole
church, yet, that general duty, it does not hinder at all, but that the
ministers also, they may and must more specially undergo such a duty for
others, so often as they perceive those others to careless in discharging that
duty themselves.


Orthodoxus. Very true. But ministers, whenever they put up their public
prayers to God for such public remission of sins, they do not that work, by
reason of the only general duty, which generally belongs to every
christian: but rather, in regard of their peculiar calling, and by virtue of a
ministerial function, more especially imposed upon them, being therein
appointed by God, Exodus 4. 15. 16.
the public mouth of that public assembly. And therefore, do tell me
directly, whether you enterprised that action, only as a common christian: or
rather, as a public minister appointed of God?


Exorcistes. I undertook the whole work (I confess) as a public minister of
God. See M. Darels. Narration, in the depositions of William Aldred, the 5.
diponent, fol. 8. page 7.
For, I both prayed, and preached publicly: yea, and that also, before such a
public auditory, as (by my special, and only directions) was foreappointed,
prepared, and purposely assembled together, in a public participation of that
selfsame intended action.


Orthodoxus. Be it even so. But, tell me in what sort you effected the work:
whether, as an ordinary; or extraordinary minister?


Exorcistes. Even only as an ordinary minister of Jesus Christ.


Orthodoxus. Why sir? were you called, and fully established an ordinary
minister at Mahgnitton: or ever you undertook that enterprise?


Exorcistes. No sir, I had there no ministerial calling in any respect.


Orthodoxus. Then (by your own confession) you could be no ordinary minister
at Mahgnitton, if any at all. And therefore, how durst you so boldly adventure,
to thrust your sickle into another man's harvest? My meaning is this. How could
you so desperately undertake such an extraordinary work in another man's charge,
you being not so much as an ordinary minister, nor having obtained before,
some ordinary allowance thereunto at the least? Genesis 4. 4.
Is this the approved practice of that wel-ordered discipline, whereof your
self, Judge. 17. 5. 6.
and some others so highly esteem? Or, must we (in any case) account that a
wel-ordered ecclesiastical government, Numb. 16. 18.
1. Chr. 13. 9. 10.
which mannageth such an unwarrantable foisting in of monstrous disorders into
the church of Christ? Act. 5. 36. 37.
And, which more is, does set open a door to such shameful confusion, and
dares privilege any (how irregular soever) after such peremptory and
popelike manner to intrude himself into another man's ordinary charge: Romans 12.
6.
without some ordinary allowance at least, to any so weighty a work? Heb. 5.
4.
For, be it supposed, that (by reason of the party, and his parents long
negligence) the timely dispatch of that selfsame business, did crave some
public assistance, and must therefore, be forthwith transferred to the
minister his public calling: how comes it to pass, that their own Minister
himself (whom such a work more especially concerned) Act. 20. 28.
did not (in all duty) undertake the whole convey 1. Pet. 5. 2.
of that business? Or, if your self, and some others had espied him to
slothful therein, 1. Tim. 5. 19. 20.
why did you not (by some consistoriall proceeding) convent him before you,
convince his said slackenesse; advise and direct him in the orderly dispatch of
that matter: rather, then thus disorderedly to rush headlong upon it your
self? Yea, and (which more is) how could you (in conscience) assure your self
of any other then the seven sons of Sceuahs success: Act. 19. 15. 16.
having neither calling, nor word, nor warrant, nor example, nor authentical
allowance thereto?


Exorcistes. In deed sir, I earnestly exhorted the Minister there, to undertake
the action himself, for that it belonged more especially unto him: howbeit,
the man, he was mightily afraid to adventure upon it, because he was utterly
unexperienced in such kind of matters.


Orthodoxus. Would you bear us in hand, that, M. Aldredge master of Arts and
an ancient authorized preacher.
so reverend a man would take upon him a Ministerial function, being very
able, but mightily afraid, to adventure upon the dutiful discharge thereof, in
a matter especially, of such weighty importance? Or, must we imagine (for
saving your credit) that the preacher at Mahgnition (a man of thirty years
standing there at the least) should be utterly unexperienced in the orderly
performance of prayer and fasting?

Besides all this, if prayer and fasting (by whomsoever performed) is (as you
say) an undoubted true means appointed of God, See M. Darels Narration, in the
depositions of Thomas Haies, fol. 7.
for the powerful expelling of spirits and devils: how comes it to pass that
master Haies, master Ebins and others (performing that means) could not
possibly effect the cure, they being Ministers as much, or more then your
self.

Moreover, See Narration, ibid. page 2.
since master Aldredg the Minister there, might (with better assurance) expect
from the Lord a blessing upon those his own labors, then your self by much:
how is it (I pray you) that he was unable to drive out the devil, he
practicing also the self same means at sundry times.

Again, See the Narration in William Aldred his depositions, fol. 8. page 1.
what hindered the driving out of that devil the night before: when your own
self (with some others) so solemnly performed the appointed means?

Yea, and (which more is) what might be the cause (I beseech you) that master
Coldwicke, a preacher also in that selfsame action when the devil was
expelled, who prayed, and preached (in his course) before your self: could not
yet have the hap (with all the cunning he had) to conjure or cast out that
perilous devil? If prayer and fasting be able to do it, by whomsoever
effected: I wonder (I assure you) that so many good men (notwithstanding they
prayed and fasted at sundry times) should never have the good hap to hit on
the matter, and that it must light so just in your lot, to strike the Popiniay
dead, and to do it your self?


Exorcistes. Why should you wonder at all: See M. Darel his Narration, fol.
8. page 2.
since the very hour it self (wherein the Lord would glorify his word, and
his work) was never till then?


Orthodoxus. What man? was prayer and fasting by whomsoever performed, the
only powerful means appointed of God, for the powerful expelling of devils
a little before: and is the same effectual now, but by times, and by turns?
Put case you your self had been the first preacher in that disordered action:
had then your said labors (how powerful and holy soever) been bestowed in
vain? Or, put case the first preacher had taken your turn, and your text, had
counterfeited your voice, and stood in such a place as the party possessed
could neither have discovered his person, nor descried his speech: what then I
beseech you? See M. Darels Narration, fol. 5. page 1. and fol. 8. page 2.
would that preacher his handling those signs of possession and dispossession
which you handled your self, have constrained the possessed perforce, to act
every thing handled, with such an apt correspondence, as he did, when your
self delivered those mystical matters? Yea and (which more is) when that
preacher (being once come to the signs of dispossession) should have charged
the devil to come out of the child: would the party possessed, so fitly,
and so justly have vomited therewith, as he did when your self entreated
thereof?


Exorcistes. In very deed sir, Augustini epistola, 137.
this I must freely confess with Augustine that (howsoever the Lord has
appointed prayer and fasting, an only effectual means for the powerful
expelling of devils) he, notwithstanding all this, does make a special choice
of persons, of places and times, for the more orderly effecting of every such
admirable enterprise.


Orthodoxus. Your answers (without doubt) are suddenly fallen to such deadly
debate among themselves, as, the one is ready to pull out the throat of the
other: Memorem mendacem esse ^portet.
by reason of some bad disposition, or present defect in your memory. For
prayer and fasting (ere while) was the only appointed means to expel the power
of the devil: and now, the efficacy thereof, is restrained to places and
times. It was not long since, a public ordinance appointed generally for all
men: and now, it is imposed upon some special persons. Not long since, it
might well be effected by the party himself and his parents: but now the
powerful dispatch thereof, is peculiar only to preachers and pastors. See.
M. Darels Narration, fol. 1. page 1.
Not long since, it was an ordinary power, incident to any godly Minister or
others: but, no Minister now (how godly soever) has the good hap to hit on
that matter, save only your self. Thus then you see, that, as the disease: so
also the cure, it does ebb and flow with the Moon.

Howbeit, these doubtful vncerteinties, do savor very shrewdly of some
legerdemaine, at the least. And, howsoever your self (auouching that God
makes special choice of persons, of places and times) would cunningly
shelter your cause under Augustines credit: very certain I am, Rhem.
testament, Luc. 4. 23. sect. 3.
that the same is only a Jesuitical iuggling devise, and therefore, it
deserves the selfsame answer with theirs. For, be it that the Lord, (as
Augustine says) does make a special choice of persons, of places and times,
for the orderly effecting of every such admirable action: this proves not,
See D. Fulke contra Rhem. Luc. 4. 23. sect. 3. Item, ibid. 1. Cor. 12. 9. sect.
2.
that the power of working miracles continues still to this present. Only it
shows, that, whenever the Lord works any wonderful work: he is free to
make choice of persons, of places and times, as seems best to his wisdom.
And therefore (admitting all this for a truth) do tell me withal, by what
means you are certain that the Lord made special choice of your self, for
such special business?


Exorcistes. Why sir? the very effect it self, does fully declare the truth
of the matter: for, I cast forth the devil.


Orthodoxus. Be it, that some such effect as your self surmizeth did forthwith
succeed your said enterprise: yet, for so much as your self did no more in the
matter, See M. Darels Narration, fol. 1. page 1.
then was ordinarily incident (you say) to any godly preacher or others: how
comes it to pass, that those other (performing the very selfsame things you
performed your self) no such admirable effect should follow their labors? Was
it, for that the rest of the Ministers were all, but ungodly wretches, in
comparison of you? Or, was it so rather, 2. These. 2. Math. 24. 23. 24.
for that (those Ministers fearing the Lord aright) the Lord would not suffer
their innocent souls to be falsely seduced by any such sleights: or, for that
you your self (being at that time more destitude of grace) had (for the
present) some power to effect such a false deceivable sign; to your greater
condemnation, 2. These. 2. 9. 10.
without speedy repentance?


Exorcistes. Howsoever I may not impure a less measure of godliness to
others, neither yet arrogate any more to my self, then to any of the rest:
very certain it is, that, only my self had then the special power to
expel the devil.


Physiologus. Master Orthodoxus let me argue this point. Come on Exorcistes. If
your own self (as you say) had then a more special power to expel the
devil by prayer and fasting, then any of the rest: that your said power, it
must needs be a vocal, or personal power at the least. My meaning is, that
such a special power, it proceeded either from your prayer; or your person,
but not from your prayer at all: for, the others also, they prayed and fasted
as devoutly as you did your self, albeit in vain: and therefore, your prayer
(of it self) it could have no more power then theirs, unless hapily you have
some special prayer, for that special purpose, beyond the rest of your
brethren. Yea, and when all comes to all, it was not your prayer: but your
preaching (it should seem) that expelled the devil.

Again, if such a special power proceeded from your person alone: then
surely, that self same personal power, it was either some natural, or,
supernatural power at the least. Howbeit, a mere natural power it might not
possibly be: because, no created, or mere natural power, may possibly extend
forth it self to any such supernatural action, as has been sufficiently
showed before.


Exorcistes. That follows not. For, the body of Christ, it was undoubtedly a
created or true natural body, and yet notwithstanding, there went virtue or
power from out of the same, for the admirable curing of people. And therefore
(if it so seemed good to the Lord for the glory of his name) why might not some
power (in like manner) proceed from my person: for the timely expelling of that
spirit or devil?


Physiologus. Besides your shameless pride in matching your body with the body
of Christ: you do monstrously mistake the very point of your purpose. For, do
you imagine, that, there went any power essentially, from out of the body of
Christ, for the admirable curing of any?


Exorcistes. I make no question thereof. Luc. 6. 19.
And, the scripture, it tells us plainly, that, the whole multitude thronged
to touch him: for, there proceeded virtue out of him, and healed them all.


Physiologus. Though it be said in the text, that, virtue proceeded out of
Christ, to the curing of many: yet, that must not be understood, as though any
virtue ( essentially existing in the natural body of Christ) did pass forth
essentially from him unto others, in that selfsame absolute number: no, In
eodemn^mero.
but this proceeding of virtue from the body of Christ unto others, is so
far forth to be accounted a going forth, as the effect may be said to
proceed from the cause. Or it is to be interpreted according to the manner of a
cause, producing an effect. The which are said to go forth the one from the
other: in as much as the very cause it self does apparently shine forth in
that selfsame effect which it works. And, even after such a manner, we must
understand this matter in question. Because, the Divine virtue it self (
essentially existing in the person of Christ) did effectually procure present
health to the parties oppressed. Otherways, how must that text be understood
which tells us, Wised. 7. 27.
that the wisdom of God (being but one and the same) can do all things it
self: that it renueth all, and enters eueh into the holy souls, making them
the friends and prophets of God. Now sir, because it is said he enters into
the holy souls; must we therefore imagine, the holy spirit of God to be any
where now, where it was not before? not so; for the same of necessity (at all
times and seasons) is every where present. Howbeit, because the holy spirit
of God does then more especially procure an apparent effect of spiritual
graces to shinefoorth in some soul where they shone not before: therefore the
spirit of God, may then be said truly to enter into such a soul, because the
efficacy thereof does more effectually, and more apparently break forth to
the view of our eyes. And even after this selfsame sort (I assure you) we are
to understand (in this place) the virtue going forth from our Savior Christ,
Luc. 6. 19.
to the curing of others: because the Divine virtue it self (perpetually
existing in the person of Christ) at that very same instant, did more
effectually cause health in those the diseased parties. So then, howsoever this
place may serve very fitly, to show forth the efficacy of Christ his virtue
in curing diseases: it helps nothing at all to underprop your pestilent
opinion, of a virtue or power essentially proceeding from your own, or any
man's person, for the powerful expelling of spirits and devils.


Exorcistes. But, tell me I beseech you, was that miraculous curing of people
by those selfsame touchings of Christ, a work of his Divinity only: or of
his humanity also?


Physiologus. This I must show you for certain, Leo, in epist. ad Flauianum.
that Leo himself, very flatly affirms all the miraculous actions effected
by Christ: to be effectually wrought by his Divinity only. For, seeing (says
Leo) there are undoubtedly in the person of Christ two distinct, or essential
natures: the one Divine, which shines forth by extraordinary miraculous
actions, and the other humane, which does solely undergo all offered injuries.
It follows necessarily, that, look how the humane nature applies it self to
the undergoing of injuries: even so, the divine nature disposes it self to
the effecting of miracles. But, the humane nature alone applies it self to
the undergoing of injuries, because, to suffer at all, is a thing utterly
opposite to the nature of the Deity: therefore, the Divine nature alone, it
likewise disposes it self to the admirable effecting of miracles, because,
the effecting of such, surmounteth the compass of Christ his created
humanity, Psalm. 136. 4. Opera miracu losa excedunt totam virtutem naturae
creatae.
according to that of David, Ichouah alone does wondrous things. Again, the
miraculous actions they do highly exceed the whole power of any created
nature. But, the humanity of Christ, it is only a created nature: therefore,
the humanity of Christ (of it self) can effect no miraculous actions.


Lycanthropus. This I suppose, is undoubtedly true, and without contradiction
at all.


Physiologus. It is so I confess, being warely and wi^ely understood: else
there may lie some exceptions against it. For, the comparison it holds very
fitly in this one respect. Namely, that as the humanity of Christ alone,
Phil. 2. 7. 8.
was a reason or cause of his undergoing the offered injuries: Heb. 2. 14.
so surely, the Divinity of Christ alone, it was also the reason, Ephesians. 1. 19.
or primarie efficient cause of his effecting the miraculous actions. Phil. 3.
21.
Howbeit that selfsame comparison, it holds not so currantly in a second
respect. For, howsoever it is no ways repugnant unto the humanity of Christ,
Luc. 24. 19.
to be also an effector of miracles instrumentally: yet is it quite contrary
unto the Divinity of Christ to suffer afflictions in any respect. I mean,
either principally or instrumentally: because, the divinity it self, is wholly
impassible. Although yet I dare not deny, but that (in an only especial
regard of the supposed identitie, or communicable proprieties of both natures
in the one person of Christ) that which is truly said of the one, may be as
true said of the other. For first (respecting the whole person of Christ) it is
not untruly Act. 20. 28.
said, 1. Tim. 3. 16.
that the Godhead did suffer: again (respecting the whole person of Christ) it
may as truly be said, that this child (meaning Christ) created the heavens.
Genesis 1. 3. 14.
Because, Christ himself is that eternal word of the father, Ioh. 1. 1. 2.
whereby all things (in the beginning) were created and made. And therefore,
Col. 1. 16.
that sentence of David; Psalm. 136. 4.
who says that Jehovah alone does wondrous things: it is not so to be taken,
as happily you would have us imagine. For, the word ( alone) in that place, it
excludes not the humanity of Christ as any isntrumental: but only as a mere
principal agent in working woondrous things.


Exorcistes. But sir (notwithstanding this your cunning distinction) it is
very apparent, Rhem. testament, Marc. 3. 10. sect. 1.
that, even the humanity of Christ alone (as a principal agent it self) did
work sundry miraculous cures, Math. 9. 21. 22.
in sundry diseased persons: for, Marc. 5. 27. and 6. 56. Luc. 8. 45. and 6.
19.
so many as but touched his body, yea, or the hemme of his garment, they were
presently healed. Now then, if those selfsame touchings of Christ, did not
effectually work in those the aforesaid cures; it must necessarily follow,
that Christ did something in vain. But Christ, he did nothing in vain:
therefore, even those the aforesaid touchings themselves, did effectually work
in those the forenamed cures. Howbeit, those sensible touchings, they were
only mere actions of Christ his humanity: therefore, Christ his only
humanity, did principally and effectually work in all those the forenamed
cures which succeeded those sensible touchings.


Physiologus. Christ, D. Fulke contra Rhem. testament, Marc. 3. 10. sect. 1.
Ambrose in Luc. lib. 6. cap. 8.
he healed so many, as handled him spiritually by the apprehension of faith:
not all such as only but touched him corporally by corporal sense. Otherwise,
if only a sensible touching of Christ or his garments, had principally and
effectually been able of it self alone, to work those selfsame cures: then,
Math. 26. 49.
Judas that kissed him: Marc. 15. 17. 20.
the soldiers that stripped him: the high priests servants that smote him:
yea, Ioh. 18. 22.
and the rest of the people that thronged and pressed upon him: Luc. 8. 41. 45.
had been every of them also effectually amended of all their maladies.

Howbeit (says Beda) only, Beda in Marc. lib. 1. cap. 3.
those men alone, do truly and effectually handle our Savior Christ: who
spiritually receive his faith, and his love in their hearts. So then, for a more
plain understanding of our matters in question, it shall not be amiss, to
proceed more exactly unto a more orderly consideration of all miraculous
actions: and this also, in a double respect. Namely, either principally: or
instrumentally.

First, if we take due consideration of the working of miracles principally, I
mean according to their primarie, or proper efficient: then are we bound
(without contradiction) to believe, and confess, that all miraculous and
supernatural actions, do highly surmount the whole power of every creature
whatsoever, Psalm. 136. 4.
and are only peculiar to Jehovah himself, who alone does woondrous things.
Yea, this is undoubtedly true, that, no one supernatural action (how simple
soever in show) may possibly be effected by any other power principally: but,
by the only supereminent power of El-shaddai alone, (...) Mammilla implens.
(...), Acer^us bono^um omnium. (...). Suis vberibus omnia alens.
I mean, that all-sufficient, Psalm. 135. 6.
omnipotent, and almighty Jehovah himself. Who is an unmeasurable mountain
of goodness: the only true cherishing dug that is never drawn dry: yea, and
who only accomplisheth whatsoever he wills in heaven and in earth: at what time,
in what place, and after what manner best pleases himself.

Howbeit, if we respect the working of miraculous actions but instrumentally, I
mean, only according to their secondary or isntrumental cause: then must we
(in like manner) believe and confess, that even Christ also (respecting only
his humanity) and many other of the saints besides (in the powerful effecting
of many miraculous actions) did ministerially, or instrumentally accomplish the
same. Neither yet, do I account the humanity of Christ, and other the saints
of God, as instruments equally alike in the working of miracles: but,
distinguish them also according to their differing degrees. For, howsoever (
distinguishing only the primary and instrumental efficients) I did sort the^ in
one and the selfsame rank: yet I acknowledge withal, an apparent plain
difference even in those instruments themselves, respecting especially, their
different manner of working. And therefore it will greatly enlighten our matter,
if we do further declare, first, how the humanity of Christ is an instrument
in the orderly effecting of miracles: and then next, how other good men, may
also be said to be instruments.


Lycanthropus A very excellent order: I pray you therefore proceed.


Physiologus. With very good will. First therefore, although it be true, that
Jehovah alone is the primarie or principal efficient of every miraculous
action: yet, this also is as certainly true, that Jehovah does eftsoons effect
those admirable actions, by some such chosen instruments, as seems good to
his wisdom. Neither are those his said instruments of one and the selfsame
condition: for the instruments wherewith the Lord serves his purpose, they are
twofold: namely, either conjoined, or separated instruments. Act. 2. 2^.
The conjoined instrument is Jesus Christ: who, albeit he be God, and man; Act.
4. 30.
yet is he not two but one Christ. And therefore the divinity, and humanity
being inseperablie united together in the person of Christ: the said
humanity, it becomes eftsoons, a conjoined instrument, unto the divinity
it self, in the powerful effecting of miracles. Aug. Marlorat. in Math. cap.
28. 20.
Whereas all other men, else, howsoever they also may be the instruments of God
in working of miracles: Act. 3. 12.
yet are they only but separated instruments, Act. 5. 12.
and not so nearly united unto the divinity it self in any those admirable
actions, Act. 19. 11. 12.
as is the humanity of Christ, and therefore, though instruments also, yet no
such excellent instruments, as is the humanity of Jesus Christ.

This (if it seems obscure to our sense) may very fitly be illustrated from
the resemblance of a Carpenter entending, and effecting some admirable work:
if we consider therein, the Carpenters mind, his hand, and his axe. For first,
the mind of the Carpenter (it being in perpetual motion) is the primarie
efficient cause of that selfsame intended business: but yet, the Carpenters
hand is a conjoined, and his axe also a separated instrument wherewith he
effects the purposed work. Now then, even as the Carpenters mind it self,
does primarily effect the whole work, but yet so, as he uses withal, his hand
as a conjoined, and his axe as a separated instrument to accomplish the same:
so surely, the divinity alone does principally effect^ech wonderful thing
whatsoever, although yet the divinity it self (so often as seems him good)
does use the humanity of Christ as a conjoined, and other good men, as a
separated instrument, for the orderly accomplishment of many most admirable
matters. And therefore, even as the axe can work nothing at all, but by the
power of the hand, neither yet, the hand it self, but by the only direction
of the Carpenters mind: so surely, the holiest person on earth, can effect no
admirable action at all, but in and by the power of Jesus Christ, as by the
hand of the Deity, neither yet the said hand, I mean the humanity of Jesus
Christ, (which is as it were a conjoined hand unto his divinity) it can (of it
self) no further accomplish any one supernatural action, then the divinity
alone does dispose it, and direct it unto. So then, howsoever the humanity of
Christ, and many other good men, did instrumentally effect many admirable
matters, and therefore (in that selfsame respect) were only but the
organicall instruments unto the divinity it self, the only true agent in
all those actions: yet surely, the humanity of Christ, is a much more
excellent instrument then any of the other besides, in an especial regard of
that Unspeakable divinity, Hieronimus, Marc. Vigerius, Decachord. chord. 8.
45. fol. 191.
whereunto it is inseperablie united. By virtue whereof, it was wholly
sufficient, for Christ (being perfectly God, and man) to say thus to the
devil, I charge thee come out of the party possessed: whereas all others
adjured him only in the name and power of Jesus Christ to depart. Theod. Beza,
ad Brentij argumenta, de carnis Christiomnipraesentia.
Howbeit, whether those good men themselves, or the humanity of Christ (being
solely, and only considered as they are in themselves, without any
transcending respect of the deity) did by means of their own natural power
existing naturally in them, effect any such admirable matters: that I suppose
may justly be doubted.


Lycanthropus. I pray you resolve us something herein.


Physiologus. How may I dare to resolve you in that, which some others of
singular account, has left in suspense. For, Augustine (entreating of the
manifold miracles wrought by the Saints) he leaves the matter undiscussed,
August. de ^iui^at. Dei, lib. 22.
thus. Whether the eternal God does work these admirable matters by himself
alone, or, whether he effects these things by his Ministers: yea, and even
those selfsame things also, which are wrought by his Ministers: or whether he
does these things by the spirits of Martyrs departed: or, by the bodies of good
men yet living: or whether (by his Angels inuisibly, immutably or
incomprehensibly) he accomplish the same: or, whether by any other means else
which may not be comprehended of mortal men: the faith of the resurrection to
erernall life, will one day make it apparently evident. Lo, thus much says
Augustine: and so leaves the matter.


Exorcistes. Yea, but Gregory, Gregorius, Dialog. lib. ^*
he seems to determine the same in this sort. Those holy men (says he) who
claue fast to the Lord with a devout and religious mind, they were accustomed
to work many miracles, both principally, and instrumentally: I mean, sometimes
by prayer, and sometimes again, by an actual power permitted unto them.


Physiologus. Gregory (you say) he seems to determine the matter. If this be
all that he says therein, then surely, he undertakes more in a seeming show:
then he is able to perform in any showing substance at all. For, that which
you aleadge from Gregory, is no determination: unless you happily imagine that
we may boldly believe it, because your Gregory does but barely report it.


Exorcistes. Nay sir, he does not barely report the matter; but, he proves it,
very soundly, by reason, and example both.


Physiologus. Show us his reason first: that we may soundly examine the
soundness thereof.


Exorcistes. His reason is this. They to whom is granted a greater power in
that which is more, it is no merueile at all, if a like power be eftsoons
permitted unto them, in that which is less. But, Ioh. 1. 12.
a power to be made the sons of God by adoption ( which is more then the
working of miracles) is freely permitted to all the Saints of God: and
therefore, there is no wonder at all, though a like power be eftsoons
permitted unto them* Math. 7. 22. 23.
for the working of miracles, it being a faculty inferior to the other by
much, yea, and such a power also, as the very wicked may have.


Physiologus. The soundness of this reason, consists in unsoundness
altogether: and therefore, the supposed soundness thereof, for the proof of
your purpose, is nothing else in effect, but a festured incurable corruption,
concerning both matter and form. For first, that it is faulty in matter, your
self may plainly perceive; in that it wholely relieth upon a very false
exposition, concerning the word Exousia. (...).
For, whereas your Gregory, or your self (in his name) do translate it a (
power) the whole coherence, and circumstance of the text, Theod. Beza, in
annotat. super Ioh. 1. 12.
does plainly declare, that, it ought rather to be termed a right, or
prerogative. Yea and (which makes me to merueile) since that selfsame word is
Gylberius Longolius in Lexic. Graec.
diversely translated, according to the diverse occasions thereof, namely,
sometimes a power, sometimes a faculty, sometimes a liberty, sometimes an
authority, sometimes a care, a procuration, a right, or prerogative: It is too
too strange that your self (quite contrary to the true scope of the text)
should so confidently cleave to the word ( power) alone, above all the other
rehearsed before. Theod. Beza, in annotat, super Ioh. 1. 12.
Neither may I possibly perceive your purpose therein, unless happily you
would iumpe with Castalio and the papists in their free will opinion: a thing
directly opposite to the holy ghost himself, Johan. Calvin, in Ioh. 1. 12.
as you may plainly perceive, both in that, and the verse immediately
following. Where the Evangelist, acknowledges only such as are borne of God:
to have the right or prerogative to be made the sons of God. Ioh. 1. 12. 13.
Not understanding by the word Exousia (as your self would falsely bear us in
hand) any power of electing: but a power of apprehending the adoption of God by
faith. Attributing wholly therein, the effectual working power of that
selfsame adoption, Johannes Calin Ioh. 1. 12. 13.
to the almighty alone: and, the power of apprehending that privilege, unto
the saving faith of the adopted sons of God in Jesus Christ. Yea, and thus
much also your self (at unawares) do flatly confess in your very assumption,
saying, that they have power to be made the adopted sons of God: making them
plainly (you see) very passiues, and no actiues at all in the work of
adoption. And so, your own reason concludes directly the contrary of that
which you labor to prove: namely, that those good men of God, they had only
a passive power in the working of miracles, that is, they had none other but an
isntrumental power therein, as we showed before.

Secondly, your reason it is faulty also in form. For (besides that the same
is in no good form) it concludes only, a ( may be) from a bare, or naked
supposall: telling us (by a pitiful begging of the cause in question) that,
if the Saints have an actual power in the greater, there needs be no merueile
at all, if sometimes, they have also a like power in that which is less. Very
true as you say, if the Saints of God have in deed, an actual power in that
which is greater: then, the sequel of your speech might happily have in it,
some more probability. But, whether they have in them such a power or no: your
Gregory he has not concluded as yet.


Exorcistes. Yea, but he illustrates the matter, by a plain example.


Physiologus. How could he illustrate the thing that is not at all? For, it is
not yet concluded (you see) that the Saints of God had ever in themselves, any
actual power for the working of miracles: and therefore, he cannot possibly
illustrate the same, by any example. Notwithstanding, propound your example:
that so we may see whether it be any sounder then the reason produced before.


Exorcistes. That sundry devout and religious persons did effect many
miracles, sometimes instrumentally, and sometimes principally: I mean,
sometimes by prayer alone, apprehending the power of Christ, and sometimes
also, by an actual power permitted unto them, it is very apparent (says
Gregory) by these following examples. First, the Apostle Peter, Act. 9. 40.
( instrumentally by prayer alone, apprehending the power of Christ) restored
Tabitha again to her life. On the otherside, the selfsame Apostle (more
principally, and by an actual power, in himself, and without any invocation
or prayer at all) did actually deliver Ananias to death. Act. 5. 5.
By both which, it is very apparent, that the holy men of God, they had in
themselves, not only instrumentally, but (which more is) even princ^pally
also, an actual power, for the powerful expelling of spirits and devils.


Physiologus. That, some holy men of God have had an especial power permitted
unto them, for the admirable effecting of miracles; no wise man will ever
deny: because the Scripture it self does plainly avouch, 1. Cor. 12. 10.
that, unto some there was given the operations of great works by the spirit
of God. Howbeit, this we must hold withal, that, such a power whatsoever, it
was only an isntrumental: and no principal power at all. Psalm. 136. 4.
For, seeing the sacred Scriptures do flatly affirm, that Jehovah alone does
woondrous things: we must therefore, very conscionable confess and
acknowledge, that, D. Fulke in Rhem. testament, Act. 3. 12. sect. 4. 5.
Jehovah alone is the author, and man but the instrument of all those admirable
actions whatsoever, which he ( by their hands) does so powerfully accomplish.
Touching therefore your vain surmize of Peter his principal power in the
actual delivery of Ananias to death: the Evangelist Luke (a little after)
does flatly avouch, Act. 5. 12.
that, Peter was only the hand, whereby the Lord himself (with his scepter,
or two edged sword) did wound Ananias his soul unto death. Yea, and it is
very apparent by the story it self, Ioh. Calvin. in Act.* cap. 5. 5.
that Peter he had only a Ministerial power in that action: he being but a
Minister, and no Master of that selfsame word of the Lord, which is
undoubtedly, a savor of death unto death, 2. Cor. 2. 13. 14.
in them that perish. Howbeit, because that self same death of the soul
cannot possibly be discerned by our corporal eyes: the Lord therefore he saw
it exceedingly good Ioh. Calvin. in Act. cap. 5. 5.
(even by the Ministry of Peter therein) to give an extraordinary visible
token thereof, on Ananias his body. To the end, that so many as then beheld,
or should from thencefoorth but hear of the same, might tremble at the
maiesticall power of the word: and humble themselves to the authority of God.
Isa. 11. 4.
Who having plainly foretold by the mouth of his prophet, that, he would smite
the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips
destroy the ungodly: did even then (by the Ministry of Peter) exhibit unto
us, an experimented trial thereof. So then, howsoever Peter himself (he being
the special instrument of Jehovah in that most admirable matter) might (by
virtue of the principal agent it self) attain to the admirable acting of
that, which highly surmounted the whole faculty or power of his own proper
person, even as we also may see, Philosophus lib. 2. de anima.
that, a natural heat (by a power in the soul) begets flesh: yet had
Peter (as has that natural heat) only an isntrumental, and no principal
power in effecting the action it self, as we showed before. Being therefore
but only a bare instrument, the instrument (how absolute soever in it self)
is unable to give any further essential form to any such admirable matter:
then the principal efficient it self, does powerfully dispose, and direct it
unto.


Exorcistes. Well sir, Rhem. testament, in Marx. 6. 13. sect. 7.
if none other but a bare isntrumental power does proceed from the instrument
it self in the powerful effecting of admirable actions: Ioh. 9. 6.
why then does the Scriptures so carefully record the spattle of Christ: Luc.
8. 44.
the homme of his garment: the anointing with oil: the shadow of Peter: Marc.
6. 13.
the napkins brought to the body of Paul: with many other such signs, Act. 5.
15. and 19. 11. 12. and 5. 12.
and woonders, which were wrought by the only hands of the Apostles, and of
other the saints of God?


Physiologus. All those ceremonial matters (how many, D. Fulke contra Rhem.
testament in Marc. 6. 13. sect. 7.
or how marvelous soever) they had (in their own nature) no actual or
miraculous power, for the powerful effecting of miracles: but, were only
external tokens of an extraordinary grace of God, dispensed unto men in the
usage of them. Item* ibid. in Marc. 7. 33. sect. 4.
And therefore, we may not grossly imagine any such essential power, or holiness
in ceremonies, or creatures in sensible, as is able to effect any thing
actually of themselves: but seeing it so pleases the Lord (by himself, or his
saints) eftsoons to use such sensible matters, as mere testifying tokens to
us, and no exhibiting signs in themselves, of that his infinite power in the
acting of miracles: we must therefore (by the help of those sensible signs)
endeavor forthwith to transcend, or mount up beyond the shallow reach of our
reason, Psalm. 135. 6. Math. 26. 26.
to Jehovah himself, the primarie, and only efficient, and (by the only
apprehension of faith) be fully persuaded, that, Ioh. 6. 52. Jude 10.
he alone is able to do whatsoever he please, in heaven, and in earth.
Otherwise we shall with the grunting papists, and the carnal Capernaites,
(being beasts without reason) but, lie altogether groueling upon those earthly
ceremonial signs: in, and by which we should (as it were by windows, or
grates) Cant. 2. 9.
pry through, Exodus 33. 20. 22.
and epsy with our spiritual eyes, the beloved himself, who stands behind
our wall, Ioh. 1. 18. 1. Tim. 6. 16.
and cannot be seen withour sensible eyes. How be it, this your needless
fantastical doubt concerning miraculous actions (the same arising as it does,
from one only sensual view of some external difference in the doing of those
self same miraculous actions) it may soon be discussed, if you would but
consider aright (as you ought) those miraculous actions themselves in a double
respect. Namely, in respect first, of the active virtue effecting them: and
then next, of the actions effected thereby.


Lycanthropus. How first I beseech you, in respect of the active virtue
effecting?


Physiologus. Why thus. If we duly consider of all sorts of miracles in an
only respect of the active virtue it self, which actually effects those
miracles: we shall plainly perceive, that no one of them all (how admirable
soever in our carnal account) is in it self more excellent, or greater then
any of the rest. Because they are all of them, equally effected, by the only
divine, and infinite power of Jehovah himself: and are such, as do wholly
surpass the power of every created nature, how holy soever. So that (in this
only respect) there appears no difference at all among any the miraculous
actions of God: because, those selfsame actions, are all equally effected by
that uncreated infinite power, which, is evermore but one, and the same.


Pneumatomatichus. And, how also (I pray you) in respect of the actions
effected thereby.


Physiologus. Surely, even thus. If we duly consider again, the only
actions, so powerfully effected by that infinite power of God, without any such
transcending reach, to the principal author himself: then shall we as
plainly perceive an apparent external difference in all those the miraculous
actions. Whether we respect the effected actions themselves: or the manner of
effecting the same. For first, if we respect but the only effected actions
themselves; then no doubt, there may some one of them appear more excellent
then another by much. Aug. Marlorat. (...) Ioh. 14. 12.
As for example, the raising of dead men to life, does outwardly exceed the
curing of leprosies: and, the curing of leprosies, does sensibly surmount the
curing of some sudden new sickness. Again, if we also respect the external
manner of effecting those admirable actions: we may likewise perceive an
apparent difference therein. For, it is outwardly, more admirable to cure a
leprosy by word, then by touching or handling: and, more wonderful by much,
to heal the diseased by a passible, or vanishing shadow, then by an audible,
or sounding word. Because, such a sounding word, is some matter, proceeding
powerfully from the party that speaks: whereas, the vanishing shadow, it is
no matter, proceeding from the party himself, but only, a privation of
light, by an interposition of the party his body. Thus then, by all the
premises it is very apparent, that, neither the humanity of Christ in it
self, nor, any one else of the saints of God, either had, or, could possibly
have any other, then only an isntrumental power in the powerful effecting of
miracles: and therefore, it is too too absurd, that your self should dare to
challenge a personal power, for the expelling of devils.


Exorcistes. How cunningly soever you seem to conclude: very certain it is,
my self did personally and powerfully drive forth the devil.


Orthodoxus. You could not possibly effect such a work, by any your own
natural power as has by Physiologus been handled at large. For, if the
humanity of Christ (it being a conioined instrument unto the divinity it
self) could not possibly accomplish any such admirable matter: much less may
any supposed personal power (existing but naturally in your proper person) be
able to do it.


Exorcistes. I perceive you have hitherto mistaken my words. For, my meaning is
not, that I (of my self) did personally accomplish that work, by any mine
own faculty, vigor, or strength: but, I did the same rather, through the
virtue and power of the almighty creator.


Orthodoxus Oh, then I perceive you are almost quite ferreted forth from all
your starting holes, and are now brought in a manner before the very mouth of
that masking not, which will so entangle your tongue, as you shall never be able
(with all your windings and turnings about) to work forth your self. For, tell
me (I pray you) did your self cast forth the devil by means of some
supernatural power from the Lord: or the Lord rather drive forth the devil by
your hands?


Exorcistes. A very superfluous and needless question.


Orthodoxus. But, the answer is needful: and therefore, answer unto it.


Exorcistes. Why sir? the Lord drove him forth by my hands.


Orthodoxus. It should seem your wits are bewitched. For, not long since, you
said that your self did cast forth the devil by means: but now (perceiving
all means to fail) you flee to the power of God. And so still, you do make
the power of God but a means, and your self the maine or principal actor:
that, thereby you may arrogate to your self, the glory due unto God.


Exorcistes. That is no part of my purpose. And, howsoever the Lord alone, be
the only efficient of every such admirable action: yet (in sundry scriptures
you know) it is an ordinary use with the Lord, eftsoons to grace his
Ministers, with that selfsame glory of the work, which is proper alone to
himself.


Orthodoxus. We are not ignorant of the course of the scriptures concerning
that point. Howbeit, when you seem (as hitherto you have done) to speak of
your self besides the scope of the scriptures: you must pardon us then, though
we esteem not your words as canonical scriptures. But, go to, you cast
forth the devil (you say now) by the power of God. Do tell me therefore (I pray
you) whether you acknowledge not that selfsame power of the Lord, a mere
supernatural power, and much beyond the shallow reach of any your natural
faculty, to attain unto?


Exorcistes. Yes, I acknowledge so much.


Orthodoxus. By what means then, did your self so effectually apprehend: that
self same supernatural power of God?


Exorcistes. By the only means of my prayer and fasting; as I told you before.


Orthodoxus. And I also did verily suppose you had heard enough before,
concerning the insufficiency of that selfsame means, considered alone in it
self. But, go to, you apprehended that supernatural power of the Lord (you
say) by the only means of your prayer and fasting. Do tell me therefore,
where you have any promise throughout the whole scriptures: that, your prayer
and fasting (for an effectual apprehending of that power of the Lord in any
such extraordinary actions) shall be effectually heard of the Lord?


Exorcistes. Why sir, our Savior Christ, he has given an infallible promise
concerning every such action, saying, Ioh. 16. 23.
Whatsoever you ask the Father in my name he will give it unto you.


Orthodoxus. Do you imagine, that, those words of Christ, contain such a
promise as tends directly, to an absolute warrant for every such enterpise:
how extraordinary soever?


Exorcistes. I do more then imagine: for I make no question thereof.


Orthodoxus. Well then, put case you your self Luke 9. 54.
(by prayer and fasting) should undertake to entreat the Lord forthwith to
send fire from heaven, for the admirable destruction of antichrist himself,
and all his adherents: would that selfsame petiton be granted unto you, in an
only regard of your prayer and fasting.


Exorcistes. The prophet Elijah; by his only prayer, 2. King. 1. 10.
obtained as great a matter as this from the Lord.


Orthodoxus. You wot not (I perceive now) what spirit you are of. Luc. 9. 54.
Do first prove directly unto us, that you have Elijah his spirit: and, then
proceed (in Gods name) to Elijah his practice and spare not. Howbe it, because
( from this general promise of Christ) you do grossly imagine that very
selfsame warranted assurance, for the powerful expelling of spirits by prayer
and fasting, which Elijah obtained against Azariah and his servants, by that
his special prayer to God: 2. King. 1. 10.
I am willing you should dwell in that your preposterous opinion, so you can
demonstrate the truth thereof, by any probability or reason, and therefore,
do frame your own argument, from that selfsame promise.


Exorcistes. I frame it thus. Ioh. 16. 23.
Whosoever asks any thing of God, in the name of Christ, he shall undoubtedly
obtain his request: But, so many as (by prayer and fasting) do crave an
extraordinary power for the powerful expelling of spirits, they ask
something of God in the name of Christ: therefore, they shall undoubtedly obtain
their request.


Orthodoxus. The very frame of your argument, is scarce in good frame. For
your assumption now (as all men may plainly perceive) is absurdly fallen into
a fearful consumption. Because, howsoyour own self ( by these preposterous
practices) presumed most grossly to profane the name of Christ, as hitherto you
have done: very certain it is, that such a request may not truly be said to
be either made, or put up in the name of Christ. For, to ask any thing truly
in the name of Christ, Musculus in Ioh. 14. 13.
is, either to ask that which only appertains to the glory of his name and
kingdom alone: or else, that thing especially, which (for our special good)
we hope to obtain at the hands of our God, through the gracious prerogative of
Christ his name. 2. King 1. 10. Act. 4. 30.
After the first manner of asking Elijah he called for fire from heaven, and the
Apostles (being fearefullie threatened) entreated the Lord to stretch forth his
arm, that healing, and signs, and woonders, might be done by the name of his
holy son Jesus. Math. 9. 11. 12. 13.
After the second manner of asking, Marc. 9. 24.
do all the faithful entreat the Lord (by prayer and fasting) for such
spiritual graces, Ephesians. 6. 18. 19.
as do necessarily concern their own and others salvation in Jesus Christ.
Coloss. 4. 2.
And hereunto only, that, the forenamed general promise (made by Christ) 1.
These. 5. 17. 23
has a more special relation. ^. These. 3. 1.
Now then, that first manner of asking things in the name of Christ, being only
peculiar to such as have some special motion from the holy spirit of God for
such special requests: it specially behooves your self (in these your
admirable enterpizes) to be undoubtedly assured of some such special motion
from that selfsame spirit of God, or ever you give the adventure so boldly,
upon such an extraordinary practice of any your prayers and fastings.
Otherwise, this promise of Christ it appertains no further unto you, then you
have an apparent warrant (from the word it self) for the ordinary disposing
of those your second manner of suits, by the gracious prerogative of Christ's
name.


Exorcistes. Why sir, I had the plain word of Christ for my warrant, where he
tells us plainly, Math. 17. 21.
that, that this kind goes not forth, but by prayer and fasting.


Orthodoxus. I was verily persuaded, you had taken your fill of that text
before. But, seeing you will fasten upon this portion of scripture afresh: I am
very well willing you shall have your full pleasure thereof. And therefore, do
tell me plainly I pray you, whether by the words ( this kind) in that place,
you do only distinguish spirits and devils from all other creatures: or,
whether you do severally consider those devils themselves, according to their
sundry conditions?


Exorcistes. Nay sir, Musculus in Math. cap. 17. 21.
I do thereby severally distinguish spirits and devils among themselves:
understanding by the words of Christ, only those principal spirits, which can
no otherways be expelled, but by prayer and fasting.


Orthodoxus. And, have all sorts of spirits; or but only those principal
devils, an actual possession in men?


Exorcistes. Undoubtedly, See M. Darels Apolog. in page 32.
all sorts of devils have an actual possession in men, and may by a
commanding power be compelled to depart: howbeit those principal spirits
whereof Christ more especially entreats, See M. Darels Narration, fol. 5.
page 2.
they cannot possibly be expelled but by prayer and fasting, as an ordinary
means appointed of God.


Orthodoxus. As in this answerelesse answer you would have men imagine, that a
bare ordinary means (by your ingenious handling thereof) is able to effect
many extraordinary matters: so, it seems again by your speech, that the
Apostles of Christ were never acquainted before with any of those principal
spirits, which made them so unready in that unwonted occurrent wherewith they
were then overtaken.

Besides that, a man might greatly wonder how your self should so readily
perceive the devil at Mahgnitton, to be a devil of that selfsame kind, in
meeting with him so fitly (at the first onset of all) by your prayer and
fasting: were it not, that (by your long experience) you are now grown such an
experimented practitioner concerning the Infernal hierarchy, as both you know
how to convent before you, each several devil in his several kind, and
which way to convince him by his special name.

Neither may this be deemed any matter impossible for your self to effect at
this present: who a dozen years since at the least, M Darel was said to cast
7. devils out of Katherine Wright: if you list to believe him therein, and to
note each devil by his several name.
could conjure forth seven at a clap, by their several names. Telling the
beholders thereof, in what moment of time, each devil took his leave: and by
what special name he was properly called. Surely, this makes many wise men
imagine, that, either you are a man profoundly experienced in the Cabalisticall
craft: or that else, you have too too strangely, a long time deluded the
simpler sort. In bearing them falsely in hand, that (only by your prayer and
fasting) you do fully apprehend an extraordinary power, from the Lord, for
the powerful expelling of devils: Math. 17. 21.
whereas Christ (the true wisdom of the father) does tell us, Luc. 17. 6.
that such an extraordinary power, is only apprehended by a special faith.
Affirming withal that this special faith, it has prayer and fasting annexed
unto it, as the only supporters thereof, and no actors at all, in the
admirable effecting of any such accident.


Exorcistes. Oh, then I perceive you have a long time mistaken my meaning. For,
howsoever I urged the holy exercise of prayer and fasting as an appointed
means for the powerful expelling of spirits: my purpose therein was never to
exclude the action of faith, it being an effectual apprehender of that self
same extraordinary power of the Lord, which so powerfully effects the work.


Orthodoxus. If this be your meaning, we shall have you at a non plus before it
be long. For, seeing now you make faith an actor in that your preposterous
enterprise: do tell us directly what faith you mean? Whether the historical,
the justifying, or the miraculous faith: for the dead faith, I am certain it
was not.


Exorcistes. Neither could it be the historical faith: because, that has
only a special relation but to the bare history of the Bible it self,
without any apprehension at all of the power of God. As for the miraculous
faith, that is thought to be ceased long since. And therefore, it was, and is
only a justifying faith which apprehended that power of the Lord: by virtue
also whereof any godly Minister, or others, might as effectually have performed
that action, as I did my self.


Orthodoxus. I am just of your mind, for that matter. Howbeit, if an only
justifying faith may effect such an action: then has that faith some certain
word concerning such works, with a special promise of such an effect. But in
all the whole Scriptures neither word nor promise concerning such purpose, is
any where extant: and therefore, the justifying faith could not possibly
effect such an action.


Exorcistes. Yes sir, the justifying faith, it has an apparent word, and a
promise both, concerning such matter, and that also from our savior himself:
Marc. 9. 23.
who told the possessed child's father, that, if he could believe it, his faith
should undoubtedly have an effect, because, all things are possible to him that
believes. And therewithal (upon the profession of the fathers faith) our
savior did presently expel the evil spirit from his son.


Orthodoxus. You huddle up your reckoning without your host: and must therefore
be enforced to reckon afresh. For, be it supposed our savior (in that place)
does undoubtedly speak of a justifying faith: yet is it certain, that Christ
means not there the Exorcists faith, but the faith of the parties possessed.
And so (by consequence) it was not your own, but the yoongman his faith at
Mahgnitton, that drove forth the devil.


Exorcistes. Very true, his faith apprehending: but, my faith effecting the
action.


Orthodoxus. You do over grossly forget your self. For not long since it was
the supernatural power of the Lord, that effected the action; your own faith
apprehending only, that effectual working power. Howbeit, your justifying
faith now (it being but a bare apprehender before) is become the powerful
effectour: and the possessed man's faith, the bare apprehender of that admirable
action. Notwithstanding, whatsoever you dream of Christ's words, concerning
faith for the action, he speaks there only of a faith in the party: the
very want whereof, was that which hindered his own disciples from effecting
the work. And for this only respect, our savior (in that part^ie alone)
reprooueth the incredulity of that faithles generation: who having had so long
experience of his divine operations, were yet no better in the faith then the
heathenish infidels. Math. 13. 58.
Yea, such a gross Marc. 6. 5.
incredulity was also the very maine cause why our Savior himself at
Nazaret; Bullinger, in Math. 13. 58.
either could not, or would not work many miracles. Calvin, in Math. 13 58.
Not, that his inevitable power was unable (of it self) to ouerswaie their
palpable impiettie: Gualter. in Math. 13. 58.
but for that (the Lord having solemnly decreed the powerful effecting of
those admirable actions by an interposition of the parties own faith
apprehending his power, and by other good means correspondent thereto) their
own unbelief and hardness of heart, Musculus, in Math. 13. 58.
had (so much as they might) very fearfully foreclosed the bottomless
fountain of those his spiritual graces from flowing among them. Math. 9 22.
Whereas on the otherside, he readily yields to the timely requests of such
as believe: Marc. 5. 34.
whatsoever they crave concerning those admirable actions. Luc. 8. 48.
By all the premises then, it is too too apprantly evident, that Christ (in
this place) he speaks only of the parties possessed, and not of the
Exorcistes faith at all.


Exorcistes. But Christ afterward told his Disciples, that, their own
unbelief was the cause why they could not cast forth the devil. Protesting
withal, Math. 17. 20.
that, if they had but so much true faith as one grain of mustard seed: Luc.
17. 6.
they should have been able thereby, to remove mountains out of their places.


Orthodoxus. Do you understand Christ's words in that place, of the justifying
faith alone?


Exorcistes. Yea, why not?


Orthodoxus. Ask you why not? Why man, by this means you would bring us in
doubt of the Apostles justification: and which more is, you do very
blasphemously derogate from the authority and dignity of their authentical
writings.


Exorcistes. Nay sir, I call not their justification in question, but do only
declare what was the principal stoppage to that special action: namely, the
not effectual working power of their own faith for the present.


Orthodoxus. Well yet, by the tenor of your speech you would have us imagine
at least, that the justifying faith of Christ's disciples did oftentimes ebb
and flow with the moon: because (howsoever the same was always inherently
dwelling within their hearts) the efficacy thereof (for that present) was
suddenly fallen to a very low ebb.

And (which more is) we must (by the purport of your speech) be further
persuaded, that very many whom Christ (in the general judgment) will
finally, Math. 7. 22.
and justly reject as workers of iniquity: 1. Cor. 13. 2.
they had once (notwithstanding) the true justifying faith in themselves,
howsoever they finally fell from the same. Heb. 6. 4. 5. 6.
For many of them also, did (in Christ's name) as effectually, and as powerfully
drive forth the devils from people possessed, as did any of the rest, how holy
soever. And so (by consequence) howsoever the callings and gifts of God to
salvation be without repentance: very many notwithstanding, they may and do
loose their justifying faith, Heb. 6. 5. 6.
and finally fall from the grace of God. This as it strengthens very shrewdly
the popish opinion of falling from grace: so does it mightily weaken that
undoubted assurance of the saving faith in all the elect.


Exorcistes. Let it strengthen, or weaken whatsoever it will: very certain I
am, that the justifying faith may effect such a work.


Orthodoxus. If you mean such a work, as your faith effected at Mahgnitton of
late, we are grown to an issue. Howbeit, if you imagine that the justifying
faith may miraculously drive forth a devil: then, all the elect (how inexpert
soever) they also are sufficiently able to cast forth spirits and devils if
they please. For, they are all mutually interessed in the selfsame justifying
faith: and do jointly participate with all the prerogatives thereof whatsoever,
as well as any of the rest. Yea, then those other preachers also, who
severally, and at sundry times did deal with the party possessed: they might
as effectually have dispatched that matter as you did your self: unless happily
you imagine them but reprobates concerning the faith.

Besides all this, if the driving out of devils from men, be (as you would have
us imagine) the undoubted effect of a justifying faith: it must necessarily
follow, that, so many as cannot effect such a work, they may doubt of their
justification in Jesus Christ.

Yea, and those other Preachers also (who eftsoons before, and with your own
self at that present) attempted the matter in vain: they may begin to make
some scruple of conscience, concerning the soundnes of their justification, for
their faith could effect no such work.

Briefly, if the powerful expelling of spirits and devils be in deed (as your
self does avouch) the essential effect of a justifying faith: then surely,
that selfsame effect (so highly surmounting very many of the rest) it would
undoubtedly have been reckoned up in some one of those places at least, where
the other effects of that faith are purposely registered by the spirit of God.
Romans 5. 1. 2. 3.
Howbeit, this powerful expelling of devils, 2. Pet. 1. 5. 6. 7.
is not any where mentioned amongst those other essential fruits of
justifying faith: and therefore, Heb. 11. 32. 33. 34. 35. 36. 37. 38.
the same is no essential effect of any such faith.


Exorcistes. But in the xvj. of Mark, this powerful expelling of spirits or
devils is principally put down as an infallible effect of the faith of the
Gospel. Marc. 16. 17. 18.
For, after our Savior Christ had spoken these words, he that believes and is
baptized, he shall be saved, he that believes not, shall be damned, then he
adds forthwith* and these tokens shall follow them that believe. In my name,
they shall cast forth Devils: speak with new toongs: take away Serpents;
drink any deadly thing without hurt: yea, and but even lay their hands on the
sick, and they shall recover. Lo, all these (you see) are most admirable
eflects. Yet such (I assure you) as do undoubtedly succeed a justifying faith
in Jesus Christ.


Orthodoxus. I do greatly mislike your assurance: for, Pet. Martyr, in 2. Cor.
cap. 12. 11
these matters (how admirable soever in show) they are no essential effects of
a justifying faith. Item, in loc. com. class. 1. cap. 8. sect. 20.
Neither were they at any time, absolutely or simply, but after a sort (as it
were) the signs or tokens of faith: and served only for that primitive age,
wherein the Gospel of Christ was first to be preached abroad in the world. That
selfsame primarie preaching of the Gospel, having (by the unsearchable
providence of God) such signs and tokens even purposely annexed unto it, as
trumpets or criers to summon all sorts of hearers unto the kingdom of Christ.
For even as Moses his law (in mount Sinai, and throughout the wide wilderness)
did gain a wonderful authority unto it self, by reason of the manifold
miracles effected by Moses and Aaron: which said miracles notwithhanding (so
soon as the people of Israel possessed the promised Land) did forthwith
determine. So surely, those selfsame miraculous actions, which in the
primitive church did credit and grace the Gospel of Christ: so soon as the
Gospel it self was universally published abroad in the world, they forthwith
did cease and grow out of use. Aug. Marlorat. in Math. cap. 28. 19.
By all which it is very apparent, that, those admirable effects, they were
only but temporary and personal prerogatives, more especially appertayning
to some special persons: accordingly as it seemed good to the Lord to bestow
them himself, in the several distributions of those his several graces.
Howbeit, because those special graces Johannes Calvin. in Math. cap. 28. 19.
(thus personally bestowed on some few) did publicly tend to the public
profit of all the elect, and for that those admirable actions, so admirably
effected by some one peculiar person, did generally serve for an undoubted
confirmation of the faith in all: it therefore pleased the holy Ghost in that
place, indefinitely to name the believers themselves, as though that which was
done by some one, or a few, had been generally effected by all the faithful.


Exorcistes. Howsoever he speaks but of one, or a few of the faithful: very
certain I am, that the miraculous actions mentioned there, they are such
essential tokens, as do undoubtedly succeed the saving faith of the Gospel.


Orthodoxus. That, those tokens succeeded the preaching of the Gospel, we do
never deny: but, whether they do follow the preaching of the Gospel, as the
essential effects of that justifying faith, which mutually belongs to all
the elect, is the very issue of the question between us: the which I am
willing (if you please) that Master Beza do determine for us both in this
sort: 1. Cor. 12. 9.
To another is given faith, by the same spirit. Theod. Beza, annot. in 1. Cor.
12. 9. editione 4.
This is not that faith (says Beza) which belongs indifferently to all the
believers in Christ, for, the Apostle (in this place) entreats only of some
certain special gifts of the spirit: and therefore, this special faith, it
has a special relation unto the effectual power of God in working of
miracles, so far forth especially, Ioh. Calvin in 1. Cor. 12. 9.
as some special persons (endued with that special gift) were especially
directed therein by some secret motion from the spirit of God. This therefore,
is that faith, which we call (in the schools) the miraculous faith: Math. 17.
20.
whereof an express mention more especially is made, Marc. 16. 17.
in the seauenteene of Matthew: Luc. 7. 6.
the sixteen of Mark: and, in the seventh of Luke. This miraculous faith is
plainly distinguished, Math. 7. 22.
yea sometimes separated quite from that true saving faith, 1. Cor. 12. 9. (...)
, whose proper object is the good-pleasure of God the father for, and
concerning the justification and glorification of all the elect in Christ,
effectually apprehended before by that their aforesaid saving faith. Finally,
this selfsame miraculous faith, she has also her several doubtings and
sundry imperfections: Numb. 20. 12.
as may plainly appear in Moses and Aaron, Math. 17. 20.
and in the disciples, and for the which also even Peter himself was sharply
rebuked of Christ. Math. 14. 31.
Thus far Master Beza. Where he makes (you see) those signs and tokens,
such only effects as follow the preaching of the Gospel for the confirmation
thereof: but, no essential fruits of a justifying faith, as your self very
fondly imagine.


Exorcistes. Whatsoever Master Beza or your self may imagine, very certain I
am, that Christ speaks there of that saving faith which does orderly succeed
the orderly administration of the word and sacraments: Marc. 16. 15.
saying thus. Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every
creature. He that believes, and is baptized, he shall be saved: he that
believes not, shall be damned. And even then (upon this so solemn a
determination concerning the saving faith of the Gospel) he adds forthwith
(by the copulative (and) the infallible tokens undoubtedly succeeding that
saving faith; Marc. 16. 17.
saying thus. And, these tokens shall follow them that believe. In my name they
shall cast out devils, and so forth. Demonstrating very plainly unto us,
that, the effectual power for expelling spirits and devils: is an undoubted
effect of the justifying faith.


Orthodoxus. No such demonstration at all. For, Christ (in that place) does
only declare what tokens should follow the preaching and faith of the Gospel,
but, puts down no essential fruits or effects of a justifying faith as we
showed before, and which may yet more plainly appear, if you rightly consider
his maine purpose it self, and the orderly course of his speech concerning the
same. The maine purpose of Christ, Hugo Cardinal. in Marc. cap. 16. 17.
was to allure the elect to a timely entertainment of the saving faith of the
Gospel: and this he endeavors to do, partly, by an infallible promise of
eternal salvation to all the believers, and partly, by an inevitable
threatening of eternal damnation to all the unbelievers thereof. And now next
(for their further confirmation in that selfsame saving faith of the Gospel)
he adds certain temporary and personal privileges, as infallible tokens
and pledges of that his eternal saving power: I mean, the powerful operation
of many most admirable and miraculous actions. The which said personal
prerogatives, our savior Christ did purposely bestow upon some certain
special persons: not that he would have those personal prerogatives reputed
as essential effects of a justifying faith, but, to be rather esteemed as
temporary pledges or seals for the perpetual establishment of his glorious
Gospel. According to that in the end of the chapter, where it is said that the
Apostles went forth and preached every where; Marc. 16. 20.
the Lord working effectually in every of them, and confirming the word with
miracles following. Thus then you may plainly perceive how Christ puts down
those tokens, as temporary pledges or seals of the perpetual truth of his
Gospel: and no essential effects of the justifying faith. And therefore, if
you have none other word else for your purpose, but that one place of Christ
where he tells us, that this kind goes not forth but by prayer and fasting,
the same (You see) will not serve your turn: it being not meant at all of a
justifying faith, as has been sufficiently showed before.


Exorcistes. Howsoever you conclude at your pleasure: I will never be
persuaded, but that, those tokens put down by our savior there, they are
undoubtedly, the very essential effects of a justifying faith.


Orthodoxus. I conclude not at pleasure concerning this point: neither do I put
down my own private opinion, but, the public consent of many most singular
persons, as may further be seen by their following testimonies.

First, Chrysostom. in Math. 17. 20.
Chrysostom ( upon that seuenteen of Matthew) says plainly thus. Seeing these
miraculous signs are not now wrought by the Church in our days: shall we
therefore conclude, that so many of the Christians as cannot possibly do the
like miracles, they are utterly destitute of faith: God forbid we should so
hardly censure the dear children of God. The justifying faith is now present
among us: but, that faith which was called the miraculous faith, is ceased long
since.

Again, Sebast. Meyer, in 1. Cor. cap. 12. 9.
Sebastian Meyer, he says, it is necessary we should distinguish this faith
of miracles, from the justifying faith: because of that which our Savior says
concerning some at the judgment day, who alleging for themselves the
miraculous faith, shall (notwithstanding the same) be rejected of Christ.

Bullinger in like manner he writes thus. Bullinger, in Math. 17. 20.
Some understand this place of the power of miracles, and do hold the faith
which is spoken of here, for a particular faith, appertaining to the Apostles
themselves: whom especially it behooved to confirm the preaching of the
Gospel, by their working of miracles.

Again, Moses Pellach. Analys. typic. Math. cap. 17. 20.
Moses Pellacherus upon the selfsame Scripture, does make the miraculous
faith, an undoubted efficient cause of expelling the devil from the possessed
child.

Again, Aretius, in Math. 17. 20.
Aretius, he tells us plainly, that, that which our Savior speaks there,
of the remoouing of mountains, and of nothing impossible to them that believe:
it must necessarily be understood of that miraculous faith, 1. Cor. 13. 2.
, whereof the Apostle elsewhere entreats.

Master Calvin, Ioh. Calvin. in Math. cap. 17. 20.
he says that our Savior (in that place) speaks properly of a particular
faith, the which (as occasion requires) has from the Lord, it secret motions:
and is the same with that whereof the Apostle makes mention saying. If I had
all faith, so as I could remove mountains out of their places, and have no
love: I were nothing at all.

Briefly, Musculus, in Math. cap. 17. 20.
Musculus he writes thus. The casting out of devils (whatsoever men think) is
an action of faith. Howbeit, it would be considered, Pet. Martyr in loc. com.
class. 1. cap. 8. sect. 14.
of what faith the Lord speaks. For we know there be three kinds of faith.
The first is that faith, whereby we believe things to be such, as they are in
the Scriptures propounded unto us: as we hear in the Scriptures, that there is
but one only true God, and the same an almighty Creator of all things. This
we believe by the Scriptures: and this faith is properly called an historical
faith. There is another faith whereby we believe the promises of God, and do
truly apprehend his great mercy and grace in Jesus Christ: this properly is
called the instifying faith. The third kind of faith, is that, whereby we do
firmly believe, that there is nothing impossible to God, and whereby also the
mind it self ( by a special motion of the spirit of God) is forciblie moved
to the powerful effecting of some admirable matters: and, this is properly
called the faith of miracles. The first kind of faith is most general, and
reaches even to the reprobates: in so much as satan also himself is thought
to enjoy it, Iam. 2. 19.
according to that of James. Thou beleeuest there is one God, thou do well:
the devils also they believe and tremble. Tit. 1. 1.
The second kind of faith, is only that saving faith of the Adopted sons: by
which they are firmly incorporate, and saved in Christ. Of this faith the
Evangelist speaks not here: neither yet can they that have this saving
faith, effect any miracles by virtue thereof. Aug. Marlorat. in Math. cap. 17.
20.
The third kind of faith, is only a particular faith, in some certain
special persons: and the same not always in force, but has her special
times, and peculiar reasons annexed unto her. Ioh. Calvin. in Math. 17. 20.
This kind of faith, may fitly be called a particular, or singular faith: it
being the singular gift of the holy Ghost, and having from thence her singular
directions, 1 Cor. 12. 9.
as the Apostle declares saying, to another is given faith by the same spirit.
The which (without doubt) must in no wise be understood of the justifying
faith: because (this being peculiar to some one, or a few) the justifying
faith, it belongs indifferently to all the elect. This miraculous faith, it
saves none, nor changes the mind: Pet. Martyr, loc. com. clas. 1. cap. 8.
sect. 14.
neither is any man bettered thereby, the worth of one hair. (Yea, and it is
also eftsoons bestowed upon many reprobate persons, who will say unto Christ
in the general judgment; Math. 7. 22.
Lord, Lord, have we not by thy name prophesied, and by thy name cast out
devils, and by thy name done many great works: to whom he will answer, I
never knew you, depart from me ye workers of iniquity. 1. Cor. 13. 2.
Again (says the Apostle) If I had al faith, so as I could remove
mountains, and have no love, I am even as nothing. Of this faith our Savior
speaks in the place you allege saying. Math. 17. 20.
If you had faith so much as is a grain of mustard seed, and should say to
this mountain remove hence to yonder place, it should forthwith obey you. By
all these testimonies, it is very apparent, that Christ (in that parcel of
Scripture which you produce for your purpose) speaks nothing at all of the
justifying faith in Jesus Christ.


Exorcistes. Howsoever your self do conclude, and those your contestes may
seem to confirm: those tokens which Christ puts down in that place, they are
(I am sure) the essential signs, or effects of a justifying faith.


Orthodoxus. Although (by reason of a self conceit) the judgment of learned
divines be unable to ouersway your settled partinacie concerning this point: yet
let the absurdity of your own speech, enforce you (at the least) to forsake
such a palpable error for shame. For, if the tokens put down in that place be
(indeed and in truth) the essential and ordinary effects of a true justifying
faith, as you would bear us highly in hand: then surely, this palpable
absurdity must necessarily ensue so absurd an assertion. Namely, that, either
there are none (now in these days of the Gospel) who may truly be said to be
justified: or that (now at the least) we have the true justifying faith in
another edition, quite differing from that which was then in the primitive
Church. For, very certain I am, that, no Christians now (how holy soever)
are able (by the only efficacy of their justifying faith) to drive out a
spirit or devil in any possessed: howsoever your self durst so boldly, (I
will not say blindly) adventure upon such a wonderful work.


Exorcistes. Sir, you do over grossly abuse me with girding quippes: I would
you knew it, I did not blindlie undertake that admirable enterprice, as your
self does bluntly imagine.


Orthodoxus. My imaginations herein are nothing so blunt, as the bluntnes of
your cause does require. For, if the undertaking of such an admirable
enterprise, without some apparent directions and warrant from the word, be but
a walking in darkness, yea, a very desperate, and a blind rushing upon the
work it self: then I hope I do not grossly abuse you with girding quippes,
because it is lawful to call darkness, darkness. But your self did undertake
that admirable enterprise, without any apparent directions, or warrant at all
from the word, as has been sufficiently declared, and therefore you rushed
but blindly upon that wonderful work. So then, (the premises you see being
duly considered) you are now enforced perforce to confess, that, either you
drove forth no devil at all from the yoongman at Mahgnitton: or that else,
you drove him forth (at the least) by the only means of a miraculous faith.
Howbeit, the miraculous faith you may at no hand avouch in that action: because
you disclaimed the same but even now, as a thing ceased long since.


Exorcistes. Not so. I only affirmed, that the miraculous faith, it was
thought (of some) to be ceased long since: but told you not what opinion I hold
my own self, concerning that matter.


Orthodoxus. Are you opinionate then concerning this point? Let us hear (I
beseech you) your proper opinion: and tell us without any doubling, whether
you hold for certain, that the miraculous faith is yet still continued in
these days of the Gospel?


Exorcistes. If I avouch the continuance thereof, it is no heresy I hope.


Orthodoxus. A man ( by the course of your speech) may give a shroud guess
concerning the length of your foot. Howbeit, the night is far spent, and I
am over weary to hold out the controversy without a breathing fit at the
least. Let us therefore break off for a little short space: and then set upon
it afresh. For, I am unwilling to give over the conference now, before the
matters be brought to some better perfection.


Lycanthropus. Gods name be blessed for your Christian care in doing us good:
and we willingly yield to your motion.


Orthodoxus. Arise then, and let us go walk a turn or two in my parlour.


Philologus. We attend on your person.


The end of the ninth Dialogue.
The tenth Dialogue.
THE ARGUMENT.
Whether a miraculous faith ( apprehending the power of God, for the powerful
expelling of Devils) be yet still continued? What a true miracle is? And
whether the working of miracles, be now fully determined in the Churches of
Christ?

The speakers names.
PHILOLOGVS. LYCANTHROPVS. PNEVMATOMACHVS. PHYSIOLOGVS. ORTHODOXVS. EXORCISTES.
Orthodoxus. A Pennie-woorth of ease, I perceive is worth a penny: Oh how
this little recreation has revived my wearied spirits? Do not you also, very
sensibly perceive the selfsame effect in your selves?


Physiologus. Yes sir, blessed be God for the same. For my own part, I feel
my self as lively in body, as sharp in conceit, yea, and as fit for the
conference, as I was at the first beginning.


Lycanthropus. The same I dare say for my self and the rest.


Orthodoxus. Let us then go roundly to work. Come on Exorcistes, tell us in
good sadness, do you hold it for certain, that the miraculous faith, is yet
still continued in these days of the Gospel?


Exorcistes. What reason have you to imagine the contrary?


Orthodoxus. What reason? I will give you one reason (for this once) in stead
of a thousand, thus. The working of miracles is ceased long since: and
therefore also the miraculous faith.


Exorcistes. Why sir? D. Apol. 32. 33.
to remove the devil by prayer and fasting is no D. 1. Narrat. page 10.
miracle at all. D. doct. page 59.



Physiologus. Master Orthodoxus, do rest you a little, and let me argue this
point. Come on Exorcistes: and answer directly. Is the driving out of devils
by prayer and fasting, no miracle I pray you?


Exorcistes. It is no miracle at all.


Physiologus. Well, then I perceive, we are of necessity enforced to declare
plainly unto you, first, what a miracle is, with the sundry kinds of
miracles: and then next, we will exactly consider of your action at Mahgnitton,
to see, whether the same (pretended to be done by your self as it was) may
truly be termed a miracle, in any respect?


Lycanthropus. I pray you proceed in your purposed course.


Physiologus. With very good will. Wherein first, (...) Psalm. 139. 14.
for the word ( miracle) it self, (...) Psalm. 118. 23.
we have to consider, that, that thing which we commonly account a miracle, is
named of the Hebrews (niphlah) I mean, a most admirable or, a merueilous
matter. Or rather ( niphlath) if you will: that is, a wonder quite hid from
our eyes. And therefore, (...) Exodus 34. 10.
all those obscure and admirable matters which do highly surmount the reach of
our reason: (...) Job. 37. 16.
they are commonly called ( niphlaoth) that is, very strange and admirable
actions. Or rather ( miphleoth) I mean, such hidden, and such secret
occurrents, as cannot possibly be conceived by the narrow compass of our
common, and natural sense. They do fitly proceed from the radical word
(palah) or ( niplah) which is as much to say, (...), yel (...).
as, to be veiled, obscured, quite hidden, difficult, and very highly
surmounting the shallow reach of our reason. Because, every miraculous action,
is always some such kind of matter, as is over much veiled, obscured, hidden,
and difficult, beyond our common capacity: yea, and such an unwonted occurrent,
as seems most admirable, and very hard in our present apprehension. (...)
In like manner, the Gretians, they entitle it ( thauma) that is a merueile, or
wonder. And, it comes of the verb (thaumazo) which signifies to admire, to
merueile, or wonder. The latins, they call it miraculum, Miraculum, q. oculi
mirum.
quasi occuli mirum, the wonder of the eye, for that it seems a merueile in
every man's eyes: and therefore, they do oftentimes expound it, Prodigium,
portentum, monstrum.
a prodigious, a monstrous, or, an admirable matter, for that the Lord by such
an vmvoonted means, does extraordinarily foreshew some admirable accident,
quite contrary to the accustomed order of nature her self. So then, by all the
premises it is very apparent what a miracle is. Namely, A miracle, What it is?
it is by the extraordinary working power of the Lord, some such unaccustomed
action, as very highly surmounteth the whole faculty of every created nature:
and is therefore thus admirablie effected, to the end it might the rather
affect the beholders with an admiration thereof, and might the more certainly
confirm their faith in the truth of the word. In this definition we may
easily discern all the essential causes of miracles. For first, The efficient
cause.
the efficient cause of every such admirable action, is an extraordinary
working power of the Lord. The material cause, are all those admirable actions
themselves. The formal cause, The material cause.
is the unaccustomed manner of effecting those actions. The final cause, The
final cause.
is partly to affect the beholders with some serious admiration concerning the
omnipotent power, and wisdom of God: and partly, to confirm their faith in
the truth of the word. By all which you may plainly perceive what a miracle
is.


Lycanthropus. Very true: but, what be the sundry kinds of miracles?


Physiologus. They are those variable and differing sorts of admirable actions:
which both may be, and are diversely discerned according to their diverse and
sundry conditions. And these sundry sorts of miracles, Two kinds of miracles.
are twofold: namely, either true, or false miracles.


Philologus. Which are the true miracles?


Physiologus. They are al those admirable actions whatsoever, A true miracle,
what?
which (both for their matter and form) are rightly and truly effected: and
which also, are wholly directed to their certain determined ends, namely, the
glory of God, and credit of his glorious Gospel. And, such are all those
admirable actions (how sielie soever in show) which were miraculously
accomplished, either immediately by the Lord alone: or mediately at least, by
his extraordinary ministers.


Pneumatomachus. Which are the false miracles?


Physiologus. They are all those admirable matters in show, A false miracle,
what?
which either are not ( in deed and in truth) the selfsame thing they seem to
portend: or which else are effected, not by any supernatural power surmounting
the reach of our reason, but, by some such natural faculty of nature
herself, as is hidden and secret from the present apprehension of those that
behold the same. Yea, and which also are eftsoons directed to some such
specialpurpose, or sinister end, as is directly opposite to the glory of God,
and the truth of the Gospel. False miracles may be effected three manner of of
ways.
These later sorts of miraculous actions (how admirable soever in sensible
appearance) they may without any extraordinary help of the Lord, be easily
effected by Angels, by diuets, and expert persons: even only thorough some
hidden faculty of nature her self three manner of ways.

1. For first, very certain it is, that Angels, devils, and men (expert in
natural philosophy) having a deep insight into the hidden secrets of nature:
and being thoroughly experienced in the powers thereof: they may and can easily
apply those said natural powers, to some such perexisting matter, as has in
it self, a natural disposition to every such action intended. For, from the
natural conjunction of some such perexisting matter with some proffered
efficients, there will even naturally succeed, some such undoubted effects, as
the party (procuring such natural conjunction) propounded before. Yea, and
those also upon the sudden, and beyond the expectation of all the beholders
thereof: which does eftsoons enforce them to admire at such rare, and unwonted
events. For, the devil himself, as also, those experienced persons in natures
secrets, they do very well know, that frogs, worms, yea, and also some
serpents, are easily engendered of some putrified matter perexisting in nature:
especially, if there be added to every such putrified matter, and of heat; by
such certain degrees as is correspondent thereto. Now then, this the foresaid
conioyning of putrified matter, an active heat together, being not very
difficult for devils, and for cogging companions to effect if they please: they
therefore eftsoons do attempt the timely effecting thereof, Aug. de trinit.
lib. 3.
and all to circumuent and deceive the beholders themselves. Even as did Iannes
and Iambres, the Egyptian sorcerers: if Augustines judgment be adjudged
Canonical.

2 Secondly, the devil himself, and so many besides as have any insight at
all into the secrets of nature, they do very well know, Philosophus, de some.
and vigil. libr.
that some sudden commotion of the natural spirits, of blood, and of humors,
do mightily disturb and distemper the bodies of men. Insomuch as the
imaginations, the forms, and representations of things raised up and conserved
in those selfsame commotions: are eftsoons exhibited to the fantasy or
imaginatiue faculty, at the very same instant the commotion was made, yea,
and eftsoons also, even in that self same manner and order wherein it
pleases the disturber of our spirits and humors to conuaie those selfsame
representations. By which said means very many and sundry visions do
forthwith appear to the fantasy: as we may plainly perceive in so many as
are fearfully affected with Phrenesies. Yea, and (which more is) the matter it
self may be brought to such issue, as those self same representations which
are inwardly conserved in the imaginatiue faculty: they may, and are eftsoons
recalled to the external senses themselves. In so much as the party
(preposterously affected therewith) does very strongly imagine that he
undoubtedly beholds those selfsame things with his eyes, which were
apprehended before, in the fantasy, imagination, or common sense, and are
conversant wholly therewith: whereas (in deed and in truth) there was never any
such matter existing essentially in outward appearance.

3. Lastly, many like admirable matters may very easily, and (as it were) with
a trice, Magister sentent. lib. 2. did. 7. fol. 87.
be forthwith effected both by devils and by cogging companions: either by the
assistance of some precompacted confederacy, or through the only supply of
some local motion. Wherein (partly by watchwords, and partly also by the
present exchange of one thing for another) many admirable actions (in an
outward sensible seeming, and by a nimble conueyance) both may be, and are
eftsoons effected by seducing make-shifts, Haet autem omnia, ratione nostri,
vel (...), appellantur miracula.
and iuggling mates. Now then, all these the forenamed sundry manners of
working many admirable matters in outward show: how strange soever they seem
to the beholders themselves, they are simply no miracles at all: howsoever
(respecting our shallow reasons, and stinted judgments) it pleases the Lord
eftsoons to entitle them so in the sacred scriptures. Come on therefore
Exorcistes, now that you have sufficiently heard what a miracle is, Applicatio
praemissorum, ad praesent negetium.
as also of the sundry sorts of miracles: do tell me with whether of both
these sorts of miracles aforesaid, you do range your supposed admirable action
wrought at Mahgnitton? I mean, whether we must esteem the same a true, or
false miracle? A true miracle you may not affirm it to be: both because the
same is utterly destitute of all those the former essential causes of
miracles, and for that, no such thing at all was ever effected, as has been,
and shall be showed at large. Again, a false miracle (I believe) you will
never avouch it to be: for fear of being forthwith concluded some such cunning
Impostor, Act. 8. 9.
as has (only by iuggling sleights and falfe legerdemaines) a long time
bewitched the minds of the 1. Cor. 11. 3.
simple. Gal. 3. 1.



Exorcistes. I account it no miracle in any respect. And surely, See M. Darel^
Apolog. page 32.
if your self, or any other have conceived thereof, as of a miracle, and
thereupon also have thought hardly upon it, for that the miraculous actions are
thought to be ceased: you are therein (by your patience) very deeply deceived.


Physiologus. Why sir? is not the driving out of Devils a miracle?


Exorcistes. In deed, to cast out devils by a commanding word so as one no
sooner commands the spirit to go out, See M. Darel^ Apolog. page 32.
but forthwith he departs, as Christ and his Apostles did: this I confess,
is not only a miracle, but of them the greatest. Howbeit, by means of prayer
and fasting to drive out Satan, Math. 28.
or rather, to entreat Christ (to whom all power is given in heaven and in
earth) to cast forth Satan: is no miracle at all.


Physiologus. And, why so I beseech you?


Exorcistes. Because of the means that is used. For, See M. Darels Apolog.
page 33.
whatsoever is brought to pass by means, that same is no miracle (because of
that said means) be it never so wonderful: as might be showed (but for
breuities sake) by a thousand instances.


Physiologus. You are either a great friend unto breuity: or breuity a good
shelter to your wether-shaken cause at the least. Notwithstanding, for that you
go about (by a bare pretense of means) to make a mere nullity in many
miraculous actions, as shall be showed hereafter: this I must be bold to tell you
(as it were) by the way, that either I wholly mistake your meaning, or, your
self do utter you wot not what. For, if by the word ( means) you understand
such a means, as has essentially in it own self, some energetical force,
either naturally, or artificially, for the orderly effecting of matters:
namely, such a means as has in it self naturally some natural consonancy
concerning the action intended (as has natural food, for the orderly
conservation of our natural being) or if otherways, you understand such an
artificial means, as has in it self artificially, an apt correspondency
unto the purposed business (as has the carpenters axe, to the hewing and
squaring of logs) then you say true. Because, any thing effected by such
essential means, has in it self no extraordinary or supernatural power,
(how admirable soever in show) but is ordinarily effected by mere natural, or
artificial means at the least: and therefore, howsoever a wonder, yet no
miracle in any respect. Howbeit if by the word ( means) you understand some
such supposed fantastical means as, neither naturally, nor artificially has
in it self any ability, disposition, or aptness at all to any such action
intended, as are all created, or mere natural means whatsoever, to every of
those extraordinary and supernatural actions which wholly concern the
powerful expelling of spirits and devils: then, this your speech (respecting
especially the point of our question) is too to absurd and senseless. Neither
shall you ever be able (though you set breuity aside for the present, and take
what leisure best likes your self) to give us herein, so much as one only
true instance, out of all those your pretended thousand instances, whereof you
so bravely vaunted before.


Exorcistes. You go about I perceive, very slightly to ouerslip the maine
point of my argument: by this your cunning new-coined distinction of means.


Physiologus. Nothing less I assure you. And therefore (seeing you are so
resolute) do frame your own argument: that you may forthwith receive an
answer directly unto it.


Exorcistes. I frame it thus. Whatsoever is brought to pass by means, See M.
Darels Apolog. page 33.
that is no miracle. But, the driving out of devils by prayer and fasting, is
brought to pass by means: therefore, the driving out of devils by prayer and
fasting, is no miracle.


Physiologus. First, make plain the ambiguous term (means) in your mayor
proposition: and tell me plainly, whether you understand thereby, any such
essential means, as, either naturally, or artificially at least, has in it
self, some energeticall force, for the powerful expelling of spirits and
devils.


Exorcistes. I understand not any such essential means at all: but such a
means rather, as does accidentally befall the action intended: that selfsame
accidental means, not having any further force in it self for expelling the
devil, then pleases the Lord to bless it withal.


Physiologus. This then I dare tell you for truth: that, your assumption is
utterly false. For, the powerful expelling of spirits and devils, was never
effected by any such means, but, by the only supernatural power of the Lord,
as has been sufficiently proved long since: and therefore, every such action
(notwithstanding your often pretended means of prayer and fasting) must needs
be a miracle.


Exorcistes. Nay sir, See M. Darels Apolog. page 33.
when satan is cast out by prayer and fasting, the whole church, or any member
thereof, it works no miracle: because, she cannot (in using the means) be
assured to prevail. For, See M. Darels Doct. in page 59.
although the assurance is, and may be great in this case: yet, we cannot be
sure that the party shall be delivered, the means being used: because, God is
at liberty, to bless the means he has appointed to this end: or to withhold
his blessing from it. And, in this latter case: what will any means profit or
prevail?


Physiologus. Your mind (it shoud seem) is mightily amazed with the matter in
question: your speeches they are so fearfully distracted among themselves. For
the assurance (you say) is very great in this case: and yet, you cannot be
assured of the parties deliverance. Because, the whole success of that
business, does wholly depend upon the great blessing of God: without which the
means cannot possibly prevail, or profit in any respect. Oh, here are
crowded up closely together, an huge company of crazie conclusions: the one of
them proferring the canuizado, or counterchecke directly unto the other.
Insomuch, as if they be not al bound the sooner unto the good behavior: some
bloody massacre will undoubtedly fall forth among themselves. But go to:
what if your said means should be blessed of God? My meaning is this; What if
the Lord, even at your prayer and fasting be entreated to drive forth a
devil? Were that work, thus effected (as you fondlly imagine) by means: no
miraculous action at all?


Exorcistes. It is then, See M. Darels Apolog. page 33.
mirandum, non miraculum: that is, a woonderful work, but not a wonder.


Physiologus. Oh, then I perceive, the very period of time is now plainly
expired: wherein that old verse must needs be fulfilled, which says: Miranda
canunt, at non credenda Poetae. --
The Poets many woonders sing:
Which are not worth the crediting.
For, tell me I pray you, whether you account this your new comed distinction
of mirandum, and miraculum: as a sound, and a current distinction?


Exorcistes. Yea, why not? It being the very same which the holy Ghost
observes in sundry places of Scripture: where he puts down these two
distinct words, namely, signs, and woonders. By signs he understands all
those miraculous actions whatsoever, which are called miracula: and by woonders
he means all those admirable matters, which, in an only regard of their
great vnwoontednes, are fitly termed miranda.


Physiologus. This new-coyned Logic, or rather, this coie-kinde of
distinguishing causes, you have learned I perceive from nyce mistres Merchant:
who (with as great probability of reason) has told us long since, that Pepper
is hot in operation, and cold in working. Making operation and working, the
diuident members of her pepper in sale: as you make your wonderful work, and
your wonder, the several kinds of admirable matters, and, all this, to
manage (if possibly it might be) your woonderles wonder wrought at Mahgnitton.

And thus you would cunningly cast a myste if you could before the eyes of the
simple: to make them believe, that a wonderful work were no wonder at all,
and that no wonder at all were a wonderful work. And so, it comes
eftsoons to pass (especially among such as are desirous of novelties) that,
signs and woonders must be esteemed, either as true woonders, or no woonders
at all, whenever, and so often as it pleases your self to make of a
woonderlesse wonder, a wonder of woonders.

Howbeit, because this new phantasied distinction of signs and woonders, is be
come (at this present) the fairest flower in your garden, to furnish forth
your faint-harted cause: it shall not be amiss first to put down the very
true meaning of those two several words: and then next, to lay open your
palpable impudency, in so groslie abusing the same, to serve your turn.


Lycanthropus. I pray you proceed in your purpose.


Physiologus. Content. First therefore (for signs and woonders) the Hebrews,
Numb. 31. 9. 10 and 26. 10.
they have usually Oath, and mopeth, saving, that eftsoons for the word Oath,
Psalm. 74. 4.
they do use the word Lanas, which signifies a sign, Isa. 13. 2. and 30. 17.
or a banner set up for a token, as in sundry places of Scripture it is very
apparent. (...), ex (...)


By the word Oath, they understand such a sign as portendeth some rare matter
to come, or rather a wonder, whose prediction is hard at hand. Exodus 4. 8.
It springs from the radical verb, Athath, which is as much to say, as to
come speedily, to make haste, Deuteronomy. 13. 1. 2. 1. Chro. 16. 12.
or to run: Psalm. 105. 5.
because every miraculous action, (surmounting the ordinary course of nature,
and coming to pass beyond the common expectation of people) is eftsoons in
place as it were on the sudden, and within the beholders view before they
begin to imagine thereof, as we may plainly perceive by the very use of the
word it self, in sundry places.

Again, Exodus 7. 3. and 11. 9. 10.
by the word Mopeth, they understand some prodigious or seldom seen thing,
Deuteronomy. 13. 1. 2.
some unwonted, or perswasorie matter, yea, 1. Chro. 16. 12.
or some such perswasible sign, as very easily procures credit with all the
beholders. Ezec. 12. 6. 11.
It comes of the word iaphah, and has an affinity with pathah, Joel. 2. 30.
which signifies to persuade, or entice: (...)ex (...)
because, every such admirable matter (how unwonted soever) it has in it
self such a persuading: Cognationem habet cum.
or an entycing power as prevails with men. And, hereof it came to pass that
the third son of Noah, (...), i. persuasit, vt very
fitly was named Iapheth, Genesis 9. 27. for that he and all his posterity (by
the admirable promises put down in the Gospel) were so easily persuaded or
enticed to dwell in the tents of Shem, unto whom the Savior was promised. The
which dwelling with Shem, may fitly be called Mopeth, that is, a wonderful
matter: by reason of that wonderful effect which it wrought upon Iapheth, R.
D. Kimhi. Pagnin. in thesauro sanctae linguae.
and all his posterity. These two words ( Oath and Mopeth) do differ the one
from the other, in this, namely, for that the word Oath, is used in many places
where the word Mopeth may not be used: because Mopeth, it evermore respects
the effect or the end, which is to procure an admiration with men: and
therefore it is very apparent, that a wonder (respecting especially the
beholders themselves) is no less admirable, then a woondrous work: howsoever
it pleases your self to distingush the one from the other.


Exorcistes. Not I, but, the holy Ghost does distinguish them so, in sundry
places, Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2.
especially in Deuteronomie: where he puts down signs and woonders,
distinctiuely. Understanding by signs, such miraculous actions as are only
effected by the supernatural or commanding power of the Lord: and by woonders,
such strange operations as do (for their strangenes) make men to admire, albeit
not wrought by any supernatural, but only by natural means. These latter,
they may (for their strangenes) be fitly called a wonder, but, no woondrous
work: because, they be effected by mere natural means, and so my
distinction (your may see) it is current.


Physiologus Were you not shameless, you would blush for very shame, thus
shamelesly to brand the holy Ghost with a lie, and all to uphold your
Legerdemaines: which cannot possibly stand of themselves, but must needs be
underpropped eftsoons withlying distinctions.

For, whereas you would make signs and woonders, two distinct or several
matters, because of the distinctiue particle (or) put down in the text, and
thereupon would have us imagine that by ( signs) are meant miracles, and by (
woonders) is understood a wonder forsooth, but no woondrous work: may it
please you to consider a little better with you self, how that the holy Ghost
(in that place) does use those selfsame two words, not as several matters
distinct in themselves, but rather, as mere Synonyma, that is, words of one
and the selfsame signification, exegetically put down, the one to explane, or
express the other, according to that in the Psalm, where the Prophet says
thus: Remember the marvelous works which the Lord has done: his woonders,
Psalm. 105. 5.
and the judgments of his mouth. Putting down the woonders and judgments of
his mouth, to show what he meant by the marvelous works rehearsed before. As
if he should say thus, would you willingly know what I mean by the miraculous
or marvelous works of the Lord? I mean, al those his woonders and
judgments, which (so expressly and after such a speaking manner) do declare
his extraordinary working power: to the great admiration and wonder of all
the beholders thereof.

Howbeit, because the disjunctive particle (or) is so precious a pearl in your
eyes, what say you to that place in Exodus, where the very selfsame words are
expressly put down to the selfsame purpose with that in Deuteronomie; albeit
not disiunctiuely, Exodus 7. 3.
but rather copulatiuely thus. And I will multiply, eth-oththai, (...).
veeth-mopthai: that is, my signs and my woonders. Here the holy Ghost, he
uses (you see) the copulative (and) and not the disjunctive particle (or) and
yet, to one and the self purpose with the text you insist upon: which plainly
declares, that signs and woonders, they are no such several matters distinct
in themselves, but were synonyma, the one put down to express the other.


Exorcistes. If signs and woonders be mere synonyma, and indifferently put
down for a miracle, then David (it should seem) he became a miracle,
especially then, when he was reputed the wonder of men, according to his own
testimony: telling us plainly, that he became a monster unto many, Psalm. 71.
7.
which (by your exposition) must be understood a miracle to many. Howbeit, the
purpose of David, was only to express his present distressed estate; by the
word mopheth declaring plainly unto us, that he was no less abhorred of
wicked men, then if he had been a monster in nature. By the which it is very
apparent, that something may truly be termed a wonder: and yet, the same no
woondrous work.


Physiologus. You do very absurdly abuse the word mopeth it self: and most
grossly mistake the true meaning of David in that portion of scripture. For
first, the word mopeth there, it does not necessarily conclude, that David was
simply a monster: but rather, it notes unto us, that he was generally reputed
with many, as an admirable sign, or token of the extraordinary care of God
toward all the chosen in Christ. And, (...), nam, (...), est litera
similitudinis. Et exponitur, periude, sicut, quasi, velut, veluti, vt, ita,
sic, etc.
so much, the letter ( ^caph) prefixed before mopeth, and making it kemopeth:
very plainly imports unto us. For, that letter, it is (as every one knows
right well) a letter of similitude, or likeness: and therefore, it must be
translated, in like sort, even as, even so, as it were, in like manner, and so
forth. Whereupon you may plainly perceive (if you please) that, the reading,
it ought to be thus. I became (as it had been) a miraculous sign, Non
simpliciter sed secundum quid.
or token to many. Not that the prophet was simply so, but rather, esteemed so;
yea, such a one in respect, and after a sort. Neither was it the purpose of
David (in that place) to make any mention at all, of any his present distressed
estate: but rather, to express the admirable mercies of God, concerning his
extraordinary working power, in so miraculously protecting the person and state
of David. As, if he should say. O Lord, thou have with such faithfulness and
truth, preserved thy poor servant from time to time, that, very many (in an
only consideration of my miraculous deliverances) do not only admire at thy
extraordinary power in protecting my person: but (which more is) they are
mightily moved (by the example of thy manifold mercies in me) to depend
altogether upon thy wonderful providence. Titelman. in Elucidat psalm. Psalm.
70. 8.
That this is the true meaning of the word mopeth there, not only the very
coherence of that scripture it self, but also the other like places where that
selfsame word is purposely applied to any man's person, Tremel. in Psalm. 71. 7.
annotat. 7.
does plainly declare. Howbeit, if by the word mopeth we must necessarily
understand a bare wonder forsooth, Ezech. 12. 6. 11.
but no woondrous work: do show me your opinion concerning another text in
Joel. Where the Lord says he will show woonders in the heavens and in the
earth, Joel. 2. 30. 31.
blood, fire, and pillars of smoke. The sun shall be turned into darkness,
and the moon into blood, before the great day of the Lord come. Do tell me I
beseech you, whether these woonders in heaven and in earth, this blood, this
fire, these pillars of smoke: whether I say, this turning of the sun into
darkness, and the moon into blood, are not every of them to be esteemed very
woondrous works? I hope you dare not, very certain I am, you may not deny
them for such: and yet the holy Ghost (notwithstanding this your new-coyned
distinction) he uses the very self same word mopeth, which you simply
translate a wonder, but no woondrous work, saying thus. I will show mopthim,
that is, (...)
woonders in heaven and in earth.

Moreover, where as the Lord in Ezechiel observes the very selfsame word
mopeth, which you simply esteem as a wonder, but not a woondrous work: the
very purpose and coherence of that scripture it self, very plainly
declares, that it may not (especially in that place) be well translated a
wonder: but rather, a foreshewing sign or token of Isreal's captivity among
the Caldeans, saying thus: Ezech. 12. 6.
I have constituted or ordained thee, (...)
ki-mopeth nethattiack lebeth Israel. that is to say, a foreshewing sign or
token to the house of Israel. And a little after in the eleventh verse, thus,
say thou unto them, emor any mopethkem: that is, Ezech. 12. 11.
I am your foreshewing sign or token: as I have done, (...)
* so shall it be done unto them, they shall go into bondage and captivity. By
all the premises then it is very apparent, that those two words ( signs and
woonders) which your self would seem to distinguish: they are not (throughout
the old testament) put down (concerning this question) for any such several
matters distinct in themselves, but rather, as synonyma, and the one to
express the other.


Licanthropus. But, how are they used in the new Testament?


Physiologus. Even as before in the old. For else, either the holy Ghost
should be contrary to himself: or that which we concluded before is utterly
false. And therefore, for the Hebrew words Oath, and Mopeth: the Gretians in
the new Testament (for the most part) they use Semeion and Teras, (...).
that is, signs and woonders miraculouslie effected by the extraordinary
power of the Lord.

Although, I deny not, but that now and then they use other words equivalent
with those, as did also the Hebrews before them. For so it appears in Luke,
that after the curing of the palsy sick, the people with a wonderful
amazednes cried out, (...).
and said: doubtless we have seen Paradoxa, this day: Luc. 5. 26.
using (insteede of those other we named before) Paradoxa: which word, the
vulgar translateth mirabilia, Erasmus incredibilia, Tremellius prodigia,
Pagnine, Beza, and Montanus, inopinata, that is, woondrous, incredible,
strange, and unlooked for things, or things beyond our common expectation.

Again, (...).
they use eftsoons also, the word Thaumaston, as appears especially in
Matthew; Math. 21. 15.
where (after the admirable curing of the blind, and the lame in the temple)
it is said of the high Priests and Scribes, that when they beheld Thaumasta
which some enterpret mirabilia, some miranda; I mean, Mart. 12. 11.
the great maruels and woonders which Jesus did) they were highly offended.
Ioh. 9. 30.
The like use of this word appears elsewhere in sundry places of Scripture.
Apoc. 15. 1. 3.


Thus then the holy Ghost (you see) he uses for this matter, such variety of
words as seems best to his wisdom: although for the most part he puts
down Seimeion, (...).
and Teras, as I told you before. And, Mat. 12. 38. 39.
by Seimeion, he understands especially, all those foreshewing signs or
tokens, Luc. 8. 11. 12.
which are by the only miraculous power of the Lord effected: Luc 11. 16. 29.
as very plainly appears throughout the whole Bible. Ioh. 4. 48.
But by the word ( Teras) (...).
he does more peculiarly express all those admirable matters of the mighty
Jehovah, Math. 24. 24.
which do suddenly procure admiration with men: Marc. 13. 22.
as may very evidently be seen in every Scripture, Ioh. 4. 48.
where the said word is in use.

By all which it is very appant, Act. 2. 43. and 4. 30. and 5. 12. and 6. 8.
and 7. 36. and 15. 12. 2. Cor. 12. 12.
that the Grecians also (howsoever in the new Testament, they use several
words concerning this question) they do understand thereby, no such several
matters, as are essentially distinct in themselves: but rather all those
miraculous actions which are entirely accomplished by an extraordinary, or
supernatural power of the Lord.


Exorcistes. Howsoever you frame expositions to fit your own turn, the
holy Ghost, he knows best how to enterpret himself: who tells us plainly
in the second of the Hebrews, that, God gave testimony to the Gospel, Heb,
2. 3. 4.
both by signs, and woonders, and by diverse miracles. In which place, either
he does plainly distinguish miracles from signs and woonders: or else he
makes but a needless tautologie at the least, which were absurd to avouch. And
therefore, my former distinction of woonders, and woonderous works (by this
portion of Scripture) is canonized current.


Physiologus. See how vainly you vaunt of a triumph, before any stroke be
stricken, concerning the sense of that Scripture. For, whereas you are in very
great hope, thereby, either to confirm your newfound distinction, or to taint
the holy Ghost at the least, (...), 3. iteratio, traductio: eiusdem verbi, aut
sermonis repetitio.
with a needless tautologie, I mean with an idle repetition of one* and the
selfsame matter: you do therein, first of all, very fondly bewray your
intolerable pride: who (rather then you would submit to the truth) are not
ashamed at all, very insolently to school the holy Ghost, concerning the
right use of a Tautologie.

Howbeit, 2. Sam. 18. 33.
as Tautologies are very frequent and ordinary throughout the whole
Scriptures: Psalm. 2. 3. 4.
so are they not needless, or idle, Ezech. 7. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10.
as your self does idly imagine. No, they are rather a more evident
demonstration, that the matter it self, so declared by them, Dan. 9. 19.
is the more constantly confirmed unto us: according to the testimony of the
patriarch Joseph. Who, Genesis 41. 25. 32.
directly told Pharaoh, that his double dreams, did both of them tend to one
end: and that therefore, his said dream, it was the second time doubled,
because the matter it self foreshewed thereby, was certainly established by
God. So surely, in that place to the Hebrews, the often repetition of miracles
by those several terms of signs, of woonders, and of sundry powers, it is
no needless Tautologie, as you do triflingly tell us: but rather a most
necessary doubling, and trebling of the matter it self by those selfsame
terms, to the end, that the newly taught Gospel confirmed thereby, might the
more firmly be testified unto us, according to the good purpose of God. And
therefore, this place to the Hebrews is so far of from proouing your
distinction a current distinction: as it rather confounds the same.

Notwithstanding, if you will in no wise be persuaded, but that (howsoever)
some difference there is concerning those several words: this then I must tell
you for further truth, that, there is no difference at all as touching their
primarie efficient, for they were all extraordinarily effected by a
supernatural power of God. Ioh. Calvin. in Heb. 2. 3. 4.
But the difference (if any at all) respects their ends or effects: which
was, to draw men into a reverend admiration of that selfsame power of the
Lord. Theod. Beza, in annotat. ad Heb. 2. 3. 4.


As for example, first, Edw. Dearin, in his 7. Reading, Hebr. 2. 3. 4.
the holy Ghost does call miracles, signs: because they were authentical
significant seals, and testimonies unto us, that, the doctrine delivered
before, was truly from God.

Again, he calls them woonders: because they were strange in themselves, and
showed forth such an unwonted work, as was utterly unknown unto men.

Lastly, he calls them powers: because they had in them, an evident proof of
the extraordinary power of the Lord. Lo, this is the whole difference that may
be discerned concerning these matters. The which as it truly declares unto
us, the unchangeable purpose of God, in an undoubted confirmation of the
Gospel thereby: so does it utterly disanull your idle distinction of woonders,
and woondrous works, as may more plainly appear, by an orderly conferring of
this place to the Hebrews, with that in the xvj. of Mark. Marc. 16. 20.
Where the Evangelist affirms, that the Apostles went forth and preached
every where: the Lord working together with them, and confirming the word with
miracles following. From both which places of Scripture, I do frame this
following reason. Whatsoever matter did extraordinarily succeed the Apostolical
preaching of the Gospel, for a further confirmation thereof to the world, Heb.
2. 2. 3. 4.
that was an undoubted true miracle. But, diverse signs and woonders, and
powers, did extraordinarily succed the Apostolical preaching of the Gospel,
for a further confirmation thereof to the world: therefore, those signs and
woonders, and powers, were every of them undoubted true miracles. By this then
it is apparently evident, that, either you accomplished no wonderful action
at al, as touching any your supposed most admirable matters wrought at
Mahgnitton: or if (as your self do affirm) the same was truly and indeed a
true wonder, then was it also a woondrous work, I mean, a true miracle
howsoever you shelter the same.


Exorcistes. It was only a wonder, See M. Darel his Apology, page 33.
but no woondrous work, as I told you before: and only because of the means.
For whatsoever is brought to pass by means, that is no miracle: because of
the means, be it never so wonderful.


Physiologus. But, do you speak in good earnest?


Exorcistes. Yea, in very good earnest.


Physiologus. Then, Exodus 7. 20.
tell me what you esteem of the turning of waters into blood by Moses his
rod: Exodus 8. 6.
of the Egyptian frogs: of the swarms of lyce which came upon man and beast:
Exodus 8. 17.
of the Egyptian scabbes and botches by the sprinkling of ashes: Exodus 9. 10.
of the thunder and hail, Exodus 9. 23.
by the stretching out of Moses his hand: Exodus 10. 13.
of the Egyptian grasshoppers, Exodus 10. 22.
ouerspredding the whole land: of the palpable darkness, Exodus 14. 21.
throughout the whole land of Egypt: of dividing the red sea, Exodus 17. 6.
by the hand of Moses: of the rock that gushed out water, 2. King. 2. 24.
by the stroke of the rod: of Elijah his making the bitter waters sweet, 2.
King. 5. 14.
by casting in salt: of the curing of Naaman his leprosy, 2. King. 6. 6.
by washing in the waters of Jorden: Ioh. 9. 6.
of the swimming of iron by Elisha his means: yea, Luc. 8. 44.
what shall we think of giving sight to the blind, by a plaster of spettle
and claie, first tempered together: of helping to health by touching the hem of
Christ's garment: Marc. 6. 13.
of curing very many by anointing with oil: Act. 5. 15.
by the shadow of Peter: yea, and by napkins brought to the sick from the
body of Paul. Act. 19. 12.
In every of these actions there was used some means: and yet, you dare not
deny, but that they were every of them miracles.


Exorcistes. These were every of them but dead, or rather quite contrary means
to the work which was wrought: and therefore, whatsoever was brought to pass
by such impotent means they were notwithstanding, true miracles. Howbeit,
prayer and fasting (being instituted of God to that work, performed withal, by
the power of the spirit, and having moreover, many promises annexed thereto) it
cannot possibly be, but that (with the orderly observation thereof) there goes
some ordinary power for accomplishing the purpose pretended: and, therefore,
the casting out of devils, or, the powerful effecting of any other admirable
matter by that special means, is no wonderful work, but a wonder, as I
told you before.


Physiologus. And, I told you likewise before, See. M. Darels Apolog. page 33.
that prayer and fasting has no power of it self to drive forth a devil:
yea, you your own self affirmed even now, that, the whole efficacy of that
wonderful work depends wholly upon the good blessing of God. Without which,
the means it self (though never so duly performed) prevails nothing at
all. But (to winck a while at these gross ouersights) do tell me in good
sadness, whether the driving out of the devil by prayer and fasting, be any
miracle at all?


Exorcistes. It is then, See Apolog. page 32.
no miracle: because of the means.


Physiologus. If the only use of that means, may make a flat nullity in
miracles, my meaning is, if prayer and fasting is of sufficient force to cause,
that miraculous works become no miracles, and only because of such means:
Exodus 8. 12. 30.
then, tell me I pray you, what you think of remoouing the egyptian frogs and
lice, Exodus 17. 11.
by the prayer of Moses: of Isreal's prevailing against Ameleck: of Elijah his
reviving the widow of Zarephthas son: 1. King. 17. 20. 21.
of Elisha his raising the Shunamits son unto life: 2. King. 4. 33.
of the admirable opening of his servants eyes: 2. King. 6. 17.
yea, Ioh. 11. 41.
what think you of the raising of Lazarus from death: of Peter his restoring
of Tabitha again unto life: Act. 9. 40.
of the earthquake, and shaking of the prison, Act. 16. 25. 26.
wherein Paul and Sylas were stocked: Act. 20. 10.
of Paul his reviving of Eutychus: of the curing of many, by the prayer of the
elders. Iam. 5. 14. 15.
These were all effected by prayer you know: were these therefore (I pray you)
no miracles?

Moreover, what must we account of all the miraculous dispossessings of spirits
and devils in the primitive church? If, because they were every of them
effected by prayer and fasting, they were therefore no miracles: then it
follows by necessary consequence, that there were never any actual
possessions, nor dispossessions of devils, at any time since the Apostles
days. Because, those dispossessions, (how admirable soever) being effected by
prayer and fasting, they could be no miracles (by your account) in an only
respect of that means: whereas, the possessions, and dispossessions of devils
(notwithstanding that means) they were always reputed true miracles with the
Church of God. And therefore if your self did drive forth a devil at
Mahgnitton by prayer and fasting, as you bear us in hand: then surely, the
same was not simply a wonderful work, but also a wonder, I mean, a true
miracle, notwithstanding any such your supposed means.


Exorcistes. If signs and woonders must every of them be esteemed true
miracles indeed: it follows then, that, not only the false Christ's of every
age, Math. 24. 24.
but Antichrist also himself may truly be said to accomplish true miracles:
2. These. 2. 9. 10.
because, they also from time have been able to work many strange and
woondrous things.


Physiologus. I told you before, Danaeus in physic. christiana, tract. 4. cap.
34. fol. 174.
there were two sorts of miracles: namely, either true, or false miracles. The
first sort is, when as a mere natural matter, is either restored, or cured,
or wrought by the only application of mere natural means. Howbeit, those
said natural means, either they are not altogether the same which we commonly
use: or, they are not used after the selfsame manner and way. After this
manner, the devil, the Egyptian sorcerers, (...).
the false Christ's, yea, and Antichrist also himself, they have done, and may
daily effect many woonders. And, in an especial regard of the strangenes
thereof, they also ( abusiuely and after a sort) may be said to be workers of
miracles: because they accomplish such matters on the sudden, as do make men
admire. Howbeit, this kind of miracles, they cannot truly be esteemed, true
miracles indeed, because either they are not truly effected, or, not to a true
end at the least: although yet, (...).
they may very fitly be termed terata, that is, wondrous actions, because of
the sudden wonder succeeding the same.

The other sort of miracles are properly called Seimeia, (...).
that is, significant or foreshewing signs: and those are only effected by
Jehovah himself, Psalm. 136. 4.
who alone does woondrous things. Yea, and that also, either without any means
at all: or quite contrary to the power of all natural causes, and of nature
herself. For, as the mighty Jehovah has created nature of nothing: so is he
able (when it seems good to his wisdom) to alter, Aug. de ciuit. Dei, lib.
21.
to incline, Hieron. ad vitalem.
and to ouerturne the orderly course of nature in any one thing whatsoever.
Neither has the said nature any power to withstand the creator and Lord of
nature.

Come on therefore Exorcistes, let us go strictly to work. Either you wrought
no wonder at all: or you wrought a wonder at least in the yoongman at
Mahgnitton? If no wonder at all: then did you grossly delude the world, by
making them to stand gazing and woondring so long at a matter of nothing.

On the other side, if you wrought a wonder at least: then was the same,
either a false, or true wonder.

If only a false wonder, then you effected the same, either as a false
Christ, Math. 24. 24.
to draw silly souls into a falsely conceited holiness, 2, These. 2. 9. 10.
concerning your person: or as a minister of Antichrist, to establish
underhand, some pretended devise of your own besides the authority of Christ.

Howbeit, if that which you wrought at Mahgnitton, was (in deed and in truth) a
true wonder, such I mean, as the Scriptures do understand by signs and
woonders: then surely (whether the same was effected by means, or without
means) it was an undoubted true miracle. And therefore, you are now perforce
constrained, to confess that either you did nothing at all but iuggle with
men, in that your pretended action: or, must flatly acknowledge, that you
wrought a true miracle. Because the expelling of spirits and devils (whether
with means, or without means) is no less admirable now, then it was in the
primitive Church.


Exorcistes. Nay sir, See M. Darels Narrat. fol. 5. page 2.
the miraculous curing of fevers, Ibidem, a little after.
palsies, leprosies, and other diseases by Christ, and his Apostles, in those
days gave credit to the Gospel: but if God (by prayer and fasting) should
heal the falling sickness or frenzy, or should grant rain drought,
victory, or such like requests, were this a miracle.


Physiologus. If I should but imagine the contrary, men might very well
think I were not well in my wits: for, what has prayer in it self, for the
orderly effecting of any such action, without the extraordinary working power
of the Lord, which was ever reputed miraculous? Howbeit, See M. Darels Apolog.
page 32.
a miracle you may never avouch it to be; both because you disclaimed the same
before: and for that the working of miracles is ceased long since.


Exorcistes. Howsoever you urge the ceasing of miracles: there is no
determination See M. Darels Narrat. 1. page 10.
thereof in the holy scripture. See his doctrine for this, page 30.



Physiologus. Why man, the two maine causes of working miracles, namely, the
testification of Christ his Deity, and the confirmation of the Gospel, are
long since determined by the sacred scriptures: and therefore, the working of
miracles, are thereby also determined.

The first, it was undoubtedly determined by Christ himself, Math. 12. 39. 40.
where he says, that the evil and adulterous generation require a sign:
Howbeit, Jonah. 2. 17.
no sign shall be given them, Ioh. Calvin. in Math. 12. 39.
but the sign of Jonah the Prophet. Erasm. Sarcerius in Math. 12. 39.
For as Jonah was three days, and three nights in the Whales belly: Item, in
Act. 4. verse. 30.
so shall the son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the
earth. Christ there declares unto us, that his death and resurrection should
be the last sign, wherewith he would testify to the world the truth of his
Deity.

The other I mean the confirmation of the Gospel, it also was long since
determined by the spirit of God in the sacred scriptures, as may very plainly
appear, by conferring the sixeteene of Mark, with the second to the Hebrews.
For first, in the sixeteene of Mark he speaks of a power from the Lord for
confirming the word with miracles following. Putting down in that place, Marc.
16. 20.
the confirmation of the Gospel in the present time, saying thus. (...).
The Lord Bebaiountos, that is, confirming the word, as if the said
confirmation had even then been in working.

Howbeit, in the second to the hebrews he speaks thereof as in the preter
time: telling us plain, the Gospel was ebebaioothei, Heb. 2. 3.
that is, (...).
confirmed unto us. Declaring thereby, that, the confirmation of the Gospel by
miracles, was then so fully accomplished, and so finally determined, Heb. 2. 2.
3. 4.
as now to let slip the certeinty of that truth which they had heard before,
for want of a further confirmation thereof by miracles: they could not possibly
escape the just recompense of such a preposterous negligence. By the premises
then, you may plainly perceive, that, those two maine ends of miraculous
actions being long since determined: the working of miracles was even then also
determined. And therefore, although you had wrought a true miracle at
Mahgnitton in deed: yet had the same been merely superfluous.


Exorcistes. This I suppose is your argument. The Gospel, it was fully, and
finally confirmed before by miracles: therefore, the further confirmation
thereof by miracles now is meerelie superfluous.


Physiologus. It is even the very same.


Exorcistes. Then, the sequel (I suppose) is unsound. For, why may there not be
as much need of such a miraculous confirmation in these days of atheism, See
M. Darels Narrat. fol. 5. page 2.
as ever before? Sure we are, that the scripture, the deity, and al religion,
is by some among us no less called in question now, then it was in any the
former ages: as, the ecclesiastical courts can testify, and daily experience
approoueth unto us.


Physiologus. This your irreligious insinuation, concerning some supposed
necessity of miracles now, in these days of the Gospel: as it does very
blasphemously derogate from the absolute wisdom of God, in not foreseeing (as
it ought) the future necessity of miraculous actions in every age: so does it
dangerously undermine the certeinety of that saving faith which was only
confirmed unto us by former miracles. For, that faith could never be fully nor
finally confirmed before, if any future necessity of confirming the same
afresh, be eftsoons admitted: even as that princes broad seal, may at no
hand he accounted authentically current, which needs eftsoons to be iterated
or imprinted afresh.

Besides that, this pestiferous insinuation of yours, it does open a wide gap
to all manner of iuggling knaueries, and crafty legerdemaines. For, if (upon
every such insinuation) the working of miracles be once freely permitted: then,
every cogging companion (under an holy pretense of miracles) may foist into the
church at his pleasure, whatsoever best pleases his fantasy, and so, the
certain truth of our hoped salvation, should never be certain unto us. And
therefore, tell me plainly I pray you: whether you hold the continuance of
miracles in these days of the Gospel?


Exorcistes. Whether I hold, See M. Darels Narrat. fol. 5. page 2.
or not hold the continuance thereof it makes no great matter: because that
article, in this action is not to be controuersed at all.


Physiologus. If not in this: then in no one action whatsoever. Howbeit,
because you are very loath (I perceive) to acknowledge that truth, which you
must needs be enforced at length, either openly to confess, or else utterly
to disclaim your admirable action wrought at Mahgnitton: let me here, what one
apparent reason or end, you are able to propound, for the continuance of
miracles in these days of the Gospel.


Exorcistes. Alas sir, See M. Darels Narrat. fol. 6. page 1.
an urgent necessity (in these days of atheism) requires the same.


Physiologus. Oh, then I perceive, your judgment concerning this matter, it
iumpeth justly with the rich man's in hell. For, he also (being utterly destitute
of all other relief) did very instantly desire that Lazarus might forth with
be sent* from the dead, to his fathers house; to forewarne his five brethren of
that place of torment. Seeing then you thus iumpe in your judgments, I were
loath you should iar in the answer: and therefore, do tell you plainly, that,
the atheistes of our age, they have Moses and the prophets, Luc. 16. 27. 28.
29. 30. 31.
to testify unto them, the truth of such matters as concern their salvation:
whom if they will not faithfully here and believe, neither would they believe at
all, notwithstanding they should see a thousand strange miracles.


Exorcistes. Yea, but such a miraculous expelling of satan by prayer and
fasting, See M. Darels Narrat. fol. 6. page 1.
it would (notwithstanding all this) very powerfully silence the papists: who
do confidently affirm, that spirits and devils cannot possible be driven out
by any the Protestant ministers.


Physiologus. The papists and your self, it should seem are in very great
hope to delude the world afresh by your fained false miracles: and that makes
you so earnestly to urge the continuance of the gift of miracles: as though the
same were yet still to be executed by some special persons. But, if they, or
your self would either win, or continue your credits by the working of
miracles, you must not bring in those your counterfeit crankes, out of whom you
would make us believe, Reginald Skot in his discovery of Witchcraft. D.
F^lke, in 2. These* ^. sect. 15. B^stow.
you have coniured spirits and devils, not unlike to the possession of Mildred
in Kent, 1574. nor to the miraculous restoring of Margaret Iesop again to her
limbs: not to the vision of the black dog, with other like fables reported
by Bristowe: but you must bring us in, some such miracle-workers, Marc. 16. 17.
28.
as are able extempore, to talk with new toongs: to take away serpents: or, to
drink any deadly thing without danger: for so your credites might happily be
deemed the greater: although yet, if you taught not the truth, we would take
you for Antichrist.

As for the Protestant Ministers, they never durst, nor now dare profess
themselves to be miracle mongers. Both, because the doctrine they teach, it
has been sufficiently and finally confirmed before by the approved miracles
of Christ and his holy Apostles: D. Cooper, in his sermons, page 78 Math. 7.
15. and 24. 23. 24.
and for that also, if there be yet still a continuance of any power in men for
the working of miracles: that power (they confess) it belongs to Antichrist,
and his Antichristian ministers, of whom they are precisely warned by Christ to
beware. These therefore, they are seely poor causes (you see) to prove the
continuance of miracles.


Exorcistes. But yet, See M. Darels Narrat. fol. 6. page 1.
the holy exercise of prayer and fasting (which with the profane is so
shamefully scorned) it would (by this, and such other like admirable actions)
be notably confirmed.


Orthodoxus. Why man, if prayer and fasting, be an ancient true ordinance of
the eternal God, then the truth there of was sufficiently confirmed before, by
the undoubted true miracles contained in the word, so as it needs not the
accursed supply of any such patched and paltrie confirmations.

Howbeit, if the same were a new, and never known ordinance in the Primitive
Church: then surely all the fained miracles and signs in the world, would
never be able, either to shelter the same from the scorns of the wicked, or to
procure it estimation among the godly. In consideration whereof, you your own
self have been highly to blame; thus badly to abuse so sacred an ordinance.
For these your preposterous courses concerning the practice thereof, has more
hindered that holy and orderly exercise, then all the scorns of the ungodly
could ever have done: and therefore, forethinke it in time.


Exorcistes. Should I forethinke me of that, which is so generally held of all
for an infallible truth? yea, See M. Darels Narration, fol. 4. page 2.
and (which more is) should I most cowardly disclaim that Christian cause,
which many great Divines do confidently hold, and have so constantly offered
(by public disputation) to uphold against all men? Offering not only to prove
the continuance of actual possessions: but which more is, the perpetual
establishment of this selfsame continued means, for the powerful expelling
of spirits and devils from time to time.


Orthodoxus. If these matters were so generally held of all for an infallible
truth: your self could never have been so iudicially conuented, nor so justly
convicted a gross male factour, for but putting an infallible truth in
practice. As for the proffered disputations by those your approved Divines; I
do verily believe, that you have borne your self much more bold (in
presuming thus peartly upon the proppe of their persons) then your commission
will warrant. Otherwise, those your great Divines having heard long since (at a
Commencement in Cambridge) this question disputed, and determined negatiuely:
they might, and they would without doubt (at some one time or other since then)
have taken occasion (either by disputation, by writing, or by preaching at
least) to manage the truth of that matter, which so directly concerned their
open pretended challenge. Especially, if they either held the same an infallible
truth: or, had so publicly offered a public dispute, as you would bear us in
hand they have done. And therefore, by this their so long continued silence, we
must either account of your speech, as of a Canterbury tale: or at leastwaies
imagine, that those your approved Divines, they have had ( like good
Christians) their second cogitations, concerning the truth of your matters.
For, we will never believe, that they would (by any their purposed silence) so
vnconscionablie betray a professed infallible truth: especially, if they so
approved thereof as you tell us they did.

Howsoever, this (I must tell you) is a very gross, and a palpable folly;
namely, that you your self or any man else, should so confidently, 1. Ioh.
4. 1.
and so fondly rely upon the persons of men, Job. 32. 9.
without any due trial or proof of their spirits: because, great men they are
not always the wisest, neither do the aged at all times understand judgment.
For, howsoever there is a spirit in man: Job. 32. 8.
the inspiration of the almighty, it gives men wisdom. Being therefore but
a young Nouice my self, in regard of those great Divines, Job. 32. 6. 7.
and ancient Fathers: I doubted, and was a long time afraid to afford my
opinion. For I said, surely the days shall speak, and the multitude of years
shall teach men wisdom. Howbeit, Job. 32. 11. 12.
having a long time waited upon their words, and perceiving withal, that no
one of those your great Divines have hitherto had in their mouths any answer
at all to reprove your adversaries, nor, found forth their forcible reasons
to manage your cause: I was inwardly moved to answer in my turn. Job. 32.
18. 19. 20. 21. 22.
For, I am full of matter: and the spirit within compels me. Therefore, now
will I speak, that I may take my breath. Neither (in speaking) will I accept
the persons of men: for fear (if I should fondly give titles to men) my maker
would suddenly take me away. Go to therefore Exorcistes, do either show us
more probable reasons for the perpetual continuace of the miraculous faith: or
grant now at length, that the same was long since determined.


Exorcistes. I will never acknowledge the determination thereof: before it be
better, and more directly proved unto me.


Orthodoxus. Why man? Musculus in Ioh. 20. 29.
Christ has put a final end to the miraculous faith, as I told you before:
and (in ending the same) he has also established for ever, the faith of
hearing. Yea, and which more is, the last miracle of all for confirmation of
that faith to the world: Act. 1. 22.
was the death and resurrection of Christ: This his last miracle, the Apostles
they saw, and testify unto us: so that now, Luc. 11. 28.
there only remains a true faith in hearing, and believing their testimony,
Ioh. 20. 29.
with a promised blessing of eternal salvation.

Besides all this, of those only true miracles which be purposely and truly
put down by the blessed Evangelists, were and are evermore fully and finally
sufficient to confirm a true saving faith to the world: Ioh. 20. 31.
then all other your supposed miracles since, they are that way merely
superfluous: but the first is true, and therefore also the later.

Moreover, if the working of miracles had been truly esteemed, and reputed
necessary indeed, for any one Church succeeding the Apostles age, then more
especially necessary for those new-sprong visible Churches, wherein the
Gospel (overwhelmed with ignorance) was to be newly revived, through the
extraordinary preachings of some special persons, raised up by the Lord, to
that special business, as, of Zuinglius, Hus, Oecolampadius, Luther, Rhem.
testamen. in Ioh. 15. 24. sect. 7.
and Calvin. But, the working of miracles it was not in use at all, in any
one of those visible Churches wherein they conuersed and preached (as the
papists report, and your self shall never be able to gainesay) therefore,
Item, 2. Cor. 12. verse. 12. sect. 5.
the working of miracles it is not perpetually necessary, for any the visible
Churches of God.

In like manner, if the use of miracles, had (for any supposed respect) been
necessarily required in any one age of the world, since the days of Christ,
and his own disciples, then, more especially necessary for the Churches
next, and immedidiately succeeding the Apostles themselves; and thereupon also,
the Apostle Saint Paul, he would undoubtedly have delivered some Apostolical
canon, or Council at least, concerning the perpetuity, 1. Tim. 3. 14. 15. and
4. 15. 16. and 5. 7. 21. and 6. 13. 14.
and orderly observation of that the supposed necessary use. But neither in
his Epistle to Timothy or Titus, (where he purposely handles all offices and
matters, Tit. 1. 5. and 2. 1. 15. and 3. 8. 9.
any way concerning the ecclesiastical discipline) does he make mention of one
Canon, or Council concerning the use of miracles: therefore, the use of
miracles is not now necessarily required at all, for the Churches of God.

Furthermore, Rhem. testam. in Math. 17. 19. sect. 5.
if the continuance of miracles might possibly be proved in any the protestant
churches since the Apostles days: then, Item Marc. 13. 21. sect. 3.
that one maine argument of the papists against our religion, for not being
confirmed by miracles, were merely superfluous: for, Item 2. These. 2. 9. sect.
15.
they do flatly affirm that not one among us, can work any miracles.

Besides that, if the working of miracles be still continued with the churches
of Christ in these days of the Gospel, then, D. Cooper in his sermons, page 78.
one principal mark, Deuteronomy. 3. 1. 2.
for discerning the Antichristian churches from the true churches of Christ,
Math. 24. 24.
would be mightily obscured, yea, even utterly extinguished: for, Marc. 13. 2.
2.
the Scriptures do advisedly, and purposely put down the admirable effecting
of false signs and woonders, 2. These. 2. 9. 10.
as an essential, Apoc. 13. 13. 14. and 16. 14. and 19. 26.
and undoubted true mark, to discern aright, the one from the other.

Moreover, if the doctrine of Christ and his own Apostles be now sufficiently
able, Psalm. 19. 7.
to make the man of God absolute and perfect to every good work, 2. Tim. 3.
15.
without the working of miracles, then, the working of miracles for that
purpose, is merely superfluous. But, the first is undoubtedly true: and
therefore also the latter.

In like manner, if the admirable effecting of miraculous actions, be a
spiritual gift successively continued in the true Church of Christ, then it is
very probable, the same gift would have been purposely imposed upon the
pastor and Doctor, as an extraordinary support to their ordinary ministry,
and so, the said gift would have been carefully recorded among those other
qualities and properties, which purposely concern their ordinary elections.
But, no such gift is either required or recorded in any Ecclesiastical Canon,
that essentially concerns the ordinary elections of pastors and doctors in
these days of the Gospel: therefore no such spiritual gift, is now
successively continued in the true Churches of Christ.

Furthermore, if the working of miracles, be such a spiritual gift, as is
necessarily required in some one or a few, for the further edification and
comfort of the whole Church of Christ: then, the Apostle Paul, he would
undoubtedly have exhorted the Corinthians (among other like spiritual gifts)
to have labored likewise for that. But, he makes no mention of that gift at
all: and therefore that is no such spiritual gift, as is now necessarily
required in any, for the further edification and comfort of the whole Church of
Christ.

Again, the miraculous expelling of spirits and devils, was but a temporary
and personal privilege, Math. 10. 7.
and, is purposely raunged among those selfsame personal privileges, Marc.
6. 7. and 16. 20.
which (by the foreseeing wisdom of God) were long since determined: Luc. 10.
9. 17.
and therefore, it is a folly of follies, for any to imagine, that the
miraculous expelling of spirits and devils, should not (in like manner) be
determined long since as well as the rest.

Briefly, the uniform consent of all Christian Churches, and the approved
judgment of soundest Divines do generally accord and conclude, that the
working of miracles is ceased long since.

By all the premises, I hope you may see it apparently proved, that, the
working of miracles was ceased long since: and therefore I doubt not at all,
but that, the very force of your own enlightened conscience, will compel you,
forthwith to subscribe to the determination thereof.


Exorcistes. Let me hear the judgment of your sound Divines concerning this
matter.


Orthodoxus. With very good will. And because the night is far spent: I will
afford you the testimony of some four, or five in stead of the rest.

1 First therefore, Augustine tells you thus. Unless you see August. Confess.
lib. 10. cap. 35.
signs and woonders, you will not believe. Herein (says he) the Lord
endeavors to lift up the minds of the faithful, so far beyond the visible
view of all mutable things: as he would not have them, so much as once to
enquire after the external contemplation of any true miracles, notwithstanding
they should be wrought by the Lord himself.

2 In another place he says thus. These miraculous actions, Aug. de ver^
relig. lib. 11. cap. 25.
they are not permitted to any in these days of the Gospel, least the mind
should be always enquiring after visible things: and for fear that men should
grow cold, Item, retract. 1. cap. 13.
by the continued custom of those selfsame admirable matters, whose only
novelties, (at the first) did set them on fire.

3 Chrysostom, he says thus. There be some in our days, Chrisost. in Ioh. 2.
hom. 22. in fine.
that ask why signs and woonders, are not now also effected by Christians?
Surely, if thou beleeuest aright, if thou love Christ in such sort as he is
to be loved, thou shall stand in no need of miracles: for, miracles are given
to them that believe not.

4 In another place thus. The working of miracles, Chrysostom. in Math. 24. hom.
49.
is now ceased with christians, and found especially among such as are
counterfeite christians: for, unto Antichrist is given power, to work lying
signs and woonders with men.

5 Again, Item, in 1. Cor. 2. homil. 6.
he says thus. The working of miracles in times past was undoubtedly
necessary: but, now it is not so.

6 The ordinary gloss says thus. If we work not miracles now: Glos. ordinar.
in Marc. 16. 17.
is it, because we want faith? not so. The working of miracles in the very
first spring of the church, was wonderful necessary, to confirm the true
faith: but, that faith once confirmed, they are now, no more necessary.

7 Lyra says thus. In the primitive church, the true saving faith, Nich. Lyra,
in Marc. 16. 17.
it was to be nourished, and confirmed by miracles: and therefore, the gracious
gift of miracles not only, was very freely bestowed upon the apostles
themselves, but, eftsoons also, upon many simple believers.

8 Hugo says thus. Hugo Cardinal. in Marc. 16. 17
Miracles (in the first sprout of the church) were wonderful necessary for
the nourishment of faith: howbeit, not now necessary at all, because the true
faith is already, very fully confirmed. And therefore now (in stead of signs
and woonders) the good works of professors must freely break forth, to make
their holy profession more resplendent and shining.

9 Isidore, Isidor. lib. de sum. bono. cap. 25.
he says thus. The working of miracles must utterly cease, before the
manifestation of antichrist: to the end, that (by such the churches supposed
baseness in comparison of those former miraculous seasons) antichrist him
self, might the more boldly presume to persecute some unto death. For even
therefore, there must necessarily appear in the christian churches, such an
external baseness by the ceasing of miracles: that the patience of persecuted
saints might more clearly shine forth: the inconstancy of scandalized
reprobates, more evidently appear: and the cruelty of bloody persecutours,
become more outrageous.

10 Master Beza says thus: Theod. Beza Annotat. in Marc. 6. 13.
That oil wherewith the sick persons were specially anointed, it was an
undoubted true sign of the admirable power of God: and, no ordinary medicine,
for the curing of men's maladies. Item, in James cap. 5. 14.
Seeing therefore, the special gift of such a miraculous curing is ceased long
since: to what end should the ceremony thereof, be yet still so fondly
retained?

11 Master Calvin says thus. M. Calvin. in Ioh. 20. 31.
Seeing the true miracles effected by Christ, and written down authentically
by the blessed Evangelists, are fully sufficient to confirm the true saving
faith: those men whatsoever, who ( for any other respect) would foist in new
miracles, they show themselves wicked, and such curious brains, as (not
contenting themselves with eternal salvation) do desire to leap beyond the
limits and bounds of the kingdom of heaven.

Bee-hyue of the Romans church, cap. 2. fol. 233.
12 In the Bee-hyue, it is thus written. The Prophets and Apostles, they had a
special gift for the working of miracles, and driving out of devils to
confirm their preaching thereby: and therefore, they joined to that selfsame
gift, some apparent ceremony or sign, as may plainly appear. 2. King. 4. 34.
Howbeit, that power being ceased long since: the sign also, 1. Cor. 12. 28.
it must cease with the power. Act. 20. 10.


13 D. Iam. 5. 14.
Cooper says thus. The working of miracles now, D. Cooper, in his sermons,
page 78
it would shake very shreudly, the certeinty of that truth which we preach:
because (being confirmed afresh by miracles) it should now be confirmed by that
selfsame deceivable means, which is wholly reserved to Antichrist. Yea, and
it would mightily strengthen the Papists, and give them an advantage against
us: by making them in this sort to object and say. If the Gospel you teach, be
the undoubted truth: why do you confirm so sacred a truth, by that selfsame
means which you so sharply condemn in us? But if the Gospel you preach, be
an inueterate falsehood: why then do you show your selves to be Antichrists, in
thus laboring (as you do) to confirm your inueterate falsehood, by such
deceaueable signs and woonders?

14 Doctor Fulke says thus. D. Fulke to the Rhem. test. Mat. 17. 19. sect. 5.
There is now, no such ordinary function in the Church of God, that men
should have power to cast out devils, more then to heal al manner of
diseases, speak with new toongs which they never learned, or, to work other
miracles. Which spiritual gifts, God gave in the beginning of the preaching of
the Gospel, to confirm the credit thereof among the Jews and Gentiles, but,
of long time have ceased among Christians: who are now to be directed by Gods
word, whereunto also their profession does bind them to give credit, without
any further confirmation by miracles, then that which is testified unto them in
the holy Scriptures.

15 Again, he says thus. Item, ibid. in Marc. 13. 22. sect. 3.
We know the gift of miracles is ceased long since in the Church: and we mean
not to counterfeit that gift, as you do, and have done. Our faith being
approved by the Scriptures, is confirmed by all the miracles of Christ, and his
Apostles, expressed in the Scriptures.

16 Briefly, M. Dearing, his 7. Reading, Heb. 2. 4.
Master Dearing says thus. We know very well that all the miracles of God, were
given to confirm his word: other signs or woonders then those, neither we,
nor our fathers have known. And now, that the use of miracles is fully
performed unto us, and we do believe the Gospel, in token that our faith is
freely accepted with God: he has taken away signs and woonders from us,
which served us fitly before, when we were unbelievers. And surely, our faith
is never so honorable, nor we so highly in the favor of God: as when we have
said both to heaven and earth, we seek no signs from you. Or, when the word
of God has such a persuasion in our hearts: Isa. 30. 22.
that we have now taken fast hold of all the good promises of the Math. 12. 38.
Gospel, and said unto miracles, get you hence. The Jews seek a sign
(says Paul) surely, 1. Cor. 1. 22.
we that be Christians seek for none. When they were offered of God, he showed
his compassion upon our infirmities: Math. 15. 28.
but now that he has taken them away, he bestows a greater mercy, in
accepting our faith. Let us hearken therefore to the word of Christ: for, by
it we shall live. Luc. 16. 29. 31.
If we believe not his word, 1. Cor. 14. 22.
neither would we believe all the miracles in the world: though dead men do
arise and preach them unto us. Behold now Exorcistes, you have heer^ a
graund-iurie impannelled concerning this point: what say you unto them?


Exorcistes. I know not well what to think of them.


Orthodoxus. If you either doubt of their credits, Pet. Martyr. in 1. Cor. 12.
11.
or suspect their consciences; you may have a tales among these that follow.
Namely, Peter Martyr, Ioh. Calvin. in Act. 14. 11.
John Calvin, Musculus, Bullenger, Gualter, Erasmus Sarcerius, Musculus, in
Ioh. 1. 37.
with sundry other besides: Bullinger, in Math. 10. 1.
who all do jointly and confidently avouch the ceasing of miracles in these
days of the Gospel.


Exorcistes. I challenge no one of your former Jurors: Gualter, in Math. 8. 16.
but do jointly hold them for good men and true. Erasm. Sarcer. in Act 4. 30.



Orthodoxus. Are you then content, to submit to their censure?


Exorcistes. Not before I have heard their verdict.


Orthodoxus. Well then, Augustine (you see) he is the foreman of the Jury:
let him therefore (if you please) deliver up the verdict, for himself, and the
rest.


Exorcistes. That likes me marvelous well.


Orthodoxus. This then is that which he says for him self, Aug. de verit.
accles. cap. 16.
and his fellows concerning these matters. Away with those fained miracles of
lying men: or rather, those woonders wrought, by enchaunting devils.


Exorcistes. This I am sure is a partial verdict, suggested before, by some
sinister means: and therefore, I will either sue forth an attaint against the
whole jury, or remove the judgment, by a writ of error.


Orthodoxus. Oh, I pray you be patient: and let the verdict pass currantly,
without your coutroulement.


Exorcistes. What reason have you, to persuade me to that?


Orthodoxus. Tertullian does yield you the reason thereof. Because, Tertul.
con^. Marcion, lib. 3.
Christ (says Tertullian) has undoubtedly taught us: that, the faith of
signs and woonders, ( which are easily effected by false Christ's and
hypocrites) is very rash, and uncertain.


Exorcistes. This reason, concerns only the good of the soul.


Physiologus. We hope man, you have that in far greater regard, then, either
the credit of your person: or the welfare of your worldly estate.


Exorcistes. Though that be certeinely so: yet the other also, it must be
respected.


Physiologus. Very true. Howbeit, Hyppocrates. See Skots book of the
discovery of Witchcraft. fol. 453.
because you are carried to much a way with carnal respects: let Hippocrates
his reason suffice for that course, who says thus. Those persons which boast,
that they can cure, or remove the infections of maladies, by sacrifices,
coniurations, inuocations, enchantments, and such other like magical means,
they are but beggarly and needy companions, wanting promotion or mainteinance.
And, for this only respect, they refer their speech to the devil: because,
they would be thought, to know somewhat more then the vulgar sort. Lo this is
Hipocrates reason.


Exorcistes. I way not his reason, a rush.


Physiologus. Never say so for shame: least you make men imagine that you
neither respect your credit, nor conscience.


Exorcistes. Men may imagine what pleases themselves: howbeit, the Lord alone,
Psalm. 7. 9.
he knows the heart.


Lycanthropus. Good Exorcistes, be not too singular.


Exorcistes. Why man, 2. Cor. 13. 8.
I may do nothing against the truth but for the truth.


Pneumatomachus. Well, well, be not wedded too much, to your will: neither do
make (I beseech you) an idle of your own wit.


Exorcistes. I hope sir, I am nether wilful nor foolishly wise: whatsoever
your self, or some others imagine.


Physiologus. Then would you not be so wise (as you are) in your own conceit:
Prou. 28. 26.
but rather yield and submit to a more dexterity.


Exorcistes. Alas sir, I have not hitherto heard any such sound dexterity,
to submit me unto.


Orthodoxus. Well, well Exorcistes, there is something that sticks in your
stomach, which makes you so loath to relent: it is not I hope, a vaineglorious
conceit of your self. Whatsoever it be, we will hope the best. Let us
therefore give over for the present, and go take our natural sleep. It may
be (when you have taken counsel at your pillow) you will change your opinion.
If therefore it seems good to your self, I will spend with you again one
hour more in the morning before you depart, and give you the best directions I
can. In the mean time, I wish you good rest, and betake you all ( body and
soul) to the gracious protection and providence of the Almighty.


Physiologus. Come then, let us arise and depart.


The end of the tenth Dialogue.
The eleventh Dialogue.
THE ARGUMENT.
A summarie Recapitulation of all the premises, concludently repeating, and
proouing the precedent purpose: with a patheticall persuasion to subscribe to
the truth thereof.

The speakers names.
PHILOLOGVS. LYCANTHROPVS. PNEVMATOMACHVS. PHYSIOLOGVS. ORTHODOXVS. EXORCISTES.
Orthodoxus. GOod morrow to you all, my dear brethren: what news I beseech
you, from Exorcistes this morning?


Lycanthropus. Surely sir, (so far as we can perceive) his Euen-song and
Morne-song, they are one and the same. Nevertheless, we have (by our urgent, and
often entreaties) prevailed so much with the man, as that he is now
exceedingly willing to accept of your Christian offer, concerning one half
hours conference before our departure: and is here come for that purpose.


Orthodoxus. The Lords name be blessed for this your good news. For surely, so
long as he will not obstinately refuse to confer: there may be great hope of
his happy conversion. Come on therefore Exorcistes, what say you to our
matters this morning? A verdict: or no verdict?


Exorcistes. No verdict at all: for any thing hitherto heard.


Orthodoxus. Oh, then I perceive you have either carelessly ouerslipped; The
necessity of recapitulating the premises.
or not carefully observed those things which you heard: and therefore, it
shall not be amiss, very succinctly to recapitulate the whole course of our
conference. That (by this means) the matters themselves being fitly reduced to
your remembrance afresh: you may either be constrained to consent to the truth,
or be otherwise destitute of all excuse, by having one, and the selfsame
truth, now the second time testified to you. 2. Cor. 13. 1.
For in the mouth of two or three witnesses, the truth of these matters, they
must be so iudicially, and so firmly established, as, all the sworn
adversaries thereof, may Iudasly be ashamed, and finally confounded.


Exorcistes. Well sir: go an end in your purpose.


Orthodoxus. With very good will. A summarie abridgement of the first Dialogue.
Wherein you must call to remembrance, how that (upon the very first entrance
into these our Dialogicall discourses) we took a due consideration of the
essential being of spirits and devils: and then next of their undoubted
dominion or power.

That there are essential spirits and devils, we proved directly from their
essential creations, and effectual operations: answering withal, those
beastly anthropomorphites, and swinish Saduces, who (in these our days) do
impudently deny, that, there is either Angel or devil. And this (in effect)
was the sum of our first conference.


Exorcistes. It was so, I confess.


Orthodoxus. The next, A summarie abridgement of the second Dialogue.
(concerning the undoubted dominion or power of the devil) it was likewise
apparently proved; that spirits and devils, they have no such possession in
men, as the world does fondly imagine. Both, because the word ( possession) is
no where (in any such sense) to be found throughout the whole Bible: and for
that also, if the same were so to be found, yet must it be taken
metaphorically, for, so only the Scriptures do demonstrate their nature,
operation, and power unto us. Admitting you therefore, the word possession in
a metaphorical meaning: we confessed that selfsame dominion or power of
spirits and devils, to be twofold. Namely, either a power of possession: or a
power of obsession.

By their power of possession, we understood that their authentical
authority, jurisdiction, or interest, which they usurpingly (by the operative
permission of God) do exercise over some special men, in afflicting,
tormenting, and vexing their persons. And, this their said power of
possession, it must needs be (we told you) either real, or actual. By the
real possession, (we told you) was meant an essential, or personal entering
in men: the which we utterly rejected as a palpable untruth, absurd in
Philosophy, and unsound in Divinity, as by unanswerable arguments,
authentical authorities, and plain evidence of Scripture was apparently
proved unto you. Telling you further, that, if such a real possession be
granted, the same must be either a mental, or corporal possession.

The real-ment all possession we flatly denied. Because else the possessed man's
mind, it must needs be a locall-receptacle, essentially, and substantially
comprehending the devil for the present: which (by the very swaie of
arguments, the authority of writers, and plain evidence of Scriptures) we
fully confuted. And this also (in effect) was the very sum or scope of our
second conference.


Exorcistes. I remember it well.


Orthodoxus. Then next, A summarie abridgement of the 3. Dialogue.
concerning the reall-corporall possession, that also we rejected, as fond and
frivolous: it being a matter never purposed by the Lord himself, in the first
creation of bodies.

For, else the mind it self must be unjustly charged, to answer all those
her animal, and organicall operations, which (without any her consent, and
approbation) are violently enforced upon the possessed man's body: or, if (the
possessed himself being freed from those operations) the devil alone should
be called to account for the guilt of those actions, then something (concerning
the possessed himself) should be acted by him to no purpose.

Besides that, such a real corporal possession (the devil being only a
spiritual substance) cannot possibly be perceived of the possessed himself,
but only effectiuely: and therefore there can be no sensible perceiuance of
any such essential possession, unless we retain the Platonists opinion,
concerning corporal devils. A thing directly opposite to reason, to the
testimony of writers: and the plain evidence of sacred Scriptures. And, this
also (as I take it) was in effect, the sum of our third conference.


Exorcistes. I may with no good conscience deny it.


Orthodoxus. Then next (because your self so earnestly insisted upon the real
corporal possession) it was further declared unto you, A summarie abridgement
of the 4. Dialogue.
that (if the same should be granted) the devils then, they must necessarily
have such a kind of possession, either by assuming to themselves some true
natural body: or, by transforming themselves into some true natural body at
least.

Their assuming of true natural bodies we flatly rejected, as an opinion too
too unreasonable, absurd, and most senseless: whether we understand the same of
bodies created before, or of bodies, then forthwith to be created. And that
therefore the devil his tempting of Euah by the Serpent, the Angel his
delivery of a sensible speech, by Baalam his Ass, the devil his supposed
assuming of Samuels body, with such other examples and Scriptures, which very
many do most ignorantly urge for this matter: they are too too grossly and
fondly abused, as we proved unto you by arguments, by writers, and by the
sacred scriptures. And this also (if I be not fowly deceived) was in effect the
sum of our fourth conference.


Exorcistes. I dare not deny any part thereof.


Orthodoxus. A summarie abridgement of the 5. Dialogue.
Then next (for the devil his transforming of himself into any true natural
body) we declared unto you, the impossibility, and most palpable absurdity
thereof, notwithstanding the Sorcerers rods transformed as you thought) into
true natural serpents, the supposed transfiguring of Nebuchad-nezzer into an
ox, with such other examples. Showing you withal (by the conference of
places) that, that place of Scripture which speaks of Satan his transforming
of himself into an Angel of light, was misunderstood of the most.

Neither may the same, or any like places of scripture, be literally
understood of any essential transformations; because that work was never in the
power of a devil. No, he cannot possibly transform him self into any true
form whatsoever, if Christ his argument (concerning the non visibility, and
palpability of spirits and devils) be without contradiction: which it could not
be, if the devil was able (but only in outward appearance) to transform him
self into any true form whatsoever, as we proved by reason, by fathers, and
by the canonical scriptures. And this also, was (in effect) the sum of our
fifth conference.


Exorcistes. I will (at no hand) contradict your report.


Orthodoxus. Having thus dispatched the supposed real possession of spirits A
summarie abridgement of the 6. Dialogue.
and devils: we entered then into a like serious consideration of their actual
possession: showing you first, what it was: and then next, the several parts
thereof. Namely, either, a mental afflicting and greeuing: or, a corporal
tormenting and vexing.

We showed you further, that this actual possession, was only in use in the
days of Christ and of his disciples.

Howbeit, the maine ends thereof (namely, the declaration of Christ his deity,
and the confirmation of his glorious Gospel) being in those days very
effectually accomplished: the possession also, it was (by our Savior himself)
very fully, and finally determined. Yea, and the determination of this
actual possession we confidently avouched, notwithstanding any one matter
pretended by you, for the perpetuity thereof: as was directly proved by force
of argument, by the plain testimony of ancient writers, and the inevitable
evidence of the sacred Scriptures. And this (in effect) was the sum of our
sixth conference.


Exorcistes. It was undoubtedly so as you say.


Orthodoxus. And then next (because you insisted still upon the perpetuity of
actual possession, A summarie abridgement of the 7. Dialogue.
by an argument drawn from common experience in all that beheld your supposed
action, wrought at Mahgnitton) we proved directly unto you, that this their
supposed experience, it could be accounted no current experience in deed. Both,
because many like admirable matters may be demonstrated from mere natural
causes, effects, and diseases: and for that also, a mere natural experience
(when the same is brought to the best) it may be no competent Judge in such
supernatural matters. A thing opposite to Divinity, to Philosophy, to
Physic, to Nature, to Law, and to Conscience, as may very plainly appear:
whether we respect the action it self, or the manner of doing the same. Then
after all this, we came to entreat of Satan his power of obsession: which
consists especially, in an outward assaulting and circumuenting, or, in an
inward suggesting and tempting. And this also in effect, was the sum of our
seventh conference.


Exorcistes. The whole truth thereof, is without contradiction.


Orthodoxus. Having thus handled the power of spirits and devils whatsoever: A
summarie abridgement of the 8. Dialogue.
we came next to entreat of that extraordinary working power, whereby their
said power was subdued. Showing you directly, that the same was either
immediate in Christ the stronger: or mediate, in some certain special
persons, extraordinarily moved to that selfsame business.

Again, the mediate power we told you, it was either Apostolical, I mean, in
the Apostles themselves, an admirable extraordinary good means, to confirm
their extraordinary preachings: or else Ecclesiastical, that is, in the
seventy Disciples, and some others succeeding. And that therefore this
Ecclesiastical power, it was more especially to be considered again, in
respect either of the Churches primitive: the Churches I mean more immediately
succeeding the Apostles themselves: or in the Churches successiue at the least.
And here we handled at large the continuance, and compass of that
Ecclesiastical power: declaring plainly unto you, that this selfsame
Ecclesiastical power (howsoever most egerly attempted, and apishly imitated of
some in every age) it consisted not in any created, or mere natural means
whatsoever, neither yet, in the only bare practice of prayer and fasting: as
was sufficiently showed by force of reason, authority of writers, and the
apparent evidence of canonical Scriptures. And this also in effect was the
sum of our eight conference.


Exorcistes. You have very faithfully abstracted the same.


Orthodoxus. Then next, A summarie abridgement of the 9. Dialogue.
for the practice of prayer and fasting, we proved directly unto you, that,
the same was never put down by Christ as any ordinary perpetual means, for
the powerful expelling of devils. That, if any such power should effectually
proceed from the practice thereof: The same must needs be either a vocal, or a
personal power at the least. The vocal power we rejected as too too (...) The
personal power, we told you, it must more especially proceed, from either the
party who prays: or the party that is prayed unto. The party that prays,
we told you, he has no such personal power: howsoever you labored to support
that opinion, from a personal power in Christ. The party that is prayed unto
(namely the Lord) although he undoubtedly has such an absolute supernatural
power, as is able forthwith to effect such a work: yet, the participating
therewith must needs be effected by the timely apprehension, either of a
justifying or miraculous faith. The apprehension of that power, by the means
of a justifying faith we flatly denied, it being an opinion too too
preposterous, as we showed you by reasons, by writers, and by the canonical
scriptures. And this in effect was the sum of our ninth conference.


Exorcistes. It were too to absurd for my self to deny it.


Orthodoxus Then next, A summarie abridgement of the 10. Dialogue.
for the effectual apprehending of that selfsame supernatural power of God
by the only means of a miraculous faith: that apprehension also, we flatly
refuted. Telling you first, what true miracles are. And declaring withal, that
this your supposed action wrought at Mahgnitton, if it were in such sort
effected, as you bear us in hand: then surely (howsoever you would cunningly
suppress the appearance thereof by your new coined distinction of mirandum and
miraculum) the same undoubtedly it was a true miracle. And that therefore,
either you must utterly disclaim the whole action it self, as a mere
sophistical practice of some: or acknowledge (at least) that you effected a
miracle. Which (we told you) you might in no wise avouch: because the working
of miracles was long since determined. All which we proved directly by the
very sway of argument, by a grand-Iurie of ancient fathers: and by the
unmeasurable true evidence of the canonical scriptures. And this in effect,
was the very true sum (as I take it) not only of our tenth conference, but
of all these our dialogical discourses. Tell us therefore directly your answer
unto them.


Exorcistes. My answer in few words is this: I cannot gainesay the undoubted
truth of any your summarie abridgements of these Dialogicall discourses.


Orthodoxus. Seeing then you have hitherto heard, that the word ( possession)
is not any where to be found (respecting this Question) in all the Canonical
scriptures. Seeing, albeit such possession of spirits and devils should be
admitted in an only metaphorical meaning, yet there was never any real, but
only an actual possession: seeing such actual possession was only but
temporary for some special respects, and long since, even actually also
determined by Christ: seeing moreover, that the dispossessing of spirits and
Devils (whatsoever, and by whomsoever attempted) was evermore effected by an
extraordinary power of the Lord either immediately or mediately: Seeing the
mediate power was only peculiar, and peculiarly applied by some special
persons for special respects: seeing that power is now finally restrained from
men, because those the former respects are fully accomplished: seeing also the
working of miracles is ceased long since: briefly, seeing the improbable
affirmation of any thing opposite to any the precedent points, is not only
absurd in Philosophy, but also unsound in Divinity, as has been declared at
large: we doubt not, but that the truth of the premises (breaking forth now
as it does, like the Sun in his strength) the same will now be so precious in
your eyes, and so far forth prevail with your judgment at least, as that (in
an holy approbation thereof) you will willingly submit and subscribe to the
same.


Exorcistes. Nay sir, howsoever I do happily iumpe with your self in the
soundnes of judgments concerning the sound truth of every thing handled
before: yet may I by no means submit to your motion for many respects.


Orthodoxus. What man? do never say so for shame. Shall any respects (how
substantial soever in outward appearance) so much ouerswaie your enlightened
judgment, as that they should forthwith enforce your unruly affections
against your own conscience, against the common consent of writers, yea and
which more is, against an apparent truth? God forbid that so gross a
corruption should ever discover it self. But go to lay open unto us those
selfsame respects.


Exorcistes. First, by such a submission, I should be discredited much, be
deemed too to inconstant, yea, and accounted but a cowardly dastard: in, now
growing weary under that selfsame cross, which I have hitherto, so
confidently, and so courageously endured.


Orthodoxus. Oh, now I perceive, what has hitherto with held you from
submitting your self to authority: namely the paltry respect of your worldly
estimation. But, go to, let us soundly examine the several points of this your
primary respect.

First therefore (concerning your supposed discredit, by such an holy
submission) do know this I beseech you, and believe it for certain, that, it
is undoubtedly a good Christians praise before God, and his church, to cease to
do evil, Isa. 1. 16. 17.
and to learn to do well: and which more is, to submit him self, his senses,
his reason, his will, and all his affections to a sounder dexterity in all
things, and to be only constant in that which is good.

As for valor and courage, we must hold this for infallible truth; namely,
that only in good matters, it is good to be fervent and zealous, whether the
Apostle (I mean any of the godly) be present, or absent. Yea, and to be highly
ashamed of the ignorance of your own soul: but, not ashamed at all, to
submit to the truth.

As for constancy under the cross, consider. I pray you, whether that which
you suffer, be the true cross of Christ, or a just scourge for your sins.
Aug. in Psalm. 34. part. 2.
There were three (you know) on the cross at once: the first a savior, the
second to be saved, the third to be damned. All these, they endured the
selfsame pain, but, did not all undergo the selfsame cause. So then, it is
not the martyrdom it self, but, the cause of the martyrdom that makes a
martyr. Math. 5. 10.
You are not therefore, simply to rejoice in suffering: but; in suffering
especially for righteousness sake. 1. Pet. 3. 13.
And, who is it (I pray you) that can harm you at all, if only you follow the
thing that is good? On the other side, what praise is it unto you, if, when you
be justly buffetted for your own faults (as herein you have been) you take it
patiently? But, 1. Pet. 2. 20.
if when you do well (which undoubtedly you should do in yielding submission) if
then (I say) you suffer evil undeserved (by undergoing with patience, the
cynical censures of some giddy conceitours) this is thankworthy and acceptable
before the Majesty of our eternal God. And therefore, this your primary
respect for not submitting your self: it is (you see) very fond, and
preposterous.


Exorcistes. Yea, but by this my submission, I should give our adversaries
great occasion, to insult over the brethren afresh in far better causes then
this: as we found by experience, how highly they triumphed over the intended
discipline of late, by reason of Hackets, Arthingtons and Copingers seductions.


Orthodoxus. If your own dealings, in these your preposterous courses, do as
deeply discredit the holy ordinance of prayer and fasting, as Hackets
seduction disgraced (in the judgment of some) the intended church discipline:
I hope then you will never account, much less entitle them adversaries to
sincere religion (howsoever opposite to these your practices) that shall seek,
by due means to suppress the irregularity of your intemperate humor.

Otherwise, if these your disordered attempts have ministered just occasion for
any to insult over the brethren (as you say) afresh, in far better causes then
this: when you see such fearful effects to follow your fooleries, you may
never blame the insulters themselves, but your own indiscretion.

Howsoever, I do advise you in all love, to reckon this late-giuen occasion as
the very principal among the rest of your sins: and, make it a perpetual
means, to your better humiliation before God and men.

As for the inconsiderate and unchristian insultings of any, over good and
Christian causes; let not their evil dealings that way, make you to constant in
evil.


Exorcistes. But yet sir, by this so unseasonable a submission of mine, I
should scandalize the zealous professors, and offend sundry honorable, and
noble personages, both Lords and Ladies, with diverse others of good
estimation: who (favoring rightly the reformation) have mightily affected my
cause, and bountifully maintained my person and state.


Orthodoxus. Your conscionable rejecting of an inueterate error, and your
zealous entertaining of a newly revealed truth, can, ever scandalize such
sincere professors, as are zealously, and rightly religious. As for offending
any honorable personages or others in any account, who ( wishing reformation)
have hitherto affected your cause and maintained your person: know this, and
know it for truth, that if those honorable personages (even in a sincere regard
of some holy reformation) have hitherto affected your cause, so far forth at
the least, as they supposed the same to be sound and good: then, doubt not at
all, but that they will much more affect your holy and hoped conversion, so
soon especially, as their enlightened judgments shall once but soundly
perceive the infallible truth. Yea and which more is, they will then be much
more forewards in supporting your person and state, then ever before.

Otherwise, those your maintainers, they might be supposed to affect your
cause, and to support your person, in an only malcontentednes, rather against
the persons of some in authority, then in any true mindednes toward
reformation indeed. And which more is, you your own self (by persisting as
you do in your error) you may be supposed of all (as you are shrewdly
suspected of some) to be rather their humorist in an only respect of their
hier: then any their approved martialist to manage these matters, in any
right reverend regard of their honors. This therefore (you see) is but a
sielie respect, to hold you from such an holy submission.


Exorcistes. Yea, but by such my submission, I should forthwith deprive my
self from all Ecclesiastical functions. For, this is held an undoubted truth,
among the preciser sort, that a man so groslie fallen, does make forthwith, a
flat nullitie of his former ministry.


Orthodoxus. Put the case, that some (concerning this point) are much more
peeuishly precise, then prudently wise: will you therefore (in an only regard
of their itching humors) refuse to do good to your self and many others of
more temperate spirits? For, tell me I pray you, Eius est dest^uere: cuius:
est construere.
who is able to make a flat nullitie in any man's ministry: but, he alone who
enableth and calls whomsoever he will to the ministry.


Exorcistes. Very true as you say, (respecting simply his gifts and graces)
there is none able to make a flat nullitie in any man's ministry, save only
the Lord. Howbeit (respecting the orderly execution and use of those gifts) the
Church, she may, and she ought to make a flat nullitie in the ministry of
such are groslie fallen.


Orthodoxus. If there be none other stoppage at all, to this your submission,
but only the fear of forgoing your ministry, this fear I hope, it may
soon be removed. For, if none but the Lord, be able to disable your gifts,
then none without warrant from the Lord, is able to disable the orderly
execution and use of your gifts. But no such warrant have any from the Lord in
all the Bible.

Besides that, if the Lord bestows and continues his gracious gifts in any
(being orderly called before to the ministry) for the edification of others:
who may without warrant, disanull, and discontinue the orderly execution and
use of those gracious gifts, in any (being orderly continued in the
ministry) for the edification of others. For, if unfeigned repentance does set
an offendour in statu quo prius, in his former estate, with God and man,
notwithstanding any his former offenses: Gal. 6. 1. 2.
why should not an unfeigned repentance, set a poor minister (being fallen by
occasion) in statu quo prius, in his former estate with God and man, for the
orderly use of his ministry, notwithstanding any his former offenses?

Otherwise, why did not the Church in former times disanull and discontinue the
orderly execution and use of gifts, in David, in Peter, in Paul, in John Mark,
in Demas, and diverse other both ordinary, and extraordinary persons. In all
whom did break forth no less apparent disorders then this one of yours: and
yet (the Lord continuing in them his gracious gifts) the Church still enjoyed
the use of those gifts. Discharge you therefore a good conscience, by
testifying truly your unfeigned submission: and then, if the Ecclesiastical
governors (upon advised deliberation) shall deem it convenient to emploie you
afresh in the use of your gifts: let those your preciser sort, set upon them
(if they please) for such their employment of one so groslie offending. In the
mean time let those precise ones beware, least (in this over nice a conceit)
they do fall (before they beware) into the Luciferian heresy: Hieronimus,
contra Luciferianos.
and be your self persuaded of this, that (notwithstanding these their
owle-like hooings and scrikings in corners) you shall find me very ready to
join with you in this point against them all: Let them make public trial
thereof, whenever they please.


Exorcistes. Alas sir, by such my submission, I should utterly deprive my self
and my family from all manner of maintenance. For, not only I am made
destitute already of my former place: but which more is, I being by this my
humble submission discovered, and discredited with the Church of God: what hope
of future preferment?


Orthodoxus. Howsoever your late practices have justly deprived you from all
present supplies for your maintenance: Let neither the fear of such want; nor
the needless distrust of any discredit in respect of your humble submission,
be any means to withhold you from the dutiful discharge of a Christian
conscience. No, no, be you rather assured of this, that your obstinate holding
out with a settled pertinacie in this your peevish opinion, it will more
discredit you with the true Church of Christ, then your humble submission would
do, by a thousand degrees.

Neither, let any falsely supposed fear of future wants, withhold you herein:
both because true repentance depriues not a man from the favor of God, or his
fatherly providence, but binds them so much the more firmly unto him: and
for that also, this your refusal to yield, in an only fear of some falsely
supposed wants, it would but confirm that hard conceit which many have had
against you of late. Who do generally give it forth, that (howsoever you
cannot but perceive your fault concerning these matters) you will never be
brought to acknowledge the same. Because (in standing thus stoutly as you do to
your tackling,) you do get better maintenance by your imprisonment, then you
could otherways gain by your enlargement. And therefore, if it were for none
other cause else, but, to take away occasion from such as seek for occasion to
deprave the holy profession, do you forthwith submit your self to the truth.


Exorcistes. Sir, although (notwithstanding those the former respects) I should
willingly submit my self to authority, yet then this vile inconvenience
would follow thereof, namely, by that means, I should be reputed to be in some
practice at least with the yoongman at Mahgnitton, with Katherine Wright, with
the boy of Burton, and with many other besides.


Orthodoxus. Surely, I cannot perceive how your standing out, should possibly
free you from that suspicion with men, if once they but read Master Harsnets
book, concerning your authentical conuention, and public conviction: and
those also exactly performed, in an orderly course, and a judicial proceeding,
if the things he reports, be reputed for truths. The which also we must be
persuaded they are: unless happily we do fondly imagine, that the Commissioners
themselves; the Register also, being a sworn public Notarie: the yoongman at
Mahgnitton: the several deponents being orderly deposed, and secretly examined
apart: yea, and you your own self, upon your corporal oath, were all
(jointly, and by one uniform consent) confederate together, to find your
self guilty concerning the causes and circumstances, so iudicially propounded
and prosecuted. And therefore, unless you be thoroughly able to discredit that
course, as a matter but forged, false, and erroneous: your standing out (as you
do) in the premises, it will rather aggrauate then lessen your fault: Humanum
est errare: Diabolicum perseuerare.
and apparently demonstrate a badde disposition, both purposely perpetrating,
and peeuishly persisting in evil.


Exorcistes. Your self then it should seem, is fully persuaded, that I, and
the boie (by a precompacted confederacy) have purposely deluded and coosened
the world.


Orthodoxus. How some others esteem of it, I know not: for my own part (I
assure you) I am very far from such a suspicion. Yea, and this also I dare
say for so many besides, as have been acquainted with your former sincerity
and upright carriage: they are every of them, free from such a persuasion. This
only is that which we entertain, and very confidently hold for a truth.
Namely, that the graceless boy, did gracelesly counterfeite, and knauishly
bear the world in hand, he was really possessed of Satan: when there was no
such matter at all. But concerning your own self, we do undoubtedly think,
that you being fully persuaded of the perpetuity of real possessions, as
also, most strongly deluded with an erroneous opinion of your own ability for
the powerful dispossessing of devils by prayer and fasting: did thereupon
simply undertake that trifling work. This then is our opinion concerning your
self in the action: namely, that the same was simply your error in judgment,
but no purposed error in your practice at all. This is that we would have you
revoke: and this is that wherein we would have you submit your self to
authority. And why should you not willingly yield to the same? Think you it
impossible for your self to be deluded by the devil: or to be deceived at all
by a cogging companion? Was not the reverend father Master Fox, and many
others besides, as grossly beguiled by such counterfeit crankes as ever was you
with this your faisely possessed patient? And therefore yield your submission
for shame.


Exorcistes. Nay sir, the yoongman (I dare assure you) he did not counterfeite
the matter: but, was actually possessed at least. Else, See M. Darels Apolog.
page 3^
you may likewise affirm, that his own sister, Mary Cooper, did but
counterfeite. For, she also (even in the selfsame manner) was fearfully
tormented by fits. Very certain it is, that she did not counterfeite at all:
but was undoubtedly possessed by the devil.


Orthodoxus. She was undoubtedly, even so possessed as her brother before her
was repossessed, which thing also you prognosticated, accordingly as it came to
pass: howbeit, neither of both their fits, were true fits indeed, but mere
counterfeit fictions.

For first, if Marie Cooper was truly possessed: by whose prayer and fasting
was she dispossessed I pray you? There was none other means used, to conjure
out the devil from her, but the only bare news of your own, and her
brothers conuention before authority. It should seem she was simply
possessed, either with some cowardly devil that could not, or with some
courteous devil that would not adventure the trial: and therefore in a
peaceable manner, they did voluntarily forgo the habitation which they
possessed in peace. And as for the repossession which you so constantly
foretold and avouched to be in the boy: the same is no less absurd then his
sisters possession expressed before. For if there was in him such a
repossession in deed: then, where was your reioynder for the casting of him out
by prayer and fasting? Either he was not repossessed at all, and so your
prognostication proved false: or else not your self by prayer and fasting,
but Judge Anderson rather (by procuring a Process, de vilaica remouenda, did
drive out that daugerous devil. In the powerful execution of which Process,
he so canuassed that cumbersome Spirit, as he was glad to betake himself to
the uttermost borders of Egypt: and ever since then, the country has been
free from such dangerous bug-boyes, and therefore you may boldly submit your
self.


Exorcistes. If I submit to this motion, my credit is cracked in the world.


Orthodoxus. Why stand you so much upon your outward reputation before the face
of the world: against the plain evidence of your inward conscience in the
presence of God? Or, why will you (in this case especially) so fondly respect
the flying reports of fantastical fellows? August, in sermon.
What will it prejudice your person, though blind ignorance should cancel your
credit in the transitory tables of worldly men's hearts: when your own
conscience does not raze forth your name from the everlasting Book of the
living? Put case, that those good reports which the world does afford you, be
not found to be faithfully registered in the closet of your conscience: then,
what other effect can they cause in the same, but an inward tormenting torture?
Put case again, that those bad reports wherewith the vile world would besmeere
your credit among men, be found utterly false in the consistory of your secret
conscience: Oh, what an exceeding great joy will be resident there, and keep
in the same a continual feast? So then, if your own conscience accuse you
not, you must not so greatly regard the causeles contumelies of cinicall
censurers, as that for the same, you care not to torture your conscience with
continual torments. Neither may you be persuaded, that other men's lying
reports are esteemed more authentical before the tribunal seat of Christ the
righteous Judge, then the approved testimony of your own conscience, which
stands there to be acquitted in judgment. The premises therefore considered,
Seneca de moribus.
I would advise you rather to respect conscience, then fame: for fame may
oftsoones be forged, but so can conscience never, and therefore submit, your
self.


Exorcistes. Alas sir, I am (by the very force of your speech) so fearfully
distracted, as I wotte not which ways to turn me. For, if I stand out (as
hitherto I have done) you will repute me to be peeuishly obstinate: on the
otherside, by submitting my self to your motion, I should but confirm the
Bishop; in their badde opinion concerning my cause. Who (suspecting me to be
confederate with the boie in some cosening practice) have hitherto handled me
too too hardly.


Orthodoxus. Your settled pertinancie in so apparent an untruth, has bred in
every of them that bad opinion: and your peevish persisting therein, does more
fully confirm them in such a conceit. Touching their hard proceeding against
your person, if you simply respect the cause, they could do no less then they
did: although yet (respecting especially your place and calling) it were to be
wished, that (as well on their, as on your own behalf) a more considerate
regard had been given to the maine cause it self, without any such eger
persute, or preposterous apologies, concerning matters of fact. For then, so
soon as it had been made apparently evident, that, there are now no
possessions at all: your standing out in the matter would forthwith have been
nipt in the head. Whereas they now (suspecting perhaps, that you had some
sinister purpose to manage your public fasts, by such a pretended false
miracle) have showed the more sharpenes: and your self on the otherside
(surmizing it may be, that they only maligning the purity of your pretended
profession) have continued so much the more obstinate. All which inconsiderate
courses, and preposterous practices would have been fitly forestalled, if
between you all, the cause it self had been cleared* Howbeit, the remedy
comes never vnseasonablie, which may fully effect the cure: and that I assure
my self, may yet be accomplished by your dutiful and humble submission.


Exorcistes. Sir, notwithstanding any your patheticall persuasions: the
premises considered, I may in no wise submit.


Physiologus. Master Orthodoxus, that which has been hitherto spoken may
fully suffice to persuade any reasonable person, affecting the sincere truth
with freedom of conscience. Howbeit, this fellow I perceive, he is wholly
ouerswaied with some spiced singularity, or with a peevish selfewill at the
least, in not submitting himself to that truth which he is unable to answer,
for any thing hitherto heard. You have (I confess) been toiled too much,
respecting especially your present meditations, for the Sabbath days exercise:
and therefore it shall not be amiss to put an end to our conference.

In the mean time, let Exorcistes repair to his familiar friends, and those
of his faction, how many or mighty soever. Let him intimate our whole
discourse, to their approved judgments. Let them duly consider, and exactly
perpend the several points: and then, let them (in a more mature deliberation)
devise with themselves, whether it be better for the man to submit, or still to
stand out as he does. If they advise him to yield a submission; we have our
hearts desire, and God the whole glory. If otherwise they will have him
standfast to his tackling: Let then signify the manner how with the time, and
place, for our meeting, and we will be ready from time to time to confer
with them to the full, if they accept of our offer.


Lycanthropus. This is (in my simple conceit) a Christian motion.


Pneumatomachus. If they dislike, they shall greatly discredit their cause.


Physiologus. They are bound to praise God for your Christian care.


Orthodoxus. Well then, in the mean time we will pray unto God to enlighten
our judgments, to make us wise to sobriety, and to give unto us the spirit of
discretion, that we may be able to discern the things that differ, and to
approve only of those things which are pleasing to God in Jesus Christ: and so
I take my leave for the present.


(...). Soli Deo gloria, (...).
A summarie Table of all the principal points, the special matters, the
several syllogismes, and the sundry expositions of such places of Scripture,
as are any way pertinent to the maine purpose it self.
The first Dialogue. page 1.
CHristian conferences, and their commendable use. page 2. Summers his supposed
passions put down. 4 Man's nature is ever desirous of Novelties. 6 Christian
exercises must be begun with prayer. 7 Pneumatomachus, what it properly
signifies. 8 That there are essential spirits and devils. 9 Angels are
celestial creatures, created of God. ibid. Spirits and devils, supposed to be
nothing else but the good, or evil motions in men. ibid. Angels supposed to be
none other thing else, but the sensible signs of Gods wonderful power. ibid.
It is dangerous to deny the essential being of spirits and devils. 11 Man is
endued with a spiritual, and immortal soul. ibid. The original fountains,
or grounds of all errors. 12 Physiologus, and what the same signifies. 13
Philosophy, is not simply forbidden, Col. 2. 8. ibid. The true use of
Philosophy expressed. ibid. The mind what it is, and the effects thereof.
ibid. The mind how it is corrupted naturally. 14 The mind differs from the
will, and how? ibid. Fantasy, what it is, and how it works. ibid. The
natural man, unable to comprehend spiritual things. 14, 15 Anthropomorphites
error, and whence it sprang. 17 Scriptures expounded hand over head, do
procure a thousand absurdities. 18 Reasons, proouing Spirits and Devils to be
more then the good or evil motions of men. 18, 19 Angels not mentioned in the
Worlds creation. 21 Angels and Spirits, not eternal, or uncreated. 22 Angels,
in what day they were created. 23, 24 Reasons to prove the essential being of
Angels. ibid. Testimonies of Fathers for the essential being of Angels. 24
Angels created on the second day. 24, 25 Reasons to prove the essential being
of Angels. 26 Angels how they are said to be evil. 28 To be created good, and
still to retain that selfsame goodness, are two distinct things. 29 Boiling
affections, the causes of controversies. 30 Physiologus, and what the same
signifies. 31 Possessions doubted in these days of the Gospel. 32 Satan's
dominion over men, what it is, and how the same is limited. 33 Possession, and
what it imports. ibid. The word Possession, is not peculiarly appropriated
to the Devil, throughout the whole Bible. ibid. If the Lord had ever intended
an essential possession of Devils, he wanted not fit words to express it. 34
Possession what it is in the Hebrew tongue. 35 Possession what it signifies in
the Greek tongue. 37 Possession how the same is defined. 40 Real possession of
Devils, what it is. 41 Mental possession what it is thought to be. ibid. Real
possession, whether in the mind alone, or in the body alone, or in the mind
and body together. ibid. Satan needs no mental possession, for the actual
accomplishment of sin in any. 42 The manner of Satan his proceeding with men.
43, 44 Reasons against the real mental possession. 45, 46 Our judgment
concerning the real mental possession, is mightily deceived, by relying too
much on the bare letter. 48 Satan being a Spirit, does principally affect man's
spirit. 49 After what manner the Devil has a mental possession. 50 Spirits
and Devils are substantial creatures. 51 Devils are Spirits by nature, and
Angels by office. ibid. Devils are spiritual and finite substances. 52, 53
Whether man's mind be a receptacle, or place circumscribing the Devil. 53
Whether man's mind be a common or proper place for the Devil. 54 Whether it be
a corporal, or an imaginary place. 55 Things are said to be in a place three
manner of ways. 56 Corporal substances are in a place dimensiuely. ibid.
Spiritual substances, are in a place determinately. 57 God is in a place
indefinitiuely, and repletiuely. ibid. Angels and Devils, howsoever they
propound diverse ends, their manner of working, is ever the same. 58 Devils how,
and by what means they torment men. 60 God is the only encliner of man's
mind. 61 Man's mind is inclined either by an interior efficient, or by an
exterior agent. 62
The third Dialogue, page 64.
Corporal possession, what it is supposed to be of some. 65 Real corporal
possession what it is ordinarily thought to be, ibid. Entering in and dwelling
there, do imply no essentially inherency, but an effectual operation in the
bodies of men. 66 The Metaphor of entering in, rightly expounded and fitly
explicated by the example of Saul and David. 67 The word Tsalak very truly
expounded, by conference with other places of scripture. 68 A good rule for the
right understanding of such scriptures, as do any way concern the
extraordinary operation of Spirits. 69 Sundry reasons against the real
corporal possession. 70 Man's mind is an incorporall substance being simply
considered. 70, 71 The proper operations of the mind, are either organicall or
animal. ibid. The organicall operations of the mind, what they are? 72 The
animal operations of the mind, what they are? ibid. Whether man's mind or the
Devil be answerable for the actions done by the body, during the time of
Satan's possession. 73, 74 God (in the first creation of bodies) never purposed
any such real corporal possessions of Devils. 74 Gods image was not lost in
Adam, as touching the essence. 76 A humane body is only capable of an humane
soul. 77 Satan so possesses, as Christ inuadeth. ibid. There is no one
necessary use or end of such a possession. ibid. If the Devil be in the
possessed man's body essentially, then is he so, either hypostatically or
formally. 78 How the real corporal possession may be perceived. 78, 79
Whether Devils have their proper, or their assumed bodies: or whether no bodies
at all? 80 Celestial bodies have only their celestial motions: and
elementarie bodies, their elementarie motions. 80, 81 Gross absurdities
ensuing the opinion of corporal Devils. ibid. It is absurd to hold that Devils
have airie bodies. 82 Augustine is not sound concerning the supposed airie
bodies of Spirits and Devils. 83 Though it were granted that Devils might add
unto, yet may they not diminish or alter their substantial being. 84 Four
several sorts of Spirits found in the word. ibid. Angels have eftsoons their
assumed bodies, and why? 85 The testimony of fathers, pretending corporal
Devils. 86 Reasons directly concluding the incorporietie of Devils. 94
Testimony of fathers concerning that point. 95 The Grand Iuries verdict
against corporal Devils. 96 The Laterane Council concluding the same. 97
The fourth Dialogue. page 99.
WHether Devils can essentially assume true natural bodies. 9. Whether that
body which the Devils are supposed to assume: be a true natural or but a
fantastical body. 100 The Devil had never power to assume essentially any
living man's body. page 101 The Devil had never power to assume essentially any
dead man's body. ibi. It is absurd to hold the Devil his assuming of dead men's
bodies. 101, 102 Whether the Devil can assume to himself an uncreated body.
102 The Lord alone is the only creator of bodies. ibid. It is absurd to
imagine that God should create bodies for Satan. 103 Satan has no power at all
to create a body. 104 Arguments pretending the Devil his essential assuming
of bodies. 105 It is no good argument to hold, that because good Angels have,
therefore evil Angels may also assume to themselves true natural bodies. 105,
106 That place in the Psalm 78. 49. is very truly expounded. 107 The Devil
did not essentially assume to himself the serpents body. 108 Whether it was
the Devil alone or the serpent alone, or the Devil and serpent together that
tempted Euah. 109 It is ordinary in the scriptures to use the names of other
creatures: in setting forth unto us the intellectual creatures. 111 Reasons
declaring why it was not the serpent, but the Devil himself set forth by the
name of a serpent that tempted Euah. ibid. A very good Canon for the faithful
expounding of scriptures. 112 It is no absurdity or impiety at all to hold,
that Moses under the person of a poisoning serpent: did metaphorically set out
the Devil who poisoned our grandmother Euah. 114 The judgment of Tremellius
and others concerning this point. 115 The common received opinion herein
consented unto, and why? ibid. The true interpretation of the word Nachash. 116
The Devil did not essentially enter into the serpents body. ibid. Whether the
Angel essentially spoke in Baalams Ass: and how that scripture is to be
understood. 117 Whether the Angel opened the Asses mouth efficiently, or but
ministerially. 118 Whether the Angel for such a ministerial opening of the
Asses mouth, did essentially enter into the Asses body? 119 Whether Samuels
true natural body was essentially assumed by Satan. 120 Whether the Devil
appeared to Saul in Samuels likeness. 123 Sundry impossiblities and absurdities
concerning such a supposed likeness. page ibid. The opinion of sundry writers
touching this point. ibid. The Witch, a cunning ventriloquist, coosened Saul.
126 The distinction of essentialiter and effectiue, is no new, but a renewed
distinction and ordinary with Schoolmen and Fathers. 127 The testimony of
writers touching that point. 128 It is absurd to understand literally the
things that are spoken of Satan. 129
The fifth Dialogue. page 131.
WHether Devils can essentially transform themselves into any true natural
body? 131 This essential transformation of Devils, is opposite to true
philosophy. 132 Devils are not essentially transformed into Angels of light.
134 The word (...), what it imports. ibid. The place of 2. Cor. 11. 14. is
truly expounded. 134. 135 The conference of that one, with other places of
scripture, 136 The family of love is fitly confuted. ibid. Transubstantiation
very shrewdly cut in the neck. 137 Antiquity is no privilege for errors
whatsoever. ibid. Whether the Sorcerers rods were essentially transformed into
true natural serpents? 138 Whether the Sorcerers rods were true Serpents in
deed, or serpents only in an outward appearance. ibid. The Serpents rods were
no true natural rods, in any orderly course of nature. 139. Neither Sorcerer
nor Devil, could ever work a true miracle. 140 Devils never had any
supernatural power or skill. 141 Why the Sorcerers rods were called Serpents:
not being in deed true natural Serpents? 142 Satan may procure an outward
appearance of things, three manner of ways. 143 Spirits and Devils, they have
a deeper insight into mere natural causes, then men have by much. 144 The
Devil in transforming the Sorcerers rods, was undoubtedly assisted with a
twofold power. 145 What is meant by the power of nature? ibid. What is to be
understood by the power of obedience? 146 The Sorcerers rods they were
trasformed into Serpents, not existingly, but appearingly. 147 Whether
Nabuchadnez-zer was essentially transformed into a natural ox? 148 There was
in Nebuchadnez-zer no transmutation of substance: but only an alteration of
qualities. 149 Fury disordering men's nature, does make them beastly affected.
152 Men by tradition have received (hand over head) an error concerning the
essential transformation of Devils. 153 God has naturally engraffed in man
such a peculiar propriety touching his natural being: as can at no hand be
essentially transformed into any other form. 153, 154 Man's members may not
possibly be transformed into the proportion or lineaments of a beast. 155 If
there are essential transformations of Devils: then Christ's argument (Ioh. 20.
27.) cannot be current. ibid. That there are no essential transformations in
any sensible appearance. 156 Lycanthropus, and what the same imports. 159
(...) is a mere natural disease, and how. ibid. Lycanthropy, and melancholy
proceed from one and the same cause. 160 The signs and effects of a true
Lycanthropy. 161 The An^yran Council against the opinion of essential
transformations. ibid. Councels, Fathers, and the popes own Canons condemning
the same. page 162
The sixth Dialogue. page 165
Actual possession what it is, and the causes thereof. 166 The actual
possession of Devils is twofold. ibid. The actual possession of Devils was
only in Christ and the Apostles days. 168 The perpetuity of actual
possession was never purposed by God. ibid. Whether the commission given by
Christ to his Apostles for the dispossessing of Devils, be a perpetual
commission? 169 Reasons against the perpetuity of actual possessions. ibid.
The extraordinary power for the expelling of Devils, was only peculiar to
Christ and his own Apostles, and why? 170 The opinion of an^ient fathers for
the supposed perpetuity of actual possessions, considerately examined. 171
Extraordinary gifts and graces, did determine with the officers themselves on
whom they were peculiarly bestowed. 172 The continuance of actual possession
avouched in some. 173 Whether the actual possession of Devils be an ordinary
disease? 174 The terms of ordinary, and continually working what they import.
176 The instance from the Sun with the Antipodes, very fitly retorted. 177
The actual possession of Devils is an extraordinary and supernatural matter:
surmounting the orderly course of nature. 178 The perpetuity of actual
possession long since determined by Christ. 179 The two maine ends of actual
possession are ceased long since. ibid. That maine end which tended to the
manifestation of Christ his Deity, is fully determined, Ioh. 12, 31. 179
Christ his power matter to work upon still, though the actual possession be
ceased long since. 180 The text in Ioh. 12. 31. is cleared by conferring the
same with other places of Scripture. 181 Scriptures unfolding that
extraordinary power of Christ for the dispossessing of Devils, before his
suffering in the flesh. 182 The difference between Christ and the Leuitical
priesthood, very plainly expressed. 183 Scriptures respecting this special
power of Christ after his suffering. 184 Tho words Tsamath, and (...) very
plainly expounded. 185 The text of John 12. 31. paraphrasticallie analyzed.
187 The Fathers opinion concerning the ceasing of actual possession. 189 The
Devil was subdued in the Fathers before the coming of Christ 190 Though
actual possession be ceased: the faithful are not freed quite from the Devil
his sundry tentations. ibid. The reason why Satan's destruction, is so
confidently applied to the actual determination of his essential possessions.
195 This our exposition of John 12. 31. overthrows not, but confirms the
ordinary received exposition. ibid. Something besides the weakening of Satan's
dominion, was actually accomplished, by the very act of Christ his death. 196
Christ restraines the actual determination of actual possession, to the very
act of his death. ibid. The dispossessions after Christ's death, were to
confirm the Gospel. 197
The seventh Dialogue. page 199.
WHether common experience may concludently prove the supposed continuance of
actual possession? 199 The actions in the young man at Nottingham were (in
experience) no admirable matters, if we consider the actions well. 200 Many
natural experiments as admirable as those, in all appeerance. 202 Many maruels
in nature, ouershadowed as yet, with natures majesty. ibid. Very strange and
admirable woonders apparent in nature. 203 More strange and admirable matters,
are reported by Augustine. 205 As admirable matters may and do proceed from
natural diseases. 206 The actions at Nottingham, they were no admirable
matters at all, if we but respect Satan the supposed actor thereof. 208 Satan
can effect nothing impossible in nature, or incredible in divinity. ibid. If
Devils be the creators of substances: then are they also the quickeners
thereof. ibid. The nature of beginnings, affects singularity. ibid. Devils
may work strange woonders: but not effect any miraculous actions. 209 Satan
restrained from working miracles: by the bounds of nature, and the will of God.
ibid. What is necessarily required in the orderly accomplishment of every
action. 210 Satan his supposed actions in Summers, are opposite to Divinity,
Philosophy, Physic, Nature, Law, and to Conscience. 211 It is impossible
for Devils, to effect impossible matters. 213 The truth of Summers his supposed
actions: is tried forth by the nature of the things: and by the rule of right
judgment. 214 Summers his supposed actions, were either natural, or not
natural. ibid. Things natural, what they properly are. ibid. Things not
natural and their kinds. 215 (...), what they are. ibid. (...), what they
import? 216 (...), how they are to be understood. ibid. The rule of right
judgment, with the several kinds. 217 The natural cause of truth, and the
kinds thereof. ibid. Natural principles, and the several kinds. ibid.
Theoricall principles, for the judging of things. ibid. Practical principles
for the effecting of things. ibid. Universal experience, another natural rule
of judgment. 218 The words Cheker, and (...) expounded. ibid. Experience, what
it is: with the sundry degrees. 219 (...), what it signifies? ibid. (...),
what it imports? ibid. (...), what it respects? ibid. (...), what the same
betokens. ibid. A supposed spiritual experience pretended, to prove the
supposed natural experience. 221 The holy Ghost has given neither Canon, nor
Council, concerning the perpetuity of actual possession. 223 Arguments
against the perpetuity thereof. 225 Obsession, what it is, with the kinds
thereof. 226 Outward assaulting and vexing, how? 227 Inward suggesting; and
tempting how? ibid. The means how Satan effects his power of obsession laid
forth at large. ibid. The determination of actual possession, gives no
liberty to Atheism: but rather the contrary. 230
The eight Dialogue. page 232
Satan's power of actual possession, could not be subdued but by some
supernatural power. 232 Etsbang Elohim, and (...), what power they import.
page 234 The immediate power for expelling Devils. ibid. The mediate power,
with the kinds thereof. ibid. Christ expels efficiently: others
ministerially ibid. The Apostles mediate power, what it was? 235 The
Ecclesiastical mediate power: with the kinds. ibid. The Ecclesiastical
mediate power, respecting the Churches primitive, what it is. ibid. The same
power respecting the Churches successiue. 236 Exorcizing what it is, with the
kinds. ibid. Counterfeit Exorcizings, ever in the Church. ibid. Satanicall
Exorcizing, what it is. 237 Ethnicall faculty for Exorcizing, what? ibid.
Judicial faculty for Exorcizing, what? 238 Papisticall power for Exorcizing
Spirits, what? 239 What kind of Exorcizing, master Darels was? ibid. Whether a
Devil indeed was driven out of Summers? 240 The pretended signs of
dispossession, cannot concludently prove a possession. ibid. Whether the
precedent, or subsequent signs, do conclude the pretended dispossession? 241
The reasons from the supposed signs of dispossession, very fitly retorted.
page 242 Dispossession, whether effected by means, or by miracle? ibid.
Whether devils are driven out, by mere natural means. 243 Whether by a
created, or uncreated means. 244 No created means may efficiently extend it
self to the supernatural expelling of Devils. ibid. Pretended instances of
created means, from Josephus. 245 Wierus his censure upon Josephus: concerning
the expelling of Devils by created means. 246 Whether the perfume made with
the fishes liver expelled the Devil from Tobiah his wife. 247 Whether David's
harp expelled the Devil from Saul. 248 Torments inflicted by Satan two ways
abated: yet not totally removed, page 250 Whether there may be an active
operation of Satan, without a passive disposition in the Demoniake. 251 Whether
Elisha recovered the gift of prophecy by the melodious sound of an harp? 255
Whether prayer alone, or fasting alone, or both together, are means for the
expelling of Devils? 257 Whether fasting and prayer was any other then a
created, or a mere natural matter? 259 Whether the efficacy of such
pretended prayer, consists in sound, in voice, or in words. ibid. Whether
the denial of dispossessions by fasting and prayer: be any disgrace to fasting
and prayer? 260
The ninth Dialogue. page 263.
WHether prayer and fasting be an ordinance perpetually established by Christ:
for the powerful expelling of Devils? 264 Whether the words of Math. 17. 20.
do directly prove such an ordinance? ibid. Whether an ordinance for all: or
some special persons. 267 What warrant master Darell had to undertake the
execution of such a supposed ordinance? 268 Whether he effected the work as a
common Christian: or as a minister of Christ? 269 Whether he did it as an
ordinary, or an extraordinary minister. ibid. Why other Ministers could not
as well do it as he. 271 Whether prayer and fasting be effectual but by times
and by turns? 272 If Exorcistes had that power above others: the same must
needs be a vocal, or personal power. 274 How virtue proceeded from Christ's
body, for the curing of men. 275 Whether dispossessions effected by Christ
were works of his Divinity, or humanity, or of both. 276 Chrsts humanity
alone, unable to effect any miraculous actions. 277 The working of miracles
must be considered, partly principally: and partly ministerially. 278 How
Christ his humanity alone, and all other the servants of God may be said to be
instruments. 279 God alone the efficient cause of miracles. ibid. The
instrument is that whereby God effects miracles: and, the same is an
instrument, either conjoined, or separated. ibid. How those instruments have in
them a certain different virtue. ibid. Augustines opinion concerning Gods
working of miraculous actions. 280 Gregory his judgment confuted: concerning
mans-working of miracles, principally, and instrumentally. 282 The word (...)
very truly interpreted. ibid. Whether Peter had a principal power in the
effecting: of miracles? 284 In all miracles, we are to respect the active
virtue effecting: and the action effected. 286 Respecting the active virtue
effecting all miracles are alike, and why? ibid. Respecting the actions
effected, there is some difference, whether we consider the matter of the thing
effected* or the manner of effecting the same. ibid. Whether Exorcistes drove
out the Devil, by means of some supernatural power from God: or whether the
Lord himself drove him out by the Exorcistes hands. 287 By what means
Exorcistes apprehended that supernatural power of God? page 288 Whether by
some power of prayer and fasting. ibid. How Devils are distinguished by the
words (this kind) 291 What faith apprehends that power of God. 292 Whether
Math. 17. 20. be to be understood of the justifying faith, as able alone to
expel Devils. 294 Whether Marc. 16. 25. 17. be to be properly understood of
the justifying faith. 296 Master Beza his judgment concerning the casting out
of Devils by a justifying faith. 297 The personal prerogatives spoken of Marc.
16. 17. were but temporary seals to establish the Gospel. 299 Testimonies of
writers concerning that point. 300 Either no Devil at all driven forth, or
driven forth by the miraculous faith. 302
The tenth Dialogue. page 340
WHether the miraculous faith be yet still continued in these days of the
Gospel? 304 What a miracle is: and whence it is derived. 305 The words
Niphlath, and Miphleoth interpreted. ibid. The causes and kinds of miracles.
306 The true miracles what they are. ibid. The false miracles what they are.
ibid. False miracles effected 3. manner of ways. 307 A thing effected by
means, whether a miracle. 309 Means either natural: or artificial. 310 The
distinction of mirandum and miraculum, dashed. 312 Sundry places expounded
concerning the true sense of Oath, and Mopeth. page 314 The words ( Oath and
Mopeth) expounded. 313 The words ( Semeion and Teras) interpreted. 317
Tautologies in scripture no idle repetitions. 319 Many things effected by
means: are (notwithstanding) miraculous actions. 321 How Sorcerers, Satan, or
Antichrists effect woonders. 323 Nothing a true miracle, that is not truly
effected: or effected to a true end. ibid. False miracles are commonly called
Terata. ibid. True miracles are properly called Semeia. ibid. Exorcistesis
driven into dangerous Dilemmaes. 324 Expelling of Devils (whether by means, or
without means) as admirable now, as ever. ibid. Whether the working of
miracles be ceased. 325 The ends of miracles are ceased now. ibid. That end
which concerns the declaration of Christ's Deity: is determined Math. 12. 39.
40. ibid. That other end which respects the confirmation of the Gospel: is
determined by Marc. 16. 20. and Heb. 23. ibid. Miracles needless, for the
confutation of Atheists. 326 Miracles, frivolous for the silencing of papists.
327 Prayer and fasting, are not graced by miracles now. ibid. Dispossessions by
prayer and fasting: not generally held of all Divines, as is pretended. 329 The
miraculous faith is now determined. 330 The faith of hearing for ever
established. ibid. Reasons for the determination of miracles. ibid. Testimonies
of writers for that purpose. 333 The faith of miracles, but rash, and
uncertain. 337 Hippocrates opinion of miracle-mongers. ibid.
The eleventh Dialogue. page 339.
A Summary recapitulation of all the premises. 339 The necessity of such a
recapitulation. ibid. A summary abridgement of the 1. Dialogue. 340 A summary
abridgement of the 2. Dialogue. ibid. A summary abridgement of the 3. Dialogue.
341 A summary abridgement of the 4. Dialogue. 342 A summary abridgement of the
5. Dialogue. ibid. A summary abridgement of the 6. Dialogue. 343 A summary
abridgement of the 7. Dialogue. ibid. A summary abridgement of the 8. Dialogue.
344 A summary abridgement of the 9. Dialogue. ibid. A summarie abridgement of
the 10. Dialogue. 345 Certain respects, restrayning Exorcistes from submitting
to the truth of this Doctrine. 346 The note of inconstancy and cowardlines.
347 The hardening of the adversaries against better causes. 348 The
sca^dalizing of zealous professors and offending of great personages. ibi.
Fear of being deprived from all ministry. 349 The depriving of him and his
from all maintenance. 351 The suspicion of practizing with the counterfeits.
352 How the charitable sort esteem the action? ibid. If W. Summers, then also
M. Cooper counterfeited. 353 How M. Cooper was cured. ibid. The fixed respect,
vz. loss of credit for ever. 354 Exorcistes is fearfully distracted. 355
Pertinacie in his opinion put over to some other conference at his own choice.
356
FINIS.
Gentle Reader so many faults in the Printing as came to our remembrance, we
pray thee correct as follows: the rest (if any arise) we refer to thy godly
wisdom.
Page 6. lin. 28. put down Orthodoxus for the speaker. page 21. l. 3. for
executiours, read executioners. page 106. lin. 4. for visible, r. visibly. page
205. lin. 31. for actual, r. effectual. page 307. l. 34. for and of heat, r.
an active heat. Item, l. 36. for an active, r. and of an active.


