The Principal matters contained in this discourse.
A Short Encomiasticke speech in praise of Charingcrosse. The sins of
Westminster. The sins of London. The Buildings of Westminster and London. The
Names of all the Kings and Queens that lie buried in Westminster. Westminsters
complaint. Vacations and Terms compared. A paradox in praise of going to Law.
A paradox in praise of a Pen. Londons answer to Westminster. Paul's steeples
Complaint. The walks of Paul's described. The Stews on the Banke-side, and
the Suburbe-houses of iniquity at (...) compared together. A paradox in (...)
of (...). An Inuectiue against (...). The Original of London. A description of
(...) bridge-Fayre. A merry lest of two London Porters performed there, about
burying of a Londo^^^.
To the very Worthy, Learned, Iuditious, and Noble Gentleman, Sir John
Harrington Knight.
SIR, the Love (which your immortal Ariosto tells to the world) that you really
bear to Divine, (but now Poor and Contemned) Poesy, has a long time made me
an Honorer of those bright ascending Virtues in you, which those Holy and Pure
Flames of Her have kindled in your bosom. Happy you are by Birth, Happy, by
your bringing up, but most happy in that the Muses were your Nurses, to whom
you have been so tender, that they make you an Elder son and Heir of their
Goodliest Possessions. So that your Love to Them, has drawn from Others, an
Honorable Love and Regard of you. The Path which True Nobleness had wont
(and ought) to tread, lies directly before you: you have been ever, and are
now in the way, which emboldens me to presume, that as our Greatest Commanders
will not disdain to instruct even Fresh Water soldiers in the Schoole-poynts
of war, so (out of your Noble disposition) you will vouchsafe to view the
labors of so dull a Pen, as This that writes, unto you. Two Cities have I
summoned to a Parley, and of their great Enter-view have I chosen you to be
Arbiter. It is Boldness in me, I confess, but it is the Boldness, of my Love,
referring which (and my self) to your worthy Censure, I Rest.

Devoted to you in all service, Thomas Dekker.

Westminsters speech to London.
O Thou goodliest Queen, Brute builded London, he conquered this I Will in A^^
1108. years before Christ. Sybert King of the East Saxons, builded Westminster
^ he reigned in An. 596. after Christ.
even over the greatest Cities! How glad am I (O London) that we two are met
together? For now will I pour my sorrows into thy bosom. Thou art Reverend
for thy Age, (as being now, two thousand seven hundred and fourteen years
old, which is more then my self, am, by a thousand, six hundred and four
years) for I am but one thousand, one hundred, and ten years of age.) Thou
art Grandam almost to this whole Kingdom: 160. Kings in Britain since Brute.
A blessed Mother thou art, for no less then one hundred and threescore
Emperors, Kings, and Queens, have thou borne in thy Womb. Healthful thou
art of body, it appears by thy strength in holding out so long; pure thou art
of complexion; It is seen by thy Cheeks, the Roofes of them are nothing
wythered: Rich thou art in the treasure of all things, witness the number of
Nations, that for thy substance, are thy daily suitors: stored are thy
breasts with wisdom, and the glory thereof shines in the government of thy
Rulers.

Thou art full of policy, great with experience, renowned for Learning; Thou
art full of love full of pity, full of piety: yea, thou art (O Noblest
Daughter of Brutus) my Eldest Sister; thou rather (if our descents be well
looked into) art my Mother.

Unto whom therefore can my condolements better come than to thee. Upon whose
lap shall I lay my aching temples if not upon thine? One eye of Heaven looks
down upon us both; one and the same handful of earth, serves us both to dwell
upon: The tears that fall from both our eyes, make up one River, and that
River serves again for both our bodies to bath in.

Since therefore we are partners in all other things, why should we not be
Sharers in our mothers affliction! Thou stand silent, I see at these my
speeches, as being driven into wonder, why I (that have always kept company
with the proudest, and been ever Iocond) should now sink down into any kind
of complayninges. But to keep thee (O my best and fairest Neighbor) from
tormenting thy self with thinking on the causes of this my grieuing: let me
tell thee (thou Nurse to many thousands of people) that I do not pine, to see
that Ancient and oldest Charing-Crosse.
Son of mine, with his Limbs broken to pieces, (as if he were a
Male-factor, and had been tortured on the German Wheel:) his Reverend
Head cut off by the cruelty of Time; The Ribs of his body bruizes; His Arms
lop't away; His back (that even grew crooked with age) almoust cleft in
sunder: yea, and the ground (on which he has dwelt so many 316. years since
Charing Cross. was bui^ded by Ed: 1, Anno. Ch^^. 1291.
hundreds of years) ready to be pulled from under his feet, so that with
grief his very heart seems to be broken.

I confess (thou brauest of Cities) that this Graund-Childe of mine, has
been the tallest and hardiest of all the Sons of my body: An Encomion of
Charing Cross.
for thou know it as well as I, that he has borne himself valiantly, (and
without shrinking) in many a storm. Many a tempest has been flung from
Heaven to shake him, yet still has he kept his own footing.

Many astounding blow has he taken on his head, yet for a long time did he
bear them without reeling. So well beloved has he been amongst the Kings
and Princes of this Nation, that they would almost never pass, to these Royal
Palaces where I inhabit, and never repair to their Houses of Parliaments, or
to their places of Kingly Tryumphes, but they would of purpose take their way
by him: yea, so greatly has he in times past been held in honor, that the
knees of common people has been bowed before him, and the bare heads of the
greatest Prelates heertofore have showed to him a kind of reverence. Yet it is
not for his sake (O far renowed Troynouant) that my Soul lives in sorrow:
albeit, I see him now laughed at and contemned.

Neither am I afflicted by beholding the vnrulynesse of those Children that are
under my keeping. The sins of Westminster^.
It were a madness in me to trette at their wickedness, because no sorrow of
mine can amend it. I know it, and am ashamed to tell thee, Drunkenness
that Drunkenness reeles every day up and down my streets. Fellows there are
that follow me, who in deep bowls shall drown the Dutchman, and make him
lie under the Table. At his own weapon of Vpsie freeze will they dare him, and
beat him with wine-pots till he be dead drunk. Quartelling.
Out swagger they will besides (being armed with that French weapon) a whole
Fair full of Butchers and Tinkers, who commonly are the greatest Fighters, and
most profound swearers. As for that sin that is after served in dinner, and
after Supper: or rather that sin that is up night and day, and can see as well
in darkness as in Lights that Monster with two bellies, Lechery.
(Lechery I meenne) do what I can, no whips are able to make it leap out of
my Jurisdiction. More Mayden-heades I verily believe are cut off upon my own
feather-beds (in one year) than are heads of Cattle cut off in (in two)
amongst the Butchers that serve my families.

But I fear ( O London) that by dwelling so near thee thou have infe^ted my
houses with these two plagues, that now run over all the Kingdom: for all the
world knows that even thy shopkeepers and poorest Tradesmen lay by their own
occupations, and fall to these.

Pride.
Other sins lies gnawing (like diseases) at my heart, for Pride sits at the
doors of the rich: Envy. Extortion.
Envy goes up and down with the Beggar, feeding upon Snakes. Rents are laid
upon the rack (even my own sight) and by my own Children that I have borne,
whilst Conscience goes like a fool in pyed colors, the skin of her body
hanging so loose, that like an Oxford Glove, thou would swear there were a
false skin within her.

Avarice
Couerousnes has got a hundred hands, and all ^^^se hands do nothing but tie
knots on her Purse-strings, but Prodigality having but two hands, Vathriftines.
undoes those knottes faster, than the other can tie them. O thou Darling of
Great Britain, thy Princes call thee Their Treasurer and thou art so. But
more pieces of Silver and Gold pass not through thy fingers, then oaths from
the mouths of my inhabitants.

Thou art held to be ( O London) the lowdest swearer in the kingdom, because
(some say) thou have whole shoppes and Warehouses filled with oaths yet I
fear, Swearing:
I have those about me that for filthy mouthing will put thee down, Knights of
the Posl.
for I am haunted with some that are called Knights only for their swearing.
Ranckely do these and other stinking weeds grow up in my walks, and in my
Gardens, the savors of them are Pestilent to my Nosthrils, and are able to
kill me, yet much good wholesome fruits do I feed upon, that are to my life a
preservation. So, that for the aches that these diseases breed in my bones I
do not languish neither.

Thou know and I confess it, The building of Westminster and London
compared.
(for if I should not, the whole world would swear it) that thou possessest the
more, but I the more goodly buildings: thy hauses are contryued for thrist and
profitable uses, mine for state and pleasure: thou dwe lest under plain
roofes, I within royal Palaces: every room that thou lodgest in, is but
called a Chamber, and every Chamber I sleep in, is a Kings Court: In thine
Arms lie the sons of England to suck wealth, but in my lap sit the Princes
of England to be Crowned, In my bosom do they slumber whilst they live, and
when they dye, they desire to be buried between my breasts.

To testify this, all the annoyted kings and Queens, (except one, who
received his Crown at Gloucester) with all the Wives of those kings, that have
reigned here since that Norman Conqueror, would if they were now living speak
on my side in that behalf, for the full number of 21. Kings and two Queens
(being a pair of Sisters) have received the glorious Titles of Majesty, 21
Kings and two Queens besides the wives of those Kings have bin crowned at
Westminst.
and were seen the very first day of their sitting on the English throne only
at my hands, and in my presence, of which that conqueror, and Matilda (his
wife) had the honor to begin, for till his time, other places were made happy
by that dignity, as Kingston, etc. which then were far above me, but now can
no way be my equal. William conqueror, and his Wife the first that were
crowned in Westminster.


To prove how much the Rulers of this Monarchy have loved me even on their
Deathbeds, their bodies which they have (as their richest Legacies) bequethed
to my keeping, are royal witnesses. I can show thee (O thou Noblest of thy
Nation) the bones not only of most of those kings before-named, but of some
that lived here long before them.

But because the Grave is the utter destroyer of al beauty, yea and so defaceth
the looks and the bodies even of the goodliest princes, that men abhor to
behold them: also for that it is held an act most impious, and full of
Sacrilege to offer violence to the dead, I will only give thee the names of
all those Kings, Queens, and Princes Royal blood, that now lay their heads on
my knees and must sleep there till that day, Kings buried in Westmin.
when all that rest in graves, shall be summoned to awaken. Of these, was Sybert
(King of the East- Saxons) the first, with his wife Aethelsoda. Sybert gave me
my first being in the world, and at his departure from the world, did I give
his body an everlasting habitation. Next unto him did I lay Harold (Sir-named
Hare-foot) King of the West Saxons.

Then Edward the Confessor, upon whom king William bestowed a shryne of
Silver and Gold. And then these.

Aegytha, wife to that Conqueror.

Matilda, wife to Henry the first, and daughter to Malcoline king of Scots.

Henry 3. who builded a great part of that my famous Temple, and whose
Sepulcher was adorned with precious stones of Jasper, fetched by his son
Edward the 1. out of France.

Eleanor, wife to that Henry.

Edmund second Son to that Henry, the first Earl of Lancaster, Darby, and
Liecester, with Auelyne (his Wife) who was Daughter and heir to the Earl of
Albemarle.

Besides him, all the Children of the said Henry the 3. and of Edward, 1.
(being nine in number.)

Edward the first, who offered to the Shryne of Edward the Confessor, the
Chair of Marble, wherein the kings of Scotland had wont to be crowned, and in
which the king that first made England and Scotland one Monarchy, was now
lately inthronized. Eleanor wife to that Edward 1. and Daughter to Ferdinando
king of Castyle. In memory of whose death, so many stately Crosses (as
Mon^umentes of his love to her) were erected in all those places where her body
was set down, when it was sent to be lodged with me.

Eleanor, Countess of Bar, Daughter of Edward the first,

Edward 3. and Phillip of Henalt (his wife.)

Wiliam of Windsore and Blanch (his Sister) children to Edward the third.

Thomas of Wood-stock, son likewise to that Edward, John of Eltham, (Earl of
Cornwall) son to Edward the second.

Richard 2. that unfortunate king with Anne his Wife, Daughter of Vinceslaus
king of Bohem, which Anne brought up the fashion for women to ride in side
Saddles, which till her time rode as men.

Then that Guttorum Mastix, the scourge of the French, Henry 5. to do honor to
whose victorious and dreaded name, Katherine his wife, and daughter to the King
of France, caused an Image (to the portraiture of her husband) to be made of
Massy Silver, all gilded over, which was laid upon his Monument: but
Covetousness, not suffering even hallowed places, and the shrines of the dead to
be free from her griping talents, the head of that Image, which was al of
Massy silver, is now broke off, and the plates that covered the body stolen, and
conveyed away.

That royal Queen and Bedfellow of his, Lady Katherine, was with me likewise
laid to rest, but after, being taken up, (without any wrong meant to the body)
it now lies unburied in a poor Coffin of bordes and with the least touch
falls into ashes.

Add to these, Anne the wife of Richard the third.

Margaret Countess of Richmond and Darby, mother to Henry the 7.

Anne of Cl^ue, wife to Henry the 8.

Henry 7. and Elizabeth his wife, do in mine arms likewise take their
everlasting sleeps: so does Elizabeth daughter to those most happy Princes.

So does Margaret daughter to Edward 4.

So does Edward the 6. Son to that famous prince, Henry 8.

So does Mary whose name serves her only as a Monument.

And lastly so does Elizabeth, daughter to that great wariour, who if she had
no Monnument at all consecrated to memory, yet were her name sufficient to
eternize her Sacred worth, and the wonder of her 44. years government. Thus
(besides other personages of great birth, too many in number for me to recite
and too tedious for thee to hear) am I compassed about with the dead bodies of
42, Kings, Queens, and the sons and daughters of Kings and Queens, ye
remembrance of whom is able to turn me wc sorrow into Marble, 42 Kings and
Queens and the Children of Kings buried in West.
but yt their statues and sumptuous monuments, do shine in my Temples, and
work such astonishment in the eyes (even of strangers) that I esteem that
hurt of mine, the best part of my glory. Besides all these gallant objects. The
swifte-footed Thamesis, daunseth all the day long, (in wanton Water-ringes)
before me, she transformes her Crystal body into a thousand shapes to
delight me: Sometimes does she change her self into High water.
a Girdle of Silver, and then do I wear it about my middle. Sometimes looks
she like an Rough water.
Amazon, (along curled hair hanging loosely about her shoulders) and then
dooes she fight with the winds, and her combats are discharged with
excellent grace. Anon shall you behold her lymbes stretched out to an infinite,
but comely Ebbing water for then she runs into the Sea, where her length
cannot be measured.
length,) and then (O my worthyest Sister) do we two grow proud, and take her
for a River whilst she continues in that shape, thou know what delicate
turnings and windinges she does make even at our feet: thy habitations stand
then like a rich Embrodery about the skirts of an imperial garment, but my
buildinges show like so many Castles, raised by Enchantment, where fair Ladies
lock up their beauties, whilst knights adventurers come armed thither with
loyalty, challenging them for their loves: yea in such goodly, and in so
artificial an order are my Turrets and Towers errected, that the Sun (at his
rising) makes me believe they are Rocks of Burnisht Silver, and with his
blushing upon them (at his going down) I have a thousand times sworn they
were so many hills of Gold.

Be thou now an indifferent Judge ( O London, thou fairest Daughter of
Europe) if I, being accustomed to this fullness of dignity, and this variety
of pleasures, have not good cause to languishe when I am deprived of them all.
The more princely are my guests, the more insufferable, and more to be pitied
are my passions, spent for their absence. Well was it for thee (thou Metropolis
of the world) that the honors, the Habits, the Tryumphes, the gifts of Kings,
and the Reuennewes that belong to my Royaltyes, are not made Thine: thou
swellest in thy heart enough already, but then would thou have bin too proud
and insolent.

How therefore can I choose but buffet my own cheeks through the anguish of
my Soul? Tear my own hair to see my self distressed? and even drink mine
own hartbloud in tears, to look on my present misery? Listen to me: for now
(O my dearest Play-fellow) shall thou hear the very true tunes of my most just
bewaylings.

Those throws of sorrow come upon me four times every year, Westminsters
complaint.
but at one time more, (and with more pains) then at all the rest. For in the
height and lustiest pride of Summer, when every little Uillage has her
Bathilers and her Damsels tripping deftly about May-pols: when Meadows are
full of Hay-makers: when the fields upon the workidaies are full of Ha^^estars
singing, and the towngreenes upon Hollydayes, trodden down by the Youths of
the Par^^ dancing: when thou (O thou beautiful, but bewitching City) by the
wantonness of thine eye, Bartholmewtide.

The long vacation before Michelmas Term.


and the Music of thy voice allurest people from all the corners of the Land
to throng in heaps, at thy Fayres and thy Theators; Then, (even then) sit I
like a Widow in the midst of my mourning: then do my buildings show like
infected lodgings, from which the Inhabitants are fled* then are my chambers
empty, and my common paths untrodden: then do I not look like thy next
neighbor, The Court and 4. Terms
but like a creature forlor^e, and utterly forsaken. Were it not that my state
is uphold by five great Pillars, (the chief of them being so hie, that Kings
and Princes sit on the top of it) I should even loose my name, and the memory
of me would be buried in the earth, that now bears me up.

That first and Capital The Court.
Column (on which leanes all my strength) is a Pyramides, whose point reaches
up to the Stars: whilst that stands in mine eye, I behold a The King.
Majesty, equal to Jove's: I see a The Queen and her P^ogeny.
Vine, whose branches shall spread so far, and so hie, that one day they
shall cover Kingdoms. I see likewise a The Counsel.
Table, at which sit none, but Those, whose heads grow white only with the
Cares of a Kingdom: I see a Row of The Nobility.
Lords too, whose flourishing does dignify the place upon which they grow, and
whose shady boughs beat back, and keep off from the people the violent
heat of Tyrrany and oppression: Besides all these, do I behold a goodly
Fountain, The Clergy
large, clear, strongly, and curiously built, out of which come a thousand
pipes, (some greater then the rest) thorough whom a sweet water flows, that
gives life unto the Soul. And last of all (so full is my happiness) in stead
of earthly Creatures, I see none but The Ladies of the Court.
Goddesses. But (woe is me) when this great Pillar is removed from my sight,
then (casting up mine eye) me thinks I look upon nothing but my own Ruins.
Nay, that calamity of mine does even stretch to thee; for thou thy self, for
all thy loftiness and boasting, dooest at that time droope, and hauge the head.

But note how the Rulers of this Land have loved me; though they give me
wounds, they give me Balm to cure them: though the Sun go from me, yet am
I comforted with the brighnesse of the Stars. The Law (which lies in, at every
Uacation) is brought to bed in four several months of the year, and
delivered of four The four Terms.
Sons. Those Sons inuit me to four kingly Feasts; they keep their
Tournes; The good that the terms bring to westminster.
and their Returns, are so many several Services. They are the Four Elements
that govern* and give life to my body; yea, so dear do I make them unto me,
that I account of them, as of Four Golden Ages. Whilst any of these four
abide in my Company, I am more Iocond then a Woman in the embracements of her
Lover. My Cheeks look then red, with a high and lusty color, for I wash them
in Wines: my heart is merry, for I nourish it with gladness. Then do my
Tenants sleep soundly, (for they drink soundly:) Then dare they talk any
thing for they have Law on their sides; Then are they content to take cracked
Crowns, though at another time they would stabbe him that should but hitte
their ear.

Vintners are then as busy as Bees are in Hiues, How busy Westminster is in a
term time.
for as Bees fly from one Flower to another to suck out Honey, so does the
Drawers leap from one Hogshead to another to let out Wines. In every room are
the Pottle Pottes working, to bring in gains to their Master, as the other
labor, to bring forth wax for their hiues. The strings are in the tails, and
that is at the end of their Cups, when they come to a bar for the Reckoning:
The Drones are those that drink that which should do others good, yet hurt
themselves by it, taking too much of it.

Neither do Tauernes alone fall into this profitable and healthful sweating
Sickness: but all other Trades, Occupations, Mysteries, and Professions, do
row up and down this Springtide stream of business; and such good Draughts
have they, that all is Fish that comes into their Net.

Yea, in the open streets is such walking, such talking, such running, such
riding, such clapping too of windows, such rapping af Chamber doors, such
crying out for drink, such buying up of meat, and such calling upon Shottes,
that at every such time, I verily believe I dwell in a Town of War.

Going to law compared to going to war.
For every morning do the men of law march to the Hall, as it were to the
field: The Counsellore are the Leaders, Atturnies and Clerks, are petty
Commanders, and Officers of the band: the trained old Weather-beaten
Soldiers, are those that have followed the Law a long time, and have undone
themselves by brabblinges. The raw, fresh-water-Souldiers, are such as entered
but yesterday into the action.

In which March of theirs, if you fall but in amongst the Ranks, you will by
and by suppose your self in the Low Countries; for as the Soldiers (there) so
these (here) talk of nothing but Stratagems and points of War. Some threaten
to overthrow their adversaries, upon assaults and Battryes: Some (as if an
enemy were to be blown up in a Town) swear to drive them out of their houses
by way of Eiectments: Others, as if they came to the sacking of a City, cry
out upon nothing but Attachments, both of goods and body.

And as among Soaldiers, some delight in blood more then others, so amongst
these, some take a pride in cruelty more then others, and labor only to have
their Enemies in Execution. At the length, they come into the field, (that is
to say, to the Bar) where they must try the quarrel by Arbiterment of
words in stead of swords: for there either the one side or other is
ouerthrown: There stand the Pikemen (that is to say, such as have had long
suits) and being wearyed, They that have had long suits are like Pike-men,
Chancery-me^ like Bill-men.
care not almost which end goes forward, because they are at a stand, The
Bill-men hard by them, but they for the most part are ever complaining. And
thus (thou Minion of so many Kings) does this stirring up and down of my
body, stir up my blood, and keeps me sound: this peopling of my streets,
makes me to be crowned with the title, dignity, and liberties of a City, (for
what are Cities if they be not peopled:) this Physic (so long as I take it)
preserues my body in health: But because I am compelled sometimes to give it
over, (which is commonly in Harvest, The hurt that vacations do to Westminster.
and now a little at the beginning of the fall of the lease, (for this part of
the year does most trouble me) I feel the state of my body weak, and
subject to infirmities. For alas there are certain Canker-Wormes (called
Uacations) that destroy the Trees of my Inhabitants, so soon as ever they
bear any fruit. These Uacations are to mine own body, like long and wasting
consumptions, they are more grievous to my remembrance, then the coming on of
a tedious night to a man tormented with sickness: or then marriages delaied, to
them that lie sighing for the delights thereof.

The unwholesome breath of Autumn, who is so full of diseases, that his very
blowing upon trees, makes their leaus to fall off (as the French Razor shaues
off the hair of many of thy Suburbians,) even that, and all the four
Maister-windes that keep such a blustering in the world, do not more scatter
the dust of the Earth, then the cold blastes of four Uacations, do blow
abroad the wealth that before I have gotten together.

In the Term times every day to me is a day of feasting, but every Uacation
starues me with ill diet, for all the days of them are to me nothing but
fasting days. Yea, the Dog-dayes are not half so unwholesome, so pestilent
and so perilous to the bodies of men, as those are to me. The Terms are my
flowings, the Uacations my ebbinges. So that (if I were sure the world would
not hold me for a miserable and covetous wretch) I could even wish, that these
battayles of the law, were fighting all the year long. It were as much glory,
fame, and preferment for me to have it so, as it is for the Low countries, to
be all the year up in arms.

And tell me I pray, (thou provident Mistress over so many families) tell me in
thine opinion, if it were not fit to have all these four Rivers of the law,
run into one stream, without any stoppings or turnings. For, do but consider
what voyage a man is to make when he says, I must go to Law: It is a Voyage,
but short and easy to finish, if you meet with an honest and skillful Pilot,
that knows the right puttings in, the watering places, and the Havens, and can
avoid the Rocks, Gulfes, Creekes, and quicksands that lie clean out of the
way, and yet many a thousand do desperately run themselves on ground, and
suffer Shipwreck upon them. But on the contrary part, if a Man sets out
carelessly, not taking the Counsel of men experienced in those Seas, though he
be never so well furnished, never so well manned, never so strong in heart,
never so able to brook storms and tempests; yet let him be sure to be tossed
from coast to Coast, to be driven forward with one prosperous gale to day, and
to be blown three times further backward with a boistrous breath to morrow: to
have his Soul afflicted with cares, and his heart eaten up with frettinges,
and in the end to find (to his cost) that he had been better to have
undertaken a Voyage to the East and West Indyes: and sooner had he made his
return home. So that to hoyst up Sails in this Ocean of Controversies, and
to meet with a fortunate and fair Ariuall, is as much honor, as to go to
Jerusalem, and safely to come back again.

Praise of the Law.
The Law is unto us, as the heavens are over our heads: of their own Nature
they are clear, gentle, and ready to do good to man: they give light to his
eyes, comfortable Air to his Spirits, warmth to revive him, coolness to
refresh him. But if they be troubled by brablings and unruly minds, and be
put from their own smooth and even by as, then do they plague the world with
storms: Then does Thunder shake the Rich man's building, lightning burns up
the poor man's Corn, Haile-stones beat down the fruits of the earth, and all
Creatures that are within reach of their fury, tremble, and hide their heads at
the horror.

The very phrase of Going to Law, shows the greatness, Majesty, and state of
Law: for the Law comes to no man, but he is either driven, or else so busy of
himself, that he goes to it. The Law sleeps continually, unless she be
wakened by the wrongs of men oppressed, or by the turbulency of those that
will not let her rest: for the first sort of which people, she has a pair of
Balance, wherein she wieghes their Innocence, and the Injuries of others*
forcing one to make good the hurts of the other. Against the second, she draws
a sword, with which she both strikes them that break her peace, and defends
the^ that are threatened to be struck wrongfully. He that Go, therefore to Law,
goes before a personage, whose brows are vnwrinckled, yet full of Judgment;
whose eyes are not wandering, yet turning to both sides; whose lips are sildome
opened, yet what they pronounce is just; whose countenance is austere, yet
settled in uprightness; whose hands are open to all, yet never filled with
bribes; whose heart lies hidden, yet free from corruption. And what man would
not desire to be hourly conversant with so excellent, and so composed a
creature. He that is up to the ears in Law, Paradox in praise of going to law.
is up to the ears in experience; He cannot choose but be a good Subject,
because he keeps the Statutes and ordinances of his Country: he cannot choose
but prove a worthy soldier, because he is still in action: he must of
necessity be both honest and pitiful, for he measures other men's cases by
his own. Law: why it makes a man watchful, for he that meddles with it, is
sure never to sleep? It keeps him from the Irish man's disease, ( Lazynes:)
from the Dutch-mans weakness (in not Bearing drink:) from the Italians evil
spirit that haunts him, ( Lust) for he is so busied with so many Actions of the
Case, that he can have no leisure nor stomach, to the Case of Actions: It
preserues him from the French falling sickness, yet no Stoues in Mosco^y can
put a man into more violent sweates. And last of all, it keeps him out of the
English-mans su^^rites, for his waiting at his Counsels Chamber so runs in his
head, that he scarcely allows himself a time to dine or sup in.

O what an excellent Husband does this going to Law make a man? He gives over
gaming presently upon it? He shakes off al commany that drew him to expenses,
and in every Uacation is so provident, that with the Ant he lays up Money
then, to let it fly amongst Counselors, and Atturnies in the Tearme-time?
what an able and lusty body does he get by it, that follows it hard? No
Carryer is able to take more pains: no Porter bears more.

It makes a man to be well given, for he prays (even as he ambles up and
down the streets:) It makes him to be beloved amongst Lawyers Clarks, and to
be feared amongst his own neigbours, (two properties which every King desires
from the hearts of his Subjects ( Love and Fear.)

If men should not go to Law one with another, the Courtier would walk up
and down (Ietting) by the Mercers door, and wearing his Silks under his nose,
which now he dare not do. Thy Citizens (O thou the Best and only Huswife of
this Island) if Suites were not tried, some would scarce keep a good Suit on
their backs, Solicitors might likewise go beg, and Scriueners go starve
themselves.

Had not the people of this large Kingdom feign to so many private quarrels,
about blows given; To so many intricate bargains, about buying and selling of
Lands; To so many Cozenages of wicked Executors, in undoing Orphans and Heirs,
and so many starting holes, Crannies, Creuises, windings, wrestlings, rackings,
Circumgirations, and Circumuentions, to abuse the beautiful body of the Law,
and to make it grow crooked, which of it self is comely and upright. And had
not the Law provided cures for these sores of a commonwealth, and whips to
punish such villains, Thou (O princely Mother of many Cities) should never
have had so many gallant, Sumptuous, and rare Nurseries for young Students,
erected full in thine eye, which stand before thy buildinges, as Gates to
Kings Palaces, and are the only honor for entrances into thee.

Had not the Inhabitants of this Empire warred so in law from time to time, one
with another, she could not have boasted of so many Grave, wise, and Learned
Judges. Of so many Discreet, Sage, and reverend Justices, Of so many careful,
prudent, and honorable Maiestrates. By means of this, is the Gentry of the
Land increased, (for Studyes are Trees that bring forth advancement) by means
of this, the multitude is held in Obedience, for laws are bridles, to curb
those that are headstrong.

What a rare invention therefore was pen and Incke, A Paradox in praise of a
Pen.
out of whom (as streams from a Fountain, flow all these wonders? How much
beholden are men to his wit, that out of a poor Goose-quill was the first
deviser of so strange an Instrument as a Pen, which carries in it such power,
such Conquest, such terror, such comfort, and such authority, that even the
greatest Subjects in kingdoms are glad sometimes to be beholden to it, and as
often to tremble when it is but held up against them. For a Pen in a princes
hand commands with as ample force as his Scepter, It gives charters to
cities, binds leagues of Ammitie with foreign Nations.
with it does he give Pardons for life, or the heavy doom of death. It
bestows honors and preferments, and like a Trumpet proclaims a kings
Liberality. Yea, of such Virtue is that work which a princes hand does with
it, that Acts of Parliament cannot give a stronger confirmation.

In the hand of a Judge, it is as dreadful as his voice, for it either saues
or condemns, pronounces freedom or imprisonment.

In the hands of a Spiritual finger, it sets down notes of Music, which to
hear the very Angels leap for joy in heaven, and delivers forth such Divine
Oracles, that out of them, mortals find means to climb up to eternity.
Lastly, in the hand of a good Lawyer, a Pen is the common sword of Justice, and
does as much in the quarrel of the poor man as of the rich: with it, does he
help those that are beaten down by oppression, and liftes them up by
supplications: but they that are trespassers against the sacred Orders of
equity, does he with that Axe only lead into Execution.

In the hands of badde and vncon^^ionable Lawyers, Pens are forkes of iron,
upon which poor Clients are tossed from one to another, till they bleed to
death: yea the nebs of them are like the Beakes of Vu^tures, (who so they may
glutie their appetite with flesh) care not from whose backs they tear it.

How many thousands (with that little Engyne alone) do raise up houses to
their posterity, whilst the Ignorant prodigal, drownes all the Acres of his
Ancestors in the bottom of a Wine-seller, or buries them al in the belly of a
Harlot? How many fly higher, and spread a more Noble wing with that one
feather, then those Butter-flies do, that stare up and down in the eyes of a
kingdom, with all the painted feathers of their riotous pride.

Is it not pity then (O thou wisest Censurer of worldly matters.) Is it not
great pity, that an Instrument of so musical a sound, of such excellent
rarity and perfection, should at any time lie dumb and untouched, and not
rather be played upon, even from the beginning of the Suns early progress to
his ending, and without intermission? It is, It is, and I know for all thy
silence thou subscribest in thought to this my opinion.

Thus have I made thee a witness of my lamentings, the tears of mine eyes have
in their falling down, dropped upon thine own cheeks: I have opened unto thee
my Bowels, and thou see what consumptions hang upon me, to make me pyne to
nothing, Be thou now (O thou Bryde worthy the love even of the greatest king.)
Be thou and the whole world my witnesses, if I descend into these complaynings
without just inforcement.

I have here, and there (in this story of my fortunes,) reckoned up some
part of my own worth, and my own* inioyinges, least swimming altogether, or
too long in the stream of my sorrows, I should utterly quick have sunk,
and so drown my honor, by forgetting that I am a City.

Counsel me therefore now, (O thou Charitable Releeuer and Receiver of
distressed Strangers) how I way either make this burden of my affliction lie
more lightly on my shoulders, or else how my shoulders may bear it with a
commendable patience.

Londons answer to Westminster.
AT these words, ( The Mother of the twelve Companies,) once or twice shaking
her aged but reverend head, on the top of which stood (as the Crown of her
honor) a heap of lofty Temples and Pynnacles, to the number of one 109.
parishes in London.
hundred and nine) thus gravely began.

That I have summoned up more years, and therefore more care than thou have
(O beloved of all our Englysh Princes) the Chronicles of Time, (who sets down
al Occurrents) can testify.

I dare boast, that Experience has with her own finger written her Histories
on my forehead, for I have had Negotiation with all the Nations that be in the
world. I have seen the growings up, and the withering of many Empyres: the
observation of foreign Countries has bin my studdy, whylest the polliticke
and stayed government of my own has been my glory. So careful have I been,
and so Jealous of my own estate, (seeing Cittyes greater than my self, to lie
as low now as their first Foundation) that I have Printed down their
mutabilities and their greatest miseries in the midst and depth of my palms,
because they should be ever in mine eye as Cautionary prospects. So that it
shall well become thee, (neither need thou be ashamed) to borrow advice from
me that am thine Elder, and so beaten to the affairs of the world.

Counsel is the cheapest gift that one Friend can bestow upon another, yet if
it be well husbanded, the Interest of no Gold nor Silver, can amount to half
the value of it. Give me leave therefore to speak (O thou Courtly Paramour)
and to speak my mind boldly, for albeit thou art the Favorite of Greatness,
and stand Gracious* (as their Minions) in the eyes of our princes, yet will
I be no slave to my own thoughts (like a Parasite) to flatter thee in evils,
wherein I shall find thee worthy of reprehension.

If I spy any blemishes on thy body, I will lay even my finger upon them (not
to have them hidden but discovered) and whatsoever I do or say, take it not
thou, as done in scorn or in thy dishonor, but as out of the office, of
integrity, zeal, and hawty affection of an honest friend. For we two have
reason to assist one another with all the faculties and powers that are within
us, sithence, no calamity can fall upon the one, but the other must receive
many bruises by it.

Noble thou art of birth, as my self am, for from two several kings had we
both our beings. Noble is thy bringing up as is thy raising to high fortunes.
Such therefore as thou art, would I have thee still to bear thy self, and
not to be dejected into vulgar, low, and earthly prostitutions, for any
threatninges or any blows of insulting Fortune. Well did it become the
greatness of thy place, thy state and calling, not to be thrown down into a
womanish softnes, for that aged and reverend (but Charing Cross.
wry-necked) son of thine, whose worthiness thou have sufficiently
proclaimed.

Miseries that fall upon us by our own wilfulnes, or by others Tyranny, are to
be grieved at, because we suffer iniustly: But strokes yt are inevitable, are
to be received, yea, to be met and stood under with a most constant and
resolved fortitude.

His downfall, though it seem great, yet is it not to be lamented, but to be
borne, because he fell not upon a dishonorable Grave; But into such a one, as
by the frailety of Time, Nature, and destiny, was preordayned for him. His end
was not like the end of Traitors, who are cut off in the pride of their blood
and youth, or as the end of Cities, that revolt from the obedience of their
Sovereigns, and have their Obloquies growing up still, eue^ in their Ashes:
But he threw himself upon the earth, seeing the hand of extreme age (which
must pull down at last the whole frame of this World) lay so hardly, and so
heavily upon him. Had his Ruin been wrought by those terrible
thunder-Clappes of civil War, Wars of the Barons in K. Stephens reign.
when (in the reign of King Stephen) all the Realm was in a flaming
combustion of discord, kindled by Maud the Empress, in the quarrel of Duke
Henry (her Son,) Or had he been condemned in that mad Parliament held at
Oxford, Mad parliament at Oxford held by the Barons in 23. of Henry the third.
when the Barons of this Land (within few months after) first forced their
King ( Henry of that name the third) to take my Tower for his Sanctuary, and
after took him prisoner with his Son, and many of his Nobility, at the
battle at Jews. Or had he been brought to slavery and confusion, as I my
self (for all my strength of friends and my own greatness) was likely to
have been in two several rebellions: The one in the reign of Richard the
second, Rebellion in Essex by Wa^ ^yk^.
by Essex men, who beheaded all men of Law, destroyed the Records and Monaments
of Learning; tyrranized over Strangers, and threatened to lead me and my
Inhabitants into Captiuit^, and so bring upon me utter disolation. The other
in those tempestuous and variable tossinges of that virtuous, but wretched King
Henry the sixth, Rebellion in Ke^^^ lack Cade.
in the hands of Fortune, when a fire of commotion was kindled by Kentish-men*
whose flames even began to burn in my own bosom. Or had that Son of
thine perished between the rage of those two great Families, Dissension of the
two Families, Lancaster and York.
(the Yorkists and Lancastrians,) that was nourished so many years together,
with the lives, honors, and overthrows of so many Princes of the blood Royal,
Battle on Palm sunday.
and with the fall of so many Subjects, that in one bat^aile were discomfited
on both sides, 35111. Persons, then if thou had not lamented for him, I
should worthily have blamed thee, then would I my self have borne a part in
thy sorrow.

A better, and not so black a fate has weighted upon That Mirror of
antiquity belonging to thee, than (ever since the first ra^sing) has fallen
upon the Goodliest, the Greatest, the Highest, and most Hallowed Paul's steeple
Monument of mine. His miseries have been so many, and the top of his
calamities is clymbed up to such a height, that I should do his sorrows wrong,
to set the^ to the tune of my voice, who^ no notes but his own are able to
sing them forth. London speaking to Paul's steeple.
Lift up therefore thy heavy head ( O thou that art maintained by the Pillars
of the Church) and though thou have a leaden countenance, of which may be
gathered the true and full weight of that which lies upon thee to press thee
down, yet with a voice (lower then theirs that are daily Singers of heavenly
songs in thy hearing,) ring thou forth the Allar^^ of those passionate
heartbreaking vlulations, which (like the ruptures of Thunder) force a
continual passage through thy bosom. Be thou attenti^e likewise (thou Nurser
up of all our English Nobility) and as I have lent an erected and serious ear
to those Complaints which thou powrest forth in behalf of thy Son, So be
thou (I conjure thee) a silent and observing Auditor of these Lamentations,
which I see are already striving to make way through the lips of this afflicted
Child of mine. Mark him well, for now he begins.

Paul's Steeples complaint.
WHerein? O wherein have I (^he most unfortunate of all this Kingdom) offended
so highly, that thus often, and with such dreadful blows, I should be smote by
the hand of heaven? So cruelly have I been struck that even fire (to my
thinking) has ^las^en out at mine eye: and such ^eepe wounds have I received
on my head, that instead of tears, my vary batilements have dropped down, and
in their falling have scalded my cheeks, as if they had been shewers of
molten Lead. Does this hot Uengeance fly (as if it were with the swiftest
wings of Lightning) from above, to se^ze upon me, for my own sins, or for
his, that first began to set me up? But alas: How ingratef^ll am I, to
have of my Patron so unrighteous, and so godless a remembrance? Ethelbert
(King of Kent) was my Founder: out of the dust of the earth did he raise me;
out of the hard Rock was I fashioned to a beautiful shape, and by him
consecrated to a most holy and religious use: For Ethelbert (that good King)
was the first that gave entertainment to Augustine, Melitus, Iustus, and John:
The first bringers of the faith into this Land.
who by Saint Gregory were sent hither to preach the Mysteries Divine: The
devotion of which men, like four streams, caused the Christian Faith to fly
into this land, and that princely father of more, was the first whom they
converted.

In advancement of Religion, and to make it spread higher, did he set me
into the earth, planted me, and had a reverend care to have me grow up in
state and beauty. It cannot be therefore, that so good and meritoryous a work
in him, should be so ill rewarded. No, no, it is not for his sake, that I have
been punnished, but either for my own or some others wicked deserving.

Howsoever it be, or in whom-soeuer the fault lies, on me are the plagues
inflicted, on my head are heaped the disgraces and dishonours, mine is the
smart, mine is the Sorrow. And though the eyes of every Stranger, and of every
starting Passenger be cast up upon me, all of them wondering at, but none
pitying my misfortune, because to them it appears slight, or else it
appears to them nothing at all, yet let me stand before a Iuditious, cleeere,
and impartial Censor, and the condition of the most wretched will not seem so
miserable and base as mine.

When the Hawthorne and Low Bryer are cut down, the spoil of them is not
regarded, for it moons not any: But when the Prince of the Forest (the mighty
and sacred Oak) has the Axe laid to his root, at every blow that is given,
the very woods send out Groans. Small Cottages being on fire, are quickly
either quenched, or if not quenched, the wound that a Commonwealth receives by
them is easily cured: But when a body (so noble; So ancient, so comely for
Stature, so reverenced for State, so richly adorned, so full of beauty, of
strength, of Ceremonies: so follows, so kneeled unto, and almost so adored as
my self am, and ever have been daily) is defaced by flames, and shaken into
dust by the wrath of the breath Almighty. The very sight of this is able to
breed Earthquakes in Cities that behold it.

And even from such a height, such a happiness, and such an honor am I fallen.
My head was advanced with the loftiest in the Kingdom, and so tender a care
had the heavens over it, that it was taken up and laid in the bosom of the
Clouds.

My aching brows rested themselves upon the Crystal Chariot of the Moon, and
the Crown of my head (when I stood on Tiptoe and stretched my body to the
length,) touched that Celestial roof, embossed all over with studs of gold,
I did not only ouer-looke the proudest buildinges in thee (O thou Land-lady to
so many thousands of houses) with those also that are the inheritance of her
thy next neybour: But mine eye at every opening had the greatest part of the
kingdom as a prospect.

The Mariner then called me his Sea-marke, for to him I stood as a
Watchtower to guide him safely to our English shore. No sooner did ye
Traveler by land see me, but his heart leaped for joy, and the wearisomnesse
of his way seemed to go from him, because he knew he was in sight of the most
goodly City which he loved. But how often has this glory of mine bin
Ec^lipsed, and at such times when it was in the fulness? whether my own ambition
(in aspyring too high) or whether the Justice of those above me in punnishing
my pride, were the cause of my Fall* I know not. But sure I am, that my head
has been often laid to the block, and many blows given to strike it off.

The first blow was paul's church builded about the year after Christ 610, and
about 477. years after was consumed by fire 1087 in the time of Willi^
Conqueror.
given me when I had stood vntaynted, and unblemished 477. years after the
beginning of my foundation, for I was raised, and entitled to the name and
hono^r of a Temple. about the year after the Incarnation 61^. And in the year
of Redemption, 1087. was I, (with a great part of thy body (O thou Best of
Cities) consumed in Fire. But I was in a short time healed of those hurts, by
Mauritius Mauritius repaired it and new built it of stone.
(thy Bishop) who to defend me from after-burnings, mounted me upon Arches and
gave me ribs of stone, which was fetched from Cane in Normandy.

Free from the malice (at least from the strokes) of ruinating T^me and the
envious 1444 in the reign of Henry 6, Burnt with lightning.
blasts of Fortune* did I continu^ full 357. years together after this first
blow, but in Anno 1444. heaven smote me with lightning, yet did I presently
recover, and held up my head loftier then before, The description of the
Steeple when it was at the H^i^th, and of the body of the church as it is now
for in Anno 1462. did my body carry in height 52^. foot, the stone work being
260. foot and the Spire as many. In length was I 720. foot, and in breadth 130.
At the same time, did I wear on the Crown of my head (as it had bin a Crest
unto it) a Cock or Eagle, which being inconstant was (I think) destroyed for
turning about with every wind: It carried in weight fort^ pounds* being of
copper gilded over: the length from the bil to the tail four foot, the
breadth over the wings, three foot, and a half, the cross (from the bole to
the Eagle) fifteen foot, and six inches of a size, the length thereof
ouer-thwarte, was five foot, and ten inches. The compass of the bole nine
foot and one ynch: of which cross (which stood above my head as a rich
Diadem) the inner part was Oak, the next cover was lead, and a third (upon
that) of copper, which with the bole and Eagle being of Copper also) were al
gilded over.

In this magnificence was I arrayed, thus was I with Marble Towers and
Pynnacles crowned: the wonder of the world was I counted in the judgment of
all eyes that beheld me, and the only mark that envy of foreign kingdoms
shot at, who did but hear of my Greatness.

But (alack) how momentary is all earthly happiness? How fading is our
painted Glory? Many years were not numbered, but behold in Anno* 1561. 1561 in
the reign of Q: Elizabeth fyred by lightning 4. of Iu:
the hand of Heaven was once more filled with vengeance, which in clouds of
fire, was there thrown upon my head^, so that in less than the space of four
hours, I that was the Mirrhor of the world (for beauty) was made the
miserablest creature in the world by my deformity. Yet did that worthy and my
ever to be honored Mistress Q. Elizabeth gave 1000 marks in gold to reedifie
the Church
bestow upon me in Gold 1000. Marks to make good my losses, and gave (besides)
warrant for a 1000. loades of Timber, to repair my ruins: Thy Citizens
likewise (O my dearest mother) and the Clergy of the Land, were even
Prodigal of their pursses to set me up again.

Some good was done unto me, and much good left undone.

This last blow was to me fatal and deadly, for now, am I both headless, and
honourlesse: my shoulders ^^ing daily trodden upon in scorn, branded with
marks and Letters, and scoared upon with the points of knives and B^dkins,
which howsoever the ignorant laugh at, those that are wise know they are
Characters of my infamy, yea to so low a ^^^te am I brought, that madmen and
fools, and every idle companion lay wagers in mockery, 8 Partridges on the top
of Powles in an. 1597
only to abuse me. Some (seeing me so patient to endure Crows and Dawes)
pecking at my ribs, have driven tame Partridges over my bosom, others even
riding over me, and Capring upon my back, A horse there likewise in An. 1600.
as if they had bin curvetting on the horse, which in despite they brought to
Trample upon me.

Who therefore that did but either know or has but heard of my former
prosperity, would not grieve to see me fallen into this baseness, and most
contemptible bondage, but I have deserved (I confess) I have most justly
deserved to have these afflictions, these dishonours, and these open
punnishmentes laid upon me, albeit they were ten times numbered over and
over.

For whereas I was at first consecrated to a mystical and religious purpose
(the Ceremonies of The quyre in which is divine service twice every day in the
year.
which are daily observed in the better part of me, for my heart is even to this
hour an Altar upon which are offered the sacrifices of holy prayers for men's
Sins) yet are some limbs of my venerable body abused, and put to profane,
horrid and servile customs, The body of the Church serves only for walks
no marvel though my head rotte, when the body is so f^l of diseases: no
marvel if the Divine Executioner cut me off by the shoulders, when in my
bosom is so much horrible and close Treason practiced against the King of the
whole world.

For albeit though I never yet came down all my stayres, The walks in Paul's
to be Occuler witnesse-bearer of what I Speak, and what is (sometimes spoake
openly, and sometimes spoke in private) committed in my Walks, yet does the
daily sound and Echo of much knauish villainy strike up into mine ear. What
whispering is there In Term times, how by some slight to cheat the poor
country Clients of his full purse that is stuck under his girdle? What plots
are laid to furnish young gallants with ready money which is shared
afterward at a Tauern) thereby to disfurnish him of his patrimony? what buying
up of oaths, out of the hands of knights of the Post, who for a few shillings
do daily sell their souls? What layinge of heads is there together and
^^^ting of the brains, still and anon, as it grows toward eleven of the
clock, (even amongst those that wear guilt Rapiers by their sides) where for
that noone they may shift from Duke Humfrey, and be furnished with a Dinner at
some meaner man's Table? What damnable bargains of unmerciful Brokery, and of
unmeasurable Usury are there clapped up? What swearing is there: yea, what
swaggering, what facing and out-fasing? What shuffling, what shouldering, what
Iustling, what Ieering, what biting of Thumbs to beget quarrels, what holding
up of fingers to remember drunken meetings, what brauing with Feathers, what
bearding with Mustachoes, what casting open of cloakes to publish new clothes,
what muffling in cloaks to hyde broken Elbows, so that when I hear such
trampling up and down, such spetting, such ^^lking, and such humming, (every
man's lips making a noise, yet not a word to be understood,) I verily believe
that I am the Tower of Babell newly to be builded up, but presently despair
of ever being finished, because there is in me such a confusion of languages.

For at one time, in one and the same rank, yea, foot by foot, and elbow by
elbow, shall you see walking, the Knight, the Gull, the Gallant, the vpstart,
the Gentleman, the Clown, the Captain, the Appel-squire, the Lawyer, the
Usurer, the Citizen, the Bankerou^, the Scholar, the Beggar, the Doctor, the
Idiot, the Ruffian, the Cheater, the Puritan, the Cutthroat, the Hye-men, the
Low men, the True-man, and the Thief: of all trades and professions some, of
all Countries some; And thus does my middle Isle show like the Mediterranean
Sea, in which as well the Merchant hoysts up sails to purchase wealth
honestly, as the Rouer to light upon prize vniu^^ly. Thus am I like a common
Mart where all Commodities (both the good and the bad) are to be bought and
sold. Thus whilst devotion kneeles at her prayers, does profanation walk
under her nose in contempt of Religion. But my lamentations are scattered with
the winds, my sighs are lost in the Air, and I my self not thought worthy to
stand high in the love of those that are borne and nourished by me. An end
therefore do I make hear of this my mourning.

The Steeple of S. Paul abruptly thus breaks off, because he felt himself
not so well as he could wish; The Lady of Cities (who is governed by the
wisdom of 24. grave Senators, all those 24. submitting themselves to the
authority only of One, 24. Aldermes L: Mayor.
thereby teaching examples of Obedience) did thus break silence, and renew her
speech: Londons speech to westminster continued.


Tell me now (O Westminster) which of Us two, have greatest cause to complain
for the misfortune of our sons; yet thou and I are not indifferent Judges in
this case, because it is our own particular: let us therefore leave the
censure of it to the Arbite^ment of the world; and whilst the Controversy is
in deciding, be not thou offended with me, if now a little I take upon me the
office of a Mother, and fall into a gentle reprehension of thee. I remember,
that when thou had laid abroad the Ruins of thy Son, and yet on the top
of them had builded up his honors, which to do, did in thee seem
glorious; thou did then presently begin to rip open the adulterous Womb
of those sins that are every day begotten under thy roofes: the very naming
of which, though it be odious to heaven and earth: yet did thou seem to
have so little feeling of thine own infamy, that thou did laugh at thy
dishonor, and were it not sorry for those euilles which thou thy self
confessest, abundantly swarm within thee.

O how palpable is thy blindness! How gross thine ignorance, in running into
this error! What vpholdeth Kingdoms but government? What subuerteth
licentiousness and disorder? Uices in a commonwealth are as diseases in a
body, if quickly they be not cured, they suddenly kill. They are Weeds in the
fairest Garden, if ear they take root, you pull them not up: they spoil the
wholesome Hea^hes and Flowers, and turn the Ground into a Wilderness. Cities
soonest destroy themselves.
There is no destruction so fearful to a City, as that destruction which a
City brings upon it self: and never is it more near a fall, then when it
makes much of those sins, which like Snakes lie in the bosom of it, and suck
out the blood.

All those Cankers of a State, that lie gnawing to eat thee up; All those
sensual streams, that ^ow about thy body, The sins of London.
and labor to drown it in impieties, flow in thy Ueynes, but as little
Riuolets, but in mine they exceed all bounds, and swell up to an Ocean. And
that the very least of them undermines and shakes my strongest buildings.

What abomination reigns in thee, which is not in me doubled? First Pride
If Pride ride up and down in thy Coa^hes, She is all the fore-noone at her
Glass in my priu^^e chambers, and in the after no^ne sits like a prosti^uted
Harlot, tempting Passengers to the ^talles of my Inhabitants. If Usurers (who
are Christian Jews) dwell in thy streets; I have both Usurers and B^okers,
Usury Brokery
(who are the English Devils) opening shopp^s in mine. Do thou bring up
Swearers, Perjury Murder Atheism
I can swear thee down? Art thou Quarrelsome? I thirst after blood? Is there
any one in thee that scoffs at Religion? Many there are in me that swear
there is no Religion.

As for that Monster with many heads, that Beast, (both Male and Female) I
mean Letchery, Lechery
it is within my Freedom more ma^e of, then Island Dogs are amongst
Citizens ^liues: and when it gets out of my freedom, it is then like the
place where it desires to lurk^ in, for then it lies out of the cricuite of all
civil Liberty.

In the troublesome reign of King Stephen, there were showed at one muster
twenty thousand armed Horsemen, and threescore thousand Footmen, all which
number were Citizens that lived within my walls: But I verily believe, that
in this peaceable reign of our Princes in these days, if a true muster were
taken, there would be found almost as many Strumpets as would be able to dare
the Turk, (with all his Concubines) into the field, or to ouer-ranne all the
Low Countries, and to spoil the enemy, were he never so strong or desperate,
if it came to handy^ gripes.

Beasts in their Act of generation use not more community: savage people that
know not their Maker, break not more the limits of Modesty: Common Inglers,
Fiddlers, and Players, do no: more basely prostitute themselves to the
pelasures of every two-penny drunken Plebeian, than do those Quadrantariae
Me^etrices, the Mercenary Hackneies that stand at rack and manger within my
suburbs.

As Bulls and Bears are for small pieces of Silver to be bayted, so are these.
As at common Outropes, when housholds-stuffe is to be sold, they cry Who gives
more. So stand these upon their thresholdes, not crying Who gives more, (only)
but Who gives any thing. But that it stands not with the Majesty of our state,
nor with the Laws of our Religion, It were as good, nay better, to give
freedom and liberties to the setting up of a common Stews, as heretofore on
the Banck (opposite to thee and me on the farther side of the Thames) it has
been used.

In those days Orders were established to keep this Sin within certain
bounds, but now it breaks beyond all limits.

It was then enacted by a parliament (at which thou y^ have had thy voice in so
many Parliaments were present) that the Bordello or common Stews on the
Bancke-side, should observe these constitutions.

Orders for the Stews.
First, no Stew-holder, or his wife was to compel any single Woman to stay
with them against her will, but to give her leave to come and go at her
pleasure.

Our suburb Bawdes keep ordinaries for all comers
Secondly, that no Stew-holder should keep any Woman to b^ard, but she to
b^^rd abroad, or where she lysted.

Thirdly, to take for a Courtezan^ The price of sin is raised, and so are the
rents.
Chamber not above 14. pence by the week.

Fourthly, not to keep open doors Noctes atque does now.
upon Holy Days.

Fifthly, not to keep any single woman in his house on the Holy Days, Officers
now have silver eyes and cannot see.
but the Bailiffe to see them voyded out of the Lordship.

Few Turnecoates in houses of this Religion.
Sixthly, that no single woman should be detayned in any such house against her
will, having an intent to forsake that course of life.

As Well Pu^itane as Protestant are welcome.
Seauenthly, that no Stew-ho^der was to give entertainment to any Woman of any
order in Religion, or to any man's wife.

Now they work like Bakers night and day.
Eyghtly, that no Courtezan was to receive hire of any man to lie with him, but
she was to lie all night with him till the next morning.

Ninthly, that no man was to be drawn by violence, or be enticed by any
impudent and whorish allurements into any Stew-house. Now they use plain
dealing


They are searched daily.
Tenthly, that every Brothely or Stew-house was to be searched weekly by
Constables, and other Officers.

^amque vrit flaminant dull^s.
Lastly, That no Stew-holder should lodge in his house any Woman that had the
dangerous infirmity of burning, etc.

These (amongst others) with penalties and punishments upon the breath of any
one of them, were the ordinances of these times, but now (thanks to the
negligence of this age) though sharper Laws do threaten to strike, this
sin, yet they do but threaten, for they seldom strike, or if they strike, it
is with the back of the sword of Justice.

The setting up of a Whore-house, is now as common as the setting up of a
Trade: yea, and it goes under that name. A stock of two beds and four wenches
is able to put a Lady Pandaresse into present practice, and to bring them into
reasonable doings.

In these shoppes (of the world, the flesh and the devil) souls are set to
sale, and bodies sent to shipwreck: men and women as familiarly go into a
chamber to damn one another on a Feather-hedde, as into a Tavern to be
merry with wine. But for all this it goes under the name of The sweet sin, and
of all, they are counted Wenches of the old Religion, and for all their
dancings in Tauernes, ryots in Suppers, and ruffling in Taffities, yet A
cloister of such Nuns stands like a Spittle, for every house in it is more
infectious then that which has a Red Cross over the door. Such as
Smithfield is to horses, such is a House of these Sisters to women: It is as
fatal to the^, It is as infamous* The Bawds Petty Bawds, and Panders are the
Horse-coursers that bring Iades into the market: where they swear they are free
from diseases, when they have more hanging on their bones then are in a French
Army; and that they are but Coltes of half a years running, when they have
scarce a sound tooth in their heads. There shall you find beasts of all
ages, of all Colors, of all prices, of all paces, yet most of them given to
false gallops: hardly among twenty one that is good, for every one that proves
so, a hundred continue bad.

Such is the quality of Smithfield Nags, such the property of Suburb
Curtizans. In brief, their beginning is bravery, their end beggary, their life
is detestable, and death (for the most part) damnable. Since therefore so
dangerous a Serpent shootes his ranckling stinges into both our bosoms, let us
not (as desperate of our own estates) open our breasts to receive them, and so
be guilty to our own destruction, but rather provide us of Armor to resist the
malice of her poison, for be assured ( O thou that art still ready, and still
most worthy to entertain forraygne Princes and Embassador^) that so long as
this double dealing-diuell, ( Lechery) walks up and down in our houses,
Vengeance will never be driven from our doors.

A little more must I yet chyde thee ( O thou Minion, now to Two mighty Nations)
for I begin to grow Iealious of thee, that thou seek to rob me of my best,
my most worthy, most Princely, and my most desired King James.
Lover, to enjoy him solely to thy self: else wherefore do thou repine that
either I, or any other of our Sister-citties, should be made happy by his
company? It shows that thy heart is stufte with a rank and boiling e^uie,
thou greeuest that any should prosper but thy self. It condemns thee of
ambition, (which ^nne thou think becomes thee, because thou art a Courtier)
It condemns thee of Covetousness, a vice, than which none more vi^y blemisheth
a noble mind, (such as all Nations that have bin thy Guests, have never
supposed to shine in thee.) I esteem my self the most Fortunate of all my
neighbor Cities in this large kingdom, if That Royal Master of us both
(nay of us all) do but vouchsafe to pass by me, or but so much as to cast
his eye upon me, and do thou cry out Thou art undone, when after his
embracings of thee so many whole months (oftentimes) together, after his
bestowing so many dignities, and so much wealth upon thee: yea, and when he
gives thee his Royal word, not to be absent from thee long? cannot this
content thee, and satisfy the flame of thy desires, but that thou must wish to
have him fond over thee, and that the beams of his most princely and free
affection, should have all their points meet in thy bosom, as their only
fixed Object? for shame desire it not, for this immoderate appetite of thine is
to the dishonor and hurt of all the Cities r^and about thee. Bridle therefore
these passions of thy soul, which otherwise will make thee turn wild, and win
them by gentle means to come in, and subject themselves to the laws of Reason.
If the moist handed The Thames who takes the name from Them and Isi^
Isis, should send all her melted Silver to that insearchable and unknown
Treasury of Neptune, (into which all Rivers pay their custom) and should
never have an profitable Return of it, how soon would she grow poor? Or if
the Sea-god, (out of a prodigal and flowing humor) should do nothing but ^our
his gifts into the lap of that his Christ all bosom daughter, how soon would
her swimming too hie in riches, make her forget her self? and in that pride of
swelling, work the subversion both of thee and me? we should lie drowned in
her greatness, as other parts of the land would be overwhelmed in thine, if
thou had what thou desire and couetest.

But thou see the Sun never tarries in one point of heaven alone, his
remoo^ing from place to place, shows his Sovereignty, and makes him better
welcome thither, where he has been the longest absent, and even so of kings.

A Citizen of (...) (to his immortal memory) did in one day, Hen. Pichard
v^^ner, mayor in An. 30, of Edward 3.
feast at his Table Four Kings (Viz) Edward the third (king of England) John
King of France, David le Bruce. king of ^^ots, and the king of Cyprus, and now
of late (imitating that example) did another of my Praeters, Sir John wats
Clothwerker Lord Mayor now this present yea, 1607
feast (tho not four kings) one equal in power* in Majesty and in Dominion,
to all th^se 4. (even the Heir and present Inheritor of 4. mighty Empires our
soueraign Lord and may* James the 6. To look but back upon which happy
days (because I have seen but few of the^) makes my heart beat against my
ribs for joy: I am proud even in the remembrance of them, and to the intent
they may never be forgotten, those years and months that brought forth this
honor unto me, shall be Chronicled in the midst^ of my bosom in Charecters of
Gold.

Thus do I comfort my self by repeating over ye blessings bestowed upon me by
a few of our Princes, but how many of them have feasted, banqueted and revealed
with thee* And yet would thou bar any of them from taking his pleasures
abroad, but only in thy presence. Thou art proud, and take upon thee to
stretch forth too imperious a hand.

Thou art contented to receive in the Golden Harvest, but loath to be shaken
with the breath of Autumn. Thou likest it well to have a Summer all the year,
but do not consider, that Winter is as wholesome for thy body. This shows
thy indiscretion, thy improuidence, and indulgence of thy self, to be pampred
like an Epicure.

Thou art greedy as the Sea, and would devour all things, but would part
from nothing: thou art catching as ^^re, so thy self may be fed, thou carest
not who perish. Uncharitable are thy wishes, immodest are thy longings, and
most unconscionable are thy aspyrings, and most vnneighborly are thy
fore-stallings. That which thou would have done, is not (I grant) against
all Law, but it is with All Law, for thou desire to have men go to Law all
the year long, which wish of thine is as dishonest as if it were to have
continual wars, and continual wars are continual Slaueries: It is as if
thou should wish to have an everlasting thunder, for what are pleadinges of
causes, but noise without ceasing.

A paradox in praise of Vacations.
Thou say the four Terms are unto thee as four great Feasts, yet do
thou in bitterness of thy sorrow, cry out upon four Vacations: wherein thou
behauest thy self all one, as if thou should complain, because thou art not
every hour feeding. If four Terms should be without term and never come
to an end, those feasts which they incite thee to, would be to their incurable
surfeits, and so consequently thy destruction. If the sound of Lawyers tongues
were but one whole twelve month in thine ear, thou thy self would even
loath it, tho it were unto thee never so delicate Music.

Nothing increases in us as a delight in any pleasure, but to have that
pleasure taken away for a time. But that the night offends us with darkness, we
should grow weary of the day. So that four Vacations (if thou can rightly
make use of them) may be unto thee as 4. several saw^es, to sharpen thy
stomach against those great feasts, are served up to thy Tables.

So go to Law (I confess) is necessary in a Republike; So is it to have a
Plague, for thereby the Superfluo^s numbers of people, which otherwise (if they
increased) would deuo^ure one another, are swept away: So is it to have War,
for the Sword cuts off those idle branches that steal away the Sap from the
profitable boughs of a Kingdom. But to have a War without end, or a Plague
without mercy, is the undoing of a Realm, and so would it be* if men were ever
in brablings.

The 4. Vacations are like so many Soundings of Retreat after 4. Battles; in
which breathing-times men renew their courages, their forces, and their manners
of fight: where (else) the Pleader (never giving over) would grow too rich, and
so be envied, and the clyent ever spending, would be made a Beager, and so
gather into faction.

Uaine therefore, idle, senseless, shapelesse, and of no validity are those
Encomiasticke honors, with which thy rhetorical cunning has fethered a Pen
so, gaily. An Idol have thou made of it, Inuectiue against a Pen.
whereas in the true nature it is a pyneon pulled from the left wing of the
devil. A Pen! The invention of that, and of Incke has brought as many curses
into the world, as that damnable Witchcraft of the Friar, who tore open the
bowels of Hell, to find those murdering engines of mankind, Guns and Powder.

Both these are alike in quality, in mischief: yea, and almost in fashion; The
Pen is the Piece that shootes, Inck is the powder that carries, and Words are
the Bullets that kill.

The one does only destroy men in time of war, the other consumes men, both
in war and peace.

The one batters down Castles, the other barters them away. Cedant Arma Togae,
let G^ns therefore give place to Gowns, for the Pen is the more dangerous
weapon to run upon.

Why then do thou, nay, how can thou without blushing defend a cause so
notoriously badde? How dare thou hang a Tree so barren of goodness, and so
rank of poison at the root, with so many Garlandes of praises? Can thou
find in thy heart to write Ealogies in honor of that deadly double pointed
Engine, that has been the confusion of so many thousands? Then let wreathes of
Laurel Crown their Temples, that shall sing the dishonorable Acts of those
Swords, which basely have been inbrued in the bowels of their own Country:
for in what other tryumphes (then in the afflictions of men) are these warlike
Instruments of writing employed?

One dash of a Pen has often been the downfall of a man and his posterity.
By help of this, Wives practice to abuse their Husbands, by the Witchcraft of
Amorous passions, (which are coniurd out of a Goose-quill,) Lovers entice young
wenches to folly. This is that which spreads abroad, and sowes the Seeds of
Schisms and Heresies. This is that, which marres all Learning, and makes it
contemptible, by making it common. It is the Weapon of a Fool, and oftentimes
his brains drop out of the end of it in stead of Incke. It is a sharp G^ade
that pricks our young Gentry to beggary, for in less than a quarter of an
hour, (with a Pen) do they betray all the Lands and livings purchased by
their progenitors, into the hands of Brokers, Scriueners, and Usurers.

What forten hand has ever been working in the forge of Treason (for the
deuastation of this Kingdom, for the extirpation of the Religion in it, or for
the murdering of our Princes) But Pens (like Hammers on an Anuile) have
continually been beating out the plottes, and conueying them hither to be
made smooth, and to pass current. What Libilles against Princes, against
Peers, against the State, or against our Magistrates, were ever (like pricking
Thorns) thrust into the sides of this Empire, to make it bleed, The words
were these, E^u^rdam nec^le^e nolite (...) bonu^^ est.
of which a Pen was not guilty?

This, by leaving a word vnpoynted, was the death of Edward the second: with
this, holding it but in his hand, did Richard the second give away all the
royalties belonging to a Crown, and blotted out his own name for ever any
more to be found written with the name of a King.

In conclusion, the Tragedy of so many of our Ancient Nobility, were never
acted on Scaffo^des, but a Pen was chief Actor in their deaths and downefals.

So then you may perceive, that this Ravens bill draws blood where it once
fastneth: The Jaws of a Toade (sweating and foaming out poison) are not more
dangerous than a Pen being filled with that banefull and venomous mixture of
Gall and Copporas. Accursed therefore be that A Goose.
Bird, out of whose wing, so pestilent and so malicious an enemy to humane
creatures is taken: offensive to the stomach, be for ever the meat of it, and
apt to engender mortal surfeits, sithence so small a part of it (as a Quill,)
has bred from the beginning, and (til the dissolution of this Universal
Frame) will be the cause of so much distemperature in the body of the World.
Which mischief that worthy Roman Captain, who (about the eight year of the
reign of Cassibelan, Julius Caesar, 54. years before Christ, conquered
Britain.
Brother to King Lud (my first Founder and 54 years before the King, both of
Heaven and earth, sent his Sonue to dwell amongst men) entered this Land,
conquered it, and made it tributary to the people of Rome, wisely looking into,
and observing, that Princes, Rulers, and Great personages, must of necessity
(being bound thereto by the ceremony of their birth, or by their place in the
state) yield sometime to that, which otherwise yt noblenes of their own blood
would abhor, did often wish that he could not know how to handle a Pen.

And that Mirror of her Sex, both for magnanimity of mind, inuinciblenesse of
Spirit, and (which is to her the greatest part of her ^ame) for the closing
up of so long a reign, with so full and so grievous a period, that Goddess
upon earth whilst she lived, that our Good Mistress (Eliza) when she was to
sign any warrant for the death of any Peer, would passionately (yet with a
Spirit equal to Cea^ars) say thus, Would to God we had never been taught how
to write.

And thus (O thou that sit crowned like an Empress) withal our riches and
fairest Monuments have I discharged the Office of a faithful surueior, by
telling thee what part of thy goodly body is builded too high, wherein my
Counsel is that thou should a little pluck down thy Pride And in what
other part thou stan^est too low, where I could wish thee to raise it up to a
more noble Eminence. I have likewise pointed with my finger, at al those
Cracks, disioyntings, Flawes, and Flyings out, which if they be not repaired,
are able in time to shake into dust a City greater then thy self: And (in my
Real love to thee) have I scored such plain marks upon thy hidden Ruins,
which (like Treacherous Servants) receive in storms (for ever to vnd^ thee)
that if in any fit season, thou underprop them, and take down whatsoever is
amiss, thou shall in this thy old age grow strong and lusty again, and with
an easy Rest save thy self from Falling.

With a free and vn-mercenary voice, have I pleaded for thy good, by
discovering what is ill in thee: so that my Lectures of Reprehention may serve
as wholesome Council. Thou can not blame me for opening thy wounds, and
searching them to the quick, sithence thou see I spare not mine own. My pills
perhaps may seem a little bitter in going down, but in the working thou shall
find them as comfortable as Restoratiues.

Take courage therefore to thee, and like a Prince that can command his own
affections (which is the Noblest Sovereignty, be bold not only to strike off
those sick and infected parts, about the body of the Weale-publicke, which
threaten danger to those that are sound, but also apply thou the same sharp
medicines, which I have ministered to thee, if hereafter (as I often feel my
self) thou perceiuest me ready or subject to fall into loathsome diseases.

We are now both of us as Buildings belonging to one Land lord, so closely
joined together in league, that the world thinks it a thing impossible, by any
violence, unless we fall to civil discention within our selves, ever to be
separated: our hands as if it were at a marriage, are plighted one to another
our bodies are still embracing, as if they were Twins: we are grown so like
and every day do more and more so resemble each other that many who never
knew us before, would swear that we were all One.

Sithence then we are held to be so, let us never be taken to be otherwise.
But as sisters do, if the one feel sorrow let the other mourn, if the one be
lifted up to honors, let not the other repine. And as stringes to an
instrument, tho we render several soundes, yet let both our soundes close up
in sweet concordant Music. Arm thy self therefore (with Me) to maintain
that Union, without which Realms are builded upon sand, and On which they are
stronger then if they stood upon Rocks.

And because al Cities were bound in common ciuility, in policy, and in
honor to maintain their Names, their Callings, their Privileges, and those
Ancient houses that Spring out of them, I will in thy presence Annatomize my
self, even from head to foot, thou shall know every limb of me, and into how
many parts my body is divided. My birth, may bringing up, and my rising shall
be as manifest to thy understanding as to mine, because by the wilful
ignorance of those that ought of duty to preserve my credit, my good name is
oftentimes and in many places abused and taken from me.

Neither would I have thee account me insolent, vainglorious, or ambitious, in
erecting these Trophyes of Fame to my self, with mine own hands: for upon
them shall neither be engraven the Acts of my sumptuous Builders, (which would
be too great an ostentation) nor the battles which my Citizens have oftentimes
fought and won in defense of my liberties, which (more to my glory) might be
rehearsed by others.

But passing over the Names of some (which to repeat would be to me an
everlasting renown). Constantine the Emperor Mawd the Empress, and Henry son
to Henry 2 born in London.
As to boast (which lawfully and without the blot of arrogance I could do)
that Constantine the Emperor y^ builded Constantinople, drew his breath from my
bosom, or that Maud the Empress, did honor to me as to the mother that gave
her life, or that King Henry (son to Henry 2,) was begotten in my womb, which
Hen^y at the age of 7. years was married to Marg. (ye French kings daughter)
being not two years old, and afterward with her in the life time of his
father, were crowned at Winch. But burying this glory of mine (to be forgotten)
in the Graves where these my children lie (now consumed to nothing) I will
only content my self (and it is but a poor ambition) to tell thee how I came
to be called a City.

By what Names London from time to time has bin called, and how it came to be
divided into Wards.
Observe me therefore (O my most ingenious Pupil and scorn not to call me thy
Tutor) for I must here and there speak of some matters, that I was an
Eyewitness to, long before thou had any being. Kn^ the^ (because time) who
alters all things, may perhaps hereafter as he has done already, give me
some other new vpstart name) that Brute from whom I took my birth, after had
brought me (as thou see to this day I abide) close to the River of Thames, The
Names of London.
did there bestow a Name on me, and called me Troynouant or Trinouant, and
sometimes Trinobant, to revive (in me) the memory of that City which was
turned into Cinders, and that for all the spite of those Gods who hated it,
there should be a new Troy which was my self.

That was the style by which I was known, for the space of more than one
thousand years, and then Lud chalenging me as his own, took away none of my
dignities, but as women married to great persons, loose their old names, so did
I mine being wedded to that king, and (after himself) was crowned with the
Title of Laire-lud, that is to say, the City of Lud or Ludstone, upon which
some nations called me London^u^ or Longidinu^, and Laodinu^, others Lundayne,
the Saxons Londonceaster, and London Bridge. The Spaniardes Londra, the French
Londres, and now in these days the people of our own country, London.

In my Infant^ rising was I but of base and mean estimation amongst other
Cities, and was scarcely known for all I was the Daughter of a king. But
Ludde lifted me up to high honors and great aduauncementes, for he set a
Corronet of Towers upon my head, and although it were not beautiful for
Ornament, yet made he for me a Gyrdle, strong for defense, which being made of
Turffe and other such stuff, Lud made a wall about London of Turfe etc, but
the Romain^ cause^ it to be made of stone.
trenched round about, served in the Nature of a Wall or Rampyre, to keep and
defend off the assaulting enemies.

Afterward the Romans being the Lords of the whole Kingdom, and so
consequently of me, insteede of throwing me into servile Slavery, raised me
up to high dignity and honor, and whereas I trembled with fear to have my
buildinges flaming about mine ears, they adorned my body, and apparrelled it
round about with stone, for til the arrival of that warlike and industrious
Nation on our shores, the Brittons dwelt in Towns as basely builded, as those
now of the wild Irish.

After I was thus fashioned and refined into the civil and beautiful shape of
a City, The several Nations that conquered this land from time to time
I began to be courted, and to be the only Minio^ of the Land, the Romans
fought in my quarrel* the Brittons heaped upon me honors, the Saxons (that
drove out them) bound Garlands of victory about my forehead.

But these being beaten from my company by the Danes, I was by them spoiled of
all my Ornaments, and prostituted as a strumpet to the lust of civil discord,
In heat of which the Normans came in rescue, chased hence yt Danes recovered
the whole Empire, and reduced it into one Monarchy. From that day have I ever
since flourished, ever since have I swelled up in greatness, ever since have I
bin loved of our kings, because ever since have to our kings bin loyal.

How London came to be divided into Wards.
In which prosperous growing up of mine, all my boughs and my branches, have
more and more in stead of bearing fruit, bin replenished with multitudes of
peoples, whose numbers increasing, it was thought fit (in policy) that they
should be quartered like Soldiers into hands, the better to bring them into
order. According therefore to the Romans custom of Cities, was I divided into
certain Signories, all of them notwithstanding, like so many streams to one
Head, acknowledging a priority and subjection, to One, Greater than the rest,
and who since above them, those Divisions or Partages are called Wards, or
Aldermanries, being 26 in number, which are ciuilly guarded and wisely
provided, for by 24. Aldermen, in whom is represented the dignity of Roman
Senators, and of Two Sheriffs, who personate (in their Offices and places)
the Roman Consuls.

Then is there a Subdiuision, for these Greater Cantles (...) again (...) into
less, being called Parishes, which (...) (...) number (...) which are unto
(...) within (...): so (...) with buildings, so furnishes with (...) people^
with wealthy Citizens, (...) so (...), wisely, and peaceably governed.

Thost things are a^well known to thee, (...) to my self, which (...) I am
willing to repeat (...), because that both of us calling to mind, the
greatness of our byrthes, and casting our eyes on the state and flourishing
glory, wherein we have always carried our selves, our misfortunes may be the
more pittyed (at the hands of for^en Cities, Londons complaint about the
Plague.
who may fall into the like) seeing the present condition, in which we now
stand. For (alack!) What auayles it us to beast of our former strength, of our
beauties, of our honors, of our possessions, or of the Ri^h^^ wherein we flow,
when that we cannot enjoy our healthes, which is worth all these; Sickness
has dwelt a long time in thy Chambers, she does now walks still in a ^hostly
and formidable shape up and down my streets. She (with her Ill Company)
infe^teth my Sons and Dau^hters, and leads them daily into such dangers,
that (in hundreds at a time) do they loose their lives. Five years has she
been a troublesome Guest unto me; I received her at first, (though I loved not
her Company) yet I give her good entertainment, and patiently endu^ed her
insulting oust me and mine, because I knew she was a Messenger sent from
above.

But woe to me (unfortunate City!) Woe unto us both (O my distressed
Neighbor,) shall we never shake hands with her and part? Shall our fair
bodies never re^^uer of this Disease, which so often and often has run all
(...) them, and does now again begin to be as a plague unto us? Howsoever
(out of the fashion of Confe^^^es, or out of a pride to show my wit) I have
checked thee for de^ecting thy Spirits for any strokes of calamity, yet believe
me, the care that I have of my Children, whom I see drooping, Conquers the
height of my mind, subdues my Nature, (...) me (with sorrow) almost the
gra^^ling on the ground. ^ead unto us both, are (...) days, whilst this
pestilent vapor hanges over our heads: Dead are our pleasures, for we do now
take delight in nothing but in mourning: Dead are (...) hours of leisure, and
those which are full of (...) the Law it self, (of whose presence we both
are glad, because we gain by her, and because she^ eue^ bringes us good and
merry Company to cheer our hearts) will sit heavily in thy Courts of
Justice, nay, I fear she will be unwilling (seeing us so subject to
diseases) to sit there at all.

Many a sad and black Term has bin seen walking in thy Hall, (like a
Mourner) and I perceive by thy looks, thou art now in fear to be troubled
with the like* I cannot blame thee, neither will I chide thee, for I purpose to
be as great with grief as thy self. Neither if that Black and Ominous day so
happen and fall upon us, shall I wonder* For I cannot see, how the Divine
Vengeance should be driven back, since so many bold darings are given, forcing
it to break through the gates of heaven.

The shaking of the Rod is not thought of, the stripes move us not, the very
drawing of blood, is by some but made a mockery: to prove it I will recite unto
thee (though to fell it, my buildinges will shake at the very horror of the
same) A story of death, both true and new. And this it is.

One (upon whom I had but lately bestowed the T^le and Dignity of a Citizen)
of whom I had good hope* A description of Sturbridge fair.
cause I found him worthy him to be advanced, taking his last leave of me
(as since it has feign out) departed to that quarter of the Land, to which
from all other parts men in multitudes repair, to suck the sweetness of
honest gaynes, and so to increase their wealth. It is a place, where (is a
large field) a City as it were is in a fel^e days builded up, and so
quickly raised, as if it had been done by Enchantment, and in as few days is
it afterward pulled down, no memory remaining of it, nor Monnument to show
that there it stood: though whilst the earth bears it up, there be Fair
streets, so filled with people, that they seem to be paued even with the
feet of men: whilst on either side, shops are so furnished and set forth with
all rich and necessary commodities, that many coming thither, have taken that
place for my self, and have not stuck to call it by the name of Little
London, so like do they swear it has been unto me, both in face and fashion
of body.

Thither went this young Son of mine, The death of a young man a linen
Draper dwelling in Friday-street.
and there mistaking the place, for me, laid down his head, as thinking it
had been my bosom, but never lifted it up again. A token had he sent from
heaven, by which he was bidden to make have thither, he obeyed the bringer of
it, and in pawn of his soul that was gone at the journey, left he his cold
body behind.

To keep which safe, Two follows were hired to hide it in the earth, The two
Porters of London.
they did so, using the body, as Soldiers do Towns which are taken, they
risted it, of all that belonged unto it, and what al men else were afraid to
touch or come near, did they (being armed with the desire of money) nimbly, and
Iocundly pack up, intending at their coming home to share it.

No sooner had they dispatched their deadly business, but those that had
Authority of the place, and who made much of these two Sharkers before, when
they stood in need of their help, make now as much have as they can, to
rid them out of their company: Away therefore like Pedlers from the end of a
Fair, so do they send them away ^rudging.

The Town looked even sick so long as they were in it* It was a killing to any
Country* fellow to have looked upon them, if he had but heard what parts in
this black Tragedy of death they had played. And both of them being Porters,
were taken by reason of their white Frocks, for two Ghosts walking in white
Shirts: to have drunk with these Pot-toffers had been no way but one, to
have sold any drink to them, had been for a Tapster to have drunk his last:
nay, whosoever did but spy them 12. store off, or were but told that two such
Ravens (who preied upon a dead body) flew that way, cried presently out, Lord
have mercy upon us, clapping their hard hands on their Country breasts, and
looking more pale then the sheet in which the man was buried.

But the best was these Parine^s (that dealt in such a a dead commodity) were
borne to bear, and took all things patiently.

But ambling on their way toward their (...), (which is under my wing) where
they kn^we they sh^^ld find better entertainment, their minds were troubled;
and their teeth watered, at the remembrance of not only Money, but also of
apparel, and other luggage which was left in the Bed chamber where the sick
man (...) which they persuaded themselves no man (upon pain of life) unless
it were They two, (...).

They shrugged as they went, (...) back, would they stand stone-(...), for
their (...) ^^zzing about several plottes (...). But the powder of (...) take
(...) and (...) speak nothing to help them in this (...) should they (...)
itched to lay hold upon the prize, but all the (...) in the (...).

At length one of them having a more plaugy pate than his (...), swore (...)
with sickness, and with the (...) if he got not the bayt that he nibled at,
(...) himself with the (...)) (...) for it: but if he w^nt away (...) in
Cambridge (...),

The other scratched at this, and grind, instead of gyuing applaud it, which
(...). Then (...) (n^^re Cambridge) (...) following (...) heed of the man, he is
(...) up and down) (...) sought to stop him.

At length he came to the house where the dead man had bin (...) be driven,
that was his Inn, there he would lie, that was his Bedlam, and there or no
where must his mad tricks be played.

In the end, the fear of further danger to flow from him (as being thought
to have the plague) and the authority of those that could command, made this
unruly guest be let into the same house, where entering, none durst keep him
company, but the Byrd of his own feather, and that was the sport which he
looked for: In no other chamber must he be lodged, but only that where, all the
dead man's (...)

FINIS.

