LANTERN and Candlelight. OR, The Bell-Mans second Nights-walke.

In which He brings to light, a Brood of more strange Villainies then ever were
till this year discovered.

-- Decet nouisse malum, fecisse, nefandum. The second edition, newly corrected
and amended



LONDON Printed for John Busby, and are to be sold at his shop in
Fleetestreete, in Saint Dunstanes Churchyard. 1609.

A table of all the matters, that are contained in this Book*
Chap. 1 Of O^nting. Cap. 2 1 What matters were tried at a Term that was in
Hell. 2 The proceedings of that court 3 A connsell held in Hell about the
Bell-man. 4 A messenger sent from thence, with instructions
Chap, 3 Of Gull-gro^ng. How Gentlemen are cheated at Ordinaries To furnish
which feast, these Guests are bidden, viz. The Leaders The Forlorn Hope The
Eagle The Wood-pecker The Gull The Gull-groper.

Cap: 4 Of Ferreting. How Gentlemen are undone by taking up Commoditi^ Which
Tragaedy has these five acts, viz A Tumbler Pu^senetts A Ferret Ra^bet-suckers
A Warren.

Cap, 5 Of Hawking How to catch Birds by the Book Which is done with five
Nets, viz. A Falconer A Lure A Te^cell Gentle A Bird A Mongril^

Cap. 6 Of Iackes of the Clocke-house Cap, 7 Of Ranek-Ryders How Inne-keepers
and Hackney men are sadled To make whom go a round pace, you must have, a
colt a snaffle a Ring Proua^der.

Cap, 8 Of Moone-men Cap, 9 The infection of the suburbs. Cap, 10 Of Iynglers
The Villainy of Horse-coursers Who consist of Iynglers Drouers Goade^
skip-Iackes.

Cap, 11 Of Jack in a Box, or a new kind of cheating, teaching how to change
Gold into silver, unto which is added a Map, by which a man may learn how to
Travel all over England, and have his charges borne. Cap, 12 The Bel-mans
second Nights walk, in which he mee^es with a number of Monsters that live
in Darkness.
To the verry worthy Gentleman Master Francis Mustian of Peckam.
Sir.
IT may (happily) seem strange unto you, that such an army of Idle-words
should march into the open field of the world under the Ensign of your Name,
(you being not therewith made acquainted till now* you may judge it in me an
Error, I my self confess it a boldness. But such an ancient and strong
Charter has Custom confirmed to This Printing age of ours, (by giving men
authority to make choice of what Patrons they like,) that some Writers do
almost nothing contrary to ye custom, and some by virtue of that Privilege,
dare do any thing. I am neither of that first order, nor of this last. The one
is too fondly-ceremonious, the other too impudently audacious I walk in the
midst (so well as I can) between both: with some fruits that have grown out
of my Bra^, have I bin so far from being in love, that I thought them not
worthy to be tasted by any particular friend and therefore have they bin
exposed only to those that would entertain them: neither did I think the
Fairest that ever was Mine, so worthy, that it was to be lookd upon with the
Eye of universal censure. Two sorts of madmen trouble the stationers shops in
Paul^ Churchyard: they that out of a M^e and Idle vainglory will ever be
Pamp^ing (tho their books being printed are scarce worth so much Brown
paper) and this is a very poor, and foolish ambition: Of the other sort are
they that being free of Wits Mer^hant-venturers, do every new moon (for gain
only) make 5. o^ 6. voiages to the Press, and every Term-time (upon
Booksellers stalles) lay whole litters of blind invention: fellows ye (if
they do but walk in the middle I Will) spit nothing but ynck, and speak nothing
but Poem. I would keep company with neither of these two madmen, if I could
avoid them, yet I take the last to be the wisest and less dangerous for
sithence all the arrows that men shoot in the world, fly to two marks only
(either pleasure or profit) he is not much to be condemned that having no more
Acres to live upon then those that lie in his head) is every hour hammering
out one piece or other out of this rusty Iron age, sithence the golden and
silver Globes of the world are so locked up, that a Scholar can hardly be
suffered to behold them. Some perhaps will say, that this lancing of the
pestilent fores of a Kingdom so openly, may infect those in it that are found,
and that in this our school, (where close abuses and gross villainies are but
discovered and not punished) others that never before knew such evils, will be
now instructed (by the book) to practice them. If so, then let not a traitor,
or a Murderer be publicly arraigned, lest the one laying open to the world,
how his plots were wouen to contriue a treason, or the other, what policies he
was armed with, for the shedding of blood, the standers-by (that are honest) be
drawn (by their rules) to run headlong into the same mischief: no, Our strong
physic works otherwise. What more makes a man to loath that Mongrell Madness
(that half English, half Dutch sin) Drunkenness: then to see a common
Drunkard acting his Scaenes in the open street? Is any Gamester so foolish to
play with false Dice, when he is assured that al who are about him know him to
be a Sworn Cheator? The letting therefore of Uice blood in these several
Veins, which the Bel-man has opend, cannot by any Judicial rules of physic,
endanger the Body of the Commonwealth, or make it feeble, but rather restore
those parts to perfect strength, which by disorder have been diseased.

Give me leave to lead you by the hand into a Wilderness (where are none but
Monsters, whose cruelty you need not fear because I teach the way to tame
them: ugly they are in shape and devilish in conditions: yet to behold them a
far off, may delight you, and to know their quallities (if ever you should come
near them (may save you from much danger. Our Country breeds no Wolves nor
Serpents, yet These engender here and are either Serpents or Wolves, or worse
then both: whatsoever they are, I send unto you not the Heard of the one, or
the Bed of the other, but only a Picture of either, View them I pray, and where
the colors are not well laid on, shadow them with your finger: if you spy
any disproportion, thus excuse it, such Painting is fit for Monsters: How
rudely soever the Peeceis drawn, call it a Picture. And when one more worth
your view lies under the workemans pencil, this Bad-one shall bring you home a
Better: In the mean time, I cease, and begin to be (if you please)

All yours. THOMAS DEKKER

To my own Nation.
Readers,
AFter it was proclaimed abroad, that (under the conduct of the Bel-man of
London,) new forces were (once more, to be leauied against certain Wild and
Barbarous Rebels, that were up in open arms against the Tranquillity of the
Weal public: It cannot be told, what numbers of voluntaries offered
themselves daily to fight against so common, so bold, so strange, and so
dangerous an enemy. Light Horsemen came in hourly, with discovery where
these Mu^ineeres lay entrenched: delivering (in brief notes of intelligence)
who were their Leaders, how they went Armed, and that they served both on Horse
and Foot: only their Strengthes could not he discryed, because their Numbers
were held infinite. Yet instructions were written and sent every minute by
th^se that were Favorers of Goodness showing what Military Disciplines the
foe used in his Battles, and what Forts (if he were put at any time to
flight) he would retire to; what stratagems he would practice, and where he
did determine to lie in Ambuscado. They that could not serve in person in This
Noble quarrel, sent their Auxiliary Forces, well armed with Counsel. So that
the Bel-man (contrary to his own hopes,) seeing himself so strongly and
strangely seconded by friends does now bravely advance forward, in maine
battalion. The day of encounter is appointed to be in this Michaelmas Term.
The place, Paules-Churh-yard, Fleetestreet, and other parts of the Ciitie. But
before they join, let me give you note of one thing, and that is this.

There is an Usurper, that of lat^ has taken upon him the name of the
Bel-man, but being not able to maintain that Title, he does now call himself
the Bel-mans brother, his ambition is (rather out of vain glory then the true
courage of an Experienced Soldier) to have the leading of the Van, but it shall
be honor good enough for him (if not too good) to tome up with the Rere. You
shall know him by his Habiliments, for (by the furniture he wears) he will
be taken for a Beadle of Bridewell. It is thought he is rather a Newter than a
friend to the cause: and therefore the Bel-man does here openly protest that
he comes into the field as no fellow in arms with Him.

Howsoever it be struck, or whosoever gives the first blow, the victory
depends upon the valor of you that are the Wings to the Bels-mans army, for
which conquest he is in hope you will valiantly fight sithence the quarrel is
against the head of monstrous abus^, and the blows which you must give are in
defense of Law, Justice, Order, Ceremony, Religion, Peace, and that honorable
title of Goodness.

Saint George! I see the two Armies move forward: and behold, the Bel-man
himself first charge upon the face of the Enemy. Thus:

To the Author.
HOw e're thou may by blazing all Abuse,
Incur suspect, thou speak what thou have proved,
(Tho then to keep it close it thee behou'd,
S^, Reason makes for thee a just excuse)
Yet of thy pains, the B^st may make good use,
Then of the Best, thy pains should be approved,
And for the same of them should be beloved.
Since thou of Falsehoods Flood d^'st open the Sluice,
That they at wast^ continually may run,
By she wing men ^he R^aches that they have,
That honest men may so or'e-reach a Knave,
Or ^ound their swallowing Deepes, the same to shun:
But if from hence, a Knave more cunning grows,
That Spider sucks but poison from thy Rose.
Thy friend if thine own, Io: Da:

To his Friend.
OF Vice, whose Counter-mine a state confounds,
Worse then Sedition: of those Mortal Wounds
Which (thoroughly searched) do Kingdoms hearts endanger:
Of Plagues that over run Cities: of those stranger
Big-swolne Impostumes, poisning the strong health
Of the most Sound, best Dieted Commonwealth,
Thou tell the Causes, and do teach the Cure,
By Mea'cine well-compounded, cheap, and sure:
And (as One read in deep Surgery,)
Draw'st of these Eu'lls, the true Anatomy.
Then, on thy Plainness let none lay reproof,
Thou take Sinne's height (as men do stars) aloof.
M: R:

To my industrious friend.
IN an ill Time thou writ'st, when Tongues had rather
Spit venom on thy lines, then from thy labors
(As Druggists do from poison) medicine gather;
This is no Age to crown Desert with Favors.
But be thou Constant to thy self, and care not
What Arrows Malice shootes: the Wise will never
Blame thy Loud singing, and the Foolish dare not:
None else but Wolves will bark at thine Endeavor.
When thou (in thy dead Sleep) lie in thy Grave,
These Charms to after-Ages up shall raise thee;
What here thou leau'st, alive thy Name shall save,
And what thou now dispraisest, shall then praise thee.
Tho, Not to know ill, be wise Ignorance,
Yet thou (by Reading Evil) do Goodness teach,
And, of abuse the coullors do advance
Only upon abuse to force a breach;
The honor that thy pen shall earne thereby,
Is this: that tho Knaves Live, their flights (Here) dye.
E: G:

Lantern and Candlelight, Or The Bell-mans second Nights walk.
Of Canting. How long it has been a language: how it comes to be a language:
how it is derived, and by whom it is spoken.

CHAP. I.
WHen all the World was but one Kingdom, One language through all the world at
the beginning
all the People in that Kingdom spoke but one language. A man could travel in
those days neither by Sea nor land, but he met his Countrymen and none
others.

Two could not then stand gabling with strange tongues, and conspire together
(to his own face) how to cut a third man's throat, but he might understand
them. There was no Spaniard (in that Age) to Brave his enemy in the Rich and
Lofty Castilian: no Roman Orator to plead in the Rethoricall and Fluent
Latin: no Italian to court his Mistress in the sweet and Amorous Thuscane^ no
Frenchman to parley in the full and stately phrase of Orleans: no German to
thunder out the high and rattling Dutch: the unfruitful crabbed Irish, and the
Uoluble significant Welsh, were not then so much as spoken of: the quick
Scottish Dialect (sister to the ^nglish) had not then a tongue, neither were
the stringes of the English speech (in those times) untied. When she first
learned to speak, it was but a broken language: the singlest and the simplest
Words flowed from her vttera^ce: for she dealt in nothing but in Monosillables,
(as if to have spoken words of greater length would have cracked her Uoice) by
which means her Eloquence was poorest, yet hardest to learn, and so (but for
necessity) not regarded amongst Stran^gers. Yet afterward those Noblest
Languages lent her Words and English tongue comparable to the best.
phrazes, and turning those Borrowings into Good husbandry, she is now as rich
in Elocution, and as abundant as her prowdest and Best-stored Neighbors.

Whilst thus (as I said before) there was but one Alphabet of Letters, for all
the world to Read by all the people that then lived, might have wrought upon
one piece of work in countries far distant a sunder, without mistaking one
another, and not needing an interpreter to run between them. Which thing
Nymrod (the first Idolater,) perceiving, and not knowing better how to employ
so many thousand Millio^s of Subjects as bowed before him: a fire of Ambition
burned within him, to climb up so high that he might see what was done in
heaven: And for that purpose, workmen were summoned from all the corners of the
Earth, who presently were set to Build the Tower of Babell. But the
Maisterworkema^ of this Great Universe, (to check the Insole^ce Building of
Babell.
of such a Saucy builder) that durst raize up Pynnacles, equal to his own
(above) commanded the selfsame Spirit that was both bred in the Chaos and had
mainteind it in disorder, to be both Surueyor of those works and Comptroller
of the Laborers. This Messenger was called Confusion. It was a Spirit swift of
sight, and faithful of service. Her looks wild, terrible and inconstant.
Confusion described.
Her attire, carelessly, loose, and of a thousand several coulors. In one hand
she gripped a heap of storms with which (at her pleasure) she could trouble
ye waters: In the other she held a whip, to make three Spirits that drew her,
to gallop fastes before her: the Spirits names were Treason, Sedition and War,
who at every time w^ they went abroad, were ready to set Kingdoms in vproare.
She road upon a Chariot of Clownes, w^ was always furnished with Thunder,
Li^htning, Winds, Rain, Haile-stones, Snow, and all the other Artillery
belonging to the service of Divine Vengeance: and when she spoke, her Voice
sounded like the roaring of many Torrents, boystrously struggling together: for
between her Jaws did she carry 1000000. Tongues.

This strange Linguist, stepping to every Artificer that was there at work,
whispred in his ear whoses looks Beginning of languages.
were there upon (presently) (...) with a strange distraction: and on a
sudden whilst every man was speaking to his fellow, his language altered and
no man could understand what his fellow spoke. They all stared one upon
another, yet none of them all could tell wherefore so they stared Their Tongues
went, and their hands gave action to their Tongues: yet neither words nor
action were understood. It was a Noise of a thousand sounds, and yet the sound
of the noise was nothing. He that spoke, knew he spoke well: and he that
heard, was mad that the other could speak no better. In the end they grew
angry one with another, as thinking they had mocked one another of purpose. So
that the Mason was ready to strike the Bricklayer, the Bricklayer to beats out
the brains of his Labourer: the Carpenter took up his Axe to throw at the
Caruer, whilst the Caruer was stabbing at the Smith, because he brought him a
Hammer when he should have made him a Chizzell. He that called for Timber, had
Stones laid before him: and when one was sent for Nails, he fetched a Tray of
Mortar.

Thus Babell should have been raized, and by this means Babell fell. The
Frame could not go forward, the staff was thrown by, the workmen made
hollyday. Every one packd up his tools to be gone, yet not to go the same way
that he came but glad was he, that could meet another, whose speech he
understood for to what place soever he went, others (that ran madding up and
down) hearing a man speak like themselves, followed only him: so that they
who when the work began were all countrymen, before a quarter of it was
finished, fled from one another, as from enemies and strangers: And in this
manner did Men at the first make up nations: thus were words coynd into
Languages, and out of those Languages have others been molded since, only by
the mixture of nations, after kingdoms have been subdued. But I am now to
speak of a People and a Language, of both which (many thousands of years
since that Wonder wrought at Babell) the world till now never made mention: yet
confusion never dwelt more amongst any Creatures. The Bell-ma^ (in his first
Voyage which The Bellma^s first book.
he made for Discoueries) found them to be savages, yet living in an Island
very te^pera^e, fruitful, full of a Noble Nation, and rarely governed. The
Laws, Ma^ners and habits of these Wild-men, are plainly set down, as it were
in a former painted Table. Yet least happily a stranger may look upon this
second Picture of them, who neuerbeheld The first, it shall not be amiss (in
this place) to repeat over again the Names of all the Tribes into which they
Divide themselves, both when they Serve abroad in the open fields, and when
they lie in garrison within Towns and walled Cities.

And these are their Ranks as they stand in order. viz.
Rufflers. Vpright-men. Hookers, alias Anglers, Roagues. Wild Roagues.
Priggers of Prancers. Paillards. Fraters. Prigges. Swadders. Curtalls. Irish
Toils. Swigmen. Iarkmen. Patricoes. Kinchin-Coes. Abraham-men, Mad Tom alias
of Bedlam Whip-Iackes. Counterfeit Crankes. Dommerats. Glymmerers.
Bawdy-Baskets. Autem Morts. Doxies. Dells. Kinchin-Morts.
Into thus many Regiments are they now divided: but in former times (above
four hundred years now past) they did consist of five Squadrons only.

viz. 1 Cur^ors, alias Vagabondes. 2 Faytors. 3 Robardsemen. 4 Draw-latches. 5
Sturdy Beggars.

And as these people are strange both in names and in their conditions, so do
they speak a Language (proper only to themselves) called canting, which is
more strange. Of canting. Howlong,
By none but the soldiers of These tottred bands is it familiarly or usually
spoken, yet within less then fourescorce years (now past) not a word of this
Language was known. The first Inuentor of it, was hanged, yet left he apt
scholars behind him, who have reduced that into Method, which he on his
deathbed (which was a pair of gallows) could not so absolutely perfect as he
desired.

It was necessary, that a people (so fast increasing, and so Canting ha^ bin
used. The first canter hanged.
daily practicing new and strange Villainies, should borrow to themselves a
speech, we (so near as they could (none but themselves should understand: and
for that cause was this Language, (which some call Pedlers French,) Inverted,
to the intent that (albeit any Spies should secretly How canting grevv to be a
language.
steal into their companies to discover the) they might freely utter their
minds one to another, yet avoid ye danger. The Language therefore of canting,
they study even from their Infancy, that is to say, from the very first hour,
that they take upon them the names of Kinchin Coes, tillthey are grown
Rufflers, or Vpright-men, which are the highest in degree amongst them.

This word canting seems to be derived from the latin verb (canto) which
signifies in English, to sing, or to make a sound with words, that's to say to
speak. And very aptly may canting take his deriuatio^ a cantando, from
singing, because amongst these beggarly consorts that can play upon no better
instruments, the language of canting is a k^de of music, and he that in such
assemblies can c^nt best, is counted the best Musician.

Now as touching the Dialect or phrase it self, I see not that it is grounded
upon any certain rules; And no marvel if it have none, for sithence both the
Father of this new kind of Learning, and the children that study to speak it
after him, have been from the beginning and still are, the Breeders and
Norishers of albase disorder, in their living and in their Manners: how is it
possible, they should observe any Method in their speech, and especialy in such
a Language, as serves but only to utter discourses of villainies?

And yet (even out of all that Irregularity, vnhansomnesse, and Fountain of
Barbarism) do they draw a kind of form: and in some words, (as well simple
as compounds) retain a certain salt, tasting of some wit and some Learning.
As for example, they call a cloak (in the canting tongue) a Togeman, and in
Latin, Toga signifies a gown, or an upper garment. Pannam is bread: and Panis
in Lattin is likewise bread, cassan is cheese, and is a word barbarously coynd
out of the substa^tiue caseus which also signifies cheese. And so of others.

Then by joining of two simples, do they make almost all their compounds. As
for example: Nab (in the canting The Dialect of canting.
tongue) is a head, and Nab-cheate, is a hat or a cap, Which word cheat being
coupled to other words, stands in verry good stead, and dees excellent
service: For a Smelling cheat, signifies a Nose: a Prat-ling chete, is a
tongue. Crashing chetes, are teeth: Hearing chetes are Ears: Fambles are
Hands: and thereupon a ring is called a Fa^bling chete. A Muffling chete,
signifies a Napkin. A Belly chete, an Apron* A Grunting chete, A Pig: A
Cackling Chete, a Cock or a Capon: A Quacking chete, a duck: A Lowghing chete,
a Cow: A Bleating chete, a Calfe, or a Shee^e: and so may that word be married
to many others besides.

The word Coue, or Cofe, or Cuffin, signifies a Man, a Fellow, etc. But differs
something in his property, according as it meets with other words: For a
Gen, tleman is called a Gentry Coue, or Cofe: A good fellow is a Been Cofe: a
Churl is called, a Quier Cuffin; Quier signifies naught, and Cuffin (as I said
before) a man: and in Canting they term a Justice of peace, (because he
punishes them belike) by no other name then by Quier cuffin, that is to say a
Churl, or a naughty man. And so, Ken signifiing a house, they call a prison, a
Quier ken, that's to say, an ill house.

Many pieces of this strange coin could I show you, but by these small
stampes, you may judge of the greater.

Now because, a Language is nothing else then heaps of words, orderly wouen
and composed together: and that (within so narrow a circle as I have drawn to
my self) it is impossible to imprint a Dictionarie of all the Canting phrases:
I will at this time not make you surfeit on too much, but as if you were walking
in a Garden, you shall openly pluck here a flower, and there another, which (as
I take it) will be more delightful then if you gathered them by handfulls.

But before I lead you into that walk, stay and hear a Canter in his own
language, making (...), albeit (I think) those charms of Poesy which (at the
first) made the barbarous tame, and brought them to ciuil^y, can (upon these
savage Monsters) work no such wonder. Yet thus he singes (upon demand
whether any of his own crew did come that way) to which he answers, yes (quoth
he)

Canting rithmes.
ENough -- with bowsy Coue maund Nace,
Tour the Patring Coue in the Darkeman Case,
Docked the Dell, for a Coper meke,
His wach shall feng a Prounces Nab-chete,
Cyar^m, by Salmon, and thou shall pek my Iere
In thy Began, for my watch it is nace gere,
For the been bowse my watch has a win etc.
This short Lesson I leave to be construed by him that is desirous to try his
skill in the language, which he may do by help of the following Dictionary;
into which way that he may more redily come, I will translate into English,
this broken French that follows in Prose. Two Canters having wrangled a while
about some idle quarrel, at length growing friends, thus one of them speaks
to the other. viz.

A Canter in prose.
STowe you been Cofe: and cut benar whiddes and bing we to Rome vile, to nip a
boung: so shall we have lowre for the bowsing ken, and when we beng back to
the Dewese a vile, we will filch some Duddes, off the Ruffmans, or mill the Ken
for a lagge of Dudes.

Thus in English
Stowe you, been cofe: hold your peace good fellow,
And cut benar whiddes: and speak better words.
And bing we to Rome vile: and go we to London.
To nip a boung: to cut a purse.
So shall we have lowre: so shall we have money.
For the bowsing Ken, for the Alehouse.
And when we bing back: and when we come back.
To the Dewse-a-vile: into the Country.
We will filch some duddes: we will filch some clothes,
Off the Ruffmans: from the hedges,
Or mill the Ken: or rob the house,
For a lagge of Duddes: for a bucke of clothes.
Now turn to your dictionary.
ANd because you shall not have one dish twice set before you, none of those
Canting words that are englished before shall here be found: for our intent is
to feast you with variety.

The Canters Dictionarie.
AVtem, a church.
Autem-mort, a married waman.
Boung, a purse.
Board, a shilling.
Half a Board, six pence.
Bowse, drink.
Bowsing Ken, an alehouse.
Been, good.
Beneship, very good:
Bufe, a Dog,
Bing a wast, get you hence.
Caster, a Cloak.
A Commission, a shirt.
Chates, the Gallows.
To cly the Ierke, to be whipped.
To cut, to speak.
To cut been, to speak gently.
To cut been whiddes, to speak good words.
To cut quier whiddes, to give evil language.
To Cant, to speak.
To couch a Hogshead, to lie down a sleep.
Drawers, Hosen.
Dudes, clothes.
Darkemans, the night.
Dewse-a-vile, the country,
Dup the Giger, open the door.
Fambles, hands.
Fambling Chete, a King.
Flag, a Goat
Glasiers, eyes.
Began, a mouth.
Gage, a Quart pott.
Grannam, Corn.
Gybe, a writing.
Glymmer, fire.
Gigger, a door
Gentry Mort, a Gentlewoman*
Gentry cofes Ken, a Noble man's house*
Harman bek, a Constable.
Harmans, the Stocks.
Heave a bough, rob a Boothe.
Iarke, a Seal.
Ken, a house.
Lage of Dudes, a Bucke of clothes.
Libbege, a bed.
Lowre, money.
Lap, Butter, Milk, or Whaye.
Libken, a house to lie in.
Lage, Water.
Light-mans, the day.
Mynt, Gold.
A Make, a halfe-penny.
Margery prater, a Hen.
Mawnding, asking.
To Mill, to steal.
Mill a Ken, rob a house.
Nosegent, a Nun.
Niggling, companying with a woman.
Pratt, a Buttock.
Peck, meat.
Poplars. Pottage.
Prancer, a Horse.
Prigging, Kiding.
Patrico, a Priest.
Pad, a way.
Quaromes, a body.
Ruff-peck, Bacon.
Roger, or Tib of the Buttry, a Goose.
Rome-vile, London.
Rome-bowse, Wine.
Rome-mort, a Queen.
Ruffmans, the woods, or bushes.
Ruffian, the Devil.
Stampes: legs.
Stampers? shoes.
Slate: a sheet.
Skew: a cup.
Solomon: the mass.
Stuling ken: a house to receive stolen goods.
Skipper: a barn.
Strommel, straw.
Smelling chete, an Orchard or Garden.
To scowre the Cramp-ring: to wear boults.
Stalling: making or ordeyning.
Tryning: hanging.
To twore: to see.
Wyn: a penny.
Yarum: milk.
And thus have I builded up a little Mint, where you may coin words for your
pleasure. The payment of this was a debt: for the Belman at his farewell (in
his first Round which he walked) promised so much. If he keep not touch, by
tendering the due Sum, he desires forbearance, and if any that is more rich
in this Canting commodity will lend him any more, or any better, he will pay
his love double: In the mean time, receive this, and to give it a little more
weight, you shall have a Ca^ting song, wherein you may learn, how This cursed
Generation pray, or (to speak truth) curse such Officers as punish them.

A Canting song.
THe Ruffin cly the nab of the Harman beck,
If we mawn^d Pannam, lap or Ruff-peck,
Or poplars of yarum: he cuts, bing to the Ruffmans,
Or else he swears by the light-mans,
To put our stamps in the Harmans.
The ruffian cly the ghost of the Harmanbeck,
If we heave a booth we cly the Ierke.
If we niggle, or mill a bowsing Ken,
Or nip a boung that has but a win,
Or dup the giger of a Gentry cofes ken,
To the quier cuffing we bing,
And then to the quier Ken, to scowre the Cramp-ring,
And then to the Trin'de on the chates, in the lightmans
The Bube and Ruffian cly the Harman beck and harmans.
Thus Englished.
THe Devil take the Constables head,
If we beg Bacon, Butter-milke or bread.
Or Pottage, to the hedge he bids us hie,
Or swears (by this light) ith stocks we shall lie.
The Devil haunt the Constables ghoast,
If we rob but a Booth, we are whipd at a poast.
If an alehouse we rob, or be taken with a whore,
Or cut a purse that has just a penny and no more,
Or come but stealing in at a Gentleman's door,
To the Justice straight we go,
And then to the Iayle to be shackled: And so
To be hanged on the gallows ith day time: the pox
And the Devil take the Constable and his stocks.
We haus Canted (I fear) too much, let us now giu^ ^are to the Bel-man, and
hear what he speaks in english.

THE BEL-MANS SECOND Nights walk. CHAP. 2
IT was Terme-time in hell (for you must understand, a Lawyer lives there as well
as here:) by which means don Lucifer (being the justice Qui fixit leges (...)
atque ^efixit.
for that County, where the Brimstone mines are) had better doings and more
rapping at his gates, then all the Doctors and Empericall Quack-saluers of ten
cities have at theirs in a great plague-time. The hal where these Termers were
to try their causes, was very large A description of the Hall where matters are
tried in He^l.
and strongly built, but it had one fault: it was so hot that people could not
endure to walk there: Yet to walk there they were compelled, by reason they
were drawn thither upon occasions, and such iustling there was of one
another, that it would have grieved any man to be in the thronges amongst em.
Nothing could be heard but noise, and nothing of that noise be understood, but
that Hinc exaudir gemitus, etc
it was a sound as of men in a kingdom, when on a sudden it is in an uproar.
Every one brabled with him that he walked with, or if he did but tell his tale
to his Council, he was so eager in the verry delivery of that tale, that you
would have sworn he did brabble: and The judge of the court, Haec Rhadaman^us
babe^ durissima regna; Castigatque ditque dolos, subig^que (...), etc.
such gnashing of teeth there was when adversaries met together, that the
fyling of ten thousand Sawes cannot yield a sound more horrible. The Judge of
the Court had a devilish countenance, and as cruel he was in punishing those
that were condemned by Law, as he was crabbed in his looks, whilst he sat to
hear their trials. But albeit there was no pity to be expected at his hands,
yet was he so upright in justice, that none could ever fasten bribe upon him,
for he was ready and willing to hear the cries of all comers. Neither durst
any Pleader (at the infernal Bar) or any officer of the Court, exact any Fee
of Plaintiffes, and such as complained of wrongs and were oppressed: but only
they (...).
paid that were the wrong dooers, those would they see dambd ere they should
get out of their fingers, such fellows they were appointed to vex at the
very soul.

The matters that here were put in suit, were more then could be bred in
twenty Uacations, yet should a man be dispatched out of hand. In one Term he
had The customs and condition of the court.
his Judgment, for hear they never stand upon Returns, but presently come
to Trial. The causes decided here are many; the Clients that complain many;
the Counselors (that plead till they be hoarse,) many; the Attorneys (that
run up and down,) infinite; the Vnde nunqua^ quum semel venit potuit e^uerti.
Clerks of the Court, not to be numbered. All these have their hands full; day
and night are they so plagued with the bawling of Clients that they never can
rest.

The Inck wherewith they write, is the blood of Coniurers: they have no Paper,
but all things are engrossed in Parchment, and that Parchment is made of
Scriueners skins flead off, after they have been puni^ed for Forgerie: their
Standishes are the Scu^s of Usurers: their Pens, the bones of unconscionable
Brokers, and hard-hearted Creditors, that have made dice of other men's bones,
or else of perjured Excecutors and blind Ouer-seeers, that have eaten up
Widows and Orphans to the bare bones: and those Pens are made of purpose
without Nebs, because they, may cast Inck but slowly, in mockery of those who
in their life time were slow in yielding drops of pity.

Would you know what actions are tried here? I will What matters are tried
before the Devil.
but turn over the Records, and read them unto you as they hang upon the
Fyle.

The Cou^^er is sued here, and condemned for Ryots.

The Soldier is sued here and condemned for murders

The Scholar is sued here and condemned for He^ezies.

The Citizen is sued here and condemned for the cityfins.

The Farmer is sued here upon Penal Statutes, and condemned for spoiling the
Markets. (...) Quique arm^ secuti impia. (...) Epulaeque ante
eraparatae-furiarum maxima iux^ accubat, and manibus prohibet contingere mens^.


Actions of battery are brought against Swaggerers, and here they are bound
to the peace.

Actions of Waste are brought against drunkards and Epicures, and here they
are condemned to beg at the Grate for one drop of cold water to cool their
tongues, or one (...) of bread to stay their hunger, yet are they denied it.

Harlots have process sued upon them here, and are condemned to Howling, to
Rottenness and to Stench. No Acts of Parliament that have passed the Heaven
Upperhouse, can be broken, but here the breach is punished, and that severely,
and that suddenlly: For here they stand upon no demurres; no Audita-Queraela
can here be gotten, no writs of Errors to Reuerse Judgment: here is no
flying to a court of Chancery for relee^, yet every one -- Exercentur Pae^s,
eternu^que malorum. Supplicia expend^
that comes heather is served with a Sub-poena. No, they deal altogether in
this Court upon the Habeas Corpus, upon the Capias, upon the Ne exeat Regneum,
upon Rebellion, upon heavy Fines (but no Recoueries) upon writers of
Out-lary, to attache the body for ever, and last of all upon Executions, after
Judgment, which being served upon a man is his everlasting vnd^oing.

Such are the Customs and courses of proceedings in the Offices belonging to
the Prince of Darkness. These hot doings has he in his Terme-times. But upon
a day when a great matter was to be tried between an Englishman and a
Dutchman, which of the two were the fowlest Drinkers, and the case being a long
time in arguing, by reason that strong evidence came in re^ling on both sides,
(yet it was thought that the Englishman would carry it away, and cast the
Dutchman) on a sudden all was staid by the sound of a horn that was heard at
the lower end of the Hall. And every one looking back (as wondering at the
strangeness) too me room was cride and made through the thickest of the
crowde, for a certain spirit in the likeness of a post who made away on a
little lean Nagge by to the Bench where Judge Rad amanth with his two grim
Brothers (Minos and Aeacus) sat. This spirit was an intelligencer sent by
Beelzebub of Batharum into some Countries of Christendom, to lie there as a
spy, ^had brought with him a packet of letters from several Leigiars, that
lay in those Countries, for the service of the Tartarian their Lord and
Master, which packet being opened, all the Letters, (because they concernd the
general good and state of those low Countries in Hell) were publicly read.
The contents of ^ranci Reg^.
that Letter stung most, and put them all out of their lawcases, were to this
purpose.

THat whereas the Lord of Fiery Lakes, had his Ministers A letter against the
Bel-man
in all kingdoms above the earth, whose Offices were not only to win
subjects of other Princes to his obedience, but also to give notice when any of
his own sworn household, or any other that held league with him should revolt
or fly from their duty and allegiance: as also discover from time to time all
plots, conspiracies, machinations, or underminings, that skold be laid (albeit
they that durst lay them should dig deep enough) to blow up his great
Internal city: so that if his Horned Regiment were not suddenly mustred
together, and did not lustely bestirre their cloven stumps, his Territories
weld be shaken, his dominions left in time vnpeopl'd, his forces looked into,
and his authority which he held in the world, contemned and laughed to
scorn. The reason was, yt a certain fellow. The Child of Darkness, a common
The Belman
Night-walker, a man that had no man to wait upon him but only a Dog, one
that was a disordered person, and at midnight would beat at men's doors,
bidding them (in mere mockery) to look to their candles when they themselves
were in their dead sleeps: and albeit he was an Officer, yet he was but of
Light-carriage, being known by the name of the Bell-man of London, had of late
not only drawn a number of the Devils own kindred into question for their
lives, but had also (only by the help of the lanthorn and candle) looked into
the secrets of the best trades that are taught in hell, laying them open to the
broad eye of the world, making them infamous, edious, and ridiculous: yea, and
not satisfied with doing this wrong to his diuellship, very spitefullye has
he set them out in print, drawing their pictures so to the life, that now a
horse-stealet shall not show his head, but a balter with the Hang-mans noose is
ready to be fastened about it: A Foyst nor a Nip shall not walk into a Fair
or a Playhouse, but every crack will cry look to your purses: nor a poor
common Rogue come to a man's door, but he shall be examined if he can cant? If
this Baulling fellow therefore have not his mouth stopped, the light Angels that
are coynd below, will never be able to pass as they have done, but be naild
up for counterfeits, Hell will have no doings, and the devil be nobody.

This was the lyning of the Letter, and this Letter drove them al to a
Nonplus, because they knew not how to answer it. But at last advice was
taken, the Court brake up, the Term was adiourn'd, (by reason that the
Hell-houndes were thus Plagued) and a common counsel in hell was presently
called how to redres these abuses.

The Sathanicall Sinagogue being set, up startes the Father of Hell and
damnation, and looking verrie terribly with a pair of eyes that stared as wide
as the mouth gapes at Bishops-gate, fetching four or five deep sighs (which
were nothing else but the Smoke of fire and brimstone boiling in his stomach,
and showed as if he were taking tobacco, which be often times does) told his
children and servants (and the rest of the citizens that dwelt wichin the
freedom of Hell, and sat there before him upon narow low forms) that they
never had more cause to lay their heads together, and to grow pollititians. He
and they all knew, that from the Corners of the earth, some did every hour in
a day creep forth, to come and serve him: yea, that many thousands were so be
witched with H^c omnis turba.
his favors, and his rare parts, that they would come running quick to him,
his dominions (he said) were great and full of people: Emperors and Kings, (in
infinite numbers) were his slaves: his court was full of Princes: if the world
were divided (as some report) but into three parts Innum^rae ge^ (...) populique
two of those three were his: or if (as others affirm) into four parts,
almost three of that four had he firm footing.

But if such a fellow as a treble voic'd Bel-man, should be suffered to pry
into the infernal Mysteries, and into those Black Acts which command the
spirits of the Deep, and having sucked what knowledge he can from them, to
turn it al into poison, and to spit it in the very faces of the professors,
with a malicious intent to make them appear ugly and so to grow hateful and
out of favor with ye world: if such a coniurer at midnight should dance in
their circles and not be driven out of them, hell in a few years would not be
worth the dwelling in. The great Lord of Limbo did therefore command all his
Black Guard that stood about him, to bestirre them in their places, and to
defend the Court wherein they lived: threatening (besides) that his curse, and
all the plagues of stinking hell should fall upon Grauco^entis (...).
his officers, servants, and subjects, unless they either aduiz'd him, how, or
take some speedy order themselves to punish that saucy intelligencer, the
Bel-man of London. Thus he spoke and then sat.

At last, a foolish Devil rose up, and shot the bolt of his advice, which flew
thus far, That the Blacke-dogge of Newgate should again be let loose, and
a far off, follow the Balling Bel-man, to watch into what plac^s he went,
and what deeds of darkness (every night) he did. Hinc risus! The whole
Syniodicall assembly, fell a laughing at this Wise-acre, so that neither he nor
his blacke-Dogge durst bark any more.

Another, thinking to cleave the verrie pin with his arrow, drew it home to
the head of Wisdom (as he imaginde) and yet that lighted wide too, But thus
shot his Counsel, that the Ghosts of all those thieves, Cheaters, and others
of the damned crew, (who by the Bel-mans discovery, had been betrayed, were
taken and sent westward) should be fetched from those fields of Horror, where
every night they walk, disputing with Doctor Story, who keeps them company
there in his corner Cap: and that those wry-neck'd spirits should have charge
given them to haunt the Bel-man in his walks, and so fright him out of his
wits. This Devil for all his roaring, went away neither with a Plaudite, nor
with a hiss: Others stepped up, some pronouncing one verdict some another: But
at the last, it being put into their Devilish heads, that they had no power
over him farther then what should be giueu unto them, it was concluded and set
down as a rule in Court, that some one strange spirit, (...) could transport
himself into all shapes, should be sent up to London, and scorning to take
revenge upon so mean a person as a Bel-ringer, should thrust himself into
such companyes, (as in a warrant to be signed for that purpose) should be
nominated: and being once grown familiar with them, he was to work and
win them by all possible means to fight under the dismal and black
colors of the Grand Sophy, (his Lord and Master:) the fruit that was to grow
upon this tree of evil, would be great, for it should be fit to be served
up to Don Lucifers Table, as a new banqueting Dish, sithence all his other
meats, (though they fatted him well) were grown stale

Hereupon Pamersiell the Messenger was called, a pasport was drawn, signed and
delivered to him, with certain instruments how to carry himself in this
travel. And thus much was openly spoken to him by word of mouth.

Fly^ Pamersi^l with speed to the great and populous city in the West: wind
thy self into all shapes: be a Dog (to fawn) a Dragon (to confound) be a
Dou^ (seem innocent) be a Devil (as thou art) and show that thou art a
Iorniman to hell. Build rather thy nest amongst willowes that bend every way,
then on tops of Oaks, whose hearts are hard to be broken: Fly with the
Swallow, close to ye earth, when storms are at hand, but keep company with
Birds of greater tallants, when the weather is clear, and never leave them
till they look like Ravens: creep into bosom^ that are buttond up in satin
and there spread the wings of thine infection: make every head thy pillow to
lean upon, or use it like a Mill, only to grind mischief. If thou meetst a
Dutchman, drink with him: if a Frenchman, stab: if a Spaniard, betray: if an
Italian poison: if an Englishman do all this.

Haunt Tauerns, there thou shall (...) yrodigalls: pay thy twopence to a
Player, in his gallerie may thou sit by a Harlot: at Ordinaries may thou
dine with silken fools: when the day steals out o^ ^orld, thou shall meet
rich drvnkards, under wel^ gowns search for threescore in the hundred, hug
those golden villains, they shine bright, and will make a good show in hell,
shriek we a cricket in the brew house, and watch how they conjure there: Ride
up and down Smith-field, and play the Jade ther^: Uisit prisons, and teach
Iaylors how to make nets of Iron there: bind thy self Prentice to the best
trades: but if thou can grow extreme rich in a very short time, (honestly)
I banish thee my kingdom, come no more into hell, I have red thee a lecture,
follow^ it, farewell.

No sooner was farewell spoken, but the spirit to whom all these matters were
given in charge, vanished: the clo^en footed Orator arose, and the whole
assembly went about their damnable business.

Gul-groping.
How Gentlemen are cheated at Ordinaries.

Chap. 3
THe Devils foote-man was very nimble of his heels (for no wilde-Irish man
could out-runne him, and therefore in a few hours, was he come up to London:
the miles between Hell and any place upon earth being shorter then those
between London and Saint Albones, to any man that travels from thence thither,
or to any Lackey that comes from hence hither on the Devils errands: but to any
other poor soul, that dwells in those low contries, they are never at an end,
and by him are not possible to be measured.

No sooner was he entered into the City, but he met with one of his Masters
daughters called Pride, dressed like a Matchants wife, who taking acquaintance of
him, and understanding for what he came, told him, that the first thing he
was to do, he must put himself in good clothes, such as were suitable to the
fashion of the time, for that here, men were looked upon only for their
outsides: he that had not ten-pounds-worth of wares in his shop, would carry
twenty marks on his back: that there were a number of sumpter-borses in the
city, who cared Aus^rimur cultu; Gemmis aureque tegnutur omnia.
not how coursely they fed, so they might were gay trappings: pea, that some
pied fools, to put on satin and velvet but four days in the year did
oftentimes undo themselves, wives and Children ever after. The spirit of the
Devils Buttry hearing this, made a leg to Pride for her counsel, and knowing
by his own experience that every Tailor has his bell to himself, under his
Shop-board, (where he dammes new Satin) amongst them he thought to find best
welcome, and therefore into Burchin-lane he stalks very mannerly, Pride
going along with him, and taking the upper hand.

No sooner was he entered into the ranks of the Linen Burchin lane described.
Tailors at first were called L^n. Armorers. serieants
Armorers, (whose weapons are Spanish needles) but he was most terribly and
sharply set upon every: prentice boy had a pull at him: he feared they all
had bin Serieants, because they all had him by the back: never was poor devil
so tormented in hell, as he was amongst them: he thought it had been Saint
Thomas his day, and that he had been called upon to be Constable: there was
such balling in his ears: and no strength could shake them off, but that they
must shows him some suites of apparel, because they saw what Gentlewoman was
in his company (whom they all knew) Seeing no remedy, into a shop he goes, was
fitted bravely, and beating the price, found the lowest to be unreasonable, yet
paid it, and departed, none of them (by reason of their crowding about him
before) perceiving what customer they had met with, but now the Tailor spying
the devil, suffered him to go, never praying that he would know the shop
another time, but looking round about his warehouse if nothing were missing,
at length he found that he had lost his conscience: yet remembering himself,
that they who deal with the devil, can hardly keep it, he stood upon it the
less.

The fashions of an Ordinary.
THe Stigian traveler being thus translated into an accomplished gallant,
with all acoutrements belonging (as a fether for his head, gilt rapier for his
sides, and new boots to hide his polt foot (for in Bed-lam be met with a
shoemaker, a mad slave, that knew the length of his last) it rested, only that
now he was to enter upon company suitable to his clothes: and knowing that
your most selected Gallants are the only table-men that are played with all at
Ordinaries, into an Ordinary did he most gentleman like, convey himself in
state.

It seemed that al who came thither, had clocks in their bellies, for they all
struck into the dyning room much aabout the very minute of feeding. Our
Caualier had all the eyes (that came in (thrown upon him, (as being a
stranger^ for no Ambassador from the devil ever dined amongst them before,)
and he as much took especial notes of them. In observing of whom and of the
place he found, that an Ordinary was the only Rendeuouz for the most ingenious,
most terse, most trauaild, and most fantastic gallant: the very Exchange for
news out of al countries: the only Booke-sellers shop for conference of the
best Editions, that if a woman (to be a Lady (would cast away herself upon a
knight, there a man should hear a Catalogue of most of the richest London
widows: (...) last, that it was a school where they were all fellows of one
Form, and that a country gentleman was of as great coming as ye proudest
Justice that sat there on ye bench above him: for he that had the grain of the
table with his trencher, paid no more then he that placed himself beneath the
salt.

The diverse intelligencer could not be contented to fill his eye only with
these objects, and to feed his belly with delicate cheer: But he drew a
larger picture of all that were there, and in these colors.

The vcider having cleared the table; Cards and Dice (for the last Mess) are
served up to the board: they that are full of coin, draw: they that have
little, stand by and give aim: they shuffle and cut on one side: the bones
rattle on the other: long have they not plaide, but others fly up and down the
room like haile-shot: if the poor dumb dice be but a little out of square,
the pox and a thousand ^plagues break their necks out at window: presently
after, the four knaves are sent packing the same way, or else (like heretics
are) condemned to be burnt.

In this battle of Cards and Dice, are several Regiments and several
Officiers.

They that sit down to play, are at first called Leaders.

They that loose, are the Forlorn Hope.

He that winnes all, is the Eagle.

He that stands by and Uentures, is the Wod-pecker.

The fresh Gallant that is fetched in is The Gull,

H^ that stands by, and lends, is the Gull-groper.

The Gull-groper.
THis Gul-groper is commonly an old Mony-mo^ger, who having trauaild through
all the follyes of the world in his youth, knows them well, and shunnes them
in his age, his whole felicity being to fill his bags with gold and silver:
he comes to an Ordinary, to save charges of housekeeping, and will eat for
his two shillings, more meat then will serve three of the guard at a dinner,
yet swears he comes thither only for the company, and to converse with
trauailers. Its a Gold-Finch that fildome flies to these Ordinary Nests,
without a hundred or two hundred pound in twenty shilling pieces about him.
After the tearing of some seven pair of Cards, or the damning of some ten
bail of Dice, steps he upon the Stage, and this part he plays. If any of the
Forlorn Hope be a Gentleman of Means, either in Esse, or in Posse* (and that
the old Fox will be sure to know to half an Acre,) whose money runs at a
low ebb, as may appear by his scratching of the head, and walking up and
down the room, as if he wanted an Ostler: The Gull-groper takes him to a side
window and tells him, he is sorry to see his hard luck, but the Dice are made of
women's bones, and will cozen any man, yet for his fathers sake (whom he has
known so long) if it please him, he shall not leave off play for a hundred
pound or two. If my young Estrich gape to swallow down this metal (and for
the most part they are very greedy, having such prouander set before them) then
is the gold powered on the board, a Bond is made for repaiment, at the next
quarter day when Exhibition is sent in: and because it is all gold, and cost so
much the changing, The Scriuener (who is a whelpe of the old Mastiues own
breeding) knows what words will bite, which thus he fastens upon him, and in
this Net the Gull is sure to be taken (howsoever:) for if he fall to play
again, and loose, the hoary Goat-bearded Satyr that stands at his elbow,
laughes in his sleeue: if his bags be so recovered of their Fallingsicknes,
that they be able presently to repay the borrowed gold, then Monsieur
Gul-groper steals away of purpose to avoid the receipt of it; he has fatter
Chickens in hatching: it is a fayrer mark he shootes at. For the day being come
when the bond grows due, the within named Signior Auaro will not be within: or
if he be at home, he has wedges enough in his pate, to cause the bond to be
broken, or else a little before the day, he feeds my young Master with such
sweet words, that surfeiting upon his protestations, he neglects his payment,
as presuming he may do more But the Law having a hand in the forfeiture of the
bond, lays presently hold of our young Gallant with the help of a couple of
Serieants, and just at such a time when old Erra Pater (the Jew,) that lent him
the money, knows by his own Prognostication, that the Moon with the silver
face is with him in the waine. Nothing then can free him out of the phanges of
those bloudhounds, but he must presently confess a judgment, for so much
money, or for such a Manor or Lordship (three times worth the bond forfeited)
to be paid or to be entered upon by him, by such a day or within so many months
after he comes to his land. And thus are young heirs coozend of their Acres,
before they well know where they lie.

The Wood-pecker.
THe Wood-pecker is a bird that sits by upon a perch too: but is nothing so
dangerous, as this Uulture spoken of before. He deals altogether upon
Returns, (as men do that take three for one, at their coming back from
Jerusalem etc.) for having a Jewel, a Clock, a King with a Diamond, or any
such like commodity, he notes him well that commonly is best acquainted with
the Dire, and has ever good luck: to him he offers his prize, rating it at ten
or fifteen pound, when happily it is not worth above six and for it he bargains
to receive five shillings or ten shillings (according as it is in value) at
every hand, second, third, or fourth hand he brawed: by which means be perhaps
in a short time, makes that yield h^nforty or fifty pound, which cost not half
twenty, Many of these Merchant venturers sail from Ordinary to Ordinary, being
sure always to make saving ^oiages, when they that put in ten times more then
they, are for the most part loosers,

The Gull.
NOw if either The Leaders, or The Forlorn Hope, or any of the rest, th^ce to
hear of a young Fresh Water soldier that never before followed these strange
wars, and yet has a Charge newly given him (by the old fellow Soldado
Vecchio his father, when Death had shotit him into the Grave) of some ten or
twelve thousand in ready money, besides so many hundreds a year: first are
Scoutes sent out to discover his Lodging, that known: some lie in ambush to
note what Apothecaries shop he resorts too every morning, or in what
Tobacco-shop in Fleet Street he takes a pipe of Smoke in the afternoon: that
fort which the Puny holds, is sure to be beleaguerd by the whole troop of the
old weather beaten Gallants: amongst whom some one, whose (...) thought to be
of a better block for his head, than therest, is appointed to single out our
Nouice, and after some faure or five days spent in Complement, our heir to
seven hundred a year is drawn to an Ordinary, into which he no sooner
enters, but all the old-ones in that Nest slutter about him, embrace, protest,
kiss the hand, Conge to the very garter, and in the end (to show that he is
no small fool, but that he knows his father left him not so much money for
nothing,) the young Cub suffers himself to be drawn to the stake: to flesh
him, Fortune and the Dice (or rather the False dice, that coozen Fortune, and
make a fool of him too) shall so favor him, that he marches away from a
battle or two, the only winner. But after wards, let him play how warily
soever he can, the damned Dice shall cross him, and his silver crosses shall
bless those that play against him: for even they that seem dearest to his
bosom, shall first be ready, and be the foremost to enter with the other
Leaders into conspiracy, how to make spoil of his golden bags. By such
ransacking of Citizens sons wealth, the Leaders maintain themselves brave,
the Forlorne-hope, that drooped before, do'es now gallantly come on. The Eagle
feathers his nest, the Wood-pecker pickes up his crumbs, the Gul-groper grows
fat with good feeding: and the Gull himself, at whom every one has a Pull,
has in the end scarce feathers enough to keep his own back warm.

The Post-maister of Hell, seeing such villainies to go up and down in cloakes
lined clean through with Ueluet, was glad he had such news to send over, and
therefore sealing up a letter full ot it, delivered the same to filthybearded
Charon) their own Water-man) to be conuaide Portiteriba^ horrendus aqua^ and
flumina seruat, Terribilisqua^ lore Charon, Cui plurima mente, Canities
incultae iacet.
first to the Porter of Hell, and then (by him) to the Master ^eeper of the
Devils.

Of Ferreting.
The Man^f undoing Gentlemen by taking up of commodities.

CHAP. IIII.
HUnting is a noble, a manly, and a healthful exercise, it is a very true
picture of war, nay it is a war in it self, for engines are brought into the
field, stratagems are contrived, ambushes are laid, onsets are given, al^arums
struck up, brave incounters are made, fierce assailings are resisted by
strength, by courage, or by policy: the enemy is pursued, and the Pursuers
never give over till they have him in execution: then is a Retreat sounded,
then are spoils divided, then come they home wearied, but yet crowned with
honor and victory. And as in battles there be several manners of fight: so in
the pastime of hunting, there are several degrees of game. Seem hunt the Lion,
and that shows as when subjects rise in Hunting of the Lion etc
Arms against their King: Some hunt the Unicorn for the treasure on his head,
and they are like covetous men, that care not whom they kill for riches: some
hunt the Sp^tted Panther and the freckled Leopard, they are such as to enjoy
their pleasures, regard not how black an infamy sticks upon them: All these
are barbarous and unnatural Huntsemen, for they range up and down the
Deserts, the Wilderness, and inhabitable Mountains. Others pursue the long
lived Heart, the courageous Stag or the nimble footed Dear: these are the
Noblest Hunting of the Bucke.
hunters, and they exercise the Noblest game: these by following the Chase get
strength of body, a free and vndisquieted mind, magnanimity of spirit,
alacrity of heart and an vnwearisomnesse to break through the hardest labors:
their pleasures are not insatiable but are contented to be kept within limits,
for these hunt within Parkes enclosed, or within bounded Forests. The hunting
of the Hare teaches fear to be bold, and puts simplicity so to her shifts,
that she grows cunning Hunting of the Hare.
and provident: the turnings and cresse windings that she makes, are embleames
of (...) ^fes uncertainty: when she thinks she is furdest from danger, it is
at he heels, and when it is nerest to her, the hand of safety defends her.
When she is wearied and has run her race, she takes her death patiently,
only to teach man, that he should make himself ready, when the grave gapes for
him.

All these kinds of hunting are abroad in the open De magno praeda petenda
grege.
field, but there is a close city hunting only within the walls, that pulles
down Parkes, lays open forests, destroies Chaces, wounds the Dear of the
land, and make such havoc of the goodliest Herds, that by their wills, (who
are the rangers,) none should be left a live but the Rascals: This kinds of
hunting is base, and ignoble, It is the meanest, yet the most mischievous, and
it is called Ferreting. To behold acourse or two at this, did the light
horseman of Hell one day leap into the saddle.

Citty-Hunting.
THis Ferret-hunting has his Seasons as other What persons follovv the game of
Ferret hunting.
games have, and is only followed at such a time of year, when the Gentry of
our kingdom by riots, having chased themselves out of the fair revenues and
large possession left to them by their ancestors, are forced to hide their
heads like Conies, in little caves and in unfrequented places: or else being
almost windles, by running after sensual pleasures too feircely, they are glad
Dolor ac v^luptas inuicem cedunt.
(for keeping themselves in breath so long as a they can) to tal to
Ferret-hunting, yt is to say, to take up commodities. No warrant can be
granted for a Bucke in this forest, but it must pass under these five hands.

1 He that hunts up and down to find game, is called the Tombler. The tragedy
of Ferret-hunting divided into 5 acts.
2 The commodities that are taken up are called Pursenets. 3 The Citizen that
selles them is the Ferret. 4 They that take up are the Rabbet-suckers. 5 He,
upon whose credit these Rabbet-suckers run, is called the Warren.
How the Warren is made.
AFter a rain, Conies use to come out of their Holes and to sit nibling on
weeds or any thing in the cool of the evening, and after a reueling when
younger brothers have spent al, or in gaming have lost al, they sit plotting in
their chambers with necessity how to be Nam illa omnes arts perde cet, vbi
quem attigit.
furnished presently with a new supply of money. They would take up any
commodity whatsoever, but their names stand in too many texted letters all
ready in Mercers and Scriueners books: upon a hundred pounds worth of Roasted
bee^e they could find in their hearts to venture, for that would away in
turning of a hand: but where shall they find a Butcher or a Cook that will let
any man run so much upon the score for flesh only? Suppose therefore that
Four of such loose fortuned gallants were tied in one knot, and knew not how
to fasten themselves upon some welthy citizen. At the length it runs into
their heads, that such a young Nouice (who daily serves to fill up their
company) was never entangled in any city limebush: they know his present
means to be good, and those to come to be great: him therefore they lay upon
the Anuill of their wits, till they have wrought him like war, for him-selue as
well as for them: to do any thing in war, or indeed till they have won him
(...) specta^ (...) laeso^; le^untur and ipsi
to slide upon this ice, because he knows not the danger) is he easily drawn:
for he considers within himself that they are all gentlemen well descended,
they have rich fathers, they wear good clothes, have bin gallant spenders, and
do now and then (still) let it fly freely: he is to venture upon no more
rocks than all they, what then should he fear? he therefore resolves to do
it, and the rather because his own exhibition runs low, and that there lack
a great many weeks to the quarter day, at which time, he shall be refurnished
from his father. The Match being thus agreed upon, one of them that has been
an old Ferret-monger, and knows all the tricks of such Hu^ting, seeks out a
Tumb^ that is to say a fellow, who beats the bush for them till ^hey catch the
birds, he himself being contented (as he protests and swears) only with a
few feathers.

The tumblers Hunting dry-foote.
THis Tumbler being let loose runs Snuffing The nature of a London Tumbler.
up and down close to the ground, in the shoppes either of Mercers,
Gouldsmithes, Drapers, Haber-bashers, or of any other trade, where he thinckes
he may meet with a Ferret: and tho upon his very first course, he can find
his ga^e, yet to make his gallants more hungry, and to think he wearies
himself in hunting the more, he comes to them sweating and swearing that the
City Ferrets are so coaped (that's to say have their lips stitched up so close)
that he can hardly get them open to so great a sum as sieve hundred roundes
which they desire. This heat be being chewd town N^l ^bet (...) l^x (...)
du^ius (...), Q^n ^d r^ (...) s^cit.
by the Rabber-suckers almost his their hearts, and is worse to them then
dabbing on the necks to Connies. They bid him if he cannot fasten his teeth
upon plate or Cloth, or Silks, to lay hold on brown paper or Tobacco,
Bartholmew babies, Lute stringes or Hobnailes, or two hundred pounds in Saint
Thomas Onions and the rest in money; the Onions they could get wenches enough
to cry and sell them by the Rope, and what remains should serve them with
mutton. Upon this, their Tumbler trottes up and down again, and at last
lighting on a Citizen that will deal, the names are received, and delivered
to a Scriuener, who enquiring whether they be good men and true, that are to
pass upon the life and death of five hundred pounds, finds that four of
the five, are winde-shaken, and ready to fall into the Lords hands, Marry the
fifth man, is an Oak, and there is hope that he cannot be hewed down in haste.
Upon him therefore the Citizen buildes so much as comes to five hundred
pounds, yet takes in the other four to make them serve as scaffolding, till
the Farm be furnished, and if then it hold, he cares not greatly who takes
them down. In all have, are the bonds sealed, and the commodities delivered,
And then does the Tumbler fetch his second carreere, and that's this.

The Tumblers Hunting Counter.
THe wares which they fished for being in the hand of the five shauers, do now
more trouble their wits how to turn those Wares into reddy money, then before
they were troubled to turn their credits into wares. The Tree being once more
to be shaken, they know it must loose fruit, and therefore their Factor must
barter away theiMarchandise, tho it be withlosse: Abroad is into the City he
Sails for that purpose, and deals with him that sold, to buy his own
Commodities again for ready money; He will not do it under 30. l. loss in the
Hundred: Other Archers bows are tried at the same mark, but al keep much
about one scantling: back therefore comes their Carrier with this news, that no
man will disburse so much present money upon any wares whatsoever. Only he
met by good fortune with one friend (and that friend is himself) who for 10 l.
will procure them a Chapman, marry that chapman will not buy unless he may have
them at 30. l. loss in the Hundred: fuh, try all the Sharers, a por on these
Fox-furd Curmudgions, give that fellow your friend 10. l. for his pains, and
fetch the rest of his money: within an hour after, it is brought, and powered
down in one heap upon a tavern table; where making a goodly show as if it
could never be spent, al of the^ consult what fee the Tumbler is to have for
Hunting so well, and conclude that less then 10. l they cannot give him, which
10. l. is ye first money told out Now let us cast up this Account: In every 100.
l. is lost 30. which being 5. times 30. l. makes 150. l. that Dedit hanc
c^ntagio labe^, et Dabit in plures.
Sum the Ferret puts up clear besides his ouer-prising the wares: unto which
1^0. l lost, ad 10, l more which the Tumbler guls them off, and other 10. l.
which he has for his voyage, al which makes 170. l. which deducted from 500.
l. there remains only 330. to be divided amongst 5. so that every one of ye
partners shall have but 66. l. yet this they all put up merrily, washing down
their losses we Sack and Sugar, whereof they drink that night profoundly.

How the Warren is spoiled.
Whilst this fair weather lasts, and that^ sthere is any grass to nibble
upon. These Rabbee uckers keep to the Warren wherein they fatned. but th cold
day of repaiment approaching, they retire deep into their Caves; so that when
the Ferret makes account to have five before him in chase, four of the five ly
hidden, and are stolen into other grounds. No marvel then if the Ferret grow
fierce and tear open his owniawes, to suck blood from him that is left: no
marvel if he seratch what wool he can from his back: the Pursnets yt were Set
are all Taken up and carried away. The Warren therefore must be Searched, That
must pay for all, over that does he range like a little lord. Sargeants,
Marshals-men, and Baliffes are sent forth, who lie scowting at every corner,
and with terrible paws haunt every walk. In conclusion the bird that these
Hawks fly after, is seazd upon, then are his feathers plucked, his estate
looked into, the^ are his wings broken, his la^^s made over to a stranger: then
must our young son and heir pay 500. l (for which he never had but 66. l.) or
else lie in prison. To keep himself from which, he seals to any bond, enters
into any statut, morgageth any Lordship, Does any thing, Says any thing,
Infelix (...) excidit ipse fuis.
yields to pay any thing, And these City storms (which will wet a man till be
have never a dry thread about him, tho he be kept never so warm) fall not upon
him once or twice: But being a little way in, he cares not how deep he wades:
ye greater his possessions are, the apter he is to Grandia permulto^ te^antur
Flumina rio^.
take up and to be trusted: the more he is trusted, the more he comes in debt,
the farther in debt, the nearer to danger. Thus Gentlemen are wrought upon,
thus are they Cheated, thus are they Ferreted, thus are they Undone.

Fawlconers.
Of a new kind of Hawking, teaching how to catch birds by books.

HVnting and Hawking are of kin, and therefore it is fit they should keep
company together: Both of them are noble Games, and Recreations, honest and
healthful, Hawking.
yet they may so be abused that nothing can be more hurtful. In Hunting, the
Game is commonly still before you, or ^'th hearing, and within a little
compass: In Hawking the game flies far off, and oftentunes out of sight: A
Couple of Rookes therefore (that were birds of Facies non om^ (...), nec diverse
at a men
the last feather) conspired together to leave their nest in the City, and to
flutter abroad, into the country: Upon two lean hac^eies were these two
Doctor doddipols horst, Ciuilly suited, that they might carry about them some
badge of a Scholar.

The devils Ranck-ryder, that came from the last Citty-hu^ting, understanding
that two such Light-horsemen, were gone a Hawking, posts after and ouer-takes
them. After some ordinary highway talk, he begins to question of what
profession they were? One of them smyling scornfully in his face, as thinking
him to be some Gull, (and ^indeed such fellows take all men for Gulles who
they Qui nisi quod ipsifaciunt, nihil rectum putant.
think to be beneath them in quallitie) told him they were Falconers. But the
Fore that followed them seeing no properties, (belonging to a Falconer) about
them smelt knavery, took them for a pair of mad rascals, and therefore resolved
to see at what these Falconers would let fly.

How to cest up the Lure.
AT last on a sudden says on of them to him, sir, we have Sprung a
Patridge, and so fare you well* which words came stammering out with the haste
that they The first Noate
made, for presently the two Forragers of the Country, were upon thr Spur:
Plutoes Post seeing this stood still to watch them, and at length saw them in
maine gallop make toward a goodly fair place, where either some Knight or some
great Gentleman kept, and this goodly house belike was the Partridge which
those falconers had sprung. He being loath to loose his share in this
Hawking, and having power to transform himself as he listed, came thither as
soon as they, but beheld all (which they did) invisible. They both like two
Knights Errant alighted at the Gate, knocked and were let in: the one walks
the Hackneyes in an outward Court, as if he had been but Squire to Sir
Dagonet. The other (as boldly as Saint George when he dared the dragon at his
verrie Den) marches undauntedly up to the Hall, where looking over those poor
creatures of the house, that wear but the bare Blew coats (for A quila non
capit Muscas) what should a Falconer meddle with flies? he only salutes him
that in his eye seems to be a Gentleman like fellow: Of him he asks for his
good Knight or so, and says that he is a * Gentleman come Et qua no^ f^ mus
ipsi, vix e^ nost^a voco:
from London on a business, which he must deliver to his own Worshipful
Ear. Up the stairs does brave Mount-Dragon ascend, the Knight and he
encounter, and with this staff does he valiantly charge upon him.

How the Bird is Caught.
SIr I am a poor * Scholar, and the report of your virtues has drawn me
hither, venturously bold to fix your worthy name as a patronage to a poor
short discourse Sen stos fuit il^ le C^ucus Frange Puer Calamos et inanes
^esere Musas Quid nisi Monstra legis?
which here I dedicate (out of my love) to your noble and eternal Memory: this
speech he vtters barely.

The Hawking pamphleter is then bid to put on, whilst his Miscellane Maecenas;
opens a book fairly aparreld in vellom with gilt fillets and fore-penny silk
ribbon at least, like little streamers on the top of a Marchpane Castle,
hanging dandling by at ye four corners, the title being superficially
suruaide, in the next leaf he sees that the Author he, has made him one of
his Gossips for the book carries his worships name, and under it stands an
Epistle just the length of a Hench-mans grace before dinner, which is long
enough for any book in conscience, unless the writer be unreasonable.

The knight being told before hand, that this little sunbeame of Phoebus
(shining thus briskly in print) has his Mite or At my waiting upon him in the
outward court) thanks him for his love and labor, and considering with
himself, what cost he has been at, and how far he has ridden to come to
him, he knows that Patrons and Godfathers, are to pay scot and lot alike, and
therefore to cherish his young and tender Muse, he gives him four or six
Angels, inuiting him either to stay breakefast, or if the sun-diall of the
hou^e points toward eleven, then to tarry dinner.

How the bird is dressed.
BUt the fish being caught (for which our Heliconian Angler threw out his
lines) with thanks, and legs and kissing his own hand, he parts. No sooner is
he horst, but his Hostler (who all this while walked the iades, and travails
up and down with him (like an vnde serving plaier for half a share) asks this
question Strawes or not? Strawes cries the whole sharer and a half, away then
^ulius quoq* (...).
replies the first, fly to our nest: This nest is never in the same town but
commonly a mile or two off and it is nothing else but the next Tavern they come
to. But the Uillage into which they rode being not able to maintain an
Iuybush, an Alehouse was their Inn: where advancing How birds are dressed after
they be caught.
themselves into the fairest Chamber, and beespeaking the best cheer in the
town for dinner, down they sit, and share before they speak of any thing else:
That done, he that ventures upon all he meets, and discharges the paper
Bullets, (for to tell truth, the other serves but as a sign, and is merely
nobody) begins to discourse, how he carried himself in the action, how he was
encountered: how he stood to his tackling and how well he came off: he calls the
Knight, a Noble fellow, yet they both shrug, and laugh, and swears they are
glad they have Guld him.

More arrows must they shoot of the same length that this first was off, and
therefore there is Trunck full of Trinckets, that's to say, their budget of
Books, is opend again, to see what leaf they are to turn over next, which
whilst they are doing, the Ghost that all this space haunted them and hard what
they said, having excellent, skill in the blacke-art, that's to say in picking
of locks, maks the door suddenly fly open (which they had closely shut. At
his strange entrance they being somewhat aghast, began to shuffle away their
books, but he knowing what cards they plaide withal, offered to cut, and turned
up two Knaves by this trick. My masters (quoth he) I know where you have bin,
I know what you have don, I know what you mean to do, I see now you are
Falconers indeed, but by the (and then he swore a damnable oath) unless you
teach me to shoot in this Birding piece, I will raise the Uillage, send for
the knight whom you boast you have guld, and so disgrace you: for your money I
care not.

The two Free-booters seeing themselves smoakd, told their third Brother, he
seemd to be a gentleman and a boon companion, they prayed him therefore to sit
down with silence, and sithence dinner was not yet ready, he should hear all.

This new kind of Hawking (quoth. one of them) which you see us use can afford no
name vnles^, be at it. viz.

1. He that casts up the Lure is called the Falconer. 2 The Lure that is cast up
is an idle Pamphlet. 3. The Tercel Gentle that comes to the Lure, is some
knight or some gentle man of like quality. 4. The Bird that is preied upon, is
Money. 5. He that walks the horses, and hunts dry foot is called a Mongrell.
The Falconer and his Spaniell.
THe Falconer having scraped together certain small paringes of wit, he
first cuttes them hansomely in pretty pieces, and of those pieces does he patch
up a book. This book he prints at his own charge, the Mongrell running up
ano down to look to the workmen, and bearing likewise some part of the cost,
(for which he enters upon his half share) When it is fully finished, the
Falconer and his Mongrell, or it may be two Falconers join in one,) but
howsoever, it is by them devised what Shire in England it is best to forage
next: that being set down, the Falconers deal either with a Herald for a
note of all the Knights and Gentlemen's names of worth that dwell in that
circuit, which they mean to ride, or else by inquiry get the chiefest of them,
printing of so many Epistles as they have names, ye epistles Dedicatory being
all one, and vary in nothing but in the titles of their patrons.

Having thus furnished themselves and packed up their wa^es, away they trudge
like tinckers, with a budget at strange hawking.
one of their backs, or it may be the circle they mean to conjure in shall
not be out of London, especially if it be Tearme-time, or when a Parliament is
holden (for then they have choice of sweete-meats to feed upon. (If a
gentleman seeing one of these books Dedicated only to his name, suspect it to
be a bastard, that has more fathers besides himself, and to try that, does
defer the Presenter for a day or two, sending in the mean time (as some have
done) into Paul's Churchyard amongst the stationers, to inquire if any such
work be come forth, and if they cannot tell, then to step to the Printers:
Yet have the Falconers a trick to go beyond such Hawks too, for all they
fly so hie. And that is this: The books lie all at the Printers, but not one
line of an epistle to any of them (those bug-bears lurk in T^ebris) if then
the Spy that is sent by his Master, ask why they have no dedications to them,
Mounsier Printer tells him, the author would not venture to add any to them
all, (saving only to that which was given to his Master, until it was known
whether he could accept of it or no.

This sati^es the Patron, this fetches money from him: and this Cozens five
hundred besides. Nay there be othere Bird catchers that use stranger
Quaile-pipes: you shall have fellows, four or fiueina contry, that buying up
any old Book (especially a Sermon, or any other matter of Divinity) that lies
for wast-paper, and is clean forgotten, ad a new-printed Epistle to it, and
with an Alphabet of letters which they carry about them, being able to print any
man's names (for a Dedication) on the sudden, travail up and down most^
Shires in England, and live by this Hawking.

Are we not excellent Falconers now (quoth three half shares?) excellent
v^laines cried the devils Deputy: by this the meat (for dinner came smoking
in, upon which they f^ll most tirannically, yet (for manners sake) offering
first, to the Bali^ of Beelzebub the upper end of the table, but he fearing they
would make a Hawk or a Buzzard of him too, and report they had ridden him like
an Ass, as they had done others, out a doors he flung with a vengeance as he
came.

O sacred Learning* why do thou suffer thy seven leaued tree, to be plucked
by barbarous and most unhallowed hands? Why is thy beatifull Maiden-body,
polluted like a strumpets, and prostituted to beastly and slavish C^rego si neq
ignoreque Pot^a salutor
Ignorance? O thou Base-broode, that make the Muses harlots: yet say they are
your Mothers? You Thieves of Wit, Cheators of Art, traitors of schools of
Learning: murderers of Scholars. More worthy you are, to undergo the Roman
Furca like slaves, and to be brandedith forehead deeper then they that forge
testaments to undo Orphants: Such do but rob children of goods that may be
lost: but you rob Scholars of their Fame, which is deerer then life. You are
not worth an Inuectiue, not worthy to have your names dropp out of a deserving
pen, you shall only be executed in Picture: (as they use to handle
Malefactors in France) and the picture (though it were drawn to be hang up in
another place) shall leave you impudently-arroga^t to yourselues, and
ignominiously-ridiculous to after ages: in these colors, are you drawn.

The true picture of these Falconers.
-- There be Fellows (...) superiquantum pectora cae^ N^ctis Habe^^

Of course and common blood; Mechanicke knaves,
Whose wits lie deeper buried then in graves:
And indeed smell more earthy, whose creation
Was but to give a Boot or Shoe good fashion.
Yet these (throwing by the Apron and the Awle)
Being drunck with their own wit, cast up their gall ^cribimus (...), (...);

Only ofyncke: and in patchd, beggarly Rimes,
(As full of foul corruption, as the Times)
From town to town they s^rowle in soul, as poor
As they are in clothes: yet these at every door,
Their labors Dedicate. But (as at Faires)
Like Pedlars, they show still one sort of wares
Unto all comers (with some filde oration)
And thus to give books, now is an occupation.
One book has seven score patrons: thus desert ^serum est aliorum incu^bere
fa^mae

Is cheated of her due: thus noble art
Gives Ignorance (that common strumpet) place,
Thus the true scholars name grows cheap and base, etc
Iacks of the Clock-house.
A new and cunning drawing of money from Gentlemen.

Chap. 6
THere is another Fraternity of wandering Pilgrims who merrily call themselves
Iackes of the Clocke-house, and are verry near allied to the Falconers that
went a Hawking before. The Clarke of Erebus set down their names too in his
Tables, with certain brief notes of their practices: and these they are.

The Jack of a Clocke-house goes upon Screws, and his office is to do nothing
but strike: so does this noise, (for they walk up and down like Fi^lers)
travail with Motions, and whatsoever their Motions get them, is called
striking.

Those Motions are certain Collections, or witty Inventions, sometimes of
one thing, and then of an other (there is a new one now in ^ime, in praise of
the Union) And these are fairly written and engrossed in Uell^m, Parcheme^, or
Royal paper, richly adorned with compartiments, and set out with letters both
in gold and in vations coullo^s.

This labor being taken, the Master of the Motion hearkens where such a
Nobleman, such a Lord, or such a Knight lies, that is liberal: having found
one to his liking, The Motion (with his Patrons name fairly texted out, in
manner of a Dedication,) is presented before him: he receives it, and thinking
it to be a work only undertaken for his sake, is bounteous to the giver,
esteeming him a Scholar, and knowing that not without great travail, he has
drawn so many little ^gling streams into so fair and smoothe a River:
whereas the Work is the labor of some other (copied out by stealth) be an
impudent ignorant fellow, that runs up and down with the Transcripts, and
every Alehouse may have one of them (hanging in the basest drinking room) if
they will be but at the charges of writing it out. Thus the liberallitie of a
Nobleman, or of a Gentleman is abused: thus learning is brought into scorn and
contempt: Thus men are cheated of their bounty, giving much for that (out of
their free minds) which is common abroad, and put away for base prices. Thus
villainy sometimes walks alone, as if it were given to Melancholy, and
sometimes knaves tie themselves in a knot, because they may be more merry, as
by a mad sort of Comrades whom I see leaping into the Saddle, anon it will
apeare.

Rank Riders,
The manner of Cozening Innkeepers. Post-maisters and Hackny men.

Chap. 7.
THere is a troop of Horsemen, that run up and down the whole kingdom,
they are ever in a gallop, their business is weighty, their iournies many,
their expenses great, their Innes rustie where, their lands no where: they
have only a certain Fr^e-holde called Tyborne (situate near London, and many
a fair pair of Gallows in other Countries besides,) upon which they li^e
very poorly fill they dye, and dye for the most part wickedly, because their
lives are villainous and desperate. But what ^ce so ever they run, there they
end it there they set up their rest, there is their last baste, whether soever
their ^ourney lies. And these horsemen have no other names but rank Riders.

To furnish whom forth for any journey, they must have Kiding suits cut out
of these four pieces.

1 The Inne-keeper or Hackney-man, of whom they have horses, is called A Colt. 2
He that never alights off a rich Farmer or country Gentleman, till he have
drawn money from him, is called The Snaffle. 3 The money so gotten, is The
Ring 4 He that feeds them with money is called The prouander.
These Ranck-riders (like Butchers to Rumford market) sildome go under sire or
seven in a company, and these Careeres they fetch. Their pursses being warmly
lined with some purchase gotten before, and they themselves well booted and
spurred, and in reasonable good outsides, arrive at the fairest Inn they can
choose, either in Westminster, the Strand, the City, or the Suburbs. Two of
them who have clothes of purpose to fit the play, carrying the show of
Gentlemen: the other a^ their parts in blew coats, as they were their
Seruingmen, though indeed they be all fellows. They enter all durted The
manner of Brideling a colt.
or dustied (according as it shall please the high way to use them) and the
first bridle they put into the Colts mouth (that's to say the Inkeepers) is at
their coming in to asks alowde if the footeman begone back with the horses?
it is answered yes, Here, the Ranck-riders lie three or four days, spending
moderately enough, yet aabating not a penny of any reckoning to show of what
house they came: in with space their counterfeit followers learn what
countryman the master of the house is, where the Hostlars and Chamberlaines
were borne, and what other country Gentlemen are guests to the Inn? which
lessons being presently gotten by heart, they fall in studdy with the General
rules of their knauerie: and those are, first to give out, that their Master
is a Gentleman of such and such means, in such a shire (which shall be sure to
stand far enough from those places where any of the house, or of other guests
were borne,) that he is come to receive so many hundred pounds upon land
which he has sold, and that he means to Inn there some quarter of a year
at least.

This Brass money passing for current through the house, he is more observed
and better attended, is worshipped at every word: and the easier to break and
bridle the Colt, his Worship will not sit down to Dinner or supper, till the
Master of the house be placed at the upper end of the board by him.

In the middle of Supper, or else very early in the following morning, comes
in a counterfeit footeman, sweatingly, delivering a message that such a Knight
has sent for the head-Maister of these Rancke-ryders, and that he must be
with him by such an hour, the journey being not above twelve or fourteen
miles. Upon delivery of this message: (from so dear and noble a friend) he
swears and chafes, because all his horses are out of Town, curses the
sending of them back, offers any money to have himself, his cousen with him,
and his me^ but reasonably horst. Mine host being a credulous Ass, suffers
them all to get up upon him, for he prouides them horses either of his own
(thinking his Guest to be a man of great account; and being loath to loose
him, because he spends well) or else sendes out to hire them of his
neighbors, passing his word for their forthcomming with in a day or two, Up
they get and away Gallopour Ranck-riders, as far as the poor Iades can carry
them.

The two days being ambled out of the world, and perhaps three more after
them, yet neither a supply of Horsemen or Foote-men, (as was promised) to be
set eye upon. The lamentable In-keeper (or Hac^ney man, if he chance to be
Sadled for this journey too) loose their Colts teeth, and find that they are
made old arrant Iades: Search, then runs up and down like a Constable half
out of his wits (upon a Shroue-tuesday) and hue and cry follows after, some
twelve or fourteen miles off, (round about London) which was the farthest of
their journey as they gave out. But (alas!) the horses are at pasture four
score or a hundred miles from their old mangers: they were sold at some
blind drunken theeuish fair, (there being enough of them in company to save
themselves, by their Toll-booke,) the Seruing-men cast off their blew-coates,
and cried All fellows: the money is spent upon wine, upon whores, upon
fiddlers, upon fools (by whom they will loose nothing) and the tide being at an
ebb, they are as ready to practice their skill in horse-manship to bring
Coltes to the saddle in that Town, and to make Nags run a race of threescore
or a hundred miles of from that place, as before they did from London.

Running at the Ring.
THus, solong as Horseflesh can make them fat, they never leave feeding. But
when they have beaten so many highways in several countries, that they fear
to be ouer-taken by Tracers, then (like Soldiers coming from a Breach) they
march fair and softly on foot, lying in garrison as it were, close in some out
towns, til the foul Rumor of their Uillanies (like a stormy durty winter) be
blown over: In which time of lurking in ye shel, they are not idle neither, but
like snailes they venture abroad tho the law has threatened to rain down never
so much puuish^t upon them: and what do they? they are not bees, to live by
their own painful labors, but Drones that must eat up the sweetness, and be
fed with the earnings of others: This therefore is their work. They
carelessly inquire what gentleman of worth, or what rich Farmers dwell within
five, six or seven miles of the Fort where they are (...) (which they may do
without suspicion) and having go^te their names, they single out themselves in
a morning, and each man takes a several path to himself: one goes East, one
West, one North, and the other South: walking either in boots with wandes in
their hands, or otherwise, for it is all to one purpose. And note this by the
way, that when they travel thus on foot, they are no more called Ranck-riders
but Strowlers, a proper name given to Country plaiers, that (without Socks)
trotte from town to town upon the hard hoof.

Being arrived at the Gate where the Gentleman or Farmer dwells, he boldly
knock, inquiring for him by name, and steps in to speak with him: the
servant seeing a fashionable person, tells his Master there is a Gentleman
desires to speak with him: the master come and salutes him, but eying him
well, says he does not know him: No Sir, replies the other (with a face bold
enough) it may be so, but I pray you Sir, will you walk aturne or two in your
Orchard or Garden, I would there confer: Having got him thither, to this tune
he plays upon him.

How the snaffle is put on
SIr, I am a Gentleman, borne to better means then my present fortunes do
allow me: I served in the field, and had command there, But long peace (you
know Sir) is the Cancker that eats up Sould^ers, and so it has me. I lie
here not far off, in the Country at mine Inn^, where staying upon the
dispatch of some business, I am indebted to the house in m^neys, so that I
cannot with the credit of a Gentleman leave toe house till I have paid them.
Make me sir so much beholden to your love as to lend me fortye or fifty
shilings to bear my horse and my self to London, from whence within a day or
two, I shall send you many thanks with a faithful repayment of your courtesy.

The honest Gentleman, or the good natured Farmer beholding a personable man,
fashionably attit'd, and not carrying in outward coullors, the face of a
cogging knave gives credit to his words, are forty that they are not at this
present time so well furnished as they could wish, but if a matter of twenty
shillings can stead him, he shall command it, because it were pi^tie any
honest Gentleman should for so small a matter mistarry. Happilye they meet
with some Chap-men that give them their own asking; but howsoever, all is fish
that comes to net, they are the most conscionable market folks that ever rode
between two paniers, for from forty they will fall to twenty, from twenty to
ten, from ten to five: nay these mountibanckes are so base, that they are not
ashamed to take two shillings of a plain husbandman, and sometimes six pence
(which the other gives simply and honestly) of whom they demanded a whole
fifteen.

In this mann^r do they dig silver out of men's purses, all the day, and at
night meet together at the appointed Rendeuouz, where all these Snaffles are
loosed to their full length, the Ringes which that day they have made are
worn. The Prouender is praised or dispraised, as they find it in goodness,
but it goes down all, whilst they laugh at all.

And thus does a Commonwealth bring up children, that care not how they
discredit her, or undo her: who would imagine that Birds so fair in show,
and so sweet in voice, should be so dangerous in condition? but Ra^ens think
carryon the daintiest meat, and villains esteem most of that money which is
purchased by baseness.

The Under Shriffe for the county of the Cacodemo^s, knowing into what
arrerages these Rank-tiders were run for horseflesh to his master, (of
whom he farmed the office) sent out his writs to attach them, and so narrowly
pursued the^, that for all they were well horst, some he sent post to the
gallows, and the rest to several iayles: After which, making all the have he
posibly could to get to London again, he was way-layd by an army of a strange
and new found people.

Moon men.
A discovery of a strange wild people, very dangerous to towns and country
villages.

CHAP. VIII.
A Moone-man signifies in English, a madman, because the Moon has greatest
domination (above any other Planet) over the bodies of Frantic persons. But
these Moone-men (whose Images are now to be carved) are neither absolutely mad,
not yet perfectely in their wits) Their name they borrow from the Moon,
because as the Moon is never in one shape two nights together, but wanders up
and down Heaven, like an Anticke, so these changeable-stuffe-companions never
tarry one day in a place, but are the only, and the only base Ronnagats upon
earth. And as in the Moon there is a man, that never stirs without a bush of
thorns at his back, so these Moone-men lie under bushes, and are indeed no
better then Hedge creepers.

They are a people more scattred then Jews, and more hated: beggarly in
apparel, barbarous in condition, beastly in behauior: and bloody if they meet
advantage. A man that sees them would swear they ha^ all the yellow Iawndis,
or that they were Tawny Moors What a moon man is,
bastardes, for no Red-oaker man caries a face of a more filthy complexion, yet
are they not borne so, neither has the Sun burnt them so, but they are
painted so, yet they are not good painters neither: for they do not make faces,
but mar faces. By a by name they are called Gypsies, they call themselves
Egiptians, others in mockery call them Moone-men.

If they be Egiptians, sure I am they never descended from the tribes of any of
those people that came out of the Land of Egypt: Ptolomy (King of the
Egiptians) I warrant never called them his Subjects: no nor Pharao before him.
Look what difference there is between a ciuell citizen of Dublin and a wild
Irish Kerne, so much difference there is between one of these counterfeit
Egiptians and a true English Beggar. An English Rogue is just of the same
livery.

They are commonly an army about foure-score cong, yet they never march with
all their bags and His orde^ in marching on foot or serving open horse.
baggages together, but (like boot-halers) they forage up and down countries,
4. 5. 026. in a company. As the swizer has his wench and his Cock with him
when he goes to the wars, so these vagabonds have their harlots with a number
of little children following at their heels: which young brood of Beggars, are
sometimes carried (like so many green geese alive to a market) in payres of
panieres, or in dossers like fresh-fish from Rye ye comes on horseback, (if
they be but infants.) But if they can stradle once, then as well the
shee-roagues as the hee-roagues are horst, seven or eight upon one jade,
strongly pineond, and strangely tied together.

One Shire alone and no more is sure still at one time, to have these Egiptian
lice swarming within it, for like flocks of wild-geese, they will evermore fly
one after another: let them be scattred worse then the quarters of a traitor
are after he is hanged drawn and quartred, yet they have a trick (like water
cut with a sword) to come together instantly and easily again: and this is
their policy, which way soever theformost^ anckes lead, they stick up small
boughs in several places, to every village where they pass, which serve as
ensigns to waft on the rest.

Their apparel is od, and phantasticke, tho it be never so full of rents: the
men wear scarses of Callico, or any other base stuff, hanging their bodies
like Morris-dancers, His Furniture
with bells, and other toys, to entice the country people to flock about
them, and to wounder at their fooleries or rather rank knaueryes. The women
as ridiculously attire themselves, and (like one that plays, the Rogue on a
Stage) wear rags, and patched filthy mantles vpermost, when the under garments
are hansome and in fashion.

The battles these Out-lawes make, are many and His manner of night.
very bloody. Whosoever falls into their hands never escapes alive, and so
cruel they are in these murders, that nothing can satisfy the^ but the very
heart blood of those whom they kill. And who are they (think you) that thus go
to the pot? Alas! Innocent Lambs, Sheep, Calves, Pigges, etc. Poultrie-ware
are more churlishly handled by them, the^ poor prisoners are by keepers in the
counter in the Poultry. A goose coming amongst them learnes to be wise, that he
never will be Goose any more. The bloody tragedies of al these, are only acted
by ye Women, who carrying long knives or Skeanes under their mantles, do thus
play their parts: The Stage is some large Heath: or a Fur bush Common, far
from any houses: Upon which casting themselves into a King, they enclose the
Murdered, till the Massacre be finished. If any passenger come by, and wondering
to see such a co^iuring circle kept by Hel-hou^des, demand what spirits they
raise there? one of the Murderers steps to him, poisons him (...) sweet words
and shifts him off, with this lie, ye one of the women is fallen in labor. But
if any mad H^let hearing this, smell villainy, and rush in by violence to see
what the taw^y Devils are doing: the^ they excuse the fact, lay the blame on
those that are the Actors, and perhaps (if they see no reme^e) deliver them to
an officer, to be had to punishment: But by the way a rescue is utely laid and
very valiantl^ (tho very villanously) do they fetch them off, a guard them.

The Cabbines where these Land-pyrates lodge in the night, are the Out-ba^es of
Farmers and Husbandmen, (in some poor Uillage or other) who dare not deny
them, for fear they should ere morning have their thatched houses burning
about their ears: inthese Ba^nes, are hoth their Cooke-roomes, their Supping
P^ors and their Bed-chambers: for there they dress after a beastly manner:
what soever they purchased after a theeu^h fashion: sometimes they eat Uenison,
and have Gray hounds that kill it for the^, but if they had not, they are
Hounds themselves and are damnable Hunters after flesh: Which appears by
their vgly-fac'd queanes that follow them: with whom in these barnes they lie,
as Swine do together in Hogsties.

These Barnes are the beds of Incests, Whoredoms Adulteries, and of all other
black and deadly-damned Impi^ies; His qualities w^st he lies entrenched.
here grows the Cursed Tree of Bastardie, that is so fruitful: here are
written the Books of al Blasphemies, Swearings and Curses, yt are so dreadful
to be read. Yet the simple country people will come running out of their houses
to gaze upon them whilst in the mean time one steals into the next Room, and
brings away whatsoever he can lay hold on. Upon days of pastime and liberty,
they Spread themselves in small companies amongst What pieces of desperate
service he ventures upon
the Uillages: and when young maids and batchelers (yea sometimes old doting
fools, that should be beaten to this world of villainies, and forewarn others)
do flock about the^, they then profess shil in Palmestry, and (forsooth) can
tell fortunes which for the most part are infallibly true, by reason that they
work upon rules, which are grounded upon certainty: for one of them will tell
you that you shall shortly have some evil luck fall upon you, and within half
an hour after you shall find your pocket picked, or your purse cut. These are
those Egiptian Grasshoppers that eat up the fruits of the Earth, and destroy
the poor corn fields: to sweep whose swarms out of this kingdom, there
are no other means but the sharpnes of the most infamous and basest kinds of
punishment. For if the ugly body of this Monster be suffered to grow and fatten
it self with mischiefs and disorder, it will have a neck so Sine ^y and so
brawny, that the arm of ye law will have much ado to strike of ye Head,
sithence every day the members of it increase and it gathers new ioints and new
forces by Priggers, Anglers, Cheators, Morts, Yeomens Daughters (that have
taken some by blows, and to avoid shame, fall into their Sins: and other
Servants both men and maids that have been pil^erers, with all the rest of
that Damned Regiment, marching together in ye first Army of the Bell-man, who
running away from their own Colors (with are bad enough) serve under these,
being the worst. Lucifers Lansprizado that stood aloof to behold the mustrings
of these Hell-hou^ds took delight to see them Double their Fyles so nimbly, but
held it no policy to come near the^ (for the Devil himself durst scarce
have done that.) Away therefore he gallops, knowing that at one time or other
they would all come to fetch their pay in Hell.

The infection
Of the Suburbs.

Chap. IX.
THe Infernal Promoter being wearied we riding up and down the Country, was
glad when he had gotten the City over his head, but the City being not able
to hold him within the freedom, because he was a Forreiner, the gates were
set wide open for him to pass through, and into the Suburbs he went. And
what saw he there? More Alehouses than there are auernes in all Spain and
Fran^e Are they so dry in the Suburb^? Yes, pockily dry. What saw he besides?

He saw the doors of notorious Carted Bawdes, (like Hell gates) stand night
and day wide open, with a pair of Harlots in Taffata gowns (like two painted
posts) Noctes atque a^e patet l^^ Dills.
garnishing out those doors, being better to the house then a Double sign:
when the door of a poor Artificer (if his child had died but (...) one Toke^
of death about him) was close ram'd up and Guarded for sear others should have
been infected: Yet the plague that a Whore-house lays upon a City is worse,
yet is laughed at ^f not laugh ed at, yet not looked into, or if looked into,
Wincked at.

The Trades^an having his house lockd up, loses his customers, is put from
work and undone: whilst in the mean time the strumpet is set on work and
maintained (perhaps) by those that vndee the other: give thanks O wide mouthed
Hell! laugh Lucifer at this Dance for joy all you Devils.

Belz. b^b keeps the Register book, of al ye Bawdes, Panders and Curtizans:
and he knows, that these Subutb sinners have nolandes to live upon but their
legs: every prentice passing by them, can say, There sits a whore: Without
putting them to their book, they will swear so much themselves: if so, are
not Counstables, Churchwardens, Bayliffes, Beadels and other Officers, Pillars
and Pillowes to all the villainies, that are by these committed? Are they not
parcell-Bawdes to winck at such damned abuses, considering they have whippes in
their own hands, and may draw blood if they please? Is not the Landlord of
such rentes the Graund-Bawde? ^f the Door Keeping mistress of such a house of
sin, but his Under-Bawd? sithence he takes twenty pounds (...) every year^,
for a vaulting school (which from no Artificer living by the hardness of the
hand could be worth five pound.) And that twenty pound rent, he knows must
be pressed out of petticoates:) his money smells of sin: the very silver looks
pale, because it was earned by lust.

How happy therefore were Cities if they had no Suburbs, sithence they serve
but as caves, where monsters are bred up to deuowre the Cities themselves?
Would the Devil hire a villain to spil blood? there he shall find him. One
to blaspheme? there he has choice. A Pandar that would court a matron at her
prayers? he is there. A cheator that would turn his own father a begging? He Is
there too: A harlot that would murder her newborn Infant? She lies in there.

What a wretched womb has a strumpet, which being (for the most part) barren
of Children, is notwithstanding the only Bed that breeds up these serpents?
upon that one stalk grow all these mischiefs. She is the Cockatrice that
hatcheth all these eggs of evils. When the Devil takes the Anatomy of all
damnable sins, he looks only upon her body. When she dies, he sits as her
Coroner. When her soul comes to hell, all shun that there, as they fly from
a body struck with the plague here. She has her dore-keeper, and she herself
is the Devils cha^ber-maide. And yet for all this, that she is so dangerous
and detestable, when she has croak'd like a Raue^ on the Eues, then comes she
into the house like a Dove. When her villainies (like the mote about a castle)
are rank, thick, and muddy, with standing long together, then (to purge
herself) is she dreind out of the Suburbs (as though her corruption were there
left behind her (and) a^ a clear stream) is let into the City.

What armor a harlot wears coming out of the Suburbs to besiege the City
within the walls.
Upon what perch then does she sit? what part plays the then? only the
Puritan. If before she ruffled in silks, now is she more ciuilly attird then
a Midwife. I^ before she swaggred in Tauernes, now with the Snaile she
stirrethnot out of doors. And where must her lodging be taken up, but in the
house of some citt^, whose known reputation, she borrowes (or rather steals)
putting it on as a cloak to cover her deformities. Yet eue^ in that, has she
an art too, for he shall be of such a profession, that all co^mers may enter,
without the danger of any eyes to watch the^. As for example she will lie in
some Scriueners house, and so under the color of coming to have a Bond made,
she herself may write Noue int vniuersi. And the the law th^eaten to hit her
never so often, yet has she subtle defenses to ward off the blows. For, if
Gallants hau^t the house, then spreds she these colors: she is a captain or
a lieutena^ts wife in the Low-cou^tries, and they come with letters, from the
soldier her husband. If Merchants resort to her, then hoistes she up these
sails, she is wife to the Master of a ship, and they bring news yt her
husband put in at the Straytes, or at Venice, at Aleppo, Alexandria, or
Scanderoon, etc. if shop keepers come to her, with what do you lack in their
mouths, the^ she takes up such and such commodities, to send them to Rye, to
Bristow, to York, etc where her husband dwells. But if the stream of her
fortunes run low, and that none but Apronmen lanch forth there, then keeps
she a pollitick tempsters, shop, or she starches them.

Perhaps she is so pollitick, that none shall be noted to How a city punck
Rangeth.
board her: if so, then she sails upon these points of the compass: so soon
as ever she is rig'd, and all her furniture on, forth she lancheth into those
streets that are most freque^ted: where the first man that she meets of her
acquaintance, shall (without much pulling) get her into a Tavern: out of him
she kisses a breakefast and then leaves him: the next she meets, does upon as
easy pullies, draw her to a Tavern again, out of him she cogs a dinner, and
then leaves him: the third man, squires her to a play, with being ended, and the
wine offered and taken (for she is no Recusant, to refuse any thing) him she
leaves too: and being set upon by a fourth, him she answers at his own weapon,
sups with him, and drincks Vpsie Freeze, til the clok striking Twelve, and the
Drawers being drowzy, away they march arm in arm, being at every foot-step
fearful to be set upon by the Band of Halberdiers, that lie scowting in rug
gowns to cut of such midnight straglers. But the word being given, and who
goes there, with come before the Constable, being shot at them, they veil
presently and come, she taking upon her to answer all the Bil-men and their
Leader, Between whom and her, suppose you hear this sleepy Dialogue. where
have you bin so late? at supper forsooth with my uncle here (if he be well
bearded) or with my brother (if the hair be but budding forth) and he is
bringing me home. Are you married? yes forsooth: what is your husband? such a
Noble-mans man, or such a Justices clarke, (And then names some Alderman of
London, to whom she persuades herself, one or other of the bench of brown
bills are beholding) where lie you? At such a man's house: Sic tenues euanescit
in Auras: and thus by stopping the Constables muoth with sugar-plummes (that's
to say,) whilst she poisons him with sweet words, the punck vanishes. O
Lantern and Candlelight, how art thou made a blind Ass? because thou have
but one eye to see withal: Be not so guld, be not so dull in understanding:
do thou but follow aloof, those two tame Pigeons, and thou shall find, that
her new Uncle lies by it all that night, to make his kinse-woman on of mine
Aunts: or if she be not in travel all night, they spend some half an hour
together, but what do they? marry, they do that, which the Constable should
have done for them both in the streets that's to say commit, commit,

You Guardians over so great a Princess as the eldest daughter of King Brutus:
you twice twelve fathers and governors over the Noblest City, why are you so
careful to plant Trees to beautify your outward walks, yet suffer the
goodliest garden (within) to be ouer-run with stinking weeds? You are the
proining knives that should loppe off such idle, such unprofitable and such
destroying branches from the Uine: The beams of your Authority should purge
the air of such infection: your breath of Justice should scatter those foggy
vapors, and drive them out of your gates as cha^e tossed abroad by the winds.

But stay: is our walking spirit become an Orator to persuade? no: but the Bell
man of London with whom he met in this pera^bulation of his* and to whom he
betrayed himself and opened his very bosom, (As hereafter you shall hear,)
is bold to take upon him that speakers Office.

Of Ginglers.
Or the knavery of Horse-Coursers in Smith-field discovered.

CHAP. X.
AT the end of fierce battles, the only Rendeuouz for lame soldiers to
retire unto, is an Hospital: and at the end of a long Progress, the only
ground for a tired Ia^e to run in, is some blind country fair, where he may
be sure to be sold, To these Markets of unwholesome Horseflesh, (like so many
Rites to feed upon Carrion) do^ all the Horse-coursers (that roost about the
City) fly one after another. And whereas in buying all other commodities, men
strive to have the best, how great so ever the price be, only the
Horse-courser is of a baser mind, for the woorst hors-flesh (so it be cheap)
does best go down with him. He cares for nothing but a fair outside, and a
hansome shape (like those that hyre whores, (though there be a hundred diseases
within: he (as the other) ventures upon the^ all.

The first lesson therefore that a Horse-courser takes out, when he comes to
one of these Markets, is to make choice of such Nags, Geldings, or Mares,
especially, as are fat, fair, and well-fauor'd to the eye: and because men
delight to behold beautiful coullors, and that some colors are more delicate
(even in beasts) then others are, he will so near as he can, bargain for
those horses that have the daintiest complexion: as the Milke-white, the Gray,
the Dapple-Gray, the Cole black with his proper marks (as the white star in
the forehead, the white heel, etc.) or the bright Bay, with the like proper
marks also. And the goodlier proportion ye beast carries or the fayrer marks
or color that he bears, are or ought to be watch-words as it were to him
that afterward buys him of the horse-courser, that he be not coozend with an
ouer-price for a bad peny-worth, because such Horses (belonging for the most
part to Gentlemen) are seldom or never sold away, but upon some foul
quallty, or some incurable disease, which the Beast is fallen into. The Best
colors are therefore the best Cloakes to hide those faults that most
disfigure a Horse: and next unto color, his Pace does oftentimes deceive and
go beyond a very quick Judgment.

Some of these Horse-hunters, are as nimble Knaves in finding out the
infirmities of a Jade, as a Barber is in drawing of teeth: and albeit (without
casting his water) he does more readily reckon up all the Aches, Crampes,
Crickes, and whatsoever disease else lies in his bones: and for those diseases
seems utterly to dislike him, yet if by looking upon the Dyall within his
mouth, he find that his years have struck but five, six, or seven: and that
he proves but young, or that his diseases are but newly growing upon him, if
they be outward, or have but hair and skin to hide them, if they be inward,
let him swear never so damnably, that it is but a Jade, yet he will be sure to
fasten upon him.

So then, a Horse-courser to the Merchant, (that out of his sound judgment
buys the fairest, the best-bred, and the noblest Horses, selling them again
for breed or service, with plainness and honesty.) is as the Cheator to the
fair Gamester: he is indeed a mere Iadish Nonopolitane, and deals for none
but tired, taited, dull and diseased horses. By which means, if his picture
The picture of a Horse-courser.
be drawn to the l^^e, you shall find every Horse-courser for the most part
to be in quality a coozener, by profession a knave, by his running a Uarlet,
in fayres a Hagling Chapman, in the City a Cogging dissembler, and in
Smith-field a common forsworn Uillaine. He will swear any thing, but the
faster he swears, the more danger it is to believe him: In one forenoone, and
in selling a Jade not worth five Nobles, will he forswear himself fifteen
times, and that forswearing too shall be by Equivocation. As for example, if
an ignorant Chapman coming to beat the price, say to the Horse-courser your
nagge is very old or thus many years old, and reckon ten or twelve; he
claps his hand presently on the buttocke of the beast, and prays he may be
damb'd if the Horse be not under five, meaning that the horse is not under five
years of age, but that he stands under five of his fingers, when his hand is
clapped upon him. These Horse-coursers are called Iynglers, and these Iynglers
having laid out their money on a company of Iades at some drunken fair, up to
London they drive them, and upon the Market day into Smithfield bravely come
they prauncing. But least their Iades should show too many horse tricks in
Smith-field, before so great an Audience as commonly resort thither, their
masters do therefore School them at home after this manner.

How a Horse-courser works upon a Jade in his own Stable, to make him
serviceable for a couzening Race in Smith-field.
THe Glanders in a horse is so filthy a disease, that he who is troubled with
it can never keep his nose clean: so that when such a foule-nosed Jade happens
How a Horse-cour^er may coozen his chap-man with a horse that has the
Glanders.
to serve a Horse-courser, he has more strange pills (then a Pothecarie makes)
for the purging of his head, he knows that a horse with such a quality, is
but a beastly companion to travel upon the high way with any Gentleman.

Albeit therefore that the Glanders have played with his Nose so long, that he
knows not how to mend himself, but that the disease being suffered to run
upon him many years together, is grown invincible, yet has our Iingling
Mountibancke Smith-field rider a trick to cure him, five or six ways and
this isone of them.

In the very morning when he is to be rifled away aamongst the Gamsters in
Smithfield, before he thrust his head out of his Masters Stable, the
Horse-courser tickles his nose (not with a Pipe of Tobacco) but with a good
quantity of the best Neesing powder that can be gotten: which with a quil
being blown up into the Nostrills, to make it work the better, he stands
p^aking there up and down with two long feathers plucked from the wing of a
Goose, they being dipped in the juice of Garlic, or in any strong oil, and
thrust up to the very top of his head, so far as possibly they can reach, to
make the pore dumb beast avoid the filth from his nostrils, which he will
do in great abundance: this being done, he comes to him with a new medicine
for a sick horse, and mingling the juice of Bruzed Garlike, sharp biting
Mustard, and strong Ale together, into both the Nostrils (with a Horn) is
powered a good quantity of this filthy Broth, which by the hand being held in
by stopping the nostrils close together, at length with a little neezing more,
his nose will be cleaner then his Masters the Horse-courser, and the filth be
so Artificially stopped that for eight or ten hours a Jade will hold up his
head with the prowdest Gelding that gallops scornefully by him, and never have
need of wiping.

This is one of the Comedies a Common horse-courser plays by himself at home,
but if when he comes to act the second part abroad, you would disgrace him,
and have him hissd at for net playing the Knave well, then handle him thus: If
you suspect that the Nagge which he would Jade you with, be troubled with that
or any other such like disease, gripe him hard about the wesand pipe, close
toward ther^ofe of the tongue, and holding him there so long and so for^bly,
that he cough twice or thrice, it then (after you let go your hold) his
chappes begin to walk as if he were chewing down a Horseloafe, shake hands
with old Mounsier Cauiliero Hors-Courser, but c^ap no bargain upon ^t, for his
Jade is as full of infirmity, as the master f Uillan^e.

Other Gambals that Horse-coursers practice upon Fowndred Horses, old Iades,
etc.
Smithfield is the Stage upon which the Mou^tibank English Horse-courser
adua^cing his banner, deffes any disease that dares touch his Prancer: Insomuch
that if a horse be so old, as that four legs can but carry him, yet shall he
bear the marks of an Nag not above six or seven pears of age: and that
counterseit badge of youth, he wears thus: The Horse-courser with a small round
yro^ made very hot, burns two black holes in the top of the two out-most teeth
of each side the outside of the Horses mouth upon the nether teeth, and so
likewise of the teeth of the upper chap, which stand opposite to ye nether, the
quallitie of which marks is to show that a horse is but young: but if the jade
be so old that those teeth are dropped out of his head, the^ is there a trick
still to be fumbling about his old chaps, and in that stroaking his chin, to
prick his lips closely with a pin or a nail, till they be so tender, that
albeit be were a given horse none could be suffered to look him in the mouth
(which is one of the best Calenders to tell his age) but a reasonable sighted
eye (without help of spectacles) may easily discover this Iugling, because it
is gross and common.

If now a Horse (having been asore Traualler) happen by falling into a cold
sweat to be Foundred, so that (as if he were drunck or had the staggers) be
can scarce stand on his legs, then will his master, before he enter into
the lists of the field against all comers, put him into a villainous chasing by
ryding him up and down a quarter or half an hour, till his limbs be
thoroughly heated, and this he does, because so long as he can discharge that
false fire, or that (beingso collerickly hot) he tramples only upon soft
ground, a very cunning Horsema^ shall hardly find where his shoo wrings him, or
that he is Fowndred. And (to blind the eyes of the Chapman) the Horse-courser
will be ever tickling of him with his wand, because he may not by standing
still like an Ass, show of what house he comes.

It a Horse come into the field (like a lame soldier) Halting, he has not
Crutches made for him, as the soldier has, but because you shall think the
Horses shooemaker has served him like a Jade, by not fitting his foot well,
the shoe shall be taken off purposely from that foot which halts, as though
it had been lost by chance: And to prove this, witnesses shall come in, if at
least twenty or thirty damnable oaths can be taken, that the want of the Shoe
is only the cause of his Halting. But if a Horse cannot be lusty at legs:
by reason that either his hoofes be not good, or that there be Splents, or any
other Eyesore about the nether Joint, the Hors-courser uses him then as
Cheating Swaggerers handle Nouices: what they cannot win by the Dyce, they
will have by Foul play: and in that foul manner, deals he with the poor
horse, ryding him, up and down in the thickest and the durtiest places, till
that dirt, like a ruffled boot drawn upon an ill-fauour'd gowtie leg,
cover the Iades infirmity from the eyes of the Buyer.

How a Horse-courser makes a lade that has no stomach, to eat Lamb-pye.
ALbeit Lamb-pie be good meat upon a table, yet it is so offensive to a horses
stomach, yt he had rather besed a month together with mustie oats, tha^ to
taste it; Yet are not all Horses ^idde^ to his Lamb-pye-Breakefasts but only
such as ate dyeted with no other meat: and those are Dull, Blockish, Sullen,
and heavy footed Iades. When-soeuer therefore a Horse-courser has such a Dead
commodity, as a Lumpish slow Jade, that goes more heavily then a Cow when she
trots, and that neither by a sharp bitte nor a tickling spur he can put him
out of his lazy and dogged pace, what does he with him then? Duelye he gives
him Lambpie. That is to say, every morning when the Horse-courser comes into
the Stable, he takes up a tough round cudgel, and never leaves fencing with
his Quarter staff at the poor Horses sides and buttockes, till with blows
he has made them so tender, that the verry shaking of a bough will be able to
make the horse ready to run out of his wits, And to keep the horse still in
this mad mood, because he shall not forget his lesson, his master will never
come near him, but he will have a fling at him: If he do touch him, he
strikes him: if he spepkes to him, there is but a word and a blow: if he do
but look upon him, the Horse flings and takes on, as though he would breaks
through the walls, or had been a Horse bredde up in Bedlam amongst mad-folkes.
Having thus gotten this hard lesson by heart, forth comes he into Smithfield to
repeat it, where the Rider shall no sooner leap into the saddle but the
Horse-courser giving the Jade (that is half scarred out of his wits already)
three or four good bangs, away flies Bucephalus as if yo^g Alexander were upon
his back. No ground can hold him, no bridle rain him in, he gallops away as
if the Devil had hired him of some Hackney-man, and scuds through thick and
thin, as if crackers had hung at his heels. If his tail play the wag, and
happen to whilke up and down (which is a sign that he does his feats of
Actiuitie like a Tumblers prentice by compulsion and without taking pleasure in
them (then shall you see the Hors^-courser late about him like a thrasher, till
with blows he made him carry his tail to his Bottocks: which in a Horse
(contrary to the nature of a Dog) is an argument that he has metal in him
and Spirrit, as in the other it is the note of cowardice.

These and such other base iuglings are put in practice, by the Horse-courser;
in this manner comes he armed into the field: with such had and deceiptfull
commodities does he furnish the markets. Neither steps he upon the devils stage
alone, but others are likewise Actors in the selfe^ame Scene, and sharers with
him: for no sooner shall money be offered for a Horse, but presently one Snake
thrusts out his head and stings the buyer with false praises of the Horses
goodness: An other throws out his poisoned hook and whispers in the Chapmans
ear, that upon his knowledge so much or so much has been offered by four or
five, and would not be taken* and of these Ravens there vesundry nests, but all
of them as black in soul us the Horse-courser (with whom they are yoaked)
(...) in conscience. This Regiment of Horsemen is therefore divided into four
Squadrons. viz.

1 When Horse-coursers travail to country faires, they are called Iynglers. 2
When they have the leading of the Horse and serve in Smithfield, they are
Drouers. 3 They that stand by and conycatche the Chapman either with
Out-bidding, false-praises, etc. are called Goades. 4 The boys, striplings,
etc. that have the ryding of the Iades up and down are called Skip-iacks.
Jack in a Box.
Or a new kind of Cheating, teaching how to change gold into Silver, unto
which is added a Map, by which a man may learn how to travel all over England
and have his charges borne.

Chap. II
HOw many Trees of Evil are growing in this country? Terra malos homines
nunce^ucat.
how tall they are? how Mellow is their fruit? and how greedily gathered? so
much ground do they take up, and so thickly do they stand together, that it
seems a kingdom can bring forth no more of their nature, yes, yes, there are
not half so many Rivers in Hell, in Noxia mill medis Laceraebitur vmbra.
which a soul may sail to damnation, as there are Black Streams of Mischief
and Villainy (besides all those which in our Now-two Ueyages, we have ventured
so many leagues up, for discovery) in which thousands of people are
continually swimming, and encrie minute in danger utterly to be cast away.

The Horse-Courser of hell, after he had durtyed himself Abuses of
race-running glanced at.
with ryding up and down Smithfield and having his beast under him, gallopped
away amain to behold a race of five miles by a couple of Running-Horses,
upon whose swiftness great sums of money were laid in wagers. In which
School of Horse-manshippe (wherein for the most part none but Gallants are
the Studients) he construed but strange Lectures of Abuses: he could make
large Comments upon those that are the Runners of those Races, and could teach
others how to loose forty or fifty pound pollitickly in the forenoone, and in
the after noone (with the selfsame Gelding) to win a thousand marks in
five or sire miles riding. He could tell how Gentlemen are fetched in and made
younger brothers, and how your new Knight comes to be a Cousen of this Race. He
could draw the true pictures of some fellows, that diet these Running-Horses,
who for a bride of forty or fifty shillings can by a false Dye make their
own Masters loose a hundred pound a race. He could show more crafty Foxes in
this wilde-goose chase the^ there are white Foxes in Russia, and more strange
Horse-trickes plaide by such Riders, then Banks his curtall did ever practice
(whose Gamballs of the two, were the honester.

But because this sort of Birds have many feathers to loose, before they can
feel any cold, he suffers them to make their own flight, knowing that
prodigalls do but jest at the stripes which other men's rods give them, and
never complain of smarting till they are whipped with their own.

In every Corner did he find Serpents ingendering: under every roof, some
impyetie or other lay breeding: Vix sunt homines hoc nomine dignis, qua^que lu^
lae^s feritati^ habe^t
but at last perceining that the most part of men were by the sorcerie of their
own devilish conditions transformed into Wolves, and being so changed, were
more brutish and bloody, then those that were Wolves by nature: his spleen
leaped against his ribs with laughter, and in the height of that joy resolved
to write the villainies of the world in Folio, and to dedicate them in private
to his Lord and Master, because he knew him to be an openhanded patron,
albeit he was no great lover of scholars.

But having begun one picture of a certain strange Beast, (called Jack in a
Box) that only (because the City had given money already to see it) he
finished: and in these colors was Jack in a Box drawn. It has the head of a
man (the face well bearded) the eyes of a Jack in a Box described.
Hawke, the tongue of a Lap-wing, which says here it is, when the nest is a
good way off: it has the stomach of an Estrich, and can digest silver as
easily, as that Bird does Iron. It has the paws of a Bear instead of
hands, for whatsoever it fastneth upon, it holds: From the middle
downe-wardes, it is made like a Greyhound, and is so swift of foot, that if
it once get the Start of you, a whole Kennel of Hounds cannot overtake it. It
loves to hunt dry-foote, and can Scent a Train in no ground so well as the
City, and yet not in all places of the City. But he is best in Scenting
between Ludgate and Temple-barre: and it is thought that his next hunting shall
be between Lumbard-streete and the Gold smithes Row in Cheapeside: Thus much
for his out ward parts, now you shall have him vnrip'd, and see his inward.

This Jack in a Box, or this Devil in man's shape, wearing (like a player on
a Stage) good clothes on his His exercise
back, comes to a Golde-smithes Stall, to a Drapers, a Haberdashers, or into
any other shop where he knows good store of silver faces are to be seen. And
there drawing forth a fair new box, hammered all out of Silver Plate, he
opens it, and powers forth twenty or forty Twentie-shilling-peeces in
New-golde. To which heap of Worldly-Temptation, thus much he adds in words,
that either he himself, or such a Gentleman (to whom he belongs) has an
occasion for four or five days to use forty pound But because he is very
shortly, (nay he knows not how suddenly) to travail to Venice, to Jerusalem
or so, and would not willingly be disfurnished of Gold, he does therefore
request the Citizen to lend (upon those Forty twenty shilling pieces) so much
in white money (but for four, five or six days at most) and for his
good will he shall receive any reasonable satisfaction. The Citizen (knowing
the pawn to be better the^ siriens fugientia captat Flumina: quid rides?
mutat^ nomine, de Te Fabula narratur
a Bond) powers down forty pound in silver, the other draws it, and leaving
so much gold in Hostage, marches away with Bag and Baggage.

Five days being expited, Jack in a box (according to his Bargain) being a
man of his word comes again to the Shop or stall (at which he angles for
fresh Fish) and there casting out his line with the silver hook, that's to say,
pouring out the forty pound which he borrowed, The Citizen sends in, or steps
himself for the Box with the Golden devil in it: it is opened, and the army
of angels being mustred together, they are all found to be there. The Box is
shut again and set on the Stall, whilst the Citizen is telling of his money:
But whilst this music is sounding, Jack in a Box acts his part in a dumb
show thus; he shifts out o his fingers another Box of the same metal and
making, that the former bears, which second Box is filled only with
shillings and being p^zed in the hand, shall seem to carry the weight of the
former, and is clapped down in place of the first. The Citizen in the mean time
(whilst this Pit-fall is made for him) telling the forty pounds, misseth
thirty or forty shillinges in the whole sum, at which the Jack in a Box
starting back (as if it were a matter strange unto him) at last making a
gathering within himself) for his wits, he remembers (he says) that he laid
by so much money as is wanting (of the forty pounds to dispatch some
business or other, and forgot to put it into the Bag again^, notwithstanding,
he intreates the Citizen, to keep his gold still, he will take the white
money home to fetch the rest, and make up the Sum, his absence shall not be
above an hour or two: before which time he shall be sure to hear of him, and
with this the little Devil vanishes, carrying that away with him, which in
the end will send him to the Gallows, (that's to say his own gold,) and
forty pound besides of the Shopkeepers, which he borrowed, the other being
glad to take forty shillings for the whole debt, and Multa potentibus desunt
multa.
yet is soundly box'd for his labor.

This Jack in a box, is yet but a Chicken, and has laid very few Eggs, if
the Hangman do not spoil it with treading, it will prove and excellent
Hen of the Game. It is a knot of Cheators but newly tied, they are not yet a
company. They fly not like Wilde-Geese (in flocks) but like Kites (single) as
loath that any should share in their pray. They have two or three names, (yet
they are no Romans, but errant Rogues) for sometimes they call themselves
Jack in a box, but now that their infantrie grows strong, and that it is
known abroad, that they carry the Philosophers stone about them, and are able
of forty shillings to make forty pound, they therefore use a dead March, and
the better to cloak their villainies, do put on these Masking suites: viz.

1. This art or sleight of changing gold into silver, is called Trimming. 2.
They that practice it, term themselves Sheepeshearers. 3 The Gold which they
bring to the Citizen, is called Iasons Fleece. 4 The silver which they pick up
by this wandering, is White-wooll. 5 They that are Cheated by Jack in a Box,
are called Bleaters.
Oh Fleete-streete, Fleete-streete! how have thou been trimd, washed, Shaven
and Polde by these dear and damnable Barbers? how often have thou met with
these Sheep-shearers? how many warm flakes of wool have they pulled from thy
Back? yet if thy Bleating can make the flocks that graze nere unto thee and
round about thee, to lift up thy eyes, and to shun such Wolves and Foxes,
when they are approaching, or to have them worryed to death before they suck
the blood of others, thy misfortunes are the less, because thy neighbors by
them shall be warned from danger.

Many of thy Gallants (O Fleete-streete) have spent hundreds of pounds in thy
presence, and yet never were so much as drunk for it: but for every fortye
pound that thou layest out in this Indian commodity (of gold) thou have a
Silver Box bestowed upon thee, to carry thy Tobacco in, because thou have ever
loved that costlye and Gentleman-like Smoke. Jack in a Box has thus plaide
his part. There is yet another Actor to step upon the stage, and he seems to
have good skill in Cosmography for he holds in his hand a Map, wherein he has
laid down a number of Shires in England, and with small How to trauule
without charges.
pricks has beaten out a path, teaching how a man may easily, (tho not verry
honestly) travel from Country to Country, and have his charges borne; and thus
it is.

He that vnder-takes this strange journey, lays his first plotte how to be
turned into a Brave man, which he finds can be done by none better then by a
trusty Tailor: working therefore hard with him, till his suite be granted, Out
of the City, being mounted on a good gelding, he tides upon his own bare
credit, not caring whether ^e travel to meet the Sun at his Rising or at
his going down. He knows his Kitchen smokes in every County, and his table
covered in every Shire. For when he comes within a mile of the Town, where he
means to catch Quas^es, setting Spurs to his horse, away he gallops, with
his cloak off (for in these Beseigings of Towns he goes not armd with any
(his Hatte thrust into his Hose, as if it were lost, and only an empty pair
of Hangers by his side, to show that he has been disarmed. And you must note,
that this Hot spur does never set upon any places but only such, where he
knows (by intelligence) there are store of Gentlemen, or wealthy Farmers at
the least. Amongst whom when he is come, he tells with distracted looks, and
a voice almost breathless, how many Uillaines set upon him, what gold and
silver they took from him, what woods they are fled into, from what part of
England he is come, to what place he is going, how far he is from home, how
far from his iornies end, or from any Gentleman of his acquaintance, and so
lively personates the lying Greek (Synon) in telling a lamentable tale: that
the mad Troianes (the Gentlemen of the town, believing him, and the rather
because he carries the shape of an honest man in show, and of a Gentleman in
his apparel) are liberal of their purses, lending him money to bear him on
his journey, to pay which he offers either his bill or bond (naming his lodging
in London) or gives his word (as he is a Gentleman, which they rather take,
knowing the like misfortu^e may be theirs at any time.

And thus with the feathers of other birds, is this Monster stuck, making
wings of sundry fashions, with which he thus basely flies over a whole kingdom.
Thus does he ride from Town to Town, from City to City as if he were a
La^d-lord in every shire and that he were to gather Rents up of none but
Gentlemen.

There is a Twin-brother to this False galloper, and he cheats Inne-keepers
only, or their Tapsters, by learning first what Countrymen they are, and of
what kindred: and then bringing counterfeit letters of commendations from such
an Uncle, or such a Coozen (wherein is requested, that the Bearer thereof may
be used kindly) he lies in the June till he have fetched over the Master or
Servant for some money (to draw whom to him he has many books) and when they
^ang fast enough by the Gills, under water Our Sharke dives, and is never seen
to swim again in that River.

Upon this Scaffold, also might be mounted a number Traveling Emperickes,
of Quack-saluing Empericks, who ariuing in some Country town, clappe up their
Terrible Bills, in the Marketplace, and filling the Paper with such horrible
names of diseases, as if every disease were a Devil, and that they could
conjure them out of any Town at their pleasure. Yet these Beggarly
Mountibancks are meat Coozeners, and have not so much skill as Horsele^es. The
poor people not giving money to them to be cured of any infirmities, but
rather with their money buying worse infirmities of them:

Upon the same post, do certain straggling Scribbling Writers deserve to have
both their names and themselves strowling schoole-maister.
hung up, instead of those fair tables which they hang up in Towns, as gay
pictures to entice Scholars to them: the Tables are witten with sundry kinds
of hands, but not one finger of those hands (not one letter there) drops from
the Pen of such a false wandering Scribe. He buys other men's cunning good
cheap in London, and sels it dear in the Country. These Swallows brag of
no quality in them so much as of swiftness. In four and twenty hours, they
will work four and twenty wonders, and promise to teach those, that know no
more what belongs to an A. then an Ass, to be able (in that narrow compass)
to write as fair and as fast as a country Uicar, who commonly reads all the
Towns Letters.

But wherefore do these counterfeit Masters of that Noble Science of Writing,
keep such a flourishing with the borrowed weapons of other Men's Pens? only
for this to get half the Birds (which they strive to catch) into their
hands, that's to say, to be paid half the money which is agreed upon for the
Scholar, and his nest being half filled with such Gold-finches, he never stays
till the rest be fledge, but suffers him that comes next, to beat the bush for
the other half. At this Careere the Ryder that set out last from Smith*field,
stopped: and alighting from Pacolet (the horse that carried him) his next
journey was made on foot.

The Bel-mans second Night-walke. Chap. XII.
SIr Lancelot of the infernal Lake, or the Knight Errant of Hell, having thus
(like a young country gentleman) gone round about the City, to see the sights
not only within the walls but those also in the Subburbes, was glad when he
saw (...) having put on the vizard that Hell lends Indu^a nigris vest^bus, c^
rum insil^ Nox
her (called darkness to leap in to her Coach) because now he knew he should
meet with other strange birds and beasts fluttring from their nests, and
crawling out of their dens. His prognostication held current, and the
foule-weather (which he foretold,) fell out accordingly. For Candlelight ha^
scarce opend his eye (to look at the City like a gunner shooting at a mark,)
but fearfully (their feet trembling under the^) their ^es suspitiously rouling
from every nooke to nooke round Nectis and ere^ (...) ^nies sunt Dolu^, Metus,
Miseria, Fr^, (...), etc. (...) Lib. 3 De Not. D^otum.
about them, and their heads (as if they stood upon oyled shrewes) still
turning back behind them, came creeping out of hollow-trees, where they lay
hidden, a number of couzning Bankrupts in the shapes of Owls, who when the
Marshall of light, the sun, went up and down to search the City, durst not
stir abroad, for fear of ^eeing houted at and followed by whole flocks of
undone creditors.

But now when the stage of the world was hung in black, they ietted up and
down like proud Tragedians O what thanks they gave to Darkness! what (...)
verenda, verenda, etc.
songs they balladed out in praise of Night, for bestowing upon them so
excellent a cleake wherein they might so safely walk muftled! Now durst they,
as if they had been Constables, rappe alowd at the doors of those to whom they
owed most money, and brave them with hie words, tho they paid them not a penny.

Now did they boldly step into some privileged Tavern, and there drink
healthes, dance with Harlets, and pay both Drawers and Fiddlers after midnight
with other men's money, and then march home again fearelesse of the blows that
any showlder-clapper durst giuethe^. Out of another Nest flew certain
Murderers and Thieves in the shapes of Skreech-owles, who, being set on by the
Night, did beat with their bold and ve^turous fatal wings at the very doors
whereas, informer times, their villainies had entered.

Not far from These, came crawling out of their bushes a company of grave and
wealthy Lechers in the shapes of Glowe-wormes, who with gold, Iyngling in their
pockets, made such a show in the night, that the doors of Common Brothelryes
flew open to receive them, the in s^piens in munera v^nit adultor, Praebuit
ipsa sinus. Nec polisti metuunt De^ ^ec ^cere Deo^ opinor.
the day time they durst not pass that way, for seat that noted Curtizans
should challenge them of acquaintance, or that others should laugh at them to
see white heads growing upon green stalks.

Then came forth certain infamou^ earthy minded Creatures in the shapes of
Snailes, who all the day time hyding their heads in their shells, lea^ b^ies
should we two fingers point at them for living b^ly upon the prostitutio^ of
their wives bodies, cared not now, before candlelight, to shoot out their
largest and longest Horns.

A number of other monsters, like These, were seen (as the sun went down)
to venture from their de^nes, only to engender with Darkness: but
candle-lights eyesight growing dimmer and dimmer, and he at last falling
stark blind, Lucifers Watchman went strumbling up and down in the dark.

How to weane Horses.
Every door on a sudden was shut, not a candle stood peeping through any
window, not a Vintner was to be seen brewing in his Cellor, not a drunkerd to
be met reeling, not a Mouse to be heard stiring: al ye City showed Mutat Quies
habitat.
like one Bed, for all in that Bed were sou^dly cast into a ^eepe. Noise made
no noise, for every one that wrought with the hammer was put to silence. Yet
notwithstanding when even the Devil himself could have been contented to take
a nap, there were few Inkeepers about ye town but had their spirits walking.
To watch which spirits what they did, our Spy, that came lately out of ye
Lowercountries, stole into one of their Circles, where lucking very closely,
he perceived ye when all the guests were profoundly sleeping, when Cariers
were soundly snorting, and not so much as the Chamberlain of the house but was
laid up, suddenly out of his bed started an Hostler. who having no apparel on
but his shirt, a pair of slip-shooes The knavery of Hostlar.
on his feet, and a Candle burning in his hand like old Ieronimo stepped into
the stable amongst a number of poor hungry Iades, as if that night he had
been to ride poast to ye Devil. But his journey not lying that way till some
other time, he neither bridled nor sadled any of his fourefooted guests that
stood there at rack and manger, but seeing them so late at supper, and knowing
that to ouereate themselves would fill them full of diseases, (they being
subject to above a hundred and thirty already) he first (without a voyder)
after a most unmannerly fashion took away, not only all the Prouander that was
set before them, but also all the hay, at which before they were glad to lick
their lips. The poor Horses looked very rufully upon him for this, but he
rubbing their teeth only with the end of a Candle (in steed of a Cortall)
told them, that for their Iadish tricks it was now time to weane them: And so
wishing them not to be angry if they lay upon the hard boards, considering all
the beds in the house were full, back again he stole to his Coach, till
break of day: yet fearing least the sun should rise to discover his knavery,
up he started, and into the stable he stumbled, scarce half awake, giving to
every Jade a bottle of hay for his breake-fast, but al of them being troubled
we the greazy toothache, could eat none, which their masters in the ^ing
espying swore they were either fullen or else that prouender pricked them.

This Hostler for this piece of service was afterward preferred to be one of
the Grooms in Belzebubs stable.

Another Night-peece drawn in sundry colors.
SHall I show you what other bottomes of mischief, Plutos Beadle saw wound
upon the black spindels of the Night, in this his privy search? In some
streets he met Mid-w^ies running, till they sweat, and following them close at
hecles, he spied them to be let in, at the back doors of houses, seated either
in blind lanes, or in by-gardens: which houses had rooms builded for the
purpose, where young Maids, being big with child by unlawful Fathers, or
young wives (in their husbands abscence Matronaeque r^ra pudica est.
at sea, or in the wars) having wrastled with batchilers or married men, til
they caught falls, lay safely til they were delivered of them. And for
reasonable sums of money, s^pe ^lent auro multa ^ubesse mala
the bastards that at these windows crept into the world, were as closely now
and then sent presently out of the Pectora tantis obseffa malis, Non sunt ict^
fertenda leut.
world, or else were so unmannerly brought up, that they never spoke to their
own parents that begot them.

In some streets he met servants in whose breast albeit the arrows of the
plague stuck half way, yet by cruel masters were they driven out of doors at
midnight and conuaid to Garden-houses, where they either died before Quit
prodere tanta relatu Funera.
next morning, or else were carried thither dead in their coffins as tho they
had lien sick there before and there had dyed.

Now and then at the corner of a turning he spyed servants purloyning fardels
of their masters goods, and delivering them to the hands of common strumpets.

This door opend, and Lust with Prodigality were heard to stand closely
kissing: and (wringing one another by the hand) softly to whisper out four of
five goodnights, till they met abroad the next morning.

A thousand of these comedies were acted in dumb show, and only in the private
houses: at which the Devils messenger laughed so loud that Hell heard him, and
for joy range forth loud and lusty Plaudities. But being driven into wonder
why the night would fall in labor, and bring forth so many Uillantes, whose
births she practiced to cover (as she had reason) because so many watchmen were
continually called and charged to have an eye to her doings, at length he
perceived that Bats (more ugly and more in number then these) might fly up and
down in darkness: for tho with their Letherne Wings they should strike the
verry bills out of those Watchmens hands, such leaden plummets were commonly
hung by sleep at all their eyelids, that hardly they could be awakned to
strike them again.

On therefore he walks, with intent to hasten home, as having filled his Table
Books with sufficient notes of intelligence. But, at the last, meeting with
the Bell-man, and not knowing what he was because he went without his Lantern
and some other implements: for the man in the Moon was up the most part of the
night and lighted him which way soever he turned, he took him for some
churlish Hobgoblin, seeing a long staff on his neck, and therefore to be one
of his own fellows. The Bel-ringer Smelling what strong scent he had in his
nose, soothed him up, and questioning with him how he had spent his time in the
city, and what discovery of Land-villanies he had made in this Island voyage:
ye Mariner of hell, opened his chart, which he had linedwith all abuseslying
either East, West, North, or South: he showed how he had pricked it, upon what
points he had saild, where he put in: under what height he kept himself:
where he went a shore, what strange people he met: what land he had discovered,
and what commodities he was laden with from thence. Of all which the Bell-man
drawing forth a perfect Map, they parted: which Map he has set out in such
collors as you see, tho not with such cunning as he could wish: the pains are
his own, the pleasure, if this can yield any pleasure, only yours, on whom
he bestows it: to him that embraces his labors, he dedicats both them and
his love: with him that either knows not how, or cares not to entertain them,
he will not be angry, but only to Him says thus much for a farrewell.

-- -- Si quid Nouisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti: Si non, His vtere mecum:

FINIS.

