Four Birds OF Noah's Arc: Viz. 1. The DOVE. 2. The EAGLE. 3. The PELICAN. 4.
The PHOENIX.


The Dove brings Comfort. The Eagle brings Courage. The Pelican brings
Health. The Phoenix brings Life.
Vigilate and Orate.

LONDON, Printed by H. B. for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at his shop
near S. Austins Gate. 1609.

A Table showing the contents of all the four Books.
The Dove.
1. A Prayer for a child before he goes to his study, or to school. fol. 4.
2. A Prayer for a prentise going to his labor. fol 8. 3. A Prayer for him that
buies and selles. fol. 12 4. A Prayer for a mayd-seruant. fol. 17. 5. A Prayer
for a Serving man. fol. 20. 6. A Prayer for a Husbandman. fol. 22. 7. A Prayer
for a mariner going to Sea. fol. 25. 8. A Prayer for a mariner at Sea in a
storm. fol. 28. 9. A Thanksgiving for a mariner being safely landed. fol.
31. 10. A Payer for a Soldier going to a battle. fol. 34. 11. A Thanksgiving
for a Soldier after victory. fol. 36. 12. A Prayer for a woman great with
child. fo. 38. 13. A Prayer for a midwife. fol 42. 14. A Thanksgiving after a
woman's delivery. fol. 44. 15 A Prayer for a sick man, to be said by himself.
fol. 46. 16 A Prayer to be said by them that visit the sick. fol. 50 17. A
Prayer for a prisoner. fol. 53. 18 A Prayer for a Gally-slaue. fol. 57. 19 A
Prayer for men that work in dangerous works, as Coale-pits, etc. fol 60. 20. A
Prayer for a poor man. fol. 63.
FINIS.
The Pelican.
THe Pelican a figure of Christ upon the Cross. fol. 1. Christ the Pelican
dies to kill sin. fol. 6. 1 A Prayer for the morning. fol. 13. 2 A Prayer
against pride. fol. 16 3 A Prayer against envy. fol. 22 4 A Prayer against
wrath. fol. 26. 5 A Prayer against sloth. fol. 29. 6 A Prayer against
covetousness. fol. 33. 7 A Prayer against gluttony. fol. 37. 8 A Prayer against
lust. fol. 40. 9 A Prayer against the temptation of the Devil. fol 65. 10 A
Prayer for the evening. fol. 69.
FINIS.
The Phoenix.
THe Phoenix a figure of Christ. 1. A Thanksgiving for all those benefits
which we reap by the death of Christ. fol. 1. 2. A Thanksgiving for all
those benefits which we reap by the burial of Christ. fol. 8. 3. A
Thanksgiving for all the benefits which we reap by the resurrection of
Christ. fol. 14. 4. A Thanksgiving for all those benefits which we reap by
the ascension of Christ. fol. 19. 5. A Thanksgiving for all those benefits
which we are to receive by Christ's coming in glory. fol. 24. Also, other
short and pitihe sentences, fit to be applied to those purposes for which the
former Prayers are made.
FINIS.
The Eagle.
1. A Prayer made by the late Queen Elizabeth. fol. 1. 2. A Prayer for the
King. fol. 4. 3. A Prayer for Qu. Anne. fol. 8. 4. A Prayer for Prince Henry,
Prince of Wales. fol. 12. 5. A Prayer for the Counsel. fol. 16. 6. A Prayer
for the Nobility. fol. 18. 7. A Prayer for the Church. fol. 20. 8. A Prayer
for the Clergy. fol* 22 9. A Prayer for the Judges of the land. fol. 25. 10. A
Prayer for the Court. fol. 27. 11. A Prayer for the City. fol. 29. 12. A
Prayer for the Country. fol. 32. 13. A Prayer for a Magistrate. fol. 34. 14. A
Prayer for a Lawyer. fol. 37. 15. A Prayer for the 2. Universities. fol. 39 16.
A Prayer for confusion of traitors fo. 42. 17. A Prayer in time of civil
war. fol. 45. 18. A Prayer to stay the pestilence. fol. 48. 19. A Prayer in
time of Famine. fol. 51. 20. A Prayer in the time of persecution. fol. 53.
FINIS.
To the Religious, Virtuous, and noble Gentleman, Sir Thomas Smith Knight; the
happiness of both worlds, this present, and that to come.
SIR, I present unto your view, a book of prayers; not that you need my weak
instructions: for you are known to be a good proficient in Gods School, and
have more of this heavenly language in you by heart, then I can teach you by
precept. The tree of sound Religion flourishes in your bosom, and bears
(both in the eye of man (outwardly) and (inwardly) to God) much, and very much
good fruit. You thereby prove your self a confirmed Christian: and shall give
further testimony of your being so, if you encourage others (that are weak)
to feed upon this milk for babes, by tasting of it your self. They (by you)
shall be led into the path of goodness, if you but vouchsafe to walk out before
them, and commend the way. Four Birds (of Noah's Arc) have taken four several
flights. The Dove (which is the first) flies to your hand; not by chance, but
upon good choice, as knowing you to be a Dove your self. The badge which a
Dove wears, is innocence: and by wearing that Christian Armor, you defended
your self, and returned safe out of the Lions den with Daniel, when it was
thought you should have bin devoured. God has since heaped Graces on your
head, and by the hands of his Anointed has rewarded you with deserved honors,
in the self same place, into which you were thrown to be swallowed up by
destruction. Receive therefore (I beseech you) a Dove, sithence her harmeles and
spotles wings have carried you over such great danger to so great happiness.

In her bill she brings a branch, upon which grows several sorts of fruit, and
al of the^ wholesome for the soul. You are the first to whose hand they are
offered: if any others gather the^ after you, and find in them the sweetness of
the food of life, they shall (as I) pray to God, that his blessings may still
more and more be multiplied so long upon you, til the last garla^d which he
keeps in store for those that run their race (here) well, may be to you a crown
of heavenly blessedness.

Ever bounden to your worship.

To the Reader.
REader, I have for thy comfort sent unto thee 4. Birds of Noah's Ark, upon
four several messages: and have changed the notes of those Birds voices into
Prayers of different music, but all full of sweetness. Under the wings of
the Dove, have I put Prayers, fitting the nature of the Dove, that is to say,
simple Prayers, or such as are fitting the mouths of young and the meanest
people: and for such blessings as they have most need of. The Eagle soars more
high, and in his beak bears up to heaven supplications in behalf of Kings
and Rulers. The Pelican carries the figure of our Redeemer on the cross, who
shed his blood to nourish us (he being the right Pelican): with the drops of
which blood, have I writ Prayers against all those deadly and capital sins,
to wash out whose foulenes our Savior suffered that ignominious death. And
lastly, in the spiced nest of the Phoenix (in which Bird likewise is figured
Christ risen again) shall thou find a book written full of Thanks and Wishes:
of thanks, for those benefits which grow unto us by Christ's death and
resurrection: of Wishes, that he would in diverse gifts bestow those blessings
upon us. Nothing that is set down is tedious, because I had a care of thy
memory Nothing is done twice, because thou may take delight in them. If thou
art young, here is pleasure for thee: if old, here is comfort* if thou art
poor, here is riches; if thou have enough, here is more: use this physic
well, and live well: run this circle truly, and die well: that is the goal:
win that, win Heaven.

Farewell.
What Prayer is.
PRayer, is the language in which we talk to God: for when we read (the Book)
God speaks to us, but when we Pray, we speak to him: It is therefore a
dialogue between him and us. It is that leader which Jacob saw ascending up to
the clouds, for by the stairs of it do we climb up to heaven. Prayer is the
key that opens all the gates of heaven. It is the compass by which we sail
thither. It is the badge by which a Christian is known that he serves God. It
is our best friend that speaks to him in our behalf. It is the eloquence
that only overcomes him. It is the music, that only charms his anger to
sleep. It is our peacemaker, in the wars between God and us. It is the
sword of defense in the combat between us and the devil. It is the ship, in
which if our soul sails not, we perish. It is the anchor, at which we lie
safe in the storms of death. It is the balm that cures the wounds of
poverty, of oppression, of imprisonment, of banishment, of despair, of cares,
of sorrows and of all calamities, that like diseases hang upon our life. Such
is Prayer, such armor must we put on if we mean to win Heaven.

The Dove, compared to Prayer.
THe Dove was the first Bird that being sent out of Noah his Arc, brought
comfort to Noah: So Prayer being sent out of the Arc of our bodies, is the
only and first bringer of comfort to us from Heaven. The Dove went out twice
ere it could find an Olive Branch, (which was the ensign of peace:) So our
Prayers must fly up again and again, and never leave beating at the doors
of Heaven, till they fetch from thence the Oliue-Branch of Gods mercy, in
sign that we are at peace with him, and that he has pardoned our sins. The
Dove no sooner brought that bough of good tidings into the Arc, but the
universal flood fell, and sunck into the bowels of the deep: So no sooner do
our hearty Prayers pierce the bosom of the Lord Almighty, but the waters of
his indignation shrink away, melting to nothing like hills of Snow, and the
universal deluge of sin that flows 40. days and nights together, (that
is to say, every hour, or all our life time) to drown both soul and body, is
driven back, and ebs into the bottomless gulf of hell. The Dove is said to
be without gall: Our Prayer must be without bitterness, and not to the hurt of
our neighbor (for such Prayers are curses) lest we pull down vengeance on our
heads. Such was the Dove that Noah sent out of the Ark, with such wings let our
Prayers carry up our messages to Heaven.

1. A Prayer for a child before he goes to his study, or to school.
O GOD, that art the fountain of all wisdom, and founder of all learning:
breathe into my soul the spirit of understanding, that in my childhood I may
learn, and (as I grow farther into years) may practice the study only of thee
and of thy laws. Feed me (O Lord) as babes are fed, with the milk of thy holy
word, that I may grow strong in setting forth thy praises. Make me (O Jesus
thou Son of God) one of those of whom thou speakekest thus, Suffer little
children to come unto me, and forbid them not. And as thou have promised that
thy wonders should be sou^ded forth by the tongues of infants and sucking
babes; so power into my lips the waters of the well of life, that whatsoever I
learn may be to proclaim thy glory. Polish thou my mind (O God) that it may
shine bright in goodness: and that I may not defile or deface this weak
temple of my body by corrupted manners or leaud speeches; but so season my
tongue that all the lessons which I take forth, may seem to be read to me in
thine own school. Be thou my Schoolmasters to instruct me, so shall I
repeat the rules of true wisdom: keep thou me in fear of the rod of thy
displeasure, so shall I be sure to have my name set in the book of life. Make
me obedient to my Parents: dutiful to my Teachers: loving to my
Schoole-fellowes: humble to my superiors; full of reverence to old men: proud
toward no man; and that I may win the love of all men. Bless me, O Lord,
this day: guide my feet, direct my mind, sanctify my studies, govern al my
actions, preserve my body in health, my soul from uncleanness. Grant this, O
my God, for thy Sons sake (Jesus Christ:) or if it be thy pleasure to cut me
off before night, and that this flower of my youth shall fade in all the beauty
of it, yet make me (O my gracious Shepherd) for one of thy Lambs, to whom
thou will say, Come you blessed, and clothe me in a white robe (of
righteousness) that I may be one of those singers, who shall cry to thee
Allelluia. Amen.

2. A Prayer for a prentice going to his labor.
O The builder of this world! (whose workmanship is to be seen excellent
even in the frames of the least and basest creatures which thou have set
together:) Cast a gracious eye upon me, and lend me thy directing hand that
the labors which this day I am to undertake may prosper. Let me not (O God)
go about my business with eye-seruice; but sithence thou have ordained that
(like poor Joseph) I must enter into the state of a servant, so humble my
mind, that I may perform with a cheereful willingness whatsoever my master
commands me, and that all his commandments may be agreeable to the serving of
thee. Bestow upon me thy grace that I may deal uprightly with all men, and
that I may show my self to him, who is set over me (a Ruler) as I another day
would desire to have others behave themselves to me. Take away from him (that
is, my master) all thoughts of cruelty, that like the children of Israel under
the subjection of Pharaohs servants, I may not be set to a task above my
strength: of if I be; stretch thou out my sinews (O God) that I may with
vn-wearied limbs accomplish it. Fill my veins with blood, that that I may go
through the hardest labors: sithence it is a law set down by thy self, that I
must earne my bread with the sweat of my own brows. Give me courage to
begin: patience to go forward: and ability to finish them. Cleanse my heart
(O thou that art the fountain of purity) from all falsehood, from all
swearing, from all abuse of thy sacred Name, from all foul, loose and
irreverent languages. Let my thoughts when I am alone be of thee: let my mirth
in company be to sing Psalms, and the arguments of my talk only touching
the works of thy hand. Take sloth from my fingers, and drowsinesse from the
lids of mine eye; whether I rise early, or lie down late, so gladly let me do
it, as if my prentiship were to be consumed in thy service. The glass of my
years shall thereby run out in pleasure, and I in the end shall be made free of
that city of thine, The heavenly Jerusalem; into whose fellowship, I beseech
thee, to enfranchise and enrol me, and that after I have faithfully labored
six days of my life here upon earth, I may upon the seventh rest in thy
everlasting Sabbath. Amen.

3. A Prayer for him that buys and sels.
O Good God, what is our life but a common Mart, wherein we sell away our bodies
to shame for the price of momentarie pleasure, and barter away our souls to
sin, which were bought at the dearest rate (even thy Sons blood?) What are
all our labors, but desperate voiages, made to purchase wealth? And what are
the riches of a worldly man when they are gotten, but (as thy Prophet sings)
The weauing of a spiders web? Esaias 59.
The spider makes fine nets to catch flies; and the worldling wastes his
nights, and wears out his days in tying his conscience full of knots to pull
up riches. Sithence then the heaping up of wealth is for the most part, the
heaping up of wickedness; and that all the travails of our life, are but like
buying and selling in a fair, which we begin to day and end to morrow: so
direct my steps (dear Lord) that I may neither wa^der to get goods by
unlawful courses, nor that I may fall in love with riches, how well soever they
be gotten. Let me not be one of those buyers and sellers, whom thy Son Jesus
thrust out of the Temple: But rather one of those Merchants that sell all to
follow thee. And since to love our neighbor is the fulfilling of the Law, give
me grace that I may be counted no breaker of that Law, but a keeper of it
sound, dealing justly with all men. And for that purpose, let not mine eye look
upon false waights, nor my hand be held out to take up an uneven balance. He
loses a piece of his soul, (every time) that robs his chapma^ of his
measure: and he that unjustly gains but thirty pence, sells (like Judas)
even his master Christ. As thou (O Father of us all) have given me two hands,
so appoint those servants of my body to execute none but good and holy
offices: Let the one hand buy honestly, and the other sell justly. Let the left
be to lay up wealth to maintain my body, and the right to distribute thy
blessings to those whose bodies are in misery. Seal up my lips from lying and
forswearing (the two poisons that ouerflow every city.) Purge my bosom from
corruption: pull out of my heart the stings of envy, and let me rejoice to see
others prosper in the world, and not to murmr if I my self wither like trees
in Autumn, though I lose the golden leaves of wealth, and be left naked with
poverty. Keep the Wolf from my door, and the Fox out of my bed-cha^ber, that
other men may neither lie in wait to rob me of my goods, nor I sit up late
in the counsel of the wicked, how to deceive other men of theirs. Be thou (O
Lord) at my elbow in all my proceedings, so shall I fear to do amiss in any.
And so mortify my affections, that every day casting behind my back the
comfort, the cares, the vanities, the vileness, the pleasures and the sorrows
of this bewitching world, I may continually have this cry aloude in my mouth, I
desire to be dissolved and to be with thee. Amen.

4. A Prayer for a mayd-seruant.
STop not thine ears (O Lord) to the requests of thy poor and humble
handmaid, but as thou have laid upon her the condition of a servant, so let her
mind be subjected to the state to which thou have called her. And for that thou
did ordain in that great work of the Creation of mankind, that woman
should be the weaker vessel, both in the labors of the body, and endeavors
of mind: strengthen me therefore (O God) with thy assistance, and enlighten my
soul with thy divine inspiration. Bestow upon my youth a prosperous
flourishing, but let it be in goodness. As I grow up in years, let me grow up in
grace: and write my name (O thou eternal Register) in that general pardon
wherein thou forgiuest the follies of our youth. Crown my Virginstate with
chaste and religious thoughts: and so temper my desires, that the wanton
pleasures of the flesh may not drown in me the heavenly treasures of the
Spirit. Take from me (O God) the health of my body, rather then by the
possession of it, I should grow proud of beauty. So thou accountest me fair, I
care not how ugly I appear to the world. And for that I am but poor, so
bless me, that I may preserve my fame: for an honest reputation is to a
maide^ an ample dowry. Defend me from the poiso^ of evil tongues, which are
more deadly the^ the stings of scorpions Defend me from violating those laws
written down by thine own finger: defend me from shame, whose spots disfigure
the living, and disgrace the dead. Defend me from sin, for the wages thereof
are death and hell. Make me a faithful steward in ordering the goods of my M.
and M ris. so shall I be a more careful disposer of my own. At my going to
rest, take thou charge of my soul, for it is thy jewel; at my vprising guard
thou my body, for thy Son has bought it: so shall I at the Suns rising pray
to thee; when he is at his height, I shall praise thee; and at his going
down, shall I sing Hymns of thanks to thy Name. To which be all honor, for
it is due; All glory, for it is proper; all fear, reverence and adoration,
for they are only thine.

5. A Prayer for a seruingman.
NO service (O God) is like unto that of thine: It is the highway to the
highest honor; It is a preferment to eternity, a promotion beyond that which
is bestowed by Kings. Admit me therefore into thy household of Faith: clothe me
in the livery of a true Christian, so shall I ever wait upon thee (O my Lord:)
lead me out of the company of swearers, quarrellers, drunkards, boasters,
adulterers, and all those that blaspheme thee. Arm me with thy grace, assist
me with thy Spirit, bless me with thy hand, fill me with thy blessings, look
down upon my weakness; lift me up in strength: bear with my frailty:
suffer not my heart to swell with pride, mine eye to burn in lust, my tongue
to sting with slander, my hand to be dipped in blood. But succor me (O my
maker) and save me, (O save me) now and ever, (O my Redeemer,) So be it. Amen.

6. A Prayer for an husband man.
THe earth (O Lord) is thy garden in which thou have appointed man to be a
labourer. Of that stuff in which he daily diggeth and delueth was Man made;
so that in trimming the earth, Man does but dress himself. But albeit Paul
planteth and Apollo waters, no herb or flower can come up or tree prosper
unless thy hand be at the graffing: send thou therefore forth a wholesome breath
from thy nostrils upon those fruits of the earth which out of the bou^ty of thy
love thou have bestowed upon me thy servant. Let not the leaf of my labors
wither, but prosper it till it grow up like a Cedar on the top of Libanus, or
like a tree planted by the waters side, bringing forth fruit in due season.
Check (O my God) the Northren wind, that it beat not down the husbandmans
hopes, but that the sick mayl in fit time send in a ripe and plentiful
harvest. Strike not the ox at the plough with death, nor the horse in the
pasture with diseases: yet I confess, that my sins deserve to have the
plagues of Egypt fall on me and my cattle. But the wings of thy mercy (O
gracious God) spread further then those of thy Justice. Shed therefore those
comfortable beams upon me that am a creeping worm upon earth. And not only
do I beg these worldly and fading blessings at thy hand, but those rather
that are heavenly, and which last for ever: power thy abundant grace on my
soul, that it may be fruitful in good works, and ever bringing forth seeds
of holiness. Open my heart, that it may not be barren of understanding thee;
clear thou mine eyes, that they may behold the face of ignorance and loathe
her, and that they may look upon the beauty of thy sacred wisdom, and be
enamored of it. For these and whatsoever else thou think fit for the health
of my body or happiness of my soul: I most humbly beseech thee in the Name
of that blessed Son of thine, Jesus Christ.

7. A Prayer for a Mariner going to Sea.
O Thou that ridest upon the Cherubins and fliest upon the wings of the winds:
Thou, at the brightness of whose presence the clouds remove, and at whose
chiding hailestones and coals of fire fall upon the world, whose arrows are
swiftest lighting, and whose bow at the going off, shoots forth thunder. Be
merciful unto me (O my God) that am to venture into the horrors of the deep.
There shall I see thy wonders, but let me not see thy wrath: there shall I
look into hell, but let me not fall into the jaws of fear and desperation.
Preserve me (O Lord) in the womb of the ship, though the waters climb round
about the ribs to swallow me up, as thou did save Jonas in the belly of
the Whale. And when with thy servant Peter I cry out (to thy Son) Help Lord,
or we perish: let his hand be stretched forth, to command the waters to be
quiet. Fill our sails with gentle and prosperous winds; let not the sun be
covered in storms by day, nor the Moon and stars conspire with darkness
by night, to spoil us by ship-wracke. But set thou an Angel at our helm, when
we hoist sails to go forth, and charge the same Angel to guide us through
that wilderness of waters, till we safely ariue on shore. Or if for our sins it
be thy pleasure that our bodies in this voyage shall perish, yet (O our
merciful Pilot) save our souls from the great Leuiathan, whose jaws are ever
open to devour: upon what rocks soever the vessel that bears us be split,
yet we (most wretched sinners) beg at thy hands, that our heavenly vessels may
arrive at the everlasting land of promise. Grant this (O Father) for his sake,
that swum through a red Sea of precious blood on the cross, to be man's
Redeemer.

8. A Prayer for a Mariner at Sea in a storm.
Save us (O save us miserable wretches.) who have no hope in the help of man,
but only (O Lord Almighty) in thee. Hear the cries of thy servants, and let
them pierce into thine ear, through this battle of the clouds and the waters.
We perish (O Savior) we perish in this prison of the deep, unless by thy
miraculous power thou deliver us from death. Cast a bridle therefore about the
stubburne necks of the winds, for they are thy servants: and beat back this
furious army of the waters, for they are thy slaves. Send (O Lord) a Moses
unto us, to conduct us through this Sea of death: send but a warrant under thy
dreadful and commanding voice, and the tempest shall obey thee. Thou hold
the winds in thy right hand, and the waves in the left; the heavens are thy
throne, and earth thy footstool: All is thine, and thou art all; to thee
therefore do we fly for succor, because there is no succor but under thy
wings. The sorrows of death do round encompasse us, the pains of hell are
felt in our bones; gather thou therefore the seas into an heap, and lay these
storms of wrath up in thy treasure house of vengeance, to confound thy
professed enemies. We (silly wretches) call upon thy Name, O hear us: we are
the work of thine own hands, O deface not thine own buildings: it was a part
of thy glory to make us, let it be a greater part of thy glory to save us,
now that we are upon the point to perish. Save us, O save us, for thine own
sake, for thy Sons Sake, for thy glories sake, and we shall sing Psalms in
thy praises upon the lute, and upon an instrument of ten strings.

9. A Thanksgiving for Mariner being safely landed.
EVerlasting thanks do we pay unto thee (O thou that art mercy it self) in
that when our feet were stepping into the grave, thou did raise us (with
poor Lazarus) from the dead. Blessed be the God of hosts, that thus has
redeemed us from danger. We were in the lions den* and yet did he deliver
us: We were in the furnace, yet not a hair has perished: We were at the
gates of hell, yet did he fetch us back; the bitter cup of death did he
remove from our lips, and out of the pit of desperation has he pulled us up
alive. He did but say the word, and the winds stood still; he did but frown,
and the waters shrunk in their heads; he did but beccon, and his Angel came
and brought us comfort. We will sing therefore unto our good God a song of
thanks: We will sound forth his Name eue^ amongst Turks and Saracens: and
send abroad the miracle of our deliverance to the furthest corners of the
earth. All glory, honor and praise be thine, O Lord: for thou art just
without corruption, merciful beyond our deseruings, and mighty above our
apprehension. All glory, honor and praise be thine for ever and ever. Amen.

10. A Prayer for a Soldier going to a Battle.
Arm me (O thou God of Battles) with courage this day, that I may not fall
before my enemies: The quarrel is thine, let the victory be thine; tie to my
sinews the strength of David, that I may with a peeble stone strike to the
earth these Giants that fight against thy truth. The weaker means I use, the
greater shall be thy glory, if I come from the field crowned with conquest. I
put no confidence (O Lord) either in the strong horse, or the iron-headed
spear: the armor that must defend me, is thy right arm. Be thou therefore
this day my Captain to conduct me: let thy word be the trumpet to encourage
me; the banner of the Church, the colors which I follow; the weapons which I
fight with faith and hope; and the cause for which I fight, The advancement of
true Religion. Keep my hands (O my God) from playing the bloody executioners;
let pity sit upon mine eylids, even in the heat of battle, and mercy on the
point of my sword when it is most ready to kill. So let me fight, that
whether I come off, lame or sound, dead or alive, I may live or dye thy
Soldier. Amen. Bless me, strengthen me, guide me, guard me, save me, O thou
Lord of hosts. Amen.

11. A Prayer, or Thanksgiving for a Soldier after victory.
VEngeance is thine, O Lord: and the fall of thy enemies is thy glory.
Immortal honor (like the beams of the sun) shine about thy Temples, because
thou have this day stood by thy poor servant. When death trampled upon heaps
of mangled carcases, thou (O Lord) plantedst a guard of Angels about mine. Thou
have circled my brows with Baytree, in sign of conquest, and with the
Palm Tree, in token of peace. All that I can give to thee for these blessings,
is but a giving Thanks. Accept it (O my God) accept this sacrifice of my heart:
and so hold in the reins of my passions, that I be not swollen up with
arrogance and pride, for that which is no work of mine; but that I may humbly
acknowledge thee for the Author both of my own safety, and my foes deseature.
And so instruct me in the heavenly discipline of other wars which I am to fight
in, in this world, that I may defy satan and his troops, beat down sin and
his damned regiment, and triumph over the assaults of the world, that in the
end I may march under the banner which Christ shall spread in Heaven. Amen.

12. A Prayer for a woman great with child.
Look down from Heaven (O Lord) upon me thy handmaid, look down from thy
throne of mercy. A curse have thou laid upon all women, (for their Grand
mother Eues sake) which is, that the fruits of their wombes shall fill them
with pain and torments: Just art thou in thy sentence, for all women in that
battle of life and death, do feel the rigor of thy doom. The horrors of the
grave do in that hour stand before them, the terrors of hell, do in that
conflict houer-rou^d about them; yet (O God) one drop of thy mercy has
sovereign power to cure all the wounds of those sorrows. Shed it therefore (O
Father) shed that drop of grace upon me (most miserable woman) in that minute
when I am to encounter with so stern an enemy. What weight of thy wrath
soever thou layest upon me (for my sins,) strengthen me with patience to
bear it, that I may not in that fearful agony be unruly, or vnforgetfull of
that modesty fitting a woman beset with such dangers; but rather, that in
those throws of child birth, (to which no pangs in the world are comparable) I
may verily believe I see thy blessed Son (my Redeemer) torn upon the cross:
suffering pains insufferable, tortures inexpresseable, and sorrows of soul
in-vttereble, only for me, only to pay for my sins, and only to free me from
the shame of death and hell. Let his immensurable and inco^prehensible agonies
on the cross, put me in mind how much he ventured for me (a wretch) and that
he can not plague me with too many miseries, that have (for all this love
bestowed) every day, and every hour in a day, and every minute of an hour,
played the wa^ton with his favor, and have abused his mercies. Forget my sins
notwithstanding (O my God) but forget not thy servant. Forgive me: and so
forgive me, that the child in my body be not punished for the mothers
offenses Bless this fruit of my womb, which thou have grafted with thine own
hand: give it growth, give it flourishing, give it form. And when the time is
come that thou will call it out of this close house of flesh, (where now it
inhabiteth) to dwell in the open world. Sanctify thy creature, and on the
forehead of it, set that sacred seal of Baptism, that it may be known to be a
La^b of thy own flock. Grant this, O maker of mankind, grant this (O Redeemer
of mankind) at the request of thy servant and handmaid. Amen.

13. A Prayer for a midwife
WIth hands lifted up to Heaven, knees prostrated on the earth, and with a
soul humbled at thy feet (O Lord) do I beg, that thou would prosper this
work which I am to undertake. Suffer me not to be fearful in my office,
fainting in my spirits, or too violent in my duty: but that I may discharge
it to thy honor, this thy handmaids comfort (who is full of pain) and to my
own credit. Bless me (O God) with skill, sithence thou have placed me as thy
deputy in this great and wonderful business: give unto thy servant an easy
and speedy deliverance. Give unto me a quick, a constant and a gentle hand.
Give unto this new unborn creature (into whom thou have breathed a soul) a
fair and wel-shape^ body; that thou may have glory by thy works, and the
mother gladness in beholding her infant, after all her sorrows. Grant this,
O Father, for thy Sons sake Jesus Christ. Amen.

14. A Prayer, or Thanksgiving, after a woman's delivery.
GLorified be thy Name (O God) for this mercy extended to thy servant: It lay
in thy power to strike death into her womb, but thou have given her a double
life: and to heap sorrows upon her sorrows, but her anguishes have thou
sweetened with gladness. Praised be thy blessed Name: Praised be thy wo^drous
works. Continue (O Lord) these thy favors to thy weak hand-maide: put
strength into her blood, blood into her veins, and courage into her heart,
that her lips may render thee a thanksgiving. Look (O God) upon this babe with
an eye of love; preserve it in health, quicken it with thy grace, and crown it
with long life, that it may grow up to be a servant in thy household. Vnty the
strings of his utterance (when thou think it meet) and give unto it a
tongue that may without stammering or any other imperfect sound speak
clearly. Let all other organs of his body execute their offices, as in thy
mercy thou have appointed. Sanctify O Lord, the breasts that must give it
suck, and feed the soul of it (when it shall please thee to fill it with
understanding) with the milk of thy word. Bless us (O Lord) that are here met
together to behold the glory of our creation, and the wonders of our creator
in this little infant. Thanks, honor, and praise be given unto thee for ever
and ever. Amen.

15. A Prayer for a sick man, to be said by himself.
Sickness (O Lord) is, I know, thy herald, and summoneth us to death: It is
thy messenger, and thou have sent it into my body: Welcome it is, because it
comes from thee; yet (O my God) if it be thy pleasure, let thy anger cease,
and cast thou that rod into the fire which has beaten me thus long with
affliction. My soul is brought low, (even to the dust) hide not therefore thy
beams from me, but shed the light of them upon my face, that I may lift up my
head and be comforted. Mercifully have thou dealt with me I confess, for I
deserve, and it lies in thy strength utterly and in an instant to confound me
in the heat of thy indignation: But thou have laid a gentle punishment upon
me, and the blows are such as fathers give to children, not to kill them, but
to correct them. Thou have not yet calde me to the bar of death, yet have
thou called me to a trial. My sins cry out as witnesses against my soul, and
my soul pleads guilty of treason against thy Majesty. Restore me (O God)
by thy pardon under that great seal of thy promise, To forgive a sinner at
what time soever he heartily powers out his tears of repentance. Or if it be
set down in thy book of irreuocable decrees, that my flesh must with this
sickness be turned into dust, so strengthen me (O my Redeemer) that to the
last hour and latest gasp, I may hold thy Name between my lips, and die
with that music only sounding in my voice. Grant this request O Lord to me
thy servant; that whenever or howsoever the glass of my mortality shall
run out, my soul at her departure may run and be received into Abraham's
bosom, which is the sanctuary for all the faithful: at which blessed haven
that I may arrive, prayer shall for ever be the sails that shall carry up my
heart; and above all, that, prayer which the best preacher of the world has
taught me; saying, Our father, etc.

16. A Prayer to be said by them that visit the sick.
O Thou (O Lord) that art the Physician both of soul and body, stretch
forth, we beseech thee, thine arm toward this thy servant: pour out the
oil of thy mercy and compassion, and with it balm his temples, that his
memory may not be taken from him, but that he may call upon thy glorious
Name. Speak unto him, as thou did speak to thy servant, when thou said,
Arise, take up thy bed and walk: for health is thy subject and obeyes no
command but thine. Arm him (O father of us all) arm this thy son with
patience to endure this trial, and with constancy to wait thy pleasure: give
him the fortitude of Job, to bear the burden of all tribulations, of all
crosses, and of al calamities, sithence the weight of them is not to bear him
down, but to lift him up to blessedness. Settle O Lord his spirits, that they
may not wander and fly out into any unruly motions. Lay thy finger upon his
lips, that they may not fall into cursing or blaspheming thy deity, or into
any vain language. Take from his eye al delight of this frail world, and let
his soul make ready only for a voyage to heaven: hear us O Lord that beg
this at thy hands: hear him O Lord, that lifts up his hands unto thee, and
begges a pardon for his sins: open the gates of mercy: open the doors of thy
saving health: open thine arms, to receive him into thy favor, or into the
celestial freedom: adopt him for thine own: adopt him in the blood of thy
Son; or if it be thy will, to add more days to his life, turn then
speedily his weakness into strength, and his sickness into health; so shall
he confess that thou art mighty, that thou art merciful, and that thou alone
art the God of salvation. To thee therefore that art One in Three, and Three in
One, and in all things incomprehensible, be all honor. Amen.

17. A Prayer for a Prisoner.
MY feet (O my Savior) are in the snares of the hunter, and like a beast in
the Wilderness have my enemies pursued me: I am now entangled in the chains
of captivity; yet (O my God) bestow thou upon me the freedom of my soul:
Soften thou the flintie hearts of those men, that have cast me into this house
of mourning and heaviness: and as thou did to Daniel in the Lions den,
defend and keep me from the jaws of misery, that are stretched wide open to
swallow me up alive. It is for my sin that I am thus round beset with
poverty, shame, and dishonor. Receive thou therefore these sacrifices of my
contrition, and turn not away thine ear, when my prayers are flying toward
thee. The sighs of a sinner repenting is a sweet breath in thy nostrils, his
tears are precious, and like those tears that washed the feet of Christ.
Accept therefore this offering from the altar of an humble, contrite, and
wounded heart.

Put into my bosom Good and Charitable thoughts, that I may pray for them that
persecute and trouble me; and that I may undergo and pass over all their
oppressions and bearings of me down, with a settled, constant, and suffering
spirit. Let this imprisonment (O LORD) be always unto me a Book wherein I
may read, first, the knowledge of thee (which hitherto I have not studied) and
secondly, the knowledge of my self. Let it be a glass wherein I may see all
the blemishes of my youth; as riots, whoredoms, drunkenness, pride, and such
like foul and vlcerous spots, that have disfigured my soul. Change (O
merciful God) if it be thy will, my wants into plenty, my thraledome into
liberty, my mourning into gladness, for thy Son Jesus Christ his sake, who
was a prisoner upon the Cross, only to set all mankind free: Work pity O my
Savior, in the breasts of my adversaries, that I may sing with the Prophet:
Blessed is he that considers the poor and needy: the Lord shall deliver him
in the time of trouble. But if it be thy will and pleasure that I must groan
under this trouble and affliction; arm me (O God) with a constant patience to
bear all. Amen.

A Prayer for a Gally-slaue.
O THOU that through the red Sea did guide the children of Israel, thrust
forth the self same arm, and pull me thy servant, out of the hands of a
Tyrant, whose heart is hardened worse then Pharoahs. He that hates thy
glorious Name (O Lord) and persecuteth thy beloved Son in the bodies of
Christians; does with an iron rod bruise my bones: O Lord be thou my
deliverer. In penury and woe do I toil out my days: In cold and hunger do I
pass over and waste out my nights: my labors are at the Oar, and my tortures
at the will of a barbarous infidel; in whose eye, stripes to a wretched and
poor Gally-slaue are but a merriment; and the gushing out of a Christians
blood but a mockery. For the honor of thy beloved Son (who laid down his
own life for my ransom) suffer not these enemies of thy glory to insult over
one of thy children. For the honor of thy Church (of which I am a member)
suffer not thy Religion to be trodden to dust (in me) by the tyranny and
cruelty of a blaspheming Pagan: or if it be in thy Divine purpose, to have me
longer to groan under this heavy yoke of servitude and slavery for the
trial of my faith; thy will be done: yet O LORD, stand thou by my side:
shrink not from me, lest thou forsaking me I fall away from thee, and so
utterly perish in Turkish ignorance: confirm me in my religion, infuse into me
thy grace, teach my tongue to speak of thee boldly, my thoughts to meditate
upon thee sincerely, and strengthen thou my body to maintain thy cause even
to the death. Amen.

19. A Prayer for men that work in dangerous works* as Colepits* mines, etc.
OVT of my Bed (the image of my Grave) have thou raised me (O Lord) thy
Angels sat upon mine eye-liddes, like Sentinels to guard me all the while I lay
asleep: O suffer thou the same watchmen to protect me now I am awake. I need
thy help always, (for what is man without thee?) but so near the house of
danger must I this day dwell, that on my knees I entreat thee to keep side by
side with me in my goings. Save my body, O Lord: for death is (at every
turning about) at my elbow. Save my soul, whatsoever falls upon my body. Which
divine part of me, that it may come into thy heavenly treasure-house, inspire
me with that wisdom which descends from above. Purify my thoughts, and
let them with spotles wings be continually flying about thy throne. Purge my
heart, that it may come before thee like a bridegroom, full of chaste love.
Refine my soul, that like silver seuentimes tried in the fire, it may bear
the bright figure of Salvation. In vain does the builder lay his foundation,
unless thy hand be at the setting up. Set therefore thy hand to this work of
mine; encourage me to undertake it, embolden me to go forward, and enable me
to finish it. Amen.

20. A Prayer for a poor man.
O Thou King both of Heaven and earth, whose blessings fall upon man like
showers of rain: open that rich fountain of thy grace, and let the drops of it
reliue me that am the miserablest of thy creatures. Thou have clothed me in
the habits of baseness; but, O LORD, furnish thou my mind with the riches of
thy mercy. I am content (O FATHER) with this poor estate, and comfort my
self with it, knowing that thy blessed Son had at his birth but a ma^ger in
stead of a cradle to ly in, and being the Lord of the whole world, not so much
as a dwelling house of his his own to lodge in. The Sparrow lights not upon
the ground without thy providence, nor does the meanest of thy children
breath, but thou prouidest for him. Sithence I came naked into the world, this
nakedness of mine is but the badge of my nativity: bestow therefore thy grace
upon me, that I may not envy those that swim in the abundance of wealth. Feed
me, O Lord, with the bread of life: that I may grow strong in health
everlasting; let me drink of the benefit of my Redeemers blood: Clothe me (O
God) with righteousness: and albeit thou have in thy judgment and to express
thy glory, appointed me to be an outcast amongst men, and to be the scum of
the world, yet, O Lord, cast me not out of thy presence, but for thy dear
Sons sake, whose blood bought the beggar as well as the Prince, make me a
free-denizen in the city of Heaven. So be it.

FINIS.
THE Eagle.

The EAGLE brings courage.

Vigilate and Orate.

Printed at London by H.B. for N.B. 1609.

To the right worthy and right worshipful Gentleman, Sir John Scot, knight: a
prosperous increase of honor in this world, and a perfect inioying of glory
in the world to come.
SIR, after I had builded up these four altars of devotion, with purpose to
present the first of the^ to your worshipful brother in Law (Sir Thomas Smith;)
I knew not where to find a man that did more truly parallel him in goodness
then you your self; as well for the ornaments of mind, as for that integrity,
piety, zeal, and other riches of the soul, wherewith the world takes
especial note, that you are (both) abundantly stored. For that cause thefore,
(as also in regard that Affinity has knit you together in a strong and holy
league of love) am I bold to rear up this my second altar to the memory of
your name. Upon it are offered up Prayers only, whose incense are as sweet
odours in the nostrils of God. They are in behalf of Princes and Rulers (who
are the highest upon earth) and therefore does an Eagle carry them up to
heaven. She flies now to your bosom, there to build her nest: esteeming it a
happy place for her to abide in, sithence she foreseeth (or at least with me
prays) that all your thoughts, words and actions which are bred within you,
do show themselves, and so may prove still true Eagles, by being able to look
steadfastly on the sun of righteousness. And thus craving pardon for
boldness, I rest:

Devoted yours

To the vertuously-hopefull young Gentleman, Sir George Hayward, Knight, son
in law to the right worshipful, Sir John Scot, Knight.
GOD is the best Schoolmasters, his laws the noblest study: and what lessons
(of Him) are taught, (truly) how plain soever the Method be, the wisest need
not be ashamed to read them. So that I presume, you will favor these young
blossoms, because your self are but in growing. They are dewed with the drops
of a Pellica^ whose property is to suffer her own bosom to bleed, that others
may be fed. It is the bird of Charity, and the true Emblem of Christ on the
Cross, (who was al Love.) His sids are here pierced, and his blood here runs
forth, making a river, in which only (and by no other fountain) the leprosy of
sin is for ever to be cleansed. You shall find only 7. heads of sin (here) cut
off by prayer: not because it has no more heads but 7. or that these ar the
greatest: but being not able to fight (in so narrow a room) with the multitude
of the^ al, I was contented to set upon a certain number. The Armor to
encounter with them is here prepared: it is made fit for any Christian to
wear. If you vouchsafe to put it on, others by your example will undertake the
same quarrel. To fight for Christ is an honorable combat. Sins are his utter
enemies, and here you may learn how to confound them. The war is godly: the
victory glorious: your triumph will be in heaven. To wrestle against such foes
shall well become your years, and to give the^ the overthrow will be a crown to
you in old age. To the honor of which I do as heartily wish you may come, as
you are happily ingrafted into religious and unblemished Families, which (to
your comfort) you may reckon the first of those good blessings which God has
multiplied upon you,

To the Reader.
READER: the greatest good that Christ did for thee, was to die for thee: and
the greatest pleasure thou can do for him, is to die to thy self. That is
to say, to crucify all the sins and corruptions of thy soul, as he suffered
his body (to redeem thine) to be mangled on a Cross. He was a Pelican for
thy sake; be thou a Pelican to thy self and others* and fly with two wings
(to heaven) Faith and good Works. If thou use the first wing without the
second, thy fligpt is but lame: if the last only without the former, thy pace
is but losie: exercise both, and be sure thou shall get thither.

Farewell.
THE EAGLE.

The EAGLE brings courage.

Vigilate and Orate.

Pinted at London, by H. B. for Nathaniel Butter. 1609.

1. A Prayer made by the virtuous and renowned Queen ELIZABETH, of most happy
memory.
O GOD allmaker, keeper, and guider; Inurement of thy rare-seen, unused, and
seld-heard-of goodness, powered in so plentiful sort upon us full often, breeds
now this boldness, to crave with bowed knees and hearts of humility, thy large
hand of helping power, to assist with wonder our just cause, not founded on
Prides-motion, nor begu^ on Malice-stock; but as thou best know, to whom
naught is hid, grounded on just defense from wrongs, hate, and bloody desire of
conquest. For since, means thou have imparted to save that thou have given, by
enjoying such a people, as scorns their blood-shedde, where surety ours is
one: fortify (dear God) such hearts in such sort, as their best part may be
worst, that to the truest part meant worst, with least loss to such a nation,
as despise their lives for their Countries good. That all Foreign lands may
laud and admire the Omnipote^cie of thy work: a fact alone for thee only to
perform. So shall thy Name be spread for wonders wrought, and the faithful
encouraged, to repose in thy vnfellowed Grace: And we that minded naught but
right, inchained in thy bonds for perpetual slavery, and live and die the
sacrificers of our souls for such obtained favor. Warrant, dear Lord, all
this with thy command. AMEN.

2. A Prayer for the King.
KINGS are gods upon earth, yet (O Lord) they are but thy servants; they rule
kingdoms, yet the chariot of their Empire turns over and over, unless thou
teach their hands how to hold the bridle. More then men they are amongst men,
yet less they are then themselves, if they break thy laws: for sithence they
are thy Stewards, and are trusted with much, it is a great reckoning to which
they must answer.

Lay therefore (O God) thy right hand upon the head of our sovereign (King
JAMES) fasten his Crown to his temples, that no treason may lift it off: bind
it about with Oliue-branches, and let peace ever dwell in the circle of it.
Plant a guard of Angels about his bed, and a troop of Saints about his throne:
that his sleeps may be golden slumbers, and his watchings may be Divine
Meditations. Power into his bosom thy grace, that all his actions may advance
thy glory. Be thou his armor in the day of battle, and (like the wings of an
Eagle) let thine arms cover him in the sunshine of peace. Make him (O Lord)
a Priest in thy Church, a shepherd to thy flocks, a father in the Commonwealth, a Captain in thy quarrel, a conqueror in thy wars. Crown his
middle age with numbers of years, as thou have crowned his youth with the
inheritance of many kingdoms; let the dial of his life move slowly on, and
suffer not the last hour of his old age to strike, till those that now stand
up about him like the tender branches of the vine may be seen growing on the
banks of his kingdom, like so many rows of tall Cedars. Let his reign (O
Lord) be like the age of Methusalem: his knowledge like the wisdom of
Solomon: and his off spring blessed like the seed of Abraham. Give him David's
soul, but suffer him not to fall into David's sins: let him number his
people, not to make thee angry with him, but to make him love them. Tie (O God)
all the strings of their hearts to his bosom, like so many lines drawn to
one center, so shall their safety be his fortress, their prosperity his
riches, and the hours of his pleasure, the sweetest of their contentation.
Grant these and all other blessings fit for such a Prince, grant them (O LORD)
for the benefit of thy Church, for the honor of this Kingdom, and the peace
of thy people. Amen.

3. A Prayer for the Queen.
SHED (O Lord) thy graces in showers of abundance upon thy royal handmaid,
ANNE, the wife of our Sovereign, thy servant, and the mother to so many
nations, besides the glory of her own. Continue that great and excellent work
in her which thou have begun; hid from our eyes for a number of years
together (now past) and to our Kingdom, the best and only comfort, which for
the present, or for the hopes of future ages, we do now enjoy: and that is a
long, a fair and a certain line of succession, of which heretofore we stood
doubtful: albeit in the secrets of thy wisdom we were not deprived of it. As
she is now a mother to a heap of Princes, that are borne to be Kings and
Queens, so (O Lord) make her a grandmother to the sons of Kings and Queens,
that they may stand about her like so many crowned rulers of nations, and she
in the midsts of them, as the only tree, upon which those nations have been
grafted. Let (O God) such an even thread of love be spunne between the King
and her, that all her thoughts may be confined to his bosom, and all his
desires may sleep only upon her pillow, and that both their hearts may burn in
holy flames of affection toward thee. Sanctify her womb, that it may bring
forth none but such fruit as may glorify thy Name, may shine as sunne-beames
to comfort this land, and to be as rich jewels in the royal eyes of the
parents. Keep treason (O Lord) from the throne upon which she sits, and
parasites (who are as dangerous as traitors) from her princely ear, when thee
wants counsel. Support her by thy right hand when she walks forth, and
let thy Angels go before her, at her returning home. As thou have crowned her
with happiness in this world, so when it is thy pleasure, that she shall put
off the robe of mortaltie, grant (O FATHER) that she may be crowned with
stars, and clothed in a robe of righteousness and of heavenly eternity.
Amen.

4. A Prayer for the Prince of Wales.
WHat are KINGS (O Lord) unless thou stand by the^ as their guard? And what
are the sons of Kings, unless thou vouchsafest to be their Father? Let the
arms therefore of thy love be thrown about that hope-full and royal heir to
our Country, Prince HENRY: adopt him into thy favor: cover him with thy
wings, let him be tender to thee as the apple of thine eye. As yet he is but a
green plant; O drop the deaw of thy graces upon his head, that he may flourish
till the shadow of his branches be a comfort to this whole Island Breath thou
all wisdom into their souls that are set over him as tutors or guardia^s,
that knowledge may, as it were, from so many pipes be conueie into his breast,
and that from thence again (as from a fountain) it may flow clearly and
abundantly into all the parts of this thy Church and kingdom. Let Religion be
the column upon which he shall always stand, zeal the pillow upon which he
shall kneel, and the quarrel of the Gospel, for which he shall go to war:
knit therefore (O Lord) strength to his right arm, and when a good cause calls
him (at his manly state) into the field, gird thou about his loins the sword
of victory. No music (O Lord) is more pleasing to thine ear (as thy kingly
Prophet David does sing) then the unity of brethren: It is like the precious
ointment, that ran down from the head to the beard, even to the beard of
Aaron, and so to the skirts of his clothing, yea, it is like the dew of
Hermon, which fell upon the hill of Sion: tune therefore (O merciful God) all
the heart strings of this our young Prince HENRY, and the rest of that royal
blood (his Brethren and Sisters) that thy may never sound in discord. Let no
more the leaves of our two Roses be plucked by civil uproar from their
stalks: no more suffer thou ensigns to be spread by Yorkists and Lancastrians
one against another: But (according to their names) grant (O Lord) that they
may be good Stewards over this great household of the now-firmlie united
Families, and covnited kingdoms. Subscribe to these requests of ours (O God)
for thy mercies sake: Seal them up, under the large patent of thy promise for
thy Sons saks Jesus Christ: In whose Name whatsoever we ask thou have vowed to
grant: grant this, give this, O God, we beseech thee. Amen: Amen.

5. A Prayer for the Counsel.
Counsel to a Kingdom is like the Compass to a ship under sail; without the
one, a State is shaken by every tempest, and without the other, men run upon
the rocks of inevitable danger. Set therefore thy foot (O God) amongst the
Lords of our Counsel: sit thou at their Table with them, and suffer no decrees
to pass there, but those wherein thou have a hand. Appoint Providence, to dwell
upon their brows, that they may fore see thine and our enemies: bid
watchfulness to sit on their eyelids, to meet the stroke when it is
coming, and courage to buckle armor to their breasts, that they may valiantly
bear it off without shrinking: let zeal and integrity go on either side of
the^, to make the^ walk upright, whilst concord holds them hand in hand to
preserve them from factions. Give them long life with much honor: heap upon
the^ wisdom, with much love. As they are one body in Counsel, so let all
their counsels be to the safety of one head. Grant this, O thou that wey
ghest all the actions of Rulers and Princes upon earth. Amen.

6. A Prayer for the Nobility.
Look down (O Lord) from heaven upon this land, and amongst all those in the
same, whom, we beseech thee, to bless, power upon our Nobibitie the riches of
all thy graces: as every good man (O Lord) in thy sight is noble, so make thou
every man that is noble amongst us to be good. Teach them to know, that
greatness of blood is given them to the intent they should build upon the same
the greatness of thy glory. And sithence they are the fairest streams that
beautify this kingdom, preserve them (O Lord) from the poison of ambition, of
envy one against another, and from dessension, lest the common people tasting
likewise of the same after them* the whole Commonwealth be swallowed up in
confusion. Stand thou before the gates of their houses, that no foul thoughts
or acts may enter to stain their Families with the spots of treason; but be
thou the pillar to uphold them, sithence if thou forsake them, the foundation
of their houses must fall, and their posterity be rooted from the earth. Guide
them therefore with thy grace, arm them with thy fear* assist them with thy
love. So be it. Amen.

17. A Prayer for the Church
THE Church (O God) is the School, where thine own laws (written by thine
own hand) are taught: It is the Temple where thou thy self vtterest thy
divine oracles. It is the house where thou dwell: It is the palace where
(with spiritual eyes) we behold the brightness of thy Majesty: Give it
therefore illumination by the beams of thy glory: and since it is thy Spouse,
let her stand before thee as a virgin (chaste and undefiled.) Drive all foxes,
and ravening wolves out of this thy Temple, and admit none but Lambs (clothed
in purity and innocence of life) and thy chosen flock to feed there. Suffer
it not to be (as it was when thy blessed Son went upon earth) a den of
thieves, but (as he did, so do thou) drive from thence all those that sell
thine honor and the souls of thy people. O Lord, weed this great and
universal garden of thine from al thorns and briers, that seek to choke the
good seed: plant in it none but grafts of thine own nurcerie, so shall thou
be sure they will bring forth fruit, fair for show, sweet for taste,
wholesome for use, and such as shall bud out in due season: so shall thy Name
be truly hououred, thy praises duly sung, thy works (with reverence)
wondered at, and thy wonders magnified from one end of the world to another.
Grant that it may be so, for the fullness of thy Sons merits, and for the
setting forth of thine own mercies. Amen.

8. A Prayer for the Clergy.
O Everlasting King of glory, that sendest the Ministers of thy word as thine
Ambassadors, to treat with men about the peace of their souls, give them (O
Lord) such instructions that they may deliver their messages boldly,
vprightlie, and to the good both of thy kingdom, and of those to whom they are
sent. They are those heavenly purseua^ts that run upon the erra^ds of our
saving health: They are Angels that go and come between thee and us: guide
therefore their feet, that sin may lay no stumbling blocks before them to
make them fall; nor that forgetting the high honor in which thou have placed
them, they be cast down for their pride, into the pit of darkness. And
sithence (O God) thou have placed the^ on thy holy hill (the Church) as beacons,
give them grace that (with the 7. wise virgins) their lights may never go
forth, but still burn brightly to arm thy people against the invasion of
that enemy of mankind the devil and his army, that day and night seeks to
devour him. Wipe away al mists of errors from their eyes, that seeing thee
clearly, they may teach others how to behold thee truly. They are Pastors
over thy flocks: as they have the names of Shepherds, so let them have the
natures to feed the sheep committed to their charge, and not to fliece them.
And as they break unto us the bread of life (which thou sendest, employing
them but as the stewards, or almoners of thy households) so grant, O Lord) that
we may not suffer them to starve for earthly bread, but that like brothers we
may relieve them, like children we may reverence them, like Lambs of thy fold
we may love the shepherds of thy fields, and like sworn soldiers to the
cross of Christ, we may live and die with then under his glorious banner.
Amen.

9. A Prayer for the Judges of the land.
IVDGEMENT, O Lord, is thine: yet to keep man in awe have thou appointed Judges
(as thy deputies on earth) to punish him when he goes beyond his bounds. Unto
those therefore that hold the sword of Justice, give thou steady hands, that
they may not strike innocence, and that when they are to punish, they may
imitate thee, who smitest not to kill, but to beget amendment. Suffer not the
left hand of our Judges to know what the right hand does: nor that the ear
near unto which the rich man stands be open, till the poor man's wrongs be
both heard and redressed. Whip, O Lord, briberie from their gates, and
partiality out of their private chambers; let thy lawesly before the^ when
they read the statutes of men's making, that reading what thou have writ, they
may not open their lips to pronounce false judgment: but sit, O Lord, so
close by them upon their seats of Justice, that by thinking they themselves
must one day be called to a bar, they may do nothing here but what (with a
good conscience) they may answer there. Amen.

10. A Prayer for the Court.
O Lord, be thou a husband to that great household of our King, be thou a
father unto that family, and keep them (as children) both in thy fear and
love. And because the Courts of Princes are the very lights of kingdoms, power
thy oil of grace into this light of ours that it may not be darkened, but may
bring comfort to all thy people: preserve those that live there in brotherly
affection one toward another, and in loyalty to him that is their Sovereign.
Banish from thence all those vices that commonly blemish the beauty of kings
Palaces: and let thy word be of such power in this place, that it may rather
seem the Temple of the everlasting king of Heaven, then the dwelling house of a
king upon earth. Grant this (O Lord) and whatsoever else is requisite for the
setting forth of thy glory, we beseech thee, in the name of thy Son Jesus
Christ. Amen.

II. A Prayer for the City.
O Father of mercy, look down upon this city, not with an eye of Justice,
for no flesh is righteou in thy sight: but behold this thy sanctuary, as thy
Son did Jerusalem, when he wept, that the city of the Lord should be so
full of iniquity. If those miracles (O God) which have been shown in this
greatest city of thine now upon earth, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they
would have repented in sackcloth and ashes; but we more and more provoke thee
to anger: yet, O Lord, stay thy hand from striking, and thy lips from
pronouncing those woes that were breathed forth by thee against Chorazin and
Bethsaida. Say not thou, O God, to this City, as thou did to Capernaum: And
thou Capernaum which art lifted up to Heaven, shall be brought down to hell.
But gather thy children together as the Hen gathers her chickens under her
wing, and suffer not thy holy habitations to be left desolate. Set, O Lord, an
host of Angels at the gates, and let truth spread her banner on the walls:
suffer not the arrows of the inuader to fall upon our houses by day, nor the
sword of the strong man to smite us by night. Give wisdom, O Lord, to the
Rulers of this City, zeal to the Preachers therein and holiness of life to
the Inhabitants. Let the tree of thy Gospel (which so many years has here
flourished) still spread into large branches, and those branches bear
abundance of lively fruit. Save, O Lord, this Temple of thine; bless it,
defend it, crown it with honors, that it may outshine all the Cities in the
world in goodness as it does in greatness. Amen.

12. A Prayer for the Country.
O Thou that art the Creator of all things that are good for man, give unto our
corne-fields fatnes and increase, and upon our medows rain down the waters of
plenty: let our la^d be like unto that which thou said should flow with
milk and honey: for as the heavens are thine so is the earth thine: Thou have
made also the North and the South: the winds are in thy hand; bridle them
therefore, and bind them in the prisons of the earth, that they may not come
forth to destroy the labors of the ploughman, nor to defeat the husbandman of
his hopes. Set, O gracious Father, faithful and learned and watchful
shepherds over the poor flock of us thy people, that the blindness of
ignorance may not cause our souls to wander in the shades of everlasting
death. Guide us, O Lord, neither in the paths of our forefathers (if they went
astray) nor after the common steps of the present time, unless it be according
to those ways which are trod out before us, by thy Son Jesus Christ. Teach
us to love thee, to know thee, to live after thy laws, and to die after thy
commandments; so shall we be sure to change this country of frailty, of
sin and of misery, for the land of promise, and the kingdom of all fullness
and felicity. Grant this O Father of us all, grant this O Redeemer of us all.
Amen.

13. A Prayer for a Magistrate.
THou have called me (O Lord) being but a worm of the earth, and raised to
riches, as it were, even out of dust, to be a Ruler over others: bestow on me
therefore the spirit of Wisdom, that I may first learn how to govern my
self: for the perfect knowledge of a man's self, brings him (O God) to the true
knowledge of thee. Humble me (O my Maker) in this top of my height: that my
head being lifted up to honor, my heart may not swell up with pride: give me a
mind not to execute my own will but thine: give me an eye that may not lust
after my own profit, but the advancement of thy glory, and the good of the
Commonwealth. As thou have placed me, to be a Pillar to uphold others, so
grant that I may not prove a weak Pillar, to throw my self down; and with
my fall to bruise others that stand under me. In all my ways (O Lord) go thou
before me, as a Lantern to my feet: In all my actions stand thou by me, as my
Schoolmaster to direct me: In all my prosperity let me look only upon
thee: In all my troubles of body or mind, turn not thou thine eyes from me:
suffer me not (O Savior) by abundance of wealth to forget thee, nor by
feeling want, to fall into despair, and so forsake thee. Grant this, and
whatsoever else O Lord, I stand in need of to guide me in this dangerous Sea,
wherein thou have appointed me to sail. Grant it O God, for thy Sons sake,
in whose Name I beg thy mercies. Amen.

14. A Prayer for a Lawyer.
O THOU that art the truest Lawgiver, so instruct me in the holy decrees of
thy word, that I may practice nothing but the fulfilling of thy Ordinances: let
not my tongue plead and be employed about purchasing earthly goods for other
men, and be forgetful how to provide for the salvation of my own soul. As my
profession is the law of man, so let my profession be to do right to all men:
for equity is the ground upon which law is builded. Take from my bosom, O
Lord, all moderate and unmeasurable desires of heaping the riches of this world
together by means unlawful. Suffer me not by oppression to join house to
house, land to land, and lord-shippe to lordship; but that I may ever remember
that I am but as a pilgrim upon earth, and that at my departure from thence I
must go either to glory eternal or torments to endure without end: grant
therefore (O my God) that I may deliver to every man his true Epha, and his
true Hin, that is to say, Just measure, of that which of right belongs unto
him. O Lord, give me (as thy kingly Prophet beggeth at thy hands, neither
poverty nor abundance of wealth; only grant unto me so much as may maintain
my life. For thy Sons sake my redeemer, hearken, O Lord, to these requests of
thy servant. So be it. Amen.

15. A Prayer for the two Universities.
O THOU insearchable depth of all wisdom, open thou the fountains of
knowledge, and let the streams of it equally run to the two famous Nurseries
of learning (the two Universities of this land) Oxford and Cambridge, that from
the breasts of those two (as it were from the tender nipples of mothers) the
youth and Gentry of this land may suck the milk both of Divine and Humane
Science. Graft thou, O LORD, upon those two great Trees infinite numbers of
Plants, that in good time may yield much fruit to thy Church, and profit to
the weal public. And seeing that these two Stars of Learning are to give
Comfort, or to fill with darkness this our whole Kingdom, bestow upon them
(O Lord) such beams of Heavenly light, that even foreign countries, as well
as our own, may be glorified in their splendour. Direct all the studies of
those that live upon the food of the soul there, (which is wisdom) to a
holy end. Make them to love as brethren, and to live as Christians: suffer not
vain glory to engender pride amongst them, nor phantasticknesse of wit, to
drown them in ridiculous and apish folly. But so mould both their minds and
bodies, that they may enter into those sanctified temples as thy children, and
come from thence as servants of thy ministry. Amen.

16. A Prayer for the confusion of traitors.
O Father of nations, O king of kings, and Lord of Lords, send from thy throne
an host of Angels to guard our Prince, his Realm and his people from the
devouring jaws of traitors that are stretched wide open to swallow up this
land, where thy Gospel is taught and practiced. Arm us with safety and with
boldness that we without fear or peril may walk upon the lion and the
adder, that lie in dens waiting to suck our blood: yea cover us (O God) with
thy wings, that we may tread upon the young lion and the dragon, that spit fire
to destroy this noble kingdom, and to drink the blood of thine anointed. The
death of Saul fall upon the^ that persecute thy servant David: let David (O
Lord) escape, but let these Saul's perish by the sword. The misery that struck
the house of Jeroboam, because he made Israel to sin, round begirt these
enemies of thy Church and of our country. Smite (O God) in thy just wrath the
rocks, and send the whirlewinds forth to blow the dust of their wicked counsels
into their own eyes: give to these Achitophels, the shame and confusion that
Achitophel met with in his cursed treasons to Absolon against his father David;
yea, O Lord, let the proudest of the faction die upon a tree as proud Absolo^
did. Up, Lord arise, and with the breath of thy nostrils, disperse into air,
all these conspiracies: scatter the traitors and their treasons, as chafe
tossed before the wind. Bring to light whatsoever they plot in darkness, and
let their own counsels be their own confusions. Amen.

17. A Prayer in time of civil war.
Heavy are our sins, and many in number, yet do we run out still in the
sum of them, not thinking upon the last, dear and most dreadful account, to
which one day we must be called: our sins are great in quantity, yet have they
a quick pace, and are ever at our heels, fly weneuer so fast from them: so
that if thy justice (O God) pursue us, we are but as sheep running to the
slaughter, or as soldiers felled to the earth in the day of battle. Have
mercy therefore (O thou God of all mercy) pull in the rod of thy anger, and
take pity of us thy children. Smite us not in thy rage, for then we perish,
but beat us in thy love, and then we shall amend. But above all the
punishments which thou have laid up in store for us, and which we all deserve,
defer, O God, defer, yea, swear thou will no more mow down this land (as
the haruesters sickle does the Corn) with the iron sword of civil war.
Beat back those surges that would drown their own shores to whom they owe
obedience, and let them serve to quench any fires that by rebellious hands
shall be kindled to burn in the bosom of our kingdom. We have been (O
Lord) a long time lookers on upon our neighbour-contreyes, and have seen their
cities turned to cinders, yet have not been scorched with the flames. France
does yet mourn in the ashes of those fires, and Germany is eue^ now stiffled
with the smoaks. O send not thy Angel with a fiery sword from them to us, to
make them spectators of our miseries, nor to shake it over our cities, as thou
did when thou threatnedst destruction to that thine own city Jerusalem.
Spare us, O Lord, and look not upon us in the day of indignation, save us from
the arrows of strange nations, and suffer not the hands of our own to be our
own murderers: for thy Sons sake Jesus Christ, who lost his blood that ours
might not be cast away, do we beg this. Grant this, O Lord. Amen: Now, and
for ever. Amen.

18. A Prayer to stay the pestilence.
CAll home, O Lord, thy messengers who^ thou have sent forth with full vials of
thy wrath to power upon thy people: O stay the Inuaders arm, who shoots
darts of pestilence so thickly amongst us, that in heaps we descend into the
mericlesse grave. Death is but thy servant, and can execute none but those whom
thou condemnest, yet he has (and still does) played the cruel tyrant: for
the living whom he spares, are not able to bury carcases so fast as he
destroys them. Check him therefore, O God, and charge him no more to spoil
these temples made by thine own hands. O God of heaven, we have broken thy
laws: we confess so much: we repent that we have angered so good and
gracious a Father. O Son of God, we have crucified thee again and again in
our sins, we confess so much, we repent that we have abused so excellent
an Author of our Repemption; yet have mercy upon us: O Father speak in our
behalf, O thou blessed Son, plead for our pardon: be thou our mediator,
reconcile us to the king of heaven and earth, against whom we have committed
treason. And whatsoever becomes of our bodies, or how soon soever they must
turn into earth, yet have mercy on our souls, save them (O Savior) challenge
them for thine own, and lay them up in the treasure-house of Heaven, because
they are the jewels bought with the price of thy precious blood Amen.

19. A Prayer in time of Famine.
THree whips (O Lord) thou hold in thy hand, when thou art displeased with
any kingdom, each of the^ with one blow being able to destroy the mightiest
nation: and those are, War, Pestilence, and Famine; the last of them being
the worst, the sharpest and most terrible: wind up therefore (O merciful God)
the cords of this thy dreadfullest executioner: bind up the jaws of this
insatiable vulture, that she breath not upon thy people: but open the entrals
of the earth, that she may give to man and beast their wonted sustenance. As
thou have made mouths, so make meat to fill those mouths; lest otherwise
Christians feed upon the blood of Christians, as heretofore they have done in
other kindgdomes, that have fallen from thy obedience. Auert, O Lord, this
consuming plague from the gates of our cities, and in stead of peniury, send
plenty to relieve us. Make us thankful for thy blessings, let us not repine
at thy punishments, but with patience bear willingly whatsoever thou laiest
upon us; yet, O FATHER, lay no more then flesh and blood may suffer, and let
all that thou do be only for our trial and amendment. Amen.

20. A Prayer in time of persecution.
Wolves (O Lord) and ravenous beasts have from the beginning broke into thy
pastures, and sucked the blood of thy sheep: now, even now, are the snares
pitched, and the Butchers knife whetted to take away the lives of thy young
ones. Arise therefore from thy throne, and set thy foot on the proud and
stiff necks of these persecutors of thy Gospel and scoffers of thy glory.
Strike them (O Lord of hosts) with thy right arm, and make them feel what it
is to strive against the Almighty: Smite them blind in their own works: and as
at the building up of Babel, thou did confou^d the pride of thine enemies by
altring their languages; so (O GOD) cast thou down this Babell of idolatry
which these ungodly ones build up in their own brains, and by the traditions
of men: and put into their mouths, tongues which none may understand. Be thou
our God, and save thy people whom thy Son has redeemed; be thou our
Captain, and fight for thy Church, whom thy Son calls his Spouse: Be thou
Jehovah, and command the earth to open and swallow these profane and professed
enemies of thy truth: so shall we thy people worship thee freely; so shall we
triumph to see thy honor advanced; so shall we ever praise thee; so shall all
nations glorify thy Name. Amen.

21. A Prayer for the Master of a Family.
SINCE thou have (O Lord) made me a Steward over a family; direct me by thy
own Laws, that I may never step beyond the limits of my duty: to the
intent that when at the great Audit-day I shall be called to an account, how I
have behaved my self in that office; I may receive from thee (O LOD) the hire
of a faithful Servant. Bless (O Father of heaven and earth) the labors of
mine own hand, and of those that are committed to my charge. Suffer me not to
descend into base and indirect ways, to purchase riches; but (according to
thine own statute) with the sweat of my brow let me eat my bread. Inspire me
with knowledge of thy holy word, that I may learn how to live well my self,
and instruct others (about me) to do the like. Temper, O Lord, my mind and my
affections, that no household brawles be kindled under my roof; or if they take
fire, give me patience to endure them, and wisdom how to quench them: preserve
my name (O my GOD) from the sting of the slanderer, and let me be so jealous of
my reputation, that I enter never into any action to the dishonouring of thee,
or bringing my own life into infamy. At my vprising, bless me: at my
downe-lying, lay thy hand over me: In my walks, be thou my guide: In my
meditations, be thou my Tutour: let thy book be my study, and let all my
study be to get advancement with those that are preferred to everlasting life;
to which (O Lord) bring me, I must humbly beseech thee, for thine own glories
sake, and for thy Sons sake Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.
THE Pelican.

The PELICAN brings health.

Vigilate and Orate.

London printed by H. B. for Nathaniel Butter. 1609.

To the Reader.
READER: as it behooves thee to become an humble supplia^t to God, when thou
stand in need of any necessaries to maintain thine own life: so art thou
bound by duty to thy maker, and by the laws of religion and Christianity to
be an earnest suter to his Majesty in behalf of others: sithence then that
the most righteous man upon earth sins seven times a day, and that Rulers
and Magistrates, who are set over others, are but men themselves; God has
appointed thee to make intercession (before him) for them, because it is his
custom to lay his blessings upon one man, through the faithful and zealous
Prayers of another. I have in few words told thee with what office the king of
heaven and earth has put thee in trust. Read over this book, and it will
teach thee how to execute it: and by discharging the place, to be a true
Christian. Do so: Thou know thy reward.

Farewell.
THE Pelican.

The PELICAN brings health.

Vigilate and Orate.

Printed at London by H. B. for N. B. 1609.

The Pelican.
THe third Bird that I call out of Noah's Ark, is the Pelican. The nature of
the Pelican is to peck her own bosom, and with the drops of her blood to
feed her young ones: so in our Prayers we must (in the love that we bear to
God) beat at our breasts till (with the bleeding drops of a contrite and
repentant heart) we have fed our Souls with the nourishment of everlasting
life. The Pelican is content to yield up her own life to save others: so in
our Prayers, we must be willing to yield up all the pleasures of the world,
and to kill all the desires of the body for the preservation of the soul. As
Christ therefore suffered abuses before his death, and agonies at the time of
his death (both of them being to the number principally of ten) so (because our
Pelican is a figure of him in his passion) does this third Bird take ten
flights; at every flight her wings bearing up a prayer, to defend us from those
sins for which Christ died. The abuses and agonies which Christ put up and
suffered being in number x.) are these: First, the betraying of him by one of
his own servants: Secondly, the buffeting of him, and scrourging him in the
open Hall by his own nation: Thirdly, his arraignement and condemnation, when
nothing could be proved against him: Fourthly, the compelling of him to carry
his own cross, when already he had undertaken to carry on his back all our
sins: Fifthly, the nailing of him to the tree of shame: Sixthly, the crowning
of him in scorn, with a crown of thorns: Seventhly, the hanging of two
common thieves in his company: Eighthly, the giving of Vinegar and Gall to him
when he was thirsty: Ninthly, the sorrows of hell, which he felt when in the
unspeakable anguish of his soul he was forced to cry: Eli, Eli,
Lamasabacthani. And lastly, the piercing of his glorious side with a spear.
These are the ten wings with which Christ (our Pelican) flew to his death. Now
cast up your eyes and behold, and listen with your ears and hear what ten
notes our Pelican makes coming out of Noah's Ark.

CHRIST, the Pelican.
Christ brings into the field seven lively virtues, to fight against, and
confound seven deadly sins.
CHRIST the Son of GOD, is the Pelican, whose blood was shet out to feed us:
the Physician made of his own body a medicine to cure us; look upon him
well, and behold his body hanging on a cross, his wounds bleeding, his blood
trickling on the earth, his head bowed down (as it were to kiss us) his very
sides opened, (as it were to show how in his heart he loved us) his arms
stretched out to their length, (as it were to embrace us.) And judge by all
these, if Christ be not our truest Pelican. He that was the Son of God, became
the mockery of men: He that was King of heaven and earth, suffered his brows
to wear a crown of thorns: He endured hunger that is our food: he drunk gal
that is our fountain of life: He received wounds, that is our health: He
tasted the bitterness of death, that is man's only salvation and what Pelican
can do more for her young ones?

Our bodies were full of corruption; our souls were spotted: our souls and
bodies were forfeited to hell: sin had pawnd them, sin had lost them, sin
had made them foul. All the physic in the world could not purge our
corruption: all the fountains in the world could not wash out our spots: all the
gold and silver on earth could not redeem our forfeitures: all the Kings under
heaven could not pay our ra^soms: nothing could free us from captivity, but to
make Christ a prisoner Nothing could give us life, but the heavenly Pellicanes
death, hell, was the goal into which we were to be throwe^, devils the
keepers, that should have fettered us for ever: our evil actions, the Judges
that should have called us to a bar: Conscience the evidence that should have
cast us away: and sins, the executioners that were to be our tormentors. But
note the mercy of our Maker, note the courage of our Redeemer. Against seven
deadly and detestable sins, that came into the field (to set upon all the
children of Adam) in that great battle and work of our Salvation, came
Christ, armed with seven lively virtues. Thus was his combat, and thus was his
victory. He suffered himself to be betrayed by a Judas; there fought his
humility, and overcame pride. He left not our safety, till he had lost his
own life; there fought his love, and overcame envy. He took buffets on the
face, scourges on the back, pricking briers on the forehead; there fought his
patience, and triumphed over wrath. He was ready in all tempests to throw
himself ouer-borde to save us from shipwreck; there fought his watchfulness,
and slew the sin of sloth. He gave away himself and the world, that the world
to come might by his Father be given to us; there fought his liberality* and
overcame covetousness. He drunk of the sowrest and bitterest grape, that we
might taste of the sweetest; there fought his temperance, and over gluttony got
the conquest. He could not be tempted with all the kingdoms upon earth, nor all
the pleasures in those kingdoms; there fought his continence, and overcame
lust. Thus with seven blows struck he off the heads of seven dragons that
stood gaping to devour us. We are still in danger of them: let us therefore
arm our selves with those weapons, which Christ has taught us to handle in
our own defense, and those are these which follow.

1. A Prayer for the Morning.
WHen I rise from my bed (O my Redeemer) it puts me in mind of my rising from
the grave, when the last trumpet shall sound, and summon us to the generalll
resurrection: and as then I hope to behold thee coming in thy fullness of
glory, and thy Father sitting in the brightness of his majesty, and that I
shall have a place amongst those that are written in thy book of life: so (O
thou my mediator) make intercession for me, that all the sins of my former
days and nights being freely pardoned, I may this day be entertained again
into thy service. Receive therefore (O Lord) this early sacrifice both of my
soul and body: I offer them up into thy hands to be disposed at thy pleasure,
and with them unfeigned sighs for offending thee: and with those sighs my
zealous Prayers, for thy pardon: and with those Prayers an assured hope, that
(in thy mercy) and in the blood of that loving Pelican (Christ Jesus) that
died for me, I shall be forgiven. Blessed be thy Name for blessing me this
night from danger. I read in the book which was written by thine own finger,
that thou did cast Adam into a sleep, when thou made (of his rib) a woman;
by which I note, that man of himself has no power to bind slu^bers to his
temples, unless thou give it him. All thanks therefore be thine, that this
night have covered me with the soft wings of quietness, and so graciously do
now suffer me to behold the light of the day. Go on (O God) with thy favors
toward me thy humble servant: go on along by me, and with me, all this day,
and all the days of my life; that I may not step into the path of sin. Grant
this, I beseech thee, give me thy grace, and forgive me my debts which I owe
to sin and death. So be it. Amen.

2. A Prayer against pride.
O THOU Son of the everliving God, who even in thy birth thou vouchsafedst to
call Joseph thy Father, and in thy cradle, which was but a poor manger, and
who in the height of all thy passions and sorrows upon the cross; were the
true pattern of true humility; teach me, O Lord, to tread that path in all my
tribulations: make me thy scholar, and leave me not till I have that lesson
perfectly by heart. God (thy father) is over all the world, the highest; but it
is to express his Majesty. Thou (that art God the son) of all those that
are of thy fold, art the lowliest-minded; but that is to instruct us (thy
children) in obedience. For alack, whereof should I be proud? Am I not dust
and ashes? Am I not made of the clay of the earth? And must I not (in the end)
like a potters earthen vessel be broken all into pieces? Thy Prophet Amos told
the people, that thou did hate the pride even of Jacob, and did abhor his
palaces: And can I have any hope (being nothing so dear unto thee as Jacob)
that thou can love to behold that Serpent (of pride) with seven heads,
sleeping in my bosom? Now thy hand is armed against the hand of the proud man,
and he cannot escape confusion. Pride was the first sin that crept into the
world; but so ugly a sin it was, that it could not be suffered to stay in
heaven: for Lucifer (the father of it) from the glory of an Angel, was thrown
headlong (for his insolence) into the pit of hell. Pharaoh was proud, but
Pharaoh and his host fell in their pride. Senacherib was proud, but Senacherib
was trod upon by the feet of his own children. Hammon was proud, but his end
was the gallow-tree, which he set up for another. Yea so odious a monster in
thine eye (O God) is a proud man: that proud Nabuchodonozer being a king, was
by thee turned into a beast and eat the grass, till he confessed himself to
be but a man; and that thou only (O God) were the God of heaven and earth. And
on the contrary side, so precious a jewel is humility in thy sight, that none
could be Christ's disciples, but such as wore the Garment of Lowliness. Pull
therefore down (O LORD) nay pull up by the very root, this tree of Pride, if
thou perceive it growing within me. Suffer (O GOD) none of the branches of this
sin to spread in the world, but lop them off even in their budding forth: and
for the purpose let not vain glory (one of the pages of Pride) follow
learning: let not disdain sit in the eye of Greatness, to cast terrifying looks
upon the distressed: let not presu^ptio^ of thy mercies make us tempt thee to
destroy us in our security; nor let thy long suffering and winking at our
sins, stir our souls up to disobedience and rebellion. But turn thou all
our affections in such concord, that we may count our glories but shadows, our
strength weakness, our riches but temptations, and snars to catch our souls,
our wisdom but folly, our life but a bubble in water, and our death our
everlasting journey to the land of sorrow, unless at our setting forth thou
undertake to be the Pilot. Be therefore so our merciful God, and in despite
of all the rocks which sin and her dreadful Sea Monsters set in the way for
our destruction, safely set us, we beseech thee, upon the shore of eternal
felicity: Amen, O Lord, Amen, So be it, now, and for ever. Amen.

3. A Prayer against Envy.
IT is a branch in thy heavenly statute (O King of heaven) that we should love
our enemies, and bless them that curse us, and do good to them that hate us,
and to pray for them that lay plots for our lives: these are the strings (O
God) whose music is pleasing to thine ear; these are the stairs by which we
climb up to charity, and holding her by the hand, we are led up into heaven.
Purge thou therefore (O Lord) our veins, and suffer not the stinking poison
of envy to infect our blood. But following the steps of Samuel, let us even
pray for king Saul, albeit king Saul be an enemy to thy servants: and with
Moses, let us not repine at the stubborn Jews, though they rebel and
threaten to kill us with death. Envy (O God) is the destroier of him that
nourishes it in his bosom: it is the tormentor of a man's own self: thou
have commanded us to love our neighbors as our selves. But how can we show
love to them, when if envy lie sucking of our own blood, we suck even the
ruin of our own bodies? As the rust eats the iron, so does this vulture
gnawe the soul.

Envy turns man into a Devil; yea into the worser shape of a Devil, does
it turn him. The Jews perished, because they chose rather to envy Christ and
his miracles, then to believe him.

Other sins have their limits, but the stream of envy keeps within no
bounds. If pride were barren, envy would never have been borne: but that
sin is the mother to this, and this sin the fountain of ten thousand more.
By means of this sin the world was drowned, and by means of this sin was
thy Son betrayed to death: cut it therefore off (O Lord) and suffer not the
seed of it to grow in men's hearts. How dare we, O God, ask forgiveness at thy
hands, when we are out of charity, and wish the downfall of our neighbor?
Pour therefore into our souls thy divine grace, that we may strive to be
like thee; that is, to be al love, and all mercy: so shall we live with thee
for ever; so shall we die thy servants, and being raised up again, shall be
thy children. Amen.

4. A Prayer against Wrath.
WRath is a short madness: madness is the murderer of reason; so that anger
transformes a man into a brute beast. Give us therefore courage (O Lord) to
fight against this strong enemy, and not to fight only, but to overcome him:
sithence the conquest is harder, to triumph over our raging affections, then to
subdue a City. All vengeance is thine (O God) and if we offer to take it out
of thy hand, it is high treason, for we do as much as if we went about to
pull thee from thy throne: Inspire us therefore with patience, that we may
bear injuries as thy Son did upon earth, and may endure afflictions (as thy
servant Job did) when it shall please thee to send them on thy message; and
that we may not at any time either murmr against thy providence, or be angry
with thee for whatsoever thou sendest, be it health or sickness, life or death;
nor in the bitterness of our souls, power down curses (which are some of the
drops of wrath) upon whatsoever Rulers or Teachers thou set over us; lest
thy heavenly vengeance smite us, (with Mirian, who murmured against Moses.):
But cast (O Lord) such a bridle upon our stiff-necked affections, that all
contention, quarrels, bloodshed, war, and murder (who are the sons of wrath)
may be curbed, and not suffered to do violence to thy Church, to offer
dishonor to thy Saints, or disturbance to the Commonwealth. Sign (O Lord) to
this humble petition of thy servants, that they may live here like Doves one to
another, without gall; and at their departure hence, they may mutually embrace
and hold hands together, to meet thee in glory.

5. A Prayer against Sloth.
HOw hateful the sin of Sloth is in thine eyes (O Lord) we may gather by the
life of our first father Adam; who albeit he had a whole world to himself, and
al things made ready to his hand; yet to show that he was not borne to live
idly, thou placedst him in the garden of Eden, and there appointedst him to
labor. And even from the beginning have thou enacted, that man should live by
the sweat of his brow; that he should earne his bread, ere he tasted bread;
and that he who would not work should not feed, for as a bird is created to
fly in the air, as fishes are to swim in the waters, so is man made to take
pains upon earth. What were the sins of Sodom but pride, fullness of meat,
wealth and idleness? Keep these sins therefore O Lord, from the gates of
our cities, lest they bring upon us the like confusion. Have we not examples
(even of those that were tender to thy love) that we should not nourish this
disease in our blood, but that we should spend our lives as the clouds execute
their offices to be still in motion? were not Abraham, Lor, Isac, and Jacob
ploughmen and shepherds? Did not thy servant Moses keep the sheep of Iethro
his father in law, the Priest of Midia? Was not David, before he was an
anointed king, a shepherd likewise? Yea, did not thine own Son take pains
continually, whilst he lived amonst men? Were not his Apostles fishermen, and
did not Luke (thy blessed Evangelist, and one of thy Sons Chroniclers)
practice physic and painting? In these men (O LORD) and in their lives have
thou set down rules for us to follow. Put therefore strength into our arms,
that we may endure labor: kindle our minds with courage, and liuely-hood,
that in winter we may not be loath to take hold of the plough for fear of
the cold, lest when summer comes, we fall into beggerie. And above all
things, so encourage us with thy grace, and so quicken our understandings with
thy spirit, that we may not be dulled and so neglect the knowledge of thy
laws, nor by lasines be besotted with ignorance, and so lose the remembrance
of our duties. Suffer not (O Lord) this unprofitable weed (of sloth) to grow
up amongst the Ministers of thy word: let no standing waters be in thy Church,
but give swiftness to them, that they may all be running streams, so shall
thy pastures be watered and bring forth increase: so shall thy flocks be
well tended, when the sheepheards be watchful; so shall we all set ourhands
to the raising up of thy heavenly tabernacle, and so in the end shall we be
lifted up to sit with thee, and thy Son in Heaven. Amen.

6. A Prayer against covetousness.
O Father of heaven* and giver of all blessings open thy hand, but so open it,
that the pouring down of thy benefits, may not make us swell into a desire to
hoord up more then is fit for us to receive. The love of worldly honors,
makes us only in love with the world, and to forget thee; the love of gold
and silver, makes us to forsake heaven, and to lose thee. O let not therefore
the griping talants of covetousness seize upon our souls. It is a golden
devil that tempts us into hell. It is a Mar-maid, whose songs are sweet* but
full of sorcerie. It is a sin that turns courtiers into beggars, and yet
makes them wear monopolies on their backs, when the commonwealth shiuereth
through cold. It is a sin, that sels thy Church (by simonie) and sends souls
away at an easy rate. It is a sin, that blinds the eye of justice; It is a
bell, whose sound so deafes the poor man's voice, that his wrongs cannot be
heard. Drive therefore this plague out of our land (O Lord) and make us
covetous of nothing but of thy glory, and of the riches of thy Gospel: let us
be covetous of doing well one to another, so shall we be sure to stand in fan
our with thee. A covetous man is like hell, ever devouring, never satisfied;
he is an insatiable drunkard of gold. Quench, O Lord, this thirst of money in
us: keep our hands clean from touching riches unlawfully, lest with Achab and
Iezabel we commit murder, and shed Naboths blood, to wring from him his
vineyard: or with Achan be stoned to death fos taking goods that are to us
forbidden. Grant these blessings (O FATHER Almighty) and with them, give us
grace to be content with such estate (how mean soever) as thou shall lay upon
us: let the wealth we desire be thy kingdom, and the gold we thirst after, be
our Salvation. Amen.

7. A Prayer against gluttony.
HOw many woes (O Lord) are thundered out by thy Prophets against this bestiall
and devouring sin of gluttony? Where is woe (cries out that proclaimer of
all wisdom king Solomon) where is wailing? Where is strife? Where are snares
laid? Where are wounds taken? Where are bloody eyes? but where the drunkard
fills out his wine, and the epicure feeds on his variety of dishes? Preserve
us therefore, O God, from falling into this bottomless gulf. All creatures have
thou given to man, to serve his use, but let not man turn that to his
destruction, which was ordained for his comfort. This sin of intemperance,
was the sin of our first parents: it was a lickorish sin, but it was sowerly
and severely punished: the eating of one apple lost Paradise from the^, and
brought thy heavy curse upon us. This sin of inordinate eating and drinking,
kindled unnatural lust in the Sodomites, which afterward in flakes of burning
brimstone fell from heaven, and destroyed their cities. This sin in Lot, made
him fall into incest: and this in the people of Israel, turned the^ into
idolatry. Strengthen therefore our hearts (O God) with thy grace, and not with
the fullness of meats: give us the waters of life to taste, and not strong
wines to overcome us: sithence drunkards shall not inherit the kingdom of
heaven: and lastly, set still before our eyes the pictures of the rich glutton,
and of poor Lazarus; the one fared deliciously every day, and drunk of the
purest grape, but afterward he lay howling in hell and could not get a drop of
cold water to quench his burning thirst. The other fed upon crummes, and he was
carried into Abraham's bosom. To us: that place, O Lord, send and grant that we
may sit at that table of thy Saints, where neither hunger nor thirst shall
afflict, but where is all fullness, all gladness, all riches, all rest, all
happiness. Amen.

8. A Prayer against lust.
MY body (O Lord) is a temple consecrated to thee, keep it then, I beseech
thee, clean and free from the pollution of sin, and amongst all that lay
siege to destroy it, defend it from unbridled flames of lust: with which
poison, who so are infected, have their part in the lake that burns with fire
and brimstone, which is the second death. Close up my lips (O God) from
speaking unchaste language; sanctify my thoughts, that no wanton desires may
burn in my bosom: be thou present in all my actions, that no temptations of
the flesh may lead my soul into wickedness. The sin of lust (O Lord) is a
covetous sin, and not content with the spoil of one body, but works the
everlasting perdition of two at once. It is a sin so foul, that by a strait
law thou have forbidden it in thy tables: yea, and have vowed that the offender
therein shall go down into hell, whereas he that goes from it shall be
saved. Place modesty therefore in mine eye, that lascivious glances may not
there have entrance: let me with Joseph rather suffer imprisonment, then to
make any body a slave to intemperate lust. It is written upon those Records of
thine which cannot lie, that four and twenty thousand Jews were slain for
the whoredoms by them committed; yea the deflowring of a Levites wife, cost
the lives of an hundred thousand people. And so hateful unto thee (O God) was
David's adultery with the wife of Vrias; that albeit he were thy chosen servant,
he could not escape thy punishment. Forgive therefore the follies of my youth
and let my body hereafter be a vessel of purity, that at the last day when all
creatures must stand before thee, I may appear in whitenes, and receive that
crown of glory, prepared for the blessed. Amen.

9. A Prayer against the temptation of the Devil.
Our life (O Lord) passing through so dangerous a wilderness, cannot choose but
meet with many sins: every sin is a temptation; to overcome every temptation
is a glorious victory; and the reward of that victory, is an everlasting crown
of stars: for there can be no conquest without a combat; and there can be no
combat without an enemy to encounter with; and no enemy is more ready to set
upon us, and more subtle in his fight, nor more cruel where he subdues, then
that arch-traytor to thy kingdom, and old enemy to mankind, the Devil. Give
him therefore (O Lord) no power over me: or if it be thy pleasure that I must
enter into the lists with him, let my trials be like those of Job, to exercise
my faith, and not to confound my soul: to which battle when I must be
summoned, stand thou (O my Savior) in my sight to inspire me with courage,
and plant a guard of Angels on either side of me, to take my part if I shrink;
that in the end I may be led away in triumph. Break (O my God) all the
snares which daily and howerly this politic hunter pitcheth to entrap me, in
the lustines of my health and youth. But above all, suffer me not to fall into
those, which he spreads at the hour of my death, to catch my soul at her
departure. O Lord drive away despair, that it may not enter at that time (nor
any other) into my bosom; neither let me be afraid that I knock at the gates
of thy mercy too late, or distrust thy grace, because so many thousands of sins
do muster themselves before me: but comfort me with the sweet physic of thy
promises, and with the examples of thy holiest servants, who all sinned
grievously; yet did thou seal them a pardon. In my meditations stand, O
Lord, at my elbow, that my soul may not wander and so be lost. Defend me
from the arrow of death eternal: save me from the jaws of the red Dragon:
keep me from entering into the gates of hell. Amen.

10. A Prayer for the Evening.
THus (O God) am I nearer to old age then I was in the morning, but (I fear)
not nearer to goodness: for he that strives to do best, comes short of his
duty. The night now steals upon me (like a thief.) O defend me from the
horrors of it. When I am to lie down in my bed, let me imagine I am to lie
in my winding sheet: and suffer me not to close mine eyes, til my soul and I
have reckoned and made even, for all the offenses which not only this day, but
all the former minutes of my life, I have committed against thy divine Majesty.
Pardon them, O LORD, forgive me my sins, which are more infinite then the
stars, and more heavy then if mountains lay upon my bosom; but thy mercy,
and the merits of my Redeemer do I trust in. In his Name do I sue for a
pardon. Suffer, O LORD, no unclean thoughts this night to pollute my body and
soul: but keep my cogitations chaste, and let my dreams be like those of
innoce^ts and sucking babes. Grant, O Lord, that the Sun may not go down upon
my wrath. But if any man this day has done me wrong, that I may freely and
heartily forgive him, as I desire at thy hands to be forgiven. Whether I
sleep or wake, give thy Angels charge over me, that at what hour soever thou
call me, I may like a faithful soldier be found ready to encounter death,
and to follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes. Amen.

FINIS.
The Phoenix.
THE fourth and last Bird which you are to behold, flying out of Noah's Arc, is
the Phoenix. The Phoenix of all other birds lives to the longest age: so must
our Prayers fly up in bright flames all the days of our life: we must be
petitioners even to the hour and last minute of our breath. The Phoenix has
the goodliest feathers in the world: and Prayers are the most beautiful wings
by which we may mount into heaven. There is but one Phoenix upon earth, as
there is but one tune, in which God delights, and that is the Prayer of a
sinner. When the Phoenix knows she must die, she builds a nest of all the
sweetest spices, and there looking steadfastly on the Sun: she beats her
wings in his hottest beams, and between the^ kindles a fire amongst those
sweet spices, and so burns her self to death. So when we desire to die to
the vanities of the world, we must build up a nest, and fill it with faithful
sighs, groans, tears, fasting, and prayer, sackecloth and ashes, (all which
in the nostrils of the Lord are sweet spices) and then fixing our eyes upon
the cross where the glorious Son of God paid the ransom of our sins, we
must not cease till with the wings of faith and repentance, we have kindled
his mercy, and in that sweet flame have all our fleshly corruptions consumed
and purified. Out of those dead ashes of the Phoenix, does a new Phoenix
arise. And even so out of the ashes of that one repentance, shall we be
regenerate and borne anew.

CHRIST is the true Phoenix.
CHrist (out of the purest flames of love) kindled a fire which drunk up the
wrath of his father, wherein all men should have been drowned for sin, and
in that fire did he die to redeem us that were lost. Yet left he not there.
To have died for us had been nothing, unless like a true Phoenix he had been
raised up again: as therefore a grain of wheat is cast into the earth, and
there first rots and then quickens again, and after yields it self in a
tenfold measure: so was our Savior cast into his sepulcher, there lay his dead
body for a time, and then was quickened, and then raised up: and in that rising
did he multiply those benefits which before he sowed amongst us, when he was
torn in pieces and scattered on the cross. When he died; he died alone, but
when he did rise, he did not rise alone. for in his resurrection do we all
ascend up into heaven. He fought hand to hand with death, that death might not
kill us, and showed us his resurrection, that we might die more willingly,
because we have hope to live eternally. Upon those five altars therefore, of
the death, burial, resurrection, ascension, and coming of Christ in glory,
do we offer up five Thanksgiuings, or rather five Sacrifices, (imitating
therein the Phoenix, who makes her own body a burnt offering)

THE Phoenix.

The PHOENIX brings life.

Vigilate and Orate.

Printed at London by H. B. for N. B. 1609.

To the two worthy and worthily admired Ladies, Sarah, wife to the right
Worshipful, Sir Thomas Smith Knight, and Catharine, wife to the right
Worshipful Sir John Scot, Knight.
Virtuous Ladies:
NO tunes (I know) can be more welcome to ears so chaste and undefiled as yours
are, then the Divine Music of Prayers and Meditations. And therefore am I
bold to bestow upon you both a Bird, whose voice yields none but heavenly
sounds. There is but one Phoenix (at one time) in the world: It is rare in
shape, and rare in quality; for which cause, I send it flying to your bosoms;
sithence you both are like the Phoenix (Rare) as well in the perfection of
body, as the excellency of mind. It is a Bird to which Christ suffers
himself to be compared. And it may aptly be a figure of his resurrection: so
that my hopes are, you will gladly receive it, because Christ his death and
rising again, are two strong, steadfast, and maine anchors to which (as
appears by your lives) your faith is fastened, thereby to lay hold on
salvation. You are sisters in love, as you are sisters by the laws of
marriage: Indifferently therefore to you both does this our Phoenix offer up
his heavenly songs. Hear them, I beseech you, if not for any worth that is in
them, yet for the love you zealously bear to him, of whose glorious
resurrection, ascension, etc. they make only mention. And thus craving pardon
of both your Ladyships, for this my boldness, which grows out of my love and
respect to your Names and Families. I wish you all the happiness that this
earthly paradise can yield, and pray, that at your going from thence, you may
enter into the everlasting Paradise of Heaven.

Humbly devoted to your Ladyships, Tho. Dekker.

To the Reader. Christian Reader:
THou have by these three former birds of Noah's Arc, gotten three blessings.
The Dove has ministered comfort to thine afflicted mind, in a number of those
storms of tribulation which shall fall upon man in this life. The Eagle has
armed thy Soul with courage, and taught it to soar high with the wings of
Prayer, till they beat at the very gates of heaven, and from thence receive
mercy. The Pelican has played the true Physician, and (where thou art full
and foul with diseases bred by sin) that teaches the way to cure thee, and
to attain to the health of salvation. The fourth and last bird is now flying
out toward thee; spread therefore thine arms wide open to welcome it: and this
Phoenix will carry thee up to a second life, that shall be ever, everlasting.

The five Altars stand prepared before in order, the Sacrifices are at hand.
And thus much to show that our Prayer must resemble the Phoenix. And thus much
to show that the true and only Phoenix is Christ Jesus.

1. SACRIFICE. A Thanksgiving for all those benefits which we reap by the
death of Christ.
WHat thanks (O Lord) can we power forth? What Hymns shall we sing? What
praises have we to crown thee with, or what gifts can we bestow worthy
enough upon thee, that did not spare thine own and only dearest Sons
blood, to save us? (that were miserable and condemned castaways) But, O Lord,
thou in thy providence did foresee, that all thy glory, and in thy wisdom
and compassion did consent that all the health of mankind should consist in
the death of thy blessed Son. We were the arch-traytors, but he answered
all our treasons at a most dreadful bar. We had transgressed, but he was
the Lamb that was to be sacraficed. Glorified be thy Name for being so full
of pity: Glorified be thy Sons death, for being so full of charitable
piety. For let us reckon before thee (O Father) and between us and our
souls, how much we are indebted for this thy Sons suretie-ship. We owed
all, and he paid the utmost farthing. Let us sum up the foot of this
account, and take a note of our gains, and his losses in this voyage. He
ventured his life, and lost it: we ventured nothing, but were upon point of
shipwrake, and yet came home sauers. By his death we are ingrafted into the
Tree of life, his blood does give it nourishment. His nailing on the cross
cleft the doors of hell in sunder, and set wide open the gates of heaven:
Christ by this means is become our way, our guide, our haven. Would we walk
safely? Christ is our path: would we not stumble? Cstrist is our leader: would
we not be cast away? Christ is our Pilot.

What need we now to fear? whom should we fly from now, for satan's head is
broken in sunder: sin is vanquished: death is overcome: hell is swallowed up:
the devil that had power over death, is put to flight. Before we lived in
slavery, but now we dwell within the liberties of the holy city. Before we
were spotted, and foul as leapers, but the precious drops that fell from
Christ's side, have cleansed our souls, and now they look as white as snow. In a
most desperate state lived we before, but now in the most happy: for we are
bought, and paid for, and none can lay claim to us now, but Jesus Christ. To
quit which love of his (albeit there is nothing in us of value that can give
him satisfaction) yet rather then to pay no part of the debt, let us tender
down so much as we can make. And that is, not to forget his kindness: which
that we may never do; let us print him in our hearts, ingraue him on our
hands, write him on our breasts, yea, wear him in our garments. Set the sorrows
of his suffering for ever before our eyes.

When we sit to meat, let us think upon the traitor that dipped his finger
with him in the dish: when the night approaches, let it be a memorial of his
apprehension with bills and staves: It was a deed of darkness, and therefore
done in the night. When we do but stretch forth our arms, let us call to
mind how he was racked upon the cross. The branches of these meditations
shall bear this fruit; by turning over the leaves of his death and passion, we
shall still read the story of our own end: and nothing can more fright a man
out of the company of sin, then when he looks upon that which he is sure
to go to, and that is his grave: so to meditate, is to live well: so to live,
is to die well; for no pil remains to make death taste bitter afterward,
unless it were taken down before. He that thus fights is sure to conquer: he
that thus conquers is sure to be crowned; he that is ambitious of that crown,
will desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ: he that so desires, does
not die patiently, but he lives patiently, and dies joyfully. Such a death, O
Lord, let me die, for in the sepulcher of thy Son, death (that once was
terrible) is swallowed up: so that now we may triumphantly sing, Where is thy
sting, O death? Where is thy victory, O hell?

The sting of death is sin, but that is taken out: the power of sin is the
Law, but that is satisfied. Thanks therefore, and immortal honor be given to
our glorious GOD, who has given us so noble a victory, through the death
only of his Son Jesus Christ. Amen.

2. SACRIFICE. A Thanksgiving for all those benefits which we reap by the
burial of Christ.
THE grave is full of horror, the house of the dead is the habitation of
sadness, for the body receives no comfort, when it comes to lodge in this
last and fardest Inn. When our feet step upon that shore, we are robbed of all
our honors, stripped out of all our gay attires, spoiled of all our gold and
silver, forsaken by our friends, fled from by our kinsfolks, yea, abhorred to
be looked upon by our own children: nothing is left us but a poor mantle of
linen to hide our nakedness; that is the last apparel we must wear, and
when that is worn out, we must be turned out of all.

A dreadful thing therefore would it be to dwell in this land of everlasting
silence and darkness, but that Christ himself has gone thither before us.
How infinitely are we bound to him, that (in this battle of death) we are
not thrust upon any danger, but what he has gone through. How above measure
does he love us, to try the ice first, before he suffer us to venture over?
He went into the grave before us, to show that we all must follow him. But
what riches may we gather out of this his sepulcher? What treasure lies hid in
these coffins of the dead? This clear gains we gather; this profitable
knowledge we gain, that as Adam was made of a piece of clay, so all the
sons of Adam must crumble into dust. The wombes of our mothers are the first
lodgings that we lie in, and the womb of the earth is appointed to be the
last. The grave is a But at which all the arrows of our life are shot; and the
last arrowe of all hits the mark.

Yet suffer us, O Lord, not to repine, whether in the morning, at noone, or at
mid night, that is to say, in our cradle, in our youth, or old age, we go to
take our long sleep, but let us make this reckoning of our years, that if we
can live no longer, that is unto us our old age; for he that lives so long as
thou appointest him (though he die in the pride of his beauty) dies an old
man. Sithence then that worms must be our last companions, and that the
pillowes upon which we are to rest for ever, are within but dead men's sculles,
whereof should we be proud? Why should we disdain the poorest beggar? when
the hand that swayes a Scepter, and the hand that holds a sheepe-hooke, being
found together in the earth are both alike. What madness is it so to pamper
the flesh with curious meats, and costly wines, when (do what we can) we do
but fatten it for crawling vermin? What folly is it, to cloth our body in
sumptuous attires, when (let them be never so gorgeous) we shall carry with us
but a winding-sheete? Why do we bathe our limbs in sweet waters, and embalme
our bodies with rich perfumes, when no carrion in the world can smell more
noisome, then must our carcases? Blessed therefore be the sepulcher that held
our Saviors body, sithence it is a book wherein we may learn how to
contemn this foolish love of our selves. Happy was thy burial (O JESUS) that
prepared our way to our last habitation. Thanks be rendered unto thee for thy
love; glory to GOD thy FATHER, for his compassion toward mankind. So be it.
Amen.

3. SACRIFICE. A Thanksgiving for all the benefits which we reap by the
resurrection of Christ.
CHRIST is risen again. O happy tidings! O blessed message! He is risen from
an ignominious death, to a life full of glory. He is risen now, to fall no
more: the Jews have done their cruelty: death has done his worst: hell has
spitte forth her venom: for in spite of all their malice, Christ is risen in
triumph. Receive your lights again you lamps of heaven: darkness fly from the
world: you graves that yawned and cast out your dead, close up your devouring
jaws. Sithence Christ is risen, let all the world rejoice; As at his
crucifying all the whole world felt pains in his suffering. How happy is
miserable man made by this resurrection of his glorious Redeemer? For now is he
sure, that his body falls not like the body of a beast (for then his estate were
more then most wretched) but that the Lord kills, and makes alive again,
and that he brings down to the grave, and fetches up again. My Redeemer
now lives, and by his life, do I know that I shall rise out of the earth at
the latter day; and that I shall be clothed again in my frailty, as my
Savior was at his resurrection in his own flesh. What a blessing therefore is
by this means powered upon us? For albeit our bodies are laid down (to rest)
in deformity, in vglines, in contempt, in baseness, in poverty, and in
dishonor; yet shall they be raised in beauty, in brightness, in fulness of
riches* and in glory. We were afflicted in Christ when we saw him hanging on
the cross in torments: But we are made joyful in Christ, seeing him raised
from the dead in triumph. The cogitation of this his resurrection, and so
consequently of our own calling up from death to life, is a spur unto us
whilst we are upon earth, to run the race of blessedness. We are not to awaken
out of our dead sleeps, and to be apparelled with the self same flesh, skin
and bone for nothing: but there is a goal, proposed, and a garland propounded;
and to win that must we begin to run in this life. Give therefore (O God)
alacrity to our hearts, that we with cheerefulnes may set forward. Give wings
to our souls, that with swiftnes we may make our flight: give strength to us in
our race, that we faint not till we come to the end; and give us grace to run
well without stumbling, that we may win the prize with honor. Grant (O Lord)
that we may go into our graves in peace; so shall we be sure to come from our
graves in gladness. Glorified for ever be thy Name, that workest these wonders
of salvation for us: With all admiration let us adore thee, that hold out
such bright crowns of immortality for us. Suffer us, O Lord, to deserve them
on earth, to be promised them at our departure from earth, and to wear them
with thee in heaven. Amen.

4. SACRIFICE. A Thanksgiving for all those benefits which we reap by the
ascension of Christ.
LIft up your eyes (O you sons of Adam) and behold your Savior ascending up
into the clouds: bitter was his death, his resurrection victorious, but his
ascension glorious. He died like a Lamb, he rose again like a Lion, but he
ascended like an Egle. By his death did he quicken us to life: By his
resurrection did he raise us to faith: By his ascension did he lift us up to
glory. The resurrection of Christ is our hope, but the ascension of Christ is
our glorification. He ascended into heaven; but how? he shut not the gates of
heaven upon us, but of purpose went thither to make the way plain before us.
His body is in heaven, but his majesty abides upon earth. Here he was once
according to the flesh, and here he is still according to his divinity. Absent
is Christ from us, yet is he still present with us. Would thou see him?
Would thou touch him? Would thou embrace him? Thine eyes have sight too
weak to pierce through the clouds; his brightness is too great, and would strik
thee blind with dazeling: thy hands are too short to reach up to the seat where
he sits; and thine arms not of compass big enough to be thrown about his
body. But let thy faith open her eyes, for she can behold him: let thy faith
put out her hand, and with the least finger she can touch him. As our
forefathers held him in the flesh, so we must hold him in our hearts. By his
ascending up into heaven are we sure that he is the very Son of God: for none
can ascend thither, but he that comes from thence. Celebrate therefore this
his ascension with faith, and with devotion, and thou shall presently be in
heaven with him. There he sits at the right hand of his father, like an
Attorney in our behalf, pleading for mercy; and like a petitioner, still
preferring up our prayers and complaints to his heavenly father. How happy is
man to have such a speaker for him? How miserable were man, if Christ were not
his Intercessiour? Sithence then that our Redeemer has begun so happy and
glorious a voyage, only to kindle in us an ambition to follow him; let us
therefore hoist up all the sails of duty and obedience, of zeal and
holiness, to arrive in that same haven. The ladder which must reach up to
heaven, and by which we must climb, has many steps of righteousness; the
burdens which keep us from getting up, are infinite in number, and they are
our sins. Give us strength, O Lord, to throw them down. Give us grace to lay
hold on the other. The reward of this conquest shall be ours; the glory shall be
thine: the path which we must tread to the land of happiness is beaten out by
thy Son, but our welcome must be from thy lips. Say therefore unto us, come
you blessed: enter the city of the Lord; fall down before his Throne, and
cry, Glory, glory, glory, now and to the worlds end. Amen.

5. SACRIFICE. A Thanksgiving for all those benefits which we are to receive by
Christ's coming in glory.
BEhold the gates of heaven stand wide open: Armies of Angels are mustred
together, the Apostles keep their places, the Evangelists their offices, the
Saints their degrees and all are attendant upon our Lord and Savior Christ
Jesus; who sittes upon a Throne of majesty, and is coming to judge the world.
The wicked at sight of this tremble, and call for mountains to cover them; but
the godly rejoice and are proud of this high day of triumph. The Goats howl,
for they are to be sent to hell, with Go you cursed; but the Lambs skippe up
and down for joy that they shall hear a voice cry, Come you blessed. Who
therefore would not put on his wedding garment to meet such a bridegroom? Who
would not put on the Armor of faith, to fight under such a banner? Upon this
day shall we behold him that in himself is Alpha and Omega: In the world is
the maker and the maintainer: In his Angels is their power and their beauty:
In the Church is as a father to a Family: In our souls as a bridegroom to a
bride: To the just as a bulwark: To the reprobate as a Battry. What eye has
seen, what ear has heard, what understanding can comprehend the excellencies
of this heavenly City; from whence the King of it (so full of Majesty) comes
in person, and in progress to conduct us thither? There is security without
fear; peace without invasion; wealth without diminishing; honors without
envy: there is all blessedness, all sweetenes, all life, all eternity. Thy
hunger shall there be filled with bread of life; thy thirst with the fountain
of goodness; thy nakedness clothed with a garment of immortality. The
comforts we shall receive upon this blessed day of peace are, that we shall
see and behold our God, who has created us; our Lord Jesus, who has redeemed
us; and the holy Ghost that has sanctified us. Come therefore speedily, O God,
for thine Elects sake hasten to this great and general Sessions: and grant, O
merciful Father, that our accounts may be found so just, that we may receive
the rewards of good Stewards. Make us, O LORD, to be Doves in our lives,
innocent and without gall: to be Eagles in our meditations, clear sighted, and
bold to look upon thee: to be Pellicans in our works, charitable and
religious: and last, to be as the Phoenix in our deaths, that after we have
slept in our graves, we may rise up in joy with thy Son. Ascend with him up
into heaven, and there at thy hands receive an immortal crown of everlasting
glory. Amen.

FINIS.
Short and pithie Sentences, fit to be applied to those purposes, for which the
former Prayers are made.
1. GOd is to thee all things: if thou art hu^gry* he is thy bread; if thou art
thirsty, he is thy drink; if thou art in darkness, he is thy light; if in
nakedness, he puts upon thee the garment of immortality. Aug.

2. God the true and only life: in whom and from whom, and by whom all good
things are, that are good indeed. God; from whom to be turned, is to fall; to
whom to turn, is to rise again; in whom to abide, is to dwell for ever. God;
from whom to depart, is to die: to whom to come again, is to reuine: and in
whom to lodge, is to live. Idem.

3. Whatsoever is not of God, has no sweetness: Whatsoever he will give me,
let him take all away, so he gives me only himself. Idem.

4. God in himself is Alpha and Omega, (beginning and ending) In the world, he
is the Ruler: In Angels he is their Glory: In the Church, he is as a Father
in his Family: in the soul as a Bridegroom in his bed chamber: in the good,
he is as a helper and protector: in the wicked as fear and horror. Idem.

5. If God hear our prayers, he is merciful: if he will not hear them, yet is
he just.

6 God is length, breadth, height, and depth. He is length in his Eternity:
breadth in Charity: height in Majesty: depth in Wisdom. Bernard.

7. Have thou a desire to walk? I am the way (says Christ:) Would thou not
be deceived? I am the truth: Would thou not die? I am the life. Aug.

8. No man can take Christ from thee, unless thou take thy self from him.
Ambrose.

9. Christ (our Redeemer) in his birth was a man: in his death a lamb: in his
resurrection a Lion: in his ascension up to heaven an Eagle. Greg.

10. Christ is honny in the mouth, music in the ear, and gladness in the
heart. Bernard.

11. In Christ's doctrine is found true wisdom: in Christ's mercy is found
justice: in his life is found temperance: in his death is found courage. Idem.

12. Christ is so much the more worthy of honor amongst men, by how much he
suffered the more dishonor in the behalf of men. Gregory.

O man, see what I suffer for thee. There is no grief comparable to this of
mine on the cross: I that die for thee, cry unto thee: see what punishments I
endure, see how I am nailed, and how I am pierced. If my outward sorrows be so
great, the grief that is within me must needs be greater, because I find thee
unthankful. Bernard.

14. In vain does he wear the name of a Christian who is not a follower of
Christ. What good is it for thee to be taken for that which thou art not? and
to usurp a title which is not thine own? if needs thou will be a Christian,
do those things that belong to Christianity, and then challenge the name.
Augustine.

15. He is a Christian, that even in his own house acknowledges himself to
be a stranger. Our country is above: in that Inn we shall not be guests. Idem.

16. A Christian can take no hurt by being thrown into [Turkish] captivity;
for even in those his fetters, will his God come to him. Idem.

17. A Christian is not so much to stand upon beginning, as upon the end.
Gregory.

18. Thou art a fresh water soldier (O thou that art a Christian) if thou
hopest to overcome without a battle, or to triumph without a victory.
Chrysostom.

19. It is not such an honor to be good amongst those that are good, but to
be good amongst them that are evil. Gregory.

20. A godly conversation overcomes thine enemy, edifieth thy neighbor, and
glorifieth thy maker. Isidore.

21. He that waits on Christ, must be of such a conversation, that his
outward manners may be but the glass to show the inward mind. Bernard.

22. Such as we are our selves, in such company we delight. Hierom.

23. Our looks and our eyes cannot put on maskes close euough to hide a bad
conscience: for the wantonness of the mind is drawn in the face, and the
actions of the body, betray the conditions of the soul. Idem.

24. Woe to the heart that is double, it gives one half to God, and another
to the devil. God (being angry that the devil has a share in it) gives away
his part too, and so the devil has all to himself. Augustine.

25. The heart of the glutto^ is in his belly: of the adulterer in his lust: of
the covetous man, in his usury. Idem.

26. Amongst men, the heart is weighed by the words; but with God, our words
are weighed by the heart. Bernard.

27. Let not thy face and thy heart be of two colors: thy face looks upward,
let not thy heart look downward. Idem.

28. The heart has four offices to look to, viz. What to love, what to fear,
what to rejoice in, and for what to be sad. Idem.

29. Amongst all the creatures that live under the Sun, there is none has a
heart more excellent then that of man, nor more noble, nor more like to God:
and that is the reason that God asks nothing at thy hands, but thy heart.
Hugo.

30. The heart of man is of it self but little, yet great things cannot fill
it: it is not big enough at one meal to satisfy a bird, and yet the whole
world cannot satisfy that. Idem.

31. The devil has a will to hurt, but not power* because a greater controles
this; for if he should do as much hurt as he desires to do, there would not
be left one righteous man living. Augustine.

32. The devils service is the worst of all others, because he is never pleased
with any duty is done to him. Gregory.

33. Where discord dwells, God never comes near the door. Aug.

34. As God takes delight in nothing so much as in love: so the devil takes
pleasure in nothing more then in the death of charity. Gregory.

35. No misery is greater then to leave God for the love of gold. Hierom.

36. What good can a chest full of riches do thee, if thou cariest about thee
an empty conscience? Thy desire is to have goods, but not to be good. Blush
therefore at thy wealth, for if thy house be full of goods it has a master to
it that is naught. What profit does a rich man get by that which he has, if
he have not God too, who is the giver? Hierome.

37. The disease of riches is pride. Idem.

38. Riches are not sin, but it is sin, not to let the poor have a part in
them. August.

39. So live, that whatsoever thou do, may be as if it were done in
presence of thine enemy.

40. There is nothing more high then humility, which (as if it were always in
the superior) knows not how to be extolled higher Amb.

41. Our contrie is aloft, the way to it is below: if then thou would travel
upward, why do thou go out of the path that leads thee thither? [which
path is humility.] Aug.

42. Humility is a glorious robe, which pride her self does desire to put
on, lest she should be disdained. Bernard.

43. It is more honor to avoid an injury by silence, then to get the better
of it by words. Gregory.

44 If thou would be revenged, only hold thy tongue: and thou give thine
enemy amortal wou^d. Chr.

45. He that makes his belly his god, makes to himself a new God. So many
sins as we have, so many gods we have. I am angry: anger is then my god. I
have seen a woman, and have lusted after her; I make lust my god. Whatsoever
we desire and make much of, that we make our God. Hierome.

46. When man is proud, it is a great misery; but when God is humble, it is a
greater mercy.

FINIS.

