The Owls Almanacke. Prognosticating many strange accidents which shall happen
to this Kingdom of Great BRITAIN this year, 1618. Calculated as well for the
Meridian mirth of London, as any other part of Great BRITAIN. Found in an
Iuy-bush written in old Characters, and now published in English by the
painful labors of Mr Iocundary Merry-braines.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for Lawrence Lisle, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Tygres head. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND generous-minded Gentleman, Sir TIMOTHY THORNHILL
Knight.
SIR,
IS it not strange that an Owl should write an Almanacke? Yet why not, as well
as a Crow speak Latin to Caesar? And why not an Owl prognosticate wonders,
which are sure to happen this year, as for Astrologicall wizzards to shoot
threating Calenders out of their inke-pots at the world, and yet when they hit,
their fillups hurt nothing? Lies are as well acquainted with Astronomers, as
oaths are with Soldiers, or as owing money is familiar to Courtiers: But
Madge-Owlet fetches her predictions out of an upper room in Heaven, where
never any common star-catcher was garretted before. Had I a bird of Paradise, I
should gladly send her flying to you, and therefore I hope that your acceptance
of this Owl (though she be none of mine, but hiding her broad face under my
Eeues by chance) will keep petty idle birds from wondering about her. I wish
every year you are to live, to begin and end with you, as merrily as this
Prognostication takes her aim to make you, and that I may cease to be, when I
give over from being

Devoted ever at your Worships disposing, L. L.

The Contents of this Work.
1. AN Epistle of the OWL, to a certain RAVEN, an Almanacke-maker. 2. The
beginnings and endings of the 4. Terms in the year. 3. Annual Computations
of time. 4. The beginning and ending of the Year. 5. English Tides. 6.
Computation Diurnall, and Astrologicall. 7. A Moone-clocke. 8. The Anotomy of
man's body, governed by the 12 signs. 9. The Signs of the Zodiac. 10. How
the Signs came to be hung up in the Zodiac. 11. A general Calendar for the
common motion of the Moon, in all the months of the Year. 12. The
disposition of the Planets for this Year. 13. Rules for Health and Profit. 14.
The 4. Quarters of the Year, with the diseases incident to each of them. 15.
General diseases to reign this Year. 16. Inundations, and most strange
ouer-flowings of Waters. 17. Of a Dearth. 18 A brief and merry
Prognostication, presaging good fortunes to a Set of fundamental Trades: viz:
1 Mercers. 2 Grocers. 3 Drapers. 4 Fishmongers. 5 Goldsmiths. 6 Skinners. 7
Tailors. 8 Haberdashers. 9 Salters. 10 Ironmongers. 11 Vintners. 12
Clothworkers. 13 Dyers. 14 Brewers. 15 Lether-sellers. 16 Pewterers. 17
Barber-surgions. 18 Armorers. 19 Bakers. 20 Chandlers. 21 Girdlers. 22 Cutlers.
23 Sadlers. 24 Butchers. 25 Carpenters. 26 Shoemakers. 27 Painters.
19 Faires in England. 20 The high ways. 21 Good and bad Days.
THE OWLS EPISTLE to the Raven.
BRother Raven, I did ever envy the happiness of other Birds, when I saw them
freely enjoying Woods, Fields, Parks, Forests, Cities, Kingdoms, and all that
the moving canopy of heaven can cover, as their proper cages to sing in all the
day, drawing thereby, audience to their bewitching-musicke-Lectures; when poor
I (having more knowledge (except in song) than the proudest of them) durst
never, or seldom gad abroad in the light. But when I heard, and beheld your
self a student in the Mathematics, and by iumbling together a hotch-potch of
Calculations, to be counted an Astronomer, and to paste up your name on every
post in the title of a Book, called, The Ravens Almanacke, I did then more
vex than ever before.

I confess you are a Bird of a larger wing than I am, goodlir is your
proportion, piercing are your eyes, your color so amiable, that Women take a
pride to have hair, black as a Ravens, dreadful is your voice, bloody your
beak, and your tallons full of terror: but let your bosom be open, and then
(as in some great Statesmen, who carry an outward glorious show) nothing is to
be found but vglines, treachery, and rapacitie. But if it shall be no dishonor
for me to stand on the tiptoes of mine own commendations, I would then against
your ominous croaking thus far prefer my wakefull hooting, that I have ever
been held a praedooming Bird; but (besides that) an Emblem of Wisdom, and so
sacred among the Athenians, that they carried the reverence of my picture
stamped upon their money.

Now (brother Raven) as in this point I spitefully make comparisons with you,
as proving my self, not one, to whom you may cry, Hail fellow well met: So
will I, in these my Ptolomaicall praedictions, discover to the world such
wonders from the planatary-Regions, that not only thou, but all other Birds
(daring to pry into the priuy-chamber of Heaven) shall pluck in their heads
(as I do until twilight) with shame, and never offer more to pester Paul's
Churchyard, with their triuiall Prognostications. I have been this year in
progress with the Moon, riding on the Dog which the man in the Moon leads,
whose bush of Thorns he lent me, in steed of a fan to keep off the wind,
whilst he himself ran along by me as my footman. Much skill learnt I of the
Moon, for she is a great light to Almanack-makers, albeit in show, she seem
but a cold friend to them: and much mad talk had I with that lunaticall fellow
(the squire of her body.) The 12 houses of the Sun, lay higher up into the
country, so that by reason my sight has ever been bad, I had no great
stomach to mount up thither, because I know the Sun (who never could endure
me) would have spied both a Moate in mine eye, and a Beam too. Here I caught
stars, faster than a Cat will kill flies; of which store I shot some down to
help those that write Almanacks for London. Some of the 12 Signs (which like
cast garments, being worn to pieces, were thrown by into an odd corner) I
clapped close under my wings, and now they are to be seen hanging in the middle
of Cheapeside; for there is the Ram, the Bull, the Crab, Capricorn, etc. Only
the young wench (called Virgo) would by no means sit in any shop in that
street, because so many Gallants lie over the stalls, courting every hansom
woman there, that the maid was afraid to have lost her head, in the company.
Thus with weary winge traueld I, but being now come back from the Court of the
Moon, (who is not much unlike me, having a great broad platter face as mine
is) listen to the wonders which I bring with me: So hooting and whooping a
silence to your Rauenship, I prognosticate my self, yours for a strange
Almanacke for a whole year,

The OWL.

The beginnings and endings of the 4. Terms in the Year.
HIllary Term is the merriest Term of all four: It begins in hope to the
Lawyer to have good doings, and ends in Hillary Term.
despair to the Client that he shall not be dispatched this Term

It has 4 Returns.
The first Return, the Lawyer comes up with an empty Capcase. The second
Return, the Client comes up with a full Capcase. The third Return, all the
Clients money is in the Lawyers Capcase. The fourth Return, nothing but
Lawyers papers stuff the Clients Capcase.
EAster Term comes in all in green, with the Spring (like a Easter Term.
puny Clarke) waiting upon him, and would be as merry as Hillary, but that
Puritans pluck down profane and highpearching May-poles.

It begins with Pox vobis, and ends with Pox vobis.

It has 5 Returns.
The first Return, the Client hopes well. The second Return, the Attorney
heartens him well. The third Return, the Client lays it on well. The fourth
Return, he prays and paies well. The fifth Return, the Attorney laughes well.
Trinity Term is a very hot fellow, yet in regard he is but Trinity Term.
short lived, (for he is borne the ninth of June, and departs the twenty eight
of July) he does no great good to the Lawyer, nor great hurt to the Client.

It begins in one of the Kings Courts at Westminster Hall, and ends in one of
the prisons about London.

It has 4 Returns.
And those Returns are like the 4 quarters of a decreasing or wayning Moon.
The first Return, the rich Plaintiff, with corpulent baconfed guts, rides
puffing up to London, with a purse warmely linde, and that's the full moon,
during which fulness he far out-shines the Defendant, and gives great light to
the Lawyers, though in the end they light him, when his own torch burns no
longer. The second Return, the lamentably-complaining Defendant, comes up too,
being more in the wayne than the other, (nay parhaps altogether out both of the
Wayne, horses, and oxen) and yet his purse not three quarters full neither. The
third Return, what with Counselors, Attournies, Clerks, and other ministers
of justice, the Plaintiffes purse is scarce half full, which he empties every
day (as he melts his grease) with trudging from Court to Court, only to undo
his poor Adversary. The fourth Return, there is a judgment gotten against
the Defendant, and now his heart and cause being both overthrown together, his
spirits are so darkened with black clouds of sorrow, that he seems utterly
ecclipsed, until the first quarter of a new Moon, which will not show her
horns until next Term.
MIchaelmas Term comes in with his nose dropping, and a pipe of lighted
Tobacco puffing out of his mouth, to dry Michaelmas Term.
up the rhewme, for he is but a sniueling companion: You shall seldom see him
but dawbd up to the hams with dirt and rain; and commonly, to make amends for
that, a pynte of mulld sack is his mornings draught. It begins with a shiuering
to 500 that are Termers, but ends in a burning Fever, for Westminster and
London are too hot for 400 of these 500 to tarry by it.

It has 8 Returns.
The first Return, an Essex Yeoman has a Goose goes gagling into his
neighbors barn. The second Return, he that owes that barn, wrings off the
neck of this Goose. The third Return, the Gooses master, ambles up to the
Term to a man of Law, drawing out his purse, as he driuells out his speech,
and scrapes with his hobnailes for counsel, how to sue in the Gooses name. The
fourth Return, he that assaulted and battred the Goose, gallops up too, and
thrashes out his silver about that Goose too. The fifth Return the matter
comes to trial. So that The Goose is pluckd, -- there is the Jury. The Goose is
roasted with delicate sauce, there is the Verdict. The Lawyer eats the Goose,
there is a Judgment entered. And gives the feathers to stick the other two
coxcombes, Execution upon that judgment.
The sixth Return, the Lawyer persuades his clyent, it was no Goose, but a
Gander: to it again they go. The seventh Return, the two Essex Calves have
suckd each other dry, and have neither Goose nor Gander. The eight Return,
they go home like a couple of tame Geese, when their feathers are plucked, and
are passing good friends.
There are Star Chamber days in all these 4 Terms, for the Star Chamber days.
Council of Heaven (with the King in all his glory) sits to censure the Riots
of the mighty on earth, oppressing the poor, the fatherles, and widow, and by
the royal authority of that most honorable Court, to guard innocence, and
weakness, from the malice and tyranny of bloudy-minded Creditors, whose pleas
are never heard before so high an assembly of Judges.

A memorial of the time sithence some strange and remarkable Accidents,
until this year 1617.
SInce the first lie was told, is (as I remember) 5565 years; First Ly^.
and that was by all computation in Adams time, but now in these days men and
women lie downright. -- 5565

Since the burning of Paul's steeple many fiery faces have heated 2
the City, but especially some Catchpolls red noses have set 500 a sweating
coming by the Counter gates: But since the burning at Winchester, (at which
time no small number of Geese were both pluckd and powdered) many heads ache to
this Winchester G^se.
day to remember it, albeit it be now about 12 or 13 years past. -- -- -- --
-- -- 12

Since the first making of noses chimneyes, with smoking 3 First ^ffing
Tobacco.
men's faces as if they were bacon, and baking dried Neats tongues in their
mouths. -- -- -- -- 32

Some Almanacks talk that Printing has bin in England not above 156 years;
but I find in an old worme-eaten Cabalisticall 4 Printing of sheets.
Author, that sheets have bin printed in this Kingdom above a 1000 years
before that time. -- 1000

Tailors have bin troubled with stitches, ever since yards came up to measure
women's petticotes, and that is at least ago 5 Tailors stitches
years -- 5000

Oranges came from Civil into England above an 100 years 6 Lemmons.
past; but we had great store of Lemmons long before, 100

Since hot waters caused bad livers in London, and her Suburbs, 7 Hot waters.
is not much above 15 or 16 years: but they never burnt out the bottoms of
men's purses so much, until Ra: Savage gave them Phlegetonticall brewings, and
horrible Necromanticall names. -- 16

Dancing was in England long before the Conquest, but 8 Dancing, and Pumps.
pumpes have bin used in London within 60 years or thereabouts. -- 60

Since bottle Ale came puffing into England, and thereby troubled the country
with terrible winds, all the Putt-gallies 9 Bottle Ale, and Roaring boys.
serving Brew-houses near the Thames are weeping witnesses, but whether
Puffing and Roaring Boys were before that time, look into the Calendar of
Newgate, and there it is Re-corded.

Since the horrible dance to Norwich. -- 14

Since the arrival of Monsieur No body. -- 11

Since that old and loyal soldier, George Stone of the Bearegarden died. -- 8

Since the dancing horse stood on the top of Powles, whilst a number of Asses
stood braying below. -- 17

The general Earthquake in rich men's consciences, has no Rich men's
Earthquakes.
certain time when it shall be, but the earthquake, and cold shiuering in
poor men's bodies is now every day, and charity cold her self, she knows not
how to comfort them.

Since the German Fencer cudgelld most of our English Fencers, now about 5
months past.

Since yellow bands, and saffroned Chaperoones came up, is Yellow bands.
not above two years past, but since Citizens wives fitted their husbands with
yellow hose, is not within the memory of man.

Since close Caroches were made running bawdy-houses, yesterday. Yellow hose.


Since swearing and forswearing cried [What do you lacke] in London, no longer
ago then this very morning.

The beginning and ending of the Year, as also of the World.
THe year begins with me when I have money in my purse, which with a good
suite on my back, a fair gelding under Year begins.
me, and a gilt Rapier by my side, makes it complete.

The year begins with some Gallants, when they cry zounds Drawers, ye rogues;
and is near expiration, when they ask in a low voice, What Is to pay?

The year ends with me when my silver is melted, and my elbowes are ragged.
Year ends.


In the interim of these two extremes it is indifferent current.

The world begins with a young man, when he new sets up for himself, and ends
with him when his wife sets up for her self.

The world begins with an old man, when every day his baggs fill, and that he
can drink half a pint of sack off at a draught, World begins and ends.
and cry Hem after it: and the world ends with him, when he begins to dote on a
young wench.

English Tides.
HIgh water above London bridge, when the Prentises there High water.
dwelling pluck up buckets full to the top of the house, to ferue their
kitchins; and low water, when people go over the Thames dry shod.

High water at London bridge, when the tide is come in: low water when it is gone
out.

High water at all Havens, when their mouths swill in so Havens.
much, that they cast it out again.

And high water with all Rivers, when bridges and they meeting, Bridges.
the bridges are glad to stand up to the middle to save themselves

High water in school boys eyes, after the fearful sentence School boys.
women.
of Take him up: and in women's, when either they cry for anger, or are maudlin
drunk.

It flows with good fellows, when their cups are full, and their brains
swim; and it ebbs at the posterne when the physic Drunkards.
works, and the body purges backward.

Its high water at Westminster Hall when porters are feed by Lawyers to ride a
picke-packe on them in stead of Mules, and Lawyers.
so to turn them into Asses: and wonderful low water when the stream of
quicke-siluer has his current stopped up.

Computation Diurnall, and Astrologicall.
GOlden number is any number of golden Angels, or other coin of the same
metal. It is this year with me 2. for Golden Number.
the Golden Number, next year I hope it will be more.

Epact is a comprehension of the teeth of the Moon; for Epact.
look into her mouth with the watching candle of Astronomicall skill, and by
the soundnes of her gum-pales you shall know how old her great belly is.

The Circle of the Sun is bigger than any Town bushel, Circle of the Sun.
yea though you allow unto it London water-measure. A sieue cannot hold it, for
the beams peep out at every little hole.

The Roman Indiction this year is, that we eat no flesh on Fridaies, and that
none feed upon Saturdayes, unless he have Roman Indiction.
victuals.

The Dominicall Letter (L) with a dash over it, signifies either a Lord, or a
pound: the one sometimes being more welcome to Dominicall letter L.
an Almanacke-maker than the other.

Shroue-tuesday falls on that day, on which the Prentices plucked down the
cockpit, and on which they did always use to rifle Madam Leakes house at the
upper end of Shoreditch.

Ashwednesday on a Wednesday.

Good Friday the Friday before Easter.

And this year Holy Thursday (which I never wonder at) will fall upon a
Thursday.

Easter day my Grandame says, she never knew but on a Sunday, and I say as
much for Whitsunday.

And now listen to a double-ribd Distichon of an old Author.

Christmas (as I remember) Old rymes to remember times

Is ever in December,
And May day the first of the row,
Saint John after Steven,
The day after even,
Believe me, I say it so.
A Moone-clocke, or a rule to know the hour of the night by the Moon.
TAke a pair of iron Tongues; pitch them stradling over a An excellent
Moone-diall, but that the Dyall is too bigg to carry in a man's pocket.
kennell; then fasten a Waggon-wheele to the diameter of the Tongues; which
done, mark what spoake does cast the shadow of the Moon into the sink,
directly between the bestriders; from which count the spoakes till you come
right opposite to the shadow: then dimidiate or part in two equal parts that
number, divide it by 3. multiply it by 7. from which extract the number of the
Epact, and the Remanet will be the just hour of the night. To show a platform
were idle, when the precept is so plain.

The Anatomy of man's body.
1. ARies, the Ram, gouernes the head: men whose wives have light heels, are
called Ramme-headed Cuckolds.

2. Taurus, the Bull, gouernes the neck and throat: for stiffenecked fellows
are Roaring Boys, and dead their tools often in Turne-Bull street.

3. Gemini, the Twins, gouernes the arms and shoulders: so thieves go to
the Sessions, two by two, arm in arm, shoulder to shoulder.

4. Cancer, the Crab, gouernes the stomach: and reason, for a Crab well
buttered is excellent meat.

5. Leo, the Lion, gouernes the heart: he that has not the heart of a Lion,
has the head of an Ox.

6. Uirgo, the Virgin, gouernes bowels and belly, and makes both cry Oh, if
they meddle too much with her government.

7. Libra, the Balance, gouernes the loins, for much double dealing is done
in those quarters.

8. Scorpio, the Scorpion, gouernes the secret parts, for those sting pockily.

9. Sagittarius, the Archer, gouernes the thighs, for between them is the
sweetest shooting.

10. Capricornus, the Goat, gouernes the knees, for a man lecherous as a Goat
is brought upon his knees.

11. Aquarius, the Water-bearer, gouernes the legs, he has a staff to help
too, and all little enough sometimes, when he carries drink and water both.

12. Pisces, the Fishes, gouernes the feet: for let a man come out of any
Tavern in Fish-street drunk, it is so slippery with fish water, that down he
comes, and lies like a heap of stinking gubbins.

If these 12 be not able to govern man's unruly body, then let the 12 Companies
of London have him to their Halls, and whip him. But to prove that these are
strong enough to hold him, you may by the verses following perceive that the
Sun of these 12. makes himself a girdle in the Zodiac.

The Signs of the Zodiac. Signs.

The Ram, the Bull, Twins, Crab, the Lion hot.
Virgin, Scales, Scorpion, he which Archer hight,
The Goat, and bearer of the Water-pot,
A brace of fishes, -- with heavenly light.
These sum the dozen of those stars in sky,
Which lend bright Cynthia such variety.
The first Induction of the Zodiac.
THe Zodiac, which begd his name of living creatures, (for all the Cullizans
in it except one, which is of no great weight neither, drew their pedigree from
the Idea of some excellent Animal) took his original thus.

When Jupiter reigned in the sky, and the fry of the gods in How the Zodiac
took his original.
the Zodiacke-circle, Promotheus that melancholicke Artizan casting down from
the earths seeling a compassionate eye on mankind, who at that time had no
other fire than that of love, which was Cupids, and that of anger, which is the
heat of Nemesis, commiserated man's cold comfort, and vowed when time Man at
first without the use of fire.
served to pull opportunity by the nose, and pleasure man with that
artificious Pantechnon, which in worth far transcended that peerless pearl
of Anthonies Lady.

What might move him to divulge this treasure out of the Exchequer of heaven, I
know not: Some think it was a swelling Premetheus the these that first stole
fire.
desire that possessed him, thinking to eternize his fame, and make his name
immortal, by bestowing this rare gift upon mortals.

Others imagine that this Promotheus was wownd into the love (and not unlikely,
for your semi-Saints and Demi-deities were ever liable to Cupids archerie) of a
pretty Damsel, that dwelt under the immortal Canopy in this cold Horizon,
which made his virgin in frostie congealing mornings look like Vespasian, as
if she had been wringing at an hard stool; and that for her sake he became so
liberal to the earths inhabitants.

Howsoever, whether this or that was his instigation, occasion being tossed in
his way, he bestowed this hot benefit on man, imparting Armorers had first use
of fire.
it first unto Pyrotes an excellent Armorer.

The means how he came by it is not certainly known: Some think that he
himself by his deepe-searching wit first invented the manner how to dash it
out of the igniferous flint.

In his right hand a shiuering flint he locks, First fire from a flint.

Which against another in his left he knockes
So up and down, that from the coldest stone,
At every stroke, small fiery sparkles shone,
Which withered Daphne with her leaves does feed,
This was our fires (it is thought) both root and seed.
Others imagine he got this knowledge by coming into Mulcibers Promethe^ robbed
Vulca^ forge of fire.
shop, (which stands at the foot of brimstone-bubling Aetna) and secretly
peeping over the old Farriers shoulder, as he was striking fire: But the most
received opinion is, that he played the thief, and stole it either out of
Vulcans Forge, (as some would have it) or rather e Coelo, out of Jove's
treasury, as most imagine: Howsoever he bestowed it on man, flat against Jove's
will and pleasure, who was much enraged at this his action.

And surely there was just cause of Jove's displeasure, for it is thought that
at that time as many damnd mischiefs throngd Why Jove was angry seeing m^n to
use fire.
into the world with fire, as there did fantastical fooleris with Monsieur
into England. Then pranked dame Paena and Pecunia, (money, and misery) bags
and beggary, the very heart and head of infelicitie. Then came craft into the
world, with his Fire the breeder of mischief.
Pages, Synon, Dautu, Geta, Parasitus, (the Fawn) and goodman Doliu (Doctor
Deceit) who for his antiquity might bear Arms as big as Charles-wayne.
Then came posting in (on a pibald Cut,) Simony (see money) Bribery, Humanisme,
Malice, all the whelps of Acheron, all the weeds of the infernal banks, with
pale-faced Incontinence, and giddy-braind Intemperance, the two swiftest
coach-horses of hell.

About this very time landed Deterior Aetas, (the ill-fauor'd The Brazen Age.
facde Beldam) and calendred her self into the Earths Almanacke; a cunning, a
coying, and purloyning Sorceresse: At whose tail marched in most stinking
Ranks, all the sores, mischiefs, and State-impostumes, that covered their
damned heads with Pasquills Mad-cap, or else were minced and boiled together in
Mad-caps Gallimafry. Now issued in from the Reareward, Madame Vice, or old
Iniquity, with a lath dagger painted, according to the fashion of an old Vice
in a Comedy, with a head of many colors, as showing her subtlety, and at her
back two Punkes that were her Chamber maids, the one called Too little. Omne
nimium vertitur in vitium.
the other Too much; and these two had like Quicksilver eaten the worlds
Goodness to the heart.

In a left wing of this Army of Barathrum, were skirmishing more sins then
ever the Bell-man of London, or Lantern and Two books written by T. D.
Candlelight did ever muster up together.

For before these barrels of mischief were set abroach, every old man was a
piece of reverend Coin, on which the very face A figure of the Golden age.
of Goodness was engraven, and every sprig of youth, was a Laurel branch,
which all the year long grew green, and smelt sweet of Innocence. Women
were those Creatures that No such women now.
were fairer within than without, wooing men to love them for their virtues,
and not one of that name did then sound, Woe-Man: Maids had that title from
Modesty: Marriage was the Merry-age: A child playing with a Dog, the Emblem
of simplicity; every man's life was his Chronicle to following No Maids.
Puppies and children do so still.
times, and in every leaf was Honesty, and Fidelity in texted letters: A
golden Age was this, yet without gold: where every Commonwealth was more (if
more might be) than Sr Thomas Moors neuer-enough praised Utopian. Sir Thomas
Moore his Vtopian.


Jove the reputed Admiral of the Aires Ocean, billowing his brows with
disdain and fury, cracking a cloud at every bended Jove in a pelting chafe.
wrinkle, and thumping out a thunder at every frown, his face flashing fire,
and his looks menacing storms, stood still as if mortality had seen Medusa
stampd on the ground, as if Cato had seen a swaggerer, vowed with a thousand
Stygian Oaths, that Prometheus should repent him of his bold attempt, and
audacious Prometheus look to your coxcombe. Jove's Pursiuant called for.
profusion, in communicating that Iouiall flame, which would in time set the
whole world in a combustion. Forthwith flies there a Voice, which summons his
winged Herald Mercury, to whom the fire-stealer is delivered in charge to be
conveyed to Vulcan the Master of the Heavenly Ferrary, or Jove's Iron works, to
be chaind to the top of cold Caucasus. Mercury presently made proclamation
(with an Iron voice out of his Starthreating Turret,) that all creatures, who
thought themselves endamaged by this fire-worke of Prometheus should instantly
Terrible doings.
present themselves before him, and wreake their balefull Ire on him at their
pleasure. On frosty-fronted Caucasus, that cold The theife taken.
Mountain, (at Jove's command) was this Prometheus lodged, shackled to a stake
with chains which Unlcan had hammered out for that unruly hell-hound, the
winde-throated Porter of Hells Porter and a prison Porter Cozens as I take it.
Erebus (Cerberus) where to this hour he stands shiuering and shaking like a
condemned Caitiffe, that attends the fatal stroke to sever his head piece from
his feare-frozen carcas; or like a Schoole-boy, doomed with that fatal, Solue
ligulas, (or untruss) Even so he stood till the sound of the writhen horn had
famosed his act far and near, with the liberty of inflicting penalties; viz.
how that all the world was licensed to whet the Spears of anger to spit him;
who like an Indian (in new Spain) stood there exposed as a fair mark for any
man's fury.

Aries, the Ram.
THe first Tilter that ran against him was Aries the crookedhorned winding Ram:
off left he his grazing, and thus began he his indictment.

Calling to mind the prejudice that this fire-filcher had done him, how that
now such craft had sunk into the brains of man, A Ram-headed Oration.
such rape and avarice into his heart, that poor Rams could no more sleep
in their golden fleeces; whereas before that time their woollen coats were
never in fear or danger of cutting out, by the cruelty of fire-molded mettali;
their tender lambs were never taken from their uberous sides; their blood was
never tainted in the Parliament of Wolves, nor had the Fox that crafty A sweet
Parliament.
noddle of his own, to play the bloud-sucker amongst their flocks. This tale
being bleated out, and heard, this cornuted husband of the Sheepes-heads,
fetching a feeze backward (like O brave Ram!
the Roman Ram, to push forward with the more violent and villainous force) ran
with all his horniferous strength at the poor Fire-fellon, and stroke his
brow-butters full in Promotheus forehead, that the very print remains in his
front, and does still in some of his race to this day; yea such was the
violence of the These horneheads are terrible fellows.
blow, that it has caused a wrinkled brow in all his progeny.

Jove stood by in a cloud, beholding the courage of the Ram, which after he had
applauded with his pleasing looks, he placed Rewards for revenge.
him on the chained head to vex his pate for ever, as the Headsigne, at which
hung his fury.

Taurus, the Bull.
But casting his eye aside, behold came Taurus up the hill, with roaring
throat, sweating like a Bull as he was, bellowing out Ware the Bull. Bulls
Oration.
in behalf of all his beastly kindred, that by Prometheus means, his soul and
body was brought into danger: For the invention of the sithe, which mowed down
the grass from his hungry paunch; the iron chain that restrained his
grinders, from hewing up the blades, were by the help of fire first framed.
Nay, the Butcher had all the instruments of death from this theft of his. The
goad that spurs his slownesse forward, and the boldness of man that durst
encounter such a mass of flesh, first fetched their original from this Act of
his.

These speeches with a bull-beefe countenance being uttered (for he was like
Ajax more warrior than Orator) he ran at this Bellowes-maker (whose filching
was the first inuenter of kindling A Paris-garden Bull could have done no more.
Jove a stickler.
fire) with such a roaring and bellowing violence, that goaring his theeuish
neck, he almost doubly nailed it to the stake.

Jove clapped the Bull on the flanks (as a Beareward does the Bull at
Paris-garden, in a great day of bayting) and was glad to see Justice (whose
sword is put into the hands of Fools and Coxcombes upon earth) to be so nobly
and stoutly executed on a villain, by a creature merely irrational.

Gemini: The Twins.
YEa, the thunder-darting god, laughes so loud that the echo of that noise
even shook the palace; celestial; but before Room for ^o Fencers.
the wrinkles of his cheeks were made smooth again, Jove fed his eyes with
the sight of two Twins (called Gemini) hand in hand approaching this condemned
Miscreant. The tears sell in sweet showers from their eyes, sometimes
trickling down their tender cheeks, anon those balls of light, swimming only
in circles of water, like two Islands encompassed about with a pair of Rivers:
So stood they gazing and greeuing to behold that Ar^-pyrate their tormented
enemy, whose punishment in heart they wished to be doubled, as were their
bodies.

Destiny had given them more woes than words: but Nature was so good a school
mistress to them, that they could without book rehearse their own misfortunes.
Who thou art (quoth Good boys.
the Gemini with feeble voices) we cannot tell; known only art thou unto us,
as a fatal tree, upon which grows all our miseries. Thou did first reveal
the use of fire to man, teaching him since how to feed and foster it
continually, and by that mystery opened to him the way to our undoing. It was
thy Sea-cole of N^wcastle a good benefactor to this. Armorers had never been a
Company else.
wit and work to set the world at wars by the fire of Dissension, and the
burning coals of Ambition, and to that end Smiths, Gun-makers, Speare-makers,
and such like hard-handed fellows have been a long time thy slaves and
prentises; night and day hammering from the Mardrons anuile, knives, ponyards,
steelettoes, swords, bills, pollaxes, canons, culuerins, sacres, muskets,
petronels, and pistolls; to feed whose insatiable sulphurous and devouring
fire spitting mouths, that black-meale of hell (Gunpouder,) has likewise
been invented. It was long of thee that our Parents were slain, that our
States were overthrown and all misfortunes fell upon us. Two we are to one,
yet our force is but small, and the stroke of our revenge That's odds.
but feeble. Yet to prove that there is spleen even in poor flies, and to
show a love to our Parents, we will in scorn of thee Habet and musca splenem.
bestride thy shoulders, and there with the horrid noise of our wrongs, so lug
thee by the ears with our nails, and so torment thy hearing, that thou shall
wish to be burnt in ten thousand bon-fires, for filching that handful of
fire from heaven, rather than be tortured by two such cruel Hangmen as we
shall prove to thee.

This threatned-sentence took place; upon his shoulders Prometheus made an
Ass to carry two Apes.
they mounted; Prometheus both patient and speachlesse, enduring their bauling
exclamations: whose scolding day and night grew to be so loud, and the barking
so intolerable that the Head of man and his Ears, laid their noddles
together, taking counsel of the brain how to prevent the shaking down and
vtter-ruine of the capital building, by such an everlasting roaring thunder;
And thereupon found out no better means to How wax crept into the ears.
stop such breaches, than by clammy wax, just at the wickets of the ears,
whose little key-holes being so choked up, the horror of their sounds could
not pierce too far. So that euersince, the head (being the bodies hiue) does
by certain Beeworkings of the Brains, convey wax to the cells of hearing.

Cancer: The Crab.
NExt came Cancer, like a Waterman in a boat, his arse toward the place to
which he was going, he looked like a piece A sweet-face Crabbe.
of Hebrew spelld the contrary way, or like a rope-maker, who as he gets his
living, does go (like a course carried to Church) with his heels forward; or
if you will, like a witch who says her prayers backward; just in that manner
marched Signior Cornuto Cancer with the Crab-treeface, Testudine gradu,
crawling with his tail before him. He was very desirous to mend his pace (not
daring to swear for fear his claws should catch no fish) but, protesting he
would give all his palaces of dead horseheads, and cared not who buttered his
lecherous guts, with eggs and muscadine, and so eat him, upon condition, he
might but O cruel Crabbe
give that Termigant Prometheus, but three pinches; not upon any legitimate
spleen in the world, but only that he would not like a snaile pluck in his
horns, in such a combat, where the Ram, Bull, and a couple of Iacke-sprat
Boys, had laid about them so like Fencers. The Revenge was common as the Law,
or as the blows of a Spittle whore (hot and dangerous) and therefore like the
Ass in the Fable, that would needs be so lusty at legs as to lend the Lion
a brace of kickes, and to play at Spurne-point with him, so would the Crab have
a bout with Don-fire Drake, but the Ass played his Iades tricks, when
Corde-Lyon lay half dead in his belly, scarce having one tooth in Age a
terrible tooth-drawer.
his head, because Age being his Barber had plucked all out, and so Monsieur
Cancro was the more hot upon his enemy, because he had him bound to the peace.

Or it may be, he was thus sower the rather, because Prometheus looked like a
fisher (as he hung) with a long driueling* beard, who was wont to scarre such
crabbed companions out of their rockie, and mossie dens; or else, because
Fishermen by help of that Fellons skill in fire-workes, got both Anchors to
This is very likely. Hinc illa lachrimae!
hold their Peeter-boates, and little hook to choke harmless fishes, (...)
other Engines, to destroy the poor inhabitants of the Ocean.

Howsoever, or whatsoever it was which boiled within him, but Cancer crawld up,
to Prometheus his linked ribs, where he fell so to pinch his stomach, that
all his chamber of Melancholy (I Crabbes are windy meat for the stomach.
mean the Milt) was in a dogged, and sullen scuruie puffing: so that the poor
Scab, was as splenaticke, as the Capadocian bawd in Plautus: Habet and musca
splene^ (quoth Jove) Cancer can be chollericke, and my little Crab crawle on
his belly but he will bite his enemy.

Leo: The Lion.
But oh! on a sudden the belly-bitten thief yells out, roares, and bandies up
curses, able to crack the clouds a sunder: yelling with loude-yawning
throat, like a prisoner in Ludgate, or the Grate-men in the begging room of
the Kings Bench Either of which ba^le extremely.
common Iayle, when they do but smell the breath of four Flanders Mares
whu^ying near them in a Caroch, all his body grew cold with fear, his
shoulders shook like an aspine, and his heart quaked like an half dead Eele
upon an hot grediron: and what was it, but LEO came flinging up the hill,
bearing his Enter Lion.
head as high as the last foot of Horace, his first song: his fierytrembling
maine, being proudly erected, and his tail retorted on his back, as chafing
his ridge-bone to provoke his courage, The addressing of the Lion to the combat.
complaining of the man's act, and the fruit of his act (fire and sword) the one
with his flame dismaies his valor, the other with his luster terrifies his
prey-coueting thoughts, more than the fearful crowing of the watchful
Chanticleere. Then giving his speech a treble plaudit, with three round roares
he skips Well roared Lion.
to the heart of the object, and had wholly sent it into his seldomfull, or
never satisfied throat, had not Jove sent a thunder of retreit unto him out of
hand. Lofty Lion (said Jove) I will thee claspe thy jaws, and shut the portall
of that vorant grave, which makes whole Towns look pale, till the nuture of
my Scepter shall have limited thy boundles sauagenes.

When that thou shall epsy this pilfrers heart, Jove (...) make verses too.

To stacke his motion, and to rest as still,
Then shall thou prey upon that resting part,
Till when remain Obedient.
morigerat to our will.
Fast under his left arm stands this greedy Lion, expecting with wide-gaping
mouth, the sedency and tired motion of his The Lion swore to have a leg or an
arm.
lives fountain, at whose fearful vigilancie the poor heart, with very
thought of the terrifying beast drives it self with a continual Sistell and
Diastoll, like the clacke of a mill, or a sunne-suckt leaf chained to a
Spiders twine, yet I have not read, that before that time it ever stirred.

Virgo: the Maid.
But me thinks fuming fury should not smoke out of Virgins entrails, when
they have so many petticoats to smother A hot whore.
it: such tendrels of Venus grove should not harbor a shadow of revenge: yea,
but look here where Virgo comes pacing up the hill, as fast as an Hang man up
a Ladder, at the hope of a good A woman is violent in revenge.
fuite, or at least, as fast as her buske will give her leave. Well, to be as
brief as an Apes tail, she had no sooner got up the hill, but she begins to
chide out these causes of her direful approach to tongue-tyed Prometheus;
knocking her sists, as the custom of shrewes is, where at length her frowns
vented this foame. Now for a fit of scolding.
Now thou pilde pilfering knave, thou maleficious Rascal, was the mumps of thy
brain swollen so big, that they must needs break out into flames, and bring
such a smoke into the world, that has infected all our yongsters breath? thou
have taught men (thou captiuated cur) to kindle that quenchlesse fire of
Tobacco (oh my bodkin I Will dig out his eyes) In which thou have robbed Thou for
my money. Women hate Tobacco. She loved kissing.
me of my greatest pleasure; let a fresh Bachelour in his new cloths come but
toward me, with intent to draw breath at my lips, why I smell my youth before
I come at him; and if he offer me the courtesy, I turn him away with a foh,
you smell (save reverence) of Tobacco. If I walk in the streets, and chance to
come down Bucklersbury, oh how the whole Orb of air is infected with this
fume, which so much alters my complexion, that if I should not view my visage,
every hour of the day in the glass, I durst be sworn that I should not know
my self, but the worst of all is, that this Prometheus smoke, melts off the
complexion from our colored cheeks, as fast as we lay it on, I cannot
forbear, Tobacco a Promethean smoke. A pain^d Punke yet g^ for a Maid. O
wh^re!
the spoil of that faculty spurs me forward, and forthwith sent she a red hot
spit (as valorously as ever Tomyris struck off Cyrus head) into the midst of
his belly, that you might well say, that Prometheus was no Hypocrite, for you
might easily see into him. Jove of pity, or rather of envy healed the wound,
as strengthening the offender for farther vengeance, but the skarre of the wound
remains in humane portracture, which we call the Navel.

Libra: The Balanced.
LIbra she that followed Uirgo (as fast as her apron-strings would give her
leave) came creeping through the supporters of the press, and being almost
breathless with taking such wide A good Lawyer, she open^ her own case.
strides, in short language laid open her case, and courted Jove for revenge.
You know attendants all; the wrongs that I have endured since the firing of the
world. My mistress Equity (whose Emblem I am) has hid her face since fraud set
up her banners, and weeps in obscure corners, to see deceit brandish the
square This is a chamber-maide to Justice.
of upright dealing. I that before was the equal hand of Justice, am now no
more Libra for skales, but Libra for pounds. Nay further, our Trades men use me
in weighing such beastly stinking stuff, and that so unjustly, that I can no
longer endure it. Chandlers, a ^b for you.
Wherefore great Jove fasten me to this Lubbers loins, that I may ever stick
by his ribs, to put him in mind of his unequal dealing. Prometheus raines
being sore affrighted at the sight of (...).
such a misshapen creature, like an heartlesse hound fell a running away, and
had not Jove stopped their race, he might have died of that disease, and
resigned his spirit to Ghost groping Pluto.

Scorpio: The Scorpion.
NOt long after came Scorpio, alleging that by the virtue of this attracting
fire, men had learned to cure his bodybiting sting, and sought out devises to
entrappe his person, and to convert his corpse into a liquid oil (most
sovereign against impoysonings) more then this, that in derision of his name,
Prometheus the great Artificer had made a scourge for his apprentises
delinquency, and called it a Scorpion, for which injuries Whips indeed bite
sore. He lies st^edead.
he enuiously skipt up to his genitals, murdring that place, lest Prometheus
should beget some more audacious boldings of his venturous nature.

Sagittarius: The Archer.
SAgittarius the Bow-man (Robin Hoods great Grand-sire (stood aiming at this
fettred wretch, ready to let fly at him, had not the proceeding (indictacnsa)
hindered him: whereupon he produces that this Salamander-breeder had brought so
many books and subtilties into the world, and so stained all the livers on the
earth with craft and foxisme, that whereas before he Foxisme.
could have slain a foul at every errand, he had sent his fetherchecked
Lacquey, now his bolts make many a vain voyage, and return empty. The Bucke,
as soon as he spies these limbslicing shafts, erected his front and ears, and
paceth into the ^irds may sing merrily at this news.
thicket, where he is warded from the dart of death: thus is the use of my
intended arrow defeated, yea, of the shafts themselves, The Bucke too crafty
for a bow.
this Prometheus labors to delude me, for when the world had no other heat
then ardoremsolis (the heavens heat) every hedge and quick-set, every knot and
turb of trees, was able to yield Sunshine the first fire man warmed his hands
at.
quiver shafts sufficient choice and variety, now whole woods and forests can
scarce fit me with a pair to my liking. All the arborean and arbustian army,
are so suddenly dride up, and turned to color as pale as ashes, at the very
sight of this Promethean fire, yea (even to this hour) if a Collier or an
Irongrinder pass but by a young and tender grove in Autum, you shall see
within an handful of days after, all the humid sap of those burning branches,
fled within the rind, and sunk under the ground (like a More-hen at the sight
of a Spaniell) as dreading by a secret antipathy, those two wood-wasting
Tyrans. Stand aside (said the shooter) I Will venture this at an hanch of his,
though Now his bolt sties.
all the woods in Arabia fail me in yielding such an other. I Will lame him
first, afterward (as my passion shall move me) I Will rage farther, have at his
thigh, away flies the arrow buzzing in the air, as singing in his greedy
voyage, for joy of this wished prey. After follows Sagittarius viewing how his
hungry arrow drunk up the Traiterous tainted blood.

Capricornus: The Goat.
NO sooner was this brunt over, but lo another calamity (more anger yet)
Capricornus the Sophy-bearded Goat came frisking in, as if he would have capred
over the Alps, his chinny dependant was bedewed with his pearled sweat, that
issued from his head with too much haste, which so tired him, that falling flat
and flexible on his knees, he thus began say. Since this fire-founder Prometheus
incensed the whole course of nature, Now the Goats beard begins to wagge.
by his damned inventions, lust and Iechery, the buds of heat and ardor have
dispersed themselves, through all the ranks of breathing creatures. My
gray-bearded Sire well calculating the event of this mischief, would ever
charge his sons and daughters, to beware of those force-enfeebling companions
(the children of heat) declaring to us by way of Items (as he went grazing
Hairy bodies lecherous.
down the hill) the aptness and inclination of our bodies that way. I (for
mine own part) thought my self sufficiently instructed against these
hot-spurs, but having them occasionately tostin my way, I resisted (like Ouids
Corinna) as though I would Grata est vi^ ipsa.
not join. And suddenly my spirits were so strongly addicted to the sinful
act (so strangely framed to the venom of venerie (that even now already I am
become the odious signature and emblem of unchastity. Yea when men would
decipher to the world a man that is lodged in lust, in one word (by way of
metaphor) they term him a Goat. Neither is this the utmost Goats Emblems of
lust.
of my grief, or of the scath that this fire-brood has done me; for he has
so searched and wrought upon my body, that I am continually vexed with the
spirit-spending ague, as the Quail Goats subject to agues. Quails to the
falling sickness. Gout, of Goat.
with the falling sickness, or else ever buckled and bended in the knees, with
the ioynt-tormenting gout (which I think borrowed his name of Goat) as now I
am, whilst kneeling I tell this story. So that damage her selfecals upon me
to sacrifice in wrath to her sister Nemesis. And (as I intend) this Waggoner of
lust shall rue my maleuolent mood before he and I depart. His knees, which I
trow are within my reach, for I will proportion his penance to the quality of
his offense, shall be the object of my banefull butcherie. Oh! ever will I pray
that the Gonagra may possess his hams, and the Sciatica his hips eternally.

Aquarius, The Water-bearer.
But opinion might persuade me, that of all men alive Aquarius the water
porter should not fume at fiery Prometheus so much, since old Oceanus the
Senior Sea-god would lovingly call him his indeered friend. Yea but Aquarius
has excellent reason for it, and will tell it as admirably, though he be
illiterate and unlearned: For (says he) in times past when fire was kept under
board like a prisoner, and dwelt far from our houses like the Antipodes,
every Conduit might flow his circle, every fountain run his dripling race,
without molest; but now since The rage of fire.
fire is grown superlatiue, and breathes naught but deuastations and
incendiaries, since it has got the knacke of translating houses into
bone-fires (for envious neighbors to warm themselves by) making them lofty
torches, as though they would Water bearers are sore emptiers of full tankerds.
outface the Moon; the pipes of our aquarie conueiance have been so drawn,
the channels of springs so sucked, that I can sound my tankerd like an empty
caske, and look into the bottom, but see not a drop of water. And assuredly
were all the waters in Europe sunk down into their kennels, yet would I laue
this thief with this relic of water in my tankerd, and send it into his
shoes with an Army of imprecations that it might prove like the Aethiop. Well
in the day time, or the Sicilian river in the night; or (at least) like the
English font that saxifies wood, and turns it into rigid stone: that his
supporters might be congealed, and his legs condensed into glassie ice, that
boys might slide his shins to shatters. Nay but there be more tormentors of
my kind coming: draw the curtains of your eyes and see.

Pisces: the Fishes.
IN good faith it is strange my Masters to my sense, a couple of fishes (I Will tell
you their names as they fall better into my knowledge) come leaping over the
fallowes like pepper in a mortar, It may be they are two Ottars.
as though revenge had sent them on her errand. The company turned their heads
back jointly at the voice of that news, like a steeple-weathercocke at the
landing of another wind: well, not many skips spent, but fortune lead them to
this Igni-fur, and being seated low by nature, they covet no higher then his
feet, Fire-stealer. Why the fishes govern the feet.
(a lesson for Ambitiosoes) which by this time were drowned in water that ran
from the Water man's pitcher, (sufficient life room for these two sworn
brothers) where ingrauing some few signs and characters in the plain visage
of the water (for fishes are the mutest creatures alive) the beholders might
gather thus much.

Fire (which this Tyrant to fishes has invented against us of An Oration writ
in water.
the moister or be) has so instructed the fish-chasers in the Art of framing
bearded hooks, and such inevitable baits of faithless forgerie, that the hare
lives not in more fear of the hound, then we of these traitorous enticing (I
may call them Italian) Sallads. Yarm^uth Herrings co^rplaine much of this. Thus
use the Fishmongers when they blow their nails.
And alas, when our captiuated corpse are yielded to those scalehunters, then
begins the Tamberlaine-Ignis to broile our bark, and carbonadoe our
well-compacted limbs. In heat has this hunter offended, but we will torment
him in another kind. Oh, let our frosten nature benumme the passages of his
veins, and let no blood of warmth have recourse to these forward feet that
T^us use the F^sh-mongers when they blow their nails.
led this wretch into this woe, whiles that our tenter-teeth armed with enuies
points, nibble on his toes, and vex his corns and kibes.

Jove thus seeing the delinquent perplexed in every part, shoring up his eye
lids above the snow-topt Caucasus (where were met whole troops and multitudes
of all kinds, except some drops of Mechanicals, and a spoonefull of old women,
that were suiueling ore the fire, spreading themselves either as actors or
spectators That's to say, the 12. Signs.
in this ruefull tragedy) hoised up these his instruments of revenge, that
took arms on them against this Traitor Prometheus (whom he left standing
still) into the greater plain of heaven, called Coelum stellatum (the
starre-coated sky) where he placed them every one in his order of revolution
and dignity of desert, composing of their bodies twelve special signs. And
because they were so far seated from the regiment of humane constitution,
Jove thought it good that they should apply their The Moon conueyes the virtue
of these constellations into our bodies. All Sublunary bodies guided by the
Moon.
power to the Lady Moon, and she should convey the virtue of their
constellation into man's body, as being nearer and better acquainted with the
same: so that euersince the Empress of the lower world soiourning in their
palaces, has a more forcible operation in our bodies constitution; that
though Prometheus and his offspring be distant from their corporal
domination, yet by their infusiue quality (as it were by an unknown
sympathy) he is still pliable to their syderiall regiment. The bleeding sores
Jove sent Aesculapius his Physician to cure, Vulcan (his Armorer) to
enfranchize and set him at liberty, and Mercury his Page to bid him void the
hal. Prometheus roused himself up (as though he had slept on Auernus bank, or
had pulled a twig of Lotos tree) gat him to his earthly tent, weighed the order
of the matter well, Jove's proceeding and his offense, and wore out the rest of
his life in some better ease and contentment. And now has my pen (like a
wandering planet) run through the circle of the Zodiac: let your favor assist
his next iourny, or it is like to be eclipsed.

A general Calendar for the common motion of the Moon in all the months of
the year.
FVll Moon in misers purses on payment day: with Landlords at Michaelmas and
our Lady day: with beggars when they are trussed full: with women when they
have great bellies: with the Moone-Tauerne in Alde^sgate street, when there is
no room in any room.

Last Quarter, with thieves at Newgate, two or three days after the Sessions:
with sick persons when the bell rings out for them: with my Almanacke, when
it is put under pie-crust.

New Moon when the good-wife sets her cheese together, or when the Tailor
broacheth a new fashion.

First Quarter when my Hostess vents her new vessel, and I clap two pots on
my new score.

The disposition of the Planets for this year.
LAdy Luna, queen of Variety, and mistress of alteration, Luna. Women more
Lunaticke tha^ man. Change, Nouiltie. Apishnesse, 3 good girls. Mercury.
shall Domineere in the minds of women, more than in all the world besides,
(the Sea excepted). Her two handmaides, (Change and Novelty) shall something
infatuate religious ears: but the sap of her Tree (Apishnes) shall color the
whole Court, City, and Country: And God shield the University.

Mercury, the god of Cousenage (as the Poets term him) ducks with the Sun,
like a Dog with a Mallard, and follows his train like an Apple-squire; but
so muffled in his cloak, and so hooded in his knavery, that a man can hardly
find him, for all the candle is so near him. He shall reign in Faires and
Markets more than in the sky: In Tradesmens shops more Cutpurses pray for him.
than in his Orb: In the minds of fetching companions, more than in his
sphaere. Buying and selling will be as good as a pair of stilts for him to
walk his stations on; And chopping and changing better than a brace of arms
to hold him up.

Venus is likely to be Retrograde, falling backward under the Venus.
earth after Sunset: somewhat shortheeld (an ordinary fault in an Hackney) I
fear me, she will prove combust with some Burnt as many of her Train are.
of the rest, after once or twice Conjunction.

Sol sits in the midst, like a Diamond in a Ring, or a Center in Sol.
a Circle, that all the other dimme-sighted stars are the lighter for him:
His Nature can hardly be imitated, it is so difficult, to be
impartially-liberall: He is likely to enlighten more eyes then I believe it.
understandings, and to heat more bodies with warmth, than minds with zeal,
yet he that gazeth on him too much may Zeal is not so hot.
hap be put blind, and he that pisseth against him, may be counted a fool for
his labor.

Mars will take horse at the Armorers shop, and never leave riding till he fall
in the Amorous lap, (Venus and He sympathize Mars. Soldiers are whoremasters.
so well together). His chiefest news is a common guest with us, that
domestical sedition will be no forreiner.

Jupiter tells me his like for Ambition will easily be found, but not a Compar
for Celestial Regiment. Those that will love as he Jupiter.
did, will not be so kind to their loves as he was. Jupiter bore Eu^opa on his
shoulders, to show that our Governors should sustain A Moral.
Europes Kingdoms. Jupiter himself was once sufficient to bear Europa on his
shoulders: God grant that all our Jupiters be able to bear up Europe against
her strong enemy, the Turk.

Saturn, the father of Melancholy, is like to domineere in the minds of those
that have lost purse and money: that have Saturn. Let such repair to Mall
Cutpurse. A tribus ad centum. More fools they. No matter.
made an ill match, and could find in their hearts to hang themselves. In
maids likewise that are tympanizde before their time, and in boys that are
sullen: In those that have lost at Lotteries, and in some that watch out their
money: In Poets when they are scuruily rewarded, or paid; and in Players when
for their bad Acts they are scuruily hissed.

Praedictions for this year.
1. MOre blazing stars will be on the morrow after Simon and Ides day next in
Cheapeside, then were seen at the conquest of Julius at Rome.

2. More Charles-Waynes in London highway than in the high Down of Heaven.

3. More Planets amongst Scholars opinions, than fixed stars.

4. More quaking Agues in cold complexions, than in the earth.

5. More shall dine with Duke Humfrey, than sup with the man in the Moon.

6. More battles fought in the fields, than in the clouds.

7. More Satin and Velvet will be taken up upon trust, and God dam mees, than
shall be paid for in seven years after.

8. More boxes on the ear shall be given at Billinsgate with a good hand and a
heart, than willingly shall be taken.

9. It is to be feared, that diverse Noble men will run the City quite
thorough and thorough, being drawn so to do, by the devilish headstrong
whorry of their Coach-horses.

10. More stinking breaths will be begotten by Tobacco this year than children.

11. If the singing men of the Chapel of Powles, and of Windsor meet this
year together in any one of the Courtcellers, I set it down infallible as
Fate, some hogshead or other must that day be knockd soundly.

12. More plucking of men by the cloakes and elbowes in Birchin lane, than
clapping men a the shoulder at the Countergates.

Some wise Justice of the Peace, that sits not upon the Bench for nothing,
auert these ills, and clap up these threating mischiefs in the close prison of
obscurity, by the vociferous doom of his inexorable Mittimus.

Rules for Health, and Profit.
PVrge when you come from a gluttonous feast within some hour after the
cramming of your guts: but if your body be foul, the Ioyners of Southwarke can
tell you how you may have the best stools.

Let blood when you have a pigge to be killed, and long to see it come in
piping hot.

Lib or geld cattle, when you see them begin to be too stonehearted.

Euacuate by vomit when the Sun in New-fish-street draws excellent French
wines, that leap up in your face.

Fell timber and wood, when you are to build, or want a good fire.

Reap corn never till it is ripe, and rather then want money, away with it to
market as fast as ye can.

Cut hair, if it be too long, or that the head is lowzy, or when you are to
go before a shauing Justice, lest he cut it for you.

The Quarters of the Year.
WINTER.
THe Winter this year will be as like a mess of mustard as Winter, a mess of
mustard.
may be; cold and moist, of a phlegmatique complexion; only hot in the nose,
by virtue of the frost-nip, but the best is and you clap a piece of bread to
your snowt, you shall find present remedy.

Diseases incident to this Quarter.
Are hunger, (a sore disease, and very dangerous to the maw). Winter diseases.
Lazines, with her three daughters, 1. Crouching in the chimney corner. 2.
Lying a bed. 3. Kibed heels.

SPRING.
THe Spring is like a piece of powdered beef, that is new Spring, a piece of
powdered beef.
skipd out of Purgatory: of nature hot and moist (paraleld to the sanguine
complexion) I mean when it is but slenderly boyld, so that the blood may flash
through the crashers, (this were enough now to make a good stomach bark) or
else the simile holds not. And surely there will be very good agreement betwixt
powdered beef and the Spring, that falling so justly in Lent: Nay Taurus
himself (the sign where the Sun dwells in the height of the Spring) shall
dominere in this Quarter, as lively as in a Butchers shop.

Diseases incident to this Quarter,
Are crawling things, being Lobsters, wrigling Eeles, and other Spring diseases.
fish, to weak and watery stomachs, and fasting days to good stomachs.

SVMMER.
SVmmer will be like the Beefes marrow-bone, (sweet and Summer, a marrow-bone.
swetty) smacking of the taste of the doublet collar: Of a fretting complexion,
being called Summer, quasi Sun-more, because the Sun is more powerful then,
than at other season.

Diseases incident to this Quarter.
Diseases that now land, are dry throats, and wet backs. For the Summer
diseases.
first, the first part of Cancer (the sign which Sol sets foot in at the
beginning of this Quarter) is very sovereign; but the latter must be beholden
to the Landerer. Choleric humors will rage now in a man's body, more than in
his picture, and a cross word may chance to cost many a servant a cracked
crown, which though it will not be taken at the Goldsmiths, yet must it be
taken to the Surgeons.

AVTVMNE, or Foli-lapse, (fall of the leaf.)
THe Harvest quarter is like in my judgment (that I may go no farther than my
mess of meat) to the pewter dish it is Fall of the leaf, the pewter dish
put in, (according to his natural operation, cold and dry) as opposite to the
flesh that lice in it, as Cato and Cataline.

Diseases
That invest themselves into men's bodies, are gluttonous Autumni^ diseases.
surfets, vp-hording of corn, raising of rents, and arresting of debtors: the
eight H.
Letter in men's joints; the old wives Griping.
Vice in young folks bellies. And thus have I anotomized the whole body of the
year, and read a Lecture upon the 4. Quarters, with what particular diseases
hang upon every Quarter; But the body of the year being great, gross, and
subject to much corruption, his breath striking all sorts of people (as being
infectious poisons them in general.) And these are other diseases which I
find will be reigning.

General Diseases to reign this year.
MAny young wenches will be subject to the falling-sicknes, More hospitals must
be built if this world hold.
crampes with pitiless convulsion will hold fast the stringes of Misers
purses. Giddiness and staggers, threaten Draymen, Porters, Tapsters, Carmen,
and Shoomakers upon Mundaies. Swellings both in men and women: And some women
greatly vexed with Pushes, but every prison horribly tormented with scabs. All
the Fiddlers that play upon wind Instruments shall in cold nipping mornings
have fistulaes in their fingers. The tooth ach, will vex young-children, at
first Fistula a pipe.
breeding of them, and young people that are to pluck teeth out, will be ready
to run mad; Comfit-makers wives shall cry out, to have a hollow-tooth stopped,
and waiting Gentlewomen, never lie still till it be drawn. Some Carbuncles
will be found amongst Goldsmiths, but they not very hotly reigning.

Inundations and most strange Ouer-flowings of Waters.
Never did the stars stuff an Almanacke with more prodigious birthes of
nature then this year is to bring forth, Sins of men grow thicker than the
Haire-bushes on the head and having filled bodies (as by the former
Hospitall-bed-role appears) with maladies, mark how the very Element of
water, (as if heaven had drunk up a second deluge to drown all) spreads
abroad his dankish and shoury wings.

For Widows that have buried 5. or 6. Husbands before, are Widows drownde in
tears.
likely this year at the burial of the last to weep out so much water, as
may serve to wash another wedding smock, but that joy has dried up both the
conduits of their eyes.

So will rich Heirs, and Executors wear mourning garments, and have Onions in
one hand, but branches of Heartsease Rich Heirs not an eye to see with.
in the other.

The Lord Majors cauldrons, brasse-pots, kettles, chafers, skellets etc. will
have their waters, and brothes flow up so high These waters do less hurt than
the Thames does at Bellings gate in men's (...).
in his kitchen chimney till they gallop so fast that they shall (in spite of
all Scummers) run over, whilst all the fatt runs into the fire. Hot-waters
threaten so to ouer-flow the stomaches offrozen blouded Bawdes and dried up
Pandresses, till they lie drowned, being dead drunk, that roaring Boys shall
take their Hack-ney Mares out of the stable, put them into Caroches, and
Terrible doings at war.
ride them to Ware, for nothing but their prouander.

Rumney-March, by all signs and tokens will meet with such an inundation of
waters this Winter, that the Summer following, What beasts are Oxen to do this.
Oxen shall go up to the knees, and sheep up to the bellies in grass; (A
fatal manger to fatten f^oles at,) for they feed themselves plumpe, and no
sooner fed full, but they go to the pot.

If all the Iaylors in and about London should this year shake off the fetters
of mortality, the learned Astrologians are of opinion, This will be a woeful
d^.
that all the Cellers and tap-houses of prisons would be drowned in
strong-beere and Ale, which from the eyes of barrels should gush out for
extreme sorrow.

Of a Dearth.
ARe there more horrors yet? yes, yes, every mischief has Wenches and
mischiefs are ever breeding.
his Twinne, and no calamity was ever borne alone: what can follow Diseases
but Inundations of waters, which are tears? And after deep ^loudes, Dearth
must of consequence play the Seruingman.

Infinite numbers therefore of sheep, calves, and oxen shall Tragedies a^ none
of the play houses. Our Constables carry Geese thither.
this year die, so that people will be in danger to be better fed than
taught. The blood of these Innocents will die red a shambles, and most
merciless cutting of throats shall there be in East-cheape. A thousand Lambs
shall be carried to the Stocks, and three times that number loose their lives
at Smithfield B^s, some of them in that butche^us massacre being driven up into
White cross (...).

Beef will be sold so dear, that an hundredth pound will not What will the
price be with a mess of mustard too. Guild H^l smoakes for this. Pillories.
Baker you hole for 9 pence.
be taken in Cheapeside for a stone; nor in any other market, 19^ 6^ be taken
for a pound. Against Simon and Iudes day such a dearth and death of poultry,
that all the Cooks in London shall sit up day and night to make coffins to
bury them in.

Bread (by the scarcity of true weights) will be so little this year, that
many a Baker will rather stand on the pillory, and have his batch marked with o
(a Goose eye, the memento of a pillory) then to give every loaf his just
bigness.

Phesant, Partridge, and Quails will be very dainty this year, Stultoru^
plen^ sunt omnia.
but Woodcocks shall fly up and down the City.

A brief and merry Prognostication, presaging good fortunes to a Set of
fundamental TRADES.
THe string of sorrow is now tuned to a merry note: Diseases, drownings,
dearths, and other drery Tragoedians, get you from the stage: And now let a
company of iouiall Citizens have a fit of mirth, to make them laugh a little.

MERCERS.
YOu that fold up Angels hues, and attire your walls with Indian coats, never
sink your souls to your shinnes, nor look as desperate as a piece of Rash
for the matter: For this year shall old plain Lads, that never went any
farther than the Letherseller Brave doings for Mercers.
for their habits, mount to your shops, wrap themselves in your royal weeds,
and scorn to dine thrice in a suite. Old Enclio^s, and old Coridons shall
persuade Chr^es, and all three The World in a n^w coat.
swear it in silk, and sweat it in satin.

Bespeake new shop-bookes in Paternoster Row; Inquire for them of an 100
quire; make a new Counter on the other side; for such a cluster of Dash
thrifts, and Scatter goods are coming up out of all Shires, that your shops
will swarm again. I could tell you (were it not needless) what a volume of
velvet Ladies trains will devour, and of which pile^, and what a bundle of
silk of Seres will be trussd up in Gentlemen's wardrobes. But not paid for.


Long Summers will discard the Draper, when every tender soul must have a
stuff gown, for cloth is too stubborn: Punkes are now no more regarded than
withered pinkes, unless All West minster can witness ^his.
the head wears a saffrond chaperoone, and the back a loose gown of light
colored silk. Not so much as Madam-Fill-thepot (mine Hostess) but must have
a changeable silk forepart, and every country less a taffata Apron; for
linen is ware for milke-maides; Perpetuana is for Pedants, and Atturnies
clerks; and Durance would be thought an excellent wear in some Virgins
petticoates. Every plain Ploddall will have a velvet neck-peece, and every old
Bawd, will have her heels guarded with sparks of satin. Every fool will
cloth himself with Rash, in all his actions; and every fantastical Ass will
be in a fustian fume at this my Prognostication, but ^di profanum vulgus.

GROCERS.
Never look as pale as your sugar-loafes (you cinnamonian Gingibers) for that
your spices groan in their bagge^ like Grocers.
a pigge in a wallet, I can tell you there are ten thousand sour countenances,
that hope all to be sweetened by the Grocer: Nay all the scoulds tongues in the
Country that were wont to rail so bitterly must be bathed (as it is decreed
by the authority Grocery war^ good physic for scolds.
of their Husbands) in the oil of your ware, that is in the syrup of sugar;
for your hotter spices, why they will fly quickly, abundance of chollericke
complexions will never be without hot mouths. And you your selves know that
every body will take pepper in the nose before he has a casket to put it in.
All the children in the world (if they be like me (will have a sweet tooth in
their head, the first that grows out of their gummes: Yea and your own
Prentises, will yerke a clod of Curranes currently down their throats, and it
may be pocket up an injury as big as a pound of sugar to welcome a friend in
a Tavern.

Old folks shall take my Ladies part,
that often use this speech,
I love the Grocer next my heart,
the Skinner next my breech.
Every Old-trot will wrap up a race to heat her cold stomach. Christmas comes
but once a year.


The gentle Nurse to still her Babyes cry,
Will hasten to your shops your plumbes to buy.
Not so much as the Cobbler, but he shall have a plumbe-pie as black as his
wax he slimes his thread with, so well stuffed that the Grocer shall
quick-smother the Butcher: and weak waterish stomakes (as tender a^ ^son
custards) shall not break a piece of flesh without Spanish trappings.

Boone-companions shall purse up a nutmegge to muster with a blacke-pot and a
tossed, and he that will drink a cup of muldsacke must needs lay up a crust
of ginger: Raisons will be much asked for, especially in an action of injury,
and he that has none of the Moon must come to you for some of the Sun: Your
starch will be in great request for stifning, and your blew will keep a band
clean an whole seauenight. If you please I can help you to those will take
your Tobacco freely, and rather I believe you.
then fail our Scullion has got such an use, he cannot make clean a pair of
boots without it, Tobacco makes him spit, and this is the reason why the
shoe-clouts look so pale in respect of the inside of a Tobacco pipe it fears
a drowning. Tobacco keeps boctes clean.


DRAPERS.
NOr you (M. Drapers) that harbor the minds as well as the mantle of sheep,
droope your fronts like a piece of Tailors have a hell for that purpose.
well basted cloth: for Gentlemen shall put more cloth in their hose now then
ever they did, and Tailors ask more lining then ever they had. You shall not
need to fear the second birth of those French Gascoynes, nor the base retire
of bases, when a cloak or horsemans coat is more comely. Good husbands will
have a cloth gown to sit by the fire in, and whip off a measure of ale; and
all our wives that smell of huswiuery must have their winter weeds from the
Draper. An ordinary cloth shall lose the nap within a month after it kissed the
back, and a good shower of rain shall wash off the wool of a new cloak.
White frize will turn the warm fashion, because twill say well against the
cold wind; and frizado the Country Ministers will buy up to make them
Cassockes, because it is warm and comely. Your yard is like to be as short as
ever it was, and you shall have many days as dark as twilight. But the maine
is this: there is a lean spindle-shanke, that looks as if he had eat never a
bit of meat since the creation, will speak to you for a thousand black, he
will help you to sell them, and you need not see him, Mounsieur Death a friend
to Drapers.
Mors, Domine Death, that peepes over the Merchants shoulder whilst he casts up
his gains, and sums up his hundreds. He has pincht a number of them by the
arms, and has given some a pluck by the shoulders. He has set some old ones
in Charons boat with one foot, and another in their beds: but Some men's misery
is other mirth.
when he wastes they must all attend him. It is a merry world with you when
many mourn, and the more wet eyes the more dry clothes.

FISH-MONGERS.
I Promise to you (you soldiers under happy Herring) that there shall be great
store of Fishmongers this year. For all Fishmongeri.
the Butcher curses our fasting days, yet shall your gettings be good: and if
he grudge that you should be permitted to sell all the year, and his shop shut
up in Quadragesima, you shall tell him that Lent is the Fish-mongers harvest,
though it be the Butchers spring. You need not fear the defect of water, for
a cold morn shall wring it out of your nose, and you take it not off with your
sleeue. A Cods head will be an ordinary dish, or a dish at an Ordinary, and a
red sprat a good breakfast for a prentise. Cods heads are picking meet all the
year long.
Stockfish and Onions will be a dish for Dutchmen, and a side of Ling will make
a double brace of Seruingmens beards wagge. The kindreds of Rufus that frequent
the grape, will metamorphise their noses into Rochet: and he that has no
facing may feed upon his cousin Greenefish. Every maid will be in love with
fish, and old men will make much of Hearing. In fine, the Fish-monger shall be
more beholding to one Recusant, then all the Puritans in a City.

GOLDSMITHS.
PRoface (you Goldsmiths) hearken to my news, and i will Goldsmiths. Goods ill
got, worse spent.
make your hearts iogge like a quike-siluer iellie with laughing. This year
shall great minerals of gold and silver burst out of misers coffers, and their
heirs shall play their pelf away at span-counter. What though the golden age
be worn out? yet the golden Art shall flourish still; and though no mines of
the earth appear to us, yet earthly minds will be plenty. Every Jack will
have a jewel in his ear, that he may defy the pillorie with the better
grace. And many elder brothers shall study Alchymie, to concoct the gold their
friends left them. Iollie Travelers, hot shots that mean to breathe in
beyond sea air, shall come to you to metamorphise their Moon into your Sun,
their shillings into Sovereigns, to clap them closein their coffers, Silver
into gold goods Al^ie.
and so geld England of her gold: And posters to Faires shall court Duccats, to
beguile thieves, and lessen their carriage.

On S. Georges day you may put out a thousand chains to grass on men's
shoulders. And you know what the Citizens will give for one to welcome his
Maiestieto London.

A blew coat without a Cullizan will be like Habberdine without mustard. Every
kitchen maid will have a marriage ring, as an emblem of her good man's love. And
the youths of the parish will offer gold at a Bridal, the metals purity
being a signet of the Brides virginity.

Negligent servants will crack their Masters plate lest it last too long: and
a little fall will make a salt look like Grantham Steeple, with his cap to the
Alehouse.

Fine wives will have a Gold smiths shop on their Livery Cubboords, though
their husbands stand up to the chinne in Wives pride undo husbands.
the Mercers Rols: and five thousand will have silver in the mouth when they
have none in the purse.

Gallant Ladies will have silver stools for fear of pollution; and every
Mawkin will have a silver bodkin to rouse a bird in the haire-bush.

Every busy wooer will present a costly necke-lace to his lovely joy, and not
a pin that came not through your fingers. Gossips at Christniugs shall help
you away with many spoones, and New years gifts (to leave out bribes) are able
to make you rich. There shall be more gilding now then honest dealing, and
Gentlemen's spurs shall speak false Latin: they shall gingle as if they were
all silver to the heel, when they are Lead at the heart.

Many Church doors shall be opened with silver keys, lest the locks be
thought baser then the bell-metall: and that which Silver keys open any door.
you thought not of, most men might climb the ladder of promotion by silver
steps. And after all this twill be good fishing with a silver hook.

SKINNERS.
OLd wives (you Pelliteers) that are as gripple of the world Skinners.
as a man shot over board of a rope, shall line their coats with your softest
furs, lest they forfet their voice to the cold. Your badge shall be worn in
ruddie Braggadotians countenance, for modesty shall hang down the head like a
twigge with a pompion at it. Our Citizens must have their destructions from the
Skinners, or else they will confound their Order; and inaulated Punies must have a
silver hair for their capes, or else Littleton will not know them.

The trotting Peddler shall summon up to your shops an Army of cunny skins,
and pick them out of the Country kitchins, Pedlars good benefactors to
Skinners.
for points, pinnes, and all to enrich you. Every simpering Sib and coy
Katherine shall round a muffe before her as a case for her nose, or a den for
her fingers in frost-biting weather; and every Oyster-wiues throat shall be
furd with Marry muffes, when cold complexions will be content to warm their
fingers in a meaner fire. Your trade must needs hold, for every
Yipsitaptrapolonion will maintain an excellent good facing. But you must not
when you epsy an hard-fauoured Gentleman with a bugled cheek, or a chinne
like a vizard, pace down your row, with cry, will you buy a good face, will
you buy a good face Sir? Twill make him hereafter go five miles about rather
then grace your street any more with that face he has, as bad as it is.

TAILORS.
I Presage (you Limb trimmers) a shipfull of new fashions Tailors.
shall sail into our coasts out of the Isle Lunaticke, and you dapper Lannoes
shall make at the footmans armor so valiantly, Tay lors pray for new fashions.
that they shall pierce it in an hundred places. Your snippers never looked so
bright as they are this year, and your goose shall so be counted the
valiantest lad in a Country, for that he can make many Drapers shrink. I
foretell a great rot amongst the present fashions, they shall change as fast as
the Moon for her heart; for mine own part I never loved them since my horse
died of them. It Is like to prove a very windy spring, and by that means many
Venetians will be blasted out behind: every one rub one till the world is out
at the elbowes; and they that use wrestling must needs to the Tailor. Every
schoole-boy that plays the truant should not want a Ierkin. And he that
learnes more knauerie then virtue, should have a breech or two. An Birchin.
breeches a good wearing for boys.
Ocean of Indentures will not serve you for measures, and as much thread as
would compass the world will be stitcht up in a twelve month.

Rich men will be ashamed hereafter to transport their hose so often to the
Botchers, for fear they purchase creepers; neither will there be any more such
old miserrimoes, that when they hear one knock at the door, will clap on
their gown (their slouens cover) lest their patched rags appear to the
world: I know you shall take measure of them for a new suit first. Finally, a
long waste will be much in request if you can frame it, because a short body is
obnoxious to a stinking breath, the mouth and tail are too nigh.

HABERDASHERS.
Never indenture your foreheads soruefully (you bonny bonettonists) for you see
the fashion of steeple crowns (a sore Haberdashers.
waster of felts) is already past. There is an Ambassador making for England
now, so fraught with quaint humoralities, and attireable sesquipedalities, that
he will set all the noses of your now worn bonnets utterly out of joint. But
do you hear me, never doubt of the fashion of your blocks for all this,
rather when a swad-swaind Gentleman shall amount into your cranny-lighted
shops, and call for an hat of the Courtiers block, exonerate The Courtiers
block.
your press, out with a Spaniardo, and clap it on his coxcombe, and swear an
oath as long as your tongue, this hat is excellently blockt Sir.

For the state of your trade, your fools caps will this Summer fly all from
your stals, that stuck there this seven year, to Fools Caps.
keep the wit of adle pates from freezing, and many old boys shall drink
till their caps crack. White hats will take slurre quickly, for their color
is labecutable, and pure black shall moulder to dirt, for that was burnt on
the block.

Citizens wives shall shift their Taffaties often, for that the low portals
knap them out at the crown: and all my black sisters must get them broader
brimmes, for these will not hide their forehead faults. A shower of rain shall
put a paste-boord out of square and order, and a little drop will cockle your
silk, as rising for revenge, if it come from a gutter. Five hundred Virgins
shall be married in their velvet potlids, and but ten millions Brides.
of blowses in their Felt stoole-pans. Oh how many Brides will measure their
brain on their wedding eve in your shop, and he that roofes not his wife under
one of your shelters on his marriage day, shall be trust up in wool, and sent
into Burgundy.

Prentises shall wear no more caps, for it makes them look Prentises flatcaps.
like costards, and he that fronts it with straw, must be content also to lie
in straw. But the best friend to men of your mould will be mannerly courtesy
and obsequious complements. Two friends shall not pass in the street without
an interchange of vailes, nor old men see Cardinal candle cast his eye upon
the Cardinal Candle.
table without reverence to his charity. As for those of your name that are
conversant with small wares, they shall fly out of your shops like foul words
out of a thanklesse person.

SALTERS.
ANd as for you (M. Salters) you will flourish this year, for Salters. White
herring, Hot Summer, Fresh beef, the 3 pillars of Salters.
white herrings, an hot Summer, and fresh beef, shall stand as stiffly under
you as any three legs under the bright trifoot in the world. All the Brewers
have sworn by the pearly cognizance that barley corn gives his Pages in their
faces, that there shall be no more broom foisted into the vate in stead of
your hops. Fatal cords will be busily set on work, and hempen cawdles will be
common physic for desperate persons. Mice and Rats will gnaw the Good-wifes
yarne, and hands and feet shall rub out her linen, so that need will make her
trot to your Worships for flax and tow, and thrift will make her set her maid
to the distaffe. Musicians will be counted scrapers and crowders if they buy
not some of your rozen. And had not our sow cast her farrow, it should have
gone hard but we would have had some of it to vnhaire a fat pigge. Ships will
leake and they be not linde with your pitch. In a word, the wheel and the
Brewer, the Shepherd and the Mariner, will make you now or never.

IRON-MONGERS
YOu that draw your line from the loins of Iron-side, you shall have harder
doings than ever you had since your hammer Iron-mongers.
told his master what his trade was, and I think an hard world is that which
you desire. Such an iron age is now on foot, and such a crew of copper
consciences, that to sheath a blade in a man's corpse will be counted voluntary
valor, and a hard A hard world with Ironmongers.
heart will be thought a good spirit, steel to the back. Opulent rich
clunch-fists as lie in as much fear of the pilferer as a Bucke of the
wood-knife, and to prevent the purloiner they shall gird the ribs of their
chests with girths of your iron, and lace the belly of their money-tombes with
laces of your weauing.

He Is mad that lays up gold of Ophyr
In a wodden lined cofer.
Boys are as like to break glass windows as ever they were, and that will
make men speak for your wyres: and thieves are as like to break prison, and
that will make the Jailer sue for you iron to bolt them: a warming pan will be
counted excellent physic for a feather-bed, and an iron cradle very good
authority to hold up sea-cole. My gossip Gooseling must needs have a fair
pair of Andirons to garnish her hall against her bellies abed; and all the
wives in the parish shall beg as much of their sweet-hearts at midnight. All
the Hobbinols of the Country shall arm their high shoes with your metal to
encounter with London stones. And there shall be so much scratching between
Susan Scold-out and Tib Tattle-basket, that I am persuaded the single combat
will make you sell all your nails.

VINTNERS.
A Caske full of comfort for you (crimson-nosd Vintners) Vintners.
that quilt your guests apparel with the best bombast: you shall not need to
take much care for those fellows that war so long under the Colors of Sack
and Sugar in the Reareward, that now they are like to make an vproare, and cast
up their accounts after the shot: never fear any foul play in this case: for
when sergeant Grape has arrested any of these Sym suck-spiggots of an action of
liberty, then shall gaffer giddy hale them to prison, where Somnus the Iaylor
shall shackle their Giddy, the Constable.
hammes, till the fume of Bacchus his anger be over, and then you may save
their credits and your own with a grace. This year all the Catoes in the
world that never used wine but physic, shall take it down at their diet as
lively as Tricongius, and all our abstemious youths at the sight of Qui medice
vinit misere viuit, shall turn pure swash, and visit your Tauernes at
midnight. Many Physicians shall set it down as an Aphorism, that a cup of
wine (as the fellow said of butter) shall be good Praise of wine.
for any thing: old excellent for old men: It shall inspire more wit into the
Scholars brain, than all the Muses can from their fountains: make a Lawyers
tongue resound like a mill-clack, and enrich a Courtier with a neast of
complements: it shall make a Clown step into the fashion, a beggar take the
wall of a Gentleman, and a coward go into the field with a fencing German:
Nunquam nisi potus ad arma, never fight but when thou art foxt shall be the
Soldiers motto: arcana recludit, wine vntwines hidden mysteries, shall be the
Poets poesy, and a cup of Hipocras shall be the best stomacher for a sweet
heart. The benefit of Hippcras stomachers.
a good stomach shall be the grapes attribute, the exiler of melancholy shall
be the title of the Vintners hogshead, and the reviving of the fly-blowne blood
in old men, shall be lyens his ho^. Diverse friends shall meet iumpe at a
Tavern, that were almost worneout of memory, then must a quart of wine play
the Ambassador to renew the league of friendship between them. Sack and Claret
are like to rise in your houses, if the parties stomach be not sound: And
sobrieties light shall be clean extinguished with your liquor.

CLOTH-WORKERS.
Were not for two weathers, your trade would be down, Cloth-workers. Two sort
of weathers uphold Clothwork^rs.
the first from the sheepefold, the last from the Sun: but both shall
succeed well, if rot and the rain cross not my Calendar and prove your bane.

Tush, Mr Furbushers, the moth will set you a work as long as the Ram shall
have a warm coat, and dusty lazines shall send ware to your shops: as long as
winter shall be fronted with frost, flatterers shall claw their prodigal
patrons like your currying cards, and envious varlets will stick on men's coats
to prick their proceedings like a burr. A cozoning nip shall sheepsheare a
cunny of his coin, and poor men may be sure to be pressed to the quick. Many a
Chuffe will steal a nap by the fire side, and many a crafty mate will raise
wool out of a hired bare coat.

DIERS.
ANd for you (Diers) your colors shall be washed off this year better than
ever they were, your dye shall be so Dyers.
slightly grounded, yet as well beloved as ever they have been, men shall be
so light minded: A good blast of wind shall blow away a seawater green, and
a forty miles journey will banish a garden violet; purple in grain shall
challenge a ruby nose, and a brown blew a Tobaconists inside. Maidens-blush
shall be counterfeitly worn, and gall imbrued green shall be a color A true
Maidons blush, a color hard to be found.
for a malicious pine-soule. Pursuers of the aspin quaking Buck shall image the
grass, to resemble forrestry: mourners shall court their sable hues, their
Ebon backs to imitate night, woe, and death: and Divines their Crulean sky
color, to put them in mind of their Embasidie: Every creature shall have his
several colors, and not so much as the Russet coats that were wont to be
worn on Plow-mens backs as they came from the Lambs limbs, but they shall
this year have a lick at your dye pan. In a word, sick men and Dyers shall be
dying all the year long. Dying all the year.


BREWERS.
AL Royston fields (Brewers) shall be barley this year, you Nectar-boyling
Brewers: and the best part of my garden Brewers.
shall be hops, and all to support the vsuer of good liquor. A thousand brace
of black iacks shall duck to the Malt vate, like the Friar to the Pope; and an
whole army of Rozen Canns shall anatomize the corpse of barley corn, and all
to enrich the patron of good potation: Fill your barrels full with heart of
oak, and flower of the field, then will they untruss an hoope, and laske like
a squirt, so shall the maids fawcets fly from the taphole, and this will make
them trot to the fountain of liquid liquor again. Every Market town shall be
better furnished Alms and Ale have not one entertainment.
with houses for Ale than for Alms, and that village shall be counted a
dunghill of Puritans, where there is never a tapstering of been bouse: small
beer shall be for dyet-keepers, but strong twang shall prove as good as
bagg-pudden (meat, and drink, and cloth). The best medicine for the fleas will
be a cup of merry-goe-downe, and the only help to clap the door upon sorrow,
and shut him out, will be a draught of March beer. Cares are drownde in cups.
The merry Physicians counsel to an odd patient of his shall be the very pitch
of Paracelsians diet: the first draught will wash a man's liver, the second
increase his blood, and the third satisfies his thirst: And all the world
knows what the Country-mans bond is,

A pot of Ale still the assurance does hatch, Good wa^.

And serves for the Scriuener to bind up the match.
The water in Netherland will taste of the bracke, and most of those Flemmings
would taste of our English beer: Harvest men will be as dry as the Arabian
sand, and a dozen of haytossers will quickly toss down a bunge of moisture:
salt meat will be a great dish if it come to the board in a Charger, and that
will draw down liquor: Red herring will prove a prologue to an hungry fast,
and that will work for the Brewer. Monsieur Domingo Knight of the malthoop,
has enacted against Sippers and Sparrowinchers, but those that take off their
liffe by quantus shall be dubbed on a barrel head: There will be one in a
parish New Dubbing.
shall piss as much against the wall in a year, as half his neighbors spend
in three. Other of your customers shall carry as much as your horse: But those
that drink in an empty cup may chance to have sore lips for their labor.

LETHER-SELLERS.
YOu that cloth your shops with cattles coats, be not all a mort, as dumb as
your hides: for all our Park vermin are like Lethersellers.
to fall into paste, and our Bucks head into pots to pleasure your faculty,
and wardrope your shelues. A buffe ierkin will be a lordly wear, and a pair
of buskins a preservative against the gowt. All tradesmen that occupy with the
letherne Apron shall sue unto you, so that your vocation may be called the
forepart of most Mechanicals; and many Cutpurses shall nip those foreparts to
make you vent your lether: our boys in Lent shall put Cutpurses loving to
Lethersellers.
off and scrape to your Worships for a mettle to course their tops, and most of
the world will turn Adam and Eve, and put on mortality: the owners of our
country will be new belted against Christmas, and the plow-ioggers of our town
must smell of your Counter at Easter: To conclude, ample indentures, large
coppies, and drum heads will metamorphise your skins, and you will let them.

PEWTERERS.
FRom great and gorgious swilling (you pewter John's) issues a world of
leaking, and I know every man will purchase a Pewterers.
pispot to prevent the chollick, or else he must spout out at the window, and
that may prove perilous to the vryne, if the descent be violent. At faires and
marts young married wives must look out for their vessels, and all the year
shall Francis Truge wear your buttons mettle before him. Many a good bitt
shall be turned in your platters, and many a mouth shall pronounce (when the
feast comes marching in the Pewterers livery) that you are the vpholders of all
good cheer. Basins and Ewers shall reviue into the fashion, as a pewter
standish proves profitable for a Scribe, twill be somewhat chargeable in the
melting, but foyst in the leaden lubber, and it will pay your pains taking.
Sea-cole fire this year shall melt a million of dishes, and the negligence of
servants shall put many a pot in the pillory: for pewter shall be the softest
naturde gentleman, he shall sink every blow, and take thought inwardly at
every knock. In sum, This is most true.
a pewter pot of Ale with a tossed in his belly will quench a man's thirst better
then a silver tankard with nothing in it.

BARBER-SVRGEONS.
YOu cunning Cut-beards, never let your stomachs quail to suck your living
out of festred sores, for lucri bonus est odor, Barber-Surgious.
Silver has a sweet sound, ask Vespasian the Emperor else: for your comfort,
a proud match at football shall send many a lame soldier to your tent, and a
fiery fray in Smith-field shall bring many a bloody companion to your shop, the
fencing schools will serve to keep your hand in ure, but the bragging prizes,
an Bragging prices.
hundred pound to a pigs-turd, will put chinck into your purses; the French
something shall line your Squirrell skins brim-full, and stretch the strings,
and so thoroughly choke their throats, that they shall speak no more then an
ouens mouth rampir'd. Oh the income, that is, Neopolitan shall bring in an hot
summer Neapolitan Incomes.
to you, and it were not for tobacco which is a preuenter, I think Chirurgians
would be the only purchasers in London: Joints shall be ill knit, and Gentles
shall cut their fingers, sanguine complexions shall swarm, and letting of
blood will be common. But the spider shall intercept something of you again.
He shall be Phlebotomist to the fly if she come in his net, and the fleas must
be let blood at Mid-summer for God a mercy. Tavern quarrels shall find you
Sunday-fare all the Sundays in the year, and lazy Ignauoes that sit still
and putrify like a mud-sinck, shall fall into your hands for fellons. And this
shall attire you from Goodfriday to Maundy-thursday, cursed and crabbed Masters
shall Cracked crowns beget silver crowns.
send many a cracked crown to your cure, and the toothache shall find you
beef for your house your life time: young beards shall pullulate and multiply
like a willow, if worm bark them not; howsoever, shauing will be good to make
a down spowt. The picky deuant (I presage) will be the cut, and a pair of
muchatoes that will fence for the face, shall be the tantara flash seacole.
Fume shall besmudge our Neatoes, that they shall go to the Barbers ball oftener
then to Church, and every nice Bacheler shall entreat a lick with the Barbers
apron, and a dash with his rose-bud, to smell odoriferous in his Mistress
nostrels.

ARMOVRERS.
THe foresound Chirurgian, and Vulcanian cres fist sacrifice Armourers.
alike for quarrels, but bellum, bellum, war, war, would fit the Armourers
hand better then a pair of gloves of twenty pound, yet in prancking peace, the
canker and rust taking the Armourers part, so bedent the Soldiers livery, that
men must seek unto this ward-part for amendment, or else prepare their purse
for fresh ones. But I take it, I speak it to the encouragement of this brood
of Mulciber, who framed a child's shield, and Aeneas his armor, that within a
while, arma viramque cano will be the worlds poesy. Men's bodies are but of
earthly mold, but their minds taste of fiery fury, a little word will kindie
war, and the Spaniards selfe-conceipt must have its issue. It is comfort
enough for you that sweat in the wardrobe of war, to foret^l that men shall
be proud, for pride is such a manly mother, that Iuno-like she can beget Mars
without a father. Armor of proof will be in great request at the tilt, and
fearful frogs will down with their dust for good brest-plates. An helmet
will be an excellent wear for him that has little wit, and a gantlet a good
guard for a tender fingered combatant. Hares in helmets.


BAKERS.
NVrses this year, you little fisted Bakers, shall crum their infants milk
with your white bread, out of all measure, Bakers.
and a white crust shall make no more teeth bleed, to fright little ones from
the love of it. Though daily Deluers mumble on a brown crust all the year,
yet they shall sweeten their chaps with a white loaf at Christmas, and though
the vulgar shall brouse on your bran, as cheaper in the purse, yet most will
desire Christmas loaves.
your loaves like your boulters, as whiter in the hand: besides, the Physician
will tell you that is hard of digestion, when this will nourish out of all
exclamation. Poor men shall not have money enough to bargain with the
meale-man, and that will make them take it of you by the penny, and those that
will be wealthy, shall have no skill to heat an oven, and that will set your
boys aworke to carry it to their doors: white puddings shall White puddings
grate upon many a loaf, and soppets in white broth shall drown many a
dozen. I will be thought the travelers Autidote, to let his tongue play at
tennis with a crust before he drink, and as good physic as any in Galen,
stomachum concludere sicco, to trusse up the stomach with a dry bit.
Shoo-makers shall lose A crust good physic.
their predominant armor, of a barrel of beer to an halfepenny loaf, and
Tailors shall be patterns and presid ents to sober men, a bushel of wheat to
a tankard of beer, lest they cut their fingers when they are whitteld. Lastly,
bread shall be Beer a puffer. Bread a nourisher.
concluded the better nourisher, and beer but a puffer: bread shall show it
self the honest binder good loose livers, when liquour shall be known but a
loose fellow, and thus farewell Mr Baker.

CHANDLERS.
FIne Ladies that set by their sents (you lamp-wrights) will Chandlers.
make such a face at the sight of a tallow-Chaundler, as if their holly-day
ruff were on fire: fah! what a gross light is this? in truth Sir Timothy, it
condenses the wit, and stupefies the brain; pray let our flames be wax, and
this will make the waxer shrug, and say this geere will cotton one day. It is
like to prove a very dark winter (except Lady Luna borrow her face) and you
know it is hard borrowing of faces (though Hypocrites might spare their
counterfeit ones) and torches will be another star in the streets; besides,
every knock at a post will dash out a rib, and then where dwells the Taperer.
Tailors shall spend searing Tailors help Chandlers.
candles beyond your thoughts, by reason of the abundance of extrauagant stuffs
that shall act on their shop-stage, and virtuous virgins must have a wax-candle
with them to the nocturnall lectures, Puritans love virgin-wax.
yet verily. But oh the long nights that shall devour you pale-bodied blazers
(you marrow-melting Luminists) and the windy chincks that shall laue out the
candle with the great wick, how many thieves think you will steal into the
tallow, and play Chaundlers make ill husbands.
prodigal with the work-mans light, and how many good husbands will card it
all night by the help of your faculty.

I would not have you look as if you were grinding mustard, and took thought
for the utterance. I tell you, salt fish and powdered beef will make your
Querne fly about like a windemill in a tempest. The Butcher must sell you his
tallow at a reasonable rate, for fear of the rats in the winter, and the
summer heat shall melt it off from his stall into the kennell, and there is for
your buying. Honest men will be as scarce as none fingred Honest men as scant
as good Tobacco.
and vnsophisticated tobacco; and knaves (you know) must have good store of
soap to scour their shirts, or they will never be clean. Many cast volumes
will fall into your employment, your doing will be so great: but forbear I
pray you to wrap your half penny wares in these leaves of mine.

GIRDLERS.
NOw you waste-circulating Girdlers, you that are the best in our age for
Tutors and Guardians, you can keep men Girdlers.
in compass, better then all the counsel of Love, or the authority of Law can
do: the time-trodden proverb, will doubtless stretch himself on his
startvps again, male cincti, male sancti, ungirt, Vugirt, unblessed.
unblessed: and that will make men seek for the Girdlers bless, to avoid some
unfortunate curse, and those that be made Praecincti (as Silla said Caesar was)
shall be counted shrewd underminers of the commonwealth. Licentious and
loose-liuing will be as much abandoned as may be. And when a man is well girt,
he shall think himself far warmer, which will be as good as an Orator to
persuade men to the Cincturer: great Gashimargoes shall prove wiser then
geese, and who are light in the middle, cause they wear no girdles, and shall
gird in their paunches, for fear they run about the house, and fine wastes
shall make much of a girdle, to keep their bodies in fashion.

CUTLERS.
NOw (you Cutlers) how many shauers will be sharp set trow ye? he that claps
him down at a board without a little Cutlers.
sword in his sheith may chance to rise an hungerd, or be set upon with the
Gentlewoman: what Sir have you never a knife, then cut my finger: old men shall
make as much of a knife as of one of their best teeth; and your good Huswife
shall so love Signior Cultello she will not suffer him to be absent from her
side: The hie-waies will prove peremptory and therefore a weapon will be
Signior Cultello
a good Companion, and the Thief that ruins the Country Ladde will let him
ride like a freeman and he but swear and discourse to him of his irons. The
Soldier that lies on the bare ground ready to be congealed with cold, shall
think his side very warm if he have the Cutler by him. And he that delights
in blunt metal may cut his foremans throat with a packsaddle.

BUTCHERS.
AN hungry year (you carnal Caruers). I know you shall have, for the
conjunction of heat and moisture (in the Butchers.
kitchen of disgesture) foretells no less: and he that has no stomach to his
work, or not a piece of a heart to meet a man in the field, shall have as
good a stomach to his prouant as a starud brislebacke to his waste, or a
croopeard coarser to his mil-brusd beans. Wolner (that cannon of gluttony)
shall revive again, Wolner the great Eater.
and those that lived by love, and feed upon the air, shall fall to their
victuals, and furbish their trenchers. A piece of powderd biefe will make a man
as strong as a cable, and a target of veale Targets of vealeare excellent
weapons.
will be as good to defend a sick body from dying, as a dead crow to defend
our corn from the living; pottage that will furre the ribs (an intch thick)
are mere restoratiue, and the best fast-killer in a morning will be one of
your marrow-bones: mutton will be like a ripe medler, or a false Lover rotten
at the liver, but never pine at the spleen for it smells of the bloudpot: keep
your own counsel, set a smooth face and a round face upon it, and then there
is never a Steward that sharkes in your shambles will smell out the
putrefaction. The Tanners will prevent the worst, and ply you with pledges
aforehand for your hides, but keep not back the horns in any case for that's
ominous. Furriers and Glouers will put money into your hands as warm as
Furriers and Glouers the Butcher prays for.
wool for your sheep skins, but for the love of a chitteriin see you hold
your beasts entrals at a clean price, and make the Tripe-wiues pay sweetly for
them, or I protest in the presence of an hogs countenance i will never feed
more on them. The countrey-farmers wives will swappe with you quickly for their
calves, because they draw away their milk, and mar their good markets. And
the Grasiers will send you their big bon'd-beeues upon trust if you pay them
largely, and keep your day truly.

SADLERS.
I shall never beat it into your brains (you horse-rigde-cushioners) Sadlers.
what care men in general will take for soft Saddles, least their shrewish
wives get the vantage of the Proverb (it was Socrates speech when he was in
iayle) He loves not his wife that loves not his tail. Coaches are like to have
a downfall this year if the horses be frantic at aside of a ditch; and
penny fathers will say it is fond to be vexed with a brace of Iades when one is
sufficient to tire a man; durty passes shall so bespot the complexion of a
velvet saddle, that if your Prentises were horses they would break their
halters with laughing, and the dustie canker so spoil the Silke-man that he
must be brushed till he be bald again. A voider for those fellows that will
ride flat breecht on a swains pannell; I do not think that you shall take
one man (that has but a dream of wealth) in that trick of clownery this
year. Why I tell you every substantial web in a parish that has a seat of
his own in his Church shall buttocke a saddle, and adorn his pranser with
your stately trappings. And Iockie that rod on his Courser (hair to hair)
shall suddenly Iockie a Gentleman now.
leap into his tuftaffity. Horses, will be headstrong as unnurtured
Lobcockes, and snap their bridles in pieces as fast as hops; the powerful
prouender shall make them swell in the belly like a sullen girl in the cheek,
or a wench after toying and that will crack girts apace: but for conclusion
diverse women shall saddle their poor Husbands backs, and make plain Women
saddle men.
Ninny hammers of Noddies; and the Lenten-faced Usurer shall bridle our
prodigal spendalls most miserably.

CARPENTERS.
YOu humane harbour-raisers, you are the only Householders Carpenters.
in these days of doe-no-good: for were it not that you held up the house
without by your faculty, it might well fall down within for want of
hospitality, well there be a bundance of rotten doors in London, and they must
all fall into your chimnies Hospitality dwells no where.
shortly; for we must not look for another Orpheus to build a City with his
harmony, our Musicians will never do the like to that Theban; I tell you many
ouer-leaning buildings will lack a little of your help, yet some of them that
bow to my Lord Mayor when he rides by their front, and lean into the streets
as though they would shake him by the hand, or look the farther after him, may
stand as they do to teach capround Slouens agilitie in the knee. As the beds
head rises, quoth he that was wont to lay his bags there, our houses must
stand, and as I store up my wealth I will story up my Chambers.

Away (quoth Mounsieur Prodigo) with these base cottages of Philemon and
Baneis, my generous blood cannot brook such Two poor people of whom Ovid
writes.
a degenerous lodging, down with wood, and up with my older oaks, stone is
too dampe, and brick is too cold: all this tickles the Carpenter, I would be
loath to tell him too much of his joy, lest with his laughing he fall from his
building; and mar the fashion of his perpendicular: You shall not need to
see the topgallant the Tyler for he will leave many a crack in the crown of an
house for his own commodity, and that will make timber rot like a muck hill,
and you know that the decay of a Commonwealth is first in the state, the
defect of my body first in my head, and the ruin of an house first in the
roof. Finally, many things will be exceedingly out of order, and there will be
much use of your line, rule, and square.

SHOOMAKERS.
You Will laugh till you stink again (you Shoomakers) to Shoomakers.
hear your selves called eternal Constables, and that (without control) you
can cast the best Gentleman (...) the Land into your stocks, only upon his
suspicion that he would have a fine Gentlemen put into the Shoomakers stocks.
foot, or means not to tread in his old steps. I protest, I think you are
able to make a greater fleet in a rainy-day, then the King of Spain in his
whole age, for all his fleeting. This is in your shops an excellent Memento
(make but use of it) of your mortality. Wet weather will be as good as a
purgation, for dry leather, and boys spurne-point will grate out shoes as fast
as a Cook can bread. Our Sirs that want shoes must trash out their boots, and
if they be in love with the fire to night they must be in league with you to
morrow. Those that would be taken for Gentlewomen must sue for shoes that
creake like a frogge, but our shrewd-Dames will have dombe bottoms, that they
may rush upon their maids as twere out of an ambush. As long as hats and shoes
shall be slipped on with horns, your Trade shall be Hats and shoes pulld on
with horns.
extant, and as long as you clappe the furre to tender Virgins soales, you
shall maintain the name of the gentle craft.

PAINTERS.
YOu Beauty-shadowers, that rob the rainbow of her colors, and disrobe the
golden-garden of her Orient spots, Painters.
and flowers; your craft shall have his spring all the year, and your Art his
flourish all your life. The Parasite that gives the dugge to humor, shall
paint it in soothing to his Patron, the light Lover in phrasing to his Mistress,
and the undermining cunnicatcher in complements to his cunny: The impotent
debtor shall paint it in protesting to his Creditor; the fetching Salesman
Exellent painting.
in praising to the buyer, and all the world besides shall paint their bosom
carriage with hypocrisy. Alas men are so frosty natured that they cannot be
thawed but by viewing the colors of the playing Satyrs, and the coupling
Nymphs behind the curtains; Heauens-smith with the skies fair one (chaste
Lucrece) and her foe in a chamber; the banished Pardan and his pheare in a cave:
this puts life into the beholders corpse, and coin into the Painters
calueskinne, while he lays colors on the table, they gild his fist, and while
he makes shadows for them he himself may sit in the sunshine. The ribs of
tottring houses must be coated with a new paint against the christning of the
next child, and a thin wall would have a Painters skin, to shroud him from
the blast of Boraeas: A colored cloute will set the stamp of decorum on a
rotten partition, and a pretty picture will hide a hole in a hall out of all
question; my Lord Majors posts must needs be trimmed against he takes his oath.
And the Vintners lattises must have a new blush, and all these will make you
suck your pensils to the bone. Oh but our sweet faced Gentlewomen will keep
your profession in great request; our lacke-lookes and barren-beauties will
uphold it for ever, when the old Baude like a green apple parch't in an Oven,
or the Italian coulorist with his new cast face shall present this good
complexion. Why then to painting speedily.

When Natures birth appears lame,
To aid with Art I count no shame,
But the smoke of my lungs will melt the vermilion.
And then more work for the Painter.
The winding up of the Cleue.
THus have you here the Zephyrall and Spring part of your destinies. Twere a
task beyond all time to suffer any Waggon-wheele, to press every lands end.
Only if you pardon this precursion, it may so happen, that as I have here
chattered of your vernall age, so I may hereafter tell you of your winter
blasts, of the rigorous tempests that shall beat the blossoms from your
blooming plants. But for this time I desist.

So Tradesmen fare you well.

Yet before we shake hands at parting, let us as Country Chapmen going from
their Innes in a morning, give one another the Basilus on horseback, with a
cup of white wine and sugar, if it be Summer: but now I remember, it being the
fall of the leaf, and trees beginning to stand like tottered roagues half
naked, a cup of mulld Sack and Ginger is better for the stomach. Take this
therefore next your heart. I know that to catch riches in a net, you fish in
all the wealthy streams of the world, besides the broad sea. But is it not
more safe for you to angle standing on the land? And what land is more
peaceable then your own? And upon your own, where shall you meet less foul
dealings then at Faires? To the fairest of Faires I wish you therefore to turn
your horses heads. Many Faires are in England, and (being wenching fellows as
you are) I think not but you have set up your standings and opened boothes in
all or the best of them. But my Prognostication speaks of other Faires, to
which if traveling, your purses be ever the warmer linde, stand wondering no
more at the ill-fac'd Owl, but say she has a piercing eye to catch Mice in
such corners. And so in the name of Minerua (Patroness of Handicrafts) set
forward, for now I proclaim my Faires.

Faires in England.
A Fare at Westminster bridge every forenoone of all the 4 Terms in the year:
And in the afternoones of the same days, a Fare at Temple stairs: And these
Fares (no bawdy boothes in them) are kept in Wherries.

A Fare on the Bankside when the play houses have two penny tenants dwelling in
them.

A Fare at Black Friars, when any Gentleman coming to that place, desires to
be a landed man.

A Fare is sure to be at cold Harbor, when a fresh delicate whore lies there,
cum priuilegio.

Bartholmew Fair begins ever on the 24 of August; but Bartlemew-babies are
held in London (in men's arms) all the year long.

A Fair at Cuckolds Haven cuery S. Lukes day; but all that pass that way have
not gilded horns, as (then) the Haven has.

The Fair kept heretofore at Beggars bush, is this year removed and held in
the prisons about London, and in some of the streets of the City too.

A Fair of Horses at Rippon in Yorkshire this year, and every year a Fair
of A^ at Layton Buzzard.

A Fair of Sowes on Michaelmas day at Blockly in Worcestershire, but your best
pigges and fattest porke are at our Lady Fair in Southwarke.

A Fair at Rumford for Hogs every tuesday in the weeken but your fairest
headed Oxen are fed in London.

A fair Wench is to be seen every morning in some shop in Cheapside: And in
Summer afternoones the selfsame Fair opens her Booth at one of the
Garden-houses about Bun-hill.

A Fair pair of Gallows is kept at Tiburne from years end to years end:
And the like Fair (but not so much resort of Chapmen, and Crack-ropes to it)
is at St Thomas a Watrings.

The High ways of England, how they lie; and how to travel from one place to
another.
NOw because there are no Faires, but they are kept in some certain places:
And that no place can be gone unto, but by knowledge of the ways, I have
therefore chalked out here some of the most notorious ways in the Kingdom,
for the benefit of galled-toe-Trauelers, thereby the sooner to come to their
Innes, viz.

The way between York and London, is just so many miles as between London
and York: It has diverse times bin ridden in a day: so that by my Geometrical
dimensions I find it but a days journey: Yet the Post-masters of the North
swear it is a great deal more.

The way between Charing Cross, and not a cross to be found scarce in 20
purses, for one that passes by, is to be tried by many a Gallants pocket, with
yellow band, fether Pendant-Reguardant, and cloak lined with velvet, and
therefore here I spare to speak of so poor a thing.

The way between the two Counters in London may be trauelld in as short a
time, as one of the Varlets there ventures his soul for money, and that's much
about a quarter of an hour, or half at most.

The way to prove the taking of any purse, (be it never so full) and to stand
in that quarrel even to the death, is to go first to Newgate, and then to
Tiburne.

The way to be an arrant Ass, is to be a mere University Scholar.

The high way to Bedlam, is first to set forth at Westminster Hall, and there
to be undone in 4 or 5 Terms by corrupted Lawyers.

Between stark drunk, and reasonably sober, is much about 4 hours sleeping:
but some that have traveled those ouerflowing Countries, say it is sometimes
more.

The way to heaven is to walk with a good conscience; he that rides without
it goes vily out of the way, and ten to one if ever he gets thither.

The way to Hell, is clean the contrary way to Heaven; the one turns a the
right hand, the other on the left.

GOOD DAYS.
1. Not one Whore in all Westminster. 3. Not one Knave in Longlane. 4. Three
Catchpolls cast into the Thames. 8. All that walk in Paul's dine to day. 10.
Nobody hangs in Barbican. 14. Atturneyes get no money. 15. Not a bribe taken
this Term. 17. My Husband is gone a ducking. 18. Bobb for Eeles now or never.
20. A cony for nothing. 23. I hole for 9. pence. 26. Turn-bull Street full of
Puritans. 28. The Scriuener ith'pillory. 30. Room for the Baker.
BAD DAYS.
2. Quarter Sessions. 5. Farewell and be hanged. 6. The dore-keepers steal. 7.
Globe a fire. 9. Cockpit plucked down. 11. The play is hissed at. 12. My wife
is out of her letters, and falls to joining. 13. Not a woodcocke to be had for
love or money. 16. The Chamber-maide is bed-ridden. 19. He hunts close, yet has
lost his hare. 21. I can read my Husbands name in his little boys horne-booke.
22. My maid is poisoned with a pudding. 24. His Evidence is burnt, yet the
Seal is saved. 25. A cuckold by Westminster clock, and that goes true. 27.
You are pepperd. 29. Ale-tap-wiues in loose gowns. 31. None of the Guard
drunk.
These 31. Good and Bad days, may wait as Pages upon all the Months in the
Year, and the rather, because our badde days are still more in number than
our good ones (as here they are). Also, because where the days are Bad, none
can be worse than these; and where they happen to be Good, few better than
these.

FINIS.

