THE PLEASANT COMOEDIE OF Patient Grissill.

As it has been sundry times lately played by the right honorable the Earl
of Nottingham (Lord high Admiral) his servants.

LONDON. Imprinted for Henry Rocket, and are to be sold at the long Shop under
S. Mildreds Church in the Poultry. 1603.

The pleasant Commoedye of Patient Grissil.
Enter the Marquess, Pauia, Mario, Lepido, and huntsmen: all like Hunters. A
noise of horns within. Marquess. Look you so strange my hearts, to see our
limbs
Thus suited in a Hunters livery?
Oh it is a lovely habit, when green youth
Like to the flowery blossom of the spring,
Conformes his outward habit to his mind,
Look how yon one-ey'd wagoner of heaven,
Has by his horses fiery winged hoofes,
Burst open the melancholy Iayle of Night,
And with his gilt beams cunning Alchimy,
Turned al these clouds to gold, who (with the winds)
Upon their misty shoulders bring in day:
Then sally not this morning with foul looks,
But teach your Iocond spirits to ply the Chase,
For hunting is a sport for Emperors.

Pau. We know it is, and therefore do not throw
On these your pastimes, a contracted brow,
How swift youths Bias runs to catch de^lights,
To me is not unknown: no brother Gualther,
When you were wooed by us to choose a wife,
This day you vowed to wed: but now I see,
Your promises turn all to mockery.

Lepi. This day your self appointed to give answer
To all those neighbour-Princes, who in love
Offer their Daughters, Sisters and Allies,
In marriage to your hand: yet for all this
The hour being come that calls you to your choice
You stand prepared for sport and start aside:
To hunt poor dear when you should seek a Bride.

Marq. Nay come Mario your opinion too,
H'ad need of ten men's wit that goes to woe.

Ma. First satisfy these Princes, who expect
Your gracious answer to their embassies,
Then may you freely revel: now you fly
Both from your own vows, and their amity.

Marq. How much your iudgmens err: who gets a wife
Must like a huntsman beat untrodden paths,
To gain the flying presence of his love.
Look how the yelping beagles spend their mouths
So Lovers do their sighs: and as the dear,
Out-strips the active hound, and often turns back
To note the angry visage of her foe,
Who greedy to possess so sweet a pray,
Never gives over till he ceaze on her,
So fares it with coy dames, who great with scorn
Show the care-pined hearts, that sue to them
Yet on that feined slight, (Love conquering them)
They cast an eye of longing back again,
As who would say, be not dismayed with frowns,
For though our tongues speak no: our hearts sound
Or if not so, before they will miss their lovers,
Their sweet breathes shall perfume the Amorous air yea,
And brave them still to run in beauties Chase:
Then can you blame me to be hunter like,
When I must get a wife: but be content,
So yo'ule engage your faith by oath to us,
Your wills shall answer mine, my liking yours,
And that no wrinckle on your cheeks shall ride.
This day the Marquess vows to choose a bride.

Pa. Even by my honor,


Marq. Brother be advised,
The importunity of you and these,
Thrusts my free thoughts into the yoke of love,
To groan under the load of marriage,
Since then you throw this burden on my youth
Swear to me whom soever my fancy choose,
Of what descent, beauty or birth she be,
Her you shall like and love as you love me.

Pa. Now by my birth I swear, wed whom you please,
And I Will embrace her with a brothers arm.

Lepi. Mario and my self to your fair choice,
Shall yield all duties and true reverence.

Marq. Your protestations please me Iollilie,
Lets ring a hunters peale, and in the ears
Of our swift forest, Citizens proclaim,
Defiance to their lightness: our sports done,
The Uenson that we kill shall feast our bride,
If she prove bad, i will cast all blame on you,
But if sweet peace succeed this amorous strife,
I Will say my wit was best to choose a wife. Exeunt,

As they go in, horns sound and hollowing within: that done, Enter Ianicolo,
Grissil, and Babulo, with two baskets begun to be wrought. Bab. Old Master
heeres a morning able to make us work tooth and nail (marry then we must
have victuals) the Sun has played boe peep in the element any time these two
hours, as I do some mornings when you call: what Babulo say you: here Master
say I and then this eye opens, yet don is the mouse, lis still: what Babulo
says Grissil, anon say I, and then this eye looks up, yet down I snug
again: what Babulo say you again, and then I start up, and see the Sun, and
then sneeze, and then shake mine ears, and then rise, and then get my
breakfast, and then fall to work, and then wash my hands, and by this time I am
ready: here is your basket, and Grissil I here is yours.


Ian. Fetch thine own Babulo lets ply our business.


Bab. God send me good luck Master.


Gri. Why Babulo, what is the matter?


Bab. God forgive me, I think I shall not eat a pecke of salt: I shall not
live long sure, I should be a rich man by right, for they never do good
deeds, but when they see they must dye, and I have now a monstrous stomach to
work, because I think I shall not live long.


Ian. Go fool, cease this vain talk and fall to work.


Bab. I Will hamper some body if I dye, because I am a basket maker. Exit.


Ian. Come Grissill, work sweet girl, here the warm Sun will shine on us,

And when his fires begin,
We Will cool our sweating brows in yonder shade.

Gri. Father, me thinks it does not fit a maid,
By sitting thus in view, to draw men's eyes
To stare upon her: might it please your age,
I could be more content to work within.

Ian. Indeed my child, men's eyes do now adays,
Quickly take fire at the least spark of beauty,
And if those flames be quenched by chaste disdain,
Then their inuenom'd tongues (alack) do strike,
To wound her fame whose beauty they did like.

Gri. I will avoid their darts and work within.


Ian. Thou needst not, in a painted coat goes sin,
And loves those that love pride; none looks on thee,
Then keep me company: how much unlike
Are thy desires to many of thy sex?
How many wantons in Saliuia,
Frown like the sullen night, when their fair faces
Are hid within doors: but got once abroad,
Like the proud Sun they spread their staring beams,
They shine out to be seen, their loose eyes tell,
That in their bosoms wantonness do dwell:
Thou can not do so Grissill, for thy Sun,
Is but a Star, thy Star, a spark of fire,
Which has no power t'inflame doting desire:
Thy silks are thrid-bare russets: all thy portion
Is but an honest name: that gone thou art dead,
Though dead thou live, that being unblemished.

Gris. If to die free from shame be nere to die,
Then I Will be crowned with immortallitie.

Ian. Pray God thou may: yet child my jealous soul
Trembles through fears, so often as mine eyes
Sees our Duke court thee: and when to thine ears
He tunes sweet loue-songs: oh beware my Grissill
He can prepare his way with gifts of gold,
Upon his breath, winged Promotion flies
Oh my dear Girl trust not his sorceries,
Did he not seek the shipwreck of thy fame?
Why should he send his tailors to take measure
Of Grissils body: but as one should say,
If thou will be the Marquess concubine,
Thou shall wear rich attires: but they that think,
With costly garments, sins black face to hide,
Wear naked bravery and ragged pride.

Gris. Good father do not shake your age with fears
Although the Marquess sometimes visit us,
Yet all his words and deeds are like his birth,
Steept in true honor: but admit they were not,
Before my soul look black with speckled sin,
My hands shall make me pale deaths underling,

Ian. The music of those words sweete^ mine ears
Come girl lets faster work: time apace wears.

Enter Babulo with his work. Gris. Come Babulo why have thou staid so long?


Ba. Nay why are you so short, Masters heeres money I took (since I went) for
a cradle: this year I think be leap year, for wonie^ do nothing but buy
cradles, by my troth I think the world is at an end, for as soon as we be
borne we marry: as soon as we marry we get children, (by hook or by crook
gotten they are) children must have cradles, and as soon as they are in them,
they hop out of the^, for I have seen little girls that yesterday had scarce a
hand to make them ready, the next day had worn wedding rings on their fingers,
so that if the world do not end, we shall not live one by another: basket
making as all other trades runs to decay, and shortly we shall not be worth a
butten, for non in this cutting age sow true stitches, but taylers and
shoomakers, and yet now and then they tread their shoes a wrie too.


Ia. Let not thy tongue go so: sit down to work
And that our labor may not seem to long,
We Will cunningly beguile it with a song.

Ba. Do master for that's honest cousonage.

The Song. Song Art thou poor yet have thou golden Slumbers:
Oh sweet content!
Art thou rich yet is thy mind perplexed?
Oh punnishment.
Do thou laugh to see how fools are vexed?
To ad to golden numbers, golden numbers.
O sweet content, of sweet etc.
Foot Work apace, apace, apace, apace*
Honest labor bears a lovely face,
Then hey noney, noney: hey noney, noney.
Can drink the waters of the Crisped spring,
O sweet content!
Swim'st thou in wealth, yet sinck'st in thine own tears,
O punnishment.
Then he that patiently wants, burden bears,
No burden bears, but is a King, a King,
O sweet content, etc.
Foot. Work apace, apace, etc.
Enter Laureo. Ba. Weep master, yonder comes your Son


Ian. Laureo my Son? oh heaven let thy rich hand
Pour plentious shewers of blessing on his head.

Lau. Treble the number fall upon your age,

Sister?


Gri. Dear brother Laureo welcome home.


Ba. Master Laureo) (aniculaes son) welcome home, how do the nine muses,
Pride, covetousness, envy, sloth, wrath, gluttony and letcherie? you that are
Scholars read how they do.


Lau. Muses: these (fool) are the seven deadly sins.


Ba. Are they: Mas me thinks its better serving the^, then your nine muses,
for they are stark beggars.


Ian. Often I have wished to see you here,


Lau. It grieves me that you see me here so soon.


Ian. Why Laureo do thou grieve to see thy father,
Or do thou scorn me for my poverty.

Ba. He needs not, for he looks like poor John himself, eight to a neck of
Mutten, is not that your commons, and a Cue of bread?


Lau. Father I grieve my young years to your age,
Should add more sorrow.

Ian. Why son what is the matter?


Lau. That which to think on makes me desperate.
I that have chargd my friends, and from my father
Pulled more then he could spare, I that have liud,
These nine years at the Uniuersity,
Must now for this worlds devil: this angel of gold,
Have all those days and nights to beggerie sold,
Through want of money, what I want I miss,
Who is more scorned then a poor: scholar is?

Bab. Yes three things: Age, wisdom, and basket makers


Gri. Brothers whatmeanes these words?


Lau. Oh, I am mad.
To think how much a Scholar undergoes,
And in the end reapes naught but pennurie.
Father I am enforced to leave my book,
Because the study of my book does leave me,
In the lean arms of lancke necessity.
Having no shelter (ah me) but to fly
Into the sanctuary of your aged arms.

Bab. A trade, a trade, follow basket-makeing, leave books and turn block
head.


Ian. Peace fool, welcome my son, though I am poor
My love shall not be so: go daughter Grissill,
Fetch water from the spring to sees our fish,
Which yesterday I caught: the cheer is mean,
But be content, when I have sold these Baskets,
The money shall be spent to bid thee welcome:
Grissill make have, run and kindle fire. Exit Grissill.

Ba. Go Grissill I Will make fire, and scour the kettle, its a hard world when
scholars ease fish upon flesh days


Lau. Is It not a shame for me that am a man, Exit. Ba.
Nay more, a scholar to endure such need,
That I must pray on him, whom I should feed?

Ian. Nay grieve not Son, better have felt worse woe
Come sit by me while I work to get bread,
And Grissill spin us yearne to cloth our backs.
Thou shall read doctrine to us for the soul,
Then what shall we there want, nothing my son
For when we cease from work even in that while,
My song shall charm griefs ears and care beguile.

Enter Grissill running with a Pitcher. Gris Father as I was runaing to fetch
water,
I saw the Marquess with a gallant train
Come riding toward us, O see where they come.

Enter Marquess, Pauia, Mario, Lepido, two Ladies and some other attendants.
Mar. See where my Grissill, and her father is,
Me thinks for beauty shining through those weeds,
Seems like a bright star in the sullen night.
How lovely poverty dwells on her back,
Did but the proud world note her as I do,
She would cast off rich robes, forswear rich state,
To cloth them in such poor abiliments,
Father good fortune ever bless thine age.

Ian. All happiness attend my gracious Lord.


Marq. And what wish you fair Maid?


Gris. That your high thoughts.
To your contentment may be satisfied.

Mar, Thou would wish so, knewst thou for what I come
Brother of Pauia behold this virgin,
Mario Lepido is she not fair?

Pa. Brother I have not seen so mean a creature,
So full of beauty.

Mar. Were but Grissils birth,
As worthy as her form, she might be held
A fit companion for the greatest state.

Lau. Oh blindness, so that men may beauty find,
They nere respect the beauties of the mind,

Mar. Father ani^ola what is he that speaks


Ian. A poor despised scholar and my Son.


Mar. This is no time to hold dispute with scholars
Tell me in faith old man what do thou think,
Because the Marquess visits thee so often?

Ian. The will of Princes subjects must not search,
Let it suffice, your grace is welcome hither.

Marq. And i will requite that welcome if I live,
Grissill suppose a man should love you dearly,
As I know some that do, would you agree
To quittance true affection with the like.

Gri. None is so fond to fancy poverty.


Mar. I say there is: come Lords stand by my side,
Nay brother you are sped and have a wife,
Then give us leave that are all Batchelers,
Now Grissil, eye us well and give your verdicte,
Which of us three you hold the proprest man,

Gri. I have no skill to judge proportions.


Marq. Nay then you jest, women have eagles eyes,
To pry even to the heart, and why not you?
Come, we stand fairly, freely speak your mind,
For by my birth, he whom thy choice shall bless,
Shall be thy husband.

Mar. What intends your graft?


Lepi. My Lord I have vowed to lead a single life,


Marq. A single life? this cunning cannot serve,
Do not I know you love her I have heard?
Your passions spent for her your sighs for her,
Mario to the wonder of her beauty,
Compiled a Sonnet.

Mar. I my Lord write sonnets?

Marq. You did entreat me to entreat her father,
That you might have his daughter to his wife.

Lep. To any one I willingly resign,
All interest in her, which does look like mine,

Mar. My Lord I swear she nere shall be my bride,
I hope she will swear so too being thus denide,

Marq. Both of you turned Apostataes in love,
Nay then I Will play the crier: once, twice, thrice,
Speak or she is gone else: no since twill not be,
Since you are not for her, yet she is for me.

Pau. What mean you Brother?


Marq. Faith no more but this:
By loves most wondrous Metamorphosis,
To turn this Maid into your Brothers wife,
Nay sweet heart look not strange I do not jest,
But to thine ears mine Amorous thoughts impart,
Gualter protests he loves thee with his heart,

Lau. The admiration of such happiness,
Makes me astonished.

Gris. Oh my gracious Lord,
Humble not your high state to my low birth,
Whom not worthy to be held your slave,
Much less your wife.

Marq. Grissill that shall suffice,
I count thee worthy: old Ianicola,
Art thou content that I shall be thy Son?

Ian. I am unworthy of so great a good.

Marq. Tush tush talk not of worth, in honest terms
Tell me if I shall have her? for by heaven
Unless your free consent allow my choice,
To win ten kingdoms I Will not call her mine.
What Is thy Sons name?

Ian. Laureo My gracious Lord.

Marq. I Will have both your consents: I tell ye Lords,
I have wooed the virgin long, oh many an hour,
Have I bin glad to steal from all your eyes,
To come disguised to her: I swear to you,
Beauty first made me love, and virtue woe,
I loved her lowlynes, but when I tried
What virtues were intempled in her breast,
My chaste heart swore that she should be my bride
Say Father, must I be forsworn or not?

Ian. What to my Lord seems best to me seems so


Marq. Laureo what is your opinion?


Lau. Thus my Lord.
If equal thoughts durst both your states confer,
Here Is is to low, and you to high for her,

Marq. What says fair Grissill now?


Gris. This does she say,
As her old Father yeeldes to your dread will,
So she her fathers pleasure must fulfill.
If old Ianicola make Grissill yours,
Grissill must not deny, yet had she rather,
Be the poor Daughter still of her poor Father.

Marq. I Will gild that poverty and make it shine,
With beams of dignity: this base attire,
These Ladies shall tear of, and deck thy beauty
In robes of honor, that the world may say,
Virtue and beauty was my bride to day.

Mar. This mean choice, will distaine your noblenes


Marq. No more Mario then it does disgrace
The Sun to shine on me.

Lep. She Is poor and base.


Marq. She Is rich: for virtue beautifies her face.


Pau. What will ye world say when the trump of fame
Shall sound your high birth with a beggars name?

Marq. The world still looks a squint, and I deride
His purblind judgment; Grissill is my Bride,
Ianicola, and Laureo: father, brother,
You and your Son graced with our royal favor,
Shall live to outweare time in happiness.

Enter Babulo. Ba. Master I have made a good fire: sirrah Grissill, the fish


Ian. Fall on thy knees thou fool: see heeres our duke


Ba. I have not offended him, therefore I Will not ducke and he were ten Dukes.

I Will kneel to none but God and my Prince.

Lau. This is thy Prince, be silent Babulo,


Bab. Silence is a virtue, marie it is a dumb virtue: I love virtue that
speaks, and has a long tongue like a belweather, to lead other virtues after:
if he be a Prince, I hope he is not Prince over my tongue, snailes, wherefore
come all these: Master heeres not fish enough for us, Sirrah Grissill the fire
burns out.


Marq. Tell me my love what pleasant fellow is this?


Gris. My aged Fathers servant my gracious Lord.


Bab. How, my love: master a word to ye wise, scillicet me my love.


Marq. What Is his name,


Bab. Babulo Sir is my name*


Marq. Why do thou tremble so? we are al thy friends


Bab. Its hard sir for this motley Ierkin, to find friendship with this fine
doublet.


Marq. Ianicola bring him to Court with thee.


Bab. You may be ashamed to lay such knauish burden upon old ages shoulders:
but I see they are stooping a little, all cry down with him: He shall not
bring me sir, i will carry my self.


Marq. I pray thee do, I Will have thee live at court,


Ba. I have a better trade sir, basketmaking,


Marq. Grissill I like thy man's simplicity,
Still shall he be thy servant Babulo,
Grissill thy mistress, now shall be my wife

Bab I think sir I am a fitter husband for her.


Marq. Why should thou think, I will make her rich


Bab. That's al one sir, beggars are fit for beggars, ge^tlefolkes for
ge^tlefolkes: I am afraid yt this wonder of ye rich leuing ye poor, will last
but mine days: old M bid this merry gentleman home to dinner, you shall have a
good dish of fish sir: and thank him for his good will to your daughter Gris.
for i will be ha^gd if he do not (as many rich cogging marcha^ts) now adays do
when they have got what they would, give her the belles, let her fly.


Gri. Oh bear my Lord with his intemperate tongue


Marq. Grissill I take delight to bear him talk.


Bab. I, I, y'eare best take me up for your foul: are not you he, that came
speaking so? to Grissill here, do you remember how I knocked you once for
offering to have a lick at her lips.


Marq. I do remember it and for thy pains,
A golden recompense i will give to thee.

Bab. Why do, and i will knock you as often as you list.


Marq. Grissill this merry fellow shall be mine,
But we forget our selves, the day grows old.
Come Lords cheer up your looks and with fair smiles,
Grace our intended nuptials: time may come,
When all commanding love your hearts subdue,
The Marquess may perform as much for you. Exeunt.

Enter Farneze, Vrcenze, and Rice meeting them running. Far. Rice how now man?
whether art you gallopping?


Ric. Faith even to find a full maunger: my teeth water till I be mounching, I
have bin at the Cutlers, to bid him bring away Sir Owens rapier, and I am
ambling home thus fast, for fear I am driven to fast.


Vrc. But Sirrah Rice, when is the day? will not thy master Sir Owen and Signior
Emulo fight?


Ric. No, for Signior Emulo has warned my Master to the court of Conscience,
and there is an order set down, that the coward shall pay my Master good words
weekelie, till the debt of his choler be run out.


Far. Excellent, but did not Emulo write a challenge to Sir Owen.


Rice. No he sent a terrible one, but he gave a sexton of a Chuch a groate to
write it, and he set his mark to it, for the gull can neither write nor read.


Ric. Ha ha, not write and read? why I have seen him pull out a bundle of
sonnets written, and read them to Ladies.


Far. He got the^ by heart Vrcenze, and so deceived the poor souls: as a
gallant whom I know, cozens others: for my brisk spa^gled babie will come into
a Stationers shop, call for a stool and a cushion, and then asking for some
greek Poet, to him he falls, and there he grumbles God knows what, but I Will
be sworn he knows not so much as one Character of the tongue.


Ric. Why then its greek to him.


Far. Ha, ha, Emulo not write and read?


Ric. Not a letter and you would hang him.


Vrc. Then heel never be saved by his book.


Ric. No nor by his good works, for heel do none. Signiors both, I commend
you to the skies, I commit you to God, adieu.


Far. Nay sweet Rice a little more,


Ric. A little more will make me a great deal less, house keeping you know is
out of fashion: unless I ride post, I kiss the post: in a word i will tell you
all, challenge was sent, answered no fight, no kill, all friends, all fools,
Emulo coward, Sir Owen brave man, farewell, dinner, hungry: little cheer,
great great stomach, meat meat, meat, mouth, mouth, mouth, adue, adue, adue.
Exit.


Vrc. Ha, ha, adue Rice, Sir Owen belike keeps a lean Kitchen.


Far. What else man, that's one of the miserable vows he makes when he is dubd:
yet he does but as many of his brother knights do, keep an ordinary table
for him and his long coat follower.


Vrc. That long coat makes the master a little king, for whersoeuer his piece
of a follower comes hopping after him, he is sure of a double guarde.


Far. I Will set some of the Pages upon thy skirts for this


Vrc. I shall feel them no more then so many fleas, therefore I care not: but
Farneze you will prove a most accomplished coxecombe.


Far. Oh old touch lad, this yonker is right Trinidado pure leaf Tobacco, for
indeed he is nothing purffe, reeke, and would be tried (not by God and his
country) but by fire, the very soul of his substance and needs would
convert into smoke.


Vrc. He Is Steel to the back you see, for he writes Challenges.


Far. True, and Iron to the head, oh there is a rich leaden mineral amongst his
brains, if his skull were well digd, Sirrah Vrcence, this is one of those
changeable Silk gallants, who in a very scuruie pride, scorn alschollers, and
read no books but a looking glass, and speak no language but sweet Lady,
and sweet Signior and chew between their teeth terrible words, as though they
would conjure, as complement and Proiects, and Fastidious, and Caprichious, and
Misprizian, and the Sintheresis, of the soul, and such like raise velvet
terms.


Vrc. What be the accontreme^ts now of these galla^ts?


Far. Indeed that's one of their fustia^ outla^dish phrases to, marry sir their
accontreme^ts, are al ye fa^tasticke fashions, yt can be taken up, either upon
trust or at second hand.


Vrc. What Is their quallities?


Far. None good, these are the best: to make good faces: to take Tobacco well,
to spit well, to laugh like a waiting Genllewoman, to lie well, to blush for
nothing, to look big upon little fellows, to scoff with a grace, though they
hane a very filthy grace in scoffing, and for a need to ride pretty and
well.


Vrc. They cannot choose but ride well, because every good wit rides them.


Far. Here Is the difference, that they ride upon horses, and when they are
ridden they are spurred for asses, so they can cry wighee and hollow kicking
jade, they care not if they have no more learning then a Jade.


Enter Emuloes Sir Owen talking, Rice after them eating secretly. Vrc. No more
of these Iadith tricks: here comes the hobbie horse.


Far. Oh he would dance a morris rarely if he were hung with belles.


Vrc. He would iangle vilanously.


Far. Peace lets encounter them.


S. O. By Cod Sir Emuloes, sir Owen is clad out a cry because is friends with
her, for Sir Owen swear, did her not swear Rice?


Ric. Yes forsooth. Spit out his meat.


S. Ow. By Cod is swear terrible to knog her pade, and fling her spingle legs
at plum trees, when her come to fall to her tagger and fencing trigs, yes faith
and to breag her shins did her not Rice?


Ric. Yes by my troth Sir.


S. Ow. By Cods vdge me is all true, and to give her a great teale of blouddie
nose, because Sir Emuloes you shallenge the prittish Knight, Rice you know Sir
Owen shentleman first, and secondly knight, what apoxale you Rice, is shoke now?


Ric. No sir I have my five senses and am as well as any man.


S. O. Well here is hand, now is mighty friends.


Emu. Sir Owen


Far. Now the gallimaufrie of language comes in.


Emu. I protest to you, the magnitude of my condolement, has bin elevated the
higher to see you and my self, two gentlemen.


S. Ow. Nay it is well known Sir Owen is good shentleman, is not Rice?


Ric. He that shall deny it Sir i will make him eat his words.


Emu. Good friend I am not in the Negative, be not so Caprichious, you
misprize me, my collocution te^deth to S. Owens dignifiing.


Fra. Lets step in, God save you Singnior Emulo.


Vrc. Well encountered S. Owen.


S.O. Owe, how do you S. Em. is friends out a cry now but Emuloes take heed,
you match no more love trigs to widow Gwenthyans, by Cod vrdge me, that do so
must knoge her, see you now?


Emu Not so tempestious sweet knight: though to my disconsolation, I will
obliuionize my love to the welsh widdowe, and do here proclaim my
delinquishment, but sweet Signior be not to Diogenicall to me,


Sir O. Ha ha is know not what genicalls mean, but Sir Owen will genicall
her, and her fag her genicalling Gwenthyan.


Far. Nay faith we will have you sound friends indeed, otherwise you know,
Signior Emulo, if you should bear all the wrongs, you would be our Athlassed.


Emu. Most true.


Sir O. By god is out a cry friends, but harg Farneze, Vrcenze twag a great
teale to Emuloes: Ow. is great teale of friends: ha ha is tell sine admirable
shest, by Cod Emuloes, for fear S. Owen, knog her shines, is tell, Sir Owen by
tozen shentlemen her pooets is put about with lathes, ha, ha, serge her serge
her.


Fa. No more tell Vrcenze of it: why should you two fall out for the love of a
woman, considering what store we have of them? Sir Emulo I gratulate your
peace, your company you know is precious to us, and we will be merry, and ride
abroad: before god now I talk of riding, Sir Owen me thinks has an excellent
boot.


Vrc. His leg graces the boot.


S. Ow. By God is fine leg and fine poote to: but Emulas leg is petter, and
finer, and shenglier skin to wear.


Emu. I bought them of a pennurious Cordwainer, and they are the most
incongruent that ere I ware.


S. Own. Congruent? sploud what leather is congruent, spanish leather?


Emu. Ha ha, well Gentlemen I have other proiects becken for me, I must
disgresse from this bias, and leave you: accept I beseeeh you of this vulgar
and domestic complement.


Whilst they are saluting, Sir Owen gets to Emuloes leg and pulls down his
Boot. Sir. O. Pray Emuloes let her see her congruenee leather ha ha, owe what
a pox is here: ha, ha, is mag a wall to her shins, for keeb her warm?


Fa. What Is here lathes? where is the lime and hair Emulo,


Ric. Oh rare, is this to save his shins?


S. Ow. Ha, ha, Rice go call Gwenthyan,


Ric. I will master dahoma, Gewnthyan dahoma?


S. Ow. A pogs on her go sedge her and call her within


Ric. I am gone sir. Exit Rice.


Fa. Nay sir Owen what mean you?


S. Ow. By Cod is mean ta let Gwenthyan see what bobie fool love her, apogs
on you.


Emu. Sir Owen and Signiors both, do not expatiate my obloquie, my love shall
be so fast conglutinated to you.


S. Ow. Cods plud, you call her gluttons, Gwenthyan, so ho Gwenthyan?


Emu. I Will not digest this pill, Signiors adieu.
You are Fastidious and I banish you. Exit Emulo.

Enter Gwenthyan. Fa. Gods so, here comes the widow, but in faith Sir Owen
say nothing of this.


S Ow. No go to the^, by Cod Sir Owen bear as praue mind as Emprour.


Gwe. Who calls Gwenthyan so great teale of time?


Vrc. Sweet widow even your countrieman here.


S. Ow. Belly the ruddo whee: wrage witho, Mandageny Mou du ac whellock en wea
awh.


Gwe. Sir Owen gramarrye whee: Gwenthyan Mandage any, ac wellock en Thawen en
ryn mogh.


Far Mundage Thlawen, oh my good widow gabble that we may understand you, and
have at you.


S. Ow. Have at her: nay by Cod is no have at her to, Is tawge tn her prittish
tongue, for it is fine delicates tongue, I can tell her. welshe tongue is finer
as greek tongue.


Far A bakte Neates tongue is finer then both.


S. Ow, But what says Gwenthyans now? will have Sir Owen, Sir Owen is known
for a wisely man, as any since Adam and Eues time, and that is by Gods vdge me
a great teale ago.


Vrc. I think Solomon was wiser then Sir Owen.


S. Ow. Salomons had pretty wit: but what say you to King Tauie: King Tauie is
well known was as good musitions, as the pest fiddler in aul Italy, and King
Tauie was Sir Owens countrieman, yes truly a prettish shentlemen porne, and
did twinckle, twinckle, twinckle, out a cry upon welsh-harpe, and it is known
Tauie love Mistress Persabe, as Sir Owen loves Gwenthyan: will her have Sir Owen
now?


Far Faith widow take him, Sir owen is a tall man I can tell you.


S. ow. Tall man, as God vnde me, her think the prittish shentelman, is
faliant as Mars that is the fine knaves, the poets say the God of pribles and
prables, I hope widdowe you see little more in Sir owen then in Sir Emuloes,
say shall her? have her now, it is faliant, as can desire, I warrant her.


Gw. Sir owen, Sir owen, it is not for faliant, Gwenthyan care so much, but for
honest and fertuous, and loving and pundall to lead her have her will.


S. owe. God vdge me, tage her away* to her husband, and is led her have her
will owd a cry, yet by God is pridle her well enoughe.


Gw. Well S. owen, Gwenthyan is going to her cozen Gualther the Duke, for you
know is her near cozen by marriage, by the other husband that pring her from
Wales.


ow. By Cod Wales is better country then Italies, a great teale so better.


Gw. Now if her cozen Gwalther say Gwenthyan tage ths pritish knight, shall
love her diggon: but must have her good will: marg your thad Sir owen.


ow. Owe what is else: Sir owen marg yt ferrewel, yet shall tage her down
quiglie enough, come widdowe will wag to the coward, now to her cozen, and bid
her cozen tell her mind of Str owen.


Gw. You Will man Gwenthyan Sir owen?


ow. Yes by Cod and prauely to, come Shentlemans you will tag pains to go with
her?


Far. We Will follow you presently Sir owen.


S. ow. Come widow: Un lod dis Glane Gwe^thya^ mondu


Gw. Gramercie wheeh, Am a Mock honnoh. Exeunt.


Far. So this will be rare: Sirrah Vrcenze, at the marriage night of these two,
insteede of Io Hymen, we shall here hey ho Hiemen, their love will be like a
great fire made of bay leaves, that yeeldes nothing but cracking noise, noise.


Vrc. If she miss his crown it is no matter for crackking,


Far. So she soader it again, it will pass current.


Enter Onophrio and Iulia walking over the Stage. Vrc. Peace here comes our
fair mistress.


Far. Lets have a fling at her.


Vrc. So you may, but the hardness is to hit her.


Ono. Farewell Farneze you atte^d well upon your mistress,


Iul. Nay, nay, their wages shall be of the same color that their service is
of.


Far. Faith mistress would you had traveled a litile sooner this way, you
should have seen a rare comedy acted by Emulo.


Vrc. Every courteous mouth will be a stage for that, rather tell her of the
welsh tragedy that is toward.


Iul. What Tragedy?


Far. Sir Owen shall marry your cousen Gwenthyan,


Iul. Is It possible: oh they two will beget brave warriors: for if she scolde
heel fight, and if he quarrel she will take up the bucklers: she is fire and
he is brimstone, must not there be hot doeings then think you?


On. They Will prove Turtles, for their hearts being so like, they cannot choose
but be loving.


Iul. Turtles: Turkie-cocks, for Gods louelets entreat the Duke my brother,
tomake a law, that wheresoever Sir Owen and his Lady dwell, the next
neighbor may always be Constable, least the peace be broken, for theyl'e do
nothing but cryearme, arm, arm.


Far. I think sir Owen would die rather then loose her love


Iul. So think not I.


On. I should for Iulia, if I were Iulies husband.


Iul. Therefore Iulia shall not be Onophries wife, for I Will have none die for me.

I like not that color.

Far. Yes for your love you would Iulia.


Iul. No nor yet for my hate Farneze.


Vrc. Would you not have men love you sweet mistress?


Iul. No not I, fie upon it sweet servant.


On. Would you wish men to hate you?


Iul. Yes rather then love me, of al saints I love not to serve mistress Venus.


Far. Then I prceiue you mean to lead apes in hell.


Iul. That spiteful proverb was proclaimed against them that are married upon
earth, for to be married is to live in a kind of hell.


Far. I as they do at barlibreake.


Iul. Your wife is your ape, and that heavy burden wedlock, your Jack an
Apes clog, therefore i will not be tied to it: Master Farneze, sweet virginity is
that invisible Godhead that turns into Angels, that makes us saints on earth
and stars in heaven: here Uirgins seem goodly, but there glorious: In
heaven is no wooing yet all there are lovely: in heaven are no weddings yet al
there are lovers.


On. Let us sweet Madame turn earth into heaven, by being all lovers here to.


Iul. So we do to an earthly heaven we turn it.


On. Nay but dear Iulia, tell us why so much you hate, to enter into the lists
of this same combat Martimonie?


Iul. You may well call that a combat, for indeed marriage is nothing else,
but a battle of love, a friendly fighting, a kind of favorable terrible
war: but you err Onophrio in thinking I hate it I deal by marriage as some
Indians do the Sun, adore it, and reverence it, but dare not stare on it,
for fear I be stark blind: you three are batchellers, and being sick of
this maidenhead, count al things bitter, which the physic of a single life
minnisters unto you: you imagine if you could make the arms of fair Ladies the
spheres of your hearts, good hearts, then you were in heaven: oh but Batchilers
take heed, you are no sooner in that heaven, but you strait slip into hell.


Far. As long as I have a beautiful Lady to torment me, I care not.


Vrc. Nor I the sweetness of her looks shall make me relish any punnishment.


On. Except the punnishment of the horn Vrcenze, put that in.


Iul. Nay he were best put that by: Lord, Lord, see what unthrifts this love
makes us? if he once but get into ourmouthes, he labors to turn our tongues
to clappers, and to ring all in, at Cupids Church when we were better to bite
off our tongues, so we may thrust him out, Cupid is sworn enemy to time, and
he that loses time I can tell you loses afriend.


Par. I a bald friend.


Iu. Therefore my good servants if, you wear my liuerie, cast of this loose
upper coat of love: be ashamde to wait upon a boy, a wag, a blind boy, a
wanton: My brother the Duke wants our companies, it is Idleness and love, makes
you captains to this solitarines, follow me and love not, and i will teach you
how to find liberty.


All. We obey to follow you, but not to love you, no renounce that obedience.
Exeunt


Enter the Marquess and Furio. Marq. Furio.

Fur. My Lord.

Marq. Thy faith I often have tried, thy faith I credits
For I have found it sollid as the rock:
No babbling echo sits upon thy lips,
For silence even in speech, does seal them up,
Will thou be trusty Furio to thy Lord?

Fur. I will.

Marq. It is enough, those words I will,
Yields sweeter music then the gilded sounds,
Which chatting parrats long toung'd sicophants,
Send from the organs of their siren voice,
Grissill my wife thou see bear in her womb,
The joy of marriage: Furio I protest,
My love to her is as the heat to fire,
Her love to me as beauty to the Sun,
(Inseparable adjuncts) in one word,
So dearly love I Grissill, that my life
Shall end, when she does end to be my wife.

Fur. It Is well done.

Marq. Yet is my bosom burnt up with desires,
To try my Grissils patience, I Will put on
A wrinckled forehead, and turn both mine eyes,
Into two balls of fire, and claspe my hand
Like to a mace of Iron, to threaten death.
But Furio when that hand lifts up to strike,
It shall fly open to embrace my love,
Yet Grissill must not know this: all my words,
Shall smack of wormwood, all my deeds of gall,
My tongue shall jar, my heart be musical,
Yet Grissill must not know this?

Enter Grissill. Fur. Not for me,

Marq. Furio My trial is thy secrecy,
Yonder she comes: on goes this mask of frowns,
Tell her I am angry: men men try your wives,
Love that abides sharp tempests, sweetly thriues.

Fur. My Lord is angry.

Gris. Angry? the heavens forese^d: with who^? for what?
Is it with me?

Fur. Not me.

Gris. May I presume,
To touch the vain of that sad discontent,
Which swells upon my dear Lords angry browe?

Marq. Away away,

Gris. Oh chide me not away,
Your handmaid Grissill with vnuexed thoughts,
And with an vnrepining soul, will bear
The burden of all sorrows, of all woe,
Before the smallest grief should wound you so.

Marq. I am not beholding to your love for this,
Woman I love thee not, thine eyes to mine
Are eyes of Basiliskes, they murder me.

Gris. Suffer me to part hence, I Will tear them out,
Because they work such treason to my love.

Marq. Talk not of love I hate thee more the^ poison
That sticks upon the aires infected wings,
Exhald up by the hot breath of the Sun,
It Is for thy sake that speckled infamy,
Sits like a screech-owle on my honored breast,
To make my subjects stare and mock at me,
They swear they will never bend their awful knees,
To the base issue of the beggar womb,
It Is for thy sake they curse me, rail at me,
Think thou then I can love thee (oh my soul)
Why did thou build this mountain of my shame,
Why lie my joys buried in Grissills name?

Gri. My gracious Lord.

Marq. Call not me gracious Lord,
See woman here hangs up thine auncestrie,
The monuments of thy nobillitie,
This is thy russet gentry, coat, and crest
Thy earthen honors I will never hide,
Because this bridle shall pull in thy pride.

Gris. Poor Grissill is not proud of these attires,
They are to me but as you liuerie,
And from your humble servant when you please,
You may take all this outside, which indeed
Is none of Grissills, her best wealth is need,
I Will cast this gayness of, and be content
To wear this russet bravery of my own,
For that's more warm then this, I shall look old,
No sooner in course freeze then cloth of gold.

Marq. Spite of my soul she will triumph over me.

Fur. Your glove my Lord,

Marq. Cast down my glove again,
Stoop you for it, for I will have you stoop,
And kneel even to the meanest groom I keep.

Gris. It Is but my duty if you will have me stoop,
Even to your meanest groom my Lord i will stoop.

Marq. Furio how slouenly thou go attired?

Fur. Why so my lord?

Marq Look here thy shoes are both untied,
Grissill kneel you and tie them.

Fur. Pardon me.

Marq. Quickly I charge you,

Gris. Friend you do me wrong,
To let me hold my Lord in wrath so long,
Stand still I Will kneel and tie them: what I do
Furio it is done to him and not to you. Tie them.

Fur. It Is so.

Marq. Oh strange oh admiral patience,
I fear when Grissills bones sleep in her grave,
The world a second Grissill nere will have,
Now get you in.

Gris. I go my gracious Lord. Exit

Marq. Did thou not here her sigh, did not one frown
Contract her beauteous forehead.

Fur. I saw none

Marq. Did not one drop fall down from sorrows eyes,
To blame my heart for these her injuries?

Fur. Faith not a drop, I fear she will frown on me,
For doing me service?

Marq. Furio that i will try,
My voice may yet ore-take her: Grissill, Grissill?

Enter Grissill. Fur. She comes at first call.

Gris. Did my Lord call?

Marq. Woman I called thee not,
I said this slave was like to Grissill, Grissill,
And must you therefore come to torture me?
Nay stay here is a companion fit for you,
Thou vexest me, so does this villain to,
But ere the Sun to his highest throne ascend,
My indignation in his death shall end.

Gris. Oh pardone him my Lord, for mercies wings
Bears round about the world the fame of Kings,
Temper your wrath I beg it on my knee,
Forgive his fault though you will not pardon me,

Marq. Thank her.

Fu. Thanks Madame.

Marq. I have not true power,
To wound thee with denial, oh my Grissill,
How dearly should I love thee,
Yea die to do thee good, but that my subjects
Upbraid me with thy birth, and call it base.
And grieve to see thy Father and thy Brother
Heau'de up to dignities.

Gris. Oh cast them down,
And send poor Grissill poorly home again,
High Cedars fall, when low shrubs safe remain. Exit

Enter at the same door Mario and Lepido. Mari. Fetch me a cup of wine.

Fur. She Is a saint sure.

Marq. Oh Furio now i will boast that I have found,
An Angel upon earth: she shall be cround
The empress of all women. Lepido?
Mario? what was she that passed by you?

Both. Your virtuous wife.

Marq. Call her not virtuous,
For I abhor her, did not her swollen eyes
Look red with hate or scorn? did she not curse
My name or Furioes name?

Mari. No my dear Lord.

Marq. For he and I raild at her, spit at her,
I Will burst her heart with sorrow, for I grieve
To see you grieve that I have wronged my state,
By loving one whose baseness now I hate.
Enter Grissill with wine. Come faster if you can forbear Mario,
It Is but her office: what she does to me,
She Shall perform to any of you three, I Will drink

Lep. I am glad to see her pride thus trampeled down

Marq. Now serve Mario, then serve Lepido:
And as you bow to me, so bend to them.

Gris. I Will not deni't to win a diadem.

Mari. Your wisdom I commend that have ye power
To raise or throw down as you smile or lower.

Gris. Your patience I commend that can abide,
To hear a flatterer speak yet never chide.

Marq. Hence, hence dare you control the^ whom I grace
Come not within my sight.

Gris. I will obey,
And if you please, nere more behold the day. Exit.

Marq. Furio?

Fur. My Lord,

Marq. Watch her where she goes,
And mark how in her looks this tryeall shows.

Fur. I will. Exit.

Marq. Mario, Lepido, I loath this Grissill,
As sick men loath the bitterest potion
Which the Physicians hand holds out to them,
For Gods sake frown upon her when she smiles,
For Gods sake smile for joy to see her frown,
For Gods sake scorn her, call her beggars brat,
Torment her with your looks, your words your deeds,
My heart sha'l leap for joy, that her heart bleedes,
Will thou do this Mario?

Mari. If you say.
Mario, do this I must in it obey.

Marq. I know you must, so Lepido must you
It Is well; but counsel me what is best to do,
How shall I please my subjects? do but speak,
I Will do it though Grissills heart in sunder break.

Lepi. Your subjects do repine at nothing more,
Then to behold Ianicola her Father,
And her base brother lifted up so high.

Mari. To banish them from Court were policy.

Marq. Oh rare, oh profound wisdom, dear Marie,
It forthwith shall be done, they shall not stay,
Though I may win by them a Kingdoms sway, Exit

Lep. Mario laugh at this.

Ma. Why so I do.
Hedlong I had rather fall to misery.
Then see a beggar raised to dignity. Exeunt.

Enter Babulo singing with a boy after him. Bab. Boy how sits my rapier: la sol
la sol. etc.


Boy. It hangs as even as a chandlers beam.


Bab. Some of them deserve to hang upon a beam for that euennes, boy learn to
give every man his due, give the hangman his due, for he is a necessary member.


Boy. That's true, for he cuts of many wicked members.


Bab. He Is an excellent barber, he shaues most cleanly But page how do thou
like the Court?


Boy. Prettily and so,


Bab. Faith so do I pretlie and so: I am weary of being a Courtiour Boy.


Boy. That you cannot be Master, for you are but a Courtiers man.


Bab. Thou say true and thou art the Courtiers man's boy, so thou art a
courtier in decimo sexro in the least volume, or a courtier at the third hand,
or a courtier by reuersion, or a courtier three descents removed, or a courtier
in minority or an under Courtier or a courtier in posse, and I thie Master in
esse:


Boy. A posse an esse non este argumentum Master,


Bab. Thou have to much wit to be so little, but imitation, imitation, is his
good Lord and Master.


Enter Ianicola Laureo and Furio. Ian. Banished from Count, oh what have we
misdone?


Lau. What have we done, we must be thus disgraced?


Fu. I know not, but you are best pack, it is my Lords will, and that's law, I
must uncase you: your best course is to fall to your own trades.


Ba. Sir, what art thou a Broker?


Fu. No, how then, I am a Gentleman.


Ba, Thou Art a Jew, thou art a Pagan: how dare thou leave them without a cloak
for the rain, when his daughter, and his sister, and my Mistress is the Kings
wife?


Fu. Go look, sir soole, my condition is to ship you too.


Bab. There Is a ship of fools ready to hoyst sail, they stay but for a good
wind and your company: ha ha ha, I wonder (if all fools were banished) where
thou would take shipping.


Ian. Peace Babulo, we are banished from the Court.


Bab. I am glad, it shall case me of a charge here, as long as we have good
clothes on one backs, it is no matter for our honesty, we will live any where,
and keep Court in any corner.


Enter Grissill. Ian. Oh my dear Grissill.

Gri. You from me are banished,
But ere you leave the Court, oh leave I pray
Your grief in Grissils bosom, let my cheeks
Be watered with woes tears, for here and here,
And in the error of these wandering eyes,
Began your discontent: had not I been,
By nature painted thus: this had not been,
To leave the Court and care be patient,
In your old cottage you shall find content.
Mourn not because these silks are taken away,
You Will seem more rich in a course gown of gray,

Fur. Will you be parking? when?

Lan. Friend what is thy name?

Fur. Furio my name is, what of that?

Bab. Is thy name Fury? thou art half hanged, for thou have an ill name.


Lau. Thy looks are like thy name, thy name and looks Approve thy nature to
be violent.


Gris. Brother forbear, he is servant to my Lord.

Ba. To him, M. spare him not an inch.

Lau. Princes are never pleased with subjects sins,
But pity those whom they are sworn to smite,
And grieve as tender mothers when they beat,
With kind correction their unquiet babes-
So should their Officers compassionate,
The misery of any wretches state.

Fur. I must obey my Master, though indeed My heart (that seems hard) at their
wrongs does bleed. Pray get you gone, I say little, but you know my mind.


Bab. Little said is soon amended, thou say but little, and that little
will be mended soon indeed, that's never, and so the Proverb stands in his
full strength, power and virtue.


Enter Marquess, Mario and Lepido, and attendantes. Fur. They will not go my
Lord.

Marq. Will they not go?
Away with them, expel them from our Court,
Base wretches, is it wrong to ask mine own?
Think you that my affection to my wife,
Is greater then my love to public weal?
Do not my people murmr every hour,
That I have raised you up to dignities?
Do not lewd Minstrels in their ribalde runes,
Scofe at her birth, and descant on her dower?

Ian. Alas my Lord, you knew her state before.

Marq. I did, and from the bounty of my heart,
I robbed my wardrop of all precious robes,
That she might shine in beauty like the Sun,
And in exchange, I hung this russet gown,
And this poor pitcher for a monument,
Amongst my costliest Iemmes: see here they hang,
Grissill look here, this gown is unlike to this?

Gris. My gracious Lord, I know full well it is.

Ba. Grissill was as pretty a Grissill in the one as in the other.


Marq. you have forgot these rags, this water pot.

Gris. With reuerenre of your Highness I have not.

Ba. Nor I, many a good mess of water grewell has that yielded us.


Marq. Yes, you are proud of these your rich attyres.

Gris. Never did pride keep pace with my desires.

Marq. Well, get you on, part briefly with your father.

Ian. Our parting shall be short, daughter farewell.

Lau. Our parting shall be short, sister farewell.

Pa. Our parting shall be short, Grissill farewell.

Ian. Remember thou did live when thou were poor,
And now thou do but live, come son no more.

Marq. See them without the Palace Furio.

Fu. Good, yet it is bad. Exeunt with Furio.

Ba. Shall Furio see them out of the Palace? do you turn us out of doors?
you turn us out of doors then?


Marq. Hence with that fool, Mario drive him hence,


Ba. He shall not need, I am no Ox nor Ass, I can go without driving, for all his turning, I am glad of one thing.


Lep. What Is that Babulo?


Bab. Mary that he shall never hit us ith teeth with turning us, for it is not a
good turn, follower I must cashere you: I must give over houskeeping, it is the
fashion, farewell boy.


Boy. Marie farewell and be hanged.


Ba. I am glad thou take thy death so patiently, farewell my Lord, adue my
Lady, great was the wisdom of that Tailor, that stitcht me in Motley, for
he is a fool that leaves basket making to turn Courtier: I see my destiny
dogs me: at first I was a fool (for I was borne an Innocent) then I was a
traveler, and then a Basket-maker, and then a Courtier, and now I most turn
basket-maker and fool again, the one I am sworn to, but the fool I bestow
upon the world, for Stultorum plena sunt ominia adue, adue. Exit.


Mar. Farewell simplicity, part of my shame farewell, Now Lady what say you of
their exile?


Gri. What ever you think good, I Will not term vile,
By this rich burden in my worthles womb,
Your hand-maide is so subject to your will,
That nothing which you do, to her seems ill.

Mar. I am glad you are so patient, get you in, Exit Gr.
Thy like will never be, never has bin.
Mario, Lepido?

Mario Lepi. My gracious Lord.

Mar. The hand of poverty held down your states,
As it did Grissils, and as her I raised,
To shine in greatness sphere, so did mine eye,
Through gilt beams of your births, therefore me thinks
Your soul should simpathize, and you should know,
Wht passions in my Grissils bosom flow,
Faith tell me your opinions of my wife?

Lep. She is as virtuous and as patient,
As innocente, as patience it self.

Mari. She merits much of love, little of hate,
Only in birth she is vnfortuuate.

Marq. I, I, the memory of that mirth does kill me,
She is with child you see, her travail past,
I am determined she shall leave the Court,
And live again with old Ianicola.

Both. Therein you show true wisdom.

Marq. Do I indeed?
Dear friends it shall be done, I Will have you two
Rumor that presently, to the wide ears
Of that newes-louing-beast the multitude,
Go tell them for their sakes this shall be done.

Mari. With wings we fly.

Lep. Swifter then time we run. Exeunt.

Marq. Begone then: oh these times, these impious times,
How swift is mischief? with what nimble feet
Does envy gallop to do injury?
They both confess my Grissils innocence,
They both admire her wondrous patience,
Yet in their malice and to flatter me,
Headlong they run to this impiety.
Oh what is this world, but a confused throng
Of fools and mad men, crowding in a thrust
To shoulder out the wise, trip down the just.
But I will try by self experience,
And shun the vulgar sentence of the base,
If I find Grissill strong in patience,
These flatterers shall be wounded with disgrace,
And whilst verse lives, the fame shall never dye,
Of Grissils patience, and her constancy. Exit.

Enter Vrcenze and Onophrio at several doors, and Farnezie in the midst.
Far. Onophrio and Vrcenze early met, every man take his stand, for there comes
a most rich purchase of mirth: Emulo with his hand in a fair scarf, and Iulia


Far. He Will strip himself out of his shirt anon, for Gods sake step in.


Emu. My opinion is I shall never recuperate the legittimate office of this
member my arm.


All 3. Signior Emulo.


Emu Sweet and accomplished Signiors.


Far. Ha ha, Madame you had a pitiful hand with this fool, but see he is
recovered.


Iu. But servant where is your other hand?


Ono. See sweet mistress one is my prisoner.


Vrc. The other I have taken up with the fine finger.


Iul. Look in his scarf Farneze for an other, he has a third hand, and it is
pitifully wounded he tells me, pitifully, pitifully.


Far. Wounded, oh palpable, come a demonstration of it.


Ono. Give him your larded cloak Signior to stop his mouth, for he will undo
you with lies.


Vrc. Come Signior, one fine lie now to apparel all these former, in some
light sarcenet robe of truth: none, none, in this mint?


Iul. Fie servant, is your accomplished Courtship nothing but lies:


Ono. Fie Signior, no music in your mouth, but battles, yet a mere milke-sop.


Vrc. Fie Emulo, nothing but wardrop, yet hear all your trunckes of suites?


Far. Fie Signior, a scarce about your neck, yet will not hang your self to
hear all this?


Iul. Servant I discharge you my service, I Will entertain no braggarts.


Ono. Signior, we discharge yoy the Court, we will have no gulles in our company.


Far. Abram we casheere you our company, we must have no minnions at Court.


Emu. Oh patience be thou my fortification: Italy thou spurnest me for
uttering that nutriment, which I sucked from thee.


Fa. How Italy? away you idiot: Italy infects you not, but your own diseased
spirits: Italy? out you froth, you scumme, because your soul is mud, and that
you have breathed in Italy, you will say Italy have defiled you: away you bore,
thou will wallow in mire in the sweetest country in the world.


Emu. I cannot conceit this rawnes: Italy farewell, Italians adue.
A virtuous soul abhorres to dwell with you. Exit.

All. Ha ha ha: Laugh.


Enter Marquess and Sir Owen. Iu. Peace servants, here comes the Duke my
brother.


Marq. Lo cosen here they be: are ye here Gentlemen?
And Iulia you too? then I Will call your eyes,
To testify, that to Sir Meredith,
I do deliver here four sealed bonds:
Coze have a care to them, it much behooues you,
For Gentlemen, within this parchment lies,
Five thousand Ducats payable to him,
Just fourteen days before next Penticoast,
Coze it concerns you, therefore keep them safe.

Owen. Fugh, her warrant her shall log them vb from Sun and Moon, and seven
stars too I hobe, but harg you cozen Marquess.


Marq Now, what is the matter?


Ow. A pore on it it is scalde matter, well, well pray cozen Marquess, use her
Latie Grissill a good teale better, for as God vdge me, you hurd Sir Owen out a
cry by maging her sad and powd so, see you?


Marq. Hurt you? what harm or good reap you thereby?


Owen. Harm, yes by Gods lid, a poggie teale of harm, for loog you cozen, and
cozen Iulia, and Shentlemen awl, (for awl is to know her wifes case) you know
her tag to wife the widow Gwenthyan.


Marq. True cozen and she is a virtuous gentlewoman.


On. One of the patientest Ladies in the world.


Vrc. She Is wondrous beautiful and wondrous kind.


Far. She Is the quietest woman that ere I knew, for good heart, she will put up
any thing.


Iul. Cozen I am proud that you are sped so well.


Ow. Are you? by God so are not I, i will tell you what cozen Marquess, you awl
know her well, you know her face is liddle fair and smug, but her has a tung
goes Iingle iangle, Iingle iangle, petter and worse then pelles when her house
is a fire: patient? ha ha sir Owen shall tag her heels and run to Wales, and
her play the tiuell so out a cry terrible a pogs on her la.


Iul. Why cozen what are her quallities that you so commend her?


Ow. Commend her? no by God not I, ha ha: is know her quallities petter and
petter, fore I commend her: but Gwenthian is worse and worse out a cry, owe out
a cry worse, out of awl cry, she is feared to be made fool as Grissill is, and
as God vdge me, her mag fine pobbie fool of Sir Owen, her shide and shide, and
prawle and scoulde, by God and scradge terrible sometime, owe and haid her will
do what her can, ha ha ha, and sir Owen were hansome pachcler again, pray cozen
Marquess tag some order in Grissill, or fedge sir Owen to mag Gwenthians quiet
and tame her.


Marq. To tame her? that I Will teach you presently,
You had no sooner spoke the word of Taming,
But mine eye met a speedy remedy,
See cozen here is a plot where Osiers grow,
The ground belongs to old Ianicula
(My Grissils father) come Sir Meredith,
Take out your knife cut three and so will I,
So, keep yours cozen let them be safe laid up,
These three (thus wound together) I Will preserve.

Ow. What shall her do now with these? peate and knog her Gwenthian. Enter
Mario.


Marq. You shall not take such counsel from my lips,
How now Mario? what news brings thee hither in such quick haste?

Mari. Your wife (my gracious Lord)
Is now delivered of two beauteous twins,
A son and daughter.

Marq. Take that for thy pains,
Not for the joy that I conceive thereby,
For Grissill is not gracious in the eye
Of those that love me, therefore I must hate
Those that do make my life unfortunate.
And that's my children: must I not Mario?
Thou bowest thy knee, well, well I know thy mind,
Virtue in villains can no succor find,
A son and daughter? I by them will prove,
My Grissils patience better, and her love:
Come Iulia, come Onophrio, coze farewell,
Reserve those wandes, these three I Will bear away,
When I require them back, then will I show
How easily a man may tame a shrew. Exeunt.

Ow. Ha ha ha, tame a shrew, owe it is out a cry terrible hard, and more worse
then tame a mad pull, but whad mean her cozen to mag her cut her wands? ha ha,
God vdge me it is fine knag, I see her knavery now, it is to pang Gwenthyans podie
and she mag a noise and prabble: Is not so? by Gods lid so, and Gwenthian, sir
Owen will knog you before her abide such horrible do. Enter Gwenthian and
Rice. Gods lid here her comes. Terdawgh Gwenthian Terdawgh.


Gwe. Terdawgh whee, Sir Owen Terdawgh whee.


owen. Owe, looge here, fine wandes Gwenthyan, is not?


Gwe. Rees tag them and preag them in pieces.


Ric. What say you forsooth?


Gwe. What say you forsooth? you saucie knave, must her tell her once, and
twice, and thrice, and four times, what to do? preag these wands.


Ow. Rees is petter preake Rees his pate: here Rees carry her home.


Ri. Would I were at gallows, so I were not here:


Gwen. Do and her tare, do and her tare, see you now, what shall her do with
wands? peate Gwenthyan? podie and mag Gwenthyan put her finger in me hole: ha,
by God by God, is scradge her eyes out that judge her, that tawg to her, that
loog on her, marg you that Sir Owen?


owen. Yes, her marg her, Rees pray marg her Lady?


Ri. Not I sir she will set her marks on me then.


Gwen. Is prade? is prade? go too Rees, I Will Rees her, you tawg you.


Owen. Pray Gwenthien be patient, as her cozen Grissill is.


Gwe. Grissill owe? owe? Grissill? no, no, no, no. her shall not mag Gwenthian
such ninny pobbie fool as Grissill, I say preage her wandes.


owen. Cods plude is pought her to peate dust out of her cloag and parrels.


Gwe. Peate her cloag and parrels? fie, fie, fie, it is lie Sir Owen it is lie.


Ri. Your worship may stab her, she gives you the lie.


Ow. Peace Rees, go to, I pought them indeed to mag her horse run and go a
mighty teale of pace, pray let Rees tag her in good Gwenthian?


Gwen. Rees bear in her wandes because Sir Owen beg so gently.


owen. Go Rees, go lock them up in a pox or shest, go.


Ri. You shall not need to bid me go, for I Will run. Exit.


Owen. I pought them for her horse indeed, for here was her cozen Marquess
and prought her pondes and scriblings here for her money: Gwenthyan pray keep
her pondes and keep her wisely: Sir Gwenthyan is tell her praue news,
Grissill is prought to bed of liddle shentleman and shentlewoman: (is glad out
a cry speag her fair) yes truly Grissill is prought a bed.


Gwen. Grissils no podie but Grissils? what care I for Grissill: I say if Sir
Owen love Gwenthyan, shall not love Grissill nor Marquess so, see you now?


Ow. God vdge me, not love her cozen? is shealous? owe is fine trig, not love
her cozen? God vdge me her will, and hang her self, see you now?


Gwe. Hang her self, owe, owe, owe, Gwenthyans the other husband is scawrne to
say hang her self: hang her self? owe owe, owe owe.


Ow. Gods plude, what cannot get by prawles, is get by owe, owe owe, is
terrible Lady, pray be peace, and cry no more owe, owe, owe, Tawsone
Gwenthyans, God vdge me is very fury.


Gwen. O mon lago, mon due, hang Gwenthyans?


Ow. Adologo whee Gwenthyan bethogh, en Thonigh, en moyen due.


Gw. Ne vetho en Thonigh, cna wathe gethla Tee, hang Gwenthyans?


Owen. Sir Owen shall say no more hang her self, be out a cry still and her
shall pie her new card to ride in, and two new fine horses, and more plew
coats and padges ta follow her heels, see you now?


Gwen. But will her say no more hang her self?


Enter Rice. Ow. Oh no more, as God vdge me no more, pray leave, owe, owe, owe.


Ri. Tannekin the Fide has brought your Rebato, it comes to three pound.


Ow. What a pestilence is this for Gwenthyan?


Gwe. For her neg, is called repatoes, Gwenthian wear it here, is it not praue?


owen. Praue? yes is praue, it is repatoes I warrant her: I patoes money out a
cry, yes it is praue, Rees the preece? Rees the preece?


Ri. The Froe sir says five pound.


owen. Ha ha ha, pound, Gwenthyan pray do not pie it.


Gwen. By God vdge me her shall pie it.


owen. God vdge me her shall not.


Gwen. Shall not? Rees tag her away, I say her shall and wear it pie and pie.


owen. Then mag a pobbie fool of Sir Owen indeed: Gods plude shall? I say shall
not: five pound for puble, for patoes: here there, so tag it now, wear it now
powte her neg, shall pridle sir Owen ha?


Ri. Oh rare sir Owen, ah precious Kninght, oh rare Sir Owen.


Gwe. Out you raskals, you prade and prade, i will prade your neaces.


Ri. Oh rare Madame, oh precious Madame, O God, O God, O God, O. Exit.


Gwe. Is domineere now, you tear her ruffes and repatoes, you preake her
ponds? I Will tear as good pondes, and petter too, and petter too.


Ow. Owe Gwenthyan, Cods plude is five thousand ducats, hold hold hold, a pogs
on her pride, what has her done?


Gw. Go loog, is now paid for her repatoes, i will have her wills and desires,
i will teadge her pridle her Lady: Catho crogge, Ne vetho, en Thlonigh gna wathee
Gnathlatee. Exit


owen. A breath vawer or no Tee: pridle her, sir owen is pridled I warrant:
widows (were petter Gods plude marry whore) were petter be hanged and
quarter, then marry widows as God vdge me: Sir owen fall on her knees, and
pray God to tag her to her mercy, or else put petter mind in her Lady: awl
prittish Shentlemans tag heed how her marry fixen widow.

Sir owen ap Meredith can rightly tell,
A shrewes sharp tongue is terrible as hell. Exit.

Enter Marquess and Furio with an infant in his arms. Marq. Did she not see
thee when thou took'st it up?

Fur. No, she was fast a sleep.

Marq. Give me this blessed burden, pretty fool
With what an amiable look it sleeps,
And in that slumber how it sweetly smiles,
And in that smile how my heart leapes for joy:
Furio I Will turn this circle to a cradle,
To rock my dear babe: A great Roman Lord,
Taught his young Son to ride a Hodby-horse.
Then why should I think scorn to dandle mine:
Furio behold it well, to whom is it like?

Fur. You, there is your nose and black eyebrows.

Enter Mario. Marq. Thou do but flatter me, here comes Mario,
I know Mario will not flatter me,
Mario, thy opinion, view this child,
Does not his lips, his nose, his forehead,
And every other part resemble mine?

Mari. So like my Lord, that the nice difference,
Would stay the judgment of the curioust eye.

Marq. And yet me thinks I am not half so brown.

Mari. Indeed your cheeks bear a more lively color

Marq. Furio, play thou the nurse, handle it softly.

Fur. One were better get a dossen then nurse one.

Marq. Mario step to Grissill she is a sleep,
Her white hand is the pillar to those cares,
Which I ungently lodg'e within her head,
Steal thou the other child and bring it hither,
If Grissill be awake and strive with thee,
Bring it perforce, nor let her know what hand,
Has robbed her of this other, haste Mario.

Mari. I fly my gracious Lord. Exit.

Marq. Run flattery, because I did blaspheme and call it brown,
This Parrasite cride (like an Echo) brown.

Fur. The child is fair my Lord, you were nere so fair.

Marq. I know it is fair, I know it is wondrous fair,
Dear pretty infant let me with a kiss,
Take that dishonor off, which the foul breath
Of a profane slave, laid upon thy cheeks;
Had but I said my boy's a Blackamoore,
He would have damned himself and so have swore.

Enter Grissill and Mario with a child. Gris. Give me mine infant, where is my
other babe?
You cannot play the nurse, your horred eyes
Will fright my little ones and make them cry,
Your tongue's too ruff to chime a lullabie:
It Is not the pleasure of my Lord I know,
To load me with such wrong.

Mari. No, I unload you. Scoffingly.

Marq. Give her her child Mario and yet stay,
Furio hold thou them both, Grissill forbear,
You are but nurse to them they are not thine.

Gri. I know my gracious Lord they are not mine,
I am but their poor nurse I must confess,
Alas let not a nurse be pitiless.
To see the cold air make them look thus bleake,
Makes me shed tears because they cannot speak.

Marq. If they could speak, what think you they would say?

Gri. That I in all things will your will obey.

Marq. Obey it then in silence: shall not I
Bestow what is mine own, as likes me best?
Deliver me these brats: come press me down,
With weighty infamy: here is aloade
Of shame, of speckled shame: O God how heavy
An armefull of dishonor is? heeres two,
Grissill for this i will thank none else but you,
Which way so ere I turn I meet a face,
That makes my cheeks blush at mine own disgrace.
This way or this way, never shall mine eye
Look thus, or thus: but (oh me) presently,
(Take them for Gods sake Furio) presently
I shall spend childish tears: true tears indeed,
That thus I wrong my babes and make her bleed,
Go Grissill get you in.

Gri. I go my Lord.
Farewell sweet sweet dear babes, so you were free,
Would all the worlds cares might be thrown on me.

Mar. Ha, ha, why this is pleasing harmony.

Fu. My Lord they will wrawle, what shall I do with them?

Marq. Tell her thou must provide a nurse for them
Comes she not back Mario?

Mari. No my Lord.

Marq. Tush, tush, it cannot be but she will return,
I know her bosom bears no marble heart,
I know, a tender Mother cannot part,
With such a patient soul, from such sweet souls,
She stands and watches sure, and sure the weeps,
To see my seeming flintie breast, Mario
Withdraw with me: Furio stay thou here still,
If she return, seem childish, and deny
To let her kiss or touch them. Exeunt

Fur. Faith not I: I have not such a heart, and she ask to touch them. I Will
deny it because i will obey my Lord, yet she shall kiss and touch them to,
because I Will please my Lady: alas, alas, pretty fools I love you well but I
would you had a better Nurse.


Enter Grissill stealingly. Gris. A better Nurse: seek'st thou a better Nurse?
A better Nurse then whom?

Fu. Then you, away.

Gris. I am their Mother I must not away,
Look, look, good Furio look they smile on me,
I know poor hearts they fear to smile on thee,
I prithee let me have them.

Fu. Touch them not.

Gri. I pry thee let me touch them.

Fu. No: Hands off.

Gri. I pry thee gentle Furio let me kiss them.

Fu, Not one kiss for a Kings crown:

Gris. Must I not kiss my babes: must I not touch them?
Alas what sin so vile has Grissil done
That thus she should be vexed? not kiss my infants?
Who taught thee to be cruel gentle churl,
What must thou do with them?

Fu. Get them a nurse.

Gris. A Nurse alack, what Nurse? where must she dwell

Fu. I must not tell you: till I know my self,

Gri. For Gods sake who must Nurse them do but name her,
And I will swear those fiery eyes do smile,
And I will swear that which none else will swear,
That thy grim brows, do mercies liuerie wear,

Fu. Choose you.

Enter Marquess, standing aside. Gris. Oh God, oh God, might Grissill have her
choice
My babes should not be scard with thy diuils voice.
Thou get a Nurse for them? they can abide,
To taste no milk but mine, come, come I Will chide,
In faith you cruel man, I Will chide indeed,
If I grow angry.

Fu. Do do I care not.

Marq. To chide and curse thy Lord thou have more need

Gris. Will thou not tell me who shall be their Nurse?

Fu. No.

Gris. Will thou not let me kiss them?

Fu No I say.

Gris. I prithee let my tears, let my bowed knees,
Bend thy obdurate heart, see here is a fountain,
Which heaven into this Alablaster bowels,
Instil'd to nourish them: man they will cry,
And blame thee that this ronnes so lauishly,
Here Is milk for both my babes two breasts for two.

Marq. Poor babes I weep to see what wrong I do.

Gris. I pray thee let them suck I am most meet,
To play their Nurse: they will smile and say it is sweet,
Which streams from hence, if thou do bear them hence,
My angry breasts will swell, and as mine eyes
Lets fall salt drops, with these white Necter tears,
They will be mixed: this sweet will then be brine,
They Will cry I Will chide and say the sin is thine.

Fu. Mine arms ache mightily.
And my heart aches.

Marq. And so does mine: sweet sounds this discord makes.

Fu. Here Madame take one, I am weary of both, touch it and kiss it to, its a
sweet child, I would I were rid of my misery, for I shall drown my heart,
with my tears that fall inward.


Gris. Oh this is gently done this is my boy.
My first borne care: thy feet that neuere felt ground,
Have traueld longest in this land of woe,
This worlds wilderness, and have most need,
Of my most comfort: oh I thank thee Furio,
I know I should transform thee with my tears,
And melt thy adamantiue heart like wax,
What wrong shall these have to be taken from me,
Mildely entreat their Nurse to touch them mildely,
For my soul tells me, that my honored Lord,
Does but to try poor Grissils constancy,
He Is full of mercy justice, full of love.

Marq. My cheeks do glow with shame to here her speak,
Should I not weep for joy my heart would break,
And yet a little more I Will stretch my trial.
Enter Mario and Lepido. Mario, Lepido?

Both My gracious Lord?

Marq. You shall be witness of this open wrong,
I gave strait charge, she should not touch these brats,
Yet has she tempted with lascivious tears,
The heart of Furio, see she dandles them,
Take that child from her: stay, stay, i will commend,
That pity in thee which I Will reprepend.

Fu. Do.

Marq. Dare you thus contradict our strait command
But heeres a trusty groom, out hipocrite,
I shall do Justice wrong to let thee breath,
For disobaying me.

Gris. My gracious Lord,

Marq. Tempt me not Siren, since you are so loving,
Hold you take both your children, get you gone,
Derobe her of these rich abiliments,
Take down her hat, her pitcher and her gown,
And as she came to me in beggerie,
So drive her to her fathers.

Mari. My dear Lord.

Marq. Uex me not good Mario if you woe me,
(Or if you shed one tear) to pity her,
Or if by any drift you succor her,
You loose my favor everlastingly,

Both. We must obey since there is no remedy,

Marq. You must be villains there is no remedy,
Mario, Lepido, you two shall help,
To bear her children home.

Gri. It shall not need I can bear more.

Marq. Thou bear too much indeed.

Gri. Come, come sweet lambs we will laugh and live content
Though from the Court we live in banishment,
These rich attyres are for your mother fit,
But not your nurse, therefore I Will off with it.

Marq Away with her I say.

Gris. Away, away?
Nothing but that cold comfort we will obey,
Heaven smile upon my Lord with gracious eye,

Marq. Drive her hence Lepido.

Lep. Good Madame hence.

Gri. Thus tyranny oppresses innocence,
Thy looks seem heavy, but thy heart is light,
For villains laugh when wrong oppresses right. Run to him
Must we then be driven hence: Oh see my Lord,
Sweet pretty fools they both smiled at that word.
They smile as who should say indeed indeed,
Your tongue cries hence, but your heart's not agreed,
Can you thus part from them? in truth I know,
Your true love cannot let these infants go.

Marq. She Will triumph over me do what I can.

Turns from her. Mari. Good Madame hence.

Gri. Oh send one gracious smile
Before we leave this place: turn not away,
Do but look back, let us but once more see
Those eyes, whose beams shall breath new souls in three,
It is enough now we will depart in joy,
Nay be not you so cruel, should you two
Be thus driven hence, trust me I Would pity you.

Marq. Disrobe her presently.

Both. It shall be done.

Grissi. To work some good deed thus you would not run. Exeunt.

Marq. Oh Grissill in large Carracters of gold,
Thy virtuous sacred fame shall be enroulde,
Tell me thy judgment Furio of my wife?

Fur. I think my Lord she is a true woman, for she loves her children, a rare
wife, for she loves you, (I believe you will hardly find her match) and I
think she is more then a woman, because she conqueres all wrongs by patience.


Mar. Yet once more will I try her, presently
I Will have thee go to old Ianicolaes,
And take her children from her, breed some doubt,
(By speeches) in her, that her eyes shall never
Behold them more: bear them to Pauia,
Commend us to our brother, say from us,
That we desire him with all kind respect,
To nurse the infants, and withal conceal,
Their parentage from any mortal ear,
I charge thee on thy life reveal not this,
I charge thee on thy life, be like thy name,
(When thou comst to her) rough and furious.

Fur. Well, I will: It Is far from Saluce to Pauia, the children will cry, I
have no teates you know, twere good you thought upon it.


Marq. There Is gold.

Fu. That Is good.

Marq. Provide them nurses.

Fu. That Is better, I will and I can. Exit Furio.

Marq. Away, though I dare trust thy secrecy,
Yet will I follow thee in some disguise,
And try thy faith, and Grissils constancy:
If thou abide unblemished, then I swear,
A have found two wonders that are sildome rise,
A trusty servant, and a patient wife. Exit.

Enter Ianicola and Laureo, with burdens of Osiers. Lau. Father how fare you?

Ian. Uery well my son,
This labor is a comfort to my age,
The Marquess has to me been merciful,
In sending me from Courtly delicates,
To taste the quiet of this country life.

Lau. Call him not merciful, his tyranny
Exceedes the most inhumaine.

Ian. Peace my son,
I thought by learning thou had been made wise,
But I perceive it puffs up thy soul,
Thou takst a pleasure to be counted just,
And kick against the faults of mighty men:
Oh it is in vain, the earth may even as well
Challenge the potter to be partial,
For forming it to sundry offices:
Alas the error of ambitious fools,
How frail are all their thoughts, how faint, how weak?
Those that do strive to iustle with the great,
Are certain to be bruz'd, or soon to break.
Come, come mell with our Osiers, here let us rest,
This is old homely home, and that is still best.

Enter Babulo with a bundle of Osiers in one arm and a child in another,
Grissill after him with another child. Bab. Hush, hush, hush, hush, and I
dance mine own child and I dance mine own child, etc: ha ha, whoop old
Master, so ho ho, look here, and I dance mine own child, etc: here is
sixteen pence a week, and sixteen pence a week, eight groates, soap and
candle, I met her in Osier grove, crying hush, hush, hush, hush: I thought it
had been some beggar woman, because of her pitcher, for you know they bear
such household stuff, to put drink and porrage together, and I dance mine, etc.


Lau. Oh father now forswear all patience,
Grissill comes home to you in poor array,
Grissill is made a drudge, a castaway.

Ian. Grissill is welcome home to poverty,

The Song. GOlden slumbers kiss your eyes,
Smiles awake you when you rise:
Sleep pretty wantons do not cry,
And I will sing a lullabie,
Rock them rock them lullabie.
Care is heavy therefore sleep you,
You are care and care must keep you:
Sleep pretty wantons do not cry,
And I will sing a lullabie,
Rock them rock them lullabie.
Enter Furio and Marquess aloof disguised with baskets. Fur. Leave singing.


Ba. We may choose, Grandsire sol fa once more, we'll alla mire him, and he we
wail in woe, and who can hinder us?


Fur. Sir Scholar read there, it is a commission for me to take away these
children.


Ba. Nay then you are welcome, there is four groates, and here is four more.


Gri. To take away my children gentle Furio,
Why must my babes bear this ungentle doom?

Fur. Go look.

Lau. O misery, O most accursed time,
When to be foes to guilt is held a crime,
Sister this fiend must bear your infants hence.

Ia. Good Grissil bear al wrongs with patience. Weeps

Gri. Good father let true patience cure all woe,
You bid me be content, oh be you so.

Lau. Father why do you weep?

Ian. What can I do,
Though her he punish, he might pity you.

Lau. Let Us fret and curse the Marquess cruelly.

Ba. I by my troth that is a good way, we may well do it, now we are out of his
hearing.


Gri. Must I then be diuorc'd? and loose this treasure,
I must and am content, since it is his pleasure,
I pry thee tell we whither they must go?

Fu. No.

Gri. Art thou commanded to conceal the place?

Fur. I.

Gri. Then will not I inquire, thou do but jest
I know thou must not rob me, it is to try
If I love them: no, no, here I read,
That which strikes blind mine eyes, makes my heart bleed,
Farewell, farewell, dear souls, adue adue,
Your father sendes and I must part from you,
I must oh God I must, must is for Kings,
And lo obedience for lo underlings.

Lau. He shall not hale them thus, keep them perforce,
This slave looks on them with a murdring eye.

Ba. No, he shall not have them, knock out his brains, and save the little hop
a my thombes.


Fa. Do if you dare.

Marq. How now my hearts, what is the matter?

Fu. What car'st thou.

Lau. This is poor Grissil, wife unto our Duke,
And these her children, thus he sendes her home,
And thus he sends a serpent to devour,
Their precious lives he brings commission,
To hale them hence, but whyther none can tell.

Gris. Forbear, forbear.

Marq. Take them from him perforce,
Are these his children?

Ba. So she says.

Marq. Two sweet Duckes, and is this his wife?

Ba. Yes, he has line with her.

Mar. A pretty soul, sir thou will be hanged for this.

Fu. Hang thy self.

Mar. Beat him, but first take these two from his arms,
I am a basket maker, and I swear
I Will dye before he bear away the babes.

Ba. Oh rare, cry prentises and clubs, the corporation cannot be () sir set
down thy baskets and to it pell mell.


Fu. Would I were rid of my office?


Gri. What will you do, drive this rash fellow hence?


Marq. The Marquess is a tyrant and does worng.


Gri* I would not for the world that he should hear thee.


Mar. I would not for ten worlds but hear my Grissil.


Gri. A tyrant, no he is mercy even her self,
Justice in triumph rides in his two eyes,
Take heed how thou prophanest high deityes:
Go Furio, get thee gone: good father help me
To guard my dear Lords servant from this place,
I know he will do my pretty babes no harm,
For see Furio looks gently: oh get thee gone,
Pity sits on thy cheeks, but God can tell,
My heart says my tongue lies, farewell farewell.

Marq. Stay sir take thy purse.


Fur. I let none fall.


Ba. Half part.


Ia. A purse of gold Furio is fallen from thee.


Fu. Its none of mine, sir basket-maker, if my arms were not full, thou
should have thy hands full: farewell Grissill, if thou never see thy children
more, curse me, if thou do see them again, thank God, adue. Exit.


Ba. Farewell and be hanged.


Gri. I will thank God for all, why should I grieve,
To loose my children? no no, I ought rather
Rejoice, because they are borne to their Father.

Ia. Daughter, here is nothing in this purse but gold.


Ba. So much the better, Master we'll quickly turn it into silver.


Ia. This purse that fellow did let fall, run run,
Carry it him again, run Babulo,
Away with it, it is laid to do us wrong.

Lau. Try all their golden baits, stay never run,
They can do no more wrong then they have done.

Ia. What ails my Grissill? comfort my child.

Ba. I Will fetch Rosa solis.

Marq. Poor soul her grief burns inward, yet her tung
Is loath to give it freedom: I do wrong,
Oh Grissill I do wrong thee and, lament,
That for my sake thou feel'st this languishment.
I came to try a servant and a wife,
Both have I proved true, that purse of gold I brought,
And let if fall of purpose to relieve her,
Well may I give her gold that so much grieve her,
As I came in by stealth, so I Will away,
Joy has a tongue, but knows not what to say. Exit.

Gri. So father I am well, I am well indeed,
I should do wondrous ill, should I repine,
At my babes loss for they are none of mine.

Ia. I am glad thou take this wound so patiently.

Ba. Whoope whether is my brother basket-maker gone: ha let me see, I smell a
rat, sneakt hence and never take leave, either he is a crafty knave, or else
he dogs Furio to byte him, for when a quarrel enters into a trade it serves
seven years before it be free.


Ia. Let him be whom he will, he seemed our friend,
Grissill lay up this gold it is Furioes sure,
Or it may be thy Lord did give it him,
To let it fall for thee, but keep it safe,
If he disdain to love thee as a wife,
His gold shall not buy food to nourish thee,
Grissill come in, time swiftly runs away,
The greatest sorrow has an ending day. Exeunt.

Enter Gwenthyan and Rice, she meanly, he like a Cook. Gwen. Rees, lay her
table, and set out her fittailes, and preades, and wines, and ale, and pear,
and salt for her guess.


Ri. Yes forsooth my Lady but what shall I do with all yonder beggars?


Gwe. Send out the peggers into her Lady, go.


Ri. How? the beggars in, we shall have a louzie feast Madame. Exit Rees.


Gwen. You rascals prate no more, but fetch them in: shall pridle Sir Owen a
good teale well enough, is warrant her. Sir Owen is gone to bid her cozen
Marquess and a meiny to dyne at her house, but Gwenthyan shall kiue her dinner
I warrant her, for peggers shall have all her meat.


Enter Rees with a company of beggars: a Table is set with meat. Ri. Come my
hearts, troop, troop, every man follow his leader, here is my Lady.


All. God bless your Ladyship, God bless your Ladyship.


Gwen. I thang you my good peggers, Rees pring stools, sid awl down, Rees
pring more meat.


Ri. Here Madame, I Will set it on, take it off who will.


Beg. Let us alone for that, my Lady shall we scramble or eat mannerly?


Gwen. Peggers I hobe have no manners, but first hear me pray you now, and
then fall to out a cry.


Beg. Peace hear my Lady, Iacke-mumble-crust steal no penny loaves.


Gwen. Peggers, awl you know Sir Owen?


All. Passing well, passing well, God bless his worship.


1 Beg. Madame, we know him as well as a beggar knows his dish.


Gwe. Awl these fittels is made for Cozen Marquess: Sir Owen is gone to fedge
him, but Sir owen has anger her Lady.


1 Beg. More shame for him, he is not a Knight, but a knitter of caps for it.


Gwe. Sir Owen has anger her Lady, and therefore her Lady is anger Sir Owen


1 Beg. Make him a cuckolde Madame, and upon that I drink to you: helter
skelter here roagues, top and top gallant, pell mell, huftie tuftie, hem, God
save the Duke, and a fig for the hangman.


Gwen. Rees fedge wine and pears enough, and fall to pegger, and eat awl her
sheere, and tomineere, see you now, pray do.


A drunken feast, they quarrel and grow drunk, and pocket up the meat, the
dealing of Cannes like a set a Mawe. Exit Rees. Gwe. Nay I pray peggers be
quiet, tag your meats, you have trinkes enough I see, and get you home now
good peggers.


1 Beg. Come your roagues, lets go tag and rag, cut and long tail, I am
victualed for a month, God bo'y Madame, pray God Sir owen and you may fall out
every day: Is there any harm in this now? hey tri-lill, give the dog a loaf,
fill the the other pot you whore and God save the Duke. Exeunt.


Gwe. I thang you good peggers, ha ha, this is fine spord, by God is have
peggers eat her fittales all day long.


Enter Sir Owen and Rees. Ow. Where is the sheere Rees? Cods plude where?


Ri. I beseech you sir be patient, I tell you the beggars have it.


Owen. Wad a pogs is do with peggers? wad is peggers ^^


Fa. How my Lady Gwenthian? ha ha ha.


Enter Marquess, Iulio, Onophria, Vrcenze, Mario. Marq. You see Sir Owen we
are soon invited,
Where is your wife the Lady Gwenthian?

Owen. Is come pie and pie, Cod vdge me Gwenthian pray put on your prauerie and
fine knags, and shame not Sir Owen, yes truly Gwenthian is come out pie and
pie, Man gras worth whee cozen Marguesse, Man gras worth whee cozen Iolia is
welcome awl.


Fa Ha ha welcome, come come Madame appear in your likeness, or rather in the
likeness of another, my Lord you are best send back to your own Cooks, if you
mean to set your teeth a work to day.


Marq. Why Farneze what is the matter?


Fa. Nay there is no matter in it, the fire's quenched, the victuals given to
beggars, Sir Owens kitchen looks like the first Chaos, or like a Brokers
stall, full of odd ends: or like the end of some terrible battle, for upon
every dresser lies legs and feathers, and heads of poor Capons and wild
foul that have bin drawn and quartred, and now mourn that their carcasses
are carried away: his are not rewmaticke, for there is no spitting here lie
fish in a pitiful pickle, there stands the coffins of pyes, wherein the dead
bodies of birds should have been buried, but their ghostes have forsaken their
graves and walked abroad: the best sport is to see the scullians, some laughing,
some crying, and whilst they wipe their eyes they black their faces, the
Cooks curse her Lady, and some pray for our Lord.


Marq. Sir Owen Meredith is all this true?


Ow. True, et is true I warrant her pogs on her too true.


Ono. You told his Grace you had tamed your wife.


Owen. By Cod is tell her a lie then, her wise has pridled and tamed her
indeed: cozen Marquess pecause Grissill is made fool and turn away,
Gwenthian mag fool of sir owen: is good? ha, is good?


Gwen. It Is lie cozen Marguesse, is terrible lie: rawsone en Ennoh Twewle, it is
lie, it is lie, sit Owen tear her repatoes and ruffes, and pridle her Latie, and
bid her hang her self, but is pridled I warrant her, is not Sir Owen?


owe. Adologg whee bethogh en Thlonigh, en Moyen due, Gwenthian.


Gwe. Ne vetho en Thlonigh, Gna watha gethla Tee.


Vrc. What says she sir Owen?


Owe. I pray and pray her for Cods love be quiet, splude her say her will not
be quiet, do what Sir owen can: mon due Gwenthian, Me knock the pen, en
vmbleth, pobe des, and pobe nose.


Gwe. Gwenogh olcha vessagh whee, en herawgh, ee.


Iu. Stand between them Farneze.


Far. You shall bob no nose here.


Gwe. En herawgh Ee? Me grauat the Legatee, athlan ith pendee* adroh ornymee on
dictar, en hecar Ee.


Ono. Does she threaten you Sir Owen? bind her to the peace.


owe. By Cod is threaten her indeed, her says she will scradge out Sir owens
eyes, and her frown upon her, a pogs on her nails.


Marq. Oh my dear Grissill, how much different
Art thou to this cursed spirit here, I say
My Grissils virtues shine Sir Meredith.
And Cozen Gwenthian come I Will have you friends,
This dinner shall be saved, and all shall say,
It Is done, because it is Gwenthians fasting day.

Gwe. Gwenthian scawrnes to be fciendes, her Lady will be Master Sir owen.


ow. By Cod i will see her Latie hanged first: cozen Marquess and cozens awl,
pray tag time and stay here, Rees shall dress more fittels, and shall dine
her in spite of her Lady: Cod splude Rees Rees. Exit.


Gwe. Will you? Is try that pie and pie: Stethe whee lawer, Cozen Marguesse
Stethe whee lawer Shentlemen, Gwenthian is not pridled so soon. Exit.


Marq. I Will see the peace kept sure, do what he can, I doubt his wife will
prove the better man. Exit.


Iul. Signior Mario you say nothing, how like you this interlude?


Mari. So well Madame, that I rather with to play the beggar, then a Kings
part in it in Sir Owens apparel.


Iul. Why this it is to be married, thus you see those that go to woo, go to
woe, oh for a Drum to summon all my lovers, my suitors, my servants together.


Fa. I appear sweet mistress without summons.


Ono. So does Onophrio.


Vrc. So does Vrcenze.


Iul. Signior Emulo I see will not be seen without calling.


Far. No faith Madame, he is blown up, no calling can serve him, he has taken
another manner of calling upon him, and I hope repents the folly of his youth.


Iu. If he follow that vocation well, he will prove wealthy in wit.


Vrc. He had need for his head is very poor.


Far. Well mistress we appear without drumming, what is your parley (and yet
not so) your eyes are the drums that summons us.


Vrc. And your beauty the colors we fight under.


Ono. And the touch of your soft hand, arms us at al points with devotion to
serve you, desire to obey you, and vows to love you.


Iu. Nay then in faith make me all soldier, mine eyes a drum, my beauty your
colors, and my hand your armor: what becomes of the rest?


Far. It becomes us to rest, before we come to the rest, yet for a need we
could turn you into an armourie: as for example, your lips (let me see) no
point of war for your lips? can I put them to no use but kissing? oh yes, if
you change them to shoot out unkind language to us that stand at your mercy,
they are two culuerins to destroy us.


Iul. That i will try: my tongue shall give fire to my words presently.


All. Oh be more merciful fair Iulia.


Iul. Not I, would you have me pity you and punnish my self? would you wish
me to love? when love is so full of hate? how unlovely is love? how bitter? how
full of blemishes, my Lord and brother insults our Grissill, that makes me glad,
Gwenthyan curbs Sir Owen, that makes you glad, Sir Owen is maistred by his
Mistress that makes you mad, poor Grissil is martred by her Lord that makes you
merry, for I always wish that a woman may never meet better bargains, when
she will thrust her sweet liberty into the hands of a man: fie upon you, you're
nothing but woormewood, and oak, and glass: you have bitter tongues, hard
hearts, and brittle faith.


Ono. Condemn us not till you try our loves.


Iul. Sweet servant speak not in this language of love, Gwenthyans peeuishnes
and Grissils patience, make me here to defy that Ape Cupid, if you love stand
upon his laws, I charge you leave it, I charge you neither to sigh for love
nor speak of love, nor frown for hate: if you sigh i will mock you, if you
speak i will stop mine ears, if you frown i will bend my fist.


Far. Then you will turn warrior in deed.


Iul. Had I not need encountering with such enemies? but say will you obey and
follow me or disobay, and I Will fly you.


Ono. I obey since it is your pleasure.


Vrc. I obey though I taste no pleasure in it.


Farn. I obey to, but so God help me mistress I shall show you a fair pair of
heels and cry a new Mistress a new, if any pitiful creature will have me.


Iul. Better lost then found if you be so wavering.


Enter Marquess Lepido, Sir owen, Gwenthyan brave, and Furio. Marq. Furio hie
thee to old Ianicolaes,
Charge him, his daughter Grissil, and his Son
To come to Court, to do such office,
Of duty to our marriage, as shall like
Our state to lay upon them.

Iul. Oh my Lord,
Uex not poor Grissill more, alas her heart,

Marq. Tut tut, i will have my will and tame her pride,
I Will make her be a servant to my bride,
Iulia I Will bridle her.

Iul. You do her wrong.


Marq. Sister correct that error, come Sir owen,
Is not this better music then your brawles?

ow. Yes as Cod vdg me is: how cozen Iulia, is out a cry friends now,
Gwenthyan is laugh and be ferie patience now Sir Owen kiss her Lady, a great
teale now: see else?


Far. I but Sir owen, the kissing her Lady is no mirth to us, if we kiss the
post.


owe. Owe her cozen Marquess has terrible mighty news for tell her, or else
is made ready a great banquit at home for awl, pray come home, is awll ready
for her, her Lady say not boepeepe now: but first hear her cozen Marquess
news.


Marq. Iulia and Gentlemen these are the news,
Brought on the wings of have and happiness,
By trusty Lepido our endeared brother,
Is hard at hand who in his company,
Brings my fair second choice a worthy bride,
Attended by the States of Pauia,
She Is daughter to the Duke of Brandenburgh,
Now shall no subjects envious soul repine,
And call her base whom now I will make mine,
None shall vpbraid me now, (as they have done)
That I will slay a daughter and a Son,
Grissils* two babes are dead, and killed by scorn,
But that fair issue that shall now be borne
Shall make a satisfaction of all wrongs.
Come gentlemen we will go meet this train,
Let every one put on a smiling browe,
Sir Owen I will have your company,
And yours fair cozen: well remembered to,
Bring your three wands Sir Owen to the Court,
Though Gwenthyan look with a smoother eye,
I Will teach you how to win the sovereignty.

Ow. Is glad of that, ha, ha, ha, tag heed of wands

Lady,


Gwen. Tag heed of nails knight,


Marq. We play the unthrifts in consuming time,
Though your cursed wife make some afraid to woe
Yet I Will woe once more and be married to.

Ow. Cod vdge me Sir Owen would hang before her marry once more, if I were
another Patcheler: marie owe. Exeunt omnes.


Enter Laureo reading and Babulo with him. Bab. Come I have left my work to
see what matte^s you mumble to your self, faith Laureo I would you could leave
this lattin, and fall to make baskets, you think it is enough if at dinner you
tell us a tale of Pigmes, and then mounch up our virtuals, but that fits not
us: or the history of the well Helicon, and then drink up our bear we cannot
live upon it.


Lau. A Scholar does disdain to spend his spirits, Upon such base imploiments
as hand labors.


Ba. Good Furio vanish, we have no appetite, tell your Master, Clownes are not
for the Court, we will keep Court our selves, for what do Courtiers but we
do the like: you eat good cheer, and we eat good bread and cheese: you
drink wine, and we strong bear: at night you are as hungry slaves as you were
at noone, why so are we: you go to bed, you can but sleep, why and so do
we: in the morning you rise about eleven of the clock, why there we are your
betters, for we are going before you: you wear silks, and we sheepeskinnes,
innocence caries it away in the world to come, and therefore vanish good Furio,
torment us not good my sweet Furio.


Fur. Ass I Will have you snaffled,


Ba. It may be so, but then Furio I Will kick.


Fu. Will you go, or shall I force you?


Gri. You need not, for I Will run to serve my Lord,
Or if I wanted legs, upon my knees
I Will creep to Court so I may see him pleased,
Then courage Father.

Ian. Well said patience,
Thy virtues arm mine age with confidence,
Come son, bondmen must serve, shall we away?

Lau. I, I, but this shall prove a fatal day.


Gri. Brother, for my sake do not wrong your self.


Lau. Shall I in silence bury all our wrongs?


Gri. Yes when your words cannot get remedy,
Learn of me Laureo I that share most woe,
Am the least moved, father lean on mine arm,
Brother lead you the way, whilst wretched I
Upholde old age, and cast down misery.

Fu. Away.


Ba, Old M. you have fisht fair and caught a frog. Exeunt

Enter Marquess, Pauia Lepido, Onophrio, Vrcenzi, Farnezi, and Mario.
Marq. Lords as you love our State, affect our loves,
Like of your own content, respect your lives,
Urge us no further, Gwalter is resolved,
To marry the half heir of Brandenburgh,
My brother Pau^^ with no small expense,
Has brought the Princess out of Germany.
Together with Prince Gwalter her young brother,
Now they are come, learn of the rising Sun,
Scatter the clowdy mistes of discontent,
As he disperceth vapors with his beams.

Pau. Brother, there is no eye but brightly shines,
Gladness voth lodge in your Nobles looks,
Nor have they any cause to cloud their brows.

Enter Sir Owen, Gwenthian, and Rees with wandes: Far Oh here comes Sir Owen,
and my Lady patience, coome there.


owen. Tardaugh Cozen Marquess and Lawrdes awl.


Mar. Welcome good cozen Gwenthian, will you please Go in, and lend your
prefence to my bride?


Gwe. Cozen, it is her intentions so to do, but I swear and I were Grissill* I
would pull her eyes out, and she were as many Sharmaines daughter is there
becowes in Cambria and that is above twenty score and a lidle more, you know
Sir Owen?


Ow. Yes truly above a dozen more is warrant her.


Marq. Grissill is patient Madame, be you pleased.


Gwen. Well, and she be so baselies minded it is well, but I know whad I know
Sir Owen here thinks to make Gwenthians so patience, sir owen it is awl in
veins, well I go to her Brides. Exit.


Ow. You prade and you taug Gwenthians, but I made you put on parrels for awl
your taug and prade: Rees, where is Rees spring the wandes here Rees.


Ri. They are here sir, in the twinkling of an eye.


owe. Cozen, when her weddings are done and at leasures, I will learn your
medicines to tame shrewes.


Marq. You shall anon good Cozen Meredith.


Ow. Stand by Rees, walk in the halles among the Seruingmans, keep her wandes
till I call, hear you now?


Inter Furio. Ri. Yes Sir. Exit.


Marq. Furio are Grissill and the other come?


Fur. Yes, they are come.


Marq. Are they employed according to our charge?


Fu. They are.


Marq. How does her brother take it?


Fu. Ill.


Marq. How her Father?


Fu. Well.


Marq. How her self?


Fu. Better.


Marq. Furio, go call out Grissill from the Bride.


Fu. I will. Exit Furio.


Farn. It Is pity that fellow was not made a Soldier, he should have but a
word and a blow at his hands.

Enter lanicola and Babulo carrying coals, Laureo with wood, Grissill with
wood.
Ba. Master go you but under the Cole-staffe, Babulo can bear all, staff
basket and all.


Ian. It is the Marquess pleasure I must drudge,
Load me I pray thee, I am borne to bear.

Lau. But I Will no longer bear a logger head,
Thus I Will cast down his fuel in dispight,
So, though my heart be sad, my shoulder's light.

Gri. Alas what do you brother, see you not
Our dread Lord yonder* come perform his will,
Oh in a subject this is too too ill.

Marq. What mean thou fellow to cast down thy load?

Lau. I have cast down my burden not my load,
The load of your gross wrongs lies here like lead.

Marq. What fellow is this?


Gris. Your handmaid Grissils brother,


Marq. Take him away into the Posters lodge,


Lau. Lodge me in dungeons, I will still exclaim,
On Gwalters cursed acts and hated name. Exit. with Marq.

Marq. Grissill Take you his load and bear it in.


Ba. Oh tiger minded monstrous Marquess, make thy Lady a collier?


Marq. What Is that that villiane prates so?


Bab. God bless the noble Marquess,


Marq. Sirrah take you his coals, Grissill depart,
Return but bear that first,

Gris. With all my heart. Exeunt. Gris. and Ba. grinning at him.


Marq. Stay you Ianicola, I have heard you sing,


Ian I could have sung when I was free from care.


Marq. What grief can in your aged bosom lie?


Ian. Grief that I am ungracious in your eye,


Ba. Then would he not desire your company*


Enter Grissill. Marq. Ianicola here is a bridal song,
Play you the Lark to greet my blessed sun,
Grissill are you returned? play you the morning,
To lead forth Gratiana my bright bride
Go in and wait on her Ianicola.
Sing Hymeneus himmes, Music I say. Exit. Grissill.

Ow. Tawsone Tawsone Cozens aul, and here harmonies and sol faes.

The Song. Song. Beauty arise, show forth thy glorious shining,
Thine eyes feed Love, for them he stands pyning,
Honor and youth attend to do their duty,
To thee (their only sovereign) Beauty.
Beauty arize, whilst we thy servants sing,
Jove to Hymen wedlock iocund King.
Ioto Hymen lo lo sing.
of wedlock, love, and youth is Hymen King.
Beauty arise, beauty arise, thy glorious lights display*
Whilst we sing so, glad to see this day,
Io Io Io Hymen Io Io sing,
Of wedlock, love, and youth is Hymen King.
Marq. Art thou as glad in soul as in thy song?

Ian. Who can be glad when he indureth wrong?

Ow. As Cod vdge me Ian Niclas is honest man, he does not flatter and sembles,
but tell his intentions: owe more melodies, owe here come her new pride.


Music sounds, enter Grissill alone, after her the Marquess Son and
daughter, Iulia, Gwenthian and other Ladies, and Mario and Furio. Marq. Salute
my beauteous love.

All. All joy betide to Gratiana our dear Marquess Bride.

Marq. Bring me a crown of gold to crown my love,
A wreath of willow for despised Grissill.

Gri. Grissill is not despised in your eye,
Sithence you name her name so gently.

Ow. Gwenthians there is wives, there is patient wives

Gwe Fuh fuh is fools, Tawsone is arrant pobie fools.

Marq. Grissill place you this crown upon her head,
Put these imbrodered slippers on her feet.
It Is well, deliver me your wedding ring,
Circle-her finger with it, now stand by,
Art thou content with all?

Gris. Content with all.


Marq. My Bride is Crowned, now tell me all of you,
Which of you ever saw my love before?
What is her name, her birth, place, or estate,

Lep. Till now I never beheld her beauty.


Ono. Nor I.


Vrc. Trust me nor I.


Far. By my troth nor I.

Mari. We hear that she was borne in Germany,
And half heir to the Duke of Brandenburgh.

Marq. You all hear this, and all think this?


All. We do.

Marq Then Fu. stand thou forth, Lords in his breast
A loyal servants true soul does rest,
Furio shall be apparrelled in a robe.

Fur. I shall not become it.


Marq. Some that are great put robes on Parasites,
Mario, Lepido come you two hither,
Are not you richly clad? have I done so?

Both. What means your grace by this?


Marq. Graceless, have done,

Truth, sildome dwells in a still talking tongue,
Furio bring Laureo from the Porters lodge,
Take in Ianicola, and cloth them both
In rich abiliments, they shall awhile
Be flattered with false fortunes wanton smiles.

Ia. Fortune can do no more then she has done,
They that are marked to woe, to woe must run. Exit Futio and Ianicola.

Marq. How do you like my Bride?


Gri. I think her blessed.
To have the love of such a noble Lord.

Marq. You flatter me.


Grissi. Indeed I speak the truth,
Only I prostrately beseech your grace,
That you consider of her tender years,
Which as a flower in spring may soon be nipt,
With the least frost of cold adversity.

Marq Why are not you then nipt? you still seem fresh
As if adversities cold Izie hand,
Had never laid his fingers on your heart.

Gri. It never touched my heart, adversity
Dwells still with them that dwells with misery,
But mild content has eased me of that yoke,
Patience has borne the bruize and I the stroke.

Enter Furio, Ianicola, and Laureo, striving about attire. Lau. Give him his
silks they shall not touch my back

Marq. What strife is there, what aileth Laureo?

Lau. I will not wear proud trappings like a beast,
Yet hourelie feel the scornful riders spur,

Marq. Cloth old Ianicola in rich attire,

Ian. Do, load me, for to bear is my desire.

Marq. Do ye repine, nay then i will vex you more,
Grissill I will receive this second wife
From none but from thy hands: come give her me,

Gris. I here present you with an endless bliss,
Rich honor, beauteous virtue, virtuous youth,
Long live my Lord with her contentedly.

owe. Marg patience there Gwenthyan see you thade*


Marq. Grissill do thou deliver me this maid,
As an untainted flower which I shall keep,
Despite of enuies canker, till the rust,
Of all consuming death finish her lilfe?

Gri. I do my dear Lord, and as willingly
As I delivered up my maiden youth.

Marq. What says Ianicola?

Ia. I say but thus,
Great men are Gods, and they have power ore us,

Marq. Grissill hold fast the right hand of my bride,
Thou wearst a willow wreath and she a crown,
True bride take thou the crown and she the wreath,

Mari. My gracious Lord you do mistake your self.

Marq. Peace peace, thou Siccophant Grissil receive
Large interests for thy love and sufferance.
Thou gave me this fair maid, I in exchange,
Return thee her: and this young Gentleman
Thy Son and daughter kiss with patience,
And breath thy virtuous spirit into their souls.

Gwe. Owe Sir Owen marg you now, the man is yielded to her Latie, learn now Sir
owen learn, learn Knight your duty, see you thade?


Marq. Why stands my wronged Grissil thus amazed?

Gris. Joy fear, love hate, hope doubts incompasse me.
Are these my children I supposed slain?

Ia. Are these my nephews that were murdered?

Gri. Blessing distill on you like morning deaw,
My soul knit to your souls, knows you are mine.

Ma. They are, and I am thine: Lords look not strange,
These two are they, at whose birthes enuies tongue,
Darted enuenom'd stings, these are the fruit
Of this most virtuous tree, that multitude,
That many headed beasts, nipt their sweet hearts,
With wrongs, with bitter wrongs, al you hane wronged her,
My self have done most wrong, for I did try
To break the temper of true constancy:
But these whom all thought murdered are alive,
My Grissill lives, and in the book of Fame,
All worlds in gold shall register her name.

Le. Mar. Most dreaded Lord.

Marq. Arise flatterers get you gone, Exeunt Lep. Ma.
Your souls are made of black confusion.
Father Ianicola.

Ia. Oh pardon me,
Though dumb betwixt my grief and joy I be.

Marq. Who stands thus sad, what brother Laureo?

Eau. Pardon me my gracious Lord, for now I see,
That Scholars with weak eyes, pore on their books,
But want true souls to judge on Majesty:
None else but Kings can know the hearts of Kings,
Hence forth my pride shall fly with humbler wings.

Marq. Our pardon and our love circle thee round,
Lets all to banquet, mirth our cares confound.

Ow. Hold, hold, hold, banquet? if you banquet so, Sir Owen is like to have
sheere, her Latie here is cog a hoope now at this, pray Cozen keep your
promise, Rees the wandes Rees, your medicines and fine trigs to tame shrewes.


Marq. Furio where be the wands that I bound up?


Fur. Here my Lord.


Marq. I wreathed them then sir Owen, and you see
They still continue so, wreath you these three.

Ow. Owe wind them, yes is wind them and mag good mighty cudgel, to tame
and knog her Latie, and she prawle, or cry, or give preade and meat to
peggers, or tear pondes, by God is well remembered too, Cozen you promised to
help her to her Duckegs, for all her paper and pondes is torn?


Mar. And I will keep my promise, wreath your wands


Owen. Owe Gods lid mine is stubberne like Gwenthians, Gods plude see it
preakes in snip snap pieces, what now Cozen?


Marq. But cozen these you see did gently bow,
I tried my Grissils patience when it was green,
Like a young Over, and I molded it
Like wax to all impressions: married men
That long to tame their wives must curb them in,
Before they need a bridle, then they will prove
All Grissils full of patience, full of love,
Yet that old trial must be tempered so,
Least seeking to tame them they master you.

Owen. By God is true as Pistle and Gospel, oh true out a cry.

Marq. But you Sir Owen giving her the head,
As you gave liberty to those three wandes,
She Will break as those do if you bend her now,
And then you are past all help, for if you strive,
You Will gain as gamesters do that sildome thrive.

owe. What shall do to her Latie then? is pest run away cozen, or knog her
brains out? for is as faliant as Mars if I be anger.


Iul. That were a shame either to run away from a woman or to strike her, your
best Physic Sir Owen, is to wear a velvet hand, leaden ears, and no tongue,
you must not fight howsoever she quarrels, you must be deaf whenever she
brawles, and dumb when your self should brabble: take this cawdle next your
heart every morning, and if your wife be not patient, the next remedy that I
know is, to buy your winding sheet.


Gwe. Cozen Marquess, cozen Iulia, and Lawrds and Laties all, it shall not
need as her cozen has tried Grissill, so Gwenthian has Sir Owen,


Ow. Owe, by Cod is thought should pull her down, ah ha.


Gwe. Is not pulled down neither, but sir Owen shall be her head, and is sorry
has anger her head and mag it ache, but pray good Knight be not proud and
triumph too much and freade her Latie down, God vdge me will tag her will
again do what her can.


Ow. By Cod is love her out a cry now, sir owen could tame her before, but
Prittish ploude scawrnes to fide with Laties, yes faith scorns out a cry, a pogs
ont it is naught: Gwenthian shall no more be called Gwenthian but patient
Grissill, ah ha is.


Marq. Our joys are complete, forward to our feast, Patience has won the
prize and now is blessed.


Iu. Nay brother your pardon awhile: besides our selves there are a number
here, that have beheld Grissils patience, you own trials, and Sir Owens
sufferance, Gwenthians frowardnes, these Gentlemen louertine and my self a
hater of love: amongst this company I trust there are some maiden batchelers,
and virgin maidens, those that live in that freedom and love it, those that
know the war of marriage and hate it, set their hands to my bill, which is
rather to dye a maid and lead Apes in hell, then to live a wife and be
continually in hell.


Gwen. Iulia by your leaves a lidle while, you taug and you prable about
shidings in marriages, and you abuse young men's and damsels, and fraide them from
good sportes and honorable states: but hear you now, awl that be sembled
here, know you that discord's mag good music, and when loners fall out is
soon fall in, and it is good you know: pray you al be married, for wedlock
increases peoples and cities, awl you then that have husbands that you would
pridle, set your hands to Gwenthians pill, for it is not fid that poor women's
should be kept always under.


Marq. Since Iulia of the maids, and Gwenthian
Of froward wives, entreat a kind applaude,
See Grissill among all this multitude,
Who will be friend to gentle patience?

Ow. Ha ha ha, Grissil is weary, pray let sir owen speag Grissill is patient,
and her cozen is patient, therefore is speage for two, Gods plude you see her
Latie is spride of buttrie, yet sir owen tame her and tear her ruffes, and mag
her cry and put ou her parrels, and say is sorry Sir owen, marg that well: if
sir owen was not patient, her Latie had not been pridled, if Grissill had not
been patient her cozen Marquess had not been pridled: well now if you love
sir owens Latie, I hope you love sir owen too, or is grow mighty angry, sir
owen love you as God vdge me out a cry, a terrible feale, do you hear now,
then pray awl that have crabbed husbands and cannot mend them, as Grissils had,
and awl that have fixen wives, and yet is tame her well enough as sir owen
does, and awl that have scoldes as sir owen does, and awl that love fair
Laties as sir owen does, to sed her two hands to his pill, and by God shall
have sir owens heard and soul in his pellie: and so God save you all. Man gras
wortha whee, Man gras wortha whee. God night Cozens awl. Exeunt.


FINIS.

