CHRIST'S MIRACLES, Delivered in a Sermon.

By ARTHVR DENT, Preacher of the word of GOD, at South-Shoobery in Essex.

AT LONDON Printed by G: E. for John Wright, and are to be sold at his shop at
Christ-church Gate. 1608.

CHRIST'S Miracles.
John. 9. 16. Then said some of the Pharisees: This man is not of God, because
he keeps not the Sabbath: others said; How can a man that is a sinner do
such miracles? And there was a dissension among them.
IN this verse is set down a double opinion which the Pharisees held
concerning Christ, and especially concerning the works which he had wrought
among them. Some of them have peremptorily, and flatly condenmed him, saying,
that he was a man that was not of GOD: and they render a reason, or rather a
shadow of a reason; namely because he keeps not the Sabbath, but their
opinion was rash, and their judgment false and erroneous, proceeding from the
malice and hatred of the person of Christ. Also that which they have used for a
reason, we have showed that it is likewise false: for Christ was so far from
breaking the Sabbath, or any part of the law, that he did in full perfection
fulfill the whole law of God.

Now follows the opinion of the second sort of Pharisees, which said; How can
a man that is a sinner, do such miracles? as if the holy Ghost should say, If
our Savior Christ were such a prophaner and breaker of the Saboth, as you
surmise him to be, then it were impossible for him, to do such strange and
wonderful miracles, as we see he has wrought: of this we have spoken before,
and shall speak more hereafter, when we have spoken generally of Miracles, of
the works of them, and therefore of the power of God, in working them, and
also of the power of Angels, of Satan, and of men therein.

Whereas it is said; How can a man that is a sinner do such miracles? these
men do insinuate, that sinners can do some wonderful miracles in the sight of
men, but to do such a miracle, as to cure a man being blind from his birthe,
was impossible for them. It is impossible that any sinner should do this or
any such miracles which Christ did, we are therefore to show, first, what a
miracle is, that every one understanding the nature thereof, may make such
proper and peculiar use of the same, as he ought.

A miracle is nothing else but a rare work, apparently wrought by the sole
omnipotent power of God, clean contrary to the order and instinct of nature,
far above nature or natural causes. I use so many words, that I may speak
to the capacity of all the people, whereas otherwise I might use fewer, we are
therefore first to know y^ it is a work, for indeed it must be in it self a
true work, deed, or fact, otherwise it cannot in it self, and of it self,
make men to muse and marvel at it: at least it cannot make wise men to marvel
at it. If therefore it be a miracle, it must be a sensible work, not a work
in show, illusion or deceit, but a work in nature, indeed, and in truth* If
it be but an appearance of a work, it is no miracle. If it be only in illusion
of the senses, it is no miracle. It is then true that the illusions of Satan,
are no miracles, for he does nothing but delude the senses of men, neither is
it the celeritie or agilitie of men's hands which are miracles, as of Juglers,
which deceive the people by an actiuitie in continuing the thing which they
do. For they do not any true work, but by their dexterity deceive men's
senses. These therefore are no miracles, for every miracle must be a true
work, and fact indeed. I therefore first call a miracle, a work, to separate
it from those that seem to be miracles, and yet are not, as be the works of
Satan, and his members, and also those that are done by agility of man, which
are works in show, but not indeed. This kind of miracle which is a true work,
has been wrought by diverse of Gods children, as Moses when he was sent to
deliver the people of Israel out of Egypt, did work many miracles, to
testify that he was sent of the Lord. He made Frogs, not in appearance, but
indeed: he turned the water of the river into blood, not in appearance, but in
deed. So also Elias wrought miracles, not in show but in deed. So Christ
wrought miracles not in show, but in deed. For Lazarus being dead indeed, he
raised him up again in deed: when the wine wanted at the marriage, he turned
water in deed into wine in deed, as pure wine as any issued out of the Uine,
and so were all the miracles which he did, works in deed, and not only in
appearance. When therefore we see any wonderful thing come to pass, we must
examine it, whether it be a work in deed, or only in appearance. If it be not
a work in deed, as be the illusions of Satan, and of men, which deceive the
senses, and do not bring any work to pass, then is it not a true miracle. For
every true miracle which the Lord has wrought himself, or any of the
Prophets, or our Savior Christ, have been true works.

Secondly, I call it a rare work of God, for of the works of God, there be
some which are usual, common, and ordinary: as the preservation of mankind, is
an ordinary and usual work of God, and it is truly said of the holy Ghost,
that we live, move, and have our being in the Lord: yet because this is
usual, ordinary, and common, yea daily and hourly, (for the Lord does
ordinarily every day and hour, preserve men, otherwise they could not live) I
say because it is ordinary, daily, and hourly, we cannot properlye call it a
miracle, for it does make men to marvel, to muse, to be amassed and astonished at
it, seeing it is so usual and ordinary among them. For it is the nature of
miracles, to make men, muse and marvel at them: and therefore when as in the
Evangelists, any miracle which our Savior Christ wrought, is set down, there
also immediately follows, that the people were astonished: therefore that which
is usual, and common, cannot properly be called a miracle. A miracle therefore
must be a rare work of God sildome brought to pass, and for this cause we
cannot say, that repentance, or regeneration is a miracle, for although
repentance be wrought in few, yet is it not properly a miracle, because it is
ordinarily, and usually at one time or another, wrought in the hearts of all
Gods children. There be also many strange and wonderful works of nature, yet
because they are not rare but usual, and ordinary, they be no miracles. An
Adamant stone (we know not by what force) will draw Iron to it self: Iron is
heavy of it self, and of it self cannot possibly move from place to place,
yet an Adamant if it be above it will draw it to it self, which is very
strange and admirable, yet because it is usual and common, it cannot be called
a miracle. So we may see the nature, and power of some water, to turn that
which in nature is gold, into stone: that is known to be true by experience,
yet no man can show any reason, why that water should rather do it, then any
other. Although this be strange and wonderful, yet because it is usual and
ordinary, yet in those waters, it is no miracle: for every miracle is a rare
work that comes to pass, not ordinarily, but very sildome.

This work is called rare, either in regard of the thing wrought, or in regard
of the manner of working it. First in respect of the thing wrought: as when the
Lord sent down Manna from heaven, to feed such a great number of people as the
Israelites were, this was very rare in regard of the thing wrought. So when
the Lord made the Sun to stay in the element: so likewise (as we may read)
when the Lord made the shadow of the Dial to go back.

Secondly, a miracle is rare in regard of the manner of working it, as when the
water was turned into blood, it was not a rare thing to see blond, but the
manner of working it, as namely with a Rod, was most rare and was never seen
before. So we do see that Christ's manner of healing the blind man was very
rare. Therefore a miracle: if it be a miracle indeed, first it must be a true
work, Secondly a rare work, either in regard of the thing it self, or in
regard of the manner of doing it.

Apparently wrought, etc.

Thirdly, a miracle must have this annexed unto it: for it must not be obscure,
but apparent I mean not to the reason and judgment of man, but to man's sense,
that is, to some of his senses, or to all of them, without controversy or
doubting. This we shall see in all true miracles wrought by god, to be of this
nature, namely clear and evident to man's senses: for either men did feel
them, as the darkness in Egypt, or else they might touch them, taste them, or
smell them. When the Lord brought his people of Israel from Egypt, all the
miracles which he by his power had wrought among them were most apparent unto
man's sense. As namely when they went through the red Sea, there he made the
waters to divide themselves, and to stand like mighty mountains on each side
of them, in such sort, that they did most mauifestly see, and behold the same.
So likewise they saw, when Moses stroke the stony Rock, so that thereout gushed
water. So they saw most evidently the walls of Jericho fall down: and
therefore if there be any miracle which is not apparent of itself, it is no
miracle. Likewise what works so ever be done by Satan or any of his Angels, if
it be not evident and to be discerned by man's sense, hence we know that it is
no miracle. Let us by this property of a-true miracle, examine the miracle of
the Altar of the Church of Rome, for in the Sacrament of the Altar, after the
Priest has said a few words as these, ( Hoc est corpus meum) they teach that
there a strange work is brought to pass, for the substance of the bread which
was on the Altar, is gone and is changed into the body of Christ: if it were
so, then indeed it were a miracle: but if it be a miracle, then men may
discern it by one sense or other: For let them show me an instance where the
lord wrought any miracle which he did not subject to the senses of man, but in
this there is no miracle, which may be discerned by the senses: for the bread
in the judgment of all the senses seems the same, that it was before to ye
sight, it seems to be the very same in substance, of the same quality and
color that it was of before, it has the same taste it had before, to the
handling it appears the same that it was before, and has the same smelling
that it had before, there is not any sense that judges now otherwise of it,
then it did before, and therefore it can be no true miracle. Indeed if before I
seeing it to be bread, tasting, smelling, and touching it, do judge it to be
bread, should now, seeing, smelling, tasting, and feeling it, perceive it to be
the body of Christ, it were a true miracle: But seeing to all the senses, it
appears one and the same that it was before, it cannot be a miracle: but they
say the outward form and external accident of ye bread yet remains, but the
substance of it is turned into y^ body of Christ, which though we cannot
perceive by our senses, yet we are to believe by faith. But how did Christ
himself deal with Thomas, when he doubted of his resurrection: he said;
Thrust thy finger into my side, and feel whether I have not flesh and bones,
for a spirit has not as thou feel me to have; he takes away his doubt by
the sense of feeling: and if this true natural body of Christ were there in
the bread, then might we feel it as Thomas did, for Christ still retains
that his true and natural body, although he be now glorified. In-so-much
therefore that in the bread there is no miracle apparent to the senses, there
is no miracle at all. But this is the difference (in Gods Church) that before
it was common bread, ordained, and sanctified by the Lord, for the nourishment
of our bodies, but now it is the holy bread, appointed, and set apart, and
sanctified by the Lord, not so much for the nourishment of our bodies, but
especially for the confirmation of our faith, and the food of our souls. The
same also is to be said of the Wine.

Fourthly I add: Wrought by the sole omnipotent power of God. Wherein I note
the workers of miracles. The Lord himself works miracles, but peculiarly
and properly by his power, and not by his wisdom, though both be infinite, and
that a miracle is wrought by the power of GOD, I prove by these reasons. First
a miracle is a work of great power far passing the power of all creatures,
therefore it must needs be wrought by the power of the Creator.

Secondly, it is apparent by diverse places of the word of God, as Joel. 2. 21.
30. there the holy Ghost ascribes the working of miracles to the Lord
himself. I will show wonders in heaven and earth, says the Lord, fear not O
land, for I will do great things.

Thirdly, the holy Ghost uses this as an argument to prove, that Jehovah is
the Lord, and is only to be served. Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. Albeit the Magitians
of Egypt could work many admirable wonders by their own Art, and by the
instruction of the Diuill, yet they confessed that the works of Moses were not
done by Moses power, nor by any actor skill that was in Moses, nor yet by
natural causes, but by the finger of God, which is nothing else but his power.
By this argument does Christ prove, that his miracles were not done by the
power of Beelzebub: If I by the finger of God cast out Diuils, by whom do your
children cast them out.

Lastly, this may also appear by the consideration of the means which the
Lord uses in working of miracles. As the shadow of Peter to cure diseases. Can
any man's shadow cure another? No, but the Lord would have that this means
should show that the things were wrought by his power. So the Handkercher of
Paul did cure diseases, not that there were any such virtue in it, but that it
came from the Lord: So also did the hem of Christ's garment: is there any power
in the hem of a man's garment to cure diseases? Surely no, but the Lord uses
that means to teach us thereby that his power only does work it. Here then
we must acknowledge, that miracles are wrought only by the Lord, and serve
greatly to the advancing of his glory.

Lastly we must consider, that a miracle is contrary to the instinct of
Nature.] Nature had never any such inclination, as to bring to pass any
miracle, as when the water stood on two parts, nature had a desire to make the
waters run, when as then the waters stood, it was contrary to nature.

The use.
The use that we must make hereof, is to give to God that which is his own,
that we should acknowledge him to be the sole author and worker of miracles,
that either have been or shall be in the world. If thou give them to Satan,
then do thou constitute him, instead of the Lord himself. Art thou the
Lords? then know, that neither Satan, nor any creature, is able to work any
miracle against thee. If thou be his, rather then his name should be
dishonored by thee, he will work miraculously, for thy good and preservation.

Further, this serves to ratify our faith in the power of God. The Diuill is
his servant, whether he will or not, he can do nothing but that which the Lord
wills.

And hereby we hold that our bodies shall be raised again at the last day. For
God is able to work all miracles: although there be neither bone, skin, nor
flesh left, yet he is able to join flesh to flesh, sinew to sinew, and raise
us up again with the same bodies, we had before.

The second part of this Sermon.
Now remains something to be spoken more plainly and particularly of
miracles. For as in all other things, so also in miracles, the Lord uses
diverse and sundry ways of working. For either himself alone, and of himself
alone, or else he uses some creature in the working of the same. As in the
creation of the world, he used not any thing out of himself, but in himself,
by himself, and of himself alone, he created all things of nothing. So
likewise in the working of some miracles, it pleases him not to admit the use
of any creature whatsoever. As when he stayed the sun in the firmament, he
did it of himself without the help of any other. So also he turned back the
shadow of the Dyall of Azah by himself alone without the use of any other. But
nevertheless in working some miracles, he uses means, but especially man for
the means thereof. As in all the miracles wrought in Egypt, the Lord did work
them indeed, but by the hand of Moses and Aaron. He divided the red Sea so,
that Israel passed through on dry foot, but it was done by Moses. So also he
wrought many miracles in the wilderness before the Isralites, but by the hands
of Moses and Aaron. So some miracles were done by Judges, some by Elizaeus, and
others of the Prophets. So also God wrought miracles afterward, not only by his
son, but also by the hands of the Apostles. So that it is a true point of
religion, to hold, that the Lord in working of miracles, does oftentimes use
the means of man therein. In this doctrine we are to take heed of these two
dangerous points. First, that we derogate nothing from the Majesty of God,
although he use means in the working of many miracles. Secondly, that we do
not magnify the Creature, which the Lord uses above that which is convenient,
Into which many have fallen heretofore. For the avoiding therefore of them, it
is necessary to hold these two points of Religion: first to believe and know
that the omnipotent power of God cannot be communicated to any creature. For
the Lord says, as of his wisdom, justice and mercy, so also of his power. I
will not give my glory to another. We are therefore to hold, that the power of
God cannot beseem any creature whatsoever, no though it be an Angel of
Heaven. Secondly, that we must know, remember, and constantly believe, that
albeit the power of GOD could be communicated to any creature, either in heaven
or in earth, yet that there is no creature capeable thereof, no creature is
able to bear it. This is evident in the example of Peter, before whom when
CHRIST had wrought a miracle, and he had seen some small sight of his glory,
he said, Depart from me Lord, for I am a sinful man. If Peter could not abide
the glimmering of his glory, and if it brought his sins to memory: insomuch
that he thought himself unworthy of his presence: how much more unable had
he been to bears the weight thereof.

But (may some say) if this be so, why then does the Lord use means in
working of miracles? why does he use men Prophets, Apostles, yea and those
also which have no justifying faith, and also other creatures? I answer, the
Lord uses them, not because he stands in need of them (for he can work all
things of himself) neither uses he them, that men should ascribe less to
him, and more to the creatures which he uses, but for to teach us these three
things.

First to teach us, how his Majesty does approve the means whereby things
are brought to pass: for if the Lord uses means when as they be of less
use, much more will he approve when the means are used which have some power
to bring things to pass. This then is the first cause why the Lord uses
means, to show that he would have us kept, maintained and live in this world,
but so, as by using such means, as his Majesty shall appoint. Therefore no
man ought to neglect and contemn the means, least he oppose himself against
the Lord

Secondly, the Lord uses creatures in working miracles, to support and uphold
man's weakness, who is not able to look on his Majesty, when he works
himself. This is plain in the example of the Israelites. Exodus 19. when they
came to Mount Sinai, to hear the Lord, there was such thunder and lightning,
and the sound of a Trumpet exceeding loud, and the Mount all of a smoke,
because the Lord came down by fire, they were so bereft of their senses, and
were so afraid, that afterward they desired the Lord not to speak to them
himself any more, but that they might have Moses to speak unto them, and they
would hear him.

Thirdly the Lord uses means for the trial of our faith, of our religion,
and conscience, whether we will ascribe the work that is wrought to the
worker thereof, or to the means, or partly to the worker, and partly to the
means, or as some do, all to the means, and none to the worker. The Lord
tries whether we will be constant, to ascribe the power that is in miracles
unto his Majesty, for in the miracles of Christ, we see how diversely they were
expounded, albeit they were effected by the finger of God, yet the Pharisees
would not ascribe them to the worker, but said, that he wrought miracles by
Beelzebub the Prince of Devils. This is the corruption of man and want of faith:
they are ready to ascribe though not all, yet at the least some part of the
miracle to creatures, which are but the means, and not wholly to the Lord, who
is the only worker of miracles; for these causes the Lord uses means in
working miracles, to teach us these things thereby, for all miracles are
wrought not for him, but for our cause.

The means which the Lord uses are of diverse sorts, but especially three.
First, some means which the Lord uses in working of miracles, are such as may
seem to men to have some power in them, for the working of the miracle. As
when Moses came to the red Sea, he lift up his Rod, and stretched out his hand
over the waters. So when he came to the Rock to get water for the people, he
struck the Rock with his staff, which seemed to have some power in it, to
make the water gush out of the Rock, as afterward it did.

The second sort of means which the Lord uses, are such as have not so much
as an appearance of any force or power, or use, in the working of the miracle.
Such was the hem of Christ's garment, the hem of a garment has not so much as
an appearance, that it should heal any that are diseased. Such was the
handkercher of Paul to cure diseases, what are handkerchers or swaddling
cloutes (as we may as well say, for the curing of diseases) such was the shadow
of Peter, where unto some coming were healed of their diseases. These were
wrought when the Apostles were ignorant thereof, and when they were occupied
about other matters. But yet it pleases the Lord to use such means, although
they have not any appearance of any power in the working of a miracle.

Thirdly, the Lord uses such means as are not available for the work, but
seem to hinder it, as in curing of the blind man, the claye which was made,
and laid upon his eyes, this CHRIST (who was God and man) used, though it
seemed to contain in it a natural hinderance to the Miracle. These three
sorts of means the Lord uses, to teach us three notable points.

First he uses the first means to try the truth of our faith, to see
whether we be so firm in faith, and whether we will so wholly rely upon him,
as that he will give all glory to him for the working of the miracle, though
the means used do seem to have some power of bringing it to pass, we must
therefore learn to give all glory to the Lord whatsoever.

Secondly, the second sort of means that the Lord uses, is to teach us, that
it is he alone that works miracles, and not the creature which is used, his
sole omnipotent power does work it: Let the means do or be what it will,
whether it be any creature what-so-euer, or no creature, as was the shadow of
Peter which was nothing, but the absence of light. Let us acknowledge the LORD
to be the only cause and worker of the miracle.

Thirdly the third sort of means, teaches us to give nothing to the creature
it self which is used, which is contrary to the opinion of many superstitious
people, and contrary to all Coniurers, Sorcerers, or casters of Figures:
Satan makes them to think that the miracle is brought to pass by him, or
the means which he appoints, and not by the power of GOD. But we must
acknowlegde that all Creatures what-so-euer, that albeit the power of Angels be
great, yet if all these were joined together, yet they were not able to work
the least miracle that could be. This doctrine has singular use. First it
teaches us what a miracle is. Secondly, what a miracle is not: as all manner
of appearances are no miracles, whether they be illusions of Satan, or
proceed from the deceit, subtilty, and agilitie of man, none of them are
miracles. So the preservation of mankind, albeit it be a true work wrought by
God only, yet because it is a true usual and ordinary work, it is no
miracle, for every miracle is a rare work of God.

Thirdly, it teaches us that no work is a miracle which cannot be felt,
smelled, or perceived by some of the senses: when men therefore hold us in hand
that there is a miracle, yet if we cannot see any thing, feel, smell, or
taste any thing, contrary to the ordinary manner, there is no miracle wrought.
Therefore let the malignant Church of Rome, teach, write, and decree in their
counsels, that there is a miracle wrought in the Sacrifice of their Altar; yet
because I can neither see, touch, smell, nor taste any thing but the same that
was before, it cannot be any Miracle.

Fourthly, every miracle is wrought by the sole omnipotent power of GOD.

If any work be done by the power of Satan, or of any man: or any thing be
done wonderfully by the power of Nature, it is no miracle. If Satan has power
to do any strange thing, it is a natural work, and therefore no miracle. So
also of the good Angels. So likewise if we see strange things come to pass in
the Heavens by Natural causes, we are not to think they are any miracles.

Last of all, if any thing fall out according to the rare strength and power of
some Waters, or other creatures, if it fall out by Nature, or if partlye by
Art, and partlye by Nature, it is no miracle. Whatsoever therefore is not
brought to pass by the sole omnipotent power of God, and that is not contrary
to Nature, it is no miracle.

It follows now to see, how many sorts and kinds of miracles there be. I
mean not how many sorts there be in Nature (for so there is but only one true
miracle) but in name, and as they are called, for so there may be diverse, and
this I gather out of the words of these Pharisees. How can a man that is a
sinner do such miracles? insinuating thereby, that there be some miracles
which sinners may do, yet not such as CHRIST had done: Out of this place then
we gather that in name there be two sorts of miracles. One is a true and
divine miracle, which is that whereof we have spoken before, which is an
vnbeceaueable miracle, for it is not done to deceive any, but to magnify the
work thereof, and for the good of them for whom it is wrought, and for the
profit of those which behold it, it is called divine because it is wrought by
the soul omnipotent power of God. Besides this there is a false vain and
deceivable miracle, false I say because it is not this, for whatsoever is not
this, is a false Miracle, and vain, because it cannot have any good, Godly,
profitable and holy use to the conscience of man, and deceivable, because it
deludeth men that are to discern and judge of it. This is the miracle which
the Pharisees here speak of, the which is granted to be done by the wicked.
Elsewhere in the scriptures we read, who are the workers of this miracle, as
namely Satan himself does oftentimes work it. So also his Ministers do
oftentimes work the same, for the holy Ghost teaches us, Math. 24. 24. That
in the latter days there shall come false Christ's and false Prophets, and
show great signs, and wonders, so that if it were possible they should
deceive the very Elect. We must not imagine that the false Christ's shall work
true miracles, but they shall work such strange and wonderful things, that
they should carry away many after them: nay if the Lord had not decreed in his
secret counsel to save them that they should never fall away, they would also
deceive them. Whereby we may be admonished, that seeing we are in the last
age of the world, that fearful times are at hand, wherein false Christ's shall
arise and deceive many. And is not Satan now strong in the hearts of the
reprobates? that they will teach false doctrines. Now what if Heretics and
Scismatickes should have power to confirm their doctrine by miracles and
strange wonders? would not many believe in them? Let us therefore (as Paul
taught the Galathians) prepare our hearts, that if an Angel from Heaven teach
us any other doctrine then that which we have received in the written word of
GOD, let him be accursed. The Holy Ghost also foretells us, 2 These. 2. 9.
That before the coming of CHRIST to judgment, shall appear Antichrist with
all power, with signs, and lying wonders. The Holy Ghost does before admonish
us hereof, That we should not waver at every motion, nor fall away at every
trial, but be constant, and hold fast the Doctrine which we have received
from the Lord, by his Prophets, his Son, and his Apostles: then although we
be tried with Heretics and Scismatickes, and seem to ourselves and to others
to be lost, yet we shall be reserved to eternal salvation.

But some man may say. If Satan can work such miracles, and the Lord would
have false Christ's to arise and work wonders, how shall we judge of a miracle
that is done: whether it proceed from the Lord, or from Satan and his
Ministers, from a good cause and worker, or from an evil, and what we are to
hold and think of the power of Satan, how far it reaches, and what it is
able to do. I answer, that this is a very necessary point to be known, and
seeing we have entered into the handling of miracles, we will show what
miracles can be wrought by Satan, what is his power, where it begins, and
where it ends.

The third part of this Sermon.
Now therefore it remains to speak of the power of Satan.

Certain it is, and we are to believe it by faith, that the power of Satan
is not equal to the power of GOD: it is not so strong, so large, and so wide:
it is every way infinitely less; there is no comparison between that which is
infinite and that which is finite. If we compare it with good Angels, it will
be less then some, and greater then other some, as afterward we shall more
plainly see: but if we compare it with the power of man, it is far greater
every way: but yet we must know that is a finite and natural power, not
supernatural; for then none could be saved: it is mighty, but yet not
Almighty: but that we may better conceive of it: let us lee wherein it lies.

All the power that Satan has consists in two points: First in his
knowledge or understanding. Secondly, in his deed, action, or work. For
according as a man's knowledge is, such is his deed: so is Satan's: as his
knowledge is great, so also his work great. For his knowledge it is to be
considered whence it arises, and how he comes by it, so shall we better
judge of the greatness thereof. He has his knowledge by these means that
follow.

First from his spiritual Nature, for by Nature he is a spirit, and therefore
by nature has the measure of knowledge given by GOD to a spirit which is
great. We know that there is a greater measure of knowledge in man, then is in
a brute beast, by reason of that nature which the Lord has given to man above
beasts. So the Diuill is made of a spiritual substance, and of that only: so
that he has not a body which might hinder him to see into the nature,
quality, and operation of a spirit, and therefore being a spirit, he has the
knowledge of a spirit. In that therefore he is a spirit, he has a greater
famili, aritic with our spirits, then otherwise he could have. In regard
therefore of his Nature his knowledge is great.

Secondarily; the measure of his knowledge may be discerned by his creation.
GOD created him a good Angel, and gave him the same measure of knowledge that
he gave to other Angels: Look therefore what knowledge is in a good Angel by
creation, the same knowledge is in Satan by his creation. It may be that he
retains still that measure of knowledge which he then received, albeit as it
may be thought, that as man by his fall, lost a great measure of that
knowledge which he had by his creation: so the Diuill lost a great measure of
his knowledge by his Apostacy from the Lord. Further it is to be known, that
the diuil being now fallen, is not of the consultation of the Lord, as the good
Angels are, for they stand always before his face, ready to do any thing that
he shall command them, for the good of the Elect, and therefore they are of
the consultations of the Lord, but Satan is not so, and therefore he cannot
have so great knowledge as they have, which is a great comfort to those that be
the true children of GOD, that the good Angels, by the measure of their
knowledge, are more able to save and defend us, then the Diuill is by the
measure of his knowledge to harm us.

Thirdly, the Diuill since his fall, has increased his knowledge, both on the
things on earth, and of the ways of God, by long observations and continual
experience, who has always had experimental knowledge of the nature of man:
for he is well acquainted with the age of men, he knows what be their
affections, what is their nature, and what is their disposition, he knows
what things be offensive to men, he knows also what pleases them best in
their young age, what in their middle age, and what in their old age. And as
in these things, so also has he experience in supernatural things. For he
remembers by whom he has been resisted, and who will not yield to him. This
then must greatly amplify his knowledge, seeing he has always had such long
experience of all things that come to pass. As put the case there were one man
alive which were perfect in sense, in body, in mind, in reason, and memory,
and in all the faculties, both of the body and the mind, that had lived from
the beginning of the world unto this day, and had observed all things that had
fallen out heretofore: this man would tell such wonderful things, both past
and to come, by natural causes, and continual observation, that I fear me
least many would worship him as a GOD: therefore the Diuill must needs have
great knowledge, seeing that he has had all these. But he knows more then
any man could have done: for he does not only know those among whom he
lives, and the things that falls out amongst them, but he goes about into
every family and country, observes what is done, and is well acquainted with
their conversation.

Fourthly, besides this he has also another means to increase his knowledge.
When the Lord commands him to appear before him to render accounts of all
the works that he has done, Job. 1. 16. When the children of GOD, that is
the good Angels came before the Lord, Satan stood amongst them, and the Lord
said unto him, Whence come thou? and he answered, From compassing the Earth
too and fro: and the Lord said. Have thou not considered my servant Job, how
there is none like him in the earth, an upright and just man? Satan answered:
It is not for nothing that Job fears thee, have thou not made a hedge about
him and his house, and about every thing which he has on every side? but
touch all that he has, and then see whether he will not blaspheme thee to
thy face. Satan knew well enough, that man will make show of religion in
prosperity, but in adversity, by impatience would fall away: For hereupon the
Lord gave him liberty to afflict Job, in visiting his body with sickness, in
taking away his children, and his goods: but whence has he this knowledge?
from the revelation of the Lord: he knew that Job should be visited with
great sickness, and loose his children, and his goods, when he heard it from
the Lord, and so he knows many other things which are to come to pass, and
after he once knows them, he goes to Witches or such like, and tells them
thereof, who like wise tell others of the same before it comes to pass, and so
deceive men thereby, making them to think that they know it of themselves:
but neither they, nor the Devil know it of themselves, but by revelation of
the LORD unto Satan.

Fifthly, Satan has another excellent means to increase his knowledge which
the Lord has also granted unto men: for they know what is to come by the
Revelation of the Prophets: for if there be any curse belonging to the people,
the Prophets do denounce the same, and make the people to know thereof, by the
preaching of the word: whereas therefore the word is preached, there is Satan
present: he observes the doctrine, whether it be of power to bring men from
the kingdom of darkness, to the Lord: from sin unto repentance. If it be,
then is he must busy, either to step it from the Care, or to pull it out of
the heart, if they have once received it, as Math. 13. 19. By this means
therefore he increases his knowledge, that he may work more covertly, and
be the less discerned: for he can turn himself into an Angel of light.

Sixthly, he has yet another means to increase his knowledge, and that is by
the observation of natural causes. If you speak of an Astronomer, he can tell
that best: if ye speak of an Astrologer, he is most cunning there in. Yea
that which men guess at, and as it were groape at in the dark, he beholds
and knows most certainly, and can tell any thing that is to come to pass by
the course of the Stars, and other natural causes. If we speak of knowledge
in the Arts, there is none comparable to him: he is most skillful in all the
tongues, and there is no time that is hid from him. So that by these means he
has wonderfully increased his knowledge. But some may say: Has he knowledge
in any thing, in which the good Angels have no knowledge? No for they are as
diligent for the salvation of the godly, as he is for their destruction. Psalm.
91. 11. GOD gives his Angels charge to keep Christ and all that are his, in
all their ways: nay they pitche their tents about him that fears the Lord to
keep him on every side, that no harm befall him any way. And therefore as
soon as Satan had left off tempting Christ, the good Angels came and
ministered unto him all things that were requisite for him in this life. But
does not Satan's knowledge serve to the working of a miracle? No: for it is a
finite knowledge, and therefore cannot produce any miracle, for every true
miracle is wrought by an omnipotent power.

The second thing wherein Satan's power does consist in his action, or his deed,
which as his knowledge is great, so it is likewise great. Let us therefore see
his actions. The deed of persuading is great, for he moved Came contrary to
his knowledge, and contrary to Nature, not only to revile his brother, but to
kill him, he talked not with Caine, but by motions and persuasions in his
heart did allure him thereunto. But it appears more great in his first action
against mankind, as when he came to our first parents in the form of a
Serpent (which argues his great power, that he can transform himself into
such a creature, and abuse the tongue of a Serpent to that end.) So we read of
his actions also in Exodus, when Moses wrought miracles before Pharaoh by the
finger of God. Satan also by his Enchanters did work the same miracles, yet
not true miracles, because they did them not by the finger of God, but by the
power of Satan. So also 1. Samuel. 28. Satan comes to a witch, and would also
tell the witch what success Saul should have in his battle, that he took
in hand, he came in the shape of Samuel, so that Saul thought he had been
Samuel. So also would he talk familiarly with men: therefore the Lord gave a
law, that if any one consulted with a familiar spirit, he should dye, which law
had been in vain, if none had consulted familiarly with him. So he was a
liar in the mouth of all the false Prophets, although they themselves did not
at that time perceive it. So he possessed men's bodies, as in the Gospel, when
our Savior had cast him out of a man, he straight way went into a heard of
Swine, and even so he is able to draw men's bodies after him. We may also see
his power by a comparison with the good Angels. 2. Kings. 19. An Angel of the
Lord slew an hundredth and 85000. men of Zenacheribs Host in one night. Now the
same power is in Satan by his creation, which hereby appears to be very
great. So when he carried Christ's body upon a Pinnacle of the Temple, and up
into a Mountain to tempt him. And Acts 16. 19. there were exoreistes that
would cast forth Diuils in the name of Jesus, but the evil spirit in the man,
ran on them, and ouer-came them, so that they sled out of the house naked,
and wounded. It is therefore certain, that Satan is of a wonderful power,
and that the children of God have oftentimes tried, both in themselves, and
also in others. Among many other I remember one that is worthy remembrance.
There was a man in Geneua who feeling something to fall out contrary to his
mind, and for diverse causes which is not needful to repeat, blasphemed God,
and desired that if there were any Diuils they might come and take him away,
who was presently in the air, and never heard of after, save only that his cap
fell off his head, which shows that Satan has great power: This teaches us
that me^ must not be careless, but must look to themselves: For Satan is a
roaring Lion seeking whom he may soonest devour: watch therefore and pray,
least ye fall into temptation. But if Satan's power be so great, how comes it
to pass, that many men do so well in this world? I answer this power is
barred and limited by the Lord, and that by two especial limits.

The first limite, is his Nature, for he is not able to do any thing then
that which his natural disposition will permit and suffer. The second limit
is, the will of GOD: for he can do nothing against the will of GOD. Except
the Lord do either permit him or command him, he is not able to do any thing
at all. As it is also in other creatures, the waters should by nature
ouer-flowe the whole earth, yet they do not because it is the will of God. So
also is it with Satan, as appears, when the Lord gave him power of all Jobs
goods, beyond the Lords will he could not go, for the Lord will not suffer him
to do any thing to his children: but only the which shall tend to their good.
Ar thou in misery, or in any dangerous distress, wherein thou art most subject
to the cruelty of Satan? be of good comfort, Satan is limited, he cannot
do any thing to thee, but only that which the Lord commands him. But may
not Satan's knowledge and power be used? I answer it may. God uses it in
punishing, trying, and correcting his children. Again the Apostles used his
power for they have delivered men to Satan as Paul did. 1. Tim. 1. 20.
Himeneus and Alexander, and as he would have done the incestuous Corinths. But
may not la man use it in familiar sort, in talking, barganing, and consulting
with Satan? No. This is forbidden Deuteronomy. 18. Leuit. 20. and we are commanded
to resist the Diuill, and to fly from him, we must not therefore consult with
him. He may oftentimes tell the truth, but we must not accept it. Christ gave
us example hereof, for he said, that Christ was the Son of God, which was a
truth, yet Christ commanded him to be silent, to teach us, that the truth is
not to be received from him, for he is the Father of lies. Here then all men
are forbidden to seek unto Satan, to know any truth whatsoever. And
therefore hereby we condemn those that use witcherie, by the counsel of
Satan: and in the former places, the very action of consulting with Satan,
though no harm come thereby, is flatly death to the party: I would this law
were established in all Christian Churches, then there would not be so many
witches in that kind, as now there are. I confess indeed, there be some which
be counted witches, which indeed are not, as namely those which hurt Cattle,
as Oxen, Horse, Swine, or such like, or else children, not from the counsel of
Satan, but by the traditions of other women, by poisoning them, in doing
nothing but using the natural causes thereof. Those I would have punished, yet
not in the name of witches, but in the name of murderers. Some men think that
they may ouerrule Satan by coniuration, in using this preparation, which is
set down by some of late, that they must make a Circle, and in it make
Triangles, Quadrangles, and Crosses, and speak certain words, as saying the
Paternoster, and many other such like things that they may call up Satan in
what shape they will, and he will appear and do for them, that which they
desire. But is Satan a friend of theirs? can any such things make him obedient
to man? Do thou think that y^ can overrule him by this means? No surely,
but he rather by this means deceives thee, and all that are of thine
opinion. And thus he deceives them that use Characters. So there be Charms
used to get away the Headache, and Toothache. But does the Charm get it
away? No, Satan knows before that thy headache shall go away, and therefore
causes thee to use that Charm, and thereby would move thee to ascribe it to
the Charm.

But when Satan whispereth men in their ears: how shall they know whether it
be he, or a good Angel that speaks to them? I answer: there be diverse
manifest tokens, whereby thou may discern this.

First the Lord does not now use such means to reveal his will unto men: thou
art therefore always to suspect it to be of Satan.

Secondly, if it be a good Angel, thou may know by this: for if it be a
good Angel, it will tell thee, either at first or at last, what it is, and for
what it comes, and from whence, as in times past the good Angels showed
themselves to Abraham and Lot.

Thirdly, if it be a good Angel, he will allure thee to keep the written
word of God, if he do not, then suspect him.

The use.
The use of all this doctrine is to lead us unto God, to acknowledge him to be
our only Lord and Savior, and to embrace the Son of God, as our King. In
all things therefore we must go unto him.

But whereas it is said: How can a man that is a sinner do such Miracles? it
may be asked whether Gods enemies can work any miracles? I answer: he that
works is not against Christ, but with him: and we see that those which
endeavored Acts. 16. to work a miracle could not.

And there was a dissension among them.

Herein we see that the Lord does so work, that Christ and his do find
favor among their enemies, and that by their dissension among themselves. Here
we see that Schism is neither a note of a false Church, nor yet of a true
Church, here it is in a false Church. Schism arises of the diversity of
knowledge and judgment of men: for all men have not one knowledge and
judgment, and all see not the truth, and if they should, yet all have not the
like yielding affection thereunto. We are therefore to prepare our selves to
meet with schisms, for it is necessary that there should be Heresies, 1. Cor.
11. 10. and that in the Church of God, that those which are approved might be
known.

FINIS.

