Another TOMBESTONE; OR, A Sermon Preached at Laurance Pountneys-Church LONDON,
upon the last day of August, in the year 16^6. At the Celebration of the
Funerals of Master JOHN IVXON, late Citizen of the Honorable City of LONDON.

By STEPHEN DENISON, Preacher of Gods most holy Word in the same City.

PRO. 10.7. (...)

The memorial of the righteous man shall be blessed, but the name of the
wicked shall rot.

Plane scio quod mortales sumus, and velimus nolimus omnes moriemur, Aug. de
spiritu and anima lib. vno.

London Printed by G. M. for Robert Milbourne.

VENERABILI Et egregio viro D. HENRICO MARTEN, Militi ac Legum Doctori, supreme
Curiae Admiralitatis Angliae Iudici, ac Magistro Custodi sieve commissario
Curiae Praerogatiuae Cant nec non almae curiae Cant. de Archubus London
Officiali principali.
Vir Colendissime,
EX veteri receptoque more quaerendus quispiam est, cui nostram hanc opellam,
qualis qualis est, deuoueremus. Nonnihil autem apud me dubitaui, an libellulum
hunc tantilli pretij, tibi nuncupatum in lucem auderem emittere: ac mihi quidem
nonnunquam veniebat in mentem subuereri, ne nimiae audaciae, ac potius
temeritatis, iure possim argui, qui nec genere, nec eruditione, nec virtute
insignis, imo vix notus quidem, ad te virum tanti nominis and meriti, scribere
auderem: sed omnem pene timorem mihi tandem excussit, and, vt audacter ad te
scriberem, incitauit summatua, quae ab omnibus praedicatur, atque adeo laudibus
in coelum effertur, humanitas. Ita enim caepi apud me cogitare, quid ni ad eum
scribam virum candidissimum? qui, quae sibi a deo data est, potestate ita
vtitur, vt priuata publicis post ponens, co^munibus commodis sua contineri
existimet, and iudicis officio, ita se demum recte functurum vere sentiat,
simultoru^ bonum sibi proponens, singuloru^ quoque quoad eius fieri potest,
rationem habendam satis intelligat. Qui autem in ta^ta dignitate ita vitam
instituit, minime timendu^ est, ne is quenqua^ propter obscuritate^ habeat
despicatui. Tibi (Eques illustrissime) qui tibituique semper similis es, multis
nominibus obligatissimum meipsum ex cord meo fateor, Maecenate^ te mihi prae
omnibus in toto mu^do praestitisti. Tota Israel Londinensis nouit quid pro me
fecisti in sumis meis angustijs. nouit dixi? imo vero gratias inge^tes deo
proculdubio agit, propter amorem tuu^ erga dei Ministros. Ingratus sim
profecto, nisi fauorem tuum agnoscerem tam propensu^, mihique gratularer in
ipso. Dr. Felton nuper Episc. Eliensis dignissimus, and mei ama^tissimus, ia^,
vtitu probe nosti, morte^ obijt, vita^ mortalem cum immortali faelicissimo modo
co^muta^s: ehu, que^ amisi? At non amissus sed praemissus est, nos omnes breui
subsequemur. Amicus item meus charissimus D. Ioannes Iuxon (in cuius memoriam
hoc Monumentu funebre instruxi) qui omnes meas curas in se suscepit, qui (...)
absque molestia mea prospexit, qui mihi nutritious, propugnator, intimus, pater
exstitit, occubuit: sic f^uctus fluctu inuocat: adeo vt ego orpha^us plane in
hoc mudo relictus sum sed quid queror? (...) in monte dominus videbitur: in
ipsum Patres nostri sunt co^fisi and non sunt confusi: and aures tuas
(venerande) gemitibus meis colubinis adimplere fortasse non decet: mitto
igitur. Themistocles ille sapiens vir Graeciae (vt refert Epist. ad Nepot.
Hieronimus.) Cu^ expletis ce^tu^ and septe^ annis se mori cerneret, dixisse
fertur, se dolere quod tunc egrederetur e mundo cum sapere caepisset: Plato
octogessimo primo anno scribe^s mortuus est: Isocrates nonaginta and noue^
annos in scribe^di and doce^di labor co^pleuit: taceo caeteros Philosophos,
Pythagoram, Democritum, Zenocratem, Zenonem, qui in aetate longaeua studijs
floruerunt: Ad poetas venio, Homerum, Hesiodu^, Simonidem, Stesichoru^, qui
grandes natu, solito dulcius vicina morte cecinerunt. Sophocles, cum propter
nimiam senectute^, and rei familiaris neglige^tiam a filijs unjust accusaretur
amentiae: Aedipi fabulam quam nuper scripserat, iudicibus recitauit, sapientiae
in aetate iam fracta, specimen dans. Cato ce^sorius Romani generis
disertissimus iam and senex graecas literas discere nec erubuerit, nec
desperauerit: and Homerus refert delingua Nestoris iam vetuli and pene
decrepiti dulciorem melle orationem fluxisse: hi inquam omnes (liceat enim mihi
velipsis Ethnicis suas lauros hederasque concedere iuxta illud, reddite Caesari
quae su^t Caesaris) omni liberali eruditione instructissimi, citius ocyus
euaserunt: mihi vero dicere licet cum Mose: non sum vir facundus, nec vnquam
fui, sed impedito ore and impedita lingua sum: tutamen (vir or natissime) qui
inter alios emines, boni consulas hunc libeliulum, etia^ atque etiam obsecro:
and indulgenti ocu^o perlegas; prouerbium est Arabicu^, (...) omni vulneri est
medicina, at malo naturae non potest esse medicina* durus est hic sermo* noui
enim candorem tuum (vir celeberrime) hebetudini meae, qua^ mihi natura indidit
ac inseuit posseremedium adhibere, nempe co^donationem sieve indulgentia^. Nunc
quod restat; Deum Opt. Max. precor vt sua dona, quae largissime inte contulit
seruare, tueri and augere dignetur: longaeuum te reddat^i^ hoc mu^do, in bonum
commune; and faelic^m in futuro, in tui ipsius bonum.

Amplitudini tuae deuotissimus Stephanus Denison.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, I have formerly set forth a Sermon, called The Monument or
Tombestone, preached at the burial of Mrs. ELIZABETH IVXON, who deceased,
Nouemb. 16. Anno. 1619. and was buried the twenty two of the same month, and
nunc ecce dolor super dolorem. Now I have the like sorrowful occasion to set
out another Sermon of the like nature, preached at the burial of the Husband
of the same worthy Woman. Be not over censorious, but judge righteous
judgment: desire rather to benefit thine own soul by the work, then to
spend thy judgment upon the workman: if there be any thing amiss in the
Book, that is mine; if any thing good, it is willingly tendered to thee, take
that which is thine own, and go thy way; and the Lord make it profitable unto
thee: A Martial. lib. 7. Epigram 84.
Poet says truly, Facile est Epigramata belle scribere, sed librum scribere
difficile est; to write a verse or two is no great task, but to compose a
book who finds't not hard. And thus desiring thy fervent prayers for me whilst
I am in viuis, instead of thine unkind censures, I rest

Thine in the Lords work S. D.

Errata.
Page 9. Hier. lib. 2. aduersus Iouinianum in the Marg. should have bin set
against Crates in the same page, In page 39. in Marg. (...) for (...) in page
52. Cyrulus for Cyrillus in Marg.

A SERMON PREACHED at Laurence Pountnyes-London, upon the last day of August,
in the year 1626.
ROMANS 7.24. O wretched man that I am: who shall deliver me from the body of
This death?


FRom the beginning of the fifeteenth verse of this Chapter, to the end of the
three and twentieth, the Apostle describes a sharp combat which he felt in
himself, between the flesh and the spirit. In this twenty fourth verse, is
declared the effect, the sense and feeling of it produced in this our Apostle,
it caused him to cry out, O wretched man that I am: who shall deliver me from
the body of this death? So that this Text may justly be termed the doleful
Lamentation of Paul for the prauity of man's nature felt in himself.

In the Text we have two points: First, an exclamation, in these words,
Wretched man that I am: Secondly, an exoptation in the rest, who shall deliver
me from the body of this death? In the exclamation two things: First, the
subject, man: Secondly, the adiunct, Wretched: In the exoptation two things:
First, the evil he wishes to be freed from, namely, from the body of death:
Secondly, the form of his wish, laid down by way of question, to employ the
earnestness of it, who shall deliver me? First, concerning the exclamation,
and in that first of the subject, man.

Man has diverse names in Scripture: he is called Adam, (...) of (...), which
signifies to be red, possibly, because he was made at the first of red earth:
Secondly, he is called Ish (...) of (...), which signifies to be, or subsist,
because in his essence and being, he excelled all other terrestrial creatures:
Thirdly, he is called Geber (...), of (...), which signifies to be strong or
valiant, to signify his magnanimity or courage: Fourthly, he is called Enosh
(...) of (...), which signifies to be sickly, because by his fall he so lost
his health spiritual, as that neither he nor his posterity in this world could
ever recover it again in perfection. Again, he is called aner (...) of (...)
and (...), because he is highly lifted up or advanced, both in his Creation
and glorification. Lastly, he is called Anthropos, (...), of looking up wards;
the reason of which Etymology is rendered by the Poet in these words, Ovid.
lib. 1. Metamor.


Pronaque cum spectent animalia caetera terram,
Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque videre
Iussit, and erectos ad sidera tollere vultus.
And whereas others see with down cast eyes,
God with a lofty look did man indue, etc.
1. Doctrine or instruction.
And as this name (...) is the name given in the text, so of all the rest it is
the most significant, and must teach us according to that in Col. 3.2. to mind
things above, and not things on the earth. First, to seek Gods Kingdom and
his righteousness, Mat. 6.33. to go toward Zion with our faces thitherwards.
Ier. 50.5.
I grant there ought to be a moderate care even for the things of this life:
the Eagle flies hie, but she must come down for her meat; so the Church must
sore high in her principal desires, reaching after nothing in comparison of
heaven: and yet she must also mind the things of this life with moderation,
and in a subordination to spiritual things, 1 Timothy 5.8. Gods ordinance is,
that none walk inordinately, or idly, but that every man and woman live in a
particular calling. That which the Lord speaks to Adam, Genesis 3.19. in the
sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, he speaks in like manner to all his
posterity: for he would have no man to live idly like a Sodomite, though he be
never so rich; he would have us indeed first to seek his kingdom, but not
only to seek it: some are justly to be reproved in this City, which under a
color of Zeal to hear Sermons all the week long live inordinately, not
working at all, but living by the sweat of other men's brows, who do
unlawfully relieve them, or by devouring that which belo^gs to the poor
indeed, thinking themselves to be wronged, if they have not a share in every
benevolence. I speak not this to quench any spark of true Zeal in any, or to
condemn diligent hearing of Gods Word. I tax not Zeal but idleness. I
desire rather to kindle Zeal, and to teach my self and others to look
upwards, and to approve our selves (...) to be men by our heavenly
mindedness. Our minds are like the weights of a clock, they must continually
be wound up, or they will sink to the earth; or like unto stones which fly
no longer upwards then they are forced in their motion: therefore when we feel
our souls to bear downward (as they are very prone to do by reason of the
weight of corruption which hangs upon them like lead) let us quicken our
selves up with the remembrance of this Title, God has made us men and not
beasts, he has given us eyes to look upwards, and let us say with Gregory
Nazianzen in a short sonnet which he makes to his own soul, (...).
O my soul, look upwards, and forget all earthly things.

O my brethren, what arguments shall I use to move every one of us according to
our Title, to look upwards? Consider we, I beseech you, the insufficiency of
earthly things. First, they do not satisfy the soul, quo plus sunt potae
plus sitiuntur aquae; the more a covetous heart has of them, the more it does
desire them: much like a man sick of a dry dropsy, the more he drinks, the
more he may. Secondly, they are not able to preserve a man either from Gods
judgments in this world, or from hellfire in the world to come, Pro. 11.4.
Riches profit not in the day of wrath. Thirdly, they are not able to make a
man's life happy, whatsoever they seem to promise: yea, oftentimes (unless
they be in a special manner sanctified) they make it far more miserable,
piercing the heart with many sorrows, 1 Timothy 6.10. I appeal to the
consciences of many rich men, that formerly have bin of mean condition, Hier.
lib. 2. aduersus Iouinian.
whether they find not now that they are rich, more cares, more distractions,
more troubles, and less comfort then they have done in a meaner condition. I
speak not this that with Crates we should cast our riches into the sea, or
with begging Friars we should affect voluntary poverty, but rather to teach
us, that if riches increase, we set not our hearts thereon, as the Psalmist
speaks: but that we have our affections always free for heaven and heavenly
things.

Secondly, Horat. lib. 1. odarum od. 28. Omnes vna manet nox, and calcanda
semel via let hi.
consider we seriously our frailty, the uncertainty of our lives, and what we
must all be ere it be long; to wit, worms meat, notwithstanding all our
strength, beauty, youth, friends, riches, parts, preferments, dignities and the
like, as the Poet speaks, every man must die; the way of death cannot be
shunned; the time therefore will shortly come when we shall wish we had cared
more for heaven and less for the earth.

Finiti ad infinitum nulla est proportio.
Thirdly, consider we how infinitely heavenly things surpass earthly, one
foot in heaven is more then ten thousand acres upon the earth, both in respect
of excellency and perpetuity. Let us not therefore inuert Gods order, setting
earth above heaven in our affections, when God has set the heaven so far
above the earth in the first Creation.

Fourthly, let us be much in the meditation of heavenly things, whiles we are
upon the earth; the Sun seems small in eye, but if we were lifted up as
high as the Sun, the earth possibly might seem smaller: even so, whiles our
minds are glued to earthly things, heavenly things are neglected, but if we
would mind things above, and seriously meditate of them, things below would
appear less precious.

Fifthly and lastly, I profess ingeniously, I know not a more sovereign
means in the world, to help us to wind up our minds toward heaven, and to
gain them from the world, and the enticing vanities thereof, then to be much
conversant in Gods ordinances, in reading and hearing and meditating Gods Word,
in Prayer, in holy conference and the like: these present heaven unto our eye,
these lead us into sweet fellowship and communion with God and Christ, these
fill us with the joys of the Holy Ghost, and peace of conscience, and by this
means bring us into that sensible happiness, even in this life which we
would not part with for all the pleasures, profits, or riches which this whole
world can afford or yield. Thus for the subject, (...). quasi (...).
Man.

Now come we to the adiunct, Wretched. The Greek word thus translated,
signifies properly one that suffers sorrow: the Hebrews express it by their
(...), which signifies one that is languid or quite spent, the Syrian and
Chaldee by their (...), which signifies heavy or mournful: the Arabic by
two words, (...) which signify vile and unfortunate: the truth is, by a
talaiporous or wretched person, we are to understand such an one as is in a
miserable case, by reason of some incumbent calamity. But here it may be
demanded, what calamity was it which caused the Apostle thus to cry out?
Surely not the calamity of affliction or persecution; yea, he gloried in his
sufferings, 2 Cor. 12.10.12. but the calamity of sin and inbred corruption as
appears by the context.

Wretched man that I am. The first thing hence to be observed, 2. Doct.
is, that sin remains in the dearest of Gods children after their
regeneration: indeed it is not regnant in them after conversion, Romans 6.12. but
it is inhabitant, it reigns not as a King, but it dwells as an inmate: for the
proof of this point; we need not go out of this Chapter; Paul was a
converted man, yet he was not without sin: what he did, he allowed not; what he
would, that he did not; what he hated, that he did. In him, that is in his
flesh, abides nothing that is good; to will was present with him, but how to
perform that which is good he found not; he found a law, that when he would
have done good, evil was present with him; he saw another law in his members
warring against the law of his mind, and bringing him into captivity to the
law of sin, Lib. vno de fide ad petru^ Diaconum Tom 3. Eos qui been viuunt
nonnulla quotidie contrahere peccata pro quibus etiam sancti and insti in hac
vita semper Deo dicere debent, dimitte nobis debita nostra, sicut and nos
dimittimus debitoribus nostris.
which was in his members; with his mind he served the law of God, but in his
flesh the law sin, Romans 7.15.18.21.23.25. Et quod apostolus fatetur de
seipso, id nos de nobis inficias ire iniquum est; and if such an Apostle
acknowledge sin in himself, it were a shame for any of us to profess
absolute perfection. Saint Augustine says, they which live well, do daily
contract sin, for the which, they ought always to say unto God, forgive us
our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us: and in another
place he says also: First, Aug. de tempor. sermon. 45 Prius recolite vitam
iusti, in isto adhuc corpore bellum esse, nondu^ triumphum
consider ye the life of the just man, that while he is in the body, he is
still in a combat, the triumph is not yet.

And there is just cause wherefore God regenerates, but in part, leaving still
the roots of sin in his dearest Saints. First, that hereby they might be
the more abased in themselves, and so preserved from spiritual pride: why did
the Lord leave the Or stubbe.
thorn in Paul's flesh, 2 Cor. 12.7. but to humble him thereby, left he should
be puffed up with abundance of revelations: the Lord is like a skillful
Chyrurgian, he is able to make a sovereign Corasiue of the Vipers flesh of
sin, to eat out the dead flesh of spiritual pride, which is a sin, which
commonly reuiueth when other sins are dead; when the devil cannot draw men
to this or that gross sin, commonly he tempts them to pride, laboring to
puff them up with a vain conceit of their graces; and so by one dead fly,
causes if it were possible the whole box of the ointment of grace to stinck in
the nostrills of God. The Lord being aware of this labors to prevent it, by
leaving in us sufficient matter to humble us to the very dust

Secondly, the Lord does it, that his power may be perfected in our weakness,
2 Cor. 12.9. the Lord did never manifest his power more in any thing, no not in
the very Creation of the World, then he does in the preserving of a weak
Christian full of infirmity to his heavenly Kingdom: in this the Lord
preserues contraries in contraries, he causes the fire of grace to burn in
the midst of a sea of corruption: he preserves Faith in the midst of
unbelief, chastity in the midst of uncleanness, patience in the midst of
distemper, holiness in the midst of profanesse, and the like.

3. This is done for the greater confusion of the devil; if the devil had
only to deal with perfect men, it were the less confusion to him if he could
not, either totally or finally prevail against them by his hellish
temptations. But having to deal with weak men, such as are more flesh then
spirit, and yet not being able with all his gates and armoury to prevail
against them, in this he must needs go away with great confusion: in this the
Lord deals with his children, as once he did with the Caldeans, Ier. 37.10.
though they remain but as wounded men, yet by his power they arise and
prevail against principalities and powers.

Fourthly, hereby the Lord does try the courage and magnanimity of his
children, leaving in their bosoms dangerous enemies against whom they must
combat all their life time. God had bin able, if it had pleased him to have
brought Israel his people into Canaan without War; but he would not, that
he might try them: even so God is able to bring his children to heaven
without any opposition, but he will not; he that will obtain the heavenly
Canaan must fight for it.

Fifthly, Sin still remains in the children of God after conversion, that
they might the more sensibly feel what need they have of Christ, and of Gods
mercy; if we were perfectly whole, we should not need the physician, but
being sickly and crasie (as indeed we be in our best estate here) we have
infinite need of the only Doctor, who by the physic of his own precious
blood heals all our infirmities.

Sixthly, hereby the Lord does weane his children from the love of this world,
and makes them willing and desirous to be dissolved, and to be with Christ;
not so much that they might be freed from afflictions and distresses, as from
sin and corruption; there is nothing in the world makes the true children of
God so weary of their lives as sin does.

Quest.

Answ. for though sin be in both, yet it is not in the like manner in both.
Sin in the unconverted or wicked man is as the Master of the house, bearing
the whole sway, ruling and domineering at its pleasure; but in the converted it
is but as a drudge, being indeed unruly and malicious but wanting power.

Secondly, Sin in the unregenerate, is as a welcome guest, entertained with
all alacrity and cheerfulness: nothing is so sweet to a carnal man as sin,
nothing so lovingly embraced, nothing so joyfully possessed; but in the
regenerate it is as an unwelcome guest, which intrudeth himself without any
inuitation, and remains without any approbation, his room being desired
rather then his company.

Thirdly, Sin in the unregenerate is committed and followed with greediness,
without any reluctation in the will: the heart does not more bray after the
rivers of water then a wicked man does lust after sin: but in the regenerate,
sin is resisted, prayed against, feared, shunned with the occasions thereof,
etc.

Fourthly, Sin in the unregenerate is continued in, excused, maintained, and
sometimes boasted of: but in the regenerate it is broken of by speedy
repentance, confessed, aggrauated and blushed at.

But to come to the Application: Bellar. lib. 5. de stat paccat. c. 7.
Champions which teaches that original sin is so washed away by Baptism,
as that it remains no longer sin of its own nature: a vain conceit: for
does not Paul after he was baptized by Ananias, complain in this Chapter of
sin still dwelling in him, and will any Papist be so impudent, as to think
himself cleaner washed by Baptism then Paul himself? but to let them go:
The Familists are the generation of the Manichaeans, Catharists, Donatists,
Iouinians and Pelagians, which in former ages of the Church held the same
opinion concerning purity as they do.


This in the second place makes against Familists, which dream of attaining of
perfection of degrees in this present world, terming themselves eagles, angels,
Archangels, comers up to God, etc. concerning whom, I may justly say with
Solomon, There is a generation pure in their own eyes, and yet are not washed
from their filthiness, Pro. 30.12. the devil may so far prevail with them
by their inbred pride as to make them believe they are pure, but alas, if we
consider them well, we shall find them most erroneous in their judgments,
distempered in their passions, disordered in their lives, unreformed in their
families: yea sometimes delivered up to some base lust, either of idleness, or
uncleanness, or covetousness, or fraud and deceit, or the like: but to leave
these and to come to our selves. In the third place let it teach us not to
despair though we find corruption in our selves after conversion, especially,
if we look upon it with the same eye that God looks upon it withal, to wit,
to hate and abhor it: it is not sin but the love of sin that baines the
soul; and yet let us take heed lest we deceive our selves, thinking under a
color that all are sinners, that therefore there is no difference between
sin as it is in the regenerate, and as it is in the unregenerate. For though
there is sin in both, yet there is great difference as we noted before.

Fourthly, let it teach us not to judge rashly concerning our Brethren as
though they were Hypocrites, because we decerne in them some frailties, yea,
although we should discover in them some acts of grosser sin, and some
recidiuations or backslidings as in David, Peter and Loath, yet we are not to
pass final sentence upon them but rather consider our selves lest we also be
tempted.

Wretched man that I am: hence obeserue in the second place; what it is that
makes a man miserable: and that is not afflictions, as poverty, imprisonment,
disgrace in the world, sickness, banishment, no not death it self: in the
mids of these we may have some joy, as the Martyrs have had but sin, sin
alone is that which makes miserable: and why so? because it defaceth Gods Image
in a man, and conformes him to the Image of Satan: no child does so aptly
resemble the parents, as sin makes a man resemble the devil, which is no small
misery. Secondly, it depriues a man of Gods favor, a man may undergo many
crosses and afflictions, and yet remain in Gods love, but he cannot continue
wallowing in sin and retain his favor. Thirdly, it robs a man of al solid
comfort, a man may be afflicted, and yet filled with the joys in the holy
Ghost: he may walk with joy, work with joy, eat with joy, lie down with joy,
rise up with joy: but he cannot sell himself to work wickedness, and retain
any true comfort, sin and comfort do mutually expel one another. Fourthly,
sin wounds the conscience, kindles Gods wrath, keeps good things from us,
depriues of heaven, exposes to hel-torments, brings a curse upon al a man
has, makes the very remembrance of death terrible; and therefore sin alone
makes miserable.

Good Anselmus had that apprehension of the misery of sin, as that if he had
been put to his choice, he would have chosen rather to have been in hell
without sin, then in heaven with sin. Supposing sin to be able to make him
more miserable then hell fire it self.

person would think himself made for ever, if by usury, false weights,
cosenage, swearing, lying, and the like, he may attain riches and greatness
in the world: the malicious person would think himself happy to work revenge
against his enemy in word or deed. The like we might say of other habitual
sinners, which account sin their summum bonum, or chiefest good; but alas! they
are far deceived, accounting that their happiness which is their misery: In
this, they are like such as have the greene-sicknesse, which take delight to
eat loame, and other baggage, taking pleasure in that which others see to be
their misery: or like one infected with the itch (pardon the plainness of my
comparison) who takes delight and pleasure in rubbing of himself, when as
alas, this he takes pleasure in, increases his misery. Thus, I say, we see
the deceitfulness of sin, it promises happiness, but it performs nothing
but woeful misery.

Paul was, but this their senselessness adds rather to their misery, then in
any sort extenuats it: a man sometimes is never more deadly sick then when he
has least feeling of his sickness; even so a sinner is then in the most
miserable case, when he can go on in sin with greediness without any
remorse and with great contentment. What should we speak of JOB sitting on
the dung hill, or of LAZARUS full of sores dying at the Rich-mans gate, or of
any other in great affliction, the sinner, the sinner is the only miserable
person. Show methe greatest sinner in the world, and I will quickly show thee
the most wretched miserable catiffe that the earth bears, or ever the Sun
looked upon. Many other good uses might be made of this point, both for the
deep humiliation of us which are sinners, and for our preservation against
sin for the time to come: but for breuity sake, I leave them to every man's
private meditation, beseeching every man and woman in the name of the Lord
Jesus, to shun that with all diligence which they see by this doctrine, will
make them wretched and miserable.

And thus for the first part of my Text, to wit, the exclamation.

Come we now to the second, namely the exoptation in these words: Who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? These words may be read two ways;
either thus, Who shall deliver me from the body of this death? or thus, Who
shall deliver me from this body of death? The Reason of the diversity of
reading is, because the pronoune (...) may be indifferently referred; as it
stands in construction, either to (...) or to (...); the Syrian translation
reads it (...), Who shall deliver me from this body of death, referring the
pronoune This, rather to body then to death: the which reading, I do the
rather embrace, because the Apostle at this time does not seem to point at
this or that particular kind of death, but rather at his present body. But in
the next place for the better understanding of these words, it may be
demanded, what is meant here by the body of death? Bucer.
Some hold, that by the body of death is meant, nothing else but sin
inhabiting in the body: Hier. in apolog aduersus Ruffin.
others, by the body of death, understand the natural body liable to death:
but Origin understands it of both. Theoph. ad loc.
I think it safest to receive the last acception: For surely the Apostle
desires so earnestly to be freed from sin, as that withal he desires to be
freed from the very body as it is infected with sin. Woe shall deliver? non
dubitantis, sed anhelantis, says reueuerend Calvin, these are not words of one
that doubts, who shall deliver him, but of one that greatly desires to be
delivered, and indeed it is the manner of the Hebrews to express an earnest
wish by way of question, as we have an example in Psalm. 53.6. (...) who will
give deliverance unto Israel out of Zion? that is, O that the Lord would give
deliverance; and so in this place, who shall deliver me out of this body of
death; that is, O that the Lord would deliver me.

Thus for the meaning.

To handle the words, First, as they have relation to the body, and then as
they have reference to sin in the body: from this body of death; the body is
called the body of death, because it is liable to death: so that the first
instruction hence to be observed, is, that the body of man is subject to death
or mortality: in this respect it is called dust, Eccles. 12.7. a karkeise, Heb.
3.17. a Tent or Tabernacle, 2 Pet. 1.13. a mortal body, Romans 6.12. and here a
body of death. Quest. But how came man to be liable to death? did GOD create
him at the first so? Surely no: the Lord created him, non moriturum, such an
one as should never have seen death, if he had persisted in his integrity: In
lib. hypognost contra Pelag. and Celestianos contra primum articulum, Tom. 7.
Dicite ergo: si deus mortem fecit cur Christus Deus mortuu^ fleuit Lazarum
secundum carnem, non enim quod ipse fecerat dolere debuit, sed dolens eum and
plorans, ostendit, quos Deus vitales fecerat, diabolum per culpam fecisse
mortales.
it was sin, it was sin, that brought death into the world. In sins womb
it was hatched; God is not properly the Author or Father of it, Romans 5.12.
Saint Augustine says notably; rather say ye, if God created death, why then
did Christ, being God, bewail the death of Lazarus according to the flesh: for
what he himself had made, he should not have grieved for; but in that he does
lament and bewail him, he shows that whom God had made vital, the devil by
sin has made mortal. We shall not need further to insist upon the proof of
this point, viz. that the body of man is mortal; we see it proved every day,
when we see by experience good men, wise men, great men, eminent men in Church
or Commonwealth, Learned men, and men of singular parts to be taken away by
death, as well as others: this point needs not proof but Use.

especial care to paint, pranck and to pamper their bodies: how many vain
women have you in this City, and elsewhere, which spend a great part of the
forenoone in trimming of their bodies, and hardly afford to spend one quarter
of an hour in a whole day in prayer, or reading of Gods Word, or in repenting
of their sins for the eternal good of their souls: yea; how many Epicures
have you both men and women, whose care is to fare deliciously every day, to
ride up and down from place to place, to seek delights for their flesh, which
will hardly go to the door to hear a Sermon? do these persons consider that
their bodies are bodies of death? their practice shows they do not: but let
them remember that those bodies which they are so curious to prank up in
apparel, far above their callings, must (they know not how soon) be clothed
with dust, and those karkeises which they do so pamper, (...) poena autem huic
mors malorum minimum plat. lib. 9. de legibus.
shall ere it be long, be very wormes-meate: yea, it were happy for them, if
no greater danger did hang over their heads then bodily death: but alas, after
death comes judgment, Heb. 9.27. when they must answer for this misexpence of
time, and the rest of their sensual and graceless courses. I might make
diverse other uses of this point; for it should teach us to live in a continual
expectation of death, and preparation for it; it should teach us to lay up
treasures for our selves in heaven by good works, to be mortified to the
world, to beware of sin, and the like, because we live in bodies of death
which may quickly fail us; but I study brevity.

This body: there is an Emphasis in these words; and they are spoken
Diacriticks, by way of distinction: for indeed, the child of God has a this
and a that body; his this body is, that which he possesses in this life, his
that body is, that which he shall enjoy at the Resurrection: indeed for
substance it is one and the same body, Job 19.26- 27. but for qualities and
excellencies far discrepant the former body is sown in corruption, the
latter is raised in incorruption; the former is sown in dishonor, the latter
is raised in honor; the former is sown in weakness, the latter is raised in
power; the former is sown a natural body, the latter is raised a spiritual
body, as the former has borne the image of the earthy, so the latter shall
bear the image of the heavenly, 1 Cor. 15.42.43.44.49.

Chrysostom. hom. 41 in 1. Epist. ad Corinth. (...). Use.
Hence it is, that one of the Fathers says, the bodies of the Saints are like
corn sown, and growing up, that which rises is the same that was sown, and
not the same; the same, because it is the same substance; not the same, because
that which grows up is better, the same substance remaining, but the
goodlines or beauty made far greater.

And this may comfort us concerning the Saints deceased, they have laid down
these infirm and corruptible bodies, but they shall receive bodies far more
glorious: their vile body shall be made like unto the glorious body of Christ
himself; howsoever not in Majesty, yet in some similitude of happiness,
Philip. 3.2. yea, they shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of their
Father, Mat. 13.43. And as * Saint Chrysostom says, God would never take
down the house of the bodies of his Saints by death, (...)
but that he means again to build it up far more glorious by the
Resurrection, then ever it was before: let us not therefore mourn immoderately
for the Saints departed, but let us remember there will come a day, wherein
they shall lift up their heads out of the grave in shining brightness.

Who shall deliver me? that is, O that the Lord would deliver me: hence note,
that its lawful for a Christian to desire to be dissolved. Paul desires it
ernestly in this place, and certainly his desire was no rash desire, yea the
whole Church desires it in, 2 Cor. 5.8. we are confident, and willing rather to
be absent from the body; And there is just cause wherefore we may do this.

First, because whiles we are in the body, we are subject to many temptations,
to much sin, and to much vexation, both inwardly and outwardly. Cyprian sermon
4. de immortalitate, Lucru^ maximum computan^ium seculi laqueis non teneri, iam
nullis peccatis and vitijs carnis obnoxium fieri, exemptu^ pressuria
angentibus, and venenatis diaboli fau cibus liberatum, ad laetitiam salutis
aeternae Christo vocante proficisci. Note.


Secondly, we are absent from those unspeakable joys which God has laid up
for us in a better world. To this purpose one of the Ancients speaks notably,
expounding that of Saint Paul, in Philip. 1. Death to me is advantage. Paul
says, he esteemed it very great gain, now by virtue of death to be freed
from many snares, from all sins, from all sorrows, from the venomous jaws
of Satan, and to be brought to the joy of eternal salvation, Christ calling
him thereunto.

Indeed it is not lawful for a Christian to lay violent hands upon himself,
upon any pretense whatsoever. Apud Aug. lib. 1. de ciuit. dei cap. 22.
One Cleo^brotus reading Platoes book de immortal. animae, Cast himself down
from a wall and so ended his days; only because thereby he hoped to come to
that blessed estate, which is prepared for good men after this life: but this
was preposterous haste, and not to be imitated of us, we may desire happiness,
but we must stay Gods leisure for it: the like may be said of Lucretia, who is
said to have taken away her own life, to prevent rauishment; all murder is to
be abhorred, but there is no murder so unnatural as hemicide or
selfe-murther which is the very reason why the devil does so violently tempt
men thereunto. The Heathen were so careful to prevent this kind of unnatural
death, Val. ^. max. lib. 8. c. 9.
that one Hegesias an eloquent Philosopher, was forbidden by Ptolemeus the
King, to reason or speak much concerning man's infelicity lest his Auditors
should be moved by his speech to make away themselves; shall the heathen be
thus careful to shun this sin, and shall not Christians much more?

Homer brings in the most valiant men armed, and weaponed ready to defend their
lives, and so it may stand with a magnan imous spirit to seek to preserve life
by all lawful means: but to dote upon this momentany life, and to prefer it
before eternity, must needs be a great sin: honey is sweet, and yet we must
not surfeit upon it; so life is pleasant, but we must not ouerualue it.

Now that we may attain this resolution of Saint Paul, to desire to be
dissolved: we must observe these rules following. First, we must pull out the
sting of death, which is sin: death is a Serpent, but if you take away its
sting, you may safely put it in your bosom. Aristot. lib. 3. ethic ad nic hom.
c 6
The Heathen Philosopher could say, that, (...), death is the most fearful
thing in the world, and why? not because after death there is neither good nor
evil, as he atheistically speaks; but because the conscience is terrified
with sin unrepented of. O that I could enlarge my self now to speak to
every particular sinner. Thou that art a common swearer, a Sabbath-breaker, a
secret adulterer, a common drunkard, a fraudulent dealer, a malicious person, a
persecutor, and a slanderer of Gods faithful Ministers, an idle droane, a
liar, a talebearer, a belly-god, a proud person, an usurer, a base worldling,
etc. do thou desire ever to look death in the face with comfort, and without
hellish fear? break off thy sin, else death will sting thee like an Addar,
and thou shall never be able to look God in the face.

Secondly, if we would attain to a willingness to die, we must get faith,
we must make our calling and election sure, we must with Simeon get Christ in
our arms, and then we shall easily say, Lord now let thou thy servant
depart in peace: a man cannot choose but fear to die, when he knows not what
shall become of his poor soul in the world to come. We have many
encouragements to believe: First, because we are commanded so to do, 1 Ioh.
3.23. Secondly, because Gods mercies and Christ's merits are greater then our
sins, be our sins never so great, Isa. 1.18. Thirdly, because great sinners
have bin saved, Manasse, Mary Magdalen, David, The prodigal Son, with diverse
others. Fourthly, because the tender of mercy is made to every Creature, Mar.
16.15. Fifthly, we have many excellent helps to believe, to wit, the preaching
of the Gospel, the use of the blessed Sacraments, experience of former
feelings and tokens of Gods love, etc. O therefore let us stir up our selves
to believe; and let us labor for such a Faith as may purify our hearts, Acts
15.9. as may work by love, Gal. 5.6. as may fill our hearts with sound joy, 1
Pet. 1.8. as may be joined with good fruits, James 2.26.

If we can but believe by such a faith as this is, nothing shall be able to
hinder our Salvation; yea, if all the tyles upon the house where we shall die,
were so many devils, we should not fear. It is recorded of one Epaminondas a
famous captain, Diadorus Siculus lib. 15.
who being wounded in War, asked first if his shield were safe, as though he
had not cared what had become of his life, so his buckler were preserved; even
so we need not care what becomes of our lives, so our Faith be safe.

Thirdly, If we will die willingly and with comfort, we must expel out of our
hearts the immoderate love of the world. Ambro. lib. de fide resur. Tom 3. Mors
nec amara ege^tibus nec gratiosa diuttibus,
It is a true saying of one of the ancient Fathers: Death is neither bitter to
men that live in want, neither is it welcome to rich men: a rich man that has
made Mamo^ and pleasure his God will be as loath to part with these at his
death, as ever Laba^ was to part with his Idols which Rahel had stolen: yea, if
God would offer him heaven upon condition to part with these, he would refuse
the offer, Mat. 19.21.22. O therefore my beloved, let us take the counsel of
the holy Ghost, in Psalm. 62.10. If riches increase, let us not set our hearts
thereon: let them not clog the wings of our affections, but let us in the mids
of abundance, reserve in our selves a willingness to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ; knowing that with him is enduring substance and fulness of joy
for ever and ever. Do thou willingly dye and leave thy dear friends? behold,
thou shall enjoy the company of the blessed Trinity, of the elect Angels, and
of the souls of men made perfect: do thou willingly part with great riches
on earth? behold, thou shall have great treasure in heaven: do thou
cheerfully leave thy earthly habitation? behold, a better mansion above ready
to receive thee.

Fourthly, if we will die willingly, we must be fruitful in good works,
this is to lay up for our selves a good foundation against the time to come
(howbeit, not of merit, but of assurance) 1 Timothy 6.19. it is no marvel if any
man be unwilling to be sent out to live in some strange Country, unto the
which he has sent no provision before hand for his own entertainment, and
so it is no strange thing, if any be unwilling to die, who has not had any
care to lay up treasure for himself in heaven: let me use therefore that
effectual exhortation of our blessed Savior, Luke 16.9. Make you friends of
the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye shall fail, they may receive you
into everlasting Tabernacles. Good works done in a right manner and with a
sound intention will make thy life sweet, thy death comfortable, and thy end
happy. What a man gives to kindred and friends out of mere natural respects,
he gives it merely to them, and they only have the benefit of it; but
whatsoever any shall give for Christ, and for pious uses, he gives it to
himself, he rewards his own soul: he alone receives the maine benefit,
according to that. August in sermon. de divite. Quicquid pauperibus dederimus
ipsum integre posside bimus.
Whatsoever we shall give to the poor, we shall enjoy it all our own selves.

Fifthly, if we would die willingly, we must with Christ finish the work the
Lord has given us to do, Ioh. 17.4. no servant is willing his Master should
return until he has done his appointed task; no steward is willing his
Lord should call him to an account before he has made all things straight.
But here it may be demanded, what is the work which the Lord has given us
to do? Or what is the maine task of a Christian? Answer, His first task is
to repent; every Christian should think himself borne for repentance: his
second task is to believe in the Lord Jesus, and so to make straight his
account by setting his debts upon Christ his score: his third task is, to
glorify God in his general and particular calling, laboring therein
faithfully, in love to his Master, and in thankfulness for the great work of
Redemption: his fourth task is, to work up his own salvation with fear and
trembling, and to give all diligence to make his calling and election sure: he
that has a conscionable care to dispatch this task, need neither be ashamed
to live, nor afraid to die.

Thus for the tractation of these words, Who shall deliver me from this body
of death, as they have relation to the body.

sin is a bondage; else, why should the Apostle speak here of deliverance
from it: Cyrulus Alexan. in euang. Joan. lib. 6. c. 2. Haec seruitus eo
deterior est qua^ corporalis subiectio,
yea, as one of the Fathers says truly, The servitude of sin is so much the
worse then bodily subjection, For these causes.

First, because al men detest and shun corporal subjection as hard and
bitter, and that out of knowledge of the bitterness of it: but the servitude
of sin is neither sufficiently known, neither does it displease: yea, we
applaud it and play with it, take pleasure in it, and account it rather a
freedom then a bondage.

Secondly, because by running away, a man may deliver himself from bodily
bondage; Seruus autem peccati non habet quo fugiat.
but a slave to sin cannot do so, his evil inclinations and guilty conscience
will still follow him.

Thirdly, in bodily bondage a man may be blameless; for what blame was there
in Joseph, when he was sold as a slave by his brethren into Egypt; but in the
slavery to sin, a man cannot be innocent, because he is not sold against
his will, but with his will to work wickedness.

Fourthly, from bodily slavery, there is freedom and deliverance at death,
though during life it be never so hard and painful, but spiritual slavery
has no end, no not in death: he that has served sin all his life, remains
a very Captive after death, without any hope at all of any freedom.

Fifthly, in corporal servitude a man's mind may be made free; but in
spiritual, Hilar. in Psalm. 125. At vero animae captiuitas qua^ infelix est. At
vero cui libido domina est in quo caeno dedecoris volutatur.
both soul and body in all the faculties and parts thereof are in bondage:
another of the Fathers says, the bondage of the soul, O how miserabe is it.
And again, he that is ouerpowred by lust, how shamefully does he wallow in
the mire as a very swine: Theoph in 8. Ioannis. (...). Beda in eundem locum. O
miserabilis seruitus, seruire peccato, seruire diabolo qui peccati est author.
a third says, the bondage of sin is of all other the most grievous: a
fourth says, O miserable servitude, to serve sin, and to serve the devil,
who is the author of sin? But what do we speak of Fathers, what says the
Scripture? Christ himself says, John 8.34. he that works sin, is the
servant of sin: and seducers in whom corruption reigns, are said to be the
bondslaues of corruption, in 2 Pet. 2.19. I might also urge that place in Gal.
4.25. Jerusalem that now is, is in bondage with her children: but I hasten to
a conclusion.

Alexander to conquer the whole world, being conquered himself of his own
lusts and passions? yea, let it move us to labor after liberty: let the
adulterer forsake his uncleanness, the drunkard his drunkenness, the
worldling his worldly mindedness, and all other sinners their deareling lusts,
that they may be free; in other respects we all love freedom, and no man by
his will would remain in bondage. O why should we be in love with the basest
bondage of all other, to wit, of sin.

Tertullian reports, Lib. de cultu faeminaru^.
that amongst the Heathen, some of them made the fetters wherewith their
prisoners were bound, of gold: but alas, what dram of comfort could this afford
to the condemned prisoner, who daily expected death: did not fetters of gold
keep as fast as fetters of iron? may not a silken halter strangle a man as well
as one of hemp? may not a costly dagger stab as well to the heart as a mean
one: even so though some may be clothed with rich array, and fare deliciously
daily, and live in pleasure, yet if in the midst of his prosperity he be a
slave to his own lusts, a Captive to Satan, in danger of eternal
imprisonment, yea, of eternal death; what will his prosperity avail him in
the end? It is far better to be a free man in rags, then a condemned
prisoner in rich robes.

Who shall deliver me: hence observe in the next place, that it is not enough
to grieve for sin, or to account it the greatest misery, but every true
Christian ought earnestly to desire to be freed from it: thus Paul here: and
certainly that grief for sin is not true, but hypocritical, which is not
joined with an earnest desire to be freed from the dominion of every sin:
there is infinite reason why any man should desire to be freed from sin: as,
First, because it is the greatest misery: and Secondly, because it is the most
woeful bondage: Thirdly, because it offends God: and Fourthly, because the
wages of it is death; but I will not insist upon this: let us rather consider
with what kind of desire we ought to desire to be freed. Surely we must
desire it with Paul's desire: but what kind of desire was Paul's desire?

First, it was an importunate, not a slight desire, that appears by the form
of it, in that it is propounded by way of question.

Secondly, it was no sluggish desire separated from the use of means, but it
was joined with prayer and fasting, 2 Cor. 12.8. 1 Cor. 9.27. and with the
improuement of the whole Armor of God, 2 Timothy 4.7. and indeed, in vain does
any man desire to be freed from sin, that does not withal diligently use the
means whereby he might be freed.

Crocadile after she has slain a man: Conradus Gesnerus.
but yet he has no sound desire to be freed from the power of that sin, for
the which he seems to weep: his prayer against sin is like the prayer of
Saint Augustine when he was between light and darkness: he prayed indeed for
chastity, but he was afraid lest God should hear and grant his prayer too
soon: as he testifies of himself in his confessions: So this man weeps for
sin, and yet still he desires to enjoy the pleasures of it. But my beloved
brethren, let us not deceive our selves with false tears: but let us stir up
our selves to earnest desires to be freed from sin: yea, unto our desires, let
us add diligent means of Mortification: let us be frequent in the use of
Gods Ordinances, in reading and hearing Gods Word, in Prayer, in the Lords
Supper, and the ike. Secondly, let us shun the occasions of temptation to
sin, viz. Stage Plays, disordered places, bad company, etc. Thirdly, let us
well improve our spiritual armor. It is feigned of the giants that they were
borne into the world in their armor. Sure I am, a christian is not sooner
newborn, but he shall find use of the whole Armor of God, having enemies to
fight against him, both within and without.

Thus I have done with the Text.

THE occasion of this Sermon, was the death of Master JOHN IVXON, Citizen and
Marchant-Taylor of London; who deceased the twenty two of August, and was
buried on the last day of the same month, Anno. 1626. Concerning whom, I
suppose every one will not speak well, although I hope none (if all things be
rightly considered) has any just cause to speak evil of him: but what good
man at these days may not say with Aristophanes, (...), I have bin a
profitable member of the Commonwealth, and a friend to the City, and yet I
suffer wrong. I have lived in the house of our deceased Brother, twelve years
and upwards. I thank God for his love: in the which time, I have observed him
to be very Zealously affected to Gods word, very careful of the sanctifying
of Gods Sabbaths, very conscionable in his personal performance of holy duties
in his family, very studious to train up his Children in the knowledge and
fear of God: he was also (I hope) very just in his secret dealings. I remember
he said unto me in his life time, that he praised God, his conscience did not
accuse him of any one groate then in his possession, which was gotten by unjust
means: a speech which (it is to be feared) too few rich men at these times,
are able to say truly; also he was very humble and lowly, having a very mean
opinion of his own parts, he was full of godly jealousy concerning his own
estate, he went mourning under the sense and feeling of natural corruption,
he reverenced God highly, he loved Christ dearly, he was lovingly affected
toward Gods faithful Ministers and people, he did good in his lifetime,
laying up treasure for himself in heaven, and he did good at his death: yea,
and to my knowledge, (by that which he has said unto me) he had a purpose to
have done a great deal more good, if the Lord had lengthened his life: what
shall I say? surely such a man will be missed by the Church of God, by the
poor in diverse places, by his own Children, and by my self: and yet I will
say with S. Chrysostom. (...), Hom. 41. in 1. Epist. ad Corinth.
let us not mourn immoderately for them that depart hence, but let us weep
for them which end their lives ill, and in this respect, I hope we have no
cause to bewail the death of this our Brother. For he dyed full of Faith, and
full of joy: and yet in respect of the want I shall find of thee my dear and
loving friend, I cannot but conclude with lugubrious verses concerning thee.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
Epitaphiu^ STEPHANI DENISON in mortem D. IOANNIS IVXON amici eius long
charissimi.
Terent Andr. act. 1. scen. 1.
Pamphilus en Chryside^ defuncta^ Collachrumabat
In lachrymasque ruit graecorum ob tristia fata
Homer Odyss lib. 8. versus fine^.
Ulysses, instar Niobes ecclesia Christi
Deflenda est nobis, flagrantesque ignibus aedes.
Res alios urgent aduersae, plangere amare
Sic tua cogor ego dulcissime funera amice.
Ecce perit instus, sed Isa. 57.1.
nemo in mente reponit
Eheu quot rapuit nuper mors maesta dynastas.
O Deus, auertas mala quae hoc praesagijt Ibidem.
omen,
Des simus memores propriae nos mortis, Jesus.
(...).

FINIS.

