A THREEFOLD RESOLVTION, very necessary to salvation. Describing EARTHS
VANITY. HELS HORROR. HEAVENS FELICITY. PSALM. 107.43. Who so is wise will
ponder these things. By JOHN DENISON Batchelour in Divinity.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Field for John Norton. 1608.

To the right worshipful, Sir William Willoughby Knight, the best blessings of
this life, and everlasting blessedness in the life to come.
ALthough, right worshipful, my many employments well known unto you, might
seem a sufficient remora to my pen: yet my desire by all means to do good,
has more prevailed with me, then those lets wherewith I have conuersed. These
meditations (a testimony of my desires) I make bold to present unto you, to
whom, if they be worthy of any respect, they do belong in many respects; as I
might sufficiently manifest, but that I hold it more expedient to remain a
thankful silent debtor, then to become a public trumpeter of your private
favors.

If you judge them worthy, vouchsafe them, I pray you, your patronage: if not,
your pardon: at least your acceptance, as a token of his thankful mind, who
will ever rest.

Your Worships at commaundment in Christ Jesus. I. D.

1
Let heavens power down their sweetest influence,
Let them enrich you with the earths best treasures;
Let them withal instill truths quintessence:
Heavens joys do far surmount all earthly pleasures
2
Let the celestial powers you guard and guide,
And countermine when wicked powers conspire:
Let spotless blood which ran from harmless side,
Quench unto you the ever burning fire.
3
And let the winged Posts void of delays.
From glorious throne when great Iehoua sends,
Translate your soul when death shall end your days
To that celestial bliss which never ends.
To the Reader.
THe last period and principal Resolution of every Christian is, or should be,
to glorify God in the fruition of eternal felicity. Wherein we must
remember, that remote ends have subordinate means to produce their effects:
which ought in no case to be neglected.

And as the seaman for the getting of his prize must have care of three
principal points: first, to balance his ship discreetly; secondly, to shun
the dangerous gulfes of the sea; thirdly, to get good landing in a safe haven:
So every Christian that desires the fruition of true felicity, must first so
balance his affections, that they be not ouer-burdened with the love of this
world; secondly, he must have a care to shun the gulf of hell and eternal
destruction; thirdly, he must labor to get the kingdom of heaven for his
haven. Upon these points (good Christian) must thy Resolution cast anchor, if
ever thou resolve to be eternally happy. Now to help forward thy resolution,
behold here the Worlds vanities deciphered, Hels torments displayed, and
Heavens happiness described: Meditations (in my conceit) never more fit then in
these wretched days, wherein men are become too great lovers of the world,
have lost the dread of hell, and the desire of heaven. The Lord bless them to
thy comfort and salvation. And if thou receive any good by them, recompense my
pains with thy prayers.

(...) (...) (...) last judgment: (...) 2. Society with the devils and the da^
3. Eternity of the hellish torment (...)

3. Heavens felicity: 1. Before the day of judgment: 1. Sanctimonie of life.
2. Peace of conscience. 3. Comfort at the day of death.
2. At the day of judgment: 1. Joy at the resurrection. 2. Comfort to meet and
come before 3. Consolation upon the sentence (...) blessed.
3. After the last iudge^^^^ 1. Freedom from torments and m^ 2. Fruition of
celestial gl^^^^ (...)


The first part. Of the Earths vanity in general.
AS it was in the days of Noah and Lot, Luke 17.26.29.
so shall the coming of the son of man be (says our blessed Savior that
Son of man.) For as in those times they did eat, and drink, marry, build
and plant, that is, exceedingly prosecute the vain profits and pleasures of
the world, till the flood came and destroyed them: so shall it be when the
Son of man shall be revealed. Was the world ever more addicted and devoted to
these vanities then now it is? and have we not therefore just cause to expect
that refining fire, 2. Pet. 3.10.
which shall burn up all the corruption upon the face of the earth? Almighty
God has given to men three mansions of a diverse quality: first, the world
wherein they live: 2. the grave wherein they corrupt: 3. either heaven wherein
they are crowned, or hell wherein they are tormented. In the world their
companion is vanity, in the grave the worm, in heaven the Angels, and in hell
the devils. Yet such is the folly of most men, that they would have perpetual
habitations, and everlasting happiness in this vain world; to who^ Augustines
speech is very fit: August. confess. lib. 4. cap. 12.
Seek for that which you seek, but not where you seek it: you seek a blessed
life in the region of death; alas it is not there. What extreme folly is this,
to seek felicity where nothing can be found worthy the affecting and
following, if all were weyed in the balance of judgment and discretion? What
is the world with the things of the world, but enimitie against God, even pitch
which defiles, birdlime which intangleth, and a snare which intrappeth? Is not
her coat misery, her crest iniquity, and her motto vanity? Neither are these
adjuncts less permanent, then eminent, both in the entrance, continuance, and
conclusion of this life. For we come into the world wailing and weeping, we
live in it with toyling and moyling, and we leave it with grieuing and groaning.
Job. 1.21. Vide Praefa. Plin. ad lib. 7.
Naked came we out of our mothers womb, and naked must we return again. Thus
both the Orient, and Occident; the Prologue, and the Epilogue of our life is
nakedness. And if we view the sundry times, places and courses of our life,
behold they yield nothing but vanity and misery. Infancy is weak and feeble;
youth is rash and dissolute: old age froward and doting. The pleading places
yield contention, the house cares, the country labor, the Court envy, the
sea tempests and pirates, the land thieves and robbers. Poverty is despised,
wealth is envied, wit is distrusted, folly is derided; yea (which is most
lamentable) vice is advanced, and virtue disgraced.

Man is by many writers called a little world; (...).
and not unfitly, in that he is a model of the miseries of this greater world,
having within him, sin rebelling against him; without, the world to allure
him: before, Satan's snares to entangle him: behind, a wary conscience to dog
him: on the right hand prosperity to inueigle him; on the left hand adversity
to vex him: v^der his feet the grave open to swallow him; and over his head
the judgments of God ready to fall upon him. So that a man in this life may
very well be compared to a seaman in a dangerous and tempestuous navigations:
if he look up to the heavens, he beholds nothing but a dreadful darkness;
if he look down to the seas, he vieweth nothing but the tossing waves; if he
behold his ship, he hears the joints thereof crack very fearfully; if he cast
his eyes upon his companions, they look pale and pitifully: and in a word,
there is nothing to be seen, but fear and dread on every side: and if it
happen that the ship of man's frail body do sail safely and quietly in the sea
of this troublesome world, commonly men have small care of arriving at the
haven of eternal bliss.

Those that are in danger of drowning, Jonas 1 5.
will cast all into the sea to save their lives: and should not we cast all away
to save our souls? Shall the fear of drowning in the sea make us forgo our
goods: and shall not the dread of drowning in hell cause us to forsake them? It
is good counsel therefore: Aug. in Psa 36.
Trample the sea of this world under thy feet, lest thou be drowned in it.

Who is he, that expecting and hoping for salvation in the life to come, would
hazard the same for these trifles which he must needs forgo, and how soon or
in what manner he knows not. Fie upon it, that all the natural ornaments of
the soul or body, or all the external vanities in the world which can be
enjoyed but a few years, should cause any Christian man to neglect his soul
and the life which can never have an end. As for the profane worldling and
secure Atheist, I would propound this question to him; though his cogitations
being carnal, he cannot conceit the joys of heaven: For there is no nation so
barbarous, but it does acknowledge there is a God. Cic. de leg l. 1.
and though he be grown more sottish then the barbarous heathen, that he say
in his heart, there is no God: yet let him tell me, whether he do not sometimes
fear at the remembrance of hell; yea though he labor mightily to deface and
obscure the cogitation thereof, would he not give much that he might be sure to
be free from the danger of it? yea, though he become not only carnal and
brutish, For they do believe and tremble. Iam. 2.
but even worse then the devils. Suppose (for the more evident demonstration of
his folly) it were doubtful whether there were any hell, judgment, or
torments prepared for the wicked; yet what madness is it for the love of these
things which are certainly vain, and must certainly be forsaken, to be in any
possible danger of such intolerable torments? And I would feign know of this
wretch, who does thus labor to nourish Atheism that he may securely hoise up
the sails of vanity, For the wicked persuades himself there is no God, that
he may boldly become abominable. Psalm. 14.1.
safely set open the flood gates of iniquity, and without fear or danger have
full scope in the field of impiety: what present benefit he has by his
profaneness and profuse abusing of temporal blessings, more then the godly
Christian by his religious conversation, and sober using of them? And what
sensible (I will not say godly) man, does not rather desire to live like the
gracious Emperors Gratianus, Vt referunt Eusebius, Socrates, etc.
Constantine and Theodosius then those graceless wretches Caligula, Nero, and
Heliogabalus? But leaving the Atheist to his conversion or confusion, let none
that fear God and desire heaven, suffer themselves by their servile affections
to be made slaves to these base and contemptible things. Cypr.
A man cannot with one eye behold the earth, and with the other at the same
time look up to the heavens: neither can he affect these earthly vanities, and
withal long after eternal felicity. Chrysostom. in Johan. hom. 53. in fine.
He that has his hands full of silver, must first empty them before he can
catch any gold in them: so cannot a man lay hold on heavenly things, till he
have let go the love of earthly. For as in natural operations the corruption
of one must be the generation of another, and the diminishing of one, the
augmentatio^ of the other: so in spiritual apprehensions, the forsaking of one
must be the means of embracing another: you cannot serve God and Mammon. Mat.
6.24.


First therefore, labor (good Christian) with thy self, to win and waine thy
affections from the love of this world, which I know will be a matter of much
difficulty, and does therefore require the greater diligence. For Satan
doubtless will deal with thee as he did with our Savior; Mat. 4.8.
when he showed him the kingdoms of the world, he showed him also the glory of
them: so is it his policy to varnish those vanities which he means to utter;
and as pictures coursly wrought seem fair a far off: so, if thou behold them
with a superficial view, they may easily delude thee; but come near, and
touch them and try them, and thou shall find they are all mere vanities.

Some have thought that at least all the three kinds of goods, that is, of
fortune, Philo in lib quid deter. potior insul. and alij.
the body, and the mind, being conjoined do produce an absolute felicity,
as the Elements combined though not severally, do make the world: but that was
their error. For albeit in their first frame, the body with all his members,
the soul with all her faculties, and the earth with all her parts being
viewed (vno actu) by the Creator, were like the many strings of a sweet and
well tuned instrument, Gen 1.31.
even all very good. Yet since the fall of man they are fallen to such a
discord, that they can never agree together in any gracious harmony, Romans
8.20.22.
til Christ at his second coming do set them in tune. The view therefore of
their vanity should cause thee to despise them, and to conclude with Solomon,
Eccl. 12.13
Let us hear the end of all: fear God and keep his commandments. To this
purpose have I penned the first part of this treatise, that the same may be a
preparatiue to the other following. Where thy house is ruinous thou will have
care to repair it; and where thy body is ill affected thou will take physic
to cure it: be not then less careful for thy soul then thou art for these
earthly tabernacles. So that where thou see thy self carried forward with the
immoderate love of these vain delights, there apply such medicines as are here
prepared for thee: to the which (if they prove weak in operation) thou may
add more simples out of the heavenly garden of Gods word, but in any case
apply them with prayer, the only means to make them effectual.

CHAP. 1.
SECTION. 1. A view of the vain condition of man in respect of the goods of
the mind: and first of the understanding
Eccles. 1.2.
Vanity of vanities; says the Preacher, vanity of vanities; all is vanity. If
ever there were any man fit and able in respect of his wealth to try, of
industry to search, and his wisdom to judge of the things of this life, it was
Solomon the King and Preacher of Jerusalem. 1. Ki. 10.27.
His wealth was such, that he made silver as plentiful in Jerusalem, as the
stones in the streets. His wisdom was exceeding much, 1. Kin. 4.29.
for he had a large heart, even as the sand that is on the sea shore. His
industry also was very great, Eccles. 1.13 14.
for behold he applied his heart to search and find out wisdom by all things
under the Sun. And when he had employed his wealth, wisdom, and industry in
this diligent scrutinie, and distilled forth even the purest spirits of these
terrestrial bodies, he found amongst them nothing but vanity; yea the
uttermost elixar was vanity of vanities.

If any thing in the world were worth respecting, it must needs be man, for
whose use all things in the world were created; but concerning him, behold what
the Prophet David says: The children of men are vani^y, and as though that
were not enough, he adds, Lay them on the balance, Psalm. 62.9.
and they shall be found lighter then vanity. If there were any thing
excellent in man, it must needs be the internal ornaments of his soul: but
behold, as they are merely natural, they are exceedingly corrupted and
depraved.

The wit of man may fitly be compared to the Israelites jewels, whereof they
made a calfe: for as the same gold being in jewels was precious, but being
cast into an Idol became odious: so the wit of man which in the days of his
innocence was good and gracious, is in his corrupted estate become vain and
vicious.

The understanding is in the sacred Scripture compared to the eye: the
principal object it should behold is the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 6.22.
with all the adjuncts of blessedness: but in that office it is as blind as a
beetle. And this is herein evident, in that, when the bright sun of
righteousness appeared, being the most glorious and most resplendent light
that ever shined in the world, having John the Baptist the day star going
before him, and many trumpetters of his manifestation: Ioh. 1.5.
yet that light shined in the darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not.
Tit. 2.11.
For had the nature of man been capable of this grace of God which brings
salvation to all men, they would never have shut their eyes against the light
of that glad tidings, 1. Cor. 2.8.
nor have crucified the Lord of glory; and so have shamefully deprived him of
life, who offered himself to deliver them from eternal death. Verse. 14.
But the natural man perceives not the things that are of God: yea they seem
foolishness to him.

Nicodemus was a teacher in Israel, yet what gross ignorance does he show in
the doctrine of our regeneration? When our Savior said: Ioh. 3.4.9.
A man must be borne of God, else can he not see the kingdom of God; Nicodemus
wondered at it, and thought he had never heard a more absurd speech in all his
life: and how much ado has Christ to fasten an instruction upon him? Has
not experience manifested this in many of the worlds wise men, Romans 1.22.
who professing themselves to be wise, have become fools? And surely the
gross dotage of mankind is not more apparent in any thing then in the sottish
idolatry of those, that have turned the glory of the immortal God into the
similitude of corruptible and base creatures. Verse. 23.
If there were any spark of spiritual knowledge shining in the soul of man,
would not the worshippers of idols say to them selves, Esa. 44.19^
I have burnt half in the fire, and have baked bread upon the coals thereof;
I have roasted flesh and eat it, and shall I make the residue thereof an
abomination? shall I bow to the stock of a tree? But thus have the wise
natural men being left to the guidance of their own corrupt hearts, become
exceeding vain in their cogitations, Romans 1.22.
verifying the Prophets speech: Ier. 10.14.
Every one is a beast by his own knowledge. Sundry beasts have wit to find
out remedies for the cure of their maladies, as experience together with the
natural Historian shows. Plia. lib. 8.
Yea, all living creatures have naturally a care of their safety, but only
man being wounded by sin, has not by the light of nature any wit to seek
for remedy: Amb. Offic. lib. 1. ca. 17.
yea only man is careless of his eternal salvation. Every one is wise enough
to do evil, Ier. 4.22.
but to do well they have no understanding. And no marvel: for as the clearest
eye beholds not the brightest object, except the Sun beams do come between
to enlighten it: so the sharpest wits are not able to conceive the heavenly
mysteries of our redemption, regeneration and eternal salvation, without the
bright beams of Gods spirit shining into them to enlighten them.

2 True it is, that in humane and civil matters the understanding of man has
by nature some insight, yet is the same mixed with manifold imperfections. The
Philosophers ignorant of the fall of man, and the natural corruption and
contagion imprinted in his soul by reason of the same, compare the soul of
man to plain wax having nothing printed on it, but fit for any impression;
Chrysostom. Lactan. lib. 5. cap. 15.
and to smooth tables without characters, yet apt to receive any inscription.
But Divines much better (because more consonant to the Scriptures) do compare
it to an untilled field, Ier. 4.4.
not only lying barren, but yielding the thorns, weeds and brambles of
iniquity, till it be husbanded by the spirit of God. Yea Chrisostom makes the
soul worse then such a field, Chr^s in Io^an hom. 17 initio,
and that in sundry respects. For the earth having once received seed, brings
forth much fruit, and needs no other sowing: but it is not so with our
minds, which must be often and diligently sowed, that they may once receive
the seed of the word; and then are they subject to thorns to choke it, and to
thieves to steal it: they must be kept in continual dressing, till they come
to ripeness; and then also in continual tilling, that they may retain their
goodness. Neither is this imperfection incident to some only, but to all the
sons of Adam: as might be instanced in the wisest Grecians and the most
politic Romans, Romans 1.14.
even when they have intended to improve their wits.

The best minerals have their poisons till they be extracted, and the sweetest
flowers their faeces, till they be separated: so the best wits have their
folly, till by Gods spirit they be refined. And how can this be otherwise, if
we consider that the soul is in the body as a stranger in a poor cottage, 2
Cor. 5.
and must needs therefore be subject to infinite wants? And if that wits be
sharp and quick, are they not commonly like the summer fruit, soon ripe
soon rotten; and like the bright flame, quickly kindled, quickly quenched?

Thus if you will take the weight of man's wit in civil things, it will be
found like Baltasar too light: Dan. 5.
but lay his natural understanding upon the balance with spiritual things,
Psalm. 62.
and it shall be found lighter then vanity it self.

3 Yet is not this all the evil incident to this depraved faculty, but it is
sawced also with that which Solomon annexeth to his vanities, even vexation of
spirit: For in the multitude of wisdom is much grief: Eccles. 1.18
and he that increas^th knowledge, increases sorrow. The Corinthians stood
much upon their knowledge, but S. Paul tells them that knowledge puffs up: 1.
Cor. 8.1.
making them to swel like a windy bladder, as it did Simon Magus, Act. 8.9.
who in regard of his magical skill said, that he himself was some great
thing. It is a hard thing to keep sharp wits within the compass of Christian
sobriety. Romans 12.3.
For as the purest substances will mount aloft, and the subtle and ayrie do
pierce every chinke: so the sharpest wits do oftentimes soar like the Eagle
beyond their reach, till they dazell and burn their eyes; and seeking to pry
into the bowels of curiosity, do get into mazes and labyrinths, which yield
them restless toyling taskes with much indignation.

Does not wit many times beguile her self, and so bring a man into the briars,
as no simple man of a shallow conceit falls? according to the Prophets saying
to the Babylonians: Esa 47.10.
Thy wisdom has deceived thee. And do not the policies and stratagemes of
the wise prove snares and traps to take them selves withal, whilst their
actions beyond their expectations are crossed and countermined? according to
the Apostles words, Ioh. 5.13. 1. Cor. 3 19.
He catches the wise in their own craftines. Joseph's brethren thought to
prevent the honor foreshewed in his dream, by selling him: howbeit, even that
(thorough the ouer-ruling hand of God) became the only means of his
advancement. But thus, Plin. lib. 34. cap. 8.
as Perillus invention in making the brazen bull, was his own ruin: so wit
many times deuiseth weapons to wound it self. Besides this, As Salust says of
Catilin: Magna vi animi fu^t, sed ingenio malo prancque. De coniu. Cat.
it is commonly seen, that as the best ground brings forth the deadliest
poisoned herbs: so those that are very ingenious are very vicious; and the
natural wit raises up the forts of carnal reason, 1. Cor. 10.4.5.
and makes the barikadoes of iniquity strong to resist the assaults of Gods
spirit. This was not unconsidered of Satan, Genesis 3.1.
when he made choice of the Serpent (being the most subtle of all other
beasts) to be his instrument in seducing of the woman in Paradise: in regard
whereof, the Apostle has just cause to challenge the wisdom of the flesh to
be enimitie against God. Romans 8.7.


Well then, forasmuch as humane wit and wisdom is thus vain and weak in
good things, and so prompt and powerful in evil; Ier. 9.23.
Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom. Pride and disdain are faults
following sharpness of wit, as the shadow accompanies the body: as the King
of Tyrus can witness, Ezec. 28.
whose haughty heart was thereby so lifted up, that he thought himself
equal with God. But labor thou to captiuate thy thoughts and thy wit to the
wisdom of almighty God revealed in his word, and let that be thy wisdom
and understanding in the sight of the people: Deuteronomy. 4.6. 2. Tim. 3.15
for it has in it the true saving wisdom. Labor to obtain that divine
wisdom, the merchandise whereof is better then merchandise of silver, Prou.
3.13.15.
and the gain thereof is better then gold, and more precious then pearl. And
if thou will be truly wise indeed, then fear God: Job. 18.28.
for behold, the fear of the Lord is wisdom, and to depart from evil, is
understanding. This is true wisdom, not to be cunning and expert in worldly
vanities, but to be wise to salvation. Consider now (my Christian brother) how
thy soul is furnished with grace to conceive and understand those mysteries
that appertain to the kingdom of God: and if thou perceive thy self wanting
that way, ask wisdom of the God of wisdom, Iam. 1.5.
and desire him to open thine eyes, Psalm. 119.18
that thou may understand the wonderful things of his law. But if thou
perceive the light of sanctified knowledge in divine things shining into thy
soul, remember what our Savior said to Simon Peter, Blessed art thou Simon
the son of Jonas, Mat. 16.17.
for flesh and blood has not revealed these things to thee: so may thou
justly count thy self blessed and happy, and have great cause to magnify the
Lord for his mercy, who has given thee an understanding heart.

SECTION. 2. Of the Will, and Affections.
HVmane reason and understanding is unto the will and affections as the eye to
the body, the captain to the soldiers, and the pilot to the ship: if the
eye be dark, the body walks blindly; if the Captain be ignorant, the
soldiers march disorderly; if the Pilot be unskillful, the ship sails
dangerously: so whilst the will and affections do follow such a blind,
ignorant, and unskillful guide as the natural understanding is in supernatural
things; how can they walk without falling, march without disorder, or sail
without danger of drowning in the Ocean of iniquity?

Having therefore showed the vanity of the understanding (the guide of the
will) the same may be sufficient to demonstrate the vanity of the will it
self, which deduceth her election from the same. For if we be insufficient to
think any (good) thing of our selves, 2. Cor. 3.5.
can there be any sufficiency in us to will that is good? considering
especially that our understanding is far fleeter then our will. But lest any
should think yea, let him remember that as the Apostle ascribes the
sufficiency of our thoughts to God: so he attributes both the sufficiency
and efficiencie of our wills to him saying, Phil. 2.13
that it is God which works in us both the will and the deed: according to S.
Augustines observation upon David's speeches, Psalm. 59.11.
My merciful God will prevent me: Psalm. 23.6.
Doubtless mercy and kindness shall follow me: Nolentem ^raeuenit, etc.
Volentem subsequitur, etc. Enchirid. cap. 31.
It preuents him being unwilling to make him will; it follows him close being
willing, lest he should will in vain.

It is the nature of every one, by reason of a certain philautia seated in
the soul of man, to flatter himself in his own freedom and sufficiency, as
the Jews did, John 8.33: but S. Paul teaches, Romans 6.20.
that every unregenerate man is the servant of sin; and that all his freedom
is to be free from righteousness, Verse. 19.
and to give up himself freely to sin: from which servitude also he can
never be exempted, till the truth make him free. Ioh. 8.32.
Yea we are not only the servants of sin, Ephesians. 2.5.
but even dead in trespasses, and do lie like Lazarus in the grave of our
transgressions. So that as Christ first rolled away the stone of the grave, and
then cried, Lazarus come forth: Ioh. 11.43 Ezec. 36.20
so Almighty God must first take away our stony heart, and then may our
Savior call, Mat. 11.21.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden; and we shall be able to
say, Lo, I come, or else will his exhortation be in vain: Ioh. 6.44.
for none can come to me (says Christ) except my Father draw him. Whilst man
was in his innocence, he had both an intelligent heart, and a tractable will;
but now he is unable to will and do good except he be delivered and helped by
grace, P. Lum. lib. 2. did. 25. q.
as the Master of the Sentences truly teaches. It fares with us as it did
with the Prophet Ezekiel, Ezec. 2.1 2.
when the Lord bids him rise and stand upon his feet, he could not do it till
the spirit entered into him and set him upon his feet: so we must expect that
the Lord which commands us shall enable us, Confess. lib. 10. cap. 29.
as Augustine says: Give us Lord, that which thou commaundest, and command
what thou will.

Senten. lib. 1. did. 17. quest. 2.
Scotus his similitude being wisely understood, may serve very well to
illustrate this matter: where he compares the will of man to a horse at
liberty, and the grace of God to the rider. For by the fall of man, the nature
of the will was not taken away, though the quality and condition thereof were
changed; but as the horse can run freely without a rider, so can the will
move freely without the assistance of Gods saving and sanctifying grace: but as
this unbridled horses race is but a mad and giddy rushing into the battle,
Ier. 8.6.
as the Prophet says; so the natural motions of the will are inclined only
to evil, Genesis 6.5.
as the spirit of God teaches. Thus the will in respect of the objects good
and evil, whereof it once had power indifferently to make choice, may be said
both to be dead, and to be alive: because it is a live to the one and dead to
the other, like a man taken with a dead palsy on the one side, but whole and
sound on the other; like a fountain which had a double course and current till
one of them was stopped; and like the opticke nerves, which be whole at the
root, though one of the branches be perished. And although in civil matters
the will has more scope, yet is it subject to many interruptions and
impediments: sometimes being abused by corrupt reason, and sometimes crossed by
external occurrents almost infinite.

Now to this frailty of the will may be added the frowardness of the
affections, which are also sundry ways vain, hating where they should love
and loving where they should hate. They should always wait upon reason as
handmaides on their mistress: but having got the head by ruling in our infancy
when reason slept, like Hagar they do often very saucily insult over Sara,
Bas. Ep. 64.
and so become to the mind like the pollution in the glass, not suffering it
to receive the impression of any image; Chrysostom. in Ioh hom. 1.
like a watrie humor coming between the eye and the object, and hindering the
sight; and like the mud which arising in the water troubles and confounds
the seeing spirits. The affections should be as wings to make us mount up to
heaven with divine meditations; Col. 3.1.
but they are ponderous bolts and clogs, causing us to cleave close to the
center of misery. They should be (as the Philosophers call them) the
whetstones of virtue, Cotes virtutis.
but they are indeed the firebra^ds of vice: they are not unfitly compared to
the strings of an instrument: but what natural man shall be able to tune the^,
except he have learned Music in the Lords quire?

This being now the miserable condition of the soul of man in regard of the
will and affections, we should not be senseless in this misery: but be touched
with a lively feeling of our bondage and slavery, and be humbled in the
consideration thereof: so far should it be from us to play the Pelagians,
imagining that goodness to remain in our wills which does not. And indeed,
seeing our understandings are such blind guides, and our wills such
rebellious attendants, we have need to pray with the Prophet: Psalm. 103.10.
Teach me o Lord, to do thy will, for thou art my God: let thy good spirit
lead me into the land of righteousness: and in all our cogitations and
actions to say with our Savior: Mat. 26.36.
O my father, not as I will but as thou will.

It is the policy of Satan to induce, and the frailty of man to be carried
from one extreme to another; either to be double diligent in will worship, or
extreme negligent in commanded obedience; to wax proud with praises, or
careless with reproves. When the Prophet, having threatened the Jews, begins
to exhort them, they become careless of their conversion, saying: Ezekiel. 33.10
If our transgressions and our sins be upon us, how should we then live? so
there are some peradventure, which hearing and thinking of this waywardness
and weakness of the will and affections, will be ready to say with
themselves: to what purpose should I enterprise any thing that is good? This
surely is a great weakness. For S. Paul which teaches that it is neither in
him that wills, nor in him that runs, Rom 9.16.
but in God that shows mercy: did not cease to will, Romans 7.18. 1. Cor.
9.26.27.
and to run; but striued and endeavored so much the more diligently, by how
much the more he found it difficult, and perceived his own disabilitie.

But who art thou that thus would nourish negligence in thy self? Though
thou be a mere natural man, yet are civil actions in the power of thy will.
For what hinders thee in dealing uprightly with thy neighbors? and who lets
thee to use the external means of thy conversion? to come to the Church, to
hear the sacred word of God, and to be partaker of his blessed Sacraments? and
have thou not a promise that he which seeks shall find? Mat. 7.7.
I, but none ca^ come to Christ but those whom the Father draws: true it is,
but what, do thou look to be haled like a beast, and not rather to be led
with the cords of love? Hos. 11.14.
Cant. 1.3.
The spouse intreates thus indeed, Draw me: but she adds presently, We will
run after thee. If thou be regenerate, and the Lord has changed thy will:
then take heed of disobedience. When the Apostle exhorts thee to finish thy
salvation with fear and trembling, he infers this as a reason to enforce
his exhortation: (which some fondly account a reason of liberty) for it is God
that works both the will and the deed. Phil. 2.12.13.
So that Gods work must not hinder, but further thy endeavors. Christ looks
that those which are ingrafted into him should bring forth much fruit. Ioh.
15.5.
The Lord cannot abide to sustain loss in any of his gifts, especially if
they be spiritual. Whosoever therefore hides his talents of grace, Mat. 25.30
shall surely be punished. When the Lord had been very gracious to Judah his
vineyard, Esa. 5.
he expected from it the good fruits of godliness: but when it brings forth
the sour grapes of iniquity, he expostulateth with them on this manner: What
could I have done more to my vineyard? and leaves them to their own censure:
Judge o ye men of Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, between me and my
vineyard. Consider then, did not the Lord create thee after his own image? and
behold, thou have defaced it by sin. Has he in mercy restored thee, and like
a kind father set thee up again, being a banckrupt in grace? What could he
do more for thee? Judge between the Lord and thine own soul, and grieve not
that holy Spirit, which has changed thy heart, and sealed thee up to the day
of thy redemption.

SECTION. 3. Of the Memory.
Our Saviors saying most needs be true: The servant is not greater then his
master. Ioh. 13.16.
Now the Memory is but the Understandings servant, and has in charge the
keeping of her conceits; so that if the understanding be vain, the memory
cannot be exempted from vanity. And this is one vain dependence of the
memory, that it must be preserved and tilled with perpetual toil or care, or
else it becomes barren: if it be not often whetted, it waxes rustie, and is
like the leaves of books, which being seldom used, do cleave together. Now
besides that the understanding must be a perpetual drudge for the preserving
of the memory, the memory requiteth her ill, like a faithless servant,
retaining those things she should reject, and rejecting those things she
should retain; like the sieue which holds fast the course brans, but lets the
fine flower fall away: Cic. de fin. bon. lib. 2.
so that every one may say with Themistocles to Simonides, offering to teach
him the art of Memory: I had rather learn the art of Oblivion; for I remember
what I would forget, and forget what I would remember.

Wrongs, reuenges, Man^t altamente repostu^ iudictu^ Paridis. Virg. Aen. lib. 1.
and every discontent, the cogitation whereof brings anguish and indignation
to the soul, the Memory can easily and ordinarily register. Cains envy to
Abel, and Esaws malice to Jacob. is very soundly settled and not easily
removed: but good and memorable things are quickly forgotten. When people come
to hear the word of God, they commonly bring chinkie and leaking souls: and
therefore the Apostle bids us take heed that we run not out. Heb. 2.1.
The Sabbath containing the memorial of our redemption, and a day to be
employed in the word of God, and the works of our salvation, is little thought
on, when men's birth days, faires, festiuities, and days dedicated to vanities
and follies are well remembered. And therefore is the Lord feign to give a
watchword: Remember the Sabbath day. Exodus 20.
When men do favors and kindnesses to men, they think that they should be had
in everlasting remembrance; but the inestimable benefits and blessings of
Almighty God, bestowed upon men, are quickly forgotten. Let those that would
not deceive themselves, look upon their memories in the Israelites, and there
shall they behold, as in a glass that which may make them blush and be
ashamed: Remember the day (says Moses) in the which ye came our of Egypt.
What, Exodus 13.3.
is it possible to forget that day, which should be celebrated for a perpetual
memorial of their wonderful deliverance? Exodus 12.14
Yes surely, for we find that they remembered not the Lords hand, Psalm 78.42.
nor the day when he delivered them. Nehem. 4.^4
Nehemiah bids the Jews remember the great Lord and fearful: a man would
think that a needless exhortation: for how can they but remember that God,
which had kept them as the apple of his eye, led them graciously through the
wilderness, subdued their many and mighty enemies, and given them possession
of an excellent inheritance? But we see that they forgot God their Savior,
Psa. 106.21
who had done great things for them: (for they did not fruitfully remember
him.) How often does Moses exhort them not to forget the law? What, forget the
law, which was delivered in that wonderful manner upon mount Sinay, by
almighty God himself, in flaming fire, with sound of a trumpet, and in the
midst of glorious Angels? Yes, they did forget the law, Hos. 4.6.
as the Prophet complains of the best of them. And that this forgetfulness
was not peculiar to them, let experience speak, and it shall witness with me
Though the Lord has drawn his commandments into so short a sum, even ten
words, Deuteronomy. 4.13.
as they are called: yet how many thousand Christians are there at this day,
who are not able to repeat them, (much less to understand them) albeit they
can remember other things very readily? Do but soundly and seriously examine
thy self (my Christian brother) and thou shall find just cause to say
concerning thy forgetfulness both of heavenly blessings and divine
instructions, Genesis 41 9.
with Pharaohs butler: I call to mind my fault this day. For thou shall be
enforced to confess, that thou have let many a good lesson slip forth of
thy mind, and received many a blessing, for which thou have not been thankful.

Well, sithence the memory is so defective and faulty, it is thy part to
seek the strengthening of it, that what is wanting by nature, may be supplied
by industry and grace; for diligence is the mother and the nurse of memory.
To be brief, seeing the walls and foundations of holiness are thus battered
and defaced in the forts and faculties of thy soul, pray with the Prophet:
Psalm. 51.12.14.
Create in me a new heart, o God, and renew a right spirit within me: and
establish me with thy free spirit. Labor with thy self by thine industry, and
with God by hearty prayer, that thou may by the assistance of his holy
spirit (the enlightener of the understanding, Ioh. 14.26.
the guide of the will, and the reuiuer of the memory) be enabled to conceive,
affect, and retain those good things, which in this life may be for thy
comfort, and thy everlasting salvation in the life to come.

SECTION 4. Of Sciences, Arts and Trades.
THe fountain being stopped, the streams do soon dry up; the tree being
plucked up, the leaves and fruit do quickly wither: Sciences, Arts and Trades
are the streams, the leaves and the fruit of those forenamed faculties of the
soul: which vanishing into the vapor of vanity, cannot so dignifie their
offspring, that it may be free from vanity, When the Lord arraigned the
malefactors in Paradise, after their conviction, this was his sentence: Genesis
3.14.19
The Serpent shall be a hateful beast Satan shall be trampled on by the seed
of the woman, Eve shall bring forth in sorrow, and Adam must eat his bread in
the sweat of his brows. Lo then, every man's trade and course of life, though
happily it may seem an ornament, is indeed a punishment, and in that respect
must needs be a vanity.

The contemplative life, though it be much commended by the Philosopher,
Ar^stot. Eth. lib. 10.
yet what is it in natural men, but a vain speculation of certain idle
Ideaes? As for the politic, ibid. cap. 7.
it is full of trouble and travail; as Numa Pompilius amongst the Romans,
Lycurgus amongst the Lacedaemonians, and Solon amongst the Athenians can
sufficiently witness: Match. disp. lib. 1. cap. 2. Casp. Peucer. Epist. duci
Sax.
and is any thing more ordinary, then the dangerous and circular mutation of
government? This also is faulty in most Commonwealths, that policy is
preferred before piety, and the injuries done to men punished, when the
transgressions against the immortal God are tolerated.

As for Mechanical arts, they are counted base and servile of all those who
are esteemed to have free minds. And if I should trace the several estates and
courses of life, He that lists to do it, may read Corn. Agrippa, de varutate
scientiarum.
what degree could I mention (from the highest to the lowest) exempted from
vanity? For if the reign and rule of Kings be a noble servitude, Aelian de
var. hist l. 2.
as Antigonus said to his son, and a life full of fear and danger, as
Dionysius showed Damocles; what shall we deem of all inferior courses and
kinds of life?

This is to be observed in trades and arts, that as they are grown toward
perfection, so are they furnished with many additions of evil. When Caine played
the husbandman, and Abel the shepherd, such homely food and fare as nature
yielded, did satisfy and content me^; but now the world falling to niceness
and curiosity, nothing (though never so dainty and costly) is scarcely thought
good enough. Our ancestors, Camden. Britan. in Cornwall. Macrob. Satur. lib 7
cap. 15. Quo post hominum memoriam nihil terribilius ab humano ingenio
excogitari potest. Pol Virg. de invent lib. 2. cap. 11.
as Antiquities do show, used brazen swords, a metal that has in it a curing
force: but later ages have used iron, being more hurtful. And how many hundred
years was it, before that hellish invention of gunnes was known in
Christendom? but thus every age, as it waxes more expert, so it grows more
ingenious in that which is evil and odious.

And what is the end both of the Politic, Moral, and Mechanical life?
surely nothing but vanity. Plutarch. in vita Demost.
Why does Demosthenes deforme himself in the shauing of his head to tie
himself to his studies, but that he may be famous among the Athenians? What
moves others to travel over the world with Plato, but to satisfy their
curious humors, Hieron. in Prolog. gal.
or to enrich them selves? And does not every one in his trade and course of
life, either labor to sacrifice to craving necessity, or seek to be partaker
of dangerous sacietie? If a man do some extraordinary work, though to small
purpose, he is extolled to the skies; De var. hist. lib. 1.
but Aelians censure of the chariot, made (by Myrmecidas and Callicrates) so
small, that it might be hid under a fly, (in my conceit) was very good: for
when others wondered at it, he said it was worthy no wise man's praise, but was
rather to be accounted a vain expense of time. And may not this censure be
justly laid upon most men's actions in their several callings? which are
undertaken for the most part to satisfy the greedy appetite, to deck the
house of clay, to satisfy the foolish humors of some, or to get the vain
applause of others; being all, nothing but a vain expense of time, all
beginning and ending in vanity.

To finish this tract then, let those who follow mean and mechanical trades,
make a virtue of necessity, by a sober, honest, and conscionable use of the
same, for the maintenance of themselves, and their families. Let those that
have addicted themselves to curious arts, forsake and sacrifice them as the
conuerts (which heard the Apostles) did their books. Act. 19.19.
Let those that are devoted to the liberal Sciences, make them (as they should
be) the handmaides of Divinity; yea let every one endeavor, that his course of
life may be correspondent to the profession of Christianity, and tend to the
glory of God, the good of his Church, and the salvation of his own soul at
the last day, Revel. 2.12.
when every man must receive according to his works.

CHAP. 2.
SEC. 1. A view of those vanities which are called the goods of the body: and
first of flourishing Youth.
IT was a celestial Oracle, Esa. 40.4.
that thus ce^sured mankind: All flesh is grass, and the grace thereof is as
the flower of the field. When Ezekiah had defaced the serpent which had defaced
Gods glory, he called it in contempt, 1 Kin. 18.4.
Nehushtan: it is a piece of brass; that so it might be vile in the eyes of
those who did adore it: so does the spirit of God call man only a lump of
flesh, that the baseness of this appellation may take away the haughtiness of
his heart, and manifest the vileness of his condition. And as though that were
not sufficient to vilify and debase him, he compares him to grass: yea the
glory of man, even the quintessence of his natural perfections, to the flower
of grass. And lest this might seem peculiar to some only, he appropriateth
the same to all those whom either nature, art, or fortune have graced or
blessed, saying: All flesh is grass. Like to this, is that speech of the
Prophet David: Surely every man in his best estate is altogether vanity. Psalm.
39.5.
Man is vanity, yea man in his best estate is vanity, yea every man is
vanity, yea nothing else but vanity.

This disgraceful decyphering of man will hardly be believed, and therefore he
prefixeth an asseueration, Surely: it will smally be regarded, and therefore he
adds a word of consideration, Selah. Let us therefore consider the best
estate of man, concerning the ornaments of his body, as youth, beauty, health,
strength, agilitie and long life, and in all these we shall find nothing but
vanity. Concerning this fresh and flourishing youth, it is vain in a double
respect. 1. It is very momentanie, and passes away swiftly. 2. It is the nurse
and pandor of iniquity.

1 The clearest wine by standing comes in time to have lees, and dregs, and
tartness: so the purest part of our age does in time gather the dregs of
loathsome old age, and becomes tart and sour to our selves, and full of
morositie and frowardness to others. And as it is in wines, so it is often in
our lives; the purest part of our days seem to run away swiftly, but the
dregs of tedious ol^ age stick long by us. F^r every one is carried in Times
chariot, which is drawn with the two restless steedes, Motion and Mutation,
which never stands still, till she be by death discharged of her passengers.
Does it not often come to pass, that as forward springs are nipped by sharp
frosts, and kindly slips broken off when they are tender: so the brauest
gallant is cut off in the flower of his age; and being arrested by death in the
prime of his youth, is carried violently to the grave? But suppose the fatal
dart be a while escaped: yet as the apple falls from the tree by ripeness,
and the fire goes out of it self, though it be not quenched: so man, if by no
fatal accident, yet by the course of nature turns at last to earth, from
whence he was taken. Sensun sine sensu Cic. de sence^t.
The shadow of the dyall paceth it so slowly, that the motion thereof is not to
be discerned, yet we see that in a days space it will go from the East to the
West: so the life of m^n passes away very slily, yet is he quickly at the West
and declining of his days, before he be aware. Even whilst thou art reading
this, whosoever thou art, albeit thou do not consider it, the thread of thy
life is wearing, the oil of thy lamp wasting, and time is carrying thee to the
habitation of darkness. Sen epi. 71. initio.
The mariners first lose the sight of their friends, then of the cities, and at
last of the shores and banks: so is every man by degrees deprived first of his
youth, then of his middle age, and lastly of his hoarie days, if happily he be
not prevented by untimely death. For indeed there is nothing more certain then
death, yet nothing more uncertain then the times and kinds of death, as
antiquities, together with daily experience can testify. Fabian. pars 7. cap.
225.
William Rufus a king of England was slain with an arrow shot at a Heart by a
knight, as Basilius Macedo the Roman Emperor was with the stroke of a Heart
in hunting. Carus and F. Valerius Anastasius the Emperors perished by
lightning. Ioh. Bap. Ignatius Romans princip. libris. 1 and 2 Sucton. in vita
Claud. Caesar. c. 27.
Young Drusus Pompey the son of the Emperor Claudius, was choked with a pear,
which he cast up and caught in his mouth in sport. Gaguin. de gestis Fran. lib.
9. in vit. Caroli sexti.
Charles a king of Navarre had a strange death: for being sewed in a sheet by
night, that he might be bathed in it, he that sewed it by burning off the
thread with a candle, set fire upon the sheet; wherewith the king being
pitifully burned, died within three days after. Eurypides the Poet was torn
with dogs. Anacreon (as Pliny writes) was choked with the stone of a raisin,
Plin hist. natu li. 7 7 cap. 7.
and Marius with a have in a mess of milk: yea Pliny himself perished by
the strange fire of mount Vesevus, Munster. Cosmogr. in descrip. Ital.
whilst he was seeking to know the reason and nature of it. But why go I about
to particularize those things that are infinite: yea when some have ended their
lives by laughing? Valor. Man lib. 9. Aul Gel. noct. A^ Seneca Ep. 71.
For the eternal Law has given us one kind of entrance into life, but diverse
(yea innumerable) passages forth of it: and albeit the Sun knows his going
down; Psalm. 104.19
yet the sons of men know not the setting of their days, and the Vesper of
their life.

2 As youth is frail and fading, Temeritas est adolescentiae. Cic. de sen^ct.
so is it environed with many follies. It is rash and inconsiderate in
enterprises: as might be instanced in such as Terentius Varro, who succeeding
wary Fabius in the Dictatorship, Plutarc. in vita Fab.
lost in one battle through his rashness 64000. soldiers. But that woeful
renting of the kingdoms of Israel and Judah, caused by the rash and indiscreete
advice of Rehoboams young counselors, 2. Kin. 12.8
may sufficiently demonstrate this. True it is, that young men many times have
sharp wits: Hieron. ad Nepot. fere initio.
but as the fire in green wood is suffocated by moist vapors, that it cannot
shine brightly; so wisdom in youth is hindered, and smoothered by temptations
and concupiscence, that it cannot shine and show forth her brightness.
Again, youth is full of arrogancy, rancor and revenge; so that humility and
mildness is very rare amongst young men. And therefore Saint Chrysostom
compares youth to the surging sea, Sermon. cum Presbyter esset designatus.
full of rough winds and raging waters; and old age to the haven of the minds
tranquillity.

But why do I endeavor to reckon up the enormities of youth, which is prone to
all manner of sin, carrying in his bosom the fire and fuel of iniquity. For
now the ungodly having strength and other oportunities answering his
disposition, Job 20.11.12.
Fills his bones with sin, and wickedness is sweet in his mouth. Pro. 7.6.
It was a young man that Solomon saw intrapped in the wily snares of the
strange woman; and that makes him thus to tax by an ironicall reproof this
licentious age: Rejoice o young man in thy youth, Eccl^s. 11.9.
and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the
ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes. What, would the Preacher
persuade youth to dissoluteness? nothing less, but he does only express
the dissoluteness of young men, which set open the windows of their eyes,
enlarge the closet of their hearts, and make speedy the feet of their
affections, to act and accomplish that which is evil. This David did
acknowledge, Psalm. 25.7.
when he desired pardon for the sins of his youth: J^r. 31.19.
and Jeremy when being converted by repentance, he was ashamed, yea even
confounded because he did bear the sins of his youth. In regard of all
which, I may justly conclude in Salomons words: Eccle. 11.10
Childhood and youth are vanity.

Forasmuch then as flourishing youth has such following inconveniences, as
si^knesse, old age, and death; with such prejudicial companions, as
indiscretion, rashness, pride, and profaneness, why is it h^d in such
admiration, as we see it is? Yea forasmuch as it is a flaming fire, and a
surging sea of sin, have we not rather cause to desire that this fire were
quenched, this water calmed, and our selves arrived at the quiet havens of
stayed old age? But sithence the Almighty has decreed the variety of our
days, and that we must taste of the adjuncts peculiar to every age wherein we
live; let those that are young, think upon Salomons exhortation: Eccles. 12.1.
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth: an exhortation very needful.
For most do live loosly in their youth, reserving old age for godliness,
offering sin and Satan the flower of their days, and keeping rottenness
for the Lord: but with such sacrifices God will not be pleased: besides that,
these men's continuance in sin in their youth, makes it so habitual, that it
will hardly be sh^ked off when they are old. Let those that are young therefore
cleanse their ways, by taking heed thereunto according to Gods word. Psalm.
119.9.
And let them season the young vessels of their souls with the sweet and
wholesome liquor of piety, that they may savor of the same so long as they live.

SECTION. 2. Of Beauty, Strength, and Agilitie.
WHen man was first created, as divine virtues adorned his mind, so glorious
majesty and beauty shined in his face and shape: but through his fall, the
ornaments of his soul were defaced, and by the same the seemlinesse of his
body was deformed, quantum mutatus ab illo? He that had seen Adam in
Paradise, and afterward met him in the vast fields, would never have known
him to be the same man: and in this defaced and deformed image, Genesis 5.3.
did he beget his posterity; so that the relics of our modern beauty, are
but like the ruinous walls of a razed city, the rotten stock of a
flourishing tree, and the withered stem of a fragrant flower? Yet is this
defaced and deformed beauty too much set by, though it be vain in substance,
variable in durance, dangerous to the beholder, and ofttimes hurtful to the
possessour.

1 Those were words worthy the mother of Solomon: Favor is deceitful, Pro.
31.30^
and beauty is vain. As many flowers are fair to the eye, which are nothing
pleasing to the smell, and as many a stinking and stinging nettle grows with
the sweet smelling rose: so the painted sepulchers of this vile body have
nothing buried in them but filthiness, and often times under the fair
countenance there lurkes very foul conditions: thus is favor deceitful. 2.
And what, is not beauty like the drops of deaw, which are either drawn up
with the Sun, or dried up with the wind? For sickness will change it,
sorrow will waste it, age will wither it, and death consume it. What an
alteration will a poor tertian fever make in a fair face? When Naomi
returned to Bethlehem, Ruth. 1.
she was so changed with the grief of her husband and sons deaths, that
every one wondered at her, saying: Is not this Naomi? And though beauty escape
sorrow and sickness, yet age will seize upon it, whose property it is to set
wrinkles in the smooth forehead, and to change the snowie and vermilion face
into a wan and swarthie color: neither is it more possible to prevent this,
then to stay the course of time. There was never any so beautiful by the union
of symetricall proportions, o^ the well disposing of colors. (which things
concur to the perfection of beauty) but she might say in time with Naomi,
Call me not Naomi, but call me Marah. And when as sickness, sorrow, and old
age have battered the fair forts of beauty, death discharges her Cannons,
and lays her flat upon the earth; and then the fairest face that ever was by
nature or art, must be trampled upon with the feet, eaten with worms, or
consumed with loathsome rottenness: and then what difference can a man find
between Thersites and Narcissus? The Epitaph of Rosamund that mirror of
beauty is worthy the remembrance: Hac iacet in tumba Rosamundi, non Rosamunda.
etc.
The worlds sweet rose, not Rosamund,
This earthen vault does shield:
And loathsome smells, not redolent,
Her body now does yield.
Thus is beauty vain. Yea the more the beauty, the greater the vanity. As
the softest stone is easily pierced, the finest lawne quickliest stained, and
the freshest flower soonest withered: so the most resplendent beauty is
foonest consumed.

3 As beauty is vain and variable, so is it dangerous to the beholder:
whereof Solomon having had woeful experience, warns his son not to d sire the
beauty of the strange woman, Pro^ 6.25.
nor to let her take him with her eye lids. And there is reason of his borrowed
speech: for beauty is an enchauntresse and bewitcheth, a net and entangleth, a
fire and enflameth, a baited hook and catches. Genesis 6.1.
The sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair, and they
took them wives of all that they liked. 2. Sam. 11.12.
David from the top of his palace saw beautiful Bathsheba washing her self,
and his heart was inflamed toward her. Lo, those that for their religious
education were called the sons of God; and he that for his virtuous
conversation was counted a man after Gods own heart, are ensnared by beauty;
and the one makes profane marriages, the other commits unlawful adultery. The
wise man's counsel is therefore worthy the taking: Eccles. 9.8.
Turn away thine eyes from beholding a beautiful woman. And his reason is
worth the noting; for many have perished by the beauty of women. The truth of
which, the deadly broiles raised between the Phoenicians and the Grecians,
Herod. in Clio. initio.
through their mutual rapes, can sufficiently testify.

4 Neither are these the hurtful bounds of beauties snares, thus to hurt the
beholder; but like as the Basiliske, by beholding himself in a glass, As to
Lucretia and Virginia. Liu. lib. 1. and 3.
is killed with the reflecting of his own poison: so does beauty many times
turn to the bane of the possessour. Genesis 34.
If Dina had not been fair, it is like she had never been deflowred. So that
as Absalon perished with his own hair which he kept very curiously: 2. Sam.
18.
so diverse have been destroyed by their beauty, which they have preserved most
carefully. Gen 12. Genesis 26.
This Abraham in Egypt and Isaac in Palestina considered, when they feared to
acknowledge their own wives; lest their beauty might have been the loss of
the women's honesty, and the husbands lives. And this was the Poets observation
in Peneius speech to his daughter Daphne: Votoque tuo tua forma repugnat. Ovid.
Met. lib. 1.
that rare beauty and perpetual virginity would hardly dwell together. Yea
happy had many a one been if she had been deformed, for then she had never
been defiled.

And is beauty thus vain? then learn to despise it: is it so dangerous? then
have a care to shun it. Oh, what cost, and care, and art, do many use to
nourish a secret enemy to themselves, and an engine for others? Is beauty a
vanity? then pray with David, Psalm. 119.37
Turn away mine eyes (O Lord) from beholding vanity: and practice with Job,
Job. 31.1.
I have made a covenant with mine eyes. Bind both thine eyes and thy heart to
the good a bearing, and suffer not thine eyes to behold it in others, nor thy
heart to affect it in thy self. But if thy heart begin a little to be
seduced, do but think with thy self, what filth lies hid in that body which
bewitcheth thee: and the same may be a medicine to prevent a dangerous malady.
Genesis 18.
I am but dust and ashes (says Abraham;) the ashes were once a fair green
tree, before the beauty of it vanished in the fire. What folly is it to be so
nice and curious in trimming of dust and ashes, which though like the green
tree it make a fair show for a time, yet has a hundred fires kindled to
consume it; sorrow, sickness, age and death? yea which cannot enjoy the
comfortable heat and light of the Sun, but it fades? Deck thy soul with
virtues, and adorn thy heart with grace: this internal beauty is eternal.

To meet a beautiful body has been counted ominous, but now I am sure it is
dangerous: yet if thou dare give thine eyes liberty to behold any beautiful
object, let that be a hand to direct and lead thee to a better meditation.
Magnify the wisdom of God in his workmanship, and think upon the beauty of
heaven: what a sweet thing it will be to behold Christ Jesus and all the
celestial company in most resplendent glory: and let thy meditation ponder
the future glorious change of thy vile body; Phil. 3.
that although the fame be turned into dust and ashes, yet at the last day it
may be beautiful, as the brightness of the firmament, Dan. 12.3.
and may shine like the stars for ever and ever.

Now the same that has been said of beauty, may be said of strength and
agilitie; which albeit they do not always grow on the same stalk, yet they
fade with the same winds, and are withered with the same Sun of sorrow,
sickness, age and death. We have heard of few that could say with Caleb: I am
this day fourscore and five years old, Ios. 14.10.11.
yet am I as strong at this time, as I was when Moses sent me: meaning when he
was forty years old. Verse. 7.
Abishai and Benaiah were goodly men, 2. Sam. 23.18.20.
and of admirable strength, able to kill hundreds, and to conquer mighty
giants; yet they with David's three worthies (more galla^t men then they) are
many hundred years since turned into dust. Beauty sometime turns to the bane
of the possessor. And did not Sampsons strength pluck the house down upon his
own head? Judge. 16.
If any one therefore be lusty and strong, let him remember the Prophets
exhortation: Ier. 9.23.
Let not the strong man glory in his strength, because it is folly to glory
in a vanity: but let him rejoice and glory in the Lord, and be able to say,
Psalm. 27 etc
The Lord is my strength: and as the Apostle exhorts, Ephesians 6.
Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. To resist the devil,
and to withstand his temptations, is a thing that requires strength and
courage: to this purpose labor to unite all thy forces: this is true strength
and valor, and this only obtains the crowns of true felicity.

SECTION 3. Of Health.
OF all the temporal benefits that Almighty God bestows upon us in this
life, (...).
there is none more excellent then health, as Menander truly says: seeing it
is that which permits a being to the goods of the body, and admits an
acceptable being to the goods of fortune (as they are called.) For when the
Lord with rebukes does chasten man for sin, Psalm. 39.11.
he makes whatsoever is desirable in him to consume away like a moath fretting
a garment. When the Lord lays the hand of visitation upon men, then health,
strength, beauty, and whatsoever seems gracious in them, consumes and
vanishes like the moath-eaten garment. When the Lord said to Abraham, Genesis
15.2.
I am thy exceeding great reward: Abraham answered, O Lord what will thou give
me, seeing I go childlesse? So may a sick man say: What will thou give me,
seeing I am healthlesse? Abraham cared not for all the wealth in the world when
he wanted an heir: and what are all the temporal blessings in the world to a
man that wants his health? Yet is health (which seasoneth all the blessings of
this life) but vain: For every man in his best estate is altogether vanity.

Man that is borne of a woman, Job. 14.1.
is but of short continuance, and full of trouble: he shoots up like a
flower, and is cut down: he vanishes as a shadow, and continues not. Lo this
is the condition of mankind, that he never continues in the same condition.
But as the flower to day flourishes, and to morrow withers: so health is
quickly changed into sickness. The Moon is not more variable in her changing,
the sea in her ebbing and flowing, the heavens in their ouercasting, then man
is in the change of his estate: now well, and presently sick; to day
triumphing on the Theater, to morrow groaning on the couch, or happily groueling
in the grave. The sea is not more subject to tossing and raging with her four
contrary winds, then the body of man is with his four contrary humors;
which being disordered, do engender infinite diseases. How many hundred
infirmities have the skillful Physicians discerned man's body subject to? yea
how many are there, whereof no true cause can be assigned, no cure can be
obtained? A clock is a thing hardly kept in tune, because it has so many
wheels and gimbols to be tempered: so the body of man is hardly preserved
long in health, it has so many variable and tender parts to be preserved.
Hence it comes to pass, that as the Israelites expecting liberty, were more
inthralled; so when men promise to themselves health and soundness, they are
ofttimes assailed by sudden sickness. A fearful trembling (the messenger of
death) shakes the joints of Baltasar at his banquet: Dan 5.
the rich man is arrested by deaths sergeant in his bed: Luke 12.
and a deadly headache meets the Shunamites child in the field. 2. Kin. 4.
Thus no state or condition is exempted from sickness, or has security of
health: neither the young child, the old man, nor the mighty king. Jesus loved
Lazarus, John 11.
yet behold he was sick: David a holy man, and an honorable king, Passim in
Psalmis.
yet was often brought low with sundry infirmities: so that Christ's love is no
preventing privilege, godliness is no supersedeas for sickness.

2 Besides that health is thus variable, it is also dangerous, being the nurse
of security, and the mother of impenitencie. Psalm. 73.4.9
For whilst the wicked have no bands in their death, but are lusty and
strong, pride and cruelty, licentiousness and blasphemy are their practices:
insomuch that they set their mouth against heaven. Alexander the Great was once
so puffed up with pride, Q. Curt. l. 7.
that he thought himself immortal: but being stricken with a stone, he felt
the pain of a festered wound, and then he faw his folly, and acknowledged his
mortality. So we have need that sickness ring us sometimes the warning peales
of death, without which we are in dang^r to grow secure, and forgetful of our
miserable condition. It is a hard thing to persuade a man, that sickness can
have any goodness in it. For no chastening for the present seems joyous but
grievous: Heb. 12.11.
and men commonly look upon that which is present, and so do find irksomeness,
because of the fear of death, the pains of body, and the loss of pleasure:
but if they would cast their eyes upon the future effects of it, they should
find that afterward it brings the quiet fruits of righteousness to them
that are thereby exercised.

1 It is the pathway to humiliation and repentance. Moab being at rest from his
youth, settled on his lees of sin, Ier. 48.11.
had the taste of his iniquity remaining, and the sent of his abomination was
not changed: but Israel being smitten, sought God early. Psalm. 78.34. Genesis 20.
And Abimelech when his family was visited with sickness for Saraes sake,
repented and rose up early to restore her to her husband.

2 It is an argument of Gods love. P^ou 3.12.
For as fathers chastise those children who^ they favor: so deals Almighty
God with his children; whom he loves he chasteneth, Reu. 3.19.
and scourges every son that he receives.

3 It stirs up to the studious, love and practice of piety: and therefore
David says, Psalm. 94.12
Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest o Lord, and teach in thy law: in
which respect, that saying is true, (...). Quae nocent docent.
Corrections are instructions.

4 It is a means to keep from hell and condemnation, as Saint Paul shows:
who speaking of the Corinthians visitation with weakness, sickness and death,
says, that they were thus chastened of the Lord, 1. Cor. 11.30 32.
that they might not be condemned with the world. For as Physicians do
sometimes cast their patients into the fit of an ague to deliver them from a
more dangerous sickness: so Almighty God does many times inflict upon his
children some temporal affliction, that he may deliver them from eternal
destruction. Percutu vt sanes. Aug. Confess. lib. 2 cap. 2.


5 It is a means to make us loath this transitory life, and to lift up our
hearts to the expectation of eternal life. Whilst the Israelites had peace in
Egypt, they never thought upon the land of Chanaan: so men being always in
health, are very much besotted with the love of this world, and forget their
salvation: but sickness catches us by the hand, Genesis 19.
as the Angel caught Lot when he lingered in Sodom, and bids us haste to
our everlasting habitation in that kingdom, which has neither sorrow nor
sickness.

Here then, in viewing the vanity of health, we may see the worlds erroneous
opinion concerning the same. For if a man might live in health all his life
time, and never be troubled with aches, sickness, sores, or any corporal
infirmities, he should be deemed the happiest man living: but woe be to them
that have their consolation in this world (says our Savior: Luke 6.
) for except God be exceedingly merciful to them, they are in the way to
eternal destruction; and howsoever the world judge, yet questionless they are
happy whom the Lord chasteneth, for them he loves. It is a fond conceit to
think that we may go to heaven, as it were in feather beds: the Cherubims
kept the East side of Paradise; and affliction is the porter to the kingdom of
heaven. If thou enjoy health, praise God for it, but take heed it be not an
occasion of thy ruin: and if God visit thee with sickness, embrace it
thankfully, as an argument of his love, a means to restrain thee from sin,
and an excellent pledge of thy everlasting happiness.

SECTION 4. Of long life.
ALthough long life be a blessing of G^d, and a temporal reward of piety;
Ephesians. 6.2.
yet is it (being considered in it self) nothing else but vanity. For if the
present fruition of the things of this life be vain, how can the continuance
thereof be otherwise? there is nothing more uncertain then long life, as the
Scriptures teach, and experience does manifest.

We come into this world like actors upon a stage, and though some have longer
parts then others, yet whosoever lives longest, and leads the merriest life,
may say with Jacob at the last: Few and evil have the days of my pilgrimage
been. Gen 47.9.
This life is but a pilgrimage, and this world an Inn to rest at, not a house
to inhabit: the days we spend are few says Jacob, Cic. de Sen. Heb. 13.14.
yet was he an hundred and thirty years old. Of the time that is past, we
judge rightly, but of that to come, erroneously: for it is hope of long life
that makes life seem long, as Augustine has well observed; In Psalm. 6.
and nothing seems to have benc more speedy then that which is past. The
Prophet David casting the ordinary sum of man's years (having therein in my
conceit some particular respect to his own age) says: Psalm. 90.10
The time of our life is threescore years and ten: and though some be so
strong, that they come to fourscore years, yet is their strength then but
labor and sorrow: it is cut off quickly, and we fly away. If David's fourscore
years yield labor and sorrow, how much more shall Jacobs six score and ten?
It is a strange thing, and to be admired, to see how men delight in youth, and
yet desire old age; and how they desire long life, and yet long after the end
of their life; whilst they wish for this day and that, and have still a
longing expectation of the future time: but thus do the cogitations of their
hearts strive like the twins in Rebeccaes womb. Genesis 25.


2 My days have been evil. says Jacob, and so he condemns them as well for
the quality, as the quantity: and the same censure that Jacob gives upon his
own days, Solomon pronounces upon every man's: Eccles. 1.8.
All things are full of labor, man cannot utter it. If Solomon could not, who
shall be able to express the calamities of this life? The sea has but twelve
contrary winds: but when we are borne, we launch into an Ocean replenished
with twelve thousand calamities. Hereof Elias had experience, when sitting
down under the Juniper tree, he desired that he might die, saying: It is now
enough, O Lord, 1. Kin. 19.4
take my soul, for I am no better then my fathers. Yea, this was not
unconsidered of the Transians, Herodot in Tirpsi. initio.
who at the birth of any child, used to sit down and weep, recounting the
calamities that were by it to be encountered: but when any one dyed, they
sported and rejoiced, rehearsing the miseries from which he was delivered. But
what is this to the spiritual calamity and misery of sin, which is increased
by old age, and the debts of our transgressions, which are augmented by long
life? It is a worthy question of Jerome; Hieron. ad Heliador.
What difference is there between him that has lived ten years, and him that
has lived a thousand years, saving that when death comes, he that is the
oldest goes to the grave laden with the greatest burden of sins? If a man
grow daily in debt and behind hand, we say he has a good turn, when God has
taken him soorth of the world; how much more should we think him happy, who
is by death delivered from running further into the debts of sin, Romans 3.19.
whereby he is brought into the Lords danger?

These evils are great which long life brings upon us; but besides, it
keeps good things from us, and us from good things. For we know that whilst
we are at home in the body, 2. Cor. 5.6.
we are absent from the Lord. The desire of long life makes us forget eternal
life, and the hope thereof causes the neglect of our preparation to death: for
whilst every one thinks he may live yet a little longer, he persuades
himself that he has time enough to repent. Is not he a foolish soldier that
would have the wars rather prolonged, then ended, that he may have the
trophies of victory? Now our life being a warfare, and the day of our death,
the day of honor and triumph; is there not just cause, that they which have
received the first fruit of the spirit, Romans 8.
should sigh for their full and final redemption? But this being the vanity of
long life, all those world-louers are justly taxed, who (like the Israelites)
would make a Canaan of Egypt, and heavenly mansions of this earthly
habitation; being loath to forsake it, though they be subject to a thousand
inconveniences in it. But as those that are much given to wine, will not stick
to drink the lees: so those that love this world and life too well, will
rather embrace old age with all the preiudices thereof, then leave it. What is
there in this life to be desired? and if there were any thing, yet what is that
to the life to come? To say the most for long life; say that the Lord offers
us two jewels, the one base and temporal, the other excellent and eternal: is
it not extreme folly to prefer the temporal before the eternal? And such
is the folly of those which prefer long life in this world, before eternal
life in the world to come. But what? is it not lawful to desire long life?
surely yes, with that condition employed in David's prayer: Psalm. 30.9.
Shall the dust give thanks unto thee? If thou desire to glorify God by living
long, then may thou desire it: and so doing, may have great hope to
obtain it.

CHAP. 3.
SEC. 1. A view of those external vanities which are called the goods of
Fortune: and first of Nobility.
WHen Dalilah would betray Sampson into the hands of the Philistims, Judge. 16.6.
she entreats him to tell her, wherein his great strength lay; knowing that
if once the same were weakened, he might easily be vanquished. Every soldier
that can approach to the standard, or come near the General, will preasse
hard, and adventure with danger to encounter them: considering that the one
being the eye, the other the voice of the army, in their victory consists
the glory of the conquest. The like course have I thought good to take in this
spiritual warfare: for being to encounter the combined forces of the mind, the
body, and of Fortune; I first assayed to set upon the ornaments of the mind,
afterward assaulted the armado of the body: which being like the locks of
Sampson, and the Captain and standard bearer of the army thou shall find
foiled and slain, except thy heart yield balm to cure them; and their fires
quenched, unless thy affections send forth oil to kindle them. And now by
Gods grace I will encounter the straggling and vnranged forces of Fortune. And
first I will begin with Nobility, a mere external good which happens unto
men in their birth, only through their ancestors worthiness.

Those that are stict in the decyphering and blazing of gentry, account none
noble, but such as are removed a third degree from ignobilitie: Nam genus and
proauos and quae non fec^mus ipsi, Vi^ea nostra voco. Ou^^. Met. lib. 13.
holding absurdly, that the ancestors can give that they have not, and decking
fondly the naked and newborn babe with the plumes of his progenitors. If
descents make nobility, how comes it to pass then, that many of most ancient
families have lost their generositie by antiquity, whilst wealth the nurse of
Nobility has failed? But thus indeed they make Nobility like the ship that
brought home the youth of Greece, which was peeced with sundry plankes; that
at last it had nothing of that matter whereof it was made. I have read a
pleasant story of a great Prince, who standing much upon these vanities, was
persuaded by one which knew how to fit his humor, that his noble pedigree might
be deduced from Noah's arc: wherewith when he being much affected, did wholly
addict himself to the searching forth of that; his ieaster told him, that his
endeavor therein would be nothing honorable to him; for if you fetch your
pedigree from Noah's ark (quoth he) my self and other such simple fellows as I
am, who now reverence you as a god, shall prove your poor kinsmen: a worthy
reproof of a proud conceit and a fond enterprise. If there be any that stand
upon these terms, it will not be hard to fetch his original sixteen hundred
years beyond the time of the flood, even from Adam, but with like inglorious
success: for in him through a treacherous rebellion against his God, he shall
find his blood so stained, that all the men and Angels in heaven and earth are
not able to restore it. If virtue were derived by propagation as vice is, and
if parents could as well impart unto their children their prowess as their
pollution, Nobility were an ornament of most honorable respect: but seeing
that as the deadly hemlocke grows in the fertile ground, and rich ore is
dug forth of the barren soil: so virtuous and honorable children many
times proceed from mean parentage, and base and ignoble descend from honorable
progenitors. And seeing that virtue (the only foundation of true Nobility) is
an acquisit and divinely instilled habit; Nobilitas sola est atque vnica virtus
there is no reason that nobleness of birth should be so priced as it is.

It is not the descent in birth, but the living virtuously and dying godly that
yields true Nobility, according to that of Seneca: Philosophy found not Plato
a Noble man, Sen. Epi. 44.
but made him one. Chrysostom.
What disparagement was it to Abraham, that his father was an idolater in Vrre
of the Chaldees? Joshua 24.2.
or what disgrace to Timothy, Acts 16.1.
that his father was a Gentile? surely none at all, seeing they both became
truly noble by their virtues: and as little honor was it to Cham that he was
the son of just and noble Noah, seeing he himself was lewd and vicious. When
the Lord chose a King over Israel, 1. Sam. 9.21.
it was out of the smallest tribe: when Christ called his disciples, Mat. 4.
they were of the meanest sort of people: and at the promulgation of the
Gospel, 1. Cor. 1.26.
not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are
called; but the simplest, the meanest and most despised, that no man should
glory in his birth, or boast of his nobility: and man was made out of
Paradise, the woman in Paradise, S. Ambrose.
that it may appear, nobility not to depend upon place or posterity. Now to
the vanity of Nobility, this may be added (which experience daily verifieth)
That to some nobility of birth begets ignobilitie of mind, Greg dial. lib. 1
c. 16. Plutar. in vita co^iol.
and untimely honor does hinder many from honorable attempts; so that whilst
the eyes of all men are upon such, tasking them with their expectation, and
taxing their defects and defaults with their censures, they stain their stock
and disgrace themselves, by degenerating from their virtuous ancestors. But
what, is Nobility of no more reputation? Truly that may be fitly said of
Nobility which Solomon speaks of old age: Age is a crown of glory, Pro.
16.31
when it is found in the ways of righteousness. A double honor belongs to
those that join virtue of life to their Nobility of birth, and noble descents
make grace more gracious in the eyes of men and Angels: but contrarily, he that
has only the honorable ensigns of his ancestors, may be a man of note,
Notus magis quam nobilis. Sen.
but he is not truly noble. The Jews bragged of their birth, and boasted that
they were the children of Abraham: but being ungracious, our Savior tells them
they are the children of the Devil, Ioh. 8.44.
and give sin and iniquity for their badge, as their father did before them.
And John the Baptist can teach us, that although a man be a slip or stem of
what tree soever, if he bring not forth good fruit, he shall be hewne down
and cast into the fire. Math. 3.10.


Let all those therefore whom their birth has thus blessed, that they are
borne the sons or daughters of Nobles and Gentles, consider that the same
should not make them ambitious, but industrious; and if the vaineglorious
cogitation of any ones ancestors honor begin too much to affect him, let him
look into their graves, and there shall he see his hereditarie ensign^s of
honor, and be compelled to acknowledge with Job: I said to corruption, Job
17.14.
Thou art my father; and to the worm, Thou art my mother and my sister. In a
word, whosoever thou art, noble or ignoble in the eyes of the world, yet if
thou embrace the mercies of God and the merits of Christ with a lively faith,
Ioh. 1.12.
and have the new birth of the immort^ll seed of Gods word, 1. Pet. 1.23.
with an unfeigned desire and a fruitful endeavor to serve him; then art thou
truly noble in the sight of God, because thou art the son of God. 1. Ioh. 3.1.
The consideration whereof may be ten thousand times more comfortable to thee,
then if thou had lineally descended from the greatest Monarchs in the world.

SECTION. 2. Of Prosperity.
SAlomons observation of the course of worldly occurrents is very right; All
things come alike to all, Eccles. 9.1.
and the same condition is to the just and the wicked. For the Lord suffers
and sends the rain to fall as well upon the wicked as the godly; Mat. 5.45.
so that profane Esau has the fatnes of the earth for his dwelling place, Genesis
27.39.
and is watered with the dew of heaven, as well as godly Jacob: and therefore
his inference upon his observation is very good: No man knows (by these
temporals) either love or hatred of all that is before him. Eccles. 9.1.
When Ahab would go up to Ramoth Gilead to battle, his four hundred false
Prophets gave him encouragement to it; 1. King. 2^.
but Iehosophat the king of Judah said wisely: Is there here never a Prophet of
the Lord more, that we might inquire of him? Such is the folly of many, whose
eyes the God of this world has blinded with the goods of the world, that they
rest in the testimony of flattering prosperity, as the king of Israel did in
his false Prophets; imagining thems^lues to be highly in Gods favor, because
they abound in temporal blessings: but those that are wise in heart, will
inquire thus with themselves: Is there no better testimony of my adoption, then
these temporal benefits, and this deceivable prosperity? and that very
justly, because the same are nothing but mere vanities.

Prosperity is commonly vain in two respects, as sententious Seneca notes:
Vel premit, vel praeterit.
for either it presses or passes, either it stays by a man to his hurt, or
flies from him to his grief. It is either like the golden bracelets, that
Tarpeia had for betraying the Roman castle to the Sabines, Plutarch. in vita
Romu.
wherewith she was pressed to death; or like to the hawke, which soaring very
high without the hearing of the call or lure, flies clean away from the
Falconer: so does prosperity glisten like gold, but oppresses the possessor;
Pene priusquam teneretur, auolabat. August. Confess. lib. 6. Prou. 1.32.
it soareth like the hawke, but flies away from the owner. Experience
verifieth the Proverb of Solomon: Ease slays the foolish, and the
prosperity of fools is their destruction. Pharaoh being afflicted was
humbled, but enjoying prosperity he was hardened. Yea prosperity has been
dangerous to the godly: and when adversity could not fasten a temptation upon
them, it has foy-them exceedingly. G^n. 9.
Noah in the arc embraced sobriety, but being in his vineyard was overtaken
with drunkenness. Lot being vexed in Sodom, Genesis 19.
abhorred their unclean conversation; but being safe in the mountains, he
fell into gross iniquity. 2. Sam. 11.
David being persecuted, gave himself to meditation and prayer: but being
advanced, he committed a bloody sin. Thus adversity is like the rough
winds, causing a man to keep close unto him the robes of righteousness: but
prosperity is like the fair Sun winning them from him. The Moon is not
eclipsed but when she is in the full: so the godly are seldom subject to those
obscurities of grace and eclipses of godliness, but when prosperity has
filled and furnished them with the abundance of temporal blessings. De verb
Domini Ser. 13 in fine.
So that Augustines saying is true: It is a point of great valor, to contend
with felicity: and great happiness, not to be overcome of prosperity,

Now if prosperity work not this prejudice, yet will she be fl^tting and
flying away, before a man can imagine: and is therefore fitly compared to the
sea, which even now is calm, but by and by rough and tempestuous, with mighty
waves and billows. Jonas, when he is flying from the Lord and flinching in
his business, goes down to Iapho, finds a ship ready to go to Tharshish,
pays the fare, and goes down into the ship: hitherto Jonas had prosperous
success, and all things fell out to his mind. But it was not long before the
Lords Pursiuant, a mighty wind, arrested him, and caused him to be arraigned
and condemned by the Lords verdite in the silent lots, and to be cast into the
sea by his own sentence: so fares it with many, which for a while have good
success in their affairs, and sail pleasantly in the voyage of this life;
but ere long adversity lays hold upon them, and casts them into the
surging seas of infinite calamities. The corn that is too rank is soon
lodged, the boughs of a tree being ouerloden are quickly broken, and the ship
ouerballanced is quickly drowned: so the prosperous estate is very much subject
to ruin and subversion. When David saw the prosperity of the wicked, he
wondered at it: Psalm. 73.1^ 18.
but at last he learnes in the Lords sanctuary, that they are set in slippery
places; they stand as it were upon ice, which yields no sure footing.

What madness then is it for any man to wax insolent because the world
laughes upon him, considering that she is ready so quickly to turn her
countenance, and to change her favors into frowns? When thou see a man
running speedily upon an high and dangerous rock, do thou not rather
pity him, then think him happy? Such furely is the case of that man whom
prosperity has advanced, exceeding dangerous. If therefore it has pleased
the Almighty to prosper thy ways, be not high minded but fear. The wary
mariner that saileth safely in calm winds, will have all things ready against
a tempest: so should the discreet Christian in the time of prosperity,
prepare the shield of patience against the day of adversity: and remember,
Greg. Mor. lib. 5. cap. 1. initio.
that holy men (as one says) when they flourish and prosper, are touched with
a godly jealousy, lest they should receive all the fruits of their labors
here in this world. Almost every man will pray hard in the day of adversity,
but thou had need to double thy prayers in the time of prosperity: for by
it do most men fall. But happy is that man whose prosperity is a spur to
piety.

SECT. 3. Of riches.
ALthough the earth which denies not to men things needful, Sen. de Benefic.
lib. 7. cap. 10.
has hidden from them riches, because they are hurtful: and though Nature has
so subjected gold and silver, that man should trample them under his feet; and
has given him a countenance erected to heaven, that he should not cast his
eyes upon these base things, but lift them up to better: yet such is the
corrupt condition of mankind, that he moiles and toils in digging and deluing
this hurtful gold and silver; and perverting the course both of nature and
grace, fixes his eyes and his heart upon riches, and trampleth under the feet
of a base estimation, those celestial things which he should hold most dear
and precious. Are there not some like the Emperor Caligula, Sueton. in vita
Calig. cap. 42.
who was so delighted to touch and handle money, that laying great heaps of
gold in a spacious place, he would tread on it barefooted, and sometimes tumble
himself in it? Sure I am, if none imitate him in that ridiculous practice,
that there are many that thirst after it as greedily, scrape it together as
eagerly, and lock it up as carefully as may be. But if a man would behold the
uncertainty, the insufficiency, or the misery depending upon riches, he
could not choose (being not extremely besotted with them) but contemn and
condemn the same as mere vanities.

1 Will thou cast thine eyes upon that which is nothing (says Solomon? Prou.
23.5.
) for riches betaketh her self to her wings like an Eagle, which flies away
very strongly? and therefore the form of money agrees well with the condition
of it; Aug. in Psa. 83.
for it is stamped round, because it is so apt to run from a man. How many
thousand examples may histories and experience afford, of men exceeding rich,
brought to extreme poverty, yea and that fometimes very speedily? And
therefore might the Apostle very fitly call them uncertain riches. ^. Tim. 6.17
For as in a wheel the spoke that now is upward, Chrysostom. Ser. de curahab. prox.
is by and by downward: so comes it to pass, that he which is now rich, does
shortly become poor. Fire, thieves, wars, and infinite causes there are of
consuming riches, and impouerishing their possessors, though they had even
millions and mountains of gold. But suppose, that contrary to their nature
they stay by a man, yet cannot he stay by them, but must leave them in spite of
his teeth, as the Psalmist says: Psalm. 49.17
The rich man shall take away nothing when he dies, neither shall his pomp
follow after him. Thus death makes a violent divorce between the rich man and
his goods, when it is said unto him: Thou fool, Luke 12.20.
this night shall they take away thy soul. The rich man sleeps (says Job very
elegantly) and when he opens his eyes, there is nothing. Job. 27.19.
It fares with a rich man at his death, as it does with a sleeping man when he
wakes out of his dream. A man that dreams of the finding or fruition of some
rich booty is wonderful glad, yet when he awaketh he finds nothing, but
sees it was only a dream, and he is sorry: so the rich man seemed in the
time of his life to have somewhat, but at the day of his death all vanishes
like the Idea of a dream, and it vexes him. Eccles. 5.15
This is an evil sickness (says Solomon) that a man must return naked as he
came: and it is an ordinary sickness, not to be cured by all the physic in
the world. When the Preacher has showed the vanity of riches, because they
vanish thus; he offers this point to our consideration: And what profit has
the rich man, that he has labored for the wind? Would you not think him a
fool or a mad man, that should go about to hold the wind? and such does
Solomon note to be the folly and madness of him which labors and endeavors to
hold his wealth.

2 As riches are uncertain, so are they insatiable: Eccles. 5.9.
For he that loves silver, shall not be satisfied therewith: and he that
loves riches, shall be without the fruit thereof: this also is vanity. Te
esurire cogunt. Qu. Curt. lib. 7.
Riches make men hungry, as the Scythians said to Alexander: so that the rich
are like the dropsy man, which the more he drinks, the more he thirsts.
Hence it comes to pass, that contrary to all sense, the more that men have,
the more they desire; and the older men wax, the more covetous they grow: as
if a traveler being nere his iournies end, Cic. de Sen.
should increase his luggage; or as though the Citizen should be building when
the enemy is battering. Thus it happens to the rich man, as it does to the
waspe, which being greedy of the honey, at last falls into the barrel, so that
she cannot get out: for wealthy men falling into a vain of covetousness, do
at last stick so fast in their insatiable desire, that they can never deliver
themselves so long as they live. If this were not so, how could that possibly
come to pass, which Solomon speaks, and experience verifieth? Eccles. 4.8.
There is one alone, and there is not a second, which has neither son nor
brother; yet is there no end of all his travel, neither can his eye be
satisfied with riches, neither does he think: For whom do I travel, and
defraud my soul of pleasure? this also is vanity. A man may swear it is but
vanity, that a man should vex and turmoile himself, yea defraud himself of
pleasure, and (which is more) of salvation also, for wealth, when he has no
use of it. When thou see a man ever thirsty, thou do not think him to be
well, though he have abundance of all sorts of drink: so when thou beholdest
a man always thirsting greedily after the pelf of this world, though he
possess abundance, thou may well account him a miserable man; Hom. Odys.
lib. 11. Hor. Sermon. lib. 1. sat. 1.
like Tantalus in the Stygean lake, and like the drudging Indians, which toil
in the golden mines, but enjoy none of the ore.

Hydropem conscientia^. Aug^ de verbo Dom. ser. 5. initio. Eccles. 5.
3 It is no small dispraise of riches that they make a dropsy conscience, but
behold a worse fruit of them then so: There is an evil sickness that I have
seen under the Sun, to wit, Riches reserved to the owners thereof for their
evil: the other sickness of parting with them is grievous, but this of being
plagued with them, is exceeding dangerous. Our blessed Savior compares the
cares of this life and deceivable riches to thorns; Mat. 13.22.
a most fit comparison, (and no marvel, being his who is best able to censure
and set forth the nature of all things both in heaven and earth:) for as
thorns do pierce and prick those things which touch them: so do riches
pierce the hearts of the owners thereof, being got with pains, kept with care,
and lost with grief; yea sometimes causing the possessors throat to be cut.
How many dangers do riches expose men unto, stirring up thieves to lie in
wait, soldiers to r^se up in arms, yea sometimes the children to long for,
and hasten the parents death? Are not rich men often made spunges, to gather much
that it may be wrung from them again? and does it not cause them to be hunted
after, and angled for like fishes, In Psalm. 64. and passim.
as Augustine says? In regard whereof the Poet spoke not unwisely, when he
called gold a more hurtful metal then iron. Ferroque no centius auru^. Ovid.
Met. lib. 1.
2. As thorns are shilter for serpents to lurk and hide themselves under: so
are riches the harbourers of many sins. For they that will be rich, 1. Tim. 6.9.
fall into temptations and snares, and into many noisome and foolish lusts
which drown men in perdition and destruction. They are the mother of pride and
presumption, and therefore S. Paul bids Timothy charge them that are rich in
this world, 1. Tim. 6.17
that they be not high minded, and that they trust not in uncertain riches,
but in the living Lord: yea he accounts them the water that yields moisture to
covetousness, the root of all evil. The examples are innumerable that might
be brought for the proof of this point. It was the wages of unrighteousness
that seduced Balaam: 2. Pet. 2.15.
yea the foulest fact that ever was committed in the world, was through the
love of money: I mean the selling of our blessed Savior, by that accursed
traitor Judas.

3 As thorns do stop up ways, hinder the growth of corn, and the path of
passengers: so do riches hinder the growth of grace, and stop up the way to the
kingdom of heaven; and that makes our Savior say: Mat. 19.23 24.
A rich man can hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven; yea to add this
vehement speech: It is easier for a Camel to go thorough the eye of a needle,
then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. The Evangelist says,
that the disciples were exceedingly amazed at this speech: how much more should
it amaze those that are great possessors and lovers of riches?

What? are riches so uncertain, that they will be gone like the Eagle? are
they so insufficient, that they make the soul insatiable? are they so hurtful
in piercing the heart with anguish, shrouding the serpent of sin, and stopping
the way to heaven? Let the meditation thereof then be a motive to embrace the
Prophets exhortation: If riches increase, Psalm. 62.10
set not thy heart upon them. For why should thou set thy heart upon
nothing, yea that which is worse then nothing? But this is an evil sickness,
and will hardly be cured, as experience teaches. Was there ever such gaping
after gain, and such deluing in the bowels of the earth for the bewitching
ore? yea such damning of souls to the pit of hell for that which should be
counted trash, and be trodden under foot? Alas, what do men mean to take
such pains in hoarding up that gold and silver, Iam. 5.3.
the rust whereof shall be a witness against them at the day of judgment? A
man that were going some great journey, or swimming over an arm of the Sea,
would not load himself, but go as light as may be: consider then dear
brother, that thou art going to heaven, which is a long, a dangerous and a
difficult journey; will thou load thy self with this ponderous pelf, which
will tire thee exceedingly? thou art passing over the dangerous ocean of this
surging world; will thou carry that which will serve to drown thee in the
gulf of eternal destruction? Nay rather, if thou have any sense of a man,
Hieron. ad Pamach. and alias. ex aliis.
imitate Crates the Thebane, and cast away thy goods rather then they shall
cast away thee. For what good shall all the goods in the world do thee, Mat. 1
6.
if thou lose thy soul? Think with thy self, what if it should be said to
thee, as it was to the churl: Thou fool, Luke 22.40.
this night shall they take away thy soul; whose then shall those things be,
which thou have provided? Little know thou, who shall gather those riches
which thou have heaped up: it may be thine enemy, for this event I have
observed in the world; or peradventure such a one as will scatter them as fast
as ever thou rakedst them together, for this often comes to pass. But admit
thou have children, who will be as frugall as thy self; will thou purchase
hell to thy self, to purchase lands for thy children? Oh what a lamentable
thing is this, that the father should fry in everlasting torments, for leaving
of his son these transitory and temporary aduancements? But would thou
keep thy money safe? then lay it up in heaven, where thieves cannot dig
through and steal. Mat. 6.20.
Would thou put it to the best and most gainful use? then be bountiful in
giving to the poor: the money so bestowed is laid up in heaven. Luk 12.33.
Thou art here but a pilgrim, and heaven is thy country: Fac traiectitiu^,
says S. Augustine.
will it not be good to have these temporal commodities returned there in
things eternal? Do thou not commend the Merchant, that changes an ounce of
lead, for a pound of gold? believe me, the heavenly gains do far exceed such
an exchange. Does not the husbandman cast his seed into that ground which is
most fertile? Let heaven be thy soil, where even a cup of cold water, Mat.
25.35
yields an Epha of glory. But thou have children, and must provide for them;
God forbid else: yet remember also, that thou have a brother in heaven, Aug. in
Psa 48. conc. 1.
who looks to be relieved, and who will assuredly recompense thy cost and
kindness: for clothing him, he will deck thee with glory: for feeding him,
he will replenish thy heart with joy and gladness: and for entertaining him
into thy house, he will receive thee into his everlasting habitations: when as
wealthy Dives (that would not hear poor Lazarus crying at his door, nor
relieve him with the crummes of his table) shall cry and howl in torments,
and shall not get so much as a drop of cold water to cool his tongue. Luke
16.24.
To conclude, if thou will be rich in this life, then remember that Godliness
is great gain: which if thou have, 1. Tim. 6.6.
thou possessest all things. Be rich in faith, 2. Cor. 6.10. Iam. 2.5.
so shall thou be heir to the kingdom of heaven: and be rich in good works,
so shall thou lay up in store for thy self a good foundation for the time to
come, 1. Tim. 6.17 18.
that thou may obtain eternal life.

SECT. 4. Of dainty Fare.
Necessity for the maintenance of health and preservation of life, is the
especial end (by Gods ordinance) of eating and drinking, to the which, through
man's weakness, dangerous delight joins her self as a handmaid: so that men
becoming dainty and curious, have augmented the vanity. And surely I cannot
sufficiently admire the folly of man in this behalf, that being the Lord of
all the creatures upon earth, he should make himself a slave even to his
appetite; yea that he should not stick, for the satisfying of a small part of
his throat, to send headlong both soul and body into hell. Who is able to
reckon up the infinite dangers and inconveniences, that do arise from pampering
the body?

1 It dulleth the wits, and takes away the edge of the understanding. For as
the clouds obscure the heavens: so does repletion darken the light of the
mind; and as birds filled ouer-full cannot fly high: so the body being
pampered, will not suffer the mind to mount up with the wings of contemplatio^
to view excellent objects. This Nebuchadnetzar knew well, who purposing to
train up the young Princes of Judah for his counselors, appointed them a
portion of meat for their diet, as it were by weight. For the word (...)
portion comes of a verb that signifies to number or to weigh.
And it is a thing to be observed, that fools are commonly great eaters: so
that much eating is either a cause, Dan. 1.5.
or at least an adiunct of their folly, and therefore befits not them that
would be reputed wise.

2 As it makes a dull and empty brain, so it yields as light a purse: For he
that loves wine and oil shall not be rich. Prou. 21.17
So that covetousness and gluttony do sometime fight together in a carnal man:
but the appetite prevailing, the throat becomes an open sepulcher, and deuours
all that the hands can provide.

3 It is the mother of sloth and idleness, according to the Proverb: When the
belly is full, the bones would be at rest. And that made the Poet to tax his
countrymen for sloth, as a fruit of their gluttony, Tit. 1.12.
saying: The Cretians are always evil beasts, slow bellies. And it is noted
in the Israelites, that they sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to
play: Exodus 32.6.
as being fit for nothing but play, when they had filled their bellies. Thus
many in their appetites are like beasts; but in the fruit and effect thereof,
they are worse then beasts: for the beasts having filled themselves, are thereby
fitted to their work, but men by eating and drinking are made unfit for any
thing that is good.

4 It breeds sickness and sundry diseases, and is to many the cause of
their untimely death. Some by overmuch eating, and others by drinking many
healths to others, leave themselves no health. Thus the glutton and drunkard (a
thing to be lamented and detested of every good man) do murder them selves.
Where are gowts, dropsies, and the like diseases, but where dainty fare and
extreme drinking have their habitation? The days of our forefathers (far from
our licentious superfluity in diet) were longer, and their bodies more
healthful, For, Qui viuit medi ce, viuit misere.
and so themselves less miserable. There was little need of the Physician when
men were of Calisthenes mind, who would not pledge Alexander to have need of
Aesculapius, not pledge the King to have need of the Physician: but now most
are like those foolish mariners, which needlessly let the water come into their
ship, and then are feign to labor hard to pumpe it forth: for they bring
upon themselves diseases by such superfluous disdiet, and then are glad to
seek help by painful physic.

5 It makes a man unmindful and forgetful of good things. For as too great a
burden drownes the ship, so that neither the calmnesse of the sea, the
skilfulnesse of the pilot, the abundance of furniture, nor the fit time for
navigations can help it: so when the body is ouerloden with meat, it is made
so senseless in the regard and wielding of good things, that neither learning,
advise, nor any exhortation can do it any good. Whilst the prodigal child had
wherewith to maintain his riot, Luke 15.13.
he played the ruffian, not thinking upon his father at all: so does sacietie
make men dissolute and forgetful of their heavenly Father. Therfo^e does Moses
warn the Israelites to take heed, Deu. 8.11, 4
lest when they have filled themselves they forget the Lord. And as sacietie
makes men forget GOD, so it makes them forget their brethren that are in
distress: for when Dives fared daintily, Luke 16.
he thought not upon poor Lazarus. Yea, it makes them forget themselves, and
those things that belong to their salvation: which causes our Savior to give
that warning: Luke 21.34.
Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be oppressed with
surfeiting and drunkenness; and that day come upon you unawares.

Lastly, it is the tinder to kindle the firebrand of concupiscence: and
therefore does the Apostle exhort the Ephesians not to be filled with wine,
Ephesians. 5.18.
because therein is excess: meaning such excess, as does breed access to
sin. A man that refraineth not his appetite (says Solomon) is like a city
which is broken down and without wall. Pro. 25. vlt.
For as such a battered city lies daungerously open to the siege of the
enemy: so is such a Christian dangerously exposed to the assaults of Satan,
who uses it as an especial stratageme to entangle the children of God by
dainty fare, as the lamentable experience of our first parents in Paradise can
sufficiently tell us. Genesis 3.


Seeing then that pompous and dainty fa^e dulleth the wit, emptieth the purse,
nourishes idleness, b^eedeth sickness, causes forgetfulness, and kindles
concupiscence; it is a gross error to think those happ^e, which fare daintily
every day as Dives did. Those gormandizers which are of Philoxenus mind,
Aristot Eth. ib. 3. ca. 11
who wished that his neck were as long as a Cranes, that he might have a long
taste of his meat and drink: what should they gain hereby if they had their
wishes? And those that make their bellies their gods, Phil. 3.19.
their kitchins their temples, their tables their aultars, their dainties their
sacrifice, and so do not serve the Lord, but their bellies, as the Apostle
says: Romans 16.18.
do they not think, that they must one day answer for the good creatures of
God, which they have vainly consumed, and for their own souls and bodies
which they have abused? Yes surely they shall one day digest their dainty
morsels in torments, which they have devoured in their bankets. Aug. in Psa.
48. Conc. 2.
And what difference in the mean time, is there between them and the poorest
wretch, saving that in their lives they provide more work for the Physician,
and at their deaths more meat for the worms? To them Sampsons riddle will not
well agree: Iud. 14.14.
Out of the eater came meat, and out of the strong came sweetness: for
behold, their eating yields nothing but stinch and filthiness. I may justly
complain in the Prophets words: Ezekiel. 16.49
The iniquity of Sodom is the sin of our land, pride, and fullness of
bread, and abundance of idleness: for our opulencie has made many lofty
hearts and lazy hands. Men rise up early to follow dunkennesse, Esa. 5.11.
Jude. 12.
and feed themselves at feasts without all fear. Little do such think of our
Saviors hungering and thirsting, and of the bitter cup that he drank for our
sakes: but let all those that fear God, embrace sobriety and temperance in
their feeding and feasting. And although it be lawful to use the creatures of
God more plentifully at some times then at others, and to feast with friends
and neighbors: yet can Jobs practice teach us, Job. 1.5.
that it is a dangerous liberty, and requires the eye of circumspection, and
the sacrifice of prayer, lest our table become a snare unto us. Christians
should learn at all times to say with a godly father: S. Augustine.
Thou have taught me, O God, to come to my food, as I come to take physic:
rather to suffice nature, then to satisfy his appetite.

Howsoever thou do provide for the body, have care for Gods sake (my
Christian brother) to nourish the inward man, and to feed thy soul, a divine
substance, ten thousand times more to be respected then thy base body: and to
that end desire the sincere milk of the word, 1. Pet. 2.2.
that thou may grow thereby. Is it not a wonder to consider, that whereas
faith teaches us, that the soul is immortal; and experience shows, that
the body is mortal: yet most people contrary both to faith and experience,
do so neglect the soul, as though it were mortal, and so cherish the body,
as if it were immortal? Prayer and meditation, hearing the word of God, and
reading good books, which are the food of the soul, they little regard and
seldom use: but their bodies they feed both as often as they need, and as
daintily as they are able. But learn thou a better lesson of our blessed
Savior: John 6.27.
Labor not for the meat that perishes, but labor for the meat that
endures to everlasting life. Feed upon Christ Jesus the bread of life, by a
lively faith. And as Elias went in the strength of the food ministered by the
Angel, till he came to mount Horeb: 1. King. 19.
so shall thou go in the strength of this food, until thou come to the
celestial mount Sion, where thou shall enjoy the food of Angels, and be
partaker of those exquisite and dainty viands, that are prepared for the
lambs supper. Reu. 19.9.


SECT. 5. Of costly Apparel.
WE read that the man in whom the plague of leprosy was found, should have
his clothes rent, Leui. 13.45
and his head bare, and should put on a covering upon his lips, and cry, I am
unclean. Would you not imagine the man to be mad, that should be proud of those
marks of his misery? Consider then that the transgression of Adam stripped him
and all his posterity of the robes of grace, Genesis 3.7.
and brought upon them the leaprosie of sin, and a shameful nakedness: and
their clothes are like the rent clothes, the bare head, and the covering of the
leaprous man, even demonstrations of their misery: and yet behold they are
proud of them, and do glory in them, as it were a thief in his burning in
the hand, the evident note of his theft and conviction; or as a beggar bragging
of his rags, the only ensigns of his base estate. Lo, thus does man glory
in his shame. Phil. 3.19.
Is not that matter worthy the title of vanity, which the silly moth (one of
the tendrest and weakest creatures) is able to consume? or if it be cloth of
gold, is subject to rusting; or if fine silk, is not free from staining and
fretting?

Too much curiosity and pomp in apparel, does commonly follow defects of
nature, and are the ordinary marks of a proud heart. When Apelles saw one of
his prentises to have painted Hellen badly, Clem Alex. paidag lib. 2. cap. 12.
yet to have decked her with gold very bravely, he said merrily: Well done
sir, though thou could not paint her beautiful, (...).
yet thou have made her rich. Many women are like this picture of Hellen,
though Nature has not made them fair, yet by decking and tricking up
themselves they will needs be fine: thus are they feign to patch up the defects
of nature, and when they have done so, they wax proud of it, like the bird
that is decked with the plumes of another bird. I know that to hear, that
defects and deformity are the foundation of their pride, some will not brook
it; and when they shall be challenged of pride in their costly and curious
apparel, they will excuse it or deny it. But the matter it self will witness
against them: for who would put on gorgeous apparel, where they could not be
seen of others? And this was Socrates observation closely touched, Aelian.
Var. hist. lib 7.
when his wife Zantippa would not put on her best clothes to go see a solemn
show. Wife (quoth he) if thou will not put them on to see the show, yet do it
that thy self may be seen there.

Psa. 58.1.
Are your minds set upon righteousness, says the Prophet? Experience may
answer, No: for the minds of most men and women are set upon vanity, and that
not a little upon the vanity of apparel. Is it not strange to see, how many
wits are set on work to this purpose? some laboring in the matter, others
studying about the form, and all endeavoring to bring vanity to her
perfection. Cypr. de habitu virgin. sect. 11.
The godly fathers observation is worthy the noting, that God did not make
sheep of a purple or crimson color, but man with the devils help (a very
cunning workman) devised these and many such other vanities. Some think, that
pomp and bravery in apparel is no fault; but if that were so, why has the
holy Ghost noted it in the Rich man, Luke 16.19.
that he was clothed in purple and fine linen?

I will not say with Ambrose: Lib. 1. de virgin.
That a woman gorgeously and sumptuously attired, is a house of all infernal
devils: yet may I boldly say, that such a one is a snare and dangerous
provocation to lewdness. Yea, but every one that is thus attired, does not
intend to entrap any thereby. Well, admit there be no such intent, yet may
there easily be such an effect; but suppose that neither of those do follow,
yet art thou not altogether blameless, because thou have offered poison,
Hieron. ad Nepot.
if any man would have drunk it. The Lord by his Prophet Zephanie threatened
Jerusalem, Zeph. 1.8.
that he would visit all such as were clothed in strange apparel. Was there
ever any people more culpable and worthy of reproof in this respect, then our
disguised nation, apt to take up the fantastical fashion of every country?
Look upon men and women, and you shall perceive in one and the same creature
the English speech the Spanish fashion, the Italian behavior, a manly shape, a
beastly life. Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici? Would it not make even
Heraclitus laugh to behold this compou^d of vanities? Heraclitus was a man that
always wept.
Is there not reason to dread the Lords visitation? Esa. 3.16.26.
The da^ghters of Sion, though exquisite in their bravery, shall come far
too short of the daughters of England; yea if pride her self were to set up
shop, she might take patterns of us. Have we not reason to fear that, which
is therefore threatened to Jerusalem? that our gates shall mourn and lament,
and that our land being desolate, shall sit upon the ground (as Job did in the
days of his affliction, Job 1.20.
in sackcloth and ashes.) The Lord give us grace so to fear it, that we may
never feel it.

These things should be seen in apparel, Hieron. Ep. 84.
necessity, honesty, and decency. Apparel must be neat, but not of a
disguised fashion: Zeph. 1.8
both affected baseness, and exquisite niceness, are extremes. 1. Pet. 3.3.
It must be comely, but not too costly; and if costly, yet without riot or too
much curiosity. It must not be always alike, for it was Dives fault, Luke
16.19.
that he was brave in apparel every day. It befittteth not every one to wear
rich attire, though Queen Hester may have her royal apparel. Hester. 5.1.
And though persons of state may wear rich clothing, Luke 7.25.
yet they may not line it with pride. But alas, in these days neither fashion,
cost, time, place, person or estate is respected; but against the laws both of
God and man, the most do seek in their attire to content themselves, though
thereby they abuse both themselves and others.

Well, now seeing that such cost and curiosity in apparel, is vain in it
self, dangerous in use, and odious to God, when it is the nurse or note of
pride: let it be far from every good Christian to take delight in brauing it
as the world does. Psalm. 138.6.
The Lord (as it were in disdain) beholds the proud a far off, but gives
grace to the lowly. Silks and velvet, and cloth of gold, make a glorious show
in the eyes of men: but sackcloth and the garment of hair are gracious in the
sight of God, Jonah 3.6. Esa. 37 1. 1. King. 21.29.
and have moved him to look upon the wearers thereof with the eye of favor
and compassion, because they are good signs of humiliation. If God have
blessed thee this way, remember the poor that want clothing, so shall thou
cloth Christ in his members, who will not let the least ragge thou give be
unrecompensed. Mat. 25 40
If thou can not be induced strictly to observe that commandment: Luke 3.11.
He that has two coats, let him part with him that has none: yet see not any
perish for want of clothing, Ioh 31.19.20.
but let their loins bless thee, because thou warmest them with the fleece of
thy sheep. Oh that our days yielded many Dorcases, Acts 9 39
that the poor might show the coats and garments which such compassionate
women make for them; but I fear it may be sooner wished then obtained.

To conclude, be not ouercarefull for thy body in decking it, but adorn thy
soul with grace; and if thou will be in a good fashion, get into Jobs fashion:
Job 29.14.
I put on justice, and it covered me, my judgment was as a robe and crown:
and put upon thee the garments of the Queens daughter, Psalm. 45.13
who is all glorious within (by sincerity) and her clothing is of the wrought
gold (of grace.) But above all, Romans 13.14.
put on the Lord Jesus Christ. Thus when thou art decked with these external
and internal robes of grace, and with the inherent and imputed righteousness
of Christ, the same shall be as the cloak of Elias, 2. Kin. 2.14
dividing the waters of the Jordan of this troublesome world, that thou may
pass over to the beautiful Jericho of eternal joy. And as when Isaac smelled
the savor of Jacobs garments, Genesis 27.27
he blessed him: so when the Lord smells the sweet air of these garments of
grace, he will assuredly bless thee with the white robes of eternal glory in
his everlasting kingdom. Reu. 6.11.


SECT. 6. Of stately buildings, and sumptuous furniture.
HE that will see the vanity of stately buildings, with the compleme^ts
thereunto belonging, let him take a view of Salomons house, 1. King. 7.1.
which was thirteen years in building under the hands of so many thousand
workmen, and hear him also what he says of it: Eccle. 2.4.5
I have built me houses, I have planted me vineyards, I have made me gardens
and orchards, and planted in them trees of all fruit, etc. Whatsoever cost or
art could do or devise, Solomon had it to beautify his works: but mark his
censure as well as his description: Verse. 11.
I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought, and behold, All is
vanity and vexation of the spirit.

What is the usual foundation of stately buildings, but pride and ambition?
Did not this humor set the builders of the towers of Babylon on work? Genesis
11.4.
For they will build them a city and a tower, whose top may reach unto the
heaven, that they may get them a name. And this is also evident in the arrogant
brag of that lofty king, many hundred years after: Dan. 4.27.
Is not this great Babel, that I have built for the house of the kingdom, by
the might of my power, and for the honor of my majesty? Mark how the
conceit of the greatness makes him arrogant, and in false assuming the honor
of the work, he is very impudent. But if the matter be well waighed, there is
no great reason, that any one should be proud of his buildings; for every one
having his due, the honor of the work rather belongs to the builder, then to
the owner: nay, many may have cause to be ashamed of their stately houses,
being void of habitation, and nothing but mere mock-beggers.

2 As pride lays the foundation: so cruelty and oppression do often times
finish the work. Are there not many, to whom the Prophets commination does
justly belong? Ier. 22.13.
Woe unto him that builds his house by unrighteousness, and his chambers
without equity: and this circumstance makes it more odious, that such cost is
bestowed and employed with neglect of the Lords house. The Prophet Aggeus
taxes and taunteth the Jews after their return from the captivity, in these
words: Is it time for your selves to dwell in your seeled houses, Agge 1.4.
and this house lie waste? Doubtless there was never any age more culpable in
this kind then ours: for every one that has enough for his own house, has
nothing to bestow in repayring the Church. Yea, there are many wretched
cormorants, who do not only let the Lords house lie waste, but do their
uttermost even utterly to ruinate it. Yea some with the spoils of the Church,
do purchase lands and build them goodly houses: and yet these sacrilegious
wretches would be counted faithful Christians. Saint James wills them to
show him their faith by their works. James 2.18.
If their stately houses the fruit of their fraud and covetousness, and the
monuments of their pride and arrogancy, may be demonstrations of faith; the
world shall witness with them, that they are very good Christians: but thus
many do make their buildings worse then the buildings of Jericho, Joshua 6.26.
not laying the foundation thereof in the blood of their bodies, but in the
bane of their souls. And let such know, that the curse of God is upon their
glorious houses, and that the stones of the wall shall cry out (for
vengeance,) Hab. 2.11.
and the beam out of the timber shall answer it (with an echo, and say, Amen.)

3 What becomes of all these? are the buildings perpetual or permanent? yea
does not time with sundry accidents, as fire, thunder, lightening, tempests,
earthquakes and the like, consume them? C^^er Epist. sa n. lib. 4. Ep. 5.
The carkas^s of mighty towns and cities* such as Aegina and Corinth, are
scarce to be seen. Where is that goodly building of Jerusalem, that ravished
our Saviors disciples with admiration? and are not those Egyptian Pyramides,
which were reckoned amongst the wonders of the world, exceedingly defaced and
decayed? Chrysostom. in Ep. ad Coloss. Hom. 2. medio.
Therefore does Chrysostom very well compare men's buildings to swallows
neasts, which in winter do fall down of themselves: and wherein (as he says)
do we differ from little children, which in their sports do build them houses,
save that their building is with play and pleasure, ours with labor and pain?
The like may be said of domestical ornaments, which has been said of the
houses. For what are they but baits for thieves, care for servants, work for
rust, food for moaths and mice, and other base creatures? The garden may
instruct us rather then delight us, by showing us what we are, even a flower:
and it is a good place to set our sepulcher in, with Joseph of Arimathea, that
in the midst of our delights we may remember our death. As for orchyards,
they may preach humiliation unto us, by remembering us of our common calamity
through the tasting of the forbidden fruit.

This being the due estimation of these momentanie vanities, it may serve to
abate the arrogancy of those, who wax proud and stately, because of their
stately buildings, and rich furniture. Such may remember, that a little womb
contained them at their birth, and a small grave will serve them at their
death: and why then should they seek for such pompous habitations in the time
of their life? Let us rather imitate Noah, Gene 8.20.
who after the flood, built an altar; then Caine, Genes. 4.17.
who after the Lords threatening, built a city. Let us seek better habitations
then those that may perish by sundry means in the time of our life, and must
needs be forsaken at our death. Heb. 11.10.
Abraham being called of God, was easily persuaded to forsake his house and his
own country, because he locked for a city, whose builder and maker is God:
so the children of God should remember, that they have a building given of God,
1. Cor. 5.1.
that is, an house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens. The
remembrance whereof should make these earthly tabernacles vile in their eyes.
As for the wicked who are so besotted with the love of this world, that they
endeavor to erect perpetual habitations in this vale of misery, never longing
or looking after the heavenly mansions prepared by our Savior; Ioh. 14.2.3.
let them know that one day they must leave all, and not have so much as the
benefit of one of the walks of their gardens or galleries: but in stead
thereof shall be shut up in that loathsome place of darkness, which yields
nothing but wailing and weeping, and gnashing of teeth.

SECT. 7. Of a great family, and many attendants.
IF sumptuous buildings remain like a cottage in a vineyard, Esa 1.8.
and like a lodge in a garden of cucumbers, (as the Prophet speaks of
Jerusalem) they become the passengers wonderment, and display the owners
vanity: but when they are fraught and furnished with great families, then do
men as well commend them, as admire them: yet is all this but vanity. Vide.
Sect. 12. 13.
For if those Oeconomicall leagues and linkes, which are most near and
natural be vain, as it is evident they are; then can it not be otherwise in
that which is more remote and servile. Many there are who are exceeding proud
of their great trains, and their many servants; but as justly, as a ruinous
house may be proud of many proppes, or a prisoner of his many keepers. The
blessed Angels go about the world, neither having nor needing any servants:
what, shall we repute them inferior to us silly men, that both have and need
them? nay rather in their power let us view our own weakness, and be humbled.
Servants should indeed be props and pillars to their masters, but they oftimes
become chinks and pillars, being neither silent in their secrets, nor faithful
in their affairs: fulfilling our Saviors saying: A man's enemies shall be they
of his own household. Mat. 10.3 Mich. 7.6. Psalm. 101.
David was as industrious as might be to free his house from badde servants,
yet had he a leude Achitophel, who gave ungracious counsel to his rebellious
son. 2. Sam. 6.
Our blessed Savior had but twelve disciples that were continually conversant
with him: yet one of them (yea he whom he trusted with his treasure) proved a
traitor. And do not our own stories make mention of diverse great me^, The
Dukes of Bu^kingham and Suffolk, and others Hollinsh.
which have been utterly undone by the treachery of their untrusty servants?

Is it not an ordinary thing for men to have such servants, as will kindle and
nourish the coals of contention, and incense and stir up their masters to
unlawful actions and attempts? Such were the servants of Abraham and Lot, Genesis
13.
who iangled among themselves eue^ to the separation of their masters, though
kinsmen and dear friends: such were the servants of Abimelech, Genesis 21.
who unknown to the king their master, offered Abraham injury in his wells
of water; yea the servants of another Abimelech wronged Isaac likewise, Genesis 26.
even contrary to the express commandment of the king.

It is no marvel that Saul had a Doeg to feed his malicious humor, 1. Sam. 22.
in accusing David and Abim lech, when as David had followers that persuaded
him to a wicked revenge, 1. Sam. 24.
even to lay hands upon the Lords anointed. But what, are all servants such?
God forbid, yea I know there are some that do fear God unfeignedly, and serve
their masters faithfully; yet I fear that sum is small. We read not of one
servant that went with Noah into the arc, not one that departed with Lot out
of Sodom: yet is it not l^ke that either of the^ was without servants. Besides
this, if a man do seriously consider his duty, as well as his dignity, he
shall find that his superiority and attendance is rather a matter of burden
then of honor: Oneris qua^ honoris.
for behold how many servants he has, so many souls he has to answer for.
The master is charged with the servants sanctifying of the sabbath; Exo. 20,
10.
and Abraham is commanded to circumcise every man-child* Genesis 17.12
both him that is borne in his house, and him that is bought with money, yea
the commandment is doubled and vehemently urged: Ver. 13.
He that is borne in the house, and he that is bought with money, must needs
be circumcised. And this is Abraham's praise pronounced by the Lords own mouth,
that he will teach not only his sons, but his household also to keep the way
of the Lord, Genesis 18 19
to do righteousness and judgment. The strictness of this duty has caused
the Spirit of God in the sacred Scriptures, 1. Kin 5.15
to confound the names of father and master, Mat. 8.6.
son and servant; to teach us that as the obedience of servants to their
masters should be filial: so the care of masters over their servants should
be parentall.

Here then those that have great families, even troops of servants and
followers, may rather learn to be humbled then exalted, upon the conceit of
their great trains. A master is not seen in the possession, Arist. Pol. lib.
1 cap. 4.
but in the use of his servants. To possess many servants is a mere vanity,
but not to use them is a dangerous iniquity. To prescribe Oeconomicall
precepts, it is not my purpose in this place: only one rule I would persuade
every master of a family to learn of ingenious Seneca, Sen. Ep. 47.
Not to esteem of a servant by his mysteries but by his manners: and of
virtuous David, Psalm. 15.
To make much of such as fear the Lord: for there is little hope, that he
shall be a good servant to his master, that has no care to serve the Lord.

SECT. 8. Of Honor fame and glory.
IT is a strange thing and worthy of admiration, that men should be proud in
the school of humility, and vaineglorious in the place of shame and reproach;
where all the creatures of God between heaven and earth, being subject to
vanity for man's fall and fault, are badges and ensigns of his dishonor.
Again, what madness is this, when men have a theater in heaven, to desire
earthly spectators? to seek to conquer in one place, Chrysostom. hom. 17. in Romans
and to be crowned in another? Yet behold this folly and madness possesses
the minds of most men; who being employed in the heavenly warfare of
Christianity, do seek to be crowned with the vanishing shadow of earthly
honor and estimation.

What is the honor glory and credit of the world, but a certain vulgar
applause? not the reward of resplendent virtue, but the popular guerdon of
vanity, and many times the recompense of apparent iniquity. He is a fool
that will commit his glory to the chest of another man's lips, Bern. super
Cant. Sermon. 13. medio.
it is a wiser course to keep it thy self: but the safest of all, to commit
it to the custody of him, 2. Tim. 1.12 Cautus in ^ustodiendo, fidelis in re
^ituendo. B^rn. ibid.
who is able to keep that which thou have committed to him against that day,
being wary in keeping, and faithful in restoring: whereas those that depend
upon the applause and opinion of other men, are made sometimes great, sometimes
little, Ber. Ser. de not. Io. Bap fere initio. Arist. eth. li. 5. cap. 5.
and sometimes nothing at all: and this caused the Philosopher to discard
Honor from being Felicity.

1 This is one bad property of worldy honor to puff up, and to inflame those
that are held in reputation, being a notable and dangerous firebrand of pride:
forth of which there arises a smokie vapor, that will scarcely suffer a man
to know himself. For as when Bucephalus was without his furniture any man
might ride him, but being in his caparison, he would suffer no man but
Alexander to come on his back: so, many there are which in their mean estate
were mild; but being advanced, became lofty and imperious. When Samuel first
spoke to Saul of his promoting to the kingdom, he speaks basely of himself,
1. Sam. 9.21
thus: Am not I the son of Gemini, of the smallest Tribe? Diverse of the
Caesar's at their first entering upon the Empire, saluted their followers with
the term of Fellow soldiers: Commilitones Sueton.
but ere long both Saul and the Caesar's became very haughty. When Herod was
applauded by those flatte^ers, which cried at the hearing of his oration, The
voice of God: Act. 12.12.
it lifted up his heart with a dangerous* vainglory, that cost him his
life. What effusion of blood did the contention for honor, cause in the
broiles between Caesar and Pompey? And how many lost their lives about the
like, in the wars between the houses of Lancaster and York in our land? Yea
did not the jealousy of this vain honor move Herod to murder the infants,
Eusebius. lib. 1 cap. 9. Macrob. Saturn. lib. 2. cap. 4.
not sparing his own child, (as the Historians do write) that he might have
slain our Savior?

2 As honor inflameth the owner with pride; so it kindles envy in others.
For as whilst the dove plays herself in her flying, and takes pleasure in
her swiftness of wing, the hawk seizes upon her: so whilst men do content
and please themselves with worldly honor; envy, which always waits upon
honor, lays hold upon them, and many times fetches them down. He
therefore spoke truly, who called obscurity the mother of tranquillity; but
fame and honor the foundation of danger.

Dan. 6.3.4.
When Daniel was preferred above the other rulers and governors of Darius,
those rulers and governors sought an occasion against Daniel concerning the
kingdom: and their malice had been effectual against him, had not the
Almighty hand of God stopped the mouths of the fierce Lions. It was indeed a
great honor for David to kill Goliath, 1. Sam. 18.9.10.
and to be met and received home with dancing and singing, David has slain
his ten thousand: but the same had like to have cost David his life. For when
he fled from Saul to Achish the king of Gath, 1. Sam. 21.11.12.
thinking there to be safe by being unknown, the kings servants said to him:
Is not this David the king of the land? did they not sing unto him? etc. Oh how
glad would David then have been, if he had never been partaker of that
dangerous honor, which would not tolerate his safety. This is no small
prejudice; yet behold a far greater inconvenience accompanying honor,
whilst some seeking to hold their reputation in the world, dare not profess
or practice those things which may tend to the honor and glory of Almighty
God: as those chief rulers which durst not confess Christ for fear of the
Pharisees, Ioh. 12.42.
because they loved the praise of men, more then the praise of God.

3 Honor and glory is very brittle, like Archimedes glassie sphere. Has
not experience showed, that those whose excellency mounted up to heaven, Job.
20.6.
and made their nest as high as the Eagle, Ier. 49.16.
have been brought down? So that it would make a man not considering the
slipperinesse of honors ladder, to wonder with the Prophet over the king of
Babel: How art thou fallen from heaven o Lucifer, Isa. 14.12.
son of the morning? and cut down to the ground, thou that did cast lots
upon the nations? What is become of those four Monarchies of the world, which
the king of Babylon saw in a vision? are they not almost vanished like his
dream and vision of them, which he utterly forgot? Alexanders pomp and
solemnity at Babylon, Dan. 2.
was wondrous great, Q. Curt. lib. 10.
when he kept as it were a parliament of the whole world: For he lay seven
days unburied.
but not many days after, he could scarce obtain the honor of burial.
Adonibezec had the glory of conquest over seventy kings, Judge. 1 7.
who having their thumbes cut off, picked crummes under his table: yet at last
himself had the like disgrace, to be conquered, and to lose his thumbes. But
that (of many others) was a most lamentable and memorable spectacle of
Zedechiah: 2. King. 25.6.7.
who being a mighty king, was taken captive by the Babylonians, arraigned at
Riblah, saw his children slain before his face, had his eyes picked out, and
lastly was led to Babel where he dyed miserably. Lo here the inconstancy of
worldly dignity, and the mutabilitie of those that enjoy honor, to shine for
a while and presently to be obscured: to be advanced to honor for a little
space and quickly to be debased: to be very rich to day, and to morrow to be
impouerished: Hest. 3.1.7.10.
now to be (with Haman) exalted to the highest seat of dignity, and by and by
to be hanged. Is it not strange to have known the father a great commander,
and to see the son a base vassal? the one to inhabit a stately palace, the
other to live in a poor cottage? the one to sit upon his triumphant throne,
the other to lie in the dust of desolation? But thus it comes to pass: Pro.
27.24.
For riches remain not always, nor the crown from one generation to another.
Yet is this more strange, to behold one and the same man brought from the
highest pitch of earthly felicity, to the lowest step of extreme misery. 1.
Cor. 7.31.
Thus does the fashion of this world pass away, and the glory thereof
vanishes like the vapor of smoke. And the Lord of hosts has decreed this
to stain the pride of all glory, Esa. 23.9.
and to bring to contempt all those that be glorious in the earth.

Seeing now that the honor, ctedite, and worship of this world, is but a
vulgar applause, the nurse of pride, the firebrand of envy, and the companion
of inconstancy: good Lord, what do men mean so earnestly to hunt after it?
Alas, who would make any reckoning of this vain and variable world? Who art
thou that gloriest in this glassie and windy vanity? What, art thou greater
then the great kings of Tyrus and Babylon, that conquering Lord of Bezeck, or
that mighty Monarch of Greece? Behold they are all gone, and have lost and
left their pomp behind them; yea their honorable memorial is perished with
them. Almost every one says with Saul, honor me amongst the people: 1. Sam.
15.
and that is the limit of their base conceit. Many stand gloriously upon their
honor and reputation, but few have due regard of honesty and religion. But
our blessed Savior when he came into the world, taught us to despise worldy
pomp and credit, both by his birth life, and death. In his birth he disrobed
himself of divine honor, Phil. 2.7.
and took upon him the shape of a servant. In his life he refused the dignity
of a king, and sought not his own glory. Ioh. 8.18.
And in his death he suffered himself to be stripped of all external
reputation, when he was buffetted by the rascal soldiers, Mat. 27.30 35.39.
crucified on the reproachful cross, and derided by the base passengers.
Christians therefore should learn his precept, and imitate his practice,
according to that: Learn of me, Mat. 11.32
for I am meek and lowly of heart: If we suffer with him we shall be
glorified with him: Romans 8.17.
and if we be humbled with him, we shall be exalted with him. Let your light
so shine before men, Mat. 5.
that they may see your good works, and glorify your father which is in
heaven, says our Savior. Let your conscience be upright, and your
conversation holy: so shall you glorify God and have praise with God, ten
thousand times more worth then all the vain and momentanie applauses of men:
yea, if thou desire to be truly honorable in the eyes of men, do this. Worldly
honor and estimation is not unfitly compared to the Crocodile, which flies
being pursued, but pursues a man when he flies. For those that contemn this
transitory honor, and seek the advancement of Gods glory, shall undoubtedly
have true honor pursuing them: though they lose it in their fathers house with
Joseph, yet shall they find it in Egypt; though they leave it in Pharoos Court
with Moses, they shall meet with it in the wilderness; and forsaking it in
their own country with Abraham, shall find it in Canaan. For those that
honor the Lord, he will honor them. 1. Sam. 2.30
The woman's cost and kindness in honoring our blessed Savior with the box of
ointment, shall never be forgotten: Mat. 26.13
But wheresoever the Gospel shall be preached throughout the world, there
shall also this that she has done, be spoken of for a memorial of her. And
when as the unworthy honor of the wicked shall be buried in oblivion, or be
turned into reproach, Psalm. 112.6.
the righteous (even in this life) shall be had in everlasting remembrance; and
in the life to come shall enjoy a glorious kingdom, thrones of majesty, and
the neuer-fading crowns of eternal glory. Lo, thus shall be done to the man,
whom the Lord will honor.

SECT. 9. Of Pleasures.
WE are now entering into the garden of Adonis, (as it is in the Proverb)
which the world makes her garden of Eden. The flowers that grow therein are the
vain plants of pleasure: which albeit they make a glorious show to the eye,
yet is their root bitterness, their gloss vanity, and their fruit deadly
poison. What is pleasure but a delightful motion seated in the senses? Cic.
defi^. bon. lib. 2.
so that the five senses are as so many roots, forth of the which pleasures
do spring and grow. Beautiful objects delight the eye, sweet sounds do
please the ears, fragrant aires affect the nose, delicate substances content
the branched nerves, dainty viands satisfy the tongue: and what has man in
all this, which is not common to him with the brute beasts? 2. Pet. 2.12
In regard whereof, Saint Peter calls those that are led with sensuality,
brute beasts. And are not these senses so many fair windows, by the which
pleasures give sin passage and entrance into the heart and soul of men? The
serpent was more subtle then any beast of the field, Genesis 3.1.
and so was a dangerous snare unto Eve; but, alas, when she gave
entertainment to pleasure, she was assaulted by a more dangerous beast. For
pleasure directed her eye, and guided her hand to the forbidden fruit, brought
it to her mouth, and persuaded her to take and taste it.

Now, as pleasures are brutish, so are they exceeding momentanie, like the
fiery Comets, which last no longer then their exhaled matter indureth, and
that cannot be long. So that even now you may see Baltasar quaffing in great
iolitie; Dan. 5.
and by and by, behold his countenance changed, his knees beat together, and
his pleasure turned into horror. To day you may see the Israelites stretch
themselves upon their beds of Iuorie, Amos. 6.4.
eat the lambs of the flock, drink wine in bowls, and sing to the sound of
the Violl: and to morrow, behold them in great misery and thraldom by the
Assyrians and Babylonians. If a man will not leave his pleasures when he is
young, they will assuredly leave him when he is old: and the^fore Solomon, I
sought in my heart, to d^aw forth etc. (...). Eccles. 2.3.11.
when he had drawn out the threede of delight, and stretched the web of
pleasures on the largest tenter of variety, says, he found nothing in it, but
vanity and vexation of spirit.

The learned both heathen and Christians have compared pleasures to the anglers
bait, Plato, Cice. Ambr. de bon. mort. cap. 6.
which has a hook hid under it, wherewith those that are inconsiderate, are
caught and killed. The golden cup in the spiritual whores hands is a goodly
cup, Reu. 17.4.
but it is full of abominations: so is pleasures cup a very fair one, but it
is full of deadly poison. The Be has honey and wax, but she has a sting
withal: so has pleasure the honey to entice, and the wax to inflame, but
take heed of the deadly sting wherewith she strikes.

The best fruit that can grow from pleasures, is Repentance and remorse of
conscience. For sweet meat must have sower sauce: and the soul that took
pleasure in sinning, must needs suffer pain in sorrowing. So shall it befall
the soul given to pleasures, Esa. 13.22.
as Esaias threateneth to Babylon: Iim shall cry in their palaces, and dragons
in their pleasant places: those souls and bodies that should have been the
temples of the holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 6.19.
but have been made the palaces of worldly pleasures, shall have the Fairies
and Furies of anguish and horror lodging and living there.

2 Are not pleasures the occasions of sickness and weakness? Chrysostom. ad pop.
Antio. hom. 55. in ipso initio.
for as the course of waters do wear and weaken the bank, and at last carry
it clean away: so do pleasures diminish health and strength, and at last do
utterly deprive men of them. And as the Fuller with raising of the nappe and
shearing of the cloth, makes it wear soft and seemly, but withal sooner then
it would be: so do pleasures raise up the nap of the spirits, yielding present
content, but withal bring old age and death before their time.

3 As pleasures do hurt the body, so do they annoy and infect the soul. They
are like thorns in hindering the growth of godliness, Luke 8.14.
and like Sirens in lulling men asleep in sin and security. Whilst Sampson
slept upon Dalilahs lap, Iud. 16.
his locks were shaued off, and his eyes put out: so when pleasure has lulled
men asleep, she will shave off the locks of grace, and besot the soul with a
spiritual blindness.

4 But Saint Peter speaks of a further and far more dangerous fruit of
pleasure, when he says, that those which have been led with sensuality, 2.
Pet. 2.13.
shall receive the wages of unrighteousness. And what that is, it appears in
Abraham's speech to Dives: Luke 16.25.
Son remember that thou in thy life time receiuedst thy pleasures, and non
thou art tormented. So that the intolerable torments of hell are the reward of
pleasures: yea the more the pleasures, the greater the torments; for the Lord
does weigh out his judgments according to the measure of men's vanities: Reu.
18.7.
So much as she has lived in pleasure, so much give you to her torment and
sorrow.

This is a meditation very meet for these days of voluptuousness; for now is
the Apostles Prophecy fulfilled: In the last days men shall be lovers of
pleasures more then lovers of God. 2. Ti. 3.1.4.
I know there is scarcely such a miscreant, but he will in this behalf
endeavor to justify himself: but when the Preachers of Gods word, being the
Lords Ambassadors, beseech men in his name, yet they cannot persuade them to
forsake any pleasures; is it not evident that they love their pleasures more
then they love God? Men that live pleasantly, seem to live happily: but
indeed their life is miserable, and their condition lamentable. The sweet and
Crystal river runs pleasantly, as it were sporting it self, winding and
turning his silver streams up and down by many a fair and goodly meadowe a
great while; but at last it falls into the salt sea, and there loses his
sweetness and becomes brackish: so many wicked men, which for a while do
turn and wind themselves up and down, through the meadows of pleasure, and
bath themselves in the transitory bliss of this world, do at last fall into
the mouth of hell; and there lose all the sweetness of their pleasures, and find
nothing but the brackishnesse of pains eternal. Aul. Gel. lib. 1. cap. 8.
(...). how much that was, the learned agree not as Pet. Mosel in Aul. Gel.
shows.
When Lais that famous Curtisan of Corinth, asked Demosthenes a great sum of
money to lie with her one night, he answered her wisely: That he would not buy
repentance at so dear a rate. Consider then dear Christian, that the price of
pleasure is not only the infirmity of body, and anguish of soul, but of
eternal pains and torments in hell: are not all the pleasures in the world
(though thou might enjoy them ten thousand ages) too dear to be bought at
such a price? we read that king Lysimachus being constrained through thirst,
Plutar. Apoth.
to yield his kingdom to the Scythians, when he had drunk the cold water,
said: O good God, for what a small pleasure have I lost so great a kingdom!
Believe me, if thou give thy self to pleasure to thy souls danger, though
thou draw it forth as Solomon did, yet when it is vanished, thou will say: O
good God, what endless torments am I subject to, and what a glorious kingdom
have I lost for trifling and momentanie pleasures! Do with thy pleasures
rather as David did with the water brought him by his Worthies, whereof he would
not drink, but powered it forth, saying: O Lord, 1. Sam. 23.
be it far from me, that I should do this: is not this the blood of these
men? If pleasures offer themselves in never so glorious a shape to allure thee,
let neither thy hands touch them, nor thy heart taste them; but pouring them
forth, say with thy self: O Lord, be it far from me, that I should yield to
these pleasures: are they not the price of my soul? This if thou shall do,
the Lord will yield thee heavenly delights in stead of earthly: Psalm. 36.9.
thou shall be satisfied with the fatness of his house, and he will give thee
drink out of the rivers of his pleasures.

SECT. 10. Of Friends and Friendship.
ALthough nothing be more consonant and contenting to the nature of man then
society, whereupon he therefore has his name homo of (...); Scaliger de
causis ling. Lat. Vt Cic. de Amic.
yea although the use of friendship were as frequent and necessary as the
Elements: yet may this benefit of friendship, be also raunged very justly in
the Catalogue of vanities. Solomon describes a friend thus; Pro. 17.17.
A friend loves at all times: if he only be a friend who loves at all times,
how few true friends are there? For the most are like the swallow, which sings
merrily with us all the summer, but bids us farewell toward winter. Many will
willingly accompany their friends while they sail safely with a pleasant
wind: but when the tempest of danger or trouble arises, they will quickly
flinch and forsake them. A friend is counted another self, but most friends in
time of need will give a man leave to trust to himself. Das nihil, and dicis.
Candide (...). Mart. lib. 2.
It is a common thing to say: All things are common among friends, when nothing
is communicated: and (I am wholly yours) is soon said, but seldom seen. Does
the whole world yield one Damon or Pythias? one Pilades or Orestes? No, a
faithful friend is a Phoenix. The Philosophers said ingeniously, Arist. Cicero
Hieron. ad Paulin.
that affinity in manners and conditions should be the foundation of
friendship: and the ancient Father divinely, Ambros. de Offic. lib 3.
That the fear of God and love of his word, should be the glue to knit men
together in the league of true love; but profit, pleasure, vanity and
iniquity, is the foundation and glue that unites most. When friendship is once
begun, is it not kept on foot by flattery? for the imperious nature of man
being impatient of reproof and advise, it is thought good rather to sooth and
claw, then to fall to iarres. So that most men become like the Iuie to the
tree, and the bear bind to the wheat, which clippe them till they have killed
them. And such friends as these, when opportunity is offered, prove faithless,
and treacherous, killing where they kissed, 2. Sa. 20.9. Mat. 26.29.
like Ioab and Judas. and that breaks the heart of him who relyeth upon such
a one. If an enemy had wronged me (says David) I could have borne it: Psalm.
55.12.
implying, that for a friend to prove treacherous it was intolerable. Thus
does the friendship of our days, begin with iniquity, continue with
flattery, and end with treachery. So that the Lords querulous admonition does
very well agree with our times: Ier. 9.4.
Let every one take heed of his neighbor, and trust you not in any brother:
for every brother will use deceit, and every friend will deal deceiptfully.

To these inconveniences may be added the iarres that usually fall out among
friends, and that often times upon trifling occasions. No instrument is sooner
out of tune, then the harmony of friendship; and then, as the purest wine
proves the tartest vinegar: so the most inward friendship being dissolved,
turns into the deadliest hatred. And as the pieces of clear Crystal cannot
be reunited by any art: so the nearest friendship turned into hatred, does
hardly admit any reconciliation; according to the divine Proverb: Pro. 18.19.
A brother offended, is harder to win then a strong city, and their
contentions are like the bar of a palace.

Friendship should be as the houses that join together, and as the stones
thereof, one stone and one house helping to support and uphold one another: but
they are sometimes ponderous occasions rather to suppress and pull down one
another. For as sheep do eagerly follow one another into the forbidden
pasture: so many a good man is brought to do evil by the society and example
of his friend, Confess. 2. lib fine.
as Saint Augustine ingeniously confesses of himself: and thereupon justly
exclaimeth: O nimis inimica amicitia! And as it has often fallen out, that they
which have adventured themselves to save a man from drowning, have by that
means been drowned themselves: so many a one by his readiness to succor and
pleasure his friend, has been brought into the same snare, and made partaker
of the same danger. To manifest this by stories which is evident by daily
experiments, were very superfluous. Ad Demonicum. So hard a thing it is to have
an absolute friend.
It is a strange speech of Isocrates, That there is a friend who will grieve
for his friends mishap, and endeavor to relieve him in distress; yet repine
also at his good fortunes: but it is true in observation, and has reason also
of it. For there is in every man by nature a secret self love, Omnesmelius
sibi mallent quam alteri. Ter.
whereby he wishes better to himself then to others, which is the cause of
this repining humor. Now let it be supposed, that none of all these evils were
incident to friendship; that neither iarres, dangers or trecheries had any
place in dissipating or dissoluing of the same: yet were this enough to set
forth the vanity thereof; That friends cannot always live together, but
against their wills are subject to separation, and that by sundry accidents,
and unexpected calamities. Whereof we have a notable instance in Abraham and
Lot: Genesis 13.
who by reason of their servants variance, were enforced to depart one from the
other. And if nothing else effect this, yet death strikes the doleful stroke
of separation; and then the dearer the love, the greater the loss. For as by
the loss of one of the optickes, the other is endaungered: so by the loss of
one friend, the other must needs be much perplexed. Then does David mourn
over Jonathan with a great lamentation: 2. Sa. 1.26.
Woe is me for thee my brother Jonathan.

The consideration of all this, may be a notable means to avoid the Prophets
curse and woe: Ier. 17.5.
Cursed be the man that makes flesh his arm. Isa. 3.1.1.
Woe be to them that go down into Egypt for help. For if friendship be so
frail and vain, why should any man depend upon it to depart from the living
God, or to diminish his confidence in him? Job. 23.21.
Embrace Eliphaz his exhortation: Acquaint thy self with God, whose love once
set upon thee is immutable, Ioh. 13.1.
whose favor and kindness is unspeakable, his power invincible, and his
promise inviolable. 2. Chro. 15.2
The Lord is with thee, whilst thou art with him: he is the first in inuiting,
and last in rejecting. Oh what a singular privilege is it to have God to be
our friend? if men rejoice in their great and loving friends, how much more may
we make our boast of God all the day long? Psalm. 44.10
If thou desire to be partaker of this privilege, remember our Saviors
saying: You are my friends, Ioh. 15.14.
if you do whatsoever I command you.

SECT. 11. Of Mirth.
Joy and Mirth is a thing desired of all, except some few, whom a certain
inhumane and melancholy disposition has distinguished from others; so that it
will not be hand for this delightful vanity to find patrons enough in the
world: but who is he that shall be able to free it from the just imputation of
vanity? We read of some, Aul. Gel. noct Attic. lib. 3. ca. 15.
whom overmuch joy has brought to their graves very speedily, as Diagoras of
Rhodes: who, having three sons which won the prizes in several exercises
at Olympus; when his children in a filial reverence cast their garlands over
him, and the people with admiration applauded him, fell down dead in the
place. In him and others the like mentioned by historians, the Proverb
fails: The merier heart, the longer life. And surely immoderate mirth cannot
be but very hurtful, by reason that it disperseth and spends the vital
spirits, which are the munition of the heart, the castle of the body.

Besides this, the Lord envying the pleasant estate of wicked men, which are
strangers from the life of God, does often shoot out his arrows of dolor and
discontent: Psalm. 32.10
so that their joys become very momentanie, and the end of their mirth is
heaviness; like a fair calm, Pro. 14.13.
that ends with a blustering storm. Ioh. 20.4.5
Which cause^h Zophar to ask Job: Know thou not that the rei ycing of the
wicked is short, and that the joy of hypocrites is but f^r a moment? as if he
should say: If thou know not that, thou know nothing. And as the Lord
deals with the wicked in judgment; so does he with the godly in compassion,
knocking at the door of their hearts with the hammer of chastisements and
affliction, mixing (like a careful Physician) his cordials with corrasiues, to
keep them low, and to cherish in them a contrite heart and an humble spirit.
So that Salomons saying for the vicissitude and change of things, is often
proved true: There is a time to laugh, and a time to weep: Eccles 3.4.
a time to dance, and a time to mourn. For the drif^ of his discourse, is not
to teach that it should be so; but to show that it will be so. Which ordinary
event considered, it is not without just cause, that the same Hebrew word used
both in Job and else where in the Scriptures, Ioh. 20.5. (...)
signifies both Mirth and Mourning.

But if mirth were in it self both good and permanent, yet how unfit is it for
this pilgrimage of tears? When the Babylonians wished the Isralites being
their captives, to sing them one of the songs of Sion, they asked: How shall we
sing a song of the Lord in a strange land? Psalm. 137.4
Can a song of Sion be more unreasonable in Babylon, then joy and mirth in this
vale of misery? For what is here to make a man laugh or be merry, except he
would laugh at the world, as Democritus did at the Athenians? If a man take a
discreet view of the vanities and miseries of this wicked world, he shall find
cause enough to mourn; but little occasion of mirth. It is worthy the
observation, that we read not, that ever our blessed Savior laughed or
smiled: but diverse times, that he sighed, groned and wept. And the like we
read of other the sanctified servants of God; Phil. 3.18. Act. 20.19.
as of Saint Paul, who writes to the Philippians weeping, and serves God with
many tears.

We have an old Proverb, and it is not more old then false: A little mirth is
worth a great deal of sorrow. This is a carnal Proverb, and true in those
only, Eccles. 3.21 22.
who look for their portion of felicity in this life. For to the children of
God, the Spirit of God can tell us, Eccl. 7.4.5.
that a little sorrow is worth a great deal of mirth. Where or when was it
ever said of mirth, Psalm. 51.19 per risum multum poteris cognoscere stulium.
as it is of sorrow: A sorrowful spirit is a sacrifice to God? Laughter indeed
is the sacrifice of fools. Though the heaven of heavens cannot contain the
Lord; yet behold, he will have his habitation with an humble spirit, Esa. 66.
and a contrite heart. This David knew well when he said: Put my tears into thy
bottle: Psalm. 56.8.
are not these things noted in thy book? The tears of a true penitent, are
laid up by the Lord as rich jewels, and he does register every sigh of a
con^rite heart: even to this end, Psalm. 1^6.5
that they which sow in tears, may reap in joy. But there appears not a
more maine and manifest difference between the estimation of mirth and sorrow,
then in our Saviors words: Woe be to you that laugh, Luk ^.25. Mat. 5.4.
for you shall wail and weep. Blessed are you that mourn; for you shall be
comforted. But what? is it not lawful to be merry? Yes surely, there is some
mirth lawful, and othersome both lawful and laudable. Leu. 23.40.
The Israelites may rejoice before the Lord their God in their solemn feasts.
As the Jews must fast in their misery; Hest 4.16.9.22.
so may they keep the days of feasting and joy for their victory: yea all
the people at the coronation of Solomon, may pipe with pipes, 1. Kin. 1.40
and rejoice with great joy, and make the earth ring with the sound of them.
Thus even in these and the like temporal things it is lawful for the children
of God to rejoice. And indeed none have just title to mirth but they, who by
reason of their adoption in Christ, their present fruition of Gods favor, and
constant expectation of their future happiness, may very wel^ have cheerful
hearts: but yet must this be with the Apostles caveat: 1. Cor. 7.30.
That they that rejoice, be as though they rejoiced not: that neither their joy
be excessive nor intempestiue: not permitting times of mourning, when there is
cause of mourning.

There is a laudable mirth when men do rejoice, Aug. conf. ^ib. 9. 7.
to the Lord, of the Lord, and for the Lord. To this joy does the Psalmist
exhort, when he says: Psalm. 102.^
Serve the Lord with fear, and come before him with ioyfulnesse. When men do
in the service of God lift up cheerful hearts to the Lord, and sing praises to
him joyfully, this is a heavenly rejoicing, and this was the blessed Virgins
joy: My soul does magnify the Lord, Luke 1.47.
and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. If this be the cause of thy
joy, I may say to thee in the Apostles words: Rejoice in the Lord; Phil. 4.4.
and I say again, rejoice. Enlarge thy heart, and extend the bounds of
consolation: Psa. 89.15
For blessed are the people, that can rejoice in the Lord. When the disciples
returned with joy, because the devils were subdued unto them: though this were
no small cause of joy, yet our Savior seeking to turn the stream of their
affections another way, says unto the^: In this rejoice not, that spirits are
subdued unto you; Luke 10 17 ^0.
but rather rejoice, that your names are written in heaven. So do thou ex^mine
the evidence of thy salvation: and if thou find in thy soul the charter of a
sound faith, sealed up unto thee by the spirit of adoption, and the sanctifying
spirit of God, bearing witness, that thou art the child of God, and that thy
name is enrolled amongs^ the heavenly citizens; then rejoice, and again I say,
rejoice: and behold, Ioh. 16.22.
this joy shall no man take from thee.

SECT. 12. Of Marriage.
WHen man was in his innocence the Lord said: Genesis 2.17.
It is not good for man to be alone: but in his corrupt estate the Apostle
says: 1. Cor. 7.1.
It is good for a man, not to touch a woman. Thus was marriage founded upon
decency, but now the principal pillar thereof is necessity. Ambr. de viduis.
Non quasi culpa vitanda, sed quasi necessitatis sarcina declinanda.
In which respect, although it is not to be shunned as a sin; yet is it to be
abandoned as a burden, and may very well be taxed as a vanity.

When a man intends to take a wife, he adventures upon a dangerous choice.
Bias saying is famous: (...).
If a man take a fair wife, it is doubtful she will prove false: if foul,
she is a loathsome plague. And experience manifests many a matrimonial
infirmity incident to that sex. If they be qualified with any extraordinary
ornaments, they become imperious: so that beautiful Vashti will not come to
Ahashnerosh when he sends for her. Hester. 1.
If their husbands have any familiar society with others, by reason of his
employments abroad, they quickly become ielous: and so are a grief of heart to
him. If they be rich, they look to dominere, according to that speech: Eccl.
25.24
If a woman nourish her husband, she is angry, impudent, and full of reproach.
If they be not like their neighbors in womanish vanities, they become
querulous; and if they be honest, they are proud and ambitious, as though
their husbands were much bound to them for it. Do not many wives prove
Michals, and so are snares to their husbands? and many husbands Nabals, even
fools and churles to their wives? And where two such evils are combined, it
were better for a man to have his habitatio^ with the wild beasts, then to
converse with such. Pro. 21.19.


The world yields enough such as Jobs wife was, who will either say blasphemously
to the dishonor of God: Curse God and die: or else foolishly to their husbands
grief, as she did: Job. 2.9.
Bless God and dye: adding affliction to his affliction: but few Sarahs and
Rebeccaes there are, which are faithful, kind and obedient to their husbands.
I mean not hereby to condemn all women: for I know diverse of that sex wise,
modest, and very virtuous: nor to justify all men: for experience shows
many of them to be very vicious: I have only said, which is the general
current in conjugal affairs. Plu. in vita P. Aemy l. and in Praecept. coniug.
Plutarch has a pleasant tale of a Roman, with whom (because he had put away
his wife) her friends did thus expostulate the matter: What fault can there be
found in her? is she not an honest woman of her body? is she not fair? and
does she not bring thee sweet children? But he putting forth his foot and
showing them his shoe, answered thus: Is not this a fair shoe? is it not
neately made? and is it not a new one? yet none of you knows where it
pincheth me: meaning that there were many secret iars happening between the
married, which others knew not.

2. Besides these inconveniences of marriage, there is in it some encumbrance in
divine actions and excercises: as may appear not only by the Lords
commandment to the Israelites of absence, Exo. 19.15.
and abstinence from their wives, at the delivery of the law upon mount Sinay,
but also by the Apostles toleration of a temporary separation, 1. Cor. 7.5.
for the more zealous and devout acting of the religious exercises of fasting
and prayer: and this is his disswasorie reason. 1. Cor. 7.32. I would have you
without carfulness: the unmarried cares for the things of the Lord, how he
may please the Lord; but he that is married cares for the things of the world,
how he may please his wife. And experience resoundeth the truth of the Apostles
words: for he that shall enter into this course of life, must have care of a
family, a provident regard of children, and that which is of most difficulty,
and therefore singled out by S. Paul, he must be careful to please his wife.
Ruth. 4.5.
And as Naomies kinsman could not redeem Elimelechs land, except he took Ruth
to wife: so can a man hardly yoke himself in the bonds of wedlock, but he
shall also marry himself to sundry worldly cares and encumbrances, which will
hinder him in the course of Christianity.

3 This also adds much to these preiudices of the married, that they are knit
in an indissoluble knot. The Gentiles made a question, whether it were good to
marie, although they allowed of divorce upon every trifling occasion: how much
more would they have done so, had they known that only death and adultery
are the swords that must cut this Gordius knot? When the Pharisees demanded of
our Savior, whether it were lawful for a man to put away his wife for every
trifling occasion (as the manner was then among the Jews) he answered: That
the man and wife were by marriage made one flesh, and so (except in the case of
adultery, which disunites the married, and makes an union between the
adulterers) could no more be separated then a man can be divided from himself:
1. Cor. 6.16
which the disciples hearing, said to him: Mat. 19.10
If the matter be so between man and wife, it is not good to marry. And
indeed it is a hard thing, were it not the divine ordinance of Almighty God,
to encounter so many inconuenie^ces, as many times marriage yields with this
i^ksome condition of inseparablenesse. Neither is this bond without bondage,
whilst neither the man nor the woman have power over their own bodies: nor
may make any separation, 1. Cor. 7.4.5
no not for a time, and though it be for divine respects, but with mutual
consent.

These being the inconveniences of marriage, the use thereof may be the Apostles
exhortation: 1. Cor. 7.27
Art thou loosed from a wife? seek not a wife. Act. 26.29.
Saint Paul once wished that all his hearers were like himself, except his
bands: 1. Cor. 7.7.
but elsewhere he wishes all were like himself, that is, free from Marriage
bands. Let those that have wives, be as though they had none: that is, 1. Cor.
7.29
let them not be hindered in divine things, or incumbered with humane, by
reason of their marriage. The spiritual marriage of Christ to the soul, is that
which every one ought principally to regard. Behold how Christ wooeth thee,
saying: Open to me my love, my dove, my undefiled. Cant. 5.2.
Now is it thy part, to set open the door of thy heart, and to say as Laban
said to Abraham's servant: Genesis 24.31.
Come in thou blessed of the Lord. For lo, he being thy souls husband, has
discharged the debts of thy sins, and will give thee a rich ioynter of grace
in this life, and the precious dowry of eternal glory in the life to come.

SECT. 13. Of Children.
AS Nature has engrafted in every thing living on the face of the earth a
desire of procreation, for the preservation of the Species: so grace requires
at the hands of those, to whom she has not given the dispensation of
continency, an offspring for the enlargement of Gods Church. Yea children are
the inheritance of the Lord, Psalm. 127.3.
and the f^uite of the womb his reward: yet is this of the number and nature
of those blessings, which in themselves are but vanities; because that a man in
the abundance of children, may be miserable and worse then an untimely birth.
Eccles. 6.3.
Has it not fallen out to many mothers, most desirous of children, that in the
midst of their throbs before and at the time of their childbirth, they have
been ready to say with Rebecca, Genesis 25.22.
Why am I thus? even sorry that ever they were with child. And does it not often
come to pass, that their children prove Ben-onies, the sons of their sorrow:
yea sometimes the sons and daughters of their death, as Benjamin was to
Rachel. Genesis 35.18.


So soon as the children are borne, there are brought forth many mutual
miseries and troubles to the parents: when they are in their infancy, if they
be nursed at home, how irksome is their crying and bawling? or if by reason of
some weighty impediment, the mother cannot: or of a foolish and unnatural
niceness, she will not nurse her own child: yet how does their fear sleep
and wake with the little tender babe? And as children grow in age and stature,
so does the cost and care of parents grow and increase. The health, the
honesty, the credit, and good estate of the children is the continual
meditation of the parents: and if they prove towardly impes, yet is the future
hope conceived of the^ very doubtful, and the comfort variable, but the care
most certain and infallible.

Children should be like the olive plants, Psalm. 128.3
yielding the oil of gladness and cheerfulness unto their parents faces:
but many by their ungracious behauiours, do make their faces shine with
tears, and do cover them with shame. They should be as arrows of protection
in the hands of the strong: Psalm. 127.4.
but they become swords and darts of sorrow and anguish, to pierce their
parents hearts. What a heart-breake was that unto Adam, Genesis 4.8.
that having but two sons, the one of them should murder his own and only
brother? And what a thing was it, that when as Isaac had but two children, the
one of them married with wives; that were a grief of mind to his mother, Genesis
26.35.27.46
and made her weary of her life. But thus do parents often hatch such filthy
eggs, as prove ugly serpents. Sometime it happens, that contrary to the
course of nature, the parents perform the funeral rites to their children,
and the fame is exceeding grievous to them. 2. King. 4.
How is the Shunamite distracted for the death of her son? and how does David
fast and lie on the ground, 2. Sam. 12.
upon the sickness of his child? and if that nature be not extreme in this
respect, they happily live to their farther discomfort. He that has married his
daughter (says a wise man) has performed a weighty work: Eccles. 7.25
but I may say truly (howsoever passion may cross reason) that he which has
buried his child in the fear of God, has performed a waightier work. For
much care and fear is thereby escaped. I am not ignorant that the death of
Children has brought the graye heads of some parents with sorrow to the grave:
but who knows not (which is worse) that the life of children does often bring
their gray heads with sorrow and ^hame to their sepulchers? In such a case
there is just cause of wering a mourning weed.

The most sort of parents (I confess) through their folly do turn this
temporal blessing into a curse, and this comfort into a corrasiue, and make it
both vanity and vexation of spirit. Such are they that bring up their children
too nicely and tenderly, or else do utterly neglect their education, to their
own discomfort, and their childrens overthrow. This was the fault of David who
loved his son Absolon too tenderly, 2. Sam. 14.
and would never displease Adoniah from his childhood. 1. R^g. 1.6.
The fruit of which indulgence appeared afterward, when the one attempted to
depose his father, the other sought to disinherite his brother. But the
judgment of God was very grievous upon old Eli, 1. Sa. 2.24. and. 4. cap.
a remiss man: who, when his sons deserved severe chastisements for their
notorious wickedness, only rebuked them with a verbal reproof. Most parents
are very provident for their childrens profits, and those things that belong to
their bodies, but few have care of the things that appertain to their souls:
they deck them in brave apparel, build them fair houses, and purchase the^
goodly lands; but do little regard their virtuous and godly education. Thus, as
if it were enough for the husbandman to sow his corn, but never weed it; and
the gardener to plant a tree, and never prune it: so they think it enough to
have children, though they never have care of their good bringing up; whereby
they pervert the principal ends of marriage and procreation. For whereas they
should have endeavored to have had of so many children so many heirs of the
kingdom of heaven, they have (alas for pity) prepared so many firebrands for
hell. This may be a warning to al parents, who do fondly dote upon their
children; and a reason to moderate their affections, that their hearts be no
more set upon them then is expedient: that the current of their love run the
right way; that they do not cocker and nuzle them up in vanity and vice, but
breed them up in the instruction and information of the Lord. Ephesians. 6.4.
That howsoever they provide for their outward estate, they endeavor to make
them rich in faith, and gracious in their conversation: for this shall tend to
the fathers credit, the childrens comfort, and Gods glory. Psalm. 127.5.
Happy is that man that has his quiver full of such arrows, he shall not be
ashamed when he speaks with his enemy in the gates.

SECT. 14. Of Recreations.
THe estate and condition of mankind is such, both in respect of his body,
and his mind, that neither the one nor the other is able substantially to
perform and prosecute those offices that belong unto them, if they shall be
conversant in continual agitatio^ and motion. The reason hereof is, because
the vital and animal spirits are to the body and the mind, like the oil to
the lamp, which if it be not sometimes repaired, will be quickly extinguished.

Now as nature challenges some intermission for her better refreshing: so has
Almighty God herein condescended to man's necessity, permitting to him some
liberty for the relaxation both of mind and body, by Recreations consonant
to them both, and not dissonant from that holy profession which becomes a
Christian. For the body; 2. Sa. 1.18.
such exercises as shooting and slinging, which were practiced for recreations
in peace, and were necessary also for defense in the time of war: and the
praises of men exquisite in that skill are mentioned in the book of Judges;
Jud. 20.16
as the seven hundred Beniamites that could sling at a hairs breadth, meaning
(by an extensiue kind of speech) very near. For the mind, some such as
ingenious sober riddles are, as that of Sampsons: Iud. 14.14.
Out of the eater came meat, and out of the strong came sweetness. And such
no doubt were diverse of the Queen of Shebaes questions, 1. Kin. 10.3
wherewith she proved Solomon. To this purpose serves Music: 2. Chro. 9.1.
by means whereof, David that excellent Musician did calm and pacify the
mind of Saul, 1. Sam. 16.24.
vexed and disquieted with a melancholicke humor, stirred up by an evil
spirit. Yet are these and the like recreations and exercises, nothing else but
mere vanities. Amongst all the recreations that have been devised, there is
(in my conceit) none comparable to that heavenly science of Music: which
causes Solomon to single it out from the rest Eccles. 2.8. Yet behold his
censure of it: When he had provided him men-singers and women-singers, the
delights of the sons of men, (...) Vide Tremel in hunc locu^.
harmony and harmonies, that is, the best simple music, and the sweetest
consorts that he could get; he concludes of this, as of other delights of this
life: Behold all is vanity. And indeed there needs no further argument to
prove the vanity of recreations, Eccle. 2.11.
then the just taxation of other earthly comforts, of more use and consequent.
Whereunto may be added, that as this vanity is of less importance: so is it
through man's corruption of more inconvenience, the^ many other; and so becomes
a vexation of spirit. Men offend in recreations either substantially, or
circumstantially: substa^tially, in the choice and use of those that be
unlawful; circumstantially, in the abuse of those that be lawful.

Though Divines of great learning do not all agree concerning the lawfulness
or unlawfulness of certain recreations; yet some there are whom Fathers,
schoolmen, and modern men also do utterly condemn, as stage plays,
lascivious wanton dancing, unthrifty dicing, etc. Against which many have
written, and some inueighed with great vehemency: which if our age were not
graceless, would at least be some restraint of the frequent abuse of them,
especially upon the sabbath. As for lawful recreations, men abuse them sundry
ways. 1. By fraudulent dealing, using impertinent circumuentions, which are
nothing else but mere cousinages. 2. By diverse outrages, as swearing,
cursing, chafing, brawling, etc. And then the best of them become mad sports,
as Solomon says. Eccles. 2.2.
3. By the wagers that are played for, which should be very little, as a note
of victory, not a mark of covetousness. But most use their sportes only for
gain, neither respecting the refreshing of the body, nor the mind: and so
they pervert the principal end of them. 4. By the too much using of them: a
thing very ordinary with diverse, which make, as it were an occupation of
recreations; and whereas they should be used as Physic, they use them as
ordinarily, as they do their meat and drink: sitting down to eat and
drink, and rising up to play. 1. Cor. 10 7.
So that feeding, sleeping and sporting is their circular course of life. Good
Lord, can any sensible man (that bethinks himself) imagine, that ever God
created him to this end? Mat. 7.
or that this is the strait gate and narrow way, that our Savior exhorts us
to enter into life by? yet who would not feign be saved? It is a narration of
Augustins, Aug. conf. lib. 6. cap. 7.
worthy the noting, of one Alipius a young man: for whom being too much
addicted to certain sports at Carthage, he was exceeding sorry, and one day
reading his Lecture, he took occasion to illustrate that which he spoke of, by
a disgraceful similitude taken from those games, not thinking of Alipius: but
so it pleased God to work in the heart of the young man, that taking it as
spoken to himself, he forsook utterly those vanities he had before affected
exceedingly. Would to God, that the due consideration hereof might have the
like success in the culpable reader; that those unlawful sports he uses, he
would utterly abandon: that he would use the lawful soberly, with the due
regard of Christian moderation: for the better fitting of him to those
Christian duties that appertain to his particular calling: making always the
service of God, the principal delight and joy of his heart.

The second part. Of the pains of the damned in general.
WHen the rich man had tried and tasted the intolerable torments of hell, Luke
16.
he entreated that his brethren might be acquainted with his miserable
condition: imagining that the consideration thereof might make them careful to
avoid the danger of the same. And not without reason: for although neither
the present vanity of earthly delights, nor the conceit of the future blessed
estate in heaven, can reclaim a man from sin: yet the consideration of the
doleful condition of the damned, and the unspeakable pains of hell may
happily be some restraint. Hierome a godly man says of himself: As often as I
consider that day, it makes every joint in my body to tremble: whether I eat
or drink or whatsoever I do, me thinks I hear that terrible trumpet
sounding in mine ears: Arise you dead and come to judgment. If men had grace
to consider and remember that doleful judgment, that terrible trumpet, and
the infernal pains, it must needs make them tremble, and enquire like humble
conuerts of the preachers of Gods word: Sirs, Act. 16.29.30.
what must we do to be saved? Indeed those are best whom love directs,
Augustine.
but those are most whom fear corrects. But of those who are incorrigible
under all these means, I may say as the Prophet speaks of Babylon: Ier. 51.9.
We would have cured Babylon, but she could not be healed. When thou perusest
this treatise, Christian Reader, let it be for thy humbling: and though
peradventure thou may meet with the mention and meditation of such
torments, as will make thee both fear and wonder: yet think not with thy
self, that those have any lively representation of the infinite miseries
endured by the damned.

Par nulla figura Gehenna.

CHAP. 1.
SECT. 1. The first step of the wicked into hell, in this life; namely, their
wicked conversation.
Psalm. 39. Greg. mor. lib. 23. cap. 24.
THis life is a pilgrimage and waifaring life; and every day we live is a step
taken toward our iournies end. The passengers have sundry paths to walk in:
for some travel to Beth-hanan, and some to Beth-anah; some to the house of
mercy some to the house of misery. Our life is a seafaring life, and there are
two havens, into which all the world does sail: the haven of eternal
happiness, the kingdom of heaven, whose straights are exceeding difficult,
enuironned with many enemies to hinder our courses: Mat. 7.
so that few take landing there. The other is the port of eternal perdition,
the gulf of hell, a way plain and easy for every passenger, into the which
most do ariue. Though the seafaring man sleep never so soundly, yet is he
sailing toward his iourneies end: and though we be grown senseless in the
course of Christianity, yet is time still carrying us to our long home. My
purpose is here to describe those first steps which the wicked take to hell,
that so they may be shunned. It is written, that malefactors amongst the
Romans, used to carry their cross, upon which they afterward should be
carried: so does Almighty God even in this life, give a taste of those
eternal and intolerable torments, which wretched and impenitent sinners shall
suffer more abundantly in the life to come: and their resolute impiety and
impenitencie is a doleful preludiu^ to their endless misery. If I should
only recount those calamities which are generally incident to all the sons of
Adam; were they not sufficient to display a miserable man? yet are all they
nothing to those peculiar miseries which are appropriate to disobedient and
rebellious sinners. For as God does prepare these vanities with the
ingrediences of his favor, that they may be wholesome, or at the least
harmless receipts unto his children: so does he season and sauce them to the
reprobate with the powder of his curses, that they may become their bane and
poiso^: they are cursed in the town and in the field, Deuteronomy. 28.
cursed in their coming in and going out, cursed in their goods and in their
grounds, cursed in their souls and in their bodies. So that herein they
resemble miserable Jerusalem, Esa. 1.
which from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head had nothing whole.
For in every place, every time, every action, and in every respect they are
accursed; and this accursed estate is an entrance to that dreadful curse,
which shall be cast upon them at the last day: Mat. 25.41
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire.

2 When the prodigal child went astray, he was brought to this extremity,
that he fed upon Acornes with the hogs: and being pinched with penury, said:
How many hired servants at my fathers house have bread enough, Luke 15.
and I dye for hunger? Lo, this is the condition of every dissolute sinner;
when he goes astray, and has spent his patrimony of grace in lewd living,
Satan gives him the husks of sin to feed upon, and he takes repast with
those base creatures whose beastly life he does imitate: and though he live a
natural life, yet being a stranger from the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18
his life is but a miserable death. In this respect was the Lords threatening to
Adam fulfilled: Genesis 2.17.
In that day thou eatest of the tree of knowledge, thou shall dye the death.
For Adam in the day of his disobedience entered into the gates of eternal
death, which had opened, received and swallowed him, had not the most blessed
seed of the blessed woman rescued him. 1 Timothy 5.6.
And the Apostle says, that she which lives in pleasures, is dead while she
lives; like a man convicted and condemned, though his execution be deferred:
For he that believes not, is condemned already. Ioh. 3.18.
So that it may be said to every impenitent sinner, as the Lord said to
Abimelech: Genesis 20.3.
Thou art but a dead man. And this death is an earnest-penny of the second
death. Reu. 10.6.


3 The wicked and ungodly are not only the Lords laughing stock, Psalm. 2.
but sins slaves, and Satan's drudges also. For they are in the snare of the
devil, 2. Tim. 2.26
of whom they are taken prisoner at his pleasure. Romans 6.16.
Know you not, that to whomsouer you give your selves servants to obey, his
servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether it be of sin unto death, or of
obedience unto righteousness? Io. 8.33.34.
When our Savior persuaded the Jews to stick to the truth, whereby they
might be made free; they poor souls stood upon their supposed privileges of
being the children of Abraham, when they were the servants of sin and Satan.
And how many thousands are there in the world which wear the devils liuerie,
yet profess themselves the Lords servants? which exercise their toungs in
speaking of heaven, but have their feet standing in hell? Do we not pity
the Israelites, when we read of their thraldom under Pharao? Alas, this
thraldom and slavery of men under Satan is much more lamentable, and may
justly cause the servants of God to wish that their head were a fountain of
tears, to bewail the slavery of seduced souls. Saint Paul calls the day of
temptation the evil day. Ephesians. 6.13
Oh how many evil days have many in the world, whose whole life is nothing
but impiety and profaneness? Jacob said to Pharao: Few and evil have the
days of my pilgrimage been: Genesis 47.
but they may say, Many and evil have the days of our slavery been, whilst
they have been Satan's servants, who will task them in his works of
wickedness, like Pharao the tyrant, and give them no liberty to worship and
serve their God.

4 The ways of the wicked are darkness (says Solomon: Prou. 4.19.
) and in this respect does their life also consort with hell the kingdom of
darkness, Mat. 8.12.
and Satan the Prince of darkness. And in this kingdom of darkness their
estate is miserable, like theirs of whom the Prophet David speaks: Psa. 107.10
They dwell in darkness and in the shadow of death, being fast bound in
misery and iron. For the bands of Satan and the darkness of their hellish
life, do far exceed the misery of all corporal bands and darkness
whatsoever. Thus whilst the wicked are strangers from the life of God, and
exposed to his curse; whilst they are the slaves of Satan, and prisoners of
the infernal kingdom of darkness; whilst their words, and deeds, and
thoughts do all savor of hell, they have in part taken possession of that
habitatio^, which they shall one day fully, fearfully, and finally enjoy,

Lo then, this is the estate and condition of all those that have sold
themselves to work wickedness; though in the world they have a name that they
live, yet are they dead, Reu. 3.1.
like the Church of Sardis: though they think themselves in Dothan, yet if
they had grace to lift up their eyes, they should perceive themselves in the
midst of Samaria: 1. King 6.
and though in the outward view, they seem with Capernaum to be lifted up to
heaven, Mat. 11 22
yet behold they are in the confines of hell: and whereas the godly have their
lives hid with Christ in God; Col. 3.3.
they have their lives locked up in Satan's custody. Psalm. 37.1.
Fret not thy self because of the ungodly, neither be thou envious for the
evil doers, says the Psalmist. Me thinks it should be an easy matter to
dissuade any man from envying them, who are rather to be pitied, because they
are set in slipperie places; for they stand as it were on the pit brinke of
hell, ready every hour to slip into it, and to be swallowed up of it,
Consider then (dear Christian) thy estate wherein thou stand: if thou be
given over to sin and iniquity, remember that thou art the devils slave, and
thy foot stands at the mouth of hell. Now is the Prophets exhortation
needful: Turn you, Ezec. 33.11 Romans 6.12.
turn you, for why will you dye? Let not sin reign in thy mortal body:
but if thou have stricken hands with sin, shake hands with it for a farewell;
shun it and abhor it, as thou would fly from a serpent; endeavor to
amend thy estate, that thou may be no longer a slave of sin, a captive to
Satan, nor a companion with the damned: but that by b^eaking off thy sins by
righteousness, Dan. 4.24.
thou may be a fellow Citizen with the Saints, and one of the household of
faith: and lo, the holy Angels shall rejoice at thy conversion

SECT. 2. The second step into hell: which is, Horror of conscience.
CAn a sower tree bring forth sweet fruit? or can a filthy fountain send
forth any but bitter streams? No more can the profane heart, and lewd
conversation yield and send forth any thing but the sower fruit and bitter
waters of a troubled conscience. Sweet meat must have sower sauce: and the
heart which took delight and pleasure in committing of sin, must afterward
be vexed with anguish and sorrow in remembrance of the same. Sin shows a
harmless mouth like the viper, but with her hidden teeth she infuseth deadly
poison: she weeps like the crocodile, but wounds like a serpent; and leaves
the sting of conscience behind her to vex the sinful soul.

The sacred Scriptures do by sundry notable comparisons, set forth the
miserable condition of those wretched men, whom the conscience of sin does
vex in this life, Zophar, Jobs friend makes a notable Antithesis between the
estate of the godly and the wicked in this respect: Job. 11.15
The godly shall lift up his face without spot, and be stable without fear:
but the eyes of the wicked shall fail, and their hope shall be grief of mind.
The wicked through the terror and conscience of sin, shall be like men whose
extreme amazedness does deprive them of the use of their senses, both
external and internal: whereas the godly shall have a cheerful countenance,
with an upright conscience. And his friend Eliphaz likewise: Job. 15.20.
The wicked man is continually as one that trauelleth of child. As the pregnant
mother is vexed with many sudden throbbes, and thinks every one to be a
warning of her dangerous and painful approaching travel: so the lewd and
wicked liver, that trauelleth with iniquity, has many inward throbbes which
gripe his heavy heart, and represent unto his pensive soul the imminent
everlasting destruction. Again, in the 24. verse. Affliction and anguish shall
make him afraid. When the Lord comes against a wicked man, he brings forth
his forces of affliction and anguish, which rise up in civil war, till they
effect that which Solomon has in the Proverbs: The wicked flies when no man
pursues him. Cap. 28.1.
And no marvel: for the distraction and dread of conscience is a sufficient
enemy to daunt the stoutest wight that breaths. Pro. 18.14
A wounded spirit who can bear? Job. 27.20.
And Job himself also says, that terrors shall take the wicked as waters, and
as a tempest shall carry him away by night. As a tempest arising suddenly,
fills both the heavens and earth with dreadful darkness: so do the storms
of dread arising in the conscience of a wicked man. The Prophet Esaias does
elegantly discipher the miserable condition of such men on this manner: Esa.
57.20.
The wicked are like the raging sea that cannot rest, whose waters do cast up
mire and dirt. And surely there could be nothing more fit to set forth the
restless and wretched estate of a wicked man; who as he swells with the
surges of pride and haughtiness of heart; as he casts forth the filthy
foame of his own shame, and boyleth with the fire of an envious spirit: so is
he tossed up and down with every blast of anguish, and blown about with every
gale of terror: neither is he like those seas which sometimes do obtain
calmnesse, but like Euripus which is in continual agitation and boiling: Pomp.
Mel. lib. 2.
and therefore does the Prophet conclude upon his similitude: Ver. 22.
There is no peace (says my God) to the wicked. All this is evident by Caines
wicked murmuring, Genesis 4.13. Genesis 27.38
Esaues bitter weeping, Mat. 27.3.
and Judas desperate mourning: all which were indeed like a restless raging
sea, and (like Noah's dove) found not one twigge of sound comfort, whereupon to
rest their distressed souls. Our Savior speaking of the pain of the damned,
says: Mar. 9.44.
That their worm dies not; this worm is the sting of conscience which is
never plucked out: and this worm begins even in this life, to nibble at the
hearts of desperate sinners. Of this thing the Poets were not ignorant,
Animoque obiecit Eryn nim. Ovid. Met. lib. 1.
when they fained that such men were vexed with Furies; meaning indeed, the
furious ho^ror of their fearful conscience arising from their wicked
conversation. We read that Nero that Roman mo^ster, Sueton. in vita Neron.
cap. 34.
having after many villainies, like a vile wretch murdered his own mother, was
exceedingly perplexed with the remorse and memory of his damnable and
unnatural fact: affirming that he was vexed with his mothers ghost, with whips
of the hellish furies, and with burning torches: and albeit the soldiers, the
Senate and people did by their applause endeavor to comfort him: yet was he
never able to endure the horror of conscience proceeding from his villainous
wickedness: Neque tamen sceleris conscientiam, aut statim, aut vnquam far
potuit.
so close did this never dying worm cleave to his clogged conscience. The
conscience of man by the divine ordinance of Almighty God, does keep an
Assise, and erect a tribunal in the soul of every one, even in this life.

First to make way to these proceedings, the conscience dogs us, and takes
notice of all our actions. Thy heart knows that thou likewise have cursed
others: Eccles. 7.24
though thou have forgot it, yet consult with thy conscience, and it will tell
thee that thou have done it. When the sons of Jacob had forgotten their
cruelty toward their brother, committed many years before: their conscience
quickened by a present affliction speaks thus unto them: Genesis 42.21.
We have verily sinned against our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his
soul. Sometimes a man goes away with his sin, as Gehazi went with the silver
and the garments, and says peradventure as he said: 2. King, 5.25.26.
Thy servant went no whither; but the conscience will answer with Elizaeus:
Went not my heart with thee, when thou did privily slander thy neighbor,
steal, swear falsely, commit filthiness, or the like? 2. When the conscience
has taken notice of some great crime, it calls us to the bar, and there it
accuses us, reckoning up our sins, and setting them in order with their
circumstances; thus the prodigal child taxes himself: Luke 15.18
Father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee. So is the conscience
like the Clearke of the Assizes, laying open the books and cases, which before
lay hid in obscurity. 3. Lest there should be any fond excusing, the
conscience having accused, gives in further evidence for proof of the
indictment, and bears witness to the accusation, as the Apostle shows,
Romans 2.15. Therefore does the Lord take that course with Adam; Genesis 3.11.
appealing to his conscience, whether he have transgressed the commandment
enjoined him, yea or no? because he knew his conscience would testify against
himself. 4. The conscience having made evident that which was obscure, and
ratified (as it were with a thousand witnesses) that which seemed doubtful,
she proceeds to pronounce sentence. Then does the prodigal child cry out:
Luke 15.19.
I am not worthy to be called thy son. Then does the Prophet censure
himself and his people thus: O Lord, righteousness does belong to thee; Dan.
9.7.
but to us open shame and confusion of face. 5. Lastly, sentence being thus
pronounced, Quo enim cor meum fugeret a cord meo? Aug. confess lib. 4. cap. 7.
what is to be expected but execution? to fly it is not possible: a man may
escape others, but to fly from an evil conscience, it is no less impossible,
then for a man to fly from his shadow, which the faster the body flies, the
faster it follows: then will the conscience inflict the punishment. Thus when
David with diffidence of Gods assistance, and affiance in his own forces had
numbered the people, it is said, that his heart smote him or scourged him. Lo,
(...) 2. Sa. 24.10
this is the fruit of sin, both to the unjust and to the Saints: for in both
of them, the conscience watches, accuses, witnesses, condemns and
punishes: but these proceedings of the conscience are to the elect like the
Apostles power: To edification not to destruction. 2. Cor. 13.10
The godly being hereby schooled are sent to Christ, Gal. 3.24.
whereby peace is spoken to their souls, and they are repriued and pardoned:
the wicked despair and fly from him, and so they are eternally tormented.

But some man will peradventure object, that all the wicked feel not these
throbbes, because some that have wholly devoted themselves to iniquity and all
abomination, do yet live merrily, and are not vexed with such storms of terror
or remorse. Whereunto I answer, that many which seem to live thus merrily, have
yet many inward gripings, Pro. 14.10.
when only The heart knows the bitterness of the soul. Caligula that
proud Atheist, Qui deos tantopere contemneret. Sueton. in vita Call. cap. 51.
who did so scorn the Gods, was wont to wink and wrappe the clothes about his
head at the least flashes of lightening: and at the greater, would hide
himself under his bed. Did not his conscience terrify him, and tell him, that
there was a revenging power? But suppose they were always exempted from these
terrors, as some no doubt are, who have senseless hearts and cauterised
consciences: 1. Tim. 4.2.
yet is their condition no less miserable, whilst this lethargy of their
souls, will not suffer them to seek to the Physician to be cured. Poison is
poison, how plesantly soever it be confected: and though these men be led by
Satan, Carrion. Chr. lib. 5.
like Baiazeth by Tamberlaine in fetters of gold, yet remember that they are
speeding to hell.

Let me then for conclusion of this point, propound unto thee, my Christian
brother, Romans 6.21.
the Apostles question to the Romans: What fruit had you of those things,
whereof you are now ashamed? Consider the fruits of sin, and thou shall
find them to be nothing but shame and sorrow, and horror of conscience:
besides which if there were no other reason of restraint, yet were this
sufficient to withdraw any man not senseless in his sins. For what a
miserable thing is it to be always hanging over a dangerous and deep water by
some small bough? and what a lamentable case is this, to be ever fearfully
looking for the dreadful judgment and violent fire, Heb. 10.27.
that shall devour the adversary? Crucify therefore thy affections with the
lusts thereof, and hold it not sufficient like the foolish Israelites to make
them tributaries, Ios. 23.13.
lest they prove worse then the Cananites: not a whippe on thy side, and
thorns in thine eyes; but a sword of sorrow wounding thy sinful soul.
Endeavor also to embrace a holy conversation, and that will yield thee a quiet
and good conscience: and a good conscience will be a continual feast. Pro.
15.15.


SECT. 3. The third step of the wicked into hell in this life, which is their
dolefulll dying.
THe cup that yeeldes bitterness in the first draught, must needs be very
bitter in the bottom. If the life of a wretched sinner be so full of terror,
as has been showed, how terrible do we think his death shall be? Exodus 5.
The Israelites were in great slavery in Egypt, but when they were ready to
leave the land, their thraldom was much increased: and so it fares with
incorrigible sinners; in their lives they are Satan's slaves, and their
consciences are subject to the scourges of remorse: but at their death their
misery is augmented, and their terrors trebled.

1 It must needs be a great grief to them to leave the world with all the
delights thereof, which they have loved so dearly. Those that have made this
life their heaven, it must needs be a hell unto them to lose it: as it was a
death unto the children of Israel, to leave the flesh pots of Egypt. 2. They
must part with their friends, whether it be wife, children or other associates:
no friendship can obtain it, no substance can procure it, that the life may be
prolonged. Psalm. 49.7.
For no man can by any means redeem his brother, he cannot give his r^nsome
to God. 3. They must leave their friend Mammon, the wealth and riches to which
their soul cleaves. O death, Eccles 41.1
how ^itter is the remembrance of thee to a man, that lives at rest in his
possessions? If only the remembrance of future death be so bitter to a man in
wealth and prosperity, how irksome shall it be to him, when death it self
stands before his face ready to arrest him? Well might Solomon say: Eccles.
5.15
this is an evil sickness. But what should I speak of the loss of these
toys and trifles? They must part with their lives: Skin for skin, and all
that a man has, Job. 2.4.
will he give for his life. Life is sweet, but not to be bought with all the
wealth and kingdoms of the world: for death will claim his due, and nature
must be paid her tribute. This is the way of all flesh, but not the end of all
flesh. Happy were many if this were the tragical catastrophe of their sinful
life, that their sins might dye and be buried with them. If the guest might
take his meat and drink, and depart without paying any r^ckoning, it were
well for him so, if the wicked that has taken his repast in sin, might leave
the world, and so an end, their case were nothing lamentable; but this is the
death, that after all this there is a reckoning to be made. Thus must a man
part with his friends, his pleasures, his wealth, yea and his life too. The
remembrance of his pleasures will possess him with a double passion; with
grief, because he must leave them: with detestation, because they have been
the causes of his ruin: the sight of friends shall vex him, envying their
prolonged life, and cursing their society, who happily have been with him
companions in iniquity. To forgo his wealth it will be a death: and to
remember, how that he has damned his soul for scraping it together, it will
be a hell to him. Now does death lay siege to the castle of the body, and
discharges an hundred Canons of calamities upon the same: conuulsions,
feauers, aches and infinite pains, which disquiet the body, distract the
mind, vex the patient, and grieve the beholders: making the one to burst
forth many times into blasphemies, causing the other in compassion to shed
plenty of tears: and at last it discharges a volley of pangs, which even
break the heart strings, and separate those old friends, the Soul and the
Body. Then comes in the conscience with her book of accounts, and she shows
many old reckonings and arrerages: she will tell the sick man of his sins,
which he has committed, of the commandments which he has contemned, of the
time that he has vainly consumed; of the dishonors done to God, the wrongs to
men, and injuries to himself, the frailty of his youth, the folly of his riper
years, and the iniquity of his whole life: then would he keep the
commandments of God, but it is not permitted; then would he redeem the time
misspent, but he cannot be suffered; then would he feign defer the time of
his accounts, but it will not be granted. Job. 13.26.
Thou writest bitter things against me (says Job) and make me poss^sse the
sins of my youth. The Lord by his chastisements will show, that he remembers
sin; and by inflicting the same will bring men's sins to their cogitations,
and make the remembrance thereof more bitter unto them then gall and
wormwood: their sins which were their companions to play with them, will now
be an enemy to plague the^; that which was a fox to deceive them, will become
a wolf to devour them; that which was like an angel to tempt them, will now
be as a devil to torment them. Now to aggrauate these calamities does Satan
set in foot; for when death lays siege to the body, then does he most
eagerly assault the soul: and his manner is to bestirre himself exceedingly,
Reu. 12.12.
when he sees that he has but a short time. He will make heavy sin seem
light, that so he may bring men to presumption: or the light sins heavy,
that so he may drive them to desperation. In the midst of all these dolours
and distractions, the distressed soul thinks upon the nearenesse of his
account to be made: Greg. mor. lib. 24. c. 17
and by how much nearer the judgment approaches, by so much the more is it
feared: because a man shall then find within a short time, that which he
cannot forgo throughout all eternity.

Miserable man that thou art, whose condition this is! whither will thou fly
for comfort in the midst of this distress? If thou look upon thy wealth, it
will be a corasiue to thy soul: if thou behold thy friends, they stand
weeping about thee, if thou have recourse to thy conscience, it is tormenting
within thee: life that thou louedst so well, biddes thee farewell; and death
that thou hatedst most extremely, salutes thee: yea hell it self gapeth for
thee: and the devils are ready to torment thee. The only refuge to a poor
soul in this distress, is the recourse to Gods mercy: but what hope can the
wicked have therein at the day of their death, Romans 2.4.
who have despised the riches of his bountifulness, and patience, and long
suffering in the time of their life? Now thinks the dying man: Oh if I might
live still, how would I bestirre my self in working forward my salvation? What
cost, what pains and care would I bestow and take, to escape this horror of
soul? But all these good motions come too late: Cum vult improbus. etc. Aug.
For the wicked when he would, he cannot: because that when he might, he would
not. Now is it too late to cry: Oh that I might dye the death of the
righteous, Number. 23.
when a man has neglected to live the life of the righteous. This is the true
president of a wicked man's will and testament, consisting of three principal
points: his goods he bequeathes to his Executors, because he cannot carry them
with him: his body and bones he leaves to the worms and rottenness, and they
will consume them: his soul goes to the devil, and he will torment it. This
indeed he would not have so: but it is his will against his will.

Behold here then, we see a maine difference between the godly and the wicked:
in that the day of death is a comicall Catastrophe to the one, but a tragical
conclusion to the other. In this life there is the same condition to the godly
and the wicked, Eccles. 9.2.
yea happily worse to the godly then the wicked: but at their death it fares
with them, as it does with the dog and the dear. For as the dog which in
his life time is cherrished, at his death is cast to the crows; but the dear
which is chased and pursued in the time of his life, when he dies is carefully
brought home and dressed: so the wicked which live pleasantly in their life,
are at their death cast forth into the place of darkness: but the godly who
are pursued and persecuted in their life, are carried at the day of their death,
by the blessed Angels into Abraham's bofome. Luke 16.22.
This being the fruit of sin, it should be a reason to restrain us from the
same.

It is strange to see how preposterous our courses are: the most presume of
Gods mercy in their life time, that they may sin the more securely: and in
death they fear his justice, lest they be condemned: but they should fear his
judgments in the time of their life, and then may they rejoice in his mercy
at the day of their death. To conclude then the conclusion of man's life: let
all the wicked that celebrate their birth days with mirth and festiuitie,
celebrate the day of their death with fear and sorrow: for a woe belongs to
them that have had their consolation in this world. Luke 6.
And if it happen also, that there be no bands in their death, neither in the
pains of the body, nor the vexatio^ of soul: their case is yet the more
lamentable, because there remains the more punishment hereafter. But let the
wicked forsake his ways, Esa. 55.8.
and the ungodly his own imaginations, and turn to the Lord in true and
hearty repentance: and let all those that would have comfort in the day of
their death, be careful to lead a sanctified life: always remembering, that
commonly such a life, such a death: Qualis vita finis ita. Aug ad Dioscor.
and as death leaves a man, so the last judgment shall find him.

CHAP. 2.
SECT. I. The first step of the wicked into hell at the day of iudgemen:
namely, their amazedness in the resurrection.
THe princely Prophet having deciphered the vain endeavors of wicked and
covetous carnal men (laboring to establish perpetual habitations to them and
their posterity) concludes thus of them: Psa. 49.14.
They lie in the grave like sheep, and death gnaweth upon them. If this were
all their misery, it were less to be marvelled at: but behold, whilst death
is feeding upon their bodies and turning them to rottenness, hell fire seizes
upon their souls, and vexes the^ with torments: neither is this the final
conclusion of their wretchedness. For as it is appointed to all men once to
dye: Heb. 9 27.
So, after that comes the judgment, when both soul and body must be
reunited, that they may be tormented together. Thus the life of the ungodly is
spent in wickedness, their death is with horror, ^oel. 2.2. Zeph. 1.15.
Diverse mistake these places of the Prophets, applying them to the day of
judgment: whereunto they cannot agree, except ^y the way of illusion.
and their rising again shall be with much terror.

The Prophets do describe the day of Gods vengeance upon the Jews, and the
terrors of their enemies insultings, by diverse dreadful speeches: calling it
a day of darkness and blackness, a day of clouds and obscurity, a day of
wrath, and a day of trouble and heaviness, a day of destruction and
desolation. If the coming of the enemy, and the Lords approaching with
temporal afflictions, be thus terrible, black, cloudy and desolate: oh how
dreadful shall the coming of Christ, and the day of spiritual vengeance be
to ^he wicked? For they shall be wonderfully amazed in their resurrection,
exceedingly terrified at their arraignement, and dolefully astonished at the
sentence of condemnation.

1 Their resurrection shall be with much amazedness by reason of the
sodainnes. The sudden coming of the day of judgment, is set forth by sundry
similitudes in the holy Scriptures: 1. These. 5. Mat. 24. Luke 21. Eccles. 9.
it shall come like an enemy, a thief, and a snare: it shall speedily assault
like an enemy, slily break in like a thief, and suddenly entrap men like a
snare. If a man should suddenly wake forth of his sleep, and see his house on
fire, and his friends wailing and weeping about him, would it not amaze him? Lo,
death is but a sleep, and the grave is the bed: when a wicked man awaketh,
and shall behold on the one side his sins accusing him, and on the other
side, the hellish feends and furies ready to vex him: a troubled conscience
burning within him, the frame of the heavens and the earth flaming without him:
under his feet the fearful pit of hell ready to devour him, over his head
the axe of Gods judgment lifted up to strike him: and many of his friends
wailing and howling about him, because of the instant desolation and
destruction: oh, how do we think that this miserable man shall be amazed? A
sudden thunder-clappe awaking a man, will make him start and quake: and will
not the sudden showt and sounding of the Archangell and trumpet of God cause
men to tremble? 1. These. 4.16
When Adoniah heard the trumpets sounding at Salomons coronation, he was much
dismayed: 1 King. 1.
and fearing the presence of Solomon, arose and went, and took hold on the
horns of the altar. When the ungodly which now sleep in the dust of the
earth, shall hear the Archangell, and the trumpet rattling at our Saviors
coronation, it must needs dismay them much; and so much the more, because they
shall find no sanctuary, but must be brought before him that is greater then
Solomon, to receive their fatal doom.

2 As the sodainenesse of this dreadful day rowzing them from death, is
terrible: so the end thereof also is lamentable, their resurrection being to
destruction. Joh. 5.29.
For they that have done evil shall come forth to the resurrection of
condemnation; yea they shall rise to perpetual shame and contempt. Dan. 12.2.
The prisoner though he come forth of the filthy and darksome dungeon, into
the sweet and wholesome air; yet when he must go to his trial in some
desperate case, had rather (if he might) remain there still. The grave is a
prison of filthy rottenness and darkness: yet happy were the wicked man, if
he might have an eternal habitation therein, and not be brought to judgment.
When Dalilah cried suddenly to Sampson: Jud. 16.20
The Philistims are upon thee, Sampson; he awaked thinking to show his strength
as at other times: but the Lord was departed from him: Therefore the Philistims
took him, put out his eyes, brought him to Azzah, bound him with fetters, and
made him to grind in the prison house. Lo, thus shall the wicked be awaked at
the day of judgment: when, because the Lord is not with them, the eyes of
consolation shall be put out; they shall be brought to the judgment seat of
Christ, who shall cause them to be bound in fetters, and to be cast into the
prison house of hell, there to be tormented world without end. Act. 23.8.
Now shall the wicked Sadduces (which say there is no resurrection nor spirit)
find that there is both a resurrection for their shame and contempt, and
spirits for their torments and confusion. The Devils said to our Savior, that
he came to torment them before their time: Mat. 8.29.
so shall these wretched men think they are raised to judgment before their
time; but it may be said to them in the Prophets words: Woe be to them, for
their day is come, Ier. 50.27.
and the time of their visitatio^. Seeing now (my Christian brother) that the
day of Christ's coming shall be thus speedy, and the resurrection of the
ungodly so full of misery and amazedness; let the remembrance thereof cause
thee so to lead thy life, that thou may be fitly prepared for the one, and
happily escape the other.

Reu. 20.6.
Blessed are they that have part in the first resurrection for on such the
second death has no power. Yea happy and thrice happy is he, who by the
power of Gods spirit, is in this life raised from the death of sin to the
life of righteousness: for behold, he shall assuredly in the life to come,
enjoy a resurrection to eternal life and salvation.

SECT. 2. The second step of the wicked into hell at the day of judgment:
namely, their terror in beholding Christ, and appearing before his throne of
judgment.
WHen Adam had taken of the forbidden fruit, Genesis 3.8.
being naked he would feign have hid himself from God walking in the garden,
in the cool of the day: the poor sinner naked both in body and soul, would
feign hide himself from the presence of Christ coming to judgment in the
evening of the world, but it may not be. For as it is intolerable to abide his
presence, so is it impossible to avoid it. Every eye must see him, Reu. 1.7.
Mat. 25.32
and all the world must be brought to judgment before him. There are two
principal things in our Saviors appearing, that shall abash and terrify the
wicked: first, his exceeding great majesty: secondly, the strictness of his
judgment. 1 The Scriptures in setting forth the Majesty of his coming, are
very copious: He shall come in the clouds of the heaven with power and great
glory, Mat. 24.30
that men may behold him in his majesty, whom they would not before vouchsafe
to look upon in his humility. Esa. 53.3.
And this Majesty shall be conspicuous and glorious in diverse respects.

1 In respect of the admirable signs that go before him, which shall be
correspondent to his admirable Majesty. Saint Matthew describes them thus:
Mat. 24.29
And immediately after the tribulation of those days, shall the Sun be
darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light: the Stars shall fall from
heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be shaken. An eclipse being great, has
been very fearful to some; and the darkness at our Saviors passion, made
the world to wonder: how fearful then and how wonderful shall the coming of
Christ to judgment be? when the Sun, and Moon, and Stars shall all lose
their light, and the heavens with their powerful influences be utterly
obscured (as inferior lights are wont) at the bright shining and glorious
appearing of Christ Jesus. When the Master of the family dies, Chrysostom. in
Mat. hom. 49.
the house is troubled, the servants lament, and put on mourning apparel: so
when man the inhabitant of the world is near his end, and coming to his
trial, his old friends and servants both in heaven and earth do thus clothe
themselves in mourning weeds, being also abashed to behold the glory of the
Savior of the world. Saint Luke likewise says: Luke 21.25.
There shall be signs in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars, and
upon the earth trouble among the nations with perplexity: the sea and the
waters shall roar, and men's hearts shall fail them, for fear and for looking
after these things that shall come upon the world. Only an earthquake if it be
vehement is very fearful, and the inundation of waters terrible: but now
when the whole massy globe of the earth shall totter and shake, the mighty
seas roar and rage, and the glorious heavens become black and duskie, how
shall the hearts of men be appalled with dread and terror to behold the same!

2 Christ's appearing shall be glorious in respect of his attendants: not silly
Fisher men, as in the days of his infirmity; but holy Saints and blessed
Angels, as consorting with this day of Majesty: Jud. ver. 14
Behold he comes with thousands of his Saints to give judgment against all
men, and to rebuke all the ungodly, etc. And as Christ shall come with his many
Saints, so shall he appear with his infinite troop and train of Angels. Dan.
7.10.
For thousand thousands shall minister to him, and ten thousand thousands shall
stand before him. Yea he shall come with all his holy Angels: and these, being
his fiery messengers, Mat. 24.31
he shall send with a great sound of a trumpet to gather together the elect,
etc. Thus glorious servants shall attend a glorious master. If Saint John a
holy Evangelist fell at the feet of Christ as dead, when he beheld him; Reu.
1.17.
and Esaias a heavenly Prophet cried out: Woe be to me, for I am of polluted
lips, Esa. 6.5.
because he saw the King and Lord of hosts compassed with the glorious
Seraphims: shall not the majesty of this great God, Tit. 2.13.
even our Savior Jesus Christ daunt the hearts of the wicked at his appearing,
even more then can be expressed.

3 Christ's coming shall be glorious in regard of the complements of honor,
which he shall have at his appearing. 2. These. 1.7.
He shall come in flaming fire, with the sound of an Archangell; he shall come
in the clouds and ride upon the wings of the wind. Act. 1.
It was strange to see mount Sin a on fire at the delivery of the Law; Eod.
19.
but how strange will it be when the heavens shall pass away, 2. Pet. 3.10
and the elements shall melt with heat, and the earth with the works therein
shall be burnt up? then shall he sit upon a throne of glory, Mat. 25.31
and before him shall be gathered all nations. The day was when he poor man,
stood before the judgment seat of Pontius Pilate, to receive his sentence:
but now Pontius Pilate with all the potentates of the earth must stand before
his throne, to receive their doleful doom. The gloriousness of which throne
Daniell describes, Dan. 7.6.
saying: His throne was like a fiery flame, and the wheels like burning fire;
yea so full of dreadful majesty it is, that when the earth and the sea do
come to be arraigned before it, they fly away, Reu. 20.11.
not able to behold the glory thereof, and the Judge that sits thereupon.
And therefore, whereas at his birth only Jerusalem was troubled; and at his
passion, Mat. 2. Luke 22.
the tender hearted women of Jerusalem wept: now at his coming to judgment,
Mat. 24.30 Reu. 1.7.
All the kindreds of the earth shall mourn and wail before him. Even so, Amen.

2 Secondly as his appearing is glorious: so shall the strictness of his
judgment be no less marvelous. If a man might be called to an account for
his gross sins only, there were some hope of safety: but Christ will call
for an account of every idle word, Mat. 12.
yea he will bring to judgment every secret thought; Romans 2.16.
and who alas shall be able to answer him one of a thousand? Job. 9.3.
When the Lord casts his infinite discerning eye upon the most excellent of
his creatures, Job. 4.17.15.15.
he finds no steadfastness in them, no not in his Saints and Angels, yea the
heavens are not clean in his sight. This caused David to say: Hear my prayer o
Lord, Psalm. 143.2
and hearken to my supplication, but enter not into judgment with thy servant:
for in thy sight shall no flesh living be justified. If David (a man after Gods
own heart) put up his petition, appealing from the justice of God unto his
mercy: how unable shall the wicked be to stand forth with boldness, Psalm. 1.
or to lift up their heads with confidence in the day of judgment? What shall
the shrubbe of the desert do, Gregor.
when the Cedar of Paradise shall be shaken? what shall the lamb do, where
the Lion does tremble? and if the righteous scarcely be saved, 1. Pet. 4.18
where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? The wary Auditor will
consider the several reckonings that he is to make: so should the wise
Christian think upon the particular accounts, that Christ will exact at the
general day of judgment.

Consider then, that he will call thee to an account for thy body, with the
parts and members thereof: whether thy hands have been ready to distribute to
the poor, whether thy feet have trodden the good path, thine eyes have beheld
the thing that is right, thy tongue has uttered words which might minister
grace to the hearer, thine ears have been open to hear the cries of the
needy. He will call thee to an account for thy soul and the faculties
thereof: whether thine understanding has been furnished with sanctified
knowledge, thy affections knit to heavenly delights, and thy memory retained
holy instructions. He will call thee to account of those temporal benefits
thou have obtained: thy health, strength, wealth, wit, beauty and the rest;
and how thou have put forth every talent of his bounty to the advancement of
Gods glory, and the good of thy brethren. He will call thee to an account for
the spiritual graces and mercies which he had offered, or imparted to thee:
what fruit thou have had by the preaching of the word, what entertainment
thou have given to his spirit when he knocked at the door of thy heart, and
what thy growth has been in grace and godliness. He will call thee to an
account of thy carriage in thy calling: if thou be a Magistrate, how thou have
behaved thy self in the administration of justice, in maintaining the just
cause of the widow, supporting the poor, and defending the fatherless,
without bribes, fear, favor, or any other partial respect. If thou be a
Minister, how thou have labored in preaching the word instantly, in season and
out of season, and how thou have fed the flock of Christ committed to thy
charge, with virtuous discipline, wholesome doctrine, and holy conversation. If
thou be a father, how thou have bred and brought up thy children: if a master,
how thou have governed thy servants. He will call thee to an account for thy
sins of omission and commission: not only cruel Ahab for taking away
Naboths vineyard, 1. King. 21.
but also merciless Dives, Luke 16.
because he relieved not poor Lazarus, In a word, every man from the richest
Craesus to the poorest Codrus, and every transgression from the highest
blasphemy to the least infirmity, must come to a strict trial in judgment.

There are six principal remedies and refuges of the guilty before the
judgment seats of mortal men: either the Judge may be deceived through
ignorance, forestalled with favor, overcome with power, bowed with pity,
corrupted with money, or moved with arguments: Ille Iudex nec gratia
praeuenitur. etc. Aug. de synch. lib. 3.
but when the sinful soul comes before the tribunal seat of the immortal
God, all these forts of confidence shall fail him.

1 This Judge cannot err through ignorance: Reu. 2.23.
for he searches the hearts and the reins: Heb. 4.13.
yea all things are naked and open to his eyes, before whom we must appear.
Ioh. 1.48.
He that saw Nathanael under the Fig Tree, knows our goings out, and our
commings in, and is able to set before us, even our most secret sins; to
repeat those we do not remember, to reveal those we would hide, and to
convict us of those we would deny. 2. He cannot be forestalled with favor:
Reu. 2.23.
for he is no respecter of persons, but will give to every man according to his
works. The poorest beggar shall find as good audience in this court of
justice, as the mightiest Prince in the world. Though amongst men, Eccles. 3.16
wickedness be in the place of judgment; yet will Christ judge most justly,
even all those who have judged most unjustly. 3. He cannot be ouerswayed with
power: Mat. 28.18
for to him all power is given both in heaven and earth. Therefore may I say
with the Prophet: The high looks of man shall be humbled, and the loftiness
of men shall be abased in that day. Esa. 2.11.
Those that say in the pride and stubburnenesse of their hearts. Let us break
their bonds asunder, Psalm. 2.
and cast their cords from us, shall then be dashed in pieces with the stone
of mount Sion, Dan. 2.45.
and all their power and puissance shall not be sufficient to deliver them. 4.
As he cannot be overcome with power, so can he not be moved with pity. There
was a time when the wicked might have repented, when Christ offered pardon, and
powered forth his precious blood to cleanse them: Heb. 10.
but now there remains no more sacrifice for sin. There was a time when he
wept over Jerusalem, but now alas there is no place for pardon or repentance,
though Jerusalem should seek it with tears. All the tears in the world
(though they distilled like the waters of a fountain) cannot now move Christ
to compassion: for his meekness shall be turned into wrath; and he that
before wept for the misery of the ungodly, Reu. 6.16.
will now laugh at their destruction. Pro. 1.26.
5. He will not be corrupted with gifts, which blind the eyes of worldly wise
men: the wealthiest in the world must come poor, naked, and empty handed
before Christ, and then shall they find, that Riches avail not in the day of
wrath, Prou. 11.4.
but righteousness delivers from death. If the jealous man will not bear
the sight of any ransom, Prou. 6.
nor be pacified, though thou multiply the gifts: will our Saviors wrath by
any rewards be mitigated toward those, that being espoused to him in Baptism,
have prostituted themselves to every abomination, Heb. 6.
and crucified him daily with their gross iniquities? 6. Lastly, all the
Rhetorical reasons, and Logical arguments of men that are most acute, shall
nothing move him in this behalf: Hieron. ad Heliodor. in fi^e.
foolish Plato with his scholars, nor Aristotle with his arguments shall
prevail but a little. The conscience shall be permitted to accuse, and Satan
suffered to urge: but no advocate allowed to plead the cause of the wicked.
The Angels shall not plead for them, being witnesses to their wilful
wickedness: the Saints shall not, for it is their office to judge the world:
1. Cor. 6.
Christ will not, because they embraced not his mercy and mediation when they
might have had it: themselves may not, for they shall obtain no audience. And
being thus destitute of all hope and comfort, what can possess their hearts
but dread and horror? what can they expect, but the dreadful sentence of
condemnation to be pronounced upon them?

When the Lord had appeared to the Israelites, in most glorious manner on mount
Sina, Moses speaks thus unto them: Fear not, Exodus 20.
for God is come to prove you, and that his fear may be before you, that you
sin not. Mark, Fear not; yet fear: as if he should say, Indeed this
glorious appearing is very dreadful: yet fear not this so much, but rather
let this bring to your cogitations his future fearful appearing, when the
Lord shall come and call for an account of this his law: and fear you that. So
the end and use of all this is, that the majesty of Christ in his appearing,
and strictness in judging, might possess our hearts with dread, and cause us
to finish our salvation with fear and trembling.

This lesson Saint Paul teaches. 2. Cor. 5.10. We must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, etc. (...) notes an exceeding great fear.
Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men. And surely if men
did consider, that their works must all come to judgment before such a strict
and glorious Judge, it would make them tremble, and stay them from those sins
into the which they run without fear. What thief is so desperate, that
being sure he cannnot escape the Judges hands, would yet continue his stealing?
Lo, thou, whosoever thou art, can not possibly avoid the appearing before
Christ, the dreadful Judge: shall not the cogitation of this reclaim thy
heart from wicked motions, and thy life from ungodly actions? But will Christ
call every man to an account for his body, his soul, his temporal benefits
and spiritual blessings, the spending of his time, and conversation in his
calling, for his sins of commission and omission? Oh good God, what an Audit
have many to make for their manifold impieties and monstrous profaneness? for
consuming the talents of grace, and treasuring nothing but wrath against the
day of wrath, Romans 2.5.
and of the declaration of the just judgment of God? When Joseph said to his
brethren: Genesis 45.3.
I am Joseph your brother, whom you sold into Egypt; his brethren could not
answer him, for they were astonished at his presence. When our Savior shall show
that blessed head that was crowned with thorns, those holy hands that were
pierced with nails, that gracious side that was thrust thorough with the
spear; and say, Behold, I am be whom your sins caused to be crucified, and
sold into the hands of Pontius Pilate and the malicious Jews: shall not the
ungodly be unable to answer him for astonishment, like Joseph's brethren; and
be speechless, like the man that wanted a wedding garment? Mat. 22.
Then would the kings of the earth, Reu. 6.15.
and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty
men, and every bondsman, and every freeman, hide themselves in the dens and
rocks of the mountains, and say to the rocks and hills: Fall on us, and hide
us from the presence of him that sits on the throne, and from the wrath of
the Lamb: but alas it will not be. Seeing then that all things must be thus
dissolved, and the coming of Christ is so dreadful, both for the end and
manner of his appearing, 2. Pet. 3.10
what manner of men ought we to be in holy conversation and godliness? If a
man had some matter of weight, wherein his whole estate were to be tried before
an earthly Judge, how careful would he be to consider his cause, solicit his
Advocate, and get the favor of the Judge? Behold, at this time all lies a
bleeding, even our souls and bodies, more dear unto us the^ the whole world,
yea then ten thousand worlds: what care and industry should we use, whilst
there is time, to examine our estate, and solicit Christ Jesus our Advocate
and Judge, that we may be delivered from the fear of conviction in that great
and dreadful day of judgment? I will therefore conclude this meditation with
our Saviors exhortation: Luk 21.36.
Watch and pray continually, that you may be counted worthy to escape all
these things that shall come to pass; and that ye may stand before the son
of man, when he comes thus gloriously to judgment.

SECT. 3. The third step of the wicked into hell at the day of judgment:
namely, their exceeding astonishment upon the sentence of comdemnation.
THus have we brought the ungodly man to the bar: where being accused by the
heavens and the earth, with all the creatures therein, convicted by a jury
impanelled of heavenly and earthly inhabitants, the elect Angels and blessed
Saints, and having his conscience crying Guilty, in stead of a thousand
witnesses; what can be expected at the hands of a most just Judge in the day of
vengeance, but the sentence of condemnation? and what that is, out Savior
himself has showed: M^. 25.24.
Depart from me (ye cursed) into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels. Few words, but full of bitterness: Depart from me, those are words
of separation: you cursed, words of obiurgation: into everlasting fire, words
of desolation: prepared for the devil and his angels, a doleful
exemplification. There are two reasons why these words should yield
astonishment. First because they are intolerable: secondly, because they are
irreuocable.

Amos. 3.8.
The Lion has roared, who will not be afraid? says the Prophet: but behold
this thundering forth the sentence of condemnation, is a thousand times more
fearful. When Baltazar in the midst of all his tolitie, saw the fingers of a
hand writing upon the wall of his palace: Dan. 5.6.
Thou art waighed in the balance, and art found too light: thy kingdom is
given to the Medes and Persians: his countenance was changed, his thoughts
troubled him, so that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees
smote one against another. If the Lords temporal decree had this effect in
Baltazar, even before he understood the writing: how shall this sentence of
eternal death, whereby the wicked are separated from the kingdom of heaven,
astonish those upon whom it shall be pronounced? Behold, 1. Sam. 3.11
(says the Lord) I will do a thing in Israel, whereof whosoever hears, his
ears shall tingle. Shall the ears of men tingle which hear of the judgment
brought upon Elies house only, and shall they not glow, when they hear this
dreadful judgment passed upon so many millions of sinful souls? when that
shall be fulfilled: Ezekiel 5.8.
I will execute judgment in the sight of the nations; so that those which
hear it, shall say: Lo, this is the man that neither regarded the Lords
promises, nor trembled at his threatenings; and see now how he quaketh at his
judgments. When the Lord had delivered the law in his dreadful voice, the
Israelites desired, Exodus 20.19
he would speak no more to them, lest they should dye; so would the ungodly
feign have Christ be silent now: Psalm. 2.
but he will speak to them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure;
he will send forth his glorious voice, which shall make the Cedars of Libanus
to shake: and the same shall be a sword piercing the hearts of all wretched
miscreants. We read that the band of men and officers, that came to apprehend
Christ in the garden of Gethsemane, were stricken down with the power of his
words, saying only: Ioh. 18.6.
I am he: how then shall they be stricken dead (think you) which appearing
before his dreadful throne, shall hear him utter this final sentence upon
them: Depart from me ye cursed? For behold, this curse shall be a thousand
times more grievous, then the cursed and bitter water to the suspected woman,
Number. 5.18.24.
which caused her thigh to rot, her belly to swell, and made her to be
detestable, and accursed among her people. For hereby both belly and thigh,
head and heart, yea body and soul shall all be filled with bitterness, and
become accursed and detestable in the sight of Almighty God, and all the holy
company of heaven.

2 This makes the sentence more dreadful, in that it cannot be revoked by any
means possible. The sentence proceeding from the judgment seat of mortal
men may be revoked or stopped, by sundry means; as by appellation, by
supplication, by complaint, or restoring the condemned to his former estate:
but all these hopes and helps shall be fruitless, when this sentence of
condemnation shall come forth from the throne of the Lord, whose judgments are
more resolute, then the decrees of the Medes and Persians, which might not be
altered. 1. There can be no appeal, for it must be to a higher Judge: but
there is none such. 1. Tim. 6.15
For he is the only and blessed Prince, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords:
he has the key of David, Reu. 3.7.
when he shuts no man opens: and the Father has committed the judgment
unto him. Ioh. 5.27.
2. There is no hope of help by supplication. For Wisdom, even the divine
wisdom of the Father Christ Jesus says: Because he called to them, and they
would not hear: therefore they shall call upon him, and he will not hear.
Yea if Job, and Noah, and Daniel stood up to entreat for them, it should be in
vain. 3. Whither shall the damned go to complain themselves? what, to the
Lord whose spirit they have grieved? what, to the Angels, whose ministry they
have abused? what, to the Saints, whose righteous souls they have vexed? this
were a fond conceit, and a fruitless course. Job says well: Job. 9.33.
There is no vmpire when God and man are at odds. 4. There is no hope of
restoring of the damned; to who^ the Lords words shall be such as he says to
Jeremy: I will put my words into thy mouth like a fire, Jer. 5.14.
and this people shall be as wood, and it shall devour them. Psalm. 2.
He will bruise them with a rod of iron, and break them in pieces like a
potters vessel: so that there shall not be left a shard to fetch fire with.
When Esau came to Isaac his father for a blessing which was passed before to
Jacob, Genesis 27.33
his father said: I have blessed him, and he shall be blessed: and he (poor
soul) could not get the blessing, though he sought it with tears. Heb. 11.
So resolute shell the Lords sentence be at the day of judgment: I have cursed
them, and they shall be cursed; and no tears or weeping shall be able to
revoke it: for the Lord having spoken it, he will not repent, nor alter the
words that are gone out of his lips. Lo, this is a time of punishment, and
not of pardon. Men that are on the sea seeing some mighty tempest arise, are
much afraid: when it beats upon the ship, it makes them amazed: but when
they begin to sink, Insequitur clamorque virum, stridorque rudentum. ^irg.
Aene. lib. 1.
oh, what crying and scriching may there be heard amongst the^? So when wicked
men foresee the danger of future judgment, it makes them afraid; when they
are brought before the tribunal they shall be mightily astonished: but when they
begin once to sink into the pit of everlasting perdition, oh Lord, what
howling and scriches will they send forth?

Well, seeing this sentence of condemnation is so intolerable and irreuocable,
why alas have men no more care to avoid it? Many, yea the most, defer their
repentance in this life, as though there were hope of pardon in the day of
punishment: but our Savior teaches us better: Mat. 5.25.
Agree with thine adversary quickly, whilst thou art in the way with him;
lest thine adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to
the sergeant, and thou be cast in prison. Let every one that has the fear of
condemnation before his eyes, seek reconciliation at the hands of God, by true
and unfeigned repentance: and that quickly whilst he is in the way of this
life, lest he be separated with Go your cursed: and so the damned spirits,
the sergeants of hell, carry him to the place of everlasting torments. When
men are persuaded by Preachers to pains, cost, or care in their salvation; to
abridge themselves of their profits, pleasures, vanities, and iniquities, and
so to enter into heaven by the straight gate; they are ready to say with our
Saviors flinching followers: Ioh. 6.60.
This is a hard saying. But would to God they did remember and consider this
hard saying: Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, and that would surely make
them careful with Abraham, Genesis 21.11.
to cast out wicked Ismael out of the houses of their souls, though it be
grievous in their eyes: and even with most painful endeavors study to make
their election sure, and to escape that fatal and final sentence of
condemnation. Remember the Apostles exhortation: To day if you will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts. Heb. 3.7.
And this do, lest at the day of judgment, you hear that voice of terror that
shook the earth, and will shake the hearts of all those that shall be goats
separated on the left hand: for they shall stand naked before the tribunal
seat of Christ, to hear with trembling hearts, the voice of his condemnation,
3 ern.
who have shut their ears at the voice of his exhortation.

CHAP. 3.
SECT. I. The first step of the wicked into hell after the last judgment:
namely, the loss of Gods presence, and all heavenly co^forts.
Hest. 7.8.
WE read in the story of Hester, that king Ahashuerosh having decreed the
death of haughty Haman; as the word went out of the kings mouth, the officers
presently covered his face, and carried him to the place of execution: so when
Christ has pronounced the sentence of Condemnation upon the wicked, shame
shall cover their faces, and the infernal officers the damned spirits, shall
instantly carry them to hell, there to be tormented for ever. When the sentence
of banishment was pronounced against Coriolanus: Plutar. in vita Coriol.
he (to move the Judges to compassion) pleaded for himself his valiant
deeds, and praised the soldiers that had served with him in the wars; but all
to no purpose: so the wicked, to move Christ to commiseration, shall say to
him in that day: Lord, Lord, Mat. 7.22.
have not we by thy name prophesied? and by thy name cast out devils? and by
thy name done many great works? but all to as little purpose: for Christ will
profess unto them: I never knew you, depart from me you workers of iniquity.
And this Depart from me, is the first degree of punishment unto the ungodly;
being now, not in the suburbs, but entered within the walls and gates of hell.
It is indeed but a privative punishment, which Divines do usually call poena
damni, but it has a positive effect: for as the absence of the Sun causes
darkness, and the lack of meat, leanenesse; so the want of Gods presence
brings exceeding grief and heaviness: Psa. 16.11
yea as the fullness of joy and pleasure is had by the enjoying of his
presence, so the fullness of sorrow and misery shall possess the hearts of
men, by being excluded from the fruition thereof. It must needs be a great
misery not to be with him, without whom there is no being. It is written, that
when the Ark of God was taken by the Philistims, old Eli with grief fell
backward and dyed; 1. Sam. 4.18.19.
and his daughter in law, Phineas wife, fell on traveling through sorrow, and
lost her life. If the loss of the Arc, which was only a figure and pledge of
Gods presence, was thus grievous to them: how shall the loss and lack of Gods
presence it self, cause the condemned to travel with grief and heaviness of
heart, and to wish that they might with Eli and his daughter, end their misery
with ending of their lives? If a man had been in some good possibility of an
earthly kingdom, Chrys^st. ad pop. Ant. Hom. 48.
and through his own folly had lost it, how do you think it would have
grieved him? Is there any comparison between the meanest mansion in the
kingdom of heaven, and the greatest Monarchy in the world? Now then, when a
man having been not only in possibility of this kingdom, but even sure of it
if he would have used his endeavor to attain unto it, shall by his negligence
have lost it, will it not vex and torment him? will it not cause him to rate
himself, and say: What a beast was I, through mine own folly to lose such a
blessed inheritance? It was exceeding ^rkesome to Absalon, 2. Sam. 14.32.
to be banished forth of his fathers presence, so that he might not behold
his face: what a hell then shall it be, to be banished for ever forth of his
presence, 2. Cor. 1.3.
who is the father of mercy, and God of all consolation; whose love to his
children is more, then David's to his son Absalon, or his brother Jonathan:
yea, greater then the mothers love to her tender babe. Esa. 49.15.
It was not the least part of Adams punishment, that he was cast out of
Paradise, and deprived of Gods presence; neither is it a small misery to be
excluded forth of the kingdom of heaven, and to lose the face and favor of
Almighty God. Chrysostom judges it to be much more bitter then the pains of
hell, yea worse then a thousand hels, Super. Mat. Hom. 33.
if there were so many: howsoever it is, Ibid. Hom. 28.
surely it must needs be exceeding grievous. We have a Proverb: Where the
eye sees not, the heart grieves not. If the damned souls might not behold the
felicity that they have lost by their folly, their grief would be the less;
but as the: elect shall have fruition thereof to their perpetual comfort, so
the view thereof shall yield an everlasting corrasiue to the conscience of the
reprobate. The Captain of the King of Israel would not believe, that it was
possible by any means, there should be such a plenty as Elizaeus had
promised; but the Prophet tells him: Behold, 2. King. 7.2
thou shall see it with thine eyes, but thou shall not eat thereof. As this
was added to the punishment of his infidelity, that though he should not taste
it, yet he should see it: so shall it be to the reprobate at the day of
judgment, when Christ with all his holy Angels and blessed Saints shall
appear in glory, that which the Psalmist has, shall be fulfilled: Psa. 112.10
The ungodly shall see it, and it shall grieve him, he shall gnash with his
teeth and consume away: the desire of the ungodly shall perish. It shall grieve
the ungodly to see the Saints of God in glory, and he shall pine away with
grief; he shall desire that he might be partaker thereof with them, but this
desire of his shall be fruitelesse, according to our Saviors saying: Luk 13.28.
There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when they shall see Abraham,
and Isaac and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the kingdom of God, and
themselves thrust out of doors. And what greater disgrace can come to a man,
then to be thus contemptuously thrust forth of the blessed society of heaven?
and to be shut without, where shall be dogs and inchaunters, Reu. 22.15.
and whoremongers, and murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves or
makes lies? Now shall those that have denied Christ before men, be denied
before the face of Almighty God: and those that have despised and scorned the
society of the godly, shall be scorned and contemned in the presence of men
and Angels. If the loss of a dear friend be grievous, and the separation of
the soul from the body, exceeding terrible: the loss of the fellowship of
Saints cannot but be much more grievous, and the separation both of soul and
body from Almighty God, must needs be both terrible and intolerable. He
therefore spoke truly, who said: That the tears of hell, are not sufficient to
bewail the loss of heaven.

Seeing then the loss of Gods presence, and the co^forts of heavenly joys, is
so great and grievous: is it not extreme folly in men, that will rather
incur this dangerous and doleful loss, then they will lose their smallest
profits or trifling pleasures? yet such is the folly of most men. But would
thou escape this misery? then think upon the Prophets words: 2. Chr. 15.2
The Lord is with you, whilst you are with him: and if you seek him he will be
found of you; but if you forsake him, he will forsake you. If thou be with God
in the kingdom of grace, thou shall be with him in the kingdom of glory; but
if thou forsake him in this life, he will forsake thee in the life to come.
Cast me not away from thy presence o Lord, Psalm. 51.11
and take not thy holy Spirit from me, says David. Is this thy prayer? behold
then, if thou grieve not Gods Spirit, he will not take it from thee; and
except thou cast thy self out of Gods presence by infidelity and disobedience,
he will not cast thee forth. It is said of Henoch, Genesis 5.24.
that he walked with God: and it is immediately added, that he was no more
seen, for God took him away: so shall it be done to all those, that
unfeignedly fear God. He that walks with God in holiness as Henoch did, shall
not be excluded from his presence: but be taken up into heaven as he was,
there to enjoy eternal consolation with the blessed Saints and Angels.

SECT. 2. The second step of the wicked into hell after the last judgment:
namely, Society with the Devils, and the sense of hellish torments.
IS it a small matter that a man must be cast out of the presence of God, and
be deprived of the communion of Saints and Angels, but he must be also subject
to the society of Devils, and the pains of hell? yet such is the condition of
the wicked. When Tully was banished, Plu. in vitis Ciceron. and Demost.
though he were in Greece, where many cities contended, who should honor him
most, and the Soothsayers showed that his exile should be short: yet was he
always sad, and could not be merry, casting his eyes often toward Italy.
Demosthenes likewise took his banishment so heavily, that many times he would
weep bitterly when he looked toward Athens, though he found much kindness,
even at the hands of his enemies If the damned souls might meet with such
comforts in their exile from heaven, it would mitigate their grief, Scythie
est quo mittitur inquam; Roma relinque^ da est Ovid. de Trist. lib 1. Eleg 3.
and extenuate the extremity of their loss: but when their case is like his,
that must leave Rome and live in Scythia: lose the joys of heaven, and meet
with the pains of hell, and that without reuocation: oh how lamentable shall
their estate and condition be? how full of tears and sadness?

Now to the end we may for our warning and safety, take a survey of the
dangers and miserable condition of the damned in hell: let us consider first
the Agents, then the Patients, and lastly the effects proceeding from them
both: and this according to sobriety, resting only upon such infallible
certainty as the word of God does yield; and leaving those curious conceits,
which the schoolmen have obtruded to the Church of God, without any sound
warrant of his word.

1 The damned are under the wrath of God. Mat. 3.7.
O generation of Vipers, who has warned you to fly from the wrath to come? If
the wrath of a mortal Prince be as the roaring of a Lion: Pro. 19.12.
how terrible is the wrath of the immortal and omnipotent God? The Scriptures
do in sundry places compare the Lords wrath to fire, because it is very fierce,
fearful and merciless, as that element is: which causes the king to pray:
Lord, Psalm. 6.1.
rebuke me not in thy wrath, neither chasten me in thy heavy displeasure;
knowing, that when the Lords wrath bursteth forth like fire, Ier. 4.4.
it becomes unquenchable.

2 They have an irksome habitation with the devils, M t. 25.41
and portion of torments with his Angels; and therefore it is said: Reu. 20.10
That the beast and the false Prophet, were cast into the place of eternal
torments with the Devil. And indeed this conclusion of the wicked does agree
well with their conversation. For as they have in this world been companions
with the beast and the false Prophet, in their slavery to Satan: so they do
justly deserve to be partakers with them of those torments in the world to
come. If David cried: Psalm. 120, 5
Woe is me that I remain in Mesech, and have my habitation amongst the tents of
Kedar: how woeful shall their estate be, who shall be constrained to dwell with
Satan, and to have their habitations for ever, amongst the troops of
reprobates and the infernal spirits?

3 They are subject to the merciless fire of hell: and this fire is a furnace
of fire, Mat. 13.42 Reu. 21.8. Heb. 10.27 Mat. 3.12.
a lake of brimstone, a devouring fire, an unquenchable fire. The furnace
wherein the three children were cast was exceeding fearful, being made seven
times hotter then it was wont to be: Dan. 3.
but how dreadful shall this furnace of hell be, whose fire is infinitely
hotter then that was? This fire does differ as much as may be from our fires,
in respect of the violence and durance, of the operation and illumination. In
respect of the violence, because it is unspeakable; of the durance, for it is
unquenchable; of the operation, for it co^sumes not what it burns; of
illumination, for though it burn violently to the vexation of the wicked,
Crematione^ habet, and lumen non habet. Gre. mor. lib. 9. cap 46. Esa. 33.14.
yet shall it not shine to their comfort. So that I may justly say thereof in
the Prophets words: Who is able to dwell in this devouring fire? or who shall
be able to dwell in these everlasting burnings?

4 The place where they are, is not any stately palace, 1. Pet. 3.19
but a filthy prison: and this prison is a loathsome dungeon, worse then that
wherein Jeremy stuck; Ier. 38.
it is worse then the prison wherein Michaiah was cast, which yielded nothing
but the bread and waters of affliction. For behold, the prisoners therein are
scourged and afflicted by the hellish tormenters, whose fury and malice to man
is infinite. Are not those threats fearful which are denounced. Deu. 28? and
do we not admire those plagues threatened. Reu. 18? Chrysostom says: They are
but la dicra and vrsus ad haec suppl^ cia: vmbra ad haec tormenta. Ad pop. Aut.
hom. 49.
Yet are those afflictions but flea-bitings to these torments, but drops to
these vials of wrath, but sparks to these flames of indignation. We read of
diverse lamentable torments devised by Tyrants agai^^^ Gods Saints in the
primitive Church, with commiseration: but alas these exquisit cruelties, are
comforts in respect of the torments of hell. If David being offered the choice
of three chastiseme^ts, famine, sword, or pestilence, said: 2. Sam. 24.14.
Let me not fall into the hands of men: how much more should we pray and
beseech our God, that we may never fall into the hand and power of the devil?

5 It is a place of darkness and blackness, and consequently of dread and
horror. Amos. Zeph. Joel. David in Psalm.
For the Prophets when they are wont to describe any extreme dolor, do call
it darkness, blackenesse and obscurity. So says our Savior speaking of the
pains and place of the damned: Mat. 8.12.22.13.
Take and cast them into the place of utter darkness. The darkness of
Egypt was wonderful and fearful: wonderful, for it was so thick, that it
might be felt: Exodus 10.21
fearful, and therefore was reserved for the ninth of the ten plagues
inflicted upon the Egyptians, as being most forceable to mollify the heart of
Pharaoh. But this darkness of hell does far exceed that palpable
darkness of Egypt: and therefore it is called, the Blackenesse of
darkness: Jude. 13. (...) and. 2. Pet. 2 17.
the Hebrew idiotisme terms it a Darkness of darkness: to utter in it the
uttermost extract of darkness. And this punishment sorteth well with the
merits of those, who call darkness, light; Esa. 5.20.
and light, darkness: and all those who have loved darkness rather then
light. Job. 3.19.


Mar. 9.44.
6 This torment is called the Worm that never dies, alluding to that of
Isaiah: Esa. 66.24.
And they shall go forth and look upon the carkases of them that have
trespassed against me, for their worm shall not dye. As of the putrefaction of
the body, there breeds a worm which eats and consumes the body: so from
the corruption of the soul tainted with sin, there arises the worm of
conscience, which gnaweth and vexes the soul with continual anguish. Romans
2.9.
So says the Apostle: Tribulation and anguish shall be upon the soul of every
one that does evil.

7 The torments of hell are called a death, because that as by the separation
of the body from the soul, the body dies: so the soul and body being
separated from God, Vita vita meae. Aug. Con. lib. 7. b.
who is the life of their life, do dye the second death. Also death being the
most terrible and bitter thing in this life, Arist Eth. lib. 3. cap. 6.
(as the Philosopher says) it may very fitly give denomination to that
condition which is most bitter and miserable in the life to come. Now when the
estate of the damned is called death, we must not understand it as of men
already dead, but ready to dye: when the veins of the body, and the strings
of the heart being ready to break, the dying man is possessed with intolerable
anguish, by reason of death-pangs. Of this death Bernard spoke when he said:
B^rn. de. Consid. ad Eugen. li. 5.
Horreo in manus incidere mortis viuentis, and vitae morientis; calling it very
fitly, A living death and a dying life. These are the doleful agents.

The miserable patients, subjects to these torments, are together with the
devils, the wicked and ungodly, who shall be tormented both in body and
soul: the body shall be tormented, because it would not obey the soul; the
soul, because it would follow the rebellious body: both soul and body,
because they obeyed the instigations of Satan, and left the directions of Gods
holy Spirit. 2. Cor. 5.10.
We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things that he has done in his body, whether they be good or
evil. For as the body has sinned with all the senses and parts thereof; so
shall they all receive a condign and correspondent punishment. The eyes that
were delighted with beholding nothing but vanity, shall now be frighted with
beholding of ugly devils: the ears that took pleasure in hearing slanders and
filthy talking, shall be troubled with the howlings and blasphemies of hellish
spirits: the nose that disdained any smell but sweet perfumes, shall feel the
loathsome stinch of fire and brimstone: the fine and dainty body that with the
rich man was wont to be clothed in fine linen, shall with him be tormented in
the flames of unquenchable fire: the mouth that offered the sacrifices of
deliciousnes to the devouring belly, and took such pleasure in quaffing and
carousing, shall drink of the pure wine of the wrath of God. Reu. 14.10.
In a word, all that body which should have been the temple for Gods spirit,
but was made a cage for unclean spirits, shall be tormented in every part
without mitigation and intermission. Neither shall the body be thus vexed
alone; but as the soul has been to the body, like Simeon to Leui, a brother
in iniquity: so shall it also partake with the body of the same punishments.
The memory shall call to mind that which is past, and the understanding
consider that which is present, and both join together to disquiet themselves.
Now shall it be thought upon, how many good motions have been neglected; how
without fruit, pardon and remission of sins has been offered; what sweet
joys are lost, and what grievous torments are found: for what trifling,
foolish and filthy sins, these intolerable, infinite and endless punishments
have been bought; how easily these miseries might have been avoided: but now
how impossible it is to obtain even the least mitigation thereof. Thus whilst
these faculties are busied in vexing of them selves, the Lord shall power down
upon them the vials of his wrath: so that the affections being set on fire with
the exhalations of fury, and burning with the wicked zeal of revenge, shall
grow mad and rage, and cast out blasphemies both against heaven and earth.

3 Lo, these are the lamentable fruits of these intolerable torments upon these
miserable patients. For how can the heavy wrath of God, the irksome society
with the devils, the merciless fire of hell, the filthy torme^ting prison,
the doleful place of darkness, the never dying worm, and the dreadful
second death, vexing the soul with terrors, and the body with flames: how can
they (I say) but yield that which our Savior does so often inculcate: Mat.
8.13.22 and Luke 13.
There shall be wailing, and weeping, and gnashing of teeth? Therefore is hell
from these effects not unfitly compared to Topheth in the valley of Benhinnom:
2. Chr. 28.3
which has the name from the noise that they made with their instruments, that
the scriching of their children which they sacrificed to Moloch, might not be
heard. For so shall hell yield most hideous horror, with extreme doleful
noises: curses shall be their hymns, and howling their tunes: blasphemy shall
be their ditties: and lachrymae their notes: lamentation shall be their songs,
and scriching their strains: yea cursing, blasphemy, scriching and howling,
shall be their daily morning and evening song: sighs, and sobs, and gnashing of
teeth shall be their doleful descant and division.

But what, shall all the damned be tormented alike?

Surely no: for albeit the least torment in hell, does far exceed the
greatest torture on the earth; yet are there very different degrees of
punishment. Luke 12.47
The servant that knew his masters will, and did it not, shall be beaten with
many stripes. Mat. 11.22
But it shall be easier for Tyrus and Sidon at the day of judgment, then for
Corazin and Bethsaida. As many live under the same Sun, yet all feel not the
like heat from it: Greg. mor. lib. 4. cap. 43.
so many may be subject to the same torments of hell, in the same manner,
though not in the same measure. But miserable and most accursed shall his
condition be, who shall taste even the least measure and degree thereof.

And are the torments of hell so dreadful? is the state of the damned so
doleful? Who can think upon the one without fear, or consider the other
without pity? Well might our Savior say concerning Judas: Mat. 26.24
It had bin good for him, if he had never been borne. And happy indeed had he
and other castawaies been, if they had never seen the light, or been created
some loathsome toades or hateful serpents: that so they might never have been
partakers of hels torments. I wonder to think of some, that use to confirm
their speeches with this fearful execration: Would I were damned, if etc.
Alas, alas, full little do they know what they say: if they considered the
horror of condemnation, they would tremble to take such words in their mouths.

Here, that exhortation has notable use: Psalm. 4.4.
Stand in awe, and sin not. If we be in some great man's danger that is able
to be revenged upon us: Lord, how we creep, and crouch, and fear: But we
should fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell. Mat.
10.18
If men had hearts to conceive, grace to believe, and minds to meditate upon
these fearful torments, it must needs make them stand in awe, and restrain
them from sin: but alas for pity, the force of sin has banished the fear
of God, and the dread of hell: else would men never live as they do. There are
some ungodly men and women so nice and tender, that they cannot abide the heat
of the Sun, and the biting of a flea will not suffer them to sleep: oh that
such could consider, what it is to fry in the unquenchable flames of fire and
brimstone, and to have the neuer-dying worm gnawing at their consciences. Some
are so coy, that they cannot abide to look upon the sores of poor Lazarus;
and so unmerciful, that they stop their ears at the cry of their distressed
brethren: oh that they would remember what a filthy prison is prepared for the
damned, and what yelling and howling the merciless shall one day hear. Some
there are, to whom the service of God is exceeding painful and irksome, as
to kneel at prayer, to be any thing long at a Sermon, or the like: oh that
such had grace to meditate upon the irksome, and painful torments prepared
for the damned. For would not the consideration, remembrance, and meditation
hereof correct their lewd affections, dry up the fountain of their filthy
words, change the course of their vain conversation, and make them willing to
do any thing, so they might escape those torments? If a man have but some
extreme fi^ of the gowt, collicke, or toothache, what pains and cost will he
be at to be eased? But what are these to the pains of hell? yet few there
are, that will bestow cost, or care to avoid them. Do but think a little upon
Dives, how that for one drop of water to cool his tongue, he would have
given the whole world (if he had been Lord of it) yet could not obtain it: and
it will cause thee with prayers and tears, and true repentance to finish thy
salvation in the fear of God. Chrysostom. in 2. Epist. ad Corin. hom. 10.
If thou should come into a loathsome prison, and there see some look pale
and wan, others bound in chains and fetters, others hungring and thirsting,
others shut up in the dark and filthy dungeon, making piteous lamentation:
would it not move thy heart with commiseration, and cause thee carefully to
avoid those courses, that might bring thee into the like danger? Then think
upon the prison and dungeon of hell, and consider seriously with thy self, how
many poor souls look pitifully there: how many are bound strongly in Satan's
fetters: how many are shut up in the place of utter darkness, and being
continually tormented with the hellish fiends, do nothing but wail, and
weep, and gnash their teeth: and it must needs make thee remember the rich
man's speech: Luke 16.28.
I beseech thee father Abraham, send Lazarus to warn my brethren, lest they
come into this place of torments. What? art thou like Thomas, Job. 20.
that thou will not believe, except thou see and feel? Exodus 10.7
art thou like Pharao, that thou will not fear before Egypt be destroyed? I
mean, will thou feel the torments of hell, before thou fear them? and will thou be destroyed, before thou will leave thy sins? Alas, that any man should
be so careless and senseless in the view of such torments. The body is
subject to bad repletion and diseases by sweet meats, but it must be purged by
bitter potions: so must the discreet Christian purge his soul of the filthy
humors of sin, and the repletion of vanity, by deep meditation of the
bitter pains of hell. We read of one, who upon the violence of any temptation
to sin, would lay his hand on burning coals; and being not able to endure the
same, would say to himself: Oh how unable shall I be to endure the pains of
hell? and this cogitation did mightily restrain him from evil. If thou will
not practice this experiment, yet at the least, ponder seriously these
meditations: and they will (I hope) through Gods gracicious assistance, make
thee careful and able to master thy corruptions, and to overcome Satan's
temptations.

SECT. 3. The last period of the pains of the damned: which is, the Eternity
of their torments.
WHen I consider the condition of the damned, it makes me remember
Nebuchadnetsar; Dan. 4.
who for his pride was driven from his kingdom, had his dwelling with the
beasts, was made to eat grass with the oxen, and wet with the dew of heaven,
till his hairs were grown as Eagles feathers, and his nails like birds
claws: for so shall the damned for their wickedness, be driven at the day of
judgment from the kingdom of God, have their dwelling with the Devils, be
tormented in the flames of fire, and transformed into the loathsome form of the
ugly fiends of hell. Herein indeed Nebuchadnetsar and they do differ: his
deposing was but carnal and temporal, theirs is spiritual and eternal: he
was punished thus only till seven times passed over him, they shall be thus
plagued till seventy times seven times seven times be passed over, even for
ever and ever. That is a long sentence that has no period, a large day that
yields no evening, and ample torments that have no end: behold such a sentence,
such a day, and such torments art thou come now to meditate upon (my Christian
brother;) and therefore enlarge thy meditation to the uttermost, that thou
may fruitefully ponder these fearful torments.

The greatness of the pains of hell in regard of the quality, is lamentable:
but the grieuousnesse thereof in respect of the quantity, makes them
intolerable. We have an old saying: That is no bad day, that has a good
night. The sharpest conflicts to the soldier, the roughest tempest to the
mariner, and weariest journey to the traveler, are not without comfort,
because they yield an expectation of an end: but the torments of hell, being as
endless in quantity, as they are easelesse in quality, yield not the least
glimpse of consolation to the damned spirits. Was it not wonderful in the
days of Joshua, that the Sun and Moon stood still, Joshua. 10.13
and hasted not to go down, for a whole day, that the people might be avenged
on their enemies? But how wonderful will it be, when the Sun and Moon shall
lose their light, and vtt^rly cease to measure time by their motion; leaving
the same to pass on without end or intermission, till the Lord be fully
avenged upon all the wicked in hell? Therefore are all the torments of the
reprobate noted with the Epithets of Eternity and perpetuity. The shame that
shall cover their face, Dan. 12.2. Mar. 9.44.
is perpetual: the worm that gnaweth their conscience, never dies: Mat. 25.46
the pain which they shall go into, is endless: the fire that shall devour
them, Jude. 7.
is eternal: the torments of the fiery lake last for ever: Reu. 20.10
the perdition which shall punish them from the throne of the Lord, 2. These.
1.9.
and the glory of his power is everlasting: and the death which they suffer is
an everlasting death. It goes hard with a man that would feign dye, but
cannot: and such shall be the condition of the damned, as Saint John speaks
of certain men, Reu. 9.6. They shall seek death, but shall not find it; and
shall desire to die, but death shall fly from them. And it is a just
recompense, that they which might have found life, but would not seek it,
should now seek for death, and not find it.

Thus shall they be like to a man, that lies with many waights upon him to be
pressed to death, crying and calling for more waights to dispatch him, but alas
he cannot get them: so shall they wish even an increase of torments to end
their lives, but it shall not be granted. That is a fearful judgment which
the Lord threateneth to the Jews: Behold, Ier. 8.17.
I will send Serpents and Cockatrices among you, which will not be charmed: but
this is a far greater judgment, that the Lord will cast men into the
everlasting fire, Mat. 3.12.
that shall never be quenched. If those who are shut up in the dungeon of hell,
had so many thousand years to endure there, as there be sands on the shore,
fishes in the sea, stars in the firmament, or grass in the field, there were
some hope and comfort, though (God knows) it were very small: but when so many
millions of ages and worlds are passed over, their torments (alas for pity)
are as fresh and new to begin again as ever they were; according to that of
Gregory: They (poor wretches) have a death without a death, Mor. lib. 9. cap.
48.
an end without an end, a defect without a defect: for the death lives, the
end always begins, and the defect never fails. Is it possible for Almighty
God, not to be eternal? neither is it possible for the punishment of the
wicked in hell, to be temporal: offenses against an infinite Majesty, require
an infinite punishment. Many (to embolden themselves to sin in this life) are
willing to remember, that Gods mercy endures for ever: but such shall in the
life to come, receive the reward of their sins; and prove (against their
wills) that the arm of his justice, is as large as the arm of his mercy:
and that his wrath and indignation also endures for ever. David has a
doleful complaint: Will the Lord absent himself for ever? Psalm. 77.7.
and will he show no more favor? is his mercy clean gone for ever? has God
forgotten to be gracious? and has he shut up his tender mercies in
displeasure? Alas this were a pitiful case: indeed he has not dealt thus with
David, but he will deal so with all the damned. Of many things in the world,
me thinks this is most admirable: That men persuading and assuring themselves,
there are such pains prepared for the wicked, do yet live as though they feared
no such thing: some making but a jest of sin, Prou. 14.9. Job. 15.16.
others drinking it up like water. Oh, God is merciful thou will say, not
desiring the death of a sinner: and that gives them hope. I, but to whom is God
merciful, to all? nay, shall not the greatest part of the world taste of his
heavy indignation? Mat. 7.
What, to every man, how lewd so ever he be? nay he has threatened, that to
a man going presumptuously on in his lewdness without remorse, Deuteronomy. 29.20
he will not be merciful. If it were bruted for certain, that in a city
where there are thousands, the Prince would shortly use some strange and severe
execution upon an hundred, but upon whom it were uncertain: would it not cause
every man to tremble? If it were told ten going over a bridge, that one of
them should fall into the water; would it not make every one look to his
feet, lest he should be the man? If a skillful Physician should assure a
town, that many in it were infected with some dangerous disease; what running
and riding would there be to Physicians to prevent the same? Behold now, men do
hear that the King of Kings will shortly come to execute his fierce wrath upon
many; Rev. 22.12 Jude. 13.
they know, that not one of ten, but rather nine of ten are in danger of
falling from the bridge of iniquity into the pit of eternal destruction; Mat.
7.
and see that in every town many are infected with those dangerous diseases,
which bring eternal death: yet how few are found that tremble, look to
themselves, or seek to the Physician of their souls, that they may escape
these dangers? Who would for thousands of goldly burning in the fire for only
one days space? who is so mad that he would for one hours pleasure, be racked
a whole year together? and yet alas, how many are there, that for trifles do
damn themselves to the fire of hell? and how many, that for foolish and
sottish sins (such as are odious in the sight of God, hateful to men, and
hurtful to their own health) do bring them selves to the rack and torments,
which endure not for an hour, or a year, but for ever and ever: and, if it
were possible, for ever and after. If ever it please God to visit thee with
sickness, think with thy self (dear Christian) as thou sit or lie in
thy bed, how irksome it would be to thee, if thou should lie always in
that small pain, without comfort or company of friends: and if that seem
tedious to thee, bethink thy self how gieuous it will be to lie in the
unspeakable torments of hell, without all comfort and company, save of the
terrible fiends, and miserable souls of hell, and that world without end: and
this meditation must needs mollify thy heart, and humble thy soul. But alas,
men do not remember, or else do only superficially consider these things. But
I beseech thee for Gods sake, who created thee like himself; for Christ's sake,
who shed his blood and dyed to redeem thee: and for thy souls sake, which
should be more precious to thee, then ten thousand worlds; let not these
infinite torments be passed over with a short or shallow consideration: but
engraue the remembrance thereof in the most sensible and secret part of thy
soul, with the diamond of a deep meditation; and let it not pass thence,
till it have wrought and perfected the work of true repentance, in mortifying
thy corrupt affections, and rectifying thy profane conversation. Otherwise
assure thy self, that if thou will not break off thine iniquities by
repentance, and make an end of sinning, thou shall surely meet with a
correspondent recompense: for there shall be no end of thy torments.

The third part. Of the joys of Heaven in general.
WHEN Cyrus sought to win the hearts of the Persians to him, Justin. lib. 1.
he caused them to be assembled, and to toil and take great pains in cutting
down a wood, and the next day after he feasted them; and then demanded,
whether they had rather live as they did that day, or the day before: and when
they all chose (as no marvel) to live in mirth and feasting: he told them,
that if they would follow Astyages, their life should be as the day of toyling:
but promised, that if they would stick to him, and be his followers, it should
be like the day of feasting. The like is here propounded to thee (my Christian
brother) in these Meditations. If thou will follow the world, and Satan the god
of the world; behold, thou see there is nothing to be got thereby but
infinite toil in this life, and eternal torments in the life to come but if
thou will take up our Saviors cross and follow him, Mat. 19.28
thou shall surely have the reward of everlasting happiness. So that I may say
to thee, as Moses said to the Israelites: Deu. 30.15
Behold, I have set before thee this day Life and good, death and evil. Only
in this I differ, Ioh. 2.10.
that as our Savior a^ Cana in Galile reserved the best wine last: so have I
first set before thee death and evil, and now am to offer thee life and good;
that (if it may be) through the view of hels torments, the kingdom of heaven
may suffer violence. Mat. 11.
The eye of man is not able to behold the brightness of the heavens in a
foggie mist: neither can the eyes of our understanding pierce thorough the
mists of earthly vanities, to that exceeding glory which shines in the
heavens. If thou belong to the kingdom of God, thou shall in the Treatise
following meet with the riches of that inheritance, which does belong to thee:
so that thou may read it to thy exceeding comfort, being the map and
model of that heavenly possession and habitation, which Christ Jesus has
purchased for thee. And if the same affect thee with joy, know this for thy
further comfort: that all this is infinitely less then that celestial bliss,
whereof thou shall one day be partaker.

CHAP. 1.
SECT. 1. The first step of the godly into heaven before the day of
judgment: namely, Sanctimonie of life.
Whilst the children of Israel were yet traveling in the wilderness, the Lord
appointed Moses the man of God, Deuteronomy. 34.1.
to go to the top of mount Nebo; from whence he showed him the spacious
region of the pleasant la^d of Canaan, which afterward the Israelites should
possess: so deals Almighty God with his servants; even whilst they are
traveling in the wilderness of this troublesome world, he does from the high
tower of a sanctified speculation, show them an excellent prospect of the
celestial Canaan, the kingdom of heaven: the fruition and fee-simple whereof,
he will afterward bestow upon them. And therefore one says well: Bern. Sermon.
super Ver. 10. cap. ^0. Sap.
The kingdom of heaven is granted, promised, showed, and received: it is
granted in Predestination, promised in Vocation, showed in Justification, and
received in Glorification. When Adam was in his innocence, he had his
habitation in the terrestrial Paradise: so when the sons of Adam are in some
measure restored by regeneration to that holiness, which they lost by their
fathers fall, they do enter into the celestial Paradise. Whereby those visions
are fulfilled: Reu. 3.12.
that New Jerusalem is come down out of heaven. The tabernacle of God is with
men, and he is their God, 21.3.
and they are his people, and God himself is their God with them. This will be
evident, if we consider the heavenly privileges, wherewith the Saints and
servants of God are endowed even in this life. To let pass the Patricia^ robes
of the blessed Sacraments: 1. They obtain pardon and remission of their
sins: Psa. 32.1.
Blessed is the man whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered
says the Prophet David. Lo, this blessedness do the children of God obtain
in the remission of their sins. And to this forgiving of sin being the
foundation of felicity, there is added the giving of grace for the reformation
of their lives; for where sin is pardoned, there it is purged: so that they
are no more strangers from the life of God, Ephesians. 2.
but it is their meat and drink to do the will of their heavenly father;
their thoughts and meditations are lifted above earthly cogitations; their
words are gracious, as becomes the heavenly citizens; and their conversation
holy, while they are clothed with the white robes of righteousness, like the
company of our Saviors blessed attendants in the kingdom of heaven. Reu. 7.9.
Thus are they by grace united unto Almighty God, and obtain his gracious
protection, Ioh. 17.22.
according to our Saviors heavenly petition, as the Psalmist says: Psalm.
5.12. For the Hebrew word, (...) of (...) a Crown, implies more then a simple
protection as Psalm. 84.11 1. Pet. 4.14.
For thou Lord wilt bless the righteous, and with favor wilt crown and
compass him as with a shield. So that the Lord does even in this life, crown
his children with grace and glory; they may boldly come in the presence of
God, and talk with him in their prayers; and they have the benefit of his
Angels attendance. Psalm. 91.


2 Again, as they are united unto God by grace: so are they ingrafted into
Christ, (who is the fountain of all heavenly happiness) and can say with the
Apostle: Gal. 2.20.
I live not any more, but Christ lives in me. And a man thus established by
faith in Christ, may truly be said to be in heaven, as Saint John says: John.
5.24.
He has everlasting life, and is already passed from death to life. There are
many wretches, which scorn the godly, count their piety folly, Psalm. 4.2.
and turn their glory into shame: esteeming them for the most base abiects of
the world, whereas their condition is most happy: for though they be under the
persecution of wicked Esau, yet are they even then with Jacob in Bethel, Genesis
28.17.
the house of God and the gate of heaven.

3 Hereunto we may add the communion of Saints, and fellowship with the elect
Angels, whereof the Apostle speaks, when he says: Phil. 3.20. (...)
We are free Citizens of heaven: meaning indeed: that as we are infranchised,
and incorporated into the heavenly Jerusalem: our conversation should be
correspondent to this dignity. And of this privilege does he speak very
comfortably, Ephesians. 2.6. saying: that God has raised us up together, and made
us sit together in the heavenly places, in Christ Jesus. So that Gods Saints on
earth, though they be poor and base in regard of their outward estate, yet
being faithful, they are heirs of grace, and have seats of honor in heaven,
together with the thrones and dominations: and are therefore no more strangers
and forrainers, Ephesians. 2.19.
but Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of faith. True it is, that
as yet the children of God on earth do not actually, but potentially and
mystically enjoy these privileges: yet because of the present comfort and
future certainetie thereof, they are actually ascribed to them, as already
obtained. When our Savior means to comfort his servants, and to banish
distrust of Gods providence, he says: Fear not little flock, Luke 12.
for it is yours Fathers will to give you a kingdom. Lo, this kingdom the
Lord does assure to his children in this life, by giving them the earnest of
his spirit for the assurance of the same. Howbeit, 2. Cor. 5.5.
as David was anointed by Samuel a great while before he obtained the Crown:
so does the Lord anoint his children in this life, with the oil of gladness;
but sets not the crown of glory upon their heads, 2. Tim. 4.8.
till the triumphant appearing of Christ Jesus. 1. Joh 3.2.
Dearly beloved, even now are we the sons of God, says Saint John: so that
being adopted in Christ, Romans 8.17.
and heirs annexed with him, we have assurance of that heavenly dignity,
which is prepared in the heavenly places for the sons of God. Thus the godly,
in respect of the remission of their sins: the sanctification of l^fe: their
vnio^ with God: their ingrafting into Christ: their Communion with the Saints:
and other privileges of grace and happiness, whereof they are possessed: may
very well be said to have made an entrance, and set foot into the kingdom of
heaven: and to have a glimpse of that glory, which shall shine most
resplendently at the great day of reward.

These things being wisely weighed in the balance of a sanctified soul, yield
sundry profitable uses.

1. Hereby a man may have trial of his future estate, by duly considering his
present condition. Is thy heart profane, thy faith dead, and thy conversation
wicked? then may I say to thee, as Iehu said to Iehora^: 2. King. 9.
What have thou to do with peace? what have thou to do with the kingdom of
heaven? which belongs only to the righteous, and has no room for the
unrighteous, 1. Cor. 6.9. Reu. 21.27.
nor entertaineth any unclean thing. But can thou discern in thy self a
sound faith, though it be like smoking fl^xe: and an upright conversation,
albeit not free from all infirmity? then may I say to thee, as our Savior
said to Zachaeus: Luke 19.9.
This day is salvation come to thy house: thou have set one foot into heaven.

2 This may be a motive to holiness of life and conversation. Some in the
weakness or profaneness of their hearts, will be ready to demand: Mal. 3
14.
What profit is it to keep Gods commandments, and to walk humbly before the
Lord of hosts? and behold, such a one may here receive an answer: for we see
that the godly are in this life interessed in many heavenly privileges, and
shall assuredly in the life to come, be partakers of everlasting happiness.
Therefore Saint Peter having exhorted men, to link a justifying faith with
sanctified virtues in a golden chain, concludes his exhortation with this
reason: 2. Pet. 1.5.11.
For by this means an entering shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: making the kingdom
of Grace the portall to the kingdom of Glory.

3 To a faithful and a godly man, this meditation may minister much cause of
true comfort: Luke 10.
Rejoice in this (says our Savior) that your names are written in heaven: so
let this be thy comfort (my Christian brother) that the Almighty has
enrolled thee amongst the holy company of heaven. And herein bless God for
his mercy with the blessed Apostle, who (considering the greatness of his
favor vouchsafed to the Colossians) renders hearty thanks to God, for
delivering them out of the power of darkness, Col. 1.13.
and translating them into the kingdom of his dear son. A man that stands
upon a high and sure rock laughes to scorn the rough surges of the raging
seas: and so may a Christian that has laid this good foundation of a sound
faith and a sanctified life, safely rejoice against all the surges of troubles
and temptations whatsoever. For though the rain fall, Mat. 7.25.
and the floods come, and the winds blow, and beat upon this building it shall
not fall, because it is builded upon a rock: yea the gates of hell shall not
be able to prevail against it.

SECT. 2. The second step to heaven before the day of judgment: namely,
Peace of conscience.
AS sorrow of heart and horror of conscience, are the usual fruits of sin
and iniquity: so is joy of heart and peace of conscience, an ordinary
companion of godliness and honesty. Genesis 3.8.
Adam having transgressed and defiled himself with sin, when God calls for
him, does hide himself. Abraham a man of a sound faith and prompt obedience,
Genesis 22.1.
when the Lord speaks to him, answers chearefully: Here am I. Thus we see
both parts of the Proverb fulfilled: Prou. 28.1.
The wicked flies, when none pursues him: but the righteous is bold as a
lion. When the heavens are clogged with foggie mists, it causes a sudden
darkness upon the face of the earth; and when the body is oppressed with
pale melancholy humors, the heart is heavy, and the countenance cast down:
but the mistes being expelled by the brightness of the Sun, all the Horizon
laughes for joy; and the pale humors being purged, the heart is joyful, and
makes the countenance cheerful. So do the mistes and humors of sin, clogge
and molest the heart of man: but the same being expelled and purged by the
bright Sunshine of righteousness, the heart is enlarged and rejoices; yea
daunceth with joy, as David speaks, Psalm 13.5.
and the heart being joyful makes a cheerful co^ntenance: Pro. 15.13.
so that the voice of joy and gladness is heard in the tabernacles of the
righteous. Psa. 118.15
And this ioyfulnesse of heart, cheerfulness of face, and gladness of tongue,
do testify: Romans 14.7.
that the kingdom of God is righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy
Ghost. Of this fruit does Solomon speak, where he says: Pro. 15.15.
That a good conscience is a continual feast; setting it forth with the same
comparison that Saint John uses in describing the joys of the kingdom of
heaven, calling them the Lambs supper: Reu. 19 9.
but indeed all the delicates in the world are not to be compared to the
feasting of a good conscience. This the Spouse shows in the second of the
Canticles: Can. 2.5.
He brought me into his wineseller, and Love was his banner over me. Lo here
the Ambrosian Nectar, wherewith Christ Jesus makes the heart of his spouse
glad, causing her to cry out: Stay me with flagons, Ver. 6.
and comfort me with apples; for I am sick with love: where the sacred soul
is cast into a holy swound, being ravished with the unspeakable comfort that
she enioyes upon this peace of conscience. Indeed these heavenly joys and
comforts are not tasted of the wicked: for how can they see, that have no eyes?
or those relish the peace of conscience, which want their spiritual taste?
Yea, who is able to express the excellency of this peace? nay, who is able to
conceive it but those that enjoy it? Neither indeed are they able: for it
passes all understanding. Phil. 4.7.
In respect of which large excellency of the peace of conscience, it may very
well be counted a part of the kingdom of heaven, whose joys are endless and
infinite.

If we consider the fountains also from whence this spiritual peace does
spring, we shall perceive that our present comfort upon earth, and future
consolation to be enjoyed hereafter in heaven, do both arise and flow from the
same heads, and fall into the same Ocean of felicity. 1 A justifying faith
yields this peace: Romans 5.2.
for being justified by faith we have peace toward God, through our Lord
Jesus Christ. And this peace yields joy, as it follows in the next verse, and
that no small joy: for they that do truly believe in Christ Jesus, 1. Pet.
1.8.
do rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious. What could the Apostle have
said more of the joy, which the Saints shall enjoy hereafter in the kingdom of
heaven, then to call it Unspeakable and glorious? and no marvel: for as the
first sight of the blind man whereby he saw men walk like trees, Mar. 8.28.
was the same whereby he saw them to be men a far off, though it was at the
first more confused: so the inchoate joy and peace of conscience, which we
obtain in this life, being unspeakable, glorious, and passing all
understanding, has more then a resemblance of that celestial glory, which
shall be imparted more abundantly and perfectly in the life to come. 2 The
children of God are endued with the spirit of God, whereby they receive the
comfortable testimony of their adoption: Romans 8.
and the same manumitting spirit does also yield them most heavenly
consolation. Ioh. 14.16.
3. This peace of conscience is the fruit of a holy conversation, as I said
before: and the Apostle can tell us of his own experience; for his rejoicing
is this, 2. Cor. 1.12
the testimony of his conscience, that in simplicity and godly pureness, he
has had his conversation in the world. Besides this, there is also an
undoubted Hope: which being the first fruits of the spirit, does after a sort
put the children of God in possession of the kingdom of heaven. So that when
they do from the watch tower of a good conscience lift up this Jacobs staff,
or rather this Jacobs ladder, Genesis 28.12.
of a steadfast hope, unto the heavens, and there behold with holy Stephen the
glory of God: Act. 7.
it rauisheth and rejoices their hearts more then any tongue is able to
express. Thus do the godly in this life, taste of the joys of heaven: the
sweetness whereof is such, that it swalloweth up all the waves of temporal
distresses; causing them with Paul and Silas to sing Psalms in the prison,
and to say with David: Act. 16.25.
Psa 94.19.
In the midst of all my troubles, thy comforts o Lord have refreshed my
soul. Which marvelous effect, this peace of conscience could never have in
encountering and conquering these infinite earthly calamities, were it not of a
divine and heavenly Nature. But what? have all the children of God this peace
and comfort alike? Surely no: but according to Zeba and Zalmunnaes words (As
the man is, Iud. 8.21.
so is his strength) it may be said in this case: as the man is, so is his
comfort and joy. For where the life is qualified with a great measure of grace,
there the heart is replenished with a great measure of joy. Neither are these
joys always participated alike; but as the heavens are sometime bright, and
sometime obscured: so the Sun of comfort shines sometimes more brightly,
sometimes obscurely in the hearts of Gods children. So that one while they
complain thus: Psalm. 77.
Will the Lord absent himself for ever? and will he show no more favor? and
other whiles, Psalm. 35.9.
their soul is joyful in the Lord, and all their bones do say: Who is like
unto thee, o Lord? yet even in their greatest distress, Dulciores sunt
lachrymae orant^u^, quam gaudia Theatrorum. Aug. super. Psalm. 1^7.
the very tears of the godly are sweeter, then all the showtes and laughters
at the Theaters.

This being the excellency of the peace of conscience, let it be thy care
(good Christian) to obtain, and maintain it. A kind and comfortable friend
is much worth: but who can prize the peace of a quiet conscience? Lo, it was
the best hymn the blessed Angels could sing: Luke 2.14.
Glory be to God in the highest heavens, and peace on the earth. The best
Legacy our Savior could leave to his servants: My peace I leave with you,
John. 14.27
my peace I give you. The best prayer the Apostle could make for the
Thessalonians: Now the Lord of peace, 2. These. 3.16
give you peace always by all means. Though there be many that say: Psalm. 4.
Who will show us any good? and have their minds wholly set upon their corn,
their wine and oil: yet the godly have more true gladness from the Lords
countenance by a thousand degrees, then the worldling has in all these
transitory trifles.

Have thou a good conscience? then cherish it: it is the greatest blessing
under heaven. Is this peace and comfort of conscience wanting or weak in thee?
then use the means, whereby the same is procured and preserved. Labor to
obtain a sound faith, and a sanctified life: Esa. 32.17
for the work of righteousness is peace. Melchizedec being king of
righteousness, Heb. 7.2.
was after that the king of peace: get righteousness, and peace will follow
it. Psalm. 85.11
For righteousness and peace will kiss each other: yea the more thou art
conversant in holiness of conversation, the more abundant shall thou be in the
comfortable peace of conscience. For where righteousness flourishes, Psalm.
72.7.
there shall be abundance of peace. Behold, it will be thy companion, both by
day and by night, at home and abroad, in life and in death: yea, it will not
only guide thee (as Moses did the children of Israel) to the celestial
Canaan; but (as Joshua did) will there take up her habitation with thee for
ever. And as the star led the Wise men till they came to Christ, Mat. ^.
and then stood still: so shall this light of joy lead thee to the kingdom of
heaven, and there stand still in the firmament of thy soul, world without end.

SECT. 3. The third step to Heaven before the day of judgment: namely, Joy
and comfort at the day of death.
THe traveler that has a long journey to take though happily he meet with
many delights by the way, yet is glad when he comes within the kenne of his
country; but rejoices exceedingly, when he has attained the end of his
journey. Behold, the ways of righteousness are the steps we take in our
travail; the peace of conscience sets before us the joy of the heavenly
mansions: but the day of death gives us fruition thereof; and is therefore to
be desired of all those, that are traveling the right way to the kingdom of
heaven. The heavenly bodies are best seen in the evening when the Sun is
set: and the heavenly joys are most enjoyed at the evening of our days, when
the Sun of our life is set; by reason that the soul is then delivered from a
mass of corruptions, and both soul and body from a mixture of infinite
miseries, The godly may now especially be said to set foot into heaven in a
twofold respect. First, because they are freed from the calamities of this
life, the bitterness whereof does greatly allay the sweetness of the heavenly
joys. Secondly, Eccles. 12 7
because their souls returning to God, do actually possess those eternal
joys, which the kingdom of heaven does yield.

1 Concerning this life, what is it but a vale of misery? and what is the
fruit thereof, Psalm. 90.10
but labor and sorrow? therefore does the Oracle of heaven rightly pronounce:
Reu. 14 13.
Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, because they cease from their
labors. The seafaring man is glad when he meets with a pleasant gale of
wind, that will bring him to the haven where he would be. Lo, this world is
the sea: the body, the ship: the soul, the mariner; and death, the pleasant
gale of wind that brings us into the haven of eternal bliss. This the Apostle
insinuates in an elegant Metaphor, (...). Phil. 2.23.
when he says: I long to be diss^lued, and to be with Christ. When Noah had
bin tossed up and down in the flood, almost a whole year, was he not glad
(think you) of mount Ararat, whereupon he rested the Arc? So the children of
God having been tossed up and down the waters of this wicked world,
peradventure for many years, have they not reason to be glad of the day of
death, the mount Ararat that gives rest to the beaten bark of their turmoyled
souls and bodies? Is the soul kept in the body as it were in a prison?
Seneca Tully etc.
and is not the day of death therefore to be desired, as the day of deliverance
from imprisonment? Surely yes: and that makes Simeon to say: Lord, Luk 2.29.
(...) thou loosest
now let thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word. The days
of man (says Job) are as the days of an hireling. Job. 7.2.
And as the servant longs for the shadow, and an hireling looks for the end
of his work: so do the godly look and long for the evening and Sunset of
their age, because then the time of labor is past, and the day of payment
comes in, which causes the^ to pray: Even so, Reu. 22.20.
come Lord Jesus.

2 As the faithful are by death delivered from the miseries of this life,
which hindered their felicity: so are they by it (as it were by a gate) led and
let into the joys of heaven. For the souls of the just, when by death they
pay the old debt, do receive a new reward of joy, which they shall never repay.
Solomon says comfortably: Pro. 14.32.
The righteous has hope in his death: but the Apostle more comfortably: We
know, 2. Cor. 5.1.
that if our earthly house of this tabernacle be destroyed, we have a building
given of God, even an house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens.
If the godly dyed doubtfully, and with a staggering confidence, there were some
reason they should suffer a wonderful conflict and reluctation in death: but
seeing they commit their souls into the hands of a faithful Creator, 1. Pet.
4.19.
and their bodies to the ground, with an assured confidence, that at the last
day they shall with the same eyes behold their Redeemer, Job. 19.
who will send his Angels to fetch them, and has promised to glorify them:
seeing that being dissolved they shall be with Christ, Phil. 1.23.
and have the reward of their works following them to heaven, Reu. 14.13.
where their time shall be spent in singing the hymns of praises to the harp
of glory; Reu. 5.8.9.
have they not reason to long for death, to search for it more then for
treasures, and to rejoice when they find it? David says, that the death of
the Saints is precious in the sight of the Lord. Psa. 116.15
And our Savior makes the day of death, the Saints seed time for that happy
harvest, wherein the Angels shall be reapers to gather the good corn into the
Lords barn, the kingdom of heaven. For except the wheat corn fall into the
ground and dye, Ioh. 12.24.
it bideth alone; but if it dye, it brings forth much fruit.

Seeing now, that death is of such singular use to the godly: we see that to
be a most false position of the Philosopher, and an erroneous opinion of many
Christians: That death is the worst and most terrible thing that can happen to
man. For albeit, that to the wicked it be so, yet to the godly it is not: to
whom (if either you respect their freedom from temporal miseries, or the
fruition of eternal felicity) The day of death is better, Eccles. 7.3.
then the day that they are borne. If the house wherein thou dwell were
rotten, Cypr. de mortal. sect 17.
and ready to fall on thy head; if the ship wherein thou art carried, leaked
very daungerously, and like to drown thee; would thou not leave thy house:
and desire the shore that might yield thee safety? Then marvel not, that the
godly desire to be freed from the crazed houses, and leaking ships of their
mortal bodies, and long for the houses, and havens of everlasting security.
What though death be a serpent and sting the wicked, griping them at the heart:
yet to the elect Christ has vanquished this serpent, and plucked out his
sting, yea, deaths sting, being sin. As bodies that have fewest bad humors,
are least shaken with agues: so those that are freest from sin, though death
assault them bitterly, are least annoyed by the pains and terror of death. Our
Savior says: Ioh. 16.33.
Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world; and I may say: Be of good
cheer, 2 Cor. 15.16
for Christ has overcome death.

2 This may be an occasion to mitigate that extreme sorrow, which many take
upon the death of their godly friends: seeing their death yields rather
cause of comfort then of sorrow; of mirth then of mourning; and of rejoicing,
rather then of weeping and lamenting. If you loved me, you would rejoice (says
our Savior to his disciples) because I said, Ioh. 14.28.
I go to the Father: so, those that love their friends indeed, have cause to
rejoice rather then to mourn for their death, because they go to be glorified
with their heavenly Father. The little child that sees the mother cutting and
bruising the sweet and pleasant herbs and flowers, is sorry because he
thinks they are spoiled: but the mother has a purpose to preserve the^,
whereby they are made much better. A simple body that should see the
Goldsmiths melting the pure metals, would be discontent, imagining that all
were marred: whereas the skillful workman has a purpose to cast some
excellent piece of plate thereof. So we silly men, when the Lord cuts off some
of our friends (by death) like the flower, and lets others wither like the
green herb: and when he melts them in the furnace of the grave, are
overcome with sorrowful conceits, as though some evil thing were befallen
our friends: whereas we should remember, that the Lord has a purpose by this
means to preserve them, and to transform them into that glorious estate,
which the Angels enjoy in heaven. And this reason is first intimated, and after
plainly expressed by Saint Paul in his dehortation to the Thessalonians: I
would not (brethren) have you ignorant concerning them which are asleep, 1.
These. 4.13
that you sorrow not as others which have no hope. Who would be sorry to see
his friend fall asleep, seeing that thereby he is made lightsome, fresh, and
lusty? Now death is to the godly nothing but a sleep, whereby they are
refined and refreshed: why should we then be offended therewith? If thy friend
(which dies) be wicked, then have thou just cause of mourning: but if thou
knew him to live and die in the fear of God, howsoever nature or affection
may have force to wring tears from thine eyes, or sighs from thy heart; yet
have thou reason to rejoice, and be glad for his happy change, as Augustine
his example may teach: Aug confe. lib. 9. v.
who bridled the infirmity of Nature, and suppressed his tears at his mothers
death, though he honored and loved her dearly: thinking it an unfit thing to
celebrate her funerals with weeping and wailing, because she had lived
religiously, and died virtuously.

3 To conclude this point, me thinks if there were no farther reason to
persuade, yet even this meditation might move any one to the practice of
godliness; in that it yields this heavenly peace of conscience in the time
of our life, and eternal consolation at the day of our death. Oh, what a
sweet comfort will it be to thee (my Christian brother) when friends, honor,
wealth, dignities, and all other comfortes in the world become vain and fail
thee, to have the joyful peace of conscience to rest with thee? When thou
shall be able (recounting thy sincere care in Gods service) to pray with good
Nehemiah: Neh. 13.22
Remember me, o my God, concerning this? to say with godly Hezechiah upon his
death bed: 2. King 20.3.
I beseech thee (o Lord) remember now, how I have walked before thee in truth,
and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight? and
with our blessed Savior before his passion: Ioh. 17.4.
Father, I have glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work which thou
gave me to do? For then shall the vprght c^nscience echo a comfort to thy
humble soul: and either the Lord will enlarge the lease of thy life with
H^zechiah, or glorify thee in the heavens with his beloved Son.

CHAP. 2.
SECT. 1. The first step into heaven at the day of judgment: namely, A
blessed Resurrection.
IF the godly in this life, and at the day of their death, have a taste of those
heavenly joys which cannot be expressed: how much more shall they have in the
resurrection, when body and soul shall both be reunited, and endued with a
blessed condition? Therefore do the Scriptures describe the excellency of the
resurrection by sundry comfortable metaphors. Ioh. 12.
1. Cor 15.
Saint Paul compares it to the husbandmans harvest: when reaping and receiving
the fruits of his labors, his heart rejoices: and so shall it be to the
godly; for they which sow in tears at the day of death, shall reap in joy at
their resurrection. Pro. 19.17.
2. Solomon says: he which has pity on the poor, lends to the Lord: and
look what he lays out, it shall be paid him again. Now, men that have
great debts desire earnestly the day of payment: and behold our Savior calls
the day of resurrection, Luke 14.14.
The day of payment: because then he having his reward with him, Reu. 22.12.
will come forth of every ones debt, and reward their good^esse with glory.

3. Those that labor must needs have a time to rest in, that so they may be
refreshed. Our life is nothing but labor, our death a sleep: and therefore
the Apostle fitly calls the resur^ection, Act. 3.19.
The time of refreshing: being as the gladsome morning to a si^ke man, Psalm.
49.14 15.
which has tossed and turned up and down wearily all the night long. The bird
that has been kept a great while in a cage, will chaunt it merrily when she
comes forth into the open air: the prisoner that has lain long in the
du^geon, re^oyceth exceedingly when he has obtained liberty: so shall the
resurrection be joyful and comfortable to the godly, when they are delivered
from the cage and prison of the grave and restored into the glorious liberty
of the sons of God. Romans 8.21.
There is nothing that does better r^semble and set forth the excellency of
the Resurrection, then the spring time; for as we flourish in our childhood,
bring forth fruit in our youth, wax ripe in our old age, and wither at our
death: so we spring fresh again at our resurrection. The trees in winter
being despoiled of their leaves, the garden of the flowers, and the fields of
the grass, do seem utterly to perish: but when the Spring time comes, they
all wax as fresh and flourishing as ever they were: so the body (which during
the winter of many ages, is deprived of her beauty and turned to rottenness)
does at the Spring time of the resurrection, not only recover her former
beauty, but obtains a far more excellent glory. Number. 17.8.
The budding of Aarons rod was very admirable, and the resurrection of our
bodies is more wonderful: but it is the Lords doing, and is marvelous in our
eyes.

1 The resurrection is comfortable in regard of the change of the body: which
shall then in beauty as much exceed the former estate thereof, as the bright
Sun does excel the least Star in glory. 1. Cor. 15.41.44.
For the body which is sown in corruption, is raised in incorruption: it is
sown in dishonor, and is raised in glory: it is sown in weak^nesse, and is
raised in power: it is sown a natural body, and is raised a spiritual
body. Thus shall the body become more excellent in four principal respects.
It shall be immortal, and so freed from corruption: it shall be glorious, and
so delivered from dishonor: it shall not need the helps of food, Physic,
sleep, or clothing, and so be exempted from weakness: it shall be bright,
pure, and nimble, and so shall differ from the natural body. For as birds
being hatched, do fly lightly up into the skies; which being eggs, were a
heavy and slimie matter: so man (which by nature is a massy substance) being
hatched by the resur^ection, Zanch. de. ^per. Dei.
is made pure and nimble, and able to mount up into the heavens. The sin of
our first parents in Paradise, added shame to their nakedness: but in the
resurrection this shame shall be abolished; and in stead thereof the body
shall in every part become glorious and beautiful. If the Creeple which lay
at the temple gate (being restored to his lims by Peter and John) did come into
the temple walking, leaping, Act. 3.8.
and praising God: oh, how much greater cause of rejoicing and glorifying God,
shall the godly have, when all deform^ties and infirmities of the body shall
be taken away, Aug de Ciu. lib. 22. c. 19
and they made not only whole and sound, but even beautiful and glorious?

2 As the beauty of the body does of it self commend the felicity of the
resurrection: so shall the reuniting of the soul with the body, much enlarge
the ^xcellencie thereof. Two old friends that have been a long time, and with
great distance of place separated each from other, how glad and joyful are
they when they meet together, and embrace one another? how does the kind
father salute his son returning home? Luke ^5.20.
and shall not the soul and body (two old friends knit together in the
nearest league) be exceeding joyful and glad at their renewed union in the
resurrection? This cannot otherwise be, if either the form or end of this
reuniting be considered. The form is glorious and angelical: Luk 20.36.
for the godly are equal unto the Angels, and the sons of God, since they
are the children of the resurrection of life. The end is blessed and happy:
for they that have done good, Ioh. 5.29.
shall come forth to the resurrection of life. Thus in respect of the glory
and beauty bestowed on the body, and the felicity imparted both to soul and
body upon the union in the Resurrection, the godly may well be said to enjoy
a great measure of heavenly felicity. The consideration hereof may serve to
assuage and sweeten the bittternesse of those miseries which happen to the
children of God in this life. This was Jobs comfort in the midst of his
grievous trial: I am sure that my redeemer lives, Job. 19.25.
and that I shall rise again out of the dust at the last day. This was David's
joy in the days of his wonderful afflictions: Psalm 16.9.
My heart is glad, and my tongue rejoices, my flesh also shall rest in hope:
for thou will not leave my soul in the grave, neither will thou suffer thy
holy one to see corruption. Yea, the remembrance hereof has made many to
submit themselves willingly to martyrdom, and to stick to the truth to the
death: Heb. 11.35.
For diverse have been racked, and would not accept of deliverance, that they
might obtain a better resurrection. Though the redemption from the rack were
a thing much to be desired: yet the redemption from hell, and the resurrection
to eternal life, was much more to be sought for; without which condition they
would not be delivered. For what though the rack should rent their flesh, and
disioynt their limbs? they were assured that at the resurrection, all should
be conjoined and perfected. Here then we may learn, not to care for any
ignominy that can be done unto us, nor be much troubled for any infirmities
that can befall our bodies; knowing that the same must one day be eaten with
worms, and consumed with rottenness: but especially, being assured that the
same shall be reformed, and refined in the Resurrection.

SECT. 2. The second step into heaven at the day of judgment: namely, The
joyful appearing before Christ.
AT the birth of our blessed Savior, though it were base, the heavenly quire
chaunted it joyfully. Luke 2.
In his infancy, when he lay swadled in a cratch in stead of a cradle, Mat. 2.
and took his Inn in a stable in stead of a stately palace; yet the Wise men
came from the East to adore him. In his riper years albeit he came attended
only with poor fishermen, Mar. 10.
yet Rulers kneeled to him: and when he rode meekely to Jerusalem upon an Ass,
M^t. 21.
the people cut down boughs, and strewed their garments in the way to
honor him: at his passion the Centurion acknowledged him to be the Son of God:
Mat. 27.
and Joseph of Arimathea after his death, honored his corpse with a seemly
funeral. If our Savior in his birth, life, and death (being the days of his
weakness and infirmity) was thus honored by men and Angels: how glorious
shall he be in the day of power and majesty, when he shall appear in the
clouds, sit upon a glorious throne, and be attended by blessed Angels, and
decked with a Crown of glory? Now shall the godly meet him in the air with
great joy, and sing Hosanna in excelsis: Blessed is the king that comes in
the name of the Lord. The Saints happiness does now consist in three
principal points. First, in beholding the glory of Christ: secondly, in being
under his judgment: thirdly, in being themselves honored with the dignity of
Judges.

1 When Jacob heard of the honor of his son Joseph in Egypt, his heart
failed him through distrust; yet when he beheld the chariots which he had sent
for him, his spirit revived: but when he saw him, he said unto him; Now let me
dye, Genesis 46.30.
since I have seen thy face. So fares it with the children of God in this
life, being hindered through their infirmities from the comfortable
considerations of Christ's exaltation: yet when they shall see his chariots, the
blessed Angels, whom he shall send to gather the elect from the four winds,
and to carry them into the land of the living, their hearts shall be much
comforted: but when they shall look upon the face of Christ, and behold his
glory, how shall their mouths be filled with laughter, and their tongues with
joy? Luke 2.29.
If Simeon beholding Christ, a little infant in the temple, rejoiced saying:
Lord, now l^ttest thou thy servant depart in peace: what peace and joy shall
the godly have, when they behold Christ, a triumphant King at the day of
judgment; when they shall not take him up in their arms as Simeon did, but
shall be embraced by him in the arms of his mercy? Though Peter seeing
Christ in his troubles, fled from him, when he went to mount Caluarie: yet, he
said it was good staying with him, when he saw him glorified on mount Tabor.

It is written of Solomon: 1. King. 10.24.
That all the world sought to see him, and to hear his wisdom. If men were so
desirous to see Solomon, the shadow: how much more desirous shall they be to
behold Christ Jesus, the substance? in comparison of whose glory and wisdom,
Salomons was but like a drop of water to the mighty Ocean; yea in respect
thereof, nothing but folly and deformity. We observed before, that Job
rejoices upon the remembrance of his resurrection; and here we may consider
how he adds and iterateth for an augmentation of his joy: Ioh. 19.27.
That he shall see, and his eyes shall behold his Redeemer. And this yielded
Stephen much comfort, and caused him to lay down his life chearefully, when he
beheld Christ on the right hand of God. Act. 7.


Mat. 13.
Blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your ears, for they hear (says our
Savior) that which many kings and great men would have been glad to have seen
and heard, but could not. (...).
Abraham rejoiced to see the day of Christ: and saw it, and was glad. If
Abraham beholding it by the eye of faith only, rejoiced so exceedingly: what
would he have done, if he might have externally seen, and heard, and handled
of the word of life, 1. Ioh. 1.4.
as the Disciples did? These things we write unto you, that your joy may be
full. If the relation of these things yield the fullness of joy: how much more
think you, did the contemplation and fruition thereof? And yet is this also
inferior, and far too short of the beholding of Christ in glory at the day
of judgment. Once our Savior said: Ioh. 20.29.
Blessed are they that have not seen, and have believed: but now I may say,
Blessed are they that see, and do not believe: because that now, Faith which
united us to Christ in the kingdom of grace, does vanish: and only love, which
unites us to God in the kingdom of glory, does remain.

2 This is the Saints happiness, that they shall be judged by Christ. For now
shall that be fulfilled in the manifestation of his glory, which the Prophet
speaks of the revelation of his grace: Psa. 102.16
When the Lord shall build up Sion, and when his glory shall appear, he
shall turn unto the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their desires. It
is usual in our trials, for the Judge to bid the Jurors, Look upon the
prisoners: oh, with what a compassionate eye shall Christ look upon the elect,
which come before his judgment seat! Genesis 18.25.
When Abraham entreats the Lord for Sodom, he reasons on this manner: B^e
it far from thee for doing this, to slay the righteous with the wicked, and
that the righteous should be even as the wicked, be it far from thee: shall
not the Judge of all the world do right? And so may it be said concerning our
Saviors judgment, before whom all the world must appear: far be it from
him, that the righteous should fare as hardly as the wicked: shall not he (the
Judge of all the world) do judgment? 2. These. 1.7.
Now it is just with him to render peace and comfort to the godly, as well as
tribulation and anguish to the wicked, at his appearing with his holy Angels.

Saint Paul asks: Romans 8.33.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen, seeing God does justify
them? and may not I say: Who shall be able to condemn the righteous, seeing
Christ shall judge them? did Christ shed his precious blood to wash them, and
lay down his life to redeem them, and will he now suffer the^ to perish? No
man yet ever hated his own flesh, Ephesians. 5.
but nourishes and cherishes it: and behold, we are flesh of his flesh, and
bone of his bones. Let Satan then, and all the damned crew accuse, and charge
and challenge the godly: yet Christ being their judge, they shall never be
convicted, they shall never be condemned.

3 Besides the contemplation of Christ: and the fruition of his favor in
judgment, behold a further privilege of the children of God: for they
themselves shall at this day become Judges, Mat. 19.28
and sit upon thrones of majesty with the great Judge, and judge the twelve
tribes of Israel. Know you not, 1. Cor. 6.2.
that the Saints shall judge the world? The most may answer negatiuely to this
question: it is a point which few do know or consider. But let all the wicked
and ungracious upon the earth remember (though now they be never so mighty in
the world) that the godly whom they have scorned, wronged, and disgraced
(albeit they be poor and simple) shall one day be assistants unto Christ, and
sit with him upon the bench: when themselves shall stand trembling at the bar
of his tribunal, and shall be subject to their assent in their just and most
deserved condemnation.

Lo then, here is a singular cause of joy and comfort to all those that do
unfeignedly fear God. The remembrance of the dreadful day of judgment cannot
be altogether without terror to us; but when we consider that Christ shall be
our Judge, the consideration thereof may be sufficient to affect our hearts
with gladness. Heb. 4.15.
The Apostle notes it for a matter of much comfort, that we have such an high
Priest, as has tasted of our infirmities, that so he may be touched with
them. And surely it is our great happiness, that we shall have him our Judge,
who has been subject to severe judgment; that so he may have compassion upon
us at the dreadful day of account: therefore Christ bids us, when his coming
to judgment approaches, then to lift up our heads and cheer up our hearts,
Luke 21.28.
because our redemption draws near.

To conclude, seeing that the judgment of Christ shall be terrible to the
wicked, and comfortable to the godly, let us embrace that heavenly exhortation
of S. John: 1. Ioh. 2.28.
And now little children abide in him, that when he shall appear, we may be
hold, and not be ashamed before him at his coming. Which happiness we shall
assuredly obtain, if we lead a sanctified life: for such honor and
happiness have all his Saints.

SECT. 3. The third step into heaven at the day of judgment: namely, The
comfortable and honorable sentence of acquiting: Come you blessed of my Father.
THe Lord by his Evangelical Prophet did in times past, make this gracious
promise concerning his forlorn and desolate Church: In an acceptable time have
I heard thee, Esa. 49 8.
in the day of salvation have I helped thee. And Saint Paul making the time of
promulgation of the Gospel the period of his promise, adds by the way of
exemplification: 2. Cor. 6.2.
Behold now the accepted time: behold the day of salvation. If the Apostle
spoke thus of the time wherein salvation was published and offered: how much
more may it be said of the day wherein salvation is given and received? Behold
the day of salvation, even now behold it, when the Savior of the world is
become the Judge of the world, and shall pronounce the comfortable sentence of
mercy and absolution: Come ye blessed of my Father, Mat. 25.34
possess the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world. In
which sentence every word has his worth and weight, and deserves to be
ingraued in letters of gold. Come, (says Christ) there is a blessed vocation:
ye blessed of my Father, a gracious appellation: poss^sse the kingdom, a
happy exaltation: prepared for you from the beginning of the world, the
foundation of all consolation. It is worthy the observation, that all Christ's
words are words of consolation, his deeds are deeds of compassion, and his
works the works of propitiation. Thus is Christ always l^ke himself,
exceeding compassionate. In the time of his life, he cries: Come unto me all
you that labor, and are heavy laden, Mat. 11.28
and I will refresh you: Ioh. 7.37.
If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink. At his death upon the
cross, his arms are stretched out, and his blood gusheth forth; as if he
should say: Come that I may wash thee, come that I may embrace thee. At the day
of judgment, he calls: Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the kingdom
prepared for you. And this Come is most comfortable of all others, being such a
word as Solomon speaks of: Like apples of gold, Prou. 25.11
with pictures of silver, even as precious and pleasant as possibly may be.
Come? yea, but who? You blessed of my father. There are sundry kinds of
blessings mentioned in the word of God. Psalm. 5.
Thou Lord wilt bless the righteous, and with favor wilt crown him as with a
shield: there is the blessing of protection. The Lord blessed the house of O
bed Edom, 1. Chapter 13.14
and all that he had: there is the blessing of prosperity. Psa. 128.3.
Thy children shall be like the Olive plants round about thy table: there is
the blessing of procreatio^. Thou crownest the year with thy goodness, Psalm.
65.11
and thy steps drop fatness: there is the blessing of plenty. Even in
these and such like are the godl^ often blessed; but the Blessing of blessings
is that which is here mentioned: Come you blessed, Mat. 25.34
receive the kingdom. And this blessedness is both obtained by Christ, and
pronounced by him. Isaiah. 65.8
Destroy not my Vine (says the Lord:) and why? for a blessing is in it.
Receive the kingdom (says our Savior:) why? because you are the blessed of
my Father. Happy are the people that are in such a case: yea happy and thrice
happy are they who are the blessed of the Lord. Our Savior sometimes promises
the kingdom of God: Luke 12.
Fear not little flock, it is your Fathers will to give you a kingdom.
Sometimes he exhorts men to seek the kingdom of God: Mat. 6.
First seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof: and his
promise is comfortable, his exhortation profitable. But behold, here he takes
men by the hand, and bids them come and take possession of the kingdom: which
is much more comfortable, because fruition far exceeds expectation. That
was a gladsome speech of Christ to the penitent thief: Luk.. 23.43
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise: but this is far more gladsom,
when Christ shall say, Come and possess it; and so shall presently take both
soul and body into his eternal kingdom. If David said: Psa 1.122.
I was glad when they said unto me, We will go into the house of the Lord; how
joyful and glad shall the children of God be, when Christ shall say unto them:
Come you blessed of my Father into the house of God, even the kingdom of
heaven?

This was Gods bountiful goodness to Adam, that before he was created, the
Lord had provided abundantly for him; and furnished most exquisitly (as it were
for a great guest) the tables both of heaven, the earth, and the sea, with all
things necessary for his use and delight. But, behold here a greater mercy of
the Lord toward the elect: that altogether without their merit, not only
before they were borne, but even before the foundations of the world were laid,
the Lord has prepared a blessed and glorious kingdom for the^. And this is
the elects happiness, that at the last day when these foundations of heaven
and earth shall be shaken, Christ will call them most graciously to possess
the kingdom which cannot be shaken. Heb. 12.


We read in the first of Luke, Luke 1.44.
that Elizabeth wondered at the blessed Virgins visiting of her: and said, that
so soon as the voice of her salutation sounded in her ears, the babe in her
womb did leap for joy. Shall not our Saviors sentence be more admirable
then the Virgins salutation? and as soon as it sounds in the ears of the
elect, shall it not cause the hearts in their bellies even to leap for joy?

Seeing now, that the condition of the godly is so happy, that they shall be
partakers of this thrice happy sentence; let every ones care and carriage be
such, that he may enjoy the comfort thereof. For as they only are the sheep
of Christ, which hear his voice in the ministry of his holy word, Ioh. 10.27.
and follow him in the steps of righteousness: so shall they only be the
sheep on his right hand; they only shall hear him say unto them (Come you
blessed of my Father) and follow him into his kingdom. Mat. 25.33
To those that have fed him being hungry, clothed him being naked, and
visited him being sick, and in prison; to those that have sanctified his
Sabboths, honored his name, embraced his word, and dealt uprightly with their
neighbors; to them (I say) does this blessing belong. Let no man then be
overcome with David's infirmity, to say: I have cleansed my heart in vain, and
washed my hands in innocence. For the Apostles words shall ever be found
true: Your work shall not be in vain in the Lord. 1. Co. 15.58
And behold here a recompense: as thou may lift up pure hands with comfort
in this life, so shall Christ take thee by the hand at the day of judgment,
Mat. 25.
and say to thee: Enter into thy masters joy. When the kings daughter is all
glorious within, Psalm. 45.
and her clothing of wrought gold, she shall be brought unto the king with joy
and gladness, and shall enter into the kings Palace: and so shall it be done
to every sanctified Christian at the last day: he shall be brought by the
blessed Angels, to Christ the most blessed king with great joy: and having
heard his gracious sentence (Come ye blessed) shall enter into his glorious
palace, the kingdom of heaven, and possess the same for ever and ever.

CHAP. 3.
SECT. 1. The first step into heaven after the last judgment: namely,
Freedom from misery.
EXperience teaches, that the consideration of passed misery, does give a
sweet relish to future felicity: Olim haec meminisse iuuabit. Virg, Aened 1.
the remembrance of the fierce assaults, sharp conflicts, and deadly fights is
joyful to the soldier: the cogitation of escape from the devouring gulfes,
perilous rocks, and dangerous streights, yield delight unto the mariner: and
is not the sick man glad, when the extremity of his fit is past, though he be
not as yet restored to his perfect health? So fares it with the children of
God at the last day: the consideration of their deliverance from the dangerous
combats with sin and Satan, their escaping the perilous sailing in the seas
of this troublesome world, and freedom from the sick fits of their inward
corruptions, does add abundantly to their everlasting happiness in the world to
come: and the greater their troubles or dangers have been, the more is their
comfort. Now to the end that this happiness of the children of God may the
better appear; the map of escaped miseries is to be considered of us, as
that blessed Captain and Pilot, Christ Jesus, with his servants and soldiers,
have described the same in the sacred Scriptures.

1 The soul is delivered from disordered passions, as hope and fear, joy and
sorrow: which contending like so many contrary disordered elements and humors
in the body, and struggling like the hot exhalation in a cold cloud, do
distract the mind, and rent the soul like a cloud. When man was at unity with
God, there was a sweet harmony and friendship between all the faculties of
his soul; but when man rebelled against his God, as all the external creatures
opposed themselves against him to work his ruin: so did his internal
cogitations conspire against him to be revenged on him for his sin; and now
that man is reconciled and acquitted by the final sentence of the great Judge,
all his unruly and rebellious perturbations are brought into subjection.

2 The godly are delivered from sundry outward calamities, as sickness, pains,
labor, reproach, etc. to the which, the dearest servants of God are subject:
(yea, from the which the Son of God in the days of his infirmity was not
exempted:) for David had a Doeg to accuse him, a Shimei to revile him, 1. Sam.
22.9 2. Sam. 16.7 1. Sam. 24. etc.
and a Saul to persecute him. But now, Ioh. 16.
the sorrows of the godly shall be turned into joy, Reu. 21.4.
and Christ will wipe all tears from their eyes. Even as tender hearted
mothers do wipe from the eyes of their little babes, the tears which they
shed through the sense of some calamity: so will the Lord with the
handkerchiffe of compassion, dry up the streams of his childrens tears, that
issued from the springs of dolor.

3 They are delivered from the prouocations and allurements of the wicked
world; which is the fan and firebrand of iniquity. Reu. 19.20.
For the beast and that false Prophet, which wrought miracles, whereby he
deceived the world, shall (now) be cast into a lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, there to be tormented for ever: and all the ungodly shall be
destroyed with an everlasting perdition, 2. These. 1.9.
and so shall never have power any more to tempt or torment the children of
God. That was a gracious petition of our blessed Savior: I pray not, Ioh.
17.15.
that thou should take them out of the world, but that thou should keep
them from evil. But forasmuch as the most sanctified servants of God, whilst
they are in the world, are not free from all prouocations of evil: happy is
he that is freed from dwelling any longer in Mesech, and having his habitation
amongst the tents of ungodliness.

4 They are delivered from the power of the devil, who now goes about like a
roaring Lion, 1. Pet. 5.8.
seeking whom he may devour. Christ came to loose the works of the Devil: 1.
Ioh. 3.8.
and albeit he has not as yet utterly crushed his power; Rom 16.20.
yet is he the God of peace, that will shortly tread down Satan under our
feet, and cast him into the lake of fire and brimstone. Reu. 20.10.
Saint John having related a victory over Satan, Reu. 12.12.
bids: Rejoice therefore you heavens, and ye that dwell therein: and shall not
the servants of God have great cause to rejoice now, when not only Satan's
power is weakened, and his fierce darts quenched, but himself utterly subdued
and fettered in the infernal lake for ever?

5 They are delivered from the slavery of sin, which is grievous to all
those that desire to live godly. The sense h^reof made Saint Paul cry out:
Romans 7.24.
O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
Lo, here is the deliverance, that the holy Apostle did so earnestly desire. For
the cause ceassing, the effects must needs follow* man's corruptions being
conquered the worlds allurements abolished, and Satan's darts quenched; the
soul and body of man being reformed and refined: there shall neither remain
any cause of sin, or (if there did) any fit subject for sin to work upon.
And now is the time, when the spouse of Christ shall be washed and cleansed,
Ephesians. 5.26.27.
that she may be without spot or wrinkle.

6 They are delivered from death, as Saint John says: There shall be no more
death. Reu. 21.14.
And no marvel; for as light expels darkness: so eternal life puts
death to flight. Romans 6.23.
Death is the reward of sin: so that sin being abandoned, death must needs
be abolished. Can that which is immortal dye? to affirm that, were to utter a
senseless co^tradiction. Therefore when this corruptible 1. Co. 15.54.
has put on incorruption, and this mortal has put on immortality; then
shall be brought to pass that saying that is written: Death is swallowed up
into victory. If our first parents had kept themselves upright, they could not
have died, for their state was angelical: neither can the Saints of God dye
now, because they are like to the Angels. Luk.. 20.36


7 Lastly, they are delivered from hell, and from the second death; even the
eternal death both of body and soul, ten thousand times more doleful and
dreadful, then the temporal and corporal death. Now this hell and death
shall be cast into the lake of Reu. 20.14
fire. Whereby, albeit the prophetical Evangelist understand The infernal
spirits yet he says Hell it self, because they are both confined within the
same miserable and immutable bounds, neither of them both having power over the
children of God. This thing Abraham tells the rich man: Between you and us
there is a great gulf set, Luke 16 20.
so that they which would go from hence to you, cannot. Doubtless it can never
come into the hearts of the elect, that they should be willing to go into
hell: and it is as impossible they should be able, as that they should be
willing: if they could, they would not; and if they would, they cannot. Thus
whilst the Elect are delivered from the disordered passions of the soul, the
external calamities both of soul and body, the prouocations of the world,
the power of Satan, the slavery of sin, the fear of death, and the dread
of hell; they may very well be accounted blessed and happy: and the meditation
thereof should make every one desirous to be partakers of that happiness. If
a man had a true sense of these miseries, oh what would he give to be freed
from them? how much would the worldling give to redeem himself from temporal
death? But how many worlds would Dives give (if he had them) to be delivered
from the intolerable pains of eternal death? If thou desire to be freed from
all these miseries and calamities, then stick to the truth, Io. 8.32.36.
and it shall make thee free. He that will reign must conquer, and he that
would conquer, must fight valiantly. Labor then very earnestly to conquer and
subdue thine own corruptions, the worlds allurements, and the devils
temptations: and then assure thy self, though the miseries of the damned were
as many as the Locusts of Egypt, yet they shall have no power over thee, but
thou shall escape them all: Reu. 2.11.
For he that ouercometh, shall not be hurt of the second death.

SECT. 2. The second degree of happiness after the last judgment: namely. The
fruition of celestial felicity.
IF Noah having escaped the flood, Genesis 8.20.
builded an altar and offered burnt offerings thereupon; if the children of
Israel sung joyfully for their deliverance from Egypt; Exodus 15.1
if David were so glad for escaping the hands of his cruel enemies, Psa 34.3.
that he praises God, and exhorts others to join with him in magnifying the
Lord: how much more had they cause to rejoice; the one, when he had obtained a
quiet habitation in the restored earth; the other, that rich possession of the
pleasant land; and the third, the expected fruition of the princely Crown? So
may it be said of the children of God. If they have cause to offer the
sacrifices of praise upon the altar of a thankful soul, for escaping the
inundation of sin; to sing Alleluiah with cheerful voices, for their
deliverance from the Egypt of hell; and to magnif^^ the Lord, for freeing them
from the deadly assaults of al their infernal enemies: how much more are they
bound, when they are seated in the heavens, possessed of the celestial Canaan,
and have the crown of eternal glory set upon their heads, to magnify the
Lord for his mercy, and to say with the blessed Angels: Praise, Reu. 7.12.
and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and power, and might, be
unto our God for evermore? For behold, this is the highest pitch and perfection
of their happiness.

Whilst I am to take a view of the kingdom of heaven; oh, that I might with
the holy Apostle be taken up into the third heavens! 2. Cor. 12.2.
And whilst I shall endeavor to blaze forth the bliss of the celestial
Jerusalem; oh, that the light of that glory might shine into my sinful soul:
that my thoughts being winged with the contemplation of Angels, Reu. 21.15.
and the Angels golden reed being given me to measure that city withal, I
might be able to comprehend with the blessed Saints the excellency of that
glorious place, which far surmounteth every humane estimate! that so my
soul being ravished with the glory thereof, my pen might distill the Nectar
of comfort to inflame the hearts of those that shall join with me in this
sweet meditation! For how (alas) shall he that was ever in darkness, be able
to describe this light? how can he that is of the earth, measure the heavens?
or he that has always lived in this vale of misery, know what belongs to the
mountain of true felicity? No more surely then he which is a slave by birth,
and base by his continual habitation, is able ingeniously to describe the
thrones, the state, and majesty of Princes. How many works of God even in
this life, do surmount our reach? Ioh 3.
If Nicodemus understand not the manner of our regeneration, how shall he be
able to conceive the excellency of glorification?

The dearest servants of God* who had Eagles eyes* and Angels meditations,
Esaias. S Paul. 1 Cor 2.20.
can tell us: that neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, neither have
those joys come into man's heart, which God has prepared for those that love
him. Though our eyes have seen many glorious objects, and our ears have heard
report of greater matters: yet our conceit has far exceeded them both. But
behold, the joys that God has prepared for his elect, do exceedingly surpass
the apprehensio^ of all our senses, both external and internal: Aug. de ciu.
Dei lib. 22.
they may be obtained, they cannot be valued. Cott. in Cicer. de not. Deor.
lib. 1.
He in Tully said truly: That it is an easier matter, to know what God is not,
then to tell what he is: and so may I s^y in this case, That it is much easier
to tell what is not in heaven, then what is there. And therefore Saint
Augustine in relating the bliss thereof takes stand, and demands this of
himself after a large discourse: What shall I say? surely I cannot tell: Sed
Deus habet quod exhib^at. Aug. super. ^oh. hom. 3.
but I know that God has such joys to bestow. Yet forasmuch as the Lords
penmen have according to our capacities, described in sundry places, diverse
particulars of this heavenly blessedness; let us briefly, and according to the
rules of sobriety, collect and consider the sam^ for our instruction and
comfort. And in the consideration thereof, we will observe three principal
points: first, the wonderful beauty of that habitation: secondly* the
glorious view and vision of Almighty God: and thirdly the blessed condition of
the Saints in glory.

1 If any one look for a curious discourse of the matter, or form of the
heavens, I intend to fail his expectation. My desire in these meditations, is
rather to stir up the affections of the godly, then to converse with the
conceits of any curiously affected. August de Genes. ad Li er. lib. 2. cap. 9.
I like his judgment, who holds the disputes about the form and figure of the
heavens, to be unprofitable: and his censure, Damasc. de Orthodox. fid. lib.
2. c. 6 (...), etc.
who says; That to search out the substance of them is unlawful: whereunto,
if I may add my own opinion, I hold it impossible. Farewell the^ to the
schoolemens frivolous and fruitless discourses about the form* the substance,
and quantity of the heavens.

Very glorious things are spoken of thee, Psalm. 87.3.
thou city of God. If the Prophet might say so of the terrestrial Jerusalem:
how much more may it justly be said of the celestial city, which is above
and the mother of us all? And Saint John indeed has made a very excellent
description of that glorious kingdom. Reu. 21. calling it first in general:
Reu. 21.11.
The holy Jerusalem, which had the glo^ie of God shining in it: and her shining
was like a stone most precious, as a Jasper stone, and clear as Crystal.
Then in particular he sets down the form of it, which was very perfect, being
quadrangular: then the quantity, it was large and spacious, containing many
cubits: then the matter and ornaments of it, which was pure gold, and all
manner of precious stones: then the adjuncts belonging to it, the brightness of
glory shining therein. By which speeches borrowed from things which are most
precious in men's estimation Saint John would teach us to conceive of those
excellencies, Ioh. 14.1.
which no man indeed is able to value. Our Savior calls heaven, his Fathers
house: and therefore it must needs be exceeding beautiful and glorious. Dan.
4.
Nebuchadnetsar spoke ambitiously of his Palace: Is not this great Babel which
I have built for the house of the kingdom, by the might of my power, and for
the honor of my majesty? But of the Lords house it may be justly said: Is not
that great Bethel, which the Lord himself has built for the house of his
kingdom, the habitations of his Saints, and for the honor and ornament of his
Majesty? If the heavens which are subject to vanity, Psalm. 19.1.
do declare the glory of God: what shall the pure and Crystal heavens do,
when they are changed and refined? H^b. 1.
If the builders of the tabernacle were renowned, as those that had perfected
an excellent work: Psalm. 74.5.
how much more excellent shall that tabernacle be, whose maker and builder is
Heb. 11.10.
God? Psalm. 84.1.
Oh how amiable are thy dwelling places, o Lord of hosts! Does the beauty of
the temple exceed David's conceit, and leave him to the task of admiration?
Oh how admirable, amiable, and glorious do we think the kingdom of heaven
shall be, Reu. 21.22.
where the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple! where the king is
Verity: the laws Charity: the honor, Equity: the peace, Felicity: the
life* Eternity: as Saint Augustine says!

Plutar. in. vita Them.
2 Themistocles having a piece of ground to sell, appointed the Crier to
proclaim in the sale thereof, that whosoever would buy it, should have a good
neighbor: so, although the kindome of heaven be excellent of it self; yet
Almighty God sending forth his Criers and Ambassadors to offer the same to
the world, Mat. 3. 2. Cor. 5.
has caused them to add this in their proclamation: That whosoever obtains
it, shall have many good neighbors, even the holy Saints and blessed Angels;
and that which is above all, he shall behold God Almighty, and Christ Jesus
the immaculate Lamb of God, shining there in most resplendent glory: Reave.
22.4.
They shall see his face, and his name shall be in their foreheads. This was
one of the last requests made by Christ in the behalf of his Church: Father I
will that those which thou have given me, Ioh. 17.24.
be with me, even wh^re I am; that they may beh^ld my glory, which thou have
given me: a gracious petition for a blessed habitation and a glorious vision.
How earnestly did Moses importune the Lord, Exo. 33.18
saying: I beseech thee show me thy glory: and it was a singular favor, that
the Lord vouchsafed to show him a glimpse of his glory, which he calls his
back parts, Verse. 23.
because a man is almost past fight, when his back is turned. But behold,
Christ has prayed for, and the Lord has promised a more glorious view of him
in the life to come: 1. Ioh. 3.2.
For we know, that when he shall be made manifest, we shall see him as he is.
A man that looks into the sea, cannot see to the bottom; and he that looks
up to the heavens, can behold no further then the Horizo^: and so indeed is
this vision of Gods Saints bounded in the limits of finitenesse. Yet is there
as great difference between their present and future contemplation of glory,
1. Cor. 13.
as between looking a man in the face, and beholding him in a glass: for then
they shall as fully behold the glory of God, as the frail condition of
mankind may possibly permit. When the Queen of Sheba had seen all the honor
and magnificence of Solomon, she said with admiration: Happy are thy men, 1.
Kin. 10.8
happy are these thy servants that stand ever before thee, and hear thy
wisdom. If those were so happy, who stood before Solomon to behold and hear
his wisdom: oh how happy shall they be, who shall stand before Almighty
God and our blessed Savior, to behold and see their glory! Psalm. 16.11
For in their presence is the fullness of joy, and at their right hand are
pleasures for evermore. And this is the cause, Psa. 42 1.2.
that as the Heart brayeth for the rivers of waters: so do the souls of the
godly pant after the Lord, longing to appear before his presence. The
ponderous stone inclines downward, and lighter substances are carried upward:
thus every thing seeks his center. Now the Lord is the Souls Center: and like
Noah's dove, it finds no rest till it return to him that gave it, Aug. Confess
lib. 1. cap. 1
according to Augustines saying: O Lord, thou have made us for thy self, and
our heart is unquiet, till it rest in thy self. But when the soul of man has
once attained this mercy, then can the child of God say: Psalm. 17.15.
I will behold thy face in righteousness, and (...) satisfied with it: because
it yields him the fullness of comfort and contentation.

3 When Christ was transfigured upon the mount, we read that Peter (albeit
himself was not changed) Luke 9.33.
said unto our Savior: Jesus master, it is good to be here. If Peter spoke
thus, only upon the view of Christ's transfiguration: how much more shall the
children of God rejoice at the last day in heaven, when they enjoy, not only
the places beauty, and the beholding of Christ his glory: but shall
themselves also be glorified, Mat. 13.43
and shine as the Sun in the kingdom of their Father? Shall they not be glad
to be there, and wish themselves everlasting tabernacles in that glorious mount
Sion? And this shall assuredly be the condition of the godly at that day. For
as the Lords glory reflected upon Moses, Exo. 34.30.
made his face to shine when he was upon the mount: so shall the Saints of God
become glorious in beholding the glory of God and of Christ, 1. Ioh. 3.2.
and so shall be like unto him. For as he shall change our vile bodies, Phil.
3.21.
that they may be like to his glorious body: so shall he refine and beautify
the faculties of our souls, 1. Co 12.10
that the perfection of grace may concur with the fruition of glory. And
even as a little water mixed with much wine, loses his own nature, and takes
the taste and color of the wine; as iron put into the fire becomes white and
like to the fire, his old form being changed: and as the air perfused with
the light of the Sun, is so transformed into the brightness thereof, that it
seems not so much to be lightened as to be light it self: so shall every
humane defect and deformity be now dissolved and abolished in the Saints of
God, and they shall be transformed into the glorious image of Almighty God.

What tongue is able to express, or heart conceive the happiness of Gods
children, being thus in glory? They enjoy a kingdom, Mat. 25.
yea and that a glorious kingdom, for it is the house of God, the kingdom of
heaven: Tit. 1.2.
they obtain a life, and that a blessed life, for it can never see death: they
have the hidden Manna, Reu. 2.17.
the white stone, and the new name written in it. They are clothed in the long
white robes of honor and dignity, Reu. 7.9.
and adorned with the palms of triumph and victory. They sit upon the
glorious thrones of majesty, Reu. 3.21.
and have set upon their heads the crowns of eternal glory. 2. Tim. 4.8.
When Naomi returned from her peregrination, she said to her old acquaintance:
Ruth. 1.20.
Call me not Naomi, but call me Marah; for the Almighty has given me much
bitterness: but contrarily may the child of God say, when he returns from the
pilgrimage of this world: Call me not Marah, but call me Naomi; for the
Almighty has given me much beauty and blessedness. The honor that Pharo
did to Joseph was very great, but yet it was with this exception: Genesis 41.40
In the kings throne will I be above thee. Pharo will sit alone upon his
throne: but behold the honor that Christ will do to his servants, when he will
also vouchsafe them this dignity, that they shall sit with him upon his
throne: for they are heirs, Romans 8.
yea coheires annexed with Christ, who has promised thus: Reu. 3.21.
To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I
overcame, and do sit with my Father in his throne.

But here it may peradventure be demanded, whether there be an equality or
difference of the degrees of bliss and glory to all the elect in the kingdom
of heaven? For answer whereunto we must consider, that there is a double
equality, to wit, Proportion^ quantitatis.
of proportion, and quantity: which arises, not from the object, Almighty
God, who is always the same; but from man, the subject, who is not in every
particular alike capable of glory. For as the same meat is more delectable to
the taste of some then of others; the same object is better seen by some then
by others; the same matter better understood of some then of others: so the
same glory shines more brightly into the souls of some, then of others. Two
vessels of a diverse content, may be filled with the same wine, yet by reason
of their bigness, differ in quantity of that they contain; two metals of a
diverse kind may be cast into the same fire, yet receive a different heat
according to their different nature; two men of sundry statures may be fitted
with the same cloth of gold, each of them having that which is sufficient in
proportion, though in quantity they differ: so the souls of the godly may be
all filled with the same wine of gladness, be made fervent with the same heat
of comfort, and clothed with the same robes of glory; yet differ much in
respect of their capacity. And according to the measure of grace, shall be the
measure of glory: 2. Cor. 9.6.
for they that sow sparingly, shall reap sparingly: but they that sow
liberally, shall reap liberally: so that whilst some shine like the
brightness of the firmament, Dan. 12.3.
other some shall shine as the stars for ever and ever. Yet happy and thrice
happy shall that man be, who shall be partaker even of the least degree of
heavenly glory: for it infinitely surmounteth all the glory and dignity of
the world.

This being the blessed condition of the elect in heaven, the meditation
thereof should affect us accordingly. First, it may make us despise the vain
and base felicity of this transitory life, and to count all doung and dross
in respect of those admirable joys, that are prepared for the godly in the
kingdom of heaven. It was a hard thing for Abraham to leave his own country,
and to travel as a pilgrim he knew not whither; yet the expectation of the
heavenly city won his affection from his native habitation: Heb. 11.
so should the sweet consideration of heavenly happiness, weine our hearts from
the love of earthly vanities. Cic. Tuscu. quaest. lib. 1. Lactant. instit. lib.
3. Cap. 18.
It is written of one Cleo^brotus, that reading Platoes book of the
Immortality of the Soul, he was so ravished with the conceit thereof, that
he cast himself headlong into the sea. It was his sinful error to deprive
himself of life: but his desire of immortality may make many Christians
ashamed, whom neither the expectation of immortality, glory, or felicity,
can estrange from the love of this vain world. Psalm. ^4.11
One day in the Lords house is better then a thousand: yea sur^ly one hour in
the kingdom of heaven, is better then a thousand years in the greatest bliss
this vain and wretched world can yield. Let us learn therefore to tune our
affections to David's dittie, that we may be able to say of the celestial
tabernacle, as he speaks of the terrestrial: Ibid.
I had rather be a door keeper in the house of the Lord, then to dwell in the
tents of the ungodly.

2 It may yield comfort to all those that have lived godly, because they shall
enjoy the comfort of a glorious vision, a blessed habitation, and the crown of
eternal glory: and so be partakers of a threefold blessedness, mentioned by
our Savior and his servants. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, Psalm.
84.4.
they shall ever be praising of thee: there is the blessed habitation. Mat. 5.8.
Blessed are they that are pure in heart, for they shall see God, there is the
glorious vision. Reave. 19.9.
Blessed are they that are bidden to the Lambs supper: there is the happy
fruition. Yea, the godly being thus happy in heaven, do enjoy joy, without
sadness; health, without sickness: light, without darkness: life, without
death: ease, without labor; wealth, without want: and in a word, an Ocean of
all felicity, without the least drop of misery.

3 Lastly, this should caus^ every one to embrace ou^ Saviors exhortation:
Mat. 6.
First seek the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof. Every one
would willingly enjoy the kingdom: but it will not be, except they also do
embrace the righteousness thereof. Number. 23.
Bala^m may cry: Oh, that I might dye the death of the righteou^: but all in
vain, except he endeavor to live the life of the righteous. David's question
should be the demand of every Christian; Psalm. 15.1.
Lord, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle? who shall rest upon thy holy hill?
And behold, there is an answer, as it were an echo from heaven: Those that
walk uprightly, and work righteousness, and speak the truth in their heart.
Heaven is a glorious place, and it is reserved for gracious men: the joys
thereof are the crown of righteousness, which shall not be set upon the head
of those, that have made themselves the base vassalles and slaves to sin and
Satan. Shall the profane, carnal, and licentious that do sink and soake in
their sins, have any place there? no, no, 1. Co. 15.50
flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven, Our Savior said well:
Mat. 15.
It is not meet to give the childrens bread to dogs: neither shall the damned
spirits have any portion in the heavenly Manna, Reu. 2.17.
the food of holy men and Angels. The earthly Paradise was no place for Adam
when he had defiled himself with sin: Genesis 3.23
and the heavenly Paradise will give entrance and entertainment to no unclean
thing. Reu. 21.27.
He that will be carried into Abraham's bosom, must walk in the paths of
Abraham's faith and obedience* Do thou hope to attain to this kingdom? then
remember, that every one which has this hope, 1. Ioh. 3.3.
purges himself. And to a man that is of such a sanctified life, I may say
with our Savior: Re^. 22.14.
Bl^ssed are they that do his comm^undements, that their right may be in the
tree of life.

SECT. 3. The third and last degree of happiness after the last judgment,
namely, The eternity of celestial glory.
THe Prophet David has one petition to make to God above all other whatsoever:
Psalm. 27.4.
One thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will require: That I may dwell
always in the house of the Lord, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to
visit his temple. And if the blessed estate in heaven before mentioned, be duly
considered, we must needs acknowledge, that the same should be the principal
prayer of every Christian: even, To dwell always in the Lords house, and to
behold his beauty without ceassing When the disciples heard our Savior speak
of the heavenly nature of the bread of life, they presently fell to this
prayer: Lord, Ioh. 6.34.
evermore give us this bread: so when a man hears and reads of these
unspeakable joys of heaven, his prayer should be: Lord, evermore give me
these joys. And if this be thy desire (my Christian brother,) I may say to
thee as the Lord said to Lot: Genesis 19.21.
Thy request is also received concerning this. For he that is once partaker of
these joys shall never lose them: he that is possessed of this inheritance,
shall never be dispossessed of it: and he that once dwells in the Lords house,
shall dwell therein for ever.

Now for the enlargement of our comfort, and the increase of our industry, it
will be very expedient to meditate upon this eternity of joy. Greg. mor. li.
26. ca. 27.
When man reasons of eternity, a blind man speaks of light: for how can
those meditations or cogitations, that are bounded within their limits of
finitenesse, comprehend that which is infinite and eternal? Yet, Cic. de leg.
lib. 1.
as the Heathen know that there is a God, though they know not what a one he
is: so may our hearts be able to conceive, that the joys of heaven are
infinite and eternal, though they be not able to comprehend the nature of this
infiniteness and eternity. And this we know, that the word of God which
propounds and promises life, glory, joy, a crown, salvation, an
inheritance, and an habitation to the godly; Mat. 19.29 2. Cor. 4.17. Ioh. 16
22. 1. Pet. 5.4.
tells us that this life is everlasting, this glory is eternal, this joy is
permanent, the crown never fades, the salvation is perdurable, the
inheritance immortal, Esa. 45.17. 1 Pet. 1.4. Luk.. 16.9.
the habitation perpetual. Behold, what a cloud of witnesses here are to
strengthen the perpetuity of this heavenly inheritance.

H^b. 12.28. For, him I hold to be the undoubted author of that Epistle. Vide,
Bez^, super inscr. Piscat. prolegom. Iun. parallel. l. 3.
Saint Paul says: We receive a kingdom which cannot be shaken. There was
never any kingdom or monarchy so surely established upon the earth, but it
has been shaken and shiuered in pieces also: but of this kingdom there shall
never be an end. Jerusalem was a glorious city; yet was it so battered, that
there was not left a stone upon a stone according to our Saviors threatening:
Mat. 24.
but the celestial Jerusalem shall never be destroyed, but be a blessed
habitation for the Saints of God, world without end. Therefore as Christ says,
that the righteous shall shine in the kingdom of their Father: Dan. 12.3.
so Daniel says, that they shall shine for ever and ever. The Stars of the
firmament shall fall from heaven at the day of judgment: but the godly shall
shine like bright stars in the glorious heavens, and never lose the light or
brightness of their glory. As the Moon and Stars do receive their light
from the Sun: so do we, both our light of grace and glory from Christ the
Sun of righteousness. And this is our happiness, that albeit in this life
we do often labor in obscurity; yet in the life to come we shall never be
eclipsed, because all earthly interpositions shall then be utterly abolished.
Genesis 3.
When Adam had made himself miserable by eating of the tree of Knowledge of
good and evil, he might not eat of the tree of life, lest he should live for
ever: but now the children of God being delivered from this misery, Reu. 22.2.
shall eat of that tree of life which has twelve kinds of fruits, and
bears fruit every month; and so shall live for ever, to enjoy those joys
that are infinite and permanent: and they shall drink of the Crystal water
that springs in Paradise, being an Ocean without brimme or bottom, which can
never be dried, but flows with her silver streams to everlasting life. Ioh. 4
Therefore, as Saint Paul says, that the joys of heaven are so great, that
no tongue is able to express or utter them: so may I say, they are so
permanent, that no time can consume or end them.

This Meditation has three principal uses.

1 It may cause us to bear patiently, and take thankefully the crosses and
calamities of this life; considering that they being short and momentanie, 2.
Cor. 4.17.
do procure unto us an everlasting weight of glory. For who would not endure
much misery, to enjoy eternal felicity? If we be killed all the day long:
Psa 44.22.
yea if we were tortured all our life long, what were that to the endless joy
and bliss of the kingdom of heaven? God forbid therefore, that tribulation,
or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword, or
any, or all the distresses and calamities in the world, should cause us to
neglect our everlasting inheritance. Saint Paul having showed, that we shall be
taken up by Christ at his second coming, 1. These. 4.17 18.
and be with him for ever, concludes thereupon: Comfort your selves with these
words. A comfort indeed, fit to counterpoise a greater misery then death can
yield. But if the Apostles exhortation persuade not, yet should Christ's example
prevail with us: Heb. 12.2.
Who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, despised the
sham: and is set at the right hand of the throne of God. If then either
sickness, or poverty, persecution, or any such affliction befall thee, do
but think (with Christ Jesus) upon the eternal glory that is prepared in the
kingdom of heaven: and the meditation thereof will be as sugar to sweeten thy
calamities.

2 Seeing the joys of heaven are eternal; it is our part with pains and
perseverance to labor for them. Balaam was ravished with the joys of heaven,
Number. 23.
yet did he not enjoy them. The Ruler that kneeled to our Savior, Mar. 10.17
and said: Good master what shall I do to possess eternal life? had a good
conceit of this blessedness: but this was his fault, that he would not do what
he was commanded, to obtain it. And is not that the fault and folly of most
people, who, though they seem to be much affected with the joys of heaven,
will not yet take pains to attain unto them? In them is our Saviors saying
verified: Luke 13.24.
Many shall seek to enter into heaven, but shall not be able. And why?
Doubtless, because they take not pains with perseverance in well doing. And
therefore he bids, Strive to enter into it: (...).
using a Metaphor drawn from Champions, who bend all their forces, and employ
their best endeavors, to attain the price, and the trophies of triumph. When
the spies, which Joshua sent to view the land of Canaan returned, they said:
Number. 13.28
Surely the land flows with milk and honey, and here is of the fruit of it:
nevertheless the people be strong that dwell in the land, and the cities are
walled and exceeding great: and moreover, we saw the sons of Anak there. Nu.
14.1.2.
Thus were the children of Israel discouraged. And so fares it with many in
the consideration of the kingdom of heaven. They will confess, that it is a
place which flows with the milk and honey of unspeakable joy, and yields
the excellent fruit of eternal glory: yet because they must contend with
many dangers and difficulties: they must subdue their corrupt affections, Romans
7.5.23
which are like strong men: and conquer the spiritual wickednesses which are
in the high places, Ephesians. 6.12.
who resemble the Anakims; they are dismayed, and so do lose the blessed land,
even the land of the living. To such I may say with the children of Dan: Iud.
18.9.10
Seeing the land is good, and a place that lacks nothing in the world; let us
not sit still, and be slothful to go, and enter to possess the land: yea,
seeing the kingdom of heaven is a blessed place, and lacks no good thing
that the tongue can express, or heart imagine; let us not be careless and
negligent in seeking to poss^sse it: which if we be, our desire thereunto shall
be fruitless; for excellent things are difficult. No pains seem too great
for the attaining of temporal pleasures and dignities, which are very short
and temporary; yea, diverse of the Philosophers have exposed themselves, not
only to dangers, but even to death it self, for the attaining of a little
vain and transitory glory: how much more then should we b^ willing to spend
our pains, wit, wealth, strength, yea, and life it self, for the obtaining of
those pleasures, and that glory, which are without measure, and shall never
have an end?

3 To conclude: are the joys of heaven so exquisite? is the felicity
permanent, and the glory eternal? Where then is that audacious man living,
that dares say he has merited them, Ambros in Sermon. 16 in Psalm. 119.
yea, or the least of them? Who is able to match such excellent benefits of
salvation with correspondent service? If any thing were meritorious, then were
persecutions and afflictions. But the Apostle judges, Romans 8.18.
that the afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of the glory that
shall be revealed unto us: and elsewhere he gives this reason of his
judgment: 2. Cor. 4.17.
Our afflictions are light, the glory is weighty: our afflictions are but for
a moment, the glory is eternal. In so great a disproportion of value and
estimation, though there be a most certain reward of mercy, yet where is the
recompense that should rise upon merit? Let us learn therefore to confess
with Jacob: I am unworthy, Lord, Genesis 32.10.
the least of all thy mercies; much more of this eternal weight of glory. Let
us cast down our crowns of glory at the feet of Christ, with the Elders in
the Revelation, Reu. 4.10.
and say with the blessed Apostle: Unto the God of all grace, 1. Pet. 5.10 11.
who has called us unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, be glory and
dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

