The three Orations of Demosthenes chief Orator among the Grecians, in favor
of the Olynthians, a people in Thracia, now called Romania: with those his
four Orations titled expressly and by name against king Philip of Macedonie:
most needful to be read in these dangerous days, of all them that love
their Countries liberty, and desire to take warning for their better avail,
by example of others. Englished out of the Greek By Thomas Wylson Doctor of
the civil laws.

After these Orations ended, Demosthenes life is set forth, and gathered out
of Plutarch, Lucian, Suidas, and others, with a large table, declaring all the
principal matters contained in every part of this book.

Seen and allowed according to the Queens Majesty's Injunctions.

Imprinted at London by Henry Denham.

GVALTERI HADDONI, LEGVM DOCTORIS, Regiae Maiestati a libellis supplicibus,
Tetrastichon.
EN Demostheneum fulmen sermon Britanno Mittitur, Anglorum Graecus in ora
venit. Thomas VVilsonus, pretiosi muneris author Eximia, Graecam, qui ferit,
art, tubam.
AEgidij Laurentij, Oxoniensis, Regiae Maiestati in lingua Graeca professoris
publici, Carmen in versionem Olynthiacarum, and Philipppicarum Orationum
Demosthenis, per Thomam Wilsonum, Legum Doctorem.
Art laboratas veneres Demosthenis (Angle)
Si cupias oculis ipse videre tuis:
Si vim dicendi, rationum inuictaque tela,
Si viuam effigiem mentis, and ingenij:
Perlege, quas doctus docte, atque fideliter, Anglis
Anglus VVilsonus vertit, Olynthiacas:
Atque quibus titulum dat Rex, hostisque Philippus,
Infestus Graecis, fraud, dolisque potens.
Aptius expressit nemo (me Iudice) Athenis
Orantem, melius postea nemo dabit.
En tibi praeclarum specimen, quod and Attica verba
Dexteritate refert lingua Britanna pari.
Non sic, quantumuis neruos contenderit omnes
Exprimere ad viuum lingua Latina potest.
In Demosthenis Olynthiacas, and Philippicas orationes a doctissimo Thoma
VVilsono, Legum Doctore, de Graeco in Anglicum sermonem conuersas: Thomae
Bingi, Oratoris Academiae Cantabrigiensis carmen.
QVae Demosthenicis olim contorta lacertis
Turbarunt coeptus, tela, Philippe, tuos:
Cecropijs tantum conseruabantur Athenis,
Dum tantum Actaea Pallas in arce stetit.
Nunc, postquam externas adijt Tritonia gentes:
Angli tela eadem te duce, Vilso, vibrant.
Scilicet hoc fuerat, quod multis ante parabas
Annis, rhetorices quando elementa dabas*
Illis vt freti nostrates, doctius ipsum
Versarent tandem Rhetora grandiloquum.
Carmen Ioannis Cooci, scholae Paulinae moderatoris, in versionem
Olynthiacarum, and Philippicarum Demosthenis, domini Thomae Wilsoni, legum
doctoris.
COmmuni cur peste luit primum acris Olynthus?
Vt sensim socias perdat par exitus vrbeis?
Heu, vigilasse fuit quanto consultius omnes,
Signaque in hanc studijs, pariter conuersa, tulisse?
Non est consilium, paries cum proximus ardet,
Delendi studium soli liquisse colenti,
Contiguos ne forte sequax iam flamma penateis
Implicet, and tacitis inuoluat cuncta ruinis.
Fida pares operas poni cum foedera poscant*
Cur affere tuis dubitas tutamen amicis?
Grassans nostra lues si depopuletur, oportet
Vi, socios, iuncta, communem pellere pestem,
Praesertim si animos societ sententia concors.
Toti, quem dederat, rhetor iam Graius orbi,
Atticus haec Graece vulgat praecepta libellus.
Atticus hunc nostro nostras sermon poliuit,
Atticus and studio, and patriae dulcedine linguae,
Quo si forte libro gens Anglica rite fruatur,
Et praecepta colat, degendae commoda vitae:
Hunc operi vigilem iuuat impendisse laborem,
Quem patriae summo pertractus iniuit amore.
I. M. Londinensis in eandem versionem carmen.
ELoquio praestans reliquis, fert Graecia palmam.
Inter and eximias Graecas, dicuntur Athenae
Praecipuae, ciuis Demosthenis optima fama est.
Is fuit vrbis honor, fuit orbis gloria summa.
Anglia pars orbis, Demosthenis ora videre
Nunc habet in votis, Anglas vt reddere voces
Audiat hunc Graecum, decus immortale suorum.
Attulit hunc nostras Thomas VVilsonus ad aures,
Et docuit, lingua nostra (res maxima dictu)
Tam been dicentem: quam pure Graeca sonabat
Tum, cum dicendi princeps regnaret Athenis,
Fulmine verborum, quatiens diademata regum.
INTERPRES LECTORI
QVid miraris opus? fato Deus imperat Orbi,
Nil ego solus ago, sed Deus vrget opus.
Aspicere in patriam monuit, labesque videre
Iussit, and Authorum dicta verenda sequi.
Inter and egregios, Demosthenis optima laus est,
Plurima, qui, patriae commemoranda, notat.
Nunc quoque tempus adest, patriae succurrere dulci:
Ne misere in praeceps Anglia tota ruat.
Discere sic monitus, Graeca exemplaria voluo,
Et moestae patriae, pharmaca Graeca paro.
Nitor and, Oceanum qui nunquam viderat hospes,
Britanni vt ciuis iam queat esse loco.
Incola vix talis, similis vix nascitur vllus.
Aduena sit gratus, qui modo talis erit.
Versio si rudis est, nos argue, nos reprehende.
Excolere hunc talem vix potis vnus erat.
Vix dudum edidicit, linguae modo soluit habenas:
Si rudis est hodie, tempore purus erit.
Atticus ex omni Graecorum gente, supremus,
Vrbis Athenarum, Gratia sola fuit.
Quisquis es, hospitio talem dignare Britanno:
Si pius in patriam, vel bonus esse cupis.
To the right Honorable Sir William Cecill Knight, principal Secretary to the
Queens Majesty, and of her privy counsel, Master of the Court of Wards
and Liueries, and Chauncelor of the University of Cambridge: Thomas Wilson
Doctor of the Civil law wishes long and perfect health with increase of Gods
most holy spirit.
GReat is the force of Virtue (Right Honorable Counselor) to win love and
good will universally, in whose mind soever it is perfitelye known, to have
once got a dwelling. I speak it for this end, that being solitary of late
time from my other studies, and musinge on this world, in the midst of my
books: I did then (as I have oftentimes else done) deepelye think of Sir John
Check Knight, that rare learned man, and singular ornament of this land. And
as the remembrance of him was dear unto me, for his manifold great gifts and
wonderful virtues: so did I think of his most gentle nature and godly
disposed mind, to help all those with his knowledge and understanding, that
any way made means unto him, and sought his favor. And to say for my self
amongst others, I found him such a friend to me, for communicating the skill
and gifts of his mind, as I cannot but during my life speak reuerentlye of
so worthy a man, and honor in my heart the heavenly remembrance of him. And
thinking of my being with him in Italy in that famous University of Padua: I
did call to mind his care that he had over all the English men there, to go to
their books: and how gladly he did read to me and others certain Orations of
Demosthenes in Greek, the interpretation whereof, I and they had then from his
mouth. And so remembering the rather this world by the very argument of those
actions: I did then seek out amongst my other writings for the translation of
them, and happily finding some, although not all: I was carried streightways (I
trust by Gods good motion) to make certain of them to be acquainted so nigh as
I could with our English tongue, as well for the aptness of the matter, and
needful knowledge now at this time to be had: as also for the right notable,
and most excellent handling of the same. And here must I say, confessing mine
own weakness and imperfection, that I never found in my life any thing so
hard for me to do. Yea, the more that I look upon this Orator to bring his
sentences and words known to our common speech and language: the more do I
find him hard and unable to be translated, according to the excellency of
his tongue. And many times I have been ashamed of my self, when I compared
his Greek and my English together. And no marueyle neither. For the Latin
translatours being otherwise most excellent men, have not always satisfied
themselves, much less answered to their charge and enterprise in the opinion
of others that compared their doings and the Greek together. Hyeronymus
Wolfius has translated all Demosthenes (the like thing never yet done by any
other) and herein he is very careful to keep himself to the Greek, and does
(as it should seem) better understand Demosthenes than any other, and yet
sometimes, either he is not well understood, or else he fails of Demosthenes
meaning. And being thus very curious in his translation to follow his Author
as nigh as may be: his Latin is now and than somewhat harsh, and more hard
than is the Greek it self. Christopherus Hegendorphius a notable learned man
undoubtedly, makes himself ouerbolde with Demosthenes, enlarging his speech
after the manner of a Paraphrasis, where as Demosthenes praise was chiefly, his
short knitting up of his matters together. Philip Melanchthon, misliketh
himself, and yet he has done very well, but compared to the Greek he is to
seek. Ioachimus Camerarius (for that which he has taken in hand) deserves
great praise with the best, and yet he does not fully satisfy all men for his
doings. Petrus Clobardus has very learnedly translated the three first
Orations made in favor of the Olynthians, and varieth from others in sense,
not without their misliking, and perhaps not always expressing the very force
and pyth of the Greek phrase. Nicholas Carre our Countrieman one notably
learned in the Greek tongue when he lived, as it is well known: has done all
these Orations passing well in eloquent Latin, that I have done in English:
who varieth from all others even in the very sense sometimes and understanding
of the Author, and seems to have reason with him. Master Cheek (whom I dare
match with any one before named for his knowledge in the Greek tongue,)
having traueyled in Demosthenes as much as any one of them all, and famous for
his learning throughout Europe: yet was he never so passing in his translations
that no exception could be made against him. And then what shall I think of
my self, after the naming of so many excellent learned men, but only submit
my doings to the favor of others, and desire men to bear with my weakness.
For this must I needs confess, that I am altogether unable to do so in
English, as the excellency of this Orator deserves in Greek. And yet the
cunning is no less, and the praise as great in my judgment, to translate any
thing excellently into English, as into any other language. And I think
(although there be many doers) yet scant one is to be found worthy amongst us,
for translating into our Country speech. Such a hard thing it is to bring
matter out of any one language into another. And perhaps it may be that even
those who take themselves to be much better learned than I am (as what is he
that is not, having any name for learning at all?) will find it an harder
piece of work than they think, even to make Greek speak English, if they
will make proof thereof as I have done. Whose labor and travail I would as
gladly see, as they are like now to see mine, that such an Orator as this is,
might be so framed to speak our tongue, as none were able to amend him, and
that he might be found to be most like himself. The which enterprise if any
might have been most bold to have taken upon him, Sir John Cheek was the man,
of all that ever I knew, or do yet know in England. Such acquaintance had he
with this notable Orator, so gladly did he read him, and so often: that I
think there was never old Priest more perfect in his Por^eise, nor
supersticious Monk in our Ladies Psalter as they call it, nor yet good
Preacher in the Bible or testament, tha^ this man was in Demosthenes. And great
cause moved him so to be, for that he saw him to be the perfitest Orator that
ever wrate for these two thousand years almost by past (for so long it is
since he was) and also for that he perceived him to have before his eyes in all
his Orations the advancement of virtue as a thing chiefly to be sought for,
together with the honor and welfare of his country. Besides this, master
Cheeks judgment was great in translating out of one tongue into an other, and
better skill he had in our English speech to judge of the Phrases and
properties of words, and to divide sentences: than any else had that I have
known. And often he would english his matters out of the Latin or Greek
upon the sodeyne, by looking of the book only without reading or construing
any thing at all: An usage right worthy and very profitable for all men,
as well for the understanding of the book, as also for the aptness of framing
the Authors meaning, and bettering thereby their judgment, and therewithal
perfiting their tongue and utterance of speech. Moreover he was moved greatly
to like Demosthenes above all others, for that he saw him so familiarly
applying himself to the sense and understanding of the common people, that he
sticked not to say, that none ever was more fit to make an English man tell
his tale praise worthily in any open hearing, either in Parliament or in Pulpit,
or otherwise, than this only Orator was. But seeing master Cheek is gone
from us to God, after whom we must all seek to follow, and that this thing is
not done by him, the which I would with all my heart had been done, for that he
was best able: it can not be counted now I trust, any fault in me, if I
endeavor to do that, the which I never saw done before me. And in deed my
labor can be no hurt to any body, except it be to my self. For the Greek is
as it was, and those that wear Grecians may read the Greek still
notwithstanding my English. And such as have no Greek, may go to the Latin
for all my doings, or any other translation else in any other strange tongue or
language. For as I do hear say, certain pieces of Demosthenes are translated
also into diverse other tongues. But such as are grieved with translated books,
are like to them that eating fine Manchet, are angry with others that feed on
Cheat bread. And yet God knows men would as gladly eat Manchet as they, if
they had it. But all can not wear Velvet, or feed with the best, and
therefore such are contented for necessities sake to wear our Country cloth,
and to take themselves to hard fare, that can have no better. But what reason
have they I pray you that will not suffer men to write reason as well as to
speak reason? for this I dare say, that even those men, if they have any
reason with them at all, will use in their proofs upon weighty matters, the
arguments of Demosthenes or reasons of like value. And may not I or any other
set down those reasons by pen, in our English language, the which are
uttered daily in our common speech, by men of understanding? Now wicked is that
mind the which does envy welfare or wisdom to an other body, because the
same man can not be so welthie, or as wise as the best. And therefore in my
simple reason, there is no harm done I say to any body by this my English
translation, except perhaps it be to my self. For whereas I might have lived
peradventure under the color of silence and stillness in some opinion of
learning: I may now perchance with mine overmuch boldness in seeking to
fashion so famous an Orator out of Greek into English: happen to bewraye mine
own unskillful dealing. But howsoever it is, I had rather hazard rebuke, if
by this means I could towle out some other to do this perfitely, the which I
have only assaide to do plainly and homely: than to suffer so noble an Orator
and so necessary a writer for all those that love their Countries liberty,
and welfare, to lie hid and unknown: especially in such a dangerous world as
this is. And although your honor has no need of these my doings, for that
the Greek is so familiar unto you, and that you also, as well as I, have
heard Sir John Cheek read the same Orations at other times: yet I think for
diverse causes I should in right present unto your honor this my traueyle the
rather to have it through your good liking and allowance, to be made common to
many. First the said Sir John Cheek (whom I do often name, for the honor
and reverence due to so worthy a man) was your brother in law, your dear
friend, your good admonisher, and teacher in your younger years, to take that
way of virtue, the fruit whereof you do feel and taste to your great joy at
this day, and shall for ever be remembered therefore. Again, by him you have
heard these Orations read and translated, as I after you (although out of
England) have heard the same likewise of him, to my great comfort and profit
in learning. Thirdly the Orator himself having been a Counselor in his
Country as you now are in this Realm, he is your glass I am well assured
whereupon you do often look, and compare his time, with this time: Country
with Country: neighbors with neighbors: and King with King. Lastly your
great goodness used to me from time to time, together with that your good
conceived opinion to enhable me to deal in things much above my power: (for so
it pleased you to like and allow of me) all these respects I say, do move
me at this time, to offer most humbly to your honor this mine enterprised
traueyle of so noble an Orator of those his seven several famous Orations
whereof three are made in favor of the distressed Olynthians sometimes a
warlike people in Thracia, now called Romania: and the other four entitled
against king Philip of Macedonie by name. The arguments whereof and Orations
also shall hereafter appear translated in order. And after this done his life
and dealings shall be truly set forth, and his faults told as well as his
virtues rehearsed. That it may appear he was a man subject to imperfections
and lacks as others are: and though he was in some things for his rare virtues
and singular gifts most excellent and passed all others: yet had he his wants,
as what is he that has not? according to that saying in Titus Liuius of
Maharball to Anniball, after that great victory got at Cannas in Italy
against the Romans. God never gave all things to any one man. And thus having
done my voluntary task, I desire none other thanks for all my labor and
traueyle herein, but your favorable defense against certain, that will do
nothing themselves, and yet will find fault with all things, being in nature
Drones, and no Bees: Lubbers and no learners: as void of sound judgment and
understanding, as they are out of reason curious judges, over the traueile and
pains taking of others. But who can stop these open mouthed talkers? empty
vessels make the greatest sound, and ringe out a hollow noise to small
purpose, and so do these that have the least skill and smallest knowledge,
make the mightiest brag, and are the boldest of all others without cause or
reason God he knows. Of which croking paddockes, and manifest ouerweeners of
themselves: I do make very little account, or no reckoning at all. Your
sound judgment Sir and good likyng, may be of sufficient value with me to
hold my self well contented whatsoever shall be said to the contrary. And
thus most heartilye I do wish to that heavenly mind of yours a strong and
lusty body, that in these perilous days your pain and travail may run
in equal course with your knowledge and understanding. From the Queens
Majesty's Hospital of Saint Katherins nigh the Tower of London the.10. of
June. 1570.

A Preface to the Reader, containing the commendation of Demosthenes.
THey are thought ever in the opinion of wisemen to be the worthiest of all
others, and to deserve the greatest estimation: that seek always to keep
company with the best sort that be. For that such every one is most like to
be himself as the company is with whom he matcheth. And as it is in other
things, so it is in the course that any man takes for his study. They that
do acquaint themselves with the only reading of the best and most excellent
writers, are like in time to resemble in some sort their value and
worthynesse, yea, according to that saying of Tullie, he that goes much in the
sun, shall be sun burnte though he think not of it. And as Aelianus says,
he that keeps company with Callias that jolly pot companion, shall be a
lusty drinker as he was: if with Ismenias, he shall be a trim Minstrell: if
with Alcibiades, he shall be proud and lofty: if with Corbylus, he shall be a
good Cook, and learn to dress meat well: if any give himself to follow
Demosthenes, he shall grow eloquent and wise: if he seek after Epaminundas,
he shall be a lusty warrier: if he like Agesilaus, he shall be a stout man,
and of great courage: if he follow Phocion, he shall be a good man: if he love
Aristides, he shall be a just man: if he follow Socrates, he shall be a wise
man. And likewise Demosthenes himself in that his Oration De falsa legatione
against Aeschines, declares Euripides verses as a testimonye and witness of
Aeschines lewd life, who kept company with Philocrates, and such other lewd
lyuers. If one set his delight, with naughtye folks to be,
It reckes not to demand, what kind of man is he: Euripides in phoenissis.

For every one is like to him that is his mate,
That bi^deth still abroad, with lime twigges and with bate.
And thus I begin after a sort to challenge praise to my self, even at the very
first chop on Gods name: for that I have thus trauayled and been acquaynted
with this famous Orator. But how I have profited I know not, nor yet if I
knew, would I make any great brag of it. Thus much I think I may boldly
say, it is no small hap for any man to hit upon the best, even at the very
first beginning. As for praise (as I said) I do not look for any, much less
do I desire it, and what good I have done to my self, that will appear
hereafter: Once virtue is contented with her own self, as yt which is of her
own nature full sufficiency, without need of outward aid or borrowed favor.
And therefore he that does well, and profits in virtue and learning, needs
not much to long after the good liking or allowance of others. For glory and
welfare do as certainly follow well doings, as ye shadow follows the body:
as the which are in all ages the necessary rewards of virtue. I do not
disprayse any man's trade of life either of elder time, or of later years: but
I do prefer in all faculties some certain before others. As in Cosmographie
Ptolomeus: in Arithmeticke our Tonstale, and Tartalio the Italian: in Geometry
Euclides, in Astronomye Aratus, in Philosophy Aristotel and Plato, in Physic
Hippocrates and Galenus, in law Justinian ye Emperor, or rather Trebonianus
and others that gathered the laws: in hystories Titus Liuius and Caesar for the
Latin, Thucidides and Herodotus as Quintilian says, with certain others for
the Greek: in eloquence Demosthenes and Cicero, the one for the Greek, and
the other for the Latin. And he that in all these faculties does chieflye and
above all others, follow these above named: he takes the best way that may
be in my mind to do himself the most good. For what is he that entering
into any faculty would not desire (if he might) to excel all others? And who
can ever come to any such excellencye that does not acquaynte himself first
with the best, yea and seeks to follow the chiefest that have traueyled in
those things, the perfection whereof he wysheth to get? So did Plato
traueyle from Greece into Egypt: Aristotell from Stagira in Macedonie, to
Athens in Greece, to hear his master Plato: and Cicero from Rome to Athens,
and Anacharsis that barbarous Scithian to talk with Solon that wise law maker
of Athens, seeking every one of them the best abroad, when they could not
have them at home. Neither do I repent me to have traueylde in this writer
amongst others, who for excellency passes all others, and the more that he is
studied, the better he is lyked. For that there are hid in him many secret
ornaments, the which at the very first, do not appear, and are hardly to be
uttered by me I confess, in our Englysh tongue. Quintilian does so set forth
this writer, that he gives him the praise above all others, specially for the
grave and pithye handlyng of his matters much better than any man else. And
therefore in comparing Cicero and Demosthenes together, he says that it
needs not so to do, for that they were both most excellent men. And yet he
wylleth that Demosthenes should chiefly be read, nay rather to be cunde
without book, word by word of every body. And concluding after a certain
comparison made of them both, says that Demosthenes being the elder, has made
Tullie to be for the most part such a one altogether as he was. Then what
should let but that all those who desire to be eloquent men (the chiefest
ornament that can be given to man upon earth) should chieflye study
Demosthenes, and follow him by all means possible, seeing Cicero attained to
such eloquence up the only imitation of so famous an Orator? Now they that
will be such (...) as he was, must do as he did, that is, they must not spare
any labor, but be always occupied, and chiefly follow this man's profession,
whose watchinges and pains taking wear notable, as may appear by the report
made in his life. Yea he was so full set to atteine unto the excellency of
eloquence, that being unapt and untoward by nature through many his great
impediments: he warred as it should seem with Nature, and conquered Nature
also, with very great pains taking, and continual wrestling for the victory.
Neither could any else that have been naturally apt, and had no let at all to
be excellent Orators, ever be able to exceed Demosthenes, notwythstandyng all
the bars and hindrances, that by Natures injury happened unto him. Besides
this, (as I have said elsewhere) he was temperate of his diet and kept his
health, and increased his wit with sobriety, and moderate usage of him self
at all times: a thing most requisite for any one that minds to compass great
matters upon earth. And where as all men of any understanding seek to follow
some one, unto whom they desire to be like, or if it may be, to pass him (the
readiest way no doubt, for any one, to wax most excellent) Demosthenes did
imitate and follow first Plato, and after Thucidides his Countriemen both, the
one a Philosopher, the other a Chronicler of the wars betwixt Athens and
Peloponnesus. And so well did he like Thucidides that many times he did
borrowe whole sentences of him, as appears by his very first sentence of the
first Oration in favor of the Olynthians, the which sentence and diverse other
sentences he took out of Thucidides first Oration made in favor of ye
Corcereans now Corfu, and out of the next Oration made by the Corinthians
against the said Corcereans. Yea, it does appear that he did borow his chief
arguments and best reasons that he uses, out of this man's Orations: and that
he did as it should seem, imitate wholly Thucidides invention. Whereunto
agrees Vlpianus, who affirms that Demosthenes chief desire was, to have
Thucidides vein and gift of writing in all things. And in deed such was
Demosthenes diligence and painfulnesse about this Author that he did write out
with his own hand, the whole history of Thucidides (being a book fully so
big as all the new Testament is) no less than eight several times. A
travail certes right painful, and yet the pains very well bestowed, when so
good fruit did follow thereupon. For no doubt Demosthenes by such imitation
and paynefull labor, came to that height of perfection, whereof he bears the
name, that is, to be the chief Orator of all Greecelande, yea of all the
world besides, I may well say. For in three or four points united in him
together, without doubt he passed greatly all others, that ever wear. First he
had a singular judgment to deuyse good matter, and to dispose the same most
aptly, as time and place required: Again, he had the stomach of a Lion, to
speak boldly although not to fight manfully, and did utter his meaning with
such might and gravity, that he appalled greatly the courages of all others
whatsoever: Thirdly his utterance was so good (being made so by Art, even
against Nature) that never any has had better, either since or before.
Lastly, he is to be praised for that, which passes all other gifts, that is,
he was a very honest man, a just dealer, a true subject always to his
country. And therefore although in some one of these gifts, he might perhaps
be matched: yet was there never any comparable to him for them all together.
And of these his doings the world is so true a judge, that I need not much to
spend any farther talk, although some will say, that Tullie is to be
compared with him in all things. Of the which two men if I should say my
mind flatly, there be perhaps that would byte the lip at it, and count me
fond in mine enterprise. And yet thus much I may boldly say, that Demosthenes
has more matter couched in a small room, than Tullie has in a large
discourse, and that Demosthenes writing is more binding, more fast, firm, and
more agreeable to our common manner of speech, than Tullies Orations are. And who
so speaks now as Demosthenes does, I do think he should be counted the
wiser, the more temperate, and the more grave man a great deal, than if he
wholly followed Tullie, and used his large vein and vehement manner of
eloquence. Besides this, Demosthenes used a plain familier manner of writing
and speaking in all his actions, applying himself to the peoples nature and to
their understanding without using of Proheme, to win credit, or deuysing
conclusion to move affections and to purchase favor after he had done his
matter: whereas Tullie with his flowing eloquence, sought to wrest the judges
to his purpose both at the beginning, in the middle, and at the end, not
trusting as it should seem to the goodness of his cause, or to speak more
modestly it was sufferable in Rome, to use these practices of eloquence, both
in the beginning and ending of their orations to advance their matters withal,
ye same being utterly forbid in Greecelande, upon pain of displeasure. And
were it not better and more wisdom to speak plainly and nakedly after the
common sort of men in few words, than to ouerflowe with unnecessary and
superfluous eloquence as Cicero is thought sometimes to do? But perhaps whereas
I have been somewhat curious to follow Demosthenes natural phrase, it may be
thought that I do speak over bare Englysh. Well I had rather follow his
vein, the which was to speak simply and plainly to the common peoples
understanding, than to ouerflouryshe with superfluous speech, although I might
thereby be counted equal with the best that ever wrate Englysh. For Demosthenes
speaks always matter and has such force in his manner of writing, as no man
hitherto has ever been able to express, and all men have still had him in
most high admiration for the same. But why do I compare these two noble
virtues together? making the one better than the other, whereas they wear both
most excellent Orators, and chief ornaments of either their own countries in
their days: both of them a rare example of nature, and such as none in any
age, has been like for excellency, to either of them. Then what needs such
comparisons, when both are equally chief in their kind? as Quintilian has
very well declared, in rehearsing their virtues severally, and in lapping up
his matter, says in this wise, that unto Tullie nothing can be added, and from
Demosthenes nothing can be taken away without harm doing to either of them.
And therefore to return to Demosthenes, I say, he is to be read of young and
old, of learned and unlearned, of wise, and unwise, for that he has in him to
serve all men's turns whatsoever. He that loves his country, and desires to
procure the welfare of it, let him read Demosthenes, and he shall not want
matter to do himself good. For him that seeks common quietness, Demosthenes
can ^eache him the lesson: he that would gladlye prevent evil to come,
Demosthenes is for his purpose: He that desires to serve his Country abroad,
let him read Demosthenes day and night, for this is he that is able to make
him fit to do any service for his Countries welfare. For never did glass so
truly represent a man's face, as Demosthenes does show the world to us, and
as it was then, so it is now, and will be so still, till the consummation and
end of all things shall be. The Devil never cease from the beginning of the
world to make division betwixt Country and Country, to stir civil war,
to enboulden the commons against their superiors, to put evil thoughts into
Counselors heads, to make people ambicious and covetous, and to corrupt the
hearts even of the very messengers and preachers of Gods word, continuing his
practyse still in all places with all men. And therefore seeing Demosthenes is
so good a Schoolemayster for man to decypher the Devil and his ministers for
the advancement of vpryghtnesse in all things: I would wyshe that all men
would become his Scholars, yea, if it might be I would that all youth wear
first taught Greek, (for so Quintilian would have it) and that they after some
rypenesse in the tongue, and of elder years, wear fully acquaynted with
Demosthenes, to learn him without book, that they might perfect their
judgments by often readyng so worthy a man. Alexander was angrye with a
Schoolemayster of children, because he did not teach them Homer. I will not be
angrye with Schoolemaysters, but I would wyshe that Scholars being of ripe
years, and otherwise trained before in other Authors: wear taught
Demosthenes, and not Homere only. Once this is most true, that the wysest man
living may learn of Demosthenes, how to benefit himself and to do good to
his Country, and to maintain also the safety of it. And a thing I have to
report, the which almost is scant credible, touching a certain embassage made.
And yet because I do find it written, I will make it known farther. Petrus
Mosellanus a notable learned Germane, the restorer of good learning about
fiftye years past, at what time he was famous in the University of Lipsia in
high Almayne, did report unto Christopherus Hegendorphinus a Germayne also, and
a man of no less worthynesse, not only for the Greek, but also for the law
whereof he made profession, that Bessario a Grecian borne and Cardinal in the
time of Eugenius the fourth Pope of that name, and ouerlyuing him till Xistus
was Pope in the year of our Lord God. 1484. desired of his own accord to
go as Legate into France, to appease the great malice that was then betwixt
Lewys the.xj. of France, and Charles of Burgondie, and to exhort the same King
to turn his wars upon the Turk. The which Embassage, as Mosellanus says,
when he took upon him, he used for his speech to the French King one of the
Orations of Demosthenes in Greek, made against Philip of Macedonye as it lay
word for word, alteryng very few sentences or none in the discourse of his
whole matter, saving that he applied that against the Turk, which Demosthenes
used against King Philip. Whereby it seems that Bessario being a notable
learned Grecian, did see, not only a pattern for himself to use in those
days, but also a mean to work some good reformation by, for thamendement of
things amysse, and the advancement of Gods truth and justice. Then how much
is this Orator to be esteemed, that having written almost two thousand years
past, can have fresh matter still, for an Ambassador to do his Legacye to a
forreyne king, so many hundredth years after. And as this most learned
Ambassador did help himself then, to advance the goodness of his matter: so
may all others at this time, and hereafter do the like, and not only
Ambassadors but Counselors also, may find great plenty of matter to do
their country good withal. For as Thucidides says, Tempora adferunt similia
exempla donec hic mundus and haec rerum natura manet. That is to say: like time
brings forth like examples, so long as the world lasts, and the course of
nature continues. But what do I in seeking to commend this Orator? I had
need to have the eloquence of the Orator himself, having so large a field to
walk in. Howbeit, his own works, are sufficient enough to commend
themselves, being read in his natural tongue, seeming perhaps but bare as they
are now brought into English. But this I have done only to give occasion to
others much better learned than I am, to take this matter upon them, confessing
plainlye, that even in these my small traueyles, both Cambridge and Oxforde
men, have given me their learned advise, and in some things have set to their
helpyng hand. This I speak, because I would not defraude any of their
praise. And touching Demosthenes worthynesse although I need not say any
more: yet will I set forth after this Prologue, the several reports of diverse
learned men, that have spoken and written in all ages of his praise, and so
leave the consideration thereof to others. I, for mine own doings must ever
make this request, that having a good meaning with me, none may blame me for
mine enterprise, although things do not so fall out, as I would have them,
many may well desire. For Demosthenes is not so easy to be englyshed, neither
is he for all men's understandings and capacities. This I thought good to
advertise the gentle Reader: that whereas in the printing of this book, there
is sometimes a sentence, or half a sentence in the small Italicke letter, the
same is not in the Greek, but added only, for the more plain understanding
of the matter, that such as be not learned, may the rather go through with the
reading of these Orations, without any sticking at all. Other things that are
hard and strange, for the matter and Countries whereof he speaks: I have
done mine endeavor to make them easy and better to be known, with devising
addicions in the margin, such as I was best able to frame. Besides this I have
set forth the town of Athens severally, with a certain declaration or rather
limitation of Greeceland, and also have given as occasion served, the names
that be used at this time, to diverse of their ancient towns. They that like
not my labor, may suffer me to abound with mine own humor, and to serve my
fantasy, as I am well contented, that they shall use their pleasures, and
satisfy their appetite, as they think meet. For so that virtue be advanced,
no man is to be mislyked, although he do but meanly. Neither is it possible
nor yet agreeing with nature, that every man can excel. But howsoever it be
with us, better or worse, let every man have this before his eyes in all his
life and doyngs: first to honor God as he has willed himself to be
honored: next to love the natural Country where he is borne, above all
worldly things: thirdly to obey the Magistrate that is in authority: and last
of all, every one to do to others, as they would have others, do to them.
And these lessons he that has them not otherwise, may learn them of
Demosthenes well enough, whom if my Country men shall as well like of, for his
good council, as I have taken pains in him for their only sakes: then have I
the fruit of my traueyle, and wysh them good success in all their doyngs.
1570.

The testimonies and reports made of Demosthenes his worthynesse, by diverse
learned men in all ages as follovveth.
The report of Aristotel.
ARistotel was wont to say, to King Philip, and to Alexander his son, that
whereas a great sort, had been his Scholars, yet had he never any one in such
admiration, as he had Demosthenes, as well for the greatness of his judgment,
as for his temperancie, his gravity, his promptness, his freedom of speech
to others, and his sufferance in all things. You think, says Aristotel, that
Demosthenes is like unto Eubulus, Phrynon and Philocrates, and you think to
corrupt this man also with money, who has bestowed his whole patrimony upon
the Athenians, both privately and publicly: and because you can do no good
with money, you manace him, that doubts nothing at all, to die for his
Country. And if he reprove any thing in your doyngs, you are much agreeued
therewith. Whereas he does not spare the people to tell them of their own, and
fears them nothing at all. Do not you see that he takes government upon
him, for the love he bears to his Country, and thinks that this charge so
taken upon him, is a certain school as a man would say, of Philosophy, and
virtue: the which were not meet to be used for gain, or for the satisfaction
of man's covetous desire and lust.

The report of Marcus Tullius Cicero.
CIcero in his book entitled Brutus, where he talks of Orators, and first
of the Grecians, as the chiefest above all others, after he has said his
mind of a great meany, and was come to talk of Lysias, thus he wrate and
said. At that time was Lysias, a man not exercised in pleading causes at the
bar, but a notable fine and excellent writer, whom a man might almost be
bold to call a perfect Orator. But as for a very perfect Orator in deed, and
such a one as wants nothing in him at all: Demosthenes may easily be said to
be the man. For in those causes that he wrate, there could be nothing wittily
found out, nothing as a man would say artificially devised, nothing to be
cunningly handled that he did not epsy, nothing finely to be said, nothing
compactly knit together, nothing exactly to be done, that could be better
pullished or trimlyer handled: of the other side, nothing could be great,
nothing high, nothing adorned either with gravity of words or sentences, that
could be more high and lofty. Likewise in his book De Oratore, he says,
that Demosthenes did not give place to the Orator Lysias in finenesse of wit,
nor to Hiperides in quickenesse or sharpness of understanding, neither yet to
Aeschines in smoothness and gayness of words. Many of his Orations are
altogether pure and fine, as against Leptines. Many altogether grave, as
certain against Philip. Many are partly fine and partly grave, as against
Aeschines de falsa legatione, and against the said Aeschines in favor of
Ctesiphon. And when he lists, he uses the middle kind of eloquence, and
leaving that most grave manner, descends chiefly to that low and familier
kind of speaking. And as touching exclamations, and crying out against abuses,
them he uses, and does most of all occupy in his speaking: when he utters
forth the places of gravity. And a little before, he says, that he remembers
he did prefer Demosthenes a great deal before all others. And in his second
book De Oratore, he wills him that should be an Orator to follow
Demosthenes of Athens, who is granted to be the chiefest Orator above all
others. And again he says in an other place. None has been more grave, none
more ware, none more temperate, than this man. Therefore they had need to be
warned by us, whose unlearned manner of speech is much known abroad, such as
either desire to be counted fine Attickes, or else have a mind to speak
Attickly, ( that is to speak purely as the Athenians did) that they esteem
and honor this man chiefly, than the which I do think that Athens it self
was never more Atticke, that is more pure or more fine, for they may learn by
him, what it is to be Atticke, that is, pure and fine, and let them judge of
eloquence, by his might and value, not by their own weakness. For now every
body praises so much, as he thinks himself able by his own force to
compass. In many places else, Tullie is full of such large reports, but these
may suffice, to show his judgment and opinion upon so famous an Orator as
Demosthenes was.

Lucian in his Dialogue where he prayseth Demosthenes.
AMongst other things whereof he speaks at large, and I have partly declared
the same in the description and setting forth of Demosthenes his life according
to Lucians report: he says these few words, the which carry great force with
them. What other thing has Fortune given to Demosthenes, but that which is
great and sumptuous? yea what other thing, but that which is most honorable and
renowned? And after this he says, who knows not what manner of Orator
Demosthenes was, how he beautified his Orations with words and sentences, how
he poudred his arguments with the stirring of affections? what brightness
appeared in his plentyfulnesse and copy? what vehemency and mightynesse of
force? what reuerencie and sparenesse used he in his words and sentences? what
shift and variety had he of figures? And therefore Leosthenes said, that he
only amongst all other Orators, used the most lively and natural speech in
his Oration above them all, without any hammer work, or framing his talk with
Beetles or Mawles, and so goes on forth in a large discourse, as partlye
elsewhere, somewhat is said to that end.

Dionisius Halicarnasseus.
DEmosthenes was counted by the opinion of all the Grecians to be the most
excellent and most perfect Orator amongst them all, as well in copy and
cunning, as in finenesse of the Atticke tongue.

Quintilian in his tenth book De institutione Oratoria.
QVintilian in making rehersall whom he would have read chiefly of any one
that should be an Orator: after long speech of others in certain professions,
he comes to the Orators, and says thus. Now follows a great company of
Orators in Athens, amongst whom Demosthenes was far passing the chiefest
Orator of them all, and almost the very law of eloquence. So great pith was
in him, all things so full and so thick set, so fastened with certain
forces, nothing idle or superfluous, such a measure of speech, that a man can
not tell what is wanting in him, nor yet what is too much. And a little after
in matching Cicero and Demosthenes together, he gives the proper praises to
them both, as I have more largelye declared in the Prologue, and says that
Demosthenes being before Tullie has made him to be such a one for the most
part as he was, and would therefore that Demosthenes should chiefly be read,
or rather learned without book, and so forth, he goth on heaping up his
praises, as elsewhere I have showed.

D. Erasmus upon the Preface of Demosthenes printed in Greek.
DEmosthenes has more Art hid in him than he shows at the first sight. For
this man as Demades the Orator said, with an honorable jest, did write to the
water, that is to say, to sober men: neither can he be understood of any, but
of those, that are sober and watchful men. That therefore which Quintilian did
write of Cicero, may be said with like reason of Demosthenes. Let that man
know and assure himself, to have profited in eloquence: whom Demosthenes has
begoon greatly to please and like. And even as a piece of work cunningly
painted, does not greatly please them that are ignorant of the Art: so that
heavenly grave manner and majesty of Demosthenes, the which all eloquent men
did always greatly marueyle in him, is not perceived, but of those that are
well practiced in the Art of Rhetoric, and stored with knowledge of
hystories. Therefore I shall be well contented that a child shall taste of
Demosthenes, but yet I would have him return to him again, and read him
earnestly when he is of better judgment, that he may perceive that very Attike
sweetness, that sound judgment, those short arguments called Enthymemata,
framed together with excellent cunning: and last of all, that pithinesse and
great gravity of his, wonderful to all men, and not attained yet unto by any
man. And a goodly exercise it were (the which thing has been done by elder
time in Homer and Virgill) if any would do the same in Demosthenes and
Tullie, that he might find by making conference of places, what Tullie has
borrowed of him, and where our Latin Orator is equal to the Greek, and where
he passes him, and where the counterfayting of him, does alter from the
original. There is nothing in the world so meet to perfect a man's judgment
withal. And here I will not spend labor to commend Demosthenes, to the
setting forth of whose praises worthily, we had need of Demosthenes eloquence:
nay there needs no eloquence at all to set him forth, whom all men with one
whole consent do praise and set up to the very heavens.

Ludouicus Viues, a Spaniarde and one notably learned, in his second book of
Rhetoric.
THerefore is Demosthenes preferred before Cicero in the opinion of some men,
in that he hides his Art, and smells the less of Schools, being more
inclined to apply himself to the plain and familiar speech of the vulgar
people: than otherwise to write or speak above the common capacity and
understanding of men.

Sadoletus in his book De liberis recte instituendis.
IT will do good to know, and therewithal to have in admiration that
unspeakable pythinesse and vehemency of Demosthenes, whose manner of speech
seems to me to be knit together as though it wear with certain hooks or
links, that if you take away never so little, the whole disposition and order
of the matter must needs quayle. And so passing fierce is his speech that it
is like always to prevail, and so full and so well stored therewithal, that
it is able to overthrow, and so artificial and cunning, that it is able
always to beguyle the adversaries. And besides this, how often report is
there made in his Oratio^s of ancient things? what choice of words and
sentences? how many exhortations used upon the sodeyne? and as the cause served
both for praise and for honor? that in good reason the eloquence of Greecelande
may be said to depend upon the glory and honor of this only man the chief
and peerless Orator in the profession of eloquence above al others.

The like opinion had sir John Cheek Knight of this famous man, and said
plainly that he passed all others, not only for learning, wit, and
judgment, but also for his familier and plain kind of writing, and was the
meetest to be followed and studied of all those that would be in deed without
color or painted Art, such as they would seem in outward show to be
reputed and esteemed of others.

And yet thus much must I say, after so many speeches used of this man, that
although nothing can be more excellent than Demosthenes Orations: yet in
Demosthenes there wants a great piece of Demosthenes himself, because he is
rather known now by reading his works, than by hearing his speech and
utterance, wherein he did chiefly excel, and got thereby the greatest praise.
But to conclude at length, what is he, that ever was taken for wise and
learned, that either could praise this man sufficiently, or durst in any point
diminish the glory of his most famous and worthy renown? And therefore I
will say of Demosthenes as one said of Carthage, Satius est silere quam parum
dicere, It were better to be silent, or at leastwise to forbear speaking any
more, tha^ not to utter at full the just commendation of so worthy a man. And
when all is done, I may apply Titus Liuius saying upon Cato, justly to
Demosthenes: Hic ille est cuius gloriae nemo vnquam laudando addidit, neque
vituperando quisquam aliquando detraxit. This is he whose glory no man has
ever made greater by praising him, nor yet any has ever made less by
dispraysing him. So that he has been, is, and will be ever, the honor of
learning, the fame of well doing, and the very pattern of virtue and
knowledge for all men living, evermore to follow. And as for his faithful and
hearty mind that he did bear to his Country, I will give him none other
praise, than only set forth those Greek verses of Sophocles in Antigona, the
which he himself rehearsed in his Oration De falsa legatione against
Aeschines, and showed to have ever observed for his part in the whole course of
his life as a very excellent lesson both to himself, and to all others that
shall bear office or rule in their country: the which verses are thus to be
englished.

A plain declaration of a just Magistrate and true subject to his Country.
Man's heart and mind cannot be tryde,
Nor inward thought be fully spyde
Before he has, in office been,
And of the laws the force well seen.
Now then if one, be set in place,
That shrinkes for fear to show his face,
And will not use his best advise,
The state to save by lore most wise:
Him do I now, and ever shall,
Of wicked men, most wicked call.
And he again, that does his frinde
Prefer before his Country kind:
I do not say, a friend is he,
But him stark naught, count I to be.
As for my self, (that judge I call,
The God on hie, who knovveth all)
If any evil, I hap to see,
Which to the state, may danger be,
That will I shevve, with heart and mind,
Fall back, fall edge, even as I find.
No publyke foe will I once take,
In private love, to be my make.
For well I know this Realm shall save
All subjects true, even till their grave.
And that so long, as state shall stand,
No friends can want within this land.
Thus much of this worthy and famous Demosthenes, whose name as it is by
interpretation, the strength and force of the people: so was he in very deed
and by nature, the strong bulwark, and mighty defense of his most dear native
Country.

Moreover because these Orations of Demosthenes conteyne matters of war, I
will show the Oath that the young men of Grecia did take, when they wear
appointed Soldiers for the wars: a note undoubtedly at this time right
needful, for all Christians, not only for English men to observe and
follow.
I Will not do any thing unworthy the sacred and holy wars, neither will I
abandon or forsake my band and Captain if I be appointed to any. I will fight
for the right of the Church, and safety of the state: as well when I am alone,
as when I am in company. I will not make my Country to be in worse case than
it is: but I will make it better than I found it. And I will ever frame my
self reuerentlye to obey such orders as are decreed and adjudged: and to laws
established, I will still yield my self, and obey those laws also, that the
state hereafter shall by common assent enact or set forth. That if any one man
shall change the laws, or not obey them: I will not suffer him to my power,
much less will I allow him in so doing. But I will be a sure defender of
right, as well by my self alone, as when I am with others: and I will evermore
honor the religion of my Country. The Gods be they my witness of these my
sayings. This Oath was solemnly given to young men being in armor in the
Church of their God, at eyghteene years of their age: and having thus sworn,
they continued always ready to serve for.xlij. years after, so that they
wear fully three score year old, before they were discharged of their Oath
and service to their Country for the wars. And such love did these people
bear to their Country, that all their sacrifices and Church religion tended
only to the long preservation and good welfare of their state. Such care had
these heathen people to the prosperous safegarde of their Nation, much to the
shame and confusion of all these in our days that are common traitors and open
Rebels to their natural soil and Country.

The Description of Athens.
AThens (having her name from Minerua, who was called otherwise, Athene) being
sometimes the Paradise of Greece, yea the Greece of Greece, as Thucidides said,
the mart of learning, the nurse of knowledge, the mother of Orators, the
fosterdame of Philosophers and Poets, and the very Palace or dwelling place
of the Gods themselves to harbowre in, as some did term it: the same City
has felt in continuance of time much of fortunes frowning, not only by the
Persians, the Macedonians, and the Peloponnesians now called the people of
Morea, but also by the Romans diverse times, and after that, by the Gauls,
and last of all, by the great Turk, who is now Lord and ruler there over all.
And to speak amongst others, of ye Gauls, you shall understand that when
they were driven from Constantinople, and lost their seat in the East, they
came back to Athens, and planted their seat there and in the country of
Morea, till translating themselves from thense to Naples, the same City came
to the hands of a Florentine of the house of Acciolai in the time of Queen
Joan of Naples, that notorious lewd Lady, for her wickedness and evil life,
known throughout the world to her shame for ever. The which Florentine seeking
aid of the Christians to keep it still, and not finding any help: he was
driven by fine force at the last, to give over his right, interest, and title,
to the great Turk about a hundredth years by past. So that now it is a very
mean village, and a poor fisher Town, having scant the name left of it,
called after a barbarous and corrupt manner of speech, Sathines in stead of
Athens, nothing now extant of so famous a City, saving that upon the rock
where the Church of Minerua was builded, there is a mighty pile or fortress,
of maine puissance and strength. Such is the course of this world that nothing
keeps any long continuance, but as our bodies are naturally subject to
alteration: so have all states and commonweals in this world, their natural
ages and chaunges, to teach us the rather to fasten our minds wholly upon
heaven, and to dedicate our selves to God alone. And as Greece was the midst of
the world, and the country Attica, the midst of all Greece: so was Athens,
the very heart of all Attica, as well for the situation of the soil, as for
the minds and disposition of the men. The people whereof (as Plutarchus
writes) were very soon stirred to anger, and yet very easily moved to mercy,
rather inclined to suspicion, than given to hear any long information or
report made of things: and as they wear ready to help the poor afflicted
sort, so did they gladlye delight in sportes and pastymes. And being praised by
others, they took pleasure in it: again being rebuked, they were not greatly
discontented. A people much feared even of ye greatest Princes, being
notwithstanding very courteous and gentle to their greatest enemies. And
touching the Country Attica, and the soil thereof, Plato says in his
dialogues Timeo and Menexemo, that the same was very apt to bring forth most
fresh and excellent wits, the which rises by reason of the temperature of
the air, being of a very moderate heat and moisture, the Country standing
in.42. degrees from the equinoctial. This City was builded in the midst
betwyxt the Temple of Diana, and the famous Church of Ceres in the City
Eleusine, next unto the which is that great mountain called Eron. Upon the
north side of Athens, runs the river Asopus, and upon the South side, the
sea called Mare Aegeum, now Arcipelagus by name. The very situation declared
the majesty of this City, as the which was the common harborowe or safe
receyte of all Greeceland to fly unto for succor in their greatest extremities
and miseries of war, lying Eastwarde in such sort that it seemed to offer
receyte, by stretching out her arm. Yea their haven or peer erst called
Pyraeeus now Lion, did after a sort appear to open her lap to harbowre
succourlesse strangers, being a haven both very safe to enter to it, and a
sure harbowre to ride in it, against all weather and danger that might happen.
They had another haven set beyond the temple of Diana, and somewhat out of the
City, called the port Munichia, standing East from Athens, where was a little
pretty town marvelous strongly fensed, the haven thereof being an harbowre or
receyte of four hundredth Galleys at the least, yea and so many Galleys the
Athenians many times used to set forth in their wars. It is written
furthermore, that Pericles that worthy Governor of Athens, in his time caused
three score new Galleys yearly to be made for a certain space of the Cities
charge. These two havens wear fortified with a notable wall of huge square
free stone, so strong and so thick therewithal, that two Carts might meet
one another, and go and come from either of the havens to the City. And it is
further said that Munichia compassed within her bounds both the haven
Pyraeeum, and also that notable Arsinall made by Philo that excellent Architect
or Master builder, the which was such a piece of work for charges and
beauty, as the like was not again to be seen in all the world. Of this
Munichia, one Epimenides Phaesti^s when he came to Athens, and saw the peril
that Athens was like to sustain by the loss of such a place standing as it
did, from Athens, and of such force: warned the Athenians very wisely in three
Greek verses, what was needful to be done with it, the which verses are to
be englished out of the Greek after this sort. Had the Athenays wist, how
great a bayne
Munichia unto their town should be,
As bread with teeth they would it eat amayne.
Meaning that it was good for them to beat down Munichia to the ground,
rather than it should remain to be a danger to the City. And as Epimenides
said, so it fell out afterward. For Antipater in his war against Athens,
as soon as he had once got Munichia: he took the city immediately after, and was
Lord over all. Whereby may appear that it is oftentimes as harmefull and as
dangerous a thing to have a strong fortress next adjoining to some town: as
it is good and available, for the defense and strength of the same. About this
City lay the Islandes called Ciclades and Sporades which wear in stead of
Suburbs and sporting places for the people of Athens, when they were disposed
to go abroad: the which City shined over against these Islandes, being a great
many in number, like as the great bright Moon does shine among the little
small stars. The yearly reuenew of Athens (as Budaeus writes) amounted to
two hundredth and sixteen thousand pounds starling, the said revenues being
called Prytanea. And this reckening is made after the rate of money at five
shyllings the ounce, the which is a large and a good reuenew. And for the
valewing of Talentum Atticum I do follow Budaeus, esteeming still the
standerde of their silver after five shillings the ounce, and say that four
Sestertia makes one Dram, and one Dram or Denarius is.7. d. and one
hundredth Drachmae makes a Mina. one Mina or Libra is three pound starling.60.
Minae or Librae, makes a talent, the which is of our English monye.180. pounds
starling. According whereunto one Fauinus in Priscian, made these verses.

Cecropium superest post haec docuisse Talentum
Sexaginta minas, seu vis, sex millia Drachmas
Quod summum doctis perhibetur pondus Athenis.
Now of Talents Atticke it restes to show the price,
The which are sixty Mines, or Drachmes.6000. clear.
To English pounds nine score, it fully does arise,
Thus learned me^ have said, this rate greek talents bear.
The bounding of Greecelande according to Ptolomeus.
GReecelande adioyneth upon two great Countries Macedonie and Epirus, now
called Albania, and stretches unto Peloponnesus, called at this present Morea.
Upon the west, Epirus is the last part of it, and northwarde Macedonie does
end it, with a part of the sea Aegeum, named now Arcipelagus. Eastwarde it
runs out to the Promontorie Sunium, the farthest part of all Atticke.
Southwarde it runs by the river Achelous, that passes by Corinth, and so
ends in that Isthmus, where two seas are within small distance. This
Greecelande esteemed all other Countries and people as Barbarians, whereas now
they themselves are the most barbarous people living, without learning,
knowledge, or any goodness else at all, all others heretofore having taken
light of them for understanding, wisdom, and good government, yea, that man
was not esteemed to be learned in times past that had not studied in Athens.
And for government, other states sought to fetch light of them, amongst others
the Romans did send out their ten Ambassadors, and had their ten Tables from
Athens. And yet albeit these men did minister examples of understanding and
knowledge: the Romans for all that gave ever more plentiful matter of virtue
and good living, as who should say, the Grecians rather excelled in wit,
than in worthiness, and could speak better than they would do, according
to that saying: Athenienses sciunt quid facere debent, sed facere nolunt. The
Athenians know what they ought to do, but that they will not do. Titus
Liuius also writes that the Athenians did war with king Philip by their
writings and their words, with the which two things only, they were famous, and
counted excellent. And truth it is, they were a people of great understanding
and knowledge, inuenting by wit diverse things, that wear before time hid
from man. And now most gentle Reader think that when I was occupied about
this work: to make Athens and the government thereof to be known to my
Country men: my meaning was, that every good subject according to the level
of his wit, should compare the time past with the time present, and ever when
he hears Athens, or the Athenians, to remember England and Englishmen, and
so all other things in like manner incident thereunto, that we may learn by
the doings of our olders how we may deal in our own affairs, and so through
wisdom by our neighbors example avoid all harm that else unawares might
happen unto us.

Because Titus Liuius in his fourth decade and first Book, declares matter
much agreeing to the Argument of Demosthenes in favor of the Olynthians,
especially for making wars rather in the enemies Country; than to tarry till
the enemy should set upon the Romans: I thought good to set forth the
history of P. Sulpitius Consul according as it is reported.
IT seems to me, O Romans, you do not know, that you are asked, not if you
will have war or peace (for king Philip will not suffer you to have free
choice in this behalf, who warreth upon you, both by sea and by land) but
whether you think it good to send your army into Macedonie, or else to
receive the enemy here in Italy. Now what difference there is betwixt the one
and the other, if ever at any other time you have had proof: certes you have
had manifest experience thereof in these last wars against the Carthagineans.
For who doubts but that if we had in like manner sent speedy aid to the
distressed Saguntines, when they desired succor of us, as our forefathers did
help the Mamertynes in like case, a people of Messana in Scicilia, we had
turned the whole wars upon Spain, the which through our lyngring and
foreslowing our affairs, we have brought upon our own backs into Italy, to
our great loss and destruction. And there is no doubt of this at all, but that
whereas this King Philip he means.
man is agreed with Anniball, by his ambassadors and letters sent, to come over
into Italy we shall be able to hold him still in Macedonie by Leuinus means,
whom we have sent with a Navy, to war with him in his own Country. And
that which we did in those days when we had Anniball our enimye in Italy,
shall we stand in a mamerment now to do, when Anniball is clean banished,
and the Carthagineans quyte ouorthrowne? Let us tarry on Gods name, and suffer
king Philip to make proof of our lythernesse, while he destroys Athens: as
we tarried to suffer Anniball to do, when he destroyed Saguntum. He will not be
absent five months from you, as Anniball was, when he came from Sagunte* but
he will be with you within five days with his whole power in Italy after he
has taken shipping at Corinth. I know, you will not match Philip with
Anniball, nor yet compare the Macedonians with the Carthagineans. And yet
surely you will make him equal with Pyrrhus, so far forth I say, as either
one man is better than another, or one nation of more value than is another.
Epirus (now called a piece of Albania) was ever a small portion and of little
force in comparison of the Macedonians, and is at this hour none other.
Whereas Philip has all Morea at this present under his dominion, and the city
of Argo, a town no more famous by the ancient renown thereof, than by the
death of Pyrrhus. Now let us make a vewe of our doings. I pray you how much did
Italy flourish more when Pyrrhus set upon us, than it does at this present?
what a full strength and force was the state in than? so many Captains being
as yet safe, so many armies as yet whole and sound, whom afterward those
Africane wars consumed and made away. Yet for all that he shook the state,
and came conquering welnie to the very gates of Rome. And not only did the
Tarentynes, and all that part of Italy the which is called main Greece,
revolt from us, so that a man might well think they had followed their
language, and their ancient name: but also the Basilicates, the Calabrians,
and the Abruzzians, several people in the kingdom of Naples. And think you
if Philip pass into Italy, that these people will be long at rest, or keep
themselves within their allegiance? In deed they were all quiet during ye time
that we warred afterward abroad with the Carthagineans. Nay, nay, this kind
of people will never leave reuolting from us, but when they shall have no body
to fall unto. If it had been so lothsom a matter to you at that time to make
over into Africa: you had had Annibal, and the Carthage enemies within Italy
at this day. Let Macedonie rather abide the mischiefs of war, than Italy:
and the Country and town rather of our enemies feel the force of fire and
sword, and be destroyed therewyth. We have good trial already, that our force
and might has been more fortunate and more puissant abroad, than at home. And
therefore go you altogether on Gods name to give your voices, and allow you
those things with one consent, the which have been wisely considered upon, by
the Senate. And for this opinion, you have not only your Consul, to encourage
you thereunto, but also the immortal Gods: unto whom when I made my
sacrifice and my prayers, that this war might be fortunate to me, to the
Senate, to you, to the friends and confederates of the Latin name, and to our
Navy and whole army: they prognosticated and foreshewed unto me, when I was
at the sacrifice, that all things should go happily forward and prosper very
well.

The Argument upon the first Oration of Demosthenes in favor of the
Olynthians, a people in Thracia, now called Romania.
PHILIP King of Macedonie, son to Amyntas, and father of Alexander the great,
did much annoye the land of Greece, but especially the people of Athens, from
whom by force and other means, he took many goodly Cities, as Pydna,
Potydaea, Amphipolis with others, usurping in all places where violence might
prevail. Yea, he brought by extreme hand whole Thessalia under his yoke, and
being grown insolent through many victories and conquestes of private
Countries and Cities, he determined at the last to denounce open war against
the whole Country of Athens, and yet before he would fall into so plain a
quarrel with them, he drew into his league the City Olynthus, being in the
Country of Thracia, now called Romania, standing sometimes betwixt Abdera and
Heraclia, a warrelike plat and a martial soil next adjoining to Attica, the
people whereof were Grecians of Chalcis in Euboia, a colonie of the Athenians.
Now these Olynthians had erst been at war as well against the Athenians as
also against the Lacedaemonians, whose valiantness king Philip knowing, and
desirous to have them match with him, he sought by great gifts of Towns
unto them, which he had gotten from the Athenians and others, to make them
assured to his part, because he might have a more easy passage to Athens, a
thing that he desired above al others. For having that, he thought it nothing
to get all the country of Grecia elsewhere whatsoever, being his full mind
to make a plain conquest of all Grecia if it were possible. The Olynthians
hereupon perceiving his ambicious nature, and smelling thereby that he was
sharply set to be Lord over all: weying also how unfaithful a man he was
otherwise in all his doings: took their time in his absence, and dispatched an
Ambassade to Athens, to be confederate with them, contrary to their league
made before with King Philip, with whom they had agreed to set upon Athens,
and to have each with others like friends, and like foes together. Which thing
when king Philip understood, he took hereupon just advantage to fall out
with them and so forthwith proclaimed open war against them. Whereupon the
Olynthians sent to Athens for succor, whose cause Demosthenes favoring as one
that did full well perceive the insaciable ambition of King Philips nature,
persuaded earnestly that aid should be sent unto them, because the safetye of
Olynthus was (as a man would say) a bulwark or forte to Athens against
Macedonie: and that King Philip could never annoye them so long as Olynthus
stood safe and sure. Whereas on the other side the Athenians might at pleasure
pierce into Macedonie, and handle him hardly in his own country. But if King
Philip once got Olynthus, he had then an open entry and a very plain passage
to Athens. And to encourage his Country men the better in this quarrel, he
says that King Philip is not so mighty, but he may easily be dealt withal
contrary to the common opinion.

Further he wills monye to be levied and taken out of the common treasury,
persuading, that where as it was wont to be bestowed upon Stage plays,
Maygames, and publyke sightes, now the time served that it might be better
employed upon Soldiers for their wages to defend the afflicted Olynthians,
and to maintain the safegarde of Athens. But because the manner is unknown to
many how the Athenians used and dispensed their treasure at that time: it wear
not amiss to touch it briefly. When the Athenians heretofore used no Theater
or scaffolde for the people to stand upon, but such only as was made of
boardes, into the which every man made haste to get a place, to see those
sightes that wear there to be seen: many times when their scaffolde failed,
they did hurt themselves, and sometimes they went together by the ears, so
that manslaughter followed for want of order, while every man sought to place
himself first, that first could get up, whereupon proclamation was made, that
none hereafter should have any place there, except they first paid out of
hand two half pence of that coin, for their standing, being about two pence
star^ing, and so they should be placed, of the which money, part was given for
the building of the Theater of stone, where the plays and open shows should
be made and set forth: and part was bestowed upon officers appointed for these
pastimes. And when the collection monye failed, the Chamber of Athens did bear
the reast for maintenance of their costly feasts and several games to the
great and intolerable charge of the City. And least the poor should be
thought hereby to be kept back, and to lose those sights for want of money: it
was ordered that they should have two half pence delivered unto them out of
the common revenues and treasury, to pay for their standings. Now this
custom grew so great that all the revenues of Athens, wear altogether
consumed and wasted upon such unnecessary uses, in spending this way and that
way, so that men had the less mind to serve their Country, no money being
left in the treasury, nor reward remaining for service and traueyle to be
done, either at home or abroad. For whereas Soldiers and men of war had
their pensions and annuities given them before time out of the treasury for
their good service done: those that tarried at home did now consume the same
altogether upon setting forth of those Pageants, royal banquets, revels, and
other such toys, for the peoples comfort, pastime and delight. And besides
this, there was a law made by Eubulus that none upon pain of death should
give council to employe the common treasure otherwise than upon stage
pastymes, common feasts and games, to the great discouragement of all
soldiers and good meaning men, that hoped to have reward for good service
doing. And here we must note by the way that the custom among the Athenians
was to hang up a Table nigh to the Pulpit or place where the Orator spoke,
containing the matters to be entreated of, and when that thing should be passed
that the Orator persuaded, the manner was that the Orator should subscribe to
the Table, which made a very absolute manner of establishing any decree among
them, and was called in Greek (...), that is, to write. And when so ever the
Orator did presume so to under write or set his hand to the Table in capital
causes whereunto the people, when he had done, did not give their consent and
agreement (which was called (...), of the which the whole thing being decreed
was called (...) a decree:) the^ should that Orator be in great danger, if
his decree did any thing derogate to the laws, or wear in any point contrary
to the order of decrees to be made. For which cause Demosthenes being very
wary in this behalf, not to wade over deeply for fear of displeasure, uses
great cunning and slight both to save himself from harm, and to do his
Country good, for the better employing of this monye, persuading that the same
Theater monye might better be converted and made Soldiers fees, and the
contribution to be rather for common profit and honor, than for common pleasure
and vain pastime, being never yet so hardy to vnderwrite the tables for the
enacting of any new decree in the matter, considering the peril that did
depend thereupon, if the people did not like it, after it was underwritten,
and enacted by the Orator, but gives them only to understand, that in his
opinion, the very ancient order was to employ it upon Soldiers, and that this
their manner of spending it, was but an abuse.

Last of all, he wills them to send forth their own Country people, and
not to use the only service of Mercinarie foreiners, and hired strangers, for
that by those means they have heretofore sustained great loss and hinderance
in the chief of their affairs. And to make this Oration more plain, I will
by a division somewhat enlarge and iterate my speech for the better
understanding of Demosthenes Art and wisdom: Three causes hindered
Demosthenes from getting the Athenians to help the OOlynthians,

For monye he says they have enough, if they will turn the idle expenses of
the Theater charges, to the necessary pay of the wars.

Thirdly, he weakneth King Philips force, by rehearsal of diverse things and
deeds in perticularitie. And the two especial points of the whole Oration,
are these, profit and ability. Proouing by the first, with many reasons
that their gain and honor shall be great therein, if they take these wars
upon them: by the second he shows, both what their own proper force is,
and what strength the enemy has, whose power he weakneth by all the cunning
means he can, the rather to harten his Country men against him. The cunning
that Demosthenes uses in this Oration is very great, and not easy for all men
to conceive, except they be very attentive to observe and follow the order and
skillful handling of this matter. And thus I have been the longer to dilate
this argument, because I would make it the playner.

The first Oration of Demosthenes chief Orator in Athens, in favor of the
people and City of Olynthus, in the Country of Thracia, now called Romania:
against king Philip of Macedonie, who sought the distr^sse of the said people
and City.
I Do verily believe (O Athenians) you had rather tha^ a great deal of money,
you were well assured, In weighty affairs of the State: men should not spare
any money to have wise and faithful counsel.
and out of all doubt, what thing were best for the good estate and welfare of
the City, in those matters which you do presently consult upon. And seeing it
is so, it is reason, you should gladly give the^ ye hearing, that are willing
to give you their council. Neither, if one come forth with some good matter
studied for, and prepared before hand, ought you to give ear to that only, and
take it in good part: but I take it to be a piece of your good luck, yt many a
needful point, should come into some man's head, upon the sudden Sodeyne
motions and enforcements of the mind, do often break out either for great good
or great evil.
to speak of. So shall it be no hard matter for you, out of them all to use
choice of the best and most profitable It is more easy to allow wise council
than to devise it.
. Wherefore (O Athenians) this present time even very now warns us Occasion
given is a warning sent from God, the which cannot be omitted without great
danger.
with open mouth, to go in hand with those affairs our selves: if you have any
regard of your own safety It is scant credible that any man will forget his
own welfare.
. Marry then what manner of mind we seem to have to them, I know not: Once
mine opinion is, that there wear an aid decreed upon out of hand: Domestical
soldiers better than forreyne hyrelings.
and the same to be ready with all speed, to the intent the aid may be of
men even out of this town, and that you commit not the like fault now,
Crafty men want no means to compass their devises, seking all ye way that
may be to have their will: and offering to serve the humor of others, for
their own purpose.
as you have done heretofore. And that there wear Ambassadors dispatched, both
to advertise them hereof, and also to be present with them at their doings. For
this is greatly to be feared, least king Philip being a subtle man, and beaten
with practice of doings, partly by yielding and giving over his own right if
need so require, partly by threatening, (which if he do, it is likely that he
shall be believed) partly by blaming us, and our absence, and the delaying of
our matters: do quite and clean ouerturne and dashe some thing, wherein the
force of all our doings lies. Howbeit, this falls out very well (O
Athenians) that wherein king Philip seems most invincible: The presence of
the Prince does speed his affairs.
therein have you most advantage of him. For, that he being but one man is
Lord of all, as well secret as open matters, and withal, chief Captain,
Master, and Treasurer, and that he is present every where with his army
himself: these be points in deed, that for the doing of his Marciall
affairs with speed, and in good time, Men had then need to watch when they
are in danger of universal ruin and destruction.
make very much with him: But as to those attonementes which he would gladly
make with the Olynthians, they make clean against him. For it is manifest to
the Olynthians, how that they are not now at war with him for Honor, Happy
is he whom an other man's harm does make wise.
or parcel of their land: but for the safegarde of their Country from
destruction and thraldom. Neither are they to learn, how he has used
himself toward the Amphipolitanes, Ambicious Princes are evil neighbors to
their inferiors.
who gave over their town unto him. And likewise how he handled them of Pydna
that received him into them. And altogether (as I take it) the government of
tyranny, is a thing to be mistrusted of free states: especially when they are
neighbors and border together. Take time, while time is for time will away.


Now these things (O Athenians) being known to you, and all other things that
be requisite, well considered: me thinks you ought to set to, your good
wills, your hearts, and your minds wholly upon the wars, and if at any
time else, now especially: as well in making a cheerful contribution of
money, as in setting forth in your own persons, and leaving nothing undone.
Neither have you any thing to pretend or allege to the contrary, why you
should not do your dutyfull endeavor. Present occasion offered and unlooked for.
For why, the thing that you all talked so much of, how it should be requisite
to make the Olynthians enemies to king Philip: you see it is now come to pass
of it self, and that in such sort, as better it could not have fallen out for
your purpose. For had they taken the war in hand through your persuasion,
Whose destruction is most certain if they be ^uercome, and the reconciling
with the enemy most dangerous: their inconstancy is not to be suspected for
continuance of amity.
there had been no great hold to be taken of their league, and they would
have tarryed but a while in that mind perhaps: but now seeing they be
enemies for these quarrelles that he has to them: it is likely that they will
continue this enmity still, as well for those injuries which he has already
done them, as for those which they fear he will do. And therefore ye ought not
(O Athenians) to let go such an occasion now happened unto you besides your
expectation: neither to suffer those inconveniences, ye smart whereof you have
oftentimes heretofore felt. For if, when we went to aid the Euboians, Examples
of foreflowing things, and the loss of occasion offered.
at which time Hierax and Stratocles Ambassadors for the Amphipolitanes wear
with us, and here in this very place requested you to send a power by Sea to
take their City into your protection: we had showed the same forwardness in
us for our own selves, as we did for the Euboians safety: Amphipolis ^ City
betwixt Macedonie and Thracia* Pidna a town of Macedonie. Potidea a town in
Thracia. Methona a town in Achaia. Pegase a tow^ of Thessalia.
ye had both gotten Amphipolis at that time, and might have been rid of all
such troubles as afterward ensued. Again, when you heard that Pydna,
Potydea, Methona, Pegase, and diverse other Cities (to long to be rehearsed)
wear besieged: had we our selves then couragiouslye, and as it was our parts
to do, aided and succored any one of them, at the first: we should have
found king Philip by this time more lowely, and more easy to be dealt
withal, by a great deal than he is. But now that we do always let slip
things present, and hope that the world will fall out better of it self
hereafter: we our selves have by this means (O Athenians) both increased the
might of King Philippe, New occasion offered upon rehearsal of other occasions
lost.
and made him so great a Prince, as never yet was king of Macedonie before him.
But now is there an occasion offered, what is that? Olynthians desire present
aid.
Even this same of the Olynthians, which offers it self unto this City, and
is nothing inferior to any of those that have been made heretofore, and verily
as I think (O Athenians) if one wear appointed as it wear an Auditour truly
to examine and to take a just account of those benifites which GOD has
bestowed upon us: he shall find when all is done, although many things be
not with us in so good state, as they should be: yet that we are bound to give
him very great thanks, Offers made, that may be received, are as much to be
esteemed as the present and absolute possession of things.
and good reason too. For why, where as we have lost many things by the wars:
a man may justly impute it to our own negligence: but whereas we have neither
felt the same long ago, and that certain have offered to join with us in
these wars, who (if we will accept them) are able to counteruayle and
recompense our former losses: Men ought as well to be thankful for that which
they have not, and yet either once had or might have had: as they have cause to
give thanks for that, which they have in their possession and keeping.
that benifite surely would I impute to proceed of his goodness toward us.

But herein me thinks I epsy the like manner in you as men use in getting of
money. For so a man can keep as much as he has gotten, he thanks Fortune
highly for it: but if it go away, he wotes near how: then away goes the
remembrance of any thanks to Fortune at all. And even so in men's doings, they
that do not use their time well, do not so much as call to remembrance, if
any good thing has happened to them by the goodness of God. For according to
that, which last happened, As things fall out, so does the common sort judge,
esteeming things fondly by the event, and not looking of the cause.
every thing that went before, is commonly judged. Wherefore we have great
need (O Athenians) to be careful of the rest hereafter, to the intent that by
the amending of these things, we may wype away the reproach of our former
doings. For if we shall forsake these men (O Athenians) and that yonder man
overthrow Olynthus, tell me some body what shall let him when that is done, They
are to be defended with all care, whose destruction shall be their undoing,
that are desired to help, if they do not send aid in time.
to run his course where he list? I beseech you (Athenians) is there none of
you, that does consider and see by what means, king Philip, who was of small
force at the beginning, is now grown and become thus mighty and great? First
when he had taken Amphipolis, after that Pidna, then Potidea, and by and by
Methona, then he invaded Thessalia, after that when he had ordered Pheres,
Pegase, Magnesia, and all as he would have it, he took his journey to
Thracia: and there having displaced some out of their Kingdoms, and
established others, he fell sick, and being somewhat amended, did not give
himself to slothfulness, but by and by went in hand with the Olynthians. I
will not speak of his iourneyes and exploytes made upon the Illirians,
Peonians, Illirians and Peonians people next adjoining to Macecedony, Italy,
and Germanye.
and against king Arymba his Uncle and every where else.

But some will say unto me, why tell you us this tale then? Marie (O Athenians)
to the intent that you may know right well and understand both these things,
first what inconvenience grows of letting slip and neglecting always somewhat
in every thing you do: Arymba king of the Molessians, and uncle to
Olympiades, king Philips w^fe, whom he did not forbere to molest,
notwithstanding the alliance and kindred.
and next the careful painfulnesse that king Philip uses and practices in
all his life toward all men, whereby it cannot be, that he contenting himself
with things already done* will be at rest. Now if he shall continue in this
mind still, that he must always be doing somewhat, whereby to advance his
state, and if you on the other side be of this opinion that you must take
nothing in hand valiauntly: Neglecting even of private causes, very
dangerous to a state.
consider what end is to be hoped, that these things will come unto at length.
Lord God, which of you all, is so void of understanding, that knows not
that the wars will come from thence hither upon us, if we be careless. He
that minds to conquer must be careful.
And if that come to pass, I fear me (O Athenians) least that after the same
sort as they who are ready to borowe upon great usury, Money borrowed upon
vsurye brings misery, although for a time it seem pleasant.
have good store for a little while, but afterward are feign to forgo even
that also which was aunciently their own before: Even so shall we (if we shall
appear to have paid dearly for our ease, seeking our pleasures in all
things) be driven hereafter to make many hard shifts, For a short pleasure,
long displeasure: repentance is the hyre.
and be put in great hazard to lose even that, which we have here at home.

Now to find fault, some will say peradventure, is (...) easy matter, and a
thing that every body can do, but to show what is needful to be done, upon
these present matters: that is the part of a Counselor. Well, I am not
ignorant, that you oftentimes have been offended not with those that have
deserved blame, but with those whose chance was to speak last of matters:
Private loss must be sustained for commonweals behoof.
if any thing do not fall out according to your mind. And yet I do not
think it meet for mine own private safegarde, to suppress or hinder any
thing that I judge is for your profit. Therefore, I say, touching these
present affairs, you ought to provide for them by two manner of ways, both by
keeping to the Olynthians their towns in safety, and sending them soldiers
to do this: and also by annoying his Country with Galleys, Negligence in
Magistrates a thing most dangerous to a state.
and an other band of soldiers besides. But if you neglect to do any one of
these things, I fear me least all your voyage besides will prove labor lost.
For whether you do but spoil his Country, and he let you alone with that,
till he shall have subdued Olynthus: then shall he at his return home, be
avenged of you with ease: or whether you send but an aid only to Olynthus,
then will he seeing things at home out of danger, sit hard and fast by his
matters: and in time will prevail against them, whom he besieges. Wherefore
the aid had need to be great, and that in two places at once. And this is my
opinion for aid.

Now for provision of money. You have (O Athenians) money, you have so much as
no men else have more, to employ upon the wars: but that do you take at your
pleasure, whereas if you would restore the same to Soldiers, you should need
no other levy besides, otherwise you shall have need, yea, and that very
great need to. Why how now, says one, do you The custom in Athens was to
have a Table hung up, containing the matter of their present assembly, and
whereof the Orators spoke, and they that would have any thing to pass did
subscribe their minds in the Table.
pass a decree to make this money to serve for pay of soldiers? no verily,
not I. But mine opinion is, that you must needs provide soldiers, and that
this money is ordained for pay of Soldiers, and that there is one order which
is even this, The common treasure was wont to be spent upon the common people,
in making of feasts and seting forth of shows, games, and stage plays, and
paying for the standings that the poore^ sort had.
both for men to receive their duty, and to do their duty: whereas you
nevertheless in this goodly manner without doing any thing, bestow this money,
upon feasts and games. Therefore it remaynes (as I take it) that every man
must make contribution of money, if much need, of much: if little need, of
little: once money must needs be had whatsoever we do: and without Money does
much, I will not say all.
money, nothing can be done at all, as it ought to be done. There be others
that have other devises to get money, take that way you like best, and while
occasion serves, go in hand with your business.

And here it wear very needful for you to consider and weigh the matters in
what case they stand now with king Philip. Neither ywisse, as it seems and
may be said by one that looks but lightly upon his doyngs, goes the world
very gay with him: or yet in such sort, as wear best for him at this time.
Neither would he ever have taken this war in hand in trust of his own
strength: King Philips force, made greater by common brute, than it is in deed.
had he thought he should have found a war of it in deed. But his hope was
to conquer all, even at the very first pushe, without resistaunce: and is
deceived now he has done. And therefore this thing first of all does vex
him, and break his heart not a little: because things have fallen out quite
contrary to his expectation.

Moreover, the fickleness of the Thessalians, does much trouble his mind,
Thessalians unfaithful people, and full of treachery.
who have been always false and unfaithful against all men of their own
nature: and even as they are, and have been to others: so are they now to him.
And they are fully decreed among themselves to demand back Pegase of him, and
have forbidden the walling of Magnesia. Yea, and I my self have heard it said
of some, that they would let him no longer receive the profits of their
Havens, and their Martes. For say they, it wear good reason that the common
charges of the Thessalians ought to be borne therewithal, and not that king
Philip should gleane it, and intercept it for his own use. So that if he be
put besides this money: his hired Soldiers shall quickly be brought to a very
narrow strayte for their vittayles.

Moreover it is most likely that the Peonians, and the Illirians, and generally
all such other people, as dwell there aboutes: had rather still be free, and
live under their own laws, than be in bondage of others. For they are a
people vnwoont to be subject to any: and King Philip he means.
yonder man as they say, is a very spiteful person, and before God he is none
other like in deed to be. For prosperity exceeding a man's desert gives an
occasion to them that be witless, Immoderate wealth causes pride: pride
brings hatred: hatred works rebellion: rebellion makes an alteration and
changes kingdoms
to be evil disposed, and to ouerweene of themselves. Wherefore it seems
oftentimes a harder matter to keep goods: than it is to get them.

Therefore you must (O Athenians) assuring your selves that his evil season is
your good season, go cherefully in hand with these matters, both by sending
forth Ambassadors to such places as shall be meet, and setting forth your
selves on warfare, That which the enemy would do to us when he might, we
should not refuse to do unto him again, when we may.
and encouraging all others to do the same: considering with your selves, that
if king Philippe had the like occasion against us, and that the wars wear
nighe to his country, how readily think you would he come upon us? And then
are not you ashamed that you dare not do these things unto him upon this
occasion and opportunity: which if he had the like ability, you might be
assured to feel at his hands? Moreover, I would not have you ignorant of this
(O Athenians) that it is in your own choice now, whither you will go fight
with him in his own Country, or that he should come and fight with you at
your own doors. Better offend than defend.
For if ye Olynthians shall be able to hold their own, you shall fight with him
there, and annoy his Realm, and enjoy the fruits of this your own Country,
without fear of any danger: Thebanes will take part with the stronger.
but if king Philip should take their City, who shall let him then, to draw
straight hither? The Thebanes? be it spoken without bitterness, they will be
ready to enter upon us with him. Phoceyans of small force.
But perhaps the Phoceyans? alas poor men, they are not able to keep their
own, except you your selves do succor them, or some body else. But good sir
( says one) King Philip will never come hither. Fond speech used lythe ^^^non
simple souls.
Now surely this wear the greatest absurdity that ever was, if that thing
which now he commonly talks and brags of, though all men countes him a mad
man for his labor: he would not do the same if he might.

Now how much odds there is whither you fight with him here, or in his own
Country: I think it not worth the speaking: for wear you once driven to be
in the Camp but one Month only, and should have all things needful for
the army out of your own Country: I say unto you that although none enimye
appeared amongst us, your farmours, and husband men should sustain more
loss and harm at home, than all the charges of the wars heretofore have
amounted unto. At Amphipolis. Better to annoy by offense than to stand at
defense, and to begin war, than to withstand war.
Great then will be our harm, if we shall be fought withal here at home.
Besides this, what a reproach will it be, and what a shame also for us to be
bearded by our enimyes, and brested by them even at our own doors, the
which blemishe and rebuke unto wise men, is comparable to the greatest loss
that may be. Wherefore, seeing all this is seen unto you: you ought altogether
to plye your aid, and to advance the war from hence upon him. Those that be
welthie men to depart with some portion of their goods, to the intent they may
better keep the mass of their treasure, and gotten goods in more safety at
home. As for young men what can they do more honorable for themselves, than
getting experience of war within the bounds of King Philips Country,
return home like valiant and redoubted keepers of their natural soil and
welfare. And the Orators for their parts to render up a clear account of
their doings in the common weal. For even as the world frames with you, so
are ye commonly wont to judge of their doings. Thus I pray God all may be
well.

The Argument upon the second Oration in favor of the Olynthians.
AFter the Ambassadors of Olynthus had uttered their requests: the Athenians
agreed unto them and appointed upon aid to be sent, but yet foreslowed somewhat
their matters, for fear of king Philips mightiness, and somewhat also because
King Philip had some bearers in the town that thu^dred his power out amain,
amongst the commons: whereby to discourage and quail their hearts from making
war. Demosthenes using great cunning to crack this his credit and the
common digested opinion of him and his magnificence: first and foremost
persuades them by this Argument, that all his puissaunce has grown but by
craft and subtlety, and therefore is of no continuance, nor yet to be weyed.
Then how his own people be wasted with continual taxes and tallages, and
therefore likely to seek means to disburdeine themselves thereof. Thirdly,
that he is a man of naughty living, which thing though it be presently kept
hid, through the flood of his prosperity: yet with time it will ebb and be
discovered, and therefore the hearts of his own people must needs be
alienated from him. And in this place he does excellently paint out a Tiraunt
in his colors: as one false to his confederates, cruel to his subjects, and
dissolute of his own life: and by the way he shows most gravely that the
good behavior of Princes has great force to win, and to keep the good will
of the common people, and commonly good luck follows good doings: and as
men's manners are, such is their prosperity. And lastly, he does most wisely
discourse of happiness and welfare, and says, that where as many do think
that wit and policy do maintain States, he affirms that all prosperity
and assurance of wealth are the only gift of God, termed by him, good
fortune. Without the which all good counsels (be they never so finely or
cunningly devised) are nothing worth at all. Wherein he does not exclude
counsel and wisdom, but he wishes that God and good hap should be our
guide in all our actions. In the second part of his Oration he rebukes their
sloth and idleness, warning them to further their good fortune and happiness,
with all painful diligence and industry that may be, and then he doubts
not but all shall be well.

The second Oration of Demosthenes in the favor of the distressed Olynthians.
WHereas God has in many other things most plainly showed his goodness
toward us, he has at this time most especially declared his great favor
and mercy to this our Country. For seeing they are now at war with King
Philippe that border upon him, being people of no small force, such as are
resolved upon this amongst themselves by full consent and agreement (the which
is the chiefest matter of all) that first the conditions and accordes made with
him are untrusty and nothing safe, nay rather such, as if they be received and
allowed, they will utterly destroy them and their country for ever: it
seems most evident that God of his goodness has wrought this feate for our
blessing and welfare. Now then, good it wear for us to look about us, that
we lose not this occasion offered, Occasion is a commodity offered for a
thing to be well done, and therefore not to be forslowed without great peril.
and so deserve worse of our selves, than fortune offers unto us. For it were a
reproach, yea a very foul reproach, to seem to let go not only the Cities
and Towns that sometimes we wear Lords over, but also to abandon and refuse
those war fellows, and occasions, that are by good fortune offered unto us.
And here to discourse unto you what the force of king Philip is, the rather to
encourage you to take this matter in hand: I do think it wear a speech
nedelesse to be used. And why? Because al such talk should turn to his
honor, and to our shame. For the mo things that he has done above the opinion
and dignity he was of, the greater honor shall be thought to be his, and the
greater shame yours, that being of such force and renown, have done little or
nothing thereafter. And therefore I will let these matters alone. For he that
will truly consider the substance (O Athenians) shall find, that king Philip
is grown great by our means, and not by his own. Therefore the things for
the which king Philips practicioners deserved thanks at his hands and
punishment at yours: those I see now is no time to speak of. But such things
as are without the counsel of those, and which be most for the profit of you
all, to hear off, and such as shall appear to be very foul reproaches against
him, to them that are disposed to try them out aright: those things do I
mind to deal withal. And yet if one do call him a false man or a perjured
person, not declaring what he has done perticularly: he might justly be
thought an evil tongued body, and a vain railing fellow. But if a man wear
disposed to rippe up all that ever he did, and to charge him with every point
thereof, King Philips force what it is.
as it falls out: it should need but a short talk. And for two causes I
think it good to be told: whereof the one is, (and that is very true too)
that he may appear to all the world to be a naughty wicked man: and the
other is, that they who are in a fear of Philip, as though he wear
invincible, may see that all his sleights and crafty guyles, whereby he has
advanced himself to this greatness, are now spent and gone: and that all is
now even at the very last cast with him. For I my self (O Athenians) would
take Philip to be a very terrible and wonderful man, if I saw him thus come
aloft, Good kings grown mighty are to be drad and feared.
by his good and just dealing: But when I well weye, and consider with my
self, I find that our own simplicity, even from the beginning (what time
the Olynthians desirous to have had conference with us, were kept back, by
certain that bare us in hand, how he would give up Amphipolis unto us, and
bring to pass for us, that secret and close matter that they bragged upon
among themselves) is the thing that brought him to this. Amphipolis. The
secret and close matter was the delivering up of Potidia. Olynthians.
Thessalians.
And after that, the friendship that he made with the Olynthians, by
destroying Pydna, a town of ours, and wronginge us, that were his war
fellows before, of purpose to give it to them. And now last of all he did
win the Thessalians to take part with him, promising unto them, the country
of Magnesia, and to take war in hand for their sakes, against the Phoceyans,
so that to conclude, he bleared the eyes of as many as had to do with him,
through his craft and subtlety. And by these means he has advanced his
might and power, with abusing the simplicity of others, and entrapping them
that know him not. And therefore even as he has mounted the wheel by these
sleightes, when every one hoped that he should do somewhat for their profit:
even so must he needs by the self same means descend again, when it shall
be proved upon him, that he has done all things for his own gain and
lucre. Lo, thus stands the case, and doings of king Philip. Or if it be not so,
let some come forth and show unto me, or to you rather, that these things
are false, that I have said: or that those, who have been first deceived by
him, will trust him hereafter. Or that the Thessalians now brought into bondage
(far otherwise than they have deserved) will not desire to be at liberty
again. It may be that some thinks all this to be true, Liberty sweet and
desired of all men.
and yet the same man is thus persuaded, yt king Philip is able by fine force
to keep whatsoever he has gotten, because he has before hand got the
Towns, Havens, Ports, and Fortresses into his own hands. But he that so
says, is much deceived in his opinion. For when things are grounded together
upon good will, and that the same things are seen expedient, for all such as
are partakers of the wars: then will men join their labors together, abide
all smart, and tarry by it, till the end. But when a man has got power and
authority, by sleight and guilefull means, as he has done: every small
occasion and light offense turns al things vpside down, and lays it flat
in the end.

For that authority or might which is gotten by wrong doing, Things wrongfully
gotten have none assurance.
by perjury, and by falsehood: can never by any possible means continue and
endure: tho I deny not but the same for a time may abide and tarry, and show
a fair flourishing face because many are with vain hope carried away, but when
time has tried the truth, such falsehoode fails suddenly, and falls
straight to the ground. For in mine opinion, even as the foundation of houses,
A similitude declaring that falsehoode has no continuance.
ships, or any other buildings, must be very strong made and sure: so ought
all doings to have sound beginnings and perfect foundations to be grounded
upon. But king Philips attempts are clean contrary: and therefore I think it
wear good for us all together to aid the Olynthians, he that will best and
most speedily utter his mind in this behalf, him will I best allow of. I do
think it good also an Embassage wear sent to the Thessalians, partly to
inform them of our readiness, and partly also to stir them to join with
us. For they are already determined to demand back Pegasas, and to have a
saying with him for Magnesia. But yet take ye good heed of this (O Athenians)
that your Ambassadors carry not words only with the^, Deeds* persuade more
than words.
but that they have some deeds to show, that is, that your army is gone into
the field accordingly, and that your affairs are already in hand.

Show me the man and not the meat.
For why, words be but fond and vain when deeds be away, especially if they
come from our Town. And the readier that we seem to be to use it, the more
do all men mistrust us for it. But, and you desire to have any man to take
part with you, you must let them see a great alteration in you against King
Philippe, He that will needs stir affections in others, must first show the
same passion in himself.
and perceive you most willing to contribute for these wars, to bring forth
men and armor, and to do all things most promptly and readily, that are to be
done. And if you will show your endeavor in this sort, as is meet for you to
do, King Philips confederates will not only break of from him, but you shall
see also that his own subjects at home will faint and ware weary of him. For
in effect the power and state of Macedonie being joined with others, is no
small piece of a help, as it appeared to be heretofore to us in Tymotheus time
against the Olynthians, Tymotheus.
and to the Olynthians against Potydea, this conjunction and linking together
with him seemed a great matter. Thessalians oppressed with the tyranny of one
Alenus a noble man amongst them, whose children succeeded and used the same
cruelty, being weary of such bondage, desired king Philipe aid to banishe
them the ste^e, who so doing received in gift for his labor the custom and
toll of all their marchandizes and trafick.
And now presently he has been an help to the Thessalians vexed and troubled
with a civil war among themselves against a family of Tyrants, usurping upon
them. And at a word, when a man has an aid, whatsoever it be, annexed to his
own: it helps very much. But the Macedonians of themselves are of small force,
and marueilously weakened with many overthrows and adversities. For by all such
means as men would guess him to be the greater by, that is to say, by wars,
and martial affairs: he has made the same more unsafe to himself, than they
would be of their own nature. And think not with your selves (O Athenians)
that the same thing that lyketh well King Philip, is any pleasure at all to
his subjects. For he desires honor and glory above all reason, and longes
altogether after that: neither will he refuse to hazard himself to any
dangerous adventure, whereby to bring ye things to pass, Diversity of
disposition betwixt the prince and subjects breeds dissension, and causes
hatred often to ensue.
which never king of Macedonie did before him: preferring glory before all
quietness in the world. And as for his subjects, what part have they of his
glory? but like men cloyed and tired with continual going up and down on
warrefare, live in continual trouble and misery. And neither are suffered to
follow their own business, and dwell upon their own, nor yet to dispose of
those goods which they have gotten by such trade, as they could occupy
themselves in: for that, that all the Ports and Havens in the Country are
shut up by reason of the wars. And by this you may easily judge, Whom the
people do not well brook, his state can not long stand,
how the common sort of the Macedonians are affected toward their king.

But then his foreyne soldiers, and guard of footmen that attend upon him,
they bear a name to be iollye fellows and expert waryers. Well, I heard of one
that was that countryman borne, a man that will not lie, that they are no
better than others are. And whosoever is among them, a man of authority, and
practiced in wars, and martial feats, him, puttes he away from him upon an
ambitious mind of his own, as one that couets to have all things seem to be
his own doings, (for amongst other faults that he has) he is thought to be
an excessive vain glorious and ambitious man. And if there be a sober person,
King Philips nature.
or otherwise an honest man amongst them, that can not away with his daily
surfeiting, drunkenness, his Cordacisinus, a filthy dance, used among the
Grecians.
hoyting and reueling: he is straight way despised and naught set by, and as
for the rest that are about him, they be a sight of thieves and flatterers,
Naughty packs make evil men the more bold: and flatterers make fools the
more fond.
and such fellows as when they are dronken, will fall to daunsing and leaping,
and such other things as I am ashamed to name unto you. And certain it is that
this is true that I have touched. For why, such as have been chased by you out
of the town, a sight of rakehelles, worse than Coniurers or Iuglers, as
Callias that town slave, Callias.
and such like fellows, iesters, rymers, and writers of filthy Ballades made
against their Companions, as laughing stocks: those are his dearlings, Such is
every one, as the company is, that he kepes.
his chief Mates and Companions. And although some man will say that those are
but light matters: yet unto wise men if they consider well upon them: they
seem tokens of a lewd naughty mind, Whose doyngs are lewd, his life is in
danger.

Welfare covers those vices that by adversity are discovered.


and are manifest signs of mischief like to tumble upon him. But peradventure
his good success at this time keeps these things from coming to light, for
prosperity is a thing of such force that it shrowdes these reproachful
demeanours of his: but trippe he never so little awrie, then every body falls
a descanting, upon all that ever he did in his life. And so I believe (O
Athenians) ere it be long, it will appear in him to the whole world, A
similitude declaring that inward griefs do then break out in every
country: when the wars are at home amongst them, and they fought withal at
their own doors.
if God be willing, and you together. For as we do not feel in our bodies (so
long as we be in health) the grief of any member diseased or evil affected,
but as soon as sickness touches us, than all those parts are out of frame
and temper, that before wear either broken, wrinched, or any otherwise
diseased: even so it fares with Countries, and Kingdoms, so long as they
keep wars abroad: domestical wrongs and mischiefs lie unespied: But when
wars breaks out once in their own Countries: than do all inward gaulles,
and griefs bewraie themselves. It may be that some perhaps will think it very
dangerous for us to deal with king Philip, seeing him so fortunate a man, and
to have so good success following him at his heels: He calls it fortune in
good part, and means the grace of God that gives success to all our actions.
in deed that man that so thinks does think as any wise man would. For it
is very true that fortune bears great sway in all worldly affairs, yea, to
say the truth, fortune rules all the world. And yet for all that, if the choice
wear mine, I had rather have the fortune of our City (so you would once do
your duties, wear that never so meanly) than to have all the happiness yt king
Philip has. For why, I see you have many more offers and occasions to receive
gods benifites than he has, Gods goodness works all in all.
which are plain tokens of the great goodness of God toward us. But I trow
we sit still at our ease, and do nothing at all. And how then is it possible
that he that is idle himself, should command his friends to do any thing for
him? much less the Gods. It is no marvel therefore, if king Philip that is
always in armor, always taking of pains in his own person, ready at all
exploytes, and such a one as will not slip any occasion or hour of his time:
does ouerreach you, who spend all your time in lingering, The painful man
bears away the garlande.
in making of decrees, and in questioning one with another. For my part I
marvel never a whitte at this: The creeping and slow Crab, can never out go
the swift and wight Hare.
nay rather would I marvel, if we by doing nothing, that is fit for men of
war to do: should go beyond him, that does all things that he needs to do.
But this thing can I marvel much at, to see that in times past (O Athenians)
you withstoode the Lacedaemonians in the right of Greece, when being ofttimes in
case to have advanced your own estate very much: you would none of it, but
spent of your own for the maintenance of other men's right, as well in
contributing your money thereunto, as also in ventring your own persons in the
wars. And now when you should set forward, for defense of your own
possessions: you draw back, and are loath to disburse any thing at all. And you
that have heretofore been the safety of all men in general, and every man
in particular: now when your own goods and welfare is taken from you, ye sit
still and do nothing. Moreover, I marvel much at this (O Athenians) that not
so much as one of you all can reckon with himself what a long time you have
had war with King Philip: and what a goodyeare you wear doing, all the while
that this time was a spending? For ywis you know this very well, that whilst
you houer and hope that others will fight for us: and whilst you accuse and
condemn one another, and lastly, whilst all that ere you do, is a manner all
after the same sort still, as your old wont was, the time runs away. Have
you so little judgment in deed, Things lo^^ by much lethernesse, must be
recovered again by gre^^ diligence, according to the proverb. Of contraries
there is one, and the self same doctrine*
that by such means as you see our country fallen from great wealth to a
weaker state: you would think it likely by the same means to turn again
from a bad state to a better being? Now surely this is against all reason, and
nature so to think. For by nature it is a more easy matter for a man that
has a thing to keep it still, than it is to get it vnhad: howbeit by this time
the war has left nothing for us to keep yt was ours before, but we must be
fain to get it a fresh: and that belongs to you, to do. Wherefore I say unto
you, you must every man bring in his money, and go forth lustily your selves,
and accusing no man before you had brought al your matters to pass, and than
when it is done, you shall do well to sit in judgment, As rewards are
necessary for well doers: so chastisement is meet for offenders.
to reward the praise worthy, and punish the offenders: laying aside all
excuses, and quarreling one with another. Neither is it fit to search other
men's doyngs over curiously, or rigorously unless we first endeavor our selves
above all others to do that which we ought to do. He that will blame an other
man, must first be blameless himself, in the self same matter, that he
blames others.
For I pray you what is the cause that all ye Capitaines whom you send forth,
do eschew these our wars, and had rather seek wars of their own in other
places? Mary if a man must needs say as it is, and speak truth, of the
Capitaines, is it not because that here with us the rewards and booties of the
war are yours? For and Amphipolis should be taken, would not you sease it to
your selves by and by? and so the Capitaines should abide all the peril, and
have no part of the reward at all, Rewards due for pains taking.
whereas any where else the danger should be less, and the gaynes much
greater to the Capitaynes and Soldiers: As was to be seen at Lampsacus and
Sygeum by the number of the sails that they had the spoil of: Mercenarie
strangers serve chiefly there for gain, where it is most to be had
So that every man goes where as he ran make his most advantage. But you, so
soon as you see things go evil fauouredly forward with you, you have your
Capitaynes in suit by and by. And when they have given up their reckoning, and
you have heard their necessity: you dismiss them straight out of the Court:
And so you remain still brabling and fauling out among your selves, some
holding one opinion, and some another. And in the mean season the common weal
taryes still at an evil stay. In every ward of Athens, was 300. com^^ers, whom
the Orator abused, as well in leuying of money, as appoynting offices.
For heretofore (O Athenians) you leuyed your money by Wards and companies,
whereas now you bear office and rule by Wards. The Orator, he rules both,
and under him the grand Captain, and the three hundred to assist him, and the
rest of you be divided, some on one side, some on the other. Therefore I pray
you setting these brawles aside, and calling better minds to you: make it free
for every man, Liberty of speech necessary for the Countries welfare.
to say his mind, to give his counsel, and to do his part. for if you will
give some men leave like Tyraunts to command you, and to enforce some to serve
in Galleys, to contribute, to go in proper person to these wars: and other
some to do nothing, but make decrees, and orders, against them, and not put
their hands to any thing themselves: why than, you shall never have any thing
well done, or in good time as it ought to be. For the party wronged, will
always fail when you shall have need. And so shall you be feign to punish
them in steed of enemies. And therefore to conclude, I think it good that you
all do contribute money according to your wealth and ability, and that every
man go forth in his course till you have been all at the wars, and that all
men may have liberty to speak their fantasies in this place, that when all
have said their minds, you may pick out the best of all, and leave the worst,
and not be addicted to that which this man or that man has said. Thus doing,
you shall not only praise the Orator for his ready counsel at the time
present: but you shall hereafter also rejoice and cunne your selves thank,
when you shall see your country in better case than now it is.

The Argument upon the third Oration in favor of the Olynthians.
THe Athenians having sent aid to Olynthus, did somewhat repress and hinder
king Philips doings. Whereupon the people wear marvelous glad and thought
they needed not now to deal any further for helping the Olynthians. And so
they slacked to contribute money, or to send supplies, as though they had no
more to do. And some there was that thought it good policy to call back the
army from Olynthus, to go straight to Macedonie to vex king Philip in his
own Country. Whereupon Demosthenes seeing what peril remained to the
afflicted Olynthians if they wear not thoroughly aided: stepped forth and rebuked
the fond joy and vain pride of his Countriemen for so small cause, and willed
them to use more temperatenesse and waryer dealings, and not to look only how
to be revenged of king Philip, but how they might best help their friends and
allies according as they had promised: and to contribute more bountifully, and
to abrogate the former law of the Theater money, and now to employ it upon
Soldiers and men of war. And here he shows how necessary it is to cut
king Philip short, least he wax so great hereafter that they shall not be able
to deal with him. And altogether he calls upon them to follow the example
of their elders, and to go to the wars in their own persons, and rebukes
the inconstancy and folly of the common people that thinks so soon as any
good fortune comes toward them, or that they have never so little
advantage of their enemy: that then all is their own, and that they need
not to travail any farther. And with the people he blames the Orators and
Counselors, that seeks only to serve the peoples humor, and so to mar all
thereby in the end. In the third part of his Oration, he sets forth a
pattern or shape of a good governed common weal, showing what the people
should do abroad, what at home, and how every man should privately use
himself, and how dangerous persons in the common weal are those wicked
Counselors and licencious people that will follow their own fancy, and have
their own will in all things. And therefore he chydeth sharply not only the
people, but also the Magistrates that have no better eye nor care to the
prosperous estate and welfare of their Country.

The third Oration in favor of the Olynthians.
I Cannot be of the same mind, Words and deeds should be all one.
(O Athenians) when I look upon men's doings, that I am of when I regard the
talk which I hear. For the talk is altogether how to be revenged of king
Philip, but their doings are come to that point, that we had need to look to
our selves, for fear we be prevented with some evil persuasion before hand.
For they that tell you those tales, me thinks they do evil in this point,
that they seek to put new matters into your head, to remove you from that
you are minded unto already. But I know very well the time was, when both we
might have kept our own safely, and have been revenged of king Philip also.
For even in my time not long ago, we might have done them both. But now I am
fully persuaded, After the afflicted confederates are first helped, we may in
the neck thereof seek reuengement of our enemy, and devise his annoyaunce, and
not before.
that it is enough for us, if to begin withal, we fall in hand to preserve our
confederates: whose safegarde when we have well assured: then may we devise
how to be revenged of him. But before ye resolve and determine what to do, at
the beginning: I think it folly to talk any thing of the end. And therefore
(O Athenians) if ever ye had need to take heed to your selves, and to be well
advised: even now is the time. Neither do I think that the hardest point,
how to advise you, Happy is he that can take his time.
what you have to do at this time: but this is all my doubt, after what manner
(O Athenians) I might frame my talk unto you. For I am persuaded by those
things, that I understand as well by mine own hearing, as by that I have
been present at my self: that most aduauntages have over passed you, not for
want of understanding, Rather negligence than ignorance, has h^^t the
Grecians.
but for lack of good will, to do your duties. And I shall require you, if I
speak boldly unto you, to bear with me: and to consider that I speak truth,
to the intent that such things hereafter may be amended. For ye see how
through the flattering speeches of some Orators, we wear almost quite undone.
And I think it wear very necessary to rip up part of the matter, and bring
to your memory things past, that have heretofore happened. And ye be remembered
(O Athenians) it was reported here about three or four years past that king
Philip in Thracia laid siege to a Fort, or piece, called the Castle of Juno:
and it was then just the Month of October. And after much talk and great ado
here about the matter: ye decreed at last, to make out forty Galleys, and to
point into them such as were under.xlv. years of age. Ten thousand eight
hundred pound starling.
And to levy threescore talents for the charges. And after that when all that
year was spent: and June, Iulie, and August past with much a do, at the
length in this month after the festiuals of Ceres wear solempnised: ye sent
me forth Charidemus with a ten empty vessels and a five talents of silver.
For when the rumor ran that king Philip was sick and dead too: Nine hundred
pounds starling.
(for both wear reported) ye thought it then no time to send any aid at all,
It is good dealing with the en^mi^ when he is most weak, and at the woorst.
and so discharged the navy. And yet even then, was the very time in deed,
that you should have done good to your selves, and to have annoyed king
Philip. For had we then dispatched an aid from hence, (as it was carefully
decreed) King Philip being then recovered, should not have been hable to have
done us any harm. Howbeit that which is done, Occasion to be taken now, or
never.
can not be undone. But now we have new occasions given unto us, to begin
wars a fresh: and therefore I thought good to put you in remembrance of your
doings heretofore, that you smart not through slacknesse in like sort as you
have done. And how shall we use this occasion? for certainly if you send not
aid, with all your possible force: you shall see how your selves shall have
entered these wars for the benefit of king Philippe.

The Olynthians they had gotten a certain force together and the state of
things stood so, that neither king Philip durst deal with them, nor they
with king Philip. Now have we, and they, made peace together. And this was a
great block, and a difficult matter in king Philips way that so great a City
as this is, being confederated with us, should always when his time served to
do any thing: lie in the gap for him. And howsoever it was, we thought good,
to set out men of war against him. And the thing that men talked of so much,
but even erewhile: the same is now come to pass, by such hap as it is. What
then have we else to do (O Athenians) but cheerfully and stoutly to aid
them? Marie nothing that I see. Besides dishonor, there is fear of danger
hereafter if aid be not sent presently for that the Thebanes are very like to
fall from them, and that the Phoceyans are very poor and needy.
For besides the shame that waytes upon us, if we foreslow any part of our
business: I see we have no small occasion, to dread the falling out of things
hereafter: especially now that the Thebanes bear us the stomach, that you see
they do: and that the Phoceyans be utterly out of monye: and that there is
none to stop king Philip, (after he has once overthrown them, whom he is
now in hand withal) to bend himself to the affairs this way. But whosoever
he be, that delays to do things till that time come: that fellow is disposed
to see sore matters hard at his nose, Gentlemen eschew evil for shame: the
common people for fear of harm.
when he might well enough have heard of them farther of: and then be feign to
seek help at other men's hands, whereas he himself, by this time, might have
been an aid to others. And surely that the end will be, that, he will set
upon us (if we let slip this present occasion) almost every man sees it by
this time.

But peradventure some will say, it is a nedeful thing to give aid, and we be
all determined upon it, and minded to do it: but how we should do it, tell you
us that. And you shall not (O Athenians) marvel much at it, if I shall speak
something contrary to the opinion of a great many. Appoint lawmakers, but among
these lawmakers, see you make no new laws (for we have enough of them already:
but such as hinder our present estate, see you do repeal. Evil laws are to
be abrogated, that hinder good proceedings.
Yea those laws I mean flatly, that are made for the maintenance of stage
plays and some other of those also, that be made for men to go on warfare,
some of which laws, do apportion that money, that belongs to soldiers, to be
divided in shows, and stage expenses, amongst them that tarry at home.
Othersome again, provide for ye indemnitie of those that forsake their array in
the field, and by that means do the more discourage them, that otherwise
would do their endeavors. And then when you have repealed these laws, and
have made a safe way for all men to say their consciences: then a Gods name
seek ye out some one, to vnderwrite and enact all that, Those that sought to
repeal laws among the Grecians by decree written and recorded in a table,
suffered smart for their attempt, if they wear not able to prove their
assertion to be for the Countries welfare.
which al ye know to be profitable. And before this be done, never look that
any man will speak the best for you, and then perish by your means for his
labor: no, you shall never find him, especially when there shall be nothing
got by that means, but that he that speaks, and enacteth these things,
shall be sure to have some hurt himself, and yet further your business never
a whit by it. And besides that, it shall make him much more fearful to utter
any good advice hereafter, than he is at this present. And it wear requisite
(O Athenians) that the very self same men, that did make the laws: should
also repeal them. For why, The law maker and none other should abrogate his
own decree, and law established.
it wear no reason that thanks should be their reward, that made those laws,
whereby the whole common weal then was endammaged: and on the other side, that
those who have spoken things for the behoof of our City, and the thing that
might be for the profit of us all: should be punished with your displeasure
and hatred. And before these things be brought into better order: never look
for it (O Athenians) that there should be any such one among you so great, as
should not be punished for his labor, if he transgressed these laws: nor yet
so foolish, that will put his neck into the haulter, Laws not executed, are of
no value: and as good not made, as not practiced.
when he may keep it out. And surely you must not be ignorant of this point
(O Athenians) that a decree is nothing worth, unless you have as good will to
keep it, as you were ready to make it. For wear decrees sufficient of
themselves, to compel you either to do your duties, or to perform the thing
that is set forth in them: then should neither you, who have made so many
decrees, put so few, or rather none of them, in execution: nor yet king Philip
should have wronged us so long, as he has done. For there was no let in our
laws and decrees, but that he should have smarted, Execution of laws a higher
thing in nature than is the devising, or bare reporting of them.
long ere this time. But the matter is clean otherwise: for why, although
doings by order and decree, follow after speaking, and passing of their
matters, by holding up of hands: yet in power it goes before, and is a much
more worthy thing. And therefore this is it that we have to do yet: the reast
is done already. For why, there are ynowe among you (O Athenians) that can
say, as is fit for men to say, and you your selves are as quick witted to
judge of things said, as any others. And even very now may you put them in
execution, if you do well. For I pray you what time, or what occasion,
Occasion offered never better, and therefore not to be foreslowed.
can you find better than this present season? or when will ye ever do, that ye
have to do, if now ye will not? has not king Philip he means.
the man got all your countries into his hand already? but if he get the
Lordship of this land of Olynthus also: it will be the greatest shame that
ever came unto us. Are not those now troubled by him with war, whom we
promised to defend stoutely, if he did war upon them? is not he an enemy?
holds he not your countries and goods? is not he a barbarous and outlandish
Prince? is he not whatsoever a man list to call him? But Lord God if we shall
let all these things unlooked to, and rather be a help in a manner for him:
Better for every man to amend one, and to do his duty: than every one to seek
faults in others, without mending his own.
shall we then fall to seek out who wear the authors of all these matters, so
evil handled? And yet we will not accuse our selves I am well assured. No more
will they that for fear run away from the wars, accuse themselves: but
rather will always lay the fault in the Captain, and him that stands next
them, yea, and upon any body than upon himself. And yet for all that, Every
one shifteth to excuse his own doings and rather posteth faults over to others,
than takes them upon him, to bear the blame himself.
was their running away the very cause, that they wear overcome in the field.
For he that accused others, might have tarried the battle himself. Which if
every one of them had done: they might have got the victory. And so now
perhaps if some one does not give the best council, let some other stand up,
and say his mind, and not find fault with him that spoke before. Is there any
man can tell you better? do it a Gods name. But peradventure this my speech
is somewhat unsavory unto you. Well, for all that, he does you no wrong that
tells it you, except peradventure he omittes prayer, if happily it needed to
Godwardes. For in deed (O Athenians) to wish and to pray unto God is an easy
matter, Public prayer and supplication used to Godwardes.
where a man may trusse up in a small rowme, as much as he list. But when
matters are brought in counsel to be debated upon, then is not the choice so
plentiful, but the better is to be preferred before the more pleasant, where a
man may have both.

But what if one could let you alone with the stage money, and yet find out
other means, to get money for soldiers? wear not he a better fellow, would
some man say? Yes marry wear he (O Athenians) if there were any such man to be
found. But I wonder how ever it was, or ever shall be, that if one do spend
money which he has upon things unnecessary: how he can get money, which he
has not: to bestow and employ upon things necessary. But in these cases it
is a great matter how men's minds are inclined, and it is the easiest matter
in the world, Not as men would, but as men may, and as the nature of things do
require, so should they deal.
for a man to deceive himself in his own opinion. For every one judges as
his own fancy and affection carries him, where as the nature of things is
far otherwise. And therefore I would wish that ye considered these things,
as the nature and condition of them requires. So shall you be able to go to
the wars, and receive your wages. Neither is it the property of a wise man,
nor yet of a Gentleman, to omit any thing that is to be done in time of war,
for want of money: either to put up lightly such foul rebukes as these be. And
what a shame were it for you, in all the haste to war with the Corynthians,
and the Megareyans, being all Grecians: and in the mean season to suffer King
Philip being a stranger and a Barbarian to subdue the towns of Greece unto
himself for want of provision for soldiers? neither do I speak these
things to get your evil will thereby. I am not so much without wit, and so
void of grace, that I would willingly procure my self your displeasure, and
then do no good neither. A good subject prefers the welfare of his
Country, before all other things.
But I think it the part of a good Citizen when he shall say his mind, to
regard more the welfare of his country: than to currie fauell with the
people. For so have I heard say, and perhaps so have you also, that your
Counselors in the time of our Ancestors (whom all your Orators now do much
praise and esteem, and do yet but a little follow them) did use themselves
after this plain manner and custom, when they had to deal in matters of the
state: Aristides. Nicias. Demosthenes. Pericles.
that is to say, Aristides that ioly fellow, Nicias, and he that was called by
my name Demosthenes, and also Pericles. But since these good fellows came
forth, that will be first asking, what will you have with us? what will you
have me enact? Flatterers, people most dangerous to a common weal:
wherein may I speak to please you? for a desire that they have to pick
thanks, and for a transitory pleasure and liking at your hands: they have
drenched the whole welfare of the City. And this is even come of it, they
themselves speed well by it, and are in very good case: but as for our
country, it is in very evil state. For I pray you way with your selves (O
Athenians) what great and principal points a man might speak of, and how
far different the doings of our Ancestors wear from those of this time? I
will recite them to you in few words, and that which is notorious. For you may
be a fortunate and a happy Nation, not by using of forrayne and strange acts,
but of domestical and home examples. A comparison betwixt those that wear,
and those that are: and what odds there is betwixt the one and the other.
Those men therefore whom the Orators did not so flatter nor fawn upon, as
these men do upon you: had the chieftie and principality over all the
Grecians, with their good liking and consent, by the space of.45. years, and
they laid up in the Treasure house more than.10000. talents. One Milion eight
hundred thousand pounds starling. Perdicca king of Macedonie paid tribute to
Athens.
Yea, the king himself that then ruled this same country, that he now
holds: was subject to the Grecians, (as fit it is for a barbarous and
outlandishe king, to be subject to the Greeks) and erected many a goodly
triumph of their deeds done both by sea, and by land. And they amongst all
other people, did leave such fame and honor behind them: as overcame all
envy of man. Thus did these men behave themselves in defense of the Greeks.

But in matters of the City, I Old Councillors what they wear among the
Greeks.
pray you mark how they ordered things both in public and private dealings?
As to public buildinges they left behind them such gorgious Temples, and so
great store of relics, and offeringes in the same: that none coming after
them, could be able to exceed them, Zerxes saddle dedicated to Minerua for his
victory had at Salamina. Mardonius Semiterra, or fawchen hong up in the temple
in honor of his victory had against the Plateians. The temperance of two
governors, Aristides, and Miltiades. Magistrates what they should be.
for their worthiness signified by their insignes.

In their private doings, they wear so temperate, and kept so well the good
orders of the City, that if any of you knew which was the house of Aristides
and Miltiades, and of the famous men's houses of that time what they wear: you
should see them to be nothing more gorgious: than wear their poor neighbors
houses about them. For why, they wear not officers in the common weal to
enrich themselves by it: but to advance the honor and state of their country.
And thus, with Old Counselors in Greece 1. Faithful to their country, 2.
Devout toward God. 3. Upright and just as a beam toward all.
behauing them in the affairs and service of Greece faithfully: in matters of
religion toward god, devoutly: and in private trades and dealings euenly and
uprightly with all men: they well deserved to make themselves happy and
fortunate men. Thus flourishing was the state of the common weal as long as
these men bare rule, whom I have named before.

When flatterers bears rule, all things comes to naught.
But now that these smooth and meal mouthed fellows a Gods name, are come to
bear rule, how go your matters forward I pray you? What? as well as they did
before time? or any thing like unto it at all? As for other things, I let them
pass though in deed much wear to be said. But notwithstanding yt many, while
this waste and desertnes round about us, being so great as you see it is: and
that the Lacedaemonians decayed, the Thebanes not at leisure, and that there is
no body else left worthy enough to contend with us for the principality: we
might well enough both keep our own in safety, and end the matters of
controversy amongst others. Yet for all that I say, we have not in this mean
while so much as defended our own, but have lost rather part thereof: and we
have spent more than.1500. Two hundred seventy thousand pound starling.
Talents to no purpose at all: and such confederates as we got us in time of
war, we lost them again in time of peace, through the fault of these our
Orators: and have made our enemy most mighty and strong against us: Yea, we
only and none other have raised king Philips strength to this that it is. And
this be not true, let me see him come forth, that can show me how king Philip
is become so mighty by any other means, than by yours only? Trifles and
vanities highly set forth, in stead of weighty affairs. Magistrates and
governors who they be* that are to be misliked, and wherefore. Demades, Phryno,
Eubulus, Philocrates, noted to be the evil and corrupt Orators. The causes of
corrupt government.
But O good sir, though things be not well abroad: yet all is well at home, and
better than ever it was, and what should you tell me of a sight of whyted
turrets, and pynacles, of pauing of high ways and streets, of fountaynes and
such like toys? Nay then I pray you look upon them, that had the charge and
ordering of these matters: you shall see some of them that were very beggars
before, are now waxen marvelous rich men: others, being meanly borne men,
are made noble and honorable personages: some you shall see to have their own
houses more gorgeously furnished, than are the public buildings of the City.
So that the lesser and worse the estate of the common wealth is: the more are
they advanced and increased. And what is the cause of all these things? And
why wear all these things so well in those days, and now nothing at all
well done at this day? Forsooth that's this: because that before time the Commons
both had the stomach to go a warfare themselves: and were also themselves
masters over the Maiestrates, and Lords of all things that good were: than
was every man contented to take office and authority of the Commons, and to
receive any good thing else at their hands. Where as now it is clean
contrary, for the Maiestrates and governors have all in their own hands,
and through them, all things are done: and you that be the Commons like men
soken to the very bottom, destitute of money, and war fellows: He means
the Orators.
are become very underlings and hangers on upon them: and think it pleasure
enough if their Maysterships can be contented to impart unto you some small
portion of the stage money, or cast a few harlatrie pence among you, (...) was
a small piece of money having the print upon it, of a small bull^cke, in value
two pence, and somewhat more.
and (that which is most unsitting that can be to man) ye bring your self in
danger for a Pigge of your own Sow. And they in the mean season keeping you
fast locked up within the City: work such maistries with you, and make you so
tame, that you are contented to come to their hands, and to be at their beck.
And surely that man shall never be found to have a valiant and lusty courage
of his own: that is of so base and abject doings. For why, Such is the man and
his manners, as his delight and study is.
like as a man accustomes and trades himself: such must his courage and mind,
needs be. And in speaking hereof, I swear by our Lady mother, I marvel
never a whitte, if I receive more hurt for speaking of this matter, than they
did, He means Ceres who was feigned to be the Goddess of corn, because she
first taught the manner of manuring and turning up the earth to cast corn
therein. By diligence and pains taking: all may be amended that is amiss.
that wear the dooers of it. For a man may not always be bold to speak his
mind before you in every thing: yea rather I marvel to see you give me such
quiet hearing as you do, at this time. And therefore let me now at length
entreat you to leave of these conditions, and to go forth on warrefare your
selves, and to do all things as becomes you, using this overplus of money
you have at home, for an instrument to do things well abroad withal: and in
so doing it is not impossible, and it may be well enough (O Athenians) that
you shall get some singular great profit by it. And make no more a do with
these petie trifling games of the stage plays, which are matters not much
unlike to meats that Physicians give to sick folk, An apt similitude to
persuade that the stage money should be employed upon the wars.
which neither gyues strength to their bodies, nor yet suffers them to dye:
Even so these sommes of money that you do now distribute, are neither so
great that they can bring you any notable profit: neither yet will let you
occupy your selves in any thing else: but are rather nourishmentes of the
lythernesse and sloth that you all wallowe in. Why then, Every man bound to
advance for his part the welfare of his country.
will one say, will you have it serve for waging of men? In deed I say so,
and withal I would that one certain order wear taken for every man to have
his part of the common money, and show himself ready to do good service
when the City shall have need. Is it so with us, that we may be at rest if
we list? In deed then I must needs say he is in better case that taryes at
home, so he wear quitte from the necessity of doing any wicked thing through
lack and need. And when ever chanced the like as it does now? He that will
have the gain of that same money, let him serve for a soldier to, as reason
good, in the quarrel (...) Country. Is their any of you above the age of a
Soldier? Why, look what so ever he received besides order, and did no good
for it: let him now take the same by equal order, ouerseeing and directing
things as need shall be. To conclude, I have neither added nor diminished
things, saving in a very little, but have taken away the misorder, and
brought the City into that order, as that men may receive wages, go on
warrefare, sit in judgment, and do whatsoever every man's own age, and the
time shall require. Neither in making of this order did I ever say that this
money ought to be bestowed upon them that would do nothing: The idle should
not reap the fruit of the painful.
and that such as they are should both live ydlely and loyter and beg too,
and stand a prating and questioning, what a goodlye victory, what should I
call his Soldiers have gotten. He misliketh that hired soldiers and
strangers should do great things for them, and they to do nothing for
themselves.
For thus is their doings now a days. And yet I speak not this to the
reproach of them whatsoever they be: that do any good service. But I would
require you all, your selves to do those things for your selves, for which
you do esteem and honor others: neither to swerve a whitte from that your
rank and place of virtue (O Athenians) which your Ancestors by many and
great dangers having attained unto, did leave unto you. Thus have I said
almost all that (as I suppose) may be for your good. God grant you to choose
out that, which shall be best for the profit of the City, and welfare of you
all.

The Argument of the first Oration against king Philip of Macedonie.
AFter that the people of Athens had the worse in battle, against king
Philip, they assembled themselves in counsel as men altogether amazed and out
of heart. Whereupon Demosthenes wills them to be of good courage, and not to
stand in despair of themselves, saying: that it is no marvel if they had the
worse that wear so careless, and so negligent in their own doyngs. And
therefore he exhorts them to be more diligent hereafter and earnestly to
give their minds to the defense of their countries liberty and the daunting
of king Philips force.

In the second part he warns them to address two armies, the one, and that
the greater of Citizens that shall always be in a readiness for the
necessary affairs of the City: the other somewhat less, to be of
forreyners and hired Soldiers, among whom the Citizens to be intermingled.
And these mercinarie strangers he would not have to abide in Athens, nor yet
to go forth into other countries for succouring others against king Philip:
but he would that they went forth to spoil and waste about the borders of
Macedonie: and to keep them still occupied there, with skirmishes and
bickerings, for fear least king Philip should come upon them in the winter
time, and take the advantage when the wind lies in the North east, which
because it was customable to come at a certain season of the year, therefore
it was called of them Etesie, and as it should seem, it lay so upon the
havens of the Athenians countries, that their navy could not put out from
land, to help those that wear distressed by him: and so in their absence he
might make some great enterprise and attempt a conquest: where, as having their
army in a readiness, they shall be always able to bearde him, and withstand
his force from time to time.

In the third part he is earnest again with them, and both wisely rebukes,
and gravely exhorts them to look well to their own affairs, and hereupon
he uses very excellent similitudes, whereby he shows that all occasions and
aduauntages possible should be taken: and that men should never depend upon
casualties, and that it is the greatest fondness in the world to follow
occasions already escaped, as who should say, there wear hope to call again
yesterday.

The first Oration against king Philip of Macedonie.
IF any new thing had been appointed and propounded to be talked upon (O
Athenians) I would have forborne till most of them that are wont to speak
first, The elders and most ancient wear wont to speak first.
had said their minds: and then, if any thing had liked me that they had
said, I would have holden my self fully contented therewith: whereas
otherwise, I would have endeavored to have given mine opinion also. But for as
much as, it falls out that those matters are now to be entreated upon, that
have been ofttymes heretofore ripped up and examined by them, I do think that
I may justly be holden excused, although I have stood up before others to
speak my mind unto you. For truly had they so spoken when time was, and
given such counsel as was fit for them to do, you should not now have
needed to sit in counsel again, upon these matters. When things are in
extremity, it is good to be of good cheer, and rather lustily to amend that
in amiss: than cowardly to faint, and be in despair of all.
And therefore to begin withal: you need not (O Athenians) to be greatly
discouraged with the present state of things, though they seem to run very
much amiss. For why, those which have hurted us most in our matters
heretofore, the self same hereafter shall do us most good. And what is that?
Marie that it is the negligence and careless doings of your selves that have
made all things to go awrie hitherto, whereas if you, Negligence, and want of
care: do cause much woe.
doing your best endeavor ( your state for all that had been never the better)
than might you well have been out of hope, of any recovery or amendment at all.
Again, you may consider as well by hearesay of others, as by your own
remembrance and knowledge, He styrreth the Athenians to be doing, by example
of their ancient prowes achieved against the Lacedaemonians.
what a mighty army the Lacedaemonians have had in times past, and that not
long ago against you, and yet how trimly and how worthily you behaved your
selves (as well beseemed for the honor of your country) in holding out and
mainteyning war in a rightful quarrel. To what end speak I this unto you?
Marie that you (O Athenians) may both see and very well perceive thus much
that neither as long as you list to be circumspect and take heed to things,
you shall need to fear any thing at all. Neither yet as long as you continue
without regard or care of things: that ever you shall compass any such matter
as you look for. And for example hereof, you have as well the might of the
Lacedaemonians in those days, whom you vanquished well enough through your
watchful and diligent looking about you: as now, you may learn by this, his
present spightfulnesse toward us at this time, that bringes us to all this
ado and trouble, and all through our own negligence who have not that regard
to things that we ought to have.

But, if any of you (O Athenians) do think it an hard matter to vanquishe
King Philip considering his present great force and strength, and the loss of
all this that he has taken from us, that same man although he has reason so
to think: yet I would he weyed this also with himself, and remembered that we
too (O Athenians) have had in possession Pydna, Pidna a City in Macedonie.
Potidea a town in Thracia.
Potidea, Methona, and all the Countries and people round about in our own
hands: and that many other Countries, now under his obeysaunce, wear
sometimes free, and had rather a great deal confederate themselves with us,
Methona, now called Modon a town in Achaia.
than with him. And had king Philip been of that mind to think it so hard a
matter with himself and so dangerous, to war with the Athenians having
their country so well fortified, and he himself being then at league with no
others about him: now surely than he would neither have enterprised any such
thing as he has done, neither yet should he ever have attained to be so
mighty as he is.

Countries and states are the rewards of valiant and courageous personages.
But in deed (O Athenians) he knows it full well, that all such places as
those, are booties of war, and prays laid open for him that can first catch
them. For by nature it is so ordained that those who are always following and
plying their matters, shall seize and get the possessions of them that leave
their business always undone: God and nature do set all things to sale for
labor.
and those that will traueile and take pains, shall enjoy the goods of the
idle and slouthful. And thus king Philip carrying wisely this judgment with
him, has both gotten all into his hands and keeps them still, some of them
with such garnisons, as towns gotten upon the enemy are wont to be kept:
some others again, he admittes into a league and friendship with him. For in
deed every man will be glad to join in league, and lean, and take part
willingly with them: whom they see to be well provided for the matter, and to
have a will to execute things as are fit to be done. Wherefore (O Athenians) if
you in like sort will now pluck up your hearts ( which seem to have been
dead in you heretofore) and every one bend himself to do his duty, in all
things, that he is able to show his country any service in, without daliaunce
and in good sadness: that is to say, those that have money, will contribute and
give of their goods and substance franckly: those that are young and lusty to
make themselves ready for the wars, and to speak all at one word, if you
will all of you, be your own men, and masters of your own, and leave of this
doing of nothing, in hope that others shall do all things for you: you shall
than by Gods grace both get all your possessions again, and receive such
things into your hands, as have been lost heretofore through negligence, and
also shall revenge your selves of him well enough.

Neither would I have you to think (O Athenians) that his present state and
good hap is so firm and so immortal, as though he wear a God, King Philips
state both fickle and weak.
and as tho all things went with him as he would wish: but ywis there are
some that hate him, some that f^are him (O Athenians) and some that envy him
to: yea, even of those that bear him best countenance: and all those things,
that are in diverse other men, the same may be thought to be in his familiers
also. Albeit, all these matters are now whist and kept in, because they have no
body to betake themselves unto for succor: seeing you so slow and so faint
hearted as you be. And that is the thing I say unto you, that I would wish you
to shake off from you, and show your selves like men without more a do. I
pray you (O Athenians) mark well the matter, behold what an insolency and
vnwoontnesse the man is grown unto, that does not so much as give you choice
to advice your selves, King Philip he means.
either to be at war with him or to be at rest: but manaceth you, and (as
the common voice goes) he threatens you with proud and hie words, as one not
contenting himself to keep that which already he has gotten, but as one
always incroching, and shooting at farther matter in his mind, and laboring
to hemme you in, and bar you up round about, The idle man is soon taken
tardie.
that you should never be able to stir a foot out of doors, that lie thus
lingering and clawing your elbowes after this sort doing nothing.

But when I pray you (O Athenians) will you do your endeavors? when will you
take care of the commonwealth? what? then, Never more need to be doing then
now.
when any great need shall be? what? when I trust very necessity shall
enforce you to it? why, what shall we think of that that is now presently
done? In good sooth I do think, that the dishonor which we sustain for our
evil and unordered doings: is the greatest necessity that can be to any free
man. Necessity.
Shall this be the fashion of you? will you still continue walking up and down
in the palace yard, Common askers of news, are no better than common pratlers.
and common assemblies, asking of news one of another? I pray you, can there
be told any greater, or stranger news, than, that a man of Macedonie one of
a barbarous nation, dares take in hand to subdue the Athenians, and aspire to
the principality of Greece land?

Again, you ask among your selves, is Philip dead or no? no forsooth,
Unnecessary questions asked of king Philips being.
says one, but he is very sick. Why? what skilles that matter to you? Now
surely, I suppose that if ought happened to him, otherwise than well, you would
make an other king Philip rise straight ways in his place, especially plying
your business none otherwise than I see you do. For it is manifest he is not
grown so great and mighty by his own force and worthiness, as he is
through the sloth and idleness of your selves. But though he wear dead in
deed, and that fortune would be so much our friend, and show us that
favor, (as in deed having ever had more care of us, then we have had of our
selves) and meaning peradventure to end these matters her self for us, and to
perfect her own goodness toward us: yet for all that assure you your selves
to compass all things as you would, so you would but have your army always
at hand, Good dealing with the enemy: when he is at the woorst.
and that you would set upon him in this time, when you see all things in this
great garboyle and trouble. But as you stand now appointed, you should not be
able to recover Amphipolis, no though, Great was the desire of the Athenians to
recover their lost towns.
the time and occasion served you never so well: and that, because I see you
are unready and void of all preparation, and judgment, how to use your
selves.

And here I need not to tell you, that you ought to be alwais ready and well
appointed like courageous men for the welfare of your country, because you know
that well enough and are thereof well and sufficiently persuaded. But I will
endeavor my self to show unto you how you may do, to get such an army
together, as shall be able to deliver and dispatch you out of care and trouble:
and what number of men, and what pays of money, is meet for them: and also
how other things may be made in a readiness, so, as they shall lie best and
speedeliest to be done. This will I do mine endeavor to say my mind in: only
I pray you grant me this request that you will suspend your judgments, and
prevent me not, till you have heard all. And although when I shall touch that
point, it may seem to some that I utter a strange kind of provision, such as
has not been heard of heretofore: yet let no man think therefore, that I do
mind the hinderaunce or delay of things.

Neither yet is their talk most to purpose that would have things to be done
in all post haste: nor yet do I think it possible to repulse these evils that
already touch us, with this small supply, that we now send: but rather is he
to be best allowed, that can show what, and how great an army we should have,
when and how the same might be mainteyned, and continued, till such time as we
have either made peace by equal treaty and composition, or else had
altogether got the upper hand of our enemies. And so by that means you shall
feel no more smart or annoiance hereafter. Thus much I thought I might say,
and I am not miscontented if others undertake to say somewhat also for their
parts. Thus you see I take great things upon me: well, the experience shall
try all, and you shall be judges thereof. The manner how the Athenians did
prepare themselves to the wars.


Therefore first and foremost I say (O Athenians) you must make ready fifty
Galleys, and prepare your selves to be of that mind, (if need so require) as
to go aborde in your own persons, like lusty Soldiers. Moreover, I would
that you had in a readiness for half part of the men at arms on horseback,
certain horsebotes, crayes, and other vessels so many as shall be sufficient.
And these I would have to be ready furnished and appointed, to the intent to
lie in wait for him against all assayes and sudden issues of his, out of his
country, upon them of Pyla, Chersonesus, Pyla, Chersonesus, Olynthus.
and Olynthus, or else wheresoever he wear disposed to offer invasion or
entry. For, this opinion of you, must you put in king Philips head, to quicken
his spirits withal, that you intend out of this your too too much negligence,
Euboia, now Negroponte, an Island in Achaia. Halia^^^m a town in Morea,
within the territory of Messe^i^.
as you did upon Euboia, and a little before that at Haliartum, and now last of
all against Pyla, so likewise now, that it is not impossible you will set upon
him amain. Neither is this a matter to be lightly regarded, no though he
minded no such thing at all, as in deed I dare say he does for all that: and
it be but for this purpose, that either when he shall know it, he may for fear
stay himself, and set his heart at rest, as surely he will know our doings,
specially seeing there be here amongst us, yea amongst our selfs I say, more
than a good meany, that will tell him of al things: or else if he shall make
none account of our readiness and provision: than, that we may distress him
unawares having no guard about him: for there is no let in your way to pass into
his country: when occasion shall serve you. These are the things that I would
have you all persuaded unto: and withal, I think it also meet that you wear
at all times in a readiness.

Moreover, mine advice is (O Athenians) that you make ready a power before
hand against king Philip, Citizens always to be ready for annoying the
enemy.
to keep him continually occupied, and to annoy him withal by all means
possible. And here let no man brave unto me, of ten thousand, or twenty
thousand strangers, nor yet of these iolye armies promised us by Paper and
written for: but let the Soldiers be our own countrymen: so shall they obey
and follow their Capitain, whom soever you shall chose or name: be he, one, or
many, this man, or that man, or whatsoever he be: and that the said army may
have vitailes, with all manner municion needful. And now what that army shall
be, how great in number, where they shall have their vittailes, and how all
these things shall be ordered: that will I tell you, and from point to point,
will I lay before you every thing severally.

As concerning strangers, I like well of them: but here beware that you do
not (as you oftentimes have done to your own hurt) esteeming all things less
than needs, and so determine upon great things with your decrees, and when it
comes to the point, put not in practice the very least of them: nay, rather
ought ye, after determination of a small number once got together, and being in
a readiness, if afterward you think them to little, to agree straight upon
more. So then I say, let there be 2000. soldiers in all, The number of
Soldiers fit for the wars.
whereof I say there must be.500. our own Countrymen, of such age as shall like
you best: they shall serve out their appointed time, and that not very long
neither, but as shall seem fit to you, by course, one after another, that
fresh men may supply their places. And the reast of the army let them be
strangers: and with these two hundred horsemen, whereof fifty at the least I
would have to be our own Citizens to go to the wars in like manner, as the
footmen shall do: and then must ye provide ships for these horsemen to use.
Very well, and what more else? Mary ten light Fusts or Pinnaces, for we have
great need of light Botes, and Pinnaces, seeing there is a navy of his upon
the Seas, to the intent that our power may sail in more safety.

But where shall we have vittayles for maintenance of this army? I will tell
you that also, as soon as I have declared unto you, why I think, that so
small an army (as I have said) will suffice: and wherefore I would that your
own countrymen should go to the wars.

So small an army I think (O Athenians) will suffice, for that we can not
gather such an army together, The reason why he would so small an army should
be provided.
as is able to beard king Philip, and encounter him in open field: but we
shall be enforced to rob and spoil upon him, and after this manner to begin
our wars with him. And therefore must we not have it over great, for that we
neither have money nor vittayles sufficient, neither yet may we have it to
little.

Why he would have his own countrymen to be joined soldiers with the
strangers.
And the cause why I would have our own Citizens go to the seas mixed with
forreyne Soldiers, is for that I understand this country heretofore has had
a certain band of strangers in wages at Corynthe, whereof wear Capitaynes
Policrates, Iphicrates, Corynthus a City in Morea. Policrates, Iphicrates,
Gabrias. Evil trusting strangers alone to serve in the wars by themselves.
Gabrias, with certain others, and that you went a warrefare with them your
selves: yea, and as I have heard say, those strangers being mixed with you and
you with them, overcame the Lacedaemonians. But after you once trusted the said
strangers to war, alone and by themselves, for you: then they spoiled and
pilled our confederates and friends, and by that means our enemies increased
more than is convenient. And so they regarding but a little the wars of our
country went their ways sailing to Artabasus Lieutenant to the Persians, and
about, to diverse other places: and the Captain after them, as reason was for
him to do. For unless the Captain gave them their pays before hand, it is
not possible to rule them, or to make them tarry. And now what is mine advice
herein? Marry, that you take away all the causes of excuses to be made as well
by the Capitaynes, Soldiers must have their pay.
as by the Soldiers: paying them their wages, and making your own Soldiers
as watches and spies entermingled amongst them to know what their chief
Captain does. For as we now rule and govern: it is none other than a
mockery. For, and a man should ask you the question, have you peace (O
Athenians) with all men, or no? You would answer no, but we have war with
king Philip. Little was the authority that the Athenians had in their wars.
And to prove that it is so, have not you made among you Ten men Citizens of
your own, to be your Capitaines, Coronels, and Marshalles, and two Governors,
or Lords of horsemen? And I pray you, what do all these men? (one man only
set aside) whom you have sent forth to the wars: all the reast does serve you
for a show and pomp to go in procession with the Priests. For you use those
Coronels, and Marshalles, as Potters and Founders do use their work in clay:
to set them forth in the market place, and not to be employed in the wars.
Had it not been better for you (O Athenians) to have chosen Coronels, of your
own Countriemen and Capitaynes of your horsemen, such as are bred and borne
among you? and so your army being all soldiers of your own country: should
also have conductors of their own countrymen to lead them. But the Capitaynes
of the men at arms being your own countrymen, they must sail to Lemnus:
forsooth: and Menelaus a stranger, Menelaus a stranger and Captain to the
Athenians in their wars at home.
he must have the charge and be general over the men at arms here at home, for
the defense and safeguard of our country. And this I do not say to challenge
Menelaus, or to complain of him whom you have allowed: but yet whosoever he
be, Dangerous (...) have a stranger general.
it wear fit that he that takes such a charge in hand, should serve by your
appointment. Thus touching these matters, it is possible you think I have said
well.

And now, all your desire is to hear what money we need, and where it is to
be gathered. Well, I will tell you that too. Therefore to the point of money (for
men must needs have wherwithall to live) we shall need for the allowance of
Soldiers in their vittayles only, that shall go in the army, nintie Sixtene
thousand two hundred pounds starling.
talents, and somewhat more: for ten swift Galleyes or Fustes Seven thousand
two hundred pounds starling.
forty talents, twenty pounds weight of silver every month Three score
pounds starling.
for every Galley. For two thousand Soldiers as much likewise as for the
Galleys, so that every Soldier shall receive every month for provision of
his vittayles It appears by this reckoning, the provision should be for a
year.
ten drachmes, and two hundred horsemen shall have Six shillings starling. A
hundred drachmes, made minam, which was a pound of xij. ounces, that is three
pound sterling of our standard.
twelve talents, the which is after every month Two thousand a hundred sixty
pounds starling.
three hundred drachmes a man. And if any body think this allowance of
vittayles to be too scant a relief for ye maintenance of Soldiers: he does
not think well. For I am assured if this be orderly done, the army will
provide the reast of themselves by the wars, to make up their full stipend
and reasonable finding, without any wrong or harm doing to any of the
Grecians, or to their allies either. And if this fall not out as I have said:
I am contented of mine own accord to go to the wars with them my self, and
to suffer all manner of extremity that they can devise.

But where this money shall be had, that must you tell us: Nine pounds starling.
well, I will show you that even now.

The discourse how to gather money is here left out.

The things that we (O Athenians) are able to find out, are these. And when
you have made an end of asking every man's voice, you shall give your hands to
that that likes you best, so shall you make your war with king Philip, To say
and do are two things.
not with Paper work, and decrees only: but with effect and in good earnest.
And in my mind you shall better conclude all things touching these wars and
the preparations for the same: if you (O Athenians) first foresee and consider
well before hand, the situation of that country where you mind to make your
wars: and farther, if you think with your selves how king Philip compasses
most of his affairs by observing the time, and season of the year: who taking
advantage of the Northeast winds and storms, Etesie, certain Northeast
winds, so called because they came ordinarily at a certain season of the year.
settes upon us at such time, as we shall not be able to stir from hence. And
therefore considering these things, it were good that you warred not with
aids and supplies only, for so we may lose all: but with an ordinary power,
and such a preparation as may continue. And this your garnison may winter it
self in Stalimene, Thasus, Lemnus now Stalimene an Island in the sea Aegeum,
south from Candia. Thasus an Island their likewise, not far from Thracia.
Sciathus an Island there also.
Sciathus, and other Isles theraboutes, where as is good harbor, forage,
vittayles, and all other things necessary for an army: and at that time of the
year when shall be good landing, and little danger of storms: and when our
Soldiers may easily approach and enter in within the country and haven
mouths, where they may fare well and have good cherishing. Thus of the manner
and time of using this power, the Captain for the time being shall direct you
well enough: but the things to be performed of your parts, are those which I
have made you a draught of. And if you will (O Athenians) first and foremost
provide this money, as I have told you: and when that is done, have in
readiness all other things, as footmen, Galleys, men at arms, and bind the
whole army by a solemn act and constitution to keep the field altogether
and not to wander or go else where: Good heed to be taken in time of war,
for dispensing of the treasure, that every man may have his just pay.
and that you your selves will be the treasurers of the Camp, the paymaisters
to Soldiers, and the Auditors to Capitaynes for the accountes of their
recepts: then shall you, at length make an end for ever of this long
consultation of matters, all to no purpose. Moreover, this commodity will also
follow unto you (O Athenians) that you shall entercept and stop him of his
greatest revenues that he receives. And what are they? Marie he mainteyneth
war against you with the money of your confederates and neighbors, extorted
from them and gotten by robbing and spoiling them, on the seas in warrelike
manner. And what more? you shall be also altogether out of his danger from
doing you any harm. Neither shall he be able to do as heretofore he has
done, when he rushed in upon Lemnus, and Imber, and there took your men
prisoners and carried them slaves to Gerastus, Gerastus. Marathona.
whereby he has got an infinite sum of money, and last of all set upon
Marathona, and coming within the land, carried away from thence our holy
Galley: and this were you not able, as then, to let him of, nor yet to send
aid in time, as was agreed upon. A sacred Galey.
But what is the reason I pray you (O Athenians) that you keep always so just
and at a day appointed the feast of our Lady Pallas, The feast of Minerua kept
by order.
and God Bacchus, whosoever it be that you choose for governors or masters
thereof, be they men of gravity and doings, The holy day of God Bacchus duly
observed, and by order appointed to be kept.
or simple and private persons, fit, or unfit men: and bestow so much money
thereupon, as you have not done the like, for setting forth of any one navy
hitherto, and that with such preparation and hurlye burlye wythall: as the
like is not to be seen in any other place. Short shooting loses the game
Whereas your navy comes always to short of the time and season and through
your delays, Methona, now called Modon, an haven town in Morea.
you lose all good occasions that might else be had, like as you played by that
you sent to Modon, Pegase, and Potidea. The reason is this. All things that
appertain to such feasts and pastimes, are done by order, Great is the value
of order and foresight to govern things well.
and established by law: and every man knows long before, who shall be ring
leader in their daunces, who shall be master of their games for his ward,
when, and of whom, and what every man's duty is to receive, and to do, so that
there is nothing to look for, Disorder and want of foreknowledge, do cause
confusion.
nothing neglected or left undone, for lack of order: where as in your wars,
and the preparation thereof, all things are confused, all done without order,
all without determination, and nothing aright as it ought to be. But as soon as
we hear say that the enemy begins to be stir himself: then by and by, we
fall to appointing of Capitaynes of Galleys, then commes in The manner was that
if any man being sessed, refused to pay that he was sessed at, an other
offering to change goods with him: might do it, and take that in hand that he
should.
chopping and changing of goods, that is, we give them leave to change their
goods with others, that will give them theirs, and take their charge in hand.
And then we lay our heads together how to get money, for provision of these
wars. When that's done, we decree that as well forreyners coming from other
places to dwell here with us, as outdwellers in the Suburbs: shall go into the
Galleys, and then to follow after our selves. Thus whilst we lie houering
about this, the thing is lost, that we sat out for: for why, we spend our
time only in preparing our selves, Time taryeth no man.
and setting things forward. And ywis the time of doing things, taries not your
leisure and delaying. Besides that, those aids and bands abroad which we
account should be our succors: are found when time shall come, not able in
deed to do any thing at all. He means king Philip.
And as for that man, he is now become so outrageous and spiteful, that he
has written such letters to the Euboians, as these are.

Here lacks the Copy of King Philips Letters to the Euboians, the which as
it should seem wear written sharply against the Athenians to disclose their
secrets.

The greatest part (O Athenians) of this matter contained in these Letters, is
very true (for would God it wear not so) howbeit, perhaps these matters be
not pleasant to your hearing. Well, wear things as easy to be passed over
with silence, and let slip in doings, as they may be spared in talk for fear
of offending: why, than I grant in deed it were not amiss to tell our tales
so, Pleasant talk unnecessary when plain speech is most needful.
as men might like withal. But seeing it is so that this currying of fauell in
words when we ought not, is a plague to our works when we should do them,
surely it is a foul shame (O Athenians) for such men as you are to bleare your
own eyes, and to shift off all things that be difficult, to come short of all
that is needful, and that you cannot understand thus much: That valiant
Capitaynes must never follow after occasions lost, but rather must prevent
them, and be aforehande with them in time. And even as it fitteth a general of
an army to foresee and provide for all things while season serves him:
Foresight in Magistrates most requisite.
so should they that take upon them government and administration of affairs:
well, advise them selves before hand, what they have to do, to the end that
such things as they once have resolved and agreed upon, may be put in
execution, and not be driven to follow the event of things. And where as you (O
Athenians) have the greatest power above all others, as well of Galleys and
Soldiers both footmen, and horsemen, as also of revenues of money: Lingering
is then noisome, when necessity requires haste.
yet for all that, as you have lack of nothing, so have you to this day, not
employed any one thing to any good use at all. But much like as these
barbarous people go to buffettes, As Switzers fight fondly: so do many people
and nations deal with their enemies unwisely.
and fight with their fistes one with another: even so do you now make war
with king Philip. For they, when one has a blow given him, by and by he lays
his hand upon that place where he had the blow, and if an other hit him in an
other place, straight ways he lays his hand there also, without any skill or
regard how to ward the blow, or almost to look him in the face that stroke
him: So you, if you hear say that king Philip is in Cherronesus, Cherronesus,
now Phan^^ a port town in Morea.
by and by you send aid thither: if you hear that he is at the Pyles, you
run straight thither to: if any other where, you gad hither and thither, and
wait upon him up and down, you wot not whither. So, you follow after him as
after your general and chief Captain: And as for any council in ordering
your wars, you have none of your selves that good is: neither do you foresee
any thing before it be either done, or is in doing. And so much might you have
done heretofore possible well enough, but now things are brought to the utter
extremity, and will not give us leave any longer to use it.

Now surely (O Athenians) I think some God being ashamed on the Cities behalf
of our doings, God sends often times wicked tormentors to securge and annoy
others.
has put this earnest love of doing, and this painfulnesse into king Philips
head: For, would he keep to himself all his conquestes and prises, and so be
at rest, I do think some of us, as it seems to me, could be well enough
content with the matter, and deal no farther, whatsoever the world cried out
of us for it, other shame, cowardlinesse, or any other villainy besides, for
this our slacknesse in government and slothful dealings. But forasmuch as he
takes upon him still ambiciously to desire more and more, peradventure his
meaning is to quicken you and egg you forward, The carfulness of the
wicked, ought to quicken the Godly to look about them.
so you be not altogether in despair of your selves. But I marueyle much (O
Athenians) that none of you does consider, nor that any of you is an angered,
when ye see that the first intent and beginning of these wars against king
Philip, was only to be revenged of him, and to do him hurt, but the end of it
is to defend our selves that we take no hurt. And most certain it is, that he
will never rest and hold himself contented till some begin to bearde him, and
to withstand his enterprises. And shall we than tarry and do nothing till that
time? What? do you think that all shall go well with you? because you have
made out a few empty and evil appointed Galleys? and have an hope in one
ioly fellow or other, that shall have charge of affairs, when you set forth?
shall we not embarke our selves? and we that could never be brought to it
before, shall we not martche forwards now at the length, with some company
of our own countrymen? shall we not put over a nauye into his Country?

But some peradventure will ask the question, and where I pray you sir shall
we put a land? All passages are open to the stowte and valiant soldier*
The very war it self (O Athenians) shall show and discover us the crackes
and breaches of his state, so we would once go in hand with the matter. But
and we do nothing but sit still at home, hearing our Orators scold one with
another, and each accusing and blaming other: we shall never do, no never shall
we do, any thing well as we ought and are bound to do. And yet assure your
selves of this, whether soever you listed to send forth any power of our men
(though ye whole army be not there altogether) there, will God himself, and
good fortune, fight in our quarrel. Whereas if you should send but a Capitain
forth with a single and sleuelesse decree, with great threats to your enemies,
and a few comfortable words from this consistory, to put men in hope withal:
you shall be sure on the other side, As good never a whit, as never the better.
you shall never do any good at all. For why, our enemies shall laugh us to
scorn, and our friends shall be utterly discouraged: and think themselves
undone when they shall see this masking and counterfeite preparations. For it
is not possible, neither can it be, that any one man alone, shall be able to do
all that for you, that you would have done. Well may he promise, and avouch any
thing, and accuse this man, or that man: and that is even it, that has brought
all to naught. For as long as things be thus handled, that a Lieuetenant of a
sight of forreyne, wretched, Dangerous to slander soldiers that have
served, and worst of all to condemn them upon the false report of others.
and vnappoynted soldiers, if he chance to take the foil in the field, by
and of that which he shall do there: you, have one here at home shall
forthwith be ready to bring a lying tale of him, and you as soon as you have
heard the matter, howsoever it be, will be as ready to make a decree
thereafter. What hope I pray you then is there left of such a government? and
when or how, will you redeem such a mischief? Marie even then and not before,
all things will be well, when you (O Athenians) shall be disposed to go on
warfare your selves, and be lively witnesses of all those things that the
Capitaines do, and at your return home, make your selves judges of all their
accountes. For it is not only convenient for you to hear how your own
matters have passed: Governors to be personal and careful vewers of things to
be done.
but also that you be personally vewers and present seers of the things done.

But now things be so shamefully handled, that there is never a Captain but
has been arreigned upon his life twice or thrice before you: where as not one
of them has been so hardy as once to adventure the same in fighting like a
man, against the enemy, but had rather choose the Gallows (as it seems)
like an errant thief and rouer: than like an honest man, to spill his blood in
open field upon his enemy. In deed it beseems well naughty packes and
wicked doers to die by order of justice, but a valiant Soldier and
courageous Captain, it becomes to die in the field, upon his enemy.

In this mean while there be some of you, that do nothing but go up and
down, and prattle news scant worth a straw, Flying tales, and flattering
news: do never good to any state.
one that king Philip through the help and aid of the Lacedaemonians practices
the destruction of Thebes, and minds the dissolution of free Cities and
commonweals: an other sort of you, tells how king Philip has sent his
Ambassadors to the Persians: others do babble, how he fortifieth in Illiria.
And thus we go up and down every man devising one tittle tattle or other, as
his own vain head imagines.

I for my part (O Athenians) do thus think of king Philip in good sooth, that
he is dronken and assotted with the greatness of his own doings, and
dreameth much in his fantasy of such like things, both because he sees
such a dezert, and wilderness of men to withstand him, and also because he
is puffed up with the pride and glory of his own prosperous doings. And yet
let no man be so mad to think that he goes so about his matters, and takes
such ways, as every fool amongst us shall perceive what he does or intends
to do. And what verier fools can there be in all the world, than these tale
cariers and news coyners be? Albeit let us give over these toys, A short
gathering of all that has been said. 1. King Philip enimye to Athens. 2. A
spoyler of their country. 3. Proud and injurious. 4. And their trusty
friends, by him made treacherous and untrue persons. Best for a man to trust to
himself. Better to fight with the enemy at his own home, than for him to
fight with us in our own country.
and learn our selves to understand: that this man is our enemy, that he
spoyleth us of our goods, and has done us wrong this great while, and
whatsoever others would have done for us, the same (as it appears) he has
altered and turned clean against us. And than our remain shall be to trust
to our selves and to advance our own power to make resistaunce against him.
But if so be it that we will not make over, to fight with him there:
peradventure he will drive us to fight with him here at home whether we will or
no. Wherefore if we can think upon these things which I have said, I doubt
not but we shall advise our selves well enough, and be well rid of the tattle
of a sight of fools: neither need we to bethink us any more of the matter,
how we shall do hereafter. Once this is certain, unless we plye our
matters otherwise than we have done hitherto, and every man be ready to do
his part, we shall be sure to do but ill fauouredly.

And I for my part was never of that mind to speak to the pleasing of any
one man, Demosthenes never preferred private welfare before common weal.
further then I was well assured the same should be profitable for every man.
And namely at this time I have not shroonke to utter franckly and plainly my
mind of whatsoever thing I thought was for your profit and commodity. And
would God, that like as I am well assured that it is for your benifite to
hear good things: so I might perceive it profitable to him that tells you,
and warnes you for the best, like a most faithful and friendly Counselor:
then should I speak with a better will. And albeit I am in doubt, and can not
tell certainly what will happen unto me upon this: yet notwithstanding,
because I am most certain that if you do as I have said, it shall turn to
your great ease: I have thought good therefore to tell you thus much. And I
pray God, that thing may prevail with you: which shall be for the welfare of
you all.

The Argument of the second Oration against king Philip of Macedonie.
DEmosthenes being afraid to stir the Athenians directly to war, for dread
of the people being evil carried away by others that told them of the great
charges that the wars do bring: does council them to take heed of king
Philip, as of a suspected enemy. And in no wise to trust his forged peace,
under shadow whereof he does all the mischief he can. And therefore he wills
them to look well to their business, and to trust to themselves, making their
people ready against all assayes: because that king Philip does nothing else
but lie in wait for them and all Greeceland besides, to conquer them, and to
become a Tyrant over them all. And in showing the manner and behavior as well
of them in their doings, as of him in his doings: he does very wisely, bring
in, many likelyhoodes and evident profes, as well concerning the disposition of
king Philips own person, as of the Grecians in general, and so he makes it a
very plain and clear matter that king Philip does hate them deadly: warning
them for that cause not to trust his fair promises, nor yet the proffered
kindness and favor exhibited by Eschines and others. For that king Philip
has most cruelly abused other cities and countries with such like craft and
subtlety. And here he gives a lesson fit at all times for all men living, the
which is this. That there can be no greater strength and assurance to a man,
than to be mistrustfull, for (according to Libanius report) even as money is
the strength and sinews of war: so is mistrustfulnesse the maintenance and
safegarde of wisdom.

In the end he promises to give king Philips Ambassadors their answer when
they shall come, in case they themselves doubt what answer to make unto them:
but he shows not what he will say, but leaves that matter and falls to
inueigh against those Traitors that are king Philips hyrelings, and shows
that their promises, and king Philips present doings, agree not together: and
therefore plainly does discifer king Philip to be their mortal enemy,
against whom he councelleth them to take armor in hand, and to proclaim open
war for the better safegarde and defense of their whole estate and Country.

The second Oration against king Philip of Macedonie.
WHen any talk is (O Athenians) of king Philips doings, Words are unfit
weapons to withstand armor.
and the outrages and violences that he committes contrary to the peace: I
perceive you esteem it to be both honest and reasonable. And who soever will
seem to speak any thing against king Philip, they shall be thought to speak,
as is fit for them: and yet for all that, there is nothing in a manner done,
as it ought to be, nor yet as should become them that have so much told them,
as you have. For the world is come to this point with us now, that the more
plainelye and cleerelye a man shows king Philip to have broken peace with us,
and to seek a conquest over al Grecelande: so much the more dangerous it is,
to give council what wear best to be done. And the reason is this, because (O
Athenians) all such as through violence and wrong covet more than in right they
should do: ought to be daunted and kept back with deeds, and not with words
only. And first of all, we our selves that take upon us this place, our wont
is to forbear council and advise, in those points, for fear of your
displeasure: and in steed of them we fall a discoursing unto you of his
doings, how dangerous, how weighty, and how heinous they are, and such like
things. And then you that be the hearers: in understanding, and giving ear to
a man's tale, be much more ready than king Philip is. But when it commes to ye
withstanding of his doings that he is now in hand withal: then you be
altogether idle, and as cold in your doings, as may be. Such study, such
fruit*
And therefore it falls out to good reason, and it must needs be so to: that
look in what things either of you both is most conversant and traueyled: in
the selfsame each of you, does excel the other, that is, he in deeds, and
you in words. And if so be you think it a goodlyer matter, to speak more
aptly to the purpose, than he does: why, that's a thing easy enough to do, and
it needs no great traueile. But if it stand us upon at this time to consider
how to amend things presently amiss, least through our unadvisedness and
ignorance, the same go to ruin and destruction more and more hereafter, and
least he shock us with such a power, as we shall not be able to encounter: then
are we not to take that way of consulting together, as we have done
heretofore, but as well all they that be Orators, Profit to be preferred unto
pleasure.
as all you that be hearers: must choose those things that be good and
profitable, and leave the delitefull and pleasant.

And first of all, if any man among you (O Athenians) is so foolehardy and so
rash that seeing how mighty a lord king Philip is, makes reckoning for all
that, The enemy being mighty: he is to be feared greatly.
yt this his stately greatness will breed no harm nor danger to our City,
neither yet that all that his preparation is meant against you: I do much
marvel at him that so thinks. And therefore I pray you al, hear me a while
what I will say, and wey my reasons, why, I am not of your mind, but rather
think king Philip to be a deadly enemy unto us all: to the intent that if I
shall by good hap seem to see farther in him, and to judge of him more truly
than others do: you may follow mine advise and council. But if these bold and
foolehardy fellows, such as have so sound a belief and trust in him, see
farther and deeper than I do: why then, agree you to them on Gods name.
Demosthenes consideration upon king Philips doings.
First (O Athenians) I consider what countries king Philip has united to
himself, since the peace concluded with us, namely the Pyles, and the
Phoceyans. And what then? Pyle certain narow gates or strayts for passages.
how has he used them I pray you? Mary he has done for the commodity of the
Thebanes all that he could possible, but for us he has done no one thing at
all. And why did he so? forsooth, because in bestowing his wits how to get
and to bring all under his subjection without regard of peace and quietness,
right or wrong: he wisely does consider and know right well that he is not
able to win our City, or us either (as we have hitherto lived) by any
corruption of gift to betraye any of the Greekishe towns to him, for our own
profit: but rather he sees that we have regard to justice, to upright
doings, and to the eschewing of dishonor, King Philip finds the Athenians
unspotted, for corruption.
always foreseeing things fit for us with great warynesse: by which he does
perceive that we will consequently withstand him (if he take any such matter
in hand) as though we had open war with him. But as for the Thebanes he
thought (as it fell out in deed) that for the pleasure he had done them:
Thebanes, corrupted by gifts and fair promises.
they would suffer him to use the rest as he listed: who not only would so
much as once offer to withstand and hinder his purposes: but would also be
ready to take part with him in the field if he required them. And so hoping
to find the like in others, he shows himself very courteous and favorable
to the Messenians, Great princes seek amity of meaner states for their own
welfare, and to serve their several turns the better.
and Argians for the same cause also. A matter (O Athenians) very highly to
your honor. For hereby you alone are of all the world judged to be the only
men above all others that will not be corrupted with any promise or reward to
forsake the common liberty of Greece, nor yet to change for any man's favor or
profit: whatsoever amity or good will you do bear their country. Athenians
never corrupted with any fair promise, or offered hope, to lose their
countries liberty.
And surely king Philip has rightly judged thus of you, and far otherwise of
the Thebanes and Argians, considering not only your present state, but also
the doings of your Ancestors: for he finds and perceives (as I believe)
that your predecessors although they might have been Lords over all Greece,
Athenians worthiness se^ forth by example of their elders.
(so as they would have bowed to the devotion of the Persians and their king)
would not only not hear Alexander (of whom these men wear come) being then
Ambassador to persuade them thereunto, but did determine rather to forsake
their country, Herodotus, reporter of these matters.
and to suffer all misery that might be. Wherein they so worthily acquitted
themselves, that all men since, have longed much to talk of them, but no man
yet could worthily set them forth: as they have deserved. And therefore, I will
stay my tongue, and good reason too. For why, their worthy exploites and
renown, have been greater, than any man has been able to utter by word of
mouth: Whereas the Ancestors of the Thebanes and Argians have some of them
joined their power with the Barbarian and stranger, In the wars against the
Persians, the Argeyans would not meddle, but the Thebanes took part with the
Persians.
marching under his banner: and other some of them, would never set out foot
against him. And therefore, he knows that both they do more esteem their
own private estates: than they do regard the common profit of all Greece
besides. And well he saw, that if he should have sought your friendships, he
must needs have chosen you for justice sake, where having the others to be of
his side, he was assured to have their maintenance in his unjust and covetous
desires. And that is the cause why he has always esteemed and still does
esteem their friendship more than yours, not because he sees they have more
Galleys than you, or because (having found good footing, or any great
superiority within the maine land) he neglects to be Lord of the Seas and
their merchant Towns. Neither has he yet forgotten these conditions and
promises, by which he trained them to be at peace with him. But (says one) it
was none of all this that moved him to do as he has done, neither yet his
ambition nor covetousness, An answer to an objection, proouing that king
Philip neither for iustise sake, nor yet by enforcement, was friend to the
Thebanes, with certain mocking of those nations.
or any other thing whereof he is accused, that made him to incline more to the
Thebanes than to us: but the only cause was because he knew them to be more
faithful than we are. This reason vnboubtedly (of all other reasons) he can
not well allege, for he that craftily forced the Lacedaemonians to give up the
town of Messena, and at the self same time, notwithstanding set the Thebanes
in possession of Orchomene and Choronea: how can he be said to have dealt justly
and uprightly. But some will say he was enforced (for else there is none excuse
remaining for the defense of king Philip) to surrender and give up those places
much against his will, as being than environed and surprised, by the horsemen
of the Thessalians, and the Soldiers of Thebes. A good tale, on forth a Gods
name. And therefore (say they) he has the Thebanes in great jealousy, yea,
and they go up and down devising further tittle tattle, how he minds to
fortify Elateia: but he will do a Dog as soon. He will never deal that way
at all, as I think: and forsooth he will never join with the Messenians and
the Argians as he does, to set upon the Lacedaemonians, and yet he has sent a
supply of strangers and money, and is looked for to be there in person
himself with a mighty power: so that he seeks the destruction of the
Lacedaemonians, as enemies to the Thebanes. And those Phoceyans whom heretofore
he did overthrow, and destroy, he minds now to succor and to defend: yea
forsooth that he will. And I pray you what mad man would believe these things.
For surely, I can not think for any thing that I can see, that king Philip will
continue to be an enemy to the enemies of the Thebanes, if either perforce or
against his will, he granted heretofore those matters before named: or else if
he now mistrusted their good will toward him: but rather it is evident by his
present doings, that he has sought their favors for a purpose and wrought
this policy to serve his own turn withal. And whosoever looks narowly
upon this matter, The lapping up of all these matters.
he cannot but plainly see that all these his practices are wholye bent
against our country to take an advantage when he sees his time. And this
he does in a manner for mere necessity. For, I pray you wey the matter with
your selves, and think thus of it: he will needs rule and be sovereign over
all: and he knows well that none can withstand him, but you, who have been
so long time molested by him through the injuries and wrongs that he has
done, and daily does against you, as his own conscience can best witness
against him, for by means of possessing those places which sometime were
yours, and now are his, he keeps the reast of his dominions in safety: but
and if he should lose once Amphipolis and Potidea: he should hardly sit sure in
his chair at home. And therefore full well is he guyltie to himself: both
that he lies in wait for you, and that you also do understand it. And because
he has found you a wise and a sage people, he gathers by just consequence,
Wise men being wronged, are to be feared of the wrong doers.
and good reason, that you are his enemies, and that makes him so sharp set,
to prevent your doings, as one looking for a scouring at your hands, whenever
any occasions shall be offered. This is it that he watches for, this is the
cause of his close lying in wait against the City. And why, he holds in,
so much with certain of the Thebanes, and with some Peloponesians also that are
of the same mind with them, whom he accountes to be so greedy and covetous of
lucre, Evil men care for nothing but for the present time only.
that the present estate pleases them well enough, and so beastly and so
foolish, that they neither regard nor foresee the time to come. Howbeit, they
that are but of a mean understanding, may have a very effectual token and
sample of his devises and purposes, by that which was my chance once to tell
both to the Messenians, and also to the Argians. And peradventure it wear not
amiss to tell the selfsame tale now again to you.

Part of an oration rehearsed here by Demosthenes, whereby he did will the
Messenians, and the Argians, not to be in league with king Philip.
I pray you (quoth I) tell me, O Messenians, how would the Olynthians have
taken it to have heard king Philip so evil spoken of in their presence at that
time, when he gave and delivered Anthemunta unto them: a town so greatly
desired and claymed heretofore by all the kings of Macedonie? or then also,
when he gave Potidea unto them, and drove out the outpeopled Athenians, a
people that came from Athens to dwell there, and the hatred borne by them
against you, Olynthians abused by King Philips counterfeyte dealings.
he took upon himself, and gave the profits of the lands to them to enjoy:
think you that they would have looked for such miseries as after followed? or
would have believed him that should have told it them? no undoubtedly never
think it: and yet thus it now falls out (said I) that where as they have
had the fruit and use of other men's lands for a very short time: they have
since lost most shamefully their own territories for a long time, and are
fowly put out, not as men conquered only, but like men betrayed and sold among
themselves traitorously. And to say the truth, it is never safe for any free
City to enter into over great familiarity with Tyrants. Thessalians deceived
^y king Philip under color of friendship offered.
What should I say unto you of the Thessalians? do you think (said I) when he
had driven out their Tyrants, and had given also unto them, Illiria, and
Magnesia, that they ever would have looked for the Ten Lords to rule them as
they do now? or that he which gave them Pyla, would afterward have taken
their own proper revenues from them? Surely, they would never have thought it.
And yet notwithstanding it did so fall out afterward, as all the world
knows: wherefore (said I) take heed of king Philip with his great gifts
and promises, and curse you him, that has so often deceived you, and brought
you to such afterdeales, and (if you wise be) pray to God you may never see him
again. There are diverse devises (said I) made for the defense and garding of
Cities, as Rampires, Walls, Trenches, and such other like, and all these
requires great costs and charges, and are the handiworks of man: but there is a
guard of natures getting, common to all wise men, and that undoubtedly is good
and assured for all degrees of men, and most of all, for all free Cities, and
Commonalties of people against the force of Tyrauntes. And what bulwark or
defense might this be? even MISTRVSTFVLNESSE. Keep this surely and embrace it,
and so you shall be safe and out of al danger. I pray you what is it you would
have? (quoth I) is it not liberty? And do you not see that even the very
Mistrustfulnes the chiefest safegarde that may be against the practices of
Tyraunts.
titles and styles, the which Philippe takes upon him, are clean contrary to
liberty? for every king and Tyrant is an enemy to all liberty, He means
because he writ himself king.
and an ouerthrower of all laws. Will not you then (said I) look about you,
and take heed least while you seek to be delivered from wars: you do find
a master of him? and bring your selves in bondage?

The Messenians when they had heard this, although they allowed well enough of it
themselves: and had heard many other reasons in my presence by other
Ambassadors besides my self: and of others also, when I was gone (as it is
most likely:) yet could they not be brought for all that, to break of from
king Philip, nor once to mistrust his fair promises. And it is no great shame
or rebuke for certain Messenians and Peloponesians, if they do a thing
contrary to that, that reason persuades them to be good for them: but to you,
it soundes marvelously to your dishonor, who as well by your own
understanding as by our telling, know your selves to be laid for, and environed
round about, and that continuing in this slothfulness and nothing doing,
Careless men are ever most nigh their own harm.
you shall catch hurt sooner (I fear me) than you beware of. Such is the force
of a little fleeting pleasure and ease for a short time more unto your hurt,
than is the honor and profit of a long time to come. And therefore (if you be
wise) take council of your selves, while you may, of your matters you have to
do.

Now how and in what manner you shall make your answer, well, and as shall
be fit for you, that will I tell you.

Meet it were (O Athenians) that you caused such to be called before you as
brought you the promises, whereby you wear induced to make peace. Ambassadors
seeking their own private welfare: are most dangerous ministers and therefore
to be narowly looked unto.
I for my part could never find in my heart to take that Embassage upon me for
reporting of the untruth, or to agree to any such peace. And sure I am that you
would have desisted from war, had you thought that king Philip after peace
concluded with you: would have done these things that he has done, but the
tale that was told than, was far otherwise. There be others also, that are to
be called to account, and who be they? Even those whom after the conclusion of
the peace at my return from my last Embassage for taking their oaths, when I
perceived they wrought wiles and crafts with the City: Dangerous to grant
an entry, to the enemy.
I told before hand, and protested unto them, that so much as in me lay I
would never agree to the letting go of the Pyles, and the Phoceyans: whereto
they told me again, that it was no marvel if I, like a water drinker as I
was, were such a froward and peeuishe colericke man. Good men maliced for
speaking truth.
And as for king Philip they said he would do according to your desires, if he
might pass once into Greece. He would also fortify both Thespias and Plateas,
and cause the Thebanes to forbear such outrage and wrong doing to their
neighbors as they use. And that he would pierce through Cherronesus, upon his
own charges, Fair promises makes fools feign.
and deliver unto you Euboia and Orope, in recompense of Amphipolis. For I
trust you remember all these promises to have been made in this place of
audience, though you are not the quickest men in the world to take a mark of
them, that have done you a shrewde turn.

And that (which is too bad a thing to speak of) you wear so far carried
away with this hope, that you have decreed that the ratifying and
establishement of this same peace, should also discende unto your successors
and posterity. So far and so thoroughly wear you led away and deceived by
these forgers and counterseyters of untruths. To what end do I tell all
this? and why would I have these men sent for to come before you? I will tell
you franckly and boldly the truth (so God help me) neither will I hide any
thing from you: Not to the intent to fall a railing and taunting, whereby to
make you have the like talk of me again, or to give them that ever since the
beginning of the matter have borne me a grudge, Pickethankes seek by
discrediting others, to benefit themselves.
a fresh occasion at this time to get money of king Philip: no nor yet to keep
a stir in vain, and to no purpose. But I speak it, because I know king
Philips doings will grieve you more hereafter, than my sayings do at this time.
For I see things are in a great forwardness. Well, I pray God I guess not
aright, yea, I fear me greatly they are ouernigh us already. And then when it
shall lie no more in our powers to remedy that which is fallen upon us, nor
that you shall have either me or any other, to tell you the treasons that are
intended against you, but when you yourselues shall behold all things with
your eyes, and know them to well: then do I think you will be thoroughly
tormented and in a great chafe with your selves. And I fear me least
questionless these faults of your Ambassadors (guilty to themselves, even in
their consciences of briberie and corruption in these matters) being concealed
and passed over with silence, Good men in greater danger for saying the truth:
than evil men are for doing naughtily.
the blame and displeasure thereof shall light upon them that seek all the
means they can, how to recover and redress the losses and hurtes received by
them. For I do see it ordinarily, men wreake their anger, not upon the
offenders: but against those that are under their power.

Wherefore, now while we stay, and be in a mammering, harckening one to
another: I would have every one of you, (although you are wise enough of your
selves) to call to your remembrance what he was that councelled you to give
over the Pyles and the Phoceyans: Pyla, were certain straytes to stop
passages, where the town Thermopylae stood.
Which places as soon as he was once possessed of, he was straight ways
master of the passages to Attica, and Peloponnesus. Whereby he has now
brought you in that case, that you are no more to consult how to make war
for any right and claim belonging unto you, Peloponesus now Morea.
or how to dispose of forreyne provinces and matters abroad: but how to
deliberate upon war when it shall come within our own Country, and within
Attica it self. Which time whenever it shall come, it will be a bitter
season to you all. And yet was this evil set abroche, even that very day when
the Pyles were given unto him.

For if you had not then been deceived and so abused, One inconvenience
suffered: many mischiefs do follow after.
this City had not had this business nor this ado that we now have. For
neither should King Philip like a Conqueror by Sea, come with his navy into
Athens: neither yet should he by land ever have been able to have passed
over the Pyles and the Phoceyans: but either he should have been feign to
have kept all couenauntes and been at peace and quietness, or else to have
fallen by and by into the like war which he was in, before he sought for
making of the peace. These things therefore may suffice for me now to have
said unto you, to put you in remembrance withal. And yet be it far from
me, and God forbid it also, that we should enter over narrowly into the
searching and sifting of these things. For in deed, I for my part would not,
that any man although he wear worthy to dye: should suffer smart and
punishment, to the common danger and peril of all men.

The Argument upon the third Oration against king Philip of Macedonie.
FOr as much as king Philip being in league with the Athenians, did in words
only keep peace, and in deeds wrought them much mischief: Demosthenes does
exhort all Grecelande to withstand his violent dealinges, and to cut of his
great rodes and invasions made every where: showing that it is now high time
for them so to do, if they will eschew perpetual servitude, and bondage for
ever. And for this purpose he brings examples of their Ancestors, that
those Cities that governed by Tyranny, lost their state, for that the Grecyans
could never abide unjust government, nor any grievous usurped authority.
Moreover, he takes on marvelously against Traitors, and reherseth certain
sharp and severe laws made in that behalf, wherein he makes report of a
notable example executed upon a certain banished and outlawed stranger. And
last of all, he shows how king Philip has gotten many other Cities and
towns, through treason only. And therefore he warns them not to trust
these fellows that speak in king Philips favor. And in this Oration he
shows that those men are the cause of all mischief, that seek to win
favor, and grace of others, for the atchieuing of a state or kingdom: the
which he proves manifestly, that king Philip has wrought and sought by all
means possible to do. And therefore he gives his Countrymen council to take
armor in hand, and to beat down king Philips ambicious attemptes,
considering the danger, wherein not only they themselves do stand, but all
the land of Greece besides.

The third Oration against king Philip of Macedonie.
ALbeit much talk has been used (O Athenians) yea almost in every assembly,
of those great wrongs that king Philip has done (since the peace concluded)
not only to you, but also to all Greceland besides: and that I see all men can
not choose but confess (although in deed they do not so) yet that it is very
needful for us to agree, Then is for^earing to speak most dangerous, when
necessity requires speech.
both to say, and do all things, whereby at the length he may leave this his
violent usage, and feel the smart of these his wrong doings: yet for all that
I see all things come to that point and so far ouerpast, that I fear me
although it be counted a slander, yet it shall be true which I will say, that if
all they that come up into this place, would say the word, and you hold up
your hands to the same, how to bring things into the worst pickle that might
be: yet to order them worse than they be now, I think it wear impossible. And
perhaps there be many causes why things are thus, and it is not one or two
causes that have made our state so evil. But most of all (if things be well
examined) ye shall find the fault to be in them, who use their talk so, as to
benifite themselves, rather than to do you any good thereby: of whom there are
some (O Athenians) so as they may keep themselves in estimation and
authority still, Flatterers and slaunderers the very authors of all
mischief, and evil hap that may be.
neither care themselves what may follow afterward: neither yet think they
that you do. Other some again do nothing else, but with slaundering and
accusing those that be in office, seek how to make our City a plague to it
self, Slaunderers.
and to keep our selves occupied about that. And that in the mean season
king Philip, he may have liberty to do and say what he list. And this is the
manner of your government, and a thing you were wont to use: but yet it is the
cause of great trouble, and makes us do many things amiss. And now (O
Athenians) if I do speak the truth freely and plainly unto you, Bold speech
upon good cause deserves favor.
I pray you be not angry with me for it. For consider this, how in all other
things you yourselues think it so fit that the liberty of the tongue
should be so common to all men within the City: that you have imparted the
same even to very strangers and bond men. And here a man may see many a
household servant speak his mind, with more liberty than the Citizens
themselves do, in some other towns. Free speaking forbidden, brings danger
to the state.
And yet in cases where council is to be given: you bar all men from it.
Whereupon it comes to pass, that in your assemblies, you be so dainty, and
love so well to be clawed, Many frame their talk according to the humor of
others.
that you must hear nothing but things to feed your humors withal: but in
your business and doings, you let things go till they be at the uttermost
danger. Therefore, if you will have this itch to hang upon you in this (...)
then I can say nothing to it. But if you be disposed (...) speak for your
commodity, and without flattery (...) for your purpose: for tho our country
be shrewdely (...) that we have lost much through your own follies and
cowardlin^^ (...) if you will from henceforth do your endeavors, Through
diligence and care those things may be redressed: that wear by sloth and
negligence forlorn.
there are ^^anes enough to redress all that is awrie. And that thing which I
shall say, though it seem against the opinion of all men: yet it shall be true
for all that. That thing which did hurt us most of all heretofore, the same in
our doings hereafter shall do us most good. And what may that be? Marye our
doings have had the worse success, because we have done nothing more or less,
in such sort as we ought to have done. For if while we showed our selves like
valiant and lusty men, the world had gone after the same sort still: then
without doubt there had been no hope at all for things to be bettered. But
now I must say plainly, that of our negligence and slothfulness only, king
Philip has got the victory, and has got no victory of our country: neither be
^ou either vanquished at al, nor yet so much as once stirred out of your place,
with all the stirring he can make. He that does wrong, gives cause of war:
not they that seek the redress of wrong.
Then seeing we do all confess that king Philip is at war with us, and
breaks the peace: what else can any man say or advise you yt shall come
hither: than that we must defend our selves, from him, with the easiest and
safest way we can. But for so much as some are so far from their wits, and
so blinded with ignorance, that though they see him take our chief fortresses
and holds: and enjoy many things of ours, and continue doing wrong to all
men: yet for all that, they can well enough away with such as bear them in
hand oftentimes in their assemblies, how it is some of us, that makes the
war, and gives the occasion of breach. Councillors speaking for the best,
do oftentimes bear the greatest blame.
Herein therefore we had need to be well advised, and to work wisely. For it
is to be feared, least he that shall give you his advise and order, how to
defend your selves against him: shall be charged to be the author of the
wars.

First of all I will say and determine thus much before you all, if so be, it
stand in us to take counsel of the matter, whether we shall have war or
peace: then I say, if our country may be at peace, Peace better than war, if
a man may be sure of it.
and that the same lies in us to choose: I think verily (to begin withal) we
shall do well to take it. And I exhort him that so says, both to enact and
execute the same: and not to deceive you and bleare your eyes. But if on the
other side, it be so, that a man having armor in hand, and a great power about
him, pretend and dash you in the teeth with the name of peace, and yet uses
such manners as belong to war: what other thing then should we do, but defend
our selves, and be revenged of him. But if you will profess that you keep
peace, in such manner as he does: I reck not much of it. Marie, and if any man
do think this to be a peace, when he shall, Not king Philips words, but his
deeds are to be marked and looked upon.
after he has got all other places, make his way straight toward us: I
think that fellow, (to begin withal) is out of his wits: And besides that,
he speaks of such a peace, as he may make with you, not such as you may make
with him putting in king Philips choice to do as he list, and not that you may
do as you would. And this is the thing forsooth that king Philip would be
glad to purchase, with all the treasure that he has spent, that he himself
may war upon us when he list without resistaunce: and we may not set upon him
at all. And if we tarry till he set upon us, and give us the defiaunce, and
confess that he will war with us: then are we the most simple and fondest
men that live upon earth. For you may be well assured he will not say so much
unto us, although he entered with an army royal here, King Philip practiced
stafford law with the people of Athens. Olynthians.
with in Attica, and the very Peer it self: as is well to be gathered and
proved by his dealings toward others. For what did he to the Olynthians? when
he was not past five miles from their town, he sent them word flatly they
must do one of the two, either they must not tarry in Olynthus, or else he must
forsake Macedonie. But if a man should have charged him with this all the
while before he came thither: then he would have stormed, and sent Ambassadors,
Phoceyans, being evil used, fors^oke their country by consent, never to
return, and builded Massilia in Prouance. Thebe, now Thi^a, in Beotia. Phere,
now Ceramidi, a town of Attica, between Megara, and Thebes. Oreteynes.
to have made his purgation. The same part he played with the Phoceyans, when
he came unto them as unto his friends that thought no harm at all, their
Ambassadors then attending upon him. There was many amongst us at the
selfsame time also, that debated the matter, and thought that his passage
would not be for the profit of the Thebanes. And a little before this, he
took Pheres, in his way to Thessalia under color of amity and alliance. And
last of all, he deceived the siely Oriteynes, with his slight and compass,
making them believe that he sent Soldiers unto them for good will, to
determine the controversies that were among them, for he heard say they could
not agree amongst themselves, but wear at jar one with another: And
therefore (quoth he) it was the part of a true and constant friend, Slight and
guile fitter for king Philip, than evenness and plain dealing.
to assist them at such times. And then do you think that he being a man yt
loves rather to set upon these men, by sleight and policy (who, though they
could do him no hurt, yet peradventure, were able well enough to keep
themselves from taking of harm) than to tell them before hand, how he would
invade them: would make open proclamation of these wars that he minds to
have against you: and that, at this time especially, when you are most willing
to deceive your selves? nay look not for that: for now that he sees himself
to have diverse ways wronged you, and you for all that, not to challenge him for
the same, but that you are rather ready always to accuse and condemn one
another: he might well be thought the veriest dolt in the world, if he would
break of this strife and contention that is amongst you, and by forewarning
you, bring it all upon his own back, and by that means leave nothing to say
to those his feed men, who bearing you in hand, that he means no war to
this City: King Philips deeds rather to be marked than his words.
seek nothing but delays and tracting out of time with you. But (O good Lord)
is there any man in his right wits that would judge whether a man had peace
or war with him, by his gay words, rather than by his dooinges? no man
without doubt. Diophites general of the Athenians army.
King Philip even immediately, after peace was concluded, Diophites not being
yet general, nor the Soldiers that now be in Cherronesus, being as yet
sent from hence: he took Serrium and Doriscum from us, Cherronesus, now
Phanar. Serrium and Doriscum, towns in Thracia and in this second town,
Xerxes army was found just 1000000. men.
and drove out those Soldiers out of Serrium wall, and the holy Mountain:
which wear put in by our General. And in these his practices, what was his
drift? for surely he had sworn to keep the peace. And let no man say, what of
all this? or what has this City to care for it? for whether these matters be
trifles, or such as the City has not to make any account of, it is no place
now, to reason of such things. Albeit, touching godliness and justice,
Whatsoever swarue^, an ynch from ius^tice: the same tends straight to
injustice.
be it in small matters, or in great, so a man once pass the bounds thereof:
all is one in effect. Well, go to now, when he sends his hired soldiers to
Cherronesus (which country, both the Persian king and all the Greeks besides,
have pronounced to be yours) and confesses moreover that he will succor the^,
and signifies the same by his letters, what does he? for he says that he is
not at war with us: And yet I for my part am so far from deeming that he
attempting such things, does keep peace, that eue^ as soon as he touched
once in Megara, and established a tyrannous government in Euboia, An
vnderm^ner, and a fetching practiser: worse than an open and plain sworn
enemy.
and now is going into Thracia, and has practices a bruing in Peloponesus, and
compasses all that he does with force of arms: I dare be bold to say, he
breaks the peace altogether, and makes war against you: except ye will say
that they that have their engines and frames in a readiness: do keep peace
till the time they have brought them hard to the very walls. The intent makes
the offense, when all things are prepared: although the execution do not
follow. Prevention necessary, when purposed mischief is foreknowne.
Hellespontus. Megaris. Euboia. Peloponesus.
But you will not say so, for why, that man that does and deuiseth those
things, whereby I may be caught: I must needs say, he is at war with me,
although he neither throw nor shoot at me. And than what things should you
put in hazard by it, if any such thing should happen? First, Hellespontus shall
revolt from you, and he that wars with you shall be Lord over the Megareans
and the Euboians: and the Peloponesians, they will be on his side. And shall I
then say unto you that this man minds peace and good faith toward us, who
prepares and rayses up this frame against our City? surely, it is far from
my thought: nay, rather even from the very first day that he destroyed the
Phoceyans, I maintain it plainly, that he began straight to be your enemy.
And therefore, if you do withstand him out of hand, I say you do wisely. And
if you do it not now, you shall not be able to do it, when you would. And so
far am I (O Athenians) from the opinion of others your Counselors, that I
think it not meet to have any longer deliberation about Cherronesus and
Bizance: Cherronesus now Phanar, Bizance, now Constantinople.
but rather that you defend and rescue them from taking of harm. And to send
unto your Generals there, all such things as they need. And in the mean
space, to consult for the safety and welfare of the whole estate of Grecia,
A^l Greceland in danger of king Philip.
now standing in very great danger.

And now I will give you the reason, why I am so afraid of your estate and
doings: to the intent, that if I shall seem to say truly and as the matter
is in deed: you may be p^rtakers thereof, and if you will not have care over
others, yet at the least that you may be provident and have care of your
selves. And in case you think I tell you a toy, and a brainlesse tale: then
never hearken to my tale, either now or hereafter, as to him that were well in
his wits. Wherefore, The sudden rising and increased might of king Philip.
to touch unto you how king Philip from so slender and so base an estate as
he was first in: is waxen so great and mounted so hie: how all Grecelande has
been tossed through treachery and sedition among themselves, how it is a great
deal more out of all men's belief for him to come from that he was, to that he
is now: than it is, that he should now at this time, bring all the reast under
his subjection, after the conquest of so many as he has made, and all such
like things as I could well recite: I do think meet to ouerpasse, and
surcease. But this I see, that all men following your leading have granted and
yielded so willingly to king Philip that thing: which always heretofore has
been the occasion of all the wars among the Greeks. And what might that be?
even this, King Philips liberty to do what he ly^^, without step or let has
been the cause of all the wars in Greece.

Grecians ruled by the Athenians.7^. years.


that he may do whatsoever him lusts to do: as much to say, he may cut
every man in pieces: he may rob and spoil the Greeks: and he may go up and
down conquering and bringing of towns under his subjection. And
notwithstanding, that you have been the chief princes over al Greece for the
space of.73. years: the Lacedaemonians for.29. years: Grecians ruled by the
Lacededemonians 29. years. Grecians ruled by ye Thebanes after the battle at
Leuctra. Such as passed the bounds of moderation among the Grecians
heretofore: were restrained of their course, and brought perforce to live in
order.
and the Thebanes also now of late years have been men of some force, since
the battle fought at Leuctra, yet for all this, was there never thus much
granted by the Grecians, either to you or to the Thebanes, or to the
Lacedaemonians either, at any time (O Athenians:) to do whatsoever he lusted to
do. And in this matter needs not much talk. But both against you, nay rather
against the Athenians of those days, after they seemed to pass the bounds of
modesty in abusing some men: all men then thought it good, to revenge the
matter by open war, yea those whom the quarrel of the wronged, did not touch
at all. Again, when the Lacedaemonians ruled and had the like seigniorie as you
had, when they fell once to encroching, and began out of measure to shake out
of order, things well established: all men than bended themselves to open war
against them, yea, even those that had no quarrel at all to them. And what
need we such far fetched examples? Did not we our selves and the
Lacedaemonians, being as then no cause of grief amongst us, yet because we saw
others oppressed, think it good for their sakes to make war? and yet all the
offenses and faults committed as well by the Lacedaemonians in their thirty
years, The unmeasurable harms and excess^ue wrongs done by king Philip in
short time. Olynthus, Methona, Apollonia, 32. towns in Thracia, Countries
spoiled by king Philip.
as by your ancestors in.lxx. years together, be much fewer, (O Athenians) yea
by a great number: than be ye wrongs that king Philip has done to all
Greceland in these not fully.xiij. whole years, that he is come thus to
glitterring glory, from a thing of nothing. And this is easy to be showed in
few words. And not to speak of Olynthus, of Methona, of Apollonia, of.32.
towns in Thracia, all which places he has so cruelly overthrown and bet to
the ground, that a man coming to them can scant find whether ever those
places were inhabited or no. I will not speak of that huge and populous nation
of the Phoceyans, spoiled and consumed by him. Phoceyans. Thessalians.
I pray you in what case lies Thessalia? has he not overthrown and taken from
them, both their towns, their political or townelike government,
Quatuorviratus.
and set Fouremen to rule over them, to the end that not only the towns, but
the people also, may live in bondage and slavery? And are not the towns of
Euboia, Euboians.
governed and possessed even now of late with Tyraunts, and that within an
Isle, very nighe to Thebes, A proud bragging manner of writing used by king
Phillip. Hellespontus. Ambracia, now Larta. Elis in Morea, now Beluedere.
Megaris, now Megr^. All the world ever little to glut king Philips gredie and
bottomless ambition. Fondly wear the Grecians careless, and unquiet among
themselves: when the enemy was so busy and stirring abroad.
and to Athens? And does he not write this apparauntly in his letters. I will
have peace (says he) with them that will do as I command them. Neither
when he writes this, does he cease to perform it also in deed: but he
enters upon Hellespont, having been before at Ambracia. He has Elis that
houge and mighty great City in Peloponnesus, and of late he made a platte
how to win the Megarians. So that neither all Grecelande, nor yet all
barbarous Countries besides, are able to satisfy the man's greedy and
ambicious mind. And notwithstanding that all the Grecians do hear, and see
these things: yet do we neither send Ambassadors one to another touching
these matters, nor yet conceive any great sorrow for it: but so maliciously be
we set among our selves, and lie so lurking like men trenched in with Walls:
that even until this day, we could never do any thing, that was either
profitable, or seemly to be done, neither to agree together, nor yet to join
in common, to the help and succor one of another: but seeing that King Philip
he means.
man waxen greater, we make none account of him. And as seems to me, every
man thinks to make that time gainful to him wherein others go to wrack: and
neither studieth or attempteth the thing, that might be for the safegarde,
Every man sekes to save one, for a time: while others miscary, whereas none
have any care of the whole state or country.
and preservation of the Greeks. An apt similitude derived from the body to
the mind, declaring how careless the Grecia^s were. Wrongs done by
strangers, more dangerous, than harms done by natural Citizens, or home
borne men.
But it fares herein, much like as it does with them that have an Ague, or any
other disease that comes by fittes or course. For how soever a man think it
presently far from him, yet at length the Fever comes, and shakes him by the
back.

Moreover, this you do all understand, whatsoever smart the Greeks suffered
of the Lacedaemonians, or of us: they have received the same as of natural and
mere Grecians: which was to be taken in like part, as if a man's own son
borne and brought up in great wealth, having done somewhat scant honestly or
unjustly: although he wear to be blamed and rebuked justly for the same: yet
to say that he should be counted a stranger or a frem man, and not an
inheritour to those goods for his fact, surely that wear not a thing to be
admitted. Whereas, if a bond slave or a man's hynde, King Philip a barbarous
prince, and mere stranger to the Grecians. King Philip contumelius and
dispitefu^l of his tongue.
would without order, make hauock of things where he ought not: Lord God how
grievously would all men stomach and take on, at such a matter. And have not
men now the same opinion of king Philip, and his doings? who is not only, not
a Grecian, and nothing kyth or kin to the Greeks at all, but also he is not so
much as a Barbarian, of any such country as is worth the naming: but even a
vile rank Macedon, from whence never man yet willingly would have bought a
good bond slave. And yet for all this, what extreme contumely and despite
has he forborne to raise against us? has not he in his hands besides the
towns that he has destroyed and beaten down, the government of the Pythia,
certain games made yearly in the honor of Apollo, for killing the mighty and
venomous serpent Pytho. Oracle of Apollo.

Amphictyones, an assembly of states to come to gither, having ye name of
Amphiction, who caused the princes of Greece to be summoned, to meet at the
hills Thermopylae, which hills were so named of the hot baynes nighe unto the^.
And those states were twelve in number. Ore^m, How Lorio.

A notable similitude declaring the nature of lyther and careless people.
Ambracia, now Larta.

Leucas, now saint Meura. Nanpactum, now Lepontus Etolia, a country betwixt
Acarnania and Phocis.


Pithyan oracles, where the common games of Greece wear? to which, if he list
not to come himself, he sends slaves of his own to be overseers of the
games. He is Lord of the Pyles and entryes into Greece: he keeps the places
with garnisons, and forreyne Soldiers to stop the passage into Greece. Has
not he also the pre-eminence and prerogative at Apollos Oracle? does not he
keep back, us, the Thessalians, the Dorians, and the rest of the Amphictyones,
from that which every sort, (no not of the Greeks themselves) might have
access unto. Does not he appoint ye Thessalians, after what fashion they shall
be ruled? does not he send out mercenarie soldiers to keep the Goulfe in
Euboia, and to drive out from thence the commons of Eretria? does not he send
others to Orium to place Philistides, the Tyrant there? All these things the
Grecians see and suffer before their faces. Now truly herein they seem to me
to do eue^ as those do, ye see a storm of hayle coming, against which every
man prayth, that it may not light upon him, but no man deuiseth how to keep it
of. And neither can the dispightes he does to all Grecelande in common, no nor
yet the wrongs done by him to every man by himself: move any man to be
revenged of him. And last of all: is he not got to the Corinthians towns,
Ambracia and Leucas? did not he promise by solemn oath, that when he had
taken Naupactum from the Achaeans, he would give the same straight to the
Etolians? has not he taken Echinum from the Thebanes? Echinus, in the geulfe
of Dollo in Macedonie. Bizance, now Constantinople in Romania. Cardia, in
Thracia Cherronesus.
and sendes he not his army now against those of Bizance? and are not they
your confederates, your allies, and your friends? And to ouerpasse others, he
has got to himself Cardia, the greatest City in Cherronesus. And yet we, for
all we see these manifest and most plain injuries, make fair weather for all
that, and dally out our matters: looking every man upon his next fellow, and
mistrusting one another: whilst he in the mean season does us all the apparent
wrongs that may be. Where covetousness reigns and licencicus living is used:
there is destruction one of another, and small care had of the common weal.
But what think you, that he (who now behaueth himself so outragiously
toward al men in general) will do when he is Lord over every man
perticularly? And what is the cause of all these things? for it was not without
reason and just cause, that all ye Greeks were then so ready, and forward to
maintain their liberty: and so willing now as they be, to live in bondage.
There was a thing, there was a thing (O Athenians) at those days in the hearts
and minds of many men, that is not now in these days, The soundnes and
upright dealing of the ancient Grecians in times past.
which did both prevail against the Persians riches, made Greece live in
liberty, and that they wear never conquered in fight, or lost battle by sea
or by land. But now that this is gone, all things go to hauock and ruin,
and the state of whole Greceland is turned altogether topsie turuie. And what
was that? A thing of no great difficulty or cunning surely. No more but this,
that they deadly hated all such, as would take money of them, that desired
always to have the rule over others, Bribe takers and corrupt receyuers of
gifts hated among the Grecians, and sharply punished.
or sought the overthrow of Greceland by corrupt means. And a very heinous
matter it was in those days, to be convicted for a bribe taker, they were most
grievously punished, none excuse or pardon was to be had for them. And therefore
amongst them, al such good opportunities, and occasions as happened unto them,
to do their feats by (which by fortune oftentimes are poured into the
careless men's lappes against the watchful, and to them that do nothing,
against them that do what they can) could not be bought out or redeemed of
the Counselors and Capitaines: Councillors uncorrupted.
neither the good will of men one to another, nor the mistrust that men had in
Barbarians, The corruption and naughtiness in bribe takers.
and Tyraunts, nor in any such like. Whereas now all these are set to sale: as
though it wear in ouert market. And in steed of these: other things are
brought in, that have been the loss and weakening of all Greece. And what are
those? Malice, and repining, if a man take money: scoffing, if one confess it:
forswearing, if it be proved upon him: hatred if any man find fault with it:
and such other like things, as do depend upon briberie. As for Galleys,
number of men, revenues of money, store of other provision, and all things
besides, that are thought meet to belong to the stre^gthning, and fortifying
of Cities: we have more plenty of them and better of al sorts, than was any
at those days. And yet for all that, all these things are now in vain, and
serve us to no use, or occupation, by reason of these copesmates, and corrupt
bribe takers. And that this is true you know, very well, and need not me for a
witness. But that in times past it has been clean contrary, that will I
declare unto you, and I will not tell you a tale of mine own head: but I will
bring you forth ye flat scriptures of our ancestors which they set up in
writing upon a brazen Pillar in the Tower Acropolis, Acropolis, the name of the
Tower or Castle of Athens.
Where you shall see the Registers and tables containing the histories for
perpetual memory. And the form of government aunciently engraven, not that
they had need of such matters: for they knew well enough without any such
wrytings, what they had to do: but that these things might be examples and
monumentes for you that followed, A severe and ancient usage of vanishing a
traitor by the example of one Arthmius a Zelite, not much unlike to baffeling,
used in the Scottish borders. Read Graftons Cronicle. 5. Hen. 8. This
A^thenius was employed to win men with briberie and corruption, and so he
brought great sums of gold from Medea to Peloponesus, a part of Greece, and
yet not under Athens.
and to see with what care such things were to be looked unto. And what says
that writing? forsooth it says, Arthmius, the son of Pithonactes, a Zelite,
let him be taken for a defamed person, and an enemy to the commons of Athens,
their allies and confederates, he and al his offspring. Underneath the cause of
his condemnation is alleged in this sort. Because he brought gold from Medea
into Peloponesus, not because he brought it to Athens. Consider now for the
reverence of God with your selves, what the meaning of the Athenians was in
those days, and what authority they had, when they did these things? They
thus proclaimed Arthmius, a certain Zelite being slave to the king of Persia
(for Zelia is a town in Asia) because that he in service of his master
brought gold with him, to Peloponesus, Bribes brought to Peloponesus, offended
the Athenians as much, as though they themselves had been offered bribes and
touched with corruption.
not because he brought any to Athens, therefore they graued in a Pyller that
both he and his offspring should be reputed as enemies to them and their
allies, and be diffamed for ever. This is not such a kind of infamy as a man
would so commonly term it. For what should he being a Zelite borne pass a
grote, for being forbidden the franchises of Athens? But this writing has not
so slight a meaning, there is an other matter in it. But it is written in the
criminal laws made against murderers: That where a man would not stand to
the punishment of the law, he should be enquired of, and aunswerable for
murder, yea, it was a godly deed to kill him.

And (says the law) let him die the death, The ancient Grecians thought
themselves bound in conscience to tender the preservation of all Greceland, not
only of their own several state or country.
with shame and dishonor, which is as much to say, that he, that kills such
a man, shall be cleared, and reputed without stayne of any fault. Wherefore,
these men thought themselves charged to look to the safe keeping of all
Grecelande. For it had been no matter, to them, if one had gone about to buy
and to brybe men with money in Peloponesus, except they had been of this
mind? neither would they have so punished, and been revenged of such whom they
knew wear bribetakers, In time of danger, and especially when neighbors and
friends are negligent and careless: it wear good for men to look well and
circumspectly to themselves.
as to set their names upon pillars. And these things by good reason made the
Greeks seem so redoubted, and so terrible to the Barbarians to deal withal,
not the Barbarians to them. But now the world is clean changed, neither be
you of like disposition, either in this or in any thing else. But how, you be
disposed, ye know well enough your selves. And therefore to what purpose wear
it to find fault with you, for every thing you do? All Grecelande besides, is
after the same sort, and nere a whit better than you are. Therefore I do ensure
you, that it wear very needful for us, to use merueilous great diligence and
to take good council for these weighty affairs, and matters that we have in
hand at this time. And how now? shall I tell it you? do you bid me? and will
you not then be angry with me? I have written it in a Table that one shall
read to you, and you shall hear it. Read these acts sirrah.

The rehersall of the Register is wanting.

The less one fears his enemy: the nigher he is to his own harm.
There is spread abroad certain fond talk by such as would put us in comfort,
with telling us that king Philip is not yet of such puissance as ye
Lacedaemonians have been heretofore, who were Lords of the sea, and of the land
all about, and wear in league with the king of Persia, so that none could
withstand them: and yet this City revenged themselves of them, and lost
nothing at their hands. And as al things in a manner be much increased, and
nothing like to that they wear in times past: so also I think nothing is more
altered and advanced, than are the affairs of war.

For first of all, I hearesay that the manner of the Lacedemonia^s in those
days, and al other Greeks to, was to be forth four or five months in
warfare, when the season of the year served, and in that space to invade and
annoy their enemies country, with a power of armed men and soldiers of their
own country, The order of warfare, clean altered, and instead of plain
dealing deceyte used, and all sleyghts, that may be, both devised, and
practiced.
and so to return home again when they had done. And so aunciently or rather
ciuilye they behaved themselves, that they would do nothing by corruption of
money, but by loyalty and open war. Whereas now adays, you see al things go
to ruin by treason, and nothing done by fight and open battle. You see that
king Philip not with squares of armed soldiers goes whither he will: but with
a retinue of light horsemen and hired archers. And then having such fellows at
hand, his manner is, where he sees men at sedition and trouble among themselves,
that for private faction and mistrust one to another, no man dares issue out,
for his Country: there he rushes me in upon them, King Philip most painful,
sparing for no weather to do his endeavor.
and having his engines with him, lays straight siege to their Towns. And I
tell you not here, how all is one to him, whether he war in Winter or in
Summer, and how he makes no choice of the season, when to leave of from doing
his business. Wherefore, Dangerous to fight with out enimye at our own
doors.
seeing you all do know, and consider this well enough: it were good that ye
suffered not the enemy, to bring the wars into our own Country: least
following that foolish and simple order of the Lacedaemonians wars, ye bring
your selves to some great mischief, enough to break your necks withal. But
you must very circumspectly or ere things approach upon us, beware as well by your
doings, as by your preparation, and look well to him that he stir not from
home, and that we be not fought withal by him, hand to hand. For why, to
maintain the wars, Better to begin wars, than to abide wars.
we have many ways advantage of him (O Athenians) so we would but do as we
ought to do: The very nature of his country, a good part whereof we may
ransacke and annoye, and ten thousand aduauntages besides. But as for the
fight, he is far better exercised in it, than we are. Neither is it enough to
withstand him abroad, with sword and armor, but ye must do it also by
reason and understanding, persecuting all such as amongst you speak on his
side, Home enemies the worst people living, and an evil cherishing it is of a
Serpent in a man's bosom.
assuring our selves that we shall never overcome our enemy abroad, till we
have punished his ministers here at home. And that thing, so far as I can
see, before God and all his Saints, you be neither able nor willing to do:
but you are come to such foolishness, or rather madness, or I wot near what
to term it: (for oftentimes it commes in my mind to be adrad, least some
spirit or fatal destiny do chase and persecute our doings) that either for
railing, or envy, or scoffing, or some other trifling matter, you make a sight
of hirelings to come up and speak in this place: of whom there are some that
cannot disavowe nor deny themselves to be such men: and then you make a
sport of it, when they fall a railing upon men. And yet this is no great matter
neither, although it be a great matter in deed. For you suffer such to govern
with more safety: than they that speak for your welfare. Evil men govern
with better safety, than good men.
And yet mark what great mischief comes hereof, because you will give ear
unto such men. I will tell you their doings, which you all shall well perceive.

At Olynthus Olynthians
there wear some men of authority in the common weal, who favored king
Philip and wear his ministers in all things they could do. Examples of
practiced treasons.
Others did all for the best, procuring al they could, that their countrymen
should not be brought to slavery. Which of them say you destroyed their
country? or who betrayed the horsemen, whereupon the City of Olynthus was
destroyed and undone? Apollonides banished being a faithful subject. Eretria.

Plutarchus a Captain, Porthmus a Creek or Goulfe of the Sea that may easily
be passed Hipponicus being sent by king Philip to aid the Gretrians, took
their town and country afterward for his masters use. Hipparchus,
Automedon, Clytarchus Eurilocus, Parmenion. Oreum, now called Loreo.
Philistides, Menippus, Socrates, Thoas, Agapeus.

Philistides accused of treason by Euphreus. Enphreus suffered to be carried to
prison by the^, that wear for king Philip, and despited even then, of his own
countrymen.


Certainly that did they, that wear on king Philips side: who (as long as the
City stood) did so slander and pick quarrels against them that spoke best
for you, that at the length they persuaded the Commons of Olynthus, to banishe
Apollonides. Now think you that this custom, was the cause of all the
mischief only in Olynthus, and no where else? Nay it was so in Eretria to,
for there, after the departure of Plutarchus, and the foreign soldiers, when
the people ruled the town and goulfe thereof: some would be under us, and some
under king Philip. To these the miserable and unhappy Eretrians giving ear in
many things or rather in all, they were at length persuaded to thrust out such
as spoke of their own side. And yet for all yt, king Philip their friend and
allie, sendes me unto them Hipponicus, with a thousand strangers, and bet
down the walls of their goulfe, placing there three tyrants, Hipparchus,
Automedon, and Clytarchus, and after this drove the^ twice out of their own
country, when now they would gladly have been in safety, sending thither the
strangers yt were with Eurilochus: and after that again, those that were with
Parmenio^. What need I to heap up many examples? at the town of Oreum, were
not Philistides, Menippus, Socrates, Thoas, and Agapeus, practisers for king
Philip, who now have the City in their hands? And this was known to all men.
But to tell how one Euphraeus, a man that dwelt here somtymes, and traueiled
for their freedom, that they should not come in bondage to any body, was
iniuried and railed upon by the commons of the Oreteynes: it would ask a long
time of talk. The year before the said town was taken, he understanding
their practices, appeached Philistides and his accomplices of high treason:
whereupon many men co^spiring and assembling themselves, having Philip their
pursebearer, and being guided by his instructions, carried me away Euphraeus to
prison, as a disturber of the common weal. Which thing ye commons of the
Oreteynes seeing, in steed of assisting him, and tormenting them: they showed
them selves not offended at all with them, and as for him, they thought he was
worthily punished, and rejoiced at it. But afterward these fellows being in
such authority, as they wished: they wrought a practice to take the town by,
and brought the same to pass. The sharp punishing and evil handling of one
good man, makes many other good men afraid.
And then the Commons, if any of them understood the matter, they held their
peace, like people amazed, remembering how Euphraeus was handled. Yea, in such
miserable state wear those men brought, that none durst open his mouth in that
extreemitie, till the army that was prepared, came even to their walls. And
then some of them defended the town, and others betrayed it. And thus the town
being fowly and evil fauoredly lost: these fellows are become Princes, and
play the tyraunts over such as erst preserved both themselves, and Euphraeus
too (being men ready to do any thing) when they had banished some, and put to
death some others. Erphreus ^emented the evil of his country, and being in
prison, not able to redress things amiss: did kill himself.
And that same Euphraeus, being in prison killed himself, witnessing by such a
deed, that he had justly and sincerely withstoode King Philip in the quarrel
of his Countrymen. But now perhaps every one of you does wonder and marvel
how it commes to pass, that the Olynthians, Eretrians, and the Oret^ynes have
more favored king Philips friends and partakers: then their own patrones and
defenders, even in like sort as you do. The cause is this: The reason, why
traitors and flatterers are better lyked, than are the just and true meaning
Counselors.
those that speak for the best, can not at al times tell you that, the which
shall please you, no though they would. For why, it lies them upon to consider
what shall be for your preservation, whereas these others while they tell you a
fair tale, and curry fauell with you, brue altogether for king Philip. They
required of every one a contribution: these men would have none. The demand of
good men, for their countries weal: the denial used by flatterers, to the
hurt thereof.
They would have us make war, and have him in a jealousy: these would have us
to be at peace, til the enemy were come upon us. And in like sort I mean of
all other things, because I will not particularly rehearse them all. These men
tell you the things, whereby they may presently please your fantasy: the
others told you that, whereby the state might be kept in safety hereafter,
not without displeasure and hazard of themselves. And last of all, the common
people, they did bear with many things, not for favor, nor yet for
ignorance, but as men (that constreyned to yield unto the time) perceive
themselves altogether unequally matched. The selfsame thing so help me God
and holidome, Advice and council to go before men's actions.
I doubt much will fall upon you: forasmuch you see there is nothing in you,
that is done by advise and council. And when I see them that bring you, in
this taking: I do not tremble and quake at them, but I loath them utterly.
For, God grant unto England many such true, faithful, stowte and wise
counselors, as was Demosthenes to Athens.
be it of purpose, or be it through ignorance, once, they have brought the
City into great hazard and to a marvelous strait: But God forbid (O
Athenians) that things should come to that point: better it wear to dye ten
thousand deaths, than by flattery to serve King Philips humor: to the utter
undoing of them that are the Authors of your welfare. Oriteynes abvsed, and
pitiful^y tormented by king Philip.
A goodly dishe of thanks I promise you, that the Oriteynes received by
yielding themselves to King Philips friends, and thrusting out of Euphraeus.
The commons of Eretrians also, they are wiselye handled, for keeping back your
Ambassadors, and yielding themselves to Clytarchus, Clytarchus.
they are handled like slaves in deed, they are whipped and scourged, and
miserably tormented. Oh Lord, how goodlily did he pardon and spare the
Olynthians for choosing of Lasthenes to their Captain of horsemen, Olynthians
deceived by king Philip of their hope and promised pardon.
and erpulsing Apollonides. It is a very folly, and the greatest beastlynesse
that may be, for men to hope for such things, (and whereas they take evil
council themselves, and are not willing to do any thing, as is fit for
them to do, but give ear to them that speak on their enemies side) to think
that they dwell in a City of such greatness that they can suffer no harm
whatsoever betide. And what a foul shame were this, if any mishap fell upon us
hereafter, Take heed of Had I wist.
to say, who would ere have thought it? For why, God knows, thus, and thus, we
should have done forsooth, and thus we should not have done. Olynthians wise a
day after the fair.
The Olynthians should have now many things to say, the which, if they had
than foreseen: they had not been undone as they are. Oriteynes beaten with
their own rod. Phoceyans come to had I wist.
So might the Oriteynes: So might the Phoceyans, and all the reast that are now
come to their undoing. But what good would this do them? So long as the ship
is safe whether it be great or small, it is meet that both Master, Mariners,
An apt similitude, to warn men to be wise in time, and to take pains when
need requires. The sum of Demosthenes advice and council, for wars to be
had, and the preparation thereof. Athenians (being the chiefest and worthiest
Grecia^s above all others) never yielded to any several subjection or bondage.
Ambassadors needful to be sent abroad in time of war, to all parts.
and every man in his course do his best endeavor, and be heedefull that no
man either witting or unawares, should by any means ouerwhelme it: but when the
sea is once come in, then is it in vain to traueils any longer: even so we
also (O Athenians) so long as we are in good state, enjoying a puissant City
of our own, and have opportunity and occasions at will, while we maintain
and hold our selves in this great dignity: peradventure there sittes some
here amongst us, that have longed this good while to ask the question, what
shall we do? Why, by Gods grace, that will I tell you, and enact it my self,
and if you like it, you may hold up your hands to it, and pass it.

Let us first and foremost, and before all others withstand him, and defend our
selves: let us, our galleys, our money and soldiers be in a readiness, for
though all the world would yield unto slavery and bondage: yet undoubtedly
must we fight for our liberty. And then I say, when we are furnished with all
these things, and that we have made the rest of ye Grecians privy thereunto:
let us couple and link in with others, and dispatch Ambassadors al about to
make information thereof to Peloponesus, to the Rhodes, to Chio, yea, even to
the king of Persia himself. For it is not against his profit neither, that we
should stop this man from conquering all: to the intent that if you may bring
them to it, than they may take such part as we do: as well in the adventures,
as in the costs and charges that be requisite. And if by this means we can not
get our purpose, yet at the least ye shall drive out the time with him, and
win somewhat by delays. Winning of time, and delays: are profitable
sometimes. Demosthenes, Polieuctus, Hegesippus, Clytomachus, Lycurgus. with
others sent Ambassadors to Morea, and the good that they did thereby, in staying
of king Philip from thence, and other places beside.
And that is a point you shall not find altogether unprofitable unto us,
considering we are to make war against the person of a man, and not
against the force of any self governed state or free City. Neither was that
embassage in vain, that I, and that worthy man Polieuctus, Hegesippus,
Clytomachus, and Lycurgus with others went in, nor yet the complaints that we
made in traueyling about Peloponesus, a year ago: for by that means we made
him stay that he could neither enter into Ambracia n^w Lacta.
Ambracia, nor yet invade Peloponesus. And yet I speak not this, to the intent
that we should call others in our aid, and then we our selves should sit
still, and be unwilling to do any thing that should do us good. For why, it
were a very fond part, yt they who do forslow their own business, should say
they took upon them the charge over other folks matters: and while they do
themselves neglect things present: should warn others to beware of things to
come. No, that is not my saying, but my meaning is, that you should send money
to the soldiers at Cherronesus, and do for them as they shall require you in all things besides. And that we our selves be in a readiness, Good for the
Athenians as chiefest among the Grecians, to begin first their wars, and
then to call others to join in league and fellowship of war with them.
and first of all do our parts, and after that to call other Grecians unto us,
and assemble them together, and inform them, and advertise them of all
things. This is the duty of a City, that has such aucthority, and
estimation as you have. For if you look that the Calcidians or the Megarians
should keep Greece, and you your selves to shrink from doing any business:
you are not well advised. For the world goes well with them, if every one of
them may save himself. But it is you that must do this feate: to you have
your Ancestors left this office, and purchased it, with many a fair and
valiant adventure. But if every one will look to have his will by sitting
still, Such as are careless in their own causes: hardily find others to be
careful for them.
and think to do nothing himself: first of all he shall be sure to find no
body will do it for him. And afterward I fear me we shall be enforced our
selves, to do every one of us that we would not do. For had there been any
such, they had long ago showed their good wills, because you your selves
would do nothing. But there are none such. And therefore this say I, this
write I, and this being done, I think there is time enough yet to amend all.
Howbeit, if any man have any better than this, let him say it, and give his
advice: and whatsoever it be, that you shall like of, God grant the same may
be for your profit.

The Argument upon the fourth Oration against king Philip of Macedonie.
Certain of Athens, being King Philips feed men, and greatly bound unto him
for large rewards given: kept the people back as much as they could from
repressing or withstanding his doings from time to time, till he had made
all things ready for the wars, and had set foot in the fittest places,
that might be for his purpose. So that such his hyrelinges as used to speak
for the maintenance of peace, against war: wear very well lyked of the
people, not for any special love they had to peace, but for fear of taxes
and paymentes, and other burdens hanging upon war, the which commonly grieve
the people most of all, and in time of war must needs be had. Wherefore it
was dangerous to propounde matter concerning war, or to exhort the people to
be at defiaunce with any body. For then those traiterous hyrelinges would
put up a Byll of complaint against them, as motioners and Aucthours of those
decrees. And the people that could not abide to hear of charges and payments,
and therefore hated war: would with open mouth and full consent condemn him
presently as an offender, that once spoke for war, although the necessity
wear never so great. So that where as Demosthenes durst not subscribe to the
enacting of war to be proclaimed, he uses cunning by a figure called
Translatio, and lays it upon an other, saying, that King Philip has
denounced war against them, so that they are in great hazard and danger. And
therefore he does exhort them to withstand the wars already commenced and
taken in hand by king Philip, the which is a natural request. For what is he
that will not seek to defend himself and devise with force to withstand
force.

Lastly, he seeks to set an atonement betwixt the rich men and the poor,
who wear at defiaunce amongst themselves. For the rich wear very loath to
yield to any subsidy, and would rather that the treasure money whereof the
poor people had, a good part for their comfort, should be converted wholly to
bear all the charges of the wars: on the other side, the poores sort wear
in an uproar against the rich, and threatened that they would enter upon their
goods, and spoil them in their own houses rather than they would lose their
stage pence and the benifite of the public treasure, for setting forth of
their shows and pastimes. Demosthenes hereupon rebukes them both, and wills
the rich men to let the stage money alone for the poor, being so small a
matter: and charge the said poor men on the other side, to forbear
violence and injury toward the richer sort. And in the neck of this, he
cries out against Traitors that hinder good motions, and councelleth hereupon
the Athenians to send Ambassadors to the king of Persia, to have him join in
league with them, and to help the^ with money, for that otherwise, the City
had not wherewith to bear out their n^^essary charges: meaning hereby, that
the rich men should not be called upon, and the poorer sort should be spared
also, and have their desires, if this embassage took place, the which is the
very scope and full intent of all his meaning. And as it should seem this
Oration was spoken more vpvpon the sudden, or at the least wise not provided
for, as the other his Orations wear. For that diverse things are here uttered,
and much matter of substance rehearsed, and almost after the selfsame manner
in this action declared: as was before spoken in certain of his other Orations
already made and uttered to the people.

The fourth Oration against king Philip of Macedonie.
FOr as much as (O Athenians) these affairs whereupon you do sit in council;
are both right weighty and necessary for our Country: I will endeavor my
self to speak thereof, that which I think is for your profit. Amongst a
great number of faults, and gauls and those not of a small times growing, that
cause us to be in this evil favored pickle: there is none of them all (O
Athenians) that does us more hurt at this time, than this, that you give your
minds altogether from the doing of your business. Negligence lost Athens.
For so long and no longer lastes all the labor you take, as you may be
sitting still, and hearing some news told you: and then every man gets him
away neither regarding nor so much as remembering the matter at all. And as for
king Philippes dealings toward all men, they be so full of outragiousnesse,
and covetousness as you hear them reported to be: and every man knows very
well, that it is not possible to bridle him or restrain him of this, Not
words, but armor, must keep king Philip under.
by any treaty or persuasion that we can use. Which thing he that can not
perceive by any other thing else, let him consider it hereby: whenever it
came to the talk of right and justice: we never had the worse, nor yet wear
ever judged to be wrong doers, but have always had the better hand, and have
prevailed in our talk: And yet I pray you what did his business proceed any
whit the worsse, or ours any thing the better for all this? nothing at all
surely. For where as his fashion is, as soon as he has taken armor in hand,
by and by to be ready to go and adventure himself with all that he has, and
ours on the other side to sit still, some when we have spoken that which right
requires, and other some, when we have given the hearing, by good reason I
think it falls out, that deeds do surpass words, and that all men do not
so much mark and regard, the right that we maintain in words, and what we
have said or shall say for our selves: as the thing that we do and put in
execution. And they be such, as are of no force to the preservation and safety
of any that is oppressed. And here needs no more talk thereof. Wherefore,
seeing it is so, that all States and Towneships, are divided into these two
factions, whereof the one sort, be of those that neither desire themselves to
have the rule by force and strong hand, neither yet to be in bondage to
others, but seek only to maintain their liberty, and to have their Country
governed by laws in an evenness: the other sort, is of them that desire to be
Princes over their own Country men, and yet can be contented to be under the
obedience of some other, by whose means they think they may attain
thereunto: So it is that such as are of his mind, that is, they that desire to
be Tiraunts and Lords, Ambicious persons cherished by king Philip.
they have got the rule and bear sway every where alredie. And I think there
is never a one of them all left, that sittes fast in their democratie or people
hold estate, save yours only. And those that by his means bear rule in
Towns, Corrupt officers never want matter, to satisfy their corrupt minds.
they have already every where gotten the over hand, by all these means
whereby matters are brought to pass. And the very first and chiefest thing of
all is, that such as be bribe takers, are sure of a briber to feed their
humor. Mandragora, of two sorts black and white bearing apples low upon the
ground, having no such root, as is fondlye ymagined, but of virtue, to cast
one into so heavy a sleep, that being lau^ced or burned, he shall not feel
the grief.
The next and never a whit less matter than that, is this, that there is a
power at hand to beat down such as do withstand their purpose, at what
time soever they shall require it. But as for us, we are not only behind in
this behalf, but like men cast into a sleep with drinking of Mandragora, or
some other like beuerage: we can not by any means be wakened. Again, we are
in such a contempt and slander abroad, by these our doings, (For I must be
plain with you, and tell you as I think) that some men being themselves in
the midst of danger, do for all that keep a quarreling with us, some for
the Generalships, Athenians contemned for their slothfulness.
others, about the diet and meeting place: and other some there be, that are
determined rather to defend themselves by themselves, than with us. And
wherefore do I say all this, and why make I so great a discourse? Now God is
my witness, and all his saints, As a Fever Hectyke is son^ cured at the
first, and hardly known: but being grown, is hardly cured, and easily
perceived: so it fares in the affairs of this world, that things may son^ be
remedied at the beginning, if they wear espied, whereas afterward being
suffered and known, they do wax incurable.
that I mean not to get your evil will by it, but to the intent that every one
of you (O Athenians) may right well know and perceive, that it fares in
Towneships, and States of Cities, by this our daily laysinesse and faint
dealings, much like as it does in our own lives, that we feel not at the
first the smart of every thing foreslowed: but when our reconing comes to
the total sum, then our sloth meets with us in the end. You see Serrius,
and Doriscus, (for these things wear first neglected after the peace
concluded, which peradventure to many of you be not known at all.) And yet
in very deed, the letting go, and oversight of them, was the loss of Thracia
and Chersobleptes your allie and warrefellow. And when he saw that you made no
account of those neither, nor yet sent them any succors: he dug down the
walls of Porthmus, and made a fortification against you in Euboia, right over
against Attike: and seeing you cared not for this neither, never so little more
he had got Megara. And so slenderly did you regard and wear moved with all
this: that you did not so much as show a countenance that you would not
suffer him so to raunge. What more? When he had bought out Antrona for his
money, he seysed to himself not long after the state of Oreo. Many other
things I let pass, as Pherrhas, the passage and high way to Ambracia, those
slaughters made in Elis, and ten thousand things besides. Elis now Beluedere,
in Morea.
Neither have I made this discourse, meaning thereby to reckon up unto you such
as king Philip has subdued with outrage, and injuriously wronged: but to show
you this point, that king Philip will never cease wronging, and getting all
the world into his hands, unless some body stop him of his course. Now
forsooth there are some men, that before they have heard a man's tale to the
end, will by and by be asking the question, what is to be done? not because
that when they have heard good council given them, they mean straight ways
to follow the same and put it in execution, He means, for that they had
peace, such questioning there was, as though it had been nedelesse to speak
when all things were well and quiet.
(for such men in deed if they did so, wear the best people in the world)
but they ask it to the intent to be the quicklier rid of the speaker. Howbe
it, for all that, I must needs tell you what is to be done. And therefore
first and foremost (O Athenians) assure your selves of this one thing, that king
Philip makes war against this City, and he has already broken the peace,
and is an evil willer, and a deadly enemy to this whole City, and to the
very ground it stands upon: yea I may say too, to the very Gods that be within
this City, King Philip hates even the very religion of Athens.
whom I beseech utterly to confound him. For there is nothing in all the
world that he does, more earnestly fight against, than the very form or
manner of our common weal, and how to undo the same, and at this time he is in
a manner, as it should seem by fine force driven so to do. For make you this
reckoning with your selves: his meaning is to rule all, Such as live in
liberty, cannot brook tyranny.
and therein he thinks, there is no body to withstand him, but you only.
For well he wotteth as his own conscience can witness with him, that he has
done you great wrong, now this long time: for with these things which be
yours of right, and the use whereof, he has against right, he has gotten the
safe possession of all the reast. For had he forgone Amphipolis, and Potidea:
he would think he should not sit sure in Macedonie. So that he understands
well each of these things, both that he lies in wayt for you, and that you
understand the same very well. But because he takes you to be men of good
understanding and judgment: he perceyueth himself to be worthilye hated of
you. Besides all these things which be so many and of so great importance, he
is well assured, that although he wear Lord over all other countries, yet
shall he never be able to keep them surely, so long as your popular and people
ruled estate does continue. For should he have any overthrow or trip (as he is
a man may have many an one) all those towns which he now keeps by main
force, will revolt straight from him to you: Athenians apt by nature to help
the afflicted.
for you be not men apt of your own nature to seek greedily, and to get the
principality over others: but rather to keep an other man from getting: and
when he has gotten any thing, to get ye same out of his hands again: and
wholly to empeach all such as aspire to principality, and well able, and
sufficient to restore all men to their liberty. And therefore it likes him not
at any hand, that the liberty, that is amongst you, should be a trumpe in his
way, when the time should serve him: neither is his reason, in this behalf
amiss or out of the purpose. And even for this cause first and foremost, must
we judge him to be such an enemy to the state of a common wealth, and populare
freedom of a City, as will never be reconciled. And next to that, be you
right well assured, King Philip myndeth nothing more, than the destruction of
Athens.
that all his practices, and devises at this time, are altogether prepared
against your City: neither is their any one, among you all, so simple as to
think that king Philip has any desire to those pelting things in Thracia (for
by what other name should a man call them) as to Drongilus, Cabyle, and
Masteira, and to those that he is now reported to have, or that for the getting
of those baggage things he would endure such travail, cold, and extreme
danger, as he does: and that his longing is not rather to the havens of
Athens, their Arsenales, their Galleies, their works of silver mines, their
huge revenues, their territory and honor, whereof God grant that neither he
nor any other may at any time be Lord and Master, after that he has brought
our City into subjection: or that he would suffer you to enjoy all these
things, and he himself be contented to winter in a Dungeon, for the getting of
Tares, Fatches, and Panyke a kind of pulses, not unlike to Millet, with a long
stalk full of joints, in the top whereof grows an ear full of little yellow
seeds as small as Mustard seed, but not so round, being of little
nourishment for man, and yet very good for small birds to feed upon, and to
fa^ them withal.
Panyke that are in the Caves of Thracia. It can not be so: but it is the
getting of these things into his hands, for which both those, and all other
his practices be. And thus much it is reason, King Philips chief drift to get
Athens.
every man should know, and be resolved of in himself, and not to require him
in good faith that should give you the best council in all rightful causes,
to subscribe to the decree for making of war. For High time for the Athenians
to proclayme war with one consent, and to go also to the wars themselves in
person
that wear the part of them that would feign find one, to whom they might
pick a quarrel, and not of them that minded the thing, that should be for
the wealth of this City. For mark you well, whereas Philip has broken the
peace concluded, once, twice, thrice (for many a time one after another has he
so done) if for these so often breaches a man had decreed to make war upon
him, and he had aided the Cardians in like manner as he now does, when none of
the Athenians decrees war: think you that he which had made this decree
should not have been pulled out by the ears, Dangerous for any one man to
subscribe to the Table for making of war: if the people did not allow of it,
and therefore every one forbear for fear of undoing, to enact or vnderwrite
to the Table, but would rather it should be the whole peoples decere and act.
and would not all men have quarreled, that Philip had aided the Cardians for
this cause? Therefore seek you not whom to hate for King Philips faults, and
to deliver up into the hands of his brybed hirelings to be pulled in pieces.
Neither is it meet, when you shall have once agreed upon war, to call the
matter again in question: and to be at contention among your selves, whether
it wear needful for you to have done this thing or no. But in like manner as
he does make war upon you, so make you your defense, by giving your money and
other things necessary to them that be now at wars with him, and your
selves by contributing and preparing of an army, swift Galleyes, horses, and
vessels for transporting of them, and all other things belonging to the
wars. For as we now use things, it is a plain mockery, King Philip
finds the Athenians to be as he would have them for his purpose.
and I believe verily, so God help me, that king Philip himself would never
wish of God, that ye should do otherwise than ye now do: you come ever to
short in your business, you spend money, you seek out, whom to give the
charge of your business unto, you brawle, you chafe, you accuse one another.
And whereof all these things do rise, you shall hear of me, and I will show
you again, how to remedy all that is amiss.

I must tell you plain (O Athenians) you did never look well to your doings
from the beginning, neither did provide any thing rightfully and orderly as you
ought to do, but are guided always, Athenians careless of their doings till
danger appeared.
by the event and falling out of things: and when you see your selves over
taken, or come to late, than you take your rest. Again, if any other thing do
happen, you prepare your selves and make a great stir, whereas you should not
so do: For it can not be, that you shall ever do any thing well, by sending
of supplies and aid. But when you have prepared an army and gotten sufficient
provision of vittayles for the same, and appointed common officers over your
treasure, The Treasure must be looked unto and kept in safety.
and as much as may be, seen that your money be in safe keeping: when I say
you have this done, then must you take an account of the Treasurers, how they
have bestowed their money, and of your General for matters of war, and leave
him no occasion or pretense, to sail any other where, or to take any other
matters in hand. And thus doing, and showing your selves willing: then shall
you in deed compel king Philip to keep the peace uprightly, and tarry at his
own home: or else you shall be sure to deal with him upon even hand. And
peradventure it may so come to pass, that even as you now are wont to ask,
what does king Philip? which way goes he with his army? even so will he be
careful which way your army is gone, and where you will make your entry, and
discover your selves. Now if any man think it very chargeable and painful to
bring these matters to pass: surely he thinks right well and with good
reason. But and he will consider what will become of this City hereafter, if
in case we will not so do: Nothing well done, that is not willingly done.
he shall then find and see how profitable a thing it is when a man must
needs do a thing, to do it with a good will. For although God himself would
be our surety, and warrant us, (as in deed it passes man's power sufficiently
to assure us in such a matter as this is) that though we would live at rest,
and let all things alone, as men careless which way the world went: and that
king Philip for all that, would not invade us himself: yet notwithstanding, it
wear a foul rebuke to us before God, and a dishonorable dealing for this
City, and a thing unfit, Our neighbors harm, should be our grief, and
careful ought we to be over them.
for the renown of the noble acts of our predecessors, that all other
Grecians should through the lythernesse and negligence of us, be brought into
extreme bondage and slavery: and for my part I had rather die the death
outright, then I would once say the word, God grant England many such
Counselors.
or give any consent thereunto. Howbeit, if any other man will so council you,
and persuade you to it, be it for me: defend not your selves, let all things
go to wrack and spoil. But for as much as there is no body of that mind,
and we all know the contrary already: The greater our enemy grows: the more
we decay.
how that we shall have king Philip so much the harder and mightier enemy,
the greater Prince that we suffer him to be: why be we so backwardes? whereupon
linger we? and when will we dispose our selves (O Athenians) to do that, which
in reason we ought to do? shall it be (on Gods name) when very need shall
drive us thereunto? well, and you mean such need, as any free borne man would
term to be need: the same not only is now present, but it is also gone and
past, a great while since: But such as bond men and slaves term need, I pray
God bless us from that. And what difference is between them I pray you? mary
thus much: Shame and rebuke of evil doings is the greatest necessity that
can be laid upon those that be free men, than the which I know none greater.
But the greatest inforcement to a slave that can be, is stripes, and
scotching, or mangling of his body, the which God keep us from, and let us
not so much as once speak of it. And now (O Athenians) for you to show your
selves so slow in those things wherein every man is bound to serve both with
his body and goods: surely that is not well, no God knows, it is far wide.
Howbeit, there may be some excuse made for it. Marie in that you be not willing
to give ear, They that will not so much as hear council given them are
persons inexcusable, and nighest their last undoing.
to yt which might be told you, and should be fit for you to receive council
in: surely, that is altogether worthy of blame in you. For it is your custom,
never to hear of the matter till things be come even upon you, as it is now:
Neither will you take counsel of any matter so long as you be in quietness:
but when Philip makes preparation against you, than do you (neglecting to do
the same, and in like manner to prepare against him sit still ydlely. And who so
ever tells you of it: you thrust him out straight. Again, when you hear of
any place lost or besieged: then you begin to hearken and buckle to armor:
where as your fittest time had been to have given ear eue^ then, and to have
taken council when you wear most unwilling: And that preparation which you had
made: to put in practice and execution even now, To provide before hand, is
most wisdom: that things being in a readiness, the same may be put in
execution upon the sudden.
at this present, when you make it your time of consultation.

So that by this your manner of dealing: you only amongst all others do things
clean contrary to all the world. For all other folks use to take council
before things be in doing: whereas you begin to deal when all is done.

Now therefore that thing which remains to be said, and should have been
done long before, and yet there is no time to late now neither: I will show
the same unto you. Of all things in the world our City has need of none so
much for these matters that be even at hand, as of money. And fortune of her
self has offered us good luck, which if we can use well, there may perhaps
some meet thing be done.

First and foremost, such as the king of Persia puttes his trust in, and has
taken to be his benefactor, sthey do hate Philip, and be at war with him.
Again, he that was all in all, and privy with Philips practices against the
Persian: The treasu^er and governor of Aterne for the Persian king, called home
from his charge for practicing with king Philip against his sovereign*
the same man is now taken away from his charge. And the Persian shall hear
al his practices, not by any of our complaints (in which case he might suspect
us to speak for our own profit) but by him that was himself the aucthor and
chief minister there in: so that our accusasion shall carry ye more credit with
it, and your Ambassadors talk, shall be such hereafter, as the king will
hear it to his very great delight and pleasure: that he who hurts us both,
shall be revenged of us both, and also that King Philip shall be a much more
terrible enemy to the Persian, if he first set upon us. For should we be once
forsaken and distressed: he would then without fear march toward him. And
for all these causes I think it good, that you do dispatch Ambassadors to
treat with the king of Persia, and lay away these simple and slender reasons
of your own, It is s^llie not to take aid of a stranger, when we may, and
have need of it.
whereby you have been so oftentimes hindered, as those. The Persian, he is a
Barbarian so he is, forsooth, and a common enemy to al men, and all the like
talk. Now surely I for my part, when I see a man stand in great fear of him
that dwelles at Susae, and Ecbatana, Susae, chief City in Persia distant from
Athens. 2000 miles, the people called Sus^^, and Ci^^^^ by Straac, but no^e
called ^oque Ismail.
and bear us in hand that he is enemy to this country, who both heretofore
has helped the matters of our City that wear out of frame, and now also has
promised us his aid, (which his offer if you did not receive, but refused it
by common decree, he is not to be blamed therefore:) And yet the same man to
report otherwise of that errant King Philip he means.
rouer of the Greeks, who is risen aloft, ^^^batana, now (...) Me^ia, (...)
Persian, (...) does use to make his abode.
hard by our noses, even at our own gates, within the very heart of Greece: at
him do I much marvel, and that man fear I, whosoever he be: because he
fears not Philip. There is an other thing plagues this City besides all this:
which is cast abroad upon a certain unjust slander and uncomely talk of men,
and besides that, gives an excuse and cloak to such as be not willing to do
their duties within the City: and of all those things that are wanting (when
that want should be supplied by any body) you shall find the blame laid on
this thing. Whereof, albeit I am greatly adradde to speak: yet for all that, I
will tell you my mind, and I hope I shall have good matter to speak of, for the
profit of the City, as well on the behalf of the poor to the rich, as for
them that have substance, to the needy: so that we remove those slanderous
reports, which certain men do spread abroad upon no just cause, touching the
theater charges or stage money: and also if we would cast away this fear,
that this thing will not be stayed without some great mischief: Civil
factions being betwixt the rich and poor are needful to be cut of.
than which thing, I think there can be nothing more for our profit, nor
generally more for the preservation and establishment of this City. Consider
the matter thus with your selves. Albeit, first of all, Speech in favor of the
poor.
I will speak of them that are the poorer sort.

The time was, and that not long ago neither, when the revenues of this City
wear not above a hundred Twenty three thousand four hundred pou^ds s^arling.
and thirty talents, and yet there was no man (that was able to maintain a
Galley at his own proper charges, or to pay any tax or tallage) that grudged
to do his duty, for want of money. But there wear Galleyes set forth, and
they made money in good time, and all things were done as they should be. After
this, by good luck, the common reuenew of the City increased, and in steed of
one hundred, there came in Three score twelve thousand pounds starling.
four hundred talents, and yet was no man pinched in his goods, or lost any
thing, but rather got by it. For why, the rich and wealthy men, came to have
their part of it, and good reason. Then what ayleth us, Rich men not to draw
back from their duties, because the poor are unwilling.
that we hit one another in the teeth, and under a cloak thereof, resist to do
our duties? Unless it be so, that we do envy the offered aid that fortune
sends to the poor: whom neither I my self do blame, nor yet would have
others to find fault with them. For even in private families and housholdes, I
cannot see the younger sort, to be of that disposition toward their elders, So
should every man live in the common weal: as good folks do in private
families.
nor any so out of order, or so foolish, that if any body do not so much as
himself, he will therefore say that he will do nothing neither. Such a
fellow surely should then feel the danger of the laws provided against
evil handling of our elders. For I think every man is bound of right, to yield
that duty willingly and of his own accord, toward his parents: which both
nature and law have ordained. And as every one of us particularly, has a
father: so ought we all to think that all the Citizens, The common Country
and natural soil, should be dear to every man that is bred and borne in it,
and no Subject ought to be vncared for.
are common parents of the whole City. And that it is not fit or convenient to
take that from them, which the City has given to them, but rather if the
City wear not able to give them any thing: we ought to provide for them
otherwise, and to see that they should not want. That if the rich men had
this considerate care with them, they would not only deal (as I believe)
uprightly, and justly: but also be profitable and benificiall to others. And it
can not be otherwise, but that, when men are commonly void of things
necessary for their living: it makes a number of men evil minded to the
dispatch of things. Again, on the other side, I would wish that the poorer
sort, would clear themselves, and leave to deal in that matter, for which the
rich men are justly grieved, and have good cause to be offended with them.

And now likewise as I have done already to the poor: The rich, well warned
not to hinder ye poor.
so will I speak of the rich, and will not shrink to say the truth. Neither
is there any man, be he of Athens, or of any other country, so miserable and
of so cruel a heart (as I think) that will grudge, to see the poor have it,
and them that are in necessity. But whereat stick we then, and what is it,
that angers us? Converting of public treasure to private game, a thing
hurtful and offensive.
Marie this, when they see some men turn the custom of the common treasurye,
to their own private use, and the worker hereof so quickly to come aloft among
you, and to live in so great security as though he were safe for ever: And
then see the voice secretly given, (...) a hurre or noise that upon some thing
yt likes or misliketh the people assembled together, goes through them all.
far different from the shoute and rejoicing that was openly made. This is it
that breeds mistrustfulnesse: this is that that causes all this anger. For
why, it is meet (O Athenians) that one man live by another, according to right
and equity. And that the rich men, may think themselves in safety of those
things, that are for maintenance of their life, Justice maintayneth estates.
and without fear to enjoy them: And when time of danger is, to yield up to
their country, all their goods in common for their safegarde and welfare: and
as for the rest, that i^ the poorer sort, to esteem things common, that are
common, and every one to have his share, and that which is every man's in
private, to remain still to the owners. And by this means, a small City
waxes great, and a great City is preserved for ever. This is in a manner all
that may be said on both sides, as well for the rich, as for the poor, but
how these things may be lawfully done, I must open the matter more plainly.

An answe^e to traitors, that said their was no fear of king Philip, because
there was plenty of vittayles* in Athens and no want of things necessary.
Of these present business and troubles, there are many by past causes to be
alleged, which I will open unto you, if it will please you to give me the
hearing.

You are much swarued (O Athenians) from that State and manner of living, which
your fore elders left you in, and are persuaded by such, as rule all in these
matters, and think it a superfluous and a needelesse charge, to be chief over
all the State of Greece, or to have always an army in a readiness, for the
relief of all those that are wronged and oppressed: and are given to think
that it is a wonderful happiness and great safety to live at rest, and to
do nothing as you ought to do: but rather neglecting every thing
perticularly, to give other men leave to take all: and by this means an other
man is stepped up to that degree (which had been fit for you to have been in)
king Philip he means.
he is become both happy, and mighty, and Lord over a great number, and good
reason. For why, that feate which was so honorable, so great, and so goodly a
matter, and such as the mightiest Cities have always striued for among
themselves, what through the Lacedaemonians untoward luck, and the Thebanes
that could not intend it by reason of their wars with the Phoceians, and
what through our negligence: that thing I say has king Philip taken up as a
thing forsaken, and given over of all men. Whereupon others of the Grecians were
in great fear, but king Philip he got thereby great allies, and mighty power.
And such and so great stirs and troubles have now compassed round about all
the Grecians, that it is no very easy matter to give such council as is
requisite. And where as (O Athenians) all Greece stands in a very dreadful case
(as I take it) yet is there none in greater peril, than you are, not only
because king Philip does chiefly mind confusion unto you above all others,
Careless people always in most danger.
but especially because you your selves are the most careless and ydlelest of
all. But if, because you see great store and good cheap of things to be sold,
and plenty of vittayles in the Market place, you are delyted so much therein,
as though the City wear out of all danger: no doubt you do not judge well of
the matter, nor as you ought to do. For in deed they wear it good matter,
for a man to judge a Market or asse^bly by, whether it wear well or evil
served or no. But as for a City, which he (whosoever always coueteth to be a
ruler over the Greeks) has thought only able to withstand his purpose, and to
defend the liberty of al ye reast: we ought not forsooth to judge of things
that are to be bought and sold, whether that City be in good state or no,
Strength of a City what it is, and wherein it consists.
but rather if it have affiance in the good will of confederates, and be strong
in furniture of armor. These be the things that ought to be considered in the
state of this City: which with you are altogether evil used, and not well
appointed. And this you may well perceive, if you will consider with your
selves by the time when Greeceland was chiefly in trouble: (as no man can say
yt ever it was at any time so much as at this present.) For in times past all
Greeceland was divided into two factions, that is to say, betwixt the
Lacedaemonians and us. The rest of the Grecians wear part at our devotion, and
part at theirs. The king of Persia, he means.
As for the king, so long as he was by himself, he was mistrusted of all men
alike. But joining to him ye weaker side that was conquered in battle: so
long was he trusted, until he had made them equal with the other side.
Afterward they whom he had saved, did no less hate him, then those did that
had been his enemies from the beginning. And at this present time to begin
withal, the king uses friendly all the rest of the Greeks, but us least of
all, except we now play the men.

Moreover, there are diverse Lieutenaunt ships appointed every where, and
every one seeks to be chief: Some reuolts from others, Falshoode in
fellowship, and common envying one an other.
some disdaynes and enuies one another, and not one trustes his neighbor,
contrary to that they ought to do. And every one holds of himself, the
Argeynes, the Thebanes, the Corinthians, the Lacedaemonians, the Arcadians, and
we. And all be it that Greece is divided into so many parts and seigniories,
as they are: yet if any man should boldly say the truth, ye shall see none
amongst them all, have their Courts and consistories, more naked and less
frequented, than they are with you. And by good reason: for no man that either
loves us, or crediteth, or fears us, commoneth with us of any matters. And
there is not one cause only of these things, (O Athenians) for then it wear
easy for us to redress it, but there is full many a fault, yea of all sorts,
and at all times committed, whereof I leave to speak particularly, only one I
will move you in, whereunto all the reast do tend: beseeching you, if I be
bold to tell you the truth, not to be offended with me for it.

Your commodities have been sold out of your hand from time to time:
Laysinesse lost Athens.
and you have taken out your part in laysinesse and rest, the pleasure whereof,
so caries you away, that you are nothing offended with them that do you wrong.
And by that means other men rob you of your honor. As for other points, it
is no fit time now to rippe them up. But so soon as we fall in any talk of
king Philip, by and by startes up one and says, it is now no time for us to
dallye, nor pass a decree for the making of war: Unnecessary reasons
alleged to hinder necessary war.
adding straight way in the neck of that, what a goodly thing it is to be at
peace: how sore a thing it is to maintain a great army: and how there be
that go about to spoil us of our treasure: and many other tales, do they tell
you (as they take them to be) very true. But verily they should not persuade
peace unto you, that sit so still, being already persuaded: but unto him
rather yt does things belonging to war. But if Philippe wear once persuaded
to peace, than for your parts it is done already. Neither should we think
those charges burdenous unto us, A well spen^ penny that saves a pound.
that we spend and employe for our own safeguard: but rather those burdenous,
which we are sure to abide, if we shall neglect this, and omit to devise the
means to keep our treasure from robbing (not by foreslowing our profit) but
by assigning a good guard for the safe keeping thereof. And surely this may well
vex me to the heart, to see how it would grieve some of you and you were
robbed of your money, Particular griefs sooner felt, than public annoya^ces.
which is in your own powers to have kept, and to punish the robbers: and yet
that king Philip who raunges thus a spoiling of all Greece one piece after
another, greeueth you nothing at all, specially whereas he robs and spoyleth
to your hurt, and undoing. And what is the cause (O Athenians) that he doing
us this apparent wrong, and taking our towns from us, yet there is no man will
say, he does us wrong, or makes war upon us: but rather will bear you in
hand, that they which council you not to suffer him, neither negligently to
cast away these things, are they that make the war? The cause is, for that of
all these evils and miseries, that may happen to come by the wars (as in
deed it must needs be, yea, it can not be otherwise, but that great troubles
and vexations will arise by the war) they will with one voice lay the whole
fault upon them, that gave you best council, for your own welfare. For they
think verily that if you would all with one mind and consent defend your
selves against king Philip, both you should have ye better hand of him, and
they also should no more have the means to serve him for his bribes as they
do. But if as soon as you see any troubles, you turn your selves by and by to
accusing and condemning of men, Dangerous giving ear to common accusers.
they think that they themselves by accusing these men, shall get both these
things, that is, thanks at your hands, and money at his. And that for those
things for which you should have punished them before: ye shall now punish
them that have spoken for your profit. And this is the hope of these bribe
takers, and the fetch of all their accusations, in charging some men to be the
authors of the wars, where as I my self know this very well, that when no
man of all Athens did decree any war at al, king Philip both keeps many
things that belongs to this City, and even now has sent in an aid to
Cardia. Now if we will not be acknowne that he warreth against us: surely he
wear the veryest fool in the world, if he would find out this fault
himself. It is good bea^ing of a proud man.
For when the wronged man, denies that any man has done him harm, what would
you have him to say that does the wrong? But when he shall set upon us our
selves, what will we say then? For certainly he will plainly say, that he has
no war with us, as he said to the Oreteynes, having his men of war within
their country. No more did he to the Pheriens till he began to batter their
walls. Nor yet to the Olynthians at the first, till he was ready with his
army within their Country. And shall we say that they that had them then
defend themselves, were the authors of the war? Why then there is none other
way, for us but to live in slavery, for there is no way else that we can take.

And as far as I can see, the danger that we are in, is far different from
other folks. For king Philip means not to have our City under his obeisance,
no, that is not his meaning? but altogether to destroy it. For he knows well
enough, you are men that neither will live in bondage, nor yet if ye would,
could tell how to do it. For you have been always accustomed to rule, and
he knows well enough that you are able to work him more trouble (if you will
watch your time) than all others are able to do what so ever they be. And
therefore he will not spare you, if he once get the upper hand of you.
Wherefore you must be of that mind to fight like men, that are at the
uttermost, and very last cast of all, and to show your selves manifest foes
unto them, and to put them to the rack and torture that be the apparaunt
hirelings and bought and sold men of king Philip, for you shall never,
Vilaynes in gross.
you shall never prevail against the outward enemy, unless you root out
first and destroy these home foes within the town, but like men driven upon a
sight of rocks: Home foes, the worst and most dangerous people living.
so you meeting with these fellows shall come short of all. Moreover, whence
commes it think you that he is so spiteful toward you? For I can not see
what he means by his doings else. For he is good to all others, and thereby
though he gets nothing else, yet he is sure to deceive them, but as for you
he threatens already. The like he has done by the Thessalians whom he has
now towled in by his number of gifts to this their present slavery.
Thessalians deceived by t^king of great gifts.
And it wear a very hard matter for any man to tell, how much he abused the
poor wretches, the Olinthians after he had given them Potidaea, Olynthians
abused*
and many things else. And even now he fetches me in the Thebanes by giving
to them the Country of Boeotia, and delivering them from a very grievous and
dangerous war. Thebanes brought into a fools Paradise.
So that every one of them by profiting and aduantaging himself in a very
small matter: are now some of them already in that case as all men may see,
and othersome of them shall be feign to abide, whatsoever may chance unto
them. But as for you, what you have been spoiled of, I will say nothing.
Athenians wyped clean of their chief towns and fortes, upon their conclusion
of peace with king Philip.
Even at the very instant of the knitting up of the peace, in how many things
have you been deceived in? how many things have you been lurched of? has he
not got from you the Phoceyans? the Piles? is he not Lord in the State of
Thracia? Doriscum? Serrium? and of king Charsobleptes himself, keeps he not
presently Cardia in his hands, and cares not who knows it? And why bears he
himself toward other men, and toward you, Bribe takers being suffered to
speak without peril, bring hurt to the state.
not a like? forsooth, because men have free liberty without peril in this
our City only, of all others, to speak in the behalf of the enemy: and if
any has taken money, he may speak safely enough amongst you, although you
should be spoiled of all that you have by the bargain.

Money taking destroyed Olynthus.
It was no safe speaking in Olynthus, on king Philips side, had not the Commons
there, been also benifited by taking the fruits of Potidaea.

Money taking undid Thessalia.
It was no safe speaking on king Philips side in Thessalia, had not the
multitude of the Thessalians been also benifited, in that Philip expulsed
their Tyraunts, and after restored to them Pyles. Money taking, the ruin of
Thebes.
It was no safe speaking in Thebes neither, till he had given them up Beotia,
and destroyed the Phoceyans. But at Athens, (though king Philip has taken from
us not only Amphipolis, and the whole country of the Cardians, but also
fortifieth even now Euboia, and makes it as a rampire or countermure against
us, and now comes straight with his army upon Constantinople. Athenians,
receiving loss, suffer flatterers to speak in favor of the enemy, contrary
to the manner and usage of other countries.
Bizanze:) yet is it safe speaking on king Philips side for all that. And
therefore some of these good fellows, that speak in his favor are risen up
from beggars state, to become suddenly very rich persons, and of men without
name or reputation, Every man for himself: none for his country.
grown to be of great authority, and famous. But you clean contrary, that
erst wear of great account, be now out of al estimation: The treasure of a
kingdom are these three. 1. War fellows and confederates 2. Faithfulness in
dooyng things. 3. good will to do well.

and that ear while wear welthie, be now out of all wealth. For surely I take
it that the riches of a state, consists in confederates, faithfulness, and
good will, all which things you do want. And by your neglecting hereof, and
letting all things go as they do, king Philip he means.
he is become happy and mighty and terrible to all the Greeks and
Barbarians: whereas you your selves are void of friends, and low brought,
making a goodly show, and glistering of a cheapnesse of vittayles that is
among you: But as for any store or preparation you have of things convenient
or needful: you may be laughed to scorn of the world for it. And I perceive
very well, there be Counselors, that give you not the like council,
Dissembling Counselors.
as they would do to themselves. For they tell you, you must be quiet, and
though a man do you wrong: Where as they themselves cannot be at rest among
you, when no man does them any harm at all. But if a man, might ask a
question without check: Aristodemus an evil counselor, persuading
unnecessary peace.
Tell me O Aristodemus, for as much as thou know it well enough (as what is
he that knows it not) that as the private man's life is very safe, quiet and
without peril: The private man's life a very safe being.
so their life that bear rule in the common weal, is fraughted with
complaints, and uncertain, full both of daily brawles and mischiefs: why
would thou not rather follow a quiet and vnbus^ed life, than choose this
dangerous and uncertain state of being? What have thou to say to it? For if
thou make unto me that answer, which is best for thee, Many in au^thoritie,
seek rather their own advancement, than the welfare of their Country.
and that I do grant it unto thee to be true, that thou do all these
things, for the desire thou have to advance thine honor: I do marvel
truly, seeing thou think it meet for thee to take all these pains, and
not to refuse any labor or peril, for honors sake: that thou will be a mean
for thy Country, to lose all these things through very sloth and lythernesse.
For thou will not say this, that it were meet for thee to be some body in this
City: and yt this City ought to be of no estimation among the Greeks. Neither
do I understand this, how it can be for the safety of the City, to meddle
with her own affairs, and yt it should be dangerous for thee: except thou
do intermeddle over curiously with other folks business. But contrariwise,
Over much meddling and ouerlittle, both hurtful to man and City.
I think that through this thy meddling and ouermedling great peril is like to
fall to thee: and the like to the City through their idleness. But thou on
Gods name have honor by thy Grandfather and Father, the which thou think a
shame to be ended in thee: and has this City received no renown or honor of
her Ancestors? But that is not so. For an errant thief was thy father, if he
were like to thee: whereas the glory of our City stands in this, that the
Grecians (as all men know) wear twice delivered out of extreme danger by
our elders. But all men do not in like manner equally and ciuilly, handle and
govern their own, and the public goods. For what equity is there in this,
Honors change manners, especially in those that rise from the Dunghill.
that some of those fellows who came but the last day out of prison, should be
so proud, that they know not themselves: and the City which earewhile had
the chieftie and pre-eminence over all Greecclande, should now become so
base, and out of all estimation? Thus having much yet to speak, and of many
matters: I will say no more. Neither is it for lack of speaking, as me
thinks, that either now, or at any time else, our matters have been in so
evil a plight, but the matter is this, when you have heard men give you good
counsel, and with one accord allowed well their sayings: you are as ready by
and by to sit you down, and give ear to those that are disposed to mar, and
overthwart the whole: And not because you know them not, for why, you know
them so soon as ever you see them who they be, that speak for their hire, who
serve king Philips turn: and who they be that tells you the truth as it is,
and best for your avail: but to the intent that having a quarrel to rebuke
them, and turning all the matter to a jest and a flowte, you may keep your
selves from doing of any thing that should be needful. Three chief points fit
for Counselors, 1. to be bold, 2. plain, and 3. faithful.

These things be true which I have told you frankely and freely with
plainness, goodwil, and for your best behooue, not a tale farced with
flattery, hurtfulnesse, and guile, for the speaker to get money by, and to
yield up the state of our City into our enemies hands. Wherefore either you
must leave of, these conditions of yours: or else you must blame no body that
all things go awrie, but your own selves.

Certain sentences, gathered out of certain several Orations of Demosthenes.
Ex orat. de falsa legatione.
THat City is of no value, Much pardoning offenses, destroys a state.
the which is not of ability enough to punish wrong dooers: neither is that
common weal any thing worth at all, where pardon and intercession preuayles
against laws.

Ex orat. Amator.
THe mind of man is his guide in all things, The mind of man, is man
himself, and needs continual teaching.
and the same is only to be instructed and trained up with knowledge and
learning.

Ex orat. Iuneb.
THe beginning of all virtue is wisdom, To know, and to do, are all in all,
in virtue.
the end of virtue is monhoode and courage: by the one we learn what to do:
by the other, we preserve and maintain our selves.

Ex orat. Amator.
IT is a very goodly thing for a man, even through fortunes goodness to be
regarded and had in estimation, Honor got by virtue, has perpetual assurance.
among the noblest and best sort of men: but yet a much more goodly thing it is
for a man to have got through his own virtue and travail, all manner of
reputation and honor: for that one which is welfare, the vile and naughty man
does attain unto now and than, but of this other surely, no man can ever be
partaker saving he only, that is of an exceeding noble courage, and has a
manly heart of his own.

Ex orat. contra Aristogit.
ALl men have Altars of justice, equity and shamefastness: Virtue, honored
of all men: but of wrong deeds, no man makes any worship.
And those some have very fair, and the most holy, every man within his own
mind, and nature: others have such as be set up for the common use of all men,
but of shamelessness, of slaundering, of forswearing, and of unthankfulness,
was never man had any altar at all.

Ex orat. ad Lept.
IF all men for very fear of the laws would leave to do any evil, If either
fear or love, would cause men to be honest: laws were nedelesse.
and every man for desire of reward would do his duty: what should let why
a country should not be very mighty, all men honest, and none evil?

Ex orat. contra Aristogi.
Whatsoever thing is goodly and honorable, and serves for the ornament and
preservation of states, as modest behavior toward parents, Virtue excludes
vice.
reuerences of young men toward their elders, and good order: all those I say
by the only aid and assistance of the law, Laws are the links of virtue.
do prevail against all wickedness: as against unshamefastness,
foolehardinesse, and vnreuerent behavior toward others.

These few sentences are set forth, to give a certain show of Demosthenes
notable worthiness, who has infinite speeches of like sort, throughout all his
Orations, which he uttered with great eloquence and pleasure to the hearers,
but much more effectually expressed he the same in the whole course of his
life, Demosthenes more honored for his notable virtues and good life: than for
his great learning and wonderful eloquence.
as being in deed more famous for his virtuous living and constant hartinesse
toward his dear Country, than for his excellent knowledge, and marvelous
gift of eloquence, wherein nevertheless, he has been thought of all men
hitherto, to be the odd man of all the world.

The life and doings of Demosthenes, gathered out of Plutarch, Suidas,
Libanius, Lucian, and others, with some discourse upon certain things, as
occasion serves.
DEmosthenes, being father to Demosthenes the Orator, Theseus persuaded the
people to live together in the City, who lived before in the country, divided
into four tribes or shyres, and those tribes wear parted into twelve
hundrethes, and those twelve hu^drethes were severed into 365 fraternities, or
brotherhoodes, every brotherhoode having their proper names, (...) Demosthenes
among the rea^^ was of the Peanian brotherhoode.
and one of the ward or company of the Paeanians, (a fellowship so called by
addicion or name of that place in the territory of Atticke from whence they
first came, as many other companies did, to dwell afterward within the City
of Athens, and to leave the Country) was a very honest man, and a welthy
Citizen, called by surname the blade Smith, or Cutler, for that he had certain
workmen under him, that made blades and swoordes, to be sold for his benifite.
And albeit his servants did thus labor under him with such handie craft
works: yet was he no work man himself, but being a wise and a welthie
Citizen, was appointed by the State to be a Trierarchus, which is as much as
Captain or Governor of some one Galley, or Galleys, who not only took that
office upon him as a good Surueyor, but also did defray of his own proper
cost, all the expenses and charges belonging to a Galley, according to the
manner then used for the rich men so to do, in favor of their Country, their
Galleyes being the wooden walls of their City, as Apollo said by his
Oracle, and so the defense of their State. Now belyke this man and such other,
as took upon them so great a matter, being of so great charge, credit, and
benifite to their Country, could not be otherwise esteemed, then for the best,
and most worthy Citizens among the reast. Thus much I speak for his degree
and calling, Such as had the government of Galeyes, wear the best esteemed
men in Athens.
notwithstanding he bare the name of a blade Smith: to the rebuke of those that
can not brook any to bear authority in their Country, that are not
Gentlemen borne, the which is no thank to them. For so might others have been
as well as they, if their constellation had been thereafter, or rather if God
had thought it so convenient. But whatsoever he be, poor or rich, low or
high, crafts man, or landed man, if he be virtuous and godly, he is a
Gentleman. And he that can do nothing, nor will do nothing: either is no
Gentleman in deed, or unfitly bears the name of a Gentleman, Virtue the best
Nobility.
yea virtue only is the truest and most rightest Nobility that is. This man
had to wife, one Cleobula, a stranger borne, and no Grecian as it was thought,
who brought him forth a son, called Demosthenes, after his own name. This
Demosthenes the father died in good wealth, to the value of.2700. pound starling
of revenues, as it should seem, 15. Talents.
leaving his son very young, and of tender age after him, scant seven years
old. Wherefore he bequeathed him with those his goods, to three executors men
of trust, named Aphobus, Demophon, and Therippides, who like common executors,
not only became careless of the childs bringing up, but also employed his
portion to their own use, Executors careless of their charge.
yea they did not so much, as pay the teachers for his learning. And the Boy
being in deed somewhat weerish, and tender of body, his mother therefore was
not willing that he should be ouertrauelled with to great pains to seek
learning, for fear of hindering his health. And the Schoolemaysters they cared
as little as who cared least, how little the child took for his money: being
neither willed by others to take pains with the Boy, nor yet like to be
greatly considered for their pains taking (as they thought) if perhaps they
should have taken any. So that this child might have been lost for want of
careful bringing up, and good heed taking to him: if he had not been better
inclined of his own nature. And for that he was such a milk soppe, and so
neshe or tender natured child, and so very a cockney therewithal, his
playfellowes commonly called him by way of scorn and mockage Battalus, as
much to say as wanton, nise, and effeminate, after the condition of one
Battalus a Musician, Battalus a Musician, so nise of behavior, yt he could not
well tell how to tread upon the ground and a great delight he had to go in
woman's apparel, or at the least wise as nisely, as women do.
that was a womanishe man, as tender a piece, God wot, as a Nuns hen. He was
also called afterward Argas, by surre name, as much to say, as a biting
Serpent, applying the term either to the fierceness and bitterness of his
nature, or for that he was so sharp to the hearers in his Orations, that they
could not well abide him.

Now that this his father was thus dead, although it be to others a great
lack for want of good bringing up: his mother being more tender than needed,
and loving her son against reason, as commonly mothers do, having greater
care to his wanton cherishing, than to his good education, he having lettes
also besides this, mo than a good many to do well: yet such was his natural
inclination and aptness to all goodness and virtue, that he of himself,
without guide, or directour in his doings, followed the best and worthiest way,
that was for man to go in upon earth. For whereas Athens was a town, that
ministered great pleasures, and carried some away, to great folly, that wear
under the power and government of their fathers, Demosthenes aptness by nature
to follow the path of virtue.
and that all youth is commonly given to disorder, and many times through
default of their governors, do run astray: yet was this child being very
young and tender of years, so wholly given to good learning, that he forsook
all the vanities of ye world, to hear Aristotle, Theophrastus, and Plato,
three of the most famous learned men that ever wear. So that whereas there be
two ways of love offered to every one at his first entry, to tread in, the
one savage, rude, and wicked, being the very path to hell, death, and
damnation: the other, godly, plain, right, and honest, being the high way to
heaven, and all the joys that may be, the which way entiseth all good men to
it, through the beauty thereof, and draws all them with an heavenly trance
or motion of mind, that are borne of Gods race: he took that loving way of
virtue, and through great pains and travail, got the immortal reward, of
his heavenly desire, being known and reputed to be one of the most famous
Orators that ever lived. Now the cause that moved him chiefly besides his
natural inclination, to be so greedy and so studious of eloquence, was this.
It happened that when Calistratus that famous Orator should handle the
Oropians cause, Oropus a town of Attica bordering upon Boeotia, for the
jurisdiction of which place there was great hold.
being a matter of so great importance, as it touched the state of their
town: there was like to be a marvelous audience, not only for the
weightinesse thereof: but also for the worthiness of the Orator. At which time
it fortuned Demosthenes (being then of very young years as it should seem) to
hear certain scholemaysters say to his Master, that they and he would go
and hear the said Orator, which made that the Boy was not quiet till by much
entreaty he had obtained of his teacher, that he might also go with him.
Wherewith his master was content, The cause that moved Demosthenes first, to
love eloquence.
and for that he had good acquaintance with the officers and keepers of that
place, he got an apt rowme for his Boy, to sit close and secret, where he
might hear all that was to be said. At last, when Calistratus had excellently
handled himself, and was wonderfully esteemed for his eloquent Oration:
Demosthenes thought it a great honor, to see him so followed and attended
upon by the people, and to be reported so worthy a man, but most of all his
wonder was, that his marvelous eloquence was such as thereby he did prevail
in all causes, and brought things to pass as he would have them, which fired
so his heart, that thereupon he gave over all other kinds of study, and began
to exercise himself with making Orations, as though yt he himself would by and
by be an Orator. Iseus an excellent Orator, and teacher of eloquence. Isocrates
kept a schole of Rhetoric, being the sweetest Orator for his sentences and
phrases that then lived.
And so professed himself scholar to one Isaeus a master of eloquence, and
not to Isocrates, who was the more famous man, and did read at the self same
time. But the cause was, as it is thought, for that he had not wherewith to pay
the pencion appointed by Isocrates, which was ten Minas that is xxx. pound
starling, he being fatherless, and motherle^^e* and having no use of his own
goods as then: or else he did rather choose to follow Isaeus for that his
kind of writing and speaking was more pearcing, and more cunning to season
causes withal, or (as it may be thought) more agreeable to his nature. Some
say again that he was scholar to Plato, Plato.
and by him did much advance his skill for eloquence, after whose death, he
became scholar to Aristotel, and was his hearer so diligently, Aristotel.
and so prospered under him, that he reported him afterward both to king
Philip, and to Alexander, to be one of the worthiest scholars, for diverse his
gifts and virtues, that ever he had. It is also said, that he had and did
secretly learn the books of Isocrates, and Alcidamantes, touching the
precepts of Rhetorike, the which he had of one Callias a Siracusan, and others.
And truth it is, so soon as he was of full years and crept out of his
minority, he brought an action against his Tutors for their wasting of his
Patrimony committed to their charge, and began to title Orations against them,
Demosthenes pleads against his Tutor.
the which are yet extant some of them, in aunswering of whom, they used great
sleightes and delatorie plees, with protestations and exceptions against the
whole process as full of Nullities, and therefore of no force. And only this
they did, because they would compel him to begin law again, and so (in form
of law through continual delays) to weary him altogether.

Thus being with painful travail and earnest study well exercised, and
following his cause without intermission: at length he prevailed against them,
although he neither got a quarter of his own, nor yet recovered that small
portion, which was awarded him, without great peril and hazard. Orchomenius
Laomedon through exercise of body cured himself of a great disease, and made
his body thereby ever after more nimble, lusty and strong.
And so by often dealing in his own matters being well seasoned and made bold
through custom to speak, and seeing what honor it was to be an excellent
Orator: he gave himself to plead openly, and to be a Counselor in other men's
causes. And as it is reported like as Orchomenius Laomedon did use by the advice of the Physician to run every day a long race to amend the fault of his
spleen, An apt similitude.
and so by such exercise got such an ability and perfection in running, that
at the common games he got the garland from all others, and was counted the
swiftest runner of all men living: so happened it with Demosthenes that whilst
he entered the Courts to plead his own cause, to recover such losses and
wrongs as he had sustained in his private goods and possessions, he thereby
got himself such experience in pleading, and such eloquence of speech
therewithal, that he was counted in civil causes (as Orchomenius was in
running for the garland) the chiefest pleader of all others, Use makes
maysteries.
that came to the bar to speak in any matter.

But yet at the first time of his speaking to the people, he was hissed at, and
out countenaunced with knocking and trampling of feet, for his unacquainted
and strange manner of speech, which being intricate and confused, carried very
long and tedious sentences, powdered with bitter and odious reasons, alleged
and wrested in, Demosthenes imperfections, in speech and want of skill to tell
his tale.
to prove his matter good. Besides this, his voice as it seemed was childishe
and small, his tongue unready and obscure, himself short breathed, hacking
and parting his sentences in such sort, that he was altogether thought confused
and superfluous. Now when through his imperfection he saw that he got small
credit for his doings: he gave over pleading in open Courts before the
people, and traded himself to walk solitarily on the Peer in Athens: Whom
when Eunomius Thriasius a very aged man did perceive to walk so, Eunomius
Thriasius.
he did sharply rebuke him for his faint heart, and told him that he had
cause enough to be of good cheer, for that his manner of pleading was not
inferior to Pericles doings, who was a most excellent and vehement Orator:
Demosthenes bashful of nature before the people.
but he said that he marred himself with a certain bashefulnesse, and faint
stomach of his own, for that he was fearful, and could neither abide
boldly the peoples presence, and their noise: nor yet acquaint his body with
exercise to endure pains, undoing himself wholly with overmuch ease, and
daintiness, and hindering his good doings with needelesse fear. An other
time being graueld in open audience, he gat him home with an heavy heart,
thrusting his head in his bosom as one clean out of countenance. And as the
tale goes, one Satyrus a Stage player, Satyrus, a professor to teach iesture
and v^terance, who showed his cunning in open stage, as Roscius and others did
among the Romans.
and of his acquaintance came to him, and kept him company. Unto whom
Demosthenes uttered his mind and said, that where he was the most painful
Orator above all others, and had almost wasted his body with the study
thereof, yet his credit with the people was nothing, but belly gods,
gluttons, lowtes, mariners, and every ignorant lubber (quoth he) can be heard,
and have audience with favor, Demosthenes complain to Satyrus.
where as I for all my travel am naught set by, but despised and esteemed as
no body. Thou say even true Demosthenes, quoth Satyrus to him. But I will
soon remedy this matter, if thou will but rehearse unto me (quoth he) without
book any sentence of Euripides, or Sophocles: which when Demosthenes had done,
Satyrus took the same sentence in hand again, and did set it forth with
vtteraunce of speech, countenance, and iesture, in such sort, Pronunciatio^ of
what force it is.
that in a manner it seemed to Demosthenes himself to be an other manner of
sentence. Whereupon, when he perceived what an orname^t good pronunciation was
to eloquence, and found that where the gift of speech and iesture was not aptly
used, every sentence was but dead: he gave him wholly to correct his vtteraunce
and iesture, and therein used the help of one Andronicus. Demosthenes practice
to amend his speech.
And as Demetrius Phalerius reports (who heard Demosthenes tell it in his
latter days) he used for help of his stammering this kind of exercise, that
is, he kept certain Counters or stones in his mouth when he was rehersing
Orations, which counters or stones served him (as I take it) for a gagge to
make him gape more wide, or to speak thereby the playner, and more distinctly.
And for help of his voice, Demosthenes manner to mend his voice.
his manner was to get him up upon high places, as on the tops of stares or such
like, and there would he make Orations by himself, and utter certain verses
with one whole breath so long, as he was able by any possibility to continue.
And to help his bashfulnesse and shamefastness withal, through which he was
many times dashed out of countenance, with the great noise that the people
made, when he should speak in open audience: Demosthenes remedy to help his
bashfulnes.
he haunted the sea side, where the surges most rored, imagining that using
himself to speak where such a tempestuous hurling noise was, he might the
rather abide the peoples exclamations and unquietness. And where as he had an
uncomely use to move one of his shoulders, Demosthenes manner to amend his
iesture
somewhat higher sometimes than the other: he caused a swoorde to be hanged
upon a beam with the point downward, almost to his shoulder, yt if by any
means he should happen to hit that iesture, or to shrug his shoulder otherwise
than wear meet: the swords point might straight ways prick him. And
besides, he had a great Glass in his house, in the sight whereof he used to
stand, till he had ended such Orations as he minded to utter before the
people. Demosthenes diligence and painfulness, and his strange kind of
keeping within.
And the better to be a help to himself in all these things, he builded him a
vawte or under cellor, by low in the ground, into the which he went daily,
and there framed his voice and iesture, and continuing sometimes two or three
months together close at home, he caused one part of the side of his head to
be shaven, to the intent that although he would go abroad, he might not for
very shame. Besides this, he lost none occasion, by such speech and conference
as he had with others: to occupy his head and wit withal. For when he came
home, Demosthenes manner to occupy his head and wit withal.
he gat him straight to his secret corner, and there repeated to himself the
whole matter of the talk had abroad as it was, and what defense was made for
it. And such Orations as he heard abroad, he would call them to his mind at
home, and first divide them into sentences, and then amend and alter the
words as he thought meet, into some other sort, as well such speeches as other
men used to him, as those which he himself used to them. Whereby it was
thought that he attained not to such excellency by any great wit,
Demosthenes more painful than witty.
but rather by great labor, and continual study. And the likelyhoode was
great it should so be, for there was no man lightly could hear Demosthenes
speak any thing in open audience upon the sudden. For being oftentimes set
in council, and by name desired of the people to say his mind, he would not
for all that stand up to speak at any time, Demosthenes never spoke in ^pen
audience, unprepared.
except he had been first prepared before hand for the matter. Insomuch that
he was one day charged that he spoke nothing unwritten, which he did not deny
flatly, but said that he neither spoke altogether without penning of his
matter, nor yet wholly with penning of it, but used to lay his ground in
writing, so that he knew what he had to say materially, before he spoke from
point to point: yea he made a more round answer to an other, that misliked
with his overmuch painful uttered Orations by writing, saying, that he wished
of God not only to bring with him written Orations, but also Orations graven
in Marble, if it wear possible, especially for such an assembly and place of
audience as the Orators had. And to like purpose was his saying an other time
to one Epicicles, Demosthenes to Epicicles.
who charging him that all his matters were studied for before hand, answered
thus: I might with good reason be ashamed in deed, if giving up mine advice
and council to such a multitude, I should speak upon the sudden: judging it
rather rashness then wisdom, to speak to a number without preparation and
aduicement, before hand. And surely this his diligence and wisdom appears
notable, to the great blame and shame of them that pass their days ydlely,
Labor and pains taking bring all things to pass.
without taking pains, or giving themselves earnestly to any trade or virtuous
exercise. For God has put virtue, and all good things to sail for labor and
pains taking only, as may appear by this notable man, one of the rarest
ornaments of all the world for eloquence, and deep understanding of those
things that he took in hand to know. Who being but meanly witted and unapt
by nature, wanne through great labor to excel all others: yea his industry
and diligence was such, that he did much forbear his sleep and natural rest,
sitting up late many times, and rising very early, doing most of his things by
candle light, Pyth^as saying to Demosthenes.
whereupon one Pythias cast in his teeth that his excellency of eloquence, and
profound reasons alleged, did smell altogether of candle smoke, unto whom
Demosthenes answered, in deed it may be (quoth he) that your charges and
mine for candle light be not of one manner, meaning that the other was a great
ryoter by night, and lashed out his thrift by smoke of the candle, where as
Demosthenes was only occupied at his book.

Demosthenes temperauncie of life.
The manner of his living was also aunswerable to his painful travail, for he
was very spare of diet, and never drank other manner of lyquor than only
water, whereupon Demades did merrily take occasion to jest: Demades saying upon
Demo^thenes.
saying that others spoke their Orations by water, but he wrote his by water,
signifying that all others having their time stinted to say their minds by a
certain hour glass, Clepsidra, a Dial, measuring hours by running of water.
called Clepsidra, out of the which, water did run softly, as sand does in
our usual Glasses, for one, two, or three hours space, as the Judges would
appoint their time of sitting, and as the necessity of the cause required: so
Demosthenes did write his Orations by water, that is to say, he did drink
nothing else but water, to have his wits ever ready, and fresh for all
matters. And therefore as he did perfect and bring forth to great excellency
these his everliving monuments of Orations, by great labor, much abstinence,
and notable watchfulness: even so they that desire in like manner to be as he
was, must take the same course, that he did, or else they shall never be able
to attain to his perfection. Demosthenes Orations, what they are.
Whose Orations are such that there lies more good matter buried in them, than
the outward show of them caryes to the eye, being uttered in the playnest and
most familier manner that could be, for the peoples capacity and understanding.
For his secret and hid knowledge can not be discovered and known by any, but
by such as are very studious of him, and wholly bend their wits to mark his
doings, and have nothing else to do, but as his scholars, to learn his
cunning, by continual care, and paineful imitation. And surely to speak of
this man fullye, and according to his worthiness, Demosthenes above al praise.
I do think it an harder piece of work, when a man is in it, how to get out
of it: than to want a beginning to make an entrance. For I am in a maze what
first to say, and where to begin, when I consider his wonderful absolute
nature, his marvelous fullness and vehemency of speech: his modest and sober
life, his piercing eloquence, his passing vtteraunce, his constant firmness
in all his doings, Many passing virtues, in one several man.
his innocent hands from corruption and bribes, his just dealing, his courteous
and gentle behavior, his faithful mind, his manly stomach, his singular
wisdom, and last of all his several order, and particular doings throughout
the whole course of all his life. So that I say in such a plentiful field,
where so many rare and notable virtues wear planted, better it is slightly
to run over the plot with admiration, and highly to honor God for such an
odd vessel of his creation: than boldly to profess the large commending of
so excellent an instrument and heavenly Orator as he was, not being able to
touch him to the quick, as he ought to be used and dealt withal. And
therefore best it is to let his own doings speak for themselves, and remain
a spectacle to the world of his wonderful disposition. For I think if
himself wear alive, he could hardly with all the eloquence that ever he had,
worthily and fully set forth all that was in him, and as he had justly
deserved, or at the leastwise, none could do it but himself alone. Wherefore,
I will pass over the rehearsal of all his Orations and doings: The rehersall
of the order to set forth Demosthenes.

1. His several speeches. 2. His love to his country. 3. His consta^cie. and
stoutnesse against the enemies of his Country. 4. His banishment. 5. His
restitution. 6. His last end and manner of death.

and only gather out certain sentences severally used by him. And after
report made of them, I will declare somewhat of the love he bare to his
Country, and of the stoutnesse he used against King Philip for the same, and
of his trouble that happened to him by banishment, and then speak of his
restitution, and lastly of his manner of death, and so make an end.

In his Orations he was vehement and bitter of speech, and yet many times in
his common and familier talk very pleasant, as may appear by diverse and
sundry his aunsweres, Demosthenes pleasant in private talk.
and phrases used to many men from time to time, among a number whereof I will
utter a few.

When one desired Demosthenes to plead in his cause, against an other man,
that had beaten the said complaynant, he hearing him tell his tale somewhat
coldely, said thus, it is not so man, as thou do say, it seems to me he
has done thee no harm at all. Utterance ma^eth much to set forth a matter.
What say you sir (quoth the man) with a short and roughe voice, as though he
had been caught with a fury, has he done me no harm, say you, at all? yea
marye (quoth Demosthenes) this is an other manner of matter, now I hear the
voice of a man that has been wronged, and evil handeled, where as thou
toldest thy tale before so coldly and so softly as though thou had been a
Mouse in a Cheese. Such force thought Demosthenes does vehement speech and apt
vtteraunce carye, that it persuades credit, and winnes good liking.

Likewise Demades that most witty and excellent Orator, (who in promptness of
speech, Minerua, the Lady of wisdom, chastity, and learning, and therefore
when an unlearned person would control one of much excellency, it is said in
rebuke to him, Sus Minerua^.
and Orations on the sudden, passed al others) being tripped by Demosthenes,
said thus, me Demosthenes, sus Mineruam. As who should say, Demosthenes
controlleth me, not unlike a filthy Sow, that would teach Lady Minerua: unto
whom Demosthenes answered: and yet forsooth, if it please you good sir (quoth
he) your fine and chaste Minerua (of whom you speak of) was lately taken in
adoultry in Colito, a place so called in Athens, as you would say the bank,
Colitu^, a place in Athens so named, being the brothell corner as it should
seem of that City.
or such a known out corner for that purpose.

There was also a certain thief in Athens called Aereus, as much to say as
brassie or made of brass, who was much offended with Demosthenes candle
lights in the dead night, and therefore iested and scoffed much at his night
watches: Sirrah, quoth Demosthenes, I know well enough that my lights are not
good for thy profession, for wear not my lights thou would do greater
matters than lights come to. But marvel not you a whit (O people of Athens)
quoth Demosthenes at these robberies that are done by this fellow, for as much
as your thieves are of brass, where as your walls are but of earth, jesting
at his name, Aereus, which in English is brassie or made of brass.

On a time when Demosthenes voice was thought to soft by reason of the noise
that the people made, which afterward was cast in his teeth by some others: he
answered that stage players are to be judged by their loud speech, when it is
either good or bad, or when their voice fails them: but Orators and
Counselors to an estate, ought to be esteemed and accounted upon, by their
wisdom and knowledge only. For the part of him that plays on a stage, is to
seek to satisfy the peoples ears, but the part of an Orator and Councellor
is, to seek the welfare of the Subjects: the one is for pleasure, the other
is for profit, and therefore we may not stand upon, A pithie speech better
than a Pilates voice.
how loud a man be that speaks to do good: but how good the council is,
that he gives. A reporter of tales, or a stage player in an open Theater, it
becomes very well to have a good ringing voice, to ouersounde the noise of
the people: but he that is a Counselor, or an Orator to an estate, ought to be
heard of the people with their own accord, very quietly and attentively, how
so ever his voice serves him.

An other time when the people would needs rumble him out of his seat where
he made his Oration, by making an uncomely noise with their hands and feet,
(as they use at this hour to do in all the Schools of Italy most unseemly,
when either they like not the readers handling of his matter, or are not
disposed to hear him any longer) he desired them to give him patience to tell
them a merry tale. Where upon when every man was whisht and still, he said
thus: a certain young man did hyre an Ass to serve for carriage in the whote
summer season, to go from Athens to Megara, and his guide with him, Fond tales
sooner heard, than grave reasons.
and when the sun was very hot about noonetide, they both would go on the
shadow side of the Ass to avoid the heat, so that they were at strife for
the matter: the guide saying, that the Ass was hired, but not the shadow,
Contention for the shadow of an Ass.
the other saying that as he had right to the Ass by hyring of him, so had he
right to the shadow of the Ass, as well as to the Ass it self. And when
Demosthenes had told his tale to this point, and saw them so heartily attentive
to hear the rest, he came down from his seat, and gave over his tale:
whereupon the people staid him, and desired him maruellously, that they might
hear the end and application of his matter, unto whom he answered, you love
very well my masters (quoth he) to hear a man speak of the shadow of an
Ass, Trifling speeches better esteemed tha^ earnest talk.
but you cannot abide that any man should tell you of earnest matters, or such
things as touches all your welfare. And so he went his way, and would not
speak any thing else to them.

Demosthenes was one of the ten Orators whom the people of Athens sent in
embassage to king Philip of Macedonie. Aeschines and Policrates with others,
favored king Philips doings against their Country.
And therefore after that Aeschines and Policrates (whom king Philip did chiefly
cherish) returned home to Athens with the rest, and had amongst other
co^mendations of the king, set him specially forth, for these three ornaments
of his, that he was a very fair and welfauoured king, a iolye talker, and a
lusty good fellow, such as we call a pot companion, or a carrowser with good
fellows: Demosthenes did thus jest upon the praise, and said that they had
reported nothing of him, King Philips praises ouerthwarted.
fit for a king to have, because the first praise was proper to a woman, the
second to a babbling Sophister, the third to a Sponge.

In his Targate that he used for the wars (although he was not the hardiest
man in the world) he caused this sentence to be written, Good luck.
Afterward coming to the field where he should show his manhood: by and by
he took his heels, and threw his Targate from him, which matter being laid
to his charge, that he played the coward, he shook off the same with this
common proverb, and usual verse. The man that turns his back, Folly to dye
without doing any good when a man may escape, and thereby do much good.
will show his face again. Meaning that it is more wisdom for a man, to
run his way when there is none other remedy, than to die in the field
foolishly. For that a dead man fights no more, whereas he that escapes upon
any overthrow, may reinforce himself again, and be profitable to his Country
diverse ways.

When Phocion that notable wise man in Athens did step forth to speak after
Demosthenes had done, he would say to his friends that sat next him, now
rises the sword or hatchet of all my reasons, Phocion the hatchet of
Demosthenes reasons.
for that Phocion did many times dissent from Demosthenes, and being short in
collecting an other man's tale, was sharp therewithal, and did cut off all
superfluous speeches, not touching any thing, but that chiefly, the which was
most of all material.

When king Alexander did grant peace to the Athenians, with this condition
that they should give him eight of their governors into his hands, amongst
whom he named Demosthenes for one: Demosthenes start up amiddes the people and
told them a fable of the Wolf, who promised unto the sheep that he would be
at peace with them, Magistrates compared to Mastiffes, that defend sheep
against the Wolf.
so that they would give unto him their Dogs, signifying by the Wolf
Alexander, by the Dogs the Magistrates and Orators, by the sheep the people
of Athens. He said moreover like as Marchantes sell great quantity of Wheat
or other corn, with bringing out a little modicum in a treene dishe for a
sample: so you (quoth Demosthenes) if you deliver your eight governors that
are demanded: you do thereby betray and give up your selves and your whole
Country. But Demades that notable wise man of Athens, Five talents*
took upon him for the charges of. 980. pound starling, to take the Embassage
upon him for them, and to entreat the king, either for the hope he had in the
kings friendship, or else for that he thought to find him now full glutted
with slaughter, as a Lion is, that has eaten his belly full of carrion or
other meat.

It is reported that he went once to Corinthus to see a famous Courtisan there
called Lais, being a man somewhat subject to the frailty of flesh, although he
drank water never so much, with whom he thought to have had some
familiarity, which Courtisan asked him for ye reward of her love. 300. pound
starling, whereupon he being amazed at her shameless demand, 10000. drachmes
was cooled, and said. Pleasure bought with sorrow, causes repentance.
Lady I do not mind to buy my repentance so dear, as for the pleasure of a
little bulbiting, to have a pinching and sharp displeasure for the same.
Meaning that all such as follow dishonest pleasures in such sort, do repent
themselves afterward, almost to their grave.

A certain Damsel received certain money to keep, for two strangers that
went out of town, with this condition, that she should deliver the same
money to them both jointly. Afterward it happened that one of them came home
colourably as a mourner for his fellow that was dead, and brought as it
should seem a false testimonial thereof, and so deceyuing the young woman, got
all the money to himself. Now when this money was paid, the other fellow
commes in the neck thereof, and demaundes the money that he left with her in
trust. The poor woman was out of her wits, and could not tell in the world
what answer to make, whereupon Demosthenes seeing her in despair, took the
matter in hand, and thus he began to say for her. This woman is ready sirrah
to pay you the money that you put her in trust withal, but except you bring
your fellow, she cannot pay it, because as you know your self, Slight avoided
by sleight.
the agreement was betwixt you, that the money should not be paid to the one,
without the other. And therefore bring your fellow and you shall have it,
otherwise you are like to have none at her hands. And by this wise sleightie
devise, he saved the poor woman from undoing, and avoided the falsehoode of
those varlets, that betwixt themselves had packed to have this money twice
paid them.

Being asked what was the chief thing in eloquence, he answered
pronunciation, and asked what was the second, he said pronunciation, Good
vttera^ce the best thing for an Orator.
and further asked what was the third, he made none other answer but still
pronunciation: signifying hereby, that none can ever be an excellent Orator,
that has not the gift of vtteraunce by nature, or at the leastwise attained
thereunto by industry and travail, and that all other skill in the profession
of eloquence is but vain, if this one thing be wanting.

On a time when one scoulded with him maruellously, and used unseemly speech,
he said thus, I am entered into a match with one, wherein he that preuayleth,
has the worste, Scolding and railing, not to be used nor answered unto.
and he that is overcome has the best, signifying that it is better yielding
to a railing verlet, than to contend with him in babbling and foul language.

Thus I have given you a taste of certain his aunsweres, whereby both his mirth
and pleasantness, have somewhat appeared, and the quickness of his wit
made notorious.

Now will I show how good a man he was toward his Country, and how
faithfully he defended the liberty thereof, devising the assurance of it, even
to his end. Demosthenes loialty toward his Country.
And therefore not only did he speak most boldly to the people, in rebuking
their disorders, and withstanding their unlawful desires: but also in denying
flatly unto them, that which he was charged to do, for (as Theopompus writes)
when he was chosen to be an accuser of one, and to burden him with surmises,
he would not do it for any thing they could do, and when the people were in a
hurly burly for it, he said thus: O you people of Athens, Slaundering, never
used by any honest man
you shall have me to be your Counselor, and to advise you the best I can,
whether you will or no: but to be an accuser or slaunderer of men, that shall
you not have me to be, although you would never so feign. Whom he knew to be
faulty, Demosthenes boldness to rebuke offenders.
he spared not to charge them to their faces, whatsoever they wear, and
namelye Antiphon, a man of great authority, whom he caused to be taken,
Antiphon charged with treason by Demosthenes.
and to be arreyned of high treason in spite of the people, amongst whom he
was very well esteemed. And he laid so hard to his charge before the Judges of
the Areopagus, to have promised unto king Philip to set their navy on fire:
as he was thereupon found guilty, and so suffered death for it, with others
that were of his conspiracy. Demosthenes ielous over his Countries welfare.
Yea he was so jealous of the state, not only against some of his own country,
but also against forreyners: that he was never at rest, but ever busy in
charging one or other, when good cause moved him. Especially he did so much
mistrust king Philip of Macedonie, Demosthenes continual ^^^mitie agayn^^ king
Philip of Macedonie.
that although there was peace betwixt him, and Athens: yet would he ever be
harping at him, for every matter, and thrust diverse things into their heads to
warn them still to take heed of him. Which king Philip did know very well,
and therefore hated him above all others, and yet sought to win him if it
wear possible to be on his side, as he did Aeschines and others, but he could
never by any means in the world get him to like well of him. And therefore
when the breach of peace was like to be, because that neither king Philip could
be at rest, and the people of Athens were maruellously encensed, by Demosthenes
against him: he did stir the Athenians to attempt Euboia, Euboia, now the
Islande Nigrop^nie.
which was governed by king Philips Tyraunts. And so they making thither by
sea, upon Demosthenes decree: did expel from thence all king Philips officers
and subjects. Again he caused those of Constantinople to be helped, Bizanze,
now Constantinople.
and the Perinthians also, against the force of king Philip, persuading the
people to love one another, and to help their allies and confederates, by
whom they have been heretofore preserved. Moreover, what with sending
Ambassages and calling the Greeks into society of war with them, and
styrring them to be doing: he brought the matter to this point, that all the
Greeks (a few excepted) were in confederacy against king Philip. And now
when all these were in league, that is to wit, the Euboians, the Achaians, the
Corinthians, Megarensians, Leucadians, and those of Corfu, there remained only
for Demosthenes this matter in hand, to bring the Thebanes to be in league
also with Athens, who had land nigh to Atticke, and sufficient power, and
wear counted the valiauntest warriors amongst all the Greeks. Neither was
it a matter easy for him to do, because the Thebanes had freshly then received
great pleasure from king Philip, in the wars against the Phoceians, and wear
still like to stand in need of him, for that there was ever like to be
controversy and debate betwixt the Phoceians and them, the lands and
territories adjoining so nighe the one to the other, as they did. Yet for all
that, when king Philip being puffed up with ye success of Amphissa, Amphissa.
Phocis. Eliteum.
had gotten Phocis, and had upon the sudden set upon Eliteum, wherewith the
Athenians wear maruellously astonished, and that no man durst step forth to
speak his mind, as people in despair and not knowing what to do: only
Demosthenes (when they wear all at their wits ends) stood up and gave
council by decree, that they should join themselves with the Thebanes, and
seek their friendship by all means possible. And so when he had hartened them
in all other things, and according to his manner had put them in good hope: he
was sent Ambassador with others to the Thebanes. Demosthenes Ambassador to the
Thebanes.
On the other side king Philip sent Amyntas, and Clitarchus, Macedonians: and
Daochus, and Thrasidaeus, Thessalians, to persuade against that confederacy,
so much as they could possible. At what time the Thebanes wear not ignorant
what profit they had received of king Philip, and carried fresh in remembrance
every one of them, the battle fought against the Phoceians, the wounds and
harms whereof wear not yet fully cured, in which king Philip had stood them
in good steed. And yet such was the force of this Orator, in styrring their
minds and heating their hearts, to the study and desire of renown, and
glory, that all other things wear lapped up, and laid a side in such sort, as
they forsook reason, had no fear in themselves, and shook out of their
heads, the remembrance of all good turns received by king Philip, and wear
carried headlong with persuasion, as though it wear by a divine inspiration, to
the advancement as they thought of all renown, and glory. Demosthenes
authority among the Thebanes, Boetians, and the rest of Greece.
The which deed of this Orator was so famous and so renowned, that king Philip
sent haroldes, by and by for peace, and the Greeks wear set all on a gogge,
and looked for great things to follow. Neither did the Capitaynes only stand
obedient to Demosthenes, and did what soever he would have them to do: but the
chiefest of the Boetians, and the whole assembly of the Thebanes were as much
ruled by Demosthenes, as were his own Country men of Athens: for that he was
dear to them both, and of great authority amongst them, and not without
cause, and desert, but as it was meet, and as he was well worthy to be.
Afterward notwithstanding, when it came to the trial of battle at
Cheronea, where king Philip prevailed, Cheronea, a town in Bo^otia, where king
Philip got victory against the Athenians.
and had victory, Demosthenes ran away, using the excuse before said, that
the man which turns his back, may show his face again, alleging more
wisdom in so doing when there is no remedy, than to be killed outright. And
yet king Philippe for all this victory and triumph that he had gotten, King
Philip after victory had, feared yet Demosthenes.
when he considered the great hazard wherein both his estate and life lay, as
to be lost in a short space: he began mightily to mistrust Demosthenes
eloquence, and to dread the force of his Orations. For such was the authority
of Demosthenes, that it stretched even to the king of Persia, in such sort that
the king sending letters to his Lords, and Counselors, commanded them to
give great sums of money to Demosthenes, King of Persia his estimation of
Demosthenes.
and him to esteem chiefly, and to honor him above all the Greeks. For that
he knew he was able with his force of eloquence and wisdom, to call back
king Philip, and to make him retire, from annoying the Greeks, or making any
stir among them. And yet there were certain Orators that began to charge
Demosthenes deeply for this overthrow at Cheronea (as what is he that being in
great authority is not envied) and sought to call him to his answer: but
the people would not hear of that, Envy follows virtue.
who not only did acquit him for all such complaints and accusations: but did
him all the honor they could very constantly for that time, and desired him to
take authority again upon him, as a good Citizen ought to do. And therefore
willed him to make the funeral Oration upon those that wear killed at
Cheronea, and being nothing discouraged, or offended with him, but rather
gathering good hearts unto them, did honor and extol him, as a most worthy
Counselor, and never repented the following of any advise that he had given
them: which Oration Demosthenes made, notwithstanding he would not put his own
name to the establishing of decrees or acts (according as the manner was to
subscribe unto any thing resolved upon) but used the names of his friends by
course, blaming his own hap and destiny, as unfortunate and unlucky,
until he heard that king Philip was dead, King Philip trayterouslye slain by
Pa^sanias one of his Guard.
and slain by Pausanias, at what time he began to take heart unto him again.
And hearing very secretly that king Philip was dead, before it was known
openly to others: because he would prevent the Athenians thereof, and make them
to be of better courage hereafter by his persuasions: he came very merrily into
the Senate house, and said that he had been warned by a dream, that some
great goodness should spedily befall to his Country. Whereupon there came word
very shortly after, that king Philip was dead, at which tidings, great
triumph, and much reioicing was made among the Athenians. Great rejoicing in
Athens upon the news had of King Philips death and especially by Demosthenes.
And Demosthenes that had buried his daughter, not past seven days before,
went in sumptuous array, and ware a garland upon his ^^ade, according as the
manner was then, in token of rejoicing and gladness, not suffering himself to
mourn for his daughters death, in the midst of the common joy, and mirth of
his Country. And yet it may be doubted much, whether such rejoicing and
ioyfulnesse be to be well lyked of or no, especially when a foreign King is
traitorously murdered by his own man, as though he had been slain in open
field, by the force and valiantness of his enemy. Truly being so mighty a
king he should not have been so used, notwithstanding his hatred never so much
against the people of Athens. For this desire of honor to advance states, and
to enlarge kingdoms, is naturally graffed in the hearts of all Princes. And
there was never yet any, of stomach or courage, None contented with their
state.
but desires to be in better case than he is, neither is any man contented
with his own estate. For the Athenians themselves if they might, they would
have been Lords over king Philip, and have had as great authority, as ever
the Romans had. Envy should end, with the death of a man.
And therefore such affections being ordinary, are rather to be pitied, than
to be dispited: and especially against the person of one that is dead. For what
harm can a dead man do? and if ever envy should cease, it should than have
an end, and die for ever, when the cause is taken away. And the rather I speak
this, for that king Philip was of a princely nature, whatsoever Demosthenes
says, and especially toward Demosthenes, whose friendship he sought by all
means possible: and yet when he could not have it, king Philips saying to
Parmenio of Demosthenes.
he said thus to Parmenio his dear friend, and counselor, I have done
whatsoever I can do to win Demosthenes, but it will not be, though there are
others that stand contented to be mine. Well, this I say, if any Citizen of
Athens when he sits in council there, Traitors to their Country hated,
even of the enemy, although their treason be sometimes rewarded.
do prefer me before his Country, I do give him my see, but I do no whitte
think him worthy to be my friend: but he that hates me for his Country, I
do and will set upon him as I would do upon a Castle, a Fortress, or a
Trench, and yet I do reverence him for his virtue, and think that City
blessed, A good subject beloved even of the enemy.
where such a man does dwell, where in deed I would hang up yonder other
fellows, when I had no more need of them. But as for this man, I would
rather have him mine, than to have my Pensioners and Guard of Illirian
horsemen, and Triballians, and all the hired soldiers else that I have now,
or that I can have hereafter. For I think the might of a wise Orator, and the
gravity of an eloquent speaker, Eloquence of as great force as armor.
is nothing inferior at all to the force of armor, and manhood whatsoever.

At an other time he spoke thus, to Antipater, that mighty warrior, and one
of his chief Counselors. What? fear thou man any Captain of Athens?
their Galleyes, and their Peer, are but trifles and toys unto me. For what
should I pass upon those fellows that give themselves to dancing, hoyting,
Demosthenes only feared of king Philip* as being a Spoke to all his devises.
banqueting, and belly cheer? that if Demosthenes only wear not among
them, I would sooner get Athens than Thebes, or Thessalia, by deceyuing, by
enforcing, by preventing, and by giving of bribes, and great rewards. But that
one man is ever in my way, watching and warding still, and takes advantage of
occasions, and follows our attemptes, and stoutely withstandeth all our
devises. Neither can we hide our doings from him, either in using sleightes, or
attempting any thing, or purposing to do any exployte: yea that one man is
altogether such an hinderaunce, and so maine a rock against us, that we can not
have our will in all things, and go through with our matters as we would. Nay
marie, he did as much as he could that we had not Amphipolis, Olynthus, and the
Phoceians. That if he had had his will, we had also gone without Thermopile,
Cherronesus, and the coast of Hellesponte, for he does nothing but stir them
up against their wills, and waketh them out of their sleep, with such
roughness of speech, that oftentimes he gettes no thank for his labor. Yea
he turns the revenues that wear wont to be bestowed upon pastimes, to the
service of their wars: and provides laws for their navy, and appoints
Capitaynes and Governors to them, which navy was almost destroyed for want of
good order and government. And where the state and dignity of the City was
utterly defaced and almost brought to naught, and the people altogether
untoward to do any thing: he brought to their remembrance their forefathers
and elders, to do such things as they did at Marathona, and at Salamine,
Marathone, a place t^n miles distant from Athens, where Miltiades that valiant
Capitain of Athens, vanquished the Parsians.
and causes them to be in league with the rest of the Greeks. And be our
doings never so close, there can be nothing hid from him, and impossible it is
for any one to deceive him, and as for corrupting him with gifts or rewards,
he is no more to be touched that way, than was Aristides that just and
undefiled Magistrate. So that this man only is more to be feared, than are all
the Greeks, Salamine, an Island by Athens, where they got a greet v^ctorie.
and navy that the people of Athens have. For the same that Themistocles and
Pericles wear heretofore, to the Athenians: the same is Demosthenes alone to
all Athens, in wisdom equal to Themistocles, and in greatness of mind,
comparable to Pericles. And this he has done by his eloquence, that all Grecia
gives ear unto him, as Euboia, Megara, Hellesponte, Boeotia. And surely the
Athenians (quoth he) do very well for my purpose, that they send Charetes,
Diopithes, Proxenus, and such others, to be their Generalles and Capitaynes,
and suffer Demosthenes to keep home, and to speak to speak to them only out
of the Pulpit. For had they put this man in trust with their armor, navy, and
money, sending him forth with their power, and had suffered him to have taken
the aduauntages that happened: The best men able to do the greatest good: are
often kept back, and others set in place that can do less good*
I fear me, I should have been to seek, for mine own Realm of Macedonie
at this time. For that he now dealing with us only, but with his decrees, and
aduises at home, does fetch us out every where, preuents our doings, prouides
things necessary, and makes great powers ready, many times against us. And
therefore (quoth he to Antipater that succeeded Alexander his son) I count it
part of my good hap, that Demosthenes was never yet General over their army.

Antipater likewise said to Archias the Marshall, whom he sent to Calauria
for the taking of Demosthenes, Calauria, now Sidra.
and willed him in any wise to bring him alive: What mean you sir (quoth
Archias) is not Demosthenes of all enemies the dreadlyest enemy that you, and
we all have? Unto whom Antipater answered: no by saint Marie is he not, as
thou do say, if any man have care of upright doings, or counts that man's
wit, friendly and honest to him, the which is altogether void of all deceyte
and falshoode, Virtue honored even among enemies.
and abides still constant. For honest things be honest, even amongst enemies,
and the nature of virtue, is to be greatly esteemed wheresoever it is found to
be graffed, or known to have a dwelling place. Neither am I a wiser man than
Zerxes, Xerxes favor to his deadly enemies.
who did maruellously honor Bulis, and Sperchis, both Lacedaemonians, and his
deadly enemies: whom he dismissed, when he might have put them both to death.
But if ever I did reverence man, I have most of all esteemed and honored
Demosthenes (with whom I talked twice in Athens, although I had not then very
good leisure to speak with him, and asked others of him) for the only gift he
had in government of the State, because men should not think that I made such
account of him, Demosthenes honored chiefly for his great wisdom in
government*
for his eloquence, although Python the Orator was nothing in comparison of him
nor yet all the other Orators of Athens: they wear but bench-whistlers, if
they were to be compared with this man's styrring, and vehemency in doings,
with his aptness of words, with his interlacing of sentences, with his often
using of demonstrations, and his marvelous reasons both to win favor, and
to pierce the hearers. It repentes us much to have called the Greeks to
Athens, in hope to conquer the Athenians, upon trust and affiaunce that we had
in Pytho, and Pytho his promises, the same being afterward overthrown by
Demosthenes himself, and the reasons that Demosthenes used. And as for us we
could never attain to the pith of his eloquence. But I do account his
eloquence in the second place in steed of an instrument and mean for him to
do his feats: having always passinglye reverenced Demosthenes himself, for
the greatness of his courage and wit, Demosthenes never dismayde by any
adversity*
who held out with a stomach upright and immovable, in all the bitter and
great ^^ormes of fortune, neither could he be removed from his purpose, by
any terror or vexation whatsoever.

And whereas some said to king Philip, that the people of Athens bare him
great hatred, and was his mighty adversary: Tushe (quoth he) it is
Demosthenes and none other, that is my adversary. For he only, makes Athens
to be so mighty as it is. Such is the force of virtue in a good man, Great
praises given to Demosthenes by king Philip his enemy.
and so great is the value of some one above thousands. And further he said
that whereas he did send Ambassadors to other places, if the Athenians did
send any of theirs thither, and suffered Demosthenes to tarry at home, he
commonly prevailed in his demand: but if Demosthenes wear in place, he
defeated still all his purposes, and was evermore a trumpe in his way. Yea such
a man is he (quoth king Philip) that there can not be any sufficient monument
erected, to set forth fully his great worthiness.

But to return again to king Philip, thus it is reported that he hearing
Demosthenes at an other time evil spoken of by Parmenio, for that he had used
very vehement words against the king, in the Council house at Athens, well
(quoth king Philip) we must allow Demosthenes to use his words, for amongst
all others, Demosthenes could never be corrupted by king Philip.
he never yet came within our books of expenses, meaning he could never fasten
penny of him: whom he did so esteem for his singular constancy, his assured
fidelity, and notable heart toward his Country: that he thought him to be
the oddest man for all gifts that ever was in Grecia.

Thus worthily king Philip reported of his deadly enemy, honoring virtue,
where soever he found it. And therefore I would have wished that the memory of
such a king should have been kept unspotted, after his death, or at leastwise
not so dispited, as to have triumphs made upon his unfortunate end, seeing he
was not so very evil, as he is made to be. I do like well that Demosthenes
hated him deadly while he lived, for that he sought to get into his hands the
whole estate of Athens, and all Greceland besides. Love and hatred must be in
every good Magistrate.
And surely I do think that no man can be a good Magistrate, that will not as
deadlye hate, as he deeply loves: and as soon make an evil man afraid of
him, as a good man to love him. For by that means, he shall both do his
Country good service, and save himself from great peril and danger, that
else might happen unto him. And according (as the Poet Pyndarus says) he is a
man among men, that is friend to a friend, Pyndarus, worthy saying of hi^, that
is both a friend, and a foe.
and a Lion to his enimye, especially the hatred rising for the detestation of
vice, and the love growing for the advancement of virtue. But now that king
Philip was dead, what do the people of Athens? forsooth by and by through
Demosthenes persuasion, they did fall to arm themselves, and joining in
confederacy with others, they warred upon king Philips country, where the
Thebanes gave the ^resh onset upon a garrison of Macedonians, and slew them
through help of Demosthenes, that provided them armor: and thereunto the
Athenians hasted all that was possible for help, and joined with them.
Demosthenes esteemed among men as a God.
And who swayed now like a God among men, but Demosthenes? addressing letters
to the Nobility of Persia, Alexander miscalled by Demosthenes.
to arm themselves against young king Alexander, whom Demosthenes called
^ibberly Boy. Notwithstanding afterward when young Alexander had satled his
Realm: he marched with a great power to Boeotia. And then was the Athenians
comb cut, and Demosthenes courage cooled. For then did the Thebanes forsake
them, and they standing upon their own proper force: wear in danger to have
lost their City, whereupon they sent Demosthenes with others, as Ambassadors to
entreat. But he was so afraid of king Alexanders indignation, Demosthenes
fearful to do his message.
that he returned back again in the midde way, without doing his message at
all. Upon the neck whereof king Alexander sent his Ambassadors, and required
to have given into his hands and power, eight of the Orators, whereof
Demosthenes was the first and principal. And although Demosthenes went to
persuade them by the tale of the woolfe and the sheep, as you heard before,
with other reasons alleged amongst his Apoththegmes, that they should not
deliver them: yet if Demades that great Orator and subtle Grecian had not
been, they had all been sent away, Nine hundred pound starling.
who requiring five talents for his charges of Ambassade, took upon him to
deal with the king, for appeasing of his wrath, hoping either upon the kings
friendship, and his favor: or else that the king being glutted already with
so great an overthrow, would the rather be satisfied. Who in deed (as he
thought) persuaded the king, and so the Orators wear not demanded, and peace
was made with the City. Now after Alexander was gone, Demosthenes out of
credit.
the rest of the Orators carried great favor, but Demosthenes was no body, and
yet when Agis king of Lacedemon began to stir, Agis king of Lacedemon, slain
by his own men, for that he would restore ye laws of Licurgus.
Demosthenes then rowsed himself a little, but after when ye Athenia^s would
do nothing, and that Agis was overthrown, and his whole country brought to
ruin: Demosthenes then sat still as others did. About this time, was that
action entered by Aeschines against Ctesiphon for crowning Demosthenes with a
Garlande, Aeschines against Ctesiphon for decreeing a garlande to Demosthenes,
in advancement of his worthiness.
for his deserts toward his Country, according to the manner then used: but the
matter was tried long after, which matter was so famous, as never was any
public cause, as well for the worthiness of both those Orators, as for the
honor and nobleness of the Judges who would not yield to the condemnation of
Demosthenes, although his enemies wear very mighty, and great friends to the
Macedonians: but did acquit him so nobly that Aeschines had scant the fifth
part of the Ballottes on his side with him. Aeschines banished and Demosthenes
cleared.
And therefore he went out of the City by and by, as a banished man, wearing
out the rest of his days, at the Rhodes where he taught Rhetorike. And there
one day unfolding his Oration to certain learned men, which he had uttered
against Ctesiphon, for the discredit and overthrow of Demosthenes, and being
maruellously well liked of them for ^t: they desired also yt they might hear
of him Demosthenes answer in his own defense. Who read it to them likewise.
Whereat when he saw they stood astonished, and amazed for the wonder of his
vehement and singular manner of persuasion: he brust out thus: nay then (quoth
he) what would you have said my masters, Demosthenes utterance commended by
Aeschines his enemy.
if you had heard the best himself utter it, and pronounce it unto you, meaning
that his pronunciation was of such force, and so excellent, that it wanne
notable credit to the matter propounded.

Thus these two men being both notable Orators, the one could never abide the
other, and in their meetings at council, wear ever contrary and
ouerthwarting together.

Not long after this, one Harpalus a great man with king Alexander forsook his
Country of Macedonie, Harpolus a traitor that forsook his master king
Alexander, and ran away with his treasure.
and fled to Athens, partly for that he had evil used things committed to
his charge, and partly for that he feared the fierceness of king Alexander,
who had cruelly dealt with certain of his dear friends, as Lysimachus and
Calisthenes, and had slain Clitus his best beloved Cou^sellor suddenly in his
fury, as he sat at table with him. Now this Harpalus being come to Athens,
with great treasure and ships (stolen from king Alexander as it was supposed)
and so to yield himself to their protection: the rest of the Orators
perceiving him a fat clyent, wear ready to further him all that they could,
Money blinds the wise.
and persuaded altogether the Athenians to receive him, and to take tuition of
him: only Demosthenes would none of it, but rather caused that he should be
sent back again, and ^adde them take heed that they did not bring war upon
their necks, without need, and upon unjust cause. Within a while after,
commandment being given that his money and treasure should be seen, and
Harpalus perceiving by Demosthenes eye, that he was in love with a cup of gold
of the kings, at the excellent workmanship whereof he saw him take great
marvel: he willed Demosthenes to p^yse the cup in his hand, and to esteem
the weight of it. Now when Demosth^^^s had wondered at the massinesse thereof,
and therefore as^ed him what it might way, Harpalus smiling upon him, said, it
weighs unto you sir, xx. talents, 3600. p^unde stacling.
and in deed as soon as it was night, he sent him the cup of gold with.xx.
talents of money. Good was the skill and insight of Harpalus in good sooth, to
judge by a man's countenance and casting of his eyes upon a cup: what his chief
desire was. Demosthenes euercome with the love of a golden cup.
Neither did Demosthenes forbear to take it, but being overcome with that
offer, as a man would say caught in the net of temptation, bare with Harpalus,
and would not gainsay that he required. And therefore gettes him the next day
certain wool and rollers to fasten handsomely about his neck, and so comes
into the Counsel house, where being desired to stand up, and to say his
mind in this matter, he answered that he had lost his voice with a pain in
his throat: but some merry conceyted fellow that smelled the matter, said
that he was not sick of Angina, Angina, otherwise called Synanche, an
inflammation of the muscle of the inner gargil.
but he was taken the last night with Argentangina, that is not with simple
Angina, but with silver angina, meaning that he was not troubled with the Uvula
being a swelling in the throat, and called in Greek Angina, but was corrupted
with Argentangina, that is, his mouth was stopped with money, for so the word
signifies upon the allusion of Angina. Now afterward when every body
perceived plain corruption, and therefore would not hear him speak for
himself, but wear very angry with him, and in an uproar and murmr for the
matter: one starts me up, and like a good friendly furtherer of Demosthenes,
said thus, what mean you my Masters, will you not hear him speak, that
has the golden cup in his throat? hereupon they banished Harpalus out of the
City, and fearing least that money should be demanded of them the which
certain of the Orators had spoiled him of, and finely fleeced to themselves:
they did make diligent search in every one of their houses saving where
Cal^cles dwelt, into whose house only they did forbear to enter, Reverence
of a spousall.
because he was lately married, and had his young spouse within the house with
him.

Thus when Demosthenes saw this matter so hotely taken, Areopagus the high
Court of Greece, called the Palace of Mars, to judge causes criminal and
matters of great importance
and stomacked in such sort: he appealed from them, and desired that his matter
should be determined by the high Court of the States of Greece, called
Areopagus, that if he wear found faulty, he might be punished thereafter. Now
the Court found him guilty and condemned him for an offender, after he had
appeared in open judgment, and fined him to pay Nine thousand pound starling.
fifty talents, and to lie in prison also, till the money wear paid: who for
very shame of this offense as it was said, and for the infirmity of his body,
being not able to endure emprisonment: made an escape, whereof partly the
keepers were ignorant, and partly they wincked at it. And as he was running
away not far from the City, he met certain of his contrary faction, whom
he would gladly have avoided, but they followed a pace, and calling him by
name, willed him to be of good cheer, for that they meant him no harm,
offering to give him money to bear his charges. Whereupon Demosthenes fetched a
great sigh, as a man wounded at the very heart, but they comforted him, and
asked what he meant so to sigh: he answered and said thus, alas my Masters,
what other countenance may I show than heaviness, that see my self
constrained to leave that City, which nourishes such good enemies of mine in
it: A good enemy better than a bad friend.
as I shall hardly be able to find the like good friends any where else. And
so going his ways, he took this his banishment very heavily, and impaciently,
casting his eyes many times upon Athens. And as he went he looked back very
often upon the Castle of Pallas in Athens, and holding up his hands said
with a loud voice: O holy Pallas, Demosthenes saying when he went into
banishment.
sovereign and Lady of cities, why have thou so great pleasure in three such
unfortunate and unlucky beasts, the night Owl, the Dragon, and the people?
The night Owl, or the scriche Owl (as some call her) being thought the bird
of death, was dedicated to Pallas, for a bird of her chief delight: the
Dragon also was set upon her crest: the people wear Pallas dearlings, The
people evil rewarders of them, that have done them good.
over whom she took great care, who are compared to a monstrous beast with
many heads, evil fauoredly acquiting those that have done them most good, as
they did Socrates, Phocion, Scipio, Demosthenes, Tullie, and diverse others. And
this man being wearyed with the malice, and unkind dealing of the people:
would say many times to his familiers that came to see him: I know (says he)
that he who seeks to bear office, Magistrates, always subject to envy.
and to carry authority in his Country: is ever ready to be envied,
threatened, maliced, slau^dered, and to be put in great hazard, to lose both
goods and life for his labor. That if I wear put to choice whether to dye, or
to take the authority of a Counselor upon me, as I have done: I had rather
clearly give away my life for ever: then once to touch the burden of the
state, or to open my mind in open audience to the people.

And good cause he had to be greatly grieved with the people that wear so
unkind toward him, who loved them so dearly, and did so much for them. For
not only did he with his council, wisdom, and courage advance the welfare
of his Country: but also he was at great charges diverse ways with them. For
he made diverse public feasts to the people of his own cost, a custom used
among them, Diverse good deeds of Demosthenes.
by such as were able to bear the charges, and desirous thereby to win favor.
He took upon him besides, to see to the maintenance of the Temples, and
private buildings in the City, and therefore was Aedilis, as who should say,
the Guardian of Churches, and buildings in the City: he also looked to the
ships, that they wanted nothing, but had all their tackell and furniture
accordingly. He repaired also the walls and ditches of the City, to his great
charge and cost, he redeemed captives and prisoners with his own proper money,
Such charity of redeming captives much used, and greatly commended at this day
among the Greeks.
and gave of himself very much to the marriage of poor maids, and orphans,
a good and godly deed, and besides this, served his Country in foreign
Ambassages, at all times when he was commanded, and devised good and wholesome
laws from time to time, for maintenance of the state. All this
notwithstanding, he was clean out of favor, for committing one bare offense,
in taking the cup of gold as a gift from Harpalus, that fled from Alexander,
and forbearing only to speak against him, whereas others, that have never
done any good at all, but rather much evil, are never dealt withal, nor so
much said unto them, as black is their eye. And yet touching this cup,
Pausanias writes the history of Harpalus at large in his second book of the
description of Greece, and seems there to clear Demosthenes.
Pausanias a Greek Author writes, that he had no such cup at all, but was
slaundered by his enemies of briberie, and through false accusation condemned,
as afterward upon his return and better trial, it fell out in proof. But
what can not the malice of wicked men procure? Wherein I note by the way, that
the best and worthiest men, are nighest their own destruction: and none other
in so great peril, though they offend never so much, as those are, that live
most vprightlye in authority, and are the chiefest favorers of their
Countries welfare. So that virtue is harmefull to some, if they exceed the
common sort of men in well doing, Ostracismus a banishment for ten years space
by a certain kind of balloting with shelles, wherein the names of ye persons
condemned wear written, and it was used to abate the power and credit of great
personages, y^ wear suspected to aspire*
and therefore they had in Athens, a certain kind of banishment called
Ostracismus, by the which they banished them that wear in the greatest favor
with the people, for their virtue and godliness of life, fearing least such
excellent worthiness should bring them to be chosen as supreeme and sole
Governors over all the rest. And thus this man still continuing in his
banishment, word came unto him in the Isle Calauria before Troezene where he
lay, that Alexander was dead. Where upon the Grecians began to have themselves
together, and one Leosthenes taking the matter stoutely upon him, beset
Antipater, Alexanders successor, so round: as if he had enclosed him within a
wall. At what time Pythias and Collimedon, being men banished from Athens,
took part with Antipater, Pytheas and Callimedon banished men from their
country, became traitors to the same.
and labored the favor and defense of Macedonie, joining themselves with his
Ambassadors and friends, and warned the Grecians not to revolt from Antipater,
nor yet to confederate themselves with Athens. Which Demosthenes understanding,
he also prepares to lincke himself with the Ambassadors of Athens, and devises
all the ways he can, Demosthenes ever true to his Country, although he was
banished.
to persuade the Grecians to drive whole flocks of the Macedonians clean out
of Greece. And while the matter stood at this point, it happened that
Demosthenes and Pytheas met together, between whom there fell such scoulding,
so openly, Demosthenes and Pytheas chiding and brawling the one with the other.
and with such inuectiues the one against the other, Pytheas for the
Macedonians, and Demosthenes for the Athenians: that it was a world to hear
them two. And whereas Pytheas had thus said in his scoulding eloquence, like
as we think (says he) there is always some evil happening to that house,
where Asses milk is brought in to be sold: even so that City of necessity
can not be long without trouble and mischief, Demosthenes turning a speech
uttered by his enemy, to his purpose.
unto the which an Ambassade is sent from Athens: Demosthenes turned his reason
thus, and said the milk of Asses is brought into men's houses for healthes
sake, and to do good: And so the Athenians do come always for the welfare of
others, and to help such as are in any wise destressed. Of which controversy
when the people of Athens had heard, and how honestly and wisely Demosthenes
had handeled himself in his countries behalf: Demosthenes called from
banishment.
they made one Demon of the tribe of Paeanea, Demosthenes Cosyn germain, to
pen a decree for his return, and so they called him home: upon the
conclusion whereof, a Galley was sent for him to Aegina, where he lay banished.
And thus after a certain time of exile returning home in the Galey with great
honor, and coming out of the Haven Pyraeeum into the City, he saw ready
before him all the Nobility and Clergy attending his arriual, with a
marvelous number of the common people, who received him with all the joy and
gladness that might be. Whereupon it was reported, he held up his hands to
heaven, with great thanks to God, that he saw that day which was more
honorable to him, than it was to that noble man Alcibiades upon his like
returning from banishment, for that he saw himself welcomed of the people
willingly and voluntarily, whereas they received Alcibiades home by
commandment, and for very necessity to their great charge, Alcibiades
received home for fear, least being absent* he might be hurtful to his
country.
much against their will. And now where a fine was set upon his head of.50.
tale^ts which yet stood still and could not be pardoned, being upon a
condemnation by consent of the state: they sought to help the extremity
thereof, by this cunning, that where they were wont upon the sacrifices made
to Jupiter the Savior, to give money unto them that trimmed and prepared the
Aultare: they did let unto him the doings of that sacrifice for.9000. pound
starling, to counteruaile thereby the value of his amerciment. Fifty talents.


Thus Demosthenes being most honorably restored and highly esteemed, he could
not yet for all this long enjoy his desired Country, Alteration of states, a
thing natural.
for that the overthrow and ruin of the Grecians was at hand, even within
five Months after, as it followed. At what time Antipater gave them an utter
distress in the battle at Cranon, Cranon a town in Thessaly.
and the next Month his garnisons approached Munichia, and shortly after both
Antipater and Craterus, came to Athens it self, whose coming being reported
and known: Demosthenes with a few others conveyed themselves away speedilye,
before hand, whereupon the people condemned him and all his company by a
decre of Demades, Demosthenes condemned by the people.
to suffer death. And now when they wear all gone, some one way, and some
another: Antipater sendes out straight his catch powles and Sergeants (whereof
one Archias was Knight marshall and chief minister) to apprehende those
Orators and others.

This Archias was sometimes a player in Comedyes, and one that brought up
scholars under him, most excellent in that faculty: Hiperides. Marathonius,
Aristonicus, Himerius.
but being called to this office, he did his diligence to seek them out, and
finding Hyperides, Aristonicus, and Himerius, in Aegina where they took
Sanctuary: he plucked them out from the sacred place, Hyperides a lewd
wavering Orator.
and sent them straight to Antipater, who caused them forthwith to be executed.
And as for Hyperides, the report went, that his tongue was first plucked out of
his head.

Now Archias hearing afterward, Calauria an Island bordering upon Tro^^enium
in Arcipelagus.
that Demosthenes was in the Isle Calauria, and had taken the Church of Neptune
for his succor: he sailed straight thither, and entering the Temple with his
officers, Archias entering the temple of Neptune, in Calauria, found
Demosthenes there, and sought to persuade him to come away quietly to
Antipater, and he should have no harm, but he could not entreat him for all
that he could do or say.
he entreated Demosthenes to go quietly with him to Antipater, and he should
have no harm. But Demosthenes had a wonderful warning by a dream the same
night before, for it seemed to him in his sleep, that he did contend with
Archias for the setting forth of a Tragedy, and having the better of him, and
winning the stage from him: he did afterward quayle for want of furniture and
charges. And therefore whereas Archias had used much entreatie, Demosthenes
looking upon him, from the place in the Church, where he did then sit, said
thus: Archias, neither could thou ever persuade me to like thee, when thou
wast a common player upon a stage: Demosthenes would not give ear to Archias
speech.
neither shall thou now persuade me with promises, when thou playest the
Orator. And when Archias thereupon had bitterly threatened him, yea now (quoth
he) thou do utter lively the oracles, and bloody doings of Macedonie,
where as thou did even now but only play the part of a stage player. Tarry
a while man (quoth he) I pray thee, that I may dispatch somewhat to my family,
and household folks. And when he had said these words, he went farther into
the Church, and taking out his writing tables as though he would have written
somewhat, he did put a quill to his mouth, Demosthenes manner of death by
putting a quill to his mouth.
and biting it a little with his teeth, as he was wont to do with his pen,
when he was writing or devising any thing: he held it so a while, and in the
end wrapping his head into his garment, he laid him down upon the ground,
which when those saw that waited at the Church door without: they fell a
mocking of him, calling him cowarde, faint hearted wretch, and a very woman.
But Archias came unto him, and prayed him to rise up, and renewing the same
mild words unto him again that he had spoken before, did promise him that
Antipater meant clearly to forgive him, and to be in perfect love and charity
with him. Notwithstanding Demosthenes when he perceived the poison had taken
force within his body, uncovering his face, he looked up upon Archias and
said: by and by thou shall play the part of that tragical Creon, Creon king
of Thebes, a cruel murderer of diverse, and especially of Antigone, and
Argia, being slain himself afterward by Theseus of Athens for his great
tyranny and murder used against others.
and shall cast this dead carcass away without burial, whereas I my self (O
mighty Neptune) do rise alive out of thy temple. And when he had said these
words, he badde them take him, whose body trembling for faintness, and
falling down as he passed forth by the Aultare: at the last he fetching a
great sigh, gave up the ghost among them. And thus ended this worthy man.
Howbeit, the manner of his death is reported diversely. Some say that he took
poison out of a quill: others say, that when he fell down at the aultare,
there was found in his writing tables the beginning of an Epistle, Demosthenes
to Antipater, and not a word more. They that came for him, and wear the guard
to Antipater, said they saw him suck poison out of a clowte, that he had in
his hand, and put it to his mouth, they taking it to be gold that he had
swalowed: but a maid servant of his being asked by Archias of this matter,
said, that Demosthenes had kept the self same clowte a long time about him,
as a remedy at all times for him. Democrates a kinsman of Demosthenes did
verily think that he did not die of any poison at all, Demosthenes dyed
without poisoning himself, being suddenly delivered by Gods mighty hand.
but rather that he was delivered by the very providence of God, from the
cruel Macedonians, by a short, easy, and natural death.

It wear not amiss to declare in some part the very words that Archias and
Demosthenes had together, and were afterward reported to Antipater successor
to Alexander the great, according as Lucian makes mention after the winning of
Athens by the said Antipater. For it should seem Demosthenes made little
account of death, after the loss of his country, but rather prepared himself
to die with it, thinking life unfit for him, when his dear Country was once
undone. And thus therefore he said to Archias, coming to him into the Isle
Calauria, whereunto he then was fled, to eschew present tyranny: after long
entreatie made by the said Archias, and promise therewithal that if he would
come away, he should not have any harm at all: A dialogue betwixt Demosthenes
and Archias, and the same rehearsed as it was, to king Antipater by Archias
upon his return from the Isle Calauria, now Sidra.
(The which words Archias rehearsed afterward to king Antipater.)

In good sooth I am not moved, O Archias, through fear of torments or death,
to make promise to come to Antipater in hope to have life. And though these
things be true that thou do say with all thy fair promises: I ought yet
much more to take heed, that I do not take my life of Antipater by the way
of a gift or by corruption, least I should seem to forsake that standing and
rowme wherein I was placed for the defense of Greece, and being counted as a
runnagate, should go over to Macedonie. That if it be honest for me to live,
let the haven Pyraeus give me life, and that Galley, A rehearsal made by
Demosthenes, of his several deeds achieved, for his countries welfare.
the which I gave to the City, and the walls and trenches that I made about
the City of mine own charges, and the Pandion Tribe, whereof I was Guardian,
and benefactor of mine own accord: and Solon, and Draco, the two law makers,
and the freedom of the Parliament house, and people, and the decrees, and
ordinances for the navy, and the worthy deeds and triumphs of our elders,
and the good affection of the communaltie, by whom I have been oftentimes
crowned, and the authority of the Grecians, whom I have often preserved. That
if I would live by the mercy and favor of others, although the same be a
dishonorable thing: yet wear it better for me to seek mercy amongst them,
whose kinsfolks and friends, I have delivered out of captivity, or to deal
with the fathers of those maids, that I holped to good marriages, or else to go
to such as I have aided heretofore, to pay their subsidies and ordinary
tributes. But if neither the state of an Islande, nor the Sea can deliver me
from death: I desire God Neptune (in whose Temple I am) to save my life, and I
desire it of this his Aultare and of his holy laws, that if God Neptune
neither cannot so much as withstand the profaning of this his Church, God
Neptunes temple a sanctuary.
and that he thinks it no shame, to give up Demosthenes to Archias: I will be
contented to die, and yet shall not Antipater for that, be honored of me, as a
God. In deed I might have had better friends of the Macedonians, than I had
of the Athenians, and might have been a companion of thy happiness and
flourishing estate, if I would have lincked my self with Callimedon,
Callimedon, Pytheas, Demades, three evil members and salemakers of their
Countries liberty.
Pythias, and Demades. But I do not like any such life, neither will I change
my faith with the fickleness of fortune. That surely is a noble passage which
a man makes upon his death, with a clear conscience, and without guilt or
fear, of any filthy act, or wicked offense done. And as much as lies in me, I
will not dishonor Athens, but will rather embrace bondage, and renounce clean
my liberty, and so go straight to my grave with honor. And good it wear for
thee Archias to call to thy remembrance the Tragedies whererein thou have
been a player. For is it not notably said there in one of them? The Lady
being ready to die, was very careful to fall down comely, Notable
bashfulnesse of a Maiden, yt being to be executed, was careful that no bare
plat of her body might unseemly appear open.
that no bare part of her body might appear. And seeing a Maid did this,
shall Demosthenes prefer a dishonorable life before an honest death,
forgetting the disputations of Zenocrates, and Plato, touching the immortality
of the soul? These wear his sayings. And moreover he enueyed bitterly against
those that do vpbrade unto others their calamity, He is worsse than mad,
that charge an other man with beggerie, for that fortune is ever unstable,
and no man assured of that he has.
and dashe them in the teeth with their poor life and miserable estate. But to
what end do I rehearse all these things, says Archias to Antipater? At the
length when I had partly entreated, and partly threatened him, using both sharpt
and sweet words together: I would (quoth he) be styrred man with these thy
words: if I wear Archias, but seeing I am Demosthenes, pardon me I pray thee,
for that it is against my wont to be a wavering or an inconstant man. And now
when I went to pluck him out perforce, and that he perceived it: he began to
laugh at me, and looking upon the God, said: Archias thinks that armor
only and armies of men, are the strength, and bulwarks of man's life, The
courage of man's mind, above all force and strength whatsoever.
contemning my furniture, the which neither the Illirian soldiers, the
Treballian guard, nor yet the Macedonian forces, shall ever be able to dash and
overthrow: The same force being stronger than that wooden wall, (our ships)
was: Their galleyes and ships, called by Apollo their wooden walls.
the which Apollo did once report by his Oracle, to be invincible. For eue^ as
through foresight and understanding, I have kept my self safe in government
of the common weal hitherto: so I trust by the same to defend my self
clearly from the Macedonians danger hereafter. I never cared a straw for
Euctemon, Euctemon, Aristogiton, Pytheas, Callimedon, four traitors to their
Country, and flatterers to king Philip.
nor for Aristogiton, nor for Pytheas, nor for Callimedon, nor then for Philip,
nor yet now for this Archias. And when he had said thus, and I began to
pluck at him. How now man (quoth he) do not lay violent hands upon me, for
this Temple shall not be profaned through me, by so much as I am able to let
it: so soon as I have done my prayers to God, I will follow thee straight
ways without leading at all. And so I looked in deed yt they would have done,
when he had put his hand to his mouth. Neither had I any mistrust at all that
he did any other thing, but only prayed to God. But what he did then we knew it
afterward, by taking straight examination of his maid, who confessed, that
he bought poison for himself a great while ago, to loose his soul from
bondage of the body, to live straight ways in liberty. Neither could he
scantly pass over the stares of the Church door, when he looked upon me and
said, The mind of every man, is man himself.
thou may carry this carcass man to Antipater, but as for Demosthenes, thou
shall not carry him, no, no, by. And seemed then according to his manner to
swear by those that dyed in the battle at Marathona in the favor of their
Country, Miltiades victor in the battle at Marathona.
where Miltiades gave the overthrow to the Persians. But death approaching and
he taking his leave of us, his speech failed, and his spirit vanished clean
away. This end, O king, Antip. of Demosthenes you say. Now all these things O (
Archias) yt thou have said are proper to Demosthenes. And do thou think
then that we would have carried this man to the slaughter house, Antipaters
notable praises given of Demosthenes.
as men carry an Ox or any other beast: or rather would we have cherished him,
and used his council touching the whole state of Greceland, that we might have
heard the voice of a free minded man, The free minded man, the best and surest
friend.
where as now we have none about us but flatterers, and soothers to all things
that we say and do. But he was to good for us. Now Lord God what a passing
man was this: O spirit invincible, and most blessed creature: what a valiant
stout heart had he. It is wisdom, I see for man, ever to have in his hand
the possession of liberty. Now he is gone most like to live in the Islandes
of the blessed, in Paradise of the renowned and worthy Champions: or rather he
has taken the straight way to heaven there to be an angel, with Jupiter the
Savior. As for his body we will send it to Athens, the which is like to be a
more precious monument to that Country, than all those that dyed at Marathona
for sauegarde of their City. Thus far Lucian, in that Dialogue, betwixt King
Antipater, and Archias the Marshall.

He was.62. years of age, when he dyed, ending his course the.xvj. day of
October upon the feast of Ceres, Demosthenes age, and how long it is since he
was.
which feast was ever after hallowed with mourning and fasting for memory of
him, about nineteen hundred and.93. years past. The Athenians upon this day
did him honor as he had deserved, and erected a brazen monument of his shape
and portrature, and gave to the eldest of his family a living in the Court,
grauing an honorable inscription upon the foot of his monument, in this wise.

If might had matched the mind, of Demosthenes the worthy:
Greecelande by the Macedones: had not been brought to misery.
Thus this noble Orator ended his days, being a man worthy to have lived
ever, whose name and glory cannot but continue, so long as the Sun gives
light upon earth, or man has tongue to speak. Neither have I in using this
report of him, done as Zenophon did in setting forth the life of Cirus king of
Persia, who in deed did color him not as his conditions wear, but spoke of
a king in his person, as a king should be: but I have been bold with
Demosthenes to show him fully and wholly in his colors as he was, not leaving
in the midst of his virtues, to touch also the nature of his vices, because I
would show plainly what he was in all points, that the world may see, God
gives not to any one man all things in perfection without some blemish or
default, although some men have some several and excellent gifts, far
passing others as this man without doubt had.

Now Demades the Orator his fellow (who for natural wit far passed
Demosthenes) decreed and enacted a sentence of death against him, after he was
fled, the rather to flatter the Macedonians, and to yield himself and his
country into their hands, which turned him to utter destruction. Traitors
end their days as they deserve.
And hereof Demosthenes gave him warning before hand, and willed him in any
wise not to make sale of his natural soil, saying that traitors in making
sale of their Country, do first make sale of themselves. And so it fell out
afterward with him in deed, for Demades shortly after was apprehended, and
had first his son slain in his arms, and he himself next put to a most
cruel and miserable death. A worthy end for all such whatsoever they be,
that are wicked betrayers of their natural soil and Country, who after a
sort pluck out their own bowelles, in that they alienate from themselves to
others (whatsoever the respect be) the proper inheritance and birth right of
their own nation, the chiefest and greatest treasure belonging to man upon
earth, next to the true knowledge and reverent fear of God.

Pausanias report upon Homere and Demosthenes, in his second book of the
description of all Grecia.
WIthin the Temple of Neptune, there is a monument of Demosthenes, upon the
which man chiefly, as upon Homere in times past, fortune seems to have showed
her great spite and malice. For Homere besides the loss of his eye sight, felt
an other great harm, the which was extreme beggerie, A strange and pitiful
sight to see learning go a begging.
whereby he was forced to traueyle the wide world, asking his almose, of every
body: Demosthenes again, being an aged man, was driven to abide the smarts of
banishment, The best men always in most danger.
and besides that dyed a violent death. Upon the which matter, like as diverse
other have spoken and written much: so Demosthenes himself has said his mind
very largely. And touching the money that Harpalus brought from Asia, without
doubt he had not one penny of it. And so proves by conjectures at large, the
likelihoode thereof, so that it should seem by Pausanias saying, that he was
wrongfully and unjustly charged with taking of that massy golden cup, and the
1600. pound starling.
xx. talents in it, as is before declared in the description and report made of
his life.

(...) The Table
Enemies to be used as they would use others. 8 Enemies to be dealt withal
when they are at the worst. 36 Enemy to be fought withal rather at his home,
than at our home. 48 Enemy waxing mighty to be feared greatly. 5^ Enemies most
dangerous when they deal with us in our own country. 75 Enemies domestical
the worst creatures living. 75 Envy follows virtue. 124 Envy should end
with the death of him, that is envied. 125 Entry granted to the enemy a thing
very dangerous. 58 Event of things rather marked than the cause. 4 Etesie,
north east winds coming ordinarily at a certain season of the year. 42
Evil men care for nothing but for the present time. 55 Evil speakers would be
evil doers. 8 Evil men govern with better safety than good men. 75 Euboia,
now Negroponte, an Island in Achaia. 38 Euphreus, a just man, evil used by his
own Countrymen, not only by his enemies. 76 Euphreus seeing the destruction
of his country would not live. 77 Examples of foreslowing things, and the
loss of occasion offered. 3 Execution of laws a higher thing in nature than
is the devising or bare reporting of them. 24 Executors careless of their
charge. 106
F
FAults rather shyfted off to others, than acknowledged of any. 25 Fair
promises make fools feign. 58 Falshoode in fellowship and common envying one
another. 96 Falshode fails. 13 Flatterers most dangerous people to a common
weal. 26 Flatterers bearing authority all things go to ruin. 28 Flatterers
suffered to speak in Athens in favor of the enemy, contrary to the manner of
all other Countries. 100 Flying tales and flattering news do never good to
any state. 47 Folly to die without doing any good, when a man may by escaping
do very much good. 118 Fond tales sooner herds than grave matters. 117
Fortune so called, otherwise in very deed is the grace of God, which gives
success to all our actions. 16 Free speaking forbidden brings danger to the
state. 63
G
GEntlemen eschew evil for shame, the common people for fear of harm. 23
Gods goodness works all in all. 16 God and nature set all things to sale for
labor. 34 Godly men to be stirred through carfulness of the wicked. 46 Good
men made afraid when they see a good man evil used. 77 Good men and evil men
are of diverse opinions. 77 Goods wrongfully gotten have small assurance. 13
Good men maliced for speaking truth. 58 Good men in greater danger for saying
the truth, than evil men are for doing naughtily. 59 Good subjects beloved,
even of the enemy. 126 Good utterance the best thing for an Orator. 120
Governors passing measure excedingly were restrained of their course. 68
Governors over Galleys the best esteemed men among the Athenians. 106
Greecelande altogether in danger of king Philip. 67 Greecelande ruled by the
Athenians.73. years. 67 Greecelande ruled by the Lacedaemonians.29. years. 68
Greecelande ruled by the Thebanes after the battle of Leuctra. 68 Grecians
fondlye unquiet among themselves, when the enemy abroad was so busy and
stirring against them. 69 Grecians aunciently most sound in their dealings.
71. Grecians in old time careful over Greecelande, not only over that
Country wheare they wear borne. 73
H
Ability in dealing rather to be followed than will. 26 Haliartum a town in
Morea. 38 Happy who learneth wit by another myshap. 21 Happy is he that can
take his time. 21 Home foes the worst people living. 99 Honors change manners
especially in those that rise from the dunghill. 102 Honor got by virtue has
perpetual assurance. 103
H
IDle men unfit to reap the paynefull man's labor. 30 Idle men soon taken
tardie. 36 Inconstancy not to be feared of them that can not revolt without
their undoing. 31 Intent makes the offense being notoriously proved although
the deed be not done. 66 Iseus an excellent Orator and teacher of eloquence.
108 Isocrates the sweetest Orator above all others. ibidem. Justice never so
little broken, injustice is streyghtwayes committed. 66 Justice maintayneth
estates. 94
K
KIngs being good and mighty therewithal, are to be dread for fear of their
authority. 12 King Philips force what it is. 12 his nature. 1^ his state both
fickle and weak. 35 his properties rehearsed in a beade roll. 48 his words
not so much to be marked as his deeds. 64
He practiced Stafforde law with the people of Athens. 64 fitter for sleyght
and guyle than for evenness and plain dealing. 65 his deeds rather to be
noted than his words. 65 his liberty to do what he list has been the cause
of all the wars in Greece. 67 his unmeasurable wrong doing in short time. 68
his proud manner of writing. 69 his bottomless ambicion. 69 barbarous and
contumelious of his tongue. 70 most painful to do his endeavor. 74 to be kept
under by armor not by words. 83 a cherisher of ambicious persons. 84 he hates
even the very religion of Athens. 86 he minds wholly the destruction of
Athens. 87 his praise is ouerthwarted. 118

L
LAbor and pains taking bring all things to pass. 113 Laysinesse lost Athens.
96 Laws to be abrogated that hinder good proceedings. 23 Law makers and none
others ought to abrogate their own decree and law established. 24 Laws
needelesse, if either fear or love could drive men to be honest. 104 Laws are
the lynkes of virtue. 104 Liberty sweet and desired of all men. 13 Lewd
doyngs shorten good days. 16 Lythernesse to be redeemed by diligence. 17
M
MAgistrates what they should be. 27 Magistrates that are to be mislyked, and
wherefore. 28 Magistrates compared to Mastrifes that defend sheep against the
Wolf. 119 Man's mind is man himself. 103 Mardonius fauchen hoong up in the
temple for his victory against the Plateyans. 27 Mandragora what it is. 85
Menelaus a stranger and Captain to the Athenians in their wars at home. 41
Men in authority seek rather their own advancement than the welfare of
their country. 101 Miltiades a temperate governor. 27 Monye to be well heeded
in time of war, for dysposing of it, that every one may have his pay. 42
Monye taking destroyed Olynthus. 100 Monye taking the ruin of Thebes. ibid.
Monye taking undid Thessalia. ibid. Mistrustfulnesse the chiefest safegarde
that may be against the practices of tyrants. 57 Mercenary soldiers serve
there where they may have the most gain. 18
N
NAughtypackes make evil men the more bold, and flatterers make fools the
more fond. 15 Necessity and need never more than now. 36 Neglecting even of
private causes, very dangerous to a state. 5 Negligence, not ignorance, hurted
the Grecians. 21 Negligence and want of care have caused much woe. 33 Negligence
lost Athens. 83 Neighbors adjoining unto us should carefully be looked unto.
89 Nothing well done that is not willingly done. 89
O
OCcasion given, is a warning sent from god not to be omitted without great
danger. 1 Occasion presently offered and unlooked for. ^ Occasions newly
offered upon rehersall of occasions lost. 4 Occasion not to be omitted without
great peril. 11 Occasions to be taken now or never. 22 Occasions offered
never better. 25 Offers made that may be received as much to be esteemed, as
the present and absolute possession of things. 4 Olynthians deceived by king
Philip. 78 Olynthians abused by King Philips counterfeyte dealings. 56 One
inconvenience suffered, many mischiefs follow after. 59 Order of great value,
to govern things well. 43 Oriteynes abused and pitifully tormented by King
Philip. 78 Orchomenius Laomedon by exercising of his body cured himself of a
great disease. 109 Overmuch meddling and ouerlittle both hurtful to man and
City. 101
P
Painful men wear the Garlands. 17 Panyke what it is. 87 Pardoning offenses
very often destroys a state. 103 Peoples common hatred prognosticateth
destruction to the party hated. 15 Peace better than war, if a man may be
sure of it. 64 Penny well spent that saves a pound. 97 Practisers undermining
worse than open enemies. 66 Particular griefs sooner felt than public
annoyances. 97 Phocion the Hatchet of Demosthenes reasons. 219 Private life a
safe being. 101 Pleasure causing displeasure brings repentance in the end.
5.119 Presence of a Prince, speedes his affairs. 2 Prevention necessary when
purposed mischief is foreknowne. 66 Private loss to be sustained for common
profit. 6 Prince and subject being of diverse dispositions can not both long
continue together. 15 Princes ambicious, evil neighbors to dwell by. 2
Princes that be mighty match in league with meaner states to serve their turn
the better. 53 Profit to be preferred unto pleasure. 52 Provision before hand
is always necessary. 91 Pykethankes seek by discrediting others to benifite
themselves. 58 Pythea certain games in the honor of Apollo. 70 Pytheas saying
to Demosthenes. 113 Pythie speech used, better than a Pylates voice. 117
Q
QVestions unnecessary asked of king Philips being. 36
R
Rewards necessary for well doers, and chastisement fit for offenders. 18
Rich men not to draw back to do their duties because the poor are
unwilling. 93
S
SAtyrus a professor to teach iesture and good utterance. 11 Saying and doing
are two things. 42 Scolding and railing not to be used nor answered unto. 121
Short shooting loses the game. 43 Sclaunderers and flatterers the worst people
living. 62 Sclaundering never used by any honest man. 121 Similitude declaring
how careless the Grecians wear. 69 Similitude declaring the nature of lyther
and careless people. 70 Similitude warning men to be wise in time. 79 Speech
daungerously forborne when necessity requires speech. 62 Speech needful to
be free for all men in their Countries quarrel. 18 Stage money ought to be
employed upon the wars. 30 Strangers not so fit to deal for others, as
others to deal for themselves. 30 Strangers aid not to be refused in time of
great need. 91 Strangers alone not to be trusted in service of the wars. 40
Stranger to be general is a thing very dangerous. 41 Strength of a City
wherein it consists. 95 Soldiers must have their pay. 40 Soldiers not to
be touched in their honor, much less to be condemned through false report. 47
Subjects always to be ready for annoying the enemy. 38 Subjects and
strangers to be joined together. 40 Subjects to live as men do in private
families. 93
T
TAke heed of had I wist. 78 Talkers often times frame their tongue to ye
humor of others. 63 Thanks to be given for that which a man might have, as well
as for that which he has. 4 Thessalians treacherous people. 7 Thessalians
deceived by king Philip under color of friendship offered. 56 Theseus persuaded
the people to forsake the Country, and to live in the City. 105 Thebanes
corrupted by king Philip. 53 Traitors and flatterers better lyked than true
meaning men, and the reason why. 77 Traitors to their Country hated even of
the enimye, although their treason be sometime rewarded. 126 Traitors end
their days as they deserve. 145 Treasons uttered by examples. 76 Treasure of
the state, consumed upon feasts and games for to pleasure the people
therewithal. 7 Treasure of the state to be looked unto. 89 Treasure of the
state converted to private gain causes great harm. 94 Treasure of a kingdom
consists upon three points. 100 Troublesome times warn all men to be
careful. 73 Trusting causes treason. 76 Trusting to a man's self is the best
trusting. 48 Time to be taken while it is, for time will away. 2 Time sometime
protracted and delays used, very profitable. 79
V
VAliant soldiers make all passages open for their purpose. 46 Virtue
consists upon knowledge and doing. 203 Virtues a great number in one several
man. 115 Virtue honored of all men, but of wrong deeds no man makes any
worship. 103 Virtue excludes vice. 104 Virtue the best nobility.106. honored
even of the enemy. 128 Villaynes in gross. 99 Use makes maysteries. 110 Usury
the cause of all misery. 5 Utterance makes much to set forth a matter. 116
VV
Wars better to be denounced, than to stand at defense. 75 Welfare touching
a man's self not likely that it will be forgotten. 1 Wealth exceeding overmuch
causes much woe. 8 Welfare hides the vices of wicked men, and adversity
unfolds their natures to be seen of all men. 16 Welfare of a state to be
preferred before all other things. 26 Words and deeds should be all one. 21
Words unfit weapons to withstand armor. 51 Wrong doers be the cause of war,
not the redressers of wrong. 63 Wrong done by strangers more dangerous than
harm done by subjects. 69 Wise counsel more easy to be allowed than to be
devised. 1
X
XErxes saddle dedicated to Minerua for his victory had at Salamnia. 27 Xerxes
favor to his deadly enemies. 128
Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in Pater noster Row, at the
sign of the Star

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

Anno Domini. 1570.


