MIRIFICA Logarithmoru^ Projectio Circularis

NIL FINIS, MOTVS, CIRCVLVS VLLVS HABET.



GRAMMELOGIA Or, the Mathematical Ring.

Extracted from the Logarythmes, and projected Circular: Now published in t^
enlargement thereof unto any magnitude fit for use: showing any reasonable
capacity that has not Arithmeticke, how to resolve and work, all ordinary
operations of Arithmeticke:

And those that are most difficult with greatest facility, the extract^on of
Roots, the valuation of Leases, etc. the measuring of Plains and Solids, with
the resolution of Plain and Sph^ricall Triangles applied to the Practical
parts of Geometry, Horo^ogographie, Geographie, Fortification, Navigation,
A^^ronomie, etc.

And that only by an ocular inspection, an^ a Circular motion, Invented an^
first published, by R. Delamain, Teacher, an^ Student of the Mathematics.
Naturae secreta tempus ^aperit.

Typus proiectionis Annuli adaucti, vt in Conclusione. lybri praelo commissi,
Anno 1630 promisi.


To the High and Mighty King, CHARLES King of Great Britain.
Dread Sovereign,
HAd not your gracious favor given life unto my first birth, I should not have
dared thus boldly to rush into your sacred presence, but only in humble
confidence I am encouraged, that, as your gracious Majesty pleased to accept
of my imperfect endeavors, the same blessed eye will not now reject that work
brought to its fuller growth and perfection. It was the great invention of that
Noble Lo. Nepeir Baron of Marcheston his ever-worthily admired discovery of the
Logarythmes in cutting off the toylesome working by Sines, Tangenis, Secants,
etc. My pains formerly was conversant about to bring them likewise into a
shorter way for practical uses, by an isntrumental Projection of these
numbers in Circles, of which I composed my Mathematical Ring. Every thing has
his beginning, and curious Arts seldom come to the height at the first; It was
my promise then to enlarge the invention by a way of decuplating the Circles,
which I now present unto your sacred Majesty as the quintessence and
excellency there of, whereby Mathematical operations which tend to ordinary
and usual affairs and such of a higher nature, are performed accuratly,
without tedious extraction of Roots, operating by natural Sines, Tangents,
secants, or the Tables of Logarythmes themselves, and that by an inspection of
the eye alone and a Circular motion. It is now again your gracious acceptance
and the public good, which my life and pains are studious of: the one I hope
will acknowledge, the other defend these mine honest labors which some
endeavor to rob me of. I have no better thing as yet to express a loyal
subjects heart, and affections by: but only my self, which with my poor
endeavors in all humble submission I cast down at your sacred feet,
accounting it my cheifest Happiness to be

Your Majesty's most humble, true, and Loyal Subject, Rich. Delamain

By a Friend upon the Mathematical Ring.
Within a little Circle, or a round
Of old, the double-six-sign'd course was found,
And much it was, the whole years toil to bring
Within so little compass as a Ring.
Yet here enclosed not one years work you see,
But what without it scarce is done in three.
The same to the inventer of the Logarythmes projected in Circles.
None e're in Circles found an End they say,
Or saw Beginning where abouts it lay:
How was there then by thee beginning found,
Of that which in it self is perfect round?
And yet (only to prove the saying true)
Some do deny it was found out by you:
So will have no beginning; If their own,
The ancient Axiom still is overthrown;
But if it were not thine, how durst thou say
Thou would augment the same another day?
Which day is come, and now that is decuplate,
Which single was before. Thus it is thy Fate,
Still to increase thine error, and of one
Make ten, to show thy good Invention:
Look to it, if one has bred so much ado,
It Is ten to one, this will be challenged too.
Well, guilty be thou first of this laws breach,
And for thy fault this censure shall thee teach,
That though Beginning thou to this did lend,
Yet of it is copious use thou's never find End.
By a Lover, and Student in the Mathematical Arts.
Thrice noble Nepier by his learned strain,
Invented profound numbers with great pain,
From whence rare proiections do arise,
That praise their Author who did them devise,
Which now again, anew this Instrument
Does those his numbers quickly represent.
And as the Orbs by motion always show
Diverse apparences which still are new,
So infinite performances thereby
Are pointed also out unto the eye,
In multiplication, division, and
Beside it makes you how to understand,
To find out mean proportionalls, that so,
You may by sight of it proportions know.
Besides all this, which is a thing more high,
It helps to work in Trigonometry,
Scorning Roots extracting, by partition,
Or graduall numbers circuition:
It equates regular figures, and does show
The solid bodies and the plains also;
Giving their sides, and perfect symmetrie,
And speedily their true soliditie,
Their circuits, and spheres will all appear,
Both circumscribed and inscribed here;
Their Diameters and transmutations,
In duplications and triplications.
And as the Logarythmes did at first exceed,
In their Inventions, all that did proceed,
Or were before in any former age,
So that which now this Author does enlarge,
Amongst these numbers is a work of grace,
By expeditious use for future race,
In weighty things much to delight his mind,
Who studious is the practike way to find,
If after ages seeks by Instrument to know,
With greater ease makes ease excessive grow,
In mirificam Logarythmorum projectionem Circularem.
NEperum merito totus mirabitur Orbis,
Qui Logarythmiacos repperit art modos:
Radicem extractam dempsit, Tangensque secansque,
Atque sinus, duram difficilemque viam:
Rite Mathematicam and subito cognoscere praxin,
Si quis amat, praestant Organa rara nova:
Rara Logarythmi projectio, circulus isque
Mobilis aspectu,, haec ardua cuncta docet.
Hic tibi cernuntur proportio recta, triumque
Regula, divisi and multiplicantis opus:
Hic tibi radicum est extractio tracta figuris,
Corporis hic plani, sic solidique metron:
Analysis plani tibi sphaeratique triangli,
Cernitur, hic praxis quamque mathesis habet;
Et latet hic usus quem non natura reclusit,
Jllum mirifice ast Organa adaucta docent.
To the courteous and benevolent Reader that affects this isntrumental
practice of the Logarythmes projected circular Entitled Grammelogia, or the
Mathematical Ring.
AS that Honorable Lord Nepeir (the first inventer of Logarythmes) did call his
Rods by reason of their facility in operation Rabdologia, the speech of Rods,
and his numbers, Logarythmes, the speech of numbers: So this Isntrumental
Projection as springing from that invention, I called Grammelogia, the speech
of lines; for being so projected as they are, these lines graduated, do
promptly teach one what to speak in proportional operations; which invention
of projection of Logarythmes Circular, I promised to enlarge at the end of my
first publication, with this entitled Grammelogia, or the Mathematical Ring,
Printed, Anno. 1630. notwithstanding it was there sufficiently perspicuous, how
it might be augmented unto any magnitude assigned, even to operate unto
minutes, and seconds in Trigonometrie, and to find Roots, and proportional
numbers in common Arithmeticke unto six or more places: a diagramme of which
projection I now here deliver, as fully sufficient to shadow out to the more
learned the quintessence of this Logarythmall projection in Circles unto 6. 10.
40. 100. or 1000. yea, to as great a capacity as one desires, (a project by
Instrument never yet produced, though long desired) which plurality of Circles
in this projection, must be conceived to be the parts of Circles, and so there
may be a quadruplicitie of them, one of which Quadruplicities, may co^^^ine
the Loga^^th^es ^f ^^^bers, another may comprehend the L^^arythmes of sines and
the other two may be for the inserting of the Logarythmes of Tangents: so in
this Scheme here delivered noted with the letter B. there are 16. Circles in
view, but 4. in effect, each of which 4. must be conceived to be broken into
parts is before: in the first of which Quadruplicities of Circles, there are
graduated the Logarythmes of ^^mbers, (as before) from 1. unto 100000. noted
with the letter N. and so may be properly called the Circle of numbers: in the
next quadruplicitie of Circles there are graduated the Logarythmes of sines,
from 34. m. 22. se. unto 90. gr. noted with the letter S. containing two
revolutions, that is, two perf^ct Circles, and therefore is divided and figured
double, beginning his first revolution at 34. m. 22. se. and ending at 5. gr.
44. m. 21. se. which are graduated upon the inner edge of the Circle the second
revolution begins at 5 gr. 45. m. 21. se. and ends at 90. gr. which are
graduated and figured on the outward edge of the Circle, which graduations and
divisions of sines, may be therefore called the Circle of sines. Lastly, the
next two quadruplicities of Circles which are noted with the letters T. T. do
contain four revolutions or Circles, because also of their double divisions,
in which are inserted the Logarythmes of Tangents, from 34. m. 22. se. unto 89.
gr. 25. m. 38. se. beginning the first revolution at 34. m. 22. se. and ending
at 5. gr. 42. m. 38 se. which are divided and figured upon the outer edge of
the Circle; the second revolution begins at 5. gr. 42. m. 38. se. and ends at
45. gr. and are graduated and figured also upon the outerside of the Circle.
The third revolution begins at 45. gr. and ends at 84. gr. 17. m. 21. se. and
are graduated and figured upon the innerside of the Circle. Lastly, the fourth
revolution begins at 84. gr. 17. m. 21. se. and ends at 89. gr. 25. m. 38. se.
all which graduations of Tangents may be called in like manner the Circle of
Tangents. And as that famous of memory (if not most injuriously late made
infamous) and worthy Mathematitian, Mr. Gunter, the first that gave light to
this Invention, did call his lines the lines of Numbers, Sines, and Tangents,
or the li^es of proportions; so this whole projection as adherent unto it, may
not unfitly be called the Circles of Numbers, Sines, and Tangents, or in
respect of operation (as some others lately called the Circles of my King
singly projected on a Plate or plain) the Circles of proportion, in which may
be noted, that if this projection be made of 10. Circles, then may there be a
quadruplicitie of them, which in all make 40. Circles, one quadruplicitie of
which may serve for the inserting the Logarythmes of numbers, another for the
Logarythmes of Sines, and the other two for the Logarythmes of Tangents. If the
projection be of 50. Circles, then the whole projection will be of 200.
Circles, whose graduations, beginnings, and terminations in each whole
revolution is the same with the former; and as there is a conformity in the
Projection by a greater number of Circles, as there is by a lesser; so is there
the same facility and agreement in operation by many Circles, as by few, and
the way how I have delivered in this Tractate, which is either by motion in a
double projection, or in a single projection, by help of a thread and lead, or
a single or double Index at the Center, or peripheria: upon which I deliver
several ways in this following Treatise. How it may please some men's
affections I know not, my intentions and desires are free. Now since the
publication of the first kind of Logarythmes Projection, Anno 1630. or the
original of this enlarged, it has pleased many about this City and Kingdom
to take liking thereunto, some contenting themselves with the double
projection, with a moveable and fixed Circle, some with the single having an
Index at the Center: but generally the most part have been by some invited if
not forced to that which carries, as they say, with it the aplause and vote of
men by a comparative attribution delivered by the assumed Author of that with
an Index on a Plate, that the way on the plate in a single Projection with an
Index at the Center, is a better way than that of my Ring, or that of a double
Projection on a Plain: The authority of whose words to some ignorant mechanic
composors of that Instrument, was a sufficient motive ever since to crown his
words with a divulged rumor out of their borrowed knowledge to maintain his
assertion, to put off their commodities, howsoever if the saddle (as the
proverb is) were put on his right place, this vote and attribution belongs to
another, who fitted the Instrument so as it is now used, and yet modestly would
not appear in it, and not our supposed Author, which assumption of fitting of
it so with an Index on a Plate, had been enough if not too much, without such
a divulgation of endeavoring what in him lies, and in others, to annihilate
and beat down the way which I write upon, and to glory in the raising up of
his supposed own: thereby not only possessing men with an untruth, but making
me also ignorant in my choice, that I should give unto the world the weakest
and imperfectest part of the projection of Logarythmes, and leave the best for
another to write upon: Of which single Projection with an Index at the Center,
had I first writ upon and left the other way, which is the double Projection
for some other to write upon: then might he have used not indirectly that
comparative aspertion of better. But before I writ of the Natural sympathy of
this projection, I was not unadvised which projection to present unto the King,
and to the public view of the world first, but considered intentively with my
self the excellency of both ways, and the more copious performance of the
one, in respect of the other; And why I delivered it first in a Ring, was, for
the aptness and gentile-forme (as I may call it) it naturally might be cast
into. Secondly, for the excellent harmony, facility and expedition that the
Logarythmes so projected did afford: having no secondary assistance to help it
in operation, but the motion of the Circle it self, for there was nothing to
do but to move one number to another in a proportion assigned, either in a
double Projection in single Circles, or the projection enlarged; and instantly
there was presented all other numbers in the same proportion; By an Index on a
Plate in a single Proiection it was gross and course for the form (in respect
of a Ring) and for operation there must be besides extending the feet of the
Index to the members, upon every several question a new search of numbers with
a new motion (which extending of the feet of the Index, was the same with Mr.
Gunters Invention of his Ruler and no new invention) Besides if the single
Projection be enlarged there does necessarily adhere unto it sundry and
manifold observations in the way of operation by it, which cannot be avoided,
which to a learner at the first seems not a little harsh and difficult; all
which the Ring or the way of the Ring on a plate, in the double Proiectio^
enlarged, does naturally avoid, and not only caries a facility in its
operation, but retains in it also a special advantage in its performance,
once rectified, for the eye and the hand may work together, and what the eye
finds in proportion, the pen may presently express in writing without a second
trouble to search out another number as before, and then to bring the edge of
the Index to it. But some envious detractors would not admit of this form and
facility (though perhaps the succeeding times may) either as before to disanull
the work, or for the difficulty that was found in an unexpert workman in the
true composing and making of the work, for if the Circles on the Ring, or
double Proiection on a plain being not exactly composed and graduated may
cause some small error in operation (which is only from an excentricke motion)
the single Proiection has not only the same defect, but also a second to
help it, to wit the Index, for by how much the legs of it are long and the
Instrument large, by so much the more is it subject to error, which is from a
continued augmentation of an error in the fitting of it to a lesser Circle
which has reference to a greater. But to pass by the errors that are subject
to the best kind of Instruments that can be made, let us a little examine the
Authors and others comparison of Better, why the way of the Index in a single
Proiection is better then a mooveable and fixed Circle, which I conceive to
have reference unto four generals about the Instrument. First, either in the
form of the Instrument; Secondly, in the ordering of the Circles thereon;
Thirdly, the expedition that is found in the practice thereof; And fourthly and
lastly, the copiousnesse of the uses of the Instrument: and other c^uses I
conceive not, why this single Projection with an Index is better then a double,
except it be in the magnitude that is now usually made, or for the price of the
Instrument: in the first there may be an equal extendure of magnitudes unto
both Instruments, and so as a thing common unto them, and no wise different.
And for the price it may be made as cheap, if not cheaper hereafter as I
shall order it for these that aflect them: Now in the first place as touching
the form, upon that I have spoken somewhat alre^dy, (as before said) and may be
sufficient: as for the second general touching that of the ordering of the
Circles on this double projection, to have one Circle mooveable and one Circle
fixed, that is agreeable to the projection and dividing of these Circles in the
first direction following, according to the great scheme in the Book noted
with the letter A, for if the Circle of numbers noted with N, N, be cut
through, and the Center of that Circular plain be fastened, so that it may move
upon the Center of the other Circle, it shall fully represent the projection of
my Ring upon a Plain, to which may be placed a small single Index as in the
scheme of the title page B, to help the eye for the finding of opposite
numbers, these Circles of the mooveable, or fixed Circles on the plain are
inserted on both sides of a Ring as it is specified at the end of the dividing
of these Circles. Now to have all the Circles placed upon one side of the Ring
(as is according to the second direction of making the Ring) were to leave the
other side naked, without one would patch and piece some other thing on the
other side, therefore to avoyde mixture, part of the projection (as an
ornament) is placed on the other side, by which occasion the whole projection
at once is not visible to the eye, as it would be in the second way in
accommodating the Circles into a Ring, as is in the double projection on a
Plain before mentioned, noted with A. But perhaps it may be objected that the
Circles are easily continued on a Plain, and the Index being at the Center the
edge of it, does accuratly cut each Circle in the proportionalls, which
intersections in a Ring are defective and difficult to find by the eye alone.
To all which I answer, that the Circles in a Ring are as easy to be continued
as on a Plate, allowing the mooveable and fixed Circle a sufficient breadth,
and here by the way I would have the Reader to understand that the Circle of
Tangents being projected from 1. gr. unto 45. gr. is sufficient for operation
(these degrees being their complements to 90. gr. but for greater expedition in
working they may be continued as is seen in the great scheme A, which
continuation I learned not from another (as may be suspected by some) seeing I
now published it after another, but long before that publication I instructed
sundry persons upon that continuation by way of facility. As for the second
clause in such Circles which are not upon the edge of the mooveable and fixed
Circle, where the eye seems to be troubled to point out some opposite
numbers, a small edge of metal may easily supply that (as many use to do) but
the graduations being so nere the edge of the Circle, the proportionalls are
sufficiently given by the eye alone without such an edge. Now if in these
respects the single projection with an Index, is better then that of a
mooveable and fixed Circle being easily supplied as aforesaid, it is but a
poor one, in common sense. But if the way with an Index on a single Projection
be not better then that of a double for the former respects, then it may be
in the third general to wit the Isntrumental expedition: in which there
needs little declaration to prove the double Projection to have a greater
expedition then the single projection with an Index, seeing it appears so
obvious, that what can be quicker; then having moved one number to another in
proportion assigned, that all other numbers are opposite one to another in the
like projection (which a single Index does point out easily to the eye as
before.) By the Index in a single projection there is first putting the one
foot to one number, and extending the other foot to another number, then must
the eye have reference to one of the feet that it fall upon his third number,
and afterward to look for the second foot for the fourth number, and so to
move it to another number, and still to have a double respect with the eye as
before in every new operation: in this regard also I see not why the way of an
Index in a single Projection is better then that which I have delivered in a
double projection. But to pass by all the former generals as trivial and of
small consequence, let us weigh seriously things more material touching both
ways of these Instruments. If the said single projection on a plate with an
Index at the Center be not better in respect of its expedition in operation,
then must it necessarily be (to prove the Authors assertion) in the
Instruments fourth general, to wit, in its copious performance, which I hold
either to be in the general, or particular use; In the general I considered
the finding of proportionalls, and that's agreeable to the way of operation in
either Instruments as is before specified; In the particular I regard also what
propositions offer themselves to the eye, either by motion, or without motion:
by motion it is impossible for the single projection without an Index being
opened at pleasure to give any more then one kind of proportionalls, the Ring,
or a mooveable and fixed Circle on a Plain, scorning as it were such
lamenesse, or such an injurious tie from its natural property, shows by
motion infinite operations in various proportionalls, even through the whole
body of the practical part of Mathematical Art, which would be too copious
for me to declare, or for the Readers patience to peruse, only some common
uses by such motion I will deliver, somewhat to prove my assertion, that the
single proiection with an Index, is not better then that with a mooveable and
fixed Circle, therefore.

1. First, the moveable being moved about at pleasure, as 1. in the moveable
passes by any multiplier in the fixed, so does any multiplicand in the
moveable, point out its product in the fixed, or contrarily, as any divisor in
the moveable does pass by, 1. in the fixed, so does any dividend in the
moveable point out his quotient in the fixed, so as 12. (the months in a year)
or 52. (the weeks in a year) or as 365. (the days in a year) in the
moveable in motion does pass by 1. in the fixed, so any sum of money in the
moveable, does point out its monthly, weekly, or daily expenses in the fixed.

2. Secondly, as 7. in the moveable does pass by 22. in the fixed ( Archimedes
Proportion between the diameter of a Circle and its Circumference,) so does
any diameter in the moveable, point out its Circumference in the fixed, vel
contra.

3. Thirdly, as a hundred weight of any commodity in the moveable, (or any
other weight or measure) passes by its price under 100. pound in the fixed, so
right against 1. in the moveable, is the price of a pound weight of that
commodity amongst the decimals in the fixed vel contra.

4. Fourthly, the moveable being moved about at pleasure, the Interest of all
sums of money according to any rate in the hundred is given; for as 100, in
the moveable passes by its interest in the fixed, so every sum of money in
the moveable, does point out its interest in the fixed, vel contra.

5. Fifthly, as 1. in the moveable passes by any sum of money in the fixed, so
any number of years in the Circle of years, does point out the amount of that
money in the fixed, according to the term of years that the money was
forborne.

6. Sixthly; as the measure of a side, of any dimension, of a Building, of a
Fortification, of a whole mixture, or the weight of it, etc. in the moveable
passes by a greater, or lesser measure, or weight in the fixed (in homogeniall
things) so the measures of the parts of any of these wholes in the moveable
will point out in the fixed the proportional parts of any other whole by way
of augmentation, or diminution.

7. Seaventhly, as 1. in the moveable passes by the square of the side of any
of the ten regular Plains, so does each plain note in the moveable point
out right against it, its Area in the fixed; and as any kind of measure to the
Pole in the moveable, passes by its quantity in the fixed, so does any other
kind of Pole point out its quantity or Area, being measured by that Pole, etc.
and whatsoever may be attributed to the use of this Circle of numbers may be
given by motion.

Further, if we consider the Circle of Sines and Tangents conjoined with the
Circle of Numbers in operation, or the Sines with themselves or joined with the
Tangents, then by motion you have the sides and Angles of infinite plain and
Sphericall Triangles for practical uses, either in Geometry, Astronomy,
Navigation, Fortification, Horot ogographie, Geographie, etc.

1. First, as the sine of 90. passes by 60. in the fixed amongst the numbers,
so the sine complement of any degree in the mooveable will point out the miles
answerable to any degree of Longitude in the Latitude; and as the said 90.
passes by the Tropicall point, in the fixed, so the sine of any degree of the
Suns distance from the Equinoctial points will point out the sine of the
suns declination answerable to that distance.

2. Secondly, as the sine of any Rumbe in the mooveable from the East or West,
sailed upon, passes by the measure of a degree in leagues or miles in the
fixed, so 1. in the mooveable points out in the fixed the number of miles, or
leagues to raise or depresse the pole a degree in that Latitude.

3. Thirdly, as the sine of any Latitude in the mooveables passes by the sine
of the Tropicall point in the fixed, so the sine of the Suns distance from
the Equinoctial points in the mooveable, that passes by the sine of 90. in
the fixed, does point out the sine of the Suns greatest degree of the
distance from the Equinoctial points that the Sun will be due East in that
Latitude.

4. Fourthly, as the sine of 90. in the mooveable passes by the sine
Complement of any Latitude in the fixed, so right against the sine Complement
of all Declining plains in that Latitude in the mooveable, are the sines of
the degrees of the styles heights in Horologographie agreeable to these
declining plains in the fixed.

5. Fifthly, as the sine Complement of any Latitude in the mooveble passes by
the Tropicall point in the fixed, so the sine of the Suns distance from either
of the Equinoctionall points, will point out right against them the sines of
the Suns Amplitude.

6. Sixthly, as the Tangent complement of any Latitude in the mooveable passes
by the sine of 90, in the fixed, so the Tangent of the Tropicall point in the
mooveable, does point cut in the fixed the sine of the greatest difference of
ascension for that Latitude

7. Seventhly, as the sine of the Suns position at his setting or rising, or
the sine of the hour from 6. at that instant in the mooveable passes by the
sine of 90. so the sine of the Suns declination in the former, and the Tangent
of that declination in the latter, will point out the sine of the height of the
Equinoctial in the former, but the Tangent of the same in the latter.

In this nature you have infinite operations performed by motion in this double
Projection of a mooveable and fixed Circle; which by a single Proiection with
an Index cannot as before possibly be performed, therefore if in this regard
the way of the Index on a single Proiection be not better but is far
inferior to that of a mooveable and fixed Circle; to prove the Authors and
others divulged assertion, then must it be better in the last clause, which was
the Isntrumental performance without motion, in which the single projection
with an Index, comes very short of other Instruments which by a single
inspection of the eye shows many pleasant, and useful propositions. But this
none, or very few at all, as only the Logarithmes of numbers, the natural
sines and the Tangents of the Logarythmall, etc. But the double projection with
a mooveable and fixed Circle does not only show that, but being at any
position carries with it such an excellency that it assumes unto it self a
prehemenencie above any Instrument never yet produced in regard of its copious
use, and manifold performances which it affords without motion as by an
inspection of the eye only: a touch of which I will unfould and unvaile which
never yet came to a publik view.

1. First, the Instrument lying upon a Table open to the eye and being at any
position, mark what numbers in the mooveable and fixed are opposite one unto
another, according to which proportion there is represented infinite other
proportionalls, in the same proportion, for one number is opposite to another
through the whole Circle of numbers, sines, and Tangents, from which one might
apply the proportionalls in numbers to the use of things, to expenses, to
proportions in Buildings, to fortifications, measurations, but too great a
prolix discovery would tire the Reader in that which he may easily from it
apply hereafter unto himself.

2. Secondly, mark what number in the fixed, (in the Circle of numbers) is
against any number of years in the mooveable, which suppose a Legacy to be
paid for so many years to come or a sum of money forborne so long time; and
it were to be sold for present money, right against 1. in the mooveable, is the
worth in present of that Legacy or sum of money in the fixed.

3. Thirdly, in Horologographie, you have the distance of the hours in a
poler, and Meridi^nall plain, without operation, for mark what number in the
Circle of numbers in the fixed is against the Tangent of 45. gr. in the
mooveable (which number in the fixed may be supposed the measure in inches,
etc. of the styles hight) so right against the Tangent of the equal hours in
the mooveable you have the hour distances in the Circle of Numbers in the
fixed.

4. Fourthly, the hours of a Horizontall or vertical dyall, for some one
Latitude or other is shown, for mark what degree amongst the sines in the
fixed (which represents the Latitude) is against the sine of 90. in the
mooveable, so the Tangent of the equal hours in the mooveable, does point out
the hour distances (for that Latitude) amongst the Tangents in the fixed, and
these hours serve for a vertical Dyall in the complement of that Latitude.

5. Fifthly, note what number in the fixed in the Circle of Numbers, is against
1. in the mooveable (which suppose to be the given side of any of the ten
regular figures) then against the circumscribing and inscribing notes of these
regular figures in the mooveable is the Circles circumscribed and inscribed
diameters of those regular figures: But if the said number in the fixed against
1. in the mooveable be taken for the square of the side of the diameter, of the
side of any of the ten regular figures, then against the Regular notes in the
mooveable, is the Area of these figures in the fixed.

6. Sixthly note what numbers in the Circle of numbers in the fixed, are against
the regular figurative notes of equality in the moveable, such are the sides of
those figures whose quantities are equal the one to the other: In like manner
the numbers in the fixed against the notes of the Regular bodies in the
mooveable represents the sides of these bodies which have equal solidities
the one unto another.

7. Seventhly, you have infinite oblique angled plain Triangles represented,
and such who have equal Altitudes but different Basis the sides of several
parallelograms, equal unto one and the same square or the quantity of a
Triangle given in Acres, the perpendicular and Base is also given: For first
the sines of the Angles on the mooveable will point out their sides of the
Triangle amongst the numbers in the fixed, vel contra.

And secondly, mark what number in the mooveable in the Circle of numbers is
against 1. in the fixed that suppose to be the Altitude of a Triangle, then the
equal distances from 1. on both sides of it taken at pleasure in the fixed
will point out in the mooveable the segments of the Basis of the Triangle, or
the sides of a parallelograme equal unto the square made of the Triangles
perpendicular. And thirdly, the quantity of the Triangle in the fixed amongst
the numbers does point out the Basis of the Triangle in the mooveable, and that
number in the fixed which is against AC, (in the mooveable) is the Triangles
half perpendicular according to the Area given.

8. Eighthly, mark what number in the fixed, is against 1. in the mooveable,
which suppose to be the side of any of the Regular bodies, then right against
the solids inscribed notes in the mooveable, are their spears Circumscribing
diameters, but if the said number in the fixed be supposed to be the
semediameter of a sphere, the numbers in the fixed (in the Circle of numbers)
against the solids circumscribed notes in the mooveable shows the sides of
these regular bodies that will circumscribe that sphere.

9. Ninthly, mark what number in the fixed amongst the Numbers is against 1.
in the mooveable which may be supposed the diameter of a Circle, the Axis of a
sphere, the side of a plain figure, or that of a solid body: so the numbers
in the fixed in the Circle of numbers against the potentiall notes in the
mooveable shall represent the diameter, Axis, or side of its homogeniall
figure, or solid, according to the proportion of these potentiall notes in the
mooveable.

10. Tenthly, mark what numbers in the Circle of numbers in the fixed are
against the notes of the regular figures, such shall be their Areas, and the
numbers in the fixed against the regular Bodies convexities, such is their
superficial convexitie: and the number in the fixed against 1. in the
mooveable, is the square of one of the sides of the regular figures, or the
sides of one of these bodies, and what numbers in the fixed are against the
notes of the solid bodies, such shall b^ the several solidities, or contents
of these regular bodies, and the number in the fixed against 1. in the
mooveable is the Cube of the sides of these bodies.

Lastly, most courteous Reader, (not in any braving flourishes or branding any
of the Nobility or Gentry with the attribute of juggling, against the simple
modesty of the Author,) I have in some measure supported their honors in that
particular in the Epistle at the end of this Book: and that we may say
something more upon the excellency of this Instrument without multiplying of
tautologized and needelesse prefixed graduall numbers, or Circuitions, if not
Circumlocutions, in the naked truth of this Isntrumental proiection, according
to its natural property. The Roots of all square and cubicke numbers without
partition are given; and that by an inspection of the eye only.

Thus I might have extended my self more copiously in the excellent use of
this my mooveable and fixed Circle, and even from the Isntrumental position by
an inspection of the eye only without motion, compile a large Book of its
ample performance, but in that which I have delivered I have only but
scatteringly glanced upon things, as making way for many occasions, and as a
motive to a further inquiry: Its an ancient proverb amongst us, good wine
needs no Bush, but the wine must not be fast locked up then, that none can come
by it, if so it wants both bush and key, and to some such needelesse
expressions might be avoided, the Instruments own excellency will to the more
learned easily present it self that which I have published: concerning it, I
glory not in, but only desire to satisfy those who would see the difference
of both ways, with, and without a mooveable Circle, and to let others know the
truth of things which are conceated, and carried away with opinion only, that
the way of the Index on a single proiection is better then the way of a
mooveable and fixed Circle, which both in regard of expedition as also
copiousnesse of the Isntrumental use, by motion or without motion comes short
of the other. What means the Authors divulgation then, that the way of the
Index is better then the way of a mooveable and fixed Circle, I know not, whose
known skill in the whole Systeme of Mathematical learning will easily free
him from the suspicion, that the way can be made, or the subject unvailed for
him.

But I have now a little more made bold to unvaile the subject for some, in the
copious declaration of the excellent use of this Logarythmall projection
Circular by a mooveable and fixed Circle, and also in its enlargement, which
hitherto lay in obscurity, and as a general benefit to those that affect the
way of this Isntrumental practice. It were good that the divulgers would prove
their aspertions, touching the word better, that others might participate
substancially of their better way by the Isntrumental performance, either by
motion, or without motion, and not to allure the world by a bare exhortation,
unto the affection of the one Instrument, and by a dehortation to beat down
the use of the other, which savours of too high a conceit of the one, and too
great a detraction from the other: Too great and too loose an aspertion has
bin cast upon me about these things, which I never thought in the least title
when I first writ upon this Invention, or my name so to come to the worlds
rumor as it has since the last publication of this Logarythmall projection
Circular; howsoever, here is my comfort, the guiltlesnesse and innocence of my
cause, which may teach me, and others carfulness hereafter, how and what we
publish to the world, seeing there are such carpers, and maligners even of the
most useful and best things, yea, such busy bodies who mar that which
others make, who scorn to have a second, knowing all things and admiring
nothing but themselves, such who have stings like Bees, and Arrows always
ready to shoot against these whom they dislike, such who while they will needs
have many callings neglect their own; sharp witty cryticks, Diogenes like,
snarling at others, and not looking home unto themselves, but by all means
endeavoring to take away the mantle of peace, and rent the seamelesse coat of
love and amity. If things be not done well by others then they triumph and
send forth their invectives, if well, they profess it nothing, and cannot
pass without their censure. To speak ill of a man upon knowledge shows want
of Charity; but to raise a scandal upon a bare supposition, and to act it in
Print, argues little humanity, less Christianity: but enough of this if not
too much, I am sure some have casted too much already, perhaps others hereafter
may help to bare a share, for my own part I desire no favor but the truth
and equity of my cause, and the due waighing of things with their real
circumstances. Veritas non quaerit Angulos. I desire no shifting, or pretenses,
but if I have done others wrong let me suffer; If I have been wronged by
others let me have truth, and right done me, that's all I require. Who am

An ever well wisher to the truth and thee. R. D.

To the Reader.
SInce my first publication of the uses of my Mathematical Ring or the
Logarythmes projected Circular, I have been oftentimes invited by sundry
persons for the way of the projecting, and dividing of the Circles of my Ring
upon a Plain, so that it might be made in Pastboard to avoyde the charge of
the Instrument in metal, for such which have not abilities to buy, and for
others, who would first see the practice on it, before they would be at the
cost of the Instrument in metal: for whose sake, and use, desiring to satisfy
the affectionate, and for a public benefit, (rather then aiming at mine own
particular profit) I have caused two Plates of metal to be cut and ingraved,
the one containing the Circles of the Projection of my Ring, to be used on a
Plain as it is there described, noted with the letter A. and the other
comprehending that Projection enlarged, noted with the letter B: that so such
may make use of them more readily, to avoid the labor of dividing the Circles;
which schemes being pasted on a Pastboard are ready for use.

And yet further to satisfy those that are desirous, I have delivered also in
the first place ensuing, how those Circles are projected and divided, that so
they may be made according to any magnitude. In the second place how several
ways they may be framed in a Ring: In the third place J show the enlarging of
the Isntrumental Invention in these Circles to as great a magnitude for use as
may be desired. Jn the fourth place J deliver several ways how these Circles
enlarged may be accommodated for Practical use. Jn the fifth place, I make a
description of the Grammelogia, or Instrument in the particular Circle of my
Mathematical Ring, projected on a mooveable and fixed plain, to wit, of the
former scheme A. And in the sixth and last place, J will declare the excellent
uses of both these Instruments, in the Practical parts of Arithmeticke,
Geometry, Astronomy, Horolographie, Navigation, etc,

Detailed depiction of the logarithmic ring (circular slide rule)

Of the projecting and dividing of the Circles of the Mathematical Ring, and
of the enlargement of the Invention, either in a single projection, or in a
double, and that several ways.
FOr the first, according to any semediameter describe several Circles
concentricall, as here are represented by the figure A, the outmost of which
may be noted with the letter E, serving for the Circle of equal parts, and be
divided into 100. 1000. or 10000. equal parts according to the capacity of the
Circle, and noted with figures thus, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100.

The next two Circles may be noted with the letters T T. which may be for the
Circle of Tangents; unto the next Circle may be set the letter S, which may
represent the Circle of Sines, and the inner Circle may be noted with the
letter N, which may represent the Circle of Numbers:

These Circles of Numbers, Sines and Tangents, may be divided out of the Table
of the Logarythmes of Numbers, of Sines, and of Tangents, in this manner
following.

1. Of the graduation of the Circle of Numbers.
First, to divide the Circle of Numbers, mark what number there is against 2.
in the Table of Logarythmes, which is 3010. and account it from E, in the
Circle of equal parts, (if the Circle be divided into 10000. equal parts, but
if the Circle be divided but into 1000. equal parts, then account only 301.
parts) which is against 2. in the Table of Logarythmes (as aforesaid) and will
be at a, lay a Ruler upon it and the Center, and intersect the Circle of
Numbers N, in 2. then mark what number is against 3. in the Table of
Logarythmes, which is 4771. and account it from E in the said Circle of equal
parts, viz. at b, and lay the Ruler upon the Center, and to the said 4771. or
at b, and intersect the Circle of Numbers N, in 3. Again from E, account 60,
20. viz. at y which is against 4. in the Table of Logarythmes, and lay the
Ruler thereto, and intersect the Circles of Numbers N, in 4. and so proceed
until you come to 10. so the intersections in the Circle of Numbers, N, noted
thus, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. shall be the capital divisions of that Circle.

Then may the spaces between 1, and 2. between 2, and 3, etc. be subdivided
by the consequent numbers in the Table of Logarythmes thus.

Mark what number is against 11. in the Table of Logarythmes, which is 413.
account this number from E. in the Circle of equal parts, viz, at d, and
laying a Ruler upon the Center A, and the said d, or 413. note the Circle of
numbers N, in e, then mark what number is against 12. in the Table of
Logarythmes, which is 791. account it from E. in the Circle of equal parts,
viz. at z. and lay a Ruler upon it and the Center, cut the Circle N, in n. and
so go on until you have divided the whole space between 1, and 2. which will
be when you come to 20. against which in the Table of Logarythmes is 13010,
etc. the same with the Logarythme against 2, viz. 03010. the figure of 1. (the
Index) being rejected, which 1, represents one whole revolution: In like manner
you may divide the space between 2, and 3. in the Circle of Numbers N. from
the Logarythmes which are against the Numbers between 20. and 30. and so of
the rest of the spaces between 3. and 4. between 4, and 5, etc. until you
come to 1, which represents 100. then if you will subdivide the space between
N, and e, mark what number is against 101. in the Table of Logarythmes which
is 43, account this from E, viz. at ^, and lay a Ruler upon it and the Center
and cut the Circle N, in i. then mark what number is against 102. which is 86.
account it also from E, in the Circle of equal parts; and lay a Ruler upon it
and the Center, and cut the Circle of Numbers N, in l, and so go on, until
you come to e, which will be at 110. and the Logarythme against which is 413.
the same which before was against 11. (the Index in each being rejected) which
represents as before only the several Revolutions. In like manner may be
divided the space between e, and n, in the Circle of Numbers N out of the
Logarythme between 100, and 200. and so of the rest: But if the Instrument be
large then it is requisite to divide the space between N, and i, between i,
and l, etc. which will be from the Logarythmes which are between 1000. and a
10000. Therefore in a small Instrument you may begin to divide it at the
Logarythme of 101. until you come to 1000. but in Instruments more large begin
from the Logarythme of 1001, until you come unto 10000. and if the divisions
fall large at the beginning, they may be divided successively from 10001.
until you come unto 100000.

And thus for the graduating and dividing of the Circles of Numbers; which I
advise any one (that intends to graduate the other Circles, viz. that of the
Sines, and Tangents,) that he fully understand and conceive this former
direction, otherwise he will not so easily apprehend the graduations of the
said Circle of Sines, and Tangents nor how to divide the projection enlarged;
therefore I have endeavored to be very plain in the opening of the original
of the work, that so the ensuing more compendiously may be conceaved.

2. Of the graduation of the Circle of Sines.
2. To divide the Circle of Sines, you ought to have reference to the Table of
Sines, and the work for the graduation of it is in a manner nothing different
from the former, only here may be noted, whereas all the Logarythmes of
Numbers are comprehended under one absolute revolution of a Circle, the Sines
(which are sufficient for practice) will comprehend or require two revolutions;
The first of which begins at the Line of Conjunction, E N, from S, at 34. m.
24. s. and ends its revolution at 5. gr. 44. m. 22. s. and then begins again
at the said 5. gr. 44. m. 22. s. and ends at 90. gr. and is divided thus: In
the Table of Sines; mark what number is against 1. gr. under the title Sines,
which is 8. 2418. (the Index 8. being rejected) of which account only but
2418. from E, viz. at a, and lay a Ruler upon the Center, and upon the said a,
or the Number 2418. and intersect the Circle of Sines upon the inside in 1,
which represents 1, gr. then mark what number is against 2. gr. under the
title Sines, which is 5428. account this from E, in the Circle of equal parts,
viz. at b, and lay a Ruler upon it and cut the Circle of Sines upon the inside,
as before in 2, which stands for 2, gr, and so proceed until you come to the
Line of Conjunction E, N. according to which direction you may subdivide those
degrees out of the said Table of Sines, into minutes, 5ths. of minutes 10ths of
minutes, etc. according to the greatness or smalnesse of the Instrument: The
inner side of the Circle of Sines being thus divided, mark what number is
against 6, gr. under the title Sines, which is 192. (the Index being rejected)
account this number from E. in the Circle of equal parts, viz. at e and lay a
Ruler thereto and the Center, and intersect the Circle of Sines S. on the
outside in 6. gr. then mark what number is against 7. whith is 858, account
from E, in the Circle of equal parts, viz. at f, and lay a Ruler thereto and
intersect the Circle of Sines S, in 7. gr. and so proceed until the whole
Circle of Sines be divided into its degrees and parts, unto 90.

Of the graduation of the Circles of Tangents.
To divide the Circle of Tangents, you must have reference also to the Table of
Logarythmall Tangents, as follows.

Look in the Table for 1. gr. and mark what Number is against it under the
title Tangents, viz. 2419. (the Index being rejected) then account this number
2419. from E, viz. at a, and lay the Ruler upon it, and the Center, and
intersect the lower Circle of Tangents T, on the outside in 1, which is
opposite to 1. gr. in the Sines, and represents the Tangent of 1. gr. then
from E, account 5430. which is the Tangent of 2. gr. and lay a Ruler upon it
and the Center, and intersect the Circle T, in the outside which shall
represent 2. gr. in that Circle, and so go on until you come to the line of
Conjunction, which will be at 5. gr. 42. m. 40. s. then mark what number is
against 6. gr. under the title Tangents which is 216. account this Number from
E, in the Circle of equal parts, viz. at e, and lay a Ruler upon it and the
Center, and cut the Circle of Tangents T, on the outside of it in 6. gr. then
look what number is against 7. gr. under the title Tangent which is 891.
account it also from E, in the Circle of equal parts, viz. at f, and lay a
Ruler upon it, and intersect the Circle of Tangents on the upper side in 7. gr.
in like manner go on in dividing the rest of the space in the degrees and
parts, unto the line of Conjunction which will be at 45. gr. Then mark what
Number belongs to the Tangent of 46. which is 100151. (reject the Index 10.)
and the number 151. account from E, in the Circle of equal parts, viz. at g,
and lay the Ruler upon the Center, and intersect the Circle of Tangents T, on
the inner side in 46. gr. then look for the Tangent of 47. gr. which is
100303. but (the Index being rejected) it is but 303. account this Number from
E, in the Circle of equal parts, viz. at h, and lay a Ruler upon it, and the
Center, and cut the Circle of Tangents T, on the inner side in 47. gr. and so
go on in dividing the inner side of this Circle until you come to the line of
Conjunction, which will be at 84. gr. 17. m. 21. s. then seek for the Tangent
of 85, gr. which is 110580 reject the Index which is 11. and account 580. from
the line of Conjunction in the Circle of equal parts, from E. viz. at 1. and
lay a Ruler upon it, and the Center, and cut the lower Circle T, upon the inner
side in 85. gr. and so proceed with the rest of the graduations until you
come to the line of Conjunction, which will be at 89. gr. 25. m. 40. s.


These last graduations of Tangents from 45. gr. unto the said 89. gr. 25. m.
40. s. are not out of any necessity to be inserted, but for expedition, in
operation, and are only the compl^ments of the former, so the complement of
the Tangent of 40. gr. is 50. gr. the middle space between which is 45.
again, the complement of the Tangent of 35. is 55. the middle of which is at
45. Now the distance between 50. and 45. is the same between 40. and 45. and
so of the rest.

How the Ring may be framed or composed.
Thus for the single projection of the Circles of my Ring, and the dividing and
graduating of them: which may be so inserted upon the edges of Circles of
mettle turned in the form of a Ring, so that one Circle may moove between two
fixed, by help of two stays, then may there be graduated on the face of the
Ring, upon the outer edge of the mooveable and inner edge of the fixed, the
Circle of Numbers, then upon the inner edge of that mooveable Circle, and the
outward edge of that inner fixed Circle may be inserted the Circle of Sines,
and so according to the description of those that are usually made.

If you bring 1. in the mooveable amongst the Numbers to 1, in the fixed, you
may on the other edge of the mooveable and fixed see the Sines noted thus, 90,
90. 80, 80. 70, 70, etc. unto 6, 6. and each degree subdivided, and then over
the former division and figures, 90, 90. 80, 80. 70, 70. etc. you have the
other degrees, viz. 5, 4, 3, 2, 1. each of those are divided and subdivided by
several points.

Secondly, (if the Ring be great) near the outward edge of the side of the
fixed, against the Numbers, are the usual divisions of a Circle, and the
points of the Compass: serving for observations in Astronomy, or Geometry,
and the sights belonging to the Ring may be placed on the mooveable Circle.

Thirdly, opposite to these Sines on the other side are the Logarythmall
Tangents, noted alike both in the mooveable; and fixed, thus, 6 6. 7 7. 8 8. 9
9. 10 10. 15 15. 20 20. etc. unto 45. 45. which numbers or divisions serve also
for their complements to 90. as before: so 40, gr. stands for 50. gr. 30. gr.
for 6^, gr. 20. for 70. etc. and each degree here both in the mooveable and
fixed is also divided into p^rts; as for the degrees which are under 6. viz. 5,
4. 3, 2, 1. they are noted with small figures above this divided Circle from
45. 40, 35, 30, 25, etc. and each of those degrees is divided into parts by
small points, both in the mooveable and in the fixed Circles.

Fourthly, on the other edge of the mooveable on the same side is another
graduation of Tangents, like to that formerly described. And opposite unto it
in the fixed is a graduation of Logarythmall Sines, in every thing answerable
to the first description of Sines on the other side.

Fifthly, on the edge of the Ring is graduated a part of the Equator numbered
thus, 10, 20, 30. unto 100, and thereunto is adjoined the degrees of the
Meridian enlarged and numbered thus, 10, 20, 30. unto 70. each degree both in
the Equator, and Meridian, are divided into parts, and these two graduated
Circles serve to resolve such Questions, which concern Latitude, Longitude,
Roumbe, and distance in Nauticall operations.

Sixthly, to the concave of the Ring may be added a Circle to be elevated, or
depressed for any Latitude, representing the Equator, and so divided into
hours and parts with an Axis, to show both the hour, and Azimuth, and within
this Circle may be hanged a Box and Needle, with a socket for a staff to slide
into it, and this accommodated with screw pinnes, to fasten it to the Ring, and
Staff, or to take it off at pleasure: Thus for the first way of inserting of
the Projection, on the face and backside of the Ring, a second way follows.

2. How the Projection may be formed in a Ring, so that all the graduations may
be upon one side only.
THis may be done by a double projection, if the mooveable Circle be so fitted
that it moove upon a Plate, and be of sufficient breadth to contain all the
Circles of the single projection, and that one of the fixed Circles retain the
same breadth with the mooveable: as for the innermost fixed Circle, that may be
but as an edge only, then may there be a small channel in the innermost fixed
Circle, in which may be placed a small single Index, which may have sufficient
length to reach from the innermost edge of the Mooveable Circle, unto the
outmost edge of the fixed Circle, which may be moved to and fro at pleasure,
in the Channel, which Index may serve to show the opposition of Numbers; then
upon the other side of the Ring may be placed what the fancy may allude unto.

3. How to fit the Circles of the Ring by a single Projection into a Ring, so
that all the Circles may be upon one side only.
THis is done by having a narrow Circle turned, to moove about the outward edge
of a broad Circle, so that being framed together, it may to the eye seem but
as one Circle only, then may all the Circles of the Projection be described
and graduated on the broad Circle, and to the narrow mooveable Circles may be
placed two like edges of Mettle as the parrs of a double Index, which may
extend unto the largeness of the broad Circle, which may move somewhat
straight in a Channel made in the narrow Circle, for then these edges being
placed unto any two proportionalls in the Projection, if you shall also moove
that Circle which carries these two edges; as the one edge passes by any
Number in that projection, the other will show the fourth proportional, in the
same projection, and this way does avoid the mooving of an Index at the Center;
for that is supplied by the motion of the Peripheria of the Circle, and so
according to this direction you may retain the form of a Ring, and have all
the Circles to the eye upon one of the sides of the Ring only; which form is
more Gentile, and Mathematical, then if the projection were placed on a Plate
or Plain; Many other forms might be deliverd, about this single projection,
but these may serve for the present.

Of the enlarging, or augmenting, of the Projecttion of the Circles of the
Mathematical Ring, to work accuratly Trigonometrie.
THis augmentation of the projection is very facil, being but only the
doubling, tripling, quadrupling, quintupling, decupling, centupling of Circles
in the single projection, and so to conceive such decuplation, centuplation,
etc. only to be the parts of one of the single Circles, and may be divided and
graduated out of the former Tables of Logarythmes, as though these Circles were
only one continued Circle, and the way how, we will somewhat open by this
general Rule, Divide 10000. (which is the Radix of numbers) by that number
which you intend to have the projection enlarged upon, according to a Ratio, or
proportion assigned, and the Quotient shall show the number of parts that one
single Circle shall be divided into; which Circle so divided is the ground of
the whole projection. As for example, admit the Ratio, or proportion of the
augmented projection were required to be Quadruple to that which is single,
that is, four times greater, then, having described four Quadruplicities of
Circles, according to the Scheme B, and one single Circle noted with E, divide
the said 100000. by 4. the Quotient is 25000. which signifies that the outmost
Circle E, (being the part of each Quadruplicitie of the other four Circles)
must be divided into 25000. equal parts, therefore let it first be divided
into 25. equal parts, each of those parts divided into halfes, and every one
of them divided into 5. parts, so the whole Circle shall be divided into 250.
equal parts, then may each of those divisions be divided again into halfes,
and every one of these halfes may be divided also into 5. other equal parts,
and then the whole Circle shall be divided into 2500. parts, and if the
divisions be great enough, let every one of them be divided again into 10.
other equal parts, so the whole Circle shall be divided into 25000. equal
parts; if they cannot be divided into so many parts, yet we may conceive them
so to be divided; and so of other divisions for this projection, which Circle
of equal parts may be noted at each capital division thus, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
etc. unto 25.

How to divide the projection enlarged.

Now to graduate these quadruplicities of Circles from the said Circle of
equal parts, you ought to keep the same method that was used in the dividing
of the single Circles in the single projection, only this by the way ought to
be observed, that when you have divided one revolution and come to the line of
conjunction, the tabular numbers will exceed the Radix of the Circle, viz. the
former 25. and Ciphers, and then how much the tabular number is above it,
account beyond the line of conjunction: so to graduate 17. upon the Circle of
numbers which falls not beyond the line of Conjunction seek the Logarythme of
the said 17. which is 123044. (the Index 1. being rejected) account from E, in
the Circle of equal parts in the scheme B, only 23044. and laying a Ruler
upon it and the Center, intertersect the lowermost Circle of the former, which
belongs to the projection of numbers in 17. but if 18. were to be inserted
into the projection, seek for it in the Table, so right against it is 125527.
account beyond the line of conjunction only the 25527. and lay a Ruler upon it
and the Center, and intersect the next higher Circle in 18. moreover, to note
out 19. upon the same Circle, against which in the Table of Logarythmes is
27875. Now because the Radix as before is but 25. and seeing 27. in this number
exceeds it by 2. reckon that 2. for 27. and account from 2. in the Circle of
equal parts, the other part of the number, viz. 875. and lay a Ruler thereto,
and to the Center, and intersect the former Circle in 19. and so proceed for
the dividing of the other numbers until you come to the line of conjunction;
then will the Radix be there 50. because of two revolutions, therefore at the
figure of 1. beyond the line of conjunction, you may account it 51. at the
figure of 2. account it 52, etc. and coming to the line of Conjunction let the
25. be accounted 75. because of three revolutions, then at the next 1. account
it as 76. at the figure of 2, account it as 77. and so proceed until you come
to the first Radix, viz. 100000. or to the line of Conjunction at the point E.
this being fully conceaved, and having a scheme here already graduated, it
shall be easy from this to divide any other projection which is to be
augmented in a different manner: But if the projection enlarged be of a
Decuple, or Centuple proportion, then the outmost Circle is to be divided only
into 10000. equal parts according to the Circle of equal parts E. in the
single projection, and then the Logarythmes in the Table will divide them
without any consideration (the Index being only rejected) and as the whole
Circle of Numbers in its quadruplicities of Circles may be divided by the
former directions, so in like manner the circle of Sines, and Tangents, in
their quadruplicities of Circles may also be divided: and so of any proiection
in this kind. Thus for the augmenting of the Circles of the proiection of my
Mathematical Ring, and of the dividing of them.

Of several ways how the Circles of the Mathematical Ring (being enlarged)
may be accommodated for Practical use.
FIrst the Circles being proiected singly upon a Plain, an Index with two
feet or a flat Compasses may be placed at the Center to open at any two
terms assigned: and so to move it about as occasion requires, but in stead of
it a semicircle may be fastened there, and a single Index to move upon it, so
that the Radius, or edge of the semicircle being placed to any one number, the
Index may be placed to the other number: and then if the semicircle be moved
Circular, as the Radius of the semicircle passes by any number in the
proiection, so the edge of the Index in motion shall show the proportionalls in
that projection; or a paper edge, and a thread, with a beade may be
sufficient, seeing the Circle of equal parts will show the equal distances of
the proportionalls, etc. But the way of operation upon this single proiect^on
with an Index, etc. to a learner will be somewhat troublesome for the several
observations that necessarily depend upon that way, and cannot be avoided, But
a double projection makes it very facil.

2. A second way of accommodating this enlarged Logarythmall Projection, for
practical use, with a single Index only.
THis is done by having a double Projection enlarged on a Plain, the one to be
fixed and the other to be moveable, (agreeable to the scheme A, in the title
page) for being so fitted it shall operate with the same facility and
expedition, as though it were a single Projection, the proportional numbers
being always by opposition, and in like differences of Circles, one caution
considered; and the Index at the Center, is only but to help the eye in
finding them.

3. A third way of fitting of the Circles of the Projection for Practical use.
THis is performed by help of a double proiection, the one to be fixed, and
the other to be mooveable: But so that the Circles of the mooveable being
described, every other Circle may be cut out, that is, that there may be a
vacuitie between each Circle, then let the edge of the mooveable Circle, be
divided and graduated answerable unto the graduation and divisions of the
proiection on the fixed, but so that the whole mooveable Circle being placed at
the Center, the divisions, graduations, and figures on the said fixed Circle,
may be seen conspicuous through these Channells, and vacuities which are cut
out in the mooveable, so this Projection shall also show, or give the
proportionalls by opposition, as the former.

4. A fourth way, how the Logarythmall projection of my Ring enlarged, may be
fitted in an isntrumental form for practical use in Calculation.
THis may be done according to my great Cylinder which I have long proposed
(in which all the Circles are of equal greatness,) and it may be made of any
magnitude or capacity, but for a study (he that will be at the charge) it may
be of a yard diameter and of such an indifferent length that it may contain
100. or more Circles fixed parallel one to the other on the Cylinder, having a
space between each of them, so that there may be as many mooveable Circles,
as there are fixed ones, and these of the mooveable linked, or fastened
together, so that they may all moove together by the fixed ones in these
spaces, whose edges both of the fixed, and mooveable being graduated by help
of a single Index will show the proportionalls by opposition in this double
Projection, or by a double Index in a single Projection.

Of the description of the Grammelogia or the Circles of my Mathematical Ring
on a Plain, according to the diagramme that was given the King (for a view of
that projection) and afterward the Ring it self.
THe parts of the Instrument are two Circles the one mooveable and the other
fixed, the mooveable Circle is that unto which is fastened a small pin to moove
it by, the other Circle may be conceived to be fixed; upon the mooveable and
fixed there are described thirteen distinct Circles, nowithstanding, on the
mooveable and fixed there are 24. several Circles considerable, (...) which
there are four in the mooveable, answerable to four in the fixed, which
double Circles are divided and noted with letters both in the mooveable and
fixed, as follows.

The Circles of the fixed are noted with these letters, viz. The Circle of
degrees and Calender. E. Represents the Circle of equal parts, and part of the
Equator, and Meridian. T The Circle of Tangents. T The Circle of Tangents. S.
The Circle of Sines. D. The Circle of Decimals. N. The Circle of numbers.


The Circles on the mooveable are noted with these letters, viz. N. The Circle
of Numbers. E. The Circle of equated figurs, and bodies. S. The Circle of
Sines. T The Circle of Tangents. T The Circle of Tangents. Y. The Circle of
time, years, and months.


A more particular description of each Circle, and first of the Circle of
equal parts.
FIrst, the Circle of equal parts on the fixed, is that which is next to the
Circle of degrees, and noted with the letter E. and is figured thus, 10, 20,
30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100. which figures do stand for themselves, or
such numbers unto which a Cipher, or Ciphers may be conceived to be added, or
taken away: so 10. stands for 1. or 10. 100. 1000. etc. and so of the rest, and
here note that the space between any two figures, must be conceived to
comprehend the difference in denomination between them, that is, so much as
one number is greater than another, so many divisions must be contained
between these numbers, so if the 20. stands for 20. the 30. then shall stand
for 30. and because the 30. does exceed the 20. in its denomination by ten,
there must therefore be conceived to be 10. divisions between the said 20.
and 30. but if the 20. had stood for 200. and the 30. for 300. then the
distance between 20. and 30. must be conceived to contain 100. divisions,
and so of the rest: which Circle of equal parts, in its divisions represents
such numbers as one has occasion to use, and is of special and singular use
if it were particularly applied, (though some one said upon the description of
it, it was scarce of any use, but only that by help thereof the given
distances of number may be multiplied, or divided as need requires) had I the
way made for me, and the subject unvayled to help my fight, I should see its
use better then now I do, and would not conceat my self to be so sharp
sighted, but be thankful to any one that would unvaile it for me yet
(acording to my weak sight) had I time, and place I could not slober over such
a point, but take up much of both, to dilate my self in the ample declaration
of the uses of that Circle; howsoever I have said somethings in its use, to
illustrate it, and to prove my assertion.

Of the Equator, and Meridian.
SEcondly, the Circle of equal parts does not only represent it self, but
also a part of the Equator, or Equinoctial Circle, containing 100. equal
degrees, each degree being divided actually into 10. parts, so that each part
does contain 6. minutes, and is numbered as before at every tenth degree, thus,
10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100. upon the inner side of which Circle
are graduated the degrees of the Meridian enlarged, or the unequal degrees of
Latitude, according to Wrights projection, figured and noted thus, 5. 10. 15.
20. 25, etc. unto 70. gr. each degree being divided into 10. parts, so that
each part contains 6. minutes also as before, which divisions may be called
the Meridian Circle, or the Circle of Latitudes.

Of the Circle of time.
THirdly, the innermost Circle on the mooveable which is noted with the letter
Y. figured thus 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. unto 30. and each of the spaces is subdivided
into 12. equal parts and is called the Circle of time, or years, the spaces
noted with figures being years, and the subdivisions, months, and serves for
to operate such questions as concerns interest and valuation of Leases, but
the outmost Circle, which is noted with letters upon the inner side, is the
Calender of time, divided into months and days, and is adjoined to the
degrees of a Circle, noted with the Signs that so readily knowing the day of
the month, the Suns place may be found, and so contrarily; which Circle of
degrees serves also to take the Suns higth, and for the observation of Angles.

Of the Circle of Tangents.
FOurthly, the next Circles to that of equal parts on the fixed are the two
Circles noted with T T. which are but one Circle in effect, and is called the
Circle of Tangents, which comprehends near a Quadrant or 90. gr. and is
graduated and numbered on both sides, having its beginning at the line of
conjunction E N, at 34. m. 22. s. the numbers that are minutes are noted with a
touch over them thus, 35^ that so they may be distinguished from these numbers
which are degrees that are not noted at all. So the Circle of Tangents which is
next to the Circle of equal parts is figured upon the outward part of it, in
its divisions from 35. m. unto 5. gr. 32. m. 48. s. and the degrees are noted
somewhat greater then the rest thus, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. In the next undermost
Circle these degrees from the said 5. are continued and are noted upon the
outside of the same Circle, from 6. gr. unto 45. gr. which 45. gr. are
continued upon the inner side of the same Circle unto 84. gr. 17. m. 21. s. and
these are further continued on the inner side of the uppermost Circle unto 89,
gr. 24. m. 38. s. These two Circles are called the Circle of Tangents; And the
Circle of Tangents noted in like manner with T T, in the mooveable, is the same
with this Circle of Tangents on the fixed: every degree in each of which
Circles unto 10. gr. is divided actually into 60. divisions, each of which
represents one minut, and from 10. gr. unto 80* gr. every degree is divided
into 30. divisions, each division being 2. minutes then from 80. degres unto 89
gr. every degree is divided into 60. parts or minutes as before: This for the
description of the Circle of Tangents, both on the fixed and mooveable.

Of the Circle of Sines.
Fifthly, next unto the Circle of Tangent, is the Circle of Sines noted with the
letter S. as before, having its beginning at the line of Conjunction at 34. m.
22. s. and is figured and divided upon both sides, upon the inner side it is
numbered from 25. m. unto 5. gr. 44. m. 21. s. which are almost opposie to the
like degrees in the Circle of Tangents, which degrees are continued upon the
outward side of the same Circle unto 90. gr. and are numbered thus, 6. 7. 8. 9.
10. etc. unto 90. every degree in this Circle of fines is divided into parts
according to the greatness of degree, and the Circle of sines on the moveable
is the same with this on the fixed.

Of the Circle of Decimalls of money.
Sixthly, next unto the Circle of sines, on the fixed, is the Circle of the
Decimals of money, noted with the Letter D. and is divided on the innerside,
and figured thus, 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. etc. unto 23. and each space subdivided into
4. parts: which divisions so numbered are the decimals of pence, (or the
divisions or notes of the whole Circle) and are to be conceived to be the 8/10
of a pound of money. In like manner the said Circle is farther divided on the
outer side, and figured thus, 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. etc. into 19 parts and the spaces
between each figure is divided into 12. parts, (or as many parts as each space
will contain) which whole Circle so divided (is supposed to represent a pound
of money,) is the Decimall of shillings, or of a pound of money: the like may
be done for the Decimals of weight.

Of the Circle of Equated figures, and Bodies.
SEventhly, the Circle which is a like situated unto this on the moveable that
is noted with the letter E. is the Circle of equated figure^ and Bodies,
serving excellently to facilitate and expedite such operations which concern
regular figures, and the five platonicall Bodies, with other occurrents, a
touch upon which was shown in the Epistle. But more at large in its place is
specified: which Circle of equated figures and Bodies, is divided out of this
Table ensuing, as the Circle of numbers was out of the Table of Logarythmes which
contains 100. notes, 50. of them serving for Superficies, and the other 50.
for Solids.

Tabula notarum corporum solidorum and figurarum regularium.
Notae figurarum. Hep. m. 01639 Hex. 41465 De. e. 05692 7. 42254 Hep. cir.
06159 8. 45154 Cir. e. 07954 Tri. in. 46040 Oc. in. 08174 9. 47712 P. 18. 09151
Qu. e. 10 50000 No, e. 10444 Cir e. 55245 Oc. cir. 11613 Hep. 56046 No. in.
13790 Tri. 63650 2. 15051 Tri. e. 68175 Oc. e. 15809 Oc. 68380 F B. 15836 Qu.
in. 69897 No. cir. 16491 M. ac. 75867 P. 16 16749 Tri. cir. 76143 De. in. 18719
No. 79111 A. c. 20411 Pen. in. 83770 De. cir. 20898 Qu. cir. 84948 Hep. e 21976
De. 88616 Pen. 23565 Cir. D. 89509 3. 23856 Pen. cir. 92975 Hex. e. 29267 Hex.
in. 93753 4. 30103 P. 21. 95762 5. 34948 P. 20. 100000 Pen. e. 38217 C. s.
100000 6. 38907

Notae Solidorum.
D. cir. 04669 O. cir 38907 T. S. 07133 Cil. c / ^ 42542 T. in. 08804 D. in.
44754 2. 10034 Cyl. G 46852 I. cir. 12161 S. x. 49714 S. in. 15051 O. x. 53959
3. 15904 I. e. 55340 Cyl. c / f 16837 59050 4. 20068 f. t 61876 5. 23300 C e.
66666 Gag. 23426 Cyl. D / f 67117 F. T. 23754 O s 67339 T. x. 23856 T. cir.
69010 C. in. 23856 S. s. 71899 Gag. 24349 73663 6. 25938 S. e. 76033 I. in.
27923 O. e. 77553 7. 28170 C. x. 77815 C. cir. 8 30103. 80855 D. x. 31483.
85497 9. 31808 D. s. 88440 10. 33333. 91497 I. s. 33879 I. x. 93753 Cil. d / f
34245 96614 D. e. 37186 T. e. 97612

A description of these Tabular notes.
These notes do represent the Regular figures. Cir. stands for Circle. Tri.
stands for Triangle Qu. stands for Square. Pen. stands for Pentago^. Hex.
stands for Hexagon Hep. stands for Heptagon No. stands for Nonogon De. stands
for Decagon these letters joined with the former, as e. signify equal. in
signify inscribed. c. signify circu^scribed.


Regular Solids. T. stands for Tetraedron. O. stands for Octaedron. C. stands
for Hexaedron. D. stands for Dodecaedron I. stands for Icosaedron. S. stands
for Sphere. these adjoined, s. signify solidity. e. signify equal. x.
signify convexity in. signify inscribed. cir. signify circumscribed.





These notes, P. 16. feet to a Pole. P. 18. feet to a Pole. P. 20. feet to a
Pole. P. 21. feet to a Pole. Ac. represent Acres: F.B. represent Foot of
Board. F.T. represent Foot of Timber. f. t. represent Foot of Timber equated.
Cir. D. represent Circles Diameter. Cir. c. represent Circles Circumference.
Cyl. D / s represent Cylindricall. solidite. Cyl. e / ^ Cyl. d / f represent
Cylindricall foot measure. these notes represent metals, viz. stands for
Gold. stands for Silver. stands for Quiksi. stands for Copper. stands for
Tin. stands for Lead. stands for Iron.

Cyl. ^/f Gag. represent Gage for wine. Gag. A represent Gage for ale.


Of the Circle of Numbers.
Eighthly, the Circle next to the decimals of money, noted with the letter N on
the fixed is the Circle of Numbers, and is divided into unequal parts,
charactered with figures thus, 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. these figures do
represent themselves or such numbers unto which a Cipher or Ciphers are added,
and are varied as the occasion falls out in speech of numbers.

First, if the figure of 1. stands but for 1. then all the divisions in the
Circle by deminition are the parts of 1. so the figure of 4. stands for the
fourth part of 1. (if 1. be divided into 10. parts,) or the 4. stands for 40.
parts of 1. (if 1. be divided into 100. parts,) 8. stands for eighth part of 1.
etc. but if 1. stands for 1. by augmentation, then the figure of 2. shall
represent two, the figure of 3. shall stand for three, etc. and the space
between each figure shall be the parts of 1.

Secondly, if the figure of 1. stands for 10, then the figure of 2. stands for
20. the figure of 3. for 30. etc. hence it follows that between the figure
of 1. and the figure of 2. or between 2. and 3. must be 10. divisions to
represent the intermediate numbers, the middle of those divisions is noted thus
^ as if the 2. be 20. and the 3. be 30. then at the next great division you may
account 21. two divisions beyond the figure of 2. to be 22. at the next great
division you may account 23. and so on, numbering till you come to 30. or any
other number, which divisions noted thus ^ is only to help the eye in
numbering.

Thirdly, if the figure of 2. stand for 200. then the figure of 3. is 300 the
figure of 4. is 400. hence there must be 100. between 200. and 300. and 100.
more between 300. and 400. and so of others. Now seeing that ten tens make an
hundred, there must be 10. divisions between the said 200. and 300. and every
one of those divisions do represent 10. so the said note ^ shall be half of
the said 100. therefore at that note you may read 250. and the middle between
300. and 400. viz. at ^ read 350. etc.

Every one of the divisions which stand for 10. is divided again into 10.
other divisions, the middle of which has its division a little higher than the
rest, to help the eye to number more readily.

And here generally is to be noted, that what denomination you give unto any of
the figures, the next great division is the next subdenomination, and the next
lesser division to that greater is the second subdenomination, as if I should
speak 243. here the denominations are Hundreds, Tens, and Unites: therefore
the figure of 2, shall stand for 200. the four great divisions next the ^.
shall be 40. and the next three small divisions shall represent 3. (which is
within seven small divisions of ^) and so of others.

Thus for the description and numbering upon the Circle of numbers on the fixed.
The numbers and divisions on the moveable Circle, are the very same with that
on the fixed; for if you move 1. in the moveable to 1. in the fixed, there is
represented to every number or division his opposite, not only in the Circle
of numbers, but also in the Circle of Sines, and Tangents.

And thus in these two Circles of numbers, and in the other Circles, there is a
great body of numbers, the one standing always fixed, and the other to be
moved; and if any number in the moveable be moved, all other numbers move with
it: so if you move 25. in the moveable in the Circle of numbers, unto 30. in
the fixed on the Circle of numbers, right against 26. in the moveable, is 31.
and 2. tenths in the fixed, and right against 27 in the moveable, is 32. and 4.
tenths in the fixed, right against 30. in the moveable is 36. in the fixed,
against 46. in the moveable, in 55. and 2. tenths in the fixed.

Again, if 108. in the moveable be brought to 15. in the fixed, right against
16. in the fixed is 115. in the moveable, and right against 12. in the fixed,
is 86. and 4. tenths in the moveable.

Thus what denomination you give unto the numbers in the Circle of numbers in
the moveable, you are successively to keep the same denomination, and the like
is to be conceived touching the progressive denomination of numbers, in the
Circle of numbers in the fixed. Thus for the description of the Instrument; the
use follows.

How to perform the Golden Rule, or to find a Proportional Number unto
another Number, as two other Numbers are in proportion amongst themselves.
THis Rule of all other is the most excellent and the most general, as well in
Mathematical Calculations, as in Arithmeticall Computations, and therefore may
not unfitly be so called, and the Isntrumental operation is rather more facile
in this Rule, than in Multiplication or Division; hence it is that I have
disposed it in the front of the work, because of expedition and facility: and
the way of operation is thus:

Seek the first number in the moveable, Constructio.
and bring it to the second number in the fixed, so right against the third
number in the moveable, is the answer in the fixed.

Example 1
If the Interest of 100. li. be 8. li. in the year, what is the Interest of
65. li. for the same time.

Bring 100. in the moveable to 8. in the fixed, Constructio.
so right against 65. in the moveable is 5. 2. in the fixed, and so much is the
Interest of 65. li. for a year at 8. li. for 100. li. per annum.

The Instrument not removed,
you may at one instant right against any sum of money in the moveable, see
the Interest thereof in the fixed: the reason of this is from the Definition of
Logarithmes.

Proportionales Logarithmi aequales habent differentias. Definitio.

Necess^ est igitur proportionales Logarithmos in proport^one
Lincari distantias aequales habere.
Example 2.
If a Troop of 50. Horse have for their pay 140. li. how much shall suffice to
pay a Troop of 64. Horse.

Constructio.
BRing 50. to 140 then right against 64. in the moveable is, 179. 2. in the
fixed, the monthly pay of the said 64. horse. And there immediately may you see
the monthly charge of any number of Horse, for, the number of Horse given in
the moveable, right against it, is their pay in the fixed.

Example 3
It is said that the proportion between the circumference of a Circle to his
Diameter is ^. 22.

Bring therefore 7. in the moveable to 22. in the fixed, then immediately at one
instant may you have the Diameter or Circumference of any Circle, only by an
ocular inspection: for right against the Diameter in the moveable, is the
Circumference in the fixed; or right against any Circumference in the fixed, is
his Diameter in the moveable: Thus for the simple Rule.

Example 4
Further uses of the Golden Rule in ordinary service in propo^tionating of
things.
Let FLX. represent the Perimeter of a Pentagonall Fort, and let the distance
between the points of the Bastines, FL. be 926. foot, or KL the square side of
a Building 470. foot, and the other dimentions, both of the Fort, and the
Building according to the here under inscribed Tables.

The distance between the points of the Bulwark. FL. 926. A perpendicular C
R. 617. The Cottine A B 662. The side of the Fort D N 425. The gorge line A D.
119. The Flank D E. 100. The line of defense D L. 700. The face of the B^stine
E F. 264. The cap^tall li^e A F. 224. The distance from the Center to the
Bastine A C. 564. From the Cottine to the Center C I. 456. The breadth of the
Bulwark. G E. 310.


The greatest square side of the Building K L. 470. foo^ Q. A court within the
middle of the Building. The distance between the middle of the Court and any
out angle, as K A. 236. The least inner square of the Court E F. 200. Between
any out corner of the Building, as RX. 180. 0. 0. 0. etc. a stone Gallery in
breadth 36.
And so of other under rooms to other uses.
NOw admit another like Fort, or another like Building is to be erected, whose
greatest distance between the aforesaid points of the Bastines, can be but
750. foot, or the greatest side of the piece of ground where the Building is to
be made, is but 400. foot, what shall the several measures of this new
Structure be, so that the Fort to the Fort, or the Building to the Building, in
all parts be proportional?

This is performed with much facility and expedition by this Grammelogia.
Constructio.


For if you move the whole to the whole, viz. 926. to 750. or 470. to 400.
right against the several known measures in the moveable, you have the
several required measures in the fixed. I bring therefore 926. unto 750.

So right against 637 662 425 119 100 700 264 224 564 456 310
In the moveable is 515. 9. 536. 1. 344. 2. 96. 4. 81. 0. 566. 9. 213. 8. 181.
4. 456. 8. 369. 3. 251. 1.
In the fixed So right against 236 200 180 36
in the moveable is 285. 9. 170. 2. 153.1. 8
in the fixed.

These numbers found out by the ordinary way of Arithmeticke may trouble a
nimble Arithmetician a whole hour or more, and therein subject to much error,
but others 6. or 8. hours at the least, if not more; but by this Grammelogia,
they are found out in less time than half a quarter of an hour: for so
quick is its operation in any question, to him that has the way of working by
it, that it gives the Answer before a man can distinctly write down the
numbers propoed in the question.

Further uses of the Golden Rule, in matters of combination of Numbers, how to
part a number into parts, as another number is already parted.
LEt A. B. C. D. E. be five men which adventure money in a Plantation or
otherwise: A. adventures 84. li. B 72. li. C 48. li. D. 54. E 42. li. by which
in the return is gotten 50. li. how much shall A. B. C. D. and E. have,
according to their several disbursments. Or admit F. borrows of A. 84. li.
of B. 72. li. of C. 48. li. of D. 54. li. and of E. 42. li. F. dies, and his
whole estate is worth but 50. li. how much shall every Creditor have of this
50. li. according to his money lent. Or suppose A. B. C. D. E. were five
several metals, allotted to make a Statue, Vessel, Bell, etc. A Gold, B
Silver, C Coper, D Latten, and E Tin; now when the Metals were melt and cast,
there was left a piece which weighed 50. li. how much Gold, Silver, Coper,
Latten, and Tin does it contain, that so the worth of that piece may be
known. Or if there were 5. Companies, or 5. Captains, A. B. C. D. E. who
expect their Pay, to A was owing for his service 84. li. to B. 72. li. to C.
48. li. to D. 54. li. and to E. 42. li. Now to keep them from mutiny, the
General sends them 50. li. to be parted amongst them proportionally according
to each others dues, what shall A. B. C. D. E. have? Or admit A. B. C. D. and
E. should load a ship of 300. tuns, A lays in 84 tuns, B. 72. C. 48. D. 54.
and E. 42. tuns; in the voyage by reason of tempest, for safeguard of their
lives and Ship, there was cast over board 50. tuns of the loading, how much
shall A bear of the loss, as also B. C. D. and E. Further, in a Shire there
is to be raised of 5. men, A. B. C. D. and E. 50. li. proportionally according
to their estates; A is worth yearly 84. li. B. 72. li. C. 48 li. D. 54. li.
and E. 42. li. how much shall each one pay, etc.
THus I might infinitely dilate my self upon one subject, tending to admirable
uses, I only in this glance by things, making but way to the occasions: The
resolution of which, and all othets of this kind, is drawn from this ensuing
Axiom. Axiom.


There is such proportion between any whole, and his parts, as between the
like whole, either greater or lesser, and his parts: or between the parts and
the parts, as between the whole and the whole.

So in the first example, Declaratio.
Add the money of A. B. C. D. and E. together makes 300. li. this is the
whole, the parts are the former: now 50. li. is another whole number, which
must be broken into parts proportional to the former; and this differs
nothing in the operation from that of the last, in proportionating the Fort to
the Fort, or the Building to the Building: for such proportion as 300. li. the
whole money disbursed has unto 50. li. the whole money gotten, so shall A 84.
have to his part, and so of any other.

Bring therefore 300. in the moveable unto 50. in the fixed, Constructio.
so right against any particular part in the moveable is his part proportional
in the fixed, as there apparently is seen, and from thence they are taken and
placed in a Table, as here under appears.

As 300. to 50. so A. 84. B. 72. C. 48. D. 54. E. 42.
to 14. 12. 8. 9. 7.


More uses upon the Golden Rule, in the division of Lines.
TO find a Line that shall keep any proportion assigned unto another line
given.

Declaratio.
As, let a Line be found which shall keep proportion to the line A. as 3. to 5.

Constructio.
Measure the line A by a scale of equal parts, then bring 3. unto 5. so against
the measure of the line A in the moveable, you have the measure of the line
required in the fixed, viz. B. so the lines A and B are in proportion as 3. to
5. etc.


Declaratio.
Let it be required to divide the Line A into 23. parts: first, by a seal of
equal parts measure the Line A, Constructio.
which admit to be 51. parts, bring then 23. in the moveable unto 51. in the
fixed. So right against 1. 5. 10. 15. 20. in the moveable, is 2. and 2. 10. 11.
and 1. 10. 22. and 2. 10. 33. and 2. 10. 44. and 3. 10. in the fixed: if these
numbers be taken from the same scale, and applied to the line A, it will be
divided in the points of 1. 5. 10. 15. and 20. then may those parts be easily
sub-divided.


Declaratio.
Let the Line B. C. be divided in the points, D. E. F. G. and H. as the Line R.
is divided.

Constructio.
Measure the Line R. 58. and his divisions R. 12. R 15 R. 20; R. 30. R. 50. then
let BC. be measured, which admit it contain 37. parts, bring 51. unto 37. so
against the parts of R in the moveable, you have the parts of B C. in the
fixed, viz. B D. B E. B F. B G. and B H.



Notions or principles touching the disposing or ordering of the Numbers in the
Golden Rule in their true places upon the Grammelogia, and the congruity of
those Numbers one unto another.
NOte that in any question of the Golden Rule, there are three numbers to work
upon, whereof two of them are of one denomination, the one of them has his
answer, and the other does require an answer, and those two numbers of like
denominations must be always accounted or sought out upon the moveable Circle.

As if 30. li. do rent 45. Acres of Land yearly, how much does the yearly
Rent of 84. Acres come to.

Here the denominations alike are 45. Acres and 84. Acres, 45. Acres has his
answer, 30. li. and 84. Acres requires his answer.

For the working of this and all others, Let the numbers in the moveable be
brought to his answer in the fixed: that is, bring 45. to 30. so, right against
the thing demanded in the moveable: that is, against 84. shall be the answer in
the fixed, viz. 56. and so many pounds will rent yearly the said 84. Acres.

Secondly, note further, that those three numbers as 45. Acres, 30. li. and 84.
Acres, are distinguished by numerall attributes, as first, second, and third.
Hence of some it is called the rule of three, and the answer to 84. Acres is
called the fourth number, which is ever of the same denomination that the
second number is of: and the fourth number sought for has alwaie such
proportion to the third number, as the second is to the first: Vel contra.

From which by a more general name, it is called The Rule of proportion, for
that it proportionateth things unto any proportion assigned; so is the said 56.
a proportional number to 84. as 30. is unto 45. for 56. is two third parts of
84. and so is 30. two third parts of 45.

Therefore these four numbers, 45. 30. 84. 56. are proportional numbers one
unto another:
And here note generally in direct proportion, if the third number be greater
than the first number, the fourth number shall be greater than the second
number.

Contrariwise, if the third number be less than the first number, the fourth
number is less than the second number.

But in Reciprocal proportion this fourth number is inverted; so if the third
number be greater than the first, the fourth number is less than the second.

So if 45. men in 30. days, will do a service, in how many days shall 270.
men do it.

Here the denominations alike are 45. Men and 270. Men, the answer to 45. men
is 30. days, the answer to 270. men is required.

Constructio.
If you move 45. in the moveable to 30. in the fixed, right against 270. in the
moveable is 180. days in the fixed: which answer is absurd, seeing there is
more men allotted to do the work, there must most necessarily be less time.

Therefore in all Questions of Reciprocal proportion, let the demand be
sought out upon the moveable, viz. 270. and brought to the first numbers answer
in the fixed, viz. 30. so right against the first number in the moveable, viz.
45. is the answer in the fixed, viz. 5. and in so many days will 270. men do
that service, if 45. men do it in 30. days.

Again, if 3840. soldiers are victualed for 10. months, how many men may it
serve that the said provision may last 12. months.

Constructio.
In this and all others (as before) bring the third number 12. in the moveable,
to the other numbers answer in the fixed, viz. 3840. so against the first
number 10. months in the moveable, is 3200 men in the fixed, and so many men
will the same provision serve for 12. months.

From which direction, those ensuing questions, and the like, may be resolved.

If I lend 140. li. for 7. months, if I should borrow of him 200. li. how long
might I keep it; facit 4. months and 9. 10.

According to the Statute, if Wheat beat 50. s. the quarter, the penny loaf
should weigh 6. ounces and a half, what shall it now weigh, if in case wheat
be at 3. li. 12. s. the Quarter; the numbers changed into decimals will be
thus, if 2. li. 5. 10. give 6. ounces, and 5. 10. what shall 3. li 6. 10. give:
facit 4. ounces and 5. 10.

A Gallery is found to contain in the walls 380. yards, how many yards of
Tapestry shall hang that Gallery of 7. quarters broad: facit 217 yards.

Ounces of 7. yards to an ounce will serve to lace a vesture, how many ounces
of 5. yards to an ounce will do the same, etc. facit 35. ounces.

How to proportion a Fraction that is not Decimall, into a decimall.
So if 8. and 12. 40. were to be used, 12. 40. must be changed into a Decimall,
thus: bring 40. in the moveable to 10. in the fixed, so right against 12. in
the moveable is 3. in the fixed, so the fraction 12 40. is changed now into 3.
10. so for 8. and 12. 40. you have now 8. and 3. 10. which may be easily found
out.

Again, let 63. 84. be a fraction which is to be used, this cannot be found
out upon the Grammelogia: change it therefore into a Decimall.

Bring therefore 84. (the Denominator) to 100. in the fixed, so 63. (the
Numerator) in the moveable, gives 75. in the fixed; so 63. 84. is now changed
into a Decimall 75. 100. the same in value with 63. 84. and so of any other
Fraction that is not decimall.

This for Lineary Proportion.

Of the Golden Rule, or Rule of Proportion, in respect of Lines and Quantities
in plain Figures.
As if ^he Diamiter of a Circle be 7. and the Area 38. and 5. 10. what is the
Area of another Circle whose Diameter is 18. Foot.

Constructio.
Bring the line known to the other line, that is 7. to 18. so right against 38.
and 5. 10. in the moveable is 99. in the fixed, which looked out in the
moveable, right against it in the fixed is 254. and 5. 10. the Area of that
Circle.

In like manner consider of Squares, Triangles, and other plain Figures.

If a piece of Land of 20. Pole square be^worth 30. li. what is a piece of Land
of the same goodness worth, which is 35. Pole square every way.

Constructio.
Bring 20 to 35. so right against 30. in the moveable you have 52. and 5. 10. in
the fixed; and right against this 52. and 5. 10. in the moveable you have 91.
and 8. 10. in the fixed, the worth of that land.

If a piece of ground of 50. paces square is sufficient to lodge an Army of
1600 men, how ma^y men shall there be ledged in a piece of ground which is 40.
paces square

Constructio.
Bring 50. to 40. so right against 1600. in the moveable is 1280. in the fixed,

Our English land measure is 16. foot and a half to the Pole, the Irish Pole
has 21. foot, how many Engl sh Acres does 30. Irish Acres make.

Constructio.
Bring 16. and 5. 10. to 21. then right against 30. in the moveable is 38. and
2. 10. in the fixed, and right against this 38. and 2. 10. in the moveable is
48. and 6 10. in the fixed, and so many English Acres is contained in 30. Irish
Acres, etc.


Our usual measures in England to the Pole are 16. foot and a half 18. or 20.
foot, the proportion of their squares are 68. 81. 100. I have set their
measures to those numbers in the Grammelogia.

Now if the quantity be given and his measure, and the quantity be required
according to another measure, you may have it with greater expedition: for
bring the measure whole quantity is required to the other measure, so against
the quantity known in the moveable, you have the quantity required in the
fixed.

Of the Golden Rule, or Rule of Proportion in respect of Lines, and the
quantity of Solids.
As admit the side of the least Cube were 4. Inches, and could not be made
under 12. li. what might a Cube of the same metal be worth that is but one
inch more in the side, viz. 5. inches.

Bring 4. to 5. so right against 12. in the moveable, Constructio.
is 15. in the fixed, and right against this 15. in the moveable is 18. and 75.
100. in the fixed, and right against this 18. and 75. 100. in the moveable is
23. li. and 4. 10. in the fixed, and so much will the second Cube cost: this
might be applied to the weight, worth, or quantity of other Solids.

A Pe^ce of 5. Inches boar or Diameter, requires for her charge 16. pound of
Powder, what quantity of Powder will serve another Piece of 4. Inches in the
boar.

Bring 5. to 4. so right against 16. in the moveable is 12. and 8. 10. in the
fixed, Constructio.
and right against 12. and 8. 10. in the moveable is 10. and 24. 100. in the
fixed; and right against this 10. and 24. 100. in the moveable is 8. and 2. 10.
in the fixed: the answer of Powder according to Cubick proportion, but
Canoniers do somewhat qualify this proprotion.

To find what Proportion in Quantity there is between two or more Solids.
There are two Bullets, Globes, or Cylenders, the Diameter of the one is 10.
inches, and the other the Diameter is 4. inches, what proportion is there
between the Solids, or how often does the greater contain the lesser.

Bring 10. to 4. so right against 100. in the moveable is 40. in the fixed,
Constructio.
against this 40. in the moveable is 16. in the fixed; and right against this
16. in the moveable, is 6. and 4. 10. in the fixed; so the proportion between
the Solids are as 100. to 6. and 4. 10.

But how often the greater does contain the lesser, the Rule ensuing does
teach.


Constructio.
MOve the Divisor to 1. so right against the Dividend in the moveable, is the
quotient in the fixed.

Declaratio.
So if it were demanded, how many days there is in 216. hours, because a day
natural contains 24. hours, that therefore is the Divisor. Move then 24. to
1. and right against the said 216. in the moveable is 9. in the fixed, and so
many days is 216. hours.


Here note that in all Divisions, by how many figures or places the Dividend
exceeds the Divisor, so many places or figures shall the Quotient have. But if
the figures of the Divisor may be taken from as many of the first figures or
places toward the left hand of the Dividend, then the Quotient shall have one
place more.

So if it were further required, how many days there were in 360. hours, or
any other number: the Instrument not moved from his first setting, they are all
given at one instant: for right against the number in the moveable, is the
answer in the fixed, so right against 360. in the moveable is 15. in the fixed,
and so many days are there in 360. hours.

This note serves only to know the number of Figures or places in the
Quotient, by which the denomination of the first figure of the Quotient may be
had.

So if it were demanded how many years there is in 14600. days, there being
365. days in the year: this therefore is the Divisor. Bring then 365. to 1.
so right against 14600. in the moveable is 4. in the fixed, but by the former
note it must be 40. and so many years is there in 14600. days, the Instrument
not moved, right against any number of days, as 5000. 10000. 20000. etc. in
the moveable, is the years in the fixed. With the same expedition and facility
may you divide by fractionall numbers.

Further uses upon Division.
IN a year are 52. weeks or 365. days. If J would know the weekly expenses of
any yearly sum of money.

Bring 52. to 1. then right against any sum of money in the moveable, you
have the weekly expenses in the fixed: Constructio.


But if you move 365. to 1. then right against any sum of money in the
moveable, you have the daily expenses in the fixed.

So if the expenses yearly were 1000. li. or the charge of a certain Company
of S^uldiers: Declaratio.
right against it according to the note of Division is 2. li. 7. 10. the daily
charge: the Instrument not removed, you may see at one instant the daily charge
of 20000. li. a year, 50000. li. or 100000. li. a year: for right against the
charge or expense in the moveable, is the answer in the fixed.

More uses upon Division.


But if the Rent were given and the Purchase required, it is the inverse of
this, and is proper to Multiplication, and the Rule follows in the next page.

Other uses upon Division to find the Scale to divide the Meridian line in a
Sea Chart, according to any breadth, and to a Latitude assigned.

Wrights projection, are 12. and 24 100. Bring this 12. and 24. 100. to 1. so
right against the breadth of the Card in the moveable, you have the Inches, or
parts of Inches in the fixed to make your scale by to divide the Meridionall
line.

So if the breadth or the Card were 33. Inches, Declaratio.
right against it in the fixed is 2. Inches, 7. 10. the largeness of a degree
of the Equator: if the breadth were 24. and 5. 10. right against it is 2.
Inches: if 20. and 8. 10. then the breadth of a degree is 1. and 7. 10. if 14.
and 7. 10. then 1. and 2. 10. if 8. and 5. 10. then 7. 10. etc.

To multiply one Number by another, or to find the Product of two Numbers.
Constructio.
MOve 1. to the multiplier, then right against the Multicand in the moveable
Circle, you have the Product in in the fixed Circle.


Here note that the Product of any Multiplication, is ever as many figures or
places, as there are places or figures contained in the Multiplicand and M
ltiplier, if the two first Figures toward the left hand being multiplied
together have excrescence (that is, if the Product exceed 9) otherwise the
Product shall be one figure or place less than there are figures or places
contained both in the Multiplicand and Multiplier.

Declaratio.
So if 38. be multiplied by 2. the Product will be but two places: But if the
said 38. be multiplied by 5 the Product will be three places, for that 3. by 2.
multiplied does not cres^ere, but the said 3. by 5. does bear excrescence,
viz. more than 9.

This Note is only to give domination to the first figure of the Product
toward the left hand, for if the Product have two figures, then the first
figure of that Product toward the left hand is ten or tens; if the Product
have three figures, then the first figure of the Product toward the left hand
is hundreds, etc.

Multiply 18. by 5. Bring 1. to 5. then right against 18. in the moveable is 9.
in the fixed, which by the former note of observation is 90. which is the
Product of 18. by 5.

But if 35. were to be multiplied by 4. move 1. to 4. so right against 35. in
the moved is 140. by the last note.

To multiply Fractionall, as 40. and 5. 10. by 7. and 3. 10. Bring 1. to 7. and
3. 10. so right against 40. and 5. 10. in the moveable is 295. and 6. 10. in
the fixed; the Product required.

So to multiply 8. 10. by 5. 10. Bring 1. to 5. 10. so right against 8. 10. in
the moveable is 4. 10. in the fixed.

Uses upon Multiplication.
Monetht make a year, bring 1. unto it, so right against any monthly expenses
in the moveable you have the yearly expenses in the fixed according to the
note: So if the monthly expenses were 75. li. right against it in the fixed is
9. which by the former note makes 900. if ^ 50. li. for a month, right against
it in the fixed is 1800. li. the yearly charges or expenses.

Other uses upon Multiplication.
Minutes make an hour, bring 1. to 60. so right against any number of hours
in the moveable is the minutes of those hours in the fixed.

Further upon Multiplication.
Admit lands be sold at 14. years Purchase, bring 1. to 14. so against any
Rent in the moveable you may at one instant see the purchase thereof in the
fixed, having regard to the former note.

How to square a Number.
facit 182. and 25. 100.

How to Cube a Number.


Again to Cube 6. bring 1. to 6. for right against 6. in the moveable is 36.
in the fixed; and right against this 36. in the moveable is 216. in the fixed,
the Cube of 6. etc.

To find Numbers in continual proportion unto any two Numbers assigned.
Constructio.
BRing the first number to the second, then right against the second upon the
moveable, is the third number in the fixed, and against this third number in
the moveable, is the fourth number in the fixed, etc.

Declaratio.
So if the numbers to be continued in proportion be 2. to 4. move 2. to 4. so
right against 4. in the moveable is 8. in the fixed, and 8. in the moveable
gives 16. in the fixed, and those numbers, 2. 4. 8. 16 etc. are said to be in
continual Proportion.




The increase or interest of Mon^y from this ground is easily found, seeing the
increase of the Money must be in continual Proportion to the Principal, as
100. li. is to his Interest.



Constructio.
Move 100. to 108. then against 40. in the moveable is 43. li. 2. 10. in the
fixed: the first years Interest and its Principal, and against this 43. li.
2. 10. in the moveable, is 46. li 8. 10. in the fixed, which is the seconds
years Principal and Interest: in like manner may you proceed to other years.


The Instrument being at this stay, the eye may denote out at one instant the
Interest of any sum of Money: for right against your number in the moveable,
is both Principal and Interest in the fixed.

fere, and so much does 27. li. 14. s. come to at the years end, and so all
other sums of money do offer themselves at one instant to the eye in their
resolutions.

To find a mean proportion, or many between any two Numbers given.
MArk what number of equal parts in the fixed is against each of the given
numbers, (which equal parts represent the Logarythmes of these numbers, if the
Logaryt^mall Index be put unto them, which is a unity less then the places of
any given number) and add these Logarythmes, or equal parts together, then
take the half of that sum, which sought out in the former Circle of equal
parts, right against it in the Circle of numbers is the mean proportional
required, or the half difference of these two Logarythmall numbers, or equal
parts being added to the lesser Logarythme will give the same, or sub. etc.

But if many mean proportionalls be required divide the differentiall
Logarythme of the two numbers, or number of equal parts, by a unity more then
the number of mean proportionalls, which quotient being by succession added to
the Logarythme or equal parts belonging to the lesser number, does show the
several mean proportionalls required. So if between the Cubicke numbers 27.
and 64. two mean proportionalls were required, the third part of the
difference of equal parts between these numbers is 125. which being added
unto 431. the equal parts against 27. makes 556. against which in the Circle of
numbers is 36. the first mean proportional unto which 556. again add
successively the said 125. which makes 681. against these equal parts in the
Circle of numbers is 48. the other mean proportional.

According to the same manner between 243. and 1024. four mean
proportionalls might be found, to wit, 324. 432. 576. and 768. Or proportions
may be found to a term assigned, between two numbers, either by augmentation
from a greater, or diminution from a lesser.

Of the Extracting of square, and Cubicke Roots, and others.
THe construction of this depends upon the latter, because the square Root of
any number, is nothing but a mean proportion between a unity and the given
number, the Cubicke Root is the first of two mean proportionalls, between
the unity and the Cube proposed* the Biquadrat Root, is the first of three
mean proportionalls between the unity and the given number, etc. But because
the former direction specified in finding of mean proportions, adheres unto
the way and nature of Logarythmes, it being more facil by them, then so to
apply it Instrumentally, therefore we will somewhat compendiate that labor by
the Instrument alone, and avoid the search of the Logarythmes of numbers, and
their partitions, and as an ease for Radical extractions.

To find a mean proportional with more facility then is formerly delivered
Constructio. Mark what number of equal parts in the Circle of equal parts
E, in the fixed is against the lesser of the two given numbers in the Circle of
numbers in the fixed.

then bring the lesser number in the moveable to these parts in the Circle of
equal parts noted with Q between Q A A Q
if these two numbers have like places or exceed one another even places.
exceed one another by odd places.
so the like number of equal parts in the fixed in the Circle Q which is
against the greater number in the Circle of equal parts E, being sought out
between Q A, in the fixed shall right against it point out the mean
proportionoll in the mooveable.

But here note that 10. in this Rule must be accounted to have but one place,
100. to have but two places, 1000. three places, etc.

For the extraction of square and Cubicke Roots more compendiously, that's done
by an inspection of the eye only, as is specified in the aforesaid Epistle to
the Reader, at the last clause of the use of the Instrument, without motion:
but hereafter more in that nature. And by the way, note that in the extraction
of square Roots, the Root does contain in places always the just half of
the places of the number given if it has even places, but if it have odd
places, then the Root has as many places as the greater half comes to.

Now as every two places in square numbers, affords one place for its Root: so
Cubicke numbers, affords for every third place, or ternarie one for its Root:
but if the number have any places above, the ternarie or ternaries of places,
then the Root shall be one place more then the number of ternaries.

Note further, that in seeking of mean proportionalls it may be doubtful
what denominations to give unto it when it is found on the Instrument, which
may be discovered in this manner, find the places that the two extreme
numbers given would make if they were multiplied together, which the Rule in
Multiplication, Page 14. will show you; then having the number of places for
the product, the former Rule which does allude to the places for the square
Root, will tell you what denomination to give the mean proportion sought for.

To find a mean proportion between two numbers.
NOte if the two Numbers have like places,
or exceed one another by two places, move the numbers to and fro, until 1 in
the fixed be equally distant between them, which the divisions in the pricked
Circle A B will help you; so right against 1. in the fixed, is the mean
proportion in the moveable.

If the two n^mbers exceed one another by one, or three places, move the
numbers to and fro, until 1. in the fixed be equal distance between them;
so right against B in the moveable is the mean Proportion.

Some uses upon mean Proportionals.
If 40. li. be lent for two years, Declaratio.
and at the end thereof were received 48. li. and 4. 10. what was taken in the
100.

Find a mean proportion between 40. and 48. 4. 10. which will be 44
according to the last rule; so right against 48. 4. 10. in the moveable, is
110. in the fixed, which is the Principal and its Interest; so ten pound is
taken per centum. In warlike discipline, the weakest place opposed to danger,
is supplied with strongest force.

Now there are two companies allotted for two several services, the one
containing 500. Soldiers, the other 320. Soldiers, there is a third place,
neither so strong as the latter, nor so weak as the former, therefore a mean
number of Soldiers is thought convenient for the defense thereof: what number
shall it be?

Find a mean proportion between 500. and 320. facit 400. and this is a mean
proportional number between 320. and 500. and the number of men required.

To find the Scale that protracted a Plot or Building by.

Let the Rectangle A C be 8. Acres, Declaratio. Constructio.
and let the Scale be sought for by which it was protracted or plotted: With
any Scale measure the side A B. admit of 10. parts in an inch, and suppose it
make 33. and 33. 100. parts, and A D. 26. and 66. 100. parts, according to
which the Area of the Rectangle now is 5. Acres and 56. 100. parts; find a
mean proportion between this and the form. 8. Acres, which is 6. and 67. 100.
and this stands against 1. in the fixed, which represents 10. his scale, but 8.
in the moveable gives 12. in the fixed, and such were the parts in an Inch of
the scale sought for.


Constructio.
LEt 1. in the fixed stand toward you, and seek that number to be extracted in
the moveable, if it have 1. 3. 7. or 9. places, etc. bring the number toward
the left side of 1. in the fixed: but if the number have 2. 4. 6. or 8. places,
etc. bring it twards the right side of the fixed 1. and move your number to and
fro, until 1. in the moveable be as far distant from 1. in the fixed, as
your given number is from 1. in the fixed: (the equal parts in the Circle A B
will help you in this) so the number in the moveable right against the fixed
1. is the Root sought for.

Here note that 1. or 2. figures has but one figure for his Root, 3. or 4.
figures has 2. figures or places for its Root, 5. or 6. figures has 3.
figures for its Root, etc.

How to extract the Cubicke Root.

Upon the moveable there are those letters A. B. C. the distance between A. B.
is divided into 10. equal parts, and each part subdivided: the distance
between A. C. B. is also divided into 10. parts, and each part subdivided,
their uses may be thus.

Constructio.
Let 1. in the fixed stand always between A and B in the moveable for the
Extraction of Cubicke Roots, and move the moveable to and fro, until that the
given number and 1. in the fixed be of like number of parts distant from A in
the moveable.

So if the given Number have 1. 4. 7. or 10. 2. 5. 8. or 11. 3. 6. 9. or 12.
Places, etc. the Cubicke Root is right against A C B
In the fixed.

And here note that a number of 1. 2. or 3. places has but 1. figure for the
Root; a Number which has 4. 5. or 6. places has but 2. figures or places for
its Root; a number which has 7. 8. or 9. places has but 3. figures or places
for its Root, etc.

Uses upon the square Root.
Pro. 1. There are two square forms, the one is 12. every way, and the other
16. every way, if of those two were made one, how many should it be every way
in the side.
Constructio.
page 16. find a number in continual proportion to 16. as 12. to 16. facit
21. and 3. 10. add this to 12. facit 33. and 3. 10. Then by 1. Pro. page 17.
find a mean proportion between that 33. and 3. 10. and 12. facit 20. the
side of the Square required.

Otherwise square (...) 12. and 16. according to the eighth example, page 15.
facit 144 and 256. the sum of those Squares is 400. and the Root Quadrat of
it by Pro. 1. page r 8. is 20. as before, those extractions serve to wonderful
uses in finding the Diagonals of Rectangles, the Diameters and Axis of Solids,
the Area, Difference or Agregate of Figures, as well plain as solid.

A B is the breadth of a ditch 16. foot, B C the heigh of a wall 12. foot, the
length of a scaling Ladder to reach from A to C. would be as before 20.

A and C are two Towns, Alies West of the Meridian of C 16. miles, and C lies
North of the Parallel of A 12. miles, the distances of the two Towns would be
as before 20. miles, etc.

Pro. 4. How to encampe horse or foot, according to any proportion assigned.
Declaratio.
that the Flank to the Front shall be in proportion, as 3 to 5, how many shall
be in the Front, and how many in the Flank.

Bring 3. to 5. so against 24. in the moveable is 400. in the fixed,
Constructio.
the square Root of which is the Front viz. 20. divide the said 240. by the
Front, 20. the Quotient is 12. the Flank.

In mental reservation of a number, to find that number.


Further uses upon the Grammelogia in the resolution of Questions, touching
Interest, Purchases, valuation of Leases, and such like.

NOte that from 1. in the moveable, there is charactered 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.
9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. etc. all of equal distances, those serve
for the number of years as occasion requires.

Pro. 1. To find what a sum of money comes to, at the end of any number of
years, accounting 8. li. for 100. p^r Annum.
Declaratio.
So if 20. li. were forborne 12. years, how much does it come to allowing
Interest compound at 8. li. for 100. li.

Constructio.
Bring 1. in the moveable to 20. in the fixed, so right against 12. years in
the moveable you have 50. li. 4. 10. in the fixed. And so much will 20. li.
amount to being forborne 12. years.


The Instrument not removed, you may at one instant see the amount of the said
20. li. for any number of years of parts of a year; for right against the
time in the moveable, you have the answer of the money in the fixed.

Pro. 2. To find what a sum of money which is due any number of years to
come, is worth in ready money, allowing 8. li. for 100. li.
Declaratio.
So if the said 20. li. were due 12. years hence, what is it worth in Present.

Constructio.
This is only the converse of the former: bring therefore 12. years in the
moveable to 20. in the fixed, so right against 1. in the moveable is 7. li. 94.
100. in the fixed, which is about 7. li. 18. s. 3. d. and so much is able to
buy the said 20. li. to be received 12. years hence.

Pro. 3. A yearly Rent of a Lease, or a Pension to be sold for any number of
years, to find the worth thereof in ready money: Or the Rent for any number
of years being unpaid, to find what it amounts unto, a^counting 8. li. for
100. li. per Annum.
Declaratio.
Let a Lease or Pension of 20. li. per Annum be sold for ready money, which is in
being 12. years, how much is it worth? Bring 8. to 100. then right against 20.
li. in the moveable is 250. li. in the fixed; Constructio.
unto this 250. in the fixed bring 12. years; so right against 1. in the
moveable is 99. li. 3. 10. in the fixed, which taken out of the said 250. there
remains 150. li. 7. 10. the worth required.

If the Rent were behind unpaid 12 years.
THen bring 1. to the said 250. so right against 12. years in the moveable is
630. li. in the fixed, take the former 250. from this 630. li. it leaves 380.
li. and so much does the said Rent of 20. li. per Annum amount to forborne 12.
years at 8. li. for 100. li. per Annum.

Pro. 4. A sum of money borrowed, and a Lease engaged for that money, to
find how long the Lease ought to be kept.
Declaratio.
of 50. li. a year, how long shall the Rent be received, that neither be
damaged one by the other, accounting 8. li. for 100. li. per Annum.

Bring 8. to 100. so right against 50. in the moveable is 625. in the fixed:
Constructio.
from this 265. li. subtract the money borrowed, viz 300. li. it leaves 325. li.
then bring 1. to this 325. in the fixed; so right against the same 625. in the
fixed, is 8. years 5 10. in the moveable, and so long time shall the Lender of
the Money enjoy the Borrowers Lease, after 8. li. for 100. li. per Annum. This
may be inverted, knowing the Sum and time to find the Rent.

Pro. 5. A Lease to begin for years to come, and then to continue for any
number of years, to find the worth thereof in present, accounting Interest
Compound at 8. li. for ^00. li. per Annum.
Let a Lease of 40. li. per Annum begin 7. years hence, Declaratio.
and then to continue 10. years after; if it were to be sold, what is it
worth in ready money?

By the third Pro. find the worth thereof in the present for the 10. years,
facit, Constructio.
268. li. 4. 10. then by the second Pro. find what that 268. li. 4. 10. is
worth in present if it were to be received 7. years hence, facit, 156. li. 6
10. and so much is the said Lease of 40. li. per Annum worth, which is to
begin 7. years hence, and then to continue unto 10. years.

Thus I might have gone further in those matters, but I intended not to be
large in this Tract, only showing what weighty, and difficult matters in this
kind by the Grammelogia, or Mathematical Ring, may be easily and speedily
resolved.

Conclusion.
IF there be composed three Circles of equal thickness, A. B. C. so that the
inner edge of D and the outward edge of ^ be^ answerably graduated with
Logarithmall signs, and the outward edge of B and the inner edge of A with
Logarithmes; and then on the backside be graduated the Logarithmall Tangents,
and again the Logarithmall signs oppositly to the former graduations, it
shall be fitted for the resolution of Plain and Sphericall Triangles.

Example.
So if you move the Sign of 90. Degrees unto the Tropicall point in the fixed,
you have the Declination of any Degree of the Eclipticke only by an ocular
inspection, for right against the Suns longitude in the moveable amongst the
Signs, is the Suns declination in the fixed.

Again, in the (...) of Tangents, if you bring the complement of any Latitude
in the moveable to 45. in the fixed, you may at one instant have the time of
Sun rising or Sun setting for any Declination required in that Latitude; for
right against the Tangent of the Sans Declination, you have the fine of the
Suns ascentionall differen^e: and in plain Triangles the operations are
performed with like facility.

Hence from the form, I have called it a Ring, and Grammelogia by annoligie of
a Lineary speech; which Ring, if it were projected in the Unequal unto two yards
Diameter, or there abouts, and the line Decupled, it would work Trigonometrie
unto seconds, and give propo^tionall number^ unto six places only by an ocular
inspection, which would compendiate Astronomicall calculations, and be
sufficient for the Prosthaphaeresis of the Motions: But of this as God shall
give life and ability so health and time.

FINIS. This Instrument is made in Silver, or Brass for the Pocket, or at any
other bigness, over against Saint Clements Church without Temple Bar, by
Elias Allen.
CHARLES by the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all our loving Subjects whom it may concern greeting:
Whereas Richard Delamain, Teacher of the Mathematics, has presented unto Us
an Instrument called Grammelogia, or The Mathematical Ring, together with a
Book so entitled, expressing the use thereof, being his own Invention; We of
our Gracious and Princely favor have granted unto the said Richard Delamain
and his Assigns, Privilege, License, and Authority, for the sole Making,
Printing, and Selling of the said Instrument and Book: straightly forbidding
any other to Make, Imprint, or Sell, or cause to be Made, or Imprinted, or
Sold, the said Instrument or Book within any our Dominions, during the space
of ten years next ensuing the date hereof, upon pain of Our high displeasure.

Given under our hand and Signet at our Palace of Westminster, the fourth day
of January, in the sixth year of our Reign.
Upon his Ring.
AS in a secret Circle wrapped lies natures mysteries,
Which time brings forth, and industry makes plain to all men's eyes,
So that what erst was hard to find, at length is wrought with ease,
Rules of Proportion, the Roots Extraction, and these
With ocular inspection now: Also Triangles Plain
And Sphaericall; for Questions soon an Answer to obtain;
That it makes Arts laugh his quickness to see, then use this Ring,
The Circle where, hid Arts lie now themselves discovering.
If after times shall seek more ease than in this easiness
By Instrument, he makes Arts lame, with eases great excess.
By a Friend.
THe Egyptian Sages, who were wont to sing
In the Hiroglyphicks, their Philosophy;
Portrai'd the year in semblance of a Ring,
Cause so the year round in it self does lie.
Thy Mathematicke Ring is more profound,
A world of Art lies in that little Round.
FINIS.
To the Reader.
NOw by way of advertisment to the Reader, in this Circular projection of
Logarithmes, you may make use of the Projection of the Circles of the Ring upon
a Plain, having the feet of a pair of Compasses (but so that they be flat) to
move on the Center of that Plain, and those feet to open and shut as a pair
of Compasses (which some call a Sector abusively) now if the feet be opened to
any two terms or numbers in that Proj^ction, then may you move the first foot
to the third number, and the other foot shall give the Answer; and so moving
those feet along Circularly, as one foot passes by any number in the
Projection, the other foot shall show his proportional number in that
Projection; it has pleased some to make use of this way. But in this there is
a double labor in respect of that of the Ring, the one in fitting those feet
unto the numbers assigned, and the other by moving them about, in which a man
can hardly accomdate the Instrument with one hand, and express the
Proportionals in writing with the other. By the Ring you need not but bring one
number to another, and right against any other number is his Answer without any
such motion. But this or the former I leave to such as shall best affect them,
only the latter for Construction I account most facile, and for expedition most
excellent, and upon that I write, showing some uses of those Circles amongst
themselves, and conjoined with others, in the resolution of such Questions
which are ordinarily practiced in Astronomy, Horolographie, in plain Triangles
applied to Dimensions, Navigation, Fortification, etc. as a preparative ground
for a more ample work, and as a declaration of the admirable, and excellent
use of this Ring in expedition, and facility. But before I come to
Construction, I have thought it convenient by way introduction, to examine the
truth of the graduation of those Circles which may be from the ensuing Tables
and directions.

Of the Examination of the Graduation of the Circles of the Ring, which may
serve as an inducement and furtherance to the Learner, to fit and acquaint him
how with promptness to conceive of opposite numbers in the answering of
Questions following.
FIrst, to examine the Circle of Numbers, bring any number in the moveable to
half of that number in the fixed: so any number or part in the fixed shall
give his double in the moveable, and so may you try of the thirds, fourths,
etc. of numbers, vel contra.

2. Bring 2. in the moveable unto 3. in the fixed, so against 3. in the
moveable is 4. and 5. tenths in the fixed, against 4. and 5. tenths in the
moveable is 6. and 75. 100. in the fixed, and so may you go on in trying the
divisions of the Circle of Numbers in continual proportion to other numbers,
according to the Table A.

3. The Instrument not removed from the rectification of 2. unto 3. right
against 3. in the moveable is 4. and 5. tenths in the fixed, and against 4. in
the moveable is 6. in the fixed, but against 4. in the fixed is 2. and 66.
100ths in the moveable; against 5. in the moveable is 7. and 5. tenths in the
fixed, but against 5. in the fixed is 3. and 33. 100ths in the moveable, and so
may you proceed in examining farther, according to the Table B. in which M. at
that head of the Table signifies moveable, and F. at the head of the Table
signifies fixed, and so against the numbers under M. or F. is one another
answer.

4. Bring 3. in the moveable unto 2. in the fixed, so right against the sine of
90. in the moveable is 41. gr. 44. m. in the fixed; against 60. gr. is 41. gr.
02. m. against 75. gr. in the moveable is 40. gr. 05. m. in the fixed, and so
you may examine further, as in the Table C.

5. To examine the sines amongst them selves in continual proportion, as 6.
gr. to 7. gr. bring 6. gr. in the moveable to 7. gr. in the fixed, so right
against 7. gr. in the moveable is 8. gr. 10. m. in the fixed, and right against
this 8. gr. 10. m. in the moveable is 9. gr. 32. m. in the fixed, and so may
you go on in examining other sines on the Instrument in continual proportion,
according to the Table D.

6. The Instrument being at this stay against 10 gr. in the moveable as 11. gr.
41. in the fixed, but against 10. gr. in the fixed is 8. gr. 34. m. in the
moveable; against 15. gr. in the moveable is 17. gr. 34. m. in the fixed, but
against 15. gr. in the fixed is 12. gr. 50. m. in the moveable, and so may you
examine other sines, according to the Table E.

7. In the examination of the graduation of the Tangents: the Instrument not
removed right against the Tangent of 6. gr. in the moveable is the Tangent of
7. gr. and the sine of 7. gr. 3. m. in the fixed; against the Tangent of 7. gr.
in the moveable is the Tangent of 8. gr. 9 m. and the sine of 8. gr. 14. m. in
the fixed, against the Tangent of 8. gr. in the moveable is the Tangent of 9.
gr. 18. m. and the sine of 9. gr. 26. m. in the fixed, and so may you examine
further according to the Table G.

A M F 2 3 3 4. 5 4. 5 6. 75 6. 75 10. 10 10. 10 15. 2 15. 2 22. 8 22. 8 34. 2
34. 2 51. 2 51. 2 76. 9 76. 9 115. 4 C 90 41. 49 80 41. 02 75 40. 05 70 38. 47
65 37. 10 60 35. 16 55 33. 06 50 30. 42 45 28. 07 40 25. 22 35 22 29 30 19. 28
25 16. 22 20 13. 10 15 9. 56 10 6. 39 B M F 2 F 3 M 3 4. 5 3 2. 0 4 6. 0 4 2.
66 5 7. 5 5 3. 33 6 9. 0 6 4. 00 7 10. 5 7 4. 66 8 12. 0 8 5. 33 9 13. 5 9 6.
00 10 15. 0 10 6. 66 15 22. 5 15 10. 00 20 30. 0 20 13. 33 25 37. 5 25 16. 66
35 52. 5 35 23. 33 45 67. 5 45 30. 00 55 82. 5 55 36. 66 65 97. 5 65 43. 33 75
102. 5 75 50. 00 85 127. 5 85 56. 66 95 142. 5 95 63. 33 100 150. 0 10 66. 66 D
M F 6. 0 7. 0 7. 0 8. 10 8. 10 9. 32 9. 32 11. 08 11. 08 13. 00 13. 01 15. 13
15. 13 17. 50 17. 50 20. 55 20. 55 24. 35 24. 35 29. 20 29. 01 34. 27 34. 27
41. 15 41. 15 50. 15 50. 15 63. 41 E M F 6 F 7 M 10 11. 41 10 8. 34 15 17. 34
15 12. 50 20 23. 03 20 17. 04 25 29. 31 25 21. 15 30 35. 39 30 25. 24 35 41. 58
35 29. 28 40 48. 33 40 33. 27 45 55. 32 45 37. 20 50 63. 16 50 41. 04 55 72. 51
55 44. 38 60 47. 58 65 51. 00 70 53. 42 75 55. 56 80 57. 38 85 58. 42 90 59. 04
G M F F M F F M F F M F F T S T S T S T S 6 7. 0 7. 3 16 18. 29 19. 32 26 29.
38 34. 39 36 40. 16 57. 54 7 8. 9 8. 14 17 19. 37 20. 52 27 30. 43 36. 27 37
41. 18 61. 28 8 9. 18 9. 26 18 20. 45 22. 16 28 31. 48 38. 19 38 42. 20 65. 23
9 10. 28 10. 38 19 21. 52 23. 40 29 32. 52 40. 15 39 43. 22 70. 46 10 11. 37
11. 51 20 23. 00 25. 06 30 33. 57 42. 18 40 44. 22 78. 03 11 12. 46 13. 06 21
24. 07 26. 35 31 35. 00 44. 28 12 13. 55 14. 21 22 25. 14 28. 06 32 36. 04 46.
46 13 15. 04 15. 37 23 26. 20 29. 40 33 37. 09 49. 15 14 16. 12 16. 54 24 27.
26 31. 16 34 38. 11 51. 51 15 17. 21 18. 12 25 28. 52 32. 56 35 39. 14 54. 33

A Type of the Ringe and Scheme of this Logarithmall projection, the use
follows.
These Instruments are made in silver or Brass by John Allen near the Sauoy
in the strand

The mouable Compass

The f^^ ed Proiection on a plain

The mouable Proiection In a Ring M. mouable F. fixed



In Astronomy.
Pro. 1. The suns place or distance from the Aequinoctiall points known, to
find his Declination.
Constructio. BRing the sine of 90. in the moveable unto the sine of the
Tropicall point, viz. 23. gr. and a half in the fixed, so right against the
sine of the degree of the Suns nearest distance from or in the moveable is the
sine of the Suns declination of that degree in the fixed.

Declaratio. So if the Suns place where in the beginning of... or. which is 60.
gr. of distance from the Aequinoctiall points; right against this 60. gr. in
the moveable, is the Declination in the fixed, viz 20. gr. 12. m. if the
d^stance were 15 gr. 12. m. the Declination would be 6. gr. if 10. gr. of
distanceth ^ in the moveable gives 3. gr. 58. m. in the fixed, if the Sun
have 3. gr. of distance this in the moveable gives 1. gr. 12. m. in the fixed.

Otherwise you may turn the 3. gr. or such which are less) into minutes by
allowing 60. minutes to a degree which 3. gr. makes 180 m. minutes, this sought
out in the moveable amongst the Numbers gives 72. minutes in the fixed, which is
1. gr. 12. m. of Declination as before: But if you make a degree to contain
100. minutes or parts, then the 3. gr. will be 300. minutes or parts, so right
against this in the moveable amongst the Numbers is 1^0. in the fixed, which is
1. gr. and 20. hunderth of a gr. of Declination. The Instrument being not
removed, you may have the Declination for any other part of the Ecclipticke,
as for 1. minut for right against 60. seconds in the moveable (which is
answerable to 1. minut) is 24 seconds in the fixed, the declination belonging
to 1. minute, etc.

Pro. 2. To find the Suns amplitude, or distance of rising or setting from
the East or West knowing the Suns place and Latitude.
Constructio. Bring the sine of the Complement of the Latitude in the moveable
unto the sine of 23. gr. 30 m. in the fixed, so against the sine of the Suns
distance from or in the moveable is the sine of the Suns Amplitude Amplitude.
in the fixed.

Declaratio. So the Latitude being 51. gr. 30. m. the Complement is 38. gr. 30.
m. Bring this to the sine of 23. gr. 30. m. in the fixed: now if the Sun have
90. gr. of Longitude: right against this 90. in the moveable is 39 gr. 50. m. in
the fixed, the greatest Amplitude of the Sun in that Latitude.

If the Longitude were 70. 60. 50. 40. 30. 20. 10. or 5. right against any of
these numbers in the moveable (or any other) is the Suns Amplitude in the
fixed, viz. against the Longitude of 70 is 37. 00 60 33. 42 50 29. 23 40 24. 19
30 18. 38 20 12. 39 10 6. 23 5 3. 12

As for any Longitude which is near the Equinoctial point, the Amplitude of
it may be had on the Numbers, as in the former Example.

In Astronomy. But if the Declination of the Sun, or a Star be known; the
Amplitude may be found thus.
Constructio. BRing the Sine of the Complement of the Latitude in the moveable
unto the sine of 90. in the fixed, so right against the sine of the Sun or
Stars declination in the moveable, is the sine of the Sun or Stars
Amplitude in the fixed.

Declaratio. So if the Latitude were 51. gr. 30. m. the Complement is 38. gr.
30. m. bring this in the moveable unto the sine of 90. in the fixed, and if the
Declination of the Sun or a Star were 20. gr. right against this 20. in the
moveable is the Amplitude in the fixed, viz. 33. gr. 20. m.

The Instrument not removed you may for any Declination have the Amplitude of
it: for right against the Declination in the moveable is the Amplitude in the
fixed, etc. and there may you see what Declination such Stars have, which
never rise, or set in that Latitude.

This Proposition may be inverted and applied to practice in Navigation to
find the Latitude, by knowing the Suns place and Amplitude, for if you bring
the degree of the Suns Amplitude amongst the Sines in the moveable, unto the
degree of the Suns place in the fixed; right against 23. gr. 30. m. in the
moveable, is the degree of the Complement of the Latitude in the fixed.

Pro. 3. In any Latitude to find what higth the Sun most have to be due East
or West knowing the Suns place.
Constructio. Bring the sine of the Latitude in the moveable unto the sine of
23. gr. 30. m. in the fixed; so right against the sine of the Suns distance
from or in the moveable, is the Sine of the Suns he^ght in the fixed: when he
is due East or West.

Declaratio. So if the Latitude were 51. gr. 30. m. bring the Sine 51. gr. 30.
m. in the moveable, unto the Sine of 23. gr. 30. m. in the fixed: and if the
Suns place were from or 90. gr. 80. 70. 60. 50. 40. 30. 20. or 10. gr.

G. M. Right against this 90 In the moveable is 30. 38 in the fixed, the Suns
height answerable to his place. 80 30. 07 70 28. 37 60 26. 11 50 23. 00 40 19.
08 30 14. 46 20 10. 02 10 5. 04

In Astronomy.
HEre note that if the Zenith be between the Tropickes, that then the Sun
sometimes will not be East or West, and what degrees those are you may easily
try, for any Latitude, by moving the moveable softly along, that as the sine of
any Latitude in the moveable passes by the sine of the Tropicall point in the
fixed, so any degree in the moveable that passes by the sine of 90. in the
fixed, does show that degree to be the greatest degree of Longitude in the
Eclypticke from or that the Sun will be due East or West in that Latitude, and
if the Instrument stay at that Elevation, any degree of Altitude in the fixed
does show his degree of Longitude in the moveable, or any degree of Longitude
in the moveable will show at what Altitude the Sun is due East or West in the
fixed, for the one is opposite to the other. So if the Latitude were 23. gr 30.
m. every degree of Longitude in the moveable would give the same degree of
Altitude in the fixed to be due East or West; so if the Sun be in Longitude
20. gr from or then the Suns A^titude would be also 20. degrees when it comes
due East or West: if the Suns place be 50. from or then the Altitude would be
50. to make due East, etc. But if the Latitude were less than 23. degrees, 30.
m. as admit 15. degrees bring the sine of this 15. in the moveable unto the
sine of 23. degrees, 30. in the fixed: so right against 90. degrees in the
fixed is 40. degrees, 28. m. in the moveable: so when the Sun comes to be in
Longitude, from or above 40 degrees 28. m. that is beyond the 10. degrees, 28.
m. of the Sun will not be East or West for more than 100. days, until he
come to the 59. degree, 32. m. of, and then every day after the Sun will
cross the Vertical Circle of East or West, until the S^nne pass the other
Equinoctial point of.

If the declination of the Sun or the Star be known, you may find the
Altitude thereof at the point of East in any Latitude by this Rule.
Bring the sine of the Latitude in the moveable unto the sine of 90. in the
fixed: so right against the sine of any Declination in the moveable is the sine
of the Suns Altitude in the fixed.

Hence you may conceive, that if the Zenith be between the Tropicks, then the
Declination that is equal to the Latitude, shows the greatest Altitude to be
East: and any greater Declination shows you that the Sun will not be East:
but if the Declination be less than the Latitude, then right against it in
the moveable is the Suns Altitude in the fixed.

In Astronomy.
Pro. 4. Knowing the height of the Sun at the point of East or West, in any
Latitude to find the hour of the day.
Construct. BRing the Tangent of 45. in the moveable unto the Sine of the
complement of the Latitude in the fixed; so right against the Tangent of the
Suns Altitude in the moveable, is the Tangent of the hour from six

Declaratio. Let the Latitude be 51. gr. 30. m. and the Suns Altitud^ bring the
Tangent of 45. gr. in the moveable unto the Sine of 38. gr. ^ed, so right
against the Tangent of 14. gr. 45. m. in the moveable is 9. gr. 18. m. in the
fixed, which reduced into Time, by allowing to every degree 4. minutes makes
37. minutes of time: so the Sun was due East that day 37. minutes after 6. in
the morning, or due West 37. minutes before 6. in the afternoon.

The Instrument not removed, you have the time of the Suns being East or West
for any other Altitude: for right against the Suns Altitude in the moveable is
the degree of time that the Sun comes due East or West in the fixed.

Or if the declination of the Sun be known. Bring the Tangent of 45. in the
moveable unto the Tangent of the Latitude in the fixed (if it be greater than
45. gr.) so right against the Tangent of any Declination in the moveable is the
degree of time amongst the Sines in the fixed, that the Sun or Star will
be due East or West according to that declination; but if the Latitude be
less than 45. gr. then bring the Tangent of the Latitude in the moveable unto
the Tangent of 45. gr. in the fixed, so right against the Tangent of the
Declinat^on in the moveable is the degree of time in the fixed amongst the
Sines. Thus if the Latitude were 70. bring the Tangent of 45 unto the Tangent
of 70. in the fixed, so right against the Tangent of the Suns Declinat^on in
the moveable admit 23. gr. 30. m. is the sine of 9. gr. 6. m. the Instrument
not removed, you have the time of the Suns coming East or West, for any
other Declination, for right against the Declination in the moveable are the
degrees of time in ^he fixed.

But if you move the moveable softly along, as the Tangent of 45. in the
moveable passes by the Tangent of any Latitude in the fixed, so the degrees of
Declination in the moveable passes by their degrees of time in the fixed,
amongst the Sines at what hour any such degrees are due East or West, until
the Tangent of 45. in the moveable be opposite unto 45. gr. in the fixed: for
then as the Tangent of any Latitude less than 45. in the moveable passes by
the Tangent of 45. in the fixed, so any degree of Declination in the moveable
will show his degree of time amongst the Sines in the fixed, that the Sun is
due East or West.

This Proposition of finding the hour of the Suns being East or West, may
serve to great use both on Sea and Land, in rectifying of Glasses, Watches, or
such like, to keep and Regulate the account of Time.

In Astronomy.
Pro. 5. To find the time of the Sun Rising or Setting in any Latitude, the
Suns declination known.
Constructio. BRing the Tangent of 45. gr. in the moveable unto the Tangent of
the Latitude in the fixed (if it be under 45. but if the Latitude be (...)
above 45. then bring the Tangent of the Complement of Latitude in the moveable
unto the sine of 90. in the fixed.) So against the degree of Declination
amongst the Tangents in the moveable, is the degree of the Ascentionall
difference among the Sines on the fixed.

Declaratio. So if the Latitude were 20. gr. and the Declination were 10. gr.
Bring the Tangent of 45. gr. in the moveable unto the Tangent of 20. gr. in the
fixed, so against the Tangent of 10. gr. in the moveable is 3. gr. 41. m.
amongst the Sines in the fixed, which being reduced into time, makes near 15.
m. and this added unto 6. (if the Sun have South declination, gives the Sun
Rising to be a quarter past 6. and that 15. minutes taken from 6. gives the
Suns setting: But if the Sun have North Declination; in stead of Addition,
use Substraction, etc. The Instrument not removed, you may at one instant have
the difference of Ascension for any Declination, for right against the
Declination in the moveable is the difference of Ascension in the fixed. Or
contrarily, the difference of Ascension known, you have the Declination
answerable unto it: In like manner may you work for any Star. Or you may
speedily compare the longest day of any two, three, or more places by knowing
their Latitudes, for having rectified the Instrument according to the former
directions, right against the Tropicall point in the moveable, viz. the Tangent
of 23. gr. 30. m. is the Sine of the greatest ascentionall difference in the
fixed for that Latitude; by which according to the former directions you may
have the Sun setting, this doubled as before gives the lengest or shortest
day for that place. Hence for Practice, if you move the moveable softly along,
as the Tangent of 45. gr. in the moveable, passes by the Tangent of any degree
of Latitude in the fixed, so the Tropicall point in the moveable, will pass by
the Sine of the greatest difference of Ascension in that Latitude.

G. G. M. So as 45. passes by the Latitude of 25 The Tropicall point, viz. 23.
gr. 30. m. will pass by 11. 41 The greatest difference of Ascension for those
Latitudes. 30 14. 32 35 17. 43 40 21. 24 45 25. 27 50 31. 12 55 38. 23 60 48.
51 65 68. 49

In Dyalling.
Pro. 1. To find the distance of the hours, in horizontall plains for an
oblique Sphaere.
Constructio. BRing the Tangent of 45 gr. in the moveable unto the sine of the
latitude in the fixed, so right against the degrees of the hours, in a right
Sphaere amongst the Tangent in the moveable under 45. gr. are the degrees of
the distances of the hours, from 12. amongst the Tangents on the fixed for an
oblique Sphaere, but if the degrees of the hours be more than 45. then right
against the Tangent of those degrees in the fixed, are the degrees of the hour
distances in the moveable.

Note, that the hours in a right Sphaere are equal, the one unto another,
viz. 15. gr. for one hour, 30. gr. for two hours, 45. gr. for three hours,
etc. hence here after they are called equal hours, etc.

Declaratio. So if the Latitude were 51. gr. 30. m bring the Tangent of 45 in
the moveable unto the sine of 51. gr. 30. m. in the fixed, so right against 15.
gr. in the moveable amongst the Tangents is 11. gr. 50. m. in the fixed amongst
the Tangent, and so much is the distance of the hour of 1. or 11. from 12. in
the Latitude of 51. gr. 30. m. The Instrument not removed you may have any
other hou^^ distance, half hours, quarters, etc.

For right against those equal hours, viz. 15 Are the unequal hour distances,
viz. 11. gr. 50. m. For the hour of 1 or 1^ 30 24. 20 2 10 45 38. 03 3 9 60
53. 35 4 8 75 71. 05 5 7 90 90. 00 6 6

By inverting this, you may try for what Latitude ordinary pocket dialls are
made, knowing the distance between the hour of 11. and 12. for if you bring
the Tangent of 15. gr. in the moveable unto the Tangents of the distance in the
fixed, right against the Tangent of 45. gr. in the moveable is the sine of the
Latitude in the fixed.

Pro. 2. To find the distance of the hours for a direct south Dyall in an
oblique Sphaere.
Constructio. This differs (...) little from the former, only, here bring the
Tangent of 45. gr. in the moveable unto the fine Complement of the Latitude in
the fixed, so right against the Tangent of the degrees of the equal hours,
are the Tangents of the degrees of the hour distances in the oblique sphaere.

Declaratio. So if the Latitude were as before 51. gr. 30. m. bring the Tangent
of 45. gr. in the moveable, unto the sine of 38. gr. 30. m. in the fixed; so
right against the Tangent.

Of those degrees, viz. 15 Are the degrees of the hour distances, viz. 9. gr.
28. m. 30 19. 45 45 31. 55 60 47. 10 75 66. 42 90 90. 00

Now if you move the moveable softly along as the Tangent of 45. gr. passes by
the sine Complement of any Latitude, so the degrees of the equal hours, will
show the degrees of the unequal hour distances, in comparison of one Latitude
to another. This may be otherwise represented in this fundamental Diagram, if
EZ, and EH be divided out of the Table of natural Tangents, so that each
Radius represent 90. gr. and so to move upon E, then may you place H to P, and
as you move H from P to increase in Latitude, so the meridians passing by E H
will show the hour distances in a Horizontall plain, and the hour distances
in E Z for a vertical plain, and this kind of projection and motion may
serve to other excellent purposes, etc.

In Dyaling.
Pro. 3. Knowing the Declination of a vertical plain, and the latitude of the
place, to find what Angle the Axis makes with the plain, commonly called the
height of the style.
Constructio. BRing the Sine of 90. in the moveable unto the sine Complement of
the latitude in the fixed, so right against the sine Complement of the
Declination, in the moveable, is the degree of the styles height amongst the
sines in the fixed.

The Instrument not removed, you may at one Instant see the styles Altitude for
all Declinations in that Latitude: for right against the Complement of the
Declination in the moveable, is the styles height in the fixed.

Declaratio. So if the Latitude were 51. gr. 30. m. the complement of it is 38.
gr. 30. m. which seek amongst the sines in the fixed, and bring 90. gr. to it,
now if the Declination of the plain were 10. 20. 30 40. 50. 60. 70. 80. etc.

The Complement of those are. 80 So right against these in the moveable are 37.
49 in the fixed the styles he^ght answerable to these Declinations. 70 35. 48
60 32. 37 50 28. 22 40 23. 35 30 18. 08 20 12. 18 10 6. 12

Pro. 4. Knowing the Latitude of the place, and the Declination of a vertical
plain to find the number of degrees betw^ene the Meridian of the place, and
the Meridian of the plain, which may be called the difference of Meridians.
Constructio. Bring the Tangent of 45. gr. in the moveable unto the sine of the
Latitude in the fixed (which admit 51. gr. 30. m.) so against this 45. (...) is
the Tangent of 38. gr. 3. m. in the fixed: So if the Declination of the Plain
be 38. gr. 3. m. then the difference of meridians is 45. gr. But if the
Declination be less then this 38. gr. 3. m. right against the Tangent of any
degree for such a Declination in the fixed is the degree of the difference of
meridians in the moveable.

So if the Declination were 35 Right against these in the fixed are 41. 49 In
the moveable, the difference of meridians answerable to those Declinations. 30
36. 25 25 30. 44 20 24. 56 15 18. 54 10 12. 42 5 6. 23

If the Declination be above 38. gr. 3. m. you may move the Tangent of 45.
softly alonge by the Tangentiall degrees of Declination in the fixed, until
45. gr. in the moveable be opposite to 45. gr. in the fixed, and as it passes
by any Declination, the sine of the Latitude in the fixed, will give the
difference of Meridians amongst the Tangents in the moveable. Lastly, if the
Declination be above 45. gr. then the Declination most be accounted amongst ^he
degrees of the moveable, and if you move the moveable softly along: As the
degree of any Declination, passes by the Tangent of 45 gr. in the fixed: so
the Tangent of the difference of Meridians in the moveable passes by the sine
of the Latitude in the fixed, etc.

Pro. 5. To find the hour distances in Dyalling in a Declining plain by
knowing the former, viz. the styles height, and the difference of Meridians.
Declaratio. LET the Declination of a Plain be S. W. 50. gr. according to the
former Instruction, the styles height would be 23. gr. 35. m. and the
difference of Meridians 56 gr. 43. m. Now before the hour distances can be
known which are always unequal, there may be made a Table of equal hours
thus.

First, place down 56. gr. 43. m. the difference of Meridians against 12. as
in the Table, then by adding 15. gr. unto this difference of Meridians, viz. to
this 56. gr. 43. m. it makes 71. gr. 43. m. for the distance between the hour
of 11. and the Meridian of the plane: unto this 71. gr. 43. m. add another 15.
gr. makes 86. gr. 43. m. for the hour distance between 10. and the Meridian
of the Plain: But for the hour of 1. 2. 3. that 15. gr. must be taken from
the said 56. gr. 43. m. so the hour distance of 1. is 41. gr. 43. m. the hour
distance of 2. is 26. gr. 43. m. the 10 86. 43 81. 50 11 71. 43 50. 20 12 56 43
31. 20 1 41. 43 19. 35 2 26. 43 11. 22 3 11. 43 4. 45 4 3. 17 1. 15 5 18. 17 7.
32 6 33. 17 14. 35 7 48. 17 24. 10 8 63. 17 38. 25 hour distance of 3. is 11.
gr. 43 m. now because 15. gr. cannot be taken out of 11. gr. 43. m. take this
out of that, so the hour distance of 4. will be 3. gr. 17. m. now unto this
add 15. gr. makes 18 gr. 17. m. for the hour of 5. then add 15. gr. to that,
and so prosecute the Table which may be called the Table of equal hours from
the Meridian of the plain.

Now to find the true hour distances, bring the Tangent of 45. gr. in the
moveable unto the sine of the styles height in the fixed, viz. 23. gr. 35. so
right against the Tangent of any equal hour in the moveable under 45. gr. is
the Tangent of the true hour distance in the fixed A. But if the equal hour
distance be above 68. gr. 12. m. (which is right against 45. gr. in the
moveable) then right against the equal hour distance in the fixed, is the
true hour distance in the moveable B. Lastly, if the equal hour distances be
between 45. gr. and 68. gr. 12. m. then move the moveable softly along, and as
the Tangent of any equal hour in the moveable passes by the sine of the
styles ^e^ght in the fixed, so right against the Tangent of 45. gr. in the
moveable is the Tangent of the true hour distance in fixed.

So the equal hour distances being A 3. 17 The true hour distances would be
1. 15 18. 17 7. 32 33. 17 14. 35 B 86. 43 81. 50 71. 43 50. 20 C 48. 17 24. 10
56. 43 31. 20 63. 17 38. 25

Having gotten the true hour distances from the Meridian of the Plain, they
may be placed against the hours as in the Table, and protracted thus, draw the
hour of 12. C. M. and on C. describe a Semicircle: now seeing in the Table
that the Meridian of the Plain is from the hour of 12. in its true distance
31. gr. 20. m. protract it in the Circular Arc from D. to S. (because of West
declination) otherwise contrary, and draw C. S for the Substiler; from this S.
protract all the hours distances, as S. R. 4. gr. 45. m. for the hour of 3.
S. Q. 11. gr. 22. m. for the hour of 2. etc. then may we draw the hour lines
CN. CO. CP. CQ. CR. CT. CV. CW. CX. CO. and upon the said CS. place the style
A. B. C. perpendicular to the plain, so it shall be fitted for the casting of
shadows upon the said hour lines,

Of Plain Triangles. Praecognita.
Theoreme. 1. IF a right line fall upon a right line, or if the side of an
Angle be augmented to make another Angle, those two Angles put together are
equal to two right angles, that is twice 90. or 180. gr. by the thirtenth of
the first of Eve. therefore knowing one of those Angles, the other is also
known* So in the Triangle A B C augmenting the angular side B A to R. by the
line R B and C A there is made two Angles, viz. C A B. and C A R. which
together make 180. gr. and seeing the Angle C A B. is assumed to be 30. gr.
necessarily by the said thirtenth Proposition, the other Angle C A R shall be
150. gr.

Theoreme 2. The three Angles of any plain Triangle either Right, or Oblique
by the 32. of the first of Euc. are equal to two right Angles, therefore one
acute Angle known in a right angled Triangle, and two Angles known in an
Oblique Angled Triangle, the third Angle is likewise known: hence in the right
angled Triangle A B C knowing the Angle at A. 30. gr. the Angle at C most be
60. gr. And so in the Oblique Triangle A H I. the Angle at A and I put together
being 135. the Angle at H must be 45. gr. etc.

Propositio. I. In any Right Angled Triangle, knowing One Acute Angle, and a
side opposite to either of the Angles, or the Hypotenusae, and one side to find
the rest. Oblique Angled Two Angles, and a side, or two sides and one Angle
opposite to either of those sides

Axiom 1. The Axiom for the resolution of this proposition is thus.
The sides in all such Triangles, bear proportion the one to the other, as the
sines of their opposite Angles do. Or the sines of the Angles are directly
proportional to their opposite sides, by the seven and twentieth of the first
Book of Regiomontanus, the thirtenth Chap. of the 1. of Copernicus, and by the
second Axiom of the third book of Pitiscus.

That is, the side A B (in the first Triangle) is in proportion to B C, as the
sine of the Angle at C is to the sine of the Angle at A, or as A B. to A C. so
the sine of the Angle at C. to the sine of the Angle at B. which are the
opposite Angles of those sides: Again in the oblique angled Triangle A D E, as
the side A E is to E D, so is the sine of the Angle at D. to the sine of the
Angle at A, or as the sine of the Angle at H, (In the fourth Triangle, is to
the sine of the Angle at A, so is the side A I, to the si^^ I H, etc.

And here note generally, that in the resolution of such Triangles there is
three things given (as before said) by which a fourth is found, according to the
method of the Golden Rule. But the disposing of the said three terms, is
primarily, and principaly to be considered.

How to dispose the three Terms known in any of the former Triangles fit for
operation.
FIrst, if a side be required in a right, or oblique Triangle, and a side be
known, and the Angles opposite to those sides be also known: the Angle
opposite to the side known shall have the first place of the Golden Rule, and
the Angle opposite to the side required may have the second place of the Golden
Rule, and the side known the third place.

Secondly, if an Angle be required, and an Angle known with the sides opposite
to those Angles, then the side opposite to the Angle known shall have the
first place of the Golden Rule, the side opposite to the Angle required may
have the second place of the Golden Rule, and the Angle known shall have the
third place: the disposing of the Terms thus considered, the Angles have
reference to the Circle of Sines upon the Ring, and the sides to the Circle of
Numbers.

Example. Let the side BC. in the Rect-Angle Tri-Angle be required, knowing the
side AB. 25. and the Angles at A and C. 30. gr. and 60. gr. therefore by the
former. As the Sine of the Angle at C. 60. gr. to the Sine of the Angle at A.
30. gr. so the side AB. 25. to the side BC. 14. and 43. 100. and so of the
rest.

The construction by the Ring is thus.
Bring 60. gr. amongst the Sines in the moveable to the Sine Complement of it
in the fixed, viz. 30. gr. so right against AB. 25. in the Circle of Numbers in
the moveable is 14. and 43. 100. in the fixed. But if the side AB. had been
any other number, you might instantly have the said BC. according to the same
proportion.

Here note generally, that if the two first Terms be upon the Circle of Sines,
the other two terms are then upon the Circle of Numbers, vel contra. *

Note further, that in all Trigonometrie, the terms or parts given either
Angles or sides, are noted with a small stroke of the Pen thus -- and the
Terms or parts required either in the Angles or in the sides, thus O. so the
sides AB. AD. AE. ^^. with the Angles at A. are given the sides AC. CB. A^. and
^^. and the Angles at E. and G. are demanded; now the mutual proportion of
these parts one unto another, is according to the former Axiom; by which
infinite propositions may be resolved of admirable consequence, lying under
the habit of some one of those whose excellent use in ordinary Practical
things, I will illustrate in several kinds by sundry propositions; first, In
Dementions; secondly, in Fortification; thirdly, in Navigation; fourthly, in
Dyalling, as follows.

Upon Plain Triangles in Dementions. How to measure an Inaccessible height
situated upon a Hill, the Practice being not upon a Plain.
THe example upon this I will take from mine own observations which I made
upon one of the goodliest Hills in this Kingdom, which belongs to Sir Richard
Newport in Shropshire, called the Wreaken, not far from Shrewsbury, which
Hill I found to be near 6. miles and a half in Circuit, and in the
Perpendicular height 995. foot, as follows.

Declaratio. Let the figure P. Q. S. N. represent the body of the Hill, and A B
E C D a part of the side of it, now admit in the side of the Hill as at C, be a
spring of water: and let a Well be sunk from the Top of the Hill at D to be
levill with the spring C, viz. at R: here it may be demanded how deep this
Well may be sunk, viz. D R, how far it is from the spring C, to the botume
of the Well R, and how far it is from the said spring C, to the Top of the
Hill D.

Constructio. First, with conveniencie I made choice of a Station at A, and
there rectified my Instrument upon his Stay, or Rest, from thence I caused to
be measured to B 20. Chains, and at B I caused another Stay or Rest to be
erected of the same height that the former at A was: Then loking from A to B.
by the Sights of the Instrument, I found the Angle of Ascent B A X. 4. gr. 44.
m. and so I had the rectangled triangle A X B. in which A B was known 20.
Chains, or 1320 feet with the Angle at A 4. gr. 44. m. and therefore the Angle
at B by the second Theorem Pagr. 64. is 85. gr. 16. m. and the Angle at X by
the same is 90. gr. and this is opposite to the side known, viz. A B. 20.

Now according to the Rule of operation by the Ring Page. 65. if the Sine of
85. gr. 16. m. in the moveable be brought to the sine of 4. gr. 44. m. in the
fixed, right against 20. in the Circle of Numbers in the moveable is 1. Chain,
and 65. 100. of a Chain in the fixed, which according to Page the ninth is 108
Foot, and 9. tenth. this shows that the station at B was so many Foot
higher, than that at A. By the same Rule A X. would be found to be 19. Chains,
and 93. hundreths of a Chain, or 1315. Foot, and 5. tenths, those two
dementions I first sought out.

Secondly, before I removed from A. I observed the Angle C A H. which I found
to be 12. gr. 8. m. and also the Angle D A H. which was 15. gr. 55. m. those
Angles I noted down, and then going from A to B. there I rectified my
Instrument as I did formerly at A. and there I observed the Angle C B Y. which
I found to be 16. gr. 45. m. and the Angle D B O. to be 22. gr. 12. m. thus for
the observation.

But according to the first Theoreme Page. 64. if particularly those Angles be
taken from 180. gr. leaves the angle G B C. 163. gr. 15. m. and the angle G B
D. 157. gr. 48. m. unto these several Angles, Add the Angle B A X. 4. gr. 44.
m. so have you the obtuse angle A B C. 167. gr. 59. m. And the obtuse Angle A B
D: 162. gr. 32. m. And seeing formerly that the Angle C A H was 12. gr. 8. m.
and the Angle D A H was 15. gr. 55. m. From either of those Angles I subtract
the Angle B A X, viz. 4. gr. 44. m. leaves the Angle C A B. 7. gr. 24, and the
Angle D A B 11. gr. 11. m. By which in the oblique Triangle A B D, and A B C
are known in each of them two Angles, and so consequently by the a^oresaid
second Theoreme, Page 64. The other Angles are also known (viz.) the Angle A C
B, 4. gr. 37. m. and the Angle A D B 6 gr. 16. m.

NOw by the before going first Axiom seeing that in the Triangles A B D, all the
Angles are known, and one side to wit A B. 20. the side A D may be also known.

Constructio. Bring the sine of the Angle A D B 6. gr. 16. m. in the moveable
unto the sine of the Angle A B D. 1^2. gr. 31. m. (that is to the Sine of the
Complement of that Angle, viz. 17. gr. 29. m.) in the fixed, so right against
20. in the moveable amongst the Numbers is 54. Chains and 93. 100. the. in the
fixed, which in feet is 3625. and 6. tenths. and so far it was from the eye
at A to the top of the hill at D.

Thirdly, in the Rectangled Triangle A H D knowing as before said the Angle D A
H 15. gr. 55. m. by the second Theoreme Page 64. all the other Angles are
known, viz. A D H 74. gr. 4. m. A H D 90. and seeing by the last work that A
D was found to be 54. Chains, and 93 100ths. the other part^ of the Triangle
by the before said Axiom will be likewise known. For the Instrument not
removed the Sine of 90. is against the Sine of 15. gr. 55. m. and right against
54. and 93. 100ths. is 15. Chains, and 07. 100ths. of a Chain, which by Page
the ninth makes 995. foot the higth of the hill. In like manner may you find
the other side of the Triangle viz. A H, that is from the eye under the top of
the hill, viz. 52. Chains, and 82 hunderths, or 3486. foot, and 4. tenths.

Fourthly, in the Oblique Triangle A B C. all the Angles are known (as before)
with the side A B, and therefore the side B C would be found to be 32.
Chains, or 2113. foot.

Fifthly, in the rect angled Triangle B Y C the Angle C B Y was formerly known^
to be 16. gr. 45. m. the Complement of which is the Angle B C Y. 73. gr. 15. m.
and the side C B was formerly found to be 32. Chains. therefore by before said
first Axiom of plain Triangles, the other sides of the Triangle, viz. B Y.
will be found to be 30. Chains, and 65. hunderths. or. 2023. foot, and 3
tenths, and the side C Y. to be 9. Chains, and 23 hunderths, or 608. foot,
and 9. tenths.

Sixthly, seeing B X. is equal unto Y Q. unto the said C Y. 608. foot, and 9.
tinths, add. B X. formerly found, viz. 108. foot, and 9 tinths makes Q C. 717.
foot, and 8. tenths. but this Q C. is equal to H R. which taken from the
higth of the whole hill D H, viz. 995. foot leaves D R. 277. foot, and 2.
tenths, the depth of the well.

Seventhly, for as much as B Y was found to be 2023. foot, and 3. tenths.
which is equal to X Q and A X being as before 1315. foot, 5. tenths, those
two put to^ether makes A Q 3338. foot, and 8. tenths, which taken from A H,
which was ^ormerly found to be 3486. foot, 4. tenths leaves Q H. 147. foot.
6. tenths, which is equal to C R. the distance between the spring C, and the
botome of the well R.

Eighthly, and lastly knowing D R. 277. foot, and 2. tenths, and C R 147.
foot, and 6. tenths C D is found to be 313. and 8. tenths, according to the
first Proposition, Page 19ths. the example being the same with the second
Proposition: thus for the Isntrumental way: such as desir^ to examine the
work by numbers may proceed by the Notes here under specified.

In Trianguli. AXB Data BAX 4. gr. 44. m. Quaeritur A X. 1315. and 5. 10ths. A
B. 1320. B X. 108. and 9. 10ths. ABD A B. 1320. A D. 3625. and 6. 10ths. B A D.
11. gr. 11. m. 43. s. ABD. 162. gr. 31. m. 45. s. AHD D A H. 15 gr. 55. m 43.
s. D H. 995. A D. 3625. and 6. 10ths. A H. 3486. and 4. 10ths. ABC C A B. 7.
gr. 24. m. B C. 2113. A B C. 167. gr. 59. A B. 1320. C B Y. 16. gr. 45. m. B Y.
2023. and 3. 10ths. B C. 2113. C Y. 608. and 9. 10ths. CRD R D. 227. and 2.
tenths. C D. 383. and 8. 10th C R. 147. and 6. tenths.

Upon his Ring.
AS in a secret Circle wrapped lies natures mysteries,
Which time brings forth, and industry makes plain to all men's eyes,
So that what erst was hard to find, at length is wrought with ease,
Rules of Proportion, the Roots Extraction, and the^e
With ocular inspection now: Also Triangles Plain
And Sphaericall; for Questions soon an Answer to obtain;
That it makes Art laugh his quickness to see, then use this Ring,
The Circle where, hid Arts lie now themselves discovering.
If after times shall seek more ease than in this easiness
By Instrument, he makes Art lame, with eases great excess.
By a Friend.
THe Egyptian Sages, who were wont to sing
In the Hiroglyphicks, their Philosophy;
Portrai'd the year in semblance of a Ring,
Cause so the year round in it self does lie.
Thy Mathematicke Ring is more profound,
A world of Art lies in little Round.
FINIS.
DELAMAIN

IN circularem Logdrythmorum projectionem adauctam (ut in fine libri, Anno.
1630. praelo commissi promissum erat) viam demonstantem qua continua circulorum
decuplatione aut alio modo, adhuc magis augeatur, ita vt operationes
Trigonometricae fiant ad minuta, numerique proportionales, and radices dentur
ad quinque aut sex locos idque motu circulari, and tantum oculari inspectione.



How to operate, in the finding of Proportionalls by my Logarythmall Projection
of Circles enlarged, either by a mooveable and fixed Circle, or by a single
Projection, with an Index at the Peripheria, or Center.
THe way of operation is drawn from the nature of Proportional Logarythmes,
that as they keep equal differences, so in a lineary or Circular
Isntrumental projection of these Logarythmes, Proportional numbers shall
always have equal distances, which as a fundamental ground may serve to the
more learned both for a full demonstration, and direction in operation.

But to make things more obvious, and to remoove such scruples as may arise in
working by this Projection; the numbering ^f the Circles especially is to be
considered, that is either by augm^^^ation or diminution, in continuation or
discontinuation, and th^^ ^ath relation to the line of Conjunction E. T. which
shows the breaches of the Circle, or the uniting or continuing of the parts:
which multiplicitie of Circles, must be conceived to be but the parts of one
Circle (as before amply in the Epistle to the Reader was specified touching
this projection) and so continued or discontinued, by ascending or descending
on this or that side of the line of conjunction, as by the succession of the
Graduations, or divisions in those Circles is most evident and conspicuous:
this well premised:

Const^uctio. Bring the first number in the mooveable, to the second n^mber in
the fixed, and mark the several revolutions or Circles between them
ascending or descending; for then the fourth Proportional is had on the fixed,
right against the third number in the mooveable by the same number of
revolutions or Circles ascending or descending, as was between the first and
second numbers.

So if the line of conjunction on the mooveable, be on the right or left side
on the line of Conjunction on the fixed, and the first and second numbers be
between them, and also the third, or all these three numbers be not between
them, the fourth number or proportional is had without any consideration, but
only by the same number of Circles, as was between the first and second
numbers. But if the third number be on the otherside of the line of
Conjunction, and that the Proportionalls did augment, or diminish, the same
number of Circles or revolutions accounted ascending or descending from the
third number, will likewise show the fourth proportional required.

Or without considering the absolute revolutions, you may operate by the
difference of Circles noted on the single Index thus.
Bring the first number in the mooveable unto the second number in the fixed,
and mark the difference of Circles, either ascending or descending between
them; then whenever in operation the said first and second number, and also
the third number are neither of them between the lines of Conjunctions, or all
of them are between them, then the fourth proportional is had in the fixed
right against the third number in the mooveable, by the same difference of
Circles ascending or descending, as was between the first and second numbers.

But if the line of conjunction on the moveable, be on the right side of the
line of conjunction on the fixed, and the first number be in a lower Circle
then the second and be not between the lines of Conjunctions, but the third,
be between the lines of conjunctions and not the third
then the fourth proportional is in one Circle more less
then the difference of Circles between the first and second numbers. But if
the first number be in a higher Circle then the second, then the difference
more will be less, and that which is less more.

Contrarily, if the line of Conjunction on the mooveable be on the left side
of the line of Conjunction on the fixed, the operation is the converse of the
former.

The like may be observed in operation by the single Projection enlarged, with
a double Index to move on the Peripheria, or Center of a Circle, if in stead of
moving one number to another, you extend the feet of the Index, as follows.

An Example of the operation upon the Projection of the Circles of my Ring
enlarged, according to the conclusion of my first Book, in a Scheme or
Instrument where the Circles of Numbers, Sines, and Tangents are decuplated,
the diameter being but 18. Inches only.
SVppose the Sun being in the Tropicke, and his greatest Amplitude were
required in the Latitude of 66. gr. 29. m. The common Rule to operate which, is
thus delivered.

As the Sine complement of the Latitude, is unto the Sine of the Suns
declination proposed, so is the Sine of 90. gr. unto the sine of the Suns
Amplitude required; the Diagramme and Demonstration of which, see page 57. and
the Isntrumental operation may be ^hus.

Constructio. Place one of the edges of the Index unto the sine of 23. gr. 31.
m. (the Complement of the Latitude proposed) and extend the other edge unto the
Sine of 23. gr. 30. m. (the Suns greatest declination) then moove the edge of
the first Index unto the Sine of 90. gr. so the edge of the second Index shall
give the fourth proportional sought for.

But because the answer in this Proposition falls near the sine of 90. gr.
(where the degrees are small, and the graduations close) the answer is not so
exactly discerned in the minutes as if it were larger. To supply which, or such
like as may fall out in Practice, I have continued the Sines of the Proiection
unto two several revolutions, the one beginning at 77. gr. 45. m. 6. s. and
ends at 90. gr. (being the last revolution of the decuplation of the former, or
the hundred part of that Proiection) the other beginning at 86. gr. 6. m. 48.
s. and ends at 90. gr. (being the last of a ^ernary of decuplated revolutions,
or the thousand part of tha^ Proiection) and may be thus used.

Lay the edge of the Ind^x upon the former 23. gr. 31. m. and mark what equal
parts in the Circle of equal parts are intersected thereby, which will be
0099. Place also the edge of the Index upon 23. gr. 30. m. which will cut in
the Circle of equal parts 0069. Then take ten times the distance of these two
numbers in the Circle of equal parts between the feet of the Index by
decuplation, that is, place one foot of the Index upon 99. and extend the
other foot unto 69. so the edge of the first foot being placed on the sine of
90. gr. the edge of the second foot will point out accuratly 87. gr. 54. m.
and such is the Amplitude in the Latitude of 66. gr. 29. m. the Sun being in
the Tropicke aforesaid.

Again, admit that in the Latitude of 51. gr. 32. m. the Suns place were
required by knowledge of his Meridionall Altitude, which suppose was found to
be 61. gr. 57. m. Now the common Axiom according to the Diagram of Page 56.
grounded on Mathematical doctrine to operate which is: As the sine of the Suns
greatest declination, viz. 23. gr. 30. m. is unto the sine of 90. gr. so is the
sine of the Suns Declination given viz. 23. gr. 29. m unto the sine of the
answer. Therefore Instrumentally open the Index unto the first two terms
proposed, and place the edge of the first foot upon the third number, so the
edge of the second foot shall give the fourth proportional required.

But for as much also as the answer in this does fall amongst the small
divisions near the sine of 90. gr. in the decuplated Proiection, we may supply
that contraction according to the former, but truer by the largest augmented
Circle of Sines, to wit, that which is the thousand part of its Proiection,
thus; Lay one of the edges of the Index upon the sine of 23 gr. 30. m. and
mark the number of equal parts which it cuts in the Circle of equal parts,
viz. 70. lay also the edge of the Index upon 23. gr. 29. m.. and it cuts
likewise in that Circle 64. then take a hundred times the distance of these two
numbers in the Circle of equal parts between the feet of the Index, that is,
place one of the edges of the Index upon 70. m the Circle of equal parts by
Centuplation, and extend the other edge unto 64 (for the Decuplating, and
Centuplating of the equal parts, do naturally without trouble represent
themselves in this projection) so the edge of the first Index being placed at
the sine of 90. gr. the other edge will accuratly point out 89. gr. 5. m. the
Suns place at the time observed, and so in like manner for other operations.

Nam quam in minoribus circulis aequalium partium distantiam proportionales
habent: eandem in circulis adauctis proportionales retinebunt.

Thus I have here now produced to a public veiw my Proiection of Logarythmes
enlarged by way of decuplating, Centuplating, etc. of the Circles, as I
promised at the Conclusion of the first publishing of this Invention, to the
world, and have in some measure showed the Accurate working of Trigonometry by
it, near the Sine of 90. gr. where difficulty seems to be; for being thus
enlarged the greatness of a degree between the sine of 89. gr. and the sine
of 90 gr. is more then 4. Inches, and if I should have enlarged the Circle of
Tangents according to the Sines, the capacity of a minute at 45. gr. would be
more than 8. Inches which enlargement amongst the degrees which falls near the
Sine of 90. gr. does operate as true (according to the former Diameter but if
18. Inches) as if Mr. Gunters excellent Lines were extended or projected unto
4000. foot. And if I should frame a Ring as is specified in the conclusion of
my first publication of this Invention, being of two yards diameter, and apply
it to Astronomicall Calculations, no doubt I might show a way (or others may
easily) to compendiate many operations therein; and sufficiently clear my
intentions then delivered touching the Prostaphereses of the motions; though
some one in contempt of my good indevours divulged after it came to the worlds
view, it could not be done, nor possibly a minute expressed at the sine of 90
gr. (as I have now produced it) thereby endeavoring to annihilate my labors
and to spread an unsavory rumor, which might seem to argue not only his
ignorance of my intentions, but also of the manner of extending and enlarging
of that invention (though now given out that I had that invention from him:)
But touching such applications to prove my assertion hereafter, as God shall
give life, and ability of health: and let a further time bring them to
maturitie, that my Jealous opposite may be no more mistaken with a suspected
untimely birth. I confess these single Circles before, were something
untimely, in regard of these which are of fuller growth, and yet may have
further application, without waiting his time to perfect them.

Courteous Reader
HItherto the world has been abused as well as my self, with a false Rumor
(raised by some rude ignorant tongue) that my Invention both of Ring and
Quadrant was got, or borrowed, or stolen (even as they please to miscall it)
from another Man, by the sight of a Letter, by some private Conference by -- J
know not what means (nor they neither) but only by their malicious fancy:
which how true, how just it is, that the world and my self may have our right,
and they the shame, by this following just defense and future event, J hope
thou may fully be informed. I did not intend to take this course, but sought
peace and my right by a private and friendly way; but failing of it my good
intentions scorned and slighted; J desire all may now Judge who is in fault;
and let this ensuing discourse be my Plea.

To the Reader
HOw undeservedly often are the single and sinc^re endeavors of some men by the
malevolent disposition of envious detractors backbited, (which sometimes rebounds
back aversly upon them) not only by bare assertions, but also by injurious,
and contumelious aspertions; In which kind I have not a little lately suffered:
for having for a general end (more then aiming at mine own particular)
published the making and use of my Horizontall Quadrant, with my new invention
of the Projection of Logarythmes Circular by a former book of the use of it,
entitled with this, Grammelogia, or the Mathematical Ring, since that time I
have been deeply glanced upon, and scandalized both about the former and
latter, these detractors taking away from one, and giving to another, famousing
some, and infaming others, which did not a little disturb the quiet and Peace
which formerly I enjoyed, but did also disorder and slack my intentions, in
the publishing of the enlarging of the Invention of my Ring, as I promised to
do in the Conclusion of the aforesaid Book of the use of that Ring, which
would serve as a help for such as affect Mathematical practices for the
working of Trigonometrie unto minutes, and to give accuratly Roots and
Proportional numbers, unto 5. or 6. places, as is specified before in the
description of the projection, and had ere now been published with the
excellent use thereof, (not out of any Mercinary respect nor interlased with
untruths, delusions, and bumbast stuff, by way of Illustration if not
confusion) had not some envious calumniators stole away my intentions, in
stealing from me my labors, by detracting from me, and assuming unto
themselves the inverting of the Circles of my Ring upon a Plate or Plain,
accommodated with an Index to open and shut at the Center, when another
imitating thereof, did so fit i^, whose modesty was such that he would not
derogate the invention of the projection from me, to himself, but ingenuously
acknowledged it being so made up, and contrived, to be the same proiection with
my Ring, But the manifestation of it, so first to the world, properly and soly
belongs unto him; which Circles so projected on a Plate with an Index, was
not also unknown unto me, as by good testimony I can produce, before any of
these things came to the worlds view, though publicly I writ not first upon
them: the Learned in those Arts, and those that understand the projection,
know it to be one and the same, and are not deluded b^ supposing a new thing,
as many are, for it is but (as a learned man said) as to turn a Garment in and
out; A motion must perform the operation to give proportionalls with such
expedition, and not otherwise, as in my Epistle to the Reader upon the use of
my Ring I have delivered, howsoever the projection on the Plate or Plain I had
published ere now, not in so an unprofitable and obscure method as i^ now
delivered, had I not been prevented by some others, whos^ callings might have
invited them to spend their hours better, tha^ to snatch with greediness that
out of another hands which wa^ not their own: for these Circles of my Ring
projected on a Plate o^ Plain, so fitted with an Index at the Center as
aforesaid, by clear testimoney in its particulars I shall prove in his due
place to be another, and not the supposed Authors, whose conscience may
checke^ him and tell him herein, that he never saw it, as he now callengeth it
to be his invention, until it was so fitted to his hand, and that he made all
his practice on it after the publishing of my Book upon my Ring, and not
before; so it was easy for him, or some other to write some uses of it in
Latin after Christmas, 1630. and not the Summer before, as is falsely alleged
by some one who has made himself a spokeseman to another in some things by
equivocations, and in other things by confessed untruths, whose ambition to be
some body, has incited him forward to deliver some supposed new stuff, or
scrambling pieces, if not confused fragments of his own, or some others, to a
public view, in obscure and various phrases, a thing supposed to be forged by
sundry heads, rather than by one alone, seeing there is such roving from the
Text; amongst whom to blow some smoke thereto, there was some gross one,
seeing the matter is so common; for to a finer element perhaps his capacity
could not assent, or ascend. A blind Guide and a Parrats speech are not much
different, the one walks he knows not whether, and the other speaks he
knows not what; and such are all precepts in Arts, which lead and make men
speak without Demonstration; which does not only protract the studious, and
frustrate the affectionate, but makes an ingenious spirit (who ever is more
Rational th^n practical) to contemn such Circumlocutions, and laugh in
private, if not in public, at the learned style of some Authors, who making
themselves by their obscure kind of writing seemingly famous, stick not to
calumniate others to make them infamous. Those that are but initiated unto
knowledge, for their faylings and defects of order, are worthy of some blame,
but for others who would so are above all, and not only pick holes in the
coats of the living, but also vilify the dead, it is a shame; making too great
have at the beginning to glory in that, which no doubt will prove shame in the
ending. Its a common thing, that, one man having labored, planted and sowed,
with great pains, another reaps his Harvest with no industry; yet in this
there was some honesty shown, not to take the Crop but the Gleanings, houlding
it easier to follow a beaten path then hazard a discovery, but the way was not
made plain, and the veil remooved to help his sight: God that gave me the
former invention without the advice of any, has also reserved for me the
manifestation of the latter, without the help of any, which I formerly
mentioned in the Conclusion of the use of my Ring, to declare as is aforesaid,
and I hope no envious, and insinuating detractors, will hereafter assume this
also to himself as his own, and say I had it from him: I have hitherto borne
the injury of the infamy with great grief of heart, (and God that is the
discerner of the spirits knows mine integrity and innocence herein.) The
window has been as yet close, and darkness possesses the place, I will now
withdraw the Curtain that the Sunshining light may appear, to expel those
(...) mists that have been scattered, and by a true and sincere medium remove
that which was suggested from a false. Many have spurred me hereto, who suffer
also with me, who wonder at my slacknesse, and long patience, others contrarily
have as much gloried, I hope in the end that truth will burst forth, that God
may have the glory, man the shame: and I doubt not but such as men sow unto
others, such shall they reap unto themselves again, and with what measure
they meat, the same shall be meated unto them, I will therefore in the first
place answer for my Quadrant, then afterward for my Ring, and lastly for my
self, and others.

The Answer upon my Quadrant.
I Have not only suffered by way of divulging of the said project in of
Logarythmes Circular, 1630. but also by the late publishing of my Horizontall
Quadrant, 1631. by a scandalous aspertion couched under the relation of the
Author, in the words of his Translator (but rather his Transcriber, if not in
the most of that Book as is suspected, his Compactor) which are as follows,
Which whilst I went about to do, another to whom the Author in a loving
confidence discovered his intent, went about to preoccupate, and prevent, if
not Circumvent. Now because his words are cautelous and subterfugious, we must
a little examine them; If they be true, then that which I have produced and
delivered as mine own cannot stand, well then, this preoccupating, preventing,
and circumventing, and discovering in loving confidence his intention to me,
must be either about that of my Horizontall Quadrant in the making and use
thereof, or touching that of my Ring; the former of which I lately produced
before the supposed Author did write so publicly upon the same Projection, as
he has now done in his book named the Circles of projection, which tract is
so far from being answerable throughout, to that which it promises in the
beginning, that it seems rather to pussle the studeous then in any wise to
further them) of which I say no more, but advise the studeous Reader only so
far to trust as is agreeable to the Text, and a true Doctrinall Method, which
being therein omitted, it does not only surcharge the memory of the learner,
but does much more frustrate and delude the Ingenious, by a labyrinth of
tedious Rules, and ambiguous precepts, when few might serve demonstratively,
making them speak Parret like, which would be as little vendible as it is
abstruse, were it not thrust on men; I would be loath to put an untruth upon it
or him, or any other; it were unmannerly, howsoever I will prove that
concerning neither of these Instruments, to wit, that of my Quadrant, or that
of my Ring, the said Author did discover his intent unto me, either in whole,
or in part, in a loving confidence or otherwise. And for the making of my
Quadrant, I could not circumvent him whom I knew not, for I drew the Proiection
long before ever I heard of the Authors name, (as in its due place I can prove)
but this aspertion no doubt was from an inveterate hate of some, who
endeavors not only to annihilate my interest in the Invention of that Ring,
and Quadrant, but also to bring me in a disrepute, and to leave a blot of
infamy upon my Name unto posterity; But I doubt not in a public Audience I
shall clear my self of it, and the disgrace that was intended to be cast upon
me in the beginning, may light upon the contrivers thereof in the ending, and
as there was a pit dug for another, perhaps the diggers may fall therein
themse^ves, let them laugh on, as they have begun while I hasten the Issue of
it. The extendure of Gods hand in his donations is manifould, and where his
spirit pleases to breath, there a door is opened; now whether the gift to the
creatures be divine or humane, we should bless God as the first and
principal Author, and giver of all, no wise d^spise man, as the second agent,
or receiver: Its very fantastical in some therefore, who think such and such
things are not worthy the general vote and allowance, if they proceed not
from such, and such an one, envying they should be produced by any other; which
if they be so divulged, as much as lies in them, they will hasten to possess
the world with a contrary opinion, thereby wronging God in his dispensation,
and man in his reputation, but such men wedded to a private and deluding
fancy, choose rather to abandon the Lore of sound reason, then to be divorced
from their prejudicate affections. I will in the first place therefore make way
for my Quadrant, that I did not circumuent the said Author for the attayning
thereof, (as before:) But whereas he taxed me with going about to preoccupate,
or prevent him, it seems somewhat soaring like, to abridge any man's free
affections, in constraining them to wait on any others concealed intentions,
which they never knew (in which every man has a freedom to himself) It is
(no doubt) somewhat too malepart, and too rigid, to ty the liberties of others
in their actions, who desiring the good of others in not concealing things, if
they shall by their industrious labors, show the excellent use of such or such
a thing, to a public view, for a general benefit, are for it envied and
calumniated: which as it smells of too great a detracting from others; so it
has its s^ource from the philautie, and too high conceat which some entertain
of their own worthiness: the said Author having had the Projection 30, years
before by him (as he gives out) wherefore did he not publish it then, or give
way to it as he has now done, how could it be so long concealed, and others
never so much as hear of such a thing, was it that he would not have the same
communicated to others, or that he would not be known in his name by a
profitable action, or that some others might challenge an Interest in it
besides himself, or that the uses of the Projection lay hidden, and obscure;
or that they were not at that time so plentifully made manifest, until Mr.
Gunters ingenuitie opened the mystery of it, and applied that projection so
methodically, and copiously, to Horolographie in his Book of Dyalling in the
use of the Sector, and accommodated that Projection long before in a Dyall for
an honorable personage, as the first that ever was made in that kind, and the
same form with these that are now made, and therefore to give every man his
due, and not to iniure the dead, it is properly ^^en Mr. Gunters Dyall, for
that composure, and not another, (notwithstanding the inverting of things and
detractions from him) But it should seem he would publish it then, either when
the way was made fair for him, or when he might catch at some one, as lately
he has done in an unfit and uncharitable way: And as Mr. Gunter was copious
in applying that projection to that particular of Dy^lling, so might he no
doubt have been in the Astronomicall uses of it also, though he delivered so
few as but six observations only to a public view upon that Projection,
which before the publishing and also after, both in the uses and the Projection
it self I often intentively looked upon, and extracted from them many useful
performances more, even in Mr. Gunters time; and since his death have published
my Horizontall Quadrant, extracted from that dyagramme: in which I have
abundantly supplied the emptiness and obscurity of that Projection, fitting it
for a Pocket Instrument, or according to any magnitude, as a help and benefit
to those that are studious of Mathematical practices; which labors, of Mr.
Gunters, and my own, if they were not to unvaile the subject and to make way
for another to help his sight, which writes afterward, I refer it to an eye
not partial, to be Judge, it being rare and wonderful for one man to see all
at once, and there are far more excellent uses yet upon that Projection,
which may be also known if some one will open the veil a little more; if
there be any that knows further uses upon it, let them discover them, for the
present use for others, and let them not, if others, more respective of the
common benefit of such who delight in those things, publish them, by scandalous
detraction deliver that they are prevented, if not circumvented. Which Quadrant
in the original as before specified I did extract and compose from the
fundamental dyagramme of Mr. Gunters Book of the sector, page 66. as I have
specified in the Epistle to the Reader, in the book of the use of Quadrant,
howsoever the supposed Author (having the free liberty granted to see my
Epistle before it was printed, and alter whatever he thought fitting, (I being
unwilling to oppose his desires) did dash out whatsoever I had there to my
knowledge justly attributed to Mr. Gunter, because he said it did belong to him
primarily, yet I must say that I was especially behoulden to the labors of Mr.
Gunter who is now at quiet in his Grave, and therefore not to be wronged. And
should I search the original from the first, neither Mr. Gunter nor especially
he may challenge so much unto himself, since the maine draught out of which
theirs is extracted, was extant before they were borne, namely in that ancient
Geographer Munster in his Dyalling, where it stands obuious, as also in the
famous (...) Orontius, as I mentioned in my former Epistle, but I suffered him
to put it out, being (it should seem) unwilling to have his own dismantled;
As also at that time, I showed him in our English Blagrave the like Scheme, in
both their works, long ere he or Mr. Gunter committed any such thing to a
public view; howsoever, I had not the least touch of furtherance from him, or
from any man breathing, either by transcripts, or verbal direction, (but only
what I have formerly acknowledged out of Mr. Gunters Book of the Sector, page
64. 65. 66. though in other trivial matters I do and shall acknowledge
freely) as has bin falsely alleged by some loose tongued Instrument, that I
had the making of that Quadrant by a sight of the Authors letter, whose honest
relation may be suspected, seeing he makes so little conscience, to detract
from another reputation whose detraction is grounded upon as great a
stabilitie, as uncertainty, whose Basis is only a bare supposition, conjoined
with an indisposed evil eye, as full of envy, as emptiness of charity, and
this upon examination he is able to make good, and no more, which a generous or
tender breast scorns to harbor, much less so partially to divulge: But it
will no doubt make such Tale tellers so much the more odious to the sweet
disposition of such noble spirits, when they shall be possessed with the
manifestation of the contrary, which will no doubt shake the foundation of that
Projection, by letting the world know it from the original, that he which has
given way and gloried at the countenancing of that aspertion, and as the
supposed Author of that Projection, perhaps may be challenged by others, as I
mentioned before, howsoever therein very ingenious, by so assuming the
Projection to himself (as in his own words) but not ingenuously enough
acknowledging from whence he had it: for my particular, I take God to witness
I have without any equivocation or mental reservation, declared in every
particular the very naked truth, in the Epistle to the Reader in that Book of
the aforesaid Quadrant, from whence I had that Quadrant, and how I produced it,
and it might have bin easily so composed, and published, as I have done it, by
another, (without the help of the sight of a Letter,) that is but
indifferently versed in delineations, seeing the Projection in my Author Mr.
Gunters Book, page 65. 66. as aforesaid lies so plain and conspicuous
(notwithstanding) in which letter to my remembrance I saw bu^ some ordinary
uses, and a check cast upon Mr. Gunter, but no directions in it for the making
of the Instrument; which uses I slighte^ as mean, and trivial, and other
things I saw not: and this I speak not to shuffle things off, but out of a
true sincerity, but perhaps since the sight thereof there may be inserted
somewhat else, to make my opposites assertion good, howsoever I needed not such
a help by the sight of a Letter, seeing Ioyners, Carpenters, and other
Mechanics about this Town and else where, yea, School Boys in imitating the
Projection aforesaid in Mr. Gunters Book of the Sector, and following the
directions therein in the 66. page of the use of the Sector aforesaid, have
drawn the Projection fully and complete by the Book alone; and others having
only had but a simple view of my Quadrant, many years before I published the
use thereof, have from the aforesaid Book of the Sector page 66. made the
like, having not had the least assistance from any, but the direction of the
Book only, as upon oath they have been examined, and do acknowledge, and
will testify it when occasion requires: beside I know sundry Gent. and others
in this kingdom, that are yet living, that have drawn the same Projection by
the Book, alone immediately after the publishing of it 1624. as at this instant
they will be ready to confirm, and my self in Mr. Gunters time 1622. (besides
many others) have drawn the same Projection, for our particular uses, and are
yet to be shown, which was long before either I, or they ever heard of a new
Author, of that Projection besides Mr. Gunter only: And to make my assertion
yet more absolute, I did not only draw the Projection in Mr. Gunters time, but
before his death did also show the making of it to others; therefore (as
before) I could not circumvent the said supposed Author, to have any assistance
from him in making of my Quadrant, either by a verbal declaration, or by the
sight of a letter: or otherwise, which in its due place God permitting life,
and health, shall be confirmed more at large in every title.

Upon my Ring.
IF I circumvented not the said Author, nor that in a loving manner he opened
his intent unto me by assisting of me in the making of my Horizontall Quadrant;
Then to make his assertion good, it must necessarily be in the other
Instrument, which I produced and published, to wit, that of my Mathematical
Ring (that is, how I might compose or make the same) but concerning this latter
Projection of the Ring or any thing to that effect, in a loving manner then, or
at any time, or otherwise that he discovered his intent unto me, it can hardly
be collected (certain circumstances seriously weighed, and considered) The
whole ground of which being from as weak a principle, to open the way unto me
for the making of my Ring, as the sight of a Letter to show me the making of my
Quadrant; for about Alhalontide 1630. (as our Authors reports) was the time
he was circumvented, and then his intent in a loving manner (as before) he
opened unto me, which particularly I will dismantle in the very naked truth:
for, we being walking together some few weeks before Christmas, upon
Fishstreet hill, we discoursed upon sundry things Mathematical, both
Theoricall and Practical, and of the excellent inventions and helps that in
these days were produced, amongst which I was not a little taken with that of
the Logarythmes, commending greatly the ingenuitie of Mr. Gunter in the
Projection, and inventing of his Ruler, in the lines of proportion, extracted
from these Logarythmes for ordinary Practical uses; He replied unto me (in
these very words) What will you say to an Invention that I have, which in a
less extent of the Compasses shall work truer then that of Mr. Gunters Ruler,
I asked him then of what form it was, he answered with some pause (which no
doubt argued his suspicion of me that I might conceive it) that it was
Archingwise, but now he says that he told me then, it was Circular (but
were I put to my oath to avoid the guilt of Conscience, I would conclude in the
former.) At which immediately I answered, I had the like my self, and so we
discoursed not a word more touching that subject: all which sundry times
ingenuously according to the very truth the said supposed Author has
acknowledged before diverse persons, who do and will testify the same: Then
after my coming home I sent him a sight of my Proiection drawn in Pastboard:
Now admit I had not the Invention of my Ring before I discoursed with the
supposed Author thereof, it was not so facil for me or any other (to an eye
not partial) to raise and compose so complete, and absolute an Instrument from
so small a principle, or glimpse of light, but was known unto me, (as I have
produced it) long before that time, and being now published as it is, the
composure of it seems most facil, (as all inventions do, once known) that I
have much wondered with my self, that Mr. Gunter or some other produced it not
so to the world as now it is, seeing it was so easy, and caries with it such
an excellency, above that which is in the Lineary form, for in a Circle it is
natural, and perfect, in a line defective and imperfect: But he, or they,
perhaps saw it not, though their sight I confess (no wise to disparage their
worth) might penitrate further in other things; but gifts may not be attributed
to natural ingenuitie, but to God the giver of them, who disposes where his
goodness pleases. And who knows to the contrary but many private men in this
kingdom, or elsewhere, might have this Invention long before my self, or he
that now challenges it, seeing the gifts of God in his donations, to several
persons, are oftentimes in one and the same thing, and if God bestows his
Talents on us, we ought to communicate them to others, which not to do, is to
hide them in a Napkin, and who so concealeth them are not free from some
reprehension: our Author may answer for himself, who reports now that he
had the Invention for more then twelve years past, but put it not to use,
which in a sense was injurious both to God and man, if he saw the copious, and
compendious use of it then, as now he does; to me and to many others it has
seemed strange, that he should hide such an excellency, so long in obscurity;
But it is supposed, that he had then but a glimpse of its performance (until
I writ upon it, by opening the Cabenet, and showing its treasure to the world)
and so regarded it not then as a Jewel, but since. But when I had a sight of
it, which was in February 1629. (as I specified in my Epistle) I could not
conceal it longer, envying my self, that others did not taste of that which I
found to carry with it so delightful and pleasant a taste, knowing that as the
Logarythmes (as a Jewel) that did excel all Inventions that ever went before
it, so this kind of Projection, as the daughter springing from so noble a
Mother, was the rarest Isntrumental Gemme, that ever Art in all preceding
Ages did afford: which in its production heretofore lay obscure, but now being
published how clear does it seem to be in its composure, and if it were so
easy at the first to produce (as some account it) why did not some one all
this while since the publishing of it (being now more then two years past)
enlarge that Invention, or deliver others in that nature of their own, being
easier to add unto an Invention, now being divulged, then to deliver its
original? But hitherto it has seemed difficult, many having attempted and
endeavored, but have failed in their ends, howsoever I know not what some
private men's industry has produced by way of augmentation to that invention of
my Ring, or the Logarythmes Projected Circular: At the Conclusion of my Book I
gave a sufficient and perspicuous direction, and invitation thereto, that so by
the former labors, and the other there intended, the way might be made fair,
and the Ice broken that they might wade the easier: and so produce at last
something for a public use by Augmentation to this Invention, at which I shall
much rejoice, rather then any wise envy: But I have as yet all this while
demurred in my pretended purpose, and being often times by sundry men
importuned, according as I have promised, to enlarge that Invention, seeing
none as yet has done any thing therein, I have now at last therefore for their
benefit, and others, to a public view delivered what is mine own to that end:
and that by sundry ways, and how easy does the enlargement of that Invention
now also seem to be, being now produced. With the like facility did I compose
long ago my Helicall line of Roots which affords five places accuratly, by an
inspection of the eye only, which being not as yet divulged to a common view
may to some seem difficult for its composure: The secrets and intentions of
the mind, how closely are they lodged in the breast, and who can search the
heart, that from a word barely delivered the whole may be conceived; therefore,
it was not easy for me to know the Authors intent in his project by a bare
word, had not God long before opened the way unto me, how this projection, or
Invention might be composed; what means then these words; that in a loving
confidence the Author discovered his intent unto me? is it not to give a fair
flourish upon a untrue subject, to delude, if not to possess Men with a
falsitie, to detract from another his good name; besides the barrenness of the
word we will a little consider the straightness of time, in the original, for
the producing of the Book, and Invention, as is challenged by the Author to be
about Alholantide, 1630. and that then his loving intent to me he opened, and
so was circumvented; I will put my cause into the hands of any indisterent
Judge to censure of it, that having had no other direction, or light from the
said Author then formerly is specified, (for more he dares not avouch with a
clear conscience) how could I from it so easily form my Projection: Mr.
Gunters Ruler, as some think, was a furtherence to me, but it was rather a
hinderance, for his line of Numbers was as impertinent for me to follow, as
such a double composure in the projection was superfluous, therefore such a
bare verbal (as before) or Isntrumental dictate was not used, or could be
sufficient to compose so high a work: but it was from a long intentive
precogitation of many years with my self, how the Logarythmes in the Tables
might be so compacted, that all Numbers in these Tables should be
proportional one unto another, and according to a diverse, and variable
proportion assigned; which to effect I found at the first very difficult, and
could not conceive how otherwise it might be done, but either by fitting of
Tables to all proportions, which so to do would not only be too great for
operation, but also breed confusion; or it must be from some graduated
insertion of these numbers Instrumentally, so that by motion numbers might be
moved one unto another; and for expedition of which I found no figure more apt
then a Circle, and on that my Meditations fixed, and there I rested, and so (as
my few hours could permit me) I made several projections, that the senses
might see the effect of it in a perfect beauty, which the intellect saw before
but in obscurity: about which how often was I afterward interrupted in my
desires to look further into the mysteries that lay open in that new
Invention, having not scarce an hour in a day, and sometimes not two hours in
a week of serious privacie (by reason of my calling) to sport my self in
operation thereon (for it seemed so to me then as a recreation, as all new
Inventions at the first do to any that invents them) It was many months
therefore before I made trial of it, in the general uses that it might be
put unto, in matters of Arithmeticke, for common operations, and to the
measuring of Plains and Solids, but especially how it might be applied to the
doctrine of Plain, and Sphericall Triangles, in Astronomicall Calculations,
Nauticall practices, and Horologicall conclusions, all which in every
particular I practiced on it at such times as convenience would permit me; And
having for many months thus satiated my self, and fed my fancy upon its
Theoricall contemplation, and its Practical operation, though oftentimes I
found many Rubs and impediments in the Practice, in applying this isntrumental
Invention at the first so generally and copiously as I did; And it cannot be
denied of any, that the ways of new Inventions lies not so obvious, or so
easy, to be discovered with such celerity, as a long premeditation might
produce; I was desirous therefore to make the world participate thereof also;
Therefore at several times, having but a little time at anytime, by little and
little did I compose and produce a method pleasing to mine own fancy; doing
one week such a piece, another week another, and so going on until I had
run through the whole parts of Arithmeticke, in the Goalden Rule direct, and
indirect, in division and in multiplication, applying all these to manifold
uses in combination of Numbers, to common affairs, in fortification, to
mensuration, and fractionall operation, then I applied the Instrument to the
finding of numbers in continual proportion, in finding of mean
Proportionalls, and the extracting of Roots, I labored further to make the
Instrument more complete that it might work all useful proportions touching
Interest, or valuation of Leases: and last of all I applied the Instrument in
the Circles of Sines, and Tangents, to some uses of Astronomy, in the finding
of the Declination of the Sun, and its ascension through all Latitudes; These
things I drew up in a Book at several times aforesaid, as a part of the
practices that I made upon it: And it was a task sufficient for a man that had
command of his hours, by allotting them soly to that end, in as long a time as
was between Alhalantide and Christmas, in the opening of the way of that new
Invention, and by applying of it so, (to use for a public view) rather then by
one that was commanded by them, especially at that time and all the Terms
before: for how few are the hours that a man of any employment gets to set
upon a new method for a new Invention at such a time, I leave to any
indifferent eye to judge; and it would have been so much the more harsher, and
difficult to have it so suddenly produced, had it been then at Alhalantide
but only conceated, and agitated on, but it was premeditated on long before,
as is aforesaid, and intended for a new years gift for the King, which
accordingly I gave him on new years day, though a fortnight, or three weeks
before Christmas, his Matie received from me a Scheme of the Projection in
Pastboard, with a manuscript of the Book which is now published, agreeable to
it in every tittle, (the Epistle excepted) a Copy of which was then at the
Press: and was Printed four days before new years day, 1630. Now that all
these Practices, and many Transcripts that were drawn, with the doubts and
hindrances that did arise in the fitting of these things, could be made, so
ordered, and produced in so little a time, as the scattering of a few hours as
between Alhalantide and a month before Christmas, I leave to the Judicious
Reader to censure: I broke the Ice, and made the way facil for another that
came behind me; yet if he took a year and more to meditate and write upon
my endeavors after my publication (thereby not to signify that he wanted
time, but takes liberty enough if not too much, to the loss of time) as long a
time, half of it, or a quarter of that time, may by a Charitable boon be
granted me. Which consideration of time, will easily also clear me from the
imputation of the Authors loose assertion, that he was Circumvented by me,
nor that in a loving confidence he opened his intent unto me. Yet in the last
place I will hasten to vindicate his untrue declaration before the Courts of
justice; if restitution be not speedily made, where true witnesses shall be
produced, and that which is now but in agitation I will bring to action, and
prove that before Alholantide or very near that time, my Invention was
produced to a public view; therefore it was very injurious in the Author to
possess the world with so an untrue aspertion, upon a bare supposition, in
that I should have the Invention from him, and that in a loving manner he
opened his intent unto me, and was Circumvented, as before, whose assuming
disposition has not only bin busy to take from me my good name, and labors
by this his loose aspertion, but has also endeavored (by too rigid and
general a censure sparing none in some sense) to bring all in a common
disrepute in their Callings, therefore,

In the behalf of vulgar Teachers and others.
BY way of advertisement to you, and my self, and to whom it may concern,
vulgar Teachers of Mathematics about this Town and kingdom, as you are
styled, which had bin fair (if no worse) seeing you are not professors, or
public Readers, but common Teachers, it behooves you, and me, that we
endeavor to avoid the disreputation of a scandalous attribute in our
profession of so noble a science, that our doctrines be not only Practical,
but also Rational, and Theoricall, that we may not be ranked with Iuglers,
and teachers of Tricks, as we are lately glanced upon publicly, but a
charitable breast howsoever (I persuade my self) has a better opinion of us,
that according to the Talent that God has given unto us, out of the Riches of
his bounty, no doubt in our callings we use them rightly, and do not (by
deceiving) derogate from the end, which is, to glorify God in these gifts in a
true and sincere use of them; which otherwise would not only be a blemish and
stain to our name but also a dishonor to our noble profession, the large
testimony of which (no doubt) every one of you in his particular can produce,
(notwithstanding such an uncharitable censure) can amply testify in your
callings your sufficiency, and therein remoove all scruples to confirm your
integrity; and as the imputation has lighted heavy upon us, so has it not
rested there, but rebounded likewise (if the words be truly scanned) unto such
Nobility, and Gentry, to which we have been servants to or in present are, in
so honorable and laudable a service, which aspertions are as highly backed
with arguments, as he was to forwords that divulged them: whose judicious and
censorious eyes, has been two much busied to show the ways of the Iugling of
others, and prove delinquents in the same things themselves, whose words are
these, That it is a preposterous course of vulgar Teachers, to begin to teach
with Instrument, which was not only to despite Art, to betray willing and
industrious wits to ignorance, and idleness, but was also loss of precious
time, making their scholars doers of tricks, as it were Iuglers. Which words
are neither cautelous, nor subterfugious, but are as down right in their
plainness, as they are touching, and pernicious, by two much derogating from
many, and glancing upon many noble personages, with too gross, if not too base
an attribute, in tearming them doers of tricks, as it were to Iuggle: because
they perhaps make use of a necessity in the furnishing of themselves with such
knowledge by Practical Isntrumental operation, when their more weighty
negotiations will not permit them for Theoricall figurative demonstration;
those that are guilty of the aspertion, and are touched therewith may answer
for themselves, and study to be more Theoricall, then Practical: for the
Theory, is as the Mother that produces the daughter, the very sinews and life
of Practice, the excellency and highest degree of true Mathematical
knowledge: but for those that would make but a step as it were into that kind
of Learning, whose only desire is expedition, and facility, both which by the
general consent of all are best effected with Instrument, rather then with
tedious regular demonstrations, it was ill to check them so grossly, not only
in what they have Practiced, but abridging them also of their liberties with
what they may Practice, which aspertion may not easily be slighted off by any
gloss or Apology, without an Ingenuous confession, or some mental
reservation: To which vilification, howsoever, in the behalf of my self, and
others, I answer; That Isntrumental operation is not only the Compendiating,
and facilitating of Art, but even the glory of it, whole demonstration both of
the making, and operation is soly in the science, and to an Artist or disputant
proper to be known, and so to all, who would truly know the cause of the
Mathematical operations in their original; But, for none to know the use of a
Mathematical Instrumen, except he knows the cause of its operation, is
somewhat too strict, which would keep many from affecting the Art, which of
themselves are ready enough every where, to conceive more harshly of the
difficulty, and impossibility of attayning any skill therein, then it
deserves, because they see nothing but obscure propositions, and perplex and
intricate demonstrations before their eyes, whose unsavory tartnes, to an
unexperienced palate like bitter pills is sweetened over, and made pleasant with
an Isntrumental compendious facility, and made to go down the more readily,
and yet to retain the same virtue, and working; And me thinks in this queasy
age, all helps may be used to procure a stomach, all bates and invitations
to the declining study of so noble a Science, rather then by rigid Method and
general Laws to scarre men away. All are not of like disposition, neither all
(as was said before) propose the same end, some resolve to wade, others to put
a finger in only, or wet a hand: now thus to tie them to an obscure and
Theoricall form of teaching, is to crop their hope, even in the very bud, and
tends to the frustrating of the profitable uses, which they now know, and put
to service, and to the hindering of them in their further search, in the
Theoricall part, which otherwise they would apply themselves unto: being
catched now by the sweet of this Isntrumental bate; which debarring would not
only injure the studeous but also cause the Mechanicke workmen of these
Instruments, to go with thinner clothes, and leaner cheeks.

Neither does the use of Instrument to a man ignorant of the cause of its
operation, any ways oppose or dispite Art, seeing that the end of producing
and inventing of Instruments, is their Practical use; Besides, its impossible
to show the use of an Instrument but in teaching there must needs be laid
down some grounds or prolegomena^, as, what is meant by such, or such names;
what are such, and such terms, and therefore the beginning of a man's
knowledge even in the use of an Instrument, is first founded on doctrinal
preceps, and these precepts may be conceived all along in its use: and are so
far from being excluded, that they do necessarily concomitate and are
contained therein: the practicke being better understood by the doctrinall
part, and this later explained by the Isntrumental, making precepts obvious
unto sense, and the Theory going along with the Instrument, better in forming
and inlightning the understanding, etc. vis vnita fortior, so as if that in
Philosophy be true, Nihil est intellectu quod non prius fuit in sensu, and
things the more they be objected to the sense, are more fully represented to
the understanding, then it must needs follow that a doctrinall proposition
laid first open to the eye, and sense, and well perceived enters more easily
the door being opened, then if the intellect by the strength of its active
sense, should eliciate, or screw out the meaning by a long exeogitated
operations; Its not therefore requisite unto all Capacities, to have Instrument
severed from science, in many things: is though the use of one could be without
the other less or more.

Neither does the practice on them betray willing and industrious wits to
ignorance and idleness, that assertion therefore is very ridiculous, for he
that is industrious, and willing to spend his hours, for the attayning of any
science, according to doctrinall method, busieth himself not with Instruments,
but applies himself to such Authors, or such compendious abstracts, as are
taken from them, which do not only open the essential parts of the subject
in the Theory, but also lays down such documents and principles which may (in
a higher nature and way) induce him to practice them, then possibly by
Isntrumental operation for exactness can be attained unto; for such is the
excellency of Art by Theoricall doctrine, that all things tending to practice
may be done by the science only, without the help of Isntrumental
operation, certain propositions being granted, which originally and
principally are proper unto Isntrumental observation, being the Basis or
foundation of the whole; Therefore science, as before, has a principal
dependence on Instrument, but is it in their observation, rather then in their
operation, and the Inventions that are daily produced in that kind, are only
to compendiate and facilitate practical things, which the learned in those
Arts (having the science) scarce use at all, if at any time they use them, it
is in small and trivial things to satisfy the sense, and not the
intellectual part; which Theoricall way does not only augment the desires of
the Teachers in the accommodating things, and remove of difficulties, by making
them conspicuous to the learner; But also by so proceeding causes the Teacher
to add many ends both pleasant and useful, by the way, for the Practicers
encouragement. To begin with Instrument is unprofitable for the Teacher, though
advantageous to the learner, (if his ends be but to know some uses upon an
Instrument, as it is with many) for it is easier for a man to learn more
useful Practice upon some Instrument in one hours Instruction, then to know
the cause in 20. hours of some Isntrumental operation: and yet there are many
Instruments almost as facil in their demonstration as in their operation; Which
kind of beginning to teach, or usual proceeding therein is not as vulgar
Teachers use, but is as indirect in the Method as false in the assertion (if
they may possibly avoid it) for that were to teach against their own profit,
and the dignity of learning; Yet that any Teachers of Mathematics should be
so nice as to deny the use of Instrument, to such Gent. or others, who perhaps
desire the Theory to contemplate on hereafter: but the practicke for the^r
private ends, for the present, were not only to frustrate their desires, but
injure their occasions; who might rather laugh at the teachers pride, then
contemn his Art.

Lastly, that the practice on a Mathematical Instrument should be loss of
precious time, (to any one that knows how to use them in their practice though
not in the Theory) is not only ridiculous but also untrue and absurd, for to
what end did the manifold and laborious calculated Tables of the learned in
their Subtenses, Sines, Tangents, and Secants serve, were they not to avoid the
great toil of Algebreticall work in Radical extractions, which otherwise in
Trigonometrie (the practical end of Theory) must necessarily be used, but they
were Invented and produced to avoid the loss of time, to the more learned (who
know the causes of their operation in the Genises) and as a facility to open
the way unto the unlearned, though thousands working Trigonometrie by them
knows not scarce the cause of such operation, which in a manner is as mere
Mechanical, as if it were Isntrumental (though more accurate in its
performance) But to come nearer unto these present times, how has the
Invention of Logarythmes, taken away the labor and loss of time, that was
used in former calculation, for that which cannot be done by the common Tables
of Sines, Tangents and Secants in 20. hours, is now done by the help of the
Logarythmall Tables in one hour, and there are thousands in the world that
also work by them for their private use, by reason of their great quickness,
in hard and laborious matters, who know not the cause also why these Numbers
should so expedite such a difficulty, with so great a facility, and
celeritie: yet they use them though the performance be also mechanical, that
they may not likewise lose time: Now Instruments though they be extracted from
Tables, yet according to their capacity in practice they exceed these Tables,
in all common serviceable uses, that I dare maintain that what the Logarythmes
by the Tables, for giving of proportionalls, either in Numbers, Sines, or
Tangents, will do in 20. hours, my Ring or the Circles so projected from it,
will do in one hour. Which Isntrumental Invention, I have also produced to
help the studeous to avoid the loss of precious time, which to omit and keep
them from it (in some occasions) were also misspending of time: Therefore in
respect of private men's ends, to begin with Instrument is not to Iuggle, nor to
do tricks, neither to oppose or dispite Art, or to betray willing and
industrious wits to ignorance and idleness, nor loss of precious time.

But I would be loath while I seem to vindicate the loss of time, cause
others to lose it, by my too prolix defending of it; the vindicating of the
truth indeed was my cheifest aim, which I hope will be my spokeseman and
defend it self, mean while not to hold my Reader too long, I wish with all
my heart that such occasions were taken away, then might he spend so much time
in reading better things, and I in propagating, not in defending my right;
detraction, Calumny and defamation come close to a man, and therefore my
Reader may excuse me if I be so tender of it, since it may be his own case
(how innocent soever) perhaps the very next of all. There is (and I am not the
first nor it may be the last truly sensible of it) a generation in the world
true salamanders whose delight is to live in the fire of contention,
endeavoring to load others with Calumny and detraction, and to raise unto
themselves a proud Babell out of others ruins; a vice odious both to God and
man, thereby forgetting the rules of equity which ought to be observed, so to
deal with others as one would be dealt withal, thereby blemishing the good
name of another, who are not ignorant (or at least should not be) how precious
the name of a man is: is it not above Riches, above pleasure, above Gold it
self? Calumny indeed is the fire this Gold is cast into sometimes, only
heeres the difference, this purifies the one, and that strives to pollute the
other; nay, what speak I of those gross things, is it not dearer then life it
self, being the very life of the life here, and eternity of a man's life
hereafter? If he that steals but a small matter from his neighbor is
obnoxious to punishment, sometimes unto death, is not he much more worthy of
the same, and greater punishment that lays violent hands upon that which is
above life it self? If reports were true, private admonitions may win men, if
false why are they then divulged? and grant the reports be true yet, is every
report to be spoken? may not a man break the ninth Commandment that divulges
these reports though true, which tend to the infamy of another? and how much
more is he guilty of this breach, that is not only a blazer of such reports,
but a compiler? Is not Satan styled from this word of Calumniation? does he not
Calumniate God to man, and man to God, and one man to another? and shall any
man tread in his steps? is it not the precept of the Psalmist, or rather of God
by the Psalmist that every one should set a watch before the door of his lips,
and keep in that unruly member, that is, a world of wickedness? what is the
stroke of the hand to the stroke of the tongue? the one wounds the body, the
other wounds the soul; the one may be easily cured, the other hardly; the one
strikes them that are present, the other those that are absent; the one striks
but one at a time, the other strikes many at the same time, at least three at
once, with the self same blow; viz, him whom he does traduce, him who hears
him, and himself, and many times the last most of all; and ought we not to
take great care how we order this unruly tongues what Gall, what Poison, what
Wormwood, what Wildbeast is to be compared with the tongue, which lancinates,
tears, and wounds the soul, by the virulencie of its words, and reports:
Look into the heavy judgment of God against such, 1 Cor. 6. that revilers
shall not escape punishment. Such was the account of the preciousnesse of a
man's goodname in ancient times, that there has been Laws utterly to banish
such from the society of men, who by their Calumny and detraction separate all
good society amongst men, making foes of friends, and breaking the sweet bands
of peace and charity, causing nothing but brawles and dissension, and as near
as they can dissolving this goodly frame into the ancient Chaos of confusion.
Again, some of the Ancients herein are so violent that they call it Grave
malum, Turbulentum Daemona Pestem pestiferam, and profess plainly, Qui
detractioni student diabolo serviunt, so that as Coals are to burning Coals
(says the wiseman) and wood to fire, so is a contentious man to kindle strife
The words of a Tale bearer are wounds, says he, they desturbe a man's Peace and
go down into the inwards of the belly, and a whisperer separateth dear
friends. I wonder what need these Lamiae gad so much abroad having work
enough at home, Te prius corrigas quam alterum corrigas, If such would turn
their eyes inward they should find matter enough to mende in themselves first,
and afterward they might reprehend others, sed ad delicta nostra Talpae, ad
aliena serpents sumus. It was once Constantines speech. That he would throw
his mantle over his brothers nakedness rather then lay it open; What shall we
think meanewhile of those who would feign discover nakedness, where they can
find none? what should be the plot, except it be to feed the bosom Wolf
of envy and malice which at last will gnaw out their own bowels? do they
envy because God gives to one man one gift, to another man another? would they
have all, and others none? If the whole body were an eye where were the
hearing, if an ear where were the smelling? so, were all contracted into one,
what would become of the rest? No, rather let every one be thankful unto God
for that he has, then envious for that he has not; God has store enough
for all, let us not envy one another; if one pull down the house as fast as
another builds, what will become of the building? rather let al^ build and then
a goodly structure will be sooner finished, Quod Sapimus conjungat Amor, quod
vivimus uno
Conspiret studio; Nil dissociabile firmum.


Nature it self peacheth us to make much of union, without which all falls to
ruin; See we how the days part equal^ stakes with the nights, and if one have
a greater share now, it allows the other it afterward.

The Sun not all does claim, but Moon and Stars have shares,
And greater lights need not envy the lesser theirs:
The Land not all does keep but gives the Sea its bounds,
Hills have their tops, and let the valleys have their rounds.
The sweet combination of Elements and inanimat bodies may teach us concord;
Fire and water, earth and air how soever opposite in themselves in both
qualities, yet in mixtion and composition sweetly conjoyne together, one not
destu^bing but qualifying the excess of the other, as if they without either
sense or reason meant to teach men both: But above all, Piety and Religion
enjoynes this, Are we not all Christians, nay are we not all Protestants (or
at least should be) all professing one and the same faith, the same Baptism?
have we not all one Father, one Redeemer, are we not all members of one and
the same holy Church? whence then are these discords amongst brethren, these
detractions amongst friends? I Will speak no more, least I seem to teach those
who should teach others. And this I speak not with any solace to my self, but
with grief of heart in the behalf of such which are guilty of such breakings
out, and make my prayers to God for them, that they may see the foulness of
the offense, and be incited and stirred up unto repentance, and make
satisfaction for the same, by calling in their sinister and untrue reports, And
as they render their own reputation, so to be careful of the reputation of
others, and as they love their own peace so to be studious and tender of the
peace of others; If they shall do this there will be some satisfaction made
(though full recompensation for Calumny can never be made) and comfort in
their acknowledgement, and repentance. If it cannot be by this effected, I
will follow the precept of my Savior, and pray to God for t^em, and walk as
well as I can through good reports, and bad reports, and comfort my self with
the company of my Savior, of the Apostles, and of all Gods Saints, who were
not exempted from the lash of the tongue, commending my cause to God (and to
the equal judgment and censure of a Reader not partial) to whose mercy
likewise I commend them, and so desiring with St. Paul that we may all keep
the unity of the Spirit in the band of peace, this ever shall be my wish

Hoc habeat concordia signum Vt quos una fides, jungat and vnus Amor.
SInce my first publication of the uses of my Mathematical Ring, or the
Logarythmes projected Circular I have been oftentimes invited by sundry
persons for to deliver the way of the projecting, and dividing of the Circles
of my Ring upon a Plain, so that it might be made in Pastboard to avoyde the
charge of the Instrument in metal, for such which have not abilities to buy,
and for others, who would first see the practice on it, before they would be at
the cost of the Instrument in metal: for whose sake, and use desiring to
satisfy the affectionat, and for a public benefit, (rather then mine own
particular) profit, I have caused two Plates of metal to be cut and ingraved,
the one containing the Circles of the Projection of my Ring, noted with the
letter A. and the other comprehending the Projection enlarged, noted with the
letter B. that so they may make use of them more readily, to avoid the labor
of dividing the Circles; which schemes being pasted on a Pastboard it is ready
for use; And yet further to satisfy those that are desirous, I have delivered
also in the first place ensuing how those Circles are divided, that so they may
be made according to any magnitude. In the second place how several ways
they may be framed into a Ring: In the third place I show the enlarging of the
Isntrumental Invention in these Circles to as great a magnitude for use as may
be desired. In the fourth place I deliver several ways how these Circles
enlarged may be accommodated for Practical use. In the fifth place, I make a
description of the Grammelogia, or Instrument in the particular Circles of my
Mathematical Ring, projected on a mooveable and fixed plain. And in the sixth
and last place, I will declare the admirable, and excellent uses of both these
Instruments, in the Practical parts of Arithmeticke, Geometry, Astronomy,
Horolographie, Navigation. etc.


