THE CHRISTIANS TRYVMPH.

Manifested By the Certitude of Salvation.

Delivered In a Sermon at Pauls-Crosse on Trinity Sunday, the 15. of June. 1617.

By NATHANAEL DELAVNE, Minister of the word of God at Saint Sepulchers. And
Chaplein in Ordinary to the Kings Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by N. O. for John Pyper, and are to be sold at his shop at
Paul's gate next Cheap Side at the sign of the Crosse-keyes. 1617.

To the most Reverend Father in God, GEORGE by the Divine providence, Lord,
Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, and one of
his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel, grace and glory be Multiplied.
MOST REVEREND.
OF making many Books there is no end. It is true. Eccles. 12.12.
Because error in Doctrine, corruption in manners have no end. What surcease
therefore from preaching, yea from writing, as long as heresy dares show show
her face, and wickedness walk the streets? Many friends desired to renew
their memory, and refresh their comfort in reading printed, that which once
they heard preached. And after many delays, I was moved to satisfy their
godly affection. Nevertheless experience shall find it true, that there is
great difference between preaching, and printing; the tongue and the pen: as
betwixt a quick, and a dead body: Yet laying a side the Action, which is the
life of persuasion, I made no difficulty to wrap my self in dead letters, to
help memory in those that were present, and to extend the benefit of Gods
word to others that were absent. And though the condition of my person be to
low, to clime so high: and the form I have given to this mystical subject be
to mean, to be presented to your Grace. Yet your manifold favors seem to
challenge as due, and to draw from me this token of thankfulness, in
dedicating unto your Grace this my first performance in so public a place. For
you cheered me in my calling at my first coming over from France in the year
1611. and now you have renewed your favors in 1616. upon the sight of my
testimonial certificates from the Churches and Synods of France, concerning my
thirteen years service in the French Ministry without spot or
dis-reputation, and finally you have admitted me into this flourishing Church
of England, in the which I received my first breathing. This small offering is
no more in regard of my debt, then Stillicidium de situla, or Spicilegium de
mess, much like the short measures of this age, wherein many debtors pay by
the shilling what they owe by the pound; as a shicle of silver, for a talent of
gold. Yet this small and light sheafe, which this weak hand has brought for
the making up some of the bundle of Gods harvest, shall by your Graces
acceptance become perhaps in reputation dear, and the barren soil it self,
which brought it forth, shall by the continuance of your wonted good aspect, be
better heartened to bring forth hereafter Laetiorem segetem. So with my
heartiest prayers unto God for the increase of happiness to your Graces
person, and to this Church, Act. 20.28.
over the which the holy Ghost has made you a supreme ouer-seer. I humbly
take my leave, and ever will rest,

Your Graces in all Christian duties to be commanded, NATHANAELL DELAVNE.

The Contents of this Sermon.
1. A Preface. 1. from a point of wisdom. 2. from the excellency of faith. 2.
The coherence. Where the question is decided, of what faith Christ speaks,
and the diverse kinds. 3. The maine doctrine. Of certitude of salvation against
doubts. Where justifying faith is defined, and divided. 4. Against the Church
of Rome. Whose Doctrine is laid open, with the Original, and state of this
Controversy. 5. Part 1. (...). The truth confirmed. By this Argument. The
prohibition of doubt, and nature of faith. 6. The grounds of this certitude. 1.
Gods mercies. 2. Christ's merrits, etc. 3. The Word and Sacraments. 4. Gods
spirit and ours. 7. Perseverance certain. Because it is grounded, on God the
Father. Son. Holy Ghost.
8. Part 2. (...). Ob. 1. Against Certitude of faith. By testimony, out of the
Old and New Testament. Ob. 2. Against Perseverance. By 1. Testimony from the
Old, and New Testament. 2. Examples. 3. Reasons. 4.

9. Use. And conclusion. 1. (...). Against Papists. 2. (...). Against
Hypocrites. 3. (...) Consolation for the Weak. 4. (...). Exhortation to the
Strong.

A SERMON, Preached at Pauls-Crosse on Trinity Sunday, the 15. day of June.
1617.
MATH. 14.31. (...); O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt?


Preface.
I RIght Honorable, Right Worshipful, and well-beloved in our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. The Soldier is trained up at home, for war abroad: The
Mariner provides his Biscuit, ere he strike up sail: The Merchant assures
his wealth, and every Noble man his lands in the best fashion they can: And it
is counted wisdom in all these to settle their temporal estate for the
increase of their joy and happiness in this life.

It is no less wisdom (beloved) in a Christian in time of peace to foresee
the calamities of war; during Health to prevent Sickness; during Life to be
armed against Death: that so assuring our spiritual estate before God, we may
with greater courage fight the Lords battles; with greater boldness sail on
this Ocean: with greater joy embrace the riches of Gods mercies, pledges of
that eternal inheritance reserved for his Saints in the Land of the living.

To this end have I made choice of this Text, where Christ reproouing Peter for
his wavering, shall teach us to assure our selves forever, saying, O man of
little faith, wherefore did thou doubt?

II. Most glorious things are reported of thee O City of the living God, and
what wonderful things do we hear of thee, O Christian faith? Thou art the
Soul of our souls, for the just shall live by faith Abbac. 2
. Thou clothest us with righteousness before God and man; before God, for the
righteousness of God is revealed in the Gospel from faith to faith Romans 1.17.
. Before man, for thou art a mother-vertue, faith working by charity Gal. 5.
. By thee Christ dwells in our hearts Ephesians. 3. Romans 3.
. By thee we are reconciled to God, and justified before him. By thee we are
sanctified, and our hearts are purified Act. 15.
. By thee we are saved Ephesians. 2.
. Without thee whatsoever is done, is a sin Romans 14.
. Without thee none can please God Heb. 11.
. None can pray aright Romans 10
. None can hope for any good thing Iam. 1.
. If we fight against sin and Satan, the Spirit and the Word must be our
swords, but we must take up the shield of faith to quench all the fiery darts
of the wicked Ephesians. 6.
. If we conquer, it must be by thy means, for this is our victory, that
overcomes the world namely our faith. 1. Ioh. 5


So that without faith, we are dead in sin, polluted in iniquity, odious to
God and man. We lie open to all the wiles of Satan, and the world, and to all
the judgments of God, temporal and eternal.

III. And yet against this lively and justifying faith, the Church of Rome
arms her self, troubles her brains, spends her wealth, wastes her strength,
musters her men, gathers her forces, reares her battlements, as if there were
no greater glory in the house of faith, then to be faithless, in the Temple
of the LORD, then to be against the Lord, in the Land of peace, then to be in
continual war.

Therefore to discover the miserable condition of that Church, and our happy
estate by reason of the Gospel, I have fixed my meditatiohs on this verse I
have read unto you. Where Peter's slidings, shall make us stand fast, his
sinking shall teach us to swim, and his doubting shall so confirm us, that
willingly none of us will ever be guilty of this reproof. O man of little
faith, wherefore did thou doubt? And so I come to my Text.

Coherence.
IIII. After the miracle of 500. men fed with five loves, and two fishes.

Christ constrained his disciples to get into a ship, Verse. 22.
and to go before him unto the other side, while he sent the multitude away.
That don, 23.
he went into a mountain to pray. But in the evening the ship being in the
midst of the sea, 24.
tossed with waves, because the wind was contrary. Verse 25.
In the fourth watch of the night, Jesus went unto them walking on the sea. 26.
The disciples seeing this were troubled, and said. It is a spirit, so they
cried out for fear. But Christ assuring them, 27.
And Peter for greater proof desiring to go unto him on the waters. 28
It was granted, and performed. 30
But the wind being great, Peter feared, and so sinking cried. Lord save me. 31
And immediately Christ stretched forth his hand, and caught him, and said unto
him. O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt?

And when he was come into the ship, 32
the wind ceased. Then they that were in the ship came and worshipped him, 33
saying, Of a truth thou art the Son of God.

This is the Coherence, and issue of the History. So that Christ gave unto
Peter a sufficient proof of his humane and Divine nature. Of his humane
nature, by walking on the waters: for it was not a spirit. Peter knew that by
his own experience, as Hierome observes against Marcion.

Of his Divine nature, making the waters stiff as a pauement to walk upon.

Thus Peter believing both, began well, but continuing not in the like zeal,
nay, fearing more the winds and waves, then he trusted Christ's power, and
word, so he sinkes. But Christ in mercy saues him, yet in wisdom checkes
him, that all men might know this peril of drowning, proceeded not from want
of good will, and power in Christ; but from want of faith in Peter. And
therefore he said, O man of little faith, etc.

The Question is.
V. Diverse kinds of faith.
Of what faith Christ speaks, Divines distinguish faith with the Schools
into fides quam, and fides qua credimus, a faith which, and an other wherewith
we do believe. That is the Object and is in Scripture. This is the habit, or
gift of Gods Spirit, and is wrought in man.

Again this faith, qua credimus, wherewith we believe, is Common, or proper.
Common to good and bad, Elect, and Reprobate, as the Historical faith, the
Temporary and Miraculous faith. The one Extraordinary, as the faith of
miracles. The other two Ordinary.

That which is proper to the Elect, is the justifying faith.

They differ in their Object, and Subject. In their Object, namely the Word,
for if the word be but a narration, then faith believing it to be true, is but
Historical. If the word contain a promise and gift of grace in Christ, then
the understanding apprehending it as a truth, and that with some joy, makes a
temporary faith. But applying it to the heart by the spirit of Adoption,
creates a justifying faith. And if the promise be to show forth Gods will and
power, then it is a faith of miracles.

In their Subject, for the one is in the understanding only, the other in the
brain and heart; Nay it possesses the whole soul, and comprehends all the
other kinds of faith, as being the most perfect, I mean this justifying,
lively, and saving faith, which receives Christ, and makes us the children of
God Ioh. 1.1.
.

Now Christ speaks here of a faith of Miracles, which again is twofold,
Active, or passive, Active, when a man by Christ's word and power is able to
work a miracle, of the which Paul speaks 1. Cor. 13.
. If I had all faith, and were able to transport mountains, If I had not
Charity, I were nothing.

Passive. Paul seeing that man of Lystra had faith to be healed, he said unto
him, Stand upright on thy feet Act. 14.
. Thus Peter's faith was passive, for he believed Christ had power to make him
walk on the waters, and to save him when he did sink. It was Active in
Christ, Passive in Peter, but fainting he is rebuked. O thou of little faith,
etc.

The Doctrine.
Thesis.
VI. Where Christ teaches us, that it is with the soul, as with the body, both
have their quames, and diseases. Therefore we read of a great faith, O woman
thy faith is great Mat. 15
, I have not found so great a faith no not in Israel Mat. 8
. There is also a little faith, as in the Disciples. Mat. 8.26
Why are you fearful, O ye of little fath? and here in Peter. O man of
little faith Mat. 14.
.

There is also a slow faith. O fools slow of heart to believe all that was
foretold by Moses and the Prophets Luke 24.
.

But howsoever, Let us discourse of what faith we will, doubting is an enemy
unto it, and therefore it is condemned in Moses, and Aaron Numb. 20.
, and in the disciples Mat 8.
, and here in Peter and 14.
, as you see, for this Doctrine will always hold true.

That faith casts out doubts, it being of the nature and essential property
of faith to assure the conscience.

To believe and doubt, is as fire, and water, light, and darkness, the spirit
and the flesh, sworn enemies. And this is the scope I aimed at, namely to
treat of the nature of faith, and specially of justifying faith, which is the
principal.

And it is defined to be: Definit.
a certain knowledge, and confidence of Gods good will toward us in Christ,
revealed in the Gospel, and wrought by the Spirit.

The parts are two. First, Division.
Knowledge with the assent of the mind. Secondly, Confidence with the consent
of the will and heart.

Object is God in Christ reconciling the world unto him, by this faith grounded
on the Gospel.

Certiude, referred to both, knowledge, and confidence.

Against Papists.
VII. Romish abuse.
And this is it I intend to prove against the Church of Rome, which erreth in
both, as namely. In the genus, knowledge, by commending the blind devotion of
implicit faith. And in the form, or difference, sc: confidence of the heart,
by condemning it as presumption, and recommending doubts, as Catholic humility.

And thus she has obscured the counsel of the Lord, and falls into that
curse, Woe be to him that calls good evil, and evil good: light
darkness, and darkness light, sweet bitter, and bitter sweet Esa. 5.
. For thus she establishes the kingdom of Satan, and under show of
godliness overthrows the Gospel of Christ, the Kingdom of Righteousness.
She is therefore an enemy to true justifying faith, without which there is no
Church, no Christ, no salvation.

Romish policy.
Nay her Obstinacy in defending this doctrine of doubts, shows she has a
further reach, sc: a Political plot to scrape up wealth.

For knowing this great Babell of works and merits would, fall to the ground,
this mass of error in the Mass, would be dispersed, these lucratiue
Indulgences, and cunning Alchimistrie, in changing lead into gold, would be
lost as well art the art of Demetrius in making Temples for Diana Act. 16.
. And withal, that this fire of Purgatory would be soon extinguished, if
this Doctrine take place in men's hearts. That a man through faith in Christ
alone, may be assured of his salvation.

Therefore she strives with might, and maine to strenthen this contrary
aphorism of doubts, that it may be a spur to hasten Pilgrims to Rome, a mill
to grind their wheare, and a bellows to blow their coals, that the
Ecclesiastical Order being built upon the backs and bellies of the Laickes,
those may sing whilst these weep, those laugh, when these lament, those
fatte^, when the faces of these are grinded through misery. In brief, that
they may be assured of temporalities, whilst these doubt of spiritualities:
that they may possess the earth, whilst they set others a working to seek the
way to heaven. Here is a wicked craft, to make Religion a baud for the devils
pleasures, to make doubts a running stream to refresh Avarice and Ambition.

Therefore the Church of Rome is so diligent and earnest in decking, and
setting forth this Helena, that she fears not to say, If a man rest in the
remission of his sins by faith in Christ alone, etiam ideo non remittuntur:
that therefore they are not remitted; as if death could be found in life, and
hell in heaven.

Nay she knows that Certitude of salvation cannot agree with justification
by works, and therefore being fully resolved to maintain that former Doctrine
for her gain and greatness, she will bend her self against this latter as
her deadly enemy, and raise the Doctrine of doubts against this certitude of
faith, as the Popes stirred up new Emperous against the old, that whilst they
fight it out in a doubtful field, he may settle his Chair at Rome, and gain
by other men's losses.

And therefore this Church is not ashamed to confess, that the Romish Religion
cannot give content to the conscience in life nor death. O iayle of conscience!
O sink of misery! Let him be of that Religion, who is an enemy to his own
soul, and whose mind the God of this world has blinded, Lest the light of
the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine upon him
2. Cor. 4 4.
.

As for us, knowing the Jesuitical plots, that trouble all the world to build
their own house. Let us take up the shield of faith, whereby we may quench
all the fiery darts of Satan, and be able to stand in the evil day Ephesians. 6.
.

The Original.
VIII. This doctrine of doubts was often moved by heretics, When doubts first
established.
and answered by the fathers. But of late publicly confirmed by the Chapter of
Trent, where ex profess^, Italy and Spain met to establish all the Popes
errors, that they may not seem any way to be instructed by Lutherans, and
Protestants. This therefore amongst other Errors, was approved by them,
though contrary to Scripture, to the fathers, and to some of their own
writers, as Ambrosius Catharenus who then writ for the certitude of faith
against Dom. a Soto, and Antonius Marinarius, then preached openly, We wholly
draw our minds from any confidence in our own works, and repose our trust in
the loving kindness and good will of our heavenly Father forever. They err
not in the maze of mistrust, who have obtained righteousness through Christ,
but they dare boldly say in the security of mind, peace of conscience, joy of
heart. Abba, Father, and therefore, though heaven should pass, the earth
consume to nothing, and the whole world should be dissolved, I shall erect my
self toward him. And though an Angel from heaven should go about to
persuade me otherwise, I should call him accursed. O the happy assurance of a
Christian soul!

Nay the Dominicans to this day are at variance with the Jesuits upon this
ground: so that we might well be dispenst to deal with them in this question,
till they be agreed amongst themselves. But seeing the Jesuitical opinion of
doubts gets ground of the others, and like a wildfire is blown abroad with
the wind of Ambition and Avarice to consume our houses, and trouble our
consciences; It is necessary every one should bring his bucket from the well
of waters to quench this fire, and to blow his Trumpet, that this wall of
Ierico may fall before him.

And this will I labor to effect by Gods grace, and your Christian attention,
after I have laid open the state of the question.

State of the Question.
IX. Which is this. The Church of Rome teaches: That though a man apprehend
Christ's merits by a lively faith in the Gospel, yet he may not be persuaded
that his sins are forgiven him. He may hope the best of Gods mercies, but he
must stand in doubt of the fruition of them, quia fidei potest subesse falsum,
there may some error lurk under faith, and spes potest fallere, hope may
deceive: So then they account this doubting a virtue in faith, and no
infirmity of the flesh, without which ornament faith is heretical, and
because they see, that faith and doubting are contraries, they feign a general
faith which does certainly believe whatsoever the Gospel reuealeth of Christ,
and the Sacraments do seal unto the believer.

But for the particular application to every conscience, that, they hold to be
heretical, that cannot be, say they, without some particular revelation.

So that in effect you see, their justifying faith is nothing else but
Historical, such as the Devils have, fluttering in the air, and swimming in
the brain, without sinking into the heart: Being then of the same nature, that
those Universals, Reals, Nominals, in the Schools, and those Platonicall Ideas
amongst the Achademikes, they would turn Christian faith into a mere
contemplation, or in steed of Christians make us turn Skeptics.

We must then oppose against this Doctrine of doubts, for the glory of God,
the comfort of our consciences, and the preventing of the Romish yoke, Let us
therefore take notice of this double error. First, of the mind. Secondly, of
the will, for we confess, that there is in every one of us living in this
militant Church, an implicit faith, and ignorance of particulars, and also too
many doubts, distrusting Gods promises, but God forbid we should allow of
them, or hold them for virtues in our Religion. They are the fruits of the
flesh, against which every Christian must fight, till he be finally
conqueror with Christ in the heavens.

And that this is so, we prove it Division.
1. (...). 2. (...).


That is first affirmatively, confirming the truth, then negatiuely refuting
whatsoever our adversaries can say against it. And first of the former.

Part. 1. (...).
X. The argument whereby I prove that a Christian ought to assure his
understanding by knowledge, and his heart by confidence in Gods mercies toward
him in Christ, is taken. First, from the prohibition of doubts. Secondly, the
nature of faith. Mat. 8. and 14. and 21.21.


First doubts are condemned, Mat. 8. in the disciples, Mat. 14. in Peter, and
Mat. 21.21. If ye have faith and doubt not. Romans 4. Abraham commended for not
doubting. He doubted not of the promise of God through unbelief, but was
strengthened in faith. The words in the Original are emphatical. (...) Mat. 14.
, signifies to be driven here and there in our affections, (...) Romans 4. Iam.
1. Mar. 11.
, is opposed to faith, and signifies to dispute with our selves. Luke Luke 12.
instead of (...) a little faith, uses the word (...), that is, to hang in
suspense, as a leaf that is driven with every wind. And therefore that which
the Chapter of Trent, Dubitante conscientia laudat, tanque virtutem fidei,
commends in a doubting conscience as a virtue of faith, that Saint Paul makes a
sin Romans 14
, and therefore concludes that whatsoever is without faith is a sin.

In the second place, Scripture expressing the nature of faith, uses these
words, (...), etc. All which intimates unto us a certitude, for Example Heb.
11. (...).
. Faith is a substance of things hoped for, and an evidence of things not seen
says Paul. And Romans 8. (...).
I am persuaded, that neither death nor life nor Angels, etc. can separate us
etc. For I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to
keep that which I have committed to him against that day 2. Tim. 1.12.
. Let us therefore go boldly unto the throne of grace Heb. 4.16. (...).
. Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith Heb. 10.22.
(...).
. In whom we have boldness, and access with confidence by faith of him Ephesians.
3.12. (...).
.

Thus Abraham being fully persuaded Romans 4. (...).
, that what God had promised, he was able to perform, etc. And having received
the spirit of Adoption, we cry Abba, Father Romans 8. Gal 4.
. All this continued style of Scripture teaches that the nature of faith is to
assure the heart, and cast out doubtings.

Wherefore Saint John says often, 1. Ioh. 3.
We know that we are the children of God. That we are translated from death
to life. By this we know we love him, when we keep his commandments. By
this we know that he dwells in us, by his spirit which he has given us.
Therefore have I written unto you, that you may knew you have life everlasting,
etc.

These places are stones as the fathers speak, quibus lapidantetur heretici,
wherewith heretics are stoned. They are as many smooth stones taken from the
brook of Scriptures to strike this Goliath of Romish doubts in the forhead,
and lay it groueling in the dust, to the great rejoicing of the LORDS host.

Again, to what end is it said that faith brings Peace Romans 5.1.5.
, and Joy and 14 Act. 8. and 10. Luke 10.
, for being justified we have peace with God and rejoice in afflictions.

The kingdom of God, is Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the holy Ghost. The
Eunuke rejoiced, and so did the Centurion after they had believed, and Christ
said to his disciples rejoice, that your names are written in heaven, etc. To
what end I say, all this Peace, and Joy? but to insinuate that faith assures
the conscience, and expels fear: and doubts: for where doubts reign, there
is neither Peace, nor Joy, no sound comfort nor rest, and therefore Christ
reprooueth Peter, sc: O man of little faith wherefore did thou doubt?

Ob.
XI. I deny not, but that every believer is subject to doubts, nay I add more:
where no doubts are, there is no true faith, as long as we carry about us this
body of death Romans 7.
.



Amplified.
When the eye of faith is dim, the eye of the flesh is too much opened, Ob.
when we feel our miseries, more then Gods mercies: when the Lord seems to
stand a far off, to hide his face, and hold his hand in his bosom, and to be
deaf at our cries. Then the Saints of GOD power out these doleful songs, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me Psalm. 22
? Will the Lord absent himself for ever? will he show no more favor? Is his
mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? Has God
forgotten to be gracious? does he shut up his mercies in displeasure? Psalm. 77
Lord how long will thou hide thy self, and shall thy wrath burn like fire?

The arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof drinks up my
spirit. The terrors of God do set themselves in array of battle against me
Job. 6.4
. He teareth me in his wrath, who hates me, he gnasheth upon me with his
teeth, mine enemy sharpeneth his eyes upon me Job. 16.9
, strange words, not far from despair.

with such passions; how, shall not the lambs tremble? If the souls of the
perfect, which have been fed with the marrow of fatness, and have drunk of
the fullness of Gods cup have thus fainted for want of relief? much more the
vnperfet and weak consciences, which scarce have tasted how good the Lord is.

All this is true, and cannot be gaine-said. But after a time the faithful
gather strength again, and are heated at the Sunshine of Gods mercies. They
enter into the Sanctuary of the Lord, and there behold their infirmities with
grief, and reprove themselves, because their feet was almost gone, and
howsoever they say in their haste, that all men are liars, yet by leisure they
repent of it: and so Job after his doubts, is strengthened by faith, and faith,
I know that my Redeemer lives. Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him
Job. 15. and 19.
. And David checks his soul, Why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in
God Ps. 42.11
.

The Apostle pithily expresses our meaning, haesitantes, sed non prorsus
haerentes, staggering, (...).
but not wholly sticking 2. Cor. 4
. So that at last faith does overcome these doubts, and triumphs ever over
death, saying, O death where is thy sting, O grave where is this victory 1.
Cor. 15
?

Nay under the thickest clouds, she beholds some beams of Gods mercies, in
the shadow of death, she embraces life, in the pit of despair she casts
the anchor of her hope in the bowels of Gods compassions, and being cast down
by the flesh, she is raised by the spirit, that she may say with Paul, Who
shall separate us from the love of Christ Romans 8
?

For as the springs are dried up in a hot Summer, Simile.
and the trees are without leaves in a cold winter. As the Sun is hidden with
a cloud: the Stars with the Sun, and the Fire with the ashes. As in a
Sound the actions of life appear not. So in the heat of Gods wrath the
cooling waters of his grace are dried up: In the winter of our afflictions, our
faith lies hid in the ground without leaves, flower or fruit. The clouds of
Gods indignation do hide the beauty of his face, whereby we should be
comforted. The brightness of his Majesty obscureth the lights of our persons,
and the sparks of grace lie hid under the ashes of our crosses: Being in this
sound, and sleep, we are liker dead, then living men. But wait a while, then
comfort will come again, and faith will conquer, and bud forth, repentance
will yield her fruits, and charity will shine bright to our comfort, and Gods
glory. For in a moment have I hid my face from thee, but in great mercies will
I gather thee. The mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my
kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be
removed, says the Lord, that has mercy one thee Esa. 54.
.

Nay even against sense and reason faith lays hold on Gods mercies, as Christ
did, saying, My God, my God, etc.

And when the Devil tempts, the world allureth, the flesh yields, then
faith resists. And if our faith were perfect, we should not doubt at all. And
without this certitude, faith is but a mask, and the believer but an
hypocrite: and therefore, Christ says to Peter. O man of little faith, etc.

The Grounds.
XII. The Grounds Grounds.
of this certitude are not our merits or works. For what can we merit of God,
that cannot challendge a pecce of bread as our own without Gods grace and
gift? and to whom God says in his law, that he shows mercy to a thousand
generations, even then when we love him, and keep his commandments? This
sandy ground of works, is it whereon the foolish Romanists have built the
houses of their consciences, and therefore when the winds of Gods wrath do
blow, or the waves of temptations beat against them, they cannot stand as they
confess it. Their houses fall, and the ruin is great, so that their Religion
cannot afford them any sound comfort in life nor death.

But we like wise men (so called by our Savior, Mat. 7. Math. 7.
) have built our house upon a Rock, that cannot be moved, nor sapped, namely,
the Rock, of 1. Gods mercies, 2. Diuis.
Christ's merits, and efficacy, 3. The Word and Sacraments, 4. The testimony
of Gods Spirit, and ours.

Mercy.
and assure our salvation, we go out of our selves, knowing that in our flesh
their dwells no good thing Romans 7.
. And we do fix our faith in the bowels of Gods mercies, from whence the day
star from one high has visited us Luke 1.
. And so anchoring our hope within the veil, where Christ is, we say unto God
in our Prayers.

Behold we are miserable sinners, and who more miserable then we, we are
misery it self: and thou art merciful, and who more merciful then thee, thou
art mercy it self. Do then thine office, O Father of mercies, and take away
my miseries, for thine own names sake. Thou have done it to others. To David a
murtherour, Solomon an idolatour, Manasses a sorcerer: To Peter that denied
thee, Paul that persecuted thee, and to many of the Jews that crucified thee;
why then do it unto me, who am a man, as they, a sinner as they, thine enemy,
as they were. For thou art always the same Ps. 102
: Thou art the Lord, and art not changed.

If Satan object, Ob.
know thou not that God is just, and that Exodus 34. and 20.
He will not hold the guilty, as not guilty, but will punish the iniquity of
the fathers upon the children, to the third, and forth generation, think
thou that God can deny himself?



And this is the second ground of my confidence.

For God has made him, Merits.
that knew no sin, to be sin for us, that we may be the righteousness of
God in him 2. Cor. 5.
. For he has borne our sorrows, and through his stripes, we are healed Esa.
53.3.
. He died for our sins, and rose for our justification Romans 4.25.
. He has freed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us Gal. 3.
. And so he has redeemed us by his blood out of every tribe, and tongue and
nation Reu. 5 9
.

Ob.
And you need not say, This is true in general, but may not be applied in
particular.

did it for us. And without this particular faith, Christ's merits would be no
more beneficial to me, Simile.
then a feast to him that cannot enjoy it, then a potion to the sick, and a
salve to the wounded being not applied.

To us a child was borne, to us a Son was given Esa 9.5 Luke 2.
. He was our Emanuel Esa. 7.
. God with us: And was made of God his Father, our wisdom, justification,
sanctification, and redemption 1. Cor 1.
. Ours I say, seeing we are his people, for he was called Jesus, that he
might save his people from his sins Mat. 1.2
.

He saved Us, I say, seeing we are penitent sinners, for this word is
certain, and worthy to be received, that Christ came into the world to save
sinners 1. Tim. 1
. Us I say, seeing we groan under the burden of our sins. For he cries,
Come unto me all you that are laden, and I will refresh you Mat. 11.
.

You, says Christ, that are my sheep, for my sheep hear my voice and follow
me, and I will give them eternal life Ioh. 16
.

And I may not doubt of Christ's Merits, seeing they are sufficient. Nor of his
efficacy in applying them by this Spirit, seeing all power is given him in
heaven and in earth. Nay he makes Intercession for us, and we know that his
Father hears him always Ioh. 11 Heb. 4.
. Seeing then we have such a high Priest Jesus the Son of God, who has
peirced the heavens in our name, and there prepares us a place, having
accomplished on earth all his fathers will concerning our salvation. Let us
hold fast our profession, and let us go with assurance of faith to the throne
of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.

If any one yet doubt, may we not rebuke him as Christ did Peter, saying, O
man of little faith, etc.

Now whatsoever has been delivered touching Gods mercies, and Christ's merits,
that is, of Gods good will toward us in Christ, we have learned it out of
Gods Word, which is the external object of our faith.

XV. Word and Sacrament.
And this is the third ground of our assurance, namely the Word of God: Not the
Law, but the Gospel, to speak properly. The promises revealing Gods will in
Christ: Therefore not Legal, but Evangelical.

The Gospel speaks but in general, Ob.
therefore your faith can be but general, and you have need of a particular
revelation to assure your conscience by a particular faith.

Romans 4
Abraham, Ioh. 20
Thomas, Gal. 2
Paul, 1. Ioh. 3
John, did apply unto themselves the promises of God by a particular faith; so
ought we to do.

1. For what they did, was not by a special revelation, but by the Spirit of
Adoption, and the nature of a true justifying faith common to all the Elect.
And therefore they speak in the plural number in the places alleged. And
Paul says, of Abraham, Romans 4.23.24. That it was not written for him alone,
but for us also, to whom faith shall be imputed for righteousness.

And Christ said of Thomas, Ioh. 20. Because thou have seen thou have
believed, blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed. Whence
appears that neither Abraham, nor Thomas, nor Paul, nor John, in assuring
themselves, and applying Gods promises to their consciences, did any thing
extraordinary, but that which is required of every believer to be saved: for
we have the same spirit they had 2. Cor. 4
, though not in the same measure.

2 Again. Though Christ in his Word speak not to every one of us, in
particular, as he did to the sick of the palsy. Cofide fili; be of good
cheer my son, thy sins are forgiven thee Mat. 9
. And to the woman, Thy faith has saved thee, go in peace Luke 7
. Yet the indefinite propositions of Scripture are equivalent with a thousand
particulars.

1 Therefore when we hear, That he which believes, shall not perish Ioh. 3
. That he which calls upon the name of God shall be saved Joel. 2
. That Christ came to save sinners 1. Tim. 1
, to heal the sick Mat. 9
, free the captives Esa. 61
, refresh the weary Mat. 11.
, satisfy the hungry Math. 5 John 6.
, To quicken the dead Ephesians. 2.
, save what was lost, To save his people Mat. 1.
, his sheep Ioh. 10.
, those that were given him Ioh. 6.
; that morn Esa. 61.
, in Sion, and are of a contrite Ps. 51.
, poor Mat. 5.
, and humble Esa. 57.
spirit. And many such like comfortable sentences in Scripture.

2 The sanctified conscience will draw the Assumption. I know I am such, I
feel it, as well as I can feel, I live, see and walk: for nature is not more
powerful to persuade me that I live as a man, then grace can be to assure me
that I live as a Christian.

3 Therefore faith will make the conclusion of this Demonstration, and say, I
shall not perish, but I shall live for ever, for the mouth of the Lord has
spoken it. Heaven and earth shall pass, but one jot of Gods word shall not
pass without his full accomplishment Mat. 5. Luke 21.
.

And to what end else all our Christian meetings? Does not the Minister stand
in Christ's room; threatening and promising, instructing and rebuking, planting,
and rooting out, building and destroying, loosening and binding, opening and
shutting, as having the keys of heaven. Does not he speak sometimes in
general. Believe, and repent, and you shall be saved, but sometimes in
particular, as Paul to the Centurion, Act. 10. and Nathan to David. Tu es homo,
Thou art the man, and Christ to Peter. Simon dormis? Peter sleep thou? Mar.
14.

And therefore salvation is of faith, that the promise may be sure to the
whole seed Romans 4.
. Not sure in general, but to the seed in particular applied.

Sacraments.
And to what other end, the administration of the Sacraments? does not the
Pastor apply the signs of Baptism, and the Lords Supper, and every child, or
believer receive the same signs, with this use and relation, that as truly as
they are made partakers of the one, so truly they receive the other to the
increase of faith, and assurance of salvation? And therefore.

Circumcision is called the seal of the righteousness of faith Romans 4.
. And those that are baptized have put on Christ Gal. 3.
. And Christ says to his disciples. Take, eat, this is my body, which is
given for you Mat. 26.
. The name of the thing signified is attributed to the external sign, to
assure us, that in believing we shall be as certainly made partakers of all
Christ's merits; as by taking with the hand, and eating with the mouth we enjoy
the terrestrial elements for the preservation of this temporal life.

Now every Christian knows he does believe, by the root, groath, and fruits
of his faith.

By the root, because it proceeds from the spirit crying in the heart, Abba
Father, and is grounded upon the pure word of God.

By the groath, because it is nurrished by the same means, it was conceived in
our minds and hearts, as the child is nursed with the same blood he was
first conceived.

By the fruits. For his heart is toward God as the dry land Psalm. 143
. As the heart pants after the water brooks, so pants his soul after his
God Psalm. 42.
.

O when (says he) shall I enter, and present me before thy glorious face,
even in that house, whereof thou art the Master builder, and not man? O who
shall deliver me out of this body of death Romans 7.
! I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ Phil. 1.
. O when shall I say with Simeon. Now let thou thy servant depart in peace
Luke 2.
. And yet, nec pudet viuere, nec piget mori. I am neither a shamed to live, nor
grieved to die.

If it be thy will, O Lord, I should live to serve thee, thy will be done. If
thou say to my heart, seek my face, I will answer, I will seek thy face, O
my God Ps. 27.8.
.

If thou say, Do my will, I will answer, Here I am come, I take a delight to
do thy will, O my God. Thy laws are written within me Ps. 40.7.
. My heart is disposed, O my God, my heart is disposed, I will sing, and give
praise. Awake up my glory, awake Psalterie and Harp, I will praise thee
amongst the people, I will sing unto thee amongst the Nations Ps. 57.8.
.

Thus the root, groath, and fruits. The disposition of the heart, the
obedience of life, the petition of the lips, with the desire of death to
glorify God, are evidences of my faith, and that in truth I have applied the
Gospel to my salvation. And therefore the mercies of God, the merits of
Christ, and the truth of the Gospel shall be sure grounds for my faith to build
upon. And if any yet doubt, we may say unto him, as Christ to Peter. O man of
little faith, etc.

But in comes Bellarmin with his. Ob. Bell: de Iustif: l. 3. cap. 8.
Nemo tenetur, nec potest, nec expedit; No man ought, or can, or may so assure
himself.

bound to have that which God commands? That none can have, that which God
promises? that none may have that which he gives? who will not hold him for
a liar, that publishes such untruths?

1 As often as God cammands us to believe in the Gospel Mark. 1.
. To ask in faith Iam. 1.
, And condemns doubtings Mat. 21.
: so often does he command us to apply in particular the remission of our
sins. For, I do prove that the faith required in the Gospel is a
particular, not a general faith, a justifying, not an hystoricall faith.

2 Again, as often as God promises to hear such prayers, so often he promises
to grant us this particular remission of sins.

3 And lastly, as often as the Gospel is preached, so often this particular faith,
and remission of sins is granted unto the Elect. This being the difference
between the Law, and the Gospel. That the Law commands and shows our
duty, but gives not power to perform it. The Gospel in commanding gives
the hability, power, and effect, to believe and obey, whereupon it is called
the Ministry of the spirit 2. Cor. 3
.

Therefore I conclude, that either a man may be assured of his salvation
resting upon these forenamed grounds, or else Gods mercies are changeable:
Christ's merits and power in-sufficient; The Word is a fable. The Sacraments are
false seals: But cursed be he that says and believes this. Therefore
Anathema, Anathema, to the Church of Rome, that says a man ought not, nor
cannot, nor may not, assure himself in particular of the remission of his
sins, and of life everlasting.

XVI. Part. 4. Gods Spirit and ours.
The last ground for the assurance of our salvation, is the testimony of the
spirit of God, and of our spirit. The holy Ghost witnessing to our spirits that
we are the adopted sons of God Romans 8.
. And that after this manner.

Because we are sons, God the Father has sent the Spirit of his Son in
our hearts crying. Abba Father Gal. 4.4.
. Thence we conclude, that we are the sons of God, and therefore heirs of
God, and coheires with Christ Romans 8.
. Because our hearts are moved to cry with confidence unto God, as unto a
Father, and this spirit of prayer, and of faith, is given only to the sons
of God.

2 Now when our spirits being sanctified, are enlightened with this faith, and
our consciences purified from dead works, then even our spirits can witness
with the spirit of God within us, that we are the children of God, and
therefore shall not perish, because this faith, and repentance bringing forth
good fruits are given only to the elect, to Gods chosen sons and daughters.

Hence the Holy Ghost is called a seal Ephesians. 1.13. and 4.30.
. Yea were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our
inheritance. Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the
day of redemption.

It is also called, A pledge, an earnest penny. For God who has sealed us,
has given us the earnest of his spirit in our hearts 2 Cor. 1.2.
.

This seal, this earnest penny are notes of the assurance of our hearts, where
the Holy Ghost dwells as in his Temple.

And now if our Conscience naturally is instar mill testium, as good as a
thousand witnesses: how much stronger is it to persuade us, being sanctified by
the spirit of truth Ioh 14. and 36.
.

And thus in the Law, under the witness of two or three, every thing was
confirmed, and ratified. Now we have four witnesses vnreproouable: two
external, the Word and Sacraments: two internal, the Spirit of God, with our
spirits.

Therefore either my conclusion is true, That a man may assure himself of his
salvation, or else the premises are false.

But cursed be he that says, God is not constant in mercy: Christ is not of
sufficient will and power to save; The Word and Sacraments, are false badges.
The Spirit of God, and our spirit are false witnesses.

Therefore Anathema, Anathema, to the Church of Rome, that teaches a man may
not be assured of his salvation.

Of perseverance.
XVII. But the Romanists say, Though now you may be assured of Gods favor, Of
our perseuerence.
and of your salvation, yet you cannot be assured to continue to the end: For
the way to heaven is long, tedious, very hard to keep. Multa cadunt inter
calicen supremaque labra. Many things fall between the lip and the cup, and
therefore you cannot be assured of your salvation.

I answer,

The plant which the Father has not planted shall be rooted out Mat. 15.
Therefore that which he has planted shall never be rooted out. That which
he builds shall never be thrown down: Therefore the just is like the tree
planted by rivers of waters Psalm. 1.
. Like the green Olius tree in the house of the Lord Psalm. 52.
. Like the Palm tree, or like the Cedars of Lebanon Psalm. 92.
, and like unto the mount Sion, that cannot be moved Ps. 125.
, and therefore he is persuaded Romans 8.
, that neither high nor low, things present, nor things to come, can separate
him from the love God bears unto him in Christ.

The Grounds.
XVIII. The Grounds.
And the grounds of this perseverance, are not our merits or works: for that
is the reddiest way to assure our damnation. If we should any ways trust in
our selves, we could not stand one moment. Thus we should fall away totaly,
and finally, as all hypocrites do.

But the foundation of our perseverance, is God, the Father the Son, and the
Holy Ghost.

Fathers, 1. love. 2. decree, 3. promise.

1 His love, for says he, I have loved thee with an eternal love. Therefore
have I prolonged my kindness unto thee Ier. 31.3.
.

Love I say so great: That he has given us his only Son, Ioh. 3.
etc. and therefore he will not deny all other things with him Romans 8.
.

He will visit our tansgressions, and chastise us with stripes; but he will not
take away his loving kindness from us for ever Psalm. 89.
Nay, he will rather send us a Nathan to reprove us, as he did to David 2.
Sam. 12.
. Or look upon Luke 22.6
us, as Christ did one Peter. And though we fall, yet shall we not be utterly
cast down, for the Lord vpholdeth us with his hand Psalm. 37.
.

Otherwise he were not a true, and heavenly Father: seeing he has the will
and power to make us such as is fitting, by taking away our stony hearts Ezech.
36.
.

2 And it must be so, because of Gods decree. His knowledge is certain, his
will is just, and power infinite. Therefore the foundation of the Lord is sure,
having this seal, GOD knows who are his 2. Tim. 2.
.

Therefore the false Prophets, and false Christ's with their lying miracles
would seduce even the Elect, if it were possible Mat. 24.
Though Marie Magdalin have seven devils. Peter deny Christ; Paul persecute
him. Yet not one of them shall perish, because those that he has
predestined, he has called; and those that he has called, he has
justified; and those that he has justified, he has glorified Romans 8.
. The future glory of the Elect, is as certain, as if it were past. And hence
arises this confidence.

He that has begun this work in us, will perfect it, till the day of the
Lord Jesus Phil. 1.9
. And thus the doctrine of predestination is so far from shaking the faith
and hope of our salvation, as that rather it does confirm it, as the
principal ground thereof.

3 Now God will be justified in all his works, and therefore he will
perform whatsoever has proceeded out of his lips. God is not a man, that he
should lie, neither the Son of man that he should repent: has he said, and
shall he not do it? Or has he spoken, and shall he not make it good Numb. 23.
? I will (says he) give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me
for ever: I will make an eternal conuenant with them, that I will not turn
away from them to do them good, but I will put my fear in their hearts that
they shall not depart from me Ier. 32.
.

And this promise of the new Covenant is not conditional, for so none should
be saved, if GOD should wait for our faith, and perseverance, but it is
absolute, proceeding from his free grace.

Christ's merits, and power. And therefore (says he) whatsoever my Father
gives me comes unto me, and I will not cast him out, but I will raise him
again, and give him eternal life Ioh. 6.
.

No man shall take my sheep out of my hands, for my Father which gave them me,
is stronger then all, and no man can take them out of his hands Ioh. 10.
. To this end he Prayed for Peter Luke 22.
, and for Us Ioh. 17.
, and was heard Ioh. 11.
. And who would suffer one of his members to be cut off, if he could otherwise
prevent it? And has not Christ bought us at a high rate, with his precious
blood 1. Pet. 1.
? And think you he will loose, that which has cost him so dear?

Gods spirit: for (says Christ) he shall dwell with you for ever Ioh. 14.
. And he shall be the earnest of your inheritance, until the redemption of the
purchased possession Ephesians. 1.
. Hence it is compared to a spring of water Ioh. 4.
. And as you have heard, to a seal, or earnest penny. And all this in truth
Ioh. 16.
, for he cannot, and will not deceive us.

Therefore, either this Conclusion is true. That we may be assured of our
perseverance in faith, and love, unto the end of our full redemption, or else
these premises are false.

But cursed be he that says, God is no sure ground for us to trust upon. His
love is variable, his will changeable, his promise deceitful. Christ's merits
are made void by our sins, his arm is too short to deliver us, and his
prayers are neglected. The Holy Ghost is a false messenger, a counterfeit seal,
and a troublesome host: for if this were so, the Bible were but a fable, the
Gospel a ridle, and Religion but a trick of wit and policy.

Therefore, Anathema, nay Maranatha, is denounced and decreed in the Counsel
of Heaven, against the Chapter of Trent, for teaching that a man may not be
assured of his salvation. If therefore any one of you (beloved) laying hold one
these hooks, and building upon such a rock, does nevertheless waver in his
heart, we may reprove him, as Christ did Peter, saying. O man of little faith
wherefore did thou doubt?

And thus much for the first part, sc: The confirmation of the Truth.

Part. 2. (...).
1 Now it is high time for us to examine our Adversaries Object: It may be, I
have wearied the patience of some, in this first part. But they who know the
weight of this Controversy, know, that a building which must reach to heaven,
ought to have a deep foundation. The taller Oak, and the higher Ceder; the
more compass the root requires under earth. And those who are exercised in
this spiritual building, or planting, know I have omitted of set purpose many
ornaments from the Fathers, and others, even from our Adversaries storehouse,
to beautify this work.

But the desire I have to finish it, and to give it his full proportion in all
points necessary, I have contented my self hitherto with Christ the
cornerstone, and with the testimony of Scripture, the only rule for Articles
of faith, and salvation.

Behold then the suttlety, and diligence of Satan to trouble, and destroy. The
Romanists allege out of Scripture. Division.
First, Testimonies. Secondly, Examples. Thirdly, Reasons, to prove that faith
cannot be a certain particular persuasion, and much less assure us of our
perseverance till we come to perfection.

Objections agains Certitude of faith.
Testimonies are drawn from the Old, and New Testament.

From the Old Testament. As,

Who can say I have cleansed my heart. Prou. 20.8


Men know neither love nor hatred by all that is before them. Eccles. 9.1


Who knows whether the Lord will return, and leave meat offerings, etc?
Joel. 2.14.


From the New Testament. As,

I find my self guilty of nothing, 1. Cor. 4.4.
yet am not I justified thereby.

Work out your salvation with fear, Phil. 2.
etc.

Be not high minded, but fear. Romans 11.


Blessed is he that fears always. Prou. 28.


I answer.

1 To the Prou. 20.

1 It is true, no man can say he has purged himself, that comes from God.

2 No man is thoroughly cleansed in this life.

2 To that of Eccles. 9.

1 The Text alleged by the Romanists is corrupt.

2 True, none can know by our external estate the condition of the Elect, or
Reprobate, because God makes his sun to shine upon good and bad. Mat. 5.
Otherwise, by internal, and external tokens (as we showed before) Paul, John,
Abraham knew they were loved of God, and so all believers know.

3 To that of Jonas, and Joel, we answer.

1 Who knows? intimates the difficulty to have such heinous sins pardoned,
to rouse them to a serious repentance.

2 Or else he speaks of temporal blessings, which being asked with
condition, we depend on Gods will, as Mat. 8. If thou will thou can heal me.

4 To that of Paul. 1. Cor. 4.4. I answer. True, Paul was not justified by his
works, though innocent in his Ministry.

5 But the last testimony of Fear, seems to cross the assurance of faith
diametrially: therefore more labor is here required. And if we break this
spear or staff, they have nothing left to run against us, or to lean upon,
with any hope of victory.

This will give Bellarmine the lie, and stop with a wisp Stapletons crowing
throat, that they shall be able to find nothing henceforth to insult against
the Gospel. Fear 4.


Consider then four kinds of fear. 1. Natural. 2. Of distrust. 3. Servile.
4. Filial.

1 The Natural fear, is an infirmity, but no sin, and therefore was found
in Heb. 5.7
Christ.

2 That of diffidence, is a heinous crime, when we fear man more then God, or
trust man, more then God, and Christ. And this is often joined with a servile
fear.

3 The Servile, and Filial fear whereof is spoken Romans 8. Differ thus.

1 In Subject: for that is in the Reprobate this in the Elect: that in a
polluted, this a sanctified conscience.

2 In the Object. For that looks to the punishment, this to the sin: that
comes after, this goes before sin: If the wicked feared not Hell, he would
harden his heart, and sell himself to do evil in Gods sight: but though
there were neither Heaven nor Hell, the righteous would not sin, because it
is evil in his own nature, and offends the Majesty of so good a Father.

3 In Effects. For that is full of anguish and despair; And therefore it
makes Adam to fly, Cain to forsake Gods service, and Judas to hang himself.
Whereas the other, begets in us a great care not to sin, and a joy, that we
cannot perish.

Simile.
As he that from the steeple looks downe-wards, and trembles; but considering
how he is fenced, and mured in with battlements, rejoices in his assurance,
and lays hold on them with greater care. Whereupon the Psalmist says, Serve
the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling Psalm. 2.
There fear and joy, assurance and trembling are joined together.

4 They differ in the End: for servile fear deserves death Reave. 21.8.
. But this filial fear makes a man happy Prou. 28.
. Fear then is so far from shaking my former foundation of confidence, as
that it does rather establish it. According to the proverb. Timere qui scit,
scit tuto aggredi. He that can fear, will make sure work.

Now this fear of distrust, or servile fear is always condemned in
Scripture. Fear not, O house of Israel, for I am with thee; be not dismayed,
for I am thy God, I have redeemed thee, and called thee by thy name, thou art
mine Esa. 41.
.

And this fear God takes away from believers, That being freed from the hands
of all our enemies, we may serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness, all the days of our lives Luke 1.
. For we have not received the spirit of bondage to be again in fear, but
we have received the spirit of adoption, by the which we cry, Abba, Father
Romans 8.
. And therefore Christ said to his disciples, Luke 12.
fear not little flock. And he rebukes them for this fear Mat. 8.
. As he does here Peter, sc: O man of little faith, etc.

Now compare these prohibitions with the Romish injunctions, and they agree as
fire and water.

And yet this does not exclude that filial fear, we owe unto so good a
Father: that fear I say, which proceeds from love, and agrees with
Christian humility, or modesty, grounded upon our own weakness, and Gods
Majesty.

Therefore Paul exhorts us to work out our salvation with fear and trembling
Phil. 2.
, because God works in us the will and the deed according to his good
pleasure, we are able to do nothing of our selves.

And he persuades the Romans not to be high-minded but fear Romans 11
, because of Gods judgments he had sent upon the Jews, who were Examples 1.
Cor. 10
for us, that we should stand by faith, and fear lest we fall 1. Cor. 10.
, by presumption as the Jews had done.

And the more we fear thus in humility in modesty, the more we are assured
of Gods protection, for this is the head of wisdom Prou. 1.
, and the whole of man Eccles. 12.
.

And thus we have broken our enemies spear to the gantlet, and have wringed
the staff out of their hands. And if nevertheless they will perfeuer in their
fears and doubts; we may justly reprove them, as Christ does Peter. O man of
little faith, wherefore did thou doubt?

And thus much against the certainty of faith.

Objection against perseverance.


When the righteous shall forsake his righteousness etc Ezech. 18.
. The parable of the seed Luke 8.
etc. He shall be cut off, Ioh. 15.3
etc. Charity shall wax cold, Mat. 24.
etc. Many shall depart from the faith, 1. Tim. 41.
etc. Some have made shipwrake of faith 1. Tim. 1.19.
. It is impossible that those if they fall, should be renewed unto repentance
Heb. 6.4.
.

Examples. 1. The Devils. 2. Ada^. 3. Saul, David, Solomon, Peter, Paul, Judas,
Simon Magus, etc. All fell from grace, therefore there is no assurance for our
perseverance.

1. The righteous. 2. Faith.


righteous, the one in their own opinion, or the Churches, and such may
deceive, and be deceived; they may fall finally, and totaly, as Saul, Judas,
Simon Magus, etc. and of such Christ said, I came not to call the righteous,
Mat. 9.
etc. Such as the proud Pharisie Luke 18.
. And of such Ezechiel speaks. The other are righteous in truth, before God,
and such if they fall, they shall not utterly be cast away, for the Lord
vpholdeth them with his right hand Psalm. 37.
And of such, if you understand the Prophet Ezechiel. The condition if, implies
not a possibility on Gods part, that he will forsake them so far, as to
suffer them to walk in all the ways of the wicked to the end.

2 Faith is twofold, as you have heard, quam, and qua credimus: The which, and
with the which we believe. This is common, as the Extraordinary and
miraculous, or Ordinary, as the historical, and Temporary faith. The other
is proper to the Elect, as the justifying faith.

Many have forsaken true Religion, and the profession of faith. Nay, they are
fallen away from a miraculous, temporary, and historical faith, totaly and
finally, as all the hypocrites, and reprobates. But though the Saints have felt
their justifying faith much decayed in temptations, yet it was never rooted out
of their hearts, and these quames endured not to the end, as you see in David,
Peter, Paul and others.

3 The Hypocrites may be thought in the judgment of the Church, and in their
own conscience to be members of Christ, and of his Church. But when the Lord
of the Vineyard shall begin to prune his vine, and take in hand the sickle of
justice, he will then cut off these dead branches that seemed to be grafted in
the Vine, and cast them into the fire. For they were in the Church as vermin in
a man's head, or as a wooden leg tied to the body, but draws not a drop of
blood from thence, and therefore being cut down, the Church is rather eased,
then diminished by their loss.

4 And as for those that sin against the Holy Ghost, it is impossible they
should be renewed unto repentance. So that all these former testimonies fight
not against the nature of justifying faith, and the perseverance of the Saints
whereof is our question.

Examples prevail against it. Example.


For they allege the Examples of evil Angels, and we speak of men.

They of Adam in his Creation, we of man redeemed in Christ, who knows not
that their conditions are far different? And yet Adam fell not finally, but
was restored by grace, Genesis 3. And therefore our doctrine is confirmed by this
example. As for Saul, Achitophel, Judas, Simon Magus; They were hypocrites, and
we speak of the righteous. As for David, Solomon, Peter, Paul. They fell
grievously, but neither totally, nor finally, as appears by their repentance,
and Salomons Ecclesiastes, and Peter's bitter Tears, and Paul's Conversion.

And thus though our adversaries mingled examples of diverse natures, and
conditions, the wicked with the just, the chafe with the corn, to delude our
eyes, yet you see how little they have prevailed. And therefore I come to my
former Conclusion, that the righteous are assured of perseverance, and who
doubts, is guilty of this censure. O man of little faith, etc.

Reasons: And they are four.

not comprehended in the Creed, and therefore it is not to be allowed say they
amongst Christians.

Bellarmin thou never knew the true meaning of the Christian Creed, though
thou take upon thee to be a chief Rabbi in Israel. For why do I confess,
that I do believe, but to note my particular faith, having God for mine Object?
The Father, and here note his will and power, both pillars of my faith.

The Son: where observe, his person, and offices, with his estate of
humiliation, and exaltation, the special object of my faith. And then the Holy
Ghost, the efficient cause of faith. Then proceed to the Catholic Church, of
the which I believe, I am a true member; and therefore that here I receive the
remission of sins, and hereafter I shall rise in the flesh to meet Christ in
the air, and so be made partaker of eternal life in him. Take away this
application, and you dry up the very fountains of true Christian comfort.

Bellarmine, do you ask for that you are assured of? Your prayers for
remission of sins, and for salvation are in vain.

Bellarmin they are not in vain, but rather means, to receive the blessings
contained in the promises. David believed the promise, that his throne should
be established for ever, and yet he prays for it 2. Sam. 7
, Elias believed God would send rain according to his word, and yet he prayed
on the mount for rain 1. King. 18.
.

Daniel, was assured God would deliver his people out of Babylon, the captivity
of 70. years being expired, and yet he prayed for it Dan. 9.
. Christ knew he should be glorified, and those his father had given him, and
yet he prays his Father to perform it Ioh. 17.
. Paul, knew that one of the ship should perish, and yet he would not suffer
the Mariners to ship away, and forsake their labor Act. 27.
. Ezechias had a grant of 15. years longer to live, yet must he use a plaster
of dry figs for his soar 2. King. 18.
. We know GOD has a care of us, and will give us our daily bread, and yet we
must labor, and pray daily for it.

This is Gods wisdom, to make our prayers meet with his blessings. Thus mercy
and justice do kiss each other. If faith and obedience do ascend to glorify
God; grace and peace, shall descend to save man.

but are deceived, for there are many presumptuous hypocrites, and Atheists. No
man can know certitudine fidei, that he has faith and repentance, and shall
be saved. All the promises of God to this purpose are but conditional, if you
believe, and persevere: therefore none can be assured of salvation.

Bellarmine, I know he would not be well pleased. There are some Fools,
Hypocrites, and Atheists at Rome, therefore Bellarmin is one of them There have
been Popes Sorcerers and Atheists, therefore Paulus 5. is one. Who knows
not, that from a particular to a general affirmatively the conclusion follows
not? There were five foolish Virgins, but there were also five wise. Some
presumptuous hypocrites do deceive themselves, being drunk with their own
conceit; but others, who have the spirit of truth, which is not deaf, dumb,
nor dead, but quick, and burning like fire in their bowels, know of a
certainty that God is their Father, and will so continue in Christ for ever,
and therefore they are bold to cry unto him, Abba, Father.

2 All the promises of God are not conditional. Those that are essential to
the Gospel are absolute, depending of Gods free and effectual grace. For
though he require faith and repentance as conditions to be saved, yet by his
Gospel he conferreth to his Elect these graces effectually, and powerfully in
his due time: that the glory may be wholly his.

3 Faith and works are required, not as merits, but as the way to salvation,
sunt via regni, non causa regnandi. They are the way to the Kingdom of Heaven,
not the cause why we reign.

4 We need not certitudine^ fidei, a certitude of faith to believe the
remission of sins, but only sense and feeling. As we need not an other soul
to persuade us we have a soul, but only let us consult our reason and sense,
we shall be fully persuaded that we are men, and live. And so by the root,
groath, and effects of a true justifying faith, we know that we believe, that
we are justified, and shall be saved.

Thus the Patriarks, Prophets, and Apostles knew in whom they had believed, and
rejoiced that their names were written in heaven. And we have the same spirit
of faith that they had, and therefore we are bound to the same duties to
glorify God our Father with our faith. For we have received the spirit that
is of God, that we may know the things that are of God 1. Cor. 2.
. And I pray you, is not faith on of the principal. Therefore he exhorts us,
saying. Prove your selves whether you be in the faith, or no, and if Christ in
you, unless you be reprobates 2. Cor. 13.5.
. Where you may observe these 3. things. 1. That we may know we do believe.
2. That by faith Christ dwells in our hearts. 3. That he which feels not
this, is a reprobate.

The heart of man is deceitful above all things, and who can know it Ier. 17.
. It is true of an unregenerate heart, but not of the renewed heart, which is
single, simple, pure, upright, perfect, and has (as you have heard) received
the spirit of God to know the things that are of God.

presumption, and doubts, they esteem as the virtue of humility and perfection
of faith.

Bellarmin, your too great conceit of your self, has put you beside the
truth: you reele like a drunkard, and take white for black, light, for
darkness.

Will you know what presumption, and arrogancy is? and do you hate these
vices? forsake then your merits, and works of supererogation, your counsels of
perfection, and such like.

2 If you account this presumption to believe in the Gospel, and obey Gods
commandments, which we esteem Christian humility and modesty, we may then
say with Augustine. Bona praesumptio est. We will be thus presumptuous still,
with the Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles, and Saints of God, that our Father may
be honored by our humility, we may be eternally blessed in his well-beloved.

3 But you that make the Devil a Saint that you may worship him without
remorse. Observe here the difference betwixt a carnal, and spiritual
security, betwixt presumption, and the confidence of a true Christian.

1 That is in the reprobrate, and is a vice: this is in the elect, and is a
virtue, that comes from the flesh, this from the spirit.

2 That rests one it self, this one God: that one surmises, this one the
Word.

3 That despises the means, and yet will enjoy the benefit: this uses all
good means, and by faith depends one Gods providence for the issue.

4 That comes one a sudden, as a passion or a flash of fire: this grows up
by degrees, and that very slowly.

5 That is rash, and impudent, this is humble, modest, but very jealous.

6 That is licentious, and troublesome, this is pure and quiet. That is often
drousie, and a sleep, the Devil keeping his hold: this is often assaulted by
Satan, but the issue of this war is peace.

7 That is bold in prosperity, and forsakes in adversity, as we see in
Balthazar, Dan. 5.9. But this is careful in prosperity, and valiant in
adversity till she overcome. As the Palm tree she reares herself up the more
she is oppressed, as Christ did, who fled unto his Father Mat. 26.
. The disciples to their Master Mat. 8.
, and Peter to his Savior Mat. 14.
, so faith never cease giving and receiving woonds, till she obtain the
victory through Christ, that strengthens her Phil. 4. Conclusion.
.

Thus having stripped our adversaries of all their weapons, and hunted them out
of their lurking holes. Let us return to our fortress: And with a garland of
bays on our foreheads, and a palm in our hands, let us sing praises unto our
Michael for this glorious victory over the Dragon and his angels, and let us
be ashamed of our manifold infirmities and doubts, whereby God is dishonored,
Christ denied, and our consciences troubled: and let this reproach ever ring in
our ears to quicken us; O man of little faith, etc.

Vsus.
1. (...) Reproof.
and your honorable patience, laid open the error of the Romish Church in this
one article of the assurance of our Christian faith, Judge you of their
obstinacy, and you shall conceive of their malice, as was specified at the
beginning of this Controversy. The sum of all, will shadow out unto your
understandings, the power and malice of Satan, with the misery of Romish
Catholics Ephesians. 2.
, the children of disobedience, who have loved darkness better then light
Ioh. 3.
. Then compare their Clergy with ours, you will cry out. Twice and thrice happy
England, by reason of the Gospel. For here every soul submits her self to
higher powers Romans 13.
, according to the Word, Romans 13.1. The reverend fathers of this Church waste
themselves as candles to give light unto others: the inferour Ministers labor
to settle your consciences in the peace of God, though many wage war against
them for their pains. This Gospel of salvation brings peace to your
consciences, joy to your families, wealth to your cities, and glory to this
nation. Take notice of this blessing, and give God the praise.

Those that assure you in your temporalities, require a duty at your hands,
and that with good reason: But for my part, having assured your spiritual
estate before God, all the acknowledgement I desire is, that you would honor
my Ministry this day with obedience to this Gospel, that through my
persuasion, you would hold doubts, as fruits of the flesh, and no part of
faith, worthy of this censure. O man of little faith wherefore did thou doubt?

And if any in this noble company has heretofore graced the Romish Religion
with their approbations, let the^ distaste it henceforth, knowing it is not
able by their own confession to give any sound comfort to a Christian
conscience. And if it maintained no other error, this were sufficient in
Luthers judgment Luth. in Genesis 41.
, to withdraw our selves from it. For every Religion has some doubts, but to
command ignorance and distrust as virtues, this is to live under a perpetual
curse Esa. 5.^.
. Therefore you that are yet entangled in the snares of superstition, and in
Gods election are the people of the Lord, come out of Babylon Reu. 18.
. Save your selves from that wicked generation Act. 2.
: And be not partakers of other men's sins. 1. Tim. 5.2. (...) Correction.
But whilst I labor to root out heresy out of the hearts of obstinate
Papists. The presumptuous hypocrite, had almost escaped my censure. Come hither
thou dissembling Protestant, and close Atheist, stay and take thy lesson with
thee. Much has been said of the nature of faith, but thou have no part, nor
lot in this business, unless thou repent, for thou art captive in the snares
of Satan, and in gaul of bitterness Act. 8.
.

Thou say thou beleeuest, that thy heart is assured, that thou fear no
man, no not the Devil, that thou did never doubt of thy salvation. Hypocrite
thy heart is not right before God. It cannot indite a good word Ps. 45.1.
, and thy works are for the devil. Thou approchest to GOD with thy lips, but
thy heart is far from him Esa. 49.
. Thy peace is a carnal security; The devil rocks thee a sleep, that thou
may not avoid the peril. If thou never have any doubts, thou never knew
what faith meant, and the combat of the flesh with the spirit. Thou know
neither thy self, nor thine enemies.

Let my advise please you at this hour. Pray God, that if it be possible this
wickedness may be pardoned Act. 8.
. Did you never hear of Peter's presu^ption? Or to come nerer unto you. Look
unto Saul, Achitophell, Judas, Simon Magus, and by their falls labor to stand;
by their final destruction, strive to save thy soul. And therefore unto you I
say; Behold the severity, and goodness of God. His severity on them that are
fallen, his goodness toward thee if thou perseuerest in his goodness,
otherwise thou shall also be cut off. Therefore be not high-minded, but fear
Romans 11.
.

3. (...). Comfort.
But whilst I reason with the hypocrite to snatch him as a firebrand out of the
fire Iud. 6.
. I see the weak Christian inclyning to despair. To apply then this balm of
Gilead to the soars of Gods people for whom it was prepared. Let me talk
with thee a while.

Dear brother, what fear thou? that Gods mercies are shut up in displeasure
Psalm. 77.
? Harken what the Lord says Esa. 54.7.8.
. I have forsaken thee for a moment, but with great mercies will I gather you.
A little while have I hid my face from thee in the time of my displeasure, but
with everlasting kindness will I return unto thee, says the Lord, who has
mercy on thee. What fear thou? That thou art not worthy of Gods favors? If
thou were worthy, grace should not be grace: But harken: I, even I, am he that
blotteth out thy sins for mine own names sake Esa. 43.
. What fear thou then? that thy sins are infinite? Know that where sin
abounds, there grace does sur-abound p. Romans 5.
What fear thou yet? that God has forgotten thee? Behold, though a mother
should forget the fruit of her womb, yet I will not forget thee, O Sion, says
the Lord Esa. 49.14.
. What fear thou? that God has altered his affection? The mountains pass,
and the hills are removed, but my kindness shall not pass, nor the Covenant
of my peace be removed, says the Lord, that has compassion one thee Esa
54.10.
. But yet thou shakest more then before. What fear thou? That God is just!
know that God has made him which knew no sin, to be sin for us, that we
might be the righteousness of God in him 2. Cor. 5.
. But Christ died not for me. Art thou not a sinner? nay laden with the burden
of sin? then hearken, This word is certain, and worthy to be received, that
Christ came into the world to save sinners, 1. Tim. 1.5.
I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance Mat. 9.
. Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden, and I will ease you Mat. 11.
. Either then thou art partaker of Christ's merits, and in him assured of thy
salvation. Or Christ is not a perfect Jesus, and the Gospel is a fable.
Therefore be of good courage dear brother, gather thy spirits again, return
to the battle. O man of little faith, wherefore etc.

But yet my thinks thy face is cast down, more then before, what fear thou?
that thy faith and repentance are but fained? Hearken, thy heart is bruised, thy
spirit humbled, thy lips confess, thy desire aspireth to God-wards, and
would not commit the least sin for a thousand worlds: then be of good
cheer: thy faith is true, thy repentance sound, thy sins are forgiven the,
thy faith has saved thee, go in peace Luke 7.
. What fear thou yet? that thou have lost this faith? It may be decayed, but
not finally lost: For such gifts of God are without repentance Romans 11.
. But why does thy heart melt within thee, why is thy countenance cast down
without? Feel thou no comfort from God, see thou no fruit of thy faith?
Thy temptation is great, Heb. 6.
dear brother, yet hold fast the Anchor of thy hope. Thou art in a sound, but
not dead. The seed of grace 1. Ioh. 3.
is within you, though the fruit appear not as yet. Similie.
Thou art in the winter of thine affliction, stay till thy spring return, and
then thou shall see the green blade push out of the earth, and shall enjoy the
fruit of thy heart. The heat of Gods wroth has dried up the waters of
comfort, but let hot Summer pass, then the living waters of Gods spirit shall
refresh thy soul, and spring up to life everlasting Ioh. 4.
. The sparks of repentance are hid under the ashes of temptation, the wind of
Gods spirit will blow over the ashes, and quicken the coals of zeal in his
due time. The beams of Gods favor are hindered by the cloud of thy sins, and
he has wrapped himself up in a cloud Lam. 3.
, that thy prayers should not pass. But weight a while. The Lord is faithful,
who has promised, He will come, and will not tarry Abbac. 2
. Believe against sense and reason as Abraham did Romans 4.
, for faith is an evidence of things not seen Heb. 11.1.
, know that thy salvation consists more in Gods apprehention then in thinef.
Phil 3.
In that God knows thee Tim: 2.
, then in thy knowledge of God, for alas this is imperfect, but that is perfect
Cor. 13.
, though all sense of grace fail on thy side, yet think not that your
unbelief can make the faith of God without effect Romans 3.3.
. Look on the Example of the Saints as Job, David, etc. who have bin in the
like temptations, and yet have bin delivered in an acceptable time. Consider
thy ways of old, the days of solace wherein thou tookest thy delight, and
remember that saving grace cannot finally be lost, Be not faithless then, but
believe Ioh. 20.
. O sweet words! O how beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of those
that bring good tidings Esa. 50.
My heart is revived, and my spirits cheered, blessed be the Lord, who has
sent his Messenger to speak a word in season to the distressed conscience.
Henceforth I will sing unto the God of my salvation. O man of little faith,
wherefore did I doubt? But yet, lend me thy hand again, for my faith is
weak. Behold, the mercies of the Lord are infinite. He will not bruise the
broken reed, nor quench the smoking flax Mat. 12.
. If only thou can, hunger, and thurst after righteousness thou shall be
satisfied Mat. 5.
. And if thy faith be but as a grain of mustard seed Mat. 17.
for quantity, yet it shall be of such virtue for quality, that it may say to the
mountains of thy sins, cast thee into the sea of Gods free grace, and they
shall appear no more before God to oppress thee.

And so I leave thee, dear brother, recovering thy spirits. They say Diseases
come a horseback, but go away a foot. Find it not strange then, if thou
pausest a while in thy weakness. Simile.
He that comes out of a dungeon, cannot so soon behold the Sun. He that
is new come a land, thinks for a while that the earth shakes. After a
tempest, the waves are not so soon settled. Therefore walk one in your
weakness, and you shall grow up from strength to strength Psalm. 84.
, til you come to the perfect stature Ephesians. 4.
, of Christ in heaven.

4. (...). Exhort.
And now to conclude with you (right Honorable, Right worshipful and
well-beloved) who stand by faith, who are fed with stronger meats, whose hearts
are replenished with the fatness and marrow of Gods house; whose spirits are
wedded unto the Lord, and who meditate in his Law day and night.

Go on, go on in this Christian course. Be sure and steadfast, abounding
always in the works of the Lord, knowing that your labor is not vain in the
Lord 1. Cor. 15.
You do honor God with your faith, for you seal his truth, and acknowledge
him to be the true God, infinite in wisdom, justice, mercy, and power. Be
assured he will honor you, for says the Lord. Them that honor me, will I
honor, and they that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed 1. Sam 2.30.
. And thus will he honor you. He will come and dwell with you Ioh. 14.
. He will sup with you, and you with him Reu. 3.
. And lo, he will not come with an empty hand, but as Christ brought
salvation to Zacheus his house; so will he bring peace to your souls, and joy
in the Holy Ghost Romans 14
, which passes all understanding Phil. 4.
. And so he will leave peace in your families, prosperity in your Palaces, and
blessings in the Church. And having fought the good fight, finished your
course, and kept this faith, the crown of righteousness shall be given you in
that day by the just Judge 2. Tim. 4.
, and at your departure out of this world, you shall say; Now let thou thy
servant depart in peace according to thy word Luke 2.
, and GOD will answer you as Christ did to the thief one the cross; This day
thou shall be with me in Paradise Luke 24.
.

Grant this O Lord for thy Sons sake. Amen.

