A PASTIME for Parents: OR A recreation, to pass away the time; containing the
most principal grounds of Christian Religion.

By Arthur Dent preacher of the word of God at South-Shoobery in Essex.

LONDON, Printed by T. E. for Thomas Man. 1606.

A PASTIME for Parents to be used with their children for recreation, to pass
away the time; containing the most principal grounds of Christian religion.
Father. What is God?


Child. An infinite perfection, Job. 11. 7.
whose being is of himself.


Father. Where is God?


Child. Always every where, Psalm. 139.
as the air.


Father. Whether is the Godhead a thing only imaginary or no?


Child. The Godhead is not a thing which only may be conceived in thought,
Exodus 3.
but indeed is a most pure and infinite selfebeing.


Father. How then do you conceive of the essence, and being of the Godhead?


Child. That the substance or essence of the dietie is of all things most
simple and single, and is neither divided, multiplied, nor compact of any
elementarie quality.


Father. Express your mind morefully.


Child. This I mean, that the divine nature is one, simple, uniform,
immateriall, impassible, immutable, illocall, eternal, omnipotent, omniscient,
infinite, void of al mixture, composition, combinatio^, division, or
dissimilitude.


Father. Which be the proper and essential attributes of God?


Child. The proper attributes of God are vbiquitie, eternity, unity,
simplicity, omnipotency: for these do spring from his essence and form, as
naturally, necessarily and directly, as the beams, light, and heat, issue from
the Sun, as the streams from a fountain of water.


Father. Can these essential attributes of God increase, or decrease?


Child. Nothing that is in GOD can be augmented, or diminished, or any way
altered: For as he is once at any time, so is he always at all times.


Father. What may we learn out of this?


Child. To fear and tremble so often as we think or speak of this infinite
Majesty.


Father. What are we especially to consider in God for our comfort and
instruction?


Child. His wisdom, providence, justice, and mercy.


Father. Are not all these in God as accidents, or accidental qualities?


Child. No: For there are no accidents, or accidental qualities in God, that
is nothing seperable or mutable: but all these are in God as essential, and
inseparable properties, or if you will of the very essence of God.


Father. Are not these forenamed qualities of wisdom, providence, justice,
and mercy, accidental, and seperable both in men and Angels?


Child. Yes verily: for they are no part of their nature or essence, nor yet
essential properties: for they may be removed, and separated from their
subjects.


Father. You said before that God is always every where, that is, in all
places at once: but how can that be, since the opinion is, that God is only in
heaven?


Child. God as touching his essence is no more in heaven then in this inferior
world: but he is said to be in heaven, because his glory and majesty does
there most clearly shine out.


Father. Since God is in all places at once: tell me also whether he does know
all things at once.


Child. God does know all men's thoughts, words, and deeds at once, all that
ever have been, are and shall be. For there is nothing past, or to come with
God, but all things are always present: and it is as easy a matter for God to
comprehend all things past, present, and to come at once, as it is for us to
tell, one, two, three.


Father. Is it not dangerous then to have any base thoughts of God, or
carnally or basely to imagine that God is like a man, or any other creature?


Child. Yes assuredly: For it is high treason to have any such thoughts or vile
conceits of God: for God is like no thing: Esaias. 40. Verse. 18.
as the Prophet says, to whom will ye liken God?


Father. Is not the sin of the Papists very great, which make Images and
similitudes of God, and set them up in their Churches to breed carnal
thoughts, and imaginations of God in the hearts of the people?


Child. It is a very high degree of blasphemy: Esaias. 40.
for the Prophet says, What similitude will you set up unto him? Abac. 2. 18
and another Prophet says: that the Image is a teacher of lies.


Father. What shall we say then to our common swearers which daily blaspheme
this great majesty of God, and take his most holy and sacred name in vain for
every trifle?


Child. They shall one day know and feel to their everlasting woe, what it is
to blaspheme such an infinite majesty.


Father. What use are the people of God to make of all this?


Child. This, to have so great a majesty always in singular admiration and
reverence. And the rather, because in these corrupt times men grow so fast
toward atheism and prophainnesse, that there is no more any common devotion
amongst them, or any Reverence of a Godhead.


Father. What yet further do you consider in God?


Child. That he is one in substance, three in persons. I mean that in this
most simple and single essence the three several persons do subsist.


Father. Do you mean that the Godhead is distinguished, or divided, into
three persons?


Child. No, for the essence of the Godhead is so simple, and single as I said,
that it can neither be distinguished, divided, or multiplied, no not when the
Son is said to be GOD of God.


Father. Are not the persons in the Godhead distinguished?


Child. Yes, the persons are distinguished each from other by their proper, and
incommunicable proprieties, that is, their diverse manner of being which they
have in the Godhead. As the Father by creation, the Son by redemption, the
holy Ghost by sanctification.


Father. Express your meaning yet more fully.


Child. My meaning is this, that although the substance of the deity being most
simple and single cannot be divided, or distinguished, nor the same essence
separated: yet I say the persons are so distinguished in office not in essence
as the one of them cannot possibly be the other.


Father. What call you the persons in the trinity?


Child. I call a person a subsistence in the essence of God, which having
relation to others is distinguished by his incommunicable propriety.


Father. Is not every person the whole and the same substance of the deity?


Child. Yes, for every person is by himself God.


Father. Are there not then three Gods?


Child. No, for the Scripture teaches plainly that there is but one God and
three persons. John. 1. 7.
As 1. John. says, there are three which bear record in heaven, the father,
the word, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one, that is one in
substance, and three in persons, and there be many other places of scriptures
which prove the distinction of the persons. As where it is said, go, and teach
all nations baptising them in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost. And again in the third chapter of the Gospel of Saint Matthew. ve. 16.
17. Mat. 28. ver. 19.
Where first mention is made of a voice from heaven which was the voice of the
Father. Where the first person in trinity is pointed unto. Then it is said,
this is my beloved son. There the second person is at. Thirdly it is said,
that the spirit of God descended, and lighted upon him like a done. Which
plainly notes out the third person which is the holy Ghost, and thus you see,
how ye scriptures do avouch a plain distinction of persons, as we say a
trinity in unity, and a unity in trinity.


Father. Yet I cannot by any reason discern but if every person be God then
there must needs be three Gods.


Child. We must not in this case consult with reason, but simply believe the
Scriptures though we cannot comprehend by humane reason the manner or rather
mystery of this matter. For it far exceeds all humane reach and capacity.


Father. Is not one person in trinity greater then an other, as the Father
greater then the Son, and the Son greater then the holy Ghost?


Child. No, for the persons be coequall, coeternall, and coessentiall.


Father. How understand you that word coessentiall, which the learned call
(...)?


Child. The persons in trinity are called coessentiall, not because they are
only of like essence, as we see the particulars of the same kind to be in
natural things, as in three apples growing together in one, and such like: but
because they are indeed one and the self same simple essence; Therefore the
persons of the deity cannot without blasphemy be said to be only coherent
together in substance, or only of like substance.


Father. Is it not necessary that Christians should be well grounded in the
knowledge of this unity of the Godhead, and the distinction of the persons?


Child. Yes verily. For many errors, and heresies have grown in the world
about these points.


Father. Do you not believe that the everlasting God has made heaven, and
earth and the sea, and all things in them contained?


Child. Yes, Act. 4. 24.
they are all the works of his hands.


Father. How did he make them?


Child. By his word. Heb. 11 3.
As it is written. Through faith we understand that the world was ordained by
the word of God.


Father. Whereof did he make the world, and all things in it?


Child. Of nothing* As it is written. The things which we see, are not made
of things which did appear. Heb. 11. 3.



Father. To what end did God create heaven and earth?


Child. To set forth his glory. Psalm. 19.



Father. Has not God as great a care for the conservation of the world, and
all particular creatures in it, as ever he had to create them?


Child. Gods care is no less for the conservation of the creature then first
it was for the creation. Psalm. 104. ver. 27. 28.
For as in great wisdom he made them all; So in as great wisdom he does
preserve the^ al He is not as a carpenter which having built a house, afterward
takes no more care of it.


Father. Do you not think that God also created the Angels?


Child. Yes, Col. 1. 16.
they also are the works of his fingers.


Father. When did he create them?


Child. In the beginning when he made all other creatures.


Father. In which of the six days were the Angels created?


Child. That is a curious question, and I can give you no certain answer unto
it: but it is most likely, and probable that it was in the sixth and last day
when man was created after Gods own image. For the Angels carry the greatest
Image of God in them.


Father. What is an Angel?


Child. An invisible spirit. Col. 1. 16



Father. Our Lord Jesus says that God is a spirit: Ioh. 4. 24.
What difference then make you betwixt God and an Angel?


Child. The difference is exceeding great. For God is an infinite spirit, the
Angels are but finite. GOD is the creator: the Angels be but creatures, and
although they be very glorious creatures: yet God does infinitely exceed them
in glory.


Father. Do not the Angels of all other creatures come nearest unto the nature
of GOD, and furthest excel the nature of man?


Child. The angelical nature does exist as a mean betwixt God and man,
although far nearer the lower, then the upper extreme. Participating somewhat
of each nature, having had a beeginning as man: and yet being immortal with
God, consisting of matter and form as does a man: yet void of all mixture as
God. Subsisting in some matter subject as a man: yet being incorporeall as God.
Ignorant of some things as a man: yet of wonderful capacity and knowledge as
God, and in a word being every way finit as a man: yet perfect in all respects
as God.


Father. As you have showed me the proper attributes of God so also show the
proper attributes of the Angels, that so we may more clearly discern their
glorious nature?


Child. The Angels have essential attributes proportionable though not
comparable to those in God. For Gods absolute vbiquitie, they have successiue
vbiquity, for the eternity of God they have immortality, for his most simple
nature, they have a most thin and subtle essence, for his omnipotency they
have great power and might.


Father. How prove you that the Angels have so great power and might?


Child. Out of the Psalm. Where it is said Praise the Lord ye his Angels which
excel in strength. Psalm. 103. ver. 20.
And again out of the Book of the Kings. Where we read that one Angel in
one night did destroy the whole army of Synacherib King of Assiria. being an
hundred fourscore and five thousand.


Father. What think you of the agilitie and swiftness of Angels?


Child. I think by reason of their agile and thin substance being far more
subtle and thin then the air it self, that they glide through the air with
vnconcernable swiftness, and can be any where in a moment as God is always
every where.


Father. What is your reason?


Child. My reason is this, we see by daily experience that the sun being a
visible body does fetch the whole compass of the heavens in four and twenty
hours and it is well known to all ye learned that the circle or circumference
of the sun does by many degrees exceed the circle or globe of ye whole earth,
needs therefore must the Sun be carried in an unspeakable swift motion far
passing the musket shot for else how could it go through his whole sphere
in 24. hours as we see it does, then consequently it follows that the motion
of Angels must needs be much swifter then that of the Sun, because they are
of a more thin, agile, aerie, and invisible nature.


Father. Can an Angel be in many places at once?


Child. No but in a minute of time they can be any where as I said before.


Father. What say you to the knowledge and understanding of Angels?


Child. I say that it is exceeding great in all things, far passing all
knowledge of men though never so learned and skilful.


Father. Do the Angels know all things?


Child. No, they are ignorant of some things, as of men's particular thoughts of
some things to come, of the last day and of the essence of God.


Father. What reason can you yield that Angels know not the essence of God?


Child. This; the essence of God is infinite therefore no Angel can know it or
comprehend it. For that which is finit cannot comprehend that which is infinite:
but the Angels are finite; therefore they cannot comprehend ye essence of God
being infinite, for the essence of God is verily known to himself: he knows
his own essence, and therefore he is infinite. For whatsoever knows and
comprehends that which is infinite, must needs it self be infinite.


Father. Where be the holy and elect Angels of God?


Child. Then be both in heaven, Psalm. 34. 7.
earth and the air. Mat. 18. 10.
And wheresoever any people of God be, there be they also.


Father. What is the special office of the good Angels?


Child. To preserve the children of God, Psa. 1. 91. 11
to guard them, Mat. 18. 10.
to minister unto them, and to keep them in all their ways.


Father. What is the reason that the Angels are discribed with six wings a
piece in the Scriptures? Esaias. 9. 2.



Child. They have two wings to cover their face, because they are not able to
endure the brightness of Gods glory: they have two wings to cover their feet,
because man is not able to abide the brightness yt is in them; they have two to
fly withal, to signify their readiness and prompt obedience to all the
commandments of God.


Father. What use are we to make of all this that God is so infinite in
himself, and so glorious in all his creatures, specially in the Angels, Sun,
Moon and Stars, etc.


Child. We are not only to fear, dread and reverence so great a majesty: but
also to love him, worship him and obey him with all our hearts, with all our
spirit, and with all our strength, and with all our thoughts.


Father. Did not the blessed Angels fall from that excellent estate wherein
they were first created?


Child. Many of them fell from their first estate and became devils as
appears in the Scriptures. John. 8. 44
2. Pet. 2. 4.
Iud. ver. 6.



Father. What was the cause or chief motive of the fall?


Child. They fell of themselves, that is to say, through their own motion,
will and disposition without any instigation of any other or any former motive
whatsoever, which thing caused God to cast them down without all hope of
recovery: but man falling by the first motive, and by instigation of others
has left unto him an assured hope of recovery.


Father. Is not the number of the Angels that fell from their first estate, and
became devils, very great?


Child. Yes exceeding great: for the devil being demanded by our Lord Jesus
what was his name, answered, My name is Legion: Mark. 9.
for says he, we are many, which plainly proves that there be many devils.


Father. What do you call a Legion?


Child. A Legion according to the account of the Romans was six thousand
footmen: Our Lord Jesus said to Peter: Mat. 26. 13
Put up thy sword, for do thou not think that I can now pray to my father,
and he will give me more then twelve Legions of Angels? So then it appears by
the scriptures that there be very many both good Angels and bad.


Father. If there be so many devils, why does the Scripture speak of the
devil in the singular number as if there were but one?


Child. There be multitudes of infernal Spirits, but yet they do so join
together in one, that they be called the devil in the singular number,
because there is a kingdom of them, and a united society under one head,
prince or principal devil: and they do all join to uphold their society,
Mat. 12. 26
and kingdom, as Christ teaches.


Father. Did the devils by their fall loose that great power and strength which
they had by nature and creation?


Child. No: They do still retain their first power and strength, Ephesians. 6. 12.
as experiance teaches: and the Scriptures do call as well the Devils, as the
good angels, principalities and powers.


Father. Have the devils by their fall lost that great wisdom and
understanding which they had in their first estate?


Child. No: But they have corrupted, and depraved it, and turned it from
wisdom into deep craft and subtlety: the like may be said for their
swiftness and agilitie.


Father. Where are the devils, what place do they keep in?


Child. Their principal abode is in the air, through the which they glide too
and fro with unspeakable swiftness: Ephesians. 1. 7.
and therefore the Apostle calls the devil the Prince of the air, Ephesians. 6.
12.
and the devils are said to be in ye high places.


Father. The common opinion is that the devils be shut up in hell, as it were
in a dungeon of darkness, and that they never come out except they be forced,
and raised up by coniurers.


Child. That is an ignorant, false and fantasticate opinion quite contrary to
the Scriptures, Job. 1. 7.
which teach that the devils are in places here below. 1. Pet. ca. 8.



Father. Is it not a true and warrantable speech to say that the devils are in
hell?


Child. Yes: If you take hell metaphorically for the torments they are in, and
not for any circumscript place: for it may be very probably coniectured that
the abode of the devils is in the air, and not in any other circumscript place
as yet: but after the great judgment they shall go to their own place, even
that depth or gulf mentioned, Luke. 8. verse. 3. which they do quake and
tremble to think off as appears in the Gospel. Mat. 8. 29.



Father. What is the estate and condition of devils in the mean time?


Child. In the mean time they are in chains of darkness as Saint Peter
says, 2. Pet. 2. 4.
that is, in a most miserable condition of life, full of terrible horror, even
as grievous malefactors having received the sentence of death are yet for a
time retained in a stinking prison, until they be drawn out to their full
and last execution: for S. Jude says expressly that they are reserved in
everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day. Iud.
ver. 6.



Father. Having thus far spoken of God, and of the Angels and their fall: Let
us now proceed to speak of man, and first of all tell me, In what estate man
was first created?


Child. In a most pure and excellent estate free from sin and corruption,
being made after the very image of God in respect of knowledge, Genesis 1. 26.
wisdom, and righteousness, having freedom of will, and Lordship over the
earth.


Father. How then fell he from this so glorious and perfect estate?


Child. The woman being beguiled by the suggestion of Satan in the likeness
of a serpent, Genesis 3.
did entise Adam her husband to eat of the forbidden fruit in the midst of
the garden, and so presently, both lost all their former excellency, and also
wrapped themselves, and their whole posterity in perpetual thraldom and
misery: Romans 5.
and thus sin first entered into the world, and together with sin came death
and the curse of God upon all mankind.


Father. Now since the fall of Adam wherein does our misery especially consist?


Child. In this; that we are wholly corrupted both in reason, understanding,
will, and affections, which is the very cause why we are so proone to evil,
and so untoward to all goodness.


Father. Does God hate us for this our natural corruption?


Child. As an Adder, or a Toad is hated of man, not so much for the evil it
has done, as for the poison that is in it: and the hurt which it cannot but
do: so God hates us, not only for the evil we do, but for the evil which
we cannot but do, that is, for our poisoned nature which is borne and bred
with us.


Father. Then you hold that our actual transgressions do not first make us
evil.


Child. I hold so indeed: For as the hurt which a venomous serpent does, makes
her not a serpent, but because she is a serpent, she poysoneth and hurts:
so our evil deeds do not first make us evil, but because we are of nature
evil, therefore we think and do evil.


Father. Do you think that this original contagion is wholly in every
particular man: or that one man has one part of it, and another man another:
and so part it among them, part, and part like?


Child. I think thus, that as every man received from Adam the whole nature of
man: so also he received the whole corruption, and is clothed with it as a
beast with a skin, his whole nature both body and soul being oppressed with
it as a most infectious leprosy: and therefore every man has in him from his
parents the seed of all sin, which is a natural disposition, and pronenesse
to commit any sin whatsoever. For the spawne of all the horrible sins that
are practiced in the world are in that man which is thought to be best
disposed by nature.


Father. But experience teaches that some even by nature are more civil,
gentle, and tractable then others.


Child. This comes to pass, not because some men are by nature less wicked
then others: but because God by his providence does limit, and restrain men's
corruptions more or less, which he does for the good of mankind: for if men
were wholly left to themselves, corruption would so exceedingly break out into
all manner of villainies, that there should be no living in the world.


Father. It seems by this that man is a most contagious and vile nature.


Child. The nature of man in regard of the corruption thereof, is the worst of
all natures except the Devil, yea worse then the nature of beasts, as Lions,
Woolues, Dogs, Swine, etc. for there is in man's nature some thing of every
beasts nature. For he is proud as the Lion, cruel as the Woolue, greedy as
the Dog, crafty as the For, filthy as the Swine, leacherous as the Goat,
etc. For look what degree of goodness we had in our first creation in Adam:
the same degree of evil have we in the corruption of our nature by his fall.


Father. But is this natural corruption always lively and operative in us, I
mean in continual action and operation, does it not sometimes lie dead in us,
and cease to work?


Child. It is always alive and woorking, except where it is kept down by
special grace, and there also it will not be held down one minute longer
then special grace woorketh, and preuayleth in the soul. For so soon as the
thought, or action of grace is out, the thought and action of sin is in: Our
concupiscence is like a crabbe tree which brings forth always sour fruit:
or like an untilled field, which brings forth nothing but weeds: or a lusty
strong horse pricked with prouender that carries his rider headlong over hedge
and ditch.


Father. But put the case a man should have no outward objection to move him,
nor external prouocations to allure him. Do you not then think that this
natural infection would lie dead in him, and cease to work?


Child. Concupiscence would show it self, though men were shut up alone in
closets between stonewals, where they could have no external prouocations,
yea, though there were no Devil, or that the Devil were chained up.


Father. Whether then do you think that the Devil or our corrupt nature are
greater enemies to our salvation: Or whether does more evil spring out of our
currupt nature, then from the devils suggestion?


Child. First, I answer that our corruption is a stronger enemy against us
then Satan, and consequently our selves greater enemies to our selves then the
devil, for we have no such enemy as our selves: and secondly that more and
greater evil does spring from our corrupt nature, then from Satan's
instigation. And all this S. James does affirm, saying: Every man is tempted,
Iam. 1. 14.
when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence, and entised: It is the
concupiscence that does first both draw away, and entice: as for the Devil he
does but work upon our concupiscence, and is, as it were, the bellows to blow
it, and fire it, without the which he could not come within us, to do any
thing against us.


Father. Do you then think that the devil cannot work immediately, or sine
medijs, without means upon the soul or heart of man?


Child. I think so indeed: But that which the Devil does upon the heart, is
by the external senses, and outward objects by reason of the hypostaticall
union betwixt the soul and the body: for he works, and pierces through
the body to affect the soul, by reason of the natural sympathy.


Father. But does this birth-corruption remain in the very elect after their
regeneration?


Child. Yes undoubtedly: and the children of God have greatest feeling of it,
and are most troubled with it, and grieved for it: struggling with it by all
good means to suppress it, and keep it under: for sure it is that even after
the people of GOD are justified, and sanctified, and assured of eternal life:
yet they have their hands full, and as we say towe enough to their Rock to
snib, and nippe of those manifold blossonies and fruits of corruption, which
daily and hourly arise and spring up in their nature. For as fast as one is
pinched, and nipt in the head, an other forthwith springs and sprouteth out:
Not unlike the Monster Hydra with seven heads, that the Heathen write of,
which having one of them cut off, seven others did arise in the stead of it.
And thus we see that the very Elect of GOD have an endless trouble, and as
we say work enough cut out, for as long as they live, to repair this rent
and torn nature. For alas, alas, though GOD forgive us our sins, yet does
he not, nor will he in this life free us of natural corruption.


Father. Is not the knowledge, and feeling of this a great corsey, and heart
smart to the most dear children of God?


Child. Yes verily: For there is nothing that does so sorely pinch them at the
heart as the consideration of this, which indeed makes them weary of their
life, weary of the world, and weary of all: and often wish with the Apostle to
be dissolved and to be with Christ; for they do continually groan under
this corruption, as under a most heavy burden, and fetch many a sorrowful
sigh to think of it, and are ever complaining of it, as of a most deadly
enemy of theirs. And all this we many clearly see, as it were, in a glass,
in the example of the Apostle Paul himself that most rare, and excellent
Servant of God. Who takes up most pitiful, and lamentable complaints of
this poisoned and infected nature. I know (says he) That in me, that is in
my flesh dwells no good thing. I allow not that which I do, Romans 7. 15
for what I would, that I do not: but what I hate, that I do: I do not the
good thing which I would: but the evil which I would not that do I. Now if I
do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but the sin that dwells
in me. I find then that when I would do good, I am thus yoaked that evil is
present with me. For I delight in the Law of God concerning the inner man, but
I see an other Law in my members rebelling against the law of my mind, and
leading me captive unto the Law of sin, which is in my members. And in the
end he breaks out into an outcry, saying: O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from the body of this death?


Father. Do not Ungodly, and unregenerate men likewise mourn under this
corruption, and complain much of it?


Child. No: you shall seldom or never hear them complain of it, or mourn
under it. For they walk after the foolish, and fulfill the lusts thereof with
all delight and greedines, being wholly carried after the swing and sway of
their own corrupt affections and desires.


Father. What is the cause hereof?


Child. Because they are forsaken of God and given over to a great blindness
of heart, and hardness of affections, so that though their misery is
exceeding great, yet they have little sight, and less feeling of it.


Father. Do you not think that a man in the state of nature cannot so feel
his misery?


Child. Sure it is, that a mere natural man can have no true sight, or lively
feeling of his misery, or any sound desire to come out of it: but does greatly
please himself in it, and is loath to come out of it; for the Apostle says
plainly, that the natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of
God. For they are foolishness unto him, 1. Cor. 2. 14
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.


Father. But may not a natural, and unregenerate man have the knowledge of
God, and the understanding of his will, and so consequently a sight of heavenly
things?


Child. Yes; a natural man has a kind of knowledge and understanding of God
and of his will: but it is only a confused and brain knowledge, and a
literal understanding of the Scriptures, for he cannot possibly have the
lively and saving knowledge, which is joined with quickening grace. Nor that
sound understanding and sight which does lineally descend from the spirit of
sanctification.


Father. May not man in the state of nature have feeling also of God, and of
heavenly things?


Child. The Scriptures do teach that a reprobate may have a kind both of
sight and feeling of heavenly things, for he may be lightened, Heb. 6. 4.
and taste of the heavenly gift and of the powers of the world to come, and also
taste of the good word of God, and be made partaker of the holy Ghost. But his
sight and taste and feeling can never be sound and good before regeneration. So
then all the cunning is to know, whether the work of grace in a man's soul be
sound and current or no, for unregenerate men are much deceived with a false
light; for they do blindly Imagine, yt because they have some kind of sight,
and feeling of heavenly things, therefore they have all, and the same that is
in every elect.


Father. What difference then do you make betwixt the knowledge of the elect
and the reprobate?


Child. The knowledge of the reprobate does puff up.

The knowledge of the elect does humble.

The knowledge of the reprobate is general and confused.

The knowledge of the elect is particular and certain.

The knowledge of the reprobates is only literal: and historical.

The knowledge of the elect is spiritual, and experimental.

The knowledge of the reprobate is speculatiue.

The knowledge of the elect is practiue, that is, joined with obedience. For
howsoever a natural, and unregenerate man may know much: yet has he not nor
can have any power to do, I mean, cheerfully and aright till his heart be
enlarged by Christ and his will renewed by grace.

The knowledge of the reprobate is like ye knowledge which a mathematical
geographer has of the earth and all places in it, which is but a general
notion, and speculatiue comprehension of them.

But the knowledge of the elect is like the knowledge of a traveler which can
speak of experience, and feeling, and has been there and seen and known
the particulars.


Father. Now tell me further what difference you make betwixt the feeling of
the elect, and the reprobate?


Child. The reprobate has a kind of natural feeling of sin but it is
without the true hatred of it, for in his heart he loves it.

The elect does so feel his sin that he hates it, takes council against
it, and prays against it.

The feeling of the reprobate is from natural faculties, for he is not as a
block without all sense.

The feeling of the elect is from the spirit of sanctification.

The feeling of the reprobate arises from natural fear and diffidence: for
man naturally feels, and fears dangers, so the reprobates feel and fear
the wrath of God, the accusations of their consciences, the punishment of
sin, hell fire, etc. But have no true feeling of Gods love toward them.

But the elect have a lively feeling of Gods love toward them.

The reprobate has sometimes at starts, a feeling of spiritual joy: but it
vanishes incontinently.

The feeling of the joy of the spirit in the elect, is more lasting and often.


Father. As you have told me much of man's misery in nature? so tell me yet one
point further, whether a man in the state of nature can do any thing that
pleases God?


Child. A mere natural man cannot please GOD in any thing he does, but even
his best actions are turned into sin. Romans 8. 8.
For the Apostle says. They which are in the flesh cannot please GOD. And
again he says. To them that are defiled, and vnbeeleeuing is nothing pure:
but ever their minds and consciences are defiled. Tit. 1. 15.



Father. How long does a man continue in this woeful and cursed estate wherein
he was borne?


Child. Till he be regenerate and borne again. For our Lord Jesus affirms,
that except a man be borne again he cannot see the kingdom of God. John. 3.
3



Father. By what means does a man come to be regenerate and borne again?


Child. By the outward preaching of the word, and the inward work of the
spirit.


Father. By what signs may a man know that he is borne again, Iame. 1. 18
justified, and sanctified? Ephesians. 1. 13.



Child. By the work of grace in his heart.

By his love to the word of God.

By his love to the children of God.

By his hatred of sin.

By his love of righteousness.

By the change of his thoughts.

By the change of his actions.

By his mortification of the flesh.

By his sanctification of the spirit.

By his walking no more after the flesh, but after the spirit, and such like.


Father. Since man in himself is so cursed and miserable as you have declared;
show me what is his best course to take, and first of all tell me which is
the first step to eternal life?


Child. The first step to eternal life, is for a man to know and feel his
misery, and then labor to get out of it.


Father. How does a man come to know and feel his misery?


Child. By the sound understanding of the law, Romans 3. 20.
contained in the ten commandments.


Father. What is the Law?


Child. The perfect rule of righteousness teaching us what we should do, and
forbidding the contrary.


Father. By whom was the Law given?


Child. By Moses.


Father. To whom was it given?


Child. To the children of Israel.


Father. When was it given?


Child. In mount Sinai. Exodus 19.



Father. How was it given?


Child. With great fear and terror. Exodus 19.



Father. To what end was it given?


Child. To let us see our sins, that by the sight thereof, we might be
constrained to fly unto Christ.


Father. Is any man able to keep the Law?


Child. No; Romans 2. 2.
and therefore no man can be justified by the law.


Father. Since then the law does condemn, and not save. Since it shows our
diseases, but can give us noe remedy, wherefore then serves it? or what is
the use of it both in the regenerate, and unregenerate?


Child. As concerning the unregenerate. Romans 7.
First, it discovers their sins.

Secondly, it stirs up the affections of sin in them, not of it self, but
through their default.

Thirdly, it works in them a feeling of the wrath of God, of death, and
damnation, without offering any hope of pardon, and therefore to them it is the
minister of death.

Lastly, it does increase, and augment sin in them accidentarily, that is, by
reason of their great corruption which declineth from that which is commanded:
but inclines to that which is forbidden.


Father. Lay open this last point somewhat more fully.


Child. Even as a waterbrooke being stopped with a damme euerwart, it does surg
and swell the more, till it break over the damme: so sin being restrained by
the Law does increase, and rage more in men not regenerate, for their will
being not reformed, does ever tend to that which is forbidden. Romans 7.
Therefore the Apostle says, that without the Law sin is dead, that is,
though sin be in men before the publishing of the Law: yet it is not known,
felt, nor perceived; as the corrupt humors in man's bodies, which lie close and
are not felt till the purgation come: but then they humble and stir mightily
to resist the medicine, or as unslaked lyme, which sleeps, as it were,
quietly and stirs not till the water be thrown upon it, but then it
smooketh, burns, and is in an extreme heat. Or as a Snake which lurketh
close in her hole all winter, as if she were dead: but when the hot Sun
shines upon her, then she reuiueth, writheth, and stingeth, and shows her
venomous nature. And thus you see what is the workinge of the Law in
unregenerate men: But in the regenerate, that is such as are under grace, it is
otherwise. For they do consent unto the Law, and their nature does not take
occasion any more by the Law to bring forth sin.


Father. What is then the special use of the Law of the regenerate?


Child. First, it is a rule for them to direct their lives by Secondly, it
teaches them not to trust in themselves Thirdly it humbles them continually
in the sight of God Lastly, it is their schoolmaster to Christ.


Father. Whether are the regenerate under the law or no?


Child. The children of God are under the obedience and institution of the law,
Romans 6. 14.
but not under the curse of it; Gal. 5. 13.
for they being in Christ are freed from that.


Father. Whether are the unregenerate under the law or no?


Child. All wicked and ungodly men are under the curse of the Law, which is all
one, as to be under the captivity of Satan and sin. For their case is
this, they must perfectly keep the Law, or else be damned. For they have no
right to Christ, in whom only the Law is satisfied. We see therefore what a
pitiful case al men are in, till they come to Christ, and be found in him.


Father. What difference is there betwixt the Law and the Gospel?


Child. The Law condemns, but the gospel saves: the law casts down, but
the Gospel raises up.


Father. What difference is there betwixt the covenant of the law, and the
covenant of the Gospel?


Child. The Legal covenant does really differ from the Evangelical, or new
covenant of Grace. For the old covenant of the Law was conditional, and did
no otherwise give life, and salvation unto men, but if they did perform it,
and therefore it was nothing else but a repetition of that, which GOD made to
Adam, to wit if he did eat of the forbidden fruit he should dye, if not, he
should live: even so if we keep the Law we shall live thereby. If not we
shall dye. But the covenant of the Gospel is free, that is, it does freely
give life to those that believe though they fail in doing.


Father. But what comfort then is there in the covenant of the Gospel, more
then in the covenant of the Law, since men of themselves are as unable to
believe the Gospel, as to keep the Law?


Child. God has promised to give power to his elect to believe the promises of
the Gospel. But he has made no promise to give power to perform the Law.


Father. Are not the Law and the Gospel contrary?


Child. They are not contrary in themselves for the same God is the author of
them both, the same Christ the substance of them both; the same promises of
eternal life the end of both; but the contrariety is in us: for to us the Law
says: Do this and thou shall live. But the Gospel says, Believe and thou
shall be saved. These then be contrary to be made righteous by our selves,
and to be made righteous by another: for these cannot stand together.


Father. What say you to the Evangelical covenant, or new covenant of grace,
was it not of two sorts?


Child. Yes: The first was that which was made to the old people: the other
was that which was made to the people of Christ's new kingdom.


Father. What difference is here betwixt these two?


Child. These two be all one in substance, but differ only in the manner of
dispensation, that is to say, in the manner of utterance, and measure of
revelation: for otherwise in substance, Evangelical covenant has always
been one and the same, first made to Adam in Paradise, afterward renewed to
Abraham, and his seed, shadowed in the law, spoken of by the prophets. and
preached unto us ever since Christ was actually exhibited to the world.


Father. You seem to say this, that the covenant of Grace with the old people
of the Jews, and us, differs only in manner, not in matter, that is, that
Christ and all the promises of remission of sins and eternal life, in him
were dimly revealed, and darkely uttered unto them in Types, and shadows: but
unto us the same are more fully and clearly opened and revealed.


Child. I mean so indeed.


Father. Express your meaning more at large in this point.


Child. When a new impression of any book comes forth in a fair letter,
good print, distinctly versed, well bound, and guilt, which before was ill
printed in a dark letter, ill bound, and covered, we say it is a new book:
yet in substance it is the same with the former: the difference is only in the
form and outward quality. Likewise when a Paynter draws a dark draught of
any kind of Picture in obscure lineaments, and colors, and afterward
flourishes it over with more lively, fresh, and orient colors, here is the
same thing in substance, but altered in quality. And thus it fares beetwixt
the Covenant of Grace made with our forefathers and us. For the oulde people
which lived under the minority, and wardshippe of the Church, had a dark
draught of Christ, and all the promises made in him. But we have them more
clearly and lively set out, 2. Cor. 3. 8.
And as the Apostle says, We are not as Moises which put a veil upon his
face, etc. But we all beehold as a mirror the glory of the Lord with open
face. etc. And again, in diverse manners God spoke in the old time to our
forefathers by the Prophets: but in these last days he has spoken unto us by
his Son most clearly and manifestly Heb. 1. 1.



Father. You told me even now that no man is able to keep the Law: Now
therefore tell me what danger lies upon it, If a man break the Law of God?


Child. Eternal death and damnation, Romans 6. 23.
for it is written: The wages of sin is death.


Father. Is eternal death and damnation due to us for every little sin, though
it were but in thought only?


Child. Yea, for the least sin of thought, If God should deal with us
according unto Justice: for it is written: Whosoever keeps the whole Law,
Iam. 2. 10.
and yet fails in one point is guilty of all.


Father. How then shall we escape this eternal death and damnation?


Child. Only by Christ: For he has redeemed us from the curse of the Law,
being made a curse for us. For it is written, Gal. 3. 13.
Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree: And again: He that knew no
sin, 2. Cor. 1. 21.
was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him.


Father. How, and by what means has Christ redeemed us from the curse of the
Law, and death eternal?


Child. By the shedding of his blood upon the Cross: for the Scripture says:
That he has made up a general peace betwixt his father, Col. 1. 20.
and all the elect by the blood of his Cross: Col. 1. 14.
And again, We have redemption throught his blood, that is, the forgiveness
of sin. And in another place. Ephesians. 2. 13.
We which were far off are made near by the bloold of Christ: And the
author to the Hebrews says, That neither by the blood of Goats, Heb. 9. 12.
and calves, but by his own blood entered he once into the holy place and
obtained eternal redemption for us.


Father. Have we no further good by Christ but only a freedom from death, and
a deliverance from hell and damnation?


Child. Yes: Ephesians. 2. 14.
For through him we are reconciled to God the Father, Col. 1. 21.
as the Scripture teaches, 2. Cor 5. 19
and through him we have remission of sins, Ioh. 3. 15.
eternal life, John. 5. 24
and all good things, for the Apostle says. 1. Cor. 1. 30
He is made of God for us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption.


Father. Is there no other way nor means, whereby we may obtain remission of
sin and eternal life, but only by Christ?


Child. No: For the holy Ghost says, There is no salvation in any other, Act.
4. 12.
for among men there is given no other name under heaven, whereby we must be
saved. And again, To him do all the Prophets witness, that through his name
only, all that believe shall receive remission of sin. Act. 10. 43.



Father. What say you then to Popes pardons, Indulgences, Masses, Trentales,
Dirges, and such like: May not a man by them obtain remission of sins, and
eternal life?


Child. Nothing less: For the Scripture knows no such means or ways to
eternal life: but does vitterly reject them as most abominable devises of
them.


Father. But may not a man be saved by his good works?


Child. No: For the Apostle says, By grace are ye saved through faith, Ephesians.
2. 3.
and that not of your selves, nor of works, least any man should boast
himself.

And sure it is that even in our best actions there is some remedy of
corruption as we do them: for the which God in justice may condemn both us
and our actions: for the Scripture says: Esaias. 64. 6.
That our very righteousness is as a defiled cloth, or filthy cloute. If then
our best works be stained, how can we be saved by works?


Father. If we cannot be saved by works, then wherefore should we do them?
as good play for naught, as work for naught?


Child. Not so for although we can not be justified in the sight of God by
our good works: yet they have their necessary use, and serve to great purpose.
As first to glorify God. Secondly, to publish our Faith to the world. Thirdly,
to bring peace and comfort to our consciences in the discharge of our duties.
And lastly, to win others.


Father. What do you call a good work?


Child. No work of man is sound and current indeed, except the same be
commanded of God to be done: and that of our part it be done in such sort
and manner as he requires, that is, from a careful heart, and sanctified
mind: otherwise, whatsoever we do in the worship and service of God, it is
abominable.


Father. If a man cannot be saved by his works, but by Christ only: then tell
me whether al men shall be saved by Christ or no?


Child. None shall be saved by Christ, but only such as believe in Christ, that
is, such as do particularly apply Christ, and all the promises made in him to
themselves, being fully persuaded in themselves that Christ with all his
merits is theirs.


Father. Are you fully persuaded that Christ with all his righteousness is
yours: that you have special interest in him, and that he dyed for you
particularly, and by name?


Child. I am fully so persuaded indeed without all doubting.


Father. How know you certainly that you have special interest in Christ, and
that you shall be saved by his merits, since thousands shall perish which will
say as much as you, and in words make great brags, that they hope to be saved
as well as the best of them all?


Child. I do certainly know it by the work of grace in my soul: I do
certainly know it, because I feel it, for this I am sure of, that I feel
that wrought in me from above, which cannot be in any but those whom God will
save.


Father. What is that I pray you?


Child. A lively feeling of his grace, a feeling of his love, a feeling of his
mercy; assured faith in the promises, a feeling of the spirit of adoption, a
change of my heart, an alteration of my ways, an unfeigned hatred of all
evil, and a sincere love of all righteousness.


Father. May not a wicked man have all this?


Child. No: He may have certain shows and shadows of these things: but in
deed and in truth these things can be in none but the very elect.


Father. Cannot the wicked and unregenerate man be fully persuaded that Christ
is his, and that he shall be saved?


Child. He cannot, whatsoever he says, because he cannot possibly receive the
spirit of adoption, whereby this inward assurance and full persuasion is
wrought, and whereby also the merits of Christ's death are sealed to every
particular conscience.


Father. What other reason have you?


Child. Because none of the wicked have that lively and justifying faith, which
makes Christ, and all his righteousness ours.


Father. But there is none so wicked, but he will say he has faith, and for
the most part they think, that they have all the faith in the world, and that
there is no want in their faith.


Child. Alas poor souls: In these matters of GOD they say and think they
know not what. For Faith is a mystrrie, and all heavenly things are such
mysteries, as they, men of this world cannot understand: they are hid from
their eyes.


Father. Tell me then what is the heavenly, and justifying faith?


Child. A full perwasion and inward assurance of Gods particular love to us in
Christ, with a sense and feeling of the same in our hearts.


Father. May not this be in the wicked?


Child. No: It is not possible.


Father. How far then may a wicked man go in faith?


Child. A wicked man may go thus far: to have knowledge of the truth: An
assent to the same, a joy both in hearing and speaking of it, and an outward
profession of it for a time: but the inward assurance of Gods love, and
sensible feeling of it in their heart, they can never have: which is indeed
the very life of faith.


Father. Is not this knowledge and assent sufficient: If a man know the word of
God, and consent to the truth of it in his heart, is not this faith?


Child. No: For the devils may go so far, and further too: For the devils
do believe the Scriptures to be true. They believe all the articles of the
faith: They have exceeding great knowledge of the will of God, and of the whole
Scripture, they believe that there is a God, and that there is a reward for the
righteous, and torments to come for the wicked, and as Saint James says: The
devils believe and tremble: and yet I hope no man will say the devils shall be
saved. Therefore we must seek a difference beetwixt their faith and ours, or
esse our faith is no better then the faith of devils.


Father. If this be true then Lord have mercy upon us, For out of doubt
thousands are deceived in this matter of faith, and most men content themselves
with a shadow of it, stead of faith indeed. And assuredly the faith of many
carnal protestants is little better then the faith of devils.


Child. It is true the more is the pity: for the faith that now a days goes
for current in the world is but an idle, dead, barren, fruitless, and
fantastical faith, or rather an opinion, conceit, and mathematical
Imagination of the brain.


Father. How many parts be there of the true and lively faith?


Child. Two.


Father. Which be they?


Child. Justification and sanctification.


Father. What is justification?


Child. A setting of us free from the guilt of sin by the blood of Christ.


Father. What is sanctification?


Child. A clensing and renewing of our nature by the spirit of God.


Father. How many parts be there of justification?


Child. Two: That is to say, remission of sin, and the imputation of Christ's
righteousness: for when our sins are forgiven, and Christ's righteousness
imputed to us, then are we truly and indeed justified.


Father. How many parts be there of sanctification?


Child. Two.


Father. Which be they?


Child. Mortification and vivification.


Father. What is mortification?


Child. A dying to sin.


Father What is vivification?


Child. A living to righteousness.


Father. How many parts be there of vivification?


Child. Two.


Father. Which be they?


Child. Regeneration, and repentance.


Father. What is regeneration?


Child. A repairing of our nature which was corrupted by Adams fall.


Father. What is repentance?


Child. An inward change of the soul, and a conversion of the whole man unto
God.


Father. Cannot a wicked man have this repentance, which is in the change of
the soul, and the conversion of the whole man unto God?


Child. This is never wrought in ye wicked.


Father. How far then may the wicked go in repentance?


Child. The wicked may go thus far to have a sight of sin, and a feeling of
it, a confession of it, a sorrow for it. A great pensiveness and terror after
some horrible fact, for fear of shame, Law, punishment, hell fire, etc. as had
Judas, Cain, Saul, Esau, Ahab, and such like. They may have also a resolution
for the time to sin noe more. But that part of repentance which has the
promise of mercy annexed unto it, that is, the conversation of the whole man
unto God, they can never have.


Father. How many parts be there of repentance?


Child. Three


Father. Which be they?


Child. Inward sorrow, confession, new obedience.


Father. Whether is faith before repentance or repentance before faith?


Child. If we respect time then they go together, for so soon as there is
fire there is heat, so soon as a man has faith, so soon he repents; but in
the order of nature, faith goes before repentance and before all other graces,
because it is the root of all things that please God. But if we respect the
outward manifestation, then repentance goes before faith and regeneration,
and all other virtues. Because it first of all appears outwardly. For Faith
is like the sap of a tree that lies hid within the bark: But repentance is
like the bud that speedily shows it self, before either blossom, fruit, or
leaf appear. Faith is like the fire and repentance like the smooke: for
though fire be before smooke, yet the smooke shows it self before the fire.


Father. You defined repentance to be an inward change of the soul, how
understand you that? Does repentance change or abolish the substance of body or
soul, or any of the faculties thereof?


Child. No such matter. But true repentance does rectify and amend them by
remoouing the corruption: for it turns the sadness of malancholy into Godly
sorrow, choler into good zeal, softness of nature, to meekenes of spirit,
lightness, and wantonness to christian mirth. It reformeth every man according
to his natural constitution, not abolishing it, but redressing the faults of it.


Father. By what means is repentance wrought in us?


Child. Both faith and repentance are wrought in us by yt preaching of the
Gospel through the inward work of the holy Ghost.


Father. Is not repentance wrought in us by the preaching of the Law?


Child. To speak properly, it is not. For the Law is not the proper cause, but
rather an occasion of repentance, because it represents unto the eye of our
soul our damnable estate, and smites the conscience with doleful terrors
and fears, which though they be no tokens of grace (for they are in their own
nature the very gates, and the downfall to the pit of hell) yet are they
certain occasions of receiving grace.


Father. Express this more plainly.


Child. Even as a Physician is sometimes constrained to give that unto his
patient which increases sickness and makes his fits more sore and terrible,
to the end he may recover him: so man because he is dangerously sick of sin
must be cast into some fits of legal terrors by the ministry of the Law,
that he may be soundly and inwardly cured.


Father. The Law is a scholemaster to bring us unto Christ, ergo it is the
cause of repentance.


Child. It brings us to Christ but not so kindly and naturally as does the
Gospel by alluring us, but as it were, violently and forceably constraining us;
and as they say it brings us not simply and of it self: but after some sort
and manner* For the law in it self is the ministry of death, and damnation,
because it shows a man his wretched estate but shows him no remedy,
therefore it cannot properly be an isntrumental cause of that repentance which
is effectual to salvation. But the doctrine of repentance is a part of the
Gospel; and therefore the preaching of the Gospel, and the preaching of
repentance are put one for another. Luke 96. Mar. 6. 12. and consequently true
repentance does spring out of the gospel, as out of his natural root and most
original cause.


Father. As you have told me by what means faith and repentance are wrought in
us: so now tell me by what means they are nourished, and increased in us?


Child. As faith and repentance are first hatched, and bred in our hearts by the
ministry of the word: so also are they increased by the same, and by other good
helps appointed of God for that purpose, as prayer, sacraments* reading,
meditation, conference, and such like good means.


Father. First then let us proceed to speak a little of prayer, and first of
all, tell me what prayer is?


Child. And earnest calling upon God according to his will; or as some say, a
familiar speech betwixt God and us, or as a secret letter wherein Gods people
signify their mind unto him at large, craving a speedy answer, which he in
his time according to his will and wisdom, does always most graciously
return without failing.


Father. How many parts are there of prayer?


Child. Three, confession, petition, thanks giving.


Father. Whereof must confession be made?


Child. Confession must be made both of original sin, and actual
transgressions, both commissions of evil, and omissions of good. And all this
must be done, with as much particularising as may be, that is, calling to
mind, and reckoning up particular offenses, especially those which lie
heauiest upon us: and that with as great grief, vehemence, and aggrauation of
them as is possible.


Father. Whereof must our petitions be?


Child. Petitions must be for the remoouing of evil, and the obtaining of
good; for spiritual, and earthly blessings, concerning our selves, and those
that are near unto us, concerning Church and commonwealth: concerning
magistracy, ministry, and commonalty.


Father. For what must our thanksgiving be?


Child. First, for all spiritual blessings, as election, creation, redemption,
justification, sanctification, adoption, word, sacrament, good men, good books
good society, good conference and all furtherances to eternal life whatsoever.
Secondly, for all outward blessings, as preservation of prince, country, peace
for magistrates, soode, raiment, health, liberty, peace, and preservation. For
daily, ordinary, and particular favors, which are renewed upon us continually
from day to day: even as the eagle renueth her bill.


Father. As you have showed me the parts of prayer; so also show me some
circumstances of prayer, and first tell me to whom we must pray.


Child. To God only.


Father. In whose name must we pray?


Child. In the name of Christ only.


Father. How must we pray?


Child. In the spirit that is, fervently, feelingly, and constantly, which
cannot be without a feeling of our misery.


Father. When must we pray?


Child. At all times as occasion, and necessity does move: Iame. c. 13
but specially in the time of affliction, as it is written; if any be afflicted
let him pray.


Father. Where must we pray?


Child. Every where; 1. Tim. 2. 8
but especially in the public assembly and our private families.


Father. Upon what must our prayers be grounded?


Child. Upon the word of God, and the promises of the Gospel.


Father. What must we pray for?


Child. For those things which our Lord Jesus has taught in his prayer which
is the perfect platform of all prayer both for matter and form.


Father. Which be those things which our Savior would have us always to be
mindful of, when we have any suites unto his father?


Child. First, the honoring and setting up of his name here amongst us, both
in regard of his Justice, and mercy, and also in respect of his word and
wisdom, power and providence.

Secondly, for the advancement and flourishing estate of his Church and
kingdom, by the regiment of his word and Spirit, by the increase of good work
men in his harvest, and a blessing upon their labor: by a remoouing of all
lets, and by a weakening and overthrow of all adversary power whatsoever:
especially that of Antichrist, Idolatry, and Atheism.

Thirdly, that all cheerful obedience may at all times, and of all persons in
their several places and callings be yielded unto his most holy will, without
grudging or hypocrisy.

Fourthly, that all things necessary for this life may be ministered unto us,
as food, raiment, health, liberty, peace and preservation: and also that a
blessing may be upon all that we have, as body, goods, name, wife, children,
family, stock, store, corn, cattle, trades, occupations yea all the works of
our hands, both goings out, and commings in.

Fifthly, that a general pardon may be granted from the throne of grace through
Christ, for the remission of all sin in his blood, and that thereby we may be
justified, acquitted, and discharged.

Sixthly, that we may not afterward be left to our selves, but sufficiently
armed with spiritual strength from above to outstand all temptations
whatsoever; that so all praise may redound to him which works all in all.


Father. As you have showed me the matter and circumstances of prayer, so show
me the effects of prayer?


Child. It were an endless labor to enter into that, since the scriptures do
plentifully teach, that all hard and admirable things have been compassed and
effected by prayer, both for the turning away of evil, and the purchasing of
good.


Father. Then tell me what things are especially to be observed of us in prayer.


Child. There be nine special things to be observed of us in prayer.


Father. Which be they?


Child. Repentance, meditation humiliation, faith, love, zeal, thanksgiving,
watchfulness, obedience. Whereof the first three go before prayer: the next
three are in the action of prayer. The last three follow after prayer.


Father. Open your meaning more plainly.


Child. My meaning is this, that our prayers can never be current and good in
the sight of God, except before prayer first we come with great sorrow for sin
and strong purposes of amendment. Secondly except we muse and meditate very
deeply of yt great and manifold dangers we go in every day, both within us
and without us Thirdly, except we be thoroughly humbled with the conscience of
our former transgressions. Moreover in yt actio^ of prayer there is nothing
sound and acceptable to god: except faith be present, yt is a full assurance to
be heard for Christ, and for the promises made in him Secondly, except love
toward our brethren be there also without envy, wrath, and all uncharitable
affections. Thirdly, except zeal that is pure and earnest affections, bear
the chief sway in this action, for god abhors coldness. Lastly, except there
be hearty thanksgiving for favors obtained: watchfullnes over our affections
afterward, and special care of bettering our obedience in all time to come.


Father. Does not our Lord Jesus in the preface of his prayer teach us all
these things concerning the manner of prayer?


Child. Yes our Lord Jesus in his preface does in general terms teach all
these things; for he teaches us to pray in faith, fear, and love. In faith
and assurance, because God is our Father, in fear and reverence, because he is
in heaven. In love, because he is our father that is, a common father to us
all.


Father. If we pray according to these rules, are we not sure to be heard?


Child. Yes certainly: Ioh. 15. 7.
As the scriptures do abundantly teach us, 1. Ioh. 3. 22
and as it may appear by this reason, 1. Ioh. 5 14.
that in prayer there is the mutual and joint work of the whole trinity: the
holy Ghost moving and quickening, the Son mediating: the father hearing, and
graciously returning an answer.


Father. But yet we see by experience, that God does not always grant the
petitions, and requests of his own children. Show me therefore some reasons
why God sometimes denies the requests of those whom he loves most dearly.


Child. There be four reasons hereof: Eze. 14. 14
first, because God has otherwise decreed with himself.

Secondly, Mat. 20. 22
because they know not oftentimes what to ask.

Thirdly, 2. Cor. 12. 9
because he in his deep wisdom sees it not good for them.

Lastly because God will try their faith, Luke 18. 7.
love, Lament. 3 8.
patience, and constancy.


Father. Having thus far spoken of prayer, as one special means whereby our
faith is increased: Let us now further proceed to speak of the Sacraments, as
of an other special help: and first of all tell me what is a Sacrament?


Child. A Sacrament is an holy sign or seal, ordained of God to confirm our
faith to testify our obedience to his majesty, and our love and fellowship one
with another.


Father. How many Sacraments be there?


Child. There are but two Sacraments of the new covenant, namely, baptism and
the supper of the Lord: for those only are Sacraments of the new testament,
which are ceremonies instituted of Christ for the common use of the whole
Church, having the promise of grace annexed unto them, which excludes five of
the popish sacraments.


Father. Why are the sacraments called signs?


Child. Because they represent to our selves spiritual things, and set forth
Christ, and his benefits to the outward senses of all.


Father. Why are they called seals?


Child. Because they seal unto our consciences the assurance of the
forgiveness of sin, and because they do effectually apply to the faithful
the truth and fruit of Christ's death.


Father. Are our sacraments but bare signs, and figures as the papists charge
us?


Child. Oursacraments are not bare signs and figures, but figures joined with
their truth and substance, and such as not only represent, but exhibit unto
us the body and blood of Christ.


Father Make this more plain?


Child. The Sacraments are signs to represent, seals to confirm, and
instruments to convey Christ and all his benefits to the believers they
represent, because we are dull to conceive and remember: they seal because
we are full of unbelief: they convey Christ unto us, because otherwise we
do hardly apprehend him.


Father. The Papists charge us that we affirm an imaginary, figurative and
spiritual body of Christ to be present in the sacrament, and not his
essential body, What say you to that?


Child. They do falsely so charge us, for we hold that the Godly receive the
true and natural body of Christ, and are partakers of his very substance, to
make us grow into one life with him, for we can have no benefit by Christ
until we be partakers of Christ himself, and that in such sort, that we
become flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, that is, one with him, and he
with us: Howbeit not corporally, but in such sort as is agreeable to a
Sacrament, that is to say, spiritually, and mistically.


Father. Lay open this point more at large?


Child. Our conjunction with Christ is not in imagination, and conceit only,
but is real and substantial, though secret and hard to be comprehended; and
therefore the Apostle calls it a great mystery. Ephesians. 5.
For we are tied to Christ by his spirit, as the natural members to the head
by joints and sinews, in a most secret, and admirable manner. For we may not
carnally conceive of this our conjunction with Christ, as though there were any
mingling of his body and ours, his substance and ours, or his person and ours:
for all things that are united one to another, are not straight ways mingled;
for although the light is joined with the air, and the Sunshine with the
windows: yet can we not therefore say they are mingled together. The
conjunction in covenant betwixt man and wife, makes them two, one flesh, so
near is it: yet for all that, they cease not to be diverse persons, and sundry
substance, although by covenant they are one flesh. Such is the conjunction,
and union betwixt Christ and us: for we are indeed united with the flesh of
Christ, and are flesh of his flesh, and bones of his bones: yet is all this
without any mingling or growing together of our persons, and substance with
his: for as the union of the faithful, one with another as members of one
body, is not by any real mingling, or growing in their persons together but by
the bond of the spirit: so it is in this our spiritual coniunctio^ with Christ.


Father. Since the Sacraments are seals as you say, tell me what it is that
they seal unto us?


Child. The Sacrament of Baptism seals unto our consciences the remission of
sins, which is the first part of our justification. The Sacrament of the
Lords Supper seals Christ's righteousness, which is the second part of our
justification: and to say all in a word, whatsoever the holy Ghost teaches by
the Gospel, the sacraments do confirm and seal the same unto us, but
especially that our whole salvation stands in the only sacrifice of Christ
offered for us upon the cross.


Father. Which be the principal uses of a sacrament?


Child. There be seven principal ends, and uses of a Sacrament.


Father. Which be they?


Child. First to be seals of the new covenant betwixt God and us. Secondly, to
assure us of ye truth of gods promises. Thirdly, to underprop the weakness of
our faith. Fourthly, to seal unto our consciences the certainty of the
forgiveness of sins Fifthly, to distinguish the Church from Infidels and
heathen, as it were, by certain visible marks, and brands. Sixthly, to
witness our love and fellowship one with another, and therefore they are as it
were the bands of the Church. Lastly, to put us in a fresh memory of the
sufferings of Christ, and the benefits which we have by his death.


Father. Are our Sacraments of the new covenant, the same with those of the old.


Child. They are the same in substance, 1. Cor. 10. 2
for the same Christ, the same faith, the same promises, and the same hope of
eternal life are contained under both the covenants: but the signs were
changed according to the circumstance of time, and some other differences there
be in regard of rites, clearness, number and time. Rites, because their
outward form of administration was diverse from ours: clearenesse, because that
which was obscurely shadowed, is now clearly revealed: Number, because they
had a great multitude of Sacramental figures, we as few in number, and as
effectual in signification as may be: In time because there is nourished in
them the faith of Christ to come, and ours confirm unto us the faith of Christ
which is already come, and has accomplished all things which are necessary for
our redemption.


Father. How many parts be there of a Sacrament?


Child. Two, that is to say, the outward sign, and the inward thing signified.


Father. What is the reason that God uses outward signs?


Child. Because of our babishnes and dulnes in conceiving of heavenly things
for if we were altogether spiritual and angelical, we should not need such
gross elements: but seeing our spirit is drowned in our body, and our flesh
does make our understanding dull, therefore the Lord is content to apply
himself to our capacity, and to teach us by visible signs, and sensible
things as sometimes he did Abraham, Gideon, Ezechiah, and other his most
excellent servants, Genesis 15. 9.
and for this cause the sacraments are as it were, Iud. 6. 37.
mirrors, or glasses, wherein we may behold the riches of the grace of god which
he bestowed upon us wherein also God does more expressly, 2. Reg. 20. ^
and in a more visible manner testify his love and good will toward us, then
by his word.


Father. Which is the outward sign in baptism?


Child. Water.


Father. Which is the inward thing signified?


Child. The washing away of sin by the blood of Christ,


Father. Which is the proper end of Baptism?


Child. The proper end of baptism is, that by this solemn, and holy action
we might be known by the testimony of men and angels to be in the number of
ye visible Church.


Father. Express your mind more fully touching the end and use of Baptism.


Child. Baptism is ordained of God not only to be a sacrament of our
regeneration and new birth, and of the burial of the old man, but also to be a
visible testimony of our admission into the household of god which is his
Church; for in baptism we do give our names to god, put on his livery coat and
cognizance, and take the oath of allegiance to be true subjects to ye crown of
heaven, and to set our selves with all might and maine against the enemies of
our Lord and king; that is, the world, the flesh, and the diuill, and to be
all for him, yt is, for his credit and honor, not regarding our selves, so we
may bring glory to him whose we are and to whom we have sworn allegiance and
given up our selves wholly to serve him faithfully, as our special good Lord
and master.


Father. Is there not yet some further use of baptism besides this you have
spoken of?


Child. Yes: there is yet somewhat more, for Baptism is a seal of the
covenant betwixt God and us; for in Baptism a covenant is made between the
Lord, and the party baptized solemnly in the assembly of the Church. In which
covenant God for his part promised Christ with all blessings that come by him,
as that he will be our God, forgive us our sins, and remember our iniquities no
more, etc. The party baptized for his part enters himself, as a covenant
servant unto God, promises faithful service with a renouncing of satan and
sin, and whatsoever is against the honor and glory of God: and so stands
bound to these covenants and conditions. Then this covenant being thus solemnly
made betwixt God and his new servant, is forthwith sealed by the sprinkling, or
dropping on of water; and thus you see that Baptism does confirm, and seal
the covenant betwixt God and us.


Father. But yet we see there be very few that have any care to keep
covenants, and to perform that solemn promise which they have made in
baptism before many witnesses, yea before God and Angels.


Child. The greater is their condemnation, and assuredly they shall one day know
to their roast, what it is to dally with God, and to break covenants with so
great a king, as all they do, which follow their own ways and their own
lusts, not regarding the commandments of God.


Father. What is the reason that infants are baptized, since they can make no
profession of faith and repentance.?


Child. There be four reasons hereof. Genesis 17. 7.


First because they are the seed of the Church. 1. Cor. 7. 14


Secondly, Act. 2. 39.
because they are within the outward covenant. Luke 18. 16.


Thirdly, because the promises belong unto them.

Fourthly, because of such is the kingdom of heaven. For to be borne in the
womb of the Church, is unto infants in stead of faith and repentance; for
faithful parents do according to the condition of the covenant, apprehend the
promise both to themselves and their children, though not all, for we must
leave unto God his secret judgments.


Father. Having thus far spoken of the Sacrament of Baptism, let us now
proceed to speak of the sacrament of the lords supper, and first tell me what
is the special use of it?


Child. First, it serves to seal unto our consciences all the promises made
in Christ, and all the benefits of his death whatsoever; and therefore there is
the same use of it, that is of a seal, which is to confirm and ratify a
writing. For in outward things men like well of a promise, but better of a
writing, and best of all of a seal. Now therefore the sacrament is, as it were
ye kings broad seal set to his general and free pardon* For all the doctrine
of the Gospel, is as it were an open proclamation of pardon to all penitent
sinners, and this sacrament is the seal of the kings pardon to ratify and
confirm all the promises of the Gospel, for a word or promise must
necessarily go before the sacrament, which it does seal and confirm unto us,
and therefore the sacraments without the word of promise going before, are as
it were a seal to a blanke.

Secondly, the sacrament of ye Lords supper is as it were a second seal set by
the Lords own hand unto the former covenant made in baptism which is renewed
in the Lords supper betwixt ye Lord himself, and the faithful receiver, and
that by the outward actions of eating bread, drinking wine, etc.

Thirdly, the Lords supper serves to represent unto us our continual feeding
in the house of God. For as by baptism we are once admitted into the household
of God: so by the Lords supper is signified a daily feeding in the same upon
Christ and all the promises made in him, and also upon the word which is our
most sweet and heavenly manna.


Father. Which be the outward signs in the Lords supper?


Child. Bread and wine.


Father. Which be the inward things signified?


Child. The body and blood of Christ.


Father. How receive you the outward signs?


Child. I receive them with my hands, eat them with my mouth, and digest them
with my stomach.


Father. How do you receive the inward things signified?


Child. Only by faith, and feed of it as of a food given me to life
everlasting.


Father. Is the bread, and wine then changed into the substance of the body and
blood of Christ?


Child. No; for that were to destroy ye nature of a sacrament, which must
consist both of heavenly, and earthly matter. Therefore the bread and wine
remain still in their own form, nature, and substance, but Christ's natural
body is in heaven. Therefore the papists would make us believe the moon is made
of a green these, when they bear us in hand that bread is changed into flesh,
and wine into blood, and Christ's natural body is really present in the
sacrament, and yet we see it quite contrary with our eyes, and a child may
discern that it is neither so nor so.


Father. Is there then no difference beetwixt bread and wine in the sacrament,
and common bread and wine?


Child. There is no difference either in substance or form, but only in the
use and end whereunto they are applied, which is to represent and signify holy
things: for whereas before they were common meat, now they are holy signs, and
bear the name of that thing which they signify: otherwise out of this action
they are the same with common bread.


Father. You said even now that Christ's body and blood and all the benefits of
his death are received of us by faith* tell me therefore whether a wicked and
unfaithful man can receive them.


Child. He cannot: for if they be received only by faith, how shall he
receive them that has no faith? the unbelievers therefore may receive the
outward signs, that is, the bread and wine as well as others, as did Judas: but
the inward thing signified, which is the body and blood of Christ, and all the
benefits of his passion, none can receive, but only the elect.


Father. If this be true that all that receive the shell do not receive the
kernel: then it follows that grace is not necessarily tied to the outward
sign or sacrament.


Child. True indeed: for otherwise the faithless should gain as much by the
sacrament as the faithful, which were most absurd, but most certain it is
that salvation is not tied, nor shut up within the Sacraments, neither do they
give grace, but only testify and assure, that grace is given: as sealed
evidences do give no lands which are otherwise attained, as by inheritance,
friendship, and money: but only testify that they are given, and assure the
quiet possession and enjoying thereof.


Father. Why did God choose these creatures of bread and wine to represent unto
us the body and blood of Christ, rather then any other earthly creature?


Child. Because there are none other earthly creatures that can so fitly
represent unto our outward senses, those things which God would have us learn
by this sacrament.


Father. What be those things that God would have us learn by this Sacrament?


Child. By the breaking of the bread we have to learn, the breaking of the
body of Christ upon the cross, and by pouring forth of the wine, the shedding
of his blood: and by the distributing to all that are present, Christ's
communicating himself to all that will faithfully receive him. By eating and
drinking we learn, that as bread and wine do nourish our bodies in this life:
so Christ's body and blood do nourish our souls to life everlasting: and as the
substance of bread and wine by digestion passes into the substance of our
bodies: even so by faith, Christ and we are united with an unspeakable union,
and we made flesh of his flesh, and bones of his bones: and this is the
proportion, and analogy betwixt the sign and the thing signified. For if the
sacraments had not a certain likeness of those things whereof they are
sacraments, then were they no sacraments at all.


Father. What more is to be learned hereby?


Child. That we being many are one in Christ, as of many grains is made one
loaf, and of many grapes one wine.


Father. For as much as the unworthy receiver is damned as the Apostle says,
1. Cor. 11.
how will thou know, whether thou art a worthy receiver or no?


Child. If I examine my self, and find that I humbly acknowledge mine own
unworthiness, that is to say, my sins, and be heartely sorry for them, and fully
purpose amendment of life, assuredly resting upon ye promises of pardon made in
Christ, then am I worthy, because mine unworthiness is forgiven, and put out of
remembrance.


Father. For whom are the Sacraments ordained?


Child. The sacraments are specially ordained for those which believe in
Christ, and do seek for remission of sins, and eternal life only through his
sacrifice: for how can the forgiveness of sin be sealed unto the unbelievers
whose sin is not forgiven?


Father. Who ought to approach unto the Lords supper?


Child. None but such as have the knowledge of God in some measure, or at
least, that have knowledge in this present action, and such as have faith,
repentance and love.


Father. How shall a man know that he has these things?


Child. Three ways: First by his settled purpose, and desire to obey God
according to all the commandments of the law Secondly, by his love to the word
of god Thirdly, by his daily fruits toward God and men.


Father. Who are to be rejected and put back from the communion?


Child. Three sorts of men.


Father. Which be they?


Child. First, strangers, that is, such as are unknown to the Pastor, are not
to be admitted, as it is written: Exo. 12. 45.
A stranger shall not eat thereof.

Secondly, 1. Cor. 11. 28
Idiots, children, mad men, and fools are not to be admitted; for they cannot
examine themselves according to the Apostles rules.

Thirdly, notorious evil livers by whom the congregation is offended; for it
is written: Give not that which is holy unto dogs. Mat. 7. 6.
Again, It is forbidden in the law, that any man being circumcised should be
admitted to the communicating of the passover, Exo. 12. 41.
because they were polluted by touching a dead corpse, Number. 9. 6.
and being at a burial. Leuit. 13.
God gave often charges, Leuit. 14.
and commandments in the law, that if any man had unwittingly defiled
himself by any legal pollution, Leuit. 15.
he might not enter into his own house, much less approach unto the Passover
till he was purified, and cleansed by offering up a Sacrifice. Now all these
Scriptures do plainly prove that no profane, or filthy persons: as
whooremongers, drunkards; blasphemers, riotters, and scoffers at religion, and
such like may be admitted to the holy communion.


Father. What say you to such as show no love nor desire to this holy ordinance
of God, nor once so much as offer themselves unto it, except sometimes at
Easter a little for fashion and law sake?


Child. Such do show themselves to be little better then miscreants, and
atheists: for they do contemptuously refuse the grace of God which he offreth
in this supper, and doubtless to abstain of set purpose is no less sin
then to receive unworthily. For that patient which is daungerously sick, and
yet makes no account of the Physicians receipt and order, deserves no less
blame, then he which abuses the same receipt, that is, does not use it
according to that diet and order that was prescribed him.


Father. If some very bad persons chance to creep in, or thrust in themselves
to be partakers of this holy institution, is therefore the whole action defiled?


Child. God forbid: for we read throughout the scriptures that good and bad
have been mingled together in matters of Gods worship and service, both word,
prayer, sacraments and sacifices: and sure it is, that the wickedness of the
wicked cannot defile or pollute either the Sacrament it self, or any of the
godly communicants, but only themselves.


Father. Are all to be admited to the sacrament of the Lords supper, which
profess says and repentance either in truth or in show?


Child. Yes* Unless there be some special exceptions taken against them.
Exo. 12. 47.
For it is written, all the congregation of Israel shall observe it through their
generations, that is to say, all the members of the visible Church which are
within the outward covenant.


Father. How ought ministers to deal with many ignorant and simple men, and
seely souls which are able to yield small reason of their faith: are they all
to be admitted to the communion, or all to be rejected?


Child. As ministers ought not rashly to accept of all that offer themselves
without examination and conference: so ought they not lightly to shut out any
from that which should seal up their remission of sins* For albeit they be
somewhat ignorant and simple, yet finding in them any seeds of religion, and
sparks of the fear of God, showing it self in some tractablenesse to know
God, and in love to the word, they are to admit them with encouraging and
exhorting them to go forward. But if with ignorance and blindness, be joined
either froward contempt of means, or mere carelessness, or open wicked
behavior, or profane dissolutenes without remorse when they be dealt withal;
Then they are with all mildness to be shut out.


All glory be given to God.
FINIS.

