The Gentle Craft. A DISCOVRSE Containing many matters of Delight, very
pleasant to be read: Showing what famous men have been SHOOMAKERS in time past
in this Land, with their worthy deeds and great Hospitality. Declaring the
cause why it is called the GENTLE CRAFT: and also how the Proverb first grew;

A Shoomakers son is a Prince borne. T. D.

With gentleness judge you,
At nothing here grudge you;
The merry Shoomakers delight in good sport:
What here is presented,
Be there with contented;
And as you do like it, so give your report.
Haud curo invidiam. LONDON: Printed for ROBERT BIRD, 1637.

To all the good Yeomen of the GENTLE CRAFT.
YOu that the gentle craft profess, list to my words both more and less
And I shall tell you many things, of worthy and renowned Kings*
And diverse Lords and knights also that were shoomakers long ago,
Some of them in their distress, delighted in this business.
And some, for who^ great wait was laid, did save their lives by this same
trade,
Other some, in sport and game, delighted much to learn the same,
No other Trade in all the Land they thought so fit unto their hand;
For evermore they still did find, that shoomakers bore a gallant mind,
Men they were of high conceit, the which wrought many a merry feat
Stout of courage were they still, and in their weapons had great skill,
Travelers by sea and land, each country guise to understand.
Wrong they wrought not any man, with reason al things did they sca^.
Good houses kept they evermore, releeuing both the sick and poor.
In law no money would they spend, their quarrels friendly would they end
No malice did they bear to any, but showed great favor unto many;
Offenses soon they would forgive, they would not in contention live
Thus in joy they spent their days, with pleasant songs and roundelaies
And God did bless them with content; sufficient for them he sent,
And never yet did any know, a shoemaker a begging go:
Kind are they one to another, using each stranger as his brother.
Thus lived shoomakers of old, as ancient writers have it told:
And thus shoomakers still would be, so fame from them shall never flee*
To all courteous Readers, health.
HOw Saint Hugh was son unto the renowned King of Powis, a noble Britain
borne, who in the prime of his years loved the fore Virgin Winifred, who was
the only daughter of Donwallo, which was the last King that ever reigned in
Tegina, which is now called Flint-shire But she refusing al offers of love, was
only pleased with a religious life. Her father was sent to Rome, and dyed;
whose Lady left her life long before. This Virgin therefore for sooke her
fathers Princely palace in Pont Varry, and made her whole abiding in the most
sweet pleasant Valley of Sich^a^nt, and lived there solitarily, and careless of
all company or comfort. It chanced that in Summers heat, this fair Virgin
being greatly distressed for lack of drink, and not knowing where to get any,
there sprung up suddenly a crystal stream of most sweet and pleasant water
out of the hard ground, whereof this Virgin did daily drink: Unto the which
God himself gave so great a virtue, that many people having been washed
therein, were healed of diverse and sundry infirmities wherewith they were
borne. Moreover, round about this well, where this Virgin did use to walk, did
grow a kind of Moss, which is of a most sweet savor, and the color thereof
is as fresh in Winter as in Summer; so that lying thereon, you would suppose
your self to be on a bed of Down, perfumed with most precious odours? And
what of all this; Marry read the book and you shall know; but read nothing
except you read all. And why so? Because the beginning shows not the middle,
and the middle shows not the latter end.

And so farewell.
The pleasant History of S. HVGH; and first of all his most constant love to
the fair Virgin WINIFRED.
COnquering and most imperious Love, having seized on the heart of young sir
Hugh, all his wits were set on work, how for to compass the love of the fair
Uirgin Winifred, whose disdain was the chief cause of his care having,
received many infinite sorrows for her sake: but as a stream of water being
stopped, ouerfloweth the bank; so smothered desire does burst out into a great
flame of fire, which made this malecontented Lover to seek some means to
appease the stri^e of his contentious thoughts, whereupon he began to encourage
himself: Tush Hugh, let not a few froward words of a woman dismay thee, for
they love to be entreated, and delight to be wooed, though they would make the
world believe otherwise; for their denyals proceed more of niceness then
niggardliness, refusing that they would feignest have. What if sometimes
Winifred frown on thee? yet her favors may exceed her frowardness. The Sun
is sometimes ouercast with clouds, so that his brightness is not seen. In
wars the ^orer the fight is, the greater is the glory of the victory; and
the harder a woman is to be won, the sweeter is her love when it is obtained:
wherefore I Will once again try my fortune, and see what success my suit shall
find. On this resolution sir Hugh returned to Winifred, greeting her thus: Now
fair Lady, having slept away the remembrance of your sharp answers; I come
again in a new concest, to reviue an old suit, and to see if the change of the
^ay will ye da change of dolours. Truly Sir Hugh (quoth she) if with the
change of the day you have changed your opinion: your dolor will be driven
away well enough: but as touching your suit it shall be n^^dlesse to repeat it
because I am not willing to prefer it.

Stay there (quoth s^^ Hugh) I will prefer it, so that you will accept it.
Now quoth she, I will accept it, if you will prefer it; in sending it back
to the place from whence it proceeded, and I would to God I could send you away
as soon as your suit. Why then belike I am not welcome, said sir Hugh. Yes
quoth she, as welcome to me, as a storm to a distressed Mariner: I muse
greatly that reason will not rule you, nor words win you from your wilfulness:
if you were as weary to woo as I am weary to hear you, I am persuaded that
long since you would have ceased your vain suit. You think by these
persuasions to turn my opinion, but as well you may think that you may quench
fire with oil: therefore I pray you good sir Hugh, be not so tedious unto me,
nor troublesome to your self.

Come, come, quoth he, all this will not serve your turue, ponder with thy
self Winifred that thou art fair, O that thou were as favorable; thy beauty
has bound me to be thy servant, and never to cease till I see another obtain
thee, or my self be possessed of my hearts content. Thou art a Kings daughter,
and I a princes son, stain not the glory of true Nobility with the foul sin
of obstinacy, but be thou as kind, as thou art courtly, and gentle as thou art
noble, and then shall our strife soon end.

Winifred perceiving that the farther off she was to grant love, the more eager
he was to desire it, shifted him off thus: Sir although your ouerhastinesse
drive me into the greater doubtfulnesse, yet let me entreat you, if you love
me, to give me one month respite to consider on this matter, and it may be
that upon my better deliberation it shall be pleasing unto you, and not at all
discontent me.

Fair love, quoth he, far be it from my heart to deny so kind a request; I
am content to stay a month from thy sight, were it two or three, upon
condition that thou would then grant me thy good will: three months,
although it be very long, yet it will come at last, and could be content for
that time to be dead for thy sake, in so much that my life might be renewed by
thy love.

Nay (quoth Winifred) stay three months and stay for ever: by this a Maid may
see how ready men are upon a light occasion to take long days, whose loves
are like a Fern bush, soon set one fire, and soon consumed, and seeing it is
so, in faith sir Hugh I do mean to try you better before I trust you.

Pardon me fair Winifred, said sir Hugh, if my tongue do outslip my wit: in
truth I speak but to please thee, though to displease my self: but I pray
thee, let it not be three hours, nor three quarters of an hour, if thou will.

Nay, nay (quoth she) your first word shall stand: after three months come to
me again, and then you shall know my mind to the full, and so good sir Hugh
be gone: but if I do ever hear from thee, or see thee betwixt this time and
the time prefixed, I will for ever hereafter blot thy name out of my book of
Remembrances, and never yield thee that courtisie which thou at this time so
earnestly intreatest for.

Sir Hugh upon these words departed betwixt hope and dread, much like to a man
committing a trespass, that stayed for the sentence of life or death.

O unhappy man, quoth he, how has my over slippery tongue lengthened y^ time
of my sorrow: she of her self most courteously requested of me but one months
stay, and I most willingly and indiscreetly added there to eight weeks more of
misery: much like the Hind, that having a knife given him to pair his nails,
did there with murder himself.

Now I could wish that the Sun had Eagles wings, swiftly to fly through the
fair ^^rmament, and finish six days in one days time: With that he began to
count the days and hours that were in three months, falling (in a manner) to
despair with himself when he found them so many in number: and therewithal
melancholily and sadly he went to his fathers house, where his brother Griffith
found by his cou^ttenance the perfect map of a pensive lover: whereupon he said
unto him.

Why how now brother? has Winifreds fair beauty so greatly wounded you, as
you cannot speak a merry word to your friends, but sit in a corner, as if you
were tonguelesse like a Stock: tush brother, women are like shadows, for the
more a man follows then the faster mey run away: but let a man turn his
course, and then they will presently follow him. What man? pluck up a good
heart: for there are more women now, then lived in the time of our old father
Adam.

O, said Hugh, were there ten thousand times more then there are now, what were
that to me, if Winifred he unkind? yet is she the oil that still maintains
she lamp of my light, and without her there is nothing comfortable to my sight.

Then (replied Griffith) you are as much troubled in love, as a Goat in an
ague, and as blind as a Fly in October, that will stand still while a man cuts
off his head. Come, go a hunting with me, that will drive away your ouer^ond
conceits, and you shall see that these three months will come upon you as a
quarter day upon a poor man that has never a penny ready toward the payment
of his rent.

CHAP. II.
How beautiful Winifred being overmuch superstitious, forsook her fathers
wealth and lived poorly by a springing fountain, from whence no man could get
her to go; which Spring to this day is called Winifreds* Well.

VVInifred, who had but of late years with her own father received the
Christian Faith, became so superstitious, that she thought the wealth of the
world for ever would have been an heavy burden for hersoule, and have drawn
her mind from the love of her Maker, wherefore forsaking al manner of earthly
pomp she lived along time very poorly, hard by the side of a most pleasant
springing well: from which place neither her friends by ^ntreaty, nor her fees
by violence could bring her: which sir Hugh hearing, he went thither
immediately after unto her, which was the time limited by them both, and
finding her mind altogether altered, he wondered not a little what she meant.
And when he aproached near unto the place where she safe, all s^^ed in simple
attire, he sa^^^ed her with these words.

All health to fair Winifred: I trust (my dear) that now the Deffin^es have
yielded a convenient oporunity for me to finish my long begun suit, with the
end of my former sorrows. Long and tedious has the winter of my woes been,
which with nipping care has blasted the beauty of my youthful delight, which
is like never again to flourish, except the bright Sunshine of thy favor do
renew the same: therefore (fair love) remember thy promise made unto me, and
put me no more off with unpleasing delays.

She (which all this while safe solemnly reading in her book) lent little
ear unto his words; which he perceiving, plucked her by the arm saying:
Wherefore answers not my fair Love, to her dearest perplexed friend?

What would you have, quoth she* can I never be quiet for you? is there no
corner of content in this world to be ^ound?

Yes Winifred, said he, content dwe^ls here or no where, content me and ^ will
content thee. If my content may be thy content then read this book, and there
rests content, said Winifred; and if thou refuse this, then think not to find
content on earth.

Sir Hugh replied, What, is this all the reward I shall have for obeying your
heart-cutting commandment Have I thus long hoped, and find no better ha^? You
wot well that it is now three long months since these eyes took comfort of
thy beauty, and since that time that my bleeding heart has received joy in thy
great gentleness.

I have forgot you quite, said she, what three months is that you speak of?
for my part I assure you, that it is as far out of my mind, as you are from
the mount of Calvary.

Fair Winifred (quoth he) have you forgotten me, and there withal my love
which was so effectually grounded opon your good liking? you told me, that now
I should receive an answer to my content.

O Sir (quoth she) you have stayed ouerlong, and your words are in my hearing,
as unprofitable as snow in harvest: my love is fled to heaven, from whence no
earthly man can fetch it, and therefore build not in vain hope, nor do thou
deceive thy self by following an unprofitable snite: if ever I love earthly
man, it shall be thee, insomuch as thou have deserved an earthly Ladies love;
but my love is settled for ever, both in this world, and in the world to come:
and this I most earnestly intre^t ^hee to take for a final answer.

With that Sir Hugh turning his head aside, wept most bitterly, and in going
away, he glanced his eye still back again after his love, saying to himself:
O unconstant women, wavering and uncertain, how many sorrows are fond men
drawn into by your wily inticements? Who are also swallowed up in the gaping
gulf of care, while they listen after the heart-liking sound of your
enchanting voices. O Winifred, full little did I think that so hard a heart
could have been shrouded under so sweet and loving a countenance: but seeing
that my good will is thus unkindly requited, I will altogether abhor the
sight of women, and I will seek the world throughout, but I will find out some
blessed plot, where no kind of such corrrupt cattle do br^ed.

Hereupon all in a hot hasty humor he made preparation for to go beyond the
Seas, suting himself after the nature of a melancholy man; and arriving in
France, he took his journey toward Paris, which city (at that time) was well
replenished with many goodly fair women, as will as Britain, though to his
thinking nothing so lovely, but nevertheless what they wanted in beauty, they
had in bravery: which when sir Hugh saw, he suddenly departed from that place,
counting it the most pernicious place in the whole Country; and from thence he
went into Italy, where he found such ^^ately Dames, and lovely Ladies, whom
Nature had adorned with all perfection of outward beauty, whose sight put him
again in remembrance of his fair Love, which like fresh fuel newly augmented
the flame of his burning desire: O (sal^ he) how unhappy am I to be haunted by
these heart-formenting f^en^s, bewitching the eyes of simple men with
Angel*like faces, and like enchanting circes, bring them to a Labyrinth of
continual woes.

O Winifred* thy pee^^^nesse has bred my dangers, and done thy self no good
at all Thou sit weeping by a Crystal stream, where is no need of water,
while I wander up and down, seeking to forget thee, thou never remembrest me;
having drawn the fountain of mine eyes dry through thy discour^eous disdain.
Might I never see any of thy sex, my heart would be more at quiet, but every
place where I come puts me in mind of thy perfections, and therewithal renewes
my pain: but I will from hence as soon as possible I can, though not so soon
as I would for fear le^^ these sweet serpents should sting me to death with
delight.

Hereupon he passed on so far, that at length he came to a City sti^^ted in
the Sea, and compassed with she wild Ocean. Here (quoth sir Hugh) is a fit
place for melancholy men; where it is supposed no women do line, insomuch that
their delicate bodies cannot abide the sa^t favor of the mounting waves: if it
be so, there will I make my residence, counting it the most blessed place under
heaven. But he was no sooner set on land, but he beheld whole troops of lovely
Ladies, passing up and down in most sumptuous attire, framing their gestures
answerable to their beauties and comely personages.

Nay now I see (quoth sir Hugh) that the whole world is infected with these
deceiving Sirens, and therefore in vaine^st is for me to seek for that I shall
never find; and therewithal sought for some house wherein he might hide
himself from them. But by that time he was set to supper, dames a ^rue of
courtlike dames richly attired, and with wanton eyes and pleasant speech they
boldly sat down by him; and perceiving him to be a stranger, they were not
strange to allure him to their delight: Wherefore while hesateat meat, they
yielded him such mirth as their best skill could afford; and stretching their
nimble fingers, playing on their sweet sounding instruments, they sung this
ensuing song, with such clear and quauering voices, as had been sufficient to
allure chasthearte^ Xenocrates unto folly: and still as they did sing, sir Hugh
answered in the last live, insomuch as it seemed to be a dialogue between them;
and in this manner following the women began their song.

The Curtizans song of Uenice.
Ladies. VVElcome to Uenice, gentle courteous Knight,
Cast off fond care, and entertain content.
If any here be gracious in thy sight,
Do but request and she shall soon consent:
Loves wings are swift, then be not thou so slow,

Hugh. Oh that fair Winifred would once say so.


Ladies. With in my lap lie down thy comely head,
And let me stroke those golden locks of thine,
Look on the tears that for thy sake I shed,
And be thou Lord of any thing is mine,
One gentle look upon thy love bestow.

Hugh. Oh that fair Winifred would once say so.


Ladies. Embrace with joy thy Lady in thine arms,
And with all pleasures pass to thy delight:
If thou do think the light will work our harms,
Come, come to bed, and welcome all the night,
There shall thou find, what lovers ought to know.

Hugh. Oh that fair Winifred would once say so.


Ladies. Give me those pearls as pledges of thy love,
Add with those pearls the favor of thy heart:
Do not from me thy ^ugred breath remove,
That double comfort gives to every part.
Nay stay sir Knight, from hence thou shall not go.

Hugh. Oh that fair Winifred would once say so.


When sir Hugh had heard this Song, and therewithal noted their wanton
gestures, he began to grow suspicious of their profers, and thinking in
himself, that either they thought his destruction, as the Sirens did to
Ulysses; or that they intended to make a prey of his purse, as Lais did of
h^riouers: and therefore supposing some adder to lie lurking under the fairest
^wres of their proffered pleasures, he determined the next morning after (with
speed) to depart from the City. So when he had with good discretion avoided
their company, while he lay ^ormented with restless thoughts on his still
tossed bed, began thus to meditate.

Now I well see mine own vanity, that is as ill pleased with women's favors as
their frowns; how often have I with heart sighing sorrow complained of women's
unkindness, making large inuectiues against their discourtesies? and yet here
where I find women as kind as they are fair, and courteous as they are comely,
I run into a world of doubts, and so suspicious of their fair profers, as I
was earnest to win Winifreds favor: it may be (quoth he) that it is the nature
of this gentle soil to breed as kind creatures, as the Country of Britain
breeds c^y dames.

Undoubtedly, had my love first taken life in this kind and courteous Climate,
she would have been as kind as they. If I mis-iudge not of their gentleness,
because I have always been inured to scornfulnesse; me thinks they are too
fair to be harlots, and too bold to be honest, but as they have no cause to
hate me that never hurt them, so have they little cause to love me, being a far
stranger borne, to them a man altogether unknown.

But it may be that this time of the year is only unfortunate for loners; as
it is certainly known to al men that every season of the year br^^ds a sundry
commodity, for Roses flourish in June, and Gilliflowers in August, and neither
of them both do so in the cold winter. Such as seek for fruit on the saplesse
trees in the month of January, lose their labors as well as their longing: then
why should I covet to gather fruits of love, when I see that love is not yet
ripe? Now let me observe the season that yields the sweetest comfort to love
sick persons, and so I may reap the joyful fruits of hearts content: I will
therefore return to my former love, hoping now to find her as freindly, as at
my departure she was froward; I will once again entreat her, and speak her
exceeding fair; for with many drops the hardest stone is pierced, so also with
many importunate entreaties a ^^inty heart may be moved to some remorse. I take
no pleasure at al in any place, but only in her presence with the which she
continually graceth a running stream; far be it from her mind, to kiss her
own shadow in the christ all spring, and to be in love with her own
similitude, for so she might be spoiled as Narcissus was: for it is commonly
seen, that sudden danger follows fond opinions: so with this and the like
thoughts he dro^e out the night, till the Suns bright eye began to peep at his
chamber window, at what time dressing himself he went to the water side, where
he found a ship ready to transport rich merchandise into the Western Islands in
the which ^ir Hugh became a passenger. But when they were put off to sea, there
arose so sudden a storm, and of long continuance, that no man looked for life
but expected every moment present death, so that the Mariners quite forsook
the tackle, and the Master the helm, committing themselves to God, and their
ship to the mercy of the swelling ^eas, by whose ^urious waves they were
sometime tossed up toward heaven, anon thrown down to the deep of hell: in
which extremity sir Hugh made this lamentation: O unhappy man, how eagerly does
mischance pursue me at my h^^les for betwixt my love on the land, and danger of
life (...) the sea, it has made me the wretchedst man breathing on earth.

Here we may see that miseries have power over men, and not men over miseries.
Now must I die far from my friends, and be drenthed in the deep, where my
body must feed the fishes that swim in the rich bottom of the Sea. Therefore
fair Winifred, the chief ground of my grie^es, here will I sacrifice my last
tears unto thee, and power forth my complaints.

Oh how happy should I count my self, if those fishes which shall live on my
bodies food, might be meat for my Love! it grieueth me much to think that my
poor bleeding heart, wherein thy picture is engraven, should be rent in pieces
in such greedy sort; but thrice accursed be that fish, that first sets his
nimble f^^th thereon, except he swim there with unto my Love, and so deliver
it as a present token from me.

Had my troubled stars allotted me to leave my life in the pleasant valley of
Sichnant, then no doubt but my Love with her fair hands would have closed up
my dying eyes, and perhaps would have rung a peale of sorrowful sighs for my
sake.

By this time was the weather*beaten Bark driven upon the shore of Sicilie,
where the men had safety of their lives, although with loss of their ships,
and spoil of their goods: but they had no sooner shaken off their dropping wet
garments on the shore, but that they were assaulted by a sort of monstrous men
that had but one eye a piece, and that placed in the midst of their foreheads,
with whom the tempest heaten soldiers had a fierce fight, in which many of
them were slain, and diverse of them fled away to save themselves; so that in
the end sir Hugh was left alone to Fortune in a double Fray: and having at last
quite overcome all his adversaries, he went his way, and so passing up the
country in dark night, in the end he lost his way, and was so far entered
into the dark wilderness, that he could not devise with himself which way
ha should take to get out, where he was so cruelly affrighted with the
dreadful cry of fierce Lions, Bears, and wild Bulls, and many thousand more
of other dangerous and cruel ravenous beasts, which with greedy mouths ranged
all about for their prey: in which distress, sir Hugh got him up to the top of
a tree, and being there, brake out into this passion.

O Lord (quoth he) have thou preserved me from the great peril and danger of
the Sea, and delivered me out of the cruel hands of monstrous men, and now
suffer me to be devoured of wild beasts? Alas, that my soul sins should bring
so many sundry sorrows on my head.

But for all this may I thank unkind Winifred, whose disdain has wrought my
destruction. Woe worth the time that ever my eyes beheld her be witching
beauty. But hereby we may see that the path is smooth that leads to danger.
But why blame I the blameless Lady? Alas, full little did she know of my
desperate courses in travel. But such is the fury that hants frantic Lovers,
that never fear danger until it fall, and light upon their own heads.

But by that time that the day began to appear he perceived an huge Elephant
with stiff joints stalking toward him, and presently after came a f^ery
tongue Dragon, which suddenly assaulted the peaceful Elephant, in whose
subtle encounter the wrathful Dragon with his long wringing tail did so
shackle the hinder feet of the Elephant together, that like a prisoner fast
fettered in irons, he could not stir a ^oot for his life; what time the
furious Dragon never left till he had thrust his stender head into the
Elephants long h^ked nose, out of which he never once drew it, until by
sucking the Elephants blood, he had made him so feeble and so weak, that he
could stand no longer upon his feet; at which time the fainting Elephant with a
grievous cry, fell down dead upon the Dragon: so with the fall of his weighty
body, burst the Dragon in pieces, and so killed him; whereby their bloods being
mingled together, it stained all the ground where they both lay, changing the
green grass into a rich scarlet color.

This strange sight betwixt these two beasts, caused good sir Hugh to judge
that nature had planted bewixt them a deadly hatred, the fire whereof could not
be quenched, but by shedding of both their hearts blood. Now when sir Hugh saw
that grim Death had ended their quarrel, and perceiving no danger near, he
came down from the tree, and sought to find out some inhabited town, but
being entangled in the woods, like the Centaure in his Labyri^th, he could by
no means get out, but wandered in unknown passages, leading him to many perils.

At last another Elephant met him, who according to his kind nature never left
him till he had conducted him out of all danger, and brought him out of the
Wilderness into the way again; whereby sir Hugh at the length came in sight
of a Port-towne, where in four days after he embarked himself in a ship
bound for Britain, and at last obtained the sight of his native Country,
where he arrived in safety, though in very poor sort, coming on shore at a
place called Harwich, where for want of money he greatly lamented, and made
much ^^oane. But meeting with a merry Iourney-man Shoemaker dwelling in that
town, and after some conference had together, they both agreed to travel in
the Country, where we will leave them, and speak of Winifred, and of her great
troubles and calamities.

CHAP. II.
How fair Winifred was imprisoned, and condemned to dye for her Religion: and
how sir Hugh became a Shoemaker, and afterward came to suffer death with his
Love: showing also how the Shoomakers tools came to be called Saint Hughes
bones, and the trade of Shoomaking, The Gentle Craft.

A Non after that the Doctrine of Christ was made known in Britain, and that
the worship of heathen Idols was forbidden, yet many troubles did the
Christians endure by diverse the outrageous blood-shirstinesse of woluish
Tyrants, that by the way of inua^ion set f^^ting in this Land, as it fell out
in the days of Dioclesian, that with bloody minds persecuted such as would
not yield to the Pagan law: amongst which the Uirgin Winifred was one, who for
that she continued constant in faith, was long imprisoned. During which time
Sir Hugh wrought in a Shoomakers shop, having learned that trade through the
coueteous directions of a kind Iourney-man, where he remained the space of one
whole year, in which time h^^ had gotten himself good appatell, and every
thing comely and decent. Not withstanding though he were now contented to
forget his birth, yet could he not forget the beauty of his Love, who although
she had utterly forsaken him, yet could he not alter his affection from her,
because indeed affections alter not like a palefaced coward. The wildest Bull
(quoth he) is tamed being tied to a F^g-tree; and the ^oyest Dame (in time) may
yield like the stone Charchaedo^^s, which sparkles like fire, and yet m^lts at
the touch of soft war. Though Roses have prickles, yet they are gathered; and
though women seem froward, yet will they show themselves kind and friendly.
Neither is there any ware so hard, but by often tempering, is made apt to
receive an impression: Admit she has heretofore b^ n^ cruel, yet now may she
be courteous. A true hearted Lover forgets all trespasses, and a smile cures
the wounding of a frown Thus after the manner of ^ond Lovers he flattered
himself in his own folly^, and in the praise of his fair Lady, he sung this
pleasant Ditty her^ following.

THe pride of Britain is my hearts delight,
My Lady lives, my true love to requite:
And in her life I live that else were dead,
Like withered Leanes in time of winter shead.
She is the joy and comfort of my mind
She is the Sun that clearest sight does blind;
The fairest flower that in the world does grow,
Whose whitenes does surpass the driven snow.
Her gentle words more sweet then honey are,
Her eyes for clearnes dimmes the brightest star.
O were her heart so kind as she is fair,
No lady might with my true love compare.
A thousand greifes for her I have sustained,
While her proud thoughts my humble suit disdained,
And though she would my heart with torments kill,
Yet would I honor, serve, and love her still.
Blessed be the place where she does like to live:
Blessed be the light that does her comfort give:
And blessed be all creatures far and near,
That yield relief unto my Lady dear.
Never may sorrow enter where she is,
Never may she contented comfort miss,
Never may she my proffered love for sake,
But my good will in thankful sort to take.
Thus feeding his fancy with the sweet remembrance of her beauty, being never
satisfied with thinking, and speaking in her praise, at length he resolved
himself to go into Flint-shire, where he might solicit his suite anew
agains: but coming near to the place of her residence; and hearing report of
her troubles, he so highly commended her faith and constancy, that at length he
was clapped up in prison by her, and in the end he was condemned to receive
equal torment, for a trial of his own truth.

But during the time that they lay both in prison, the Journey* men Shoomakers
never left him, but yielded him great relief continually, so that he wanted
nothing that was necessary for him; in requital of which kindness he called
them Gentlemen of the Gentle Craft a^^ a few days before his death, he made
this Song in their d^e commendations.

OF Craft and Crafts-men more and less,
The Gentle Craft I must commend:
Whose deeds declare their faithfulness,
And hearty love unto their friend:
The Gentle Craft in midst of strife,
Yields comfort to a careful life.
A Prince by Birth I am indeed,
The which for Love forsook this Land:
And when I was in extreme need,
I took the Gentle Craft in hand,
And by the Gentle Craft alone,
Long time I lived, being still unknown,
Spending my days in sweet content,
With many a pleasant sugared Song:
Sitting in pleasures complement,
Whilst we recorded Lovers wrong:
And while the Gentle Craft we used,
True Love by us was not abused.
Our shoes we sowed with merry notes,
And by our mirth expelled all moan:
Like Nightingales, from whose sweet throats.
Most pleasant tunes are nightly blown;
The Gentle Craft is fittest then,
For poor distressed Gentlemen*
Their minds do mount in courtesy,
And they disdain a niggards feast:
Their bodies are for Chivalrie,
All cowardnesse they do detest.
For Sword and Shield, for Bow and Shaft,
No man can stain the Gentle Craft.
Yea sundry Princes sore distressed,
Shall seek for succor by this Trade:
Whereby their greifes shall be redrest,
Of foes they shall not be afraid.
And many men of fame likewise,
Shall from the Gentle Craft arise.
If we want money over night,
Ere next day noone, God will it send,
Thus may we keep our selves upright,
And be no churl unto our friend:
Thus do we live where pleasure springs,
In our conceit like petty Kings.
Our hearts with care we may not kill,
Man's life surpasses worldly wealth,
Content surpasses riches still,
And fie one knaves that live by stealth:
This Trade therefore both great and small,
The Gentle Craft shall ever call.
When the Iourney-men Shoomakers had heard this Song, and the fair Title that
Sir Hugh had given their Trade, they ingraued the same so deeply in their
minds, that to this day it could never be razed out: like a remembrance in a
^arbiest^ne which continues time out of mind.

But not long after came that doleful day, wherein these two Lovers must loose
their lives, who like two meek Lambs were led to the slaughter: the bloody
performance thereof was to be done hard by that fair Fountain, where the
Love despising Lady made her most abode: and because she was a Kings daughter,
the bloody Tyrant gave her the privilege to choose her own death: to the which
she passed with as good a countenance, as if she had been a fair young Bride
prepared for marriage.

(viz.) When they were come to the place of execution, and mounted upon the
S^affo^d, they seemed for beauty like two bright Stars, Castor and Pollux,
there they e^braced each other with such chaste desires, as all those that
beheld them, admired to see how steadfast and ^^rme both these Lovers were,
ready in hearts and minds to heaven it self.

At what time the Lady turned herself to Sir Hugh, and spoke to this effect:
Now do I find thee a perfect Lover indeed, that having settled thy affection
above the Skies, art ready to yield thy life for thy Love, who in requital
thereof, will give thee life for ever.

The Love of earthly creatures is mixed with many miseries, and interlaced with
sundry sorrows; and here grief shall abate the pleasures of Love, but ^e well
assured that ^^y shall follow the same.

Thou did woo me for love, and now have I won thee to love* where settling
both our loves upon God his love, we will love one another; and in token of
that heavenly love receive of me I pray thee a chaste and loving kiss from my
dying lips.

Fair Winifred (quoth he) it is true indeed; I never loved truly, until thou
taughtest me to love, for then my love was full of discontent: but now
altogether pleasing, and more sweet is the thought thereof than any tongue can
express.

The thing that I ever before called Love, was but a shadow of love, a
sweetness tempered with gall, a dying life, and a living death, where the
heart was continually tossed upon the Seas of tempestuous sorrows, and wherein
the mind had no calm quietness: and therefore blessed be the time that I
ever learned this Love. With that he was interrupted by the Tyrant, who said,
You are not come ^^therto talk, but to dye; and I have sworn you both shall
dye at this instant. Thou Tyrant (said Sir Hugh) the very like sentence is
pronounced against thy self; for Nature has doomed that thou sh^lt die
likewise, and albeit the execution thereof be something deferred, yet at length
it will come, and that shortly, for never did Tyrant carry gray hairs to the
grave.

The young Lady desired first to dye, saying to Sir Hugh, Come dear friend and
learn magnanimity of a Maid: now shall thou see a silly woman scorn death at
his teeth, and make as small account of his cruelty, as the Tyrant does of our
lives, and there withal script up her silken sleeves, and committed her
slablaster arms into the executioners foul hands, having made choice to dye
in bleeding: at what time being prickee in every vein, the scarlet blood
sprung out in plentiful sort, much like a precious fountain lately filled
with Claret wine.

And while she thusbled, she said, Here do I sacrifice my blood to him that
bought me, who by his blood washed away all my sins, O my sweet Savior, thus
were thy sides pierced for my transgressions, and in this sort sprung thy
precious blood from thee, and all for the love thou barest to mankind: I feels
my heart to saint, but my soul receives strength, I come sweet Christ, I
come. And therewithal her body ^ai^ting, and the blood failing, like a Conduit
suddenly drawn dry, the young Princess fell down dead, at what time a pale
color ouer-spread her fair face in such comely sort, as if a heap of Roses
had been shadowed with a sheet of pure Lawne.

But it is to be remembered, that all the while the young Prinsesse bled, her
blood was received into certain basins, which being in that sort saved
together, the Tyrant caused to be tempered with ^oyson, and prepared it to be
the last drink that Sir Hugh should have, saying; That by her love whom he so
dearly loved, he should receive his death. And thereupon incontinently,
without any further delaying of time, he caused a cup of that most deadly
poisoned blood to be delivered into his hands, who with a lovely and
cheerful countenance received the same, and then uttered his mind in this
manner.

O thou cruel Tyrant (quoth he) what a poor spite is this to inflict upon a
dying man, that is as careless how he dies, as when he dies? Easy it is for
thee to glut me with blood, although with blood thou art not satisfied. Sweet
blood (quoth he) precious and pure, how fair a color do thou cast before
mine eyes? Sweet I say wast thou, before such time as this ill savoring poison
did infect thee: and yet as thou art, I nothing despise thee. O my dear
Winifred, full little did I think, that over I should come to drink of thy
heart blood.

My greedy eye that glutton-like did feed upon thy beauty, and yet like the
Sea was never satisfied, is now with thy gore blood fully gorged. Now may I
quench my thirsty desire with love, that like hot burning coals set my heart
in such an extreme heat, that it could not be quenched before this time; For
if fair Winifred could spare any love from Heaven, assuredly she left it in
her blood, her sweet heart blood I mean, that nourished her chaste life: see,
here is a Ca^dl^ to cool my vain affections. Far be it that my true Lover
should ever taste the like.

But this punishment have the just heavens poured upon me, for the preferring
the love of an earthly creature before the love of an heavenly Creator; Pardon,
O Lord, the ^oule sins of superstitious Lovers, that while they make Idols of
their Ladies, they forget the honor of thy divine Majesty. Yet does it do my
heart much good to think that I must bury sweet Winifreds blood in my body,
whose love was lodged long ago in my heart: and there withal, drinking the
first draught, he said, O Lord, me seems this potion has a comfortable
taste, far does it surpass that Nect^r wherewith the gods were nourished.

Well (said the Tyrant) seeing it pleases thee so well, thou shall have more,
and therewith another cup of the same blood was given him to drink.

Yes come (quoth he) my thirst is not quenched; for the first draught gave me
but a taste of sweetness, and like a longing woman, I desire the rest; and
with that he drank the second draught. The third being delivered him, he took
the cup into his hand, and looking about, he said: Lo here, I drink to all
the kind Yeomen of the Gentle Craft.

I drink to you all (quoth he) but I cannot spare you one drop to pledge me.
Had I any good thing to give, you should soon receive it: but my self the
Tyrant does take, and my flesh is bequeathed to the Fowls, so that nothing is
left but only my bones to pleasure you withal; and those, if they will do
you any good, take them: and so I humbly take my leave, bidding you all
farewell. There with the last draught he finished his life, whose dead carcass
after hanged up where the Fowls devoured his flesh, and the young Princess
was contemptuously buried by the Well where she had so long lived. Then had he
the title of Saint Hugh given him, and she of Saint Winifred, by which terms
they are both so called to this day.

CHAP. IV*
How the Shoomakers stole away Saint Hughes bones, and made them working tools
thereof, and the virtue that they found in the same: whereby it came, that when
any man saw a Shoemaker traveling with a pack at his back: they would
presently say: There goes Saint Hughes bones.

Upon a time it chanced, that a company of Iourney-men Shoomakers passed along
by the place where Saint Hughes dead body was hanging, and finding the flesh
picked clean off from the bones, they entered thus into communication among
themselves.

Never was Saint Hugh so bare (quoth one) to carry never a whit of skin upon
his bones; nor thou never so bare (said another) to bear never a penny in thy
purse.

But now seeing you talk of Saint Hugh, it brings me to remembrance of his
Legacy that he gave us at his death: What was that said the rest? Marry (quoth
he) I will tell you, When the gentle Prince saw that the cruelty of the time
would not suffer him to be liberal to his friends, but that his life was taken
away by one, and his ^leth given to others, he most kindly bequeathed his bones
unto us.

Tush (quoth another) that was but to show his mind toward the Shoomakers,
because he had received of them so many favors: for alas, what can the dead
man's bones pleasure the living? No? (quoth another) I can tell you there may be
as great virtue found in his bones, as the brains of a Weasill, or the tongue
of a Frog: Much like (answered the rest) but I pray thee show us what virtue is
in those things you speak of. Quoth he, I will tell you; The brains of a
Weasill has this power, experientia docet, that if the powder thereof being
mingled with the ^unnet, wherewith women make their Chief, no mouse dares ever
touch it: In like manner, the tongue of a water frog has such great force in
it, that if it be laid upon the breast of any one sleeping, it will cause them
tell whatsoever you shall demand; for by that means Dicke Piper knew be was a
Cuckold. Again, I know that those that are travelers are not ignorant, that
whosoever puts b^t s^r^ leaves of Mugwor^ in his shoes, shall uere be weary,
though he travel thirty or forty miles on foot in a forenoone. That indeed may
be true, quoth one, for by the very same herb my last Dame kept her Ale from
so wring: and it i^ said, that where houseleeke is planted, the place shall
never be hurt with thunder. Pimper^ell is good against Witchcraft; and because
my sister Joane carried always some about her, Mother Bumby could not abide
her: Therefore what virtue a dead man's bones may have, we know not till we have
tried it.

Why then said the third man, let us soon at night steal Saint Hughes bones
away, and albeit the Tyrant will be displeased, yet it is no theft, for you
say they were given us, and therefore we may the bolder take them, and because
we will turn them to profit, and anoyd suspicion, we will make diverse of out
Tools with them, and then if any virtue do follow them, the better we shall
find it.

To this motion every one gave his consent, so that the same night Saint Hughes
bones were taken down, and the same being brought before a sort of shoomakers,
there they gave their opinion, That it was necessary to fulfill the will of the
dead, and to take those bones in as good a part, as if they were worth ten
thousand pounds; whereupon one steps out, and thus did say.

MY friends, I pray you lift to me,
And mark what S. Hughs bones shall be.
FIrst a Drawer and a Dresser,
two Wedges, a more and a lesser:
A pretty block three inches high,
in fashion sqared like a Die,
Which shall be called by proper name,
a Heel block, the very same.
A Hand-leather and a Thumb-leather likewise,
to pull out shoo-threed we must despise;
The Needle and the Thimble,
shall not be left alone
The Pincers and the pricking Aule
and the rubbing Stone.
The Aule steel and Tackes,
the Sow-haires beside,
The Stirrup holding fast,
while we sow the Cow-hide,
The whetstone, the stopping stick,
and the Paring knife:
All this does belong,
to a Journeymans life.
Our Apron is the Shrine,
to wrap these bones in:
Thus shroud we Saint Hugh
in gentle Lambs skin.
Now all you good Yeomen of the Gentle Craft, tell me now (quoth he) how like
you this?

As well (replied they) as Saint George does of his Horse, for as long as we
can see him fight with the Dragon, we will never part from this Posie.

And it shall be concluded that what Iourney-men soever he be hereafter,
that cannot handle the Sword and Buckler, his Long Sword, or a Quarter staff,
sound the Trumpet, or play upon the Flute and bear his part in a three man's
Song: and readily reckon up his tools in Rhyme; except he have borne Colors in
the field, being a Lieutenant, a Sergeant or Corporal, shall forfeit* and p^^
a pott^es^ wine, or be counted for a colt: to which they answered all viva voc^
Content, content, and then after many merry Songs, they departed And never
after did they travel without these fools on their ^^ckes: which ever since
were called Saint Hughes bones.

CHAP. V.
How Crispianus and his brother Crispine, the two sons of the King of Logria,
through the cruelty of the Tyrant Maximinus, were feign in disguised manner to
secke for their lives safety, and how they were entertained by a Shoemaker in
Feversha^^.

When the Roman Maximinus sought in cruel sort, to berea^e this Land of all
her noble youth or youth of noble blood, The virtuous Queen of Logria (which
now is called Kent) dwelling in the City Durovernum, alias Canterbury, or the
Court of Kentishmen, having at that time two young Sons, sought all the means
she could possible to keep them out of the Tyrants clawe^; and in this manner
she spoke unto them.

My dear and beloved sons, the joy and comfort of my age, you see the danger
of these times and the storms of a Tyrants reign, who having now gathered
together the most part of the young Nobility, to make them slaves in a
foreign Land, that are free borne in their own Country, seeks for you
also, thereby to make a clear riddance of all our borne Princes, to the end he
might plant strangers in their stead. Therefore (my sweet sons) take the
counsel of your mother, and seek in time to prevent ensuing danger, which
will come upon us suddenly as a storm at sea, and as cruelly as a Tiger in the
wilderness: therefore suiting your selves in honest habites, seek some poor
service to shield you from mischance, seeing necessity has privileged those
places from Tyranny, And so (my sons) the gracious Heavens may one day raiss
you to deserved dignity and honor.

The young Lads seeing their mother so earnest to have them gone, fulfilled her
commandment, and casting of^ their attire, put homely garments on. and with
many bitter tears, took leave of the Queen their mother, desiring her before
they went, to bestow her blessing upon them.

O my son^ (quoth she) stand you now upon your ceremonies? had I leisure to
give you one kiss, it were something; The Lord bless you, get you gone, away,
away, make have I say, let not swift time o^er^^ip you, for the Tyrant is hard
by: with that she pushed them out of a back door, and then set herself
down to weep.

The two young Princes, which like pretty lambs went straying they knew not
whether, at length by good fortune, came to Feversham. where before the days
peep, they heard certain Shoomakers singing, being as pleasant as their
notes, as they sa^e at their business, and this was their Song:

Would God that it were Holiday,
hey dery down down dery:
That with my love I might go play,
with woe my heart is weary:
My whole delight is in her sight,
would God I had her company,
her company,
Hey dery down, down a down.
My Love is fine, my Love is fair,
Hey dery down, down dory:
No maid with her may well compare,
in Kent or Canterbury;
From me my Love shall never move,
would God I had her company,
her company,
Hey dery down, down a down.
To see her laugh, to see her smile,
hey dery down, down dery:
Does all my sorrows clean beguile,
and make my heart full merry;
No grief does grow where she does go,
would God I had her company, etc.
Hey dery down, down a down.
When I do meet her on the green,
hey dery down, down dery:
Me thinks she looks like beauties Queen,
which makes my heart full merry;
Then I her greet with kisses sweet,
would God I had her company, etc.
Hey dery down, down a down.
My love comes not of churlish kind,
hey dery down down dery;
But bears a gentle courteous mind,
Which makes my heart full merry,
She is not ^oy, she is my joy,
would God I had her company, etc.
Hey dery down down adowne.
Till Sunday come, farewell my dear,
hey dery down down dery.
When we do meet, we will have good cheer,
and then I will be merry:
If thou love me, I will love thee,
and still delight thy company, thy company,
Hey dery down down adowne.
The young Princes perceiving such mirth to remain in so homely it cottage,
judged by their pleasant Notes, that their hearts were not cloyed with over
many cares, and therefore wished it might be their good ^ap to be harbored in a
place of such great content.

But standing a long time in doth^ what to do, like two distressed strangers,
combating twixt hope and fear; at length taking courage, Crispianus knocked at
the door: What knave knockes there (quoth the Journey man) and by and by,
down he ^akes his quar^er staff and opens the door, ^being as ready to
strike as ^o^ake, saying: What lack you? To whom Crispianus made this answer:
Good sir, pardon our holdnesse, and measure not our truth by our rudeness; we
are two poor boys that want service, stripped from our friends by the fury of
these wars, and therefore are we enforced succourlesse to crave ^eruite in
any place. What have you no friends or acquaintance in these parts to go to
(said the Shoomakers) by whose means you might got preferment? Alas sir (said
Crispianus) necessity is despised of every one, and misery is trodden down of
many; but seldom or never relieved: yet notwithstanding, if our hope did not
yield us some comfort of (...) hap, we should grow desperate through
distress. That were ^^at pity (said the Shoemaker) be content for as our Dame
often ^els our Master. A patient man is better than a strong man. Stay a while
and I will call our Dame to the door, and then you shall hear what ^hee will
say. With that he went in, and forth came his Dame, who be holding the said
youths, said: Now alas, poor boys, how comes it to pass that you are out of
service? What, would you be Shoomakers, and bearne the Gentle Craft? Yes
forsooth (said they) with all our hearts. Now by my ^roth (quoth she) you do
look with honest true faces. I will entreat my husband for you, for we would
gladly have good boys; and if you will be just and true, and serve God, no
doubt you may do well enough: Come in my lads, come in. Crispianus and his
brother, with great reverence gave her thanks; and by that time they had
stayed a little while, down came the good man, and his wife hard by his
heels, saying: See husband, these be the youths I told you of, no doubt but
in time they will be good men.

Her husband looking wishtly upon them, and conceiving a good opinion of their
favors, at length agreed that they should dwell with him, so that they would
be bound for seven years. The youths being contented, the bargain was soon
ended, and so set to their business; where at they were no sooner settled, but
that great search was made for them in all places; and albeit the officers came
to the house where they dwelt, by the reason of their disguise they knew them
not: having also taken upon them borrowed names of Crispianus and Crispine.
Within a few days after, the Queen their mother was by the Tyrant taken, and
for that she would not confess where her Sons were, she was laid in prison
in Colchester Castle: whereunto she went with as cheerful a countenance, as
Cateratus did, when he was led captine to Rome: and coming by the place where
her son tes sat at work, with a quick eye she had seen espied them, and
look how a dying coal reu^ues in the wind, even so at this sight she became
suddenly red: but making signs that they should hold their tongues, she was
led along: whom seven years after her Sons did never see. But as men stand
amazed at the sight of Apparitions in the air, as ignorant what success shall
follow, even so were these two Princes aghast to see their own mother thus led
away, not knowing what danger would ensue thereof.

Notwithstanding, they thought good to keep their service as their lives
surest refuge: at what time they both bent their whole minds to please their
Master and Dame, refusing nothing that was put to them to do, were it so wash
dishes, scour Bettles, or any other thing, whereby they thought their Dames
favor might be gotten, which made her the readier to give them a good report
to their Master, and to do them many other services, which otherwise they
should have missed; following therein the admon^tion of an old Iourney-man, who
would always say to the Apprentices:

Howsoever things do frame,
Please well thy Master, But chiefly thy Dame.
Now by that time, these two young Princes had truly served their Master the
s^ace of four or five years, he was grown something wealthy, and they very
cunning in their trade; whereby the house had the n^me ^o breed the best
workmen in the Country; which report in the end preferred their Master to be
the Emperors Shoemaker: and by this means, his servants went to Maximinus
Court every day: but Crispianus and Crispine fearing they should have been
known, kept themselves from thence, as much as they could. Notwithstanding, at
the last persuading themselves, that Time had worn them out of knowledge, they
were willing in the end to go thither, as well to hear tidings of the Queen
their Mother, as also for to seek their own preferment.

CHAP. VI.
How the Emperors fair daughter Ursula, fell in love with young Crispine,
coming with Shoes to the Court; and how in the end they were secretly married
by a blmd ^rier.

NOw among all the Shoomakers men that came to the Court with shoes, young
Crispine was had in greatest regard with the fair Princess, whose Mother
being lately dead, she was the only ^oy of her Father, who always sought
means to match her with some worthy Roman, whose renown might ring
throughout the whole world.

But fair Vrsula, whose bright eyes had entangled her heart with desire of the
Shoomakers favor, despised all proffers of Love, in re^ard of him. And yet
notwithstanding she would off check her own opinion, in placing her love
upon a person of such low degr^^, thus reasoning with herself.

Most aptly is the god of Love by ^unning Painters drawn blind, that ^o
equally shoots forth his ^^ery shafts: for had he eyes to see, it were
impossible to deal in such sort, as in matching fair Ven^rs with soul
Vulcan, yoaking the Imperial hearts of Kings to the love of beggars* as he did
to Cofetua, and as now in my self I find how mad a thing it would seem to
the eyes of the world, that an Em^erors daughter should delight in the favor
of a simple Shoemaker.

O Vrsula take heed what th^^ ^^^t, stain not thy royal^y with such indignity.
O that Crispines birth were agr^^able to his person! for in mine eye, there is
no Prince in the world comparable to him: if then while he is clothed in these
rags of servitude, he appear so excellent, what would he be, were he in
Princely attire. O Crispine, either thou art not as thou seem, or else
Nature, in disgrace of Kings, has made tho^ a Shoemaker.

In these humors would the Princess be often, especially at Crispines
approach, or at his departure: For, as soon as ever he came within her sight
with shoes, a sudden blush like a flame of lightning would strike in her face,
and at his departure an earthly pale color, ^^^e to the beams of the bright
^un obscured by coal black clouds. But after many weary conflicts with Fancy,
she fully resolved, at his next coming, to enter into communication with him,
but ima^ining his stay from Court over long, on the sudden she sent pre^ently
for him, finding great fault in the last shoes he brought her. At which time
Crispine most humbly on his knee greatly craved pardon for all such faults as
she then had found, promising amendment in the next shoes she should have.

Nay (quoth she) I Will show thee, they are too low something in the instep; also
the heel is bad, and besides that, they are too strait in the ^oes. You shall
have a pai^e made (said he) shall ^it you better, ^or none shall set a stitch
in them but mine own self. Do, said the Princess, but let me have them to
soon as thou can^^, and there with Crispine departed.

The Princess then all solitary, got her self into her Chamber, entered there
into consideration, and found within her self great trouble and sorrow, while
the tongue, the hearts aduorate was not suffered to speak. At last ^he heard
Crispines voice, enquiring of the Ladies in the great Chamber for the
Princess, who answered, That having taken little rest the night before, she
was now laid down to sleep, and therefore they willed him to come again some
other time. Asleep, replied the Princess! I am not a sleep, bid him stay:
what hasty huswife was that which sent him hence? Call him again quickly I
would advise you* And therewith all changing melancholy into mirth, she arose
up from out of her bed, and as a bright ^tarre shooting in the ^lemen she
swiftly got her ^^^th tp meet the Shoemaker, whose fair sight was to her as
great a co^for^ as a Sunshine before a sh^w^^ of rain* How now (quoth she)
^ast thou brought me a pair of shoes? I have (gracious Madam, quoth he.) Then
(quoth the Princess) come thy self and draw them on* there with she sitting
down lifted up ha^ well proportioned l^g upon his gentle knee. Where, by that
time her shoes were dra^^ne on, she had prepared a good reward for her
shoemaker, and giving him a handful of gold, ^he said: Thou ^ast so well
pleased me in making of these shoes, that I cannot but reward thee in some
good sort, therefore shoemaker, take this, and from henceforth let no man make
my shoes but thy self. But tell me Crispine, art thou not in love, that thou
do sm^g up thy self so finely, thou wast not wont to go so neatly: I pray
thee tell me what pretty wench is it that is mistress of thy heart? Truly,
fair Madam (quoth he) If I should not love, I might be accounted barbarous,
for by natures cours^ there is a mutual love in all things: the Dove and the
Peacocke love intir^l^, so does the Turtle and the Popiniay: she like affection
the fish Musculus ^eareth unto the huge Whale, insomuch that (...) leads him
from all danger of stony rocks: and as among birds and fishes, so amongst
plants and trees the like concord is to be found, for if the male of palm
trees be planted from the female, neither of both prosper: and being set one
near another, they do flourish accordingly, embracing with joy the branches
one of another. And for mine own part, I am in love too: for first of all, I
love my Make^ and next, my good Master and Dame: But as concerning the love of
pretty wenches, verily Madam, I am clear: and the rather do I abstain from
firing my ^ancy on women, seeing many sorrows do follow the married sort, for
a dram of delight has a pound of pain.

That is (answered the Princess) where Contention sets the house on fire,
but where true Love remains, there is no discontent: and what can a man more
desire for this worlds comfort, but a virtuous wife, which is reported to be a
treasure inestimable. Therefore Crispine, say thy mind, if I prefer thee to
a wife, every way deserving thy love, would thou take it well.

Truly Madam, (said Crispine) if I should not accept of your good will, I
should show my self more unmannerly than well nurtured: But seeing it pleases
you to grace me with your Princely countenance, and to give me liberty to
speak my mind, this is my opinion: If I were worthy to choose a wife, then
would I have one ^aire, rich, and wise; first, to delight m^^e eye: secondly,
to supply my want: and thirdly, to govern my house.

Then (said the Princess) her beauty I will refer unto the judgment of
thine own eyes, and her wisdom unto the trial of Time: but as concerning
her portion, I ^^^e make some report, because it well deserves to be praised:
For at her marriage thou shall have ^ ^ag full of rare virtues with her. Truly
Madam (quoth Crispine) such coins go not current among Tanners: and I know,
if I should go wit^ it to the Mar^et, it would buy me no soale leather.
Notwithstanding, when I do^ see her, I will tell you more of my mind.

The Princess taking him asi^e privately, walking with him in a fair Gallery,
said; In looking upon me, thou may judge of her, for she is as like me as
may be. When Crispine heard her say so, he right prudently answered: I had
rather Madam she were your own self, than it^e yourselfe: and although my
words savor of presumption, yet with your favor I dare boldly pronounce it,
that I hold my self worthy of a Queen, if I could get her good will. And were
(...) no danger to match with your Excellency, so it should please you, it
should not dislike me.

Then said the Princess, Now Shoemaker I see thou have some courage in thee:
and doubt thou not but if I were of that mind, but I would be as ready to
guide the^ from the dangerous rocks of my Fathers wrath, as the fish called
Musculus is for the Whale: But, could thou not be contented to dye for a
Ladies love? no Madam, (^^oth he) if I could keep her love, and live.

Then live fair friend (answered she) enjoy my Love, for I will dye rather
than live without thee. Crispine hearing this, was stricken into, an ex^asie of
io^, in such sort, as he wi^^ not whether he were asleep or dreamed: But by
that time he had summoned his wit^ together, with ^he plighting of his faith,
he o^ened his estate and high birth unto her, showing all the extremities that
he and his brother had been put unto since the death of their royal Father,
and of the imprisonment of the Queen their Mother.

The which when fair Vrsula with great wonder heard, giuin^ him an earnest of
her love with a sw^^t kiss: she said; My dear Love, and most gentle Prince,
ever did I think, that more than a common man was throwded in these poor
habiliments, which made me the bolder to impart my mind unto thee, and now
dread no more my Fathers wrath, for the ^^re thereof was lon^ a^oe quenched.

No, no, (quoth Crispine) an Eagles thirst is never expelled, but* by blood.
And albeit your father have now (perhaps) qualified the hea^^ of his ^ury by
the length of time, yet if be should understand of this my love to thee, it
would cause him to take out of the ashes, hot burning coals of displeasure
again: and then might my life pay a dear price for thy love.

Therefore (my dear Vrsula) I desire thee, even by the power of that love thou
bear to me, to keep secret what I have the wet thee, nothing doubting but
that in time, I may find release of these miseries; in the mean space we
will be secretly married, by which holy knot, we as well in body* as in heart,
he vnseparately tied together.

To this Vrsula consented most gladly, and thereupon told him that she would
meet him in her Fathers Park, at any hour he would appoint; which she might
do the more easily, in respect she had a key to one of the garden doors,
which gave present passage into the Park* The day and hour being concluded
upon, they parted for this time* both of them endued with such content, as in
all their lives they never found the like.

And at this time there was in Canterbury a blind Friar that in many years
had never seen the Sun, to this man did Crispine go, thinking him the fittest
Chapplaine to ^hop up such a marriage, who meeting with him at Christ church
one evening after the Antheme, broke with him after this manner.

God speed good father: there is a certain friend of mine that would be
secretly married in the morning bet^mes; for which purpose he thinks you the
fittest man to perform it in all the Cleyster: and therefore, if you will be
diligent to do it, and secret to conceal it, you shall have four angels for
your pains.

The Friar being fired with the desire of his gold, rubbing his elbow and
scratching his crown, swore by the blessed ^ooke that hung by his knee, that
he would be both willing and constant to keep it secret. Tush young man, you
may trust me, I have done many of these feats in my days; I know that youth
are youth, but they would not have all the world wonder at their doings: and
where shall it be, said the Friar? quoth Crispine, at Saint Gregory's Chapel,
and because you shall not make your boy acquainted therewith. I my self will
call you in the morning. Good father be not forgetful to observe the time, at
two of the clock is the hour, and therefore look you be ready when I shall
call you. I warrant you (replied the Friar:) and because I will not ouersleepe
my self, I will for this nightlye in my clothes, so that as soon as ever you
call, I will straight be ready. Then father I will trust you (quoth Crispine)
and so departed.

When he came to his Master, he made not many words, but so soon as he had
supt on Sunday at night, he went to his Chamber, and laid him down upon his
bed, making no creature in the house privy to his intent, not his own brother,
his mind still running on his fair mistress, and the happy hour that should
tie them both in one: never was there hunger starued man that did long more for
the sweet approach of wholesome food, than did Crispine for two a clock. And
so soon as the silent night had drawn all things to rest, Crispine got him
up, and to Canterbury goes he to meet his rose cheeked Lady in her fathers
Park, who also took hold of Times for lock, and like clear Cynthia shaped
her course to sooke out Sol in the Meridian. But so soon as her searching eye
had spyed him the commended his vigilance, saying: He well observed his hour:
O my dear (quoth he) rich preyes do make true men thieves: but finding thee
here so happily, I will fetch the Friar straight: he had no soon called at the
Friars door, but he presently heard him; and groaping the way down, he opened
the door, and along they went together: but the Friar finding his journey
longer than he expected, said; That either Saint Gregory's Chapel was
removed, or else he was not so good a footman as he was wont to be: that is
likely enough (said Crispine:) for how much the older you are since you went
this way last, so much the weaker you are to travel, but be you content, now
we are at the last come to the place, and therefore good Friar make what speed
you may. I warrant you (quoth he) and there withal he puts his spectacles on
his nose The fair Princess perceiving that, laughed heartily, saying: Little
n^^d has a blind man of a pair of Spectacles. Truly Mistress, said he, as
little need has an old man of a young wife; but you may see what use is:
Though I be blind and can see never a letter, yet I cannot say Mass without
my Book and my Spectacles, and then he proceeded to solemnize their marriage,
which being finished, the Friar had his gold* and home he was led: in the
mean time the Princess stayed still in the Park for her bridgroome, where
when he came, on a bank of sweet Primroses, he plucked the rose of amorous
delight: and after the Princess came to her Fathers Palace, and Crispine to
his Masters shop.

CHAP. VII.
How Crispianus was pressed to the wars, and how he fought with Iphicratis the
renowned General of the Persians, who made war upon the Frenchmen: showing
also the occasion that a Shoomakers son is said to be a Prince borne.

IN the mean time that Crispine was secretly busied about his marriage, his
brother Crispianus the same night, with many other, was pressed to wars into
the Country of Gaul, now called France, which made his Master and Dame full
of woe, who had committed to his government the whole rule of his house. And
when Crispine came home, they told him what chance had happened. And demanded
where he had been, they said* they were glad he had so well escaped.

Crispine excusing himself so well as he could, said, he was sorry for his
brothers sudden departure: notwithstanding, the joy of his late marriage
mi^^igated much of his sorrow: to whom in his brothers absence, his Master gave
the oversight of his household, which place he guided with such diseretion, as
thereby he got both the good will of his Master, and the love of the household.
And as he sat one day at his work, he sung this song in commendation of
marriage, himself sung the Ditty, and his fellows bore the burden.

AMong the joys on earth, though little joy there be,
hey down down adowne, fine is the silken twist,
Among the married sort most comfort I do see:
hey down down adowne, believe it they that list.
He that is a married man, has beauty to embrace,
Hey down down adowne, and therefore mickle woe:
He lives in delight, and is in happy case,
Hey down down adowne, in faith we think not so.
His wife does dress his meat, with every thing most meet,
Hey down down adowne, fair women love good cheer:
And when he comes to bed, she gives him kisses sweet,
Hey down down adowne, for thanks he pays full dear.
A hundred honey sweets, he has when that is done,
hey down down adowne, the truth is seldom known,
He has in a little time a daughter or a son,
hey down down adowne, God grant they be his own.
A wife is evermore, both faithful, true and just,
hey down down adowne, it is more than you do know:
Her husband may be sure, in her to put his trust,
hey down down adowne, most are deceived so.
While he does ride abroad, she looks unto his house,
hey down down adowne, the finest cloth is torn:
And when he comes, she gives him brawne and sowse,
hey down down adowne, and oftentimes the horn.
Now now, what is that you say (quoth Crispine?) Nothing (quoth they) but only
bear the burden of your Song. And surely we think it great pity that you
are not married, seeing you can sing so well in the praise of marriage. Truly
(quoth he) were it not for that holy Iustitution, what would the world but be a
brood of hapless bastards, like to the cursed s^^d of Cain, men fit for all
manner of villainy, and such as would leave behind them a race of runnagates,
persons that would live as badly as they are lewdly begotten.

The rest of the Iourney-men hearing him enter into such a deep discourse of
the matter began therefore to demand many questions: but s^^ing it appertains
not to our matter, we will leave them to their disputation: and in the mean
space I will show you something of Crispianus, who is now in France, with many
other Noble Britains, whom Maximinus sent thither to aid the Gauls against
the mighty force of Iphicratis the Persian General, who had at this time
invaded their country with a great power. The day of battle being appointed,
the Armies met in the field, at what time both the Generals like two Lions
filled with wrath in their proud march viewed one another, breathing forth on
both sides words of dis^aine, and thus the General of the Gauls began.

Thou insolent Commander of the Eastern troops, how durst thou set thy
ambitious foot within our territories? Cannot the confines of Persia content
thee, nor those conquered Kingdoms already in thy hand, but that with
vn^atiate desire thou must come to usurp our right? Know thou, that the
undaunted Gauls do scorn thee: for albeit that Alexander like, thou seek
to subdue the whole world, flattering thy self in thy fortunes, yet never
think that the son of a Shoemaker shall bend our neck to a servile yoke.
Therefore in our just right we are come to give thee hire for thy pride, and by
the force of our swords to beat down the Scepter of thy proud thoughts.

The renowned Iphicratis upon these words made this reply: Now may I report
that the Gauls can do something, finding them such good scolds: But know this
that I come not to ra^le, but to revenge these contemptuous speeches, and with
the points of sturdy Lances to thrust them down your throats again. Indeed,
my fathers trade is a reproach unto me, but thou art a reproach to thy father:
but thou shall understand that a Shoomakers son is a Prince borne, his fortunes
made him so, and thou shall find no less. And hereupon the ^r^mpets sounding
to a charge, and the drums striking alarm, there followed a sore and cruel
fight: wherein Crispianus like a second Hector laid about him, he wing down
his foes on every side. Whose ^alianey and Princely courage was noted of all
the Gauls. And this fierce fight ended with the nights approach, each Army
took their rest. At what time ^he Noble General of the Gauls sent for
Crispianus, and receiving him with sundry kind imbracements in his Tent, he
demanded of what birth he was. To whom Crispianus sha^ed this answer: Most
worthy General, my birth is not mean, and my secrets less, but by trade I am
a Shoemaker in England.

A Shoemaker (said the General!) If such ^ame wait vp^o Shoomakers, and such
magnanimity follow them, well were it for us, if all the people in the Kingdom
were Shoomakers. And as great thanks I am to give Maximinus for sending me
such a Soldier, as he may be proud to have such a subject: and now right sorry
am I, that ever I reproached famous Iphicratis, with his Fathers trade, seeing
I find it true that Magnanimity and Knightly Prowess, is not always tied
within the compass of Noble blood. And for my own part, I will so honorably
requite thy deseruings, that thou shall bless the time thou ever came into
these wars.

The next morning the Generals joined battle again, resolving in this fight
either by death or victory, to make an end of these troubles, where the
Soldiers on each side strou^ for the golden wreath of ren^wne, The two
Generals meeting in the battle, ^ought most courageously together; in which
bloody conflict the Prince of the Gauls was thrice by Iphicratis unhorsed, and
as many times of Crispianus mounted again: but in the end the great Commander
of the Eastern Army, so mightily prevailed, that he had seized on the person
of the French Prince, and was carrying him cap^iue to that Colors.

But so highly was Crispianus favored of fortune, that he and his followers
met him in the pride of his conquest: who then all besmeared in the Persian
blood, set upon Iphicratis, and so manly behaved himself, that her recovered
the Prince again, and in despite of the Persians, brought him to his Royal
Tent: in which encounter the Noble Iphicratis was sore wounded, by reason
whereof the Soldiers had rest for three or four days: in which space
Iphicratis sent to the Prince of Gauls, to know what kin he was, that in such
valtant sort rescued him out of his hands, saying; that if he would serve him,
he would make him ruler over a mighty Kingdom.

The French Prince sent him word, that it was a right hardy Britain, which
had performed that honorable service: but no knight, though well deserving
greater dignity, but a shoemaker in England: and thus (quoth he) a Shoomakers
son was by a shoemaker foiled.

When Iphicratis understood this, he sent word again to the Gauls, that for
the favor of that worthy man, he would not only cease the wars, but for
ever after be a friend to the Gauls: which joyful message when the French
king understood, most willingly he embraced the unlooked for tidings of happy
peace: and thereupon made Crispianus a knight.

After the which there was a great feast ordained, whereunto the renowned
Iphicratis was invited, and the two Generals, with Crispianus friendly met
together. Thus the sour war was ended with sweet feasting: and Iphicratis
soon after departed out of the Country with his Army, and never after annoyed
them.

Then the French king, writing his Letter of thanks unto the Emperor Maximmus,
did therein certify him of the Princely a^ts of Crispianus, whereby he was
brought into the Emperors favor; and with these Letters Crispianus returned
into England.

CHAP. VIII.
How the Lady Ursula finding her self to be with child, made her great moan
unto her husband Crispine, and how he provided for her a secret place, where
she was delivered.

IN the mean space the Lady Vrsula finding her self to be with child, and
her unknown husband coming one day with shoes unto her, she made her moan
unto him, saying: O Crispine how shall we do? the time of my sorrow and shame
draws on; I feel that ^i^ing in my womb, which, I fear, will bring death
upon us all: Why my dear Lady (answered he) art thou with child? keen thy
Chamber close, and wi^tily excuse thy griefs, until I have found means to
procure our safety.

But do thou mean faithfully (said she) will thou not deceive me, and for
fear of my Fathers wrath fl^e the Country: if thou should do so, then were
I the wretchedst. Lady alive. Forsake me not sweet Crispine, whatsoever thou
do, but take me with thee wheresoever thou go: it is not my fathers
frowns that I regard, so I may have thy favor, what do I care for a Princely
Palace: an homely Cottage shall content me in thy company.

O my Love, I will rather learn to spi^ne hemp for thy sh^^ thread, than live
without thee in the greatest pleasure.

I will not leave thee my dear ^oue, (quoth he) by that faith I ^ow, which I
plighted to thee at our blessed marriage; and therefore be contented, and it
shall not be long before I return. Leaving thus his sad Lady he came home, and
secretly brake the matter unto his Dame, desiring her counsel in this his
extremity.

What, how now (quoth she) have thou got a Maid with ch^ld? Ah thou whoreson
villain, thou have undone thy self, how will thou do now? thou have made a
fair hand; here is now sixteen pence a week beside Soap and Candles, Beds,
Shirts, Bigpins, Wastcoat^, Headbands, Swadlebands, Crosseclothes, Bibs,
Taileclouts, Manties, Hose, Shoes, Coats, Petticoates, Cradie and Crickets,
and beside that a standing stool, and a Po^net to make the Child Pap; all this
is come upon thee, besides the charges of all her lying in. Oh Crispine,
Crispine, I am heartily sorry for thee.

But in good faith, if I knew the queen that has brought thee to this folly;
I would have her by the face ^ swear to you: for though I speak it before
thee (Crispine) thou art a proper fellow, and thou might have done full
well, if thou had had grace. God has done his part on thee: and with that
she began with kindness to weep. Whereupon her Husband coming in, asked what
she ailed: O man said she) Crispine! Why what of Crispine? tell me. Why
speak thou not? We shall loose a good servant, so we shall. What se^u^nt
shall we loose foolish woman (quoth he?) Tell me quickly. O husband! by Cock
and Pie I swear, I Will have her by the nose. Who will thou have by the nose?
What the Devil art thou mad, that thou will not answer me? Crispine, who at
his Masters coming shunned the room, lending an ear unto those words, went
to his Master, and said unto him: Sir, these four years have ^ served you;
and the fi^t draws near to an end; and as I have found you a good Master to
me, so I trust you have had no great cause to complain of me, though (through
ignorance) I have sometimes made offense: and knowing at this instant, no man
so near a friend unto me as your self, I have thought good to impart my
secret counsel to you: something I presume upon my Dames favor: which made me
open that unto her, which now I wish I had not discovered. Notwithstanding,
resting more upon your discretion than her secre^y, I would desire your
counsel in a matter that concerns me very near. Uerily said his Master, if
it be a thing wherein I may do thee good, thou shall find that I will not
fall from thee in thy sorrows, and therefore be not abashed to declare thy
mind: for I swear, if I may procure thee right, thou shall put up no wrong.
Why then sir, thus it is (quoth he) my will running before my wit, I have
gotten a Maiden with child, and I wot not in this case what to do, that I
might preserve the Maid from shame, and my self from discredit: desides, I
doubtifit be known, it will cost me my life: therefore in such case good
Master, be secret. Tush man fear not (quoth he) it is a matter of nothing: but
I pray thee, now tell me, what wanton wagtaile is it that thou have clapped thus
under the apron? O Master (quoth he) the Kings fair Daughter Vrsula is my
Love, and she it is that lives in care for my sake. Passion of my heart thou
whor^on Knave, quoth his Master, thou art a dead man. I marvel how the Devil
thou came to be so bold with her: Surely thou have drawn on her shoes on
Sunday, I may say, thou have left so good a token behind: but intruth my boy I
commend thee: that thou would shoot at the fairest. Yea sir, quoth Crispine,
and I have hit the mark I frow, and do verily believe, that none will shoot
(...) near again. Nay swear not, said his Master, many may aim at fair
marks, and more than one man hits them now and then: but what would thou
have me to do in this case? My good Master (quoth Crispine) the truth is, she
is my wife; and the very same night my brother was pressed to the wars, I was
married to her: and if you could tell me how she might be delivered of her
burden without any suspicion, I should not only remain beholding to you
while I lived, but would also gratify your kindness in such sort as should
content you. His ^ame all this while listened to their talk, and when ^he
understood he spoke of the kings daughter, and that he had married her, she
said: Now Gods blessing on thy heart Crispine, that thou art so careful for
thy wife, but it makes me wonder she would marry a Shoemaker, and a poor
fellow too. Master and Dame (quoth Crispine) seeing I have begun, I^^ show you
a further matter, as strange as the other. The necessity of these times makes
many Noble personages to mask in simple habit, as Jupiter did in a shepherds
weed, and the truth is, that Lady Vrsula is not ignorant, that by matching with
me she has wedded a Prince, and you may say, that these five years two
Princes have served you obediently, under the simple borrowed names of Crispine
and Crispianus.

Our Royal Father was slain by the Emperor Maximinus, and the Queen our
Mother yet lies imprisoned, and your poor house, and these leather garments,
have been our life of defense against the blood* thirsty tyrant. Now you see,
that though there were hate toward us in the father, yet there is love yielded
us by the daughter. This must be kept for a certain time from the knowledge of
him lest our lives pay a dear ransom for our loves. Well Crispine (quoth his
Dame) be of good cheer, for I have a device in my head, how to get thy Love
out of her fathers Palace, that she may be brought to bed in my own house,
without either hurt to thee, or dishonor to her, if thou will do as I wish
thee. When you do perceive that she grows near unto the time of her
travel, I would w^sh you to work such means as to set some tree on fire late
in the night, that stands somewhat near one of the Beacons upon the Sea
coast, whereby it will follow, that such watchmen as watch at our Beacons,
supposing the Beacons at the Sea coast to be on fire, will set theirs on fire
also. Then will there be a great hurly burly, with the preparation of men at
Arms on all sides to withstand a supposed foe, that which they shall never
find: then (as you know) Maximinus with his household will be in most fear,
because he is most hated, that whilst he is abroad, the rest of his household
will every one of them seek for their own safeguard, amongst the which, let
fair Vrsula be one, who by that means singling her self alone, may take up
my house, and here she may be closely kept till she be delivered, taking upon
her the name and habit of a simple woman. But the truth of this matter (quoth
Crispine) I doubt it will soon be perceived and found out, then how shall Lady
Vrsula do, for she will straight be missed. Tush that is no matter (quoth his
Dame) and missed let her he, until such time as she is in a better case to go
abroad again; for in such a tumult as then will be, they will suppose many
things, that one mischance or other is befal^e her: or if she be in health,
that she has wandered into the woods or some other uncouth place* where she
might best provide for safety: and when she comes home again, I warrant thee
Crispine she shall be welcome. Then said his Master, I like my wives counsel
well; therefore by my consent put it in practice: Whereunto Crispine consented,
and so making the Lady privy to the purpose, at length it was put in execution,
at what time there was crying out on all sides, Arm, Arm, Arm: our enemies
are coming upon us. Where quoth they?) at Rutupium said one, at Aruvagus
Castle said another: quoth the third it is at Doris: I tell you (quoth the
fourth) it is at Duur: And all this is but Dover, (said the fifth man;) and at
Dover it is undoubtedly, therefore haste, haste away: for never was there more
need: so that Maximinus was almost at his wits end, as one not knowing which
way to turn, the cries of the people came so thick, one after another, the
waiting Gentle women left the Princess, and sought their own safety. Thus
while some were busy in carrying out the Kings treasure, others hiding the
plate, and others the goods, Vrsula had an easy passage into the Shoomakers
house.

The young Prince Crispine was gone with the rest of the Town toward Dover,
where when they came, there was nothing to do, which when Maximinus saw, he
was not a little glad the wars were so soon ended: But when he came to the
Court, and missed his daughter, there was posting up and down in every place
to seek her, but all in vain, for no man could meet with her, for which he
made a great lamentation, making a Proclamation throughout the whole Country,
That whosoever could bring her to him, he should not only have a Princely
reward, but also if he were a man of Noble blood, he should be honored with
the marriage of his fair daughter. This was good news to Crispine, who was
not to learn to make profit thereof. But by that time his Lady was i^^ht,
Crispianus his eldest brother arrived into England wi^h great honor, as before
you have heard. And before he went to the Court he thought it good to visit
his old Master, who came also in good time to the christening of his brothers
child, which when he with wonder beheld, noting what a strange accident there
was, that Maximinus daughter should be his brothers wife. But after that he had
in Princely manner saluted the new delivered Lady, taking the infant in his
arms, he kissed it, saying, Now I will say and swea^e *said he that a
Shoomakers Son is a Prince borne joining in the opinion of phicratis, and
henceforth Shoomakers shall never let their term ^ie.

Then turning to his Master and Dame (he said) how much dear Master and Dame
are we bound to your favors, that have maintained our honors with our
happiness; for by this means, I hope we shall make a joyful conclusion of
our sorrowful beginning, and I will so work, that the Emperor shall confirm
what is already begun, I mean, the honor due to these Princely Lovers, and
together with our happy fortunes procure our mothers liberty.

Hereupon, within a short time after, he made preparation to the Court, he
attired himself in Princely manner, and with a most knightly grace he
delivered to Maximinus, the ^ing of Gauls letter, where he certified the
Emperor of the honorable deeds performed by Crispianus, whereupon he received
him to great favor, and said unto him: Right renowned knight, for the great
honor thou have done me in France, I will honor thee with any thing which
thou shall command, that stands with the Majesty and credit of an Emperor to
give. Then I beseech your Highness (quoth he) to grant me the life and
liberty of my dear mother, that late Queen of Logria. Art thou her son said
Maximinus? although thy father was my foe, yet I must needs say, he was a
most courageous and warlike Prince: thy suit is granted. And once I had a
daughter worthy of thy love, but unconstant Fortune has bereft me of that
bliss; but had it pleased the fair Heavens to have left her me till this day,
I would have made thee more honorable by her match: But seeing that my wishing
does nothing profit thee, take hence the richest Jewel I have, and be thou
next my self in authority: with that he took from his own neck a ^ollar of
most, precious Diamonds, and gave it to Crispianus, saying, Be thou as
fortunate as Policrates.

CHAP. IX.
How fair Ursula came before her father with Crispine her husband, who was
joyfully received by him, and in the end had his good will to confirm the
marriage betwixt them, whereupon there was great joy on both sides. And the
Shoomakers in honor of this happy day, made a joyful Song.

Within a certain space after, word was brought to the Emperor, that his
daughter was with a Shoemaker, come to the Court; whereat Maximinus was
stricken into a sudden joy, saying: An honorable Shoemaker may he be that
has brought my fair daughter again, Welcome my sweet Vrsula, and in good
time welcome to thy father, and welcome also is this happy young man that has
so fortunately brought thee: and turning to Crispianus he said: Noble Sir
Knight, take here my daughter to wife; Not so dear Father (quoth she) this man
has best deserved my love, that has preserved my life, and his wife will I
^e. Why Vrsula* said her father, will thou darken the sun shine of my joy, with
the clouds of foul obstinacy, and yoke thy self so unequally? This man is a
Prince. And this man's son is another (quoth she*) That is strange said the
Emperor; can that child be a Prince, whose father is but a Shoemaker?

Then answered Vrsula, My Royal Father, a Shoomakers son is a Prince borne:
Most gracious Lord (quoth Crispianus) the very like sentence did I hear the
renowned Iphicrates pronounce to the King of Gauls. when he vpbraided him
with his birth: with that Crispines Dame presented the child to the Emperor,
and fair Vrsula was very diligent to discover the child's face, and held it to
her Father. Why daughter (quoth he) art thou not ashamed to henour a base borne
brat so much? hence with the Elfe, and therewithal pusht it from him; whereat
his daughters tears trickled down her cheeks, and so kissing the child, gave
it again to the woman. What (said Maximinus) do thou love the child so
well, that thou must kiss it, and weep for it? I have cause dear Father
(quoth she) for that this childs mother lay in my mothers belly.

At these words the Emperor suspected something, and demanded of Crispine of
what parentage he was. And then knowing that he was Crispianus brother, all the
controversy was ended, and their secret marriage confirmed openly, with great
joy and triumph: at which time the Shoomakers in the same town made holiday:
To whom Crispine and Crispianus seat most Princely gifts for to maintain their
merriment. And ever after upon that day at night the Shoomakers make great
cheer and feasting, in remembrance of these two Princely brethren: and because
it might not be forgotten they caused their names to be placed in the Calendar
for a yearly remembrance, which you shall find in the month of October,
about three days before the feast of Simon and Jude.

The Shoomakers Song on Crispianus night.
Two Princely brethren once there* were,
Right Sons unto a King.
Whose father tyrant Maximus
to cruel death did bring:
Crispianus one was called,
the eldest of the two;
Crispine was the others name,
which well had learned to woo,
These brethren then were after feign,
from fathers house to fly:
Because their foes to spoil their lives
in privy wait did lie:
Into a kind Shoomakers house,
they suddenly stepped in;
And there to learn the Gentle Craft,
did presently begin.
And five years space they lived so,
with great content of mind;
So that the Tyrant could not tell;
whereas he should them find:
Though every day to Court they came*
with Shoes for Ladies feet;
They were not known by their attire,
they used themselves so meet,
At length unto the furious wars
was Crispianus pressed;
Whereas his knightly prowess then
he tried above the rest:
But Crispine found him better sport,
would I had Crispine been;
The Kings fair daughter loved him well,
as it was after seen.
The length of this fair Ladies foot,
so well did Crispine know,
That none but he could please her mind,
the certain truth is so:
Came he by night or else by day,
he was most welcome still;
With kisses sweet she did him pay,
and thanks for his good will,
So often these Lovers twain did meet,
by day and eke by night:
That at the last the Lady said,
she should be shamed quite;
What was the matter tell me true,
that so her sorrow bred?
Her Shoemaker most daintily
had got her Maidenhead.
But he at length so wisely wrought,
as does the Story tell:
Her fathers right good will he got,
and every thing was well.
And Crispianus came again
from wars victoriously:
Then Shoomakers made Holiday,
and therefore so will I.
And now for Crispianus sake,
this wine I drink to thee,
And he that does this mark mistake,
and will not now pledge me:
He is not Crispianus friend;
nor worthy well I wot,
To have a Lady to his Love,
as Crispine he has got.
CHAP. X.
How Sir Simon Eyer being at first a Shoemaker, became in the end Mayor of
London, through the counsel of his wife: and how he broke his fast every day
on a Table that he said he would not sell for a thousand pounds: and how he
builded Leaden Hall.

OUr English Chronicles do make mention, that sometime there was in the
honorable City of London a worthy Mayor, known by name of Sir Simon Air,
whose fame lives in the mouths of many men to this day, who albeit be
descended from mean parentage, yet by Gods blessing, in the end he came to be
a most worthy man in the commonwealth.

This man being brought young out of the North Country, was bound prentise to
a Shoemaker, bearing then the name of the Gentle-Craft (as still it does) his
Master being a man of reasonable wealth, set many Iourney-men and prentises to
work, who followed their business with great delight, which quite excludes
all wearines, for when servants do sit at their work like Dromedaries, then
their minds are never lightly upon their business: for it is an old proverb,

They prove servants kind and good,
That sing at their business like birds in the wood.
Such fellows had this young Lad, who was not behind with many Northern I^gs,
to answer their Southern Songs. This youth being the youngest prentise in the
house, as occasion serue^, was often sent to the Conduit for water, where in
short time he fell acquainted with many other prentises coming thither for the
same intent.

Now their custom was so, that every Sunday morning diverse of these prentizes
did use to go to a place near the Conduit, to break their fast with pudding
Pies, and often they would take Simon along with them: but upon a time it so
fell out, that when he should draw money to pay the shot with the rest, that
he had none* whereupon he merrily said unto them: My faithful friends, and
Conduit companious, treasurers of the Water-tankerd, and maine pillars of the
pudding-house, I may now compare my purse to a varren Do, that yields the
Keeper no more good than her empty carcass: or to a bad nut, which being
opened has never a kernel: therefore, if it will please you to pardon me at
this time, and excuse me for my part of the shot, I do here vow unto you, that
if ever come to be Lord Mayor of this City, I will give a breakfast unto all
the prentizes in London. We do take your word (quoth they) and so they
departed.

It came to pass, that Simon having at length worn out his years of
Apprentiship, that he fell in love with a Maiden that was a near neighbor
unto him, unto whom at length he was married, and not him a shop, ^^d labored
hard daily, and his young wife was never idle but straight when she had nothing
to do she sat in the shop and spun: and having lived thus alone a year or
thereabout, and having gathered something together, at length he got him some
prentizes and a Iourniman or two, and he could not make his ware so fast as be
could have sold it, so that ^e stood in great need of a Iourni man or two more.

At the last, one of his servants spring one go along the street with a
^ardell at his back called to his Master, saying, Sir, yonder goes S. Hughes
bones, twenty pounds to a ^^nny. Run presently quoth he) and bring him hither.
The boy running forth, called to the man, saying, Good fellow, come hither,
here is one would speak with you* The fellow being a Frenchman, that had not
long been in England, turning about, said: Hea, what you sea? Will you speak
wed me, Hea? what you have? tell a me, what you have* hea? And with that
coming to the stall, the good man ask^ him if he lackt work, We par ma foy,
quoth the Frenchman. Hereupon Simon took him in, and to work he went
merrily, where he behaved himself so well, that his Master made good account
of him, thinking he had been a Bachelour, but in the end it was found
otherwise.

This man was the first that wrought upon the low cut sh^^e, with she square
toe, and the latchet ouerth wart the instep, before which time in England they
did wear a high shoe that reached above the ankles, right after the manner of
our husbandmens shoes at this day, save only that it was made very sharp at
the toe turning up like the tail of an Island dog: or as you see a Cock carry
his hinder feathers.

Now it is to be remembered, that while John Denevale dwelt with Simon Air, it
chanced that a ship of the I Will of Candy was driven upon our Coast, laden with
all ^inde of Lawnes and Cambrickes, and other linen cloth: which commodities
at that time were in London very scant, and exceeding dear: and by reason of a
great l^ake the ship had got at Sea, being unable to fail any further, he
would make what profit he could of his goods here.

And being come to London, it was John Denevales chance to meet him in ^he
streets, to whom the Merchant (in the Greek tongue) demanded where he might
have lodging, for he was one that had never been in England before; and being
unacquainted, wist not whither to go: but while he spoke Greek, John Denevale
answered him still in French, which tongue the Merchant understood well: and
therefore being glad that he had met with one that could talk to him, he
declared unto him what tempests he endured at Sea, and also how his ship lay
upon the Coast with such Commodities as he would sell. Truly Sir (quoth John)
I am my self but a stranger in this Country, and utterly unacquainted with
Merchants, but I dwell with one in the City that is a very honest man, and it
may be that he can help you to some that will deal with you for it, and if
you think it good, I will move him in it and in the mean space, I Will bring you
where you may have a very good lodging, to morrow morning I will come to you
again.

Sir, said the Merchant, if you please to do me that favor, I Will not only be
thankful unto you for the same, but also in most honest sort will content you
for your pains: and with that they departed.

Now, so soon as John the Frenchman came home, he moved the matter unto his
Master, desiring him that he would do what he could for the Merchant, when
his Master had heard each circumstance, noting there with the want of such
commodities in the ^and, cast in his mind as he stood cutting up his work,
what were best to be done in this case, saying to his man John, I will think
upon it betwixt this and the morning, and then I will tell you my mind: and
there withal casting down his cutting Knife, he went out of his shop into his
Chamber, and therein walked up and down alone very sadly, ruminating hereon:
he was so far in his muse, that his wife sending for him to supper two or
three times he nothing regarded the maids call, hammering this matter in his
head: at last his wife came to him saying: Husband, what mean you that you do
not come to supper? why speak you not man? Hear you? good husband, come away,
your meat will be cold: but for all her words, he staid walking up and down
still, like a man that had sent his wits a wool gathering: which his wife
seeing, pulled him by the sleeue, saying, why Husband in the name of God, why
come you not? will you not come to supper to night? I called you a good while
ago. Body of me, wife (said he) I promise thee I did not hear she: no says,
it seems so (quoth she) I marvel whereupon your mind runs: Believe me
wife quoth he, I was studying how to make my self Lord Mayor, and thee a Lady.

Now God help you (quoth she) I pray God make us able to pay every man his
own, that we may live out of debt and danger, and drive the Woolfe from the
door, and I desire no more. But wife, said he, I pray thee now tell me, Do
thou not think that thou could make shift to bear the name of a Lady, if it
should be put upon thee? In truth Husband (quoth she) I Will not dissemble with
you, if your wealth were able to bear it, my mind would bear it well enough.
Well, wife, replied he, I tell thee now in sadness, that if I had money, there
is a commodity now to be bought, the gains whereof would be able to make me a
Gentleman for ever. Alas husband, that dignity your trade allows you
already, being a squire of the Gentle-Craft. then how can you be less than a
Gentleman seeing your fonne (...) Prin^e ^^rne? Tush wife, quoth he, those
titles do only rest in name, but not in nature: but of that sort had I rather
be, whose lands are answerable to their virtues, and whose rents can maintain
the greatness of their mind. Then sweet husband, tell me, said his wife, tell
me, what commodity is that which you might get so much by? I am sure your self
has some money, and it shall go very hard but I^e procure friends to borrow
one forty shillings, and beside that, rather then you shall lose so good a
bargain, I have a couple of crowns that saw no Sun since we were first
married, and them also shall you have.

Alas wife (said Simon) all this comes not n^^re that matter: I confess it
would do some good in buying some backs of leather, but in this thing it is
nothing: for this is Merchantize that is precious at this time and rare to be
had, and I hear, that whosoever will have it must lay down 3000 pounds ready
money. Yea wife, and yet thereby he might get three and three thousand pounds
profit.

His wife hearing him say so, was inflamed with the desire thereof, as women
are (for the most part) very covetous: that matter running still in her mind,
she could scant find in her heart to spare him time to go to supper, for very
eagerness to animate him on to take that bargain upon him. Wherefore so soon
as they had supt, and given God thanks, she called her husband, saying: I pray
you come hither I would speak a word with you: that man is not always to be
blamed that sometimes takes counsel of his wife: though women's wits are not
able to comprehend the greatest things, yet in doubtful matters they often help
on a sudden.

Well wife, what mean you by this (said her husband?) In truth quoth she, I
would have you to pluck up a man's heart, and speedily cho^ up a bargain for
these goods you speak of. Who, ^? quoth he, which way should I do it, that am
not able for three thousand pounds, to lay down three thousand pence? Tush man
quoth she, what of that? every man that beholds a man in the face, knows not
what he has in his purse; and whatsoever he be that owes the goods, he will no
doubt be content to stay a month for his money or three weeks at the least:
and I promise you, to pay a thousand pounds a week, is a pretty round payment,
and I may say to you, not much to be misliked of.

Now husband, I would have you in the Morning go with John the French man to
the Grecian Merchant, and with good discretion drive a sound bargain with him
for the whole fraught of the S^i^, and thereupon give him half a dozen Angels
in earnest, and eight and twenty days after the delivery of the goods,
condition to deliver him the rest of his money; But woman (quoth he) do thou
imagine that he would take my word for so weighty a mass of money, and to
deliver his goods upon no better security?

Good Lord quoth she, have you no wit in such a case to make shift? ^le tell
you what you shall do: Be not known that you bargain for your own self,
but tell him that you do it in the behalf of one of the chief Aldermen in
the City; but beware in any case, that you leave wi^h him your own name in
writing, he ^eing a Grecian cannot read English: and you have no need at all
to show John the French man, or if you should, it were no great matter, for you
can tell well enough that he can neither write nor read.

I perceive wife (quoth he thou would ^aine be a Lady, and worthy thou art to
be one, that do thus ^^^loy thy wits to bring thy husband profit: but tell
me, if he should be desirous to see the Alderman to confer with him, how
shall we do then* Jesus have mercy upon us (quoth she) you say women are
fools, but me seems men have need to be taught sometimes. Before you come
away in the morning, let John the Frenchman tell him that the Alderman
himself shall come to his lodging in the afternoon: and receiving a note of
all the goods that be in the ship, he shall deliver unto him a Bill of his hand
for the payment of his money, according to that time. Now sweet heart (quoth
she) this Alderman shall be thine own self, and I Will go borrow for thee all
things that shall be necessary against that time. Tush. (quoth her husband)
can thou imagine, that he seeing me in the morning will not know me again in
the afternoon? O husband quoth thee, he will not know thee, I warrant thee:
for in the morning thou shall go to him in thy doublet of sheep skins, with
a smutched face, and thy apron before thee, thy thumb leather and hand-leather,
^uckled close to thy wrist, with a foul band about thy neck, and a greas^e
tap on thy head. Why woman (quoth he) to go in this sort will be a discredit
to me, and make the Merchant doubtful of my dealing: for men of simple attire
are (God wot) slenderly esteemed.

Hold your peace good husband (quoth she) it shall not be so with you, for
John the Frenchman shall give such good report to the Merchant for your honest
dealing (as I praise God he can do no less) that the Grecian will rather
conceive the better of you, than otherwise: judging you a prudent discr^^t man,
that will not make a show of that you are not, but go in your attire agr^^able
to your trade. And because none of our folks shall be privy to our intent, to
morrow w^^le^ing at my Cousin John Barbers, in S Clements Lane, which is not
far from the George in Lumbard-street, where the Merchant ^^rangers lie. Now
I Will be sure that all things shall be ready at my Cousin Jo^ns, that you shall
put on in the afternoon. And there he shall first of al with his scissers,
snap off all the superfluous hairs, and fashion ^hy bushy ^eard after the
Aldermans grave cut: then shall he wash thee with a sweet Camphire Ball and
^esprinkle thine head and face with the purest rose water; then shall thou
scour thy pitchy fingers in a basin of hot water, with an ordinary washing
Ball: and all this being done, strip thee from these common ^eeds, and I Will put
thee on a very fair doublet of tawny satin, over the which thou shall have a
cassocke of branched damask, furred round about the shirts with the finest
foynes, thy breeches of black ^eluet, and shoes and stockings fit for such
array: a band about thy neck as white as the driven snow, and for thy wrists a
pretty pa^^^ of cuffs, and on thy head a cap of the finest black* then shall
thou put on a fair gown, welted about with Ueluet, and overthwart ^he back
thwart it shall be with rich foyne, with a pair of sweet gloves on thy hands,
and on thy forefinger a great sealering of gold.

Thou being thus attired, I Will entreat my Cousin John Barber, because he is a
very handsome youngman, neat and fine in his apparel, (as indeed all Barbers
are, that he would take the pains to wait upon you unto the Merchants as if he
were your man, which he will do at the first, because one of you cannot
understand the other, so that it will be sufficient with outward courtesy, one
to greet another; and he to deliver unto you his notes, and you to give to him
your E^ll, and so come home.

It does my heart good, to see how trimly this apparel does become you, in
good faith husband, me seems in my mind, I see you ^^^t already, and how like
an Alderman you will look, when you are in this costly array. At your return
from the Merchant, you shall put off all these clothes at my Cousins again,
and come home as you did go forth. Then tell John the frenchman, that the
Alderman was with the Merchant this afternoon; you may send him to him in the
morning, and bid him to command that his ship may be brought down the River:
while she is coming about, you may give notice to the Linnen-Drapers, of the
commodities you have coming. Enough wife (quoth he) thou have said enough, and
by the grace of God, I Will follow thy counsel, and I doubt not but to have good
fortune.

CHAP. XI.
How Simon Eyer was sent for to my Lord Mayors to supper, and sh^wing the great
entertainment he and his wife had there.

A Non after, supper time drew near, she making her self ready in the best
manner she could devise, passed along with her husband unto my Lord Mayors
house: and being entered into the great Hall, one of the Officers there
certified my Lord Mayor, that the great rich Shoemaker and his wife were
already come. Whereupon the Lord Mayor in courteous manner came into the Hall
to Simon, saying, You are most heartily welcome good Master Eyer, and so is
your gentle bedfellow. Then came forth the Lady Mayoresse and saluted them both
in like manner, saying: Welcome good Master Eyer and Mistress Air both, and
taking her by the hand, set her down among the Gentlewomen there present.

Sir (quoth the Lord Mayor) I understand you are a Shoemaker, and that i^ is
you that has bought up all the goods of the great Argozy. I am indeed my Lord
of the Gentle Craft, quoth he, and I praise God, all the goods of the great
Argozy are mine own, when my debts are paid.

God give you much i^y of them, said the Lord Mayor, and I trust you and I
shall deal for some part thereof. So the meat being then ready to be brought
in, the guests were placed each one according to their calling. My Lord Mayor
holding Simon by the hand, and the Lady Mayoresse holding his wife, they would
needs have them sit near to themselves, which they then with blushing cheeks
refusing, my Lord said unto them, holding his ca^ in his hand;

Master Air and Mistress Air, let me entreat you not to be troublesome, for
I tell you it shall be thus: and as for those Gentlemen here present, they are
all of mine old acquaintance, and many times we have been together, therefore
I dare be the bolder with them: and albeit you are our neighbors also, yet I
promise you, you are strangers to my Table, and to strangers common courtesy
does teach us ^o shewthe greatest favor, and therefore let me rule you in mine
house, and you shall rule me in yours.

When Simon sound there was no remedy, they safe them down, but she poor
woman was so abashed, that she did eat but little meat at the Table, bearing
her self at the Table with a comely and modest countenance: but what she
wanted in outward feeding, her heart yielded ^o wi^h inward delight and content.

Now so it was, many men that knew not Simon, and seeing him in so simple
attire sit next my Lord, whisperingly asked one another what he was. And it was
enough for Simons wife with her eyes and ears, to see and hearken after every
thing that was said or done.

A grave wealthy Citizen sitting at the Table, spoke to Simon, and said, Sir*
in good will I drink to your good health, but I beseech you pardon me, for I
know not how to call your name: with that my Lord Mayor answered him: saying,
his name is Master Air, and this is the Gentleman that bought all the goods
that came in the black Swan of Candy, and before God, though he sit here in
simple sort, for his wealth I do verily believe he is more sufficient to bear
this place than my self. This was a man that was never thought upon, living
obs^ure amongst us, of none account in the eyes of the world, carrying the
countenance but of a Shoemaker, and none of the best sort neither, and is able
to deal for a bargain of five thousand pounds at a c^ap. We do want many
such Shoomakers (said the Citizen:) and so with other discourse drove out
supper, at what time rising from the Table, Simon and his wife receiving sundry
salutations of my Lord Mayor and his Lady, and of all the rest of the
worshipful guests, departed home to their own house: at what time his wife
made such a reci^all of the matters; how bravely they were entertained, what
great cheer was there, also what a great company of Gentlemen and Gentlewomen
were there, and how often they drank to her husband and to her, with diverse
other circumstances* that I believe, if the night had been six months long,
as it is under the North pole, the would have found talk enough till morning.
Of a truth (quoth she) although I sat closely by my Ladies side, I could eat
nothing for very joy, to hear and see that we were so much made of. And never
give me credit husband, if I did not hear the Officers whisper as they stood
behind me, and all demanded one of another, what you were, and what I was: O
quoth one, do you see this man? mark* him well, and mark his wife well, that
simple woman that sits next my Lady: What are they? What are they quoth
another? Marry this is the rich Shoemaker that bought all the goods in the
great Argozie: I tell you there was never such a Shoemaker seen in London
since the City was builded.

Now by my faith (quoth the third) I have heard much of him to day among the
Merchants in the street, going between the two Chains: Credit me husband, of
mine honesty this was their communication. Nay, and do you not remember when
she rich Citizen drank to you (which craved pardon, because he knew not your
name) what my Lord Mayor said? Sir (quoth he) his name is Master Eyer, did you
mark that? and presently thereupon he added these words: This is the Gentleman
that bought, and so forth. The Gentleman understood you, did you hear him
speak that word?

In troth wife (quoth he) my Lord uttered many good words of me, I thank his
honor, but and heard not that. No (queth she) I heard it well enough: for by
and by he proceeded further, saying: I suppose, though he sit here in simple
sort, he is more sufficient to bear this charge than my self. Yea thought I,
he may thank his wife for that, if it come so to pass. Nay, said Simon, I
thank God for it. Yea, and next him, you may thank me (quoth she.) And it did
her so much good to talk of it, that I suppose, if she had lived till this
day, she should yet be prating thereof, and if sleep did not drive her from it.

And now seeing that Simon the Shoemaker is become a Merchant, we will temper
our tongues to give him that title, which his customers were wont to do, and
from henceforth call him master Eyer, who, while he had his affairs in hand,
committed the government of his shop to John the Frenchman, leaving him to be a
guide to his other servants, by means of which favor, John thought himself
at that time to be a man of no small reputation.

CHAP. XII.
How John the Frenchman fell in love with one of his Masters Maids: and how
he was crossed through the craft of Haunce the Dutchman.

AT the same time there was dwelling in the house, a jolly lusty wench* whose
name was Florence, whom John the Frenchman loved dearly well, and for her only
sake he brought many a good bottle of wine into the house, and therewithal so
soon as their Master and Mistress were gone to bed, they would oftentimes
make merry amongst themselves; which Haunce, a Iourney-man in the same house
perceiving, sought to cross them as much as in him lay, thereby to bring his
own purpose the better to pass, which was to join the Maidens favor to his
own affection.

And because the Frenchman had greatest gains under his Master, and being
thereof no niggard when he had got it, the Maids did most delight in him, and
little esteemed the Duchman, though his good will ware as great toward her as
the other: for they could not be in any corner of the house together, nor could
they meet in any place abroad, but the Dutchman would still watch them.

Upon a time, Florence being at Market, her Love John went forth of the shop to
meet her, and Haunce stayed not long behind, who at length espied them, and
heard his fellow John questioning with her in this sort.

What Florence, what have you in your basket? hea, let me see what you buy.
Marry John (quoth she) I have bought Beef and Mutton, and other things. Come,
come, must you peep in my basket (quoth she) away for shame away. Be got
Florence, me will see a little: ha, ha! Florence, you buy the pudding, hea,
you love de puddings? Florence hea? Yea Sir (quoth she) what it I do love
puddings? what care you? of my tra Florence, if I be your husband, me will give
you pudden shall warren. My husband (quoth she) in faith sir no, I mean not to
marry a French man. What Florence, de French man be de good man: but Florence,
me will give you a pint of wine by my treat.

O, I cannot stay now, I thank you John: (quoth he) What Florence, no stay
with your friend? I shall make you stay a little time: and so with that, taking
her by the hand into the Tavern they go, and Haunce the Dutch man following
them, and sat close in the next room, and by that means he heard all that
they said, and that they appointed the next Sunday to go to Islington
together, and there to be merry: and so the Maid hasting away they departed.

Well (quoth Haunce secretly to himself) it shall go hard but I Will disappoint
you. Sunday in the afternoon being come, John the French man, according to
appointment* went before to Islington, leaving Florence to come after, with
another Maid which dwelt in the same house, whilst he prepared good cheer
for their coming: and the more to make her m^rry, he hired a noise of
Musicians to attend t^^^^ pleasure.

And as it after happened, his fellow Haunce prevented this sport, who watching
in the fields for Florence, at length he spied her coming: to whom he said,
Well met fair Florence, your friend John has changed his mind: for whereas
he appointed you to meet him at Islington, you shall lose your labor so to
do, for he is not there. No, how so said Florence? The reason is this (said
Haunce) So far as I can understand by him, he thinks you are very flekle and
inconstant; and because it was his chance this morning, to see you speak to a
young man that passed by, he says ver^ly, that you are a marvelous great
dissembler: and in this humor he is gone I know not whither.

And is it even so, said Florence? I Will tell thee what Haunce, because he has
made thee privy to his mind, I will show thee somewhat of mine. Does he
suspect me because I did but speak to one? Nay, i^ he be so jealous now, what
will he be hereafter? And therefore insomuch that it is so, let him go to the
Devil, he shall very well find, that I will set as light by him, as he does
by me: Did ^he Knave get leave of my Mistress for me to come abroad this day,
and does he now serve me thus? Well, this shall teach me wit, in faith, and
so she turns back again.

Nay (quoth Haunce) seeing you are now abroad, let me entreat you to go to
Hogsdon, and I will bestow a mess of cream upon you. In the end she was won,
and as they walked together, Haunce spoke thus unto her: I know not what cause
John the French man has given you, to bear him so much good will, as I
perceive you do, but in my mind, he is a far unmeet match for you. And thus
much I know, he is of a very mistrustfull nature, a wavering mind, and
deceitful heart, he did pro^esse great good will to you in outward show, but
I have heard him speak most shamefully of you behind your back. making his
vaunts, that he had you at a beck of his finger, and how that for a pint of
Wine, he could cause you to follow him up and down over all the City.
Florence, I am a fool to tell you thus much, it may be you will scarce believe
it, and for my part, I will not urge you thereunto: but in troth, look what I
tell you, it is for good will, because I have been sorry to see you abused.

I thank you good Haunce (quoth she) I may believe it well enough: but from
henceforth I know what I have to do: I confess indeed, that I have drunk
with him abroad, but it was at his own earnest entreaty, neither could I ever
be at quiet for the Knave, he does so follow me up and down in every place,
but seeing I know his dissimulation to be such, if I do not requite him in his
kind, trust me no more: and now I am heartily sorry that I was so foolish as
to follow him this day at his appointment: but seeing he has served me thus,
he shall not know of my coming out of doors, and therefore good Haunce, do
not tell him that you met me this day on the fields.

Nay in ^aith Florence (quoth he) I will not only be secret to thee, but will
also from henceforth acquaint thee with all my proceedings. And having eaten
their cream, Haunce brought her some part of the way homeward: and taking his
leave of her, he went back to see if he could meet with John the Frenchman,
who having stayed at Islington for Florence until almost night, and she not
coming, he and the Musicians together were feign to eat up the meat, without
more come pany, which caused John the Frenchman to swear like a Turk.

And as he was coming homeward over the fields ^hafing and fretting to
himself, who should he meet withal but Haunce the Dutchman, who said to
him: What, John, who thought to meet you here? Here thou ^eest I am now, said
John: but when came you from home? Marry but even now (quoth Haunce.) And who
is at home, said John? The other answered, there was no body but their
Mistress, and ^he Maid Florence, with the rest of the household: ^s Florence at
home, said John? The devil take her for me, she has made a right fool of
me indeed* ^ow so, quoth Haunce? Then the other in a great chafe, said: Be Got
shall be revenged, Florence mock an me too mush, too mush she make me believe
she love me, an me tinke ^o too, and be Go^ ^he make me a (...) fool. When
Haunce heard him say so, he said: Alas good John she love thee? if you think
so, you are greatly deceived: for she is the ^co^^ingest quea^ in London: And I
have heard her behind your back, to mock and flout you, saying: Does shitten
John think that I will marry him? in faith sir no. When the Frenchman heard
this he stamped like a mad man, and b^^ his thumb saying; Mordue me shall be
revenged be Got: shitten John? call a shitten John, hea? Ad^put in
corroyname-shant, shitten John, no better name but shitten John? It is as I
^ell you quoth Haunce: an^ moreover, ^he said she scorned to come after you to
Islington, saying, she would see you hanged first. Well be no ma^ra, she no
love me, me no love she, but me shall go home, me shall, and beat as a
stock^^sh. Nay, do not so, said Haunce, but let her alone: for it is no credit
for you to beat a woman: and besides that if you should, our Master would turn
you out of doors; therefore be quiet a while, and be secret in that I have
told you, then shall you see how she v^^th you.

In this humor they d^^aried* at what time, John ^ull of melancholy, stood
frow^ing by the fire side: and as the Maid went up and down the house about
her business* he cast looks on her, as ^^erce as a Panther; but she, by
reason of the Dutchmans tale to her, shows her self as scornful as he was
^urrish, and not once cast her eye toward him, and thus they drove out the
time of a ^^night or a fortnight.

CHAP. XIIII.
How Master Eyer was called upon to be She^iffe of London, and how he held his
place with worship.

^^ this space Master Eyer following his business, had sold so much of his
Merchandise as paid the Grecian his whole money* and yet had resting to
himself three times as much as he had sold, whereof he trusted some to one
^lderman, and some to another, and a great deal amongst substantial
Merchants; and for some had much ready money, which he employed in diverse
Merchandises: and became Adventurer at Sea, having (by Gods blessing) many a
prosperous voyage, whereby his riches daily increased.

It chanced upon a time, that being in his study, casting up his accounts, he
found himself to be clearly worth 12. or 13. thousand pounds, which he
finding to be so, ^e called his wife to him, and said:

The last day I did cast up my accounts* and I find that Almighty God of his
goodness has lent me thirteen thousand pounds to maintain us in our old
age, for which his gracious goodness toward us, let us with our whole hearts
give his glorious Majesty eternal praise and there withal pray unto him that
we may so dispose thereof, as may be to his honor, and the comfort of his
poor members on earth, and above our neighbors may not be ^uffed up with
pride, that while we think on our wealth we forget God that sent it va, for it
has been an old saying of a wise man, That abundance grows from riches and
disdain out of abundance: of which God give us grace to take h^^d, and grant
us a contented mind.

So soon as he had spoken this, they heard one knocking hastily at door;
whereupon he sent Florence to see who it was, the Maiden coming again, told
her Master it was one of my Lord Mayors Officers that would speak with him.
The Officer being permitted to come in, after due reverence, he said, Sir, it
has pleased my Lord Mayor, with the worshipful Aldermen his brethren, with
the counsel of the whole communalty of the honorable City, to choose your
worship Sheriff of London this day, and have sent me to desire you to come
and certify your mind therein, whether you be contented to hold the place or
no.

Master Eyer hearing this, answered he would come to his Honor and their
worships incontinent, and resolve them what he was minded to do; and so the
Officer departed.

His wife, which all this while listened unto their talk, hearing how the case
stood, with a joyful countenance meeting her husband, taking him about the
neck with a loving kiss, said, Master Sheriff, God give thee joy of thy name
and place. O wife (quoth he) my person is far unworthy of that place, and the
name far exceedes my degree.

What, content your self good husband (quoth she) and disable not your self
in such sort, but be thankful unto God for that you have, and do not spurn
at such promotion as God sends unto you: the Lord be praised for it, you have
enough to discharge the place whereto you are called with credit: and wherefore
sends God goods, but there withal to do him and your Country service?
Woman (quoth he) it is an old proverb, Soft fire makes sweet malt: for such
as take things in hand rashly, repent as suddenly: to be Sheriff of London it
is no little cost. Consider first (quoth he) what house I ought to have, and
what costly ornaments belong thereunto, as hanging of Tapistry, cloth of Arras,
and other such like, what store of Plate and Goblets of Gold, what costly
attire, and what a chargeable train, and that which is most of all, how
greatly I stand charged beside to our Sovereign Lord the King, for the
answering of such prisoners as shallbe committed to my custody, with an hundred
matters of such importance, which are to such an Office belonging.

Good Lord Husband (quoth she) what need all these repetitions? you need not
tell me it is a matter of great charge: notwithstanding I verily think many
heretofore have with great credit discharged the place, whose wealth has not
in any sort been answerable to your riches, and whose wits have been as mean
as your own: Truly Sir, shall I be plain? I know not any thing that is to be
spoken of, that you want to perform it, but only your good will: and to lack
good will to do your King and Country good, were a sign of an unworthy
subject, which I hope you will never be.

Well wi^e (said her husband) thou do hold me here with ^rittle prattle,
while the time passes on, it is high time I were gone to G^^^d-Hall, I doubt I
shall appear too unmannerly, in causing my Lord Mayor, and the rest to stay my
leisure. And he having made herself ready, meet to go before such an
assembly as he went unto, he went out of doors, at what time his wife called
after him, saying: and holding up her finger.

Husband, remember, you know what I have said: take h^^de you dissemble not
with God and the world, look to it husband: Go too, go too, get you in quoth
he, about your business, and so away he went.

So soon as he was gone out of sight, his wife sent one of his men after him
to Guild Hall to hearken and hear, whether her husband held his place or no:
and if he do, bring me word with all possible speed.

I will Mistress quoth her man.

Now when Master Eyer came to Guild Hall, the Lord Mayor and his brethren bad
him heartily welcome, saying: Sir, the communalty of the City having a good
opinion of you, have chosen you for one of our Sheriffs for this year, not
doubting but to find you a fit man for the place.

My good Lord, quoth he, I humbly thank the City for their courtesy and
kindness, and would to God my wealth were answerable to my good will, and my
ability were able to bear it. But I find my self insufficient; I most humbly
desire a year respite more, and pardon for this present.

At these words, a grave Commoner of the City standing up, with one reverence
spoke thus unto the Mayor: My good Lord, this is but a slender excuse for
Master Eyer to make; for I have often heard him say, and so have diverse others
also, that he has a Table in his house, where on he breaks his fast every
day, that he will not give for a thousand pounds: Wherefore (under your
Lordships correction) in my simple judgment, I think he that is able to
spare a thousand pounds in such a dead commodity, is very sufficient to be
Sheriff of London. See you now, quoth my Lord, I muse Master Eyer, that you
will have so lame an excuse before us, as to take exceptions at your own
wealth, which is apparently proved sufficient; you must know Master Eyer, that
the Commons of London have searching eyes, and seldom are they deceived in
their own opinion, and therefore look what is done, you must stand to it.

I beseech you my Lord (quoth Master Eyer) give me leave to speak one word.
Let it be granted, that I will not give my Table whereon I break my fast for a
thousand pounds, that is no consequence to prove it is worth so much, my fancy
to the thing is all* for doubtless no man here would give me a thousand
shillings for it when they see it. All is one for that, quoth my Lord Mayor,
yet dare I give you as much wine as you will spend this year in your Shriualty
to let me have it: my good Lord quoth he, on that condition I will hold my
place, and rest no longer troublesome to this company. You must hold, said my
Lord, without any condition or exceptions at all in this matter: and so they
ended.

The Assembly being then broken up, the voice went M Eyer is Sheriff, Master
Eyer is Sheriff. Whereupon the fellow that Mistress Eyer sent to observe how
things framed, ran home in all haste, and with leaping and rejoicing said:
Mistress, God give you joy, for you are now a Gentlewoman. What quoth she, tell
mesir sauce, is thy Master Sheriff, or no^ and does he hold his place? Yes
Mistress, be holds it now as fast as the stirrup does the shoe while we sow
it; why then (quoth she) I have my hearts desire, and that I so long looked
for, and so away she went.

Within a while after came her husband, and with him one of the Aldermen, and a
couple of wealthy Commoners, one of them was he that gave such great
commendations of his Table, and coming to his door, he said, You are welcome
home good Master Sheriff* Nay, I pray you* come in and drink with me before
you go.

Then said he, Wife bring me forth the Pastie of Uenison, and set me here my
little Table, that these Gentlemen may eat a bit with me before they go. His
wife which had been often used to this term, excused the matter, saying; The
little Table! good Lord husband, I do wonder what you will do with the little
Table now knowing that it is used already? I pray you good Husband, content
your self, and sit at this great Table this once. Then she whispered him in
the ear, saying; What man, shall we shame our selves? What shame (quoth he?)
fell not me of shame, but do thou as thou art ^idden, for we are three or
four of us, then what should we do troubling the great Table? Truly
(answered she) the little Table is not ready: now good husband let it alone.

Trust me we are troublesome guests (said the Alderman) but yet we would feign
see your little Table, because it is said to be of such price. Yea, and it is
my mind you shall, quoth Master Eyer: therefore he called his wife again,
saying: Good wife, dispatch and prepare the little Table: for these Gentlemen
would faigne have a view of it*

Whereupon his wife seeing him so earnest, according to her wonted manner, came
in: and setting herself down on a low stool, laid a fair Napkin over her
knees and set the platter with the pastie of Uenison thereupon and presently a
chair was brought for Master Abderman, and a couple of stools for the two
Commoners, which they beholding, with a sudden and hearty laughter, said; Why
Master Sheriff, is this the table you ^eld so dear? Yes truly, quoth he.
Now verily, quoth they, you herein have utterly deceived our expectation. Even
so did you mine, quoth he, in making me Sheriff: but you are all right
welcome, and I will tell you true, had I not thought wondrous well of you, you
had not seen my Table now. And I think, did my Lord Mayor see it as you do,
he would repent his bargain so hastily made. Notwithstanding I account of my
Table never the worse. Nor have you any cause (quoth they) and so after much
pleasant talk, they departed, spreading the fame of Master Sheriffs little
table over the whole City.

But you must now imagine, that a thousand cares combred the Sheriff, in
providing all things necessary for his office: at what time he put off his
Shoomakers shop to one of his men, and set up at the same time the sign of the
Black Swanne swimming upon the Sea, in remembrance of that Ship, that first
did bring him his wealth, and before that time the sign of the Black Swanne
was never seen or known in any place in or about the City of London.

CHAP. XIII.
How Haunce having circumvented John the Frenchmans Love was by him and others
finely deceived at the Garden.

NOw at that time John the French man, and fair Florence were both at
variance, as you heard before, by the Dutchmans dealing* by which subtilty he
sought means to win favor for himself: which John the Frenchman perceived,
and therefore went about not only to prevent him, but to take revenge on him
for his deceitfulnes. And meeting Florence as she went into the Garden for
flowers, he began to talk thus unto her.

What Florence, you go to the Garden? And how then, quoth she, what have you
to say to that? Me sea nothing, but you be discontent; you no speak a me, you
no look a me, nor you no drink with me, nor noting a^ Florence, how chance
dat?

Go get thee hence, prating fool, quoth she, I drink with thee? thou shall
be piepeckt first. Piepecke? What be pie peckt a hea? Be ^o^ Florence, you make
me a ^acke nape, you mock a mae, and call (...) shitten Jan, and you be
soproud, because Haunce lo^^e you, dat shall be marvel: but and if you call
me shitten John any more, par ma foy shall not put up, shall not take at your
hands. Who told you* that I called you shitten John, quoth Florence, I never
called you so. No Florence! you no call a me shitten John? a so me^^ant villain
^^lard Haunce tell a me so: I never said so, quoth Florence. But Haunce told
me that you made your boast that I was at a beck of your finger; and that you
could make me follow you up and down the whole City for a pint of Wine; no,
I would you should well understand, I will not follow a better man than you. Of
me fet Florence, me never sea so. No? yes, quoth she but you did, I can tell
you by a good foken, for that very time that I should have met you at
Islington* you said it, and made me a fool to come over the fields to you, and
when all came to all, you sent Haunce to tell me you were gone there hence long
agone.

Ahcet t^king Haun^r, quoth John, be des fen bon, '^is true, for me tarry dear
more den one* two free hour, and had provide shapon, de rabit, de cream, de
pu^ing pie, and twenty ding more. Well, howsoever it was, I am sure, I was made
an ass betwixt you, and for that cause I will be ware how I show kindness
again to any: therefore John I pray you be gone, and seek some other company,
for you shall not go with me: No said John? Wellden, adieu Florence, and so
they par^ed.

Now it is to be understood, that Haunce had promised Florence to meet her in
the garden, and to bring with him a bottle of wine, and there in the presence
of a Maid or two more, to make themselves sure together: and she for that
purpose, had carried with her a good corner of a venison pastie. But there was
an English Iourney-man in the house called Nicolas that understood thereof, who
meeting with John the French man, he made him privy thereunto saying; Trust me
John, if thou will be ruled by me, we will not only disappoint this match,
but also with their good cheer make our selves merry* John, who was glad and
ready to do the Dutchman any injury, consented to follow Nicolas his counsel
in any thing.

Then, quoth Nicholas, it shall be thus: I will go to the Garden; and stay for
Haunce his coming with the wine, and in the mean space do thou hide thy
self under one of the hedges of the Garden on the other side, and with thee
take a couple of pots, and let ^he one be em^t^, and the other filled with
water, and when Haunce is come into the Garden with his bottle of wine (now he
will not let me see it by his good will, notwithstanding) i will obseruo well
where he does set it down, and then I will find the means, while they are
busy in toying and talking, to convey the bottle of wine through the hedge to
ti^e, and likewise the Uenison: then emptying the bottle, thou shall fill it
with water, and thrusting it through the hedge again* it shall be set where
^^rst it was sound, which being done, thou shall ^astily rap at the Garden
door, at what time they shall be told that it is my Master or Mistress, which
they hearing, will be in such a maze, that on a sudden they will not know which
way to turn themselves, especially for the conueying away of Haunce: Now when
you have knocked twice or thrice, and that ^ou hear no body come to the door,
^et you away, and stay for me at the Rose in Barking, and there we will
drink up their wine, eat up the Uenison: and this being done, we^e^e laugh
them to s^orne.

Truly Nicholas, quosh John the Frenchman, this will be brave, and thereupon
they prepared themselves to do the seat. Nicholas therefore got him into the
Garden, and by and by after comes Haunce with the bottle of Wine, who knocking
at the Garden door was straight let in: but seeing Nicholas there, he
secretly set his bottle in a corner: but Nicke, who had as searching eyes as
Argoes in his business, quickly did as before he had determined, and in stead
of wine set the bottle down again, where he first found it, full of water.

Then comes John, and lustily knocked at the door. There is our Master and
Mistress (quoth Nicholas,) Alas quoth Florence, what shall we do for Haunce?
Then rapt he at the door again; Alas, quoth she, get you over the hedge.
Shall I open the door, quoth Nicke? O no said Florence, not yet good Nicke.
With that he knoc^t more hastily, Anon, anon, quoth she. ^ence Haunce: ^oe to
the door Nicke, Who is there, quoth he? and with that opening the door ^ound
^ust no bo^^. Truly Florence, said he, they are gone whosoever they were. God
be with you, I can stay no longer.

When he was departed, the Maids wished that Haunce* had been there again.
Alas poor fellow (quoth they) is he gone, and left his bottle behind him?
Marry I am glad that it is no worse, quoth Florence: And now, that the wine is
here, we will drink it for his sake, and I have here a morsel of Uenison,
that will give it a good ^el^^^: and therewithal looking for it, she found the
cloak, but the mea^e gone. Now a vengeance on it (quoth ^he) one skuruy ^u^^e
or other has got into the Garden, and took away the meat.

O God, what ill luck is that (quoth the Maid!) a murren on that curre that
got it: but seeing it is gone, farewell it. Well, sa^ Florence, here is the
wine yet, ^ know it is excellent good: for he told me he^ would bring a
bottle of the best Renish wine that in London could be bought: and I am
certain he is as good as his word. But believe me Ioane, he is as
kin^-hearted, and as loving a fellow as ever professed love to any: I assure
you, that here is a cup of Wine that the King migh drink thereof: but how
shall we do for a glass* W^^le drink it out of the bottle, said Ioane. Notso
(quoth Florence) I do love to see what ^ drink, and therefore I Will borrow a
glass at the next house. And while she goes for a glass, said Ioane to her
self, I Will have a taste of it before ^he returns again: and then setting her
hand unto the bottle, and the bottle to her mouth, she drank a good draught,
and finding it to be something thin in the going down she said to Besse
that sat by: Credit me now, but for the name of Wine, I have drunk as good
water. It is ^enish Wine (quoth Besse) and that is never strong. It may be
made of rain well enough, quoth Ioane. At which words Florence entre^ with a
glass: and pouring it out into the glass, she extolled the color, saying:
See what a brave color it has, it is as clear I do^ assure you as
rocke-water: and therewithal drinking it off, she said, it drinks very dead:
Of a troth quoth she, this is but bad Wine, it is even as dead as a door
nail: and so ^^lling the glass again, ^hee gave it unto Besse: the tasting
thereof said: Passion of me, this is plain water. Water, said Ioane? is it
water: let me taste of it once again: by my Mayden-head it is water indeed
(quoth she) Water, said Florence, verily you have pla^d the drabs in drinking
out the wine, and filling the bottle again with water. (...) my faith (quoth
Ioane) you say not true in so saying: I would you did understand, we played not
the ^rabs in an* such sort, but Haunce rather played the ^na^e that brought
(...) water in stead of Wine. Nay (quoth Florence) ^ ^are not swear for him
that he would not serve you so. for all the wealth my Master is worth. And I
am persuaded it was no body but your selves that (...) it: but in faith you
might have dealt so with another and not with me. Nay then quoth they, you
need not to serve us so, to cause us drink water in stead of wine: and we
would you should think, although you be Master Sheriffs Mai^e^ we love our
mouths as well as you do yours for your (...), and it was but an homely
recompense for our goo^ will, I tell you true: neither do we care how little
we come to be thus de^^ded. Go to ^^e too, sa^^ Florence, you are like to
^enelope's puppy, that does both bi^e and whine, I know you well enough. Know
us (quoth oa^^?) What do you know by us? we de^^e you for any thing you can
say by us. Know us? Nay, it were well if thou did (...) know thy self, and
hencest thou? though thou have thy companions to meet thee at thy pleasure,
and we have not: no, know us? we are known to be as honest as thou a^t, or
else we should be sorry; and to the ^e^arted in a ^hase.

Now John the Frenchman and Nicholas having eaten the venison, and drunk up
the wine, came back again time enough to hear all this ^trife whereat they
greatly re^oyced. But so soon as Florence did meet with Haunce again, ^he
kept no small stir for mocking her with a bottle of water: about the which
they fell at variance, in such (...) that they were not friends for a long time
after.

But during the time that Haunce was out of ^auour, Nicholas ^o^^^t the Ma^^es
friendship by all the means he might, but in ^ine was ^^s pains spent
therein: for although Florence (outwardly ^^^med much displeased. yet Haunce
had her heart still, and in process of ^^ne obtained great favor: the matter
was grown ^o forward* that the performance of their marriage was forthwith
a^^ointed, which they intended should be celebrated at the Abbey of Grace
(...) Tower Hill. Notwithstanding, this matter was not (...) so close, but that
their secret dealings were known, and Nicholas pu^^o^^ng to deceive the
Dutchman, made John Frenchman pr^^^ there^nto, saying; John, it is so that this
night at midnight ^^sse; Florence and Haunce do intend secretly to be married,
and they have appointed the Friar to do it so soon as the Tapers are all
pu^out, because they will not be seen of any: Therefore John, i^ no^ (...)
will be my friend, ^ do not doubt but to marry her my self, (...) so to give
the Dutchman she ^^^mpam, and ^ore him through ^^^^se with a (...). H^ (quoth
John) be G^t me shall do as you sea, and therefore Nicholas tell a me what
you do. Marry John, quoth he, you know the Dutchman louet^ to drink well,
and by that he loves, we will cause him to lose his Love, ^or we will get him
out to the ^^uerne, and there cause him to be disguised, that he shall neither
be able to stand nor go; and while he lies parbreaking his mind* I Will go and
marry the Maid. The Frenchman hearing this, scratcht his head, and rubbing his
elbow, said, Ma^foy, Nicholas, ^^s be de f^ne trick: how shall we get him
forth adoores? Excellent well, quoth Nicholas, for there is a new ^ourney man
come to Town with Sir Hughes bones at his back, and you know, that we being
of the Gentle Craft, must go give him his welcome, and I will tell Haunce
thereof, who being now very ^ocund, by reason that his marriage is so near,
will not deny to come, I know. Therefore you and the strange Iourney-man shall
go before to the Tavern, and then I will go fetch him. Ab^ene, content,
content said John.

And so to the Tavern he hasted with the strange man. Anon comes Nicholas
and Haunce, and with them two or three Iourneymen more, and all to the new
Iourney-man: sitting down, they get Haunce. in the midst, called for wine
lustily, and such varieties, us the Dutchman was soon set packing, for every
one sought to ouercharge him, and being himself of a good kind to take his
liquor, spared not to pledge every man. At what time in the midst of his cups,
being well whitled, his tongue ran at random (as wine is the bewrayer of
secrets) so it proved by him, for there he opened to his companions all his
whole mind, saying, My hearts, for all I sit here, I must be a married man
ere morning. God give you joy (quoth they) but who shall you marry, said Nicke,
Florence? Yea, Florence, said the Dutchman, that is the Less that I do love,
and all the world cannot deceive me of her now, I am the man that must have
her Maidenhead, and this night we must be married at the Abbey of Grace; and
if you be good fellows, go with me to Church, will yo^ go with me? Will we
ge^ with thee? (said John Frenchman) that we will. O John (said Haunce) have
wiped your nose, and Nickes too, you must wear the willow Garland. Well, what
remedy (quoth they) it is the better for you: but in faith Haunce, seeing it is
so (quoth Nicke) we will have one ^ottle of wine more, that we may drink to the
health of your fair Bride. I Will pledge her if it be a gallon (quoth Haunce.) Be
my set and trot, said John, we will have ^ gallon. Hea Drawer, where be you? I
pray you bring me agallo^^ of the best Claret, and a gallon of de best Seck,
shall make merry I set: what Florence be merry and I no know? ^ut by the time
this Wine was drunk, Haunce was laid up for walking any more that night. When
Nicke perceived that, he stole suddenly out of the Tanerne, and went to meet
Florence at the appointed place: but John quickly missing him, knew straight
whereabout he went, got ^^n presently to the Constable of the ^osterne Gate,
and told him, that Nicke had laid a man for dead in Tower street, and that he
was gone to save himself under the prfu^ledge of the Abbey of Grace, but
(quoth he* if you will go along, I shall bring him out with fair words unto
you, and then I desire you to clap him up to answer this matter in the morning.
But where dwell you, said the Constable? I do dwell with Master Alderman Eyer
(quoth John) and there you shall have me at all times, The Constable did as
John bade him, and committed Nicholas to prison. In the mean space, Florence,
and an old woman of Tower street, said that they did go to a woman's labor,
and by that means they passed along by the Watch, and to the Abbey of Grace
they came. They had not long been there, but that John Frenchman meeting them,
said; Florence, well met, here is a fit place to finish that I have long looked
for: John (quoth ^he) thou art like an evil spirit that must be contured out
before a body shall get any quietness, urge not me upon any such matters, for
you be not the man I look for, and therefore, as taking little pleasure in
your presence, as of your proffers; I would be very glad to see your back.
What said John, have you no compassion upon a poor man? you be hard hearted
indeed. But as he was uttering these speeches, it was his wifes chance to
hear his ^on^ue, being newly come from the Barge at Billingsgate, and at that
time going toward Saint Katharines, to see if she could me te with some of
her Country folks, that could tell her any tidings of her husband, but as I
said, hearing his tongue, and knowing him by his speech, she said, What, John
Denevale? my husband John Denevale? What make you wed pretty wence hea? At
which words John was stricken into such a dump, that he wist not what to say:
notwithstanding, hearing Florence to ask if she was his wife he answered and
said, Yea. O thou dissembling fellow, quoth she, it is ^uen so: Did thou say
thou wast a Batcheller; seeking to marry me, and have a wife alive? now ^^e on
thee: O good Lord, how was I ble^^ to e^^ape him? nay, now I see, that Haunce
may have a wife (...) Flaunders too, although he be here: and therefore by the
grace of God, I will not marry a stranger. O (quoth John) I thought my wife had
been dead, but seeing ^he is alive, I will not lose her for twenty thousand
crowns. So Florence departed, and left John with his wife.

Now, Haunce never waking until it was next day at noone; wh^r^ he saw he had
ouers^ept himself, being very sorry, he went home, not knowing how to excuse
his folly to Florence, whom she now vsterly forsook, as well in regard of his
drunkenness as for that being a stranger, he might (like John Frenchman) have
another wife living, But Nicholas (that all this while lay in prison) being
brought before Alderman Eyer, rehearted the truth, and craving pardon for his
offense, was without more ado delivered. And Florence being called before him,
he made up the match between her and his man Nicholas, marrying them out of
his house with great credit, giving them a good stock to begin the world
withal: also for John Frenchman dee did very much, and showed himself a good
Master to his man Haunce, and to all the rest of his servants.

CHAP. XVI.
How Master Alderman Air was chosen Lord Mayor of London, and and how he
feasted all the Prentices on Shrove-tuesday.

Within a few years after Alderman Air being ^ha^en Lord Ma^or of London,
changing his copy, he became one of the Worshipful Company of Drayers, and
for this year he kept a mo^^ be ^ntifull house. At this time it came into his
mind what a promise once he made to the Prentices, being at breakfast with
them at their going to the Con^uit, speaking to his Lady in this wife. ^oo^
Lord quoth he) what a chance have we had within these thirty years? And how
greatly has the Lord blessed us ^^uce that? blessed ^e his Name for it.

I d^e remember, when I was a young Prentice, what a match I made upon a
Shroue* tuesday morning, ^ein^ at the Canduit among other of my companions;
trust me wise (quoth he) it is worth the hearin^, and I Will tell thee how it f^ll
out.

After we had filled out. Tankards with water, there was some would needs
have me set down my Tankard, a^^ go^ with them ^o breakefast (as many times
before I had done) to which I consented: and it was a breakefast of Pudding
pies. I shall never forget it: But to make short, when the shot came to be
paid, each one drew out his money, but I had not one penny in my purse, and
credit I had none in the place; which when I behe^d, being a^ashed, I said;
Well my Masters, do you give me my breakfast this time; and in requital
thereof, if ever I be Mayor of London, I Will bestow a breakfast on all the
prentizes of the City: these were the words, little thinking (God wot) that
ever it should come to pass: but such was the great goodness of our God, who
sets up the humble, and pulls down ^he proud, to bring whom he pleases
to the seat of honor. For, as the Scripture witnesses, Promotion comes
neither from the East nor from the West, but from him that is the giver of all
good things, the mighty Lord of Heaven and Earth: Wherefore wife seeing God
bath bestowed that upon me that I never looked for; it ^s reason that I should
perform my promise: and being able now, I Will pay that which then I was not able
to do: for and would not have men say that I am like the Ebon tree, that
neither bears leaves nor fruit. Wherefore wife, seeing that Shrone. Tuesday is
so near at hand, I will upon that day fulfill my promise: which upon that day
I made. Truly (my Lord) quoth thee, I will be right willing thereunto. Then
answered my Lord, as thou do love me, let them lack neither Pudding p^es
nor Pancakes, and look what other good cheer is to be had, I will refer all
to your discretion. Hereupon great provision was made for the Prentizes
breakefast: and Shrouetuesday being come, the Lord Mayor sent word to the
Aldermen, that in their several Wards they should signify his mind to the
Citizens, to ^ra^e their favors that their Prentizes might come to his house
to breakefast, and that for his sake they might play all the day after.

Hereupon it was ordered, that at the ringing of a Bell in every Parish, the
Prentizes should leave work and shut up their shops for that day, which being
ever since yearly observed, it is called the Pancake bell. The prentizes being
all assembled my Lord Mayors house was not able to hold them, they were such a
multitude: so that besides the great ^all, all the gardens were set with
Tables, an^ (...) the backeside Tables were set, and every other spare place
was also furnished: so that at length the Prentiz^s were all placed, and while
^ea^e was bringing in, to delight their e^res, as well as to ^eede their
bodies, and to drown the noise of their pra^lings, Drums and Trumpets were
pleasantly sounded: that being ended, the Waits of the City, with diverse other
sorts of mu^^cke played also to begutle the time, and to put off all discontent.

After the first service, were all the Tables pleutifully furnished with
^udding-p^e^ and Pancakes, in very plentiful manner; and the rest that
remained was given to the poor. Wine and Ale in very great measure they had
given, insomuch that they had no lack, nor ^xcesse to cause them to be
^isordered. And ^u the midst of this their merriment, the Lord and a or in
his scarlet gown, and his Lady in like manner went in amongst them, bidding
them all most heart^ly welcome, saying unto them, that his promise so long ago
made, he has at length performed. At what time they (in token of
thankfulness) slung up their Caps, giving a great shout, and incontinently
they all quietly departed.

Then after this, Sir Simon Eyer builded Leaden Hall, appointing that in the
midst thereof there should be a Market place kept every Monday for Leather,
where the Shoomakers of London, for their more ease, might buy of the ^anners,
without seeking any further. And in the end, this worthy man ended his life in
London with great Honor.

FINIS.

