THE FRENCH ALPHABETH, TEACHING IN A VERY SHORT TIME, BY a most easy way, to
pronounce French naturally, to read it perfectly, to write it truly, and to
speak it accordingly.

Together with THE TREASVRE OF THE French tongue, containing the rarest
Sentences, Pouerbes, Parables, Similies, Apothegmes, and Golden sayings, of the
most excellent French Authors, as well Potes as Orators.

The one diligently compiled, and the other painfully gathered and set in
order, after the Alphabeticall manner, for the benefit of those that are
desirous of the French-toung.

By G. D. L. M. N.

AT LONDON Printed by R. Field, and are to be sold by H. Iackson, dwelling in
Fleetstreet, beneath the conduit, at the sign of S. John the Evangelist. 1592.

A TRES-ILLVSTRE, ET TRES-HEROIQVE LE SIEVR HENRY WALLOPPE Cheualier, and
Thresorier General de sa Serenissime Majesty en Irlande.
MONSIEUR, le principal but, ou doibuent viser toutes nos Actions, est d'auoir
plus d'esgard au bien publicq, qu'a nostre propre vtilite. Et combie^ que tous
ne soyent suffisans de proffiter en chooses grandes, ils ne doibuent neantmoins
auoir honte de s'employer es petites. Car comme il n'y a membre, qui, pour
quelque excellence qu'il puisse auoir, ne pay tribut de servitude au corpse,
don't il est vne party: aussin'y a il null (s'il n'est du tout monstre en
nature) qui ne vueille ou doibue procurer, en tout ce qui luy sera possible,
l'aduanceme^t du Corpse dela Republicque, don't luy mesme est un membre. A ceste
cause, encore que le flambeau ardant de la guerre civil, qui maintenant
consume nostre pauure France, ait tellement brusle les aisles de mes Estudes,
and rompu le col a ma fortune, qu'il m'a du tout desrobe les moye^s de luy
fair quelque bo^ service: toutesfois ie n'ay voulu viure du tout inutile,
sino^ a ma patrie, au moins a ceux, qui au lieu d'icelle m'ont aim, embrasse,
and chery. Estant doncq refugie a l'ombre favorable du Scepter de fa
Serenissime Majesty, qui est le vray port de retraicte, and Asyle asseure de
ceux, qui faisans profession de l'Euangile, souffrent ores persecution soubs la
Tyranny de l'Antechrist, i'ay tasche, de tout mon pouuoir, de fair en sort
par mes labeurs, que ceste Noble Nation, qui maintenant nous sert de mere and
de nourrice, peust tirer quelque proffit d'iceux, afin que par ce moye^ ie
peusse euiter le vice enorme de l'ingratitude, vice autant detestable, que
l'hospitalite, and largess est louable. Or enter toutes les belles, and rares
vertus, don't la Noblesse Angloise se rend tant renommee par tout le monde,
admiree des Estrangiers, and honoree en son pais, est l'Estude des bonnes
lettres, and cognoissance des langues, qui leur sont si familieres and
communes, qu'il s'en trouue peu parmy eux, non seulement enter les Seigneurs,
and Gentils-hommes, qui n'en parlent trois ou quatre pour le moins, mais aussi
enter les Dames, and Damoiselles, exercice veritablement louable, par lequel
toute virtue s'honore and se rend immortelle, and sans lequel nulle autre n'est
parfait, n'y digne d'estre aucunement estime. Or c'est ce qui, outre la
singuliere affection, que naturalement ils portent aux estrangers, and la
grande courtoisie, don't ils ont accoustume de les traicter, leur fait fair
tant d'estat des Francois, si bien qu'il y en a fort peu, qui n'en ait un auec
soy. Ce qui m'a esmeu, voyant nostre Nation leur estre tant redeuable, de leur
fair (pour l'obligatio^ de mo^ particulier) ce petit Traicte, que i'ay
intitule The French Alphabeth, par lequel i'espere qu'ils trouuero^t cy apres
la langue Francoise aussi aisee a prono^cer, que cy deuant ils l'estimoye^t mal
aisee and difficile. le m'en raporte neantmoins (Monsieur) a ce meur and sain
judgment, don't auec la bala^ce de la raison, vous auez accoustume de peser
iustement de toutes chooses, vous, dy-ie, a qui la langue Francoise est aussi
naturelle, que la vostre propre. C'est pourquoy ie pre^s la hardiesse de luy
fair voir le iour soubs vostre Nom, m'asseurant que si vous daignez le couurir
du manteau de vostre accoustumee faueur, and le pre^dre en vostre protection,
les griffes de l'enuie ne le pourront aucuneme^t offencer. Et ce qui m'a esmeu
de le vous dedier plustost qu'a null autre, est que, des il y a trois ans
passez, que i'eu cest ho^neur d'estre cogneu de vous, and que de vostre grace
il vous pleut me fair ta^t de faueur de me do^ner acces en vostre maison, par
le moyen de Monsieur HENRY WALLOPPE vostre fills aisne, qui suyuant les
glorieuses traces de vos heroiques vertus, se fait par les belles parties, qui
sont en luy, non seulement aymer d'vn chacun, mais aussi done esperance a tous
de produire, des souaues fleurs du Prin temps de sa douce ieunesse, de beaux,
and sauoureux fruicts de la virtue, a l'honneur, and gloire de Dieu, au service
loyal de son Prince, and au bien, and proffit de sa patrie, ie vey reluyre en
vous tant d'estincelles de l'Ancienne, and vraye Noblesse, and depuis en ay de
plus en plus remarque ta^t d'effects, que i'ay pense ne luy pouuoir choisir
plus favorable parrain. Ie vous supply donc affectueusement de l'auoir pour
aggreable, and luy fair aussi bon accueil, que tres-humblement ie le vous
present, don't ie ne fay aucune doubt, veu qu'entre les vertus, qui vous font
respecter de tous en general, and honorer d'vn chacun en particulier, la
singuliere douceur, and mansuetude, qui vous accompagne, and vous rend si
affectionne aux Estrangers, and specialement aux Francois, m'en asseure. Et en
cest endroit, ie prieray Dieu.

MOnsieur, vous donner en sante tres-heureuse, and longue vie. De Londres ce
11. d'Aoust. 1592. Vostre tres-humble, and tres-affectionne seruiteur. G.
Delamothe N.

AN AGRAMME DVDICT SIEVR.
H E N R Y W A L L O P P E. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, L H
O N E V R L' A P P V Y E. 9, 1, 11, 3, 2, 6, 4. 10, 8, 12, 13, 7, 5, 14.

QVATRAIN.
Quand Lachesis ourdit le fill de vostre vie,
Clotho, soubs vostre Nom, chantoit de vous ainsi:
Il ira triumphant du Temps, and de l'Enuie,
Puis que L'HONEVR L'APPVYE, and le maintient aussi.
SONNET ACROSTICHE.
Honeur fills des Vertus, and friar de Louange,
Est nourry du Nectar, qui s'influe des cieux:
Ne de parens diuins, il vit enter les Dieux,
Rendant divine celuy, qui soubs son bras se range.
Ya-til rien plus grand? Il fait (merueille estrange)
Wiure apres le trepas les hommes vertueux;
Woire il les pousse encor, d'vn vol audacieux,
Ains leur Soleil couche, d'Albion iusqu'au Gange.
Lhomme est trois fois heureux, qui l'eslit pour appuy.
Le Temps, qui sap tout, n'a de pouuoir sur luy,
Ores qu'il soit tousiours assailly de l'Enuie.
Partant HENRY WALLOPPE est seur co^tre le Temps,
Puis que L'HONEVR L'APPVYE, and bienheura^t ses ans.
Eternise son Nom, and decore sa vie.
G. Delamothe N.

AN EPISTLE TO THE READER, WARNING HIM OF THE Method that he ought to keep
in learning the French-toung.
THe first and chiefest degree of learning (gentle Reader) is a mutual love
and agreement, between him that does teach, and him that does learn: I hope
that both are both in you and me. In you, because you seek for me, and having
found me, keep me in your company, and delight to talk with me. In me,
because I have with very great pain and care, compiled this book, only for
you, I spare no time to do you good, and prefer your furtheraunce before
mine own studies. But before we go any further, it is my duty to teach you
faithfully, the method that you ought to keep, if you will shortly reap the
fruit of your hope, and gather the sweet premises of my liberal promise: you
being then so desirous to be taught of me, as I am willing to instruct you, I
do not doubt, but you will be so careful to observe both my method and my
rules, so wary to perform the same, and so constant to continue in them, as I
have been painful and earnest to invent them, diligent to prescribe, and am
willing to further you by them. They be few, and so the more easy to learn,
and less hard to practice: and thus much for our mutual love. And as for the
other, you mean to learn quickly, and I purpose to teach you speedely, and so
we agree. But as I have taken great pains in gathering these rules, so you
must spare no labor in learning them, and so we shall agree to. For do not
think that my book is able by himself to make you a good Fre^chma^, except
for your part you will play the diligent studient, as for it, it will teach you
faithfully. There is nothing though never so easy if one go unwillingly about
it, and besides be not well taught, but he shall find it most hard. There is
nothing though never so hard, if one go with a desire to it, an earnest labor
about it, use diligence in it, and be well taught, but is quickly learned, and
found most easy. Therefore if you will willingly observe my rules, and
carefully keep my method, I do not doubt, but you shall find the French
tongue so easy, as other before have tried it hard: and shall receive such
benefit thereby, that you will never repent to have learned of me, nor I to have
taught you. For I hope that shortly you shall receive the fruit of your hope,
the profit of your labor, and I thanks for the reward of my pain.

The first thing I desire you to observe is, that you will vouchsafe to learn
perfectly, and above all things both your letters and your syllables. Be not
loath to spend three or four days about them, for those four days will do
you more profit, then four months spent without the learning of them.

Secondly, when you have them perfectly, begin to read, but before, spell four
or five times every word, though never so small, one after another: And for the
beginning take but three or four lines at once, or more or less according as
your capacity can reach, and your patience permit. And in your spelling and
reading, let not pass any letter nor syllable, without bringing the^ to the
trial of your rules, to know if either they must be sounded after the English
fashion or no, what difference there be between the^, what letter must be
pronounced and what not: and why it is pronounced or not. I have spoken of the^
particularly, so that if you have need of any of the^, you shall find them in
their order, and the general rules after.

Thirdly, when you can read truly, and pronounce perfectly, the^ go about to
English it, you have in this book the English translation word for word, to
teach it you. When you understand it, and are able to English it, the^ copy
out the French, and write it in some paper book, the which you shall have
provided for that purpose. Then after having shut your French Alphabeth, write
under the French, the English that you can give to it: that being done,
confer your translation with your book, and amend your faults if you have
committed any. After that lay away from you the French, and try if you can put
your English translation into French again. Continue this order for a month
every day, repeating three or four times, both your letters and your
syllables, and reading and Englishing as many times your old, from the
beginning, till your later lesson: least in learning the one, you should forget
the other, and besides that, the old may be a help to the new. Being once able
to read and pronounce perfectly with your rules two or three leaves of your
book at the most, I can assure you, that there is not any French book,
though never so hard, but you shall be able to read and pronounce it as truly
as can be wished for. For in less then in a leaf of your book, all your
rules are to be observed, three or four times at least. For there is no word
but in it is one or two rules to be noted. This way will seem to you at the
beginning very hard, and so though it be more painful then hard, it is in
deed the hardest of the French tongue, except it be faithfully taught, and also
diligently learned. But though in it self it is without teaching, not only
the hardest, but also, as if it were impossible to attain, you shall find it
the most easiest, if you will learn, and be ruled by these rules.

Fourthly, when you know all the rules of your true pronounciation, and can
exactly observe them in reading, then go forward speedely in your book, and
every day translate of it out of French into English, and out of English into
French, as much as you can, repeating often your old, least you should forget
it. This is the only readiest way to instruct you, not only in the right
reading, and natural pronounciation of the French tongue, and in the perfect
knowledge and understanding of the same, but also to make you write it truly,
and speak it accordingly. Without changing of method, keep this order
still, not letting pass any day without learning some thing, and you shall
find, in less then five or six weeks, your labor and diligence, afforde
you such profit and advancement, that you will wonder at it, and much greater
then I dare promise you.

Furthermore when you are pretely furthered in it, get you acquainted, if it be
possible, with some French man, to the end you may practice with him, by daily
conference together, in speech and talk, what you have learned. And if you be
in a place, where the Frenchmen have a Church for themselves, as they have in
London, get you a French Bible, or a new Testament, and every day go both to
their Lecture and Sermons. The one will confirm and strength your
pronounciation, and the other to understand when one does speak.

Finally, if you have a desire both to understand perfectly the hardest and
most eloquent French, and to speak it naturally, you must provide you some
French Dictionarie, and the hardest book you can find, then translate it,
after the manner that I have prescribed you before, or if you will not take the
pain to translate (though it be the surest and shortest way) read it
diligently and pick out in some book, both the hardest words, and the best
phrases to serve your turn, either to speak or to write, when you have need
of.

But because without Grammar it is almost impossible to speak perfectly, but
with a very great labor, and long tract of time, if this my French-Alphabeth,
whom I send you for an herbenger of my great love, and good will I bear you,
can find any favor at your hands; I will shortly sent you a FRENCH TVTOR,
that will teach you in so short and easy way, as may be both, by the perfect
knowledge of the parts of your speeches and Syntaxe, not only to speak
perfectly, but also to know if one does not speak well, to reprove him when he
does speak ill, and to teach him how to amend his bad speech, a thing which
yet before has never been taught. The promise is great, but the performance
shall not be less, if this be acceptable unto you. If I satisfy you, I do
satisfy my self, desiring the one, because I wish for the other. But if my
wishes do not answer to your expectation, I pray you let your favorable
courtesy wash my fault in the streams of the good will I bear you: And in
that devotion. I bid you farewell.

A TABLE OF THE THINGS contained in this book.
OF the letters in general. page 2 Of the single Syllables. 8 Of the double
Syllables. 12 Of the Pronunciation. 16 Of the Division of the letters. 20 Of
the Vowels. 28 Of the Consonantes. 44 Of the general Rules. 62 Of the
Distinctions. 70 That all Frenchmen do not speak well French. 74 Whether
Frenchmen speak faster then Englishmen or no. 76 Of the Pronunciation of the
tounges in general. 78 Wherefore there be many letters written, that are not
pronounced. 80 That it is impossible to learn to speak true French without
Rules. 92 Of the difference of the speech, which is in France. 94 Of the
difference which is between those that learn French in England, and those
that learn in France. 98 Of the difference of the true French, and the law
French. 104 Of the Latin tongue. 106 Of the French tongue. 112 Of the Italian
tongue. 114 Of the Spanish tongue. 116 Of the English tongue. 118
The second part.
Of Familiar Speeches. 124 Of the Kindred. 124 Of the Time. 126 Of the Number.
128 Of the Day. 128 Of the Week and the Months. 130 Of the Weather. 130 Of
the Seasons. 130 Of meat and drink. 135 To buy and sell. 138 Of the Tailor.
142 Of the Shoemaker. 146 Of the Barber. 146 Of the Play. 150 Of the Music.
152 Of the night and going to bed. 152 Of the rising of men. 154 Of the rising
of women. 156 Of Travailing. 160
AN ADVERTISEMENT to the Reader.
GEntle Readers, if there be any of you, that for your better furtherance in
the French tongue, shall be desirous to be acquainted with the Author of this
book, you shall hear of him, in Fleetstreet beneath the conduit, at the sign
of S. John th'Euangelist, where this book is to be sold: or else in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Helmet. And there you shall find him very
willing to show you any favor and courtesy he may: and most ready to endeavor
himself to satisfy you, in all that can be possible for him to do. And thus.
Fare you well.

Des lettres en general. Of the letters in general.
MOnsieur, vous plaist il me fair tant de faueur, ou voudriez vous prendre la
peine de m'appre^dre a parler Fra^cois? SIr, will it please you to do me so
much favor, or would you take the pain to teach me to speak French?
Tres-uolontiers, si vous en auez envy. With all my heart, if you have a desire
to it. Ie ne desire rien plus. I desire nothing more. Si vous le desirez, vous
l'apprendrez bie^ tossed, If you desire it, you shall learn it quickly, S'il
vous plaist de prendre un peu de peine. If it please you to take some pain. Il
ny a rien si difficile, qui par labeur ne soit facile. There is nothing, though
never so hard, but by labor is made easy. Vous dites vray. Ie vous en croy.
You say true, I believe you. Et pour mon regard, ie suis content de prendre
quelque peine, pourueu qu'elle ne soit en fin perdue; and que i'en puisse
recepuoir apres and le plaisir, and profit. And as for me I am contented to
take some pain, so that in the end it be not lost, and that I may receive
afterward, both the pleasure, and the benefit thereby. N'en doutez point, ie
vous en asseure, ie feray tout ce qu'il me sera possible, pour fair que vous
ne soyez frustre, and de vostre attente, and du fruit de voz labeurs. Make no
doubt thereof, I warrant you, I will do the best I can that you may not be
frustrated, both of your hope, and of the fruits of your labors. Ie vous
remercie de bien bon coeur. I thank you with all my heart. Vous me ferez un
singulier plaisir. You shall do me a great pleasure. Ie n'en seray point
ingrat. I will not be ingratfull for it. Ie le scauray bien recognoistre. I
will endeavor my self to requite it. Ie n'en fay point de doubt. I make no
doubt thereof. Ie m'en remets du tout a vostre courtoisie. I will leave that to
your courtesy. N'apprintes vous iamais deuant? Did you never learn before?
Nenny, si peu que rien, bien, No, so little as nothing, well, Tant mieux, i'en
suis bien aise. It is the better, I am very glad of it. Il vous sera plus aise
d'apprendre, and a moy de vous enseigner. It will be the more easy for you to
learn, and for me to teach it you. Or sus, commencons donc? Go to, let us
begin then: Quand il vous plaira. When it please you. Commencons par les
lettres? Let us begin with our letters. De la prononciation des lettres, se
forment les syllabes, and des syllabes se font les mots. Of the pronounciation
of the letters are made the syllables; and of the syllables are made the
words. Qui vne fois peut bien prononcer ses lettres, ne peut qu'il ne prononce
bien les mots les plus difficiles. He that once can pronounce well his letters,
can not choose but to pronounce well, the hardest words. Et qui veut apprendre
a lire, sans premierement scauoir parfaictement prononcer, and les lettres and
les syllabes, ne lira iamais bien. And he that will learn to read, without
knowing first, how perfectly to pronounce, both his letters and syllables,
shall never read well.
Lettres. Prononciation. Valeur Exemple. A a awe a apart B b be b bat C c ce c
car D d de d dit E e masculin e e done E e feminin e e done F f of f fort G g
ge g grand H h ash h hanter I i ee ee il faut L l el l lors M m em m mon N n en
n non O o owe o obstine P p pe p par Q q ku q qui R r er r rit S s es s sante T
t te t tort V v u u un X x ex x xerxes Y y igrec y luy Z z zed z zele

Lettres doubles. Prononciation. Valeur. Exemple. Prononciation. and et and and
e ct cete ct act act st este st triste tris te ss double esse ss press pres
se ff double of ff effort of fort fi effi fi fin f in fl efel fl fleur f leur
sl esel sl fresle f rele. Titres a^ a titre am an bla^c blanc e^ e titre em en
e^tre enter i^ i titre im in pri^t print o^ o titre om on bo^ bon u^ u titre um
un humble humble pre pe titre pre premier premier per pe tranche per permis
permis pro pe trousse pro promis promis que ku titre que que que qui ku tranche
qui qui qui us escrochue us nous nous

Des syllabes simples. Of the single syllables.
MOnsieur, seauez vous vostre lecon? SIr, can you say your lesson? Auez vous
apprins a prononcer vos lettres? Have you learned to pronounce your letters?
Ouy, le mieux qu'il m'est possible. Yea, as well as I can. Ie n'ay fait autre
chose qu'estudier, depuis que vous me feites dire hier. I have done nothing else
but studied it, since you did hear me yesterday. C'est tresbien fait, i'en
suis bien aise. It is very well done, I am glad then. Or-sus, que ie voye
comment vous prononcez? Go to, let me hear how you do pronounce? Ie le veux,
i'en suis content. I will, I am content. Dites doncq, commencez, parlez haut,
prononcez distinctement. Tout beau. Say then, begin, speak aloud, pronounce
distinctly. Softly, Ne vous hastez point, ouurez la bouche. Make no have, open
your mouth. Voyla qui va bien, cela est bien dict. That is very well: that is
well said. Repetez encores vne fois, de rechef. Repeat it once again. Again.
Prononce-ie bien? ouy, vous prononcez bie^. Do I pronounce well? Yea, you
pronounce well. Aydez moy, ie vous pry, Help me, I pray you. Comment se
prononce ceste lettre? How do you pronounce that letter? Deuant que passer
outre il faut que vous prononciez vos lettres parfaictement. Before we go any
farther you must pronounce perfectly your letters. Maintenant que vous scauez
vos lettres. Now that you can tell your letters well, Apprenez vos syllabes,
dictes apres moy. Learn your syllables, say after me.
a e e i o u Ba be be by bo bu Ca ce ce ci co cu Da de de di do du Fa fe fe fi
fo fu Ga ge ge gi go gu Ha he he hi ho hu Ia ie ie ji io iu La le le li lo lu
Ma me me mi mo mu Na ne ne ni no nu Pa pe pe pi po pu Qua que qui quo qu'v Ra
re re ri to ru Sa se se si so su Ta te te ti to tu Va ve ve vi vo vu Xa xe xi
xi xo xu Za ze ze zi zo zu

Ab eb ib ob ub Ac ec ic oc uc Ad ed id od ud Af of if of uf Ag eg ig og ug Ah
eh ih oh uh Al el il ol ul Am em im om um An en in on un Ap ep ip op up Ar er
ir or ur As es is os us At et it ot ut Ax ex ix ox ux Az ez iz oz uz

Des syllabes composees. Of the double syllables.
BOn iour Monsieur, GOod morrow sir, comment vous portez vous? How do you? A
vostre service, and moy a vostre commandment. At your service, and at your
commandment. Ie suis au vostre, ce sera moy qui vous obeiray. I am at yours,
I will obey you. Vous estes bien venu, and bien? scauez vous maintenant vos
syllabes? You are well come, how now? can you pronounce your syllables? Ouy,
que ie pense, ie ne scay. Yea, as I think, I can not tell. Vous plaist il
voir? I'en suis content, Will it please you to hear me? I am content. Ou est
vostre liver? le voyla, le voicy. Where is your book? there it is, here it is.
Or dites maintenant, vous triomphez, Say now. You say very well: Vous prononcez
tresbien. Il vous plaist de dire ainsi, c'est pour me do^ner courage. You
pronuonce very well. It pleases you to say so, it is to encourage me. Ie ne
doubt point, qu'en peu deiours, vous ne prono^ciez and lisiez parfaicteme^t,
pourueu que vous vous resouueniez bien de la prononciation and de vos lettres,
and de voz syllabes. I do not doubt, but in few days you shall pronounce, and
read perfectly, so that you remember well the pronunciation both of your
letters, and of your syllables. Mais d'autant qu'il y'a d'autres syllabes a
apprendre, apprenons les parfaictement, deuant que commencer a lire. But
because there be some other syllables to learn, let us learn them perfectly,
before we begin to read. Tout ce qu'il vous plaira, ie suiuray vostre aduis. As
it please you, I will follow your counsel.
Ail air aux ains art arc Bal bail blanc biens boeuf bleu Cail cuit ciel coy
corpse ceux Dieu duit dail doit dort dans Eau eux eut est et es Fail faux frais
foy faint fut Gail guy grand gna gnons gue Haut huy horse hait heurt hant Iail
iean ieu iour i'ay i'oy Lard luy l'oeil leurs loy luist Mail muy meurt mais moy
miel Niel neud nous n'ay n'oit nuist Oeil oeuf ost ou ours oit Pain prou pro^pt
puis peut pieu Quand qu'on quel qu'il qu'vn quart Rail rit rend rien roy rut
Sail scuil seul saint soit suit Tail tuil tort teinct toict tout Vail vucil
veuz vain voit vit

Orthographe. Prononciation. Exemple. Prononciaation. ai e, ou ea Anglois paix
mais peace, mes ain ein ainsy einsy au o long aussy ossy ei e seigner segner eu
u feu fu em am femme famme en an souuent souuant ien ien rien mien rien mien
ent 3. person of the plural of verbes. et ayment aymet el e long belle belle
er e long terre terre es e long estre etre oi, oy, oe long voit, moy voet more
om oun nom noun on oun mon moun ch sh chose shose th t Athee atee ca ka car kar
ca sa vienca viensa qu k qui ki tion cion action accion

De la prononciation. Of the pronunciation.
MOnsieur, d'ou vient que la prononciatio^ de la langue Francoise differe tant
de la prononciation del Anglois? SIr, what is the cause that the pronunciation
of the French tongue does differ so much from the English pronunciation? Et
qu'encor qu'on puisse bien lire en Anglois, il ne le peut en Francois? And that
although one can read English well, yet he can not read French? Toute la
difference est en la prononciation des lettres, est-il possible? ouy. All the
difference is, in the pronunciation of the letters, is it possible? yea: Car
nous prononcons tout autrement nos lettres, que les vostres. For we do
pronounce our letters otherwise, then ye yours. Car vous scauez (comme i'ay dit
deuant) que de la prononciation des lettres, se fait la prononciation des
syllabes: and de la prononciation des syllabes, se fait la prononciation des
mots, and de la vraye prononciation des mots, se fait la vraye prononciation de
la langue Francoise, and ainsi des autres: si bien qu'il faut tousiours
commencer par les lettres, and ne passer point outre qu'on ne les ait
parfaictement. For you know (as I have said before) that of the pronunciation
of the letters, is made the pronunciation of the syllables: and of the
pronunciation of the syllables, is made the pronunciation of the words: and of
the true pronunciation of the words, is made the true pronunciation of the
French tongue, and likewise of others: so that it behooves always to begin with
the letters, and not to go any further, till one has them perfectly, Comme
estant le premier degree d'appre^dre, and le seur fondement sur lequel est
basty la cognoissance de quelque la^gue que ce soit. As they being the first
degree of learning, and sure ground whereupon is builded the knowledge of any
tongue what sceuer. Il me sera fort difficile d'oublier nostre prononciation,
pour apprendre la vostre. It will be very hard for me to forget our
pronunciation, for to learn yours. Il n'est pas de besoin que vous oubliez la
vostre, It needs not that you should forget yours, mais il est necessaire que
vous vous resouueniez de la nostre. but it is necessary that you should
remember ours. Rome ne fut pas toute bastie en un iour. Rome was not builded in
one day. Cela se fera peu a peu, and auec le temps. That will be done by little
and little in time. Pouua^t vne fois parfaictement prono^cer vos lettres, and
leur donner leson and l'accent propre, il vous sera puis apres fort aise de
lire: Being able once to pronounce perfectly your letters, and to give the true
sound and fit accent, it will be afterward very easy for you to read: Pouuant
vne fois parfaictement lire, and prononcer, il vous sera fort aise de
l'entendre: Being able once to read and pronounce perfectly, it will be very
easy for you to understand it. Et le pouua^t vne fois parfaictement entendre,
il vous sera fort aise de le parler. And being able once to understand it, it
will be very easy, for you to speak it. L'on ne scauroit parler, ce que l'on
n'entend point: and l'on ne scauroit entendre, ce que l'on ne peut ou lire ou
prononcer. One can not speak, what he can not understand: and one can not
understand, what he can neither read nor pronounce. Vous dites vray: sans
doubt. You say true: without doubt. Il faut donc commencer par la
prono^ciation des lettres: car le profit en est double. One must then begin
with the pronunciation of the letters: for the profit is double of it. Il vous
seruira non seulement a bien lire, mais aussi a parfaictement escrire. It will
avail you not only to read truly, but also to write perfectly. Car les
mesmes reigles qui vous monstrero^t l'vn, vous enseigneront l'autre. For the
self same rules that show you the one, will teach you the other. De sort que
si vous gardez cest order, il n'y a mot si difficile qu'en moins de huict ou
quinze iours, vous ne prononciez aussi bien qu'vn Francois naturel; So that if
you will keep well this order, there is no word, though never so hard, but in
less then in seven night, or a fourthnight, you shall pronounce it as well as
any French man borne: and qu'en trois sepmaines ou un mois au plus tard, vous
en puissiez parfaictement escrire. and in three weeks, or within a month at
the most, you shall be able to write it truly. Est il possible? vous me faictes
esmerueiller: toutesfois ie vous en croy, car vos raisons sont vray semblables.
Is it possible? I wonder at it: notwithstanding I believe you, for your reasons
are likely. Et d'autant que deuant que passer outre, ie desire scauoir, si ie
scay bien mes lettres, and quelle difference il y a enter vostre prononciation
and la nostre, ie vous pry de m'enterroguer, and ie vous respondray. And
before we go any further, I would feign know, if I can pronounce my letters, and
what difference there is between your pronunciation and ours. I pray you ask
me, and I will answer you. Cest bien dit, i'en suis content. It is well said, I
am content.
De la Division des lettres. Of the Division of the letters.
COmbien y a il de lettres, en la langue Francoise? HOw many letters are there
in the French tongue? Il y en a vingt and deux. There are two and twenty. Qui
sont else? A, b, c, d, e, f, etc. Which be they? A, b, c, d, e, f, etc. En
combien de parties sont else diuisees? Into how many parts are they divided?
En deux parties. Into two parts. Qui sont else? Which be they? Voyelles, and
Consonantes. Vowels and consonants. Qu'est-ce qu'vne voyelle? What is a vowell?
Vne voyelle est vne lettre, qui de soy mesme a voix, and se prononce d'elle
mesme come a. A vowell is a letter, which of it self has a voice, and is
pronounced with it self, as a. Combien y a il de voyelles? How many vowels are
there? Six, ascauoir A, e, i, o, u, y. Six, to wit, a, e, i, o, u, y. Qu'est-ce
qu'vne consonante? What is a consonant? Vne Consonante est vne lettre, qui n'a
null, son ou voix, sans l'vne des voyelles, come b, c, d, etc. qu'on ne
scauroit prono^cer sans la voyelle e. A consonant is a letter which has
neither sound nor voice without one of the vowels, as, b c d, etc. the which
cannot be pronounced without the vowell e. Combien y a il de Consonantes? How
many consonants are there? Quinze: cest ascauoir b c d e f g l m n p q r s t x
z. Fifteen: that is to say, b c d f g l m n p q r s t x z. Pourquoy laissez
vous h? Wherefore do you leave out h? Par-ce que h, n'est ny voyelle ny
consonante. Because it is neither a vowell nor a consonant. Qu'estce-donc? What
is it then? H, est vne aspiration, par laquelle le mot ou elle se trouue se
prononce auec plus de vehemence qu'on ne feroit autrement, comme hanter, and
non pas anter. It is an aspiration, by the which the word wherein it is, is
pronounced with greater vehemence then it would be otherwise, as, hanter, and
not anter. En combien de parties, sont diuisees les Consonantes? Into how many
parts are the consonants divided? En deux parties, ascauoir, Muettes and
Liquides. Into two, to wit, Mutes and Liquides. Qu'est-ce qu'vne Muette? What
is a Mute? Vne Muette est vne consonante, qui deuant vne autre consonante,
except deuant l, ou r, n'est iamais pronouncee, soit au commencement, soit au
milieu, soit a la fin, ou d'vn mot, ou d'vne syllabe, comme vous me faictes
grand tort certes: A Mute is a consonant, which before an other consonant,
except before l and r is never pronounced, either in the beginning or in the
midst, or the end, either of a word or of a syllable, as vous me faictes grand
tort certes. Lisez, vou me faite gran tor certes. Read, Vou me faite gran tor
certes. Donnez moy vne exemple ou deux, ou les muettes sont prononcees deuant
l, and r? craindre, plaindre, front, fleute, grand, etc. Give me an example or
two, wherein the Mutes are pronounced before l and r. craindre, plaindre,
front, fleute, grand, etc. Et encore cela s'entend quand l, and r, sont dans la
mesme syllabe que la consonante, car autreme^t else ne sont point prono^cees,
comme grand lieu, haut roc. And yet that is to be understood when l and r be in
the selse same syllable, for if it be otherwise, they be not pronounced, as
grand lieu, haut roc. Il faut lire gran lieu, hou roc. It must be read, gran
lieu, hou roc. 'P, and x, sont aussi prononcez au milieu d'vn mot, mais non pas
a la fin, comme exces, excepter, exprimer, etc. P and r be also pronounced in
the midst of a word, but not in the end, as exces, excepter, exprimer. etc. N'y
a il point d'autre exception des muettes? Is there none other exception of the
Mutes? Si a, car s, encore qu'elle soit muette est tousiours prononcee aux mots
qui sont deriuez des Latins comme estimer, esprit, testifier, etc. Yes: for
though s be a mute, yet it is always pronounced in the words which are taken
out of the Latin tongue, as estimer, esprit, testifier, etc. Il faut excepter
Chrestien, honneste, tesmoing, Crespin, best, rest, prester, and tout le
verb estre, etc. You must except, Chrestien, honneste, tesmoing, Crespin,
best, rest, prester, and all the verb estre etc. Ceste exception n'a lieu
qu'aux mots Latins seulement, car aux vrays mots Francois s, n'est iamais
prononcee, deuant vne autre consonante, comme brusler, mesme, eslire,
tousiours, meschant, eschapper, etc. Il les faut prononcer bruler, meme, elire,
touiours, mechant, echapper. This exception has no power but in the Latin
words only, for in the true French words s is never pronounced before an
other consonant, as brusler, mesme, eslire, tousiours, meschant, eschapper,
etc. They must be pronounced bruler, meme, touiours, mechant, echapper. Combien
y a il de muettes? How many mutes are there? Vnze, ascauoir b c d f g p q s t x
z. Eleven, to wit, b c d f g p q s t x z. Qu'est-ce qu'vne liquide? What is a
Liquide? Vne liquide est vne consonante, qui est tousiours prononcee, soit au
commencement, soit au millieu, soit a la fin d'vn mot, ou d'vne syllabe, comme
un mal sur mal; bon renom. A Liquide is a consonante which is always
pronounced either in the beginning or the midst, or in the end of a word, or of
a syllable, as un mal, sur mal; bon renom. Il faut excepter l, deuant s, t, x,
a la fin ou d'vne syllabe, ou d'vn mot, comme hault, faulx, fills, prononcez
haut, faus, fis, etc. You must except I, before s, t, or x, at the end either
of a syllable or of a word, as hault, faulx, fills, etc. pronounce haut, faux,
fis, etc. Combien y a il de liquides? How many liquides be there? Quatre,
ascauoir l, m, n, r. Four, to wit l m n r. N'y a il point de voyelles, qui
puissent estre consonantes? Is there not any vowell, that can be a consonant?
S'y a. Quelles? Yes. Which be they? I, and v, quand ils ont quelque autre
voyelle apres eux, estant au commencement ou d'vn mot, ou d'vne syllabe, comme
ie, Jesus, i'ay, tousiours, vous, auoir, scauoir, and v, ayant r, apres luy,
comme viure, vray, etc. I, and v, when there follows another vowell being in
the beginning either of a word, or of a syllable, as ie, Jesus, i'ay,
tousiours, vous, auoir, scauoir, and v, having r, following, as viure, vray,
etc. Car s'ils sont ou au milieu, ou a la fin d'vne syllabe ils ne sont pas
consonantes, comme cogneue, folly, etc. For if they be either in the midst, or
at the end of a syllable, they be not consonants, as cogneue, folly; etc.
Quelle difference y a il enter i, and y? What difference is there between i,
and y? Nulle quant a la prononciation, None concerning their pronunciation,
mais grande quant a l'orthographe. but very great concerning their writing.
Quelle, ie vous pry? What difference I pray you? I, est tousiours mis au
commencement d'vn mot ou d'vne syllable, comme iamais, tousiours, and lors est
consonante: ou au millieu d'vne syllabe ayant e, ou vne consonante apres luy,
comme mis, mais fait, lieu, and lors est voyelle: I, is always in the
beginning of a word or of a syllable as iamais, tousiours, and then is a
consonant: or in the midst of a syllable having e, or a consonant following, as
mis, mais fait, lieu and then it is a vowell: y est tousiours ou a par soy,
comme y a il, ou au millieu d'vn mot, ayant vne voyelle apres pour le
distinguer de i, consonant, comme ayant, voyant, yeux, and non aiant, voiant,
ieux, ou a la fin d'vn mot comme i'ay, i'iray, i'auray. y is always either by
it self, as y a il, or in the midst of a word having a vowell following for to
know it from i, consonant, as ayant, voyant, yeux, and not aiant, voiant, ieux,
or it is in the end of a word, as i'ay, i'iray, i'auray. Il faut excepter ces
mots qui, si, vei, fei. etc. We must except these words qui, si, vei, fei,
etc.
Des voyelles. Of the vowels.
a
COmment prononcez vous la lettre a? HOw do you pronounce the letter a? A se
prononce ouuert and long, comme ce mot Anglois awe, to be in awe, comme ma, ta,
sa, la, bat, part, blanc. etc. A, is pronounced plain and long, as this
English word awe, to be in awe, as ma, ta, sa, la, bat, part, blanc, etc.
ai
Comme^t prononcez vous la diphtho^gue ai? How do you pronounce the diphthong
a? ai se prononce come ce mot Anglois haie, ayant oste h; ou comme e, neutre,
ou comme la diphthongue Angloise ea, ai, is pronounced like this English word
haie, having taken away h, or else like e, neutre, or else like the English
diphthong ea, comme paix, mais, iamais, fair. as paix, mais, iamais, fair. Il
faut prononcer commes'il estoit escript, peace, mes, iameas, fear, etc. We
must pronounce as if it were written, peace, mes, iameas, fear, or fere.
ain
Comment se prononce ain? How do you pronounce ain? ain se prononce ein, comme
ainsy, pain, main, prononcez einsy, pein, mein, etc. ain is pronounced like
ein, as ainsy, pain, main, pronounce einsy, pein, mein, etc.
au
Comment se prononce au? How do you pronounce au? Au se prononce comme o long,
ou ce mot Anglois owe, comme aussi, Paul, d'autant, aucun, prononcez ossi, pol,
dot ant, ocun. au is pronounced like an O long, or else like this English word
owe, as aussy, Paul, d'autant, aucun, pronounce, ossy, Pol, d'otant, ocun.
ay
Comment se prononce ay? How do you pronounce ay? Ay se prononce comme e
masculin long: comme i'ay, feray, i'iray, prononcez in e fere i'ire, Exceptez
fay, may, geay, cathay, fontenay, partenay, l'aunay, ou il se prononce, comme e
neutre. ay will be pronounced like e masculine long, as i'ay, feray, i'iray,
read, ie, fere, i'ire, Except fay, may, geay, cathay, fontenay, partenay,
l'aunay, wherein ay is sounded like e neuter.
e
Comment prononcez vous e? How do you pronounce e? Diuersement: pourquoy?
Diversely: why? Pour-ce qu'il y en a de trois sorts. Because there be three
kinds of e. Qui sont ils? Which be they? e masculin, e feminin, and e neutre. e
masculine, e feminine, e neuter.
e masculin.
Comment cognoissez vous e masculin? How shall one know e masculin? e masculin
est note d'vn accent sur la test comme e. e masculin is noted with an accent
over his head as this e. Comment se prononce e masculin? How do you pronounce e
masculin? Il se prononce comme e de la fin de ce mot Latin amare: ou comme e du
mot Anglois the, comme pare, pre, bonte, beauty, etc. It is pronounced like the
e at the end of the Latin word amare: or like e of this English word the, comme
pare, pre, bonte, beauty, etc.
e feminin.
Comment se cognoist e feminin? How is e feminin to be known? e feminin est
cogneu quand il n'a aucun accent sur la test, comme e. e feminin it known
when it has not any accent over his head, as this e. Comment se prononce e
feminin? How is e feminin pronounced? e feminin se prononce au commencement
auec difficulte, par les estrangers de la langue Francoise, d'autant qu'il est
peculier au Francois seulement, si bien qu'il en faut apprendre la
prononciation d'eux; il se prononce presque comme e de ces mots Anglois able,
table, possible; amiable, toute la difference est que les Anglois le prononcent
comme s il estoit deuant l; and l'estouffent en la bouche, en pressant leur
palais auec leur langue, ou au contraire les Francois luy donnent sa
prononciation apres l, en ouurant un peu la bouche It is very hard for the
strangers of the French tongue, in their beginning, to pronounce e feminin,
because it is peculiar to the Frenchmen only, so that the pronunciation
thereof can not be learned, but in hearing them to sound it. it is almost
sounded like e of these English words, able, table, possible, amiable, all the
difference is that the Englishmen do pronounce it as if it were before l, and
they smoother it in their mouth, pressing the palet with their tongue, where
contrariwise the Frenchmen do give him his sound after l, opening a little their
mouth pour luy donner sortie, comme done, fault, port, race, un chacun de ces
mots estant de deux syllabes. to give him issue out, as done, fault, port,
race, each one of these words being of two syllables.
e neutre.
Comment se cognoist e neutre? How is e neuter to be known? e neutre n'est
point note, non plus que e feminin, mais il est tousiours deuant ou l, ou r, ou
s. Cela s'entend quand il est en la mesme syllabe qu'est ou l, ou r, ou s,
comme belle, terre, estre, etc. e neuter is not noted, no more then e feminin,
but it is always before either l or r, or s. That is to be understood when e
is in the self same syllable that either l, or r, or s, be, as belle, terre,
estre, etc. Exceptez le plurier des noms qui se finissent au singulier par e
feminin, comme chooses, toutes, belles, etc. ausquels e demeure tousiours
feminin, except les mots d'vne syllabe, comme des, les, ses, tes, es, ausquels
e est neutre. Except the plural number of the nownes which do end their
singular number with e feminine, as chooses, toutes, belles, etc. in the which e
remains always feminine, except the words of one syllable, as des, les, mes,
ses, tes, es, in the which e is neuter. Comment se prononce e neutre? How do
you pronounce e neuter? e neutre se prononce ouuert and long, comme ces mots
Anglois haie, ou may, en ostant h de haie, and m de may, ou bien comme la
diphthongue ea, en ce mot peace, comme elle, ferme, pressed, etc. prononcez
ealle, fearme, preast. e neuter is sounded both plain and long, as these
English words, hay, may, taking away h from haie, and m from may, or else like
the diphthong ea of this word peace, as elle, ferme, priest, etc. pronounce
ealle, fearme, preast. N'y a il point de mots ou les trois e se trouuent? Is
there not any word wherein your three e can be found? Si a, comme honnestete,
don't le premier Yes, as this word honnestete, whereof the first. e est neutre,
a cause qu'il est deuant s, and se prononce long: le second feminin, a cause
qu'il n'est point note d'vn accent, and se prononce brief: and le dernier
masculin, note, and se prononce comme e ou Anglois ou Latin. e is neuter,
because it is before s, and it is pronounced long: the second e is feminin,
because he has no accent over his head, and is pronounced short: and the last
is masculin, noted with an accent, and is sounded like English e. Comment se
prononce e deuant m, ou n? How do you pronounce e before m or n? e deuant m, ou
n, se prononce comme un a, pourueu que e soit en la mesme syllabe que m, ou n,
comme femme, enter, prendre, il l es faut prononcer comme s'ils estoyent
escripts famme, antre, prandre. e before m or n is pronounced like an a, so
that e be in the self same syllable that m or n are, as femme, enter, prendre,
pronounce them as if they were written famme, antre, prandre. Ceste reigle n'a
elle point d'exception? Has not this rule any exception? Si a, il faut
excepter, quand i va deuant e, car lors e est prononce comme e, and non pas
comme a, comme bien, mien, tien, sien, etc. Yes, we must except when i is
before e, for then e is pronounced like e, and not like a, as bien, mien, tien,
sien, rien, vien. Cela s'entend quand i and e sont en la mesme syllabe que n,
car s'il n'est en la mesme syllabe, e se prononce selon la reigle generale,
c'est ascauoir comme a, comme sapience, audience, conscience, etc. dans
lesquels mots, ou leurs semblables e est prononce comme a, encore qu'il ait i
deuant, a cause que i n'est pas en la mesme syllabe que e. If fault done
prononcer sapiance, audiance, consciance, etc. That is to be understood when
both i and e be in the same syllable that n is in: for if it be not in the same
syllable, e is sounded according to the general rule, to wit like an a, as
sapience, audience, conscience, etc. in which words, or their like e is sounded
like a, though that i be before e, because i is not in the same syllable
wherein is e. pronounce then sapiance, audiance, consciance, etc. La reigle
generale de e deuant n n'a elle point d'autre exception? Has not the general
rule of e before n any other exception? Si a. Qu'elle? Yes. What is it? C'est
que e deuant n de la troifiesme person du plurier des verbes ne se prononce
iamais comme a, mais comme e. It is that e before n in the third person of the
plural of verbes is never pronounced like a, but like e Pourquoy? Why? La
raison est, que n n'est iamais prononcee a la troisiesme person du plurier
des verbes, and don't e est feminin, comme firent, sautent, dansent, auoyent, il
faut prononcer firet, sautet, danset, auoyet. Because n is never pronounced in
the third person of the plural of verbs, in the which e must be sou^ded
feminin, as firent, sautent, dansent, auoyent, pronounce firet, sautet. danset,
auoyet.
ei.
Comment se prononce la diphthongue ei? How do you pronounce the diphthong ei?
ei se prononce comme e masculin, comme seigner, seize, peigner, etc. prononcez
segner, seze, pegner, etc. ei is pronounced like e masculine, as seigner,
seize, peigner, etc. sound segner, seze, pegner, etc. Ceste reigle n'a elle
point d'exception? Has not this rule any exception? Si a. Combien? Deux. Yes.
How many? Two. Qu'elle est la premiere? Which is the first? La premiere est de
ces deux mots vei, and fei, and de leurs deriuez, comme veit, feit, veirent,
feirent, ou i est prononce, and non pas e. Il faut donc lire vi, fi, virent,
firent, etc. The first is of these words vei, and fei, and of those that are
derived of the^, as veit, feit veirent, feirent, wherein i is pronounced, and
not e. Read then vi, fi, virent, firent, etc. Quelle est la second? Which is
the second? La second est quand n suit apres ei, car lors e and i sont tous
deux prononcez, comme peindre, creindre, vein, ceindre. The second is when n
follows ei, for then both e and i are pronounced, as peindre, creindre,
vein, ceindre.
eu.
Comment prononcez vous eu? How do you pronounce eu? eu sont prononcez u, comme
feu, peu, vouleu, Dieu, lieu, prononcez fu, pu, voulu, Diu, liu, retenant
neantmoins un peu de la prononciation de e. eu is pronounced like u only, as
feu, peu, vouleu, Dieu, lieu, pronounce fu, pu, voulu, Diu, liu, keeping
notwithstanding somewhat the pronunciation of e.
i.
Comment prononcez vous i? How do you pronounce i? ise prononce comme le double
ee Anglois, comme fit, mit, rit, pris, suit, lisez feet, meet, reet, prees,
sueet. i is pronounced like the double English ee, as fit, mit, rit, pris,
suit, read feet, meet, reet, prees, sucet.
e, i,
Comment prononcez vous e, and i, notez de deux points sur la test, en ce
maniere e i? e, and i, notez en ceste maniere sont diuisez de la voyelle
precedente, and font vne syllabe apart, comme pais, veue, creu-e, na-if, ba-if:
po-ete. lisez pa-is, veu-e, creu-e, na-if, ba-if: po-ete. How do you pronounce
e and i noted with two points over their head in this manner e, i? e and i
noted after this manner are divided from the vowell going before, and they make a
syllable by them selves, as pais, veue, creue, naif, baif, poet, Read pa-is,
veu-e, creu-e, na-if, ba-if, po-ete.
o.
Comment prononcez vous o? How do you pronounce o? o se prononce comme ce mot
Anglois owe, comme sot, pot, mot, lot, oser, oster. Exceptez fol, sol, qui sont
fou, sou. o is pronounced like this English word owe, as sot, pot, mot, lot,
oser, oster. Except fol, sol, which are pronounced fou, sou.
oi, oy.
Comment prononcez vous oi ou oy? How do you pronounce oi, or oy? oi ou oy se
prononce comme oe, comme moy, toy, soy, toit, boit, roy, loy, Lisez more, toe,
so, toet, hoet, roe, lo, and notez que cest e se prononce comme e neutre, ou
comme la diphthongue Angloise ea. oi, or oy are pronounced like oe, as moy,
toy, soy, toit, boit, roy, loy, Read more, toe, so, toet, boet, roe, lo, note
that this e is pronounced like e neuter, or like the English diphthong ea.
oeu
Comment prononcez vous oeu? How do you pronounce oeu? oeu se prononce u, comme
oeuure, coeur, Lisez uvre, cur, en ouurant u, and le faisant long, comme
participant un peu de e, qui est deuant luy. oeu are pronounced like u, as
oeuure, coeur, Read uvre, cur, in opening u, and making it long, as borowing
somewhat of the pronunciation of e, which is before it.
om
Comment prononcez vous om? How do you pronounce om? om se prononce comme s'il
estoit escript oun, comme nom, renom, lisez noun, renoum. om is pronounced as
if it were written oun, as nom, renom, read noun, renoun.
on
Comment prononcez vous on? How do you pronounce on? on se prononce comme s'il
estoit escript oun, comme mon, non, ton, lisez moun, noun, town. on is
pronounced as if it were written oun, as mon, non, ton, read moun, noun, town.
ou
Comment prononcez vous ou? How do you pronounce ou? ou se prononce comme le
double oo Anglois, comme nous, vous, tous, sous. lisez noos, voos, toos, soos.
ou is pronounced like the double English oo. as nous, vous, tous, sous, Read
noos, voos, toos, soos.
u
Comment prononcez vous u? How do you pronounce u? u se prononce comme les
Escossois prononcent u de ce mot Good, ou u de ce mot lute, comme but, fut,
vser, etc. u is pronounced as the Scots do pronounce u of that word Good, or
like the u of that word lute, as but, fut, vser, etc.
y
Comment prononcez vous y? How do you pronounce y? y se prononce tout ainsy que
i Francois, comme le double ee Anglois, comme luy, aussy, ainsy, cestuy,
auiourd'huy. y is pronounced even as the French i, or the English double ee, as
luy, aussy, ainsy, cestuy, au iourd'huy. lisez lui, ossi, einsi, cestui,
oioura'ui. Read lui, ossi, einsi, cetui, oiourd'ui.
Des Consonantes. Of the Consonants.
MOnsieur, puis que la prononciation de la langue Francoise, and generalement
de toutes les autres langues, consiste en la prononciation des lettres, mais
principalement en celle des voyelles, (d'autant que sans icelles les
consona^tes ne peuuent do^ner aucun son) and que ce sont les voyelles, qui
donnent voix, and aux syllabes, and aux mots; and que nous auons assez
suffisamment parle desdictes voyelles; cela ne suffit il pas pour la
prono^ciation de la langue Fra^coise, tant a bien lire, qu'a bien parler? SIr,
since that the pronunciation of the French tongue, and generally of all the
other languages, consists in the pronunciation of the letters, but especially
of the vowels (because that without them the consonants cannot give any sound)
and that there be vowels which give voice both to the syllables and to the
words; and besides that, we have sufficiently enough spoken of the same vowels;
will not that suffice for the pronunciation of the French tongue, as well to
read well, as to speak well? Nenny. Car comme la prononciation de nos
voyelles differe de la prononciation des vostres, aussy la prononciation de nos
Consonantes est beaucoup differente de la vostre, qui fait que vostre langue,
and la nostre different tant en prononciation. No forsooth. For even as the
pronunciation of our vowelles differs from the pronunciation of yours; so the
pronunciation of our Consonantes is much different from yours, the which thing
causes your tongue and ours to differ so much in the pronunciation. Il est donc
de besoing que vous scachiez, comment nos consonantes se prononcent, and que
vous puissiez discerner la difference qu'il y a enter la prononciation de nos
consonantes, and les vostres. Then it is needful for you to know, how our
consonantes are pronounced, and discern the true difference which is between
the pronunciation of our consonantes and yours. I'ay apprins cela des le
commencement, par les tables que vous en auez faictes en ce liver. I have
learned that even from the beginning, by the tables that you have made of them
in this book. Tant mieux vaut. I'en suis bien aise. It is the better. I am
very glad of it: Mais ie desire scauoir si vous ne les auez point oubliez. Car
il les faut repeter tous les iours, and si souuent que vous les imprimiez en
sort en vostre memoire, qu'elles vous soyent aussi aisees and familieres, que
les vostres propres. Car sans cela il est du tout impossible que iamais vous
prononciez bien, soit en lisant, soit en parlant, ny que vous puissiez onc
vrayement escrire. But I desire to know if you have not forgotten them. For you
must repete them every day, and so often that you may imprint them in such sort
into your memory, that they be as easy and familiar unto you, as your own.
For without them, it is impossible that ever you can pronounce well, either
reading or speaking, nor that ever you should write truly. Ie vous pry donc
de m'interroguer, I pray you then, ask me them, pour voir si ie les ay point
oubliees. to see if I have not forgotten them. Ie le veux, and afin de ne vous
ennuyer par un trop long discourse, i'omettray a cause de briefuete, beaucoup de
chooses qui se pourroyent dire des consonantes en general, and ne vous
interrogueray point particulierement de chascune, car ce seroit vne chose
superflue. Seulement ie vous examineray; de ce en quoy else sont differentes
des consonantes Angloises. I will, least I should weary you by a to long
treatise, I will omit, for brevity sake, many things that might be generally
spoken of the consonantes. And I will not ask you particularly of every one,
for it should be a superfluous thing. I will only examine you upon that they
do differ in from the English consonantes. Ie vous remercie affectueusement
vous me ferez un singulier plaisir. I thank you heartily, you shall do me a
great pleasure. Or-sus commencons donc? Go to. Then let us begin.
b
Comment prononcez vous b a la fin d'vn mot? How do you pronounce b in the end
of a word? b a la fin d'vn mot ne se prononce iamais, soit qu'il suyue vne
voyelle, soit qu'il suyue vne autre consonante, comme plomb, coulomb, etc.
Lisez plom, coulom. b being at the end of a word is never pronounced, if either
a vowell, or another consonant follow or no, as plomb, coulomb, etc. Read plom,
coulom.
c
Comment prononcez vous c deuant a, o, and u? How do you pronounce c either
before a, or o, or u? c deuant a, o, and u, se pronounce comme k, comme car,
cor, cure: lisez kar, kor, kure. c before a, o, and u, is pronounced like
English k, as car, cor, cure. Read kar, kor, kure.
c
Comment prononcez vous c deuant a ou o, ayant un crochet dessoubs marque How
do you pronounce c before a, or o, having a mark under it noted en ceste
maniere c? after this manner c? c deuant a, ou o, marque en ceste maniere, se
prononce comme vne ss, comme vienca, macon, lecon, facon. c before a, or o,
noted after this manner, is pronounced like two ss, as vienca, macon, lecon,
facon: Lisez vienssa, masson, lesson, fasson. Read vianssa, masson, lesson,
fasson.
ce, ci
Comment prononcez vous c deuant e, ou i? How do you pronounce c before e, or
i? c deuant e, and i se prononce comme s, comme celuy, cela, cite, ciron. c
before e, or i is pronounced like s, as celuy, cela, cite, ciron: Lisez seluy,
cela, site, siron. Read seluy, cela, site, siron.
ch
Comment prononcez vous c deuant h? How do you pronounce c before h? c deuant h
se prononce comme s deuant h en Anglois, comme chose, charge, chef, cheual. c
before h is pronounced like s before h in English, as chose, charge, chef,
cheual: Lisez shose, sharge, shef, sheual. Read shose, sharge, shef, sheual. Il
faut excepter Christ, Christophle, Chrestien, cholere, choleric, ou h n'est
point prononcee du tout. We must except Christ, Christophle, Chrestien,
cholere, choleric, etc. Wherein h is not pronounced at all. Comment prononcez
vous c en ces mots second, secondement, secret, secretaire, secretement,
becasse? How do you pronounce c in these words second, secondement, secret,
secretaire, secretement, becasse? c se prononce en ces mots comme g, il faut
doncq prononcer, segond, segondement, segret, segretaire, segretement, begasse.
c is pronounced in these words like g, Pronounce then segond, segondement,
segret, segretaire, segretement, begasse.
d
Comment prononcez vous d How do you pronounce d a la fin d'vn mot? at the end
of a word? d a la fin d'vn mot se prononce comme un t, comme grand, prend,
rend, rond. d being at the end of a word is pronounced like t, as grand, prend
rend, rond: Lisez grant, prent, rent, ront. Read grant, prent, rent, ront.
Exceptez bled, pied, ou d n'est point prononce. Except bled, pied, in the which
d is never pronounced.
g
Comment prononcez vous g deuant a, o, and u? How do you pronounce g before a,
o, or u? g deuant a, o, and u, se prononce comme le g Anglois en ces mots
Gabriel, God, comme gaber, guard, gobelet, guerdon. g before a, o, or u is
pronounced like the English g in these words Gabriel, God, as gaber, guard,
gobelet; guerdon.
ge gi
Comment prononcez vous g deuant e, and i? How do you pronounce g before e, or
i? g deuant e, and i se prononce comme i consonant, non du tout si fort que i
consonant Anglois, comme geler, gemir, general, giron, gibbier. g before e, or
i is pronounced like i consonant, not altogether so hard as i English
consonant, as geler, gemir, general, giron, gibbier.
gua.
Comment prononcez gua? How do you pronounce gua? gua se prononce comme ga,
comme guarir, language, lisez guerir, language. gua is pronounced like ga, as
guarir, language, Read garir; langage.
gue.
Comment prononce vous gue? How do you pronounce gue? gue se prononce comme ge
de ces deux mots Anglois get, guess, comme guerdon, langue. gue is pronounced
like ge of these two English words get, guess, as guerdon, langue.
gn.
Comment prononcez vous g deuant n? How do you pronounce g before n? gn se
prononce difficilement par les Anglois, toutesfois s'ils veulent prendre guard,
comme ils prononcent minion, onion, companion, il leur sera plus aise de le
prononcer, car encore que nous escriuions ces mesmes mots par gn neantmoins il
y a peu de difference de leur prononciation a la nostre, seulement qu'ils
prenent guard a mettre g en la mesme syllabe que n, and ils ne trouueront
aucune difficulte en sa prononciation, comme mignon, oignon, compagnon,
lignage, ligne, compagnie. Lisez mi-gnon, oi-gnon, compa-gnon, li-gnage,
li-gne, compa-gnie. gn is hardly pronounced by the Englishmen, notwithstanding
if they will take heed how they do pronounce minion, onion, companion, it will
be easy for them to pronounce it, for though we do write the self same words
with gn, nevertheless there is small difference between their pronunciation
and ours, let them take heed only to sound g in the same syllable that n is,
and then they shall not find any hardness in his pronunciation, as mignon,
oignon, compagnon, lignage, ligne, compagnie, Read mi-gnon, oi-gnon,
compa-gnon, li-gnage, li-gne, compa-gnie. Exceptez sign, cygne, digne,
cognoistre, and ses composez, ou g n'est point prono^ce. Except, sign, cygne,
digne, cognoistre, etc Wherein g is not pronounced at all.
h.
Comment prononcez vous h? How do you pronounce h? h se prononce par
aspiration, ascauoir aux mots qui sont vrays Francois, ausquels elle est
tousiours prononcee, comme hache, hanter, hay, honte, etc. Il faut excepter
haleine, huict, helas, heur, heureux, h is pronounced with aspiration, to wit
in words that are true French, in the which h is always pronounced, as hache,
hanter, hay, honte, etc. We must except haleine, huict, helas, heur, heureux,
and tous les mots deriuez du Latin, qui se commencent par h; comme homme,
honneur, heritage, etc. ausquels elle n'est iamais prononcee: and all the
words that are derived from the Latin which begin with h; as homme, honneur,
heritage, etc. wherein h is never pronounced: Lisez donc omme, onneur, eritage,
etc. Read then omme, onneur, eritage, etc.
ll
Comment prononcez vous deux ll au millieu d'vn mot, ayant i deuant, and vne
simple l a la fin d'vn mot, ayant deux ou trois voyelles deuant? How do you
pronounce two ll in the midst of a word, having i before: and a single l at the
end of a word, having two or three vowels before? Deux ll au millieu d'vn mot,
ayant i deuant; comme fille, baille: and vne simple l a la fin d'vn mot, ayant
deux ou trois voyelles deuant, comme oeil, dueil, or gueil, se prononcent
difficilement par les Anglois, toutesfois s'ils prenent guard comme ils
prononcent ces deux mots scalion, scoulion, il leur sera plus facile de les
prononcer, car else se prononcent presque de mesme: comme baille, taille,
vaille, fille, veille. Except ville. Two ll in the midst of a word having i
before, as fille, baille: and a single l at the end of ae word, having two, or
three vowels before, as oeil, dueil, orgueil, are hardly pronounced by the
Englishmen, notwithstanding if they will take heed, how they pronounce these
two words scalion, sculion, they shall find more easy to pronounce it: for
they are pronounced almost like, as baille, taille, vaille, fille, veille,
Except ville. Ceste reigle la n'a elle pas lieu au mots ou il y a vne antre
voyelle, que i comme a, e, o, u, deuant deux ll? Is not this rule to be
understood in the words, wherein there is an other vowell then i, as a, e, o,
u, before two ll? Nenny car lors il n'y a que l'vne des l qui se prononce,
comme palle, malle, belle, selle, folle, nulle, seulle: lisez No, for then
there is but ae single l pronounced as palle, malle, belle, selle, folle,
nulle, seulle, Read pale, male, bele, sele, fool, nulle; seulle. pale, male,
bele, sele, fool, nule, seule.
m.
Comment prononcez vous m a la fin d'vn mot? How do you pronounce m at the end
of a word? in a la fin d'vn se prononce comme n, comme nom, renom: lisez non;
renon. m in the end of a word is pronounced like n as nom, renom: Read non
renon.
ph.
Comment prononcez vous ph? How do you pronounce ph? ph se prononce comme f,
comme philosophe, prophet, phlegm: ph is pronounced like f, as philosophe,
prophet, phlegm: Lisez filosofe, profete, phlegm. Read filosofe, profete,
phlegm.
qu.
Comment prononcez vous qu? How do you pronounce qu? qu se prononce comme k
Anglois, comme qui, que, quiconque, quand: qu is pronounced like English k, as
qui, que, quiconque, quand: Lisez ki, ke, kiconke, kand. Read ki, ke, kiconke,
kand.
r.
Comment prononcez vous un simple r, au milieu d'vn mot? How do you pronounce
a single r being in the midst of a word? r simple se prononce comme r de ce mot
Anglois borow, il la faut prononcer fort doucement, and sans force, come si
elle estoit ioincte auec la lettre de deuant, encore qu'elle ne le soit, comme
pare, pere, mere, mare, more, guerre, etc. a single r is pronounced like r of
this English, word borow, it must be pronounced very sweetly, and without
force, as if it were joined with the letter going before, though it be not in
deed, as pare, pere, mere, mare, more, guerre, etc. Et au commencement d'vn
mot elle se prononce comme r do ce mot Anglois ravish, comme rauir, neprendre.
And in the beginning of a word r is pronounced like r of this English word
ravish, as rauir, reprendre, rimer, rome, rumeur. rimer, rome, rumeur. Comment
prononcez vous deux rr? How do you pronounce two rr together? Deux rr se
prononcent plus rudement, and auec plus de force que la simple r, and se
prononce comme les deux rr de ce mot Anglois warrier, domme terre, guerre,
bar, etc. Two rr are pronounced more hardly, and with more force then the
single r is; and are pronounced like the two rr of this English word warrier,
as terre, guerre, bar, etc.
s.
Comment prononcez vous s enter deux voyelles? How do you pronounce s between
two vowelles? s enter deux voyelles se prononce comme un z, comme chose,
mauuaise, priser: s between two vowels is pronounced like z as chose,
mauuaise, priser: Lisez choze, mauuaize, priser. Read choze, mauuaize, prizer.
ss.
Comment prononcez vous deux ss? How do you pronounce two ss? Deux ss se
prononcent comme un c, comme press, feisse, fosse, trousse: Two ss are
pronounced like c, as press, feisse, fosse, trousse: Lisez prece, feice, foce,
trouce. Read prece, feice, foce, trouce. Comment prononcez vous s a la fin d'vn
mot? How do you pronounce s at the end of a word? s a la fin d'vn mot se
prononce comme z, comme pas, bas, nous, vous, tous, rois: s at the end of a
word, is pronounced like z as pas, bas, nous, vous, tous, rois, Lisez paz, baz,
nouz, vouz, touz, roiz. Read paz, baz, nouz, vouz, touz, roiz.
th.
Comment prononcez vous th? How do you pronounce th? th se prononce comme t
sans h, comme Timothee, thesme, atheiste: th is pronounced like t without h; as
Timothee, thesme, atheiste: Lisez Timotee, tesme, ateiste. Read Timotee, tesme,
ateiste.
tion.
Comment prononcez vous tion? How do you pronounce tion? tion se prono^ce
comme s'il estoit escript cion, comme action, affection, prononciation: tion is
pronounced as if it were written cion, as action, affection, prononciation:
Lisez accion, affection, prononciation. Read accion, affeccion, prononciation.
x.
Comment prononcez vous x a la fin d'vn mot? How do you pronounce x at the end
of a word? x a la fin d'vn mot se prononce comme z, comme aux, paix, faix,
lieux, mieux: x at the end of a word is pronounced like z, as aux, paix, faix,
lieux, mieux: Lisez auz, paiz, faiz, lieuz. Read auz, paiz, faiz lieuz, mieuz.
Des Reigles generales. Of the general Rules.
MAintenant que nous auo^s particuliereme^t parle des lettres Fra^coises, ta^t
voyelles que consonantes; and que ie scay quelle difference il y a enter leur
prononciation, and celles des lettres Angloises, que me rest il pour
parfaictement lire and bien parler? NOw sir, that we have particularly spoken
of the French letters, as well vowels as consonantes, and that I know what
difference there is between their pronunciatio^ and the English letters, what
lack I to perfectly read, and speak well? Il vous rest encore quelques
reigles generales, qu'il faut diligemment obseruer, sans iamais errer a
l'encontre, si vous desirez bien prononcer; mais qui sont fort aisees, d'autant
qu'elles sont peu en no^bre. You lack yet some general rules, the which ought
diligently to be observed, without transgressing them in any wise, if you
desire to prononce well, but they be very easy because, they be few.
La premiere Reigle. The first Rule.
QVelle est la premiere? Which is the first? La premiere est, que si un mot se
finist The first is, that if a word ends par e feminin, and que le mot
suyuant se commence par vne voyelle, e feminin n'est iamais prononce, and les
deux, ou trois, ou quatre mots sont ioincts ensemble, comme s'ils n'estoyent
qu'vn, comme belle amye aim estre aymee: with e femimn, and that the word
following begins with a vowell, e feminin is never pronounced, and the two,
or three, or four words are joined together, as if they were but one word, as
belle amye aim estre aymee: Lisez bell-amy-aym-estr-aymee. Read
bell-amy-aym-estr-aymee. Et si un mot se finist par e masculin, ou par quelque
autre voyelle, and que le mot suyuant se co^mence par vne autre voyelle, e
masculin, ou quelque autre voyelle quelle quelle soit (excep te e feminin)
doibt elle estre prononcee? But if a word ends with e masculin, or with an
other vowell, and that the word following begins with another vowell, must e
masculin, or some other vowell whatsoever (except e feminin) be pronounced?
Ouy, dictes donc I'ay done a mon pere, and non pas i ay donn a mon pere. Yea,
say then I'ay done a mon pere, and not i'ay donn-a mon pere. Prononcez il
donna a amor, and non pas il donn amor. Pronounce il donna a Amor, and not
il donn-Amour. Prononcez il est vni and ioinct, and non pas il est un and
ioinct. Sound il est vni and ioinct, and not il est un and ioinct. Dictes il a
coureu a Londres, and non pas il a cour a Londres: and ainsy des autres leurs
semblables. Say il a coureu a Londres, and not il a cour a Londres: and even so
of other their like.
La second Reigle. The second Rule.
QVelle est la second Reigle generale? Which is the second rule? La second
est, que si un mot se finist par vne consonante, and que le mot The second rule
is. If a word ends with a consonante, and the word suyuant se commence par
vne voyelle, les deux, ou trois, ou quatre mots sont prononcez ensemble, comme
s'ilz n'estoyent qu'vn mot, comme il aymoit assez a chanter en Music,
prononcez comme sice n'estoit qu'vn mot, ilaymoitassezachanteren Music.
following begins with a vowell the two or three, or four words are
pronounced together, as if they were but one word, as il aymoit assez a chanter
en Music, pronounce as if it were but one word, Ilaymoitassezachanteren
Music. Ceste reigle n'a elle point d'exception? Has this rule no exception?
Nenny, sinon en ce mot et, qui tousiours est prononce e, soit qu'il ait vne
voyelle, soit qu'il ait vne consonante apres. No, but in this word et, which
always is pronounced e, without t, whether a vowell, or a consonant does follow
after him.
La troisiesme Reigle. The third rule.
QVelle est la troisiesme Reigle generale? Which is the third general rule?
La troisiesme reigle est, que si un mot se finist par vne, ou deux consonantes,
and le mot suyuant se commence par vne autre consonante, les consonantes de la
fin du mot ne sont iamais prononcees, comme i'ay faict cela: c'est trop tossed
parle: The third rule is, if a word ends with one, or two consonantes, and
that the word following, begins with another consonant, the consonantes in
the end of the word are never pronounced, as i'ay faict cela: c'est trop tossed
parle: Lisez i'ay fai cela. Ce tro to parle. Read i'ay fai cela, ce tro to
parle. Cestre reiglen'a elle point d'exception? Has this rule no exception? Se
a; Il faut excepter les Liquides l, m, n, r, and des Muttes c, quand il est le
dernier du mot, car s'il estoit penultime il ne seroit prononce, comme pour les
Liquides mon loyal seruiteur faict son deuoir. Ila acquis un nom fameux, Yes.
The liquides l, m, n, r, are excepted and the muts c, when it is the last
letter of a word, for otherwise it must not be pronounced, as for the liquides
mon loyal seruiteur faict son deuoir. Il a acquis un nom fameux. Et pour c,
auec moy, un sac plain de bled. And for c, auec moy, un sac plain de bled.
Apostrophe.
QVe signify ceste marque' mise enter deux lettres d'vn mot? What does this
mark 'meane being put between two letters of a word? 'Ceste mar^que s'appelle
Apostrophe, and vaut autant qu'vn e feminin, elle se met pour e de ces mots
d'vne syllabe ce, de, ie, le, me, ne, que, se, te, si le mot suyuant se
commence par vne voyelle, comme c'est pour ce est, d'amour, pour de amor, i'ay
pour ie ay, l'amy, pour le amy, m'enseigner: pour me enseigner, n'est, pour ne
est, qu'il, pour que il: s'esbatre, pour se esbatre: t'apprendre, pour te
apprendre, and ainsy des autres leurs semblables and pareillement en ce mot si
comme s'ils pour si ils, and la comme l'aureille pour la aureille. 'This mark
is called Apostrophe and it stands for an e feminin, it is put for an e in
these words of one syllable ce, de, ie, le, me, ne, que, se, te, if the word
following begins with a vowell, as c'est, for ce est, d'amour, for de amor,
i'ay for ie ay, l'amy, for le amy, m'enseigner for me enseigner, n'est for ne
est, qu'il, for que il: s'esbatre, for se esbatre: t'apprendre, for te
apprendre, and even so of other their like, and likewise in this word si, as
s'ils for si ils: and la, as I'aureille for la aureille.
Liaison. Band.
QVe signify ceste marque? What does this marke-meane? Ceste marque-signifie
que le mot au millieu duquel elle se trouue est compose de deux mots, qui se
doibuent prononcer ensemble sans division, co^mme porteflambeaux, donne-iour,
graue-doux. This marke-showeth that the word in the midst of the which it is
found is co^pou^ded of two words, which ought to be pronounced together with
any division, as porteflambeaux, donne-iour, graue-doux.
Admiration.
QVe signify ceste marque?! What does this mark! signify? Ceste marque! se
met apres les paroles d'admiration, ou exclamation, comme helas! las moy
miserable! o quel auguste port! quelle Angelique face! etc. This mark! is
commonly set after the words of admiration, and exclamation, as helas! las moy
miserable! o quel auguste port! quelle Angelique face! etc.
Interrogation.
QVe signify ceste marque?? What does this mark? signify? Ceste marque? se
met apres les paroles d'interrogation, ou demand, comme Qui a faict cela?
Est-ce vous? This mark? is put after the words of interrogation, or asking,
as Qui a faict cela? est-ce vous? Ce qui ce doibt prononcer auec un peu de
vehemence. The which ought to be pronounced with some vehemency.
Des Distinctions. Of Distinctions.
QVe signify ceste marque, estant a lafin d'vn mot? What does this marque,
signify being at the end of a word? Ceste marque, qui se nomme comma signify
qu'en lisant, ou parlant il faut lire, ou parler sans s'arrester iusques la;
and la prendre un peu haleine, puis suyure, d'autant que le sens de la sentence
n'est pas encore parfaict, comme Qui a bon voisin, a bon matin. This mark,
which is called comma, shows us in reading, or speaking that we must either
read or speak thetherto, without any staying or brething, and being there we
must breath a little, then follow, because the whole sense of the sentence is
not yet perfect, as Qui a bon voisin, a bon matin. Que signify ces deux
points?: What do these two points: signify? Ceste marque: qui s'appelle colon,
This mark: which is called colon, signify qu'il faut s'arrester deux fois
autant la qu'au coma, and que la sentence n'est encore paracheuee, comme Les
chooses faictes auec deliberation, apportent honneur a qui les faict, si else
sont bien faictes: and au contraire deshonneur au conseiller, si else sont mal
faictes. teaches us that we must stay there twice as much as the comma, and
that the sentence is not yet ends, as Les chooses faictes auec deliberation,
apportent honneur a qui les faict, si else sont bien faictes: and au contraire
deshonneur au conseiller, si else sont mal faictes. Que signify ce point
seul?. What does this point alone. signify? Ceste marque. signify que la
sentence est parfaicte, and que la il faut prendre bonne haleine, deux fois
autant au moins qu'on en prend au colon, ou deux points, come. This mark.
teaches us that the sentence is ended, and that we must there breath long
twice as much, as at the Colon at least, as L'homme ruse, par long usage,
L'homme ruse, par long usage, N'est folement auantereux: N'est folement
auantureux: Et qui par son peril, est sage, Et qui par son peril est sage,
S'appelle sage malheureux. S'appelle sage mal'heureux. Que signify ceste
marque?() What does this mark () signify? Ceste marque() qui s'appelle
parenthese entrecouppe le sens de la sentence, and ce qui est contenu en icelle
se doibt prononcer plus bas que le rest, comme Ie scay bien (and ne me feray
iamais donner la gesne pour le confesser) qu'ily a plus d'ignorance en moy, que
de science en vous. This mark () which is called parenthesis. divides the
sense of the sentence: and that which is contained in it ought to be pronounced
more low then the rest, as Ie scay bien (and ne me feray iamais donner Ia geine
pour le confesser) qu'il ya plus d'ignorance en moy, que de science en vous. Or
maintenant voyla tout, ie suis infiniment aise de voir, que vous auez si bien
retenu vos reigles de prononciation: si vous les pouuez aussi bien obseruer and
pratiquer comme vous les scauez, and que vous Now there is all, I am very glad
to see, that you can so well remember your rules of the pronunciation, if you
can observe and practice them so well as you can tell them, and as you m'auez
respondu, sans auoir faict aucune fault, il ne se peut fair que vous ne
prononciez, and lisiez aussi bien and parfaictement qu'vn Francois naturel,
voire mesme beaucoup mieux que beaucoup de Francois qu'il y a. have answers
me without having committed any fault, you can not choose but to pronounce and
read as well and perfectly as any natural Frenchman, yea much better then many
Frenchmen them selves. Ce seroit vne chose estrange que moy, qui suis
estranger, peusse mieux prononcer la langue d'vn pais, que celuy qui est ne au
mesine pais. It were a strange thing that I, which am a stranger, should
pronounce better the language of some country then he which is borne in that
country. Ie vous dis verite. Tous ceux qui sont Francois ne prononcent, ny ne
parlent pas bie^ Francois, come vous ente^drez cy apres. I tell you true: all
Frenchmen do not pronounce and speak French well, as you shall hear
hereafter. Ie suis content de vous croire pour ne vous frustrer de vostre
desir, qui est de me donner courage, don't ie vous remercie
tres-affectueusement. I am content to believe you, lest I should frustrate you
from your desire, which is to encourage me. I thank you heartily for it. Vous
le trouuerez ainsy. You shall find it so. Maintenant que ie vous ay
satisfaict, touchant les reigles de la prononciation, que de vostre grace vous
m'auez apprises, vous plaist il me fair tant de faueur, pour adiouster vne
second obligation a la premiere, de me resouldre de quelques doubts, ou ie
suis, and me respondre a quelques demandes, que i'ay a vous fair de la
prononciation encore. Now that I have contented you, concerning the rules of
the pronunciation, the which by your own courtesy you have taught me, will it
please you to do me the favor (for to add a second band to the first) to
resolve me of some doubts wherein I am, and answer me upon some questions
that I would feign yet ask you of the pronunciation. Vous ne me scauriez saire
plus de plaisir, You could not do me a greater pleasure, C'est le vray moyen
d'apprendre. It is the true way of learning. On monte a la doctrine par les
degrez du doubt. Or sus donc, commencez. We mount up to knowledge through the
steares of doubt. Go to, let us then begin.
Si les Francois parlent plustost que les Anglois ou non. Whether Frenchmen
speak faster then Englishmen or no.
D'Ou vient que les Francois parlent si tossed? What is the cause that Frenchmen
speak so thick and fast? Il le vous semble ainsy: mais ils ne parlent pas
plus tossed que les Anglois: les Francois en pensent autant des Anglois s'ils
n'entendent leur language, pour le moins ie l'estimois ainsi, quand ie vins en
Angleterre, mais ie trouue du contraire maintenant que i'entens leur langue:
vous le trouuerez tout de mesme, quand vous entendrez la nostre; and y
trouuerez fort peu, ou point de difference, ie ne veux pas nier qu'il n'y en
ait, qui ne parlent plustost les vns que les autres selon la disposition de
leur esprit, comme ceux qui ont l'esprit plus vif and prompt parlent plus
vitement, and promptement que ceux qui ont l'esprit tardif and lent, qui
parlent fort lentement, sinon que les vns se temperent and corrigent par le
judgment, and les autres s'amendent par l'exercice, autrement ie n'y voy aucune
difference. Il y a vne autre raison qui vous It seems so unto you, but they
do not speak faster then the Englishmen: the Frenchmen think so much of the
Englishmen, if they do not understand their tongue, as for me I thought so when
I came unto England, but I find the contrary now that I understand their
tongue: you shall find it so, when you shall understand ours, and you shall
find very little difference, or none at all. I will not deny, but there be
some that speak faster one then others, according the disposition of their
wit, as those whose wit is more sharp and quick do speak more fastly and
readily then those whose wit is blunt and slack, which in deed do speak very
slackly, unless one correct him self by judgment, and the other amend their
fault by practice, otherwise I see not any other difference. There is another
reason that makes faict penser que nous parlons si tossed, c'est que la plus
grand part de nos mots sont plus longs que les vostres, qui presque tous sont
d'vnesyllabe, si bien qu'vn de nos mots vous semble estre deux, ou trois, ou
quatre des vostres, selon autant de syllabes qu'il a. Il y a plus, c'est que
nous ioingnons tellement nos mots ensemble, par vne mutuelleliaison and
proportion de voyelles and consonantes, qu'il semble que chasque coma n'est
qu'vn mot, car encore qu'il y en ait quelque fois sept, ou huict ils sont si
bien mariez and enchainez ensemble, qu'on ne les peut desioindre, sans rompre
les reigles de la vraye and naturelle prononciation: Ce qui, tant s'en faut
qu'il nous face parler tossed, qu'au contraire il done grace, and distinstion a
la prononciation. you think that we speak so fast, to wit the most part of
our words be longer then yours, which are almost all of one syllable, so that
one of our words seems unto you to be two or three or four of yours,
according as many syllables, as it has. Besides, we knit and join together so
our words with a mutual knot and proportion, both of vowelles and
consonantes, that it seems that every comma is nothing but a word: for though
they are sometimes seven or eight together, they are so well joined and
feathered one with another, that they can not be vnknitted without breaking the
rules of the true and natural pronunciation: The which thing so much lacked
that it will make us speak fast, but by contrary it gives both grace and
distinction to the pronunciation.
De la prononciation des langues en general. Of the pronunciation of toungs in
general.
ET en quoy consiste la prononciation des langues? ANd in what thing consists
the pronunciation of toungs? La prononciation des langues consiste en la, vraye
and naisue prononciation de toutes les lettres; mais principalement des
voyelles, car il n'y a aucune syll abe qui The pronunciation of toungs does
consist in the true and lively pronunciation of all the letters, but namely of
the vowelles, for there is not any syllable, but it n'ait vne voyelle au moins,
laquelle voyelle done le son a la syllabe, and sans laquelle la syllabe, ou
mot ne scauroit estre prononce, comme bat, bell, fit, sot, fut, ou vous voyez
que le mot bat est prononce par a, bell par e, fit par i, sot par o, fut par u;
and que bt sans a, bl sans e, ft sans i, st sans o, ft sans u, ou quelque autre
voyelle, and ainsi des autres, ne peuuent auoir aucune prononciation, voire
quand toutes les consonantes seroyent ensemble: Mais au contraire vne voyelle
seule peut faired'elle mesme vnesyllabe, voire un mot sans l'aide d'aucune
consonante, comme y a il, vnir, ou vous voyez que y, a, and u, font trois
syllabes d'eux mesmes, and ainsi des autres. Mais ce n'est pas ainsi des
consonantes. Tellement que qui peut vne fois donner aux voyelles leur vray, and
naturel son, se peut bien vanter qu'il a atteinct la meilleure part de la
prono^ciatio^, de la langue qu'il apprend: puis que la prono^ciatio^ d'icelle
en depend entiereme^t. has one vowell at least, the which vowell gives sound
to the syllable, and without which the syllable or word could not be
pronounced, as bat, bell, fit, sot, fut, wherein you may see that the word bat
is pronounced by a, bell by e, fit by i, sot by o, fut by u; and that bt,
without a, bl, without e, ft, without i, st, without o, ft, without u, or some
other vowell, and likewise of other, can not have any pronunciation, ne when
all the consonantes were together: But contrariwise a vowell alone can make by
it self a syllable, yea a word without the help of any consonante, as y a il,
vnir, wherein you may see that y, a, and u, make three syllables by them
selves, and in like manner of others. But it is not so of the consonantes. In
such sort that he that can once give to the vowels their true and natural
sound, ca^vante himself that he has gotten the best part of the pronunciation
of the tongue that he learn, seeing that the pronunciation of it does wholly
belong to it.
Pourquoy on escrit les lettres qui ne sont point prononcees. Wherefore
Frenchmen do write many letters that are not pronounced.
ENquoy consiste la douceur and facilite d'vne langue? IN what does consiste
the sweetness and facility of a tongue or speech? La douceur and facilite
d'vne langue consiste en la multitude des voyelles, and au contraire la
difficulte and rudesse proceed des consonantes, de sort que les langues, ou il
y a plus de voyelles, comme la Grecque, and la Latin, and autres leurs
semblables, sont beaucoup plus douces a prononcer, and plaisantes a ouyr, que
celles, ou pour vne voyelle, il y a tousiours trois, ou quatre consonantes: and
afin qu'on ne pense que i'en parle par affection, i'en laisse le judgment au
lecteur debo^naire, qui tout ainsi que i'en parle sans affection particuliere,
en voudra iuger, sans passion, and peser les raisons en la balance d'vn arbitre
indifferent. C'est pourquoy il y a tant de consonantes en la langue Fra^coise,
qui ne sont point prononcees: car si deux, ou trois, ou quatre consonantes
s'entresuiuent sans aucune voyelle, soit au commencement, soit au millieu, soit
a la fin d'vn mot, ou de deux, ou de trois, ou de quatre, il n'y a que la
derniere qui soit prononcee, exceptant l, m, n, r, and x, and p, au millieu
d'vn mot, and non pas a la fin, comme nous auons dit deuant. The sweetness and
facility of a tongue consists in the multitude of vowels, and contrariwise
both the hardness and rudeness ethereof proceeds of the consonantes, so
that the toungs, wherein vowels exceed the number of consonantes, as the
Greek and Latin tongue, and other their like, are much more sweeter to be
pronounced, and pleasant to be heard, then those wherein for a vowell there is
always three or four consonantes: And to the end one should not think that I
speak of it by affection. I leave the judgment of it to the gentle reader,
which even as I speak of it without particular affection, both will judge of
it without passion, and weigh the reasons in the balance of an indifferent
arbitreme^t. That is the cause wherefore there be so many consonants in the
French tongue which are not pronounced: for if two, or three or four
consonantes do follow one another, without any vowell: either in the beginning,
or in the midst, or in the end of a word, or two, or three, or sour, none but
the last is pronounced, excepting l, m, n, r, and likewise x, and p, so that
they be in the midst of a word, and not in the end as we have said before.
Pourquoy les escript on donc, sion ne les prononce? Pour trois raisons
principales. Wherefore are they then written, if they be not pronounced? For
three principal reasons. La premiere pour demo^strer que les mots, au The
first is for to show, that the words in the millieu desquels vne co^sonante
n'est point prono^cee, sont empruntez du Latin, come prompt, faict, faulx, ou
le dernier p de prompt, and le c de faict, and l de faulx, ne sont point
prononcez, mais sont escripts pour demonstrer qu'ils sont deriuez des mots
Latins promptus, factum, falsum, and ainsi des autres: co^bien que cela n'a pas
lieu en tous les mots Latins, selon les exceptio^s que nous en auons done,
come excepter, exces, exprimer, ou x, and p, sont tousiours prononcez au
milieu du mot, encore qu'ilz soyent deriuez de excipere, excessus, exprimere.
midst of which a consonant is not pronounced are borrowed of the Latin tongue as
prompt, faict, faulx, wherein the last p, of prompt, and c, of faict, and l, of
faulx, are not pronounced, but are written to show that they are derived of
those Latin words promptus, factum, falsum, and the like of others: although
that it is not observed in all the Latin words, according the exceptions that
we have given before, as excepter, exces, exprimer, wherein x, and p. are
always pronounced in the midst of the word, though they be derived from
excipere, excessus, exprimere. Quelle est la second raison pourquoy on
escript, au millieu d'vn mot, des co^sonantes qu'on ne prononce point? What is
the second reason, wherefore they write in the midst of a word some consonants,
that are not pronounced? C'est, ou pour render la lettre de deuant la
consonante longue, qui autrement seroit briefue, comme test, best, eust,
cognoist, ou pour monstrer que les mots, ou else sont escriptes, and non
prononcees, sont Noms du plurier nombre, lequel est form du singulier en
adioustant s, ou z, comme de mot mots, d'est ang estangs, de long longs, de
grec grecz, de grand grands, de chef chefs, ausquels pluriers la penultime
consonante n'est iamais prononcee n'y en autres leurs semblables, Lisez mos,
estans, lons, It is for to make the letter which is before the consonante long,
which otherwise should be short, as test, best, eust, cognoist, or for to
show that the words wherein they be written and not pronounced, are Nouns of
the plur all number, the which is formed of the singular, adding thereunto
either s, or z, as of mot mots, of estang estangs, of long longs, of grec,
grecz, of grand gra^ds, of chef chefs: in the which plurals nombers the last
consonant, saving one, in never pronounced nor in other their like, Read the^
mos, esta^s, lons, grez, grans, ches, etc. grez, grans, ches, etc. Quelle est
la troisiesme and derniere? Which is the third and the last? La troisiesme est
de tous les mots, qui se finissent par vne co^sonante, laquelle encore qu'elle
ne soit iamais prononcee, except les liquides deuant vne autre consonante,
comme il faut tousiours cercher virtue, ou n'y t, en faut n'est point prononce,
a cause que le mot suiuant tousiours, se commence par vne autre consonante, n'y
s, deuant i, en ce mot tousiours, d'autant que t, deuant vne voyelle est
consonante, n'y s, a la fin du mot tousiours, d'autant que le mot suiuant
cercher, se commence par la consonante c, si bien qu'il faut prononcer il fau
touiour cercher virtue: encore di-ie qu'on ne prononce point vne consonante,
estant a la fin d'vn mot, quand il suit vne autre consonante, elle doibt
neantmoins estre escripte, d'autant que s'il suit vne voyelle elle est
prononcee, comme il faut aymer tousiours unite, ou t, en faut est prononce,
d'autant que le mot suiuant aymer se commence par vne voyelle, and pareillement
la derniere s, de tousiours a cause que le mot suiuant unite se co^mence par
vne autre voyelle, and ainsi des autres. The third is of all the words, which
do finish with a consonante, the which though it never be pronuunced,
excepting the liquides before another consonant, as il faut tousiours cercher
virtue, wherein neither t, in the word faut, is not pronounced, because the word
following tousiours, is begone with another consonant; nor s, before i, in the
word tousiours, because i, before a vowell is consonant; nor s, at the end of
the word tousiours, because the word following cercher, begins with the
consonant c, so that it must be pronounced il fau touiour cercher virtue: though
I say we do not pronounce a consonant being at the end of a word, when another
consonant follows, it ought notwithstanding to be written, because if a vowell
does follow, it is pronounced, as il faut aymer tousiours unite, wherein t, in
the word faut is pronounced, because the word following is begone with a vowell,
and likewise the last s, of the word tousiours, because the word following unite
begins with another vowell, and likewise in other their like. C'est donc vne
chose tres-necessaire qu'on escriues ces consonantes (encore qu'on ne les It is
then a most necessary thing that such consonantes should be written (though
they prononce point) tant pour la distinction des mots qui ont diverse
signification, diverse orthographe, and neantmoins pareille prononciation, que
pour fuir le baaillement, qui se feroit a cause des voyelles, si l'on
n'interposoit enter else des consonantes; come de ceux qui ont diverse
signification diverse orthographe, and pareille signification, Il a perdu le
sens de la veue, Il a perdu le sang des veins. Il ne viendra point sans moy.
Ou vous voyez que ces trois mots sens, sang, and sans, se prononcent l'vn come
l'autre, neantmoins l'vn signify vne chose, and l'autre l'autre, c'est
ascauoir sens signify sense en Anglois, and sang blood, and sans without, and
ainsi des aut res. be not pronounced) as well for the distinction of the words
that have diverse signification, diverse spelling, and notwithstanding like
pronunciation, as to eschew a bleating which should follow, because of the
vowels, if we should not intermingle between them some consonants, as for
example of those that have both diverse signification, diverse spelling, and like
pronunciation, il a perdu le sens de la veue, il a perdu le sang des veins. Il
ne viendra point sans moy. Wherein you may see that these three words sens,
sang, sans, are pronounced like one another notwithstanding one signifies one
thing, and the other another, to wit sens signifies sense in English, and sang
blood, and sans without, and likewise of other their like. Ie vous pry donnez
moy vne exemple des mots, ou il faut que la consonante soit escripte, encore
que s'il ne suit vne voyelle, elle n'est point prononcee? I pray you give me an
example of the words, wherein a consonante must be written, though except a
vowell does follow it is pronounced? Ceste cy vous seruira pour toutes. This
will serve you for all others. Il faut fair cela, ou t, du mot faut n'est
point prononce, a cause que le mot suiuant fair se co^mence par vne
consonante, toutesfois il faut escrire le t, pour tenir le mot en sa nature,
premierement pour la signification, comme pour le distinguer de faux en ceste
exemple faux teston, and prestez moy vne Il faut fuire cela, wherein t, in the
word faut is not pronounced, because the word following fair begins with a
consonant, notwithstanding t, must be written, for to keep the word in his
nature, and virtue, first for his signification, as for to distinguish it of
the word faux in this example faux teston, and prestez moy vne faulx pour
coupper mes prez, ne faux point a fair cela, ou ces quatre mots faut, faux,
faulx, faux, ont quatre significations, encore qu'ils n'ayent qu'vne mesme
prononciation, a cause des co^sonantes qui suiuent un chacun d'iceux.
Secondement il les faut escrire pour la prononciation car s'il suiuoit vne
voyelle else, sont prononcees, comme il faut aymer ou t, en faut est prononce
a cause que le mot suiuant aymer se commence par vne voyelle, and ainsi des
autres autrement il se feroit un baaillement de voyelles, qui seroit aussi
difficile a prononcer, que rude a ouyr, come si on prononcoit il fau aymer,
pour il faut aymer, ie vou en croy, pour ie vous en croy. Car la plus douce
prono^ciatio^ consiste en vne deue liaison de voyelles, and consonantes
ensemble, si bien que s'il excede ou de l'vne, ou de l'autre de plus de deux,
ou trois au plus, la prononciation en est beaucoup plus rude. faulx pour
coupper mes prez, ne faux point a fair cela, wherein these four words faut,
faux, faulx, faux, have four significations, though they have but one self
same pronunciation, because of the consonants that follow each one of them.
Secondly they must be written, because of the pronunciation, for if a vowell
does follow, they be pronounced, as il faut aymer: wherein t, in the word faut
is pronounced, because the word following aymer begins with a vowell, and
likewise others their like, otherwise it should follow a gaping and bleating,
because of the vowels which should be as hard to pronounce, as rude to be
heard, as if one would pronounce il fau aymer, for il faut aymer: ie vou en
croy, for ie vous en croy. For the sweetest pronu^ciatio^ consists in an even
and apt joining together both vowels and consonants, in such sort that if it
does exceed either of one, or of the other above two or three, the
pronunciation is much more the harder. Maintenant vous voyez en qu'elle erreur
to^be^t ceux qui veule^t qu'on escriue come on prono^ce, and qu'on prononce
ainsi qu'on escript, and qu'elle absurdite s'en ensuiuroit. Now you may see
unto what error do fall those that will have us to write as we pronounce, and
to pronounce as we do write, and what absurdity should follow of it. Il est
vray. Mais dites moy, ie vous pry, est-il de besoing que les Francois
apprenent toutes ces reigles, quand ils apprenent a Is it true. But tell me I
pray you, is it needful that Frenchmen should learn all those rules, when
they begin to learn both lire, and escrire. to read, and write. Nenny: car la
naturelle prono^ciatio^ de nostre langue en parlant, and le continuel usage que
nous auons en lisant, nous l'appre^t, en sort que si on vouloit parler, ou
lire come il est escript, il seroit aussi difficile (i'entens de ceux qui
parlent naturellement bon Francois) a prononcer mal, soit en parlant soit en
lisant, comme il est mal aise aux estrangiers de le bien prononcer sans
obseruer les reigles. No: for the natural pronunciation of our tongue, when we
speak, and the continual use that we have in reading, do teach us in such
sort, that if one would either speak, or read as it is written, it were so
hard to him (I mean of those that naturally speak good French) to pronounce
ill either speaking or reading, as it is hard to strangers to pronounce it
well, without observing the rules. Est-il donc de besoin que pour bien lire,
bien prononcer, and bie^ parler, on observe toutes ces reigles? Is it then
necessary for to read well, to pronounce well, and to speak well, one should
observe all these rules? Ouy necessairement. Car tout ainsi qu'il est
impossible de discerner l'air, and Music d'vne chanson iouee sur le lut, pour
belle qu'elle soit, si celuy qui jove n'obserue le temps, la cadance, and
mesure requise: ainsi celuy qui parle, s'il ne prononce comme il faut, faisant
vne syllabe briefue qui deuroit estre longue, and longue celle, qui deuroit
estre briefue, ou do^nant a vne lettre leson, qui est deu a vne autre, ou
ostant celles qu'on doibt retenir, ou retena^t celles qu'on doibt oster, oste
non seulement la grace de la langue, mais aussine peut estre entendu qu'auec
grandedifficulte: car les paroles ne sont autre chose que les forms, ou images
Yea necessarily. For even as it impossible to discern the tune and Music of
a song played upon a lute, though never so good, except he that plays, does
observe both time and measure fit and apt for it: even so he that speaks,
except he does pronounce as he ought to do, making a syllable short, that ought
to be long, and long that which ought to be short: or giving to a letter the
sound which is due to an other, or taking away the letters that must be kept,
or keeping those that ought to be taken away, takes away not only the grace
of the tongue: but also can not be understood but with much a do: for the words
are nothing else, but the shaps and images of des chooses que nous auons conceu,
and que nous voulons exprimer, si bien que si ces forms sont desguifees par
vne autre prononciation, que celle qui leur est deue^, and leur sert de
couleur, il est fort difficile de les cognoistre tells qu'elles sont. things,
that we have conceived, and that we will express and declare in such sort,
that if these shapes are disguised with another pronu^ciatio^, then with the
same which they must have, and that serves them in steed of a color, it were
very hard to know them such as they are. Vous auez raison. Mais si est-ce que
i'en cognoy plusieurs, qui ont este en France trois ou quatre ans, qui ont
apprins longuement, and qui se persuadent de bien parler, voire mesine quelques
Francois qui n'obseruent pas toutes ces reigles. You say true: But
nevertheless I know many which have been in France three or four years,
which have learned long time and persuade them selves they speak well, yea
some Frenchmen them selves, which observe not all these rules. Ie vous en croy:
car ie vous asseure que s'ils n'ont ou frequente la Court, ou hante la
noblesse, ou apprins de quelque homme de lettre, il leur est impossible n'y de
bien prononcer, n'y de bien parler. I believe you: for I promise you if they
have not either frequented the Court or hanted both the Nobility and
Gentilitie, or learned of some learned man, it is impossible for them, either
to pronounce well, nor to speak well. Et quoy ne peut on pas aussi bien
apprendre du co^mun peuple que des Gentils-ho^mes? But I pray you, can not one
learn so well of the common sort as of the Gentlemen? Non: car il n'y a n'y
province, n'y ville, n'y place en France, ou l'on parle le vray and parfaict
Francois, tell qu'on le list par les livers; except parmy les Courtisans, enter
les Gentils-ho^mes, Dames, and Damoiselles, and generalement parmy ceux qui
font profession des lettres, come aux Courts de Parlements, and Vniuersitez:
qui seuls se sont reseruez la naifuete de la langue Fra^coise. No truly: for
there is neither province, nor city, nor any place in France, where they
speak the true and perfect French, such as it is to be read in the books,
saving among the courtiers, Gentlemen, Ladies, Gentlewomen, and generally among
those that profess learning, as in the Courts of Parliament and Universities,
which only have reserved to them the true nature and perfection of the French
tongue. Comment donc parle le vulgaire? How then speaks the common sort? Le
vulgaire parle un Francois corrompu and bastard, and pour le moins aussi
esloingne du vray Fra^cois, que l'Italien est du Latin and qui plus est, aussi
diverse and different l'vn de l'autre, tant en la prononciation qu'aux terms,
qu'il y a non pas seulement de Provinces, ou Citez, mais mesmes de Bourgs and
Villages. The common sort speaks a broken and bastard French, and at least so
far from the true French, as the Italian is of the Latin: and which is more,
so diverse and so differring from one of the other, both in the pronunciation
and terms, as there be not only many Provinces, or Cities, but also as there
be many Towns and Villages. Vous me faictes esmerueiller? Est-il possible que
le language des Ge^tils-hommes differe tant du language commun? I wonder at it?
Is it possible that the Gentlemen's speech differreth so much of the common
language? Aussi vray que ie vous le dis. Il y a d'auantage: c'est que la plus
part de ceux du vulgaire qui ont appris and a lire, and a escrire, encore que
quand ils lisent un liver, ils le lisent bien, and que quand ils escriuent vne
lettre, ou autre chose ils le facent raisonnablement bien, and que s'ils
vouloyent bien parler, ils parleroye^t aucunement bien: neantmoins s'ils ne
conuersent ordinairement auec la Noblesse, comme nous auons dict, ils
n'oseroyent bien parler, d'autant que parlant autrement que le vulgaire, le
vulgaire se mocqueroit d'eux, and l'attribueroit a orgueil and presumption,
disant qu'il vouldroyent trencher du Gentil-homme, ou du Courtisan. As true as
I tell you. There is more then that, to wit, that the most part of the common
sort, which have learned both to read and write, although that when they read a
book, they read it well, and when they do write a letter, or any other thing
else, they do it raisonable well, and besides, if they would speak well, they
should speak reasonable, yet notwithstanding if they be not conversant
ordinarily with Gentlemen, as we have said before, they durst not speak well,
because if they would speak otherwise the^ the common sort does, they would
laugh at them and mock the^, and they would think it to be done by pride and
presumption, and say that they would play the part either of a Courtier or of a
Gentleman. Iem'en estonne. Comment est-ce donc que ceux qui vont en France
peuuent appre^dre I wonder at it. Those then that go into France how can they
learn to speak good French. a parler bon Fra^cois? Il ne le feront iamais
auec le vulgaire. Il faut qu'ils s'aident des moyens don't i'ay parle, ou iamais
ne le parleront bien. S'il estoit ainsi il ne seroit point de besoing de sortir
d'Angleterre, pour apprendre a parler Francois? They can never do it with the
common sort, they must need use the means whereof I have spoken, or else they
shall never speak it well. If it were so, it were not need to go out of
England to learn to speak French. Aussi n'est il, pourueu qu'ils aye^t un
homme lettre pour les enseigner. No more it is not, so they have a learned man
to teach it them. Ie cognoy des Dames Angloises, des Gentils-hommes, and
Damoiselles, qui n'ont iamais sorty d'Angleterre, qui sans comparaison parlent
beaucoup mieux que d'autres que ie cognoy, qui on este en France l'espace de
trois ou quatre ans. I know some English Ladies, some Gentlemen, and
Gentlewomen that never went out of England, but yet without comparison they
speak much better then some others I know, which have been in France by the
space of three or four years. Cela est estrange. That is strange. Ne vous en
esmerueillez point. Car la plus part de ceux qui vont en France apprene^t par
routine, sans reigles, and sans art, de sort qu'il leur est impossible
d'apprendre, sinon auec vne grande longueur de temps: Au contraire, ceux qui
apprenent en Angleterre, s'ils apprenent d'vn qui ait bonne method, il ne se
peut fair qu'ils n'apprenent en brief. D'auantage ce qu'ilz apprenent est
beaucoup meilleur que le Francois qu'on apprend en France par routine, car nous
ne pouuons parler ce que nous n'auons appris, and que nous ignoro^s. Ceux qui
apprenent du vulgaire, Do not marvel at. For the most part of those that go
into France do learn by rote, without rules, and without art, so that it is
impossible for them to learn, but with a very great space of time:
Contrariwise those that learn in England, if they do learn of one which has
a good method of teaching, they can not choose but to learn in a very short
time: Furthermore what they learn is far better then the French which is
learned in France by rote. For we can not speak, that we have not learned and
of that we are ignorant. Those that learn of the common people can not speak
but ne peuuent parler que vulgairement, d'autant que leurs phrases and manieres
de parler sont vulgaires, communes, and basses, d'vn Francois corrompu: Au
contraire, ceux qui apprennent par livers, parlent selon ce qu'ils apprennent:
or est-il que les terms and phrases des livers sont le plus pur and naif
Francois (bien qu'ily ait distinction de livers) il ne se peut do^c qu'ils ne
parlent plus purement, and naifuement (comme i'ay dict) que les autres.
commonly and vulgarilie, because their manner of speech and terms be common,
basse and broken of a broken French. Contrariwise, those that do learn by
books, they speak according that they learn. But thus it is, that the
terms and phrases of the books are the purest, finest, and liueliest French
(although there is a distinguishing of books) they can not choose then but to
speak more purely, and more lively (as I have said before) then others. Et
quoy voudriez vous qu'on parlast aussi elegamment qu'on pourroit escrire? But
what? would you have one to speak so eloquently, as one could write? Cela
seroit a desirer, s'il se pouuoit fair, mais il n'est pas possible. That were
to be wished for, if it were possible but it can not be. Aussi n'est-ce pas ce
que ie veux dire, il y a difference de parler purement, and elega^me^t. Ceux
qui ont tant soit peu de judgment peuuent fair distinction, and election des
mots, soit pour parler, soit pour escrire. Therefore, that is not what I mean,
there is difference between to speak purely, and to speak eloquently. Those
that have never so little judgment, can make distinction and choice in words,
either to speak, or to write. Il y a d'auantage. C'est que tout ainsi qu'il y
a diverse argumens and matieres, ainsi y a il diversity de livers. Les vns
traictent de chooses familieres, les autres de subject grave and serieux: le
language des vns est doux and commun. Les terms des autres eloquens and
graves. Si l'on parle comme ceux-cy, l'on ne scuroit estre repris de bien
parler: Si l'on escript comme ceux-la, Furthermore. Even as there be diverse
arguments, and matter of writtings, so there is diversity of books. Some of
them do handle familiar matter: others a subject more grave and more serious.
The terms of one are sweet and common: the phrases of others be eloquent and
grave. If we speak as these, we can not be reproved, but in speaking well: If
we do write as those, the worse we can get l'on n'en peut remporter que
louange. is but praise worthy. Mais ceux qui vont en France, peuuent aussi
bien apprendre par liver, que ceux qui apprenent en Angleterre. Yea but those
that go into France can learn as well by book, as those that learn here in
England. Il est vray: S'ils auoyent qu'elqu'vn pour les les enseigner par
method, comme on trouue icy, mais il y en a la peu ou point, qui en facent
profession. I grant it, so they have some to teach them with method, as there
be some here, but there be few ornone at all there which profess it. Or de le
fair sans un long usage and experience d'enseigner, il est du tout impossible.
Now to do it, but with a very long use and experience of it in teaching, is
impossible at all. Si est-ce que ceux qui vont en France, ont un grand auantage
sur ceux, qui apprenent icy, d'autant qu'estant la, and n'oyant rien sinon
parler Francois, il est impossible qu'ils n'apprenent incontinent?
Nevertheless, those that go into France, have a very great advantage of
these that learn here, because being there, and hearing nothing but to speak
French, they can not choose but to learn, in a very short time. A la verite
cela leur aid beaucoup, si d'autre cost ils apprenent par liver, mais s'ils
ne le font, ie vous puis bien asseurer, que I'on aura aussi tossed apprins a
parler de deca estant enseigne qu'eux a l'entendre de par dela nel'estant
point. In truth that helps them much, if of the other side, they learn by
books. But if they do not, I can assure you that one can learn so soon to
speak it here, being taught, then they to understand it there, being not
taught. I'adiouste tant de credit a vostre dire que i'ayme mieux le croire, que
de le reuocquer en doubt. Et afin de ne vous ennuyer d'auantage en vous
repliquant trop, ie me tairay sur ce propos, pour vous fair vne autre
question, qui est la derniere que i'ay a vous fair, vous priant que, comme
vous auez faict des autres, il vous plaise I give so much credit to your
saying, that I had rather to believe it, then to doubt of it. And to the end I
trouble you no longer in replying you to much, I will hold my peace concerning
this speech, to ask you another question, which is the last that I have to
ask you, beseeching you that even as you have done in others, it will please
you to resolve me me resourdre des doubts d'icelles. of the doubts of the
same. Ie suis a vostre commandment: Dites, and tout ce que ie pourray ne vous
sera deny, and si ie suis si heureux que de vous satisfaire, me voyla content,
car ie ne desire rien plus que de vous plaire. I am at your commandment: Say
and all that I do shall not be denied unto you, and if I am so happy as to
satisfy you, I am contented me self, for I desire nothing more, then to
please you. Ie vous remercie tres-hu^blement, ie vous pry donc de me dire,
d'ou vient la difference de la prono^ciation du vray language Francois, and du
Francois de nos loix d'Angleterre? I thank you with all my heart, I pray you
then to tell me, what causes the difference, both of the pronunciation of the
true French tongue, and of the French of your English laws. La difference vient
de la prononciation de vostre langue, and de la nostre. Car ceux qui appre^nent
les loix, appre^nent a prononcer le Francois d'icelles selon la prononciation
Angloise; and non pas selon la prono^ciation Francoise, de sort que leur
prononciation differe tant de la nostre qu'il est du tout impossible qu'vn
Francois les puisse aucunement entendre. The difference comes from the
pronunciation of your tongue, and of ours. For those that learn the laws,
learn to pronounce the French of them, according the English pronunciation,
and not according to the French pronunciation, so that their pronunciation
differreth so much of ours as it is impossible for a Frenchman to understand
them. Mais il semble qu'il differe non seulement en la vraye prononciation,
mais aussi en orthagraphe? But it seems that it differreth not only in the
true pronunciation, but also in the orthographie. Il est vray, car de la fault
de l'vn n'est l'erreur de l'autre. Il le veulent escrire comme ils le
prononcent, and le prononcer comme ils l'escriuent, ce qui faict qu'il est
maintena^t du tout corrompu: and pourroit a bon droit estre compare a quelques
vielles masures d'vn beau bastiment, ou il y a tant It is so, for of the fault
of the one, springs the error of the other. They will write it, as they do
pronounce it, and they will pronounce it, as they have written it, the which
thing makes, that now it is allaltered and corrupted, so that it may be
worthily compared to some old ruins of some fair building, where so many creu
de ronces and espines, qu'a grand peine il appert que iamais ily ait eu de
maisons, car deuant qu'on eust trouue l'Imprimerie, on la tant de fois coppie,
and chaque escriuain, l'escriuant a sa fantasy and ne retenant l'orthographe
Francoise, que maintenant il semble, qu'il n'y a presque language plus esloigne
du vray Francois que ce Francois de vos loix: N'y ayant presque mot que par
interposition, ou addition, ou diminution, ou changement de lettre en vne
autre, l'on n'ait du tout corrompu. bra^bles and thorns are grown, that
scarsely it appears that ever there had been any house. For before they had
found how to Print, they have copied it out so many times, each scriuener
writting it as his own fancy, keeping not the true French orthographe, or
spelling, that now it seems that almost there no language more far from the
true French, then the French of your laws: There is not almost any word, which
either by an intermingling, or adding, or diminishing, or changing of a lettre
into another, they have not altered and corrupted. A ce que ie voy, il se faut
bien donner guard de prononcer vne langue estrangere selon que nous prononcons
nostre langue maternelle, si nous ne voulons changer sa prononciation, puis que
chaque langue a sa peculiere prononciation? As I see we must take great heed,
not to pronounce a straung tongue, as we do pronounce our mothers tongue, except
we will change his pronunciation, seeing that every tongue has his own proper
pronunciation? Il est vray. Car si, selon la prononciation des lettres de
nostre langue naturelle, nous prononcons vne langue estrangere, nous luy ostons
non seulement sa naturelle prononciation, mais aussi sa grace. C'est pourquoy
il y a autant de diuerses prononciations de la langue Latin, qu'il y a de
nations qui la parlent, car un chacun la prononce selon son propre language,
and tous la prononcent mal It is true. For if according the pronunciation of
the letters of our mothers tongue, we should pronounce a strangers tongue, we
take away from it, not only his natural pronunciation, but also his grace.
That is the only reason why there be so many pronunciations of the Latin
tongue, as there is nations which do speak it, for every one pronounces it
according to his own language, and all pronounce it not well fors les
Italiens, qui ont retenu en leur langue la plus proche prononciation des
lettres Latins, don't leur langue approach plus pres que nulle autre, quoy
qu'on veille dire du contraire de l'Espagnole. except the Italians, which above
the rest have kept in their own tongue the nearest pronunciation of the Latin
letters, of the which their tongue comes nearer then any other, whatsoever it
be spoken to the contrary, for the Spanish tongue. Ie vous pry de me prouuer
cela par quelque similitude? I pray you to prove me that, by some similitude?
Comme un pourtraict, que quelque peintre excellent a tire de quelque belle
face, ou il y a plusieurs and diverse lineame^s a remarquer, represente de plus
pres tous ses traicts, que ne scauroit fair un autre, qui n'auroit este trace
que sur le mesme pourtraict; qui nonobstant quelque excellence qu'il scauroit
auoir, ne peut rien estre que l'ombre du corpse qu'il figure: and qu'vn tiers
tire sur le second en est encore plus esloigne, and pareilleme^t le quart sur
un troisiesme, le cinquiesme, sur le quatriesme, and ainsi consequutiment.
Ainsi la langue Italienne, qui est la plus viue image de la langue Latin, and
qui en represente plus de traicts, que nulle autre, pour auoir este la
premiere, qui ait este depeinte sur la belle face d'icelle, doibt a bon droit
luy resembler le plus en prononciation. Ce qui se pourroit prouuer par si grand
no^bre d'exe^ples, tant de lettres, que de mots, Even as picture that some
excellent painter has drawn of some fair visages, wherein there be many and
diverse lines to marque, represents more lively all his draughts, then can do
another, which only had been drwen, but upon the same picture, the which,
though never so rare, can not be but, as it were, the shadow of the body, which
it represents, and besides, as a third drawn after upon the the second is
yet more unlike then the other, and likewise the fourth after the third: the
fifth after the fourth, and so consequently: So the Italian tongue, which is the
liuelier picture, or Image, or shape of the Latin tongue, and which represents
more draughtes of it then any other, because it had been the first, which has
been drawn of the fair face of it, ought worthily to be the more like to it,
in pronunciation. The which thing may be proved by so many examples, as well of
the letters, as of the words, qu'il suffiroyent a en fair un gros liver, a
qui s'y voudroit amuser. that they would suffice to make a great book of it,
if one would spend time about it. Tous ceux, qui ont quelque estincelle de
judgment, and qui tant peu que ce soit sont versez aux langues, le
confesseront. Il n'y a null qui ne scache que tant plus un peintre est prez de
quelque corpse, and tant mieux il le voit, and remarque les traicts qu'il a: Et
au contraire, tant plus il en est loing, and moins il les peut discerner and
imiter. C'en est ainsi de la langue Italienne a la Latin. All those that have
any sparkle of judgment and which have, though never so little knowledge of the
toungs, will grant it. There is none but he knows that the more a painter is
near to some body, much more he sees it, and marks the lines and draughts
that be in it: Contrariwise, much more he is far of, the less he ca^discerne
and imitate the^. It is even so of the Italian tongue, to the Latin tongue. Il n'y
en a point de si proche qu'elle, car elle en est si proche, qu'elle est mesme
eu sa place. C'estoit a Rome, and en toute l'Italie ou l'on parloit entierement
Latin: c'est a Rome, and par toute l'Italie, on l'on parle maintenant Italien.
Et faut fair estat que ceux qui sont plus esloignez d'Italie, and don't leur
langue a moins de mots Latins, sont aussi plus esloignez de la vraye
prononciation Latin. Les Francois and Espagnols en sont les moins esloignez.
C'est pourquoy leur prono^ciation y a plus d'affinite que nulle autre, co^bien
que ie ne veux nier qu'ils ne different en beaucoup de chooses. Mais ce beaucoup
est peu en co^paraison des autres prono^ciations, quoy que chacu^ se vueille
attribuer la meilleure. There is none so near to it then that same, for it is
so near to it, that now it is in the place of that same. It was at Rome, and
through all Italy where they spoke altogether Latin: it is now at Rome, and
through all Italy where they speak Italian. And we must deem that those that
be more far from Italy, and whose tongue has less Latin words, are also
more far from the true Latin pronunciation. The Frenchmen and the Sparniardes
are the nearest of. Therefore their pronunciation have greater likeness to it,
then any other (though I will not deny) but they dissagree and differ in many
things, but these many things are sewe in comparison of others pronunciations,
though every one will attribute to him self the best. L'on ne scauroit nier
que langue Latin, n'ait One can not deny but the Latin tongue has trois
filles, don't l'aisnee est Italienne, la second Espagnolle, and la troisiesme
Francoise. Or il est vray semblable que les filles sucans le laict de la mere
ont aussi apprins a parler d'elle: Et bien qu'elles ayent change les Idiomes
des mots, else n'ont pas change la prononciation, ou si else l'ont change
else en doibuent auoir plus retenu que ceux qui en estoyent du tout
estrangiers. three daughters, whereof the eldest is the Italian tongue, the
second the Spanish tongue, and the third the French tongue. But it is very like
that the daughters, sucking of their mothers milk, have also learn to speak
of her: And though they have changed the Idiomes of words they have not
changed the pronunciation, or if they have changed it, it is like that they
have kept more of it, then the strangers. La langue Italienne n'est autre
chose qu'vn Latin and Francois corrompu. The Italian tongue is nothing but
broken Latin and French mingled together. La Francoise que le viel language des
Gaulois, and Latins marie ensemble. The French tongue nothing but the old French
and Latin married together. L'Espagnolle qu'vn Latin and Sarrasin mesle pesle
mesle. The Spanish tongue nothing but Latin and Sarrasin mingled together. En
quel te^ps commenca la langue Francoise? In what time did the French tongue
begin? La langue Francoise eut sa naissance du te^ps de Iules Caesar. Car
Caesar ayant subiugue les Gauls, and rendu les Gaulois tributaires aux
Romans, il apporta leurs loix en France, qui depuis y ont continue, si bien
que les Francois furent contraincts d'apprendre le Latin, afin de les mieux
entendre, de sort que tous les escripts and playdoyers, qui se faisoyent
estoyent en Latin: Ce qui ayda beaucoup a corrompre le viel language Gaulois.
The French tongue has his beginning in the time of Julius Caesar. For Caesar
having conquered the Gauls, and make the Frenchmen yield tributarie to the
Romans, he brought their laws into France, which since have still remains
there, in such ways that the Frenchmen were constrained to learn the Latin
tongue, to the end they should understand the^ the better, in such sort that all the writings and plea made before the Judges were in Latin tongue: The which
thing helps much to corrupt and alter the old tongue of the Gauls. Il y a
plus c'est qu'il falloit que les Seigneurs, and Gentils-ho^mes Gaulois, qui
vouloyent viure a la Court des Lieutenans de Rome, en Gaul, apprinsent a
parler Latin: si bien que de ce changement se feit aussi le changement de la
langue Gauloise. Car comme un chacun scait, ceux qui veulent bien parler
imite^t, en tout ce qu'ils peuue^t, le language des Courtisans comme ceux qu'on
estime parler le mieux, and don't le language est plus necessaire a ceux qui ont
affair a la Court: and ainsi print le commencement de la langue Francoise, qui
depuis iusques icy a tellement creu, and s'est enrichie en sort qu'on la voit
auiourd'huy en sa perfection. Besides, it was necessary that the Lords and
Gentlemen of Gaul, which would live at the Court of the Lieutenants of Rome in
Gaul, should learn to speak Latin: in such manner that of this changing, was
made the change of the tongue of the Gauls. For as every one knows, those
that will speak well, do imitate as much as they can, the speeches of the
Courtiers, as of those which are accounted to speak best, and whose tongue is
more necessary for those, which have some suit at the Court: and so the French
tongue has his beginning, which since hitherto has grown so much, and is
enriched in that sort, that now it is in his perfection. En quel temps comme^ca
la langue Italienne? In what time did the Italian tongue begin? Aussi tossed que
les Francois eurent secoue le ioug de l'Empire de Rome, and qu'ils eurent
chasse les Romans de Gaul, la langue Italienne commenca. Car les Romans
remporterent en Italy tant de mots Gaulois, que par curiosite il auoyent
apprins des Gaulois, come les Gaulois en auoyent apprins d'eux, qu'esta^s
retournez a Rome, ou estoit la Court ils changerent entierement la langue
Latin. Car pour nouuellete un chacun s'estudia, en tout ce qui leur fut
possible, d'imiter leurs As soon as the Frenchmen had laid done the yoke of
the bondage of the Empire of Rome, and that they had cast the Romans out of
Gaul, the Italian tongue began. For the Romans carried away with them so many
French words, which by curiosity they had learned of the Gauls, as the
Gauls had learned some of them, that being returned to Rome, where the Court
was kept, they did wholly change and alter the Latin tongue. For novelty sake
every one indeuoreth, the best they could, to imitate both their phrases de
parler: come de nostre naturel nous sommes tous plus enclins aux chooses
nouuelles, qu'aux anciennes: mais principalement a celles qui s'inuententa la
Court, qui n'est autre chose qu'vn modelle, sur lequel se faco^ne tout le rest
d'vn pais. Et ces nouueaux Latins Gaulois, ayans iette les premiers fondemens
de la langue Italienne, les Gots vindrent apres, qui auancerent bien le
bastiment. Mais les voyages de Charlemaigne en Italy, and les continuelles
guerres, que presque depuis nous y auons eu, and en temps de paix le frequent
commerce and trafficq d'vne Nation verse l'autre, a apporte la derniere main a
l'oeuure, tell que nous le voyons auiourd'huy, words, and their phrases: as of
our nature we are more inclined to new things, then to old: but namely to them
which are invented at the Court, the which is nothing but a moold, on the which
all the rest of the country, will frame him self. And these new Latins of
Gaul, having cast the first foundations of the Italian tongue, the Goths came
after which helped much to set the building forward. But the iourneys of
Charlemaigne into Italy, and the wars that we had almost continually with
the Italians since, and in time of peace the daily traffic of one Nation, with
the other, have set the last hand to the work and have finished it, such as we
see it at this day. En quel temps commenca l'Espagnolle? In what time did the
Spanish tongue begin? L'Espagnolle eut son origin des conquestes de Pompee en
Espagne, qui eut pour principe pareils acccidens qu'eurent l'Italienne and
Francoise. The Spanish tongue began in the conquestes of Pompeius in Spain,
which for his principles and beginnings, had like accidens, as the Italian and
the French toungs. Il y a tell affinite en ces trois langues, que qui en scait
vne, peut aisement entendre les autres, and en peu de temps les apprendre a
parler. There is such affinity between these three tongs, that whosoever can
speak one of them, may easily understand the others, and in a short time
learn to speak them. Ie suis bie^ aise d'auoir entendu le co^me^ceme^t de ces
langues. Ie vous en remercie: Mais ie vous pry de me dire ce que vous pensez I
am very glad to have heard the beginning of these tounges. I thank you for it:
But I pray you to tell me, what you think de la nostre Angloise? of our
English tongue? L'Angloise a sa principale origin des Saxons, and depuis des
Normans. Car les Saxons, ayans conquis l'Angleterre, apportere^t auec eux leur
language. Ce qui ce peut prouuer par les mots monosyllabes que vous auez, qui
sans doubt sont presque tous Saxons. The English tongue had his first beginning
of the Saxons, and after of the Normans. For the Saxons, having conquered
England, brought with them their speech. The which thing can be proved by the
words of one syllable that you have, which doubtless are almost all of the
Saxons. Les Normans vindrent apres, auec Guillaume le Conquereur, qui firent un
tell meslange du Saxon and du Normand, qu'ils en bastirent vostre langue
Angloise, qui depuis peu de temps s'est fort enrichie, par les lettres qui
maintenant fleurissent en ce Royaume, a cause du regne tranquile and pacifique
qu'il a pleu a Dieu, par sa divine grace, d'y establir soubs les aisles
fauorables de sa Serenissime Majesty, pour estre l'asile and refuge des pauures
Eglises affligees en ces derniers iours, soubs la tyranny de l'Antechrist. The
Normands came after, with William the Conqueror, which made such mingling both
of the Saxon tongue, and the Normans, that they made your English tongue of it,
the which not many years ago has been much enritched and beautified by the
learning that now florishe in this kingdom, because of the most quiet and
peaceable reign, that it has pleased God by his divine mercy to stablish in,
it, under the favorable wings of her most Royal Majesty, to the end it might
be the retraite and refuge of all the poor afflicted Churches in these latter
days, under the tyranny of the Antichrist. A ce que ie voy, il n'y a donc
rien qui enrichisse plus les langues que la paix, n'y qui les change and
corrompent plus que la guerre. As I perceive there is nothing which enricheth
more the tongs then peace, nor which alters and corrupts them more then
war? Il est vray. Car les langues ont leurs saisons, tout ainsi que les
Empires and Monarchies and se peuuent accomparer a l'age de l'homme. It is
true. For the toungs have their seasons and time, eue^ as the Empires and
Monarchies have theirs: besides they may be compared to the age of a man. Du
temps d'Ennius, l'Empire de Rome ne faisoit guere que co^me^cer. Aussi la
langue Latin n'estoit qu'en son enfance. Or tout ainsi que les enfans ne
peuuent si bien parler que lors qu'ils sont paruenus en l'age d'ho^me
parfaict:aussi en ce te^ps la, la la^gue Latin auoit a grand peine apprins a
parler, and ne faisoit que comme^cer a begayer, tout ainsi que l'enfant apres
sa nourrice. In the time of Ennius, the Empire of Rome, was but in the
beginning. Even so the Latin tongue was but in his infancy. Now even as the
children can not speak so well, as when they are come unto the perfect age of
a man: so in that time the Latin tongue had scarsely learned to speak, and as
it were, did nothing but stammer, as a child after his nurce. Du te^ps de
Caesar, Pompee, Cicero^, and Saluste, la Monarchy Roman estoit en son age
viril and parfaict, aussi de leurs temps la langue Latin estoit en sa
perfection. In the time of Caesar, Pompei, Cicero, and Salust, the Monarchy of
Rome was in his most perfect age, so in their time the Latin tongue was in his
perfection. Du temps de Quintilian, Pline, Tite Live, and Seneque l'Empire de
Rome estoit en sa viellesse, soubs Traian and Neron: aussi la langue Latin
commencoit a dotter^, de sort que l'Empire croissant, creut la langue; and
l'Empire diminuant, diminua aussi iusques a venir a son dernier periode, and a
en mettre un autre en sa place, qui est l'Italian. On pourroit fair tell
comparaisons de toutes les autres langues and Monarchies, qui ont este deuant,
and depuis celle des Romans, a qui voudroit si amuser, mais d'autant que le
discourse seroit trop long a fair, and trop ennuyeux a ouyr, ie me contenteray
de vous auoir parle de la Latin pour vne exemple, In the time of Quintilian,
Plinius, Liuius, and Seneca, the Empire of Rome was in his latter age under
Traian and Nero: so the Latin tongue began the^ to dote, in such sort that when
the Empire did increase so did the Latin tongue, and when the Empire did
diminish the language diminished also, till that it had come to his last point
of all, and had put another into his place, which is the Italian. One might
make such comparisons of all the other toungs and Monarchies, that have been
before and after the Romans, if one would go about it, but because the
discourse of it should be to long to utter, and to tedious to be heard, it will
suffice to have spoken of the Latin tongue, and of the Empire of the Romans,
for veu principalement que les autres ne font rien a nostre propos, and que ce
seroit vne chose superflue d'en discourir. an example, since namely that the
other serve nothing for our purpose, and that it were a superfluous thing to
speak of it. Il n'en est point de besoing, ie vous remercie
tres-affectueusement. It is not need, I thancke you most heartily. C'est assez
pour ceste fois, mesme i'ay peur de vous auoir importune. Is it enough for this
time, yea I am afraid that I have been to importunate. Et moy ie crains que ie
ne vous aye ennuye. Le singulier desir que i'auois de vous satisfaire m'a fait
fair un si long discourse. Ie vous pry de le prendre en bonne part, and s'il y
a quelque fault la voisler du manteau de vostre faueur and courtoisie. And as
for me, I fear that I have been to troublesome to you. The great desire, that
I have to satisfy you, has caused me to make you so long a discourse. I pray
you to take it in good part, and if there be any fault, shadow it with the
veil of your favorable courtesy. Vostre modesty est si gra^de, and mon merit
si petit, que ie ne voy aucune fault, sinon en moy, qui n'ay point craint de
vous importuner, mais ie la repareray ou i'auray moye^ de vous fair plaisir
and service. Et afin de ne vous ennuyer d'auantage, pour le present, ie
pre^dray conge de vous iusques a demain, ou i'espere que me ferez ceste faueur
de me fair parler au Tuteur Fra^cois, que vous nous auez promis de nous
donner. Your modesty is so great, and my desert so little, that I do not see
any fault, but in me which durst abuse of your patience, but I will amend it,
when I am able to do you any pleasure and service. And to the end I trouble
you no longer at this time, I will take my leave of you till to to morrow, and
I hope you will grant me the favor as to bring me acquainted with the French
Tutor, whom you have made promise of. Ie n'y faudray point, Dieu aydant, a qui
ie vous recommande. Without fail, God willing, to whom I commend you. A Dieu
Monsieur. God be with you Sir. Dieu vous doint bonne vie and longue. Far you
well.
Deuis Familiers. Familiar Speeches.
BOn iour Monsieur. Bon soir Madame. GOod morrow sir. Good evening my Lady.
Bon soir bon-nuict Mademoiselle. Good night mistress, or Gentlewoman. Comment
vous portez vous ce matin? How do you this morning? A vostre commandment. A
vostre service. At your commandment. At your service. Ie suis au vostre
Monsieur, bien pour vous obeir, bien pour vous seruir. I am at your sir, very
well to obey you, well to serve you. Ce sera moy qui vous obeiray. I will be he
that shall obey you. Ce sera moy qui vous seruiray. I will be he that shall
serve you. Comment se port Monsieur vostre pere? How does your father? Bien
Dieu mercy, bien, graces a Dieu. Well God be thanked, well thanks be to God.
Il se recommande a vos bonnes graces, Il vous baise bien humblement les mains.
He has him heartily commended to you, he most humbly kisseth your hands. Dieu
luy doint bonne vie and longue. God grant him a good and long life. Et a vous
aussi. And to you also.
Du Parentage. Of Kindred.
COmment se port, mon pere, ma mere, ton grandpere, ta grandmere, son
beaupere, sa belle mere, vostre friar, vos freres; ma seur, mes seurs, nostre
oncle, and tante, nos cousins, voz cousines, tes amiss; son beaufrere, sa
belleseur, ses parens, ses enfans, mon gendre, sa bru, ton voisin, nostre
voisine, son compere, sa commere, mon parrain, ma marraine, vostre fills, vostre
fille, ton fillieul, ta fillieule, mon HOw does my father, my mother, thy
grandfather, thy grandmother, his father in law, his mother in law, your
brother, your brethren, my sister, my sisters, our uncle, and Ante, our
cousins, our she cousines, thy friends, his brother in law, his sister in law,
his kinssolkes, his children, my son in law, my daughter in law, thy
neighbor, your she neighbor, his gossip, his she gossip, my Godfather, my
Godmother, your son, your daughter, thy Godsonne, thy Goddaughter, my nepueu,
ta niepce. neuew, thy nice.
Du Temps.Of Time.
QVand les veistes vous? Hier, l'autre iout, auiourd'huy, ce matin, ce soir, il
n'y a pas long temps, depuis peu de yours enca, il y a huict iours, il y a
quinze iours, il y a trois sepmaines, il y a un mois, il y a long temps, il y
eut l'vndy huict iours, il y a auiourd'huy quinze iours, il y aura demain trois
sepmaines, il y aura mardy un mois. When saw you them? yesterday, the other
day, to day, this morning, this evening, not long ago, a few days ago, a
seven night ago, a fourtennight ago, three weeks ago, a month ago, long
since, a monday come seven night, this day fourten night, it shall be to morrow
three weeks, a teusday shall be a month. Quand les verrez vous? When shall
you see them? Quand esperez vous le voir? When hope you to see them? Demain
Dieu ayda^t, d'auiourd'huy en huict iours, de demain en quinze iours, de
mercredy en trois sepmaines, de ieudy en un mois, a Noel, aux estreines, aux
Rois, a la Chandeleur, au mardy gras, a Caresme prenant, en Caresme, a la my
Caresine, a Pasques, a la nostre Dame de Mars, a la Pentecoste, a la Saint
Iehan, a la Saint Michel, a la Toussaincts. To morrow God willing, this day
seven night, to morrow come fouten night, wensday come three weeks, thursday
come a month, at Christmasse, at new years tide, in the twelve day, at
Candlemasse, at shrouetyde, on asheswensday, in Lent, at Middlelent, at Easter,
at our Lady day in Lent, at Whit sontyde, at Midsommer, at Michelmasse, at All
hallontyde. Ie vous pry de me recommander a ses bo^nes graces, ie vous supply
de luy baiser bien humblement les mains de ma part. I pray you commend me to
him I beseech you to remember my humble duty unto him. De bien bon coeur.
With all my heart.
Du Nombre. The Number.
QVel age auez vous? HOw old are you? Quel age auoit il? How old was he? Un an,
deux ans, trois, quatre, cinq, six, sept, huict, neuf, dix, onze, douze,
treize, quatorze, quinze, seize, dixsept, dixhuict, dixneuf, vingt, vingt and
un, vingt and deux, etc. Trente, quarante, cinquante, soixante, septante,
octante, ou quatrevingts, nona^te, ou quatrevingts dix, cent, six vingts, cent,
six vingts, cent cinquante, deux cents, etc. mil, dix mile, cent mile, milion,
etc. A year old, two years old, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine,
ten, eleven, twelve, thirten, fourten, fiften, sixten, seuenten, eighten,
ninten, twenty, one and twenty, two and twenty, etc. Thirty, forty,
fifty, sixty, seventy, eighty, or four score, ninety, or fourscore and
ten, a hundred, six score, hundred and fifty, two hundred, etc. thousand, ten
thousand, hundred thousand, milion, etc.
Du Iour. Of the Day.
QVelle heure est il? What is it a clock? Il est midy, un quart d'heure,
demie heure, trois quarts d'heure, vne heure, deux heures, etc. Apres midy, il
est pass douze heures, il est sept heures passees, il n'est pas encore huict
heures, il est haute heure, il est tard, il est encore matin, il est tantost
nuict, il est au point du iour, a l'aube du iour, de grand matin, au matin, a
Soleil leuant, deuant Soleil leave, apres Soleil leave, au soir, a Soleil couche,
a Soleil couchant a iour couche, a minuict, apres minuict. It is twelve a
clock, a quarter of an hour, half an hour, three quarters of an hour, an
hour, two a clock, etc. After noone, after twelfe a clock, it is past seven
a clock, it is not yet eight a clock, it is far day, it is late, it is
early yet, it is almost night, it is the breaking of the day, the dawning of
the day very early, in the morning, at the suns rising, before Sun rising,
after Sun rising, at the evening, after setting of the Sun, at the setting
of the day, at midnight, after midnight.
Les iours de la Sepmaine. The days of the Week.
QVel iour est-ce auiourd'huy? WHat is it to day? Lundy, Mardy, Mercredy,
Ieudy, Vendredy, Samedy, Dimanche. Monday, teusday, wensday, thursday, friday,
suterday, sunday.
Les Mois. The Months.
LE qua^tiesme du mois est-ce auiourd'huy? WHat day of the month is to day? Le
premier de Ianuier, le second de Feburier, le troisiesme de Mars, le quatriesme
d'Apuril, le cinquiesme de May, le sixiesme de Iuin, le Ieptiesme de Iuillet,
le huictiesme d'Aoust, le neufiesme de September, le dixiesme d'Octobre,
l'vnziesme de Nouembre, le douziesme de December, etc. le treziesme, le
quatorziesme, le quinziesme, etc. The first of January, the second of
February, the third of March, the fourth of April, the fifth of May, the sixth
of June, the seventh of July, the eight of August, the ninth of September, the
tenth of October, eleventh of November, the twelfth of December, etc: the
thirtenth, the fourtenth, the fiftenth, etc. Quel temps fait il? What weather
is abroad? Il fait beau temps, il fait mauuais temps, il fait fort grand chaud,
il fait grand froid, il pleut, il vente, il neige, il tonne, il gresle, il
gele, il degele. It is fair weather, it is foul weather, it is very hot, it
is very cold, it raineth, it blows, it snoweth, it thundreth, it haileth, it
freeseth, it thaweth. De quel cost est le vent? Of what side is the wind? Il
est du cost d'Orient, d'Occident, de Midy, de Septentrion. It is East, West,
South, North. En quelle faison de l'annee sommes nous maintenant? In what
season of the year are we now? Au Printemps, en l'Este, en l'Automne, en
l'Hyuer. In the spring time, in summer, in the falling of the leaf, in winter.
La Table. The Table.
VOus estes le tresbien venu Monsieur. YOu are very well come Sir. Ie vous
remercie tres-humblement. I thank you heartily. Est-ce apres desieuner? Auez
vous desieune. Is it after breakefast? Have you broken your fast? Desieunerons
nous? Irons nous desieuner? Shall we go to breakefast? Vous plaist il disner?
collationer, soupper? Will you dine, will you have your drinking, will you sup?
Comme il vous plaira, i'en suis content. As you will, I am content. Car i'ay
bon appetit, ie n'ay pas desieune, disne, souppe. For I have a very good
stomach, I have not broken my fast, I have not dyned, non supped. I'ay grand
faim, i'ay grand soif, i'ay grand chaud, i'ay grand froid. Auez vous faim,
soif, chaud, froid? Approchez vous du feu, chauffons nous, mets un faggot au
feu, and des charbons, faictes bon feu, n'espargnez pas le bois, cha^briere
mettez la nappe, apportez la saliere, and du sell sur la la table, mettez des
assiettes, and des seruiettes, apportez nous quelque chose a manger. Ca lauons
les mains, garco^ pren ce bassin, verse de l'eau, essuyons nous voyla la
touaille. I am very hungry, I am very thirsty, I am very hot, I am very
cold, are you hungry, thirsty, hot, cold, come near the sire, let us warm
our selves, put a faggot on the fire, and some coals, make a good fire, do not
spare the wood, maiden, lay the cloth, bring the salt seller, and some salt
upon the table, lay some trenchers, and some napkins, bring us some thing to
eat, come, let us wash, boy take this bassin; power some water, let us wype
our hands, there is the towell. Messieurs vous plaist il vous seoir? Sir
please you to sit down? Seez vous la en ceste chair, ie me seoray sur ce
banc, Monsieur, prenez c'est escabeau, and un coissin, ie vous pry de me
prester un cousteau, car ie n'en ay point, mangez vostre potage, donnez moy du
pain ie vous pry, duquel vous plaist il; du Sit you there in that chair, I
will sit on this form: Sir, take this stool and a cooshin, I pray you lend me
a knife, for I have none, eat your porage. I pray you give me some bread: what
bread will you have, some blanc, du bis, du noir, du tender, du rassis, duquel
il vous plaira, voyla de bon beurre frais, and de bo^s oeufs. Garcon, baillez
moy a boire: que vous plaist il boire, Monsieur? versez moy du vin clared, du
vin blanc, donnez moy du sec, de la muscadele, de la maluoisie, du vin du Rhin.
Apportez moy de l'eau en ceste esguiere? emplis moy ce voirre, ceste couppe,
holla, c'est assez, a vos bonnes graces, Monsieur. white bread, some brown
bread, some new bread, some stale bread, what you will. There is very good new
butter, and goodegs, boy, give some drink, what pleases it you drink Sir:
power me some clared wine, white wine, give me some sake, some muscadine, some
malmesie, some Renish wine, bring me some water, in that Ewer, fill me this
glass, that cup, hold, it is enough, I drink to you Sir. Ie vous baise bien
humblement les mains. I thank you Sir. Ie vous feray maintenant raison. I will
pledge you by and by. Vous plaist il de cecy? vous coupperay-ie de cela?
Deseruez le bouilly, apportez nous maintenant le rosty, donnez moy un trenchoir
net, vous trencheray-ie de ce boeuf, mouto^, veau, agneau, cocho^, connils? De
quelle viande vous plaist il manger? du chappon, d'vne perdrix des pigeons, des
becasses, d'vn cocq d'Inde, de ce paste de venaison? Comme il vous plaira. Will
you some of this, shall I cut you some of that, take away the boild meat,
bring us now the roast meat, give me a clean trencher, shall I carue you some
of the beef, mooton, veale, lamb, pigge, rabets? What meat will you eat?
some cappon, some partriche, some pigeons, some woodcocke, some of the
Turkiecocke, some of this veneson pie, as you will. Apportez nous le poisson,
co^me^t Monsieur? voulez vous mesler le poisson auec la chair? il n'y a point
de dangier. Reculez ce plat, ostez ceste escuelle, and ses cuilliers, faites
place a ceste carpe: veistes vous iamais un plus beau brochet? ce saumon est
fort frais, voyla vne belle Bring us the fish: how now sir? will you mingle
both fish and flesh together: there is no danger, it is all one, set farther
this plate, take way that dish, and these spoones, make rowme for this carpe,
did you ever see a fairer pike, this saulmon is very fresh, there is a fair
anguille, un beau rouget, un solle, de la Raye, vne truite, du merlang, vne
tenche, apportez nous le dessert, despechez vous, ne nous faites point
attendre, seruez le fourmage. Mangeastes vous iamais d'vne meilleure tarte, de
meilleures po^mes, poires prunes, cerises, noix, etc. Eelle, a fair Gornet, a
Sole, some Thornbacke, a troute, some whittings, a tench, bring us the fruit,
the second course, dispatch you, make us not tarry, serve up the cheese, did
you ever eat of a better tarte, better apples, pears, plumes, cheries,
nuttes, etc. Vous plaist il de ce gasteau, and de ce flan? Will you have some
of this cake, of that flawne? No^ pas s'il vous plaist, ie vous remercie de bo^
coeur. Il est impossible de plus, me voyla bien Dieu mercy. Or sus donc,
garcon, desseruez nous, ostez tout cecy, apportez le tapis. No I thank you
heartily, I can do no more, I am very well God be thanked, go to then, boy,
take away, take all this, bring the carpet. Rendons graces a Dieu. C'est bien
dict. Let us say grace. It is well said. Louange a Dieu de tous ses biens, etc.
Thanks be to God for all his gifts, etc. Prouface Messieurs, prouface. Much
good do it you, sirs, much good do it you.
Pour Vendre and Acheter. To buy and Sell.
QVe ferons nous maintenant? WHat shall we do now? Ce qu'il vous plaira. Irons
nous nous promener? I'en suis content, mais deuant allons acheter quelque chose
don't i'ay besoing. Ie le veux, allons, de quel cost irons nous, ou vous vou
drez, entrons en ceste boutique, Dieu soit ceans, ne vous desplaise, que vous
plaist il Messieurs, auez vous de bon drap, carise, sarge, taffetas, damas,
satin, veloux. What you will, shall we go walk? Content, but before, let us
go buy some things we have need of, I will, let us go, of what side shall
we go what side you will, let us go into that choppe. God be here, by your
leave: what lack you Sirs? have you any good cloth, kersie, sarge, taffetie,
damask, satin, velvet. Ie vous en monstreray d'aussi bon qu'il s'en peut
trouuer. Que ie voye, de quelle I can show you as good as can be, let us see
it. Of what couleur vous en plaist il? color will you have it? Denoir, de
blanc, de rouge, iaune, verd, gris, taken, cramoisi, bleu, bleu celeste, couleur
de peschier, violet, orange, de pourpre, etc. Black, white, read, yellow,
green, gray, taney, crimsine, blue, watchet, peach color, violet, ora^ge
color, purple color, etc. Monstrez m'en de meilleur, si vous en auez?
autrement vous n'aurez point de mon argent? En voyla vne piece que si vous
alliez par toutes les boutiques de Londres, vous n'en scauriez trouuer de
meilleur. I'en ay veu de meilleur, and de pire aussi. Show me some better, if
you have any, or else you shall not have of my money? There is a piece that if
you will go through all the shoppes of London, you could not find better. I
have seen better and worse also. Combien me coustera l'aulne de cestuy cy?
What shall I pay for the yard of this? Combien vendez vous la verge de cestuy
la? How sell you the elle of that? Vous n'en payerez que vingt sols, un escu,
quatre livers, six francz, etc. C'est trop. Il en faut rabattre. Ie n'en
donneray que tre^te, quarante sols. C'est trop peu, ce n'est pas assez. Il m'en
couste d'auantage. Vous plaist il me le donner? Ie vous en donneray cinq sols
dix deniers d'auantage. I'y perdrois. Ie n'en donneray non plus. Regardez si
vous le voulez. Ne m'enuoyez point ailleurs. Mon argent est aussi bon que d'vn
autre. Bien Monsieur, d'autant que i'espere, que vous me reuie^drez reuoir vne
autre fois vous l'aurez, combien que ie vous assure, ie n'y gaingne rien
dessus. You shall pay but twenty shillings, a crown, four pounds, six
francz, etc. It is to much. You must bate some of it. I will give but thirty,
forty, etc. it is to little, it is not enough. It cost me more then that. What
will you give me? I will give you five shillings ten pence more. I should loose
by it. I will give no more: See if you can take it. Let me not go into another
place. My money is as good as another man's. Well Sir, Because I hope that you
will come see me another time you shall have it, though I assure you, I get
nothing by it. I'espere que vous n y perdrez rien aussi. I hope, you loose
nothing neither. Or sus combien vous en plaist il? Trois aulnes and demie, and
un quart. Mesurez le. Well, how much will you have? Three yardes and half and
a quarter. Measure it. Faites bo^ne mesure. Voyla estes vous content. Give good
measure. Here it is, are you content. Tenez voyla vostre argent. Ceste piece
d'or n'est pas de poix. Elle est legere de quatre grains. En voyla vne autre.
Rendez moy mon rest? Le voyla, s'il y a quelque autre chose ceans don't vous
ayez affair ne l'espargnez pas. Ie vous remercie, adieu. Hold here is your
money. This piece of gold is not weight. It is to light by four grains. Here
is another. Give me the rest. There it is, if there be any thing else here ye
have need of, spare it not. I thank you, God be with you. Dieu vous doint
bonne vie and longue. God give you a good and long life. Allo^s, auez vous
achete tout ce qu'il vous faut? Nenny pas encore. Il me faut auoir; un bas
d'estame, un bas de soye, un chappeau, un bonnet de nuict, vne fraize, un
rabat, un mouchoir, des pendans d'espee, vne pair de gands, etc. Let us go,
have you bought all you lack? Not yet. I must needs have a pair of stockms
of worsted, a pair of silk stockins, a hat, a night cap, a roof band, a
falling band, a handkerchef, some hanggers, a pair of gloves, etc. Or sus,
n'auez vous plus rien a acheter? Now have you no more to buy? Nenny. Retournons
nous en doncq? No. Then let us return home. Ie le veux, mais passons par chez
le Tailleur, a qui ie veux laisser ces estoffes, pour me fair des habits.
Voyla sa boutique, entrons. I will, but let us pass by the Taillor, with whom
I will leave this stuff, to make me some apparel. There is his shop, let us
go in.
Le Tailleur. The Tailor.
HAu la. Qui est-la? Amy, ouurez la port. H Oe. Who is there: A friend of
yours, open the door. Ou est vostre maistre? il n'est pas ceans, il est la
haut, il est en ville. Allez le querir. Where is your master? he is not at
home, he is above, he is in the town, go and fetch him. Ie m'y en vay. Prenez
un peu de patience. I go. Take some patience. Attendez un peu, ie ne
demeureray guere. Tarry a little, I will not tarry long. Courez vistement, and
ne tardez pas, car nous Run quickly, and tarry not, for we auo^s haste,
hastez vous. Ie seray incontinent de retour. Maistre, il y a un Ge^til-homme a
la maison, qui vous pry de venir parler a luy. Qui est il? C'est Monsieur,
etc. have great have, make speed, I will come again presently. Sir, there is a
Gentleman at home, which desires you to come to speak with him. What is his
name? It is Mo^sieur N. Ie ne le cognoy pas. Ie pense que c'est pour fair
fair des habits. Ie m'y en vay, ie seray aussi tossed que vous. Le voyci qui
vie^t. Vous estes les bie^ venus messieurs. I do not know him. I think it is
to make some suits of apparel. I will come, I shall be so soon at home as
you. He comes. You are very well come Sir. Ie vous pry dem'excuser, si ie
vous ay fait tant attendre. C'est tout un. Nous nous sommes reposez, car nous
estions las. I pray you to excuse me, because I make you, tarry so long. It is
all one, we have rest our selves, for we were weary. Mais quoy? Estes vous
fort empesche maintenant? Auez vous force besongne? Me scauriez vous me fair
un manteau, un pourpoint, un haut de chausses? Ouy dea Monsieur. Quand vous
plaist il les auoir? But what? Are you now very busy? Have you much work? Can
you make me a cloak, a doublet, or hose? Yes forsooth Sir. When would you have
them? D'icy a quatre ou cinq iours, vous les aurez, il n'y aura point de fault.
Ie vous en pry, n'y faillez pas, car il me fault aller bien tossed aux champs.
Fiez vous en moy. Ou font voz estoffes? les voyla: les voulez vous voir tailler
deuant vous? comme vous voudrez. Four or five days hence: you shall have
them, there shall be no fault. I pray you fail not, for I must needs go
shortly into the country. Trust to me, where is your stuff? here it is, will
you see them cut? as you will, Prendray-ie vostre mesure? ouy, ne faites pas
les ma^ches trop estroictes. Else seront assez larges. Mais il fault de la
doubleure, du cotton, du passement, de la soye, du fill, des boutons. Achetez en
vous mesmes pour moy, and ie vous re^bourseray l'argent. Ie le veux, il me faut
par mesme moyen shall I take your mesure? yea, make not the sleeves to narrow:
they shall be large enough, but you lack some lyning, bombasse, some lace,
some silk, some third, some bouttons: buy you some for me, and I will give you
the money again. I will, I must by the same mean acheter des aiguiles, car
ien'en ay plus, ie m'oubliois de vous dire que le tout soit bien cousu, ne
faites point de consture au dos de mo^ pourpoint. N'en ayez pas peur. Quand
commencerez vous a le coudre. Tout a ceste heure, ie m'en vay apres. Or sus, a
Dieu doncq, iusques reuoir. buy me some needles, for I have no more, I did
forget to desire you that all be well sown, make no seame in the back of my
doublet, be not afraid of that, when will you begin to do it, by and by, I go
about it, very well, farewell then, till I see you again.
Le Cordonnier. The Shoemaker.
PVis que nous sommes si pres du Cordo^nier, entro^s en sa boutique pour voir
si nous nous pourrons accommoder. Auez vous de bons souliers a double semele, a
triple semele, des souliers liegez, des mules, des pentousles, des escarpins de
marroquin, de bonnes bottes. Vous en trouuerez ceans a choisir. Monstrez m'en
d'autres, i'en veux de meilleurs, en voyla vne bonne pair, il ne font que
d'estre tirez de la form, vous plaist il les essayer? nenny d'autant que ie
suis botte, mais apportez les demain matin a mon logis, and nous les
essayerons. Come il vous plaira, n'y faillez pas ie vous pry, ie m'atte^dray
a vous. Il n'y aura point de fault, a Dieu, bonne vie and longue. Since we be so
near the shoemaker, let us go into his shop, to see if he can fit us. Have
you any good shoes with double solles, with three solles, some corkeshoes, some
pantoples, some slippers, some Spanish leather pompes, some good bottes? you
shall find here to choose, show us some others, I will have some better. There
is a good pair, they are newly taken out of the last, will you try them: no
because I am booted, but bring them to morrow morning to my lodging, we shall
try them, as you will, fail not then I pray you, I will look for you: there
shall be no fault, farewell, God give you a good and a long life.
Le Barbier. The Barber.
AVez vous maintenant despesche toutes vos affairs? non pas encore, il me faut
Have you dispatched all your business? not yet, I must have fair fair ma
barbe, and mes cheueux: voyla la boutique d'vn Barbier. iro^s nous la deda^s?
ouy. Entrons donc, Dieu soit ceans. Vous estes les tres-bien venus messieurs,
vous plaist il fair coupper vos cheueux? voulez vous fair raser vostre barbe?
ouy donnez des linges blancs. ie ne vous en donneray point d'autres. Garcon,
donnez moy cest estuy ou sont ces cizeaux, ce peigne, and ce rasoir. Ne couppez
pas ceste moustache. Donnez vous en guard, ie vous pry? vous n'ettoyeray-ie
les aureilles? voyla le miroir, regardez estes vous bien, vous plaist il estre
laue, la face and le col? nenny, me voyla bien. Combien vous faut il? Ce qu'il
vous plaira. Adieu. my beard cut, and my hears. There is a Barbers shop,
shall we go in? yea, come let us go. God be here: you are verte well come sirs.
Will you have your hears cut? will you have your beard shaven? yea, give us
some clean clothes. I will give you none other. Boy, give me that case wherein
are the cisers, the comb, and the raser. Do not cut that lock, take heed of
it I pray you. Shall I make clean your ears, here is the glass, see are you
well, will you have your face and neck washed. No, I am well. How much must
you have. What you will. Farewell. IRons nous maintenant? qua^d il vous plaira.
Retournons a la maison par ce chemin. Comment s'appelle ceste rue? comment
nommez vous ce temple? Ie ne scay certes. Voila un fort beau logis. Hastons
nous, i'ay peur que nous les fassions attendre a soupper. Il est desia tard.
Frappez a la port. Qui est la? Amy. Ouurez. Vostre maistre and maistresse ont
ils souppe? Ouy. I'en suis bien aise. Prouface messieurs. Est-ce apres soupper?
Nenny. Vous venez donc bien tard, car SHall we go now? when you will. Let us
go home this way. How do you call this street? How do you call that Church?
I can not tell truly. There is a fair house. Let us make have. I am afraid
that we shall make them tarry for us at supper, it is might already. Knock at
the door. Who is there? A friend of yours. Open the door. Have your master and
mistress supt? yea, I am very glad of it. Much good do to you sirs. Is it
after supper? Yea, you come to late, for nous auons souppe comme vous voyez,
encore que nous vous ayo^s atte^du lo^gueme^t, i'en suis fasche. Il n'en estoit
point de besoing. Or sus sus. Seez vous, nous auons guard quelque chose. Ie
vous remercie, i'ay si bie^ disne que ie n'ay point d'appetit, n'y moy aussi Or
sus, nous fero^s co^llation, apportez nous des confitures des dragees, du
coudignac, du biscuit, etc. we have supte as ye see, though we have tarried for
you very long. I am sorry for that. There was no need of it. Go to go to, set
you down, we have kept some thing for ye. I thank you, I have dyne so well,
that I have no stomach: nor'I neither. Well the^, we shall eat some thing
bring us some preserues, some confits, some marmelat, some biscuit, etc. Voyla
qui est fort bon. Et bien quelles nouuelles? Qu'auez vous apprins de nouueau en
ville? Rien qui soit. That is very good. What good news? What news have you
heard in the City? Nothing at all.
Du Ieu. Of Plays.
OR ca que fero^s nous? Ce que vous voudrez, Iouerons nous? A quel ieu voulez
vous iouer? Voulez vous iouer aux Dames, aux Dez, aux Tarots, aux Eschets, etc.
Non, iouons au Chartes, afin que toute la compagnie jove ensemble. C'est bien
dict. A quel ieu iouerons nous, au Cent, a la Premiere, a la Triumph? etc.
Soit. Meslez les Carts, couppez, baillez, voyla un Roy de coeurs, i'ay vne
Royne de carreaux, and moy, le valet de picques, and moy l'as de treffles, a
combien de ieux iouerons nous? a cinq, a six, a sept, a huict, etc. I'ay le
ieu, i'ay un leave plus que vous. Or sus. C'est assez. COme, what shall we do?
What you will, shall we play? What game will you play at? will you play at
Tables, at Dyce, at Tarots, at Chesses, etc. No, let us play at Cards, to the
end that all the company may play together. It is well said. At what game
shall we play? at Sant, at Primera, at Trumpe, etc. Let it be so. Shoofle the
Cards, cut, deal there is a King of hearts, I have a Queen of diamondes, and
I the knave os spades, and I the ase of clubbes: how many games shall we play?
five, six, seven, eight, etc. I have a trick more then you. Well. It is
enough.
De la Music. Of Music.
QVe ferons nous maintenant? What shall we do now? Cha^tero^s vne chanson a
quatre parties. Shall we sing a song of four parts? C'est bie^ dict. Vous
chanterez la Basle-co^tre, It is well said. You shall sing the Base. Monsieur
N. chantera le Contra-tenor, ie chanteray le Tenor, and Mademoiselle chantera
le Superius. Chantons de mesure. Master N. shall sing the Contertenor, I will
sing the Tenor, and Mistress N. shall sing the Treble. Let us keep time.
Co^mencez. Voyla vne fort belle chanson. Begin, there is a very fine song.
Monsieur vous plaist il la iouer sur le lut? Sir, will you play it upon the
lute. Et ie la ioueray sur l'Espinette. Accordez vostre lut. L'espinette n'est
pas d'accord. And I shall play it upon the Virginals, tune your lute. The
virginals is not in tune. Vostre chanterelle est trop basse. Messieurs vous
plaist il danser? Voulez vous vne gaillarde, un bransle, la courante, la volte,
la pauane? etc. Comme il vous plaira, voyla un bon fredon. C'est fort bien
danse. Your treble is to low. Sirs will you danse? Will you have a galiarde,
the mesures, the courante, the volte, the pauane, etc. As you will, There is a
very good song. You da^se very well. Vous gardez bien la cadance. C'est assez,
ie suis las, ie ne scauroy plus danser. Il est temps de s'aller reposer. Il est
nuict. You keep time well. It is enough, I am weary. I can danse no more. It
is tune to go to bed, it is night.
Le Soir and le Coucher. The Evening and going to bed.
CHambriere: Apportez nous de la lumiere. MAiden, bring us some light. Allumez
la chandelle, mettez la dans le chandelier. Donnez moy ceste bougie, fermez la
port, and les fenestres de la salle. Light the candle, put it within the
candlestick. Give me the wax candle, shut the gate, and the hall windows.
Nous irons au lict quand il vous plaira. We will go to bed when you please. Il
est tard, il est temps de s'aller coucher. It is very late, it is time to go
to bed. Iacques menez Monsieur N. a sa chamber. James, bring Master N anto his
chamber. Monsieur co^mandez ceans comme si vous estiez en vostre maison. Ie
vous remercie tres-humblement. Bon soir bon-nuict Monsieur, etc. Par icy,
mouto^s ces degrez, cest escallier, voyci vne fort belle chamber, un bon lict,
de beaux rideaux, un beau buffet. Vous plaist il vous desabiller. Ostez mes
esperons. Tirez mes bottes, mes chausses. Attens un peu, ie ne suis pas
desiarte. Mets la mes iartieres, and ma ceinture, mon espee, and mon poignard.
Sir, command in this house as if you were in your own. I thank you most
heartily. God give you good night Sir, etc. Here is the way, let us go up these
steares: here is a very fair chamber, a good bed, fair courtines, a fair
cupbord. Will you make your self unready. Take away my spurs? Pull of my
boots, my hose. Tarry a little, I am not vngartred. Lay there my garters, my
girdle, my rapier, and my dagger. Voyla de fort beaux linceux, and fort bla^cs.
There be very fine sheets, and very clean. Estes vous bie^ auez vous assez de
couuerture, Mettez cest aureiller soubs vestre test, car le trauers-lict ou
cheuet est trop bas. Me voyla bien maintenant. Si vous auez affair de quelque
chose ne l'elpargnez pas. Are you well, have you clothes enough, Lay that
pillow under your head, for the bolster is to low. I am well now. If you have
need of any thing else. Do not spare it. Ie vous remercie. Ie vous pry de me
resueiller demain a quatre heures, and m'appeller, car ie me veux lever de
grand matin. Il n'y aura point de fault Mo^sieur. I thank you. I pray you to
awake me to morrow at four a clock and call me. For I will rise very early. I
will not fail Sir, Esteindray-ie la cha^delle? Ouy, ie t'en pry, car
autrement ie ne scauroy dormir. Et bie^, bo^ soir bo^-nuict, Mo^sieur, bo^ soir
bo^-nuict. shall I put out the candle. Yea I pray thee, for otherwise I could
not sleep. Very well. God give you good night Sir, good night.
Le Lever des Hommes. The Rising of Men.
MOnsieur vous plaist il vous lever? SIr, will you rise? Il est fort haute
heure. Quelle heure est il? Il est six heures. Donnez moy vne It is far of
the day. What is it a clock? It is six a clock. Give me a chemise blanch. Ie
veux changer, car la mienne est salle. La chauferay-ie? Ouy, car elle est
encore toute trempee, inouillee, moite, say du feu icy, ou la va chauffer la
bas a la cuisine, ou en la fall, s'il y a du feu allume. clean shirt. I will
shift mine, for it is foul, shall I warm it? yea, for it is wet, and moist,
and da^kish, make here some fire, or go and warm it below in the kitchen, or
in the hall, if there be any fire made there. Tenez, la voila, elle est fort
chaude. Ie pe^se que tu l'as bruslee, pardo^nez moy. Baillez moy mon pourpoint.
Tens moy mes chausses, aid moy a vestir ma iuppe, Espoussette mon ma^teau, and
mo^ chappeau, aydez moy a attacher mes esguillettes, va moy querir le
chaussepied pour chausser mes souliers: apporte moy un bassin, vne esguiere, de
l'eau net pour me lauer les mains, la bouche, la face, and les yeux, done
moy ceste seruiette, cest essuyemain, ceste touaille pour m'essuyer. Hold.
There it is. It is very hot, I think you have burn it. No: give me my
doublet. Rech me my hosen, help me to put on my Ierkin, brushe my cloak, and
my hatte, help me to tie my points, fetch me a shoeinghorne, to put on my
shoes: bring me a hassin, the ewer, some clean water to wash my hands, my
mouth, my face, and mine eyes. Give me that napkin, that towell, to wype me. Or
sus, me voyla pressed, ie suis abille. Well. I am ready. Mademoiselle est elle
leuee? Ie ne scay. Va voir, and luy done le bon iour de ma part. Is mistress
N. up, I can not tell. Go and see, and bid her good morrow from me.
Le Lever des Femmes. The Rising of Women.
APpellez moy la seruante, car ie me veux lever. Marie. Plaist il, Mademoiselle
vous demand. Ie m'y en vay. donnez moy ma Cotte, mon Cotillon, lacez moy ma
Robe, crochetez moy, ou sont les vergettes, espousetez mon chapperon de veloux,
CAll me the maiden, for I would feign rise. Marie: Anon for sooth. My mistres
does ask for you I come, give me my Petticot, lace my gown, claspe me, where
is the brush? brush my Frenchhoode, mon deuat de robe. Ou est mon escoffion,
baillez moy ce peigne pour me peigner. Frizez mes cheueux, tendez moy ma
dorure, mon carquan, mes manchons, mes manchettes, ou poignets, prestez moy vne
espingle pour attacher mo^ masque. Voyla vostre ceinture, vostre bource, vos
cousteaux, vos ciseaux. Ou est mon garderobe, mo^ esuentoir, and mon escharpe.
my kertle, where is my caul? give me that comb to comb me, courle my hears,
reach me my border, my carkenet, my sleeves, my cuffes, lend me a pin, to pin
my mask. There is your girdle, your purse, your knives, your cisers. Where is
my sauegarde, my fan, and my scarf? Ostez ce miroir, pliez toutes mes hardes
dans mon desabiller, and les serrez. Take away that glass, fold all my things
within my cooshin cloth, and put them up safe. Nettoyez la chamber. Sweep the
chamber, and make it clean. Ou est le balay, ostez toutes ces ordures. Where
is the broom, take away all that filth. Faites le lict, and quand vous aurex
faict venez moy trouuer. Make the bed, and when you have done come to meet me.
De l'Hostelerie. Of the Inn.
OV est le parefrenier? Il est a l'estable. Where is the hosteler? He is in
the stable. Appellez le. Tenez mon cheual. Call him. Take my horse. Promenez
le. Menez le boire apres. Walk him. Water him after. Pensez le bien. Ne le
desselez point. Dress him well. Take not away his sadle. Faictes luy bonne
littiere. Give him good litter. Donnez luy de bon foin, de bonne auoine. Give
him good hay, and good oats. Desbridez le. Unbridle him. Gardez bien sa bride.
Keep well his bridle. Attachez le par son licol. Tie him by his halter.
Dessanglez le. Vngirte him. Donnez vous guard qu'on ne desrobe ses sangles, ses
estrieux, sa croupiere. Take heed that his girtes be not stolen away, nor his
stirrups nor his cropper. Il y a vne boucle rompue a sa selle. There is a
buckle broken in his saddle. Allez moy querir le sellier pour la racoustrer.
Go, and fetch me the Sadler to amend it. Ie m'y en vay. I will. Quand vous
serez de retour, frottez le bien. When you are come again, rub him well.
Estrillez le bien, and luy troussez sa queue, car ie veux tantost partir. Comb
him well, and tie up his tail. For I will depart by and by.
Pour Demander le Chemin. For to Ask the Way.
COmbien y a il d'icy a Londres? HOw many miles to London? Dix lieux, vingt
mil. Ten leagues, twenty miles. Quel chemin faut il tenir? What way must we
keep? Ou est le plus court chemin d'icy a la Rye? Which is the shortest way to
go to Rye? Suyuez tousiours le grand chemin. Keep always the great way. Ne
vous fouruoyez n'y a dextre n'y a senestre. Do not stray neither at the right
nor at the left hand. Combien vous doy-ie maintenant? What do I owe you now?
Deux sols. Two shillings. Les voyla. Here it is. Amenez moy mon cheual. Bring
me my horse. Vous plaist il monter a cheual? Will you take up your horse? Ouy.
Yea. I'espere que ie ne descendray que ie ne soy arrive a Londres. I hope I
shall not alight till I be come to London. A Dieu, Bonne vie and longue. God be
with you. Farewell.
FIN. FINIS.
Fautes escaped in the Printing of the French.
Page 17. line 5. il ne le, Read on ne, page 17. line 9. que les, read que vous
les, page 17. line 20. read parfaictement apprinses, page 21. line 2. vous en,
read vous ne, page 25. line 8. hou roc, read hau roc, page 41. line 18. Ince
maniere, read en ceste maniere, page 45. line 10. comme le, read ou comme le,
page 47. line 18. oubliez, read oubliees, page 53. line 20. prononcez gua, read
prononcez vous gua, page 59. line 5. d'vn se, read d'vn mot se, page 61. line
5: prononce, read prononcent, page 63. line 16. celles, read celle, page 105.
line 23. n'est, read naist, page 119. line 26. corrompent, read corrompe.

In the English.
page 24. line 7. hou, read hau.

page 32. line 11. it known, read is known.

THE TREASVRE OF THE FRENCH TOVNG CONTAINING THE RAREST Sentences, Proverbs,
Similies, Apothegmes and golden sayings, of the most excellent French Authors,
as well Poets, as Orators. Diligently gathered, and faithfully set in order,
after the Alphabeticall manner, for those that are desirous of the French tongue.
By G. D. L. M. N.

printer's device of Richard Field, featuring an anchor surrounded by laurels
(McKerrow 164) ANCHORO SPEI


Printed by R. Field, and are to sold by H. Iackson.

A TRESNOBLE ET TRES-VERTVEVSE DAMOISELLE Mademoiselle TASBVRGH.
MADEMOISELLE, il y a tantost un an, que par vostre expres commandment, esta^t
a Oxford auec Monsieur R. Wenman vostre fills aisne, and Messieurs ses freres,
ie fei le Recueil de ce Tresor de Sentences, que ie vous donnay pour Estreines
au premier iour de l'An. Vous luy feistes, de vostre grace, un si favorable
accueil, qu'il n'a voulu sortir en lumiere soubs autre Nom, and protection que
la vostre, s'assurant qu'il ne manquera point de faueur ailleurs, si vous
daignez estre sa Marraine. S'il aduient que ie sois si heureux qu'il proffite a
quelques vns, c'est vous que l'on en doibt remercier. Car tout ainsi que ie ne
le fei que pour vous obeir, aussi ne voit ille ionr que pour seruir a la face
de tout le monde d'vne generale Action de graces, que ie vous fay des biens,
que de vostre seule liberalite i'ay diuerses fois receu de vous, lors que
i'auois cest honneur d'Instruire la langue Francoyse a Mademoiselle E. Wenman,
and Mademoiselle L. Cressey vos filles, qui imitans les vestiges glorieux de
vos rares vertus, donnent esperance a un chacun d'estre un iour du nombre de
celles, qui tiennent le premier rang, non seulement en beauty, mais aussi en
honneur. Et combien que ce soit vne bien petite recompense, pour vne si grande
debte, neantmoins i'ayme mieux estre estime vous demeurer tousiours redeuable,
auec vne liberale confession de n'estre suffisant a vous payer, qu'ingrat
faisant banqueroute a mo^ deuoir, and ne mefforcant a vous satisfaire, sinon en
tout ce que ie doibs, pour le moins en tout ce que ie puis. La benign and
gracieuse bonte de nature qui vous accompagne, and qui comme un Soleil do^ne
lumiere a toutes les autres belles and heroiques vertus qui vous sent
domestiques, and que vous auez tire du Tres-ancien and Tres-noble sang des
Seigneurs de la War, don't vous auez pris vostre heureuse naisance, m'asseure
que ce mien essay ne vous sera des-agreable, and que vous aurez plus des-gard a
la sincere affection don't il depart qui est infinie, que non pas a sa
petitesse, qui veritablement seroit du tout indigne de porter vostre liuree, si
vous mesmes ne l'en rendez digne. Il la port neantmoins pour inciter les plus
Doctes a a vous dedier leurs Escrits, afin que par la faueur que vous faictes
au Muses, vostre Nom glorieux se puisse lire par la posterite, au front
gracieux de leurs oeuures immortelles: and a m'ayder a vous render graces des
plaisirs, que vous m'auez desia faicts, and de ceux qu'a mon exemple ils
receuront de vostre accoustumee faueur. Et en ceste devotion ie prieray Dieu.

Mademoiselle vous donner tres-longue and heureuse vie. De Londres ce 11.
d'Aoust. 1592. Vostre tres-humble and tres-affectionne seruiteur. G. De la
Mothe. N.

A
ABon co^menceme^t faut donner bonne fin. A Good beginning will have a good
ending. A la fin d'vn chef d'oeuure on judge de l'ouurier. At the end of his
work, we judge of a workman. A la fin du co^bat se cognoist la victoire. At
the end of the fight is known the victory. Aux moeurs, and non aux mots, if
faut iuger de l'homme. By his works and not by his words, we must judge of a
man. Aux fruicts, and non aux fleurs, on cognoist le bon arbre. By the fruits
and not by the flowers, we do know the good tree. Amor fait trouuer beau ce
qui de soy n'est beau. Love makes us judge a thing fair, though it be foul.
Au prix du mal d'amour, tout autre mal est doux. All sower is sweet, being
compard with the sweet sower of love. Au lever du Soleil les tenebres
s'enfuyent. At the Suns rising, all darkness does fly away. Amor ne fut
iamais ou sans peur, ou sans pleurs. Love never was without both fear and
tears. A un bon entendeur ne faut que demi mot. A word suffises for a wise
man. Au fait, and non au front, l'homme sage se judge. By his doings not by his
face, the wise is to be judged. Apres un fascheux soir vien un beau l'endemain.
After araynie evening, may well follow a fair morning. Auec le bell honneur le
labeur est vtil. With credit and honor, labor is profitable. Apres la mort ne
sert d'apporter le remede. When death is come, remedy is to late. Apres un peu
de joy on sent mieux la tristesse. After a little joy, we feel the greater
annoy. Apres le temps perdu vain est la repentance. When time is lost,
repentance is but vain. A la queue d'Aspic consiste le venim. An Adder keeps
his venim at his tail. A chat cendreux iamais ne tomb rien en gueule. A
mufled Cat is no good mouse hunter. Au milieu des perils la prudence reluist.
Wisdom does shine in the midst of danger. A ceux qui ont failly, rien ne
sert l'ignorance. Ignorance does not excuse the faulty. Aspirer iusqu'au ciel
n'est pas dans le ciel estre. To aspire to heaven, is not to be in heaven. Auec
un peu de fer un petit homme s'arme. With a small store of steel, a little man
is armed, A fool question ne faut point de responce. We must answer a fool
with silence. Alors que nous pensons estre plus miserables, When we do think
to be most miserable, Cest alors que les Dieux nous sont plus fauorables. God
unto us is then most favorable. A peuple rebelle Prince vindicatif. To a
rebellious people, a cruel Prince is due. A rude chien faut dur lien. A cursed
dog must be tied short. Autant d'hommes autant de volontez. So many men, so
many minds. Autant de testes autant d'opinions. So many heads, so many wits.
Autant de pais autant de coustumes. So many countries, so many laws. A chaque
oiseau son nid luy semble beau. The Crow does think her own birds the
fairest. Amor and Royaulte ne veulent point desgal. Love and Royalty, can
suffer no equal. Au besoin se cognoist l'amy de l'ennemy. In our want we do
know, a good friend from a foe. A un petit mercier conuient petit panier. A
small pack becomes a little peddler. A rude cheual done rude esperon. To a
restif horse, we must give a sharp spur. Au valet on cognoist communement le
maistre. Commonly we do know the master by the man. A tell Saint tell
offrande. Such a Saint, such an offering.
B
Bien fair a l'homme ingrat est semer sur du sable. To do good to the
ingratfull, is to sow on the sand. Baille sans esperer d'en recepuoir usure.
Give without hope to receive any usury thereof. Bonne cause a souuent bon
besoing d'estre aydee. A good cause has often need of help. Bon loup iamais
ne queste au pres de sa tasniere. A good wolf will never hunt to near his
den. Bien que le corpse soit beau, l'ame est encor plus belle. Though the body
be fair, the soul is fairer. Beauty est le miroir de la beauty divine.
Beauty is the true glass of divine virtue. Bien fair a l'indigent merit
double gloire. To do good to the poor, deserves double glory. Baille a qui
te demand, and ne le fay attendre. Give to him that asks thee, and make him
not tarry. Balance les desseings, and non pas les paroles. Weigh the meaning,
and look not at the words. Beauty dompte les coeurs, and l'or vaincq la
beauty. Beauty does tame the heart, and gold does overcome beauty. Bo^ vin n'a
point besoin qu'on luy do^ne d'enseigne Where is the best wine, there needs to
have no sign. Beauty d'esprit se rend par virtue immortelle. Beauty of the
mind, makes it self by virtue immortal. Beauty sans la virtue ne merit estre
aymee. Beauty without virtue, does not deserve to be loved. Bonne doctrine
pre^d en luy, qui se chastie per autruy. Happy is he that can beware by an
other man's harm. Bonne renommee vaut mieux que ceinture doree. Good fame is
better worth then a golden crown. Bany de tes costez toute trouppe meschante.
Banish far from thine eye, all wicked company. Banquets, dances, and ieux
effeminent les hommes. Both feasts, dances and plays, do effeminate men.
Beauty du corpse resemble a la fleur du Printemps. Beauty of the body, is like
to the flowers of the spring. Broncher aucunesfois fois est chose supportable.
To stumble so that it be not often is a thing sufferable. Bien-heureuse est la
douce nourriture, Thrice blessed is the good nurture, Qui scait pollir vne rude
nature. That can amend a bad nature. Bon faict auoir amy accord, It Is good to
have a wise and discrete friend, Quand on a process a la Court. If in the law we
have a suit to end. Beau parler n'escorche langue. Fair words breaks no
bones. Bon vin de bonne vigne. Good wine of a good vineyard. Bon fruict d'vn
bon arbre. Good fruit of a good tree. Bonne moisson d'vne bonne semence. Good
corn of a good seed.
C
Cela qui se fait bien ce fait prou vitement. We do it soon enough, if what we
do be well. C'est plus de cruaute de differer la peine. Cruelty is more
cruel, if we defer the pain. Celuy qui n'est qu'vn sot habile ho^me pense
estre. Though one be but a fool, yet he thinks himself wise. Cognoistre and
ne pouuoir est un double malheur. To know and not to be able to perform, is a
double (mishappe. C'est heur aux malheureux de ne rien esperer. To have no
hope, is a hap to th'vnhappie. C'est la seule virtue qui done la noblesse. It Is
virtue only that gives nobility. Ce qui estoit hier ne se voit auiourd'huy.
Some thing was yesterday, that is nothing to day. Cela qu'vn iour nous do^ne un
autre iour nous l'oste. What one day gives us, another takes away from us.
Chien qui iappe de loing n'ose approcher pour mordre. A dog that barks far
of, dares not come near to bite. Cercher en un mouto^ cinq pieds au lieu de
quatre. To seek in a sheep five seete, where there is but four. Cheual
roigneux ne peut endurer qu'on l'estrille. A scabed horse cannot abide the
comb. Couard amant n'eut onc n'y n'aura belle amye. A cowardly lover, shall
never have a fair paramour. Ce qui est amer en la bouche est souuent doux au
coeur. What is sweet in the mouth, is often bitter at the heart. heart. Ce qui est
doux en la bouche est souuent amer au coeur. What is bitter in the mouth, is
often sweet at the Celuy sent en son coeur vne excessive pain, The man does
feel in his heart great pain, Qui va mourant de soif aupres de la fontaine.
That starues for thirst, by a goodly fountain. Ce n'est tout d'auoir belle
entree si lissue n'est belle A good beginning is nothing worth, except the end
be good. C'est vne saint guerre, de deffendre sa terre. It is a holy war to
fight for our country. Ce qui fut ce refait. Tout coule comme vne eau: Et rien
dessoubs le ciel ne se voit de nouueau. That which was done, is done again,
all slideth like a spring: And under the large Cope of heaven, we see not a new
thing. Communement toutes chooses retiennent, Commonly every thing do keep
still as we see, Le naturel du lieu d'ou else viennent. The nature of the
place from whence they come to be. Celuy doibt a iamais demeurer miserable, Let
him for ever live in misery and grief: Qui languist en un mal don't il se peut
guerir. That will languish in pain, when he may have relief. C'est estre
temeraire, de vouloir resister, quand on ne le peut fair. Rash is the man that
will resist when he can not. C'est plus grande virtue d'aider aux affligez, que
soustenir ceux qui sont en prosperity. It is greater virtue to relief and help
those that be in adversity, the^ to maintain those that be in prosperity.
C'est trop tard de fermer l'estable, quand les cheuaux s'en sont allez. It is
to late to shut the stable door, when the steed is stolen. Chat eschaude
craint l'eau froide. A scalded Cat does fear the coldest water. Chacun villain
est Roy chez soy. Every clown is king at home.
D
Dieu bat ceux qu'il cherist du bers iusqu'au cercueil. God does chasten those
he loves, eue^ from their cradle to their grave. Dieu nous ayant battu iette la
verge au feu. God having beaten us, does cast his rode into the fire. Dieu
tonne plus souuent qu'il ne foudroye pas. God thundreth more often, the^ he
does strike and beat. Dieu nous frappe du doigt, and non de tout le bras. God
strikes with his finger, and not with all his arm. Dieu depart l'ire au poix,
and sans poix la pity. God gives his wrath by weight, and without weight his
mercy. Dieu a des pieds de lain, and ses bras sont de fer. God has his feet
of woollen, his arms be iron. D'vne nouuelle amor viennent nouuelles larmes.
Of a new love, new spring of tears come forth D'abondance du coeur souuent la
bouche parle. Of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks. Deux
contraire' opposez s'entredonnent lumiere. Two contraries, give light the one
to the other. Dieu fait habiter l'homme enter le bien and mal. God makes the
man to dwell, betwixt the good and evil. D'amis plus que d'argent faut estre
desireux. Of friends more then of gold, we must be desirous. Deux testes sur un
corpse est chose monstrueuse. Two heads on a body, is a monstrous thing. D'vn
bien petit ruisseau sort souuent gra^d' riuiere. Often of a little brook, comes
forth a great river. De peu de mots viennent de grands effects. Often of few
words, may great effects ensue. De nouueau Prince nouuelle servitude. Of a new
Prince, new bondage. De temeraire esperance fin perilleuse. Of rash hope,
perilous end. De nouueau tout est beau. All new things seems commonly to be
fair. De fol luge brieue sentence. Of a foolish Judge, rash sentence. Donner a
garder la brebis au loup. To give the sheep to the wolf to keep. Deux
montaignes ne se rencontrent iamais, ce que font bien deux hommes. Two hills
can never meet, two men may often meet. Difficile est en toute affair,
Entierement a chacun satisfaire. It Is very hard to please all men in all
things. Deux petits chiens font grand peur a un grand. Two little dogs, make
a mastif affrayd. De deux grands maux faut eslire le moindre. Of two evils, the
least is to be chosen.
E
Enseigner l'ignorant est le moyen d'apprendre. To teach the unlearned, is the
true way to learn. Enter deux bancs rompus demeurer cul a terre. Betwixt two
broken stools, to fall flat to the ground. Entretien tes amiss quand tu les
acquis. Keep well thy friends, when thou have gotten them. Entretenir amiss est
chose difficile. To keep his friends, it is a very hard thing. Eschappe d'vn
danger guard d'y retomber. Being escapt from a danger, take heed to fall
again. Endure de celuy qui est plus fort que toy. Endure of him which is
stronger then thou. Ensuyure la virtue est chose commandable. To follow virtue,
is a commendable thing. Entasser l'or sur l'or est se render servile. To get
gold upon gold, is to make himself slave to gold. Escoute cestuy la qui te
bien admonneste. Hear him that does give you a good warning. Eslargy de tes
biens aux pauures souffreteux. Give of thy goods to the poor and needy.
Esperer contre espoir prouie^t d'vn grand courage. To hope against all hope
proceeds of a great mind. Esprouuer ses amiss est souuent profitable. To try
his friends, is often profitable. Euiter le destin est du tout impossible. To
eschew destiny, is wholly impossible. En faisant ce qu'on doibt ne faut de
recompense. In doing what we ought, we deserve no reward. Enter la bouche and
le verre, le vin souuent tomb a terre. Between the lip and cup, often the
wine is spilt. En petit lieu souuent se cache un grand thresor. Often in a little
place, a great treasure is hid.
F
Fay ce que tu voudrois qu'on fit a ta person. Do that thou would to be
done unto thee. Folier bien apoint est sign de sagesse. To play the fool
well, is sign of wisdom. Fin contre fin n'est bon a fair de doubleure. Two
crafty men, can never well agree. Fortune aux vns est mere, and aux autres
marastre. Fortune to one is mother, and to another stepmother. Fol qui veut
voler haut sur des ailes de cire. A fool is he that will fly with wings done
with wax. Fortune ne peut rien sur la discretion. Fortune has no power on
discretion. Fortune aid aux hardis, and les couards mesprise. Fortune does
help the hardy men, and despises the cowards. Fortune vaincq tousiours, and
n'est iamais vaincue. Fortune ouercomes all, and it can not be overcome.
Fortune oste les biens, mais non pas la virtue. Fortune ca^take away our goods,
but never our virtue. Facilement on croit ce qu'on craint and desire. We soon
believe the thing, that we fear and desire. Fascher l'homme fasche est
redoubler sa peine. To trouble a troubled man, is to redouble his pain. Faueur
par or acquise est trop chere vendue. Favor gotten by gold, is to dearly
bought. Flatteurs cerchent leur bien, and non de ceux qu'ils flattent.
Flatterers seek their own good and not those they flatter. Flatter un homme
sage est fault de sagesse, To flatter a wiseman, comes of want of wisdom.
Fault commise expres ne doibt estre excusee. A fault purposely committed, ought
not to be excused. Fuir ce qu'il faut suiure est suiure sa ruin. To fly from
that which we should follow, is to follow our own destruction. Franchise and
liberte vallent tout l'or du monde. Freedom and liberty be better worth then
all the gold of the world. Franc se peut appeller qui maistrise son ame. Free
is the man that well can master his soul.
G
Grand diseurs sont souuent les plus petits faiseurs. Those that do speak the
most, often do the least. Gratieuse est la fin qui termine nos peines. Gracious
is the end, that does end all our pains. Gratieux sont les pieds qui apportent
la paix. Gracious be the feet, that do bring us peace. Gratieux est le front
qui ne promet qu'amour. Gracious is the face, that promises nothing but love.
Garnir ses coffres d'or est se garnir de peine. To fill his treasure with gold,
is to fill himself with peine. Grand heur ne suit tousiours ceux qui sont en
grandeur. Good fortune always does not follow those that be in great estate.
Grauite est requise a vne barbe grise. Gravity is to be desired in a white
beard. Gouuerner un estat, est un pesant fardeau. To rule an estate, is a
heavy burden. Garny toy de sagesse, and rien ne te faudra. Garnish thee with
wisdom, and thou shall want nothing. Guard le bon renom que tu auras acquis.
Keep the good fame, that once thou have gotten. Gain de richesse fait, souuent
perdre les cieux. Gain of gold, makes often a man to loose his soul. Gloire
s'aquiert auec, la sueur and le sang. Glory is gotten both in sweating and
blood.
H
Heureux qui peut du mal d'autruy deuenir sage. Happy is he that can beware, by
another man's harm. Heureux qui peut tirer, un grand gain de sa perte. Happy is
he that makes a great gain of his loss. Horse de soy la virtue, n'a point de
recompense. Out of it self virtue can not have any reward. Haine n'apporte
rien, que repentir a l'homme. Hate brings nothing but repentance to man.
Hanter les vicieux, est se tacher de vice. To hante the vicious, is to blot
himself with vice. Hardiesse sans crainte, est seur de la folly. Hardiness
without fear, is the sister of folly. Hayr ce qui nous aim, est chose
monstrueuse. To hate that does love us, is a monstrous thing. Honneur sans le
repos, nuist plus qu'il ne profit. Honor without some rest, hurts more then
it does profit. Humilite se voit aux faits, and non aux gestes. Humility is
seen in deed, rather the^ in gesture Humilier le grand, est aggrandir sa
gloire. To abase the great, is to increase his own glory. Heur and malheur se
suyuent tour a tour. Good and evil follows the one after the other. Heureux
est celuy la, qui plus rien ne desire. Happy is the man that desires no more
then he has. Heur ne se parfaict point, sinon apres la mort. Happiness is
never perfect, but after death.
I
Il faut battre le fer, ce pendant qu'il est chaud. We must strike the Iron
whilst it is hot. Il n'est si bon cheual, qui quelques fois ne bronche. It is
a good horse, that does never stumble. Il ne fait iamais bon, se iouer a son
maistre. It is not good to play with his master. Il n'y a si petit, qui ne
puisse un iour nuire. There is no man though never so little, but sometimes he
can hurt. Il vaudroit beaucoup mieux se taire, que trop dire. It were far
better to hold the tongue, then to speak to much. Il vaut mieux parler moins,
and fair d'auantage. It were far better to speak less, and to do more. Il
faut seruir deuant que pouuoir estre maistre. One must be a servant, before he
be a master. Iamais ne fut mocqueur, sans estre en fin mocque. There is never a
scoffer, but in the end is scoffed at. Il faut d'vn Judge feint, redoubter le
courroux. We must fear the anger of a dissembling Judge. Il vit en Loup-garou
qui vit sans compagnie. The man that lives alone, does live like a wild Cat. Il
fait bien bon iouer, mais il fait mauuais perdre. It Is good to play, but
displeasaunt to loose. Il faut bien peser tout pour iuger droictement. We must
weigh all things well to judge rightly. Il n'est rien si certain, qu'il faut
que l'ho^me meure. There is nothing so sure as once a man must dye. N'y rie^ si
uncertain qu'elle en doibt estre l'heure. Neither so uncertain, when shall be
his last day. Il faut porter au front la honte de mal fair. We must bear in
our face the shame of doing evil. Il faut prendre le temps ainsi comme il nous
vient. We must needs take the time as it does come. Il nous aduient souuent un
bien que l'on n'attend. Often some good happens to us, when we least look for
it. Il faut contre fortune opposer la virtue. We must with our virtue, withstand
against fortune. Il faut plus resister plus on est combatu. The more we be
assailed, the more we must withstand. Il n'est pas rechappe qui train son
licol. The horse that draws after him his halter, is not altogether escaped.
Iamais un bell esprit n'est deux fois abuse. A wise man can not be twice abused.
Il n'y a loy qu'on puisse a l'amour comparer. There is no law to be compared
with love. Il ne faut craindre pis, mais bien esperer mieux. We must fear the
worste, and also hope the best. Il n'est rien si cache qu'en fin l'on ne
descouure. There is nothing so well hide^, but it may be discovered. Il n'est
si belle fleur qu'vn orage ne fane. There is no flower so fair, but it may be
withered with storms. Il vaut bien mieux scauoir bie^ fair que bien dire.
It Is better to do well, then to speak well. Il faut semer deuant qu'on puisse
moissonner. We must both till and sow, before that we can reap. Il est bien
mal aise de se taire ayant mal. It Is very hard to hold his tongue, when one has
cause to mourn. Il se faut reculer un peu pour mieux sauter. We must recule a
little, to the end we leap the better. Il n'est de laid amor, ny de belle
prison. There was never a foul love, nor a fair prison. Il n'y a soubs le
ciel chance, qui ne return. There is not under heaven any chance, but it
returns again. Il fait tres-bon auoir deux cords en son arc. It is good to
have two stringes to his bow. Il descouure S. Paul pour en couurir S. Pierre.
To robe Saint Paul for to give to S. Peter. Il ne faut pas clocher deuant un
viel boiteux. One must not halt before an old lame man. Il n'est de iour si
clair, qui n'ait quelque nuage. There is no day never so clear, but it has
some dark clouds. Il n'est si petit crin, qui ne port son ombre. There is no
hair never so small, but it has his shadow. Il n'y a point de feu, qui ne
iette fumee. There is never a fire, but it must have his smoke. Il n'est homme
si fin qu'a la fin on n'affine. There is no man never so crafty, but he may be
deceived. Il faudroit acheter les homme' au poix de l'or. We must esteem me^
as the weight of the most precious gold. Il n'est si fort qu'en fin plus fort
que soy ne trouue. There is no man though never so strong, but there is a
stronger. Iamais le loup ne fait guerre a un autre loup. A wolf will never
make war against another wolf. Il n'est conseil si clos qu'en fin l'on ne
desrobe. There is no counsel so secret, but it may be disclosed. Iamais il
n'est clarte, ou lumiere sans ombre. There was never any light, but it had some
shadow. Il ne faut pas laisser pour le son, la farine. We must not leave the
meal, to take the branne. Il vaut mieux n'estre ne que de n'estre enseigne. It
were better to be unborn, then to be untaught. Il faut que nous aymions comme
deuans hair. We must love, as looking one day to hate. Il faut que nous
haissions comme esperans aymer. We must hate, as looking one day to love. Il
faut long temps penser deuant qu'executer. We must think upon, before we
execute. Il est plus de comperes que d'amis. There are more dissemblers then
faithful friends. Il ne faut demander a un malade s'il veut sante. We must not
ask of a sickma^, if he will have his health. Il est fol qui pour autruy
s'oublie. The man is unwise, that forgets himself for another. Il vaut mieux
tard que iamais. It is better late then never. Il ne faut qu'vne brebis
ro^gneuse pour gaster tout un troupeau. One scabed sheep, will infecte a whole
flock. Il n'y sauce que d'appetit. A good stomach is the best sauce that one
can have. Il est empesche comme vne poule qui n'a qu'vn poulet. He is as busy
as a hen that has but one chicken. Il ne faut approcher le feu des estouppes
qui ne veut qu'elles ne bruslent. We must not bring the flax to near the
fire, except we will have them burn. Il ne faut coupper du cuir d'autruy large
courroye. We must not cut a large thong of another ma^s leather. Il a beau se
lever matin, qui a bruit de se lever haute heure. In vain he rises early, that
was wont to rise late. Il a beau se coucher tard, qui a le bruit de se lever
matin. In vain he goes to bed late, that is wont to rise early. Il faut
hazarder un petit poisson afin d'en prendre un grand. We must adventure a small
fish, to take a great one. Il n'y a chose si belle qui n'ait quelque vice en
elle. There is nothing so fair, but it has some fault. Il fait bon auoir des
amiss and en paradis and en enfer. It is good to have some friends both in heaven
and hell. Il faut coupper sa robe selo^ la gra^deur de son drap. We must cut
our coat according to our cloth. Il peut aduenir en vne heure ce qui n'aduient
en mile. A thing may happen in an hour, that happens not in a thousand. Iamais
le bien ne sera bon trouue, Good shall never be found to be good, Si par le mal
il n'est premier prouue. Unless it have been first proved by the evil. Il
n'est meilleure rent, que d'vne ame content. There is nothing better, then a
contented mind. Il y a plus de tristesse a perdre les richesses, qu'il n'y a
de plaisir a les posseder. There is greater sorrow in loosing riches, then
pleasure in getting them. Il vaut beaucoup mieux garder un ho^me des sie^s,
qu'en tuer cent de ses ennemis. It is better to save a man of his own, then to
kill a hundredth of the enemies. Il est malheureux qui sert, plus malheureux qui
offense: and tres-malheureux qui ne se cognoist. Unhappy is he that desires,
vnhappier that offends and unhappiest that knows not himself. Il n'y a
point de plus grande pestilence qu'audace, and puissance accompagnez
d'ignorance. There is no greater plague then boldness and power when they be
accompanied with ignorance. Il n'y a routte que de vieux renards. There is no
surer way to follow, the^ that of an old fox. Il est impossible en guerre,
enter vaillans ennemis, De mettre un chacu^ per terre, sa^s iamais y estre mis.
It is impossible in war against valiant enemies, to overcome always, and
never to be overcome. Il n'est rien si certain qui ne soit esbranle, Du soir au
lendemain. There is nothing so sure, but it may be changed between the
evening and the morning. Iamais le Marinier ne fit de long voyage, Qu'ores par
le beau temps, and ores par l'orage. A good Mariner never made a good voyage,
but sometimes with fair weather, and sometimes with tempestuous storms. Il ne
faut pas crier victoire deua^t qu'auoir co^batu. We must not cry victory,
before we have fought. Il est bien miserable qui refuse de voir la clarte du
Soleil. He is most miserable, that denies to see the Suns light. Il vaut
souuent mieux iouer des aureilles que de la langue It is often better to play
with our ears, then with our tongue. Il vaut mieux auoir un ennemy descouuert
qu'vn amy sophistique. It is better to have an open foe, then a dissembling
friend. Il faut plustost cercher un homme qui ait besoing de richesses, que de
richesses qui ayent besoing d'vn homme. We must rather seek for a man that
wantes wealth, then for wealth that wantes a man. Il faut s'accommoder au
temps, aux lieux, and aux persons, and obeir a la necessite. We must frame
our selves both to time, to place, and to persons, and obey their necessity
and laws. Il faut manger un muy de sell auec un homme deuant que le bien
cognoistre. We must eat a bushel of salt with a man, before we can know him
well. Il vaut mieux se monstrer sans esprit, que d'entrer en la voye
d'ingratitude. It is better to show himself without wit, then to enter into
the way of unthankfulness. Il est mal aise de bien viure, mais bien aise de
mal mourir. It is very hard to live well, but very easy to dye ill. Il vaut
mieux perdre auec virtue, que gaigner sans icelle. It is better to loose with
virtue, then to gain without it. Il est bien mal aise de plaire a tout le
monde. It is hard to please all, but very easy to displease. Il fait beau voir
vne ame qui assemble, Et les vertus, and les beautez ensemble. It is a fair
sight to see a body, that gathers both the virtues and the beauty together.
Il n'est rien si secret qu'en fin l'on ne cognoisse. There is nothing so
secret, but it may be known. Il n'est rien si cache que le temps ne descouure.
There is nothing so hiden, but time can discover it. Il est bien mal aise que
qui bien vit mal meure. It is almost impossible, that a man that lives well,
should dye ill. Il est bien mal aise que qui mal vit, bien meure. It is almost
impossible, that a man that lives not well, should dye well. Il est bien
difficile de tondre sur un oeuf. It is very hard to shave an egg. Il fait bon
tenir son asne par la bride. It is good to hold the ass by the bridle. Il ne
faut iamais courir apres son esteuf. It is not good to run after his ball.
L
Les sains scauent donner bon conseil aux malades. The helthfull man can give
good counsel to the sick. La mort d'vne ieune loup n'est iamais trop hastee.
The death of a young wolf, does never come to soon. La volonte doibt estre
estimee pour faict. The will must be accoumpted for the deed. La rage d'vn
sanglier brigande plus d'vn bois. The rage of a wild boar, is able to spoil
more the^ one wood, L'ho^me propose en terre, and Dieu dispose au ciel. Man
does purpose in earth, and God disposes in heaven. La coustume a la fin en
nature se change. Custom in time, unto nature is changed. L'ignorant perira
auec son ignorance. The ignorant shall perish, with his ignorance. La douleur
augmentee augmente les complaints. Grief being increased, does increase the
complaints. Le chantre est ignorant, qui ne scait qu'vne notte. Unskillful is
the Musition, that can sing but one song. Le neud que l'amour joint, la mort ne
peut deffaire. The knot that love does knit, death can not unknit. La mort
vient assez tossed, voire trop vistement. Death comes soon enough, yea it
comes to so. La brebis qui est seule est en danger du loup. The sheep alone
is in danger of the wolf. L'homme est bien chastie d'vne grand repentance.
Man is punished enough with a great repentance. Le ciel n'est pas acquis, si
tossed que souhaitte. Heaven is not gotten, so soon as wished for. Le peu fait
tousiours peu peu de bois peu de flame. Little makes always little, of little
wood little flame. Le sage delibere auant que de conclure. The wise considers
well, before he does conclude. Le trompeur choit souue^t aux lacz de tromperie.
The deceitful man, falls often into the snares of deceit. La virtue fuit le coeur
de l'homme mercenaire. Virtue flies from the heart of a mercenarie man. L'ame
basse ne peut iuger de chose haute. A basewit, can not judge of a high thing.
L'enfer est en tout lieu, ou l'Eternel n'est pas. Hell is in every place,
wherein the Lord is not. L'eau qui ne court se rend and puante and mal saine.
The water that does not run, is soon infected. L'air n'est presque iamais
sans ve^s, ou sans nuages. The air is never without either some wind or
clouds. Le ciel cessera d'estre en cessant de courir. Heaven shall cease to
be, when it shall cease to run. Le seul vice est mauuais, la virtue seule est
bonne. The only vice is ill, the only virtue good. Les members ne sont beaux,
qua^d tout le corpse est laid. The limbs can not be fair, when the body is
foul. L'aueugle ne peut voir le deffaut de ses yeux. The blindman can not see
the deffaute of his eyes. Les gens lepreux ne font que des enfans lepreux. The
leprous man can not get but leprous children. L'ire and pity de Dieu se
suyuent tour a tour. The wrath and love of God, does follow one another.
L'homme cruel mourra d'vne cruelle mort. A cruellman, shall dye by cruel
death. Les enfans derniers nez sont tousiours plus aymez. The children borne
the last, be often loved the best. Le nocher vient souuent fair naufrage au
port. The sayler comes often to make shipwrake in the port. Le riuage est
tousiours plus seur que la mer haute. The coast is always surer then the main
sea. Les deniers sont les nerfs, and force de la guerre. Money is the sinews,
and the force of war. La langue du meschant souille l'homme de bien. The
tongue of the wicked, does defile the righteous. La presence du mal fait le bien
apparoistre. The presence of the evil, makes goodness appear. Le repos est
plus doux, apres un long malaise. Most sweet is rest after a long travail.
L'ho^me sage and prudent prend le te^ps come il vie^t. The wise and discret
man, takes the time as it comes. L'ho^neur, sans le proffit, laisse l'homme en
arriere. Credit without proffit, does leave a man behind. Le proffit sans
l'honneur ne proffite de guere. Proffit without credit, does loose his best
reward. Le bon cheual souuent a besoing d'esperon. A good horse often has need
of a good spur. La Rose a la parfin se flestrist and desseiche. The fairest
rose in the end is withered. La foudre rue a bas les plus superbes tours. The
thunder overthrows the highest towers. Le toict d'vn bergerot sans peur dure
tousiours. The cottage of a swain, without fear still does stand. Le loup
mange souuent des ouailles contees. The wolf eats often, of the sheep that
have been told. Les fols and les enfans prophetisent souuent. Fools and
children often does prophecy. L'or au fourneau s'esprouue and l'amy en
malaise. Gold is approved in the fournace, and the friend in troubles. Le
conseil pris, quand la chose est parfaicte, Counsel taken after the thing is
done, N'est qu'vne pluye apres la moisson faicte. It but as rain after harvest
is past. L'homme ne doibt d'aucun estre blasme, A man must not of any man be
blamed, S'il aim peu, quand il n'est point aim. If he loves but little, when
he is not loved at all. Le feu couuert a plus de violence, Que n'a celuy qui
ses flames eslance. Fire which is hiden, has greater violence, then that, that
gives his flames. Le cha^p qui quelques ans demeure come en friche, Quand il
est reseme fait un raport plus rich. The soil that some years is left
fallow, is the more fruitful, when it is tylled and sown again. L'arc, qui
pour quelques iours desencorde demeure, Enfonce plus auant la mortelle
blesseure. The bow that for some days is left vnbente, shootes deeper his
deadly wound, then it did before. Le renard, ne pouua^t atteindre aux hautes
meures, Dit lors qu'il n'en veut point, and qu'elles ne sont meures. When the
fox can not reach the blackeberyes, he says that he will none, because they
be not ripe. L'eau qui dort est pire que celle la qui court. The standing
water, is worse the^ the water that runs. Le chat aim bien le poisson, mais
il craint de mouiller la patte. A Cat loves fish well, but she will not wet her
feet. Le repentir suit souuent court plaisir. A long repentance, often follows
a short pleasure. La chose guere veue est chere tenue. The thing seldom seen,
is accounted dear. La souris qui n'a qu'vne entree est incontinent happee. The
mouse that has but a hole, is quickly taken. La pierre qu'on remue souuent
n'amasse iamais mousse. The rolling stone, does never gather moss. Le Roy pert
son droit, ou il n'y a que prendre. The King does loose his right, where there
is nothing to be had. Le diable n'est tousiours a la port d'vn homme. The
Devil is not always at a poor man's door. Le plaisir est trop cher vendu, A
pleasure is bought to dear, Qui longuement est attendu. When it is looked for
to long. La buy va si souuent au puys, qu'en fin lance y demeure. The water
pot is so many time carried to the well, that in the end it comes broken home.
La maison est malheureuse and meschante, Ou la poule plus haut que le coq
chante, Unhappy and cursed is the house, wherein the hen sings higher then
the cock. L'arc tousiours tendu ne peut durer long temps sans rompre. The bow
always bente, can not last without breaking. Le temps perdu iamais ne se
recouure. The time lost, can not be recovered again. Le temps s'en va, and
iamais ne reuient. The time passes away, and never comes again. La belle
pleume fait le bell oyseau. The fair feathers, makes a fair foul. Le feu
n'est iamais sans chaleur. The fire is never without heat. L'vn au matin senfle
en son bien, Qui au Soleil couche n'a rien. One in a morning swells for pride
of his goods, that at the Suns setting has lost all. La fleur des ans, qui
peu seiourne, S'enfuit and iamais ne return. The flower of our years, that
last but little, vanishes away, and never comes again. Le filet te monstre
combien, La vie est un fragile bien. The thread teaches us, how weak and
frail is this poor life. Les murailles ont des aureilles. The walls may have
some ears. L'amy qui flat est ennemy. The friend that does flatter, is a foe.
Le vray amy iamais ne dissimule, A true friend will never dissemble. L'Ire
aueugle le judgment. Wrath and anger, does blind the judgment. La fin couronne
l'oeuure. The end does crown the work. La farine du diable s'en va moitie en
son. The meal of the devil, is half turned into branne. Les pommes aigres de
nature peuuent deuenir douces par industry. Crabbes by nature may become good
apples by art. L'amy n'a plus seur thresor que l'amy en la necessite. A man
has no greater treasure in his adversity, the^ a true friend. L'homme est bien
aueugle, qui s'amuse a iouer aux eschets, alors que sa maison brusle. Very
careless is the man, that will play at chesse, when his house is on fire. La
menace, est tres-bonne, qui do^ne aduertisseme^t. Most good is the threatening,
that gives a good warning. La diversity des viandes empesche la digestion. The
diversity of meats does hinder digestion. Le cheual brusque peut tirer and
son maistre and soy horse du danger. A good horse can draw out of danger, both
his master and himself. Le cheual restif met son maistre and soy en danger. A
Iaide puts in danger, both his master and himself. L'amour des subjects est
la ferme coulomne d'vn Prince. The love of the subjects, is the strongest
pillar of a Prince. La ou la haine reign, Seigneurie n'a point de seurete.
Where hate does reign, Lordship has no surety. Le bien fait a un ingrat
n'est iamais bien employe. The good turn done to an ingratfulma^, is ill
bestowed. Les promesses longues sont figures de cruaute. Long promises be
figures of cruelty. Les bras des Roys sont de grande estendue. The arms of
kings do reach very far. La necessite engendre a l'homme la guerre auec soy
mesme. Necessity engenders in man war against him self. La moindre chose
de ce que nous ignoro^s est plus grande que tout ce que les ho^mes peuue^t
scauoir. The lest thing whereof we be ignorant, is greater then all that men
can know. La difficulte de toutes chooses est precieuse. Scarsitie of things is
always precious. Le pardonner n'est moindre virtue aux grands, quand ils sont
offencez, que la vengence, vice eux petits, quand ils sont iniuriez. To forgive
is no less virtue in Princes, when they be offended, then revenge a vice in
the common sort, when they be wronged. Le petits se vengent pour l'honneur, Les
grands pardonnent pour la virtue. The common sort do take revenge for their
credit, Lords forgive for their virtue. Le bon conseil asseure souue^t les
chooses douteuses. Good counsel often assures the doubtful things. Les chooses
faictes en colere se pesent auec repe^ta^ce. The things done in anger, are
weyed with repentance. La hastiuete est do^mageable, and la tardiuete seure.
Hastiness is hurtful, but slownesse is sure. Les innoce^s ne doibue^t moins
craindre la fortune, que les coupables la loy. The guiltless ought not to
fear less fortune, then the guilty the laws. L'homme ruse par long usage,
N'est follement auantureux. A man that has experience by a long usage, will
not rashly hasarde him self. Et qui par son peril est sage, Celuy est sage
malheureux: And he which is wise by his own folly, may be called unhappy wise.
Le beau soulier bless souuent le pied. The fairest shoes, do often hurt the
foot. L'honneur surmonte la foible honte, s'on est vainqueu par un brave
vainqueur. Honor overcomes the feeble shame, if we be overcome by a valerous
warrier. Le lieu n'honnore l'homme, mais l'ho^me honnore ou deshonnore le lieu.
The place does not honor the man, but the man honoreth or dishonoreth the
place. L'Eternel tient deuant sa port, The Lord of heaven has at his gate,
Deux tonneaux, don't il fait pleuuoir: Two great Tonnes, from whence does
reign. Tout ce qui aux hommes apporte, All that bring to men the cause Dequoy
joy and tristesse auoir. Both of their joy, and also pain. Les peines
importunes, ne sont volontiers loing des plus hautes fortunes. The trouble some
pains, be not commonly far of the most prosperous fortune. Le mal venu il le
faut endurer. We must endure the evil, when it is come. Le confort des
malheureux est d'auoir des semblables. The comfort of the unlucky, is to have
for fellows many unlucky. L'homme bon, en mourant, laisse le bon renom. The
righteous man dying, does leave a good name. L'homme mauuais moura^t, laisse le
mauuais nom. The wicked man dying, leaves after him an ill name. La mort n'a de
pouuoir sur le los des vertus. Death has no power, on the praises of virtue.
L'honneur qu'vn iour nous done, un autre iour nous l'oste. One day takes away
from us, the credit that another has given us. La course d'vn malheur est
tousiours trop hastiue. The course of ill fortune is always to swift. La
course d'vn bon heur n'est iamais trop hastiue. The course of good fortune is
never to swift. La mediocrite rend la person heureuse. Mediocritie makes a
man happy. Le haut degree d'honneur est chose dangereuse. The high degree of
honor, is a dangerous thing. La mort nous va suiuant comme l'ombre le corpse.
Death does still follow us, as the shadow does the body. La mort nous tient
tousiours un cousteau sur la gorge. Death holds always a sword upon our
throats. La seule opinion fait les hommes armer. Opinion only makes men arm
themselves, one against another. Le changement d'ho^neurs aussi change les
moeurs. The changing of honors, does change also the manners. La seule virtue
peut les hommes decorer. Virtue only can deck and honor men. Le sage par
conseil deuance son dommage. The wise man by counsel may prevent an ill hap.
Le plaisir n'est plaisant, s'il ne couste bien cher. Pleasure is not pleasant,
unless it does cost dear. Le coeur en nostre corpse tous les me^bres address.
The heart in our body, does rule all the rest of the limbs. Les Princes, sans
amiss, sont tousiours malheureux. Princes without friends, be always unhappy. La
beauty n'est beauty, sinon qu'auec virtue. Beauty is not beauty, but only
with virtue. L'enuie nuist tousiours a ceux qui sont en vie. Envy can not
offend, but those that be alive. L'enuie ne peut rien sur les vertus d'vn mort.
Envy has no power, upon the virtue of a dead body. Le bo^ heur tousiours
train un bo^ heur a se queue. Good luck bringes always an ill turn after
him. La raison ne peut rien, quand la force command. Reason has no power,
when force does command. Le feu ne seroit feu s'il cessoit d'estre chaud.
Fire were not fire, if it were not hot. La nature est tousiours plus forte que
la loy. Nature is always stronger then the laws. Le malade aim l'eau, qui
luy est deffendue. The sickman loves water, though it be forbidden him. La mort
est le recours des hommes miserables. Death is the recourse of miserable men.
La joy and la douleur commandent tour a tour. Gladness and sadness, does
rule one after another. Le penser aux amans, sert de langue and de veue.
Thoughts serve to lovers, both for tongue and ears. L'homme sage obeit, ne
pouuant commander. The wise man will obey, when he can not command.
L'auctorite ne sert, qui n'a contentement. Honor avails nothing, except we be
content. L'ho^neur est moins que rien, quand l'ho^me est miserable. Honor is
worth nothing, when man is miserable. Le desir n'est content que l'espoir
reconforte. Love whom hope comfort, is not altogether content. Le desir nous
tourmente, and l'espoir nous content. Desire tormenteth us, and hope
comfort us. Les Dieux du ciel ont mis la sueur au deuant, De la haute virtue,
a qui la va suyuant. God of heaven has put before us virtue, sweat, and
labor, for those that will follow it. Le chat qui vne fois a taste du fromage.
N'a iamais de repos qu'il n'en ait dauantage. The Cat that once has tasted of
the cream, will not be quiet, till she has gotten more. L'honneur suit les
hasards, and l'homme audacieux, Par son malheur s'honnore, and se rend
glorieux. Honor follows dangers, and the hardy man by his mishap honoreth
himself, and makes himself glorious. Les effects sont les masles, and les
paroles les femeles. The deeds are manly, and the words womanly. Les mouches
vo^t tousiours, aux cheuaux maigres. The flies go to lean horses. Le mal
vient par livers, and s'en va par onces. Mischief comes by pounds, and goes
by ounces away. La mort des loups, est la sauuete des brebis. The death of the
wolves, is the safety of the sheep.
M
Mieux vaut le peu en paix, que l'abo^dance en guerre. Little is better worth in
peace, the^ great store in war. Mettre de l'huile au feu, n'est le vouloir
esteindre. To cast oil into the fire, is not the way to quench it. Maistriser
ses desirs, est grande Seigneurie. To rule his own desire, is the greatest
Lordship. Maintenir le meschant est fair tort au bon. To maintain the wicked,
is to do wrong to the godly. Maintenir l'innocent, est oeuure charitable. To
take the part of a guiltless man, is a charitable work. Malheureux qui ne
voit, que par les yeux d'autruy. Unhappy is he that sees nothing, but by the
eyes of others. Malheureux qui desire, and n'est iamais content. Unhappy is he
that desires continually, being never content. Meilleure au miserable, est la
mort que la vie. Death is better to the miserable then life. Mauuaises
nouuelles sont le plus souue^t veritables. Ill news be commonly to true. Matin
le iour se leave, pour mourir sur le soir. One rises in health in the morning,
that does dye before the evening. Mal dessus mal n'est pas sante. Sore upon
sore is not a salve. Mauuaise guard paist souuent le loup. An ill shepherd,
does often feed the wolf. Ma chemise m'est plus proche que ma robe. My shirt
is nearer to my skin, then my coat. Mieux vaut plier que rompre. It is
better to bow then to break. Mettre la charrue deuant les bcufs. We must not
put the carte, before the oxen. Moustarde apres disner. After dinner mustarde.
Merchant qui pert ne peut rire. The Merchant that loses can not laugh.
N
Nous desirons le plus, ce que l'on nous deffend. We desire most the thing
forbidden us. Ne regard en la bouche, au cheual qu'on te done. Never look in
the mouth of a horse that has been given thee. Nier la verite est sign
d'impudence. To deny the truth known, is a great impudency. Necessite est
mere and nourrice des Arts. Necessity is mother, and nurce of all Arts. Ne
laissons le chemin pour suyure un faux sentier. Let us not leave a true way,
for to follow an uncertain pathway. Nature s'esiouist en la diversity. Nature
has pleasure in diversity. N'admirons le fourreau, pour m'espriser la lame.
Let us not admire the scabberd, for to despise the blad. Null homme n'est
heureux, sinon apres la mort. No man is happy, but after death. Nous
conseillons bien mieux les autres, que nous mesmes. We can give always better
counsel to other, then to our selves. Nous ne scauons rien mieux, que ce que
nous desirons scauoir. We know nothing better, then that we desire to know.
Necessite n'a point de loy. Necessity has no law. Nous ne scauons rien moins,
que ce que nous pensons le plus. We know nothing less, the^ when we think to
know most. Nourriture pass nature. Bringing up goes beyond nature. Nous nous
persuadons aysement ce que nous desiro^s. We easily believe, what we do desire.
Null ne doibt entreprendre outre les limits de sa capacite. No man ought to
undertake any thing more, then he is able to perform. Null bien sans peine. No
good without pain. Nulle fumee sans feu. No smoke without fire. Ne dites
iamais que vous estes en la ville, iusques a ce que vous en ayez pass les
ports. Do never say that you are in the City, until you have passed the
gates thereof. Nous deuo^s plus aymer ceux qui nous sont obligez, que ceux, a
qui nous sommes obligez. We ought to love those better that be beholding to us,
then those to whom we be beholding. Ne faisons a autruy ce que nous ne
voudrio^s qu'on nous fist. Let us not do to others, the thing that we would
not to be done to us. Nous ne tenons en nostre main, Leiour d'hier ny de
demain. We do not hold in ours hands neither yesterday nor the morrow.
O
On se doibt espiner, qui veut cueillir des Roses. The thorns will prick us,
if we will gather any roses. On peut beaucoup mieux vaincre un ennemy que deux.
It is easier to overcome one enemy then two. On pert parole and te^ps, qua^d on
parle a des sourds. We loose both our speeches and time, when we do speak to a
deaf man. On fait perdre le corpse, en trop cerchant l'esprit. He marres his
body, that seeks to much for the spirit. On fait perdre l'esprit, en trop
flattant le corpse. He marres his wit, that pampereth his body to much. On
frotte tant le fer qu'a la fin il s'eschauffe. We rub the Iron so much, that in
the end we heat it. On peut a peine aymer, and ensemble estre sage. We can
scarce both love, and be wise together. On le visage est beau, le coeur doibt
sstre doux. When the face is fair, the heart must be gentle. On ne voit pas
tousiours en mesme estat les cieux. We see not the heavens always in one self
same estate. On ne scauroit voler, deuant qu'auoir des aisles. One can not
fly, before he has wings. On ne peut a grands coups, fair douce Music. One
can not with great blows, make sweet Music. On ne dit rien que l'on n'ait
dit deuant. Nothing is said, that has not been said before. On voit qu'en fin,
par un commun malheur, Tousiours le pire est maistre du meilleur. We see that
commonly by a common mischaunce, that the worse overcomes the best. On ne
scauroit fair d'vne buse un espreuier. It is impossible to make a good hawk
of a kite. On ne scauroit fair d'vne fille deux gendres. One ca^ not have at
once two sons in law of a daughter. Ostez un vilain du gibet, il vous y
mettra. Save a thief from the gallows, and he will put you in his place. On
sera mesure de la mesure mesme qu'on mesure autruy. We shall be measured by the
same measure, that we measure others by. On doibt donner les dignitez aux
hommes, and non pas les hommes aux dignitez. We must give dignities to men, and
not give men to dignities. On endure souuent d'vn mauuais seruiteur pour
l'amour de son maistre. We do endure often of a bad servant, for his masters
sake. Oingnez vilain il vous poindra, Annointe a knave, and he will gall you,
Poingnez vilain il vous oindra. Gall a knave, and he will annointe you.
P
Plus on veut s'auancer, and plus on se recule. The more have, the worse
speed. Pardonner, and sauuer, est le propre des Dieux. To forgive, and to
save, is the virtue of God. Plus la joy est extreme, and plus elle est
fuitiue. The greater that joy is, the sooner it flies away. Par un order
uncertain, toutes chooses se muent. By an uncertain order and course, all
things do move and stir. Pour fair ce qu'on doibt, il ne faut de salaire. In
doing our duty, we deserve no reward. Par les plays du front, le soldat se
signale. By the scarres of his face, the soldier does get fame. Pour bien
tirer il faut prendre visee. For to shout right, and hit the white, one must
lenell. Presque tousiours, la recheute est mortelle. The falling again, is
almost always deadly. Plus de beauty plus de tourment apporte. Where there is
great beauty, great torment it brings. Par les hazards, l'honneur se doibt
cercher. Through perils, credit ought to be sought. Plus penser que dire, and
espoir de mieux. Think more then thou speaks, and hope for the best. Pour
bien seruir and loyal estre, De seruiteur on deuient maistre. In serving well,
and being faithful, one may become of a good servant, a good master. Petit
feu fait souuent vne grande fumee. A small fire, makes often a great smoke.
Petite pluye abbat grand vent. Small rain alayes great wind. Petit homme abbat
grand chesne. A little man may fell a great oak. Pour un plaisir mill
douleurs. For one pleasure, a thousand griefs. Pres de l'Eglise loing de Dieu.
Nearer the Church, further from God. Petites gens deuiennent grands. Children
may become men. Peu de paroles and beaucoup deffects. Few words, and many
deeds. Patience pass science. Patience passes science. Petite flame peut
s'accroistre en un grand feu. A little flame, may increase to a great fire. Peu
d'eau n'esteint grand feu. A little water cannot quench a great fire. Parmy la
voix des trompettes, la voix de bonnes loix ne peut bien estre entendue.
Amongst the sound of trompets and drommes, the voice of the good laws can not
be heard. Point d'argent point de valet. No money no man.
Q
Qui ne voudra danser, ne se met en la danse. He that will not dance, must
not come to daunces. Qui merit le mieux, est le moins guerdonne. He that
descrues the best, is commonly the worst rewarded. Qui console le mal le fait
renouueller. He that comfortes a grief, makes it renew again. Qui vise loing,
iamais ne rend son coup heureux. He that leuels far, shall never hit the
white. Qui n'a tousiours du bon, n'est pas tousiours vaincu. He that does not
overcome always, is not always overcome. Qui bless le cerueau, va blessant
tout le corpse. He that does hurt the brains, does hurt the whole body. Qui
surmo^te un vainqueur, merit double gloire. He that conqueres a co^queror,
deserves double glory. Qui n'a gouste d'aigreur, la douceur ne merit. He that
has not tasted of the sour, deserves not the sweet. Qui veut bien accuser,
n'ait rien don't on l'accuse. He that will reprove, must be blameless him
self. Qui vne fois est ne, doibt vne fois mourir. He that once is borne, once
must dye. Qui aim pour son bien, ne se peut dire amy. He that loves for his
own good and profit, can not be called friend. Qui par trop entreprend en fera
penitence. He that under takes more then he is able to perform, shall make
penance thereof. Qui l'ayant bien acquis, guard son heritage. Let us keep
fast the wealth, that once we have gotten. Qui acquiert fait beaucoup, qui
guard, d'auantage. He that does get, does much, he that does keep, does more.
Qui meurt pour le public, meurt honorablement. He that dies for the common
wealth, dies honorably. Qui fait honneur aux Roys, il fait honneur a Dieu. He
that honoreth the king, does honor God also. Qui veut battre son chien, trouue
assez de bastons. The man that will beat his dog, can find cudgels ynow. Quand
beau vient dessus beau, le beau pert sa beauty. When beauty comes on beauty,
then beauty loses her beauty. Qui n'a qu'vn oeil ait grand peur de le
perdre. He that has but an eye, must be afraid to loose it. Qui monte plus
haut qu'il ne doibt, Descend plus bas qu'il ne voudroit. He that mounteth
higher then he ought, shall descend lower then he would. Qui ne veut quand il
peut, il ne pourra quand il voudra. He that will not when he may, shall not
when he would. Qui bien se mire, bien se voit, He that beholdes himself in a
glass, may see himself well: Qui bien se voit, bien se cognoist. He that does
see himself well, does know himself well. Qui bien se cognoist peu se prise,
He that knows himself well, despises himself, Qui peu se prise, sage est.
He that despises himself is wise. Qui se fait brebis le loup la mange. He
that makes himself a sheep, shall be eaten by the wolf. Qui a bon voisin, il
a bon matin. He that has a good neighbor, has also a good morrow. Qui m'ayme,
aim mon chien. He that loves me, loves my dog. Qui desrobe un oeuf,
desroberoit bien un beuf. He that steals away an egg, will steal an ox.
Qui plege, pay. He that will be a surety, shall pay. Qui fait ce qu'il ne
doibt, Luy aduient ce qu'il ne voudroit. He that does what he ought not to do,
shall find what he would not. Qui veut entretenir son amy, N'ait rien affair
auec luy. He that will keep his friend, let him have nothing to do with him.
Qui contesans son host, luy conuient conter deux fois. He that reckneth
without his host, shall reckon twice. Qui trop se haste, loing se recule. He
that makes to great have, does hinder himself. Qui rien ne hazard, rien ne
prend. He that will adventure nothing, shall get nothing. Qui a terre, si a
guerre. He that has some la^d, must have also war and debat. Quand la chose
est faite, tout conseil est vain. When a thing is done, all counsel is in
vain. Qui voit brusler la maison d'autruy, doibt auoir grand peur de la
sienne. He that sees an other man's house on fire, must be afraid of his own.
Quatre yeux voyent plus que deux. Four eyes can see more then two. Qui a
affair de feu le doibt cercher. He that wants fire must needs seek for it.
Qui bien aim, bien chastie. He that loves well, does punish well. Qui debat
contre son maistre ordinairement pert sa cause. He that will strive against his
master commonly loses his cause. Quand orgueil cheuauche le premier, honte
and dommage le suyuent de pres. When Pride does ride, shame and damage does
follow after. Qui ne scait dissimuler, ne scait pas regner. He that can not
dissemble, can not rule. Quand on combat a lances d'argent, on a souuent la
victoire. They that fight with golden lances, gets commonly the victory.
Quand ton ennemy voudra fuir, fay luy un pont d'argent. When thine enemy will
fly, make him a golden bridge. Qui trop se promet, rien n'obtient. Whosoever
promises him self to much, gets nothing. Qui honor, and qui aim, Le
seruiteur de Roy, honor le Roy mesme. He that honoreth and loves the servant
of a king, does honor and love the king himself. Qui pert le sien, pert le
sens. He that loses his good, loses his senses. Qui vne fois au mal a voulu
s'adonner, vne and vn'autresfois ne craint d'y retourner. He that once has
given himself to evil, cares not to return to it another time. Qui n'a la
foy, n'a rien. He that has no faith, has nothing. Qui ne peut auoir ce qu'il
veut, doibt seulement vouloir ce qu'il peut. He that can not have what he
would, must wish what he can. Qui bien recompe^se, enseigne autruy d'estre bien
recompense. He that rewards well others, teaches how to be well rewarded.
Quand le coeur est embrouille de passions, 'les aureilles sont closes au
conseil. When the heart is wrapped with passions, the ears be shut to any good
counsel. Qui veut estre craint, force luy est qu'il craigne. He that will be
feared, ought to fear also. Qui a peur des fueilles, ne doibt aller au bois.
He that is afraid of the leaves, must not go to the wood. Qui voudra seurement
ramer, Iamais ne cingle en haute mer. He that will sail without danger, must
never sail in a maine sea.
R
Raison doibt surmonter les appetits de l'ame. Reason must overcome the desires
of the soul. Raison deuroit tenir la clef de tous nos faicts. Reason ought to
keep the key of all our actions. Raiso^doibt estre en nous la Royne, and la
maistresse. Reason must be in us, both the Queen and mistress. Raison pert la
raison, quand passion domine. Reason looses her reason, when passions rules.
Reproach de bienfait, rend le bienfait trop cher. The vpbraiding of a pleasure,
makes it to dearly bought. Richesse de l'esprit ne se peut iamais perdre. The
riches of the mind, can never be lost. Rare sont les thresors que le sage
possede. Rare be the treasures that the wiseman possesses. Rome ne fut toute
en un iour bastie. Rome was not builded in one day. Rire sans cause est sign
de folly. To laugh without cause, is sign of mere folly. Reprens autruy, mais
corrige toy mesme. Reprove others, but correct thy self. Repos d'esprit and
patience, Sont instrumens de la science. The rest of the mind, and patience,
be the instruments of a good science. Remets en droicte voye, Celuy la qui
fouruoye. Turn again in the way, the man that goes astray.
S
Si le coeur n'y consent, la fault est excusable. Except the heart agrees, the
fault is excusable. Sage est celuy qui croit a qui bien l'admonneste. Wise is
the man that believes him, that gives him a good warning. Se bien cognoistre,
est le plus grand scauoir. Que l'on scauroit desirer and auoir. To know
himself well, is the greatest knowledge that one can have, or wish for.
Scauoir le mal est souuent proffitable, Mais en vser est tousiours euitable. To
know the evil is often profitable, but the use of it, is always to be
eschued. Si nostre chemise scauoit nostre secret, nous la deurions brusler. If
our shirt know our secrets, it were to be burned. Sur l'enclume du reproach,
est bien souuent forge le vice d'ingratitude. Upon the Anuil of vpbraiding, is
often forged the vice of unthankfulness. Se mettre en rang d'oignon, and ne
valloir vne eschallotte. To put himself in the number of onions, and not to be
worth a scallion. Souuent a mauuais chie^, to^be un bon os en gueulle. Into the
mouth of a bad dog ge, falls often a good bone.
T
Tousiours le changement est fascheux a porter. The change, is always hard to
be borne. Tous ceux qu'ayment les Dieux ne viue^t pas long temps. All those
that God loves, do not live long. Tuer un miserable est act de pity. It is an
act of pity, to kill a miserable man. Tout mistere d'amour, merit estre
cache. All mystery of love ought to be hidden. Tout ce qui est au mo^de, est
un ieu d'inconstance. All that is in this world, is nothing but a play of
inconstancy. Tant plus on se voit pres d'vne chose esperee, Tant plus
l'affection s'en fait demesuree. The nearer we see our selves, to that we
desire, the more our affection to it is increased and augme^ted. Tousiours
l'exces d'amour se change en ialousie. The excess of love, is always changed
into jealousy. Tu pers l'occasion si tu ne la scais prendre. Thou loosest the
occasion, if thou know not how to take it. Tout ce qui prend naissance est
perissable aussi. All that has beginning, has also an ending. Trop tard on se
repend, quand on est embarque. It is to late to repent, when we are imbargued.
Tell fleurist auiourd'huy, qui demain flestrira. Some florisheth to day, that to
morrow shall be withered. Tell flestrist auiourd'huy, qui demain fleurira. Some is
withered to day, that to morrow shall flourish. Tant que l'ennemy vit, la guerre
n'est pas morte. So long as the enemy lives, the war is not ended. Tell se
cuide estre au port, ayant la mer bonace, Qui de vens effrontez soudainement
desplace. One thinks to be in the haven with a calm sea, which in the end is
constrained to depart by tempest. Tant plus un bien est longuement cache, Plus
est requis attendu and cerche. The more a thing is hidden and forbidden, much
more it is looked for, desired and sought. Tout ce mo^de est douteux: la seule
heure derniere, Parfait nostre bon heur, ou bien nostre misere. All this world
is doubtful, the only last hour, has power to end, either our happiness, or
unhappiness. Tout homme quel qu'il soit, ou ne de race haute, Ou sorty de bas
lieu, a en soy quelque fault. Any man whosoever, whether he be borne of a high
or of a low degree, has some fault in him. Tout ainsi que le vent sans
retourners'en vole, ans espoir de retour, s'eschappe la parole. Even as the
wind passes away, without returning any more, so styeth away our words,
without any hope to call them back again. Tort bien plaide rend bon droit
inutile. An ill cause well pleaded, makes a good cause unprofitable. Toute
chose naturelle appete son semblable All natural things loves that, which is
most like to it. Trop grand familiarite engendre du mespris. To great
familiarity breeds contempt. Toute chose se pass, and rien seur ne demeure,
en ceste terre basse. All things passes away, and nothing remains sure, in
this earth below. Toute peine merit salaire. All pains taking, deserves his
reward. Tout ce que l'homme pense n'aduient pas. All that man thinks, comes
not to pass. Tant plus on foul au pied, le saffran and meilleur il en est.
The more saffron is trodden under foot, the better it is. Tout ce qui a
sembla^ce de verite n'est verite pourtant. All that which has likeness of
truth, is not truth. Tell feint estre simple comme un agneau, qui est cauteleux
comme un renard. Some feign themselves to be as simple as a lamb, which are as
crafty as a fox. Trop d'artifice enuers l'amy, Est vne marque d'ennemy. To
much Art toward a friend, is a token of a foe. Trop achette le miel, qui sur
espines le leche. Honey licked on the thorns, is to dearly bought. Trop tard
se repend qui n'a plus de remede. To late repented the man, that has no more
remedy. Tell refuse, qui apres muse. Some refuses a thing, that he wishes for
after. Trop parler nuist, trop gratter cuist. To much speaking does hurt, to
much galling do smart. Trop enquerre n'est pas bon. It is not good to inquire
to much. Tout vient a point, qui peut attendre. All things may come time
enough, if we ca^haue the patience to stay. Tousiours pesche qui en prend un.
Sill fisheth he, that catches one. Trop tossed vient a la port, Qui mauuaise
nouuelle apporte. He comes to soon at our gate, that bringes with him ill
news. Tout ce qui luist n'est pas or. All that glistereth, is not gold. Tell
seem, qui ne moisonne. One sows, that reapeth not. Tell bat les buissons, qui
ne prend les oisillons. One beats the bushes, that catches not the birds.
Tousiours le pire, est maistre du meilleur. The worst is commonly master of the
best. Tell cuide prendre, qui est pris. One thinks to catch, when he himself
is caught. Tout ce fait auec le temps. All things are done with time. Toute
chose a son tour. Every thing has his turn. Tell vie tell fin. Such a life,
such an end. Tout ce qui est de beau ne se guard long temps. All that which is
fair, is not to be kept long. Toute rigueur s'amollit par priere. All rigors
is assuaged with prayer. Tell a grand peur qui bien souuent menace. Some ma^is
greatly, afraid that sometime does threate^. Tousiours propice aux bons est Dieu
la justice. The justice of God, is always favorable to the good. Tout homme
volontiers ses ancestres ressent. Commonly every man, is like to his
auncesters. Tant plus les hommes ont, plus ils veulent auoir. The more men
have, the more they desire. Tout chose prend fin and rien n'en est exempt.
Every thing has an end, and nothing is free from it. Tout le monde ne peut pas
estre maistre. Every one can not be a master. Toute chair n'est pas venaison.
All flesh is not venison. Trop ne vaut rien. To much is stark naught.
V
Vne second erreur n'est pas digne d'excuse. A second fault, ought not to be
pardonned. Vne beauty parfaicte est de mauuaise guard. A perfect beauty is of
an ill guard. Vne beauty cruelle est un monstre en nature. A cruel beauty, is
a monster in nature. Un Dieu, sans se vanger, n'endure estre offense. God
without the fault, will never be offended. Vin de grain est plus doux, quen'est
pas vin de press. The wine of the grapes, is sweeter then the wine of the
press. Vne amor par co^trainte est plus chaude rendue. Love does increase,
when it is withstood. Vne parfaite amor ne se peut desguiser. A perfect love
can not be disguised. Vne parfaite amor dure eternellement. A perfect love
does last eternally. Vne extreme douleur ne peut estre durable. An extreme
grief can not continue long. Un contraire est tousiours mieux veu par son
contraire. One contrary, is always better known, by his contrary. Un bon
peintre scait peindre and un Diable, and un Ange. A good painter, can draw as
well a devil, as an Angel. Un ho^me sans argent, est come un corpse sans ame.
A man without money, is as a body without the soul. Un coup de langue est plus
da^gereux qu'vn coup de lance. The biting of the tongue is more dangerous, then
the blow of a lance. Vin vieux and amys vieux, so^t louez en tous lieux. Old
wine, and old friends, are praised every where. Ville qui parlemente, est a demi
rendue. The City that does parle, is more then half gotten. Vne once de
discretion vaut mieux, qu'vne liver de hardiesse. An ounce of difcretion, is
better worth, then a pound of hardiness. Un nouueau mal fait de nouueaux
effects. A new sore gives new effects. Vne mauuaise cause auec l'art bien
plaidee, Est plus que le bon droit souue^t recommandee. A bad cause with good
skill well pleaded, is often above the good right commended. Un bon conseil est
la force d'vn Roy. Good counsel is the force of a king. Un fort desir tout
conseil va domptant. A greedy desire, overcomes all good counsel. Un seul
sentier n'est clos a la virtue. There is not any way shut to virtue. Un malheur
iamais ne vient tout seul. An ill chance never comes alone. Virtue n'a iamais
bonne bourse. Virtue has never a good purse. Un clou est repousse, par un
autre plus fort. One nail is driven out by an other nail. Vneliure d'or vaut
mieux, qu'vne once d'ho^neure. A pound of gold is better worth, then an ounce
of honor. Vne abeille morte ne fait plus de miel. A dead Be makes no honey. Un
viel chien iamais ne iappe en vain. An old dog will never bark in vain. Un
piteux medecin fait vne mortelle play. A pityfull Physician makes a deadly
wound. Un magnanime coeur volontiers nes'excuse. A courageous heart, will not
commonly seek for an excuse. Un magnanime coeur se cognoist a l'effect. A
courageous heart is known by his deeds. Un Judge partial ne scauroit bien
iuger. A partial Judge, can never judge well. Un Prince est bien voulu pour
son humanite. A Prince is well beloved, for his gentleness. Un Empereur est
craint pour sa seuerite. An Emperor is feared, for his severity. Un Prince
trop cruel ne dure longuement. A Prince to cruel, can not continue long. Un
Prince trop humain ne regne seurement. A Prince to gentle, does not reign in
security. Un magnanime coeur ne se plaint des malheurs. A courageous heart,
will never complain of his ill hap. Un magnanime coeur ne peut viure en
seruage. A courageous heart, can not live in thraldom. Un sac perce ne peut
tenir le grain. A broken sack, can not hold any corn. Un fol enseigne bien
aucunefois un sage. The fool some time, does teach the wise. Vne mauuaise
parole s'estend incontinent par tout. An ill word is quickly spread abroad. Un
bon subject doibt mourir pour son Roy. A good subject, must dye for his Prince.
Vne belle vie engendre belle mort. A good life, engenders good death.
FIN. FINIS.

