A proper new sonet declaring the lamentation of Beckles in Suffolk, which
was in the great wind upon S. Andrews eve last, past most pitifully burned
with fire, to the loss by estimation of twenty thousand pound and upward,
and to the number of four scoredwelling houses. 1586. To Wilsons tune.
WIth sobbing sighs and trickling tears my state I do lament
Perceiving how Gods heavy wrath against my sins is bent
Let all men view my woeful fall and rue my woeful case
And learn hereby in speedy sort repentance to embrace.
For late in Suffoclke was I seen to be a stately town
Replenished with riches store and had in great renown
Yea planted on a pleasant soil so fair as heart could wish
And had my markets once a week well storde with flesh and fish
A fair fresh River running by to profit me withal
Who with a cristall cleared stream about my banks did fall
My fayres in somer welth^ly for to increase my store
My meadows green and commons great what could I wish for more.
But now behold my great decay which on a sudden came
My sumptuous buildings burned be by force of fires flame
A careless wretch most rude in life his chymney set on fire
The Instrument I must confess of Gods most heavy ire.
The flame whereof increasing still the blustering winds did blow
And into diverse buildings by dispersed it to and fro
So kindling in most grievous sort it waxed huge and hie
The River then was frozen so no water they could come by.
Great was the cry that then was made among both great and small
The women wept and wrong their hands whose goods consumed all
No help was found to slack the fire their pains was spent in vain
To bear their goods into the fields for safegarde they were feign.
And yet amid this great distress a number set their mind
To filtch and steal and bear away so much as they could find
Their neighbors wealth which wasted lay about the streets that time
They secretly conuayde away O most accursed crime.
Thus from the morning nine a clock till four a clock at night
Fourscore houses in Beckles town was burnd to ashes quite
And that which most laments my heart the house of God I say
The Church and temple by this fire is clean consumde away.
The market place and houses fair that stood about the same
Has felt the force and violence of this most fearful flame
So that there is no christian man but in his heart would grieve
To see the smart I did sustain upon saint Andrews eve.
Wherefore good christian people now take warning by my fall
Live not in strife and envious hate to breed each other thrall
Seek not your neighbors lasting spoil by greedy suit in Law
Live not in discord and debate which does destruction draw.
And flatter not your selves in sin hold not Gods word in scorn
Repine not at his Ministers nor be not false forsworn
For where such vices does remain Gods grace will never be
And in your health and happy state have yet some mind on me.
Whose songs is changd to sorrows sore my joys to wayling woe
My mirth to mourning sighs and groans the which from grief does grow
My wealth to want and scarsetie my pleasure into pain
All forth sin and wickedness which did in me remain.
If then you wish prosperity be loving meek and kind
Layrage and rancour clean aside see malice from your mind
And live in love and charity all hateful pride detest
And so you shall with happy days for evermore be blessed.
And thus I end my woeful song beseeching God I may
Remain a mirror to all such that do in pleasure stay
And that amongst their greatest mirth and chiefest joy of all
They yet may have a heart to thinks of Beckles sudden fall.
FINIS.
T. D.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by Robert Robinson for Nicholas Colm^ of Norwich,
dwelling in S. Andrews Church yard.


