A most joyful Song, made in the behalf of all her Majesty's faithful and
loving Subjects: of the great joy, which was made in London. at the taking of
the late traiterous Conspirators, which sought opportunity to kill her Majesty,
to spoil the City, and by foreign invasion to ouerrun the Realm: for the
which heinous Treasons, fourteen of them have suffered death on the 20. and, 21.
of Sept. Also, a detestation against those Conspirators, and all their
Confederates, giving God the praise for the safe preservation of her majesty,
and their subversion. Anno. Domini. 1586.
To the tune of: O man in desperation.


OH Englishmen with Romish hearts, what Devil does bewitch you,
To seek the spoil of Prince and Realm, like Traitors most untrue.
Why is your duty so forgot, unto your Royal Queen,
That you your faith and promise break, O viperous brood vncleene.
Blessed be God who knew your thought, and brought your treason out:
And your destruction now has wrought that made us so in doubt.
For if you might have had your wills to make your bloody day,
Many a widow and fatherless child, had then cried wellaway.
Many a City had been sacked, whose houses had been firde.
Yea, many a Peer had lost his life, these fruits you all desirde,
But now fourteen of you have felt, that death you have deserved,
And God (in mercy) from your hands, our prince and us preserved.
And would you seek your Countries spoil, your Mother and your Nurse,
That fostred you and brought you up, what treason may be wurse?
Why is your false and poisoned hearts, surprised with such hate,
That you must needs by foreign power, suppress your happy state.
Why do you bear such foolish love unto the Rags of Rome,
That you would seek sweet Englands spoil, and Princes deadly doom,
Will nothing serve your deuillish turn in this your deadly strife,
But even the blood of your good Queen, and her to reaue of life.
Do you not know there is a God, that guides her night and day,
Who does reveal her foes attempts, and brings them to decay,
O wicked men with Tigers hearts, nay Monsters I should say,
That seeks to spoil so good a Queen, as none the like this day.
Her tender love, procures your hate, her mercy makes you bold,
Her gentle sufferaunce of your pride, presumptuous vncontrolde,
Does make you to forget your God, your selves and duties all,
Whereby you bend your busy brains to mischief and to thrall.
Know you not who her highness is? King Henry's daughter dear,
The mightiest Monarche in his days, or has been many a year:
She is our Prince and sovereign Queen, anointed by Gods grace,
To set forth his most sacred word, his enemies to deface.
Have you not holy scripures read, how byrds with fluttering wings,
A Traitors thought they will betray against anointed Kings,
God will no secret treason hide, against a wicked Prince,
Much more, for safety of the good, their foes he will convince.
Therefore you cruel cankred crew, why seek you mischief still,
For to attempt with violent hands, Gods chosen for to kill.
How dare you once in hollow heart, think ill of such a Queen,
Whom God himself does favor so, as like was never seen.
Have you such wicked hateful hearts, in thirsting after blood,
That with false Judas you can bear, two faces in one hoode?
Too often has her Majesty beheld without mistrust,
The outward smiles of Crokadiles, whose hearts were most unjust.
O living Lord who would suppose that under veluets fine,
Such cankred poison should be hid, as has been found this time.
Is this the precious faithful fruit, which does from Papists spring?
Are these the works whereby they think Gods Kingdom for to win?
Is not their greedy thirsting throats yet satisfied with blood?
When as it streamde down Paris streets, much like to Nylus flood.
Or are they not yet drunk enough, in quaffing bloody bowls,
But look they for a second draught among us English souls.
O England, England yet rejoice, thy God beholds all,
And he has given for evermore thy foes a shameful fall.
By him all Kings and Princes reign, he gives them life and breath,
He has set up and will maintain our Queen Elizabeth.
The secret drift and ill intent, of her late hateful foes,
Unto all faithful Subjects joys, the Lord did well disclose.
Yea many Traitors false of faith, through his most mighty power,
Are taken in most happy time, and sent unto the Tower.
Which happy sight for all to see, did glad each Subject true,
And many thousands ran apace, those Caytiues vile to view.
Whom when the people did epsy, they cried loud and shryll,
There go the Traitors false of faith, which sought our Queen to kill.
There go the wretched wicked ones, her City meant to spoil,
And murder all her Citizens, but now they have the foil.
There go the enemies of the Realm, did think to ouerrunne
All England: to let in the Pope, but now Gods will is done.
God sent them now their due deserts, as they in heart conspyrde,
To take away our gracious Queen, and City to have fyrde.
God grant we never live to see, that dismal day to have,
Who bless our noble Queen and Realm, and eke her City save.
And thus the people still did cry, both men and women all,
And children young did shout alowde, and Traitors Traitors call.
Yea thousands trudging to and fro, to meet them still did run,
And some stood fasting all the day, till that day light was done.
To see these Traitors taken so, their hearts for joy did spring,
And to declare this perfect joy, some ran the Belles to ring.
The Belles I say did bravely ring, that day and all the night,
And throughout stately London streets rejoiced every wight.
And when the day was past and gone, and that the night drew near,
The worthy Citizens many a one, prepared their good cheer.
And Bondfyres did they merely make, through all the streets that time,
And in the streets their Tables stood, prepared brave and fine.
They came together (gladly all, and there did merry make,
And gave God thanks with cheerful hates, for Queen Elizabeth's sake.
In solemn Psalms they sung full sweet, the praise of God on hie,
Who now and ever keeps our Queen from Traitors tyranny.
But when our noble gracious Queen, did understand this thing,
She writ a letter presently, and sealed it ^^th her Ring.
A Letter such of royal love, unto her Subjects ears,
That moved them from watery eyes, to shed forth joyful tears.
O noble Queen without compare, our hearts does bleed for woe,
To think that Englishmen should seek, thy life to ouerthroe.
But here we humbly do protest, oh gracious Queen to thee,
That Londoners will be loyal still, whilst life in them shall be.
And all that would not gladly so, spend forth their dearest blood,
God give to them a shameful end, and never other good.
And Lord with heart to thee we pray, preserve our noble Queen,
And still confound her hateful foes, as they have always been.
FINIS.
T. D.

The names of vij. traitros which were executed on the xx. of September being
Tuesday. 1586
John Balard semenary Peiest, Anthonye Babyngton Esquier. John Savage gent.
Robert Barnwell gent. Chediorck Tichburne Esquier. Charles Tylney Esquier,
Edward Abington Esquier.
The next day following these 7,
Thomas Sals^bury Esquier. Henry Dun gent. Edward Ihones Esquier. John Trauis
gent. John Charnocke genesis Robert Gage gent. Jeremy Bellamy gent.
Printed at London by Richard Jones.


