THE Secrets of Angling.

TEACHING, The choicest Tools* Baytes and seasons, for the taking of any Fish,
in Pond or River: practiced and familiarly opened in three Books.

By I. D. Esquire.

Well fair the pleasure
that bringes such treasure

Hold hook and line
then all is mine



TO THE WORTHY, AND MY MVCH RESPECTED FRIEND, Mr. JOHN HARBORNE, of Tackley, in
the County of Oxford, Esquire.
WOrthy Sir, this Poem being sent unto me to be printed after the death of the
Author, who intended to have done it in his life, but was prevented by death: I
could not among my good friends, bethink me of any one to whom I might more
fitly dedicate it (as well for the nature of the subject in which you delight
as to express my love) than to your self. I find it not only sauouring of
Art and Honesty, two things now strangers unto many Authors, but also both
pleasant and profitable; and being loath to see a thing of such value lie
hidden in obscurity, whilst matters of no moment pester the stales of every
STATIONER; I therefore make bold to publish it, for the benefit and delight of
all, trusting that I shall neither thereby disparage the Author, nor dislike
them. I need not, I think, Appollogize either the use of the subject, or for
that it is reduced into the nature of a Poem; for as touching the last (in
that it is in verse) some count it by so much the more delightful; and I hold
it every way as fit a subject for Poetry as Husbandry: and touching the first,
if Hunting and Hawking have been thought worthy delights and Arts to be
instructed in, I make no doubt but this Art of Angling is much more worthy
practice and approbation; for it is a sport every way as pleasant, less
chargeable, more profitable, and nothing so much subject to choler or
impatience as those are: you shall find it more briefly, pleasantly, and more
exactly performed, then any of this kind heretofore. Therefore I refer you
to the perusing thereof, and my self to your good opinion, which I tender as
that I hold most dear; ever remaining at

your gentle Command, R. I.

In due praise of this Praiseworthy Skill and Work.
IN skils that all doeseeke, but few do find,
Both gain and game; (like Sun and Moon do shine,
Then the Art of Fishing thus, is of that kind;
The Angler takes both with Hook and Line.
And as, with Lines, both these he takes; this takes,
With many a Line, well made, both Ears and Hearts,
And, by this skill, the skill-lesse skill-full makes:
The Corpse whereof discected so he parts,
Upon an humble Subject never lay
More proud, yet plainer Lines, the plain to lead,
This playner Art with pleasure to suruay,
To purchase it, with profit, by that DEED:
Who think this skill's too low than, for the high,
This Angler read, and they will be taken thereby.
Io. Dauies.
The Contents.
The first Book contains these 3. heads.
1 THe antiquity of Angling, with the Art of Fishing, and of Fish in general.
2 The lawfulness, pleasure, and profit thereof, with all Objections, answered,
against it. 3 To know the season, and times to provide the Tools, and how to
choose the best, and the manner how to make them fit to take each several
Fish.
The second Book, contains
1 THe Anglers experience, how to use his Tools and Baytes, to make profit by
his game. 2 What Fish is not taken with Angle, and what is: and which is best
for health. 3 In what Waters and Rivers to find each Fish.
The third Book contains,
1 THe 12. virtues and qualities which ought to be in every Angler. 2 What
weather, seasons, and times of the year is best and worst, and what hours of
the day is best for sport. 3 To know each Fishes haunt, and the times to take
them. Also, an obscure secret, of an approved Bait, tending thereunto.
THE SECRETS of Angling.
The first Book.
OF Angling, and the Art thereof I sing,
What kind of Tools it does behoue to have;
And with what pleasing bayt a man may bring
The Fish to bite within the watery wave.
A work of thanks to such as in a thing
Of harmless pleasure, have regard to save
Their dearest souls from sin; and may intend
Of precious time, some part thereon to spend.
You Nymphs that in the Springs and Waters sweet,
Your dwelling have, of every Hill and Dale,
And often amidst the Meadows green do meet,
To sport and play, and hear the Nightingale;
And in the Rivers fresh do wash your feet,
While Prognes sister tells her woeful tale:
Such aid and power unto my verses lend,
As may suffice this little work to end.
And thou sweet The name of a Brook.
Boyd that with thy watery sway,
Do wash the cliffes of Deington and of Week;
And through their Rocks with crooked winding way,
Thy mother Auon runnest soft to seek:
In whose fair streams the speckled Trout does play,
The Roche, the Dace, the Gudgin, and the Bleeke.
Teach me the skill with slender Line and Hook
To take each Fish of River, Pond, and Brook.
The time for providing Angle Rods.
FIrst, when the Sun begins to decline
Southward his course, with his fair Chariot bright,
And passed has of Heaven the middle Line,
That makes of equal length both day and night;
And left behind his back the dreadful sign,
Of cruel Centaure, slain in drunken fight,
When Beasts do mourn, and Birds forsake their song,
And every Creature thinks the night too long.
And blustering Boreas with his chilling cold,
Unclothed has the Trees of Summers green;
And Woods, and groves, are naked to behold,
Of Leaves and Branches now dispoyled clean:
So that their fruitful stocks they do unfold,
And lay abroad their offspring to beseene;
Where nature shows her great increase of kind
To such as seek their tender shutes to find.
Then go into some great Arcadian wood,
Where store of ancient Hazels do abound;
And seek amongst their springs and tender brood,
Such shutes as are the straightest, long, and round:
And of them all (store up what you think good)
But fairest choose, the smoothest, and most sound;
So that they do not two years growth exceed,
In shape and beauty like the Belgicke Reed.
These prune and cleanse of every leaf and spray,
Yet leave the tender top remaining still:
Then home with thee go bear them safe away,
But perish not the Rine and utter Pill;
And on some even boarded floor them lay,
Where they may dry and season at their fill:
And place upon their crooked parts some weight,
To press them down, and keep them plain and straight.
So shall thou have always in store the best,
And fittest Rods to serve thy turn aright;
For not the brittle Cane, nor all the rest,
I like so well, though it be long and light,
Since that the Fish are frighted with the least
Aspect of any glittering thing, or white:
Nor does it by one half so well incline,
As does the plyant rod to save the line.
To make the Line.
THen get good Hair, so that it be not black,
Neither of Mare nor Gelding let it be;
Nor of the tyreling Jade that bears the pack:
But of some lusty Horse or Courser free,
Whose bushie tail upon the ground does tracke,
Like blazing Comete that sometimes we see:
From out the midst thereof the longest take,
At leisure best your Linkes and Lines to make.
Then twist them finely, as you think most meet,
By skill or practice easy to be found;
As does Arachue with her slender feet;
Draw forth her little thread along the ground,
But not too hard or slack, the mean is sweet,
Least slack they snarle, or hard they prove unsound,
And intermixed with silver, silk, or gold,
The tender hayres, the better so to hold.
Then end to end, as falls to their lot,
Let all your Linkes in order as they lie
Be knit together, with that Fishers knot
That will not slip, or with the wet untie:
And at the lowest end forget it not
To leave a Bought or Compass like an eye,
The Link that holds your Hook to hang upon,
When you think good to take it off and on.
Which Link must neither be so great nor strong,
Nor like of color as the others were;
Scant half so big, so that it be as long:
Of grayest Hue, and of the soundest Hair,
Least whiles it hangs the liquid waves among
The sight thereof, the wary Fish should fear.
And at one end a Loope or Compass fine,
To fasten to the other of your line.
Cork.
THen take good Cork, so much as shall suffice,
For every Line to make his swimmer fit;
And where the midst and thickest parts does rise,
There burn a round small hole quite through it:
And put therein a Quill of equal size,
But take good heed the Cork you do not slit.
Then round or square with Razor pare it near,
Piramid-wise, or like a slender Pear.
The smaller end does serve to sink more light,
Into the water with the Plummets sway;
The greater swims aloft and stands upright,
To keep the Line and Bayt at even stay,
That when the Fish begins to nib and byte,
The moving of the float does them bewray.
These may you place upon your Lines at will,
And stop them with a white and handsome Quill.
Hooks.
THen buy your Hooks the finest and the best
That may be had of such as use to sell,
And from the greatest to the very least
Of every sort pick out and choose them well,
Such as in shape and making pass the rest.
And do for strength and soundness most excel:
Then in a little Box of dryest wood
From rust and canker keep them saire and good.
That Hook I love that is in compass round
Like to the print that Pegasus did make,
With horned hoof upon Thessalian ground;
From whence forthwith Pernassus spring out brake,
That does in pleasant Waters so abound:
And of the Muses often the thirst does slake,
Who on his fruitful banks do sit and sing,
That all the world of their swee tunes does ring.
Or as Thaumantis, when she list to shroud
Her self against the parching sunny ray,
Under the mantle of some stormy cloud,
Where she her sundry colors does display
Like Iunoes Bird, of her fair garments proud,
That Phoebus gave her on her marriage day:
Shows forth her goodly Circle far and wide,
To mortal wights that wonder at her pride.
His Shank should neither be to short nor long,
His point not ouersharpe, nor yet too dull:
The substance good that may endure from wrong;
His Needle slender, yet both round and full,
Made of the right Iberian mettell strong,
That will not stretch nor break at every pull,
Wrought smooth and clean withouten crack or knot
And bearded like the wild Arabian goat.
Then let your Hook be sure and strongly plaste
Unto your lowest Link with Silk or Hair,
Which you may do with often ouercaste,
So that you draw the Bouts together near,
And with both ends make all the other fast,
That no bare place or rising knot appear:
Then on that Link hang Leads of even weight
To raise your floate, and carry down your bait.
Thus have you Rod, Line, Float, and Hook;
The Rod to strike, when you shall think it fit,
The Line to lead the Fish with wary skill,
The Float and Quill to warn you of the bit;
The Hook to hold him by the chap or gill,
Hook, Line, and Rod, all guided to your wit.
Yet there remains of Fishing tools to tell,
Some other sorts that you must have as well.
Other fishing Tools.
ALittle Board, the lightest you can find,
But not so thin that it will break or bend;
Of Cypres sweet, or of some other kind,
That like a Trenchor shall it self extend:
Made smooth and plain, your Lines thereon to wind,
With Battlements at every other end:
Like to the Bulwark of some ancient Town,
As well-wald Sylchester now razed down.
A Shoe to bear the crawling Worms therein,
With hole above to hang it by your side,
A hollow Cane that must be light and thin,
Wherein the Bobb and Palmer shall abide,
Which must be stopped with an handsome pin,
Least out again your baytes do hap to slide.
A little Box that covered close shall lie,
To keep therein the busy winged Fly.
Then must you have a Plummet, formed round,
Like to the Pellet of a birding Bow:
Wherewith you may the secret'st waters sound,
And set your floate thereafter high, or low,
Till you the depth thereof have truly found:
And on the same a twisted thread bestow
At your own will, to hang it on your hook,
And so to let it down into the Brook.
Of Lead likewise, yet must you have a Ring,
Whose whole Diameter in length contains
Three Inches full, and fastened to a string
That must belong and sure, if need constraines:
Through whose round hole you shall your Angle bring,
And let it fall into the watery plain:
Until he come the weeds and sticks unto,
From whence your hook it serves to undo.
Have Tools good store to serve your turn withal,
Least that you happen some to lose or break;
As in great waters often it does befall,
When that the Hook is naught or Line too weak.
And waxed thread, or silk, so it be small
To set them on, that if you list to wreake
Your former loss, you may supply the place,
And not return with sorrow and disgrace.
Have twist likewise, so that it be not white,
Your Rod to mend, or broken top to tie;
For all white colors do the Fishes fright,
And make them from the bayte away to fly;
A File to mend your hooks, both small and light,
A good sharp knife, your Girdle hanging by:
A Pouch with many parts and purses thin,
To carry all your Tools and Trynkets in.
Yet must you have a little Rip beside,
Of Willow twigs, the finest you can wish;
Which shall be made so handsome and so wide
As may contain good store of sundry Fish:
And yet with ease be hanged by your side,
To bring them home the better to your dish.
A little Net that on a Pole shall stand,
The mighty Pyke or heavy Carpe to Land.
His sever all Tools, and what garment is fittest.
ANd let you garments Russet be or gray,
Of color dark, and hardest to discry;
That with the Rain or weather will away,
And least offend the fearful Fishes eye:
For neither Skarlet nor rich cloth of ray,
Nor colors dipped in fresh Assyrian dye,
Nor tender silks, of Purple, Paul, or gold,
Will serve so well to keep off wet or cold.
In this array the Angler good shall go
Unto the Brook, to find his wished game;
Like old Menaleus vvandring to and fro,
Until he chance to light upon the same,
And there his art and cunning shall bestow,
For every Fish his bayte so well to frame,
That long ere Phoebus set in Western some,
He shall return well laden to his home.
Objection.
SOme youthful Gallant here perhaps will say,
This is no pastime for a gentleman.
It were more fit at cards and dice to play,
To use both fence and dancing now and than,
Or walk the streets in nice and strange Array,
Or with coy phrases court his Mistress fan,
A poor delight with toil and painful watch,
With loss of time a silly Fish to catch.
What pleasure can it be to walk about,
The fields and meades in heat or pinching cold?
And stand all day to catch a silly Trout,
That is not worth a teaster to be sold,
And peradventure sometimes go without,
Besides the toles and troubles manifold,
And to be washed with many a shower of rain,
Before he can return from thence again?
More ease it were, and more delight I trow,
In some sweet house to pass the time away,
Amongst the best, with brave and gallant show,
And with fair dames to dance, to sport and play,
And on the board, the nimble dice to throw,
That brings in gain, and helps the shot to pay,
And with good wine and store of dainty fare,
To feed at will and take but little care.
The Answer.
I Mean not here men's errors to reprove,
Nor do envy their seeming happy state;
But rather marvel why they do not love
An honest sport that is without debate;
Since their abused pastimes often move
Their minds to anger and to mortal hate:
And as in bad delights their time they spend,
So often it brings them to no better end.
Indeed it is a life of lesser pain,
To sit at play from noone till it be night:
And then from night till it be noone again,
With damned oaths, pronounced in despite,
For little cause and every trifle vain,
To curse, to brawle, to quarrel, and to fight,
To pack the Cards, and with some cozning trick
His fellows Purse of all his coin to pick.
Or to beguile another of his Wife,
As did Aeghistus Agamemnon serve:
Or as that Roman Nero.
Monarch led a life
To spoil and spend, while others pine and sterue,
And to compel their friends with foolish strife,
To take more drink then will their health preserve:
And to conclude, for debt or just desert,
In baser tune to sing the Counter-part.
O let me rather on the pleasant Brinke
Of Tyne and Trent possess some dwelling place;
Where I may see my Quill and Cork down sink,
With eager bit of Barbill, Bleike, or Dace:
And on the World and his Creator think,
While they proud Thais painted sheat embrace.
And with the fume of strong Tobacco's smoke,
All quaffing round are ready for to choke.
Let them that list these pastimes then pursue,
And on their pleasing fancies feed their fill;
So I the Fields and Meadows green may view,
And by the Rivers fresh may walk at will,
Among the Dayzes and the Violets blew:
Red Hyacinth, and yealow Daffadill,
Purple Narcissus, like the morning rays,
Pale Ganderglas, and azour Culuerkayes.
I count it better pleasure to behold
The goodly compass of the lofty Sky,
And in the midst thereof like burning gold
The flaming Chariot of the worlds great eye;
The watery clouds that in the air vprold
With sundry kinds of painted colors fly:
And fair Aurora lifting up her head,
All blushing rise from old Thitonus bed.
The hills and Mountains raised from the Plains,
The plains extended level with the ground,
The ground divided into sundry veins,
The veins enclosed with running rivers round,
The rivers making way through natures chain,
With headlong course into the sea profounde:
The surging sea beneath the valleys low,
The valleys sweet, and lakes that lovely flow.
The lofty woods the forests wide and long,
Adornd with leaves and branches fresh and green,
In whose cool bowers the birds with chaunting song,
Do welcome with their quire the Summers Queen,
The meadows fair where Flora's gifts among,
Are intermixed the verdant grass between,
The silver skaled fish that softly swim,
Within the brooks and Crystal watery brimme.
All these and many more of his creation,
That made the heavens, the Angler often does see,
And takes therein no little delectation,
To think how strange and wonderful they be,
Framing thereof an inward contemplation,
To set his thoughts from other fancies free,
And whiles he looks on these with joyful eye,
His mind is rapt above the starry sky.
The Author of Angling.
But how this Art of Angling did begin,
And who the use thereof and practice found,
How many times and ages since have bin,
Wherein the sun has daily compast round,
The circle that the signs twice six are in:
And yielded yearly comfort to the ground,
It were too hard for me to bring about,
Since Ovid wrote not all that story out.
Yet to content the willing Readers ear,
I will not spare the sad report to tell,
When good Deucalion and his Pirrha dear,
Were only left upon the earth to dwell
Of all the rest that overwhelmed were
With that great flood, that in their days befell,
Wherein the compass of the world so round,
Both man and beast with waters deep were dround.
Between themselves they wept and made great moan,
How to repair again the woeful fall,
Of all mankind, whereof they two alone
The remnant were, and wretched portion small,
But any means or hope in them was none,
That might restore so great a loss with all,
Since they were aged, and in years so run,
That now almost their thread of life was spunne.
Until at last they saw where as there stood
An ancient Temple, wasted and forlorn;
Whose holy fires and sundry offerings good,
The late outrageous waves away had borne:
But when at length down fallen was the flood,
The waters low it proudly began to scorn.
Unto that place they thought it best to go,
The counsel of the Goddess thereto know.
For long before that fearful Deluge great,
The universal Earth had overflowed;
A heavenly power there placed had her seat,
And answers gave of hidden things unknown.
Thither they went her favor to entreat,
Whose fame throughout that coast abroad was blown
By her advice some way or mean to find,
How to renew the race of humane kind.
Prostrate they fell upon the sacred ground,
Kissing the stones, and shedding many a tear;
And lowly bent their aged bodies down
Unto the earth, with sad and heavy cheer:
Praying the Saint with soft and doleful sound
That she vouchsafe their humble suite to hear.
The Goddess heard, and bad them go and take,
Their mothers bones, and throw behind their back.
This Oracle obscure, and dark of sense,
Amazed much their minds with fear and doubt,
What kind of meaning might be drawn from thence;
And how to understand and find it out,
How with so great a sin they might dispense
Their Parents bones to cast and throw about:
Thus when they had long time in study spent,
Out of the Church with careful thought they went.
And now beholding better every place,
Each Hill and Dale, each River, Rock, and Tree;
And muzing thereupon a little space,
They thought the Earth their mother well might be,
And that the stones that lay before their face,
To be her bones did nothing disagree:
Wherefore to prove if it were false or true,
The scattered stones behind their backs they threw.
Forthwith the stones (a wondrous thing to hear,
Began to move as they had life conceived,
And waxed greater then at first they were;
And more and more the shape of man received,
Till every part most plainly did appear,
That neither eye nor sense could be deceived:
They heard, they spoke, they went, and walked too,
As other living men are wont to do.
Thus was the earth replenished a new,
With people strange, sprung up with little pain,
Of whose increase the progeny that grew,
Did soon supply the empty world again;
But now a greater care there did ensue,
How such a mighty number to maintain,
Since food there was not any to be found,
For that great flood had all destroyed and drowned.
Then did Deucalion first the Art invent
Of Angling, and his people taught the same;
And to the Woods and groves with them he went
Fit tools to find for this most needful game;
There from the trees the longest ryndes they rent,
Wherewith strong Lines they roughly twist and frame,
And of each crook of hardest Bush and Brake,
They made them Hooks the hungry Fish to take.
And to entice them to the eager bit,
Dead frogs and flies of sundry sorts he took;
And snayles and worms such as he found most fit,
Wherein to hide the close and deadly hook:
And thus with practice and inuentiue wit,
He found the means in every lake and brook
Such store of Fish to take with little pain,
As did long time this people new sustain.
In this rude sort began this simple Art,
And so remained in that first age of old,
When Saturn did Amaltheas horn impart
Unto the world, that then was all of Gold;
The Fish as yet had felt but little smart,
And were to bite more eager, apt, and bold:
And plenty still supplide the place again
Of woeful want, whereof we now complain.
But when in time the fear and dread of man
Fell more and more on every living thing,
And all the creatures of the world began
To stand in awe of this usurping King,
Whose tyranny so far extended than
That Earth and Seas it did in thraldom bring;
It was a work of greater pain and skill,
The wary Fish in lake or Brook to kill.
So worse and worse two ages more did pass,
Yet still this Art more perfect daily grew,
For then the slender Rod invented was,
Of finer sort then former ages knew,
And Hooks were made of silver and of brass,
And Lines of Hemp and Flax were framed new,
And sundry baits experience found out more,
Then elder times did know or try before.
But at the last the Iron age drew near,
Of all the rest the hardest, and most scant,
Then Lines were made of Silk and subtle hair
And Rods of lightest Cane and Hazell plant,
And Hooks of hardest steel invented were,
That neither skill nor workmanship did want,
And so this Art did in the end attain
Unto that state where now it does remain.
But here my weary Muse a while must rest,
That is not used to so long a way;
And breath, or pause a little at the least
At this Lands end, until another day,
And then again, if so she think it best:
Our taken-taske afresh we will assay,
And forward go as first we did intend,
Till that we come unto our iourneyes end.
The end of the first Book.
The second Book.
BEfore, I taught what kind of Tools were fit
For him to have that would an Angler be:
And how he should with practice and with wit
Provide himself thereof in best degree:
Now does remain to show how to the bit
The Fishes may be brought, that erst were free,
And with what pleasing baits intis'd they are,
To swallow down the hidden Hook unware.
Baits.
IT were not meet to send a Huntsman out
Into the Woods, with Net, with Gin, or Hay,
To trace the brakes and bushes all about,
The Stag, the Fox, or Badger to betray:
If having found his game, he stand in doubt
Which way to pitch, or where his snares to lay,
And with what train he may entise vvithall
The fearful beast into his trap to fall.
So, though the Angler have good store of tools,
And them with skill in finest sort can frame;
Yet when he comes to Rivers, Lakes, and Pooles,
If that he know not how to use the same,
And with what baits to make the Fishes fools,
He may go home as wise as out he came,
And of his coming boast himself as well
As he that from his fathers Chariot fell.
Not that I take upon me to impart
More then by others has before been told;
Or that the hidden secrets of this Art
I would unto the vulgar sort unfold,
Who peradventure for my pains desert
Would count me worthy Balams horse to hold:
But only to the willing learner show
So much thereof as may suffice to know.
But here, O Neptune, that with triple Mace
Do rule the raging of the Ocean wide;
I meddle not with thy deformed race
Of monsters huge, that in those waves abide:
With that great Whale, that by three whole days space
The man of God did in his belly hide,
And cast him out upon the Euxin shore,
As safe and sound as he had been before.
Nor with that Orke that on Cephaean strand
Would have devoured Andromeda the fair,
Whom Perseus slew with strong and valiant hand,
Delivering her from danger and despair,
The Hurlepoole huge that higher then the land,
Whole streams of water spouteth in the air,
The Porpois large that playing swims on hie,
Portending storms or other tempests nie.
Nor that admirer of sweet Musickes sound,
That on his back Arion bore away;
And brought to shore out of the Seas profound,
The Hippotame that like an horse does neigh,
The Mors, that from the rocks enrolled round,
Within his teeth himself does safe convey:
The Tortoise covered with his target hard,
The Tuberone attended with his guard.
Nor with that Fish that bears in his snout
A ragged sword, his foes to spoil and kill;
Nor that fierce Thrasher, that does fling about
His nimble flayle, and handles him at will:
The ravenous Sharke that with the sweepings out
And filth of ships does often his belly fill.
The Albacore that follows night and day
The flying Fish, and takes them for his pray.
The Crocodile that vveepes when he does vvrong,
The Hollibut that hurts the appetite,
The Turbut broad, the Sceale, the Sturgion strong,
The Cod and Cozze, that greedy are to bite,
The Haake, the Haddocke, and Conger long,
The yeallow Ling, the Milwell fair and white,
The spreading Ray, the Thornback thin and flat,
The boisterous Base, the hoggish Tunny fat.
These kinds of Fish that are so large of sise,
And many more that here I leave untold
Shall go for me, and all the rest likewise
That are the flock of Proteus watery fold:
For well I think my Hooks would not suffice,
Nor slender Lines, the least of these to hold.
I leave them therefore to the surging Seas,
In that huge depth, to wander at their ease.
And speak of such as in the fresh are found,
The little Roach, the Menise biting fast,
The slymie Tench, the slender Smelt and round,
The Vmber sweet, the Graueling good of taste,
The wholesome Ruff, the Barbill not so sound,
The Perch and Pike that all the rest do waste,
The Bream, the Carpe, the Chub and Chauendar,
And many more that in fresh waters are.
Sit then Thalia on some pleasant bank,
Among so many as fair Auon has,
And mark the Anglers how they march in rank,
Some out of Bristoll, some from healthful Bath;
How all the Rivers sides along they flank,
And through the Meadows make their wonted path:
See how their wit and cunning they apply,
To catch the Fish that in the waters lie.
For the Goodgion.
Lo, in a little Boat where one does stand,
That to a Willow Bough the while is tide,
And with a pole does stir and raise the sand;
Where as the gentle stream does softly slide,
And then with slender Line and Rod in hand,
The eager bit not long he does abide.
Well leaded is his Line, his Hook but small,
A good big Cork to bear the stream withal.
His bait the least red worm that may be found,
And at the bottom it does always lie;
Whereat the greedy Goodgion bites so sound
That Hook and all he swalloweth by and by:
See how he strikes, and pulls them up as round
As if new store the play did still supply.
And when the bit does dye or bad does prove,
Then to another place he does remove.
This Fish the fittest for a learner is
That in this Art delights to take some pain;
For as high flying Hawks that often miss
The swifter fowls, are eased with a train,
So to a young beginner yields this,
Such ready sport as makes him prove again,
And leads him on with hope and glad desire,
To greater skill, and cunning to aspire.
For the Roche.
THen see on yonder side, where one does sit
With Line well twisted, and his Hook but small;
His Cork not big, his Plummets round and fit,
His bayt of finest paste, a little ball
Wherewith he does entice unto the bit,
The careless Roche, that soon is caught withal:
Within a foot the same does reach the ground,
And with least touch the float straight sinketh down.
And as a skillful Fowler that does use,
The flying Birds of any kind to take,
The fittest and the best does always choose,
Of many sorts a pleasing stale to make,
Which if he does perceive they do refuse,
And of mislike abandon and forsake,
To win their love again, and get their grace
Forthwith does put another in the place.
So for the Roach more baits he has beside,
As of a sheep the thick congealed blood,
Which on a board he uses to divide
In portions small, to make them fit and good,
That better on his hook they may abide:
And of the waspe the white and tender brood,
And worms that breed on every herb and tree,
And sundry flies that quick and lively be.
For the Dace.
THen look where as that Poplar gray does grow,
Hard by the same where one does closely stand,
And with the wind his Hook and bayt does throw
Amid the stream with slender hazell wand,
Where as he sees the Dace themselves do show,
His eye is quick, and ready is his hand,
And when the Fish does rise to catch the bayt,
He presently does strike, and takes her strayt.
O worlds deceit! how are we thrald by thee,
That do thy gall in sweetest pleasures hide?
When most we think in happiest state to be,
Then do we soonest into danger slide,
Behold the Fish that even now was free,
Unto the deadly hook how he is tide,
So vain delights alure us to the snare,
Wherein unawares we fast entangled are.
For the Carpe.
But now again see where another stands,
And strains his rod that double seems to bend,
Lo how he leads and guides him with his hands,
Least that his line should break or Angle rend,
Then with a Net see how at last he lands,
A mighty Carpe and has him in the end,
So large he is of body, scale, and bone,
That rod and all had like to have been gone.
Mark what a line he has, well made and strong,
Of Bucephall, or Bayards strongest hair,
Twisted with green or watched silk among,
Like hardest twine, that holds the entangled Dear,
Not any force of Fish will do it wrong,
In Tyne, or Trent, or Them he needs not fear:
The knots of every lincke are knit so sure,
That many a pluck and pull they may endure.
His cork is large, made handsome, smooth, and fine,
The leads according, close, and fit thereto,
A good round hook set on with silkentwine,
That will not slip nor easily undo:
His bait great worms that long in moss have bin,
Which by his side he bears in a shoe.
Or paste wherewith he feeds him often before,
That at the bottom lies a foot or more.
For the Chub and Trout.
SEe where another hides himself as slye,
As did Acteon, or the fearful Dear;
Behind a withy, and with watchful eye
Attends the bit within the water clear,
And on the top thereof does move his fly,
With skillful hand, as if he living were.
Lo how the Chub, the Roche, the Dace, and Trout,
To catch thereat do gaze and swim about.
His Rod, or Cane, made dark for being seen,
The less to fear the wary Fish withal:
His Line well twisted is, and wrought so clean
That being strong, yet does it show but small,
His Hook not great, nor little, but between,
That light upon the watery brimme may fall,
The Line in length scant half the Rod exceedes,
And neither Cork, nor Lead thereon it needs.
For the Trout, and Eele.
NOw see some standing where the stream does fall,
With headlong course behind the sturdy weere,
That overthwart the river, like a wall,
The water stops, and strongly up does bear,
And at the Tails, of Mills and Arches small,
Whereas the shoot is swift and not too clear,
Their lines in length not twice above an ell,
But with good store of lead and twisted well.
Round handsome hooks that will not break nor bend,
The big red worm, well scowred, is their bayte,
Which down unto the bottom does descend,
Whereas the Trout and Eele does lie in wait,
And to their feeding busily intend,
Which when they see they snatch and swallow straight.
Upon their lines is neither Cork nor Quill,
But when they feel them pluck then strike they still.
For the Sewant and Flounder
BEhold some others ranged all along,
To take the Sewant, yea, the Flounder sweet,
That to the bank in deepest places throng,
To shun the swifter stream that runs so fleet,
And lie and feed the brackish waves among,
Whereas the waters fresh and salt do meet:
And there the Eele and Shad sometimes is caught,
That with the tide into the brooks are brought.
But by the way it shall not be amiss,
To understand that in the waters gray,
Of floating Fish, two sundry kinds there is,
The one that lives by raven and by pray,
And of the weaker sort, now that, now this,
He bites, and spoils, and kills, and bears away,
And in his greedy gullet does deuowre,
As Scillas gulf, a ship within his power.
And these have wider mouths to catch and take
Their flying pray, whom swiftly they pursew,
And rows of teeth like to a saw or rake,
Wherewith their gotten game they bite and chew,
And greater speed within the waters make,
To set upon the other simple crew,
And as the grayhound steals upon the hare,
So do they use to rush on them unware.
Unequal Fate, that some are borne to be
Fearful and mild, and for the rest a pray,
And others are ordained to live more free,
Without control or danger any way:
So does the Fox the Lamb destroy we see,
The Lion fierce, the Beuer, Roe, or Gray,
The Hawk, the foul, the greater wrong the less,
The lofty proud, the lowly poor oppress.
For the Pike or Perch.
NOw for to take these kind of Fish with all,
It shall be needful to have still in store,
Some living baits as Bleiks, and Roches small,
Goodgion, or Loach, not taken long before,
Or yealow Frogs that in the waters craule,
But all alive they must be evermore:
For as for baits that dead and dull do lie,
They least esteem and set but little by.
But take good heed your line be sure and strong,
The knots will knit, and of the soundest hair,
Twisted with some well colored silk among,
And that you have no need your Rod to fear:
For these great Fish will strive and struggle long,
Rod, line, and all into the stream to bear.
And that your hook be not too small and weak,
Least that it chance to stretch, or hap to break.
And as in Arden or the mountains hoare,
Of Appemmie or craggy Alps among,
The mastifes fierce that hunt the bristled Boar,
Are harnesed with Curats light and strong,
So for these Fish, your line a foot or more,
Must armed be with thinnest plate along,
Or slender wyre well fastened thereunto,
That will not slip nor easily undo.
The other kind that are unlike to these
Do live by corn or any other seed:
Sometimes by crummes of bread, of paste or cheese,
Or grassehoppers that in green meadows breed,
With brood of waspes, of hornets, doares or bees,
Lip berries from the bryar bush or weed,
Blood worms, and snayles, or crauling Ientiles small.
And buzzing flies that on the waters fall.
All these are good, and many others more,
To make fit baits to take these kind of Fish,
So that some fair deep place you feed before,
A day or two, with paile, with bole, or dish;
And of these meats do use to throw in store,
Then shall you have them byte as you would wish:
And ready sport to take your pleasure still,
Of any sort that best you like to kill.
Thus serving them as often as you may,
But once a week at least it must be done,
If that to bite they make too long delay,
As by your sport may be perceived soon:
Then some great Fish does fear the rest away,
Whose fellowship and company they shun:
Who neither in the bait does take delight,
Nor yet will suffer them that would to byte.
For this you must a remedy provide,
Some Roche or Bleike, as I have showed before,
Beneath whose upper fin you close shall hide
Of all your Hook the better half and more,
And though the point appear or may be spide,
It makes no matter any whit therefore:
But let him fall into the watery brimme,
And down unto the bottom softly swim.
And when you see your Cork begin to move,
And round about to soar and fetch a ring,
Sometime to sink, and sometime swim above,
As does the Ducke within the watty spring,
Yet make no haste your present hap to prove,
Till with your float at last away he fling,
Then may you safely strike and hold him short,
And at your will prolong or end your sport.
But every Fish loves not each bayte alike,
Although sometime they feed upon the same;
But some do one, and some another seek,
As best unto their appetite does frame,
The Roche, the Bream, the Carpe, the Chub, and Bleik.
With paste or Corn their greedy hunger tame,
The Dace, the Ruff, the Goodgion and the rest,
The smaller sort of crawling worms love best.
The Chauender and Chub do more delight
To feed on tender Cheese, or Cherries red,
Black snayles, their bellies slit to show their white,
Or Grasshoppers that skip in every Meade;
The Perch, the Tench, and Eele, do rather bite
At great red worms, in Field or Garden bred,
That have been scowr'd in moss or Fenell rough,
To rid their filth, and make them hard and tough.
And with this bayte has often taken bin
The Salmon fair, of Riuer-fish the best;
The Shad, that in the Spring time comes in,
The Suant swift, that is not set by least,
The Bocher sweet, the pleasant Flounder thin,
The Peele, the Tweat, the Botling, and the rest,
With many more, that in the deep does lie
Of Auon, Vske, of Seuerne, and of Wye.
Alike they bite, alike they pull down low
The sinking Cork that strives to rise again,
And when they feel the sudden deadly blow,
Alike they shun the danger and the pain:
And as an arrow from the Scithian bow,
All flee alike into the stream amain,
Until the Angler by his wary skill,
There tyres them out, and brings them up at will.
Yet furthermore it does behoue to know,
That for the most part Fish do seek their food
Upon the ground, or deepest bottom low,
Or at the top of water, stream, or flood;
And so you must your hook and bayte bestow,
For in the midst you shall do little good,
For heavy things down to the bottom fall,
And light do swim, and seldom sink at all.
All Summer long aloft the Fishes swim,
Delighted with fair Phoebus shining ray,
And lie in wait within the waters dim
For flies and gnats that on the top do play,
Then half a yard beneath the upper brimme
It shall be best your bayted Hook to lay,
With gnat or fly of any sort or kind,
That every Month on Leaves or Trees you find.
But then your Line must have no Lead at all,
And but a slender Cork, or little Quill,
To stay the bayte that down it do not fall,
But hang a Link within the water still,
Or else upon the top thereof you shall
With quicker hand, and with more ready skill
Let fall your fly, and now and then remove,
Which soon the Fish will find and better love.
And in the stream likewise they use to be
At tails of floudyates, or at Arches wide;
Or shallow flats, whereas the waters free
With fresher springs and swifter course do slide:
And then of Waspe, the brood that cannot fly
Upon a Tyle-stone first a little dried,
Or yealow bobs turned up before the Plough,
Are chiefest bayts, with Cork and Lead enough.
But when the golden Chariot of the Sun,
Departing from our Northren countries far
Beyond the balance, now his course has run,
And goes to warm the cold Antarticque star,
And Summers heat is almost spent and done,
With new approach of Winters dreadful war:
Then do the Fish withdraw into the deep,
And low from sight and cold more close do keep.
Then on your Lines you may have store of Lead,
And bigger Corkes of any size you will,
And where the Fish are used to be fed
There shall you lay upon the bottom still,
And whether that your bayte be Corn, or bread,
Or Worms, or Paste, it does not greatly skill,
For these alone are to be used then,
Until the spring or summer come again.
Thus have I showed how Fish of diverse kind
Best taken are, and how their bayts to know;
But Phoebus now beyond the Western Inde;
Begins to descend and draws low,
And well the weather serves and gentle wind
Down with the tide and pleasant stream to row,
Unto some place where we may rest us in,
Until we shall another time begin.
The end of the second Book.
The third Book.
NOw falls it out in order to declare,
What time is best to Angle in aright;
And when the chief and fittest seasons are
Wherein the fish are most disposed to bite,
What wind does make, and which again does mar
The Anglers sport, wherein he takes delight,
And how he may with pleasure best aspire,
Unto the wished end of his desire.
For there are times in which they will not bite,
But do forbear and from their food refrain,
And days there are wherein they more delight
To labor for the same and bite amain;
So, he that can those seasons find aright
Shall not repent his travel spent in vain,
To walk a mile or two amidst the fields,
Reaping the fruit this harmless pleasure yields.
And as a ship in safe and quiet road
Under some hill or harbor does abide,
With all her freight, her tackling, and her load,
Attending still the wind and wished tide,
Which when it serves, no longer makes abode,
But forth into the watery deep does slide,
And through the waves deuides her fairest way
Unto the place where she intends to stay.
So must the Angler be provided still,
Of diverse tools, and sundry baytes in store;
And all things else pertaining to his skill,
Which he shall get and lay up long before,
That when the weather frames to his will,
He may be well appointed evermore
To take fit time when it is offered ever,
For time in one estate abides never.
The qualities of an Angler.
But ere I further go, it shall behoue
To show what gifts and qualities of mind
Belongs to him that does this pastime love;
And what the virtues are of every kind
Without the which it were in vain to prove,
Or to expect the pleasure he should find,
No more then he that having store of meat
Has lost all lust and appetite to eat.
For what auailes to Brook or Lake to go,
With handsome Rods and Hooks of diverse sort,
Well twisted Lines, and many trinkets more,
To find the Fish within their watery fort,
If that the mind be not contended so,
But wants those gifts that should the rest support.
And make his pleasure to his thoughts agree,
With these therefore he must endued be.
The first is Faith, not wavering and unstable,
But such as had that holy Patriarch old,
That to the highest was so acceptable
As his increase and offspring manifold
Exceeded far the stars innumerable,
So must he still a firm persuasion hold,
That where as waters, brooks, and lakes are found,
There store of Fish without all doubt abound.
For nature that has made no empty thing,
But all her works does well and wisely frame,
Has filled each Brook, each River, Lake and Spring
With creatures, apt to live amidst the same;
Even as the earth, the air, and seas do bring
Forth Beasts, and Birds of sundry sort and name,
And given them shape, ability, and sense,
To live and dwell therein without offense.
The second gift and quality is Hope,
The Anchor-holde of every hard desire;
That having of the day so large a scope,
He shall in time to wished hap aspire,
And ere the Sun has left the heavenly cope
Obtain the sport and game he does desire,
And that the Fish though sometime slow to bite,
Will recompense delay with more delight.
The third is Love, and liking to the game,
And to his friend and neighbor dwelling by;
For greedy pleasure not to spoil the same,
Nor of his Fish some portion to deny
To any that are sickly, weak, or lame,
But rather with his Line and Angle try
In Pond or Brook, to do what in him lies,
To take such store for them as may suffice.
Then follows Patience, that the furious flame
Of Choler cooles, and Passion puts to flight,
As does a skillful rider break and tame,
The Courser wild, and teach him tread aright:
So patience does the mind dispose and frame,
To take mishaps in worth, and count them light,
As loss of Fish, Line, Hook, or Lead, or all,
Or other chance that often may befall.
The fist good gift is low Humility,
As when a Lion coucheth for his pray
So must he stoop or kneel upon his knee,
To save his line or put the weeds away,
Or lie along sometime if need there be,
For any let or chance that happen may,
And not to scorn to take a little pain,
To serve his turn his pleasure to obtain.
The sixth is painful strength and courage good,
The greatest to encounter in the Brook,
If that he happen in his angry mood,
To snatch your bayte, and bear away your Hook
With wary skill to rule him in the Flood,
Until more quiet, tame, and mild he look,
And all adventures constantly to bear,
That may betide without mistrust or fear.
Next unto this is Liberality,
Feeding them often with full and plenteous hand,
Of all the rest a needful quality,
To draw them near the place where you will stand,
Like to the ancient hospitality,
That sometime dwelt in Albions fertile land,
But now is sent away into exile,
Beyond the bounds of Issabellas I Will,
The eight is knowledge how to find the way
To make them bite when they are dull and slow,
And what does let the same and breeds delay,
And every like impediment to know,
That keeps them from their food and wanted pray,
Within the stream, or standing waters low,
And with experience skilfully to prove,
All other faults to mend or to remove.
The ninth is placabillitie of mind,
Contented with a reasonable dish,
Yea though sometimes no sport at all he find,
Or that the weather prove not to his wish.
The tenth is thanks to that God, of each kind,
To net and bayt does send both foul and Fish,
And still reserve enough in secret store,
To please the rich, and to relieve the poor.
The eleauenth good gift and hardest to endure,
Is fasting long from all superfluous fare,
Unto the which he must himself inure,
By exercise and use of diet spare,
And with the liquor of the waters pure,
Acquaint himself if he cannot forbear,
And never on his greedy belly think,
From rising sun until a low he sincke.
The twelth and last of all is memory,
Remembering well before he sets out,
Each needful thing that he must occupy,
And not to stand of any want in doubt,
Or leave something behind forgetfully:
When he has walked the fields and brokes about,
It were a grief back to return again,
For things forgot that should his sport maintain.
Here then you see what kind of quallities,
An Angler should endued be with all,
Besides his skill and other properties,
To serve his turn, as to his lot does fall:
But now what season for this exercise,
The fittest is and which does serve but small,
My Muse vouchsafe some little aid to lend,
To bring this also to the wished end.
Season and time not to Angle.
FIrst, if the weather be to dry and hot,
And scalds with scorching heat the lowly plain,
As if that youthful Phaeton had got,
The guiding of his fathers Carte again,
Or that it seemed Apolle had forgot
His light foot steedes to rule with steadfast rain,
It is not good with any line or Hook,
To Angle then in river, pond, or brook.
Or When cold Boreas with his frosty beard,
Looks out from underneath the lesser bear,
And makes the weary trauailer afeard,
To see the valleys covered every where
With Ice and Snow, that late so green appeared,
The waters stand as if of steel they wear:
And hoary frosts do hang on every bough,
Where freshest leaves of summer late did grow.
So neither if Don Aeolus lets go,
His blustering winds out of the hollow deep,
Where he their strife and struggling to and fro
With triple forke does still in order keep,
They rushing forth do rage with tempests so,
As if they would the world together sweep,
And ruffling so with sturdy blasts they blow,
That tree and house sometimes they over throw.
Besides when shepherds and the swains prepare,
Unto the brooks with all their flocks of sheep,
To wash their fleeces and to make them fair,
In every poole and running water deep,
The savor of the wool does so impair,
The pleasant streams, and plunging that they keep,
As if that Lethe-floud ran every where,
Or bitter Doris intermingled were.
Or when land floods through long and sudden rain,
Discending from the hills and higher ground,
The sand and mud the crystal streams do stain,
And make them rise above their wonted bound,
To over flow the fields and neighbor plain,
The fruitful soil and Meadows fair are drowned,
The husbandman does leese his grass and hay,
The banks their trees, and bridges borne away.
So when the leaves begin to fall apace,
And bough and branch are naked to be seen,
While nature does her former work deface,
Vnclothing bush, and tree, of summers green,
Whose scattered spoils lie thick in every place,
As sands on shore or stars the poles between,
And top and bottom of the rivers fill,
To Angle then I also think it ill.
All winds are hurtful if too hard they blow,
The worst of all is that out of the East,
Whose nature makes the Fish to biting slow,
And lets the pastime most of all the rest,
The next that comes from countries clad with Snow,
And Articque pole is not offensive least,
The Southern wind is counted best of all,
Then, that which rises where the sun does fall.
Best times and season to Angle.
But if the weather steadfast be and clear,
Or ouercast with clouds, so it be dry,
And that no sign nor token there appear,
Of threatening storm through all the empty sky,
But that the air is clame and void of fear,
Of rufling winds or raging tempests hie,
Or that with mild and gentle gale they blow,
Then is it good unto the brook to go,
And when the floods are fallen and past away,
And carried have the dregs into the deep,
And that the waters wax more thin and gray,
And leave their banks above them high and steep,
The milder stream of color like to whay,
Within his bounds his wonted course does keep,
And that the wind is South or else by-West,
To Angle then is time and seasons best
When fair Aurora rising early shows
Her blushing face beyond the Eastern hills,
And dies the heavenly vault with purple rewes,
That far abroad the world with brightness fills,
The Meadows green are hoare with silver dewes,
That on the earth the sable night distills,
And chanting birds with merry notes bewray,
The near approaching of the cheerful day.
Then let him go to River, Brook, or Lake,
That loves the sport, where store of Fish abound,
And through the pleasant fields his journey make,
Amid'st sweet Pastures, Meadows fresh and sound,
Where he may best his choice of pastime take,
While swift Hyperion runs his circle round;
And as the place shall to his liking prove,
There still remain or further else remove.
To know each Fishes haunt.
NOw that the Angler may the better know
Where he may find each Fish he does require,
Since some delight in waters still and slow,
And some do love the Mud and slimy mire;
Some others where the stream does swifter flow,
Some stony ground, and gravel some desire,
Here shall he learn how every sort do seek,
To haunt the Layre that does his nature like.
Carpe, Eele, and Tench, do love a muddie ground,
Eeles under stones or hollow roots do lie;
The Tench among thick weeds is soonest found,
The fearful Carpe into the deep does fly,
Bream, Chub and Pike, where clay and sand abound,
Pike loves great pooles, and places full of fry:
The Chub delights in stream or shadie tree,
And tender Breame in broadest lake to be.
The Salmon swift the Rivers sweet does like,
Where largest streams into the Sea are led:
The spotted Trout the smaller Brooks does seek,
And in the deepest hole there hides his head:
The prickled Perch in every hollow creek,
Hard by the bank, and sandy shore is fed.
Perch, Trout, and Salmon love clear waters all,
Green weedy rocks, and stony gravel small.
So does the Bulhead, Goodgion, and the Loache,
Who most in shallow Brooks delight to be,
The Ruff, the Dace, the Barbill and the Roach,
Gravel and sand do love in less degree,
But to the deep and shade do more approach,
And ouerhead some covert love to see,
Of spreading Poplar, Oak or Willow green,
Where underneath they lurk for being seen.
The mighty Luce great waters haunts always,
And in the stillest place thereof does lie,
Save when he raungeth forth to seek his pray,
And swift among the feerefull fish does fly,
The dainty Humber loves the marley clay,
And cleerest streams of champion country hye,
And in the chiefest pooles thereof does rest,
Where he is soonest found and taken best.
The Chauender amidst the waters fair,
In swiftest streams does most himself bestow,
The Shad and Tweat do rather like the laire,
Of brackish waves, where it does ebb and flow,
And thither also does the flock repair,
And flat upon the bottom lies low,
The Peele, the Mullet and the Suant good
Do like the same, and therein seek their food.
But here experience does my skill exceed,
Since diverse Countries diverse Rivers have;
And diverse Rivers change of waters breed,
And change of waters sundry Fish does crave,
And sundry Fish in diverse places feed,
As best does like them in the liquid wave,
So that by use and practice may be known,
More then by art or skill can well be shown.
So then it shall be needless to declare,
What sundry kinds there lie in secret store,
And where they do resort, and what they are,
That may be still discovered more and more:
Let him that list no pain nor travel spare
To seek them out, as I have done before,
And then it shall not discontent his mind,
New choice of place, and change of game to find.
The best hours of the day to Angle.
FRom first appearing of the rising Sun,
Till nine of clock low under water best
The Fish will bite, and then from nine to noone,
From noone to four they do refrain and rest,
From four again till Phoebus swift has run,
His daily course, and sets in the West:
But at the fly aloft they use to bite,
All summer long from nine till it be night.
Now least the Angler leave his Tools behind,
For lack of heed or haste of his desire,
And so enforced with unwilling mind,
Must leave his game and back again retire,
Such things to fetch as there he cannot find
To serve his turn when need shall most require,
Here shall he have to help his memory,
A lesson short of every wants supply.
Light Rod to strike, long line to reach withal,
Strong hook to hold the fish he haps to hit,
Spare Lines and Hooks, what ever chance do fall,
Baits quick and dead to bring them to the bit,
Fine Lead and Quils with Corks both great and small,
Knife, File and thread, and little Basket fit,
Plummets to sound the depth of clay and sand,
With Pole and Net to bring them safe to land.
And now we are arrived at the last,
In wished harbor where we mean to rest;
And make an end of this our journey past:
Here then in quiet road I think it best
We strike our sails and steadfast Anchor cast
For now the Sun low sets in the West,
And ye Boat-Swaines, a merry Carroll sing,
To him that safely did us hither bring.
FINIS.
Would thou catch Fish?
Then here is thy wish;
Take this receipt,
To annoint thy Bait.
THou that desir'st to fish with Line and Hook,
Be it in poole, in River, or in Brook,
To bliss thy bait, and make the Fish to bite:
Lo, here is a means, if thou can hit it right,
Take Gum of life, fine beat, and laid in soake
In Oil, well drawn from that which kills the Oak,
Fish where thou will, thou shall have sport thy fill,
When twenty fail, thou shall be sure to kill.
Probatum.
It Is perfect and good,
If well understood;
Else not to be told
For Silver or Gold.
B. R.

FINIS.

