The pleasant History OF JOHN WINCHCOMB, In his yonguer years called JACK of
NEWBERY, The famous and worthy Clothier of England; declaring his life and
love, together with his charitable deeds and great Hospitality.

And how he set continually five hundred poor people at work, to the great
benefit of the Commonwealth.

Now the tenth time Imprinted, corrected and enlarged by T. D.

Haud curo invidiam.

LONDON, Printed by H. LOWNES, and are to be sold by Cuthbert Wright in S.
Bartholomews, near the entrance into the Hospital. 1626.

To all famous Cloth-Workers in England, I wish all happiness of life,
prosperity and brotherly affection.
AMong all manual Arts used in this Land, none is more famous for desert, or
more beneficial to the Commonwealth than is the most necessary Art of
Clothing. And therefore as the benefit thereof is great, so are the professors
of the same to be both loved and maintained. Many wise men therefore, having
deeply considered the same, most bountifully have bestowed their gifts for
upholding of so excellent a commodity, which has been, and yet is, the
nourishing of many thousands of poor people. Wherefore to you, most worthy
Clothiers, do I dedicate this my rude work, which has raised out of the dust
of Forgetfulness a most famous and worthy man, whose name was John
Winchcombe, alias Jack of Newberie, of whose life and love I have briefly
written, and in a plain and humble manner, that it may be the better
understood of those for whose sake I took pains to compile it, that is, for the
well minded Clothiers; that herein they may behold the great worship and
credit which men of this trade have in former time come unto. If therefore it
be of you kindly accepted, I have the end of my desire, and think my pains
well recompensed: and finding your gentleness answering my hope, it shall move
me shortly to set to your sight the long hidden History of Thomas of Redding,
George of Gloucester, Richard of Worcester, and William of Salisbury, with
diverse others; who were all most notable members in the Commonwealth of this
Land, and men of great fame and dignity. In the mean space, I commend you all
to the most high God; who ever increase, in all perfection and prosperous
estate, the long honored trade of English-Clothiers.

Yours in all humble service, T. D.

THE MOST PLEAsant and delectable History of John Winchcombe, otherwise called
Jack of Newberie: and first of his love and pleasant life
CHAP. I.
IN the days of King Henry the eight, that most noble and victorious Prince*
in the heginning of his reign, John Winchcomb, a broad cloth Weauer, dwelt in
Newberie, a town in Barkshire: who for that he was a man of a merry
disposition and honest conversation, was wondrous wel-beloued of Rich and
Poor, especially, because in every place where he came, he would spend his
money with the best, and was not at any time found a churl of his purse.
Wherefore being so good a companion, he was called of old and yongue Jack of
Newberie: a man so generally well known in all his country for his good
fellowship, that he could go in no place but he found many acquaintance; by
means whereof, Jack could no sooner get a Crown, but straight he found
means to spend it: yet had he ever this care, that he would always keep
himself in comely and decent apparel: neither at any time would he be
overcome in drink, but so discreetly behave himself wish honest mirth, and
pleasant conceits, that he was every Gentleman's companion.

After that Jack had long led this pleasant life, being (though he were but
poor) in good estimation: it was his Masters thance to dye, and his Dame to be
a widow, who was a very comely ancient woman, and of reasonable wealth.
Wherefore she having a good opinion of her man John* committed unto his
government the guiding of all her worke-folkes for the space of three years
together: In which time she found him so careful and diligent, that all
things came forward and prospered wondrous well. No man could entice him from
his business all the week by all the entreaty they could use: Insomuch that
in the end some of the wild youths of the town began to deride and scoff at
him.

Doubtless, quoth one, I think some female spirit has inchaunted Jack to
his treadles, and coniured him within the compass of his Loome, that he can
stir no further. You say true, quoth Jack, and if you have the leisure to
stay till the Charm be done, the space of six days and flue nights, you
shall find me ready to put on my holy-day-apparell, and on Sunday morning for
your pains I will give you apot of Ale over against the May Pole. Nay, quoth
another, I Will lay my life, that as the Salamander cannot live without the fire,
so Jack cannot live without the smell of his Dames smock. And I marvel, quoth
Jack, that you being of the nature of a Herring (which so soon as he is taken
out of the Sea, presently dies) can live so long with your nose out of the pot.
Nay Jack, leave thy testing, quoth another, and go along with us, thon shall
not stay a jot. And because I will not stay; nor make you a liar (quoth Jack)
I Will keep me here still: and so farewell.

Thus then they departed: and after they had for half a score times tried him
to this intent, and saw he would not be led by their lure, they left him to
his own will. Never thelesse, every Sunday in the afternoon, and every
Holy Day, Jack would keep them company, and be as merry as a Pie, and having
still good store of money in his purse, one or other would ever be borrowing of
him, but never could he get pennis of it again: which when Jack perceived,
he would never after carry above twelve pence at once in his purse: and that
being spent, he would straight return home merrily, taking his leave of the
company in this sort.

My masters, I thank you, its time to pack home,
For he that wants money is counted a mome:
And twelve pence a Sunday being spent in good cheer,
To fifty two shillings amounts in the year;
Enough for a Crafts-man that lives by his hands:
And he that exceeds it, shall purchase no lands.
For that I spend this day, I Will work hard to morrow.
For woe is that party that seeks to borrow.
My money does make me full merry to be;
And without my money none cares for me:
Therefore wanting money, what should I do here?
But have home, and thank you for all my good cheer?
Thus was Iackes good government and discretion noted of the best and
substantiallest men of the Town: so that it wrought his great commendations,
and his Dame thought her self not a little blessed to have such a servant, that
was so obedient unto her, and so careful for her profit: for she had never a
Prentise that yielded her more obedience than he did, or was more dutiful: so
that by his good example, he did as much good as by his diligent labor and
painful travel: which his singular virtue being noted by the widow, she
began to cast a very good countenance to her man John, and to use very much
talk with him in private: and first by way of communication, she would tell
unto him what suitors she had, as also the great offers they made her, what
gifts they sent her, and the great affection they bare her, craving his opinion
in the matter.

When Jack found the favor to be his Dames Secretary, he thought it an
extraordinary kindness: and ghessing by the yarne it would prove a good web,
began to question with his dame in this sort. Although it becomes not me
your servant to pry into your secrets, nor to be busy about matters of your
love: yet for so much as it has pleased you to use conference with me in those
causes, I pray you let me entreat you to know their names that be your suitors,
and of what profession they be.

Marry John, faith she, that you shall, and I pray thee take a cushion and sit
down by me. Dame, quoth he, I thank you: but there is no reason I should sit
on a cushion till I have deserved it. If thou have not* thou might have done
said she: but some Soldiers never find favor. John replied, that makes me
indeed to want favor: for I never durst try maidens because they seem coy,
nor wives for fear of their husbands, nor widows doubting their
disdainfulnes. Tush John (quoth she) he that fears and doubts womankinds,
cannot be counted mankind: and take this for a principle, All things are not
as they seem. But let us leave this, and proceed to our former matter. My
first suitor dwells at Wallingford, by trade a Tanner, a man of good wealth, and
his name is Grafts, of comely personage and very good behavior, a widower, well
thought of among his neighbors: he has proper land, a fair house well
furnished, and never a child in the world, and he loves me passing well. Why
then Dame, quoth John, you were best to have him. Is that your opinion quoth
she? now trust me, so it is not mine: for I find two special reasons to the
contrary: the one is, that he being ouerworne in years, makes me ever loath to
love him: and the other, that I know one nearer hand.

Believe me dame (quoth Jack) I perceive store is no sore, and proffered ware
is worse by ten in the hundred than that which is sought: but I pray who is
your second suitor? John, quoth she, it may seem immodesty in me to bewray my
lovers secrets: yet seeing thy discretion, and being persuaded of thy secrecy.
I will show thee: the other is a man of middle years, but yet a Batchellor, by
occupation a Tailor, and dwelling at Hungerford: by report a very good husband,
such a one as has crowns good store, and to me he professes much good will:
for his person, he may please any woman. I dame, quoth John, because he
pleases you. Not so, said she, for my eyes are impartial Judges in that case:
and albeit my opinion may be contrary to others, if his Art deceive not my
eyesight, he is worthy of a good wife, both for his person and conditions.
Then trust me Dame (quoth John) for so much as you are without doubt of your
self that you will prove a good wife, and so well persuaded of him, I should
think you could make no better a choice* Truly John (quoth she) there be also
two reasons that move me not to like of him: the one that being so large a
ranger, he would at home be a stranger: and the other, that I like better of
one nearer hand. Who is that, quoth lack? Says she, the third Suter is the
Parson of Spinhom-land, who has a proper living, he is of holy conversation
and good estimation. whose affection to me is great. No doubt Dame (quoth John)
you may do wondrous well with him, where you shall have no care but to serve
GOD, and to make ready his meat. O John (quoth she) the flesh and the spirit
agrees not: for he will be so bent to his book, that he will have little
mind of his bed: for one months studying for a Sermon, will make him forget
his wife a whole year. Truly Dame (quoth John) I must needs speak in his
behalf, and the rather, for that he is a man of the Church, and your near
neighbor, to whom (as I guess) you bear ye best affection: I do not think
that he will be so much bound to his book, or subject to the spirit, but that
he will remember a woman at home or abroad. Well John (quath she) I wis my
mind is not that way: for I like better of one nearer hand. No marvel (quoth
lack) you are so peremptory, seeing you have so much choice: but I pray ye
Dame (quoth he) let me know this fortunate man that is so highly placed in your
favor? John (quoth she) they are worthy to know nothing, that cannot keep
something: that man (I tell thee) must go namelesse: for he is Lord of my
love, and King of my desires: there is neither Tanner, Tailor, nor Parson may
compare with him, his presence is a preservative to my health, his sweet
smiles my hearts solace, and his words heavenly music to my ears. Why then
Dame (quoth John) for your bodies health, your hearts joy, and your ears
delight, delay not the time, but entertain him with a kiss, make his bed next
yours, and chop up the match in the morning. Well, quoth she, I perceive thy
consent is quickly got to any, having no care how I am matched so I be matched:
I wis, I wis I could not let thee go so lightly, being loath that any one
should have thee, except I could love her as well as my self. I thank you for
your kindness and good will, good Dame, quoth he, but it is not wisdom for
a yongue man that can scantly keep himself* to take a wife: therefore I hold
it she best way to lead a single life: for I have heard say, that many
sorrows follow marriage, especially where want remains: and beside, it is a
hard matter to find a constant woman: for as yongue maids are fickle, so are
old women jealous: the one a grief too common, the other a torment
intolerable. What John (quoth she) consider that maidens fickleness proceeds
of vain fancies, but old women's jealousy of superabounding love: and
therefore the more to be borne withal. But Dame, quoth he, many are jealous
without cause: for is it sufficient for their mistrusting natures to take
exceptions at a shadow, at a word, at a look, at a smile, nay at the twinkle
of an eye, which neither man nor woman is able to expel? I knew a woman that
was ready to hang her self, for seeing but her husbands shirt hang on a hedge
with her maids smock. I grant that this fury may haunt some, quoth she, yet
there be many other that complain not without great cause. Why, is there any
cause that should move jealousy, quoth John? I by S. Mary is there, quoth she:
for would, it not grieve a woman (being one every way able to delight her
husband) to see him for sake her, despise and contemn her, being never so
merry as when he is in other company, sporting abroad from morning till noone,
from noone till night, and when he comes to bed, if he turns to his wife, it
is in such solemness, and wearisome drowsy lamenesse, that it brings rather
lothsomnesse than any delight? can you then blame a woman in this case to be
angry and displeased? I Will tell you what, among brute beasts it is a grief
intolerable: for I heard my Grandame tell, that the Bel-weather of her flock
fancying one of the Eawes above the rest, and seeing Gratis the Shepherd
abusing her in abominable sort (subuerting the law of Nature) could by no
means bear that abuse; but watching opportunity for revenge, on a time found
the said Shepherd sleeping in the field, and suddenly ran against him in
such violent sort, that by the force of his wreathen horns, he beat the
brains out of the Shepherds head and slew him. If then a Sheep could not
endure that injury, think not that women are so sheepish to suffer it. Believe
me (quoth John) if every horne-maker should be so plagued by a horned beast,
there should be less horns made in Newbery by many in a year. But Dame
(quoth he) to make an end of this prattle, because it is an argument too deep
to be discussed between you and I, you shall hear me sing an old song, and so
we will depart to supper.

A maiden fair I dare not wed,
For fear to have Acteons head.
A maiden black is often proud:
A maiden little will be loud.
A maiden that is high of growth,
They say is subject unto sloth.
Thus fair or foul, little or tall,
Some faults remain among them all:
But of all the faults that be,
None is so bad as iealoesie.
For jealousy is fierce and fell,
And burns as hot as fire in hell:
It breeds suspicion without cause,
And breaks the bonds of reasons laws.
To none it is a greater foe,
Than unto those where it does grow.
And God keep me both day and night,
From that fell, fond, and ougly spright:
For why? of all the plagues that be,
The secret plague is jealousy.
Therefore I wish all women kind,
Never to bear a jealous mind.
Well, said John (quoth she) thy song is not so sure, but thy voice is as
sweet: but seeing the time agrees with our stomachs, though loath, yet will we
give over for this time, and betake our selves to our suppers. Then calling the
rest of her servants, they fell to their meat merrily and after supper, the
Goodwife went abroad for her recreation, to walk a while with one of her
neighbous. And in the mean space John got him up into his chamber, and there
began to meditate on this matter, bethinking with himself what he were best
to do: for well he perceived that his Dames affection was great toward him:
knowing therefore the woman's disposition, and withal, that her estate was
reasonable good, and considering beside, that he should find a house ready
furnished, servants ready taught, and all other things for his trade necessary,
he thought it best not to let slip that good occasion, lest he should never
come to the like. But again, when he considered her years to be unfitting
to his youth, and that she that sometime had been his Dame, would (perhaps)
disdain to be governed by him that had been her poor servant, and that it
would prove but a bad bargain, doubting many inconueniencies that might grow
thereby, he therefore resolved to be silent, rather than to proceed further:
wherefore he got him straight to bed, and the next morning settled himself
close to his business. His Dame coming home, and hearing that her man was
gone to bed, took that night but small rest, and early in the morning hearing
him up at his work, merrily singing, she by and by arose, and in seemly sort
attyring her self, she came into the worke-shop, and sat her down to make
quills, quoth John, Good morrow Dame, how do you to day? God a mercy John
(quoth she) even as well as I may: for I was sore troubled in my Dreams. Me
thought two Doves walked together in a corn field, the one (as it were) in
communication with the other, without regard of picking up any thing to
sustain themselves: and after they had with many nods spent some time to their
content, they both fell hard with their pretty bills to pecke up the scattered
corn, left by the weary Reapers hand. At lengh (finding themselves satisfied)
it chanced another Pigion to light in that place, with whom one of the first
Pigions at length kept company: and after, returning to the place where she
left her first companion, perceived he was not there: she kindly searching
up and down the high stubble to find him, lights at length on a Hog fast
asleep, wherewith me thought the poor Dove was so dismayed, that presently
she fell down in a trance. I seeing her legs fail, and her wings quiver,
yielding her self to death, moved with pity ran unto her, and thinking to
take up the Pigion, me thought, I had in my hands my own heart, wherein me
thought an arrow stuck so deep, that the blood trickled down the shaft, and
lay upon the feathers like the silver pearled deaw on the green grass, which
made me to weep most bitterly. But presently, me thought there came one to
me crowned like a Queen, who told me my heart would dye in time, except I got
some of that sleeping Hogs grease to heal the wounds thereof. Whereupon I
ran in all haste to the Hog with my heart bleeding in my hand, who (me
thought) grunted at me in most churlish sort, and vanished out of my sight.
Whereupon coming strait home, me thought, I found this Hog rus^ing among the
Loomes, wherewith I presently awaked, suddenly after midnight, being all in a
sweat and very ill: and I am sure you could not choose but hear me groan.
Trust me Dame, I heard you not (quoth John) I was so sound asleep And thus
(quoth she) a woman may dye in the night before you will have the care to see
what she asles, or ask what she lackes. But truly John (quoth she) all is one:
for if thou should have come, thou could not have got in, because my
chamber door was locked: but while I live, this shall teach me wit: for
henceforth I will have no other lock but a latch, till I am married. Then Dame
(quoth he) I perceive though you be curious in your choice, yet at length you
will marry. I truly (quoth she) so thou will not hinder me. Who I, quoth John?
on my faith Dame, not for a hundred pounds, but rather will further you to the
uttermost of my power. Indeed (quoth she) thou have no reason to show any
discourtesie to me in that matter, although some of our neighbors do not stick
to say, that I am sure to thee already. If it were so (quoth John) there is no
cause to deny it, or to be ashamed thereof, knowing my self far unworthy of
so high a favor. Well, let this talk rest (quoth she) and take there thy
quils, for it is time for me to go to market.

Thus the matter rested for two or three days, in which space she daily
devised which way she might obtain her desire, which was to marry her man.
Many things came in her head, and sundry sleights in her mind, but none of
them did fit her fancy, so that she became wondrous sad, and as civil as the
nine Sibbels; and in this melancholy humor continued three weeks or a monesh,
till at last it was her luck upon a Batholomew day (having a Fair in the
town) to spy her man John give a pair of Gloves to a proper maid for a
Fayring, which the maiden with a bathfull modesty kindly accepted, and requited
it with a kiss: which kindled in her an inward jealousy: but notwithstanding
very discreetly she covered it, and closely past along unspied of her man or
the maid.

She had not gone far, but she met with one of her suitors, namely the
Tailor, who was very fine and brisk in his apparel, and needs he would
bestow the wine upon the Widow: and after some faint denial, meeting with a
Gossip of hers, to the Tavern they went, which was more courtesy than the
Tailor could ever get of her before, showing her self very pleasant and merry;
and finding her in such a pleasing humor, the Tailor, after a new quart of
wine, renewed his old suit: the Widow with patience heard him, and gently
answered, that in respect of his great good will long time borne unto her, as
also in regard of his gentleness, cost, and courtesy at that present
bestowed, she would not flatly deny him. Therefore (quoth she) seeing this is
not a place to conclude of such masters, if I may entreat you to come to my
poor house on thursday next, you shall be heartily welcome, and be further
satisfied of my mind: and thus preferred to a touch of her lips, he paid the
shot and departed. The Tailor was scant out of sight, when she met with the
Tanner: who albeit he was aged, yet lustily he saiuted her, and to the wine
she must, there was no nay. The Widow seeing his importunacy, calls her
gossip, and along they walked together. The old man called for wine plenty, and
the best cheer in the house: and in an hearty manner he bids the Widow
welcome. They had not sitten long, but in comes a noise of Musicians in tawny
coats, who (putting off their caps) asked if they would have any music. The
Widow answered no, they were merry enough. Tut, queth the old man, let us hear
good fellows what you can do, and play me The beginning of the World. Alas,
quoth the widow, you had more need to harken to ye ending of the world. Why
Widow, quoth he, I tell thee the beginning of the world was the begetting of
Children: and if you find me faulty in that occupation, turn me out of thy
bed for a bungler, and then send for the Sexton. He had no sooner spoken the
word, but the Parson of Speen with his corner cap, popt in at the door, who
seeing the Widow sitting at the table, eraued pardon and came in. Quoth she,
for want of the Serton, here is the Priest if you need him. Marry (quoth the
Tanner) in good time, for by this means we need not go far to be married.
Sir, quoth the Parson, I shall do my best in convenient place. Wherein, quoth
the Tanner? To wed her my self, quoth the Parson. Nay soft, said the Widow,
one Swallow makes not a Summer, nor one meeting a marriage: as I lighted on you
unlooked for, so came I hither unprovided for the purpose. I trust, quoth the
Tanner, you came not without your eyes to see, your tongue to speak, your
ears to hear, your hands to feel, nor your legs to go. I brought my eyes,
quoth she, to discern colors, my tongue to say No to questions I like not, my
hands to thrust from me the things that I love not, my ears to judge twixt
flattery and friendship, and my feet to run from such as would wrong me. Why
then, quoth the Parson, by your gentle abiding in this place, it is evident
that here are none but those you like and love. God forbid I should hate my
friends (quoth the widow) whom I take all these in this place to be. But there
be diverse sorts of loves, quoth the Parson. You say truth, quoth the Widow: I
love your self for your profession, and my friend the Tanner, for his courtesy
and kindness, and the rest for their good company. Yet (quoth the Parson) for
the explaining of your love, I pray you drink to them you love best in the
company. Why (quoth the Tanner) have you any hope in her love? Believe me
(says the Parson) as much as another. Why then Parson sit down said the
Tanner: for you that are equal with me in desire, shall surely be half with
me in the shot: and so Widow, on Gods name fulfill the Parsons request.
Seeing (quoth the Widow) you are so pleasantly bent, if my courtesy might not
breed contention between you, and that I may have your favor to show my
fancy, I will fulfill your request. Quoth the Parson, I am pleased howsoever it
be. And I, quoth the Tanner. Why then (quoth she) with this cup of Claret
wine and Sugar, I heartily drink to the Ministrels boy. Why, is it he you love
best, quoth the Parson? I have reason, said she, to like and love them best,
that will be least offended with my doings. Nay, Widow (quoth they) we meant
you should drink to him whom you loved best in the way of marriage. Quoth the
Widow, you should have said so at firsh: but to tell you my opinion, it is
small discretion for a woman to disclose her secret affection in an open
assembly: therefore, if to that purpose you spoke, let me entreat you both to
come home to my house on Thursday next, where you shall be heartily welcome,
and there be fully resolved of my mind: and so, with thanks at this time, I Will
take my leave. The shot being paid, and the Mufftians pleased, they all
departed, the Tanner to Wallingford, the Parson to Speen, and the widow to her
own house: where in her wonted solemnes she settled her self to her business.

Against Thursday she dressed her house fine and brave, and set her self in her
best apparel: the Tailor nothing forgetting his promise, sent to the Widow a
good fat Pigge, and a Goose. The Parson being as mindful as he, sent to her
house a couple of fat Rabbets and a Capon: and the Tanner came himself, and
brought a good shoulder of Mutton, and half a dozen Chickens, beside he
brought a good gallon of Sack, and half a pound of the best Sugar. The Widow
receiving this good meat, set her maid to dress it incontinent, and when
dinner time drew near, the Table was covered, and every other thing provided
in convenient and comely sort.

At length the guests being come, the Widow bade them all heartily welcome. The
Priest and the Tanner seeing the Tailor, mused what he made there: the Tailor
on the other side, marvelled as much at their presence. Thus looking strangely
one at another, at length the Widow came out of the Kitchen, in a fair train
gown stuck full of silver pinnes, a fine white Cap on her head, with cuts of
curious needle work under the same, and an Apron before her as white as the
driven snow: then very modestly making curtsie to them all, she requested them
to sit down. But they straining courtesy the one with the other, the Widow
with a smiling countenance took the Parson by the hand, saying, Sir, as you
stand highest in the Church, so it is meet you should sit highest at the
Table: and therefore I pray you sit down there on the bench side. And Sir,
said she to the Tanner, as age is to be honored before youth for their
experience, so are they to sit above Bachelors for their gravity: and so she
set him down on this side the Table, over against the Parson. Then coming to
the Tailor, she said, Batcheler, though your lot be the last, your welcome is
equal with the first, and seeing your place points out it self, I pray you
take a cushion and sit down. And now (quoth she) to make the board equal, and
because it has been an old saying, that three things are to small purpose, if
the fourth be away: if so it may stand with your favor, I will call in a
Gossip of mine to supply this void place. With a good will, quoth they. With
that she brought in an old woman with scant ever a good tooth in her head, and
placed her right against the Batcheler. Then was the meat brought to the board
in due order by the Widows servants, her man John being chiefest seruitor. The
Widow sat down at the Tables end, between the Parson and the Tanner, who in
very good sort carned meat for them all, her man John waiting on the Table.

After they had sitten awhile, and well refreshed themselves, the Widow taking
a Crystal glass filled with Claret Wine, drunk unto the whole company, and
bade them welcome. The Parson pledged her, and so did all the rest in due
order: but still in their drinking, the cup past over the poor old woman's
Nose; insomuch that at length the old woman (in a merry vain) spoke thus unto
the company: I have had much good meat among you, but as for the drink I can
nothing commend it. Alas, good Gossip (quoth the Widow) I perceive no man has
drunk to thee yet. No truly, quoth the old woman: for Churchmen have so much
mind of yongue Rabbets, old men such joy in yongue Chickens, and Batchelers in
Pigs flesh take such delight, that an old Sow, a tough Hen, or a gray Cony
are not accepted: and so it is seen by me, else I should have been better
remembered. Well old woman, quoth the Parson take here the leg of a Capon to
stop thy mouth. Now by S. Anne, I dare not, quoth she. No, wherefore said the
Parson? Marry, for fear lest you should go home with a crutch, quoth she.
The Tailor said, then taste here a piece of a Goose. Now God forbid, said the
old woman, let Goose go to his kind: you have a yongue stomach, eat it your
self, and much good may it do your heart, sweet yongue man. The old woman
lackes most of her teeth, quoth the Tanner: and therefore a piece of a tender
Chicke is fittest for her. If I did lack as many of my teeth, quoth the old
woman, as you lack points of good husbandry, I doubt I should starve before it
were long. At this the Widow laughed heartily, and the men were stricken into
such a dumpe, that they had not a word to say. Dinner being ended, the Widow
with the rest rose from the Table, and after they had sitten a pretty while
merrily talking, the Widow called her man John to bring her a bowl of fresh
Ale, which he did. Then said the Widow: My masters, now for your courtesy and
cost I heartily thank you all, and in requital of all your favor, love and
good will, I drink to you, giving you free liberty when you please to depart.
At these words her suitors looked so sowerly one upon another, as if they had
been newly champing of Crabs. Which when the Tailor heard, shaking up himself
in his new russet Ierkin, and setting his Hat on one side, he began to speak
thus. I trust sweet Widow (quoth he) you remember to what end my coming was
hither to day: I have long time been a suitor unto you, and this day you
promised to give me a direct answer. 'Tistrue, quoth she, and so I have: for
your love I give you thanks, and when you please you may depart. Shall I not
have you, said the Tailor? Alas (quoth the Widow) you come too late. Good
friend (quoth the Tanner) it is manners for yongue men to let their elders be
served before them: to what end should I be here if the Widow should have thee?
a flat denial is meet for a sawey suitor: but what say thou to me fair
Widow (quoth the Tanner?) Sir, said she, because you are so sharp set, I
would wish you as soon as you can to wed. Appoint the time your self (quoth
the Tanner.) Even as soon (quoth she) as you can get a wife, and hope not
after me, for I am already promised. Now Tanner, you may take your place with
the Tailor, quoth the Parson: for indeed the Widow is for no man but my self.
Master Parson (quoth she) many have run nee the goal, and yet have lost the
game, and I cannot help it though your hope be in vain: besides, Parsons are
but newly suffered to have wives, and for my part I will have none of the first
head. What (quoth the Tailor) is your merriment grown to this reckoning? I
never spent a Pig and a Goose to so bad purpose before: I promise you, when I
came in, I verily thought, that you were invited by the Widow to make her and I
sure together, and that this jolly Tanner was brought to be a witness to the
contract* and the old woman fetched in for the same purpole, else I would never
have put up so many dry bobs at her hands. And surely, quoth the Tanner, I
knowing she to be a Tailor, did assuredly think, that theu wast appointed to
come and take measure for our wedding apparel. But now we are all deceived,
quoth the Parson: and therefore as we came fools, so we may depart hence like
asses. That is as you interpret the matter, said the Widow: for I ever doubting
that a concluding answer would breed a jarre in the end among you every one, I
thought it better to be done at one instant, and in mine own house, than at
sundry times, and in common Tauernes: and as for the meat you sent, as it was
unrequested of me, so had you your part thereof, and if you think good to
take home the remainder, prepare your wallets and you shall have it. Nay Widow,
quoth they, although we have lost our labors, we have not altogether lost
our manners: that which you have, keep; and GOD send to us better luck, and
to you your hearts desire. And with that they departed.

The Widow being glad she was thus rid of her guests, when her man John with
all the rest sat at supper, she sitting in a Chair by, spoke thus unto them.
Well my masters, you saw, that this day your poor Dame had her choice of
husbands, if she had listed to marry, and such as would have loved and
maintained her like a woman. It Is true, quoth John, and I pray God you have not
withstood your best fortune. Trust me (quoth she) I know not, but if I have, I
may thank mine own foolish fancy.

Thus it past on from Bartholmewtide, till it was near Christmas, at what time
the weather was so wonderful cold, that all the running Rivers round about the
Town were frozen very thick. The Widow being very loath any longer to lie
without company, in a cold winters night made a great fire, and sent for her
man John, having also prepared a Chair and a cushion, she made him sit down
therein, and sending for a pint of good Sack, they both went to supper.

In the end, bed time coming on, she caused her maid in a merriment to pluck
off his hose and shoes, and caused him to be laid in his masters best bed,
standing in the best Chamber, hung round about with very fair curtains. John
being thus preferred, thought himself a Gentleman, and lying soft, after his
hard labor and a good supper, quickly fell asleep.

About midnight, the Widow being cold on her feet, crept into her man's bed to
warm them. John feeling one lift up the clothes, asked who was there? O good
John it is I, quoth the Widow; the night is so extreme cold, and my Chamber
walls so thin, that I am like to be starued in my bed, wherefore rather than
I would any way hazard my health, I thought it much better to come hither and
try your courtesy, to have a little room beside you.

John being a kind yongue man, would not say her nay, and so they spent the
rest of the night both together in one bed. In the morning betime she arose up
and made her self ready, and wild her man John to run and fetch her a link
with all speed: for, quoth she, I have earnest business to do this morning.
Her man did so. Which done, she made him to carry the Link before her, until
she came to Saint Bartholmewes Chapel, where Sir John the Priest with his
Clark and Sexton, stood waiting for her. John, quoth she, turn into the
Chapel: for before I go further, I will make my prayers to S. Bartholmew, so
shall I speed the better in my business. When they were come in, the Priest
according to his order, came to her, and asked where the Bridegroom was? Quoth
she, I thought he had been here before me. Sir, (quoth she) I will sit down
and say over my Beads, and by that time he will come. John mused at this
matter, to see that his Dame should so suddenly be married, and he hearing
nothing thereof before. The Widow rising from her prayers, the Priest told her
that the Bridegroom was not yet come. Is it true, quoth the Widow? I promise
you I will stay no longer for him, if he were as good as George a Green: and
therefore dispatch, quoth she, and marry me to my man John. Why Dame (quoth
he) you do but jest, I frow. John (quoth she) I jest not: for so I mean it
shall be, and stand not strangely, but remember that you did promise me on
your faith, not to hinder me when I came to the Church to be married, but
rather to set it forward: therefore set your link aside, and give me your
hand: for none but you shall be my husband. John seeing no remedy, consented,
because he saw the matter could not otherwise be amended; and married they
were presently. When they were come home, John entertained his Dame with a
kiss, which she other servants seeing, thought him some what saucy. The Widow
caused the best cheer in the house to be set on the Table, and to breakfast
they went, causing her new husband to be set in a chair at the tables end,
with a fair napkin laid on his trencher: then she called out the rest of her
servants, willing them to sit down and take part of their good cheer. They
wondering to see their fellow John sit at the tables end in their old masters
chair, began heartily to smile, and openly to laugh at the matter, especially
because their Dame so kindly sat by his side: which she perceiving, asked if
that were all the manners they could show before their master? I tell you,
quoth she, he is my husband: for this morning we were married, and therefore
hence forward look you acknowledge your duty toward him. The folks looked
one upon another, maruelling at this strange news. Which when John perceiu^d,
he said; My masters, muse not at all: for although by Gods providence, and your
Dames favor, I am preferred from being your fellow to be your master, I am
not thereby so much puffed up in pride, that any way I will forget my former
estate: Notwithstanding, seeing I am now to hold the place of a master, it
shall be wisdom in you to forget what I was, and to take me as I am, and in
doing your diligence, you shall have no cause to repent that God made me your
master. The servants hearing this, as also knowing his good government before
time, past their years with him in dutiful manner.

The next day, the report was over all the Town, that Jack of Newberie had
married his Dame: so that when the woman walked abroad, every one bade God give
her joy: some said that she was matched to her sorrow, saying, that so lusty a
yongue man as he, would never love her, being so ancient. Whereupon the woman
made answer, that she would take him down in his wedding shoes, and would
try his patience in the prime of his lustiness: whereunto, many of her Gossips
did likewise encourage her. Every day therefore for the space of a month after
she was married, it was her ordinary custom, to go forth in the morning
among her Gossips and acquaintance to make merry, and not to return home till
night, without any regard of her household. Of which, at her coming home, her
husband did very oftentimes admonish her in very gentle sort, showing what
great inconvenience would grow thereby: the which sometime she would take in
gentle part, and sometime in disdain, saying.

I am now in very good case, that he that was my servant but the other day,
will now be my master: this it is for a woman to make her foot her head. The
day has been, when I might have gone forth when I would, and come in again
when it had pleased me without controulement, and now I must be subject to
every Iackes check. I am sure (quoth she) that by my gadding abroad, and
careless spending, I waste no goods of thine. I, pitying thy poverty, made
thee a man, and master of the house, but not to the end I would become thy
slave. I scorn, I tell thee true, that such a yongueling as thy self* should
correct my conceit, and give me instructions, as if I were not able to guide
my self: but y faith, y faith, you shall not use me like a babe nor bridle me
like an Ass: and seeing my going abroad grieves thee, where I have gone forth
one day, I will go abroad three; and for one hour, I will stay five. Well
(quoth her husband) I trust you will be better advised: and with that he went
from her about his business, leaving her sweating in her fustion furies.

Thus the time*past on, till on a certain day she had been abroad in her
wonted manner, and staying forth very late, he shut the doors and went to
bed. About midnight she comes to the door, and knockes to come in: to whom
he looking out of the window, answered in this sort.

What? is it you that keeps such a knocking? I pray you get hence, and request
the Constable to provide you a bed, for this night you shall have no lodging
here. I hope, quoth she, you will not shut me out of doors like a dog, or
let me lie in the streets like a Strumpet. Whether like a dog or drab, quoth
he, all is one to me, knowing no reason, but that as you have stayed out all
day for your delight, so you may lie forth all night for my pleasure. Both
birds and beasts at the nights appreach repair to their rest, and observe a
convenient time to return to their habitation. Look but upon the poor
Spidee, the Frog, the Fly, and every other silly worm, and you shall see all
these observe time to return to their home: and if you, being a woman, will
not do the like, content your self to bear the brunt of your own folly: and
so farewell.

The woman hearing this, made pittious moan, and in very humble sort entreated
him to let her in, and to pardon this offense, and while she lived vowde never
to do the like. Her husband at length being moved with pity toward her, slipped
on his shoes, and came down in his shirt: the door being opened, in she
went quaking, and as he was about to lock it again, in very sorrowful
manner she said, Alack husband, what hap have I? my wedding King was even now
in my hand, and I have let it fall about the door: good sweet John come forth
with the candle, and help me to seek it. The man incontinent did so, and
while he sought for that which was not there to be found, she whipped into the
house, and quickly clapping to the door, she locked her husband out. He stood
calling with the candle in his hand to come in, but she made as if she heard
not. Anon she went up into her chamber, and carried the key with her: but when
he saw she would not answer, he presently began to knock as loud as he could
at the door. At last she thrust her head out at the window, saying: Who is
there? It Is I, quoth John, what mean you by this? I pray you come down and
open the door that I may come in.

What sir, quoth she, is it you? have you nothing to do but dance about the
streets at this time of night, and like a Spright of the Buttery hunt after
Crickets, are you so hot that the house cannot hold you? Nay, I pray thee
sweet heart, quoth he, do not gybe no longer, but let me in. O sir, remember,
quoth she, how you stood even now at the window, like a Judge on the Bench,
and in taunting sort kept me out of mine own house. How now Jack, am I even
with you? What, John my man, were you so lusty to lock your Dame out of
doors? Sir, remember you had me go to the Constable to get lodging, now
you have leisure to try if his wife will prefer you to a bed. You sir sauce,
that made me stand in the cold, till my feet did freeze, and my teeth chatter,
while you stood preaching of birds and beasts, telling me a tale of Spiders,
Flies, and Frogs: go try now if any of them will be so friendly to let thee
have lodging. Why go you not man? fear not to speak with them; for I am sure
you shall find them at home: think not they are such ill husbands as you, to
be abroad at this time of night.

With this John's patience was greatly moved, insomuch, that he deeply swore,
that if she would not let him in, he would break down the door. Why John,
quoth she, you need not be so hot, your clothing is not so warm, and
because I think this will be a warning for you against another time, how you
shut me out of my house, catch, there is the key, come in at thy pleasure, and
look thou go to bed to thy fellows, for with me thou shall not lie to
night. With that she clapped to the casement, and got her to bed, locking the
chamber door fast. Her husband that knew it was in vain to seek to come into
her chamber, and being no longer able to endure the cold, got him a place among
his prentises, and there slept soundly. In the morning his wife rose betime,
and merrily made him a Cawdle, and bringing it up to his bed side, asked him
how he did?

Quoth John, troubled with a shrew, who, the longer she lives, the worse she
is: and as the people of Illyris kill men with their looks, so she kills her
husbands heart with untoward conditions. But trust me wife, quoth he, seeing
I find you of such crooked qualities, that (like the Spider) ye turn the
sweet flowers of good counsel into venomous poison, from henceforth I will
leave you to your own wilfulness, and neither vere my mind, nor trouble my
self to restrain you: the which if I had wisely done last night, I had kept
the house in quiet, and my self from cold. Husband (quoth she) think that
women are like starlings, that will burst their gall before they will yield to
the Fowler: or like the Fish Scolopendra, that cannot be touched without danger.
Notwithstanding, as the hard steel does yield to the hammers stroke, being
used to his kind, so will women to their husbands, where they are not too much
crossed. And seeing ye have sworn to give me my will, I vow likewise that my
wilfulness shall not offend you. I tell you husband, the noble nature of a
woman is such, that for their loving friends they will not stick (like the
Pelican) to pierce their own hearts to do them good. And therefore forgiving
each other all injuries past, having also tried one-anothers patience, let us
quench these burning coals of contention, with the sweet juice of a faithful
kiss, and shaking hands, bequeath all our anger to the eating up of this
Cawdle. Her husband courteously consented: and after this time, they lived long
together, in most godly, loving and kind sort till in the end she dyed, leaving
her husband wondrous wealthy.

CHAP. II.
Of Jack of Newberie his great wealth, and number of servants: and also how
he brought the Queen Katharine two hundred and fifty men prepared for the
war at his own cost against the king of Scots at Floden field.

NOw Jack of Newberie being a widower, had the choice of many wives, men's
daughters of good credit, and widows of great wealth. Notwithstanding he bent
his only like to one of his own servants, whom he had tried in the guiding of
his house a year or two: and knowing her carfulness in her business,
faithful in her dealing, an excellent good huswife, thought it bettsr to have
her with nothing, than some other with much treasure. And beside as her
qualities were good, so was she of very comely personage, of a sweet favor,
and fairs complexion. In the end, he opened his mind unto her, and craved her
good will. The maid (though she took this motion kindly) said, she would do
nothing without consent of her parents. Whereupon a Letter was writ to her
father, being a poor man, dwelling at Alesburie in Buckinghamshire: who being
joyful of his daughters good fortune, speedily came to Newberie, where of her
master he was friendly entertained: who after he had made him good cheer,
showed him all his servants at work, and every office in his house.

Within one room being large and long,
There stood two hundred Loomes full strong:
Two hundred men the truth is so,
Wrought in these Loomes all in a row.
By every one a pretty boy,
Sat making quils with mickle joy;
And in another place hard by,
An hundred women merrily,
Were carding hard with joyful cheer,
Who singing sat with voices clear.
And in a chamber close beside,
Two hundred maidens did abide,
In petticoates of Stammell red,
And milke-white kerchers on their head:
Their smocke-sleeues like to winter snow,
That on the Western mountains flow,
And each sleeue with a silken band,
Was featly tied at the hand.
These pretty maids did never lin,
But in that place all day did spin:
And spinning so with voices meet,
Like Nightingals they sung full sweet.
Then to another room came they,
Where children were in poor array:
And every one sat picking wool,
The finest from the course to cull:
The number was seven score and ten,
The children of poor silly men:
And these their labors to requite,
Had every one a penny at night,
Beside their meat and drink all day,
Which was to them a wondrous stay.
Within another place likewise,
Full fifty proper men he spies,
And these were Shearemen every one,
Whose skill and cunning there was shown:
And hard by them there did remain,
Full fourscore Rowers taking pain.
A Dye-house likewise had he then,
Wherein he kept full forty men:
And likewise in his fulling Mill,
Full twenty persons kept he still.
Each week ten good fat oxen he
Spent in his house for certainty:
Beside good butter, cheese, and fish,
And many another wholesome dish.
He kept a Butcher all the year,
A Brewer eke for Ale and Beer:
A Baker for to bake his bread,
Which stood his hushold in good stead.
Five Cooks within his kitchen great,
Were all the year to dress his meat.
Six scullian boys unto their hands,
To make clean dishes, pots, and pans,
Beside poor children that did stay,
To turn the broaches every day.
The old man that did see this sight,
Was much amazed, as well he might:
This was a gallant Cloathier sure,
Whose fame for ever shall endure.
When the old man had seen this great household and family, then was he brought
into the Warehouses, some being filled with wool, some with flocks, some with
wead and madder, and some with broadcloathes and kersies ready dyed and dressed,
beside a great number of others, same strecht on the Tenters, some hanging on
poles, and a great many more lying wet in other places. Sir (quoth the old man)
I wis che zee you be vominable rich, and cham content you shall have my
daughter, and Gods blessing and mine light on you both.

But Father (quoth Jack of Newberie) what will you bestow with her? Marry
hear you (quoth the old man) I vaith cham but a poor man, but I thong God,
cham of good exclamation among my neighbors, and they will as zoone take my
vice for any thing as a richer man's: thick I will bestow, you shall have with
a good will, because che hear very good condemnation of you in every place,
therefore chil give you twenty Nobles and a weaning Calfe, and when I dye and
my wife, you shall have the revelation of all my goods.

When Jack heard his offer, he was straight content, making more reckoning of
the woman's modesty, than her Fathers money. So the marriage day being
appointed, all things was prepared meet for the wedding, and royal cheer
ordained, most of the Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen thereabout, were invited
thereunto: the Bride being attyred in a gown of sheep russet, and a kertle
of fine woosted, her head attyred with a villiment of gold, and her hair as
yeallow as gold, hanging down behind her, which was curiously combed and
pleated, according to the manner in those days: she was led to Church
between two sweet boys, with Bride-laces and Rosemary tied about their
silken sleeves: the one of them was son to Sir Thomas Parry, the other to Sir
Francis Hungerford. Then was there a fair Bride-cup of silver and gilt carried
before her, wherein was a goodly branch of Rosemary gilded very fair, hung
about with silken Ribands of all colors: next was there a noise of Musicians
that played all the way before her: after her came all the chiefest maidens of
the Country, some bearing great Bride Cakes, and some Garlands of wheat finely
gilded, and so she past unto the Church.

It is needelesse for me to make any mention here of the Bridegroom, who
being a man so well beloved, wanted no company, and those of the best sort,
beside, diverse Merchant strangers of the Stillyard, that came from London to
the Wedding. The marriage being solemnized, home they came in order as before,
and to dinner they went, where was no want of good cheer, no lack of melody:
Rennish Wine at this wedding was as plentiful as Beer or Ale: for the
Merchants had sent thither ten Tons of the best in the Stillyard.

This wedding endured ten days, to the great relief of the poor that dwelt
all about: and in the end, the Brides Father and Mother came to pay their
Daughters portion: which when the Bridegroom had received, he gave them great
thanks: Notwithstanding he would not suffer them yet to depart, and against
they should go home, their son in law came unto them, saying; Father and
Mother, all the thanks that my poor heart can yield, I give you for your good
will, cost, and courtesy, and while I live make bold to use me in any thing
that I am able, and in requital of the gift you gave me with your daughter, I
give you here twenty pound to bestow as you find occasion, and for your loss
of time, and charges riding up and down, I give you here as much broadcloath
as shall make you a cloak, and my mother a holiday gown, and when this is
worn out, come to me and fetch more.

O my good zonne (quoth the old woman) Christ's benizon be with thee evermore:
for to tell thee true, we had zold all our kine to make money for my daughters
marriage, and this zeauen year we should not have been able to buy more:
Notwithstanding we should have zold all that ever we had, before my poor
wench should have lost her marriage. I (quoth the old man) chud have zold my
coat from my back, and my bed from under me, before my gyrle should have
gone without you. I thank you good father and mother, said the Bride, and I
pray God long to keep you in health: then the Bride kneeled down and did her
duty to her parents, who weeping for very joy, departed.

Not long after this, it chanced while our noble king was making war in
France, that James king of Scotland, falsely breaking his oath, invaded England
with a great Army, and did much hurt upon the Borders: whereupon on the sudden,
every man was appointed according to his ability, to be ready with his men and
furniture, at an hours warning, on pain of death. Jack of Newberie was
commanded by the Justices to set out six men, four armed with Pikes, and two
Caliuers, and to meet the Queen in Buckinghamshire, who was there raising a
great power to go against the faithless king of Scots.

When Jack had received this charge, he came home in all haste, and cut out a
whole broadcloath for horsemens coats, and so much more as would make up
coats for the number of a hundren men: in short time he had made ready fifty
tall men well mounted in white coats, and red caps with yellow Feathers,
Demilances in their hands, and fifty armed men on foot with Pikes, and fifty
shot in white coats also, every man so expert in the handling of his weapon,
as few better were found in the field. Himself likewise in complet armor on a
goodly Barbed Horse, rode foremost of the company, with a Lance in his hand,
and a fair plume of yellow Feathers in his crest, and in this sort he came
before the Justices: who at the first approach did not a little wonder what he
should be.

At length when he had discovered what he was, she Justices and most of the
Gentlemen gave him great commendations for this his good and forward mind
showed in this action: but some other envying hereat, gave out words that he
showed himself more prodigal than prudent, and more vainglorious than well
advised, seeing that the best Nobleman in the Country would scarce have done so
much: and no marvel (quoth they) for such a one would call to his remembrance,
that the King had often occasions to urge his subjects to such charges; and
therefore would do at one time as they might be able to do at another: but
Jack of Newberie like the Stork in the Springtime, thinks the highest Cedar
too low for him to build his nest in, and ere the year be half done, may be
glad to have his bed in a bush.

These disdainful speeches being at last brought to Jack of Newberies ear,
though it grieved him much, yet patiently put them up till time convenient.
Within a while after, all the soldiers of Barkshire, Hampshire, and Wiltshire,
were commanded to show themselves before the Queen at Stonny Stratford, where
her Grace, with many Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen were assembled, with ten
thousand men. Against Jack should go to the Queen, he caused his face to
be smeared with blood, and his white ceate in like manner.

When they were come before her Highness, she demanded (above all the rest)
what those white coats were? Whereupon, Sir Henry Englefield (who had the
leading of the Barkshire men) made answer.

May it please your Majesty to understand, that he which rides foremost
there, is called Jack of Newbery, and all those gallant men in white, are his
own servants, who are maintained all the year by him: whom he at his own
cost has set out in this time of extremity, to serve the King against his
vaunting Foe: and I assure your Majesty, there is not, for the number, better
soldiers in the field.

Good sir Henry (quoth the Queen) bring the man to me, that I may see him:
which was done accordingly. Then Jack with all his men allighted, and humbly
on their knees fell before the Queen. Her Grace said, Gentleman arise; and
putting forth her lilly white hand, gave it him to kiss. Most gracious Queen,
quoth he, Gentleman I am none, nor the son of a Gentleman, but a poor
Clothier, whose lands are his Loomes, having no other Rents but what I get from
the backs of little sheep: nor can I claim any cognizance but a wadden
shuttle. Nevertheless, most gracious Queen, these my poor servants and my
self, with life and goods, are ready at your Majesty's command, not only to
spend our bloods, but also to lose our lives in defense of our King and Country.

Welcome to me Jack of Newberie, said the Queen, though a Clothier by trade,
yet a Gentleman by condition, and a faithful subject in heart: and if thou
chance to have any suit in Court, make account the Queen will be thy friend,
and would to God the King had many such Clothiers. But tell me, how came thy
white coat besmeared with blood, and thy face so bescratcht? May it please
your Grace (quoth he) to understand, that it was my chance to meet with a
monster, who like the people Cynomolgy, had the proportion of a man, but headed
like a dog, the biting of whose teeth was like the poisoned teeth of a
Crocodile, his breath like the Basilisks, killing afar off. I understand, his
name was Envy, who assailed me inuisibly, like the wicked spirit of Mogunce,
who flung stones at men, and could not be seen: and so I come by my scratcht
face, not knowing when it was done. What was the cause this monster should
afflict thee above the rest of thy company, or other men in the field?
Although, most Sovereign Queen, quoth he, this poisoned curre snarleth at
many, and that few can escape the hurt of his wounding breath, yet at this time
he bent his force against me, not for any hurt I did him, but because I
surpast him in hearty affection to my Sovereign Lord, and with the poor
Widow, offered all I had to serve my Prince and Country. It were happy for
England, said the Queen, if in every market Town there were a Iybbet to hang
up curres of that kind, who like Aesops dog lying in the Manger, will do no
goodhimselfe, nor suffer such as would to do any.

This speech being ended, the Queen caused her Army to be set in order, and in
warlike manner to march toward Flodden, where King James had pitched his field.
But as they passed along with Drum and Trumpet, there came a Past from the
valiant Earl of Surrey, with tidings to her Grace, that now she might
dismiss her Army, for that it had pleased God to grant the noble Earl victory
over the Scotts: whom he had by his wisdom and valiancy vanquished in fight,
and slain their King in battle. Upon which news, her Majesty discharged her
forces, and joyfully took her journey to London, with a pleasant countenance,
praising God for her famous victory, and yielding thanks to all the noble
Gentlemen and Soldiers for their readiness in the action, giving many gifts
to the Nobility, and great rewards to the Soldiers: among whom, she nothing
forgot Jack of Newbery, about whose neck she put a rich chain of gold: at
what time he with all the rest gave a great shout, saying, God save Katharine
the noble Queen of England, Many Noble men of Scotland were taken prisoners at
this battle, and many more slain: so that there never came a greater foil to
Scotland than this: for you shall understand that the Scottish King made full
account to be Lord of this Land, watching opportunity to bring to pass his
faithless and traiterous practice: which was when our King was in France, at
Turney, and Turwin: in regard of which wars, the Scots vaunted there was none
left in England, but shepherds and ploughmen, who were not able to lead an
Army, having no skill in martial affairs. In consideration of which
advantage, he invaded the Country, boasting of victory before he had won:
which was no small grief to Queen Margaret, his wife, who was eldest sister
to our noble King. Wherefore in disgrace of the Scots, and in remembrance of
the famous achieved victory, the Commons of England made this Song: which to
this day is not forgotten of many.

THE SONG:
KIng Iamie had made a vow,
keep it well if he may:
That he will be at lovely London,
upon Saint James his day.
Upon Saint James his day at noon,
at fair London will I be;
And all the Lords in merry Scotland,
they shall dine there with me.
Then bespake good Queen Margaret,
the tears fell from her eyes:
Leave off these wars most noble King,
keep your fidelity.
The water runs swift and wondrous deep,
from bottom unto the brimme:
My brother Henry has men good enough,
England is hard to win.
Away, quoth he, with this silly fool.
in prison fast let her lie:
For she is come of the English blood,
and for these words she shall dye.
With that bespake Lord Thomas Howard,
the Queens Chamberlain that day:
If that you put Queen Margaret to death,
Scotland shall rue it always.
Then in a rage King Iamie did say,
away with this foolish Mome:
He shall be hanged, and the other be burned,
so soon as I come home.
At Flodden Field the Scots came in,
which made our Englishmen feign,
At Bramstone-greene this battle was seen:
there was King Iamie slain.
Then presently the Scots did fly,
their Cannons they left behind,
Their ensigns gay were worn all way,
our Soldiers did beat them blind.
To tell you plain, twelve thousand were slain,
that to the fight did stand;
And many prisoners took that day,
the best in all Scotland.
That day made many a fatherless child,
and many a widow poor;
And many a Scottish gay Lady,
sat weeping in her bower.
Jack with a feather was lapt all in leather,
his boastings were all in vain:
He had such a chance with a new morris dance,
he never went home again.
FINIS.
CHAP. III.
How Jack of Newberie went to receive the King, as he went in progress into
Barkshire: and how he made him a banquet in his own house.

ABout the tenth year of ye kings reign, his Grace made his progress into
Barkshire, against which time Jack of Newbery clothed 30. tall fellows, being
his household servants, in blew coats, faced with Scarcenet, every one having a
good sword and buckler on his shoulder, himself in a plain russet coat, a
pair of white kersie breeches without welt or guard, and stockens of the same
piece sowed to his slops, which had a great codpeece, whereon he stuck his
pinnes: who knowing the King would come over a certain meadow, near adioining
to the Lowne, got himself thither with all his men; and repairing to a
certain Ant-hill, which was in the field, took up his seat there, causing his
men to stand round about the same with their swords drawn.

The King coming near the place with the rest of his Nobility, and seeing them
stand with their drawn weapons, sent to know the cause. Garret King at Arms
was the Messenger, who spoke in this sort. Good fellows, the Kings Majesty
would know to what end you stand here with your swords and bucklers prepared to
fight. With that, Jack of Newbery started up, and made this answer. Harrold
(quoth he) return to his Highness, it is poor Jack of Newbery, who being
scant Marqnesse of a Molehill, is chosen Prince of Ants: and here I stand with
my weapons and Guard about me, to defend and keep these my poor and painful
subjects, from the force of the idle Butterflies, their sworn enemies, lest
they should disturb this quiet Commonwealth, who this Summer season are
making their Winters provision.

The messenger returning, told his Grace that it was one Jack of Newbery, that
stood there with his men about him, to guard (as they say) a company of Ants,
from the furieus wrath of the Prince of Butterflies. With this news the King
heartily laughed, saying: Indeed it is no marvel he stands so well prepared,
considering what a terrible tyrant he has to deal withal. Certainly my Lords
(quoth he) this seems to be a pleasant fellow: and therefore we will send to
talk with him.

The messenger being sent, told Jack he must come speak with the King. Quoth
he, his Grace has a horse and I am on foot; therefore will him to come to
me: beside that, while I am away, our enemies might come and put my people in
hazzare, as the Scots did England, while our King was in France. How dares the
Lamb be so bold with the Lion, quoth she Herald? Why, quoth he, if there be a
Lion in the field, here is never a cock to fear him: and tell his Majesty,
he might think me a very bad Governor, that would walk aside upon pleasure,
and leave my people in peril. Herald (quoth he) it is written, He that has a
charge must look to it, and so tell thy Lord my King. The Message being done,
the King said: My Lords, seeing it will be no other, we will ride up to the
Emperor of Ants, that is so careful in his government. At the Kings approach,
Jack of Newbery and his servants put up all their weapons, and with a joyful
cry flung up their caps in token of victory. Why how now my masters (quoth the
King) is your wars ended: Let me see, where is the Lord General of this great
Camp? With that, Jack of Newbery with all his servants fell on their knees,
saying: God save the King of England, whose sight has put our foes to flight,
and brought great peace to the poor laboring people. Trust me (quoth our
King) here be pretty fellows to fight against Butterflies: I must commend
your courage, that dares withstand such mighty giants. Most dread Sovereign
(quoth Jack) not long ago, in my conceit, I saw the most provident Nation of
the Ants, summoned their chief Peers to a Parliament, which was held in the
famous city Dry Dusty, the one and twentieth day of September: whereas, by their
wisdoms, I was chosen their King, at what time also many bills of complaint
were brought in against diverse il members in the commonwealth: among whom, the
Moule was attainted of high treason to their State: and therefore was banished
for ever from their quiet Kingdom: so was the Grasshopper and the Catterpiller,
because they were not only idle, but also lived upon the labors of other men,
amongst the rest, the Butterfly was very much misliked, but few durst say any
thing to him, because of his golden apparel: who through sufferance grew so
ambitious and malapert, that the poor Ant could no sooner get an egg into her
nest, but he would have it away, and especially against Easter, which at length
was misliked. This painted ass took snuff in the nose, and assembled a great
many other of his own coat, by windy wars to root this painful people
out of the land, that he himself might be seated above them all. (These were
proud Butterflies, quoth the King.) Whereupon I with my men (quoth Jack)
prepared our selves to withstand them, tili such time as your Maiestles royal
presence put them to flight.

Tush (said the King) thou must think that the force of flies is not great.
Notwithstanding (quoth Jack) their gay gowns make poor men afraid. I
perceive (quoth Cardinal Wolsie) that you being a King of Ants, do carry a
great grudge to the Butterflies. I, quoth Jack. we be as great foes, as the
Fox and the Snake are friends: for the one of them being subtle, loves the
other for his craft: but now I intend to be nolonger a Prince, because the
majesty of a King has eclipst my glory: so that looking like the Peacocke on
my black feet makes me abase my vaine-glorions feathers, and humbly yield
unto his Majesty all my Sovereign rule and dignity, both of life and goods,
casting my weapons at his feet, to do any service wherein his Grace shall
command me. God a mercy good Jack (quoth the King) I have often heard of thee,
and this morning I mean to visit thy house,

Thus the King with great delight rode along until he came to the Towns end,
where a great multitude of people attended to see his Majesty: where also Queen
Katharine with all her train met him. Thus with great rejoicing of the
Commons, the King and Queen passed along to this jolly Clothiers house, where
the good wife of the house with threescore maidens attending on her, presented
the King with a Bee-hiue, most richly gilt with gold, and all the Bees therein
were also made of gold curiously by Art, and out of the top of the same Hiue,
sprung a flourishing green tree, which bore golden Apples, and at the root
thereof lay diverse Serpents, seeking to destroy it, whom Prudence and Fortitude
trod under their feet, holding this inscription in their hands;

Lo here presented to your Royal sight,
The figure of a flourishing Commonwealth:
Where virtuous subjects labor with delight,
And beat the drones to death which live by stealth:
Ambition, Envy, Treason, loathsome serpents be,
Which seek the downfall of this fruitful tree.
But Lady Prudence with deep searching eye,
Their ill intended purpose does prevent,
And noble Fortitude standing always nigh,
Dispersed their power prepared with bad intent.
Thus are they foild that mount with means unmeet,
And so like slaves are trodden under feet.
The King favorably accepted this Emblem, and receiving it at the women's
hands, willed Cardinal Wolsie to look thereon, commanding it should be sent to
Windsor Castle. This Cardinal was at that time Lord Chancellor of England, and
a wonderful proud Prelate,, by whose means great variance was set betwixt the
King of England and the French King, the Emperor of Almaine, and diverse other
Princes of Christendom, whereby the traffic of those Merchants was utterly
forbidden, which bred a general woe through England, especially among
Clothiers: in so much, that having no sale for their cloth, they were feign to
put away many of their people which wrought for them, as hereafter more at
large shall be declared.

Then was his Majesty brought into a great Hall, where four long tables stood
ready covered: and passing through that place, the King and Queen came into a
fair and large Parlour, hung about with goodly Tapistry, where was a Table
prepared for his Highness and the Queens Grace. All the floor where the King
sat was covered with broad clothes in stead of green rushes: these were
choice pieces of the finest wool, of an Azure color, valued at an hundred
pound a cloth, which afterward was given to his Majesty. The King being set
with the chiefest of the Council about him, after a delicate dinner, a
sumptuous banquet was brought in, served all in glass: the description whereof
were too long for me to write, and you to read. The great Hall was also filled
with Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, who were attended by no other but the
servants of the house. The Ladies of Honor and Gentlewomen of the Court were
all seated in another Parlour by themselves: at whose table the maidens of the
house did wait in decent sort. The Serving men by themselves, and the Pages
and footmen by themselves, upon whom the prentices did attend most diligently.
During the Kings abiding in this place, there was no want of delicates: Rhenish
wine, Claret wine and Sarke, was as plentiful as small Ale. Thus from the
highest to the lowest, they were served in such sort, as no discontent was
found any way, so that great commendations redownded unto the goodman of the
house. The Lord Cardinal that of late found himself galde by the Allegory of
the Ants, spoke in this wise to the King. If it should please your Highness
(quoth he) but to note the vainglory of these Artificers, you should find no
small cause of dislike in many of their actions. For an instance, the fellow of
this house, he has not stuck this day to undo himself, only to become
famous by receiving of your Majesty: like Herostratus the Shoemaker, that
burned the Temple of Diana, only to get himself a name, more than for any
affection he bears to your Grace, as may well be proved by this: Let there be
but a simple Subsidy levied upon them for the assistance of your Highness
Wars, or any other weighty affairs of the Commonwealth and state of the
Realm, though it be not the twentieth part of their substance, they will so
grudge and repine, that it is wonderful: and like people desperate cry out,
they be quite undone. My Lord Cardinal, quoth the Queen, (under correction of
my Lord the King) I durst lay an hundred pound lack of Newbery was never of
that mind, nor is not at this instant: if ye ask him, I warrant he will say
so. My self also had a proof thereof at the Scottish invasion, at what time
this man being seized but at six men, brought (at his own cost) an hundred
and fifty into the field. I would I had more such subjects said the King, and
many of so good a mind. Ho, ho, Harry (quoth Will Summers) then had not Empson
and Dudley been chronicled for knaves, nor sent to the Tower for treason. But
then they had not known the pain of imprisonment, quoth our King, who with
their subtilty grieved many others. But their subtilty was such that it broke
their necks, quoth Will Summers. Whereat the King and Queen laughing
heartily, rose from the Table. By which time Jack of Newbery had caused all
his folks to go to their work, that his Grace and all the Nobility might see
it, so indeed the Queen had requested. Then came his Highness where he saw a
hundred Loomes, standing in one room, and two men working in every one, who
pleasantly sung on this sort.

The Weavers Song.
WHen Hercules did use to spin,
and Pallas wrought upon the Loome,
Our trade to flourish did begin,
while Conscience went not selling Broomes.
Then love and friendship did agree,
To keep the band of unity.
When Princes sons kept sheep in field,
and Queens made cakes of wheaten flower,
Then men to lucre did not yield,
which brought good cheer in every bower.
Then love and friendship did agree,
To hold the bands of amity.
But when that Giants huge and hie,
did fight with spears like Weauers beams,
Then they in iron beds did lie,
and brought poor men to hard extremes.
Yet love and friendship did agree,
To hold the bands of amity.
Then David took his sling and stone,
not fearing great Goliahs strength,
He pierst his brain, and broke the bone,
though he were fifty foot of length.
For love and friendship, etc.
But while the Greeks besieged Troy,
Penelope apace did spin,
And Weauers wrought with mickle Joy,
though little gains were coming in.
For love and friendship, etc,
Had Helen then sat carding wool,
(whose beauteous face did breed such strife)
She had not been sir Paris trull,
nor caused so many lose their life.
Yet we by love did still agree, etc.
Or had King Priams wanton son
been making quills with sweet content.
He had not then his friends undone,
when he to Greece a gadding went.
For love and friendship did agree, etc.
The Cedar tree indures more storms,
than little shrubs that sprout not hie:
The Weauer lives more void of harms,
than Princes of great dignity.
While love and friendship does agree, etc.
The Shepherd sitting in the field,
does tune his pipe with hearts delight:
When Princes march with spear and shield,
the poor man soundly sleeps all night.
While love and friendship does agree, etc.
Yet this by proof is daily tried,
for Gods good gifts we are ingrate:
And no man through the world so wide,
lives well contented with his state.
No love nor friendship we can see*
To hold the bands of amity.
Well sung good fellows, said our King: Light hearts and merry minds live
long without gray hairs. But (quoth Will Summers) seldom without red noses.
Well, said the King, there is a hundred angels to make cheer withal: and
look that every year once you make a feast among your selves, and frankly
(every year) I give you leave to fetth four Buckes out of Dunington Park,
without any man's let or controwlment. O I beseech your Grace (quoth Will
Summers) let it be with a condition. What is that, said our King? My Liege,
quoth he, that although the Keeper will have the skins, that they may give
their wives the horns. Go to said the Queen, thy head is fuller of knavery,
than thy purse is of crowns.

The poor workmen humbly thanked his Majesty for his bountiful liberality:
and ever since, it has been a custom among the Weaners, every year presently
after Bartholmewride, in a remembrance of the Kings favor, to meet together,
and make a merry feast. His Majesty came next among the spinsters and carders,
who were merrily a working: whereat Will Summers fell into a great laughter.
What ailes the fool to laugh, said the King? Marry (quoth Will Summers) to see
these maidens get their living, as Bulls do eat their meat, How is that, said
the Queen? By going still backward, quoth Will Sommes: and I will lay a wager,
that they that practice so well being maids to go backward, will quickly
learn ere long to fall backward.

But sir, said the Cardinal, thou did fall forward when thou brokest thy
face in master Kingsmills seller. But you my Lord sat forward (quoth Will
Summers) when you sat in the stocks at Sir Amie Paulets. Whereat there was
greater laughing than before. The King and Queen, and all the Nobility
heedfully beheld these women, who for the most part were very fair and comely
creatures, and were all attired alike from top to toe. Then (after due
reverence) the maidens in dulcet manner chaunted out this Song, two of them
singing the Ditty* and all the rest bearing the burden.

The Maidens Song.
IT was a Knight in Scotland borne,
follow my love, leap over the strand:
Was taken prisoner and left forlorn,
even by the good Earl of Northumberland.
Then was he cast in prison strong,
follow my love leap over the strand:
Where he could not walk nor lie along,
even by the good Earl of Northumberland.
And as in sorrow thus he lay,
follow my love, come over the strand:
The Earls sweet Daughter walked that way,
and she the fair flower of Northumberland.
And passing by like an Angel bright,
follow my love, come over the strand:
This prisoner had of her a sight,
and she the fair flower of Northumberland.
And loud to her this knight did cry,
follow my come over the strand:
The salt tears standing in his eye,
and she the fair flower of Northumberland.
Fair Lady he said, take pity on me,
follow my love, come over the strand:
And let me not in prison dye,
and you the fair flower of Northumberland.
Fair Sir, how should I take pity on thee,
follow my love come over the strand:
Thou being a foe to our Country,
and I the fair flower of Northumberland.
Fair Lady, I am no foe he said,
follow my love, come over the strand:
Through thy sweet love here was I staid,
for thee the fair flower of Northumberland.
Why should thou come here for love of me,
follow my love, come over the strand:
Having wife and children in thy Country,
and I the fair flower of Northumberland.
I swear by the blessed Trinity,
follow my love come over the strand:
I have no wife nor children I,
nor dwelling at home in merry Scotland.
If courteously you will set me free,
follow my love, come over the strand:
I vow that I will marry thee,
so soon as I come in merry Scotland.
Thou shall be Lady of Castles and Towers,
follow my love, come over the strand:
And sit like a Queen in princely bowers,
when I am at home in fair Scotland,
Then parted hence this Lady gay,
follow my love, come over the strand:
And got her fathers ring away,
to help this sad knight into fair Scotland*
Likewise much gold she got by sleight,
follow my love, come over the strand:
And all to help this forlorn knight,
to wend from her father to fair Scotland.
Two gallant steeds both good and able,
follow my love, come over the strand:
She likewise took out of the stable,
to ride with this knight into fair Scotland.
And to the Iaylor she sent this ring,
follow my love, come over the strand:
The knight from prison forth to bring,
to wend with her into fair Scotland.
This token set this prisoner free,
follow my love, come over the strand:
Who straight went to this fair Lady,
to wend with her into fair Scotland.
A gallant steed he did bestride,
follow my love, come over the strand:
And with the Lady away did ride,
and she the fair flower of Northumberland.
They rode till they came to a water clear,
follow my love, come over the strand*
Good sir how should I follow you here,
and I the fair flower of Northumberland.
The water is rough and wonderful deep,
follow my love, come over the strand:
And on my saddle I shall not keep,
and I the fair flower of Northumberland.
Fear not the foord, fair Lady, quoth he,
follow my love, come over the strand:
For long I cannot stay for thee,
and thou the fair flower of Northumberland.
The Lady pricked her wanton steed,
follow my love come over the strand:
And over the river swom with speed,
and she the fair flower of Northumberland.
From top to toe all wet was she,
follow my love come over the strand:
This have I done for love of thee,
and I the fair flower of Northumberland.
Thus rode she all one winters night,
follow my love, come over the strand:
Till Edenborow they saw in sight,
the chiefest town in all Scotland.
Now choose (quoth he) thou wanton flower,
follow my love come over the strand:
Whither thou will be my Paramour,
or get thee home to Northumberland.
For I have wife and children five,
follow my love come over the strand:
In Edenborow they be alive,
then get thee home to fair England.
This favor shall thou have to boot,
follow my love come over the strand:
I Will have thy horse, go thou a foot,
go get thee home to Northumberland.
O false and faithless knight, quoth she,
follow my love, come over the strand:
And can thou deal so bad with me,
and I the fair flower of Northumberland?
Dishonor not a Ladies name,
follow my love, come over the strand:
But draw thy sword, and end my shame,
and I the fair flower of Northumberland.
He took her from her stately Steed,
follow my love, come over the strand:
And left her there in extreme need,
and she the fair flower of Northumberland.
Then sat she down full heavily,
follow my love, come over the strand:
At length two knights came riding by,
two gallant knights of fair England.
She fell down humbly on her knee,
follow my love, come over the strand:
Saying, courteous Knights take pity on me,
and I the fair flower of Northumberland.
I have offended my father dear,
follow my love, come over the strand:
All by a false knight that brought me here,
from the good Earl of Northumberland.
They took her up behind him then,
follow my love, come over the strand:
And brought her to her fathers again,
and he the good Earl of Northumberland.
All you fair maidens be warned by me,
follow my love, come over the strand:
Scots were never true, nor never will be,
to Lord, to Lady, nor fair England.
FINIS,
After the Kings Majesty and the Queen had heard this song sweetly sung by
them, he cast them a great reward: and so departing thence, went to the
Fulling-mils, and Dyehouse, where a great many were also hard at work: and his
Majesty perceiving what a great number of people were by this one man set on
work, both admired, and commended him, saying further, that no Trade in all
the Land was so much to be cherished and maintained as this, which, quoth he,
may well be called The life of the poor. And as the King returned from this
place with intent to take horse and depart, there met him a great many of
children in garments of white silk, fringed with gold, their heads crowned
with golden Bays, and about their arms each one had a scarf of green
sarcenet fast tied, in their hands they bore silver bows, and under their
girdles golden arrows.

The foremost of them represented Diana, Goddess of Chastity, who was attended
on by a train of beautiful Nymphs, and they presented to the King four
prisoners: The first was a stern and grisly woman, carrying a frowning
countenance, and her forehead full of wrinkles, her hair as black as pitch,
and her garments all bloody, a great sword she had in her hand all stained
with purple gore: they called her name Bellona, Goddess of wars, who had
three daughters: the first of them was a tall woman, to lean and il favored,
that her theeke bones were ready to start out of the shinne, of a pale and
deadly color: her eyes sunk into her head: her legs so feeble, that they
could scantly carry the body; all along her arms and hands through the skin
you might tell the sinews, ioints and bones: her teeth were very strong and
sharp withal: she was so greedy, that she was ready with her teeth to tear
the skin from her own arms: her attire was black, and all torn and
ragged, she went barefooted and her name was Famine. The second was a strong
and lusty woman, with a look pitiless, and unmerciful countenance: her
garments were all made of Iron and Steel, and she carried in her hand a naked
weapon, and she was called the Sword. The third was also a cruel creature, her
eyes did sparkle like burning coals: her hair was like a flame, and her
garments like burning brass: she was so hate, that none could stand near her,
and they called her name Fire.

After this they retired again, and brought unto his Highness two other
Personages, their countenance was Princely and amiable, their attire most rich
and sumptuous: the one carried in his hand a golden Trumpet, and the other a
Palm tree: and these were called Fame and Victory, whom the Goddess of
Chastity charged to wait upon this famous Prince for ever. This done, each
child after other with due reverence, gave unto his Majesty a sweet smelling
Gilliflower, after the manner of the Persians, offering something in token of
loyalty and obedience. The King and Queen beholding the sweet favor and
countenance of these children, demanded of Jack of Newberie whose children
they were? Who answered: It shall please your Highness to understand, that
these are the children of poor people, that do get their living by picking of
wool, having scant a good meal once in a week. With that the King began to
tell his Gilliflowers, whereby he found that there was 96. children.
Certainly, said the Queen, I perceive God gives as fair children to the
poor as to the rich, and fairer many times: and though their diet and keeping
be but simple, the blessing of God does cherish them. Therefore said the
Queen, I will request to have two of them to wait in my Chamber. Fair
Katharine, said the King, thou and I have tumpt in one opinion, in thinking
these children utter for the Court than the Country: whereupon he made choice
of a dozen more, four he ordained to be Pages to his royal Person, and the
rest he sent to the Uniuersities, allotting to every one a Gentleman's living.
Diverse of the Noblemen did in like sort entertain some of those children into
their services, so that (in the end) not one was left to pick wool, but were
all so provided for, that their Parents never needed to care for them: and God
so blessed them, that each of them came to be men of great account and
authority in the Land, whose posterities remain to this day worshipful and
famous. The King, Queen, and Nobles, being ready to depart, after great
thanks and gifts given to Jack of Newbery, his Majesty would have made him
Knight, but he meekely refused it, saying, I beseech your Grace let me live a
poor Clothier among my people, in whose maintenance I take more felicity, than
in all the vain titles of Gentility: for these are the laboring Ants whom I
seek to defend, and these be the Bees which I keep: who labor in this life,
not for our selves, but for the glory of GOD, and to do service to our dread
Sovereign. Thy Knighthood need be no hinderance of thy Faculty, quoth the
King. O my dread Sovereign, said Jack, honor and worship may be compared to
the Lake of Laethe, which makes men forget themselves that taste thereof: and
to the end I may still keep in mind from whence I came, and what I am, I
beseech your Grace let me rest in my rufset coat, a poor Clothier to my
dying day. Seeing then (said the King) that a man's mind is a Kingdom to
himself, I will leave thee to the riches of thy own content, and so farewell.
The Queens Majesty taking her leave of the good wife with a Princely kiss,
gave her in token of remembrance a most precious and rich Diamond set in gold,
about the which was also curiously set six Rubies, and six Emeralds in one
piece, valued at nine hundred Marks: and so her Grace departed. But in this
mean space, Will Summers kept company among the maids, and betook himself
to spinning as they did, which among them was held as a forfeit of a gallon of
wine, but William by no means would pay it, except they would take it out in
kisses, rating every kiss at a farthing. This payment we refuse for two
causes, quoth the maids: the one, for that we esteem not kisses at so base a
rate; and the other, because in so doing we should give as much as you.

CHAP. IIII.
How the maidens served Will Summers for his sauciness.

THe maidens contented together, seeing Will Summers was so busy both with
their work and in his words, and would not pay his forfeiture, to serve him as
he deserved: first therefore they bound him hands and feet, and set him upright
against a post, tying him thereto: which he took in ill part, notwithstanding
he could not resist them. And because he let his tongue run at random, they
set a fair gagge in his mouth, such a one as he could not for his life put
away: so that he stood as one gaping for wind. Then one of them got a couple
of dogs droppings, and putting them in a bag, laid them in soke in a basin of
water, while the rest turned down the collar of his Ierkin, and put an
housecloath about his neck in stead of a fine towell: then came the other
maid with a basin and water in the same, and with the perfume in the
pudding-bagge, flapt him about the face and lips, till he looked like a tawnie
Moore, and with her hand washed him very orderly: the smell being somewhat
strong, Will could by no means abide it, and for want of other language,
cried, Ah ha ha ha. Feign he would have spet, and could not, so that he was
feign to swallow down such licour as he never fasted the like. When he had a
pretty while been washed in this sort, at the length he croucht down upon his
knees, yielding himself to their favor: which the maidens perceiving, pulled
the gag out of his mouth. He had no sooner the liberty of his tongue, but that
he cursed and swore like a devil: the maids that could scant stand for
laughing, at last asked how he liked his washing? Gods ounds, quoth he, I was
never thus washed, nor ever met with such Barbers since I was borne: let me
go, quoth he, and I will give you whatsoever you will demand, wherewith he
cast them an English Crown. Nay, quoth one of the Maids, you are yet but
washed, but we will shave you ere ye go. Sweet Maids, quoth he, pardon my
shauing, let it suffice that you have washed me: if I have done a trespass to
your Trade, forgive it me, and I will never hereafter offend you. Tush, said
the Maids, you have made our wheels cast their hands, and bruised the teeth
of our cards in such sort, as the effence may not be remitted without great
penance. As for your gold, we regard it not: therefore as you are perfumed
fit for the dogs, so we enioine you this night to serve all our hogs, which
penance, if you will swear wish all speed to perform, we will let you
loose. O, quoth Will, the huge Elephant was never more fearful of the silly
sheep, than I am of your displeasures: therefore let me loose and I will do it
with all diligence. Then they unbound him, and brought him among a great
company of Swine, which when Will had well viewed over, he drove out of the
yard all the Sowes: why how now, quoth the Maids, what mean you by this?
Mary, quoth Will these be all sowes, and my penance is but to serve the hogs.
Is it true, quoth they, have you overtaken us in this sort? Well, look there
be not one hog unserved we would advise you. William Summers script up his
sleeves very orderly, and clapped an apron about his motly hosen, and taking a
paile served the hogs handsomely. When he had given them all meat, he said thus:

My task is duly done,
My liberty is won,
The hogs have eat their crabs,
Therefore farewell you drabs,
Nay soft friend, quoth they, the deriest hog of all has yet had nothing.
Where the devil is he, said Will, that I see him not? Wrapped in a motley
Ierken, quoth they, take thy self by the nose, and thou shall catch him by the
snout. I was never so very a hog, quoth he, but I would always spare from my
own belly to give a woman. If thou do not (say they) eat (like the prodigal
Child) with thy fellow hogs, we will so shave thee, as thou shall deerly
repent thy disobedience. He seeing no remedy, committed himself to their
mercy: and so they let him go. When he came to the Court, he showed to the
King all his adventure among the weauers maidens, whereat the King and Queen
laughed heartily.

CHAP. V.
Of the pictures which lack of Newbery had in his house, whereby he
encouraged his servants to seek for fame and dignity.

IN a fair large Parlour which was wainscotted round about, Jack of Newberie
had fifteen fair Pictures hanging, which were covered with Curtains of
green silk, fringed with gold, which he would often show to his friends and
servants. In the first was the Picture of a shepherd, before whom kneeled a
great King named Viriat, who sometime governed the people of Portugal. See
here, quoth Jack, the father a shepherd, the son a Sovereign. This man
ruled in Portugal, and made great wars against the Romans, and after that
invaded Spain, yet in the end was traitorously slain.

The next was the Portraiture of Agathocles, which for his surpassing wisdom
and manhood, was created King of Sicilia, and maintained battle against the
people of Carthage. His father was a poor Potter, before whom he also kneeled.
And it was the use of this King, that whenever he made a banquet, he would
have as well vessels of earth as of gold set upon the Table, to the intent he
might always bear in mind the place of his beginning, his Fathers house and
family.

The third was the picture of Iphicrates an Athenian born, who vanquished the
Lacedomonians in plain and open battle. This man was Captain General to
Artaxerxes, King of Persia, whose father was notwithstanding a Cobbler, and
there likewise pictured. Eumenes was also a famous Captain to Alexander the
great, whose father was no other than a Carter.

The fourth was the similitude of Aelius Pertinax, sometime Emperor of Rome,
yet was his father but a Weauer: and afterward, to give example to others of
low condition to bear minds of worthy men, he caused the shop to be
beautified with Marble curiously cut, wherein his father before him was wont to
get his living.

The fist was the picture of Dioclesian, that so much adorned Rome with his
magnificall and triumphant victories. This was a famous Emperor, although no
other than the son of a Beeke-binder. Valentinian stood the next, painted
most artificially, who was also crowned Emperor, and was but the son of a
poor Rope-maker: as in the same picture was expressed; where his father was
painted by him, using his trade.

The seventh was the Emperor Probus, whose father being a Gardener, was
pictured by him holding a spade.

The eighth picture was of Marcus Aurelius, whom every age honors, he was so
wise and prudent an Emperor; yet was he but a Cloth-weauers son.

The ninth was the Portraiture of the valiant Emperor Maximinus, the son of a
Blacksmith, who was there painted as he was wont to work at the Anuill.

In the tenth table was painted the Emperor Gabianus, who at at the first was
but a poor shepherd.

Next to this picture, was placed the pictures of two Popes of Rome, whose
wisdom and learning advanced them to that dignity. The first was the lively
Counterfeit of Pope John the 22. whose father was a Shoemaker: he, being
elected Pope, increased their rents and patrimante greatly.

The other was the Picture of Pope Sixtus the fourth of that name, being a
poor Mariners son.

The thirteenth Picture was of Lamusius, King of Lombardy, who was no better
than the son of a common Strumpet: being painted like a naked child's walking in
water, and taking hold of the point of a Lance, by the which he held fast,
and saved himself. The reason whereof, was this: After his lewd mother was
delivered of him, she unnaturally threw him into a deep stinking Ditch,
wherein was some water. By hap king Agilmond passed that way, and found this
child almost drowned; who moving him softly with the point of his Lance, the
better to perceive what he was, the child (though then newly borne) took
hold thereof with one of his pretty hands, not suffering it to slide or slip
away again: which thing the King considering, being amazed at the strange
force of this yongue little Infant, caused it to be taken up, and carefully to
be fostered. And because the place where he found him was called Lama, he
named the child Lamusius: who afterward grew to be so brave a man, and so much
favored of Fortune, that in the end he was crowned King of the Lombards, who
lived there in honor, and in his succession after him* even until the time of
the unfortunate King Albouina, when all came to ruin, subversion and
destruction.

In the fourteenth picture Primislas King of Bohemia was most artificially
drawn* before whom there stood an Horse without Bridle or Saddle, in a field
where Husbandmen were at plough. The cause why this King was thus painted
(quoth lack) was this. At that time the King of the Bohemians died without
issue, and great strife being amongst the Nobility for a new king, at length
they all consented that a horse should be let into the field, without bridle
or saddle, having all determined with most assured purpose to make him their
king, before whom this horse rested: At what time it came to pass, that the
horse first stayed himself before this Primislas, being a simple creature, who
was then busy driving the plough, they presently made him their Sovereign,
who ordered himself and his kingdom very wisely. He ordaned many good laws,
he compassed the City of Prague with strong walls, besides many other
things, meriting perpetual laud and commendations.

The fifteenth was the Picture of The ophrastus, a Philosopher, a counselor of
Kings, and companion of Nobles, who was but son of a Tailor. Seeing then my
good servants, that these men have been advanced to high estate and Princely
dignities, by wisdom, learning, and diligence, I would wish you to imitate
the like virtues, that you might attain the like honors: for which of you
does know what good fortune God has in store for you? there is none of you so
poorly borne, but that men of baser birth have come to great honors. The idle
hand shall ever go in a ragged garment, and the sloathfull live in reproach:
but such as do lead a virtuous life, and govern themselves discreetly, shall
of the best be esteemed, and spend their days in credit.

CHAP. VI:
How all the Clothiers in England joined together, and with one consent
complained to the King of their great hindrance sustained for want of Traffic
into other Countries, whereupon they could get no sale for their Cloth.

BY means of the wars which our King had with other countries, many Merchant
strangers were prohibited for coming to England, as also our own Merchants
(in like sort) were forbidden to have dealings with France or the
Low Countries: by means whereof the Clothiers had most of their cloth lying
on their hands, and that which they sold was at so low a rate, that the money
scantly paid for the wool an workmanship. Whereupon they sought to ease
themselves by abating the poor workemens wages. And when that did not
prevail, they turned away many of their people, Weauers, Shearmen, Spinsters
and Carders, so that where there was a hundred Looms kept in one town, there
was scant fifty: and he that kept twenty put down ten. Many a poor man
(for want of work) was hereby undone, with his wife and children, and it made
many a poor widow to sit with a hungry belly. This bred great woe in most
places in England. In the end lack of Newberie intended (in the behalf of the
poor) to make a Supplication to the King: and to the end he might do it the
more effectually, he sent Letters to all the chief clothing towns in
England to this effect.

The Letter.
Well-beloved friends and brethren, having a taste of the general grief, and
feeling (in some measure) the extremity of these times, I fell into
consideration by what means we might best expel these sorrows, and recover
our former commodity. When I had well thought hereon, I found that nothing was
more needful herein, than a faithful unity among our selves. This sore of
necessity can no way be cured but by concord: for like as the flame consumes
the candle, so men through discord waste themselves. The poor hate the rich,
because they will not set them on work; and the rich hate the poor, because
they seem burdenons: so both are offended for want of gain. When Belinus and
Brennus were at strife, the Queen their mother in their greatest fury persuaded
them to peace, by urging her conception of them in one womb, and mutual
cherishing of them from their tender years: so let our Art of Clothing, which
like a kind mother has cherished us with the excellence of her secrets,
persuade us to an unity. Though our Occupation be decayed, let us not deal
with it as men do by their old shoes, which after they have long borne them
out of the mire, do in the end fling them on the dunghill: or as the
Husbandman does by his Bees, who for their Honey burns them. Dear friends,
consider that our Trade will maintain us, if we will uphold it: and there is
nothing base, but that which is basely used. Assemble therefore your selves
together, and in every town tell the number of those that have their living by
means of this Trade, note it in a Bill, and send it to me. And because suits
in Court are like Winter nights, long and wearisome, let there be in each place
a weekly collection made to defray charges: for I tell you, Noble men's
Secretaries and cunning Lawyers have flow tongues and deaf ears, which must
be daily noynted with the sweet oil of Angels. Then let two honest discreet
men be chosen and sent out of every town to meet me at Black well Hall in
London on All Saints Eeue, and then we will present our humble petition to the
King. Thus I bid you heartily farewell.

Copies of this Letter being sealed, they were sent to all the clothing Towns
of England, and the Weauers both of linen and woollen gladly received them: so
that when all the Bills were brought together, there were found of the
Clothiers, and those they maintained, threescore thousand and six hundred
persons. Moreover, every clothing Town sending up two men to London, they
were found to be an hundred and twelve persons, who in very humble sort fell
down before his Majesty walking in S. James his Park, and delivered to him
their Petition. The King presently perusing it, asked if they were all
Clothiers? Who answered (as it were one man) in this sort: We are (most
gracious king) all poor Clothiers, and your Majesty's faithful subjects. My
Lords (quoth the king) let these men's complaint be thoroughly looked into, and
their griefs redressed: for I account them in the number of my best
Commonwealths men. As the Clergy for the soul, the Soldier for defense of
his country, the Lawyer to execute justice, the Husbandman to feed the belly:
so is the skillful Clothier no less necessary for the clothing of the back,
whom we may reckon among the chief Yeomen of our Land: and as the crystal
sight of the eye is tenderly to be kept from harms, because it gives the whole
body light: so is the Clothiers, whose cunning hand prouides garments to defend
our naked parts from the Winters nipping frost. Many more reasons there are,
which may move us to redress their griefs: but let it suffice that I command
to have it done. With that, his Grace delivered the Petition to the Lord
Chauncellor, and all the Clothiers cried, God save the king. But as the king*
was ready to depart, he suddenly turned about, saying; I remember there is one
Jack of Newberie, I muse he had not his hand in this business, who professed
himself to be a defender of true Laborers. Then said the Duke of Sommerset:
It may be his purse is answerable for his person. Nay (quoth the Lord
Cardinal) all his treasure is little enough to maintain wars against the
butterflies. With that Jack showed himself unto the king, and privately told
his Grace of their grief anew. To whom his Meiesty said: Give thy attendance
at the Council Chamber, where thou shall receive an answer to thy content. And
so his Highness departed. Finally, it was agreed that the Merchants should
freely traffic one with another, and that Proclamation thereof should be
made as well on the other side the Sea, as in our Land: but it was long before
this was effected, by reason the Cardinal being Lord Chancellor, put off the
matter from time to time. And because the Clothiers thought it not best to
depart before it was ended, they gave their daily attendance at the Cardinals
house: but spent many days to no purpose: sometime they were answered, My Lord
was busy, and could not be spoke withal; or else he was asleep, and they
durst not wake him: or at his study, and they would not disturb him: or at his
prayers, and they durst not displease him: and still one thing or other stood
in the way to hinder them. At last, Patch the Cardinals fool, being (by their
often repair thither) well acquainted with the Clothiers, came unto them and
said: What have you not spoken with my Lord yet? No truly (quoth they) we hear
say he is busy, and we stay till his grace* be at leisure. Is it true, said
Patch? and with that in all haste he went out of the hall, and at last came in
again with a great bundle of straw on his back. Why how now Patch (quoth the
Gentlemen) what will thou do with that straw? Mary (quoth he) I will put it
under these honest men's feet, lest they should freeze ere they find my Lord
at leasury. This made them all to laugh, and caused Patch to bear away his
straw again. Well, well, (quoth he) if it cost you a groates worth of faggets
at night, blame not me, Trust me (said Jack of Newbery) if my Lord Cardinals
father had been no hastier in killing of Calves, than he is in dispatching of
poor men's suits, I doubt he had never worn a Myter. This he spoke betwixt
themselves softly, but yet not so softly, but that he was ouer-heard by a
flattering Fellow that stood by, who made it known to some of the Gentlemen,
and they straight certified the Cardinal thereof.

The Cardinal (who was of a very high spirit, and a lofty aspiring mind) was
maruellously displeased at Jack of Newbery: wherefore in his rage he
commanded and sent the Clothiers all to prison, because the one of them should
not sue for the others releasement. Four days lay these men in the
Marshalsey, till at last they made their humble Petition to the King for their
release: but some of the Cardinals friends kept it from the kings sight.
Notwithstanding, the Duke of Sommerset knowing thereof, spoke with the Lord
Cardinal about the matter, wishing he would speedily release them, lest it
did breed him some displeasure: for you may perceive (quoth the Duke) how
highly the King esteems men of that Faculty. Sir, quoth the Cardinal, I doubt
not but to answer their imprisonment well enough, being persuaded that none
would have given me such a quip but an Heretic: and I dare warrant you were
this Jack of Newbery well examined, he would be found to be infected with
Luthers spirit, against whom our King has of late written a most learned
Book, in respect whereof, the Popes holiness has entitled his Majesty
Defender of the Faith: therefore I tell you such fellows are fitter to be
faggots for fire, than Fathers of Families: notwithstanding (at your Graces
request) I will release them. Accordingly the Cardinal sent for the Clothiers
before him to White hall, his new built house by Westminster, and there
bestowing his blessing upon them, said: Though you have offended me I pardon
you; for as Steven forgave his enemies that stoned him, and our Savior those
sinful men that crucified him, so do I forgive you that high trespass
committed in disgrace of my birth: for herein do men come nearest unto God, in
showing mercy and compassion. But see hereafter you offend no more. Touching
your suit it is granted, and tomorrow shall be published through London. This
being said they departed: and according to the Cardinals words, their
business was ended. The Stillyard Merchants joyful hereof, made the Clothiers
a great banquet. After which, each man departed home, carrying tidings of their
good success: so that within short space, Clothing was again very good, and
poor men as well set on work as before.

CHAP. VII.
How a yongue Italian Merchant coming to Jack of Newberies house, was greatly
inamoured of one of his maidens, and how he was served.

AMong other servants which Jack of Newbery kept, there was in his house
threescore maidens, which every Sunday waited on his wife to Church and home
again, who had diverse Offices. Among other, two were appointed to keep the
beams and waights, to weigh out wool to the Carders and Spinsters, and to
receive it in again by weight. One of them was a comely maiden, fair and
lovely, borne of wealthy Parents, and brought up in good qualities, her name
was Ione: so it was, that a yongue wealthy Italian Merchant, coming often from
London thither to bargain for cloth (for at that time Clothiers most commonly
had their cloth bespoken, and half paid for before hand.) This Master Benedicke
fell greatly inamoured of this maiden: and therefore offered much courtesy to
her, bestowing many gifts on her, which she received thankefully: and albeit
his outward countenance showed his inward affection, yet Ione would take no
knowledge thereof. Half the day sometime would he sit by her, as she was
waighing wool, often sighing and sobbing to himself, yet saying nothing, as
if he had been tonguelesse, like the men of Coromandae; and the loather to
speak, for that he could speak but bad English. Ione on the other side that
well perceived his passions, did as it were triumph over him, as one that were
bondslaue to her beauty, and although she knew well enough before that she
was fair, yet did she never so highly esteem of her self as at this
present: so that when she heard him either sigh, or sob, or groan, she would
turn her face in a careless sort, as if she had been borne (like the woman
of Taprobana) without ears. When Master Bennedicke saw she made no reckoning
of his sorrows, at length he blabored out this broken English, and spoke to
her in this sort. Metressa Ione, be me tra and fa, me love you wod all mine
heart, and if you no shall love me again, me know me shall die, sweet
Mistress love a me, and by my fa and tra you shall Jack noting. First; me will
give you de silk for make you a Frog: Second, de fin fin Camree for make you
ruffes, and the turd shall be for make fin handkercher, for wipe your nose. She
mistaking his speech, began to be collericke, wishing him to keep that bodkin
to pick his teeth. Ho ho Metresse Ione (quoth he) be Got, you be angry. Oh
Metresse Ione, be no chafe with you friene for noting. Good sir (quoth she)
keep your friendship for them that cares for it, and fix your love on those
that can like you, as for me I tell you plain, I am not minded to marry. Oh
it is no matter for marrye, if you will come in my chamber, beshit my bed, and
let me kiss you. The Maid though she were very much displeased, yet at these
words she could not forbear laughing for her life. Ah ah Metresse Ione: me
is very glad to see you merry, hold Metresse Ione, hold your hand I say, and
there is four Crown because you laugh on me. I pray you Sir keep your
Crowns, for I need them not. Yes be Got you shall have them Metresse Ione, to
keep in a pox for you. She that could not well understand his broken
language, mistook his meaning in many things: and therefore wild him not to
trouble her any more. Notwithstanding such was his love toward her, that he
could not forbear her company, but made many iournies thither for her sake.
And as a certain spring in Arcadia makes men to starve that drink of it: so
did poor Bennedicke feeding so did poor Bennedicke feeding his fancy on her
beauty: for when he was in London, he did nothing but sorrow, wishing he had
wings like the monsters of Tartaria, that he might fly to and fro at his
pleasure? When any of his friends did tell her of his ardent affection toward
her, she wished them to rub him with the sweat of a Mule, to assuage his
amorous passion, or to fetch him some of the water in Boetia, to cool and
extinguish the heat of his affection: for quoth she, let him never hope to be
helped by me. Well, quoth they, before he saw thy alluring face, he was a man
reasonable and wise, but is now a stark fool, being by thy beauty bereft of
wit, as if he had drunk of the river Cea, and like bewitching Ci^rces thou
have certainly transformed him from a man to an Ass. There are stones in
Pontus, quoth they, that the deeper they be laid in the water, the fiercer they
burn: unto the which fond Lovers may fitly be compared, who the more they are
denied, the hotter is their desire: but seeing it is so, that he can find no
favor at your hand, we will show him what you have said, and either draw him
from his dumpes, or leave him to his own will. Then spoke one of the Weauers
that dwelt in the Town, and was a kinsman to this maid. I muse (quoth he)
that Master Bennedicke will not be persuaded, but like the Moath, will play
with the flame that will scortch his wings. Me thinks, he should forbear to
love, or learn to speak, or else woo such as can answer him in his language:
for I tell you, that Ione my kinswoman, is no taste for an Italian. These
speeches were told to Bennedicke with no small addition. When our yongue
merchant heard the matter so plain, he vowed to be revenged of the Weauer, and
to see if he could find any more friendship of his wife: therefore
dissembling his sorrow and covering his grief, with speed he took his
journey to Newberie, and pleasantly saluted Mistress Ione: and having his
purse full of crowns, he was very liberal to the workefolkes, especially to
Jones kinsman, insomuch, that he got his favor many times to go forth with
him, promising him very largely to do great matters, and to lend him a hundred
pound, wishing him to be a servant no longer, beside he liberally bestowed on
his wife many gifts, and if she washed him but a band, he would give her an
Angel: if he did but send her child for a quart of Wine, he would give him
a shilling for his pains. The which his courtesy changed the Weauers mind,
saying he was a very honest Gentleman, and worthy to have one far better
than his kinswoman.

This pleased master Bennedick well to hear him say so, notwithstanding he
made light of the matter, and many times when the Weauer was at his Masters at
work, the Merchant would be at home with his wife, drinking and making merry.
At length time bringing acquaintance, and often conference breeding
familiarity, master Bennedick began somewhat boldly to jest with Gillian,
saying that her fight and sweet countenance, had quite reclaymed his love from
Ione, and that she only was the mistress of his heart: and if she would lend
him her love, he would give her gold from Arabia, orient pearls from India,
and make her bracelets of most precious Diamonds. Thy garments shall be of the
finest silk that is made in Uenice, and thy purse shall still be stuffed with
Angels. Tell me thy mind my love, and kill me not with unkindness, as did
thy scornful kinswoman, whose disdain had almost cost me my life. O master
Bennedicke, think not the wives of England can be won by rewards, orenticed
with fair words, as children are with Plums: it may be that you being merrily
disposed, do speak this to try my constancy. Know then, that I esteem more
the honor of my good name, than the styding wealth of the world. Master
Bennedick hearing her say so, desired her, that considering it was love that
forced his tongue to bewray his hearts ardent affection, that yet she would be
secret: and so for that time took his leave. When he was gone, the woman
began to call her wits together, and to consider of her poor estate, and
withal the better to note the comeliness of her person, and the sweet favor
of her face: which when she had well thought upon, she began to harbor new
thoughts, and to entertain contrary affections, saying, Shall I content myself
to be wrapped in sheep russet that may swim in silks, and sit all day carding
for a great, that can have crowns at my command? No, quoth she, I will no
more bear so base a mind, but take Fortunes favors while they are to be had.
The sweet Rose does flourish but one month, nor Women's beauties but in yongue
years. As the Winters frost consumes the Summer flowers, so does old age
banish pleasant delight. O glorious gold, quoth she, how sweet is thy smell?
how pleasing is thy sight? Thou subduest Princes, and ouerthrowest kingdoms,
then how should a silly woman withstand thy strength? Thus she rested
meditating on preferment, purposing to hazard her honesty to maintain her
self in bravery: even as occupiers corrupt their consciences to gather
riches. Within a day or two master Bennedicke came to her again on whom she
cast a smiling countenance: which he perceiving (according to his old custom)
sent for Wine, and very merry they were. At last, in the midst of their cups,
he cast out his former question: and after farther conference, she yielded, and
appointed a time when he should come to her: for which favor, he gave her
half a dozen portigues. Within an hour or two after entering into her own
conscience, bethinking how sinnefully she had sold her self to folly, began
thus to expostulate. Good Lord; quoth she, shall I break that holy vow which
I made in marriage, and pollute this body of mine which the Lord has
sanctified? Can I break the commandment of my God, and not rest accursed? or
be a traitor to my husband, and suffer no shame? I heard once my brother read
in a book, that Bucephalus, Alexanders Steed, being a beast, would not be backed
by any but the Emperor, and shall I consent to any but my husband? Artemisa
being a Heathen Lady, loved her husband so well, that she drunk up his ashes,
and buried him in her own bowels, and should I, being a Christian, cast my
Husband out of my heart? The Women of Rome were wont to crown their Husbands
heads with Bays, in token of victory, and shall I give my husband horns in
token of infamy? An Harlot is hated of all virtuous minded people, and shall I
make my self a Whore? O my God forgive my sin, quoth she, and cleanse my
heart from these wicked imaginations. And as she was thus lamenting, her
husband came home: at whose sight her tears were doubled, like unto a river
whose stream is increased by shewers of rain. Her husband seeing this, would
needs know the cause of her sorrow: but a great while she would not show him,
casting many a piteous look upon him, and shaking her head, at last she said,
O my dear husband, I have offended against God and she, and made such a
trespass by my tongue, as has cut a deep scarre in my conscience, and
wounded my heart with grief like a Sword: like Penelope se have I been wooed,
but like Penelope I have not answered. Why woman, quoth he, what is the matter?
If it be but the bare offense of thy tongue why should thou so grieve?
considering that women's tongues are like Lambs tails, which seldom stand
still? And the Wise man says, Where much talk is, must needs be some
offense. Women's beauties are fair marks for wandering eyes to shoot at: but
as every Archer hits not the white, so every Wooer winnes not his mistress
favor. All Cities that are besieged are not sacked, nor all women to be
mislikt that are loved. Why wife, I am persuaded thy faith is more firm, and
thy constancy greater to withstand Lovers alarums, than that any other but my
self should obsaine the fortress of thy heart. O sweet husband (quoth she)
we see the strongest Lower, at length falls down by the Canons force,
though the Bullets be but Iron: then how can the weak Bulwark of a Woman's
breast make resistance, when the hot Canons of deep persuading words are
shot off with golden Bullets, and every one as big as a Portigue? If it be so
wife, I may think my self in a good case, and you to be a very honest woman.
As Mars and Venus danced naked together in a Net, so I doubt, you and some
knave have played naked together in a bed: but in faith thou queen, I will send
she to salute thy friends without a Nose: and as thou have sold thy honesty,
so will I sell thy company. Sweet Husband, though I have promised, I have
performed nothing: every bargain is not effected, and therefore as Judas
brought again the thirty silver plates, for the which he betrayed his Master:
so repenting my folly, I Will cast him again his gold, for which I should have
wronged my Husband. Tell me, quoth her husband, what he is. It is master
Bennedicke* quoth she, which for my love has left the love of our kinswoman,
and has vowed himself for ever to live my servant. O dissembling Italian,
quoth he, I will be revenged on him for this wrong. I know that any favor
from Ione our kinswoman, will make him run like unto a man bitten with a mad
dog: therefore be ruled by me, and thou shall see me dress him in his
kind. The woman was very well pleased, saying he would be there that night.
All this works well with me, quoth her husband, and to supper will I inuit
Ione my kinswoman, and in the mean space make up the bed in the Pariour very
decently. So the goodman went forth, and got a sleepy drench from the
Poticaries, the which he gave to a yongue Sow, which he had in his yard, and
in the evening laid her down in the bed in the Parlour, drawing the Curtains
round about. Supper time being come, master Bennedicke gave his attendance,
looking for no other company but the good wife: Notwithstanding at the last
mistress Ione came in with her kinsman, and sat down to supper with him.
Master Bennedicke musing at their sudden approach, yet nevertheless glad of
mistress Jones company, past the supper time with many pleasant conceits, Ione
showing her self that night more pleasant in his company than at any time
before: wherefore he gave the good man great thanks. Good master Bennedicke,
little do you think how I have traveled in your behalf to my kinswoman, and
very much ado I had to bring the peevish Wench into any good liking of your
love: notwithstanding by my very great diligence and persuasions, I have at
length won her good will to come hither, little thinking to find you here, or
any such good cheer to entertain her: all which I see is fallen out for your
profit. But trust me, all the world cannot now alter her mind, nor turn her
love from you: In regard whereof, she has promised me to lie this night in my
house, for the great desire the has of your good company: and in requital of
all your great courtesies showed to me, I am very well content to bring you to
her bed. Marry this you must consider, and so she had me tell you, that you
should come to bed with as little noise as you could, and tumble nothing that
you find, for fear of her best gown and her hat, which she will lay hard by
the bed side, next her best partlet, and in so doing, you may have company with
her all night, but say nothing in any case till you be a bed: O quoth he* Matter
Ian, be Got Matter Ian, me will not spoil her clothes for a towsand pound, ah me
love metres Ione more than my wife. Well, supper being done, they rose from the
table. Master Bennedick embracing mistress Ione, thankt her for her great
courtesy and company, and then the good man and he walked into the Town, and
Ione hyed her home to her masters, knowing nothing of the intended jest. Master
Bennedicke thought every hour twain, till the Sun was down, and that he were
a bed with his beloved. At last he had his wish, and home he came to his
friends house. Then said John, master Bennedick you must not in any case have a
candle when you go into the chamber, for then my kinswoman will be angry, and
dark places sits best Lovers desires, O Matter Ian, quoth he, its no such
matter for light, me shall find Metres lone will enough in the dark. And
entering in the parlour, groping about, he felt a gown and hat. O Metres Ione
(quoth he) here is your gown and hat, me shall no hurt for a tousand pound.
Then kneeling down by the bed side, instead of mistress Ione, he saluted the
sow in this sort. O my love and my delight, it is thy fair face that has
wounded my heart, thy gray sparkling eyes, and thy Lilly white hands, with the
comely proportion of thy pretty body, that made me in seeking thee to forget
my self, and to find thy favor, lose my own freedom: but now is the time
come wherein I shall reap the fruits of a plentiful harvest. Now my dear,
from thy sweet mouth let me suck the honey balm of thy breath, and with my
hand stroke those Rosy checkes of thine, wherein I have took such pleasure,
Com with thy pretty lips and entertain me into thy bed with one gentle kiss:
Why speak thou not my sweet heart, and stretch out thy Alablaster arms to
infold thy faithful friend? Why should ill pleasing sleep close up the
crystal windows of thy body so fast, and bereave thee of thy five Lordly
attendants, where with thou wast wont to salute thy friends? let it not offend
thy gentle ears that I thus talk to thee. If thou have vowed not to speak, I
will not break it: and if thou will command me to be silent, I will be
dumb: but thou need not fear to speak thy mind, seeing the cloudy night
concealeth every thing. By this time Master Bennedicke was unready, and slipped
into bed, where the Sow lay swathed in a sheet, and her head bound in a great
linen cloth: As soon as he was laid, he began to embrace his new bedfellow,
and laying his lips somewhat near her snout, he felt her draw her breath very
short. Why how now love (quoth he) be you sick, be Got mistress Ione your breat
be very strong: have you no cacke a bed? The Sow feeling her self disturbed,
began to grunt and keep a great stir: whereat master Benedick (like a mad
man) ran out of the bed, crying, de devil de devil. The good man of the house
(being purposely provided) came rushing in with half a dozen of his
neighbors, asking what was the matter. God ound (quoth Benedick) here be the
great devil, cry hoh, hoh, hoh, be Gossen I tink you play the knave wid me,
and me will be revenge be Got. Sir, quoth he, I knowing you loved mutton,
thought porke nothing unfit: and therefore provided you a whole Sow, and as you
like this entertainment, spend Portegues. Walk, walk, Barkeshire maids will
be no Italians strumpets, nor she wives of Newbery their hands. Barkeshire dog
(quoth Benedick) owl face shack hang dou and die veife, have it not be for me
love to sweet Mettresse lone, I will no come in your houz: but farewell tell I
cash you, be Go bode, I make your hog nose bud: The good man and his
neighbors laughed aloud, away went master Benedick, and for very shame departed
from Newbery before day.

CHAP. VIII.
How Jack of Newberie keeping a very good house, both for his servants and
relief of the poor, won great credit thereby: and how one of his wives
gossips found fault therewith.

GOod morrow good Gossip: now by my truly I am glad to see you in health. I
pray you how does master Winchcombe? What never a great belly yet? now fie: by
my fa your husband is waxt idle: Trust me gossip, says mistress Winchcombe,
a great belly comes sooner than a new coat: but you must consider we have not
been long married. But truly gossip you are welcome: I pray you to sit down,
and we will have a morsel of something by and by. Nay truly gossip, I cannot
stay, quoth she, in troth I must be gone: for I did but even step in to see
how you did. You shall not choose but stay a while, quoth mistress Winchcomb:
and with that a fair napkin was laid upon the little table in the Parlour,
hard by the fire side, whereon was set a good cold Capon, with a great deal of
other good cheer, with ale and wine plenty: I pray you good Gossip eat, and
I beshrew you if you spare quoth the one, I thank you heartily good Gossip
says the other. But good gossip I pray you tell me: does your husband love you
well* and make much of you? yes truly I thank God quoth she: now by my troth
said the other, it were a shame for him if he should not: for though I say it
before your face, though he had little with you, yet you were worthy to be as
good a man's wife as his. Trust me, I would not change my John for my lord
Marquess, quoth she, a woman can be but well, for I live at hearts ease, and
have all things at will, and truly he will not see me lack any thing, mary Gods
blessing on his heart quoth her Gossip, it is a good hearing: but I pray you
tell me* I heard say your husband is chosen for our Burgess in the Parliament
house, is it true? Yes verily quoth his wife: I wis it is against his will: for
it will be no small charges unto him. Lush woman, what talk you of that?
thanks be to God, there is never a Gentleman in all Barkshire that is better
able to bear it. But hear you gossip, shall I be so bold to ask you one
question more? Yes, with all my heart, quoth she. I heard say that your
husband would now put you in your hood and silk gown, I pray you is it true?
Yes in truth, quoth mistress Winchcombe, but far against my mind Gossip: my
french-hood is bought already, and my silk gown is a making: likewise the
Goldsmith has brought home my chain and bracelets: but I assure you gossip,
if you will believe me, I had rather go an hundred miles than wear them: for
I shall be so ashamed that I shall not look upon any of my neighbors for
blushing. And why, I pray you? quoth her Gossip, I tell you dear woman, you
need not be any thing abashed or blush at the matter, especially seeing your
husbands estate is able to maintain it: now trust me truly, I am of opinion
you will become it singular well. Alas, quoth mistress Winchcomb, having never
been used to such attire, I shall not know where I am, nor how to behave my
self in it: and beside, my complexion is so black, that I shall carry but an
ill favored countenance under a hood. Now, without doubt (quoth her Gossip)
you are too blame to say so: beshrew my heart if I speak it to flatter, you
are a very fair and well favored yongue woman, as any is in Newberie. And
never fear your behavior in your hood: for I tell you true* as old and
withred as I am my self, I could become a hood well enough, and behave my
self as well in such attire, as any other whatsoever, and I would not learn
of never a one of them all: what woman, I have been a pretty wench in my days,
and seen some fashions. Therefore you need not to fear, seeing both your
beauty and comely personage deserves no less than a french-hood: and be of
good comfort. At the first (possible) folks will gaze something at you: but
be not you abashed for that, it is better they should wonder at your good
fortune, than lament at your misery: but when they have seen you two or three
times in that attire, they will afterward little respect it: for every new
thing at the first seems rare, but being once a little used, it grows common.
Surely Gossip you say true, (quoth she) and I am but a fool to be so
bashful: it is no shame to use Gods gifts for our credits, and well might my
husband think me unworthy to have them, if I would not wear them: and though
I say it, my hoode is a fair one, as any woman wears in this Country, and my
gold chain and bracelets are none of the worst sort, and I will show them you,
because you shall give your opinion upon them: and therewithal she stepped into
her chamber and fetched them forth. When her Gossip saw them, she said: Now
beshrew my fingers but these are fair ones indeed. And when do you mean to
wear them Gossip? At Whitsontide (quoth she) if God spare me life. I wish
that well you may wear them, said her Gossip, and I would I were worthy to be
with you when you dress your self, it should be never the worse for you, I
would order the matter so, that you should set every thing about you in such
sort, as never a Gentlewoman of them all should stain you. Mistress Winchcombe
gave her great thanks for her favor, saying, that if she needed her help, she
would be bold to send for her.

Then began her Gossip to turn her tongue to another tune, and now to blame
her for her great house keeping. And thus she began: Gossip, you are but a
yongue woman, and one that has had no great experience of the World, in my
opinion you are something too lavish in expenses: pardon me good Gossip, I
speak but for good will; and because I love you, I am the more bold to
admonish you: I tell you plain, were I the mistress of such a house, having
such large allowance as you have, I would save 20. pound a year that you spend
to no purpose. Which way might that be (quoth Mistress Winchcombe?) indeed I
confess I am but a grieve huswife, and one that has had but small trial in
the World, therefore I should be very glad to learn any thing that were for
my husbands profit and my commodity. Then listen to me quoth she: You feed
your folks with the best of the beef, and the finest of the wheat, which in
my opinion is a great ouerfight: neither do I hear of any Knight in this
country that does it. And to say the truth, how were they able to bear that
port which they do, if they saved it not by some means? Come thither, and I
warrant you that you shall see but brown bread on the board: if it be wheat
and rye mingled together, it is a great matter, and the bread highly commended:
but most commonly they eat either barley bread, or rye mingled with pease, and
such like course grain: which is doubtless, but of small price, and there is
no other bread allowed, except at their own board. And in like manner for
their meat: it is well known, that neekes and points of beef is their
ordinary sare: which because it is commonly lean, they sees therewith now
and then a piece of bacon or porke, whereby they make their pottage fat, and
therewith drives out the rest with more content. And thus must you learn to
do. And beside that, the midriffes of the Oxen, and the cheeks, the sheep
heads, and the gathers, which you give away at your gate, might serve them
welenough: which would be a great sparing to your other meat, and by this
means you would save in the year much money, whereby you might the better
maintains your hoode and silk gown. Again, you serve your folks with such
superfluities, that they spoil in a manner as much as they eat: believe me
were I their Dame, they should have things more sparingly, and then they would
think it more dainty. Trust me Gossip (quoth Mistress Winchcombe) I know
your words in many things to be true: for my folks are so corn fed, that
we have much adoo to please them in their diet: one does say this is too salt,
and another says this is too gross, this is too fresh, and that too fat, and
twenty faults they will find at their meals: I warrant you they make such
parings of their cheese, and keep such chipping of their bread, that their
very ortes would serve two or three honest folks to their dinner. And from
whence I pray you proceeds that (quoth her Gossip) but of too much plenty? but
in faith were they my servants, I would make them glad of the worst crummes they
cast away, and thereupon I drink to you, and I thank you for my good cheer
with all my heart. Much good may it do you good gossip said mistress
Winchcombe: and I pray you when you come this way let us see you. That you
shall verily, quoth she, and so away she went.

After this, mistress Winchcombe took occasion to give her folks shorter
commons, and courser meat than they were wont to have: which at longth being
come to the good man's care, he was very much offended therewith, saying: I
will not have my people thus pincht of their victuals. Empty platters makes
greedy stomachs, and where scarcity is kept, hunger is nourished: and
therefore wife as you love me, let me have no more of this doings. Husband
(quoth she) I would they should have enough: but it is sin to suffer, and a
shame to see the spoil they make: I could be very well content to give them
their bellies full, and that which is sufficient, but it grieves me, to tell
you true, to see how coy they are, and the small care they have in wasting of
things: and I assure you, the whole Town cries shame of it, and it has bred
me no small discredit for looking no better to it. Trust me no more, if I was
not chekt in my own house about this matter, when my ears did burn to hear
what was spoken. Who was it that chekt she, I pray thee tell me? was it not
your old gossip, dame dainty, mistress trip and go? I believe it was. Why
manif it were she, you know she has been an old housekeeper, and one that
has known the World, and that she told me was for good will. Wife (quoth
he) I would not have thee to meddle with such light braind huswiues, and so I
have told thee a good many times, and yet I cannot get you to leave her
company. Leave her company? why husband, so long as she is an honest woman,
why should I leave her company? She never gave me hurtful counsel in all
her life, but has always been ready to tell me things for my profit, though
you take it not so* Leave her company? I am no gyrle I would you should well
know, to be taught what company I should keep: I keep none but honest
company, I warrant you. Leave her company ketha? Alas poor souls, this reward
she has for her good will. I wis, I wis, she is more your friend, than you
are your own. Well, let her be what she will, said her husband: but if she
come any more in my house, she were as good no. And therefore take this for a
warning I would advise you: and so away he went.

CHAP. IX.
How a Draper in London, who owed lack of Newbery much money became bankrout,
whom lack of Newbery found carrying a porters basket on his neck, and how he
set him up again at his own cost, which Draper afterward became an Alderman of
London.

THere was one Randoll Pert a Draper, dwelling in Watling-streete, that owed
lack of Newbery five hundred pounds at one time, who in the end fell greatly
to decay, in so much that he was cast in prison, and his wife with her poor
children turned out of doors. All his creditors except Winchcombe had a share
of his goods, never releasing him out of prison, so long as he had one penny to
satisfy them. But when this tidings was brought to lack of Newberies ear,
his friends counseled him to lay his action against him. Nay (quoth he) if he
be not able to pay me when he is at liberty, he will never be able to pay me
in prison: and therefore it were as good for me to forbear my money without
troubling him, as to add more sorrow to his grieved heart, and be never the
nearer. Misery is trodden down by many, and once brought low, they are seldom
or never relieved: therefore he shall rest for me untouched, and I would to God
he were clear of all other men's debts, so that I gave him mine to begin the
world again. Thus lay the poor Draper a long time in prison, in which space,
his Wife which before for daintiness would not foul her fingers, nor turn
her head aside, for fear of hurting the set of her neckenger, was glad to go
about and wash buckes at the Thames side, and to be a chare-woman in rich men's
houses, her soft hand was now hardened with scouring, and in stead of gold
rings upon her lilly fingers, they were now filled with chaps, proueked by the
sharp lee, and other drudgerees. At last, Master Winchcombe being (as you
heard) chosen against the Parliament a Furgesse for the town of Newberie, and
coming up to London for the same purpose, when he was alighted at his Inn,
he left one of his men there, to get a Porter to bring his trunk up to the
place of his lodging. Poor Randoll Pert, which lately before was come out of
prison, having no other means of maintenance, became a Porter to carry
burdens from one place to another, having an old ragged doublet, and a torn
pair of breeches, with his hose out at the heels, and a pair of old broken
slip shoes on his feet, a rope about his middle in stead of a girdle, and on
his head an old greasy cap, which had so many holes in it, that his hair
started through it: who as soon as he heard one call for a Porter, made answer
straight: here master, what is it that you would have carried? Mary (quoth
he) I would have this Trunk borne to the spread Eagle at Iuiebridge. You
shall Master (quoth he:) but what will you give me for my pains? I will give
thee two pence. A penny more and I will carry it, said the Porter: and so being
agreed, away he went with his burden, till he came to the spread Eagle door,
where on a sudden espying Master Winchcombe standing, he cast down the
Trunk, and ran away as hard as ever he could. Master Winchcombe wondrying
what he meant thereby, caused his man to run after him, and to fetch him
again: but when he saw one pursue him, he ran then the faster; and in
running, here he lost one of his slip shoes, and there another: ever looking
behind him, like a man pursued with a deadly weapon fearing every twinkling of
an eye to be thrust through. At last his breech, being tide but with one point,
what with the haste he made, and the weakness of the thong, fell about his
heels: which so shackled him, that down he fell in the street all along,
sweating and blowing, being quite worn out of breath: and so by this means
the Seruing-man ourtooke him, and taking him by the sleeue, being as windlesse
as the other, stood blowing and puffing a great while ere they could speak one
to another. Sirrah, quoth the Serving man, you must come to my Master, you have
broken his Trunk all to pieces, by letting it fall. O for Gods sake (quoth
he) let me go, for Christ's sake let me go, or else Master Winchcombe of
Newbery will arrest me, and then I am undone for ever. Now by this time lack
of Newbery had caused his Trunk to be carried into the house, and then he
walked along to know what the matter was: but when he heard the Porter say that
he would arrest him, he wondered greatly, and having quite forgot Perte favor,
being so greatly changed by imprisonment and poverty, he said, Wherefore
should I arrest thee? tell me good fellow: for my own part I know no reason
for it. O Sir (quoth he) I would to God I knew none neither. Then asking him
what his name was: the poor man falling down on his knees, said: Good Master
Winchcombe bear with me and cast me not into prison: my name is Pert, and I
do not deny but that I owe you five hundred pound: yet for the love of God take
pity upon me. When Master Winchcombe heard this, he wondered greatly at the
man, and did as much pity his misery, though as yet he made it not known,
saying: Passion of my heart man, thou will never pay me thus: never think
being a Porter to pay five hundred pound debt. But this has your prodigality
brought you to, your thriftlesse neglecting of your business, that set more by
your pleasure than your profit. Then looking better upon him, he said, What,
never a shoe to thy foot, hose to thy leg, band to thy neck, nor cappe to
thy head? O Pert, this is strange: but will thou be an honest man, and give me
a bill of thy hand for my money? Yes sir, with all my heart, quoth Pert. Then
come to the Scriueners, quoth he, and dispatch it, and I will not trouble thee.
Now when they were come thither, with a great many following them at their
heels, master Winchcomb said: Hear thou Scriuener? this fellow must give
me a bill of his hand for five hundred pounds, I pray thee make it as it
should be. The Scriuener looking upon the poor man, and seeing him in that
case, said to master Winchcombe: Sir, you were better to let it be a Bond, and
have some sureties bound with him. Why Scriuener (quoth he) do thou think
this is not a sufficient man of himself for five hundred pound? Truly Sir
(said the Scriuener) if you think him so, you and I are of two minds. I Will
tell thee what (quoth Master Winchcomb) were it not that we are all mortal, I
would take his word as soon as his Bill or Bond; the honesty of a man is all.
And we in London (quoth the Scriuener) do trust Bonds far better than
honesty. But Sir, when must this money be paid? Marry Scriuener, when this man
is Sheriff of London. At that word the Scriuener and the people standing by
laughed heartily, saying: In truth Sir, make no more adoo but forgive it him:
as good to do the one as the other. Nay, believe me (quoth he) not so:
therefore do as I bid you. Whereupon the Scriuener made the Bill to be paid
when Randoll Pert was Sheriff of London, and thereunto set his own hand for a
witness, and twenty persons more that stood by, set to their hands likewise.
Then he asked Pert what he should have for carrying his trunk. Sir (quoth
he) I should have three pence, but seeing I find you so kind, I will take
but two pence at this time. Thanks good Pert. quoth he, but for thy three
pence, there is three shillings: and look thou come to me to morrow morning
betimes. The poor man did so, at what time master Winchcombe had provided him
out of Burchin-lane, a fair suit of apparel, Merchant like, with a fair
black cloak, and all other things fit to the same: then he took him a shop
in Canweek street, and furnished the same shop with a thousand pounds worth of
cloth: by which means, and other favors that master Winchcombe did him, he
grew again into great credit, and in the end became so wealthy, that while
master Winchcombe lived he was chosen Sheriff, at what time he paid five
hundred pounds every penny, and after dyed an Alderman of the City.

CHAP. X.
How lack of Newberies servants were revenged of their Dames tattling Gossip.

Upon a time it came to pass, when master Winchcombe was far from home, and
his wife gone abroad: That mistress many better, dame tittle tattle, Gossip
pintpot, according to her old custom came to mistress Winchcombes house,
perfectly knowing of the good man's absence, and little thinking the good wife
was from home: where knocking at the gate, Tweedle stepped out and asked who was
there? where hastily opening the wicket, he suddenly discovered the full
proportion of this foul beast, who demanded if their mistress were within. What
mistress Frank (quoth he) in faith welcome: how have you done a great while? I
pray you come in. Nay, I cannot stay, quoth she: Notwithstanding, I did call
to speak a word or two with your mistress, I pray you tell her that I am here.
So I will (quoth he) so soon as she comes in. Then said the woman, What is
she abroad? why then farewell good Tweedle: why what haste, what haste, mistress
Frank, (quoth he) I pray you stay and drink ere you go. I hope a cup of
new Sack will do your old belly no hurt: what (quoth she) have you new Sack
already? Now by my honesty I drunk none this year, and therefore I do not
greatly care if I take a taste before I go: and with that she went into the
wine-cellar with Tweedle, where first he set before her a piece of powdered
beef as green as a leeke: And then going into the kitchen, he brought her a
piece of roasted beef hot from the spit. Now certain of the maidens of the
house, and some of the yangue men, who had long before determined to be
revenged of this prattling huswife: came into the Cellar one after another, one
of them bringing a great piece of a gammon of Bacon in his hand: and every one
bad mistress Frank welcome: and first one drunk to her, and then another,
and so the third, the fourth, and the fifth: so that mistress Frankes brains
wart as mellow as a Pippin at Michaelmas, and so light, that sitting in the
Cellar, she thought the world ran round. They seeing her to fall into merry
humors, whetted her on in merriment as much as they could, saying, Mistress
Frank, spare not I pray you, but think your self as welcome as any woman in
all Newberie, for we have cause to love you, because you love our Mistress so
well. Now by my troth (quoth she, lisping in her speech; her tongue waxing
somewhat too big for her mouth) I love your Mistress well indeed, as if she
were mine own daughter. Nay but hear you, quoth they, she begins not to
deal well with us now. No my Lambs, quoth she, why so? Because, quoth they,
she seeks to bar us of our allowance, telling our Master, that he spends
too much in housekeeping. Nay then (quoth she) your Mistress is both an
Ass, and a Fool: and though she go in her Hood, what care I? she is but a
girl to me: Twittle twattle, I know what I know: Go too, drink to me. Well
Tweedle, I drink to she with all my heart: why thou horeson, when will thou
be married? O that I were a yongue wench for thy sake: but it is no matter,
though I be but a poor woman, I am a true woman. Hang dogs, I have dwelt in
this town these thirty winters. Why then, quoth they, you have dwelt here
longer than our Master. Your Master, quoth she? I knew your Master a boy, when
he was called lack of Newberie, I lack, I knew him called plain lack: and
your mistress, now she is rich and I am poor, but its no matter, I knew her
a draggle tail girl, mark ye? But now, quoth they, she takes upon her
lustily, and has quite forgot what she was. Tush, what will you have of a
green thing, quoth she? Here I drink to you, so long as she goes where she
list a gossipping: and its no matter, little said is soon amended: But hear
you my masters, though mistress Winchcombe go in her Hood, I am as good as
she, I care not who tell it her: I spend not my husbands money in Cheeries and
Codlings, go too, go too, I know what I say well enough: I thank God I am not
drunk: Mistress Winchcomb, mistress? No Nan Winchcombe, I will call her
name, plain Nan: what, I was a woman when she was sir-reuerence a paltry
girl, though now she goes in her Hood and Chain of Gold: what care I for
her? I am her elder, and I know more of her tricks: nay I warrant you, I know
what I say, it is no matter, laugh at me and spare not, I am not drunk I
warrant: and with that being scant able to hold open her eyes, she began to
nodde, and to spill the Wine out of the Glass: which they perceiving, let her
alone, going out of the Cellar till she was sound asleep, and in the mean
space they devised how to finish this piece of knauerie. At last they all
consented to lay her forth at the back side of the house, half a mile off,
even at the foot of a Style, that whosoever came next over, might find her:
notwithstanding, Tweedle stayed hard by to see the end of this action. At last
comes a notable Clown from Greeneham, taking his way to Newbery: who coming
hastily over the Style, stumbled at the woman, and fell down clean over her.
But in his starting up, seeing it was a woman, cried out, Alas* alas. How now,
what is the matter, quoth Tweedle? O, quoth he, here lies a dead woman. A dead
woman, quoth Tweedle, that is not so I trow, and with that he tumbled her
about: bones of me (quoth Tweedle) it is a drunken woman, and one of the Town
undoubtedly: in troth it is great pity she should lie here. Why do you know
her quoth the Clown? no not I, quoth Tweedle, nevertheless, I will give thee
half a groate and take her in thy Basket, and carry her throughout the Town,
and see if any body know her. Then said the other, let me see the money and I
will: For by the Mass, she earnd not half a great this great while. There it
is, quoth Tweedle: then the fellow put her in his Basket, and so lifted her
upon his back. Now by the Mass she stinkes vilely of Drink, or Wine, or some
thing. But tell me, What shall I say when I come into the Town, quoth he?
First, quoth Tweedle, I would have thee so soon as ever thou can get to the
Towns end, with a lusty voice to cry, O yes, and then say, Who knows this
woman, who? And though possible some will say, I know her, and I know her; yet
do not thou set her down till thou come to the Market Cross, and there
use the like words: and if any be so friendly, to tell she where she dwells,
then just before her door cry so again: and if thou perform this bravely, I
will give thee half a groat more. Master Tweedle (quoth he) I know you well
enough, you dwell with Master Winchcombe, do you not? I faith if I do it not
in the nicke, give me never a penny: And so away he went, till he came to
the Towns end, and there he cries out as boldly as any Bayliffes man, O yes,
who knows this woman, who? Then said the drunken woman in the Basket, her head
falling first on one side, and then on the other side, Who co me, who? Then
said he again, Who knows this woman, who? Who co me, who? (quoth she) and
look how often he spoke the one, she spoke the other: saying still, Who co me,
who come, who? Whereat all the people in the street fell into such a laughter*
that the tears ran down again. At last one made answer* saying: God
fellow, she dwells in the North brook street, a little beyond Master
Winchcombes. The fellow hearing that, goes down thither in all haste, and
there in the hearing of a hundred people, cries, Who knows this woman, who?
Whereat her husband comes out, saying ^ Marry that do I too well, God help
me. Then said the Clown, If you know her, take her: for I know her not but
for a drunken beast. And as her husband took her out of the Basket, she gave
him a sound box on the ear, saying, What you Qneanes, do you mock me? and
so was carried in. But the next day, when her brain was quiet, and her head
cleared of these foggy vapors, she was so ashamed of her self, that she went
not forth of her doors a long time after: and if any body did say unto her,
Who come, who? she would be so mad and furious, that she would be ready to
draw her knife and stick them, and scold, as if she strove for the best game
at the cucking stool. Moreover, her prattling to mistress Winchcombes folks
of their mistress, made her on the other side to fall out with her, in such
sort, that she troubled them no more, either with her company or her counsel.

CHAP. XI.
How one of lack of Newberies maids became a Lady.

AT the winning of Morlesse in France, the noble Earl of Surrey being at that
time Lard high Admiral of England, made many Knights: among the rest was Sir
George Rigley, brother to Sir Edward Rigley, and sundry other, whose valors
far surpassed their wealth: so that when peace bred a scarcity in their
purse, and that their credits grew weak in the City, they were enforced to
ride into the Country, where at their friends houses they might have favorable
welcome, without coin or grudging. Among the rest, lack of Newberie that kept
a table for all comers, was never lightly without many such guestes: where
they were sure to have both welcome and good cheer, and their mirth no less
pleasing than their meat was plenty. Sir George having lain long at board in
this brave Yeomans house, at length fell in liking^ of one of his maidens, who
was as fair as she was fond.

This lusty wench he so allured with hope of marriage, that at length she
yielded him her love, and therewithal bent her whole study to work his
content: but in the end, she so much contented him, that it wrought altogether
her own discontent: to become high* she laid her self so low, that the
Knight suddenly fell over her, which fall became the rising of her bellry. But
when this wanton perceived her self to be with child, she made her moan unto
the Knight in this manner.

Ah Sir George, now is the time to perform your promise, or to make me a
spectacle of in famy to the whole world for ever: in the one you shall discharge
the duty of a true knight, but in the other show your self a most perjured
person. Small honor will if be to boast in the spoil of poor maidens, whose
innocence all good Knights ought much rather to defend. Why thou lewd paltry
thing (quoth he) come thou to father thy bastard upon me? Away ye dunghill
carrion, away: Hear you good huswife, get you among your companiens, and lay
your litter where you list: for if you trouble me any more, by heaven I
swears, thou shall dearly abids it: and so bending his brows like the angry
god of war, he went his ways, leaving the childe-breeding wench to the hazard
of her fortune, either good or bad.

The poor maiden seeing her self for her kindness thus cast off, shed many
tears of sorrow for her sin, inueighing, with many bitter groans, against
the inconstancy of love alluring men. But in the end, when she saw no other
remedy, she made her case known unto her mistress: who after she had given
her many bitter checks and tants, threatening to turn her out of doors, she
opened the matter to her husband.

So soon as he heard thereof, he made no more to do, but presently poasted
to London after Sir George, and found him at my Lord Admirals. What, master
Winchcombe (quoth he) you are heartily welcome to London, and I thank you for
my good cheer. I pray you how does your good wife, and all our friends in
Barkshire? All well and merry, I thanks you good Sir George, quoth he: I left
them in health, and I hope they do so continue. And trust me sir (quoth he)
having earnest occasion to come up to talk with a bad debtor, in my journey it
was my chance to light in company of a gallant widow: a Gentlewoman she is, of
wondrous good wealth, whom griesely death has bereft of a kind husband,
making her a widow ere she had been half a year a wife: her land, Sir George,
is as well worth a hundred pound a year as one penny, being as fair and
comely a creature, as any of her degree in our whole country: Now sir, this is
the worst, by the reason that she doubts her self to be with child, she has
vowed not to marry these twelve months: but because I wish you well, and the
Gentlewoman no hurt, I came of purpose from my business to tell you thereof:
Now Sir George, if you think her a fit wife for you, ride to her, woo her,
win her, and wedde her. I thank you good Master Winchcombe (quoth he) for
your favor ever toward me, and gladly would I see this yongue widow if I wist
where. She dwells not half a mile from my house (quoth master Winchcombe)
and I can send for her at any time if you please.

Sir George hearing this, thought it was not best to come there, fearing Ioane
would father a child upon him, and therefore answered, he had no leisure to
come from my Lord: But, quoth he, would I might see her in London, on the
condition it cost me twenty nobles. Tush sir George, quoth Master Winchcombe,
delays in love are dangerous, and he that will woo a widow, must take time by
the forelocke, and suffer none other to step before him, lest he leap
without the widows love. Notwithstanding, seeing now I have told you of it, I
will take my Gelding and get me home: if I hear of her coming to London, I
will send you word, or perhaps come my self: till when, adieu good Sir George.
Thus parted master Winchcombe from the Knight: and being come home, in short
time he get a fair Taffety gown, and a French hood for his maid, saying ^
Come ye drabbe, I must be feign to cover a foul fault with a fair garment,
yet all will not hide your great belly: but if I find means to make you a
Lady, what will you say then? O Master (quoth she) I shall be bound while I
live to pray for you. Come then minion (quoth her mistress) and put you on
this gown and french hood: for seeing you have lien with a Knight, you must
needs be a Gentlewoman. The maid did so: and being thus attyred, she was set
on a fair Gelding, and a couple of men sent with her up to London: and being
well instructed by her master and dame what she should do, she took her
journey to the City in the Term time, and lodged at the Bell in the Strand:
and mistress Louelesse must be her name, for so her Master had warned her to
call her self: Neither did the men that waited on her, know the contrary; for
master Winchcombe had borrowed them of their Master, to wait upon a friend of
his to London, because he could not spare any of his own servants at that
time: notwithstanding, they were appointed, for the Gentlewomans credit, to
say they were her own men. This being done, master Winchcombe sent Sir George
a letter, that the Gentlewoman which he told him of, was now in London, lying
at the Bell in the Strand, having great business at the Term.

With which news Sir Georges heart was on fire, till such time as he might
speak with her: three or four times went he thither and still she would not
be spoken withal, the which close keeping of her self, made him the more
earnest in his fuite.

At length he watched her so narrowly, that finding her going forth in an
evening, he fellowed her, she having one man before, and another behind:
carrying a very stately gate in the streere, it drove him into the greater
liking of her, being the more urged to utter his mind. And suddenly stepping
before her, he thus saluted her, Gentlewoman God save you, I have often been
at your lodging, and could never find you at leisure. Why sir, quoth she
(counterfeiting her natural speech) have you any business with me? Yes fair
Widow, quoth he, as you are a clyent to the law, so am I a suitor for your
love: and may I find you so favorable to let me plead my own case at the
bar of your beauty, I doubt not but to unfold so true a tale, as I trust will
cause you to give sentence on my side. You are a merry Gentleman, quoth she:
But for my own part, I know you not; nevertheless, in a case of love, I will
be no let to your suit, though perhaps, I help you little therein. And
therefore Sir, if it please you to give attendance at my lodging, upon my
return from the Temple, you shall know more of my mind, and so they parted.
Sir George receiving hereby some hope of good hap, stayed for his dear at her
lodging door: whom at her coming she friendly greeted, saying, Surely Sir,
your diligence is more than the profit you shall get thereby: but I pray you
how shall I call your name? George Rigley (quoth he) I am called, and for some
small deserts I was knighted in France. Why then Sir George (quoth she) I have
done you too much wrong to make you thus dance attendance on my worthless
person. But let me be so bold to request you to tell me, how you came to
know me: for my own part I cannot remember that ever I saw you before.
Mistress Louelesse (said Sir George) I am well acquainted with a good neighbor
of yours, called Master Winchcombe, who is my very good friend, and to say the
truth, you were commended unto me by him. Truly sir George said she, you are
so much the better welcome: Nevertheless, I have made a vow not to love any
man for this twelve months space. And therefore Sir, till then I would wish
you to trouble your self no further in this matter till that time be expired:
and then if I find you be not entangled to any other, and that by trial I
find out the truth of your love, for Master Winchcomb sake your welcome shall
be as good as any other Gentleman's whatsoever.

Sir George having received this answer was wondrous we, cursing the day that
ever he meddled with Ioane, whose time of deliverance would come long before a
twelve Month were expired, to his utter shame, and overthrow of his good
fortune: for by that means should he have Master Winchcombe his enemy, and
therewithal the loss of this fair Gentlewoman. Wherefore to prevent this
mischief, he sent a Letter in all haste to Master Winchcombe, requesting him
most earnestly to come up to London, by whose persuasion he hoped straight to
finish the marriage. Master Winchcombe fulfilled his request, and then
presently was the marriage solemnized at the Tower of London, in presence of
many Gentlemen of Sir Georges friends. But when he found it was Ioane whom he
had gotten with child, he fretted and fumed, stamped, and star'd like a
devil. Why (quoth M. Winchcombe) what needs all this? Came you to my table to
make my maid your strumpet? had you no man's house to dishonor but mine? Sir,
I would you should well know, that I account the poorest wench in my house to
good to be your whore, were you ten knights: and seeing you took pleasure to
make her your wanton, take it no scorn to make her your wife: and use her well
too, or you shall hear of it. And hold thee Ioane (quoth he) there is a
hundred pounds for thee: And let him not say thou came to him a beggar. Sir
George seeing this, and withal casting in his mind what friend Master
Winchcombe might be to him, taking his wife by the hand gave her a loving
kiss, and Master Winchcombe great thanks. Whereupon he willed him for two
years space to take his diet and his Ladies at his house: which the Knight
accepting, rode straight with his wife to Newberie. Then did the Mistress make
curtsie to the Maid, saying: You are welcome Madam, giving her the upper hand
in all places. And thus they lived afterward in great joy: and our King hearing
how Jack had matched sir George, laughing heartily thereat, gave him a living
for ever, the better to maintain my Lady his Wife.

FINIS.
OS ^ HOMINI ^ SVBLIME ^ DEDIT
printer's or publisher's device HL




