AN ANSWER TO ONE QVESTION. WHEREUPON DEPENDET^ The Resolution of all
CONTROVERSIES, Doubts, and Questions, which are, or can be made about matters
of FAITH

Wherefore it is to be diligently, and carefully read, and duly pondered,
after prayer made to God for the light of his grace, without which it cannot be
rightly understood in such sort as is fit.

Permissu Superiorum.

Printed at DOWAY.

MCDXXVIII.

THE QVESTION.
WHether is it necessary, that there should be in all ages since Christ, a
Visible Christian Church, having in it lawfully sent visible Pastors, and
Doctors, teaching with Infallible Authority One and the same Infallible,
sincere, and entire Faith of Christ, necessary to salvation; without admixtion
of any error, proposed as divine Truth, (by addition, or detraction, or
mis-interpretation) contrary to the Doctrine first delivered by our Savior and
his Apostles, and which Church has bin such?

THE ANSWER.
It is necessary that one such Church be: and the Roman Catholic Church only
is such.
For Declaration of the truth of this my Answer:
IT Is to be noted 1. That although Almighty God, by his omnipotent power
could, by extraordinary means, breed infallible, supernatural, Divine,
soule-sauing Faith in men, without vsinge the help of any visible Doctors,
Pastors, or any other living creature. Yet if we speak, as we ought,
according to the ordinary law, and course of Gods providence, manifested in the
Holy Scriptures, and confirmed by Histories, and daily experience; It is
necessary, that there should be in all ages, some or other Visible Doctors and
Pastors, or lawfully sent Preachers, authorized by Almighty God, and assisted
by the Holy Spirit of Truth, promised for ever to be in the said Church, to
teach it all Truth: For otherwise people of each age could not be sufficiently
instructed, nor confirmed in Infallible certainty, and unity requisite in
soule-sauing Christian Faith: nor preserved from wavering in uncertainty, or
wandering in errors, contrary to that One, Infallible, entire, and sincere
Faith of Christ, which is necessary to salvation.

Note 2. That the Necessity of Doctors, and Pastors in the Church, is not only
generally acknowledged by ancient Fathers, and all other learned Catholics of
this age; but is also confessed by the Learneder sort of Protestants. Only
Protestants deny, these Doctors, and Pastors, of whatsoever age after the
Apostles, to have Infallible Aucthority, although teaching with unanimous
consent, or with full Authority of a lawfully called, continued, and confirmed
General Counsel; unless it be in points Fundamental, or so farreforth as
they prove out of Scripture. But Catholics hold the Authority of the Church
to be Infallible, in whatsoever point of Faith.

This therefore being the chief point in Question.
I will prove, that there is Infallible Aucthority in the lawfully sent
Doctors. Pastors, and Preachers of the Visible Church of Christ, so
farreforth as in any age after Christ they teach, and propose to people
doctrine to be believed by divine Faith, with unanimous consent, or with there
full Aucthority in any lawfully called, continued, and confirmed General
Council, whatsoever the point of Faith be, Fundame^tall, or not Fundamental,
proved out of Scripture, or not so proved.

This I prove first by plain texts of holy Scriptures.
My spirit which is in thee, Isa. 59.21.
and my word, which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth,
nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of the seed of thy seed,
from benceforth for ever.

I will ask my Father, Joan. 14.16
and he will give you another Paraclete, that he may remain with you for ever,
the spirit of Truth.

When the spirit of Truth shall Come, Joan. 16.13
he shall teach you all Truth.

Going teach all nations etc. taching them to observe all things whatsoever I
have Commanded you; Matthew. 28 19.20.
and behold I am with you, all days unto the end of the world.

Preach the Gospel to every creature and he that will not believe shall be
condemned. Mare. 16.16.


He that will not hear the, Math. 18 17.
Church let him be to the a Heathen and Publican.

Upon the Chair of Moses Scribes, Math. 23.2 3.
and Pharisees have sitten: all things therefore whatsoever they shall say to
you, Observe ye and do.

He that hears you, Luc. 10.16
hears me he that despises you, despises me.

Obey your Prelates and be subject to them for they Watch, Heb. 13.17.
as being to render account for your Souls.

The lips of the Priest shall keep Knowledge, Malach. 2.7.
and they shall require the Law out of his Mouth, because he is the Angel (or
Messenger) of the Lord of Hosts.

He that shall be proud refusing to obey the Commandment of the Priest,
Deterom. 17.
who at that time does minister unto the Lord, by decree of the Judge, that man
shall dye.

How shall they believe, Romans 10.14.15.
whom they have not heard? How shall they hear without a Preacher? How shall
they preach, unless they besent.

He has given some Apostles, Ephesians. 4.
Some Prophets, and Evangelists, others Pastors, and Doctors etc. that we be
not now little ones wavering, and Carried about with enery wind of Doctrine.

The Church of the Living God is the Pillar and Ground of Truth. 1. Tim. 3.15.


Out of which texts I frame this argument.
THose to whom Almighty God has promised the spirit of Truth, to teach them
all Truth: and in whose mouth he has placed his word, (and this not for one,
or two, or more of the first ages after Christ, but for ever, and all days,
until the end of the world) making them his Legates, and Messengers over the
whole world, and out of whose mouth people are to require his Law, in whom
they are commanded to hear, believe, and obey, in whatsoever they teach, as if
Christ Jesus himself did teach, and this under pain of Death, and eternal
Damnation, and of being accounted as Heathens, and Publicans.

Those (I say) to whom such Promises are made, and such Authority is given by
Almighty God, without any Limitation, or restictiue Condition, must needs be
thought to have far more Authority then any others, to whom no such Promise
was made, nor Authority given, yea they must needs be thought to have
Infallible Authority, and to be a firm Pillar, and Ground of Truth, as S. Paul
styles the Church: so as they never did, nor shall be permitted, to teach any
errors by Addition, Detraction, or Misinterpretatio^ of Gods Word, at least
with unanimous Consent, and when (by a Visum est Spiritui Sancto et nobis, or
some such like sign of using their full Authority) they express themselves to
teach (as Gods Legates, Messengers, and lawfully sent Preachers,) not thire own
Private inventions, or opinions, but the public Doctrine of God, and the
Church. But to the Doctors, and Pastors of the Catholic Visible Church in
all Ages these Promises were made, and this Authority was given without any
Limitation, or restrictiue Condition, as appears by the Texts aforecited.

Therefore the Authority of Doctors, and Pastors of the Visible Church in all
ages is Infallible, in all points with vnanime consent, or by their full
Authority, they teach to be divine Truth, whether the point be great, or
littell, Fundamental, or not Fundamental, or whether they bring proof for
that they teach out of Scripture, or not. For in the afoure said text there is
no such Limitation of great, or little, Fundamental, or not Fundamental
points of Truth: Nor any such reflrictiue Condition of proouing what they teach
out of Scripture.

Seendly I prove the same by Sentences of ancient Fathers.
First S. Irenaeus, S. Iren. l. 3. cap. 4.
who lived in the next age to the Apostles, says. We ought not to seek Truth
from others, which we may easily receive from the Church; Since the Apostles
have laid up in it, as in a rich tresury, or storehouse, most fully those
things which are of Truth etc. And a little after to show that this is not meant
with only Limitatio^ of Fundamental points he adds saying: and if
controversy arise even about some small questions, should we not have recourse
to the most ancient Church, in which the Apostles did Co^uerse and take from
them what is certain, and clear in this question. And further, to show that
it is not necessary that this Church must prove every thing she does teach out
of Scripture, he presently adds: What if the Apostles had left us no
Scripture, ought we not to have followed the Order of Tradition?

2. Tert. lib. de Praesiript.
Tereullian says: The order of things does require, that this Question should
first be propounded, to whom does faith belong (as if he should say which is
the true Church?) Whose are the Scriptures, from whom, by whom, when, and to
whom, was the Discipline delivered, by which we are made Christians, for where
the truth of Christian Discipline, and Faith shall appear to be, there shall be
the Truth of Scriptures, and expositions, and all Christian Traditions. By
which we may learn, that although to one, who does believe Scriptures, we may
out of them prove which is the true Church, yet to proceed according to right
order of things, the true ancient, and always Visible, continued Church, is to
be found first; and from the true Church we must find which be true
Scriptures, which true Expositions, and all true Christian Traditions.

3. S. Cyprian says: S. Cyprian. lib. 1. c. 3.
That from no other root do Herisies and Schisms spring, but from this, that
men do not obey the Priest of God, neither do consider, that in the Church
there is on Priest, and one Judge for the time in steed of Christ.

4. S. Basil says: S. Basil. lib. de Spiritu sancto. c. 27.
The Doctrines which are in the Church now proposed and Preached, we have
partly from the written Doctrine, partly from the Traditions of the Apostles,
brought unto us in mystery, both which are of like force to piety.

5. S. Chrsyost. upon these words. 2 Thessalonians. 4.14.
S. Crysostome upon those words, hold the traditions etc. says: Hence it is
euedent, that the Apostles did not Deliver all in writing, but many things
without writing, and that the one, and the other are a like worthy of Credit.

6. S. August. lib. contra epistolam fun damenti. cap. 5.
S. Augustine attributes so much to the Authority of the Church, that he
says: I would not believe the Gospel it self, if the Authority of the Church
did not induce me. And speaking of a point which could not be proved out of
Scripture, Lib. 1. co^tra Crescon. c. 32. or 33.
he says: The Truth of Scripture is holden by us, when we do that which
pleases the whole Church, which the Authority of the same Scriptures does
co^me^d, and because holy scripture cannot deceiue^, whosoever is afraid to be
deceived with the obscurity of this Question: Let him ask the Judgment of the
Church, which without all ambiguity the holy Scripture does Demonstrate. Epist.
118. c. 1.
And in his Epistle, he affirms: That it is most insolent madness to dispute
against that which the Church does universally practice. See Saint, Augustine
de vtilitate credendi cap. 10. vsque adsinem libri. S. Vince^tius Lirinensis in
his goulden treatise against he resie. c. 1.


Lastly S. Vincentius Lirinensis living near to S Augustines time first
advises (as a Rule to Discern, and to preserve us from heresy) to Join the
authority of the Catholic Church, her Tradition, and Interpretation to the
written Word of God, in regard the height of Scripture is such, as every man
does not take it in one, and the same sense, but so many sensual men, so many
sensual senses of it may be made. And he assures, that this Church of Christ
is so diligent and wary a keeper of Doctrine, Delivered as a sacred Depositunn
unto her, that nihil in his permut at, nihil minuit, nihil addit, she never
changes any thing (to wit, by misinterpretation of the sense and meaning of
any point of Faith). nor diminishes any thing (to wit, by Denying what was
once held for a point of Faith.) nor adds any thing (to wit, by affirming
any thing to be a Divine Truth, which was no at first for such Delivered by
Christ, and his Apostles.) And a little after he shows, that although it may
seem, that the Church in the Decrees of her Counsels may have made some
addition, or change: yet indeed the addition, or change is not in substance,
or in sense, but only (being excited by novel Heretics,) she sets down
in writing what from our Elders she received by only Tradition, and the
better to express in words what was infoulded in ancient Belief, she somtymes
gives to an old article (not a new sense, but) a new name, as for example, the
Conncell of Nice added the word Consubstansttiall, and the Lateran Council,
the word Transubstantiation, with out any mutation of the Sense of the Article.

3 I prove the same Verity by these ensuing plain reasons.

The first Reason.
If the Authority of the Church be not Infallible, but (as the Authority of
other men) only fallible, and such as may err, and has erred, in any one
point proposed as a divine Truth, by Unanimous Consent, or full authority of it.
It will follow, that we never have, nor can have, (according to the ordinary
Course of Gods providence, any Infallible certainty of any other Point of our
Faith proposed by the Unanimous Consent, or full Authority of the same Church.
For if it can err, and has erred in any ponit so Deliured; we may justly
fear, and have no assured ground to assure, that she teaches Infallible Truth
in any fo the rest. As S. Augustine says of holy Scrirture, if we once admit
any untruth to be in any one part of it, we shall thereby take away all
infallible authority, and credit from it in all the rest.

But if we neither have, nor can have Infallible certainty of any point
proposed, as divine Truth by unanimous consent, or full authorite of the
Church, we can have no Divine faith at all: Romans 10. Ephesians. 4.
for since as S. Paul signifies; Divine Faith comes by heraing the Word of
Christ; preached by those only, who are lawfully sent (as are those Doctors
and Pastors lineally desceding from Christ, and his Apostles, which by Christ
his appointment must be always in the Church (If we can not have Infallible
assurance, by hearing these Doctors, and Pastouis in any point they teach, we
can have noe Divine Faith at all; for this requires Infallible assurance.
Therefore, If the Authority of the Church or the Doctors or, Pastors thereof
be not Infallible in proposing, and teaching Divine Truth in whatsoever, even
in the least point, we can have no Infallible assurance in any other point of
Divine Truth, nor any Divine Faith in whatsoever point allthough most necessary
to salvation.

The 2. reason.
IF we that live now, had never hard of Christ, or his Apostles, or their
Preaching, or writing Deuinely reuailed Truths, necessary to Salvation: or had
only heard of them one, or more, but such as wear commonly, known to tell
nothing but fictions, and lies; we could not at least according to the ordinary
course of divine Providence believe these necessary points at all; yea although
we had heard of these, by some one, or more honest men, who sometimes speak
true, sometimes false, the most we could do were to assent unto these things,
by a probable, yet weak, and fallible opinion, or humane faith. Therefore to
assent unto these things, by an absolute, sure and Infallible Judgment of
Divine Supernatural faith; It is needful, that these Doctors and Pastors of
the Church, by whose teachinge we are by the ordinary course of Gods
Providence to learn them by men, not only sent, but also Infallibly assisted
by God, and that partly with natural, or at least with Supernatural gifts,
this their Authority may Sufficiently be made known to be such, as may Justly
move men to a supernatural, Divine, and Infallible belief. For although.
these things be (as they are in all the foresaid cases) in themselves
infallible, and Divine Truths; yet they do not breed in us Infallible,
supernatural, and Divine belief, until they be applied to our understanding,
by a means having in it a due Proportion of Divine, supernatural, and
Infallible Authority. Since therefore This ordinary means, which by Gods
appointment, is to apply these Truths to our understanding; is no other,
besides the teaching of the Doctors, and Pastors of the true, continually
Visible, Catholic Church. It must be granted, that they have an Infallible,
Supernatural, and Participatiue Divine Authority in their teaching, so long as
they teach with Unanimous consent, and conformable to that, which is Authorized
Doctrine of the Church.

The Third Reason.
IF there be not Infallible Authority in the Pastors of the Church, in
Proposing divine Truths, by unanimous Consent or by there full Authority: it is
(at least morally) Impossible, that Unity of Faith so much commended, 1. Cor.
1.10. ^phes. 4.3.45. ^^^llpi. 2.2. Gel. 5.20.
and required so much to be amongst Christians, should be preserved, or that
Heresies, and Schisms, so much fpoken against, both by Scriptures, and Ancient
Fathers, could be prevented, or taken away. For since words, of Scriptures, do
not express all matters pertaining to Faith, (as namely) which Books be
Canonical Scripture, which Apocriphall, which in doubtful, and not evident
causes, is true, and Infallible translation, and which is the Infallible sense
of the words of the holy text, and which taxts those be, which contain points
of doctrine Fundamental, or necessary for all sorts to know, and Believe
expressly.) Since also about seeming plain words of Scripture eue^ co^taining
points necessary to be known, and believed expresely, there have bin, and
daily do, or may arise questions, or Coutrouersies even amongst learned men,
about the sense; Some houlding it necessary to salvation to take the words in
this, others in a contrary sense. If there be not an Infallible Aucthority in
the Church to instruct men Infallibly in the right sense, and to deside
controversies arising about the sense; How it is possible that men should
submitt these there different opinions to some other man's Judgment in matters
of such moment, as is eternal Salvation, or Damnation, when each man is, by
nature apt to apprehend, that to be truest, which seems so to his own wit
and understanding, and that to be securest, which being suitable to his own
apprehention, seems to be confirmed by (to-him-seeming-plaine) words of
divine Scripture, as every sensual sect master apprehends his opnion to be
confirmed by some or otheir (to-him-seeming-plaine) words of divine Scripture.

Other Reasons might be added: But by these it is plain enough, that the
Authority of the perpetual Visible Church, is not only such, as is of other
private men, who do not Ordinarily err in points of Faith, Fundamental, and
necessary to be known of all sorts, or in such points which they can evidently
prove out of Sripture: but that it is obsolutly Infallible, and never did,
does, or shall err, at least with Unanimous consent, or when it teaches by
her full Authority, in whatsoever point Fundamental, or not Fundamental,
proved, or not proved by Scripture.

Which being so: you may plainly see, supposing there cannot (as there cannot)
be assigned any other True Visible Church, in all Ages since Christ, different
from the Roman, which can, and does show it felfe to have been See (...) ^bula
(...) al^o S. (...) Cata^ in the A^p^^dix to the Antido^^.
Visible, and teaching without change the Faith of Christ in all Ages. You may
see (I say) First how safely you may rely upon the Authority of the Roman
Church, and noe other in whatsoever point, pertaining to Christian Faith, and
Religion, espcially when even best learned Protestants do grant that See
Protestants Apology Tract. 1. Sect. 6.
Salvation may be had in it. 2 How unjustly Protestants pretend cause of there
separation from her, to have been that she has changed her first faith, either
by Addition, Detraction, or Misinterpretation of any point of Faith, especially
necessary to salvation. Thirdly, how needful it is for those who (either for
one reason, or other) remain separate from the Faith, Unity, and obedience of
the Roman Church, to return with speed into the Unity of the Roman Church, as
the dove into Noe his Arc, in regard there is noe other place, whereupon they
may safely rest the feet of their Faith, and Conscience, or where in they can
abide with out danger of being drowned in eternal Damnation. For out of the
true, infallible, all ways Visible Catholic, (which is only the Roman)
Church. There is noe communion of Saints, no remission of Sins, no salvation
of Soul to be hoped for. And what (...) it profit a man to gain all the wo^^^
with loss, or hasard of the loss of Eternal Salvation of his Soul.

I will therefore conclude with t^^ Dilemma drawn out of a discourse S.
Augustine. If there be no Prouider of God in human matters, then a m^^ need
not endeavor to be of a right Religion, nor care whether he be of this or that,
or any Religion at all. But i^ there be a divine Providence (as all but
Atheists do confess, and these also may be co^uinced to believe by the
greatness, multitude, beauty, variety, and order which is seen in the whole
world, and by the secret instinct engraven in the hearts of all, even most
barberous people, and felt sometimes, especially in danger of death, even by
Atheists them selves.) Then it is not to be doubted but that there is by divine
providence ordained some on, or other certain, and Infallible Authority, upon
which, as upon a sure Step we may rely for finding out that one Infallible, and
entire true Faith, and Religion, in which God is Pleased to be served of men,
and without which it is Impossible, that God should be pleased, or men do to
him that duty, for which they were created, or attain that happy End, unto
which they were ordained.

But among all Authorities ordained by Almighty God for this purpose, there is
none greater, and more worthy to be credited, then the Authority of the
Catholic Roman Church, which even by Confession, or acknowledgme^t of Makind
has been esteemed to have highest Authority from the Apostolical Seat, and
by succession of Bishops, while Heretics have in vain barcked round about
it, and have been condemned partly by the Judgment of the people, partly by the
gravity of Counsels, partly by the Majesty of Miracles. To which Authority not
to yeald principality is huge impiety, or headlong arrogance.

Therefore it is not to be doubted, but the Authority of the Catholic Roman
Church is Infallible, and that upon it, as upon a sure stepp we may rely, or
finding out that One Infallible entire Faith, and Religion which is necessary
to Salvation.

FINIS.

