AN EXPOSITION UPON THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE second Epistle of Peter: WITH, THE
PRINCIPAL DOCTRINES naturally arising from every verse of the same Chapter.

By STEPHEN DENISON Minister of Kree-Church London.

IER. 14.19. Have thou utterly rejected Judah, has thy soul loathed Sion? why
have thou smitten us, and there is no healing for us? We looked for peace, and
there is no good; and for time of healing, and behold trouble.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Field for Robert Mylbourne, and are to be sold at
the great South door of Paul's. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND ELECT LADY, THE LADY THEODOSIA DVDLEY, Grace and
peace be multiplied.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
As the Lord has honored you in respect of place, so he has doubly honored
you with grace and virtue. Amongst the rest of the rare endowments wherewith
God has enriched your honorable person, I observe these in particular: First,
humility,, a grace hard to be found in great personages. Secondly, love to Gods
house; your Honors diligence in this kind will rise up in judgment against
many proud despisers of holy things, and will condemn them. Thirdly, Christian
government in your family. I could name many more, but it is needless, because
they are better known then I can express them. Your singular virtues,
together with the experience which I have of your love in the best things, do
encourage me to dedicate this small work unto your Honor. The most part of
this Chapter was preached in your hearing, and considering you vouchsafed to
hear it preached with joy and great diligence, I make no doubt but your honor
will accept it, and as diligently read it now, as before you heard it. Good
Madam, I know God has laid upon you a great trial of affliction, in that he
has taken away your noble son Sir Ferdinando Dudley. But I beseech you
consider whither he is removed, to wit, from earth to heaven; his great zeal
in Religion, especially in his later years with the fruit thereof, do give
sufficient testimony of his present happiness. Who would not be content that
their dearest friend should be advanced? Behold, he is advanced to a Crown,
yea to a Crown of glory, which shall never be taken from him, nor he from it.
If the dead in Christ were to speak unto us, they would surely say to us that
mourn for them; Weep not for us, for we are in bliss and happiness. And so,
if this worthy son were to speak unto you, he would say unto you (seeing
your tears) My honorable Mother weep not for me, behold my happiness. The
Church of God has the greatest loss in the death of this worthy Saint. She
has too few such favorers as he was: but all must submit to the will of God;
the will of the Lord is good, the Lord has given, and the Lord has taken
away, blessed be the Name of the Lord. He is taken away from beholding the
evil to come; and we are left still for our further trial; the Lord sanctify
our crosses unto us. Sorrow for such a son shall be no hinderance (as I hope)
but rather a furtherance to your Honors zeal. This shall make you more
mindful of mortality, more careful to work out your own salvation, more
industrious in the study of heavenly things. And indeed it nearely concerns
every Christian, to have especial respect unto Gods word in the time of
affliction: for whence can any expect sound comfort in time of trouble but from
the word, or whence strength to bear afflictions, but from the same word? The
word of God is as the balm of Gilead: We must fly unto it to be healed of our
sorrows. The word of God is as a strong Tower, we must run unto it, if we
would be safe from spiritual dangers. Now Gods word is not only that which is
expressly written in the Bible, but also the labors of Gods servants in
expounding and preaching, so far as they deliver nothing but that which has
warrant from the Scripture, this is also Gods word. And in this word we must be
conversant as well as in the former; though in the former principally, because
it was by immediate revelation. But I shall not need to provoke your Honor to
the study of Gods word, for I am persuaded you are taught of God. I only
beseech your acceptance and patronage for this little Book; and so rest

Your Honors to be commanded in all Christian service, STEPHEN DENISON.

To the Christian Reader.
Beloved Christian, I present this Book unto thy view; I desire thee to read
it with an holy affection; interpret things in the best sense, and according
to my true meaning, and thou shall find nothing contrary to the analogy of
faith. Some few things are escaped in the Printing, and in the pointing, but
thou will easily conceive them, by diligent observation. Amongst the rest,
these are escaped;

Page 27. line 5. sins and godliness can never stand together, it should be,
reigning sins and godliness can never stand together, it is only
mis-pointed. Page 105. line 19. their is set in stead of ever, by mis-printing.
Page 121 line 29. a deprived Minister is put in stead of a restrained Minister.

If you reap any fruit by these my weak labors, give all the glory to God,
and I beseech your prayers to God for me.

Thine in the Lord, St. D.

A Table of the chief things contained in this book, or a brief view of the
Doctrines gathered out of every verse of the Chapter.
VERSE 1.
1 IT is an honest and commendable practice, for such as write Books, to set
their names to their writings. page 1 2 The chief of the creatures are but
servants in respect of Christ. 2 3 Unless a Minister speak as from Christ, we
are not to receive him. 4 4 Grace is a portion obtained by lot. 4 5 The people
may have the like saving graces as are in their Ministers. 5 6 Gods own
fidelity is an especial motive unto God to give grace. 6
VERSE 2.
1 Gods favor and his Spirit are to be wished above all, etc. 6 2 Peace with
God is to be desired above all other peaces. 9 3 Ministers should desire
increase of grace in their bearers. 10 4 The differences between literal and
saving knowledge. 13 5 The way to grow in grace, in sense and feeling of Gods
favor, in peace of conscience; yea the way to attain victory against enemies,
and other temporal blessings (for all these are comprehended in grace and
peace,) it is to get saving knowledge. 14 6 Jesus Christ is the only
meritorious Savior. 16 7 Unto whom Christ is a Savior, to them he will be a
Lord. 18
VERSE 3.
1 Christ has in him, not an humane power only, but also a divine. 20 2
Whatsoever tends to salvation or sanctification, we receive it all from
Christ. 21 3 Whatsoever pertains to life and godliness, it is not of merit
but of free grace. 23 4 There is a life prepared for the elect after this life
ended. 23 5 The motives to persuade unto godliness. 26 6 Glory and virtue go
together; he that has one, shall have both. 28 7 No man can usurp glory and
virtue, they are by calling. 28 8 The calling of a Christian is an honorable
calling. 29
VERSE 4.
1 The promises of God are highly to be esteemed, they are to be accounted
great. 31 2 Gods promises, though great, yet they are free, not mercenarie. 33
3 Saving grace comes the nearest of all other things to the nature of God. 34 4
The Evangelical promises are special means to beget grace in the heart. 36 5
In the world there be great corruptions. 37 6 Original sin is the cause of
worldly corruptions. 39 7 The corruptions of the world may be shunned and
escaped. 40 8 None escape the corruptions, but such as have received the divine
nature. 41
VERSE 5.
1 We must not be content with that degree of grace which we have received in
our first conversion, but we must to the first, labor to add other graces. 43
2 There is a great deal of diligence required, for the obtaining of increase
of grace. 43 3 A Christian must not content himself with one good gift of the
Spirit, etc. 44 4 A Christian ought to labor to be truly virtuous. 45 5 Virtue
must be added unto Faith. 47 6 It is not sufficient to be virtuous, but we must
have knowledge also. 48
VERSE 6.
1 Temperance is the moderation of lust and appetite in the use of the gifts
and creatures of God. 2 There is a double patience, one toward God, the other
toward men; both are to be added unto our knowledge. 51 3 Godliness is a
sincere desire, and conscionable endeavor after an universal conformity to
Gods revealed will. 55
VERSE 7.
1 All such as truly fear God, are brethren. 58 2 There ought to be brotherly
love amongst Christians. 60 3 Charity is to be labored for as well as other
graces. 62
VERSE 8.
1 It is not sufficient to talk of grace, but we must have grace in
possession. 65 2 We must have grace always in readiness. 66 3 It is not
sufficient to have a truth of grace, but we must endeavor to abound in grace.
67 4 Christians ought to labor for an holy strictness, yea for such a degree
of strictness, as is esteemed curiosity in the world. 68 5 A true sanctified
Christian is no idle person. 70 6 A Christian is not barren and unfruitful. 71
7 Grace in the child of God, is the cause of painfulness and fruitfulness.
72 8 Wherein the knowledge of Christ consists. 73
VERSE 9.
1 Every graceless person is a blind person. 74 2 Graceless persons are
wilfully ignorant. 76 3 Every man and woman are sinners of old. 78 4 There is
means whereby to be purged from old sins. 79 5 Graceless persons are not
exempted from that redemption which is by Christ. 80 6 Graceless persons are
very forgetful of Gods blessings, yea even of redemption it self. 80
VERSE 10.
There is a double calling, ineffectual and effectual: and what they be. 81 2
The definition of election, or what election is. 84 3 It is our parts to labor
to be well persuaded of our effectual calling. 85 4 We ought also to labor to
be assured of our election. 86 5 The marks of election. 87 6 There is a great
deal of diligence required for the making our calling and election sure. 88 7
We ought the rather to get assurance, because this is a means to prevent
falling away. 90 8 How far a man may fall from grace. 92 9 The child of God
shall never utterly and finally fall from grace. 94 10 Prastise of Gods word,
and adding grace unto grace is an especial means to prevent backesliding. 95
VERSE 11.
1 That Christ has a kingdom. 96 2 Christ's kingdom is an everlasting
kingdom. 98 3 That Christ's kingdom has an entrance. 100 4 That men and women
do not enter the gate of grace by their own power, but by Gods power. 101 5
That there be degrees in this matter of entrance into the kingdom of grace.
103 6 That the entrance into Christ's kingdom is made by the eight graces
spoken of in the fifth, sixth, seventh and eight verses of this Chapter. 104
VERSE 12.
1 It is a great sin in a Minister, to be negligent in his place. 106 2 It
ought to be an especial motive unto a Minister to be careful and diligent in
his calling, because he may be a means, by his diligence, to bring souls into
Christ's kingdom. 108 3 That it is the office of the Minister, to put people in
remembrance of those things which concern the kingdom of God. 108 4 It is the
duty of every true Christian, to be well acquainted with the Scriptures. 109 5
It is not sufficient to know the truth, but we ought to be established in it.
110 6 There is but one truth, howsoever there may be many opinions concerning
that truth. 111 7 That there is but one truth, and that it was the only truth
which was preached by the holy Apostles. 112 8 It is lawful for a Minister to
preach vulgar things. 113
VERSE 13.
1 The preaching of Gods word is a just practice. 114 2 It is a just practice,
not only in the sight of God, but also of good men. 116 3 A Christian must not
dissemble his religion. 118 4 The body is like a Tent or Tabernacle. 119 5 A
Minister must be constant until death in his ministerial pains. 120 6
Ministers must endeavor, not only to inform the judgment, but also to work
upon the affections. 123
VERSE 14.
1 A Christian should make account of short life. 125 2 Consideration of the
shortness of life should make us more diligent. 129 3 Every one ought to be
infallibly persuaded of the truth of Gods word. 130 4 Death is but a means of
remouall from one place to an other. 131
VERSE 15.
1 A Minister must endeavor the future good of the Church, as well as the
present good. 134 2 Ministers must carefully avoid errors in teaching. 136 3
Why erroneous doctrine is compared to fables. 135
VERSE 16.
1 That it ought to be a great motive to people to hear their Ministers, when
they are convinced in their consciences that they deal faithfully. 138 2 That
every man, yea the very elect themselves are naturally without the knowledge of
the Gospel. 139 3 That the Apostles were the especial instruments of making
the Gospel manifest. 140 4 That Ministers ought, above all other doctrine, to
preach Christ. 142 5 That Christ is mighty and strong, able to do what he will.
144 6 The manner of Christ his coming in the flesh. 146 7 That there was
majesty in Christ whilst he lived upon the earth. 147 8 That Christ his
majesty was visible and apparent. 148 9 That the Apostles had certain
knowledge of the truth of those things which they did write and preach.
VERSE 17.
1 That Christ as man received all things from the Father. 152 2 That God will
honor them that honor him. 153 3 What honor and glory Christ received in his
transfiguration. 155 4 That God has his time to put honor upon his children.
156 5 Rather then Gods children shall want honor, God will give them honor by
extraordinary means. 157 6 God dwells in the midst of such glory, as
becomes his greatness. 158 7 How Christ is the Son of God, by what kind of
sonneship. 159 8 Christ is beloved of God after an especial manner. 160 9 That
God the Father was ever well pleased with Christ. 162 10 God is wel-pleased with
his Church in Christ. 163 11 That one place of Scripture expounds another. 165
VERSE 18.
1 That Gods voice is an audible voice. 166 2 That it is an especial privilege
to be conversant with Christ. 168 3 Every place is holy during the time of Gods
holy ordinances. 171 4 The Gospel of Christ is an infallible truth. 172
VERSE 19.
1 We ought to prize the sentences of Scripture above all other speeches or
Sentences. 173 2 It is the duty of all Christians to give diligent heed to the
word of God. 175 3 It is a commendable thing to take heed to the word of God.
176 3 That it is the duty of Ministers to encourage people in their practice of
hearing Gods word by commending them. 177 4 That the word is a light. 179 5 The
heart of the unregenerate is a dark place. 182 6 Why illumination, or the gift
of Christ, is compared to the dawning. 184 7 Why it is compared to the morning
Star. 185 8 Differences between light in the elect, and light in the
reprobate. 186 9 How long we ought to give heed to Gods word. 186
VERSE 20.
1 That none can interpret Scriptures without the help of Gods Spirit. 188 2
None should be ignorant that the Scripture is not of private interpretation.
191
VERSE 21.
1 The Scriptures are not the invention of man. 193 2 The Prophets and Apostles
were men, not Gods. 194 3 That they were men of God. 195 4 That they were holy
men. 196 5 That the canonical Scriptures were given by inspiration. 197 6 That
the holy Ghost did strongly reign in the Prophets and Apostles. 199
AN EXPOSITION AND CERTAIN COLLATIONS, UPON THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE SECOND
EPISTLE OF PETER.
2. PET. 1.1.
THis Epistle, as the former, is intended to the scattered Christians; and it
consists of two parts, to wit, the Preface, and the body of the Epistle.

The Preface consists of three parts; first, of a subscription, in these words;
Simon Peter, a servant, and an Apostle of Jesus Christ; the second, an
inscription, in these words; To them which have obtained like precious faith
with us; the third is a salutation, in these words; Grace and peace be
multiplied, etc.

Simon Peter. Observe here the first thing which the Apostle does in this
work; he sets or subscribes his name. And Doctrine.
It is an honest and commendable practice in such as write Books for the use
of Gods Church to do the same: and that for these reasons: first, to show that
they are ready to justify their writings: secondly, that they are ready, to
their power, to satisfy any which make any scruple of any thing writ by them:
thirdly, that they are not ashamed of the truth delivered.

Indeed in some cases Writers names are better kept close then published; as
first, if the persons writing be scandalous, it is pity that their scandalous
names should hinder the passage of the truth, Secondly, if the Penmen be in no
request in the Church of God, it is pity that their disregard should hinder a
profitable book.

Use.
The use of this point may justly be to tax a great many namelesse railing
books, sent out by Anabaptists, Separatists, and the like, which are so vile
and so bitter, as that the writers thereof have seemed to be ashamed to
subscribe their names, as being unable indeed to justify the^.

Use.
This may also serve to justify the practice of reverent Ministers, which use
to subscribe their names unto their writings. Their practice in publishing
their names is not hypocritical and vainglorious, but Apostolical and
sincere: 1 Thessalonians. 3 17
what they do in publishing their names, the Apostles did before them, as we
see.

A servant of Jesus Christ. Peter was a great Apostle, and one that had
obtained a great degree among men, and yet he professes himself but a
servant of Jesus Christ; and indeed Doctrine.
the chief of the creatures are but servants in this respect. David though a
King, yet professes himself but a servant, in respect of God. Psalm. 116.16.
Yea the very Angels acknowledge themselves to be but fellow servants with us in
the same regard, Revel. 19.10.

Use.
This makes much for the glory of Christ. We may say of Christ, as it is said
of Melchisedech, Heb. 7.4. How great was this man unto whom the Patriarch
Abraham paid tithes? So, how great was this God and man, unto whom Kings,
Apostles, and Angels profess themselves to be but servants. And this should
serve to remove the scandal of the Cross. They that take offense at Christ,
because he dyed such a base death, should remember withal what the Scripture
notes concerning the glory of Christ.

Use.
This also should teach every Christian, not to be ashamed to profess
themselves to be the servants of Christ. We need not be ashamed of our Master,
for he is a God; nor of our work, for it is honest; nor of our (though
undeserved) wages, for that is no less then a kingdom; therefore let us
profess without shame or abashment.

And an Apostle. There were five orders of Ministers appointed by Christ,
Ephesians. 4.11. viz. Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Doctors;
amongst these five orders, the Apostles were the chief, and therefore are
named in that forenamed Text before the Prophets, because indeed they lived to
see all things accomplished, which the Prophets and John the Baptist did not.
Now the office of an Apostle was first to plant Churches, 1. Cor. 3.6. Paul may
plant; and secondly, to have especial sway in Ecclesiastical government, Acts
15.3. they were to decide controversies. Thirdly, to work miracles, Matthew.
10.8. heal the sick, cast out devils, etc. Fourthly, to preach to the whole
world, Math. 28.19. and that by extraordinary revelation, Matthew 10.20. It is
not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaks in you.

Now Peter was such a Minister, and not an ordinary teacher.

An Apostle of Jesus Christ. Here Peter does intimate unto the Church, that
their duty was to receive his doctrine, for he came unto them as an Apostle or
messenger, from Christ, and did speak from him.

And indeed, Doctrine.
unless a Minister speak as the words of Christ, we are not to receive him,
nor his doctrine.

If any come unto you, and bring you not this doctrine, receive him not to
house, says the Apostle, in the second Epistle of John, the tenth verse.

And it is set down as the commendation of Gods people, in John 10.5. that
they will not follow a stranger, but fly from him, etc.

Use.
The use of this is, to teach us Ministers, that if we will have Gods people to
receive our doctrine, then we must speak from Christ, and not from our own
spirit: we must deliver the ordinances and oracles of Christ, not our own
inventions.

Use.
Secondly, it should teach the people, as good Baereans, to try the doctrine
delivered unto them, whether it be from Christ, or no. And this will appear if
they try it by the canonical Scriptures.

To them which have obtained. The word in the original is very significant,
for it signifies to obtain by lot: whence we may observe, That grace is as a
portion obtained by lot: and the reason is, because, as God is the author of
whatsoever is given by lot, Pro. 16. the last verse, so he is the author of all
grace which we receive, 1. Cor. 12.13. All these things works the same
Spirit. Secondly, because, as in the dividing of the la^d of Canaan, there was
given, by Gods disposing, to one Tribe a greater portion, to another Tribe a
less, Number. 33.54. so to one is given a greater measure of grace, to another a
less, 1. Cor. 12.13.

Thirdly, because, as in that dividing of Canaan by lot, every Tribe received
an inheritance, but with condition, that they must fight for it, and cast out
the inhabitants, Numbers 33.52. so every elect child of God shall receive a
portion of grace, but yet always provided, that they cast out the inhabitants,
that is, the strong man. For, if there be not a mortifying of the old man,
there can be no putting on of the new.

Use.
This should teach us, not to envy the gifts of others, though they be better
then our own; it is God which gives both the greater gift to another, and the
less gift to thee: submit to his wisdom.

Like precious faith. What Faith is, we will not in this place stand to define,
purposing to speak at large of it (if God permit) among the Grounds of
Religion, by way of catechism, neither will we insist on the preciousnesse of
this grace; only that which we will observe, is, Doctrine.
That the people may attain the like saving graces as are in their Ministers.
Yea in some particular graces the people may go beyond their Ministers, as we
see in Aquila and Priscilla, in Acts 18.26. they out-stripped Apollos himself
in some things. Yea, as we see likewise in experience from time to time; how
many people be there that excel many Ministers, in patience, in tenderness of
heart, in almsdeeds, and the like.

And the reason is, because God is a free worker, he has mercy on whom he
will, and whom he will he hardens, Romans 2.

Use.
Ministers therefore must bestirre themselves, lest the people outstrip them.
And this indeed should be the striving between Ministers and people, namely to
contend who shall outstrip one another in grace.

By the righteousness of God. That is, by his fidelity in the performance of
his promise. Whence note, that Doctrine.
Gods own fidelity is an especial motive unto God to give grace unto his
elect. It moved him to give the like precious faith which he gave to his
Apostles, even to his Church and people. And what I pray you moved Christ to
send down his Spirit in the similitude of cloven Tongues, Acts 2.3. but
because he had promised so to do? Acts 1. verse. 5.

And it must needs be, if God give grace unto any of us, he is moved thereunto,
either by something in himself, or else by something in us; but there is
nothing in us naturally to move God: therefore he must needs be moved
intrinsicallly, or by somewhat in himself, and that is his fidelity and mercy.

Use.
Therefore the way to attain grace at Gods hand, is to urge God with his
promise; we must say as David did, Psalm. 31.2. Deliver me in thy
righteousness. Let us therefore get a catalogue of promises out of the Word,
such as these. I will pour my Spirit upon all flesh, Joel 2. They shall all be
taught of God, Jeremy 31. I will give them an heart of flesh, Ezech. 36. My
servants shall rejoice, Esaias 65. and then let us fly to the fidelity of God
for the performance of these promises.

Grace. Now come we to the third part of the Preface, which is the Salutation:
and in this Salutation we are to take notice; first, of the things wished to
the Church, and they are two, to wit, grace and peace.

Where by grace, we are to understand two things, viz. the favor of God, as
the same word is taken in Exodus 33.17. and the gift of the Spirit, as it is
meant in Hebr. 13.9.

So that the point hence to be observed is this, viz. Doctrine.
That the favor of God, and the gift of Gods Spirit, they are to be wished and
desired above all things in the world, next to Gods glory. The Apostle wishes
these under the name of grace, as we see here, in the first place: and indeed
these things are worth the seeking: for first, as for Gods favor, it is better
then life it self, as David speaks, Psalm. 63.3. It is the cause of all
blessings which we receive; yea, without it nothing can comfort us. As nothing
could satisfy Absolon, but the kings face, 2. Sam. 14.32. so nothing can
satisfy a true Christian, but the assurance of Gods favor.

Secondly, as for the gift of the Spirit, what can be compared unto it? If with
Simon Magus thou would buy it with money, thy price will be scorned, all
things are but dross and dung, as the Apostle speaks, Phil. 3.6. in
comparison of the excellent knowledge of Christ. Grace is that treasure in the
field, and that Pearl, which when a man has found, he will part with all
which he has to purchase it, Matthew. 13. Yea, grace is that which will help in
time of need, Hebr. 4.16. Riches will leave us, friends will forsake us at the
hour of death, but saving grace will never forsake us.

This serves justly to reprove the common course of the world; for many will
seek the favor of the Ruler, as it is in Proverbs 29.26. but, who respects
or seeks the favor of God? Gods favor is neglected, as a thing not worthy
our seeking, when it is the most excellent thing in the world. O fools that we
are, when will we be wise!

Secondly, let it serve to excite us to seek Gods favor: and that we may
attain unto it, these rules are to be observed: first, we must be thoroughly
humbled for sin with Manasseh, 2. Chron. 33.12, 13. Secondly, we must come
unto God by a Mediator, to wit, by Christ, as the men of Tyrus and Sydon,
reconciled themselves to Herod, having made Blastus the Kings Chamberlain
their friend, Acts 12.20. Thirdly, we must come unto God with a resolution to
become his servants, as the Prodigal son did, Luke 15.19. Which rules if we
do observe, the Lord will come running to meet us; yea he will fall upon our
necks, and kiss us.

Yea there is not the filthiest adulterer, nor the most cut-throate usurer, nor
the most damnable swearer, but if they had grace to come unto God after this
manner, the Lord would forgive them, though their sins had been as red as
scarlet.

Use.
Again, this should teach us to labor for the gift of the Spirit, that is,
for grace. And that we may obtain it: first, we must get the preparation
thereunto, and that is, self-denial, and humility; for God gives grace to
the humble, 1. Pet. 5.5. Secondly, we must plant our selves under a powerful
Ministry: we must repair to the tents of the Shepherds, Cant. 1.8. Thirdly,
we must wait in Jerusalem for the promise of the Father, Acts 1.4. we must
not separate from Gods true Church. If we observe these rules; this is the way
to obtain grace.

And peace. Peace in Scripture is sometimes used for prosperity, as in 1. Sam.
25.6. Peace be to thee, and peace be to thy house, and peace be to all that
thou have. It is the speech of David's messengers unto Nabal, wherein they wish
him all prosperity.

Secondly, Peace is used sometimes in a more restrained sense, and so it is
taken for peace from enemies, as in 2. King. 20.19. where Hezekiah hearing of
the coming of the Chaldeans, he makes answer to the Prophet; Is it not good
that peace and truth be in my days? where, by peace, we are to understand
peace from enemies.

Thirdly, Peace is put also for reconciliation with God, as in Luke 2. Glory to
God on high, on the earth peace, that is, reconciliation with God.

We do not deny, but the very outward prosperity of the Church is to be
desired, according to that in Psalm 102.14. Thy servants rejoice in her
stones, and take pitic of her dust: and therefore that a woe belongs unto such
as labor to ruinate the prosperity thereof.

Secondly, we do not deny, but that peace also from enemies is greatly to be
wished to the Church of God, according to that in Psalm 74.19. Give not the
soul of thy Turtle dove into the hands of the multitude, etc. Neither of these
two peaces are to be excluded in this wish or option of the Apostle.

But I take it, that in this Text, by peace we are to understand peace from God
especially.

Doctrine.
And this peace indeed is of all other peaces to be desired. This is the peace
which passes all understanding, Phil. 4.7. This is that peace which the
Apostle does so earnestly wish to the Romans, in the fifteenth of that
Epistle, the thirteenth verse, and to the Thessalonians in 2 Thessalonians. 3.16. This
is that peace which was bought with so dear a price, to wit, with the blood of
Christ, Colos. 1.20. This is that peace which is the procurer of fellowship
with God, Amos 3.3. Yea, this is that peace which is the cause of our
salvation, and without the which we cannot be saved. Romans 5.10.

Use.
Let us labor for this peace above all. If we have peace with God, we need not
fear any adverse power. If God be on our side, who can be against us?

Secondly, if you think you have peace with God, then try your peace, whether
it be sound or no: and the rather, because where the strong man armed keeps
the house, there all his goods are in peace, Luke 11.21.

Now the peace of God in the hearts of the elect, does differ from the devils
peace in the hearts of the wicked, in diverse respects.

First, because the peace of God has a sure ground, as we see in the example
of Symeon, Luke 2.29.30. whereas as the peace of the wicked has no sound
foundation.

Secondly, because the peace of God follows upon great humiliation, Esaias 61.3.
whereas the peace of Satan does not so.

Thirdly, because the peace of God makes the person in whom it is, better
toward God; it keeps his heart and mind in Christ Jesus, Phil. 4.7. whereas
the wicked are not bettered by their peace, but empaired.

Fourthly, because the peace of God in the hearts of the elect is subject to
interruption. For Zion (notwithstanding her peace with God) yet has these and
such like qualmes; The Lord has forsaken me, and my God has forgotten me,
Esaias 49.14. whereas the peace of the wicked is not so, but is always alike.
Let us therefore try our peace by these differences.

Be multiplied. Peter desires that grace might increase in the Church unto
whom he writes; Doctrine.
And the same should every Minister desire concerning his hearers.

Paul exhorts the Thessalonians, to grow and to increase more and more, 1.
Thessal. 4.1.10. And Peter concludes his second Epistle with this close; Grow
in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Use.
And if the Ministers ought to desire a growth of grace in the people, then
much more ought the people themselves to desire this growth. They should with
Elisha desire a double portion of the Spirit, 2. King. 2.9. They should, like
good Thessalonians, desire that their faith might grow mightily, and that their
love one toward another might abound. 2 Thessalonians. 1.3.

And that we may grow in grace, we must observe these rules. First we must
remove these impediments: we must beware of suffering sin to reign in us: we
must beware of intangling our selves over much with the affairs of this world:
we must carefully avoid bad company. If we remove not these impediments, it is
in vain for us to think ever to grow in grace.

Secondly, if we desire to multiply grace, we must multiply use of means. We
must hear much, we must pray much, and the like. Solomon's Temple had many
thousand workmen, to bring it to perfection, 2. Chron. 2.2. even so it is no
small pains which is required for the building of the temple of the holy Ghost
in our hearts.

Question.
But how may we try, whether we grow and multiply in grace, or no? or whether
we decrease and go backward?

Answer.
These are signs of growth of grace: First, if we attain increase of victory
in our especial corruptions, sound mortification is substantial growing.
Secondly, if we grow more holy concerning the celebrating of the Sabbath,
concerning the inward worship of God, and the like. Thirdly, if we grow in
righteousness in all our dealings toward men. Fourthly, if we grow in
fruitfulness according to our ability. Fifthly, if we grow in sufficiency of
gifts the better to glorify God. These are marks for strong Christians to
examine their growth by.

Now the signs of growth of grace in weak Christians, are these.

First, if they grow in humiliation for sin, and in hatred to it, though they
have as yet but small victory over it.

Secondly, if they grow in care to avoid the occasions of their sin.

Thirdly, if they grow in desire to attain the victory over corruption.

Fourthly, if they grow in desire to be dissolved, that they might be freed
from this body of death.

By the knowledge of God. Howbeit the word in the original signifies most
properly, acknowledgement; yet it is best rendered in this place (as it does
also signify) Knowledge: for the compound word is used in Scripture sometimes
as the simple, and in the same sense, as we read in Luke 1.4. that thou may
know the word in the original, according to the Letter, signifies, that thou
may acknowledge; but it is better translated as the simple word, that thou
may know; and so in this place, in the acknowledgement of God, that is, in
the knowledge of God.

By or in the knowledge of God. By knowledge, is not meant a bare literal
knowledge, as to know that there is a God, or, that there is a Christ, and that
this Christ is Lord of all, and the like: but we are to understand it of a
spiritual and special knowledge. And to the end that we may the more
distinctly conceive what is meant by the special or saving knowledge of God; I
will lay down certain differences between that kind of knowledge of God,
which is merely literal, and that knowledge which is spiritual and saving.

And the first difference is; this saving knowledge of God, is knowledge joined
with saving faith, as we see in the example of Paul, 2. Tim. 1.12. I know whom
I have believed: Knowledge and Faith went together. But literal knowledge is a
bare notion in the brain, without faith in the heart; for so says the
Apostle, All men have not faith. 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.

Secondly, the saving knowledge of God, is transforming, it alters the
persons in whom it is to the similitude of it, even as a seal leaves its
print upon the wax. Thus we read 2. Corinthians. 3.18. But we all with open face
beholding as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. It is not so
with bare literal knowledge; it delights the subject, but it changes him
not.

Thirdly, saving knowledge is experimental. Gods children know Christ, and the
power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his afflictions, and are made
conformable unto his death, Philip. 3.10. They feel that which they know: but
it is not so with them which have a mere literal knowledge: these may talk
of faith and regeneration, and the like, but they feel it not.

Fourthly, the saving knowledge of God, is joined with obedience to Gods
commandments, as appears in 1. John 2.3.4. And hereby we do know that we know
him, if we keep his Commandments. He that says, I know him, and keeps not
his Commandments, is a lier, and the truth is not in him. But bare literal
knowledge is not joined with sound practice: it can furnish a man with talk,
and vain glorious words, but it leaves him short in practice: it can say well,
but it cannot do well; it can frame a form of godliness, but it denies the
power, 2. Timothy 3.5.

Fifthly, true saving knowledge is joined with the fruits of good works, as
appears in Colos. 1.6. Which is come unto you as it is in all the world, and
brings forth fruit, as it does also in you, since the day ye heard of it,
and knew the grace of God in truth. Whereas bare literal knowledge is always
barren, it is like to the cursed fig tree, it has leaves, but it bears no
fruit.

Lastly, true saving knowledge is joined with humility, it makes a man or
woman more humble, according to that in Ecclesiast. 1.18. For in much wisdom
is much grief, and he that increases knowledge, increases sorrow. Whereas
bare literal knowledge, it puffs up, as the Apostle speaks in 1.
Corinthians 8.1. Where have you any which have knowledge without grace, but
they are puffed up like a bladder with the very conceit of it?

Let us examine our knowledge by these six rules, and it will easily appear,
whether it be saving or deceitful, whether it be spiritual or literal.

By the knowledge of God. Hence we are to learn, Doctrine.
That the way to grow in sense and feeling of Gods favor, to grow in grace, in
peace of conscience; yea the way to attain victory against enemies and other
temporal blessings, it is to get saving knowledge. This is manifest, because
the Apostle wishes here grace and peace to be multiplied by knowledge.

And how came Paul to be rapt up into the third heaven? 2. Corinthians 12.4. or
John to be ravished in the Spirit? Reuelat. 1. but because revelations of
knowledge were given unto them; their plenty of knowledge wrought in them a
wonderful degree of the sense and feeling of Gods favor.

Secondly, how came Christians to understand the fear of the Lord, judgment,
and righteousness, and equity, and every good path, but by knowledge? Prou.
2.3.4.9.

Thirdly, whose ways are ways of pleasantness, and whose paths are paths of
peace, but the ways and paths of knowledge? Prou. 3.17.

Fourthly, how came that little City which had few men in it, to be delivered
from the great King which came against it, but by wisdom? Eccles. 9.15.

Fifthly, how came Solomon to be so incomparably rich, and honorable in the
world, was it not because he asked wisdom in the first place? 2. Chron.
1.12.13.

Thus you see the doctrine propounded, to be evidently proved in the several
branches of it.

Use.
And it serves first to show unto us a maine reason, wherefore so many
complain of the want of peace of conscience, and of their not profiting in
grace, and of their not beholding Gods favorable countenance, and the like. It
is because they do not grow and increase in saving knowledge: for if they grew
in knowledge, they should also grow in all other graces. Knowledge is the first
wheel in this clock, it moves all the rest.

Secondly, it should serve to stir us up to the study of saving knowledge. Get
we knowledge, and all other graces will follow. And the rules to be observed
for the obtaining of knowledge, are these:

First, we must seek it of God, by earnest praiet. So says Solomon, Proverbs
2.3. If thou cry for knowledge, and lift up thy voice for understanding, then
thou shall understand the fear of the Lord, and shall find the knowledge of
God.

Secondly, we must take great pains in seeking of it, and in digging for it in
the mines of Gods ordinances, according to the Wise man's direction, Proverbs
2.4. If thou searchest for her as for silver, etc.

Thirdly, we must practice that which we know already. And this is the way to
obtain more knowledge, according to that in John 7.17. If any man will do his
will, he shall know of the doctrine, etc.

Fourthly, we must walk with the wise, that is, we must company with such as
fear God, and by this means we shall be made more wise. Proverbs 13.20.

And of Jesus. This name Jesus, it signifies a Savior: it is a name which was
given unto Christ before he was conceived in the womb, Luke 2.2. And the
reason why it was given unto him, is yielded in Matthew 1.21. Thou shall call
his name Jesus: for he shall save his people from their sins. But to come to
the doctrine.

Jesus. In that Christ is here named Jesus, which signifies a Savior, hence
we are to note, Doctrine.
That he alone is the meritorious Savior. This is manifest out of Acts 4.11.
where it is said: This is the stone which was set at naught of you builders,
which is become the head of the corner, neither is there salvation in any
other, etc. And like unto this is that also in 1. John 5.11.12. And this is the
record, that God has given unto us eternal life, and this life is in his
Son, he that has the Son, has life, and he that has not the Son of
God, has not life. By which Texts it is manifest, that Christ is the only
meritorious Savior. There was never any other Savior preached to the world by
the Prophets and Apostles, neither was there ever any other Savior believed on
in the world by the true Church. 1. Timothy 3.16.

Use.
Therefore this serves to confute that popish antichristian doctrine,
concerning merit of works: for if Christ be the only Jesus our Savior, then
our own works are not our saviors. What is more manifest? Where note by the
way, we do not here speak against the doing of good works, or preach an
exemption from good works, though we thus speak; we rather exhort men unto
them by all our power: but that which we condemn and preach against, is the
putting confidence in the merit of works. Therefore let not the Papists
slander the doctrine of our Church, as though it were an enemy to the very
practice of good works. It is not an enemy of charity, but a true friend unto
it.

Use.
Secondly, if Christ be the only Savior, then let us trust in him alone. Our
Fathers trusted in him, and were not confounded, Psalm 22.5. Yea, if Gods
wrath be kindled but a little, blessed are all that trust in Christ, Psalm
2.12. Let us not trust in our own works; Christ is sufficiently able of
himself to save them which come unto God by him, Hebrews 7.25. And he is as
willing as able; he entreats us to be reconciled to God, 2. Corinthians 5.20.
Christ is like an indulgent nurse, and we are like unto froward children; the
nurse would kiss us and be friends, but we hang back and resist. But let us
kiss the Son lest he be angry, and we perish from the right way, Psalm 2.

Use.
This doctrine may also teach us, how to understand those words in Revelation
3.4. These shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy. It is not meant,
that any man is worthy of heaven, by any merit in himself, but by the
worthiness of Christ: it is not meant of our dignity, but of Gods dignation.

Secondly, hence we may learn, how aright to understand that place in James 2.
that Abraham was justified by works. It is not meant that he was justified
before God by works; for a man is justified before God by faith, without the
works of the law, Romans 3.28. but it is meant, that he was justified before
men by works; or, his faith was manifested to be a true living faith, by the
fruits thereof.

Thirdly, hence we may note, that that place in Revel. 22.12. He will give to
every man according as his works shall be is not meant of merit. It is one
thing to receive according to our works, and another, to receive for the merit
of our works.

Our Lord. Whence observe we, that Doctrine.
unto whomsoeeuer Christ is a Savior, to them he will be a Lord. Whosoever
will not be ruled by Christ, they shall never be saved by him. Christ being
consecrated, became the author of salvation to them which obey him, Hebrews
5.9. Whom Christ redeemeth, they follow him whither soever he goes, Revelation
14.4. Christ is Priest after the order of Melchisedech, Psalm 110.4. that is,
King and Priest; to signify, that unto whom he is a Priest to offer Sacrifice
for, to them he is a King, to rule and govern them. It is said as well, Behold
thy King comes unto thee, Zechar. 9.9. as, Behold, the deliverer shall come,
Romans 11.26. In this respect Christ is like unto Iephta, Judges 11.9. For as
Iephta would not deliver the Giliadites out of the hands of their enemies, but
upon condition, that he might be made their head: even so, no more will Christ
deliver us spiritually, but upon condition, that he may be our head and chief
governor.

Use.
This shows how horribly they deceive themselves, which expect salvation by
Christ, and yet live in rebellion against him, and cry in their hearts; We
will not have this man to rule over us. But let such men remember, that when
Christ shall come, he shall call for his enemies which would not have him to
rule over them, and will slay them publicly in stead of saving of them. Luke
19.27.

Use.
Secondly, let this teach us to submit our selves to Christ, to be ruled by
him. And the rather, first, because his service is an honorable service: what
service to the service of a King? Secondly, because it is a profitable service:
what Potentate is able to do that for his servants, which Christ is able to do
for his? Thirdly, because it is an easy service: for howbeit great pains is
to be taken in this service, yet we must remember, this great pains by Christ
is made easy unto us. Christ his yoke is easy, and his burden is light.

Use.
Let us in the last place try our selves, whether Christ rule over us or no;
that so we may try, whether we shall be saved by him or no, and the trials
briefly are these: First, if we fear to offend his godly will; for thus says
God: If I be a Master, where is my fear? Malach. 1.6. Secondly, it is a sign
that we are Christ's servants, if he has bored our ears, that is, if he has
given us a sanctified care, to hear the word profitably, Deuter. 15.17.
Thirdly, it is a sign that Christ rules over us, if we obey, for it is in
vain to call him, Lord, Lord, and not to do the things which he says, Luke
6.46.

According as his divine power, etc. Now come we from the Preface to the
subiect-matter of the Epistle, which is threefold; First exhortatory, in this
first chapter. For here he exhorts to an increase of grace. Secondly,
praemonitory, in the second chapter; for therein he fore-warneth us concerning
false prophets. Thirdly, prophetical, in the third chapter; for therein is
foretold the last judgment, and the manner of it. Before the Apostle come to
his matter of exhortation, which begins in the fifth verse, he first
prefixeth an acknowledgement tending to Gods glory, and the comfort of the
Church, unto whom he writes in the third and fourth verses: in which
acknowledgement, two things are to be noted: first, a cause, in the third
verse: secondly, an effect, in the fourth verse. For the former, we are to
note; first, the power of the giver, according to his divine power. Secondly,
the bountifulness of the gift; all things which belong to life and godliness.
Thirdly, the means of obtaining this gift, by the knowledge of him who has
called us unto glory and virtue.

According to his divine power. This is spoken of Christ, and has relation to
the end of the former verse. Whence we are to note, Doctrine.
That Jesus has in him, not an humane power only, but also a divine, not the
power of a man only, but also the power of a God. For this cause he is termed
in Esaias. 9.6, The mighty God. And in Tit. 2.13 The great God. For this cause is
made mention of his mighty power, Phil. 3. the last: Yea for this cause he is
said to have all power, both in heaven, and in earth. Matthew, 28.18.

And it is further manifest, that Christ had divine power; First, because he
was able to create the world, John 1.3. Secondly, because he is able with his
word, to bear up the world, Hebr. 1.3. Thirdly, because he knows the thoughts
of me^, Mat. 9.4. Fourthly, because he wrought miracles by his own power, John
15.24. Fifthly, because he vanquished Satan, Hebrews 2.14. dissolved sin: 1.
John 3.8. and overcame the world, John 16.33. which works he could never have
turned his hand to, if he had not had a divine power.

Use.
This makes against Arrians and other cursed heretics, which disable Christ,
affirming him to be mere man, and not God.

Secondly, it makes also against the blasphemous Papists, which subject Christ
to the command of the virgin Marie, derogating thereby from his divine power.

Thirdly, it may be terror to the wicked, and namely, to Antichrist: for it
shows how able Christ is to consume him with the spirit of his mouth, and to
destroy him with the brightness of his coming, 2. Thessalonians 2.8.

Fourthly, it may minister comfort to the faithful: for, be their dangers
never so desperate, and their enemies never so malicious, yet Christ by his
divine power, is able to deliver them, and to protect them. If a finite power
be against them, yet an infinite power is for them, 2. Chron. 32.7.8.

All things which pertain to life, and etc. Whence note we, Doctrine.
That whatsoever tends to salvation or sanctification, we receive it all from
Christ. For by life here is meant, glory; and by godliness is meant virtue,
as it is expounded in the end of the verse.

The doctrine may be proved by instance. For, from whom have we the Gospel, but
from Christ? The Gospel of the kingdom is Christ's Gospel, as it is termed 2.
Corinthians 10.14. And God speaks unto his Church in these last days by his
Son, Hebrews 1.1. Again, from whom receive we the Spirit, but from Christ?
John 16.7. Thirdly, whence receive we gifts of the Spirit, but from Christ
which ascended up on high? Ephesians. 4.8. that he might give gifts to men. Of
whose fullness do we receive grace for grace, but of Christ's fullness? John
1.16. Lastly, how are we kept in the state of grace unto glory, but by Christ,
who is the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls? 1. Pet. 2.25.

Furthermore, whence are the Sacraments but from Christ? He ordained Baptism,
Mat. 28.19. He also instituted the Lords Supper, Matt. 26.26. Lastly, who is it
that sends Ministers, but the same Christ, which gave some to be Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, etc. Ephesians. 4.

So that it is apparent by instance, that whatsoever tends to salvation or
sanctification, it is from Christ.

Objection.
Yea but do we not receive these things, as well from God the Father, and from
God the holy Ghost, as from Christ? I answer, Yes. Far be it from us to
exclude the Father, or the holy Ghost. But this we affirm, that as all things
pertaining to life and godliness, are of the Father, and the holy Ghost, so
they are also from Christ. For, as the Father has life in himself, so he has
given to the Son to have life in himself. John 5.26.

Use.
The use of this point may be to teach us to be thankful for Christ; for by
his means we receive life, and all things tending thereunto. Yea it should
teach us to depend upon Christ, for life, and for all the means thereof. Of
his divine power we receive all things which belong to life and godliness.

Secondly, this should teach us to take notice of Christ's bounty. He gives life
and all things that belong thereunto. He is the good Shepherd, in Psalm 23.
which supplieth all things necessary to his flock. Christ's flock may want
many things which they desire, but they shall never want those things which
shall be good for them.

Has given unto us. The word in the original is passive, and signifies, has
been given: but we must know, that with the Greeks, the passive voice is
sometimes put for the active. An example for this we have. Hebr. 12.26. where
you have it translated, has promised; but it properly signifies, has been
promised: the passive voice being put for the active.

But the doctrine hence is this, viz. Doctrine.
That whatsoever pertains to life and godliness, it is not of merit, but of
free gift.

Salvation is the free gift of God. Romans 6. the last. The Gospel is the word
of grace, that is, of free favor, Acts 20.32. To you it is given to know the
mysteries of the Kingdom of God, Luke 8.10. Paul obtained mercy, not merit,
1. Tim. 1.16. By all which it is manifest, that salvation and all the means
thereof, is of free gift: and so by us is to be accounted. But we will not
insist upon this point.

Life. Hence we are to note, Doctrine.
That there is a life prepared for the elect after this life ended. And that
this is so, it is manifest out of Psalm 21.4. He asked life of thee, and thou
gave him a long life, for ever and ever. And Psalm 133. For there the Lord
commanded the blessing, even life for ever. And Matthew. 25.46. And they shall go
away into everlasting punishment; but the righteous into life eternal. Unto
this also accords that in John 11.25. Jesus said unto her, I am the
resurrection and the life, he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet
shall he live. And that in Matthew. 22.32. I am the God of Abraham, and the God
of Isaac, and the God of Jacob: God is not the God of the dead, but of the
living. And that in Colloss. 3.3. You are dead, and your life is hid with
Christ in God. By all which testimonies it is proved, that there is a life
prepared for Gods elect, after this life ended.

Now if you desire to know what kind of life it is which is prepared, I
confess I am not able to express it, if I had the tongues of men and Angels:
but these things are noted in general in holy Scripture concerning it. First,
that it is not a dissolute, but an holy life: and for this cause heaven is
called an holy place, Hebr. 9.12. and Gods holy habitation, Deuteronomy. 26.15.

Secondly, it is not a miserable, but a blessed life: For blessed are they
which shall be called to the marriage Supper of the Lamb, Revel. 19.9. and
blessed are they which die in the Lord, etc. In this life shall be no sorrow,
for all tears shall be wiped away. In this life shall be no want, for we shall
hunger no more, nor thirst no more, Revel. 7.16.17. In this life we shall be
happy, in respect of our company, for we shall ever be with the Lord, 1 Thessalonians.
4.14. Yea, we shall come to the company of innumerable Angels, Hebr. 12.22. and
shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven, Matthew.
8.11.

Thirdly, that it is not a disquietous, but a peaceable life; and in this
respect it is called a rest in Heb. 4.9. There remained therefore a rest to the
people of God. Here Gods children shall rest from their labors, Revel. 14.13.
Here they rest from their troubles and molestations, Job 3.17.18. Yea, here
they shall rest from their temptations. For he that is dead is freed from
sin, Romans 6.7. and so by consequence, from all occasions and temptations of
sin.

Fourthly and lastly, it is an eternal life which is prepared, as appears by
that speech of Christ himself in John 10.28. And I give unto them eternal
life. And by that of the Apostle in 1. Pet. 1.4. where this life whereof we
speak, is termed an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, that fades not
away, etc.

Use.
The application of this point may serve; first, to refell the cursed opinion
of Atheists, which impugn and gainsay (especially in their hearts) the truth
of this doctrine. These are like unto blind men, which say there is neither
Sun, Moon, nor Stars in the firmament, because they see none, not
considering what others see and know.

Use.
Secondly, this should move us to be thankful to God for this his infinite
mercy toward us, in that he has provided thus for us for time to come: we
shall not drop down like dogs and brute beasts, but we shall live for
ever.

Use.
Thirdly, it should teach us to labor to attain this life. And that we may do
so, we must observe these rules; first, we must learn to know God and Christ
aright. For this is life eternal, to know God, and whom he has sent, Jesus
Christ, John 17.3. Secondly, we must hear Gods word with diligence: for God
has said; Hear, and your soul shall live, Esaias 55.3. Thirdly, we must
believe: for the just shall live by faith, that is, shall obtain eternal life
by faith, Romans 1.17. For of that life the holy Ghost speaks in that place.
Fourthly, we must endeavor to keep the Commandments, Matthew 19.17. Fifthly, if
we would receive the crown of life, we must be faithful to the death, Revel.
2.10. Thus much for this point.

And godliness. The word in the original signifies the right worship of God,
part being put for the whole. But certainly, by godliness, we are to
understand the same as is understood by Virtue in the words following, to wit,
all grace and goodness; but especially, holiness.

Doctrine.
Now concerning this grace, first let us observe the motives which should move
us to labor for it, and they are these: first, because we are commanded of God
to labor for it, as in 1. Timothy 6.11. But thou a man of God, fly these
things, and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience,
meekness, etc.

Secondly, because it is a sign of election, Psalm 4.3. But know, that God
has chosen to himself a godly man.

Thirdly, because it is profitable for all things, and has the promises of
this life present, and of that which is to come, 1. Tim. 4.8.

Fourthly, because it is great gain, being joined with contentment, 1. Tim.
6.6.

Now the means to attain godliness, are these: first, we must have a care to
keep the Sabbath day holy. Profaneness upon the Sabbath, is the cause of
profaneness all the week after.

Secondly, we must be careful of private duties, as of prayer, reading,
meditating, and the like; and that every day in the week.

Thirdly, we must converse with such as are godly. Much increase of godliness
is obtained by Christian society.

Fourthly, we must be content to part with our sins; yea our especial sins
reigning: sins and godliness can never stand together.

Fifthly, we must be practisers of the will of God, and not hearers only.
Practice is the very life of godliness. 2. Timothy 3.5.

Lastly, if any desire to try themselves, whether they be godly or no, let
them examine themselves by the five forenamed rules: for the practice or not
practice of the rules, is a sign, either of our godliness, or profaneness.
By them it will appear what we are.

By the knowledge of him. What it is to know God aright, we heard before: and
how knowledge is the means of increase in grace.

Which has called us unto glory and virtue. Some read the words thus; which
has called us by glory and virtue; understanding by glory and virtue, the
glorious and virtuous work of God himself, in the converting and saving of a
sinner. And howsoever this sense might stand well with the construction of the
Greek Text, yet it does not well agree to the scope of the holy Ghost. For
the scope is not to show, by what we are called, but, unto what we are called:
so that I embrace this reading, who has called us to glory and virtue. And if
any shall object, that the word in the original signifies by glory and
virtue, I answer, the word original may signify, by, or to: as the same word
is used in Romans 6.4. where it is said, that Christ was raised from the dead, by
the glory of the Father: or, as it may be better rendered, to the glory of God
the Father.

Which has called us unto glory and virtue. Where from the conjunction of
these two together, we may observe, Doctrine.
that glory and virtue are twins, which go together, the one cannot be had
without the other. He that will attain glory, must have virtue; and he that
has attained true virtue, he shall be sure to obtain glory. For the proof
hereof I refer you to that in Psalm 84.11. For the Lord God is a Sun and
shield: the Lord will give grace and glory. Where note, that the Lord gives not
grace without glory, nor glory without grace: but unto whom he imparts the
one, to them also he gives the other. The like we read in Acts 28.32. And now
brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to
build you up, and to give you an inheritance amongst all them which are
sanctified. Where we must also note, unto whom this heavenly inheritance of
glory is given; namely, to such as are sanctified, or to such as have virtue.

Use.
Which shows how far they are deceived, which think to attain glory
without virtue. But let such remember, God has joined these two together; they
must take both, or refuse both. Yea, let them seriously consider that in
Hebrews 12.14. That without holiness no man shall see the Lord.

Use.
Secondly, it may serve for the comfort of the godly. Let them assure
themselves, that the same God which has given them virtue, will also give them
glory. These two, virtue and glory shall never be separated.

Called. Whence note, Doctrine.
That no man may usurp glory and virtue: None can attain unto them, but he
that is called unto them by God. The Corinthians did not usurp sanctity, but
they were called to be Saints, 1. Corinthians 1.2. And the Thessallonians did
not usurp salvation, but they were called to Gods Kingdom, and glory. 1.
These. 2.12.

Yea, for the attaining of glory and virtue, there is required, not an outward
calling only, but an inward, even that effectual calling, whereby we are
translated out of darkness into his marvelous light. 1. Pet. 2.9.

Reason.
And the reason is manifest, to wit, because grace and glory, they cannot be
attained by humane power, as is clear out of Luke 13.24. Many shall seek to
enter, and shall not be able: therefore these things cannot be usurped.

Objection.
Now, if any shall object, that in the days of John Baptist, the violent took
the kingdom by force, Mat. 11. my answer is, That violence does not
necessarily imply usurpation; a man may be violent in his calling, as Jacob was
in his wrestling with God, Genesis 32. The violent took the kingdom by force,
but they were such as were called to the kingdom. The Israelites took the
Land of Canaan by force; but they had a calling so to do.

Use.
The use of the point is; First, to show the necessity of effectual calling.
Unless we be first effectually called, we can neither attain glory nor
virtue. Secondly, it shows what a blessed thing it is to be truly called. If
we be called effectually, we may lay hold both of glory and virtue without
usurpation.

Called to glory and virtue. Whence we may note, Doctrine.
that the calling of a Christian is an honorable calling: they are called to
glory and virtue. For this cause the blessed Apostle names it an high calling
in Philipp. 3.14.

And in eed it must needs be an high calling; first, because thereby we are
called to be the children of God. 1. John 3.1.

Secondly, thereby we are called to the fellowship of Christ. 1. Corinthians. 1.9.

Thirdly, thereby we are called to be Kings and Priests. Revel. 1.6.

Fourthly, thereby we are called to be Saints here. 1. Corinthians. 1.2.

Fifthly, thereby we are called to be heirs of the unspeakable joys of
heaven. Romans 8.17.

And therefore the calling of a Christian, is the most honorable calling in
the world.

Use.
Which serves to manifest the folly of such which despise sanctified
Christians. Many proud worldlings are lifted up, and exalt themselves above
poor Christians, because they have borne all offices which some Christians
have not. But understand ye unwise amongst the people; the poorest Christian
has a more honorable calling then your selves. You have borne office on the
earth, but a true Christian is set in heavenly places in Christ, Ephesians. 1.4.
His calling is worth ten thousand of yours; yea indeed yours is not worthy to
be compared to it.

Secondly, this should be a motive unto all Christians, to walk worthy this
holy calling, as the Apostle also exhorts, 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. Otherwise, it
were better that a millstone were hanged about our necks, and that we were
cast into the bottom of the Sea, then that we should pollute this holy
calling.

Whereby. Some render it, in as much: but I rather subscribe unto their
judgment which read the Text thus, whereby, or by which things; for they have
reference to the beginning of the former verse, where it is said, that Christ
by his divine power has given unto us all things which belong to life and
godliness: by which gift of all things, or by which all things given, most
great and precious promises are also given.

Most great and precious promises. Whence observe we, that Doctrine.
the promises of God are highly to be esteemed, they are to be accounted great,
yea most great and precious.

And that first, because they are the promises of a King, yea of the King of
kings; and therefore to be highly esteemed for their author.

Secondly, because they are of infallible truth. Gods promises are not as the
promises of many men, that is, yea and nay, but they are all, Yea, and Amen, 2.
Corin. 1.20. and therefore to be respected for their truth.

Thirdly, because they are the deeds and shewings of a Christian for his
salvation, and for all other good things. For, what have any of us to show,
whereby we may challenge heaven, and remission of sins, and such like
privileges, but only Gods promises entitling us thereunto? Therefore, as a man
makes great account of his deeds and evidences, so must we of Gods promises.

Fourthly, Gods promises have excellent effects: they make us partakers of the
divine nature, as we shall hear afterward, if God assist. Secondly, they
comfort them which are cast down. Thirdly, they establish and confirm them
which stand. And therefore they are highly to be esteemed.

Fifthly, Gods promises shall stand when heaven and earth shall be removed. For
heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away. So says
Christ Matthew 24.35. Wherefore it follows by sufficient reason, that the
divine promises are to be respected for their stabilitie.

Use.
Not to insist upon any more arguments for the proof of the point, the uses
which we may make of it, are these: First, it serves justly to condemn all
atheists and incredulous people, which respect not the promises of God. If a
great man, or a friend engage himself by promise unto them, they make great
account of such a promise; but as for the promises of God, they esteem them
light. O cursed infidels! is the promise of a man precious, and is not the
promise of a God infinitely more precious? Do thou believe the creature, and
not the Creator? But to let these pass.

Secondly, it may also serve to reprove many Christians, which esteem too
lightly of Gods promises, putting them from them, as though they were little
worth. Consider with thy self; suppose that a King should freely offer unto
his subject a great gift, or should freely promise him such or such a favor;
would we not account him foolish which would refuse the Kings offer, and make
light of it? Beloved, this is thy case: God does freely offer to bind himself
by promise unto thee, and thou refusest to take his word and offer.

Thirdly, we must examine, whether the promises of God be most great and
precious or no with us. And that will appear: first, by our zeal, and
forwardness to hear Gods word: if we esteem it precious, sure we will prease
unto it. Secondly, by our thankfulness for it. Thirdly, by our care to keep
it safe. Fourthly, by our joy in it.

Are given. Some read it thus; He has given: taking the passive verb in the
active signification, as the participle of the same word was taken actiuely in
the former verse. Whether we take it actiuely or passiuely, it is not much
material: the doctrine which will follow from either reading is this, viz.
Doctrine.
That Gods promises, though they be most great and precious, yet they are of
free gift.

What moved God to make that precious promise to Adam; the Seed of the woman
shall break the Serpents head, Genesis 3. but his own free grace? What moved
Christ to say to the thief on the cross, To day thou shall be with me in
Paradise, Luke 23.43. but his own compassion? What caused the Lord to say unto
Abraham; In thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed, Genesis
22.18. but his own goodness? The like may be said concerning the promise of
sending of the Comforter, John 16.7. and concerning spiritual protection,
Matthew. 28.21. and concerning Christ's returning at the last day to receive us,
John 14.3. The like may be said of the promises made to Israel concerning
their return out of Egypt and Babylon. In a word, the like may be said of all
Gods promises made to his Church; from time to time they were all of free grace.

Objection.
Now if any shall object, that God was moved to promise riches unto Solomon, by
the wise choice of Solomon himself, 1. Kings 3.12.13. and therefore that his
promise is not always free.

To such I answer, That the Lord gave the power to Solomon to make that choice,
so that God is the cause of the cause. For if the Lord move us to do good, and
enable us thereunto, and then make a gracious promise unto us for our
obedience; it is manifest that the original of such a promise, is merely of
grace, because he of his mercy enableth us to do that, for the which he is
moved to make a promise unto us, and that by the same mercy.

Use.
As this makes against merit-mongers, which ascribe so much to their deserts:
so it serves to set forth the glory of God. He makes most great and precious
promises, freely, and for nothing. If men make promises, commonly their
promises are mercenarie, but Gods promises are free.

Use.
Secondly, it may serve to encourage all such as are touched with the sense and
feeling of their own unworthiness, to stir up themselves, to take hold on
Gods promises. They are free, they are of gift, they go not by desert,
therefore receive them as a free gift offered to an unworthy person.

That by them ye might be partakers of his divine nature. By divine nature here
is not meant the very essence of God: for is impossible that the Lord should
dwell essentially in so narrow a compass as our hearts, considering that the
heavens, and the heavens of heavens are not able to contain him. 2. Chron.
2.6. But we are to understand by divine nature, the image of God, or true
saving grace, which is called the divine nature: first, because it is begotten
of God in the elect, John 1.13. Secondly, because it is like unto him, as being
indeed his own image, Genesis 1.26.

The divine nature. Hence we are to observe, that Doctrine.
Saving grace comes the nearest of all other things to the nature of God
himself. It is called here the divine nature it self, from the near
likeness which it has unto it. So in like manner it is sometime termed God,
as in 1. John 4.15. God dwells in him, that is, saving grace. Sometimes it is
called Christ, as in Colos. 1.27. Christ in you the hope of glory, that is,
grace in you. Sometimes also it is styled the holy Ghost, as in 1. Corinthians.
6.19. Know you not that your body is the temple of the holy Ghost which is in
you; that is, of grace which is in you. Now why is grace called God, and
Christ, and holy Ghost, but merely in respect of that lively resemblance which
it has of God, of Christ, and of the holy Ghost?

Reason.
And indeed saving grace may truly be said to come the nearest to the nature of
God. First, because it is the most excellent thing in the world, according to
that in Proverbs 4.7. Wisdom is the chief thing. Secondly, because it is the
most pure thing in the world, more pure then alabaster, then gold, yea then the
heavens themselves. Thirdly, because it is the most powerful thing in the
world, next unto God himself: it is able to make of a Wolf, a Lamb, as we
see in Paul. It is able to conquer the world: for this is the victory which
ouercometh the world, even our faith, 1. John 5.4. Yea it is able to quench all
the fiery darts of the wicked one, Ephesians. 6.16. Lastly, it is able to help in
time of need, when all the world cannot help, Hebr. 4.16. Therefore grace
comes the nearest to the nature of God.

Use.
Which serves to descrie the folly of Papists and other idolaters, which
think to resemble God in bodily shapes, as though a dumb idol were the
nearest of all other things to Gods nature. But let such idiots remember, that
not stone, or wood, or gold, but grace and virtue, come the nearest to Gods
image.

Use.
Secondly, we may here take notice, that the devil was a lier from the
beginning, in that he would make our first parents believe, that the way to
become like to God, was to violate and break Gods commandments, Genesis 3.5.
whereas indeed the way to be like God, is to take the quite contrary course.

Use.
Thirdly, this shows that the sin of such which scoff at grace and
persecute it, is very fearful; for in this they scoff at and persecute the
divine nature: but let such remember the practice of Ismael, and what befell
him for the like sin, Genesis 21.9.10.

Use.
Fourthly, this should teach us to esteem of Gods children, which are endued
with this divine nature; and we must labor for the same image, which we see in
them: it is worth the laboring for, it is no less then the divine nature.

Whereby. Whence observe we, that Doctrine.
The word, but especially the Gospel and the promises, are the means to beget
this divine nature of saving grace in the hearts of the elect. Thus says James
in his first chapter and eighteenth verse; Of his own will begat he us by the
word of truth. Thus says also Peter in his first Epistle, the first chapter,
and three and twentieth verse; We are borne again, not of mortal seed, but of
immortal by the word of God. I do not deny but that the Spirit may be received
by the faithful preaching of any part of canonical Scripture: but yet it is
also true, that most usually the Spirit is conveyed by the preaching of the
Gospel; in which respect also the Gospel is called the ministration of the
Spirit, 2. Corinthians 3.8. Not only because it is a spiritual doctrine, but
also because the Spirit of God is given by it.

Use.
This condemns the persecuters of the Gospel: for they are enemies to that
which is the means of the greatest good unto Gods Church. For, take away the
Gospel, and how shall we ever come to be partakers of the divine nature?

Use.
Secondly, this should teach us to be thankful for the Gospel, considering
unto what an excellent purpose it is given, viz. that by it we might be made
partakers of the divine nature.

Thirdly, if ever we mean to be partaker of the divine nature, we must
diligently hear Christ's Gospel, and carefully meditate therein day and night.
We must make high account of the promises; for by them we come to be partakers
of the divine nature.

The corruptions in the world. By corruptions we are to understand the corrupt
dealings in the world; the which corrupt dealings are fitly termed corruptions
or putrifactions, because they come from the putrefaction of the flesh, and
that for want of the salt of grace. And the doctrine hence to be observed, is,
Doctrine.
That in the world there be great corruptions. There be, and have been
corruptions in all sorts of men from time to time; in Magistrates, as Psalm
94.20. Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, which frames
mischief by a Law? In Ministers, as Phil. 1.21. All seek their own things,
and not that which is Jesus Christ's. In tradesmen, as Hosea 12.7. He is a
merchant, the balances of deceit are in his hand, he loves to oppress. In
congregations and meetings, as Psalm 58.1. Do ye indeed speak
righteousness, O congregation? Do ye judge uprightly, O ye sons of men?
yea in heart you work wickedness, and weigh the violence of your hands in the
earth. Yea in all men, as Genesis 6.11. The earth also was corrupt before God,
and the earth was filled with violence.

And as there be corruptions in all sorts of men, so likewise in all things
there is much corrupt dealing. Do we not see gross sins to pass unpunished?
Do we not see things too much to be ruled by bribes or favor? Do we not see
the livings of Ministers to be impropriated, and given to them which feed not
the flock? Do we not see Church-stockes, which are pretended to be for the
poor, to be used especially at the humors, and for the easing of the rich? Do
we not see many things pass for current which are unsound, under color of
custom? Is not custom at these days (though never so corrupt) pleaded
against law? It were infinite to insist on all particulars: for infinite are
the corruptions of these times.

Use.
But the uses which we may make of this point are these: first, it should teach
us to bear with such Ministers as are earnest against the corruptions of the
time. If ever there was need that ministers should cry shame against the
abominations of the times, surely much more now: for never was the world more
full of corruption, as I suppose.

Secondly, it should teach us to be the more vigilant over our selves, lest we
be corrupted. It must be our care to keep our selves unspotted of the world,
James 1. the last verse. If it were an infectious time, how provident would men
and women be to avoid the infection? Shall we be so careful for our bodies,
and shall we not be much more circumspect for our souls? Yes by all means.

Thirdly, this may teach us to justify God in all his visitations and
judgments. If God bring upon us famine, sword, pestilence, or the like; the
cause (if we consider it well) is most just: for the world is full of
corruption and full of sin. If God drown the world, there is sufficient
cause why he should do so, for all flesh had corrupted their ways.

Fourthly, this should make us willing to die, and to leave this world, because
it is so full of corruption. We must not desire death in respect of
afflictions, but we may desire it in respect of sin; even as Elias when he
saw idolatry publicly erected in the days of Iesabel, he desired God to
take away his life, 1. Kings 19.4.

Through lust. By lust here we are to understand original sin: so that the
point to be observed is, that Doctrine.
Original sin is the cause of all these innumerable corruptions which are in
the world. This is manifest out of James 1.14. But every man is tempted when he
is drawn away of his own lust, and is enticed; then when lust has conceived,
it brings forth sin, etc.

The same Apostle says to the same effect in Iam. 4.1. From whence come wars
and fightings amongst you, come they not from hence, even of your lusts which
fight in your members? Our Savior likewise implies he same in Matthew. 15.18.19.
For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, that is, from the heart polluted
with original sin. Thus David, when he had committed adultery and murder,
acknowledged, that in sin his mother had conceived him, Psalm 51. as
implying thereby, that original sin was the cause of the other sins. Thus
likewise Paul in Roman. 7. acknowledges that he was led captive into sin by
the law of sin, which was in his members. And for this cause those fifteen
actual sins spoken of in Galat. 5.19.20. are called fruits of the flesh. All
these places do sufficiently prove, that all corruptions are, or do flow from
original sin.

Objection.
Yea but swearing in common talk, it comes of the evil one, Math. 5 37. and
sin is called the lusts of the devil, John 8.44. therefore it seems that
sin comes from the devil, and not of our own lusts. I answer: Sin comes
from both, but especially, and immediately from our natural corruption: for
were it not for this, Satan could do nothing at all unto us.

Use.
Let the due consideration of this point teach us, not to impute our sins
unto others, but especially to our selves. Secondly, let us labor to mortify
the flesh by the Spirit, and so we shall weaken all sin. Let us dry up the
fountain, and the streams must needs cease.

Having escaped. Whence observe we, that Doctrine.
the corruptions of the world may be shunned and escaped. Here the holy Ghost
makes mention of such as have escaped them. And in like manner we read of
seven thousand which had not bowed the knee unto Baal, in the corrupt times of
Iesabel. The like may be said of the three Children, Daniel 3. and of Joseph of
Arimathea, Luke 23.57. of Noah in the old world, Genesis 7.1. of Lot in Sodom,
2. Peter 2.8. of the Angel or Minister of the church of Pergamus, Revel. 2.13.
who, though all of them lived in corrupt times, yet they kept their garments
unspotted.

Reason.
And the truth is, none does compel to sin; for howbeit men sin
necessarily, they cannot choose but sin, yet they do not sin compulsiuely.
Satan preuailes more by inticement then by force.

Which serves to clear Gods justice in the condemnation of a sinner. Every
sinner is worthy to be condemned, because he sins without compulsion. God may
justly say unto a graceless person, Who compelled thee to swear, to lie, to
steal, to be drunk, and the like? Might not these things have been avoided?
Do thou not see such and such to shun them, and to avoid them? Therefore,
forasmuch as thou have sinned willingly, and with greediness: depart from me
thou cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels.

Use.
Secondly, forasmuch as sin and corruption may be avoided, therefore every
one of us must be careful to avoid and shun it: and that first because God
himself commands us to fly from it, Psalm 34.14. Eschew evil, etc.
Secondly, because it dishonors God, and grieueth, yea quenches his Spirit,
as the Scripture speaks. Thirdly, because it scandalizeth our profession,
opening the mouths of the wicked, to speak evil of that worthy name after
which we are named. Fourthly, because it gives a dangerous example unto
others. Fifthly, because it is perilous and pernicious to our souls. For all
these reasons let us be careful to avoid sin.

Use.
And that we may escape the corruptions of the world, we must observe these
rules: First, we must watch and pray, that we enter not into temptation, Matthew.
26.41. Secondly, we must not have fellowship with corrupters, Ephesians 5.11.
Thirdly, we must take the benefit of all Gods ordinances, as of the Word and
Sacrament, and the like. Gods ordinances are like a common armourie, out of
which we may freely fetch all that is necessary for out defense.

Having shunned. Observe here who they be which are said to have escaped the
corruptions of the world, to wit, such as have received the divine nature.

Doctrine.
And indeed no other can attain to this power. Who is it which ouercometh the
world, but he which is borne of God? 1. John 5.4. Who is it which keeps
himself, that the wicked one touches him not, but he that is borne again? 1.
John 5.18.

Reason.
And indeed none but such have the promise of especial protection. Secondly,
none but such have the Spirit as a preserver. Thirdly, none but such have skill
to use their weapons.

Objection.
Yea but it is said of apostates, that they had clean escaped from them which
live in error. I answer, The wicked indeed may shun sin for a time, but it
is commonly but for a time. And when they do shun it, it is by the
restraining Spirit of God, not by the sanctifying Spirit, as it is in those
which are partakers of the divine nature.

Use.
Hence we see what necessity there is, that we should labor to be partakers of
this divine nature: Without it we shall never attain to escape the corruptions
of the world.

Use.
It shows what cause mortified Christians have to bless God for this nature
received. Have thou obtained victory, thank the divine nature: it was it
which folled thine enemies, and not thou. For who art thou that thou should
stand against these mighty giants, the world, the flesh and the devil.

Besides this. Or moreover, for so the Text is read the best. Now the Apostle
comes to his exhortation: and the maine matter whereunto he exhorts the
Church is, that it give all diligence for the attaining of grace. And this he
does from this fifth verse, unto the end of the eleventh. In the next place he
shows the reasons why he thus adhorteth, from the twelfth verse, to the end
of the Chapter. In the former observe we first, what is exhorted, and that is,
to add one grace to another, in 5.6. and 7. verses. Secondly, the arguments
wherewith this exhortation is pressed, in the 8.9.10. and eleventh verses.

Besides this. That is, over and above the gift of divine nature, which you
have received, give, or bring with you (as the word signifies) all diligence,
etc. Whence note, that Doctrine.
no Christian must content himself with that degree of grace, which he has
received in his first conversion, but he must to the first labor to add other
graces.

The grace of regeneration is our talent, which we must so employ, as that we
may gain five talents more, Matthew. 25. This was the godly practice of Paul
himself, Phil. 3.13. where he says, I forget those things which are behind,
reaching forth to those things which are before, etc. They therefore which can
content themselves with that grace which they suppose they have received, and
think they need no more; it is a manifest sign they have received nothing
yet, as they ought to receive.

Giving all diligence. Or according to the original; bringing all diligence.
The doctrine hence to be observed, is, that Doctrine.
There is a great deal of diligence required for the obtaining of increase of
grace. True it is, that the first grace, to wit, the grace of regeneration,
comes without our pains or seeking. We are called suddenly when we think
least of any such matter, as we see in Paul and others. But as for increase of
grace, it is not without great industry and diligence. David was eminent in
grace, but he was withal very diligent in the use of means. For the obtaining
of the same he prayed often, he fasted much; he meditated in Gods word day and
night. The like may be said of other of Gods Saints, who have not obtained that
degree of grace which they have, without much pains and great striving.

Use.
Which serves to condemn those slow-bellies which would be content to receive
saving grace, but they are loath to take any pains for it: if God will put it
in their mouths, well and good; but if not, they are resolved not to seek it.
O wretched man whosoever thou art! art thou content to labor and toil, and to
use all possible diligence for the obtaining of the things of this life, and
have thou no pains for things of a better life? Surely thy condemnation
sleeps not.

Use.
Secondly, this may serve to reprove such which are the means to discourage
others from the diligent search of grace; laboring to persuade them that they
are too forward, and the like. O impudent practice! does God require all
diligence for the acquiring of grace? and dare thou say, that diligence is
more then needs? O cursed tongue, which contradictest thy Maker! how will thou
escape vengeance?

Use.
Lastly, this may serve to exhort all of us, to the practice of more diligence
in the seeking of grace. We see worldlings omit no pains, but use all
diligence to get wealth. Shall they be so busy for the earth, and shall not we
be much more diligent for heaven? Let us learn of them.

Add to your faith, etc. Observe here, we are not only exhorted to get faith,
but likewise other graces: so that the point to be noted, is, that Doctrine.
A Christian must not content himself with one good gift of the Spirit, but he
must labor for many gifts. For this we have the example of the Corinthians, 1. Corinthians. 1.7. Who came behind in no good gift, and of Christ himself, Esaias
11. who abounded with several gifts. A true servant of God must desire gifts
whereby to glorify God in his calling, according to the example of Solomon.
Secondly, he must desire saving gifts, which may distinguish him from
reprobates, as faith, and holiness, and such like; but especially, every
Christian must labor for that grace wherein he is most defective, and which is
most contrary to his corruptions. The angry person must especially labor for
patience; the lascivious person for chastity; the ambitious person for
humility; the niggard for liberality; the intemperate man for sobriety, and
the like.

Use.
This may justly condemn the common multitude: for if they have but one good
quality in them, they are prone to bless themselves in their estate, though
they neglect all other good gifts of Gods Spirit, and disesteeme them.

Use.
Secondly, let it put every one of us in mind, to take notice what graces we
do especially want, and let us endeavor to obtain those graces. Let us forget
that which is behind, and reach forward to that which is before.

Add to your faith virtue. By virtue we are to understand an honest and good
life, or an universal practice of all those graces which God has put in us.
Thus the good woman which was so painful in her calling, so faithful to her
husband, so bountiful to the poor, is termed a virtuous woman, Prou. 31.10.

The lesson hence to be learned, is, that Doctrine.
every Christian should labor to be truly virtuous, to be of a good life and
canuersation.

Thus we are taught, not only in this Text, Add to your faith virtue: but
also in Philip. 4.8. Finally brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be
any virtue, or if there be any praise, think on these things For this also we
have the examples of the Saints; as first the example of Ruth, of whom it is
said, That all the City knew her to be a virtuous woman, Ruth 3.11. and of the
good woman in Prou. 31.29. Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou
excellest them all.

Reason.
And indeed there is great necessity of virtue; first, because God is more
glorified by deeds then words. It is true, there must be both, we must
profess, and we must be virtuous; but the latter brings more glory to God
then the former. Hereby (says Christ) is my Father glorified, that ye bring
forth much fruit, John 15.8.

Secondly, we ought to be virtuous, because virtue is the power of profession.
He or she that professes Christ and is not virtuous, their profession is a
powerless profession, it is of no validity, of no force; yea indeed it is
mere hypocrisy, 2. Timothy 3.5. They have a form of godliness, but deny the
power thereof.

Thirdly, we ought to be virtuous, because this will sooner convince the wicked
then any thing else: some which will not be won by the word, will be
convinced by a good conversation, 1. Pet. 3.1.

Use.
Now if there ought to be virtue amongst men, then how justly may we reprove
the viciousness of the time? For, when did blasphemy, and profaneness, and
whoredom, and drunkenness, and deceit, and lying, and pride, and idleness,
and usury, and all kinds of vices more abound then at these days? How hard
is it now to find a virtuous person?

Secondly, this must teach every one of us to labor for a virtuous life and
practice. Let Ministers, Magistrates, Masters of families, servants, children,
and all sorts, from the highest to the lowest, labor to be truly virtuous;
that is, let us all become zealous hearers of Gods word, and conscionable doers
and practisers of the same. Oh how happy were it for us, if we would suffer our
selves to be persuaded this way. The Lord persuade us.

Add to your faith. Concerning faith we purpose to speak hereafter (if GOD
permit) amongst the Grounds of Religion: The point therefore which we will
observe in this place, is this, to wit, that Doctrine.
Virtue must be added unto Faith. Indeed it must flow from faith as from the
fountain; and the reason is manifest: first, because else it is were sin.
For, whatsoever is not of faith (whatsoever show it may make) it is sin,
Romans 14.23. Secondly, because without faith it is impossible to please God,
Hebrews 11.6. So that Virtue without faith is no better then Caines sacrifice:
It may give satisfaction to men, but it is an abomination to God.

Use.
This serves to discover the nakedness of civil virtues. Many of the heathen
were virtuous, some excelled for justice, others for fortitude, others for
temperance, others for prudence. But because their virtues were not added to
faith, therefore they were but glistering sins, they did not please God.

Secondly, this proves against Papists, that our best works are not
meritorious, ex opere operato. For if they were, what need virtue be added to
faith to make it acceptable? Yea the truth is, that whatsoever is offered to
God by an unregenerate person, which is destitute of faith: it is no better
then if he should kill a man, or cut off a dogs neck, Esaias 66.3.

Thirdly, it must teach us to use all means whereby faith may be wrought and
increased in our hearts: for, so much faith as we have, so much acceptance of
virtue we shall find with God.

Knowledge. Whence note, that Doctrine.
It is not sufficient for a Christian to be virtuous, but he must have
knowledge also. Whereupon Solomon says in Prouer. 4.5. Get wisdom, get
understanding, forget it not, and in the seventh verse, Wisdom is the
principal thing; therefore get wisdom, and with all thy getting get
understanding.

There be many motives to move us to seek after knowledge.

First, because, by it we are translated out of darkness, and so by
consequence, out of the kingdom of Satan.

Secondly, because by it we come to have the image of God drawn upon us
afresh, Col. 3.10.

Thirdly, because in want of it, we are estranged from the life of God: we
remain by ignorance in the state of death, that is, destitute of the life of
Grace, Ephesians. 4.18.

Fourthly, by ignorance we are liable to temporal judgments. For want of
knowledge my people are destroyed, Hos. 4.6. yea to eternal damnation, 2
Thessal. 1.8. Christ will come in flaming fire, rendering vengeance to all them
which know not God. We may as safely live in adultry as live blind and
ignorant; both are damnable.

But what kind of knowledge is it which we must join to our virtue?

Surely it is not meant of worldly wisdom, much less of sinful craft and
subtlety, neither is it meant of a bare litterall knowledge in the brain.

But it is meant of an holy experimental knowledge, wrought in the hearts of
the elect by the holy Ghost, and that by the means of Gods word.

By which experimental knowledge, we come first to know our selves, to wit,
our cursed estate by nature. He that knows not himself to be in a damnable
state naturally, to be under the wrath of God, and guilty of Adams sin; he
that is not convicted of the necessity of repentance and of the new birth, he
knows nothing yet as he ought to know.

Secondly, by this experimental knowledge, we come to know God and Christ. God
to be our Father, Christ to be our Redeemer, the holy Ghost to be our
sanctifier and comforter.

Thirdly, by this experimental knowledge learned from Gods word, we come to
know Gods will, to wit, what to avoid and what to follow, what to believe and
what to reject, how God will be worshipped, and the like.

Lastly, by this experimental knowledge, we come more and more to know the
wiles of Satan, the deceits of our own hearts, the ways of Gods providence,
the ways of Gods works, and the like.

But some may say, By what means may we attain this precious grace of saving
knowledge?

To such I answer, If thou desire to attain this grace, then first labor for
humility: be a fool in thine own opinion: for the Lord teaches the humble
his way, Psalm. 25.

Secondly, search the Scriptures, for they are able to make thee wise to
salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15.

Thirdly, if thou lack wisdom, ask it of God, Iam. 1

Temperance. It is the moderation of lust and appetite, in the use of the gifts
and creatures of God.

As first in the use of meats and drinks: a temperate person will not wast and
ruin his estate in frequent and riotous feasting, neither does he desire to
fare deliciously every day. Yea if he live in such a place where there is great
fare and plenty of wine, he has learned to moderate himself concerning
measure, partaking only so far of Gods creatures, as thereby he is made more
fit to glorify God. There is great want of this branch of temperance at this
day, as appears by the riotous feasting, by the drunkenness and gluttony of
the time.

Now the remedies against this intemperance, are first to remember that in Luke
21.34. Take heed lest at any time your hearts be ouercharged with surfeiting
and drunkenness, etc.

Secondly, to remember the examples of the Saints, as of the three children in
Dan. 1.8. who could not be tempted with the kings diet.

Thirdly, let us consider that drunkards and gluttons shall have their part in
the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, Gal. 5.21. And let this move us
to the practice of temperance.

Secondly, temperance is seen in the moderation of apparel. A temperate
person will apparel himself according to his sex, according to his place,
according to the most modest fashion of his country, according to his ability,
and the like. There is also great want of this branch of temperance, men are
turned women, and women are turned men at these days: every fashion is in use
but that which is most modest, and how unreasonably do men and women flaunt it
out, far above their degree and place? What difference is there in apparel
between a Gentlewoman and a Lady; between a Lady and a Countess; between a
Gentleman and a Knight; and a Knight and a Lord; between a Citizen and a
Courtier? No man knows his place and degree.

But let all intemperate persons in this kind remember that in Zeph. 1.8. It
shall come to pass in the day of the Lords Sacrifice, that I will punish the
Princes and the kings children, and all such as are clothed in strange
apparel. Now if God could not endure pride of apparel in Princes, how shall he
endure it in persons of mean rank?

Patience. It is the due moderation of anger: and it is seen especially in the
quiet and peaceable enduring of afflictions.

There is a double patience; one toward God, the other toward men: both of
these we must labor to add unto our knowedge.

Patience toward God, is nothing else but an humble, meek and quiet
submitting our selves to Gods correction, in what kind soever he shall think
fit to chastise us. And this kind of Patience is enjoined in Pro. 3.11. My
son despise not the chastening of the Lord, neither be weary of his
correction.

The arguments which should move us to this kind of patience are these: Gods
greatness; he is able to do what he will, and therefore it is but folly to
carry our selves frowardly toward him, we cannot resist him. Secondly, we must
remember how they have spe^ (...) have been froward toward God. Did not God
fearfully destroy Israel for their murmuring, 1 Cor. 10.10. Yea, who ever
hardened his heart against the Lord, and prospered? Job. 9.4.

Thirdly, we must consider, how justly we do deserve any scourge which God
inflicts upon us; and our just desert should make us patient Mica. 7.9.

Fourthly, we must remember that God corrects us for our profit, as namely to
make us partakers of his holiness and the like, Heb. 12.10. And shall we not
be patient to suffer for our own good?

Fifthly, consider we the examples of the Saints, how patiently did they endure
their trials, Iam. 5.10.

Sixthly, we have had the fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave
them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the father of
Spirits, and live* Heb. 12.9.

Objection.
But some it may be will say, my afflictions are greater then I can bear,
therefore how is it possible that I should be patient?

Answ.
Surely thou deceiuest thy self; God will not lay upon his children more then
they can bear, but will give them the issue with the temptation, 1.
Corinthians 10.13. It may be thou art not willing to bear, or thou art weary
of thy burden, and therefore pleadest inabilitie.

Objection.
Yea but Job cursed his birthday, by reason of afflictions; therefore is it
any strange thing if such a weakeling as I, am impatient?

Answ.
We must not embolden our selves in sin, by the frailties of the Saints; but
consider again with thy self Jobs ^ictions were greater then thine, his
grief was heavier then the sand, Job. 6.3.

Use.
The use of this point may be: first for our trial and examination; try we our
selves whether we be truly patient under Gods chastising hand or no, and the
signs of patience are these. First, if we do not murmr neither in heart nor
tongue. This was an argument of David's patience, Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb and
opened not my mouth, because thou did it.

Secondly, if we submit to the will of God, in our very extremity, as Christ
did, Math. 26.39. Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will.

Thirdly, if we can bless God in the very fire of affliction, as Job did; The
Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord,
Job. 1.21.

Use.
In the next place, this point may serve justly to reprove us, for want of this
kind of patience. What murmuring thereis in time of unseasonable weather, our
own ears may be witnesses: and so in like manner, how stubburnely we carry our
selves toward God if he touch us, our own consciences will easily testify.
My brethren, these things ought not so to be.

Patience. The second branch of patience, is that which we must exercise
toward men. That is also intended in this Text, and we find it commanded in
diverse places of Scripture, as in 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. Now we exhort you brethren,
warn them which are unruly, comfort the feeble minded, support the weak, be
patient toward all men. And in 1 Timothy 6.11. But thou o man of God, fly these
things, and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience,
meekness.

We must be patient toward men, if they take away our goods, Math. 5.40. if
they take away our good names, Math. 5.11. yea if they take away our lives,
Isay. 53.7.

Reason.
And great reason we should be patient in this kind.

First, because men could do nothing if God did not bid them. This was that
which made David patient when Shimei rayled upon him, 2. Sam. 16.10.

Secondly, because if men persecute us, it is because they are ignorant, they
know not what they do: and this made Christ patient, Luke 23.34.

Thirdly, because all the persecutions of men, shall turn to our good: for the
more we are persecuted, the more we are tried in this world, Dan. 11.33. and
the more we shall be glorified in the world to come, 2. Cor. 4.17.

Objection.
Yea, but mine enemy has done me especial injury. Answer.
Surely if thy enemy has done the injury, yet consider that thou thy self
do greater injury to God. Every day the Lord bears with thee, and is
patient; ought not thou to do the like to thy brother?

Objection.
Yea, but if I should put up such a wrong, it were a great indignity and
disgrace unto me.

Answ.
Thou think then that to seek revenge, is a means to maintain thy credit:
but thou art deceived, for it is a man's honor to pass by an offense, as
Solomon speaks, Prou. 20.3.

Labor for this excellent grace, and that first because anger rests in the
bosom of fools, Ec. 7.9. Secondly, because causles anger is manslaughter, 1.
Ioh. 3.15. Thirdly, because the wrath of man works not the righteousness of
God. Fourthly, because vengeance is peculiar to God, Romans 12.19. Fifthly,
because it is the greatest conquest in the world, for a man to rule his own
spirit, Pro. 16.32.

Try your selves also, whether you have in any sort this grace or no; and the
signs of it are these. First, if we can forgive from our hearts our enemies.
Secondly, if we can heartily pray for them. Thirdly, if we can do them good in
their necessity. Fourthly, if we can be grieved when we hear any ill to
befall them. These are evident signs of patience. Although we reprove them for
sin, and though we cannot endure their wickedness, yet if we can find these
marks, we may be sure we have patience in the root.

Godliness. It is a sincere desire, and conscionable endeavor after an
universal conformity to Gods revealed will. I say, after an universal
conformity; for we cannot say that an hypocrite is a godly person, because
howsoever he does many things praescribed in the first Table, yet he is sound
tardy and foul in the second, neither can we say that a profane person is
godly, because howsoever he does many things praescribed in the second Table,
yet he is careless in yielding obedience to the first: But he or she are true
godly persons, which sincerely desire, and conscionably endeavor to yield
universal obedience to Gods most holy will. I do not deny but the word
translated godliness in this text, does properly signify in the greek, a
right worship of God, but I take it, that the Holy Ghost does speak it
Synecdochically, putting the right worship of God, which is but a part of
godliness, for all godliness.

The point hence to be noted is, that every true Christian ought to labor for
godliness, or universal conformity to Gods will, and that for these reasons.
First, First, because God commands so, 1 Timothy 6.11.

Secondly, because true godliness is a sure mark of election, Psalm. 4.3.

Thirdly, because godliness has been the practice of all Gods children from
time to time, as of Abel and Henock, and Noah, and Abraham, and the rest, from
whom we ought not to degenerate.

1. Objection.
But some (possibly) will object, If I should set my self for godliness, I
should be scoffed at and derided, and hated and persecuted.

I answer, It is most true, that whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus,
must suffer persecution, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy 3.12. but it is as
true, that whosoever denies Christ before men, shall be denied by Christ at
the last day, Mat. 10.33.

2. Objection.
Others it may be will object, Yea but your definition of godliness is too
strict, for who is able to conform himself universally to the will of God?

I answer, We do not affirm that godliness is an absolute perfect conformity,
but that it is a sincere desire and conscionable endeavor after universal
conformity. And that this is never a whit too strict, it is apparent out of
Math. 5.48. where Christ himself exhorts us to be perfect, as out Father
which is in heaven is perfect.

Use.
The use of this point may be, first, to reprove the world of ungodliness;
every sin is ungodliness, and when did sin ever more abound then at these
days?

Secondly, it serves justly to condemn such as scoff and mock and deride at
godliness, and at godly persons. Cursed Ismaelites they be; the Lord give them
repentance, if they belong to his election.

Thirdly, it serves to justify the godly practices of Gods children; they
labor after godliness, they do well, let them labor more after it: they do
but that which God himself requires of them.

Fourthly, this may serve to excite and to stir up all of us to the study of
godliness; and that we may attain thereunto, we must observe these rules
following.

First, we must be content to part with our especial sins; reigning sin and
godliness are like Dagon and the Arc, they can never stand together. Will you
steal, murder, commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense unto
Baal, and walk after other gods whom ye know not, and come and stand before me
in this House, whereupon my Name is called. It is the speech of God himself
unto the Jews in Jeremy 7.9.10. wherein he does reprove them for thinking,
that godliness and reigning sin might stand together. The like reproof you
have in Psalm 50.16.17. I will not name it, I leave it to your own reading.
But by both these places you may plainly discern, that if we will be
professors of the Gospel, or true godly persons, we must forsake sin. I
conclude this point with that speech of the Apostle, 2. Timothy chapter 2.
verse 19. Let every one that names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity.

Secondly, if we desire to be truly godly, we must be careful to keep the
Sabbath; it is a sure mark of an ungodly person, to be a Sabbath-breaker, as
on the contrary it is an evidence of godliness, conscionably to celebrate it
to Gods glory: he that is an Eunuch to God, keeps Gods Sabbath, as it is in
Esaias 56.4. The holy keeping of the Sabbath is a means to hallow us the better
for all the week after; whereas the profaning of the Sabbath is the cause of
profaneness and ungodliness, if God be not more merciful all our life after.

Thirdly, if we desire to be truly godly, we must be careful of private duties
of Religion: we must pray continually, 1. Thessalonians 5. We must meditate in
the law of the Lord day and night, Psalm 1. We must beat down our bodies and
keep them under, 1. Corinthians 9. the last. We must daily examine our selves,
and daily repent, Psalm 4.4. The way to be truly godly, is, thoroughly to
exercise our selves in these and the like duties.

Fourthly, if we desire to be truly godly, we must associate our selves with
such as are godly. We must not inhaunt our selves with ungodly persons; for
that is the way to be made ungodly: but with Saints and holy persons. So long
as Peter kept company with Christ, he was religious and holy, but when he came
amongst the high Priests servants, how profane was he, in denying his Master,
in swearing, and forswearing, and the like? Matthew. 26.

And by these same rules we may also try whether we be truly godly or no: he
that observes these rules, is godly: he that observes them not, is certainly
ungodly.

Brotherly kindness. Or as the word may signify, brotherly love. I agree unto
their judgment which refer this unto the inward affection; and the next,
namely charity to the practice; the first is to teach us to love, the second is
to teach us to be kind.

Brotherly kindness. That is, love to the brethren. By brethren we are to
understand such as truly fear God, unto whom, of all other men, our love and
best affections are due.

Brotherly. Hence observe we, that Doctrine.
all such as truly fear God, are brethren. And they are so called in Ephesians
6.23. Peace be to the brethren, with love and faith from God. And in Coloss.
1.2. To the Saints and faithful brethren in Christ.

And justly are they so called: first, because they are adopted of one and the
same Father, Ephesians. 1.5.

Secondly, because they are borne, I mean, newborn of one and the same
mother, Galat 4.26.

Thirdly, because they are brought up in the same family, Ephesians 2.19.

Fourthly, because they shall be partakers of the same inheritance, Romans 8.17.

Use.
This serves to condemn the practice of such which do scoff at this term
Brethren, saying, He is one of the holy brethren, and the like: Oh thou wretch!
Does God himself give this title to his people, and dare thou mock and
scoff at it? Does God give this name in holiness, and do thou use it in
derision?

Secondly, this should teach rich Christians humility; they must know that the
poorest Christian is their brother or sister, and therefore they must carry
themselves accordingly toward them: they must not be ashamed of them; for if
Christ himself be not ashamed to call us Brethren, as it is in Hebr. 2.10.
then we must not be ashamed to own one another.

Thirdly, this should teach poor Christians thankfulness; God has made them,
by virtue of regeneration akinne to the greatest Nobles and Potentates in the
world: I mean, to such Potentates as are true fearers of God. All Gods people
come of a great house, and are of a great kindred, both in respect of God and
man, they are all brethren.

Fourthly, this should teach us to avoid diverse things, as first, contention
with any that fear God: we may say as Abraham said to Lot, Genesis 13.8. Let
there be no strife between us, we are brethren.

Secondly, evil speaking or slandering. It is the devils property to traduce
or falsely to accuse the brethren, Revel. 12.10.

Thirdly, we must avoid tyrannizing over Gods servants; we must remember they
are our brethren.

Fifthly, considering that all that fear God, are brethren, therefore this must
teach us diverse things: it must teach us indeed to carry our selves toward our
Fellow Christians as toward brethren: therefore, as one brother will stand by
another, so one Christian must defend another; we must not suffer any Christian
to be wronged, if it be in our power to help him.

Secondly, one brother will have a fellow-feeling with another; they will
rejoice to see any good to befall one another, and they will grieve to see
hurt. Even so we must rejoice to hear of the prosperity of Zion, and we must
grieve to hear or to see the desolation thereof.

Thirdly, one brother will do for another according to ability; even so we
must every one according to his ability do for the Church of God. If a brother
or sister be naked or destitute of daily food, as James speaks, James 2.15.
we must relieve them.

Brotherly kindness, or brotherly love. In the next place we are to observe,
that Doctrine.
There ought to be love amongst Christians, yea brotherly love. This is proved
by 1. Pet. 3.8. Love as brethren. and out of Hebr. 13.1. Let brotherly love
continue.

And there be especial motives to stir us up to this love: first because it
is a sign that we are translated from death to life. 1. John 3.14. Secondly,
that we are borne of God, 1. John 4.7. Thirdly, that we are of the truth, 1.
John 3.19. Fourthly, that God dwells in us, 1. John 4.16.

Questi.
But how should I know a true Christian, that I may love him as a brother?

Answ.
Thou may know him: first, by his faith; he looks for salvation by Christ
alone.

Secondly, by his humility; he thinks basely of himself.

Thirdly, by his love to Gods house, the place where Gods honor dwells.

Fourthly, by his language, for he speaks the holy language of Canaan.

Fifthly, by his practice and life; for he lives holily, righteously, and
soberly in this present world.

Sixthly, by his fruitfulness; for he is no barren figtree, but he brings
forth fruit in due season.

Seventhly, by his opposition in this world; for his sect is evil spoken of in
every place, Acts 28.22. Thus thou may know a Christian.

Use.
Now, is it so, that true Christians, and true fearers of the Lord are to be
beloved with brotherly love? Then this serves justly to rebuke the world for
want of this brotherly love. The world is so far from loving the godly, as
that they hate no people in the world more. A fearful sign of a bad estate.

Secondly, it may serve to reprove, even Christians themselves; for where is
that love which should be amongst us? Surely, it is either grown cold, or
else, which is worse, its turned into prejudice and envy: but I will say with
the Apostle in another case; My brethren, these things ought not so to be.

Thirdly, this must teach us to be thankful to God, in that he has commanded
all to love us, and to encourage us. We may justly say with David, Lord, what
is man that thou thus regardest him? The truth is, we deserve to be hated both
of God and man: Therefore it is the greater mercy of God, not only to love us
himself, but also to command others to love us.

Fourthly, let this teach us to examine our selves, whether we love the
brethren or no. And that will appear by these signs: First, if we love poor
Christians as well as rich; if our love be toward all the Saints, Ephesians. 1.15.

Secondly, if we love not in tongue only, but in deed and in truth; if we love
sincerely, from the heart, and fruitfully, doing them all the good we can.

Thirdly, if we think our service for the Church to be easy, as Jacob thought
his seven years service for Rachel, it is a sign we love.

Fourthly, if we continue in our love toward Gods Saints. The continuance
proves our love to be true, the not continuing argues hypocrisy in our love.

Charity. By this we are to understand the practice or expression of brotherly
love. In the former grace we are taught affection, in this grace we are taught
action. The point is, that It is the part and duty of every Christian, amongst
the rest of his gifts and graces, to labor for Charity. The Apostle Paul
presses this duty with great feruencie, in 1. Corinthians. 13.1.2.3. showing, that
if one do never so great things, yet if he have not Charity, it avails him
nothing.

Now there is a twofold charity to be exercised by us toward our brethren;
the first is a charity toward their souls, the second is a charity toward
their bodies.

The Charity toward the souls of our brethren, is seen in these
particulars: First, in pitying their spiritual estate, if we see them out of
the way; according to that in Jude 22. Have compassion of some, in putting
difference. Or if we see them destitute of the means of salvation, if they be
as sheep without a shepherd, Matthew. 9, 36. or if they be proud and obstinate,
Jeremy 13.17. But if ye will not hear it, my soul shall weep in secret
places for your pride.

Secondly, Charity toward the souls of others is seen in the instructing of
them. The Centurion showed himself a true charitable person, in building a
Synagogue, Luke 7.5. Yea, in this he was more charitable then if he had built
them an Almes-house or Hospital, by how much the soul is more excellent then
the body.

Thirdly, spiritual charity is seen in forgiving our brethren, if they have
offended us, and now come and say, It repents me; according to that in Matthew.
18.33. Should not thou have had compassion on thy fellow-seruant as I had
compassion on thee? He that can forgive without revenge, is charitable.

Fourthly, spiritual charity is seen in reproving and admonishing such as
are out of the way; and seeking their reformation, Leu. 19.17. Thou shall in
any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. And indeed, what
greater charity can there be then to labor to save a soul from hell?

Fifthly, spiritual charity is seen in praying for the salvation of others.
Thus Paul showed himself a charitable person in Romans 10.1. in that his
hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel, was, that they might be saved.

Use.
This may serve to reprove the world of want of this spiritual charity. For
who amongst a thousand is charitable spiritually? Some will show themselves
charitable in matters concerning the body; but what is become of spiritual
charity?

Now the charity toward the bodies of our neighbors is seen in these things.

1. In commiserating their estate, to wit, in grieuing for the affliction of
Joseph, Amos 6.6. 2. In visiting them in their distress, James 1.27. Mat.
25.36. 3. In feeding the hungry, and clothing the naked, Job 31.17.19. 4. In
lending them sufficient for their need, Deuteronomy 15.8. 5. In forgiving them
their debts, if they be not able to repay, Luke 6.35. 6. In standing in the
gap, to turn away Gods judgments from them, as Moses did, Psalm 106.23.
Use.
This serves justly to reprove such as will reprove and exhort, and say, God
help you, and the like; but they exercise no charity toward the bodies of
their brethren: these are hypocrites.

For if these things be in you. In the former verses the holy Ghost has
exhorts us to labor for those forenamed graces, viz. faith, virtue,
knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness and charity:
Now in the verses following from the beginning of this eight verse, to the end
of the eleventh, he presses the said exhortation with diverse arguments: First,
by an argument taken from the effects in the eighth verse. Secondly, by an
argument taken from the contraries, in the ninth verse. Thirdly, by an argument
from utility or profit, in the tenth and eleventh verses.

Now in that the holy Ghost does use so many arguments for the enforcing of the
exhortation to grace: it does imply, that Doctrine.
Whosoever desire to persuade others to grace and godliness, they had need to
use a great many arguments. With how many arguments does the Spirit of God use
to press duties in the Scripture? To instance in one duty for many, this duty
of Alms: How is it pressed, in how many books, in how many chapters, in how
many verses, with how many forcible persuasions?

Use.
Which may serve justly to condemn our backwardness to that which is good,
especially considering how little persuasion will prevail with us, unto that
which is evil. We are soon tempted to sin; yea, oftentimes we tempt the
Devil to tempt us, by running into places of temptation: we are more ready to
sin (if it be possible) then the Devil can be to solicit us thereunto.

If these things be in you. The words in the original are very significant;
they may be read thus: if you have these things, or if these things be present
with you.

Where we are to note that it is not said, If you can talk of these things; or
if you can purpose to labor for these things; or if you can wish these things:
but, If you have these things. Whence observe, that Doctrine.
it is not sufficient to talk of grace, or to profess grace, but we must
have grace in possession: according to that in Mark 9.50. Have salt in your
selves, and peace one with another. Thus Elihu was full of matter, Job. 32.18.
And Stephen was full of faith and power, Acts 6.8. Thus the Corinthians were
enriched in every thing, 1. Cor. 1.5. And in Christ the Godhead dwells bodily,
Col. 2 9.

And indeed, as the talk of riches profits nothing unless we have the
possession of riches; so the talk of grace, and the profession of grace is
vain, unless we be endued with grace.

Use.
Which may seem to condemn many which content themselves with wishes and
formalities, but have no substance of grace in them: But let such remember that
copper will not pass for gold with God.

If these things be in you, or, as the words in the original will also bear
it, If these things be present with you: whence observe we, that Doctrine.
it is not sufficient to have grace; but we ought to have it always in
readiness, it should not be at any time to seek, but it should still be
present with us. This is that which is enjoined in Luke 12.35. Let your loins
be gyrded about, and your lights burning, and ye your selves, like to the men
which wait for their Lord, when he will return from the wedding. And the want
of this presence of grace, Christ reproves in his Disciples, Luke 8.25. Where
is your Faith? Their faith was to seek when they had most need of it; which
was their sin. In this respect grace is compared to armor, or weapons; and
Christians to soldiers: because as soldiers must never be without their
weapons; so Christians must never be without their graces. Christians must
learn of Gentlemen, always to walk with their swords by their sides, that
is, with grace.

Use, against such as content themselves with vain expectations and purposes
of grace; they mean to repent hereafter, and they purpose to break off their
sins hereafter, and they say they will do great matters hereafter: But what
grace or reformation have they for the present? Surely none.

Secondly, this may serve justly to reprove even the very children of God,
which are not so careful as they ought to be, to keep their graces in
readiness. If any temptation come, they are to seek, and their heart fails
them. My brethren, take heed of this vnpreparednesse.

Thirdly, this must teach us to use the means whereby to keep the presence
and nimblenesse of grace, and for this end take these directions.

First, beware of sin; for sin takes away the heart of grace, and the sense
and feeling of it.

Secondly, be diligent in the use of Gods ordinances, for these maintain in us
the life of grace.

Thirdly, daily examine thy self whether thou find the graces of God in
thee, in that measure as thou did find them yesterday or heretofore.

Fourthly, labor to stir up the gift that is in thee, and the grace which
thou have received. Fire, if it be not stirred up, will burn deadly: So grace,
if we do not quicken it up, will soon decay.

Fifthly, labor to exercise thy graces by daily practice; want of practice
causes any gift to decay; weapons, if they be not used, will rust in the
scabbard; so will grace.

And abound. Whence observe we, that Doctrine.
it is not sufficient for a Christian to have a truth of grace in him, but he
must endeavor to abound in grace.

For this we read Phil. 1.9. And this I pray, that your love may abound yet
more and more, in knowledge and in all judgment. And 1 Thessalonians. 3.12. And the
Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward another: and thus Paul
requires the Corinthians to abound to every good work, 2. Cor. 9.8. and rich
men to be rich in good works, 1. Tim 6.18.

Use.
This serves justly to condemn our common practice, in that we content our
selves with so small a portion of grace, and labor not to abound therein.

Secondly, It should serve to stir us up to labor to abound; and that we may
so do, observe these doctrines.

First, We must abound in the use of means. Great riches, or abundance, are
not obtained, for the most part, without great pains and industry; no more are
riches in grace.

Secondly, We must employ our talents: He that well imployeth his five talents,
shall gain other five; but he that will hide his talent in the earth and not
use it, he shall not increase but decrease.

And abound. The word in the original is very significant, it signifies
properly to superabound, or to abound more then needs. Not that there is any
degree of grace, which is indeed more then needs: but it is spoken in respect
of the wicked, which esteem strictness of religion to be mere curiosity.

The point hence to be noted is this, viz. that Doctrine.
Christians ought to labor for an holy strictness in profession, yea for such
a degree of strictness as is esteemed curiosity in the world. This we are
taught also in Ephesians. 5.15. Walk circumspectly, or rather as the word in the
original signifies, walk accurately, or nicely.

This we are taught also in Math. 5.48. Be ye perfect. Unto this strictness or
holy curiosity, the examples of the Saints should move us. David daunced
before the Arc, although Michal esteemed him a fool for his labor, 2. Sam.
6.22.

Thus Paul served the God of his Fathers, although that kind of service was
counted heresy, Acts 24.14.

Thus should Christians make question, Whether it be lawful to stand gazing at
their doors in time of divine Service upon the Sabbath day? Whether it be
lawful to swear at all in common talk? Whether it be lawful to receive all
gifts, though never so freely offered? Whether it be lawful to go to the
uttermost limits of lawfulness, in partaking of the things of this life; and
thus in many other things.

Use.
This condemns the practice of hypocrites, which will not be counted fools
for Christ, and therefore will profess no further then will stand with their
credits.

Secondly, It serves to condemn the practice of the wicked, which account all
things which savor of any strictness, to be foolishness and curiosity; but
let such remember that in Isay 5: Woe unto them which call good evil.

Thirdly, to encourage all holy Christians in their strictness, let them go
on, and be yet more curious and scrupulous in avoiding all appearance of evil,
although they be despised for the same.

Neither idle. Some translations read it, neither barren; but I rather agree
to their judgments which read it neither idle. First, because the greek word
does most properly signify so, it being the same word which is used in Math.
20.6. Why stand ye here all the day idle? Secondly, because otherwise here
might seem a vain tautalogie or repetition to be made: The first word,
barren, being the same in sense with the second, unfruitfulness; which is not
to be granted.

Neither idle. Hence we may observe, that Doctrine.
A true sanctified Christian is no idle person. True Christianity, and
idleness, they are as the Arc and Dagon, they cannot stand together. Thus
Jacob was a true Christian, and mark what pains he took, Genesis 32.40: The
drought consumed him by day, and the frost by night, and the sleep departed
from his eyes. Thus the good woman spoken of in Prou. 31. was a true Christian,
and behold she seeks wool and flax, and works willingly with her hands;
yea, she rises whilst it is night, and eats not the bread of idleness, Pro.
31.13.15.27. Thus Paul was a Christian Minister, and he labored more
abundantly then they all, 1. Cor. 15.10. A Christian has a double calling to
follow. First, his general calling, as he is a Christian. Secondly, his
particular calling, as he follows this or that trade of life; and this double
calling will not suffer him to be idle: he may happily want work in his
particular calling at some times; but he can never want work in his general
calling, he shall have enough to do, to work out his salvation, though he
work day and night: therefore a true Christian cannot be an idle person.

Objection.
But some possibly may object, that in 2. These. 3.11. I hear (says Paul) that
there be some which walk disorderly amongst you, and work not at all.

Answer.
Such indeed were amongst the Thessalonians, but they were not of them. Or
secondly, we deny not but a true child of God, may for a time be overtaken
with idleness, as he may be overtaken with other sins; but idleness does
not reign in him.

Use.
This serves to discover many to be no true Christians; as first, many of our
gentry, which follow no calling but spend their precious time idly and
scandalously. Secondly, our common beggars, which cast off all labor, and live
by begging. Thirdly, usurers which cast off their lawful callings, and live by
usury. Fourthly, stageplayers, and cheators, and drunkards, and harlots, with
many others, which follow no lawful employment: These are no true Christians,
as appears by their idleness.

Secondly, this may serve to excite us to avoid idleness; as we desire to
approve our selves true Christians, let us always be found either in our
general or particular calling, and that for these reasons. First, because
idleness is one of the very sins of Sodom, Ezekiel. 16.49.

Secondly, because it is the breeder of other sins, 1. Tim 5.13.

Thirdly, because it brings poverty by a just judgment of God, Pro. 24.34.

And lastly, because it brings damnation, as appears by the foolish virgins
which were found sleeping, Math. 25.

Nor unfruitful. The best Greek copies read it thus, though there be some
books which read it otherwise.

The lesson hence to be learned is this, viz. that Doctrine.
as a true sanctified Christian is no idle person, so he is not barren and
unfruitful. He is like a tree planted by the rivers of waters, which brings
forth fruit in due season, Psalm. 1. yea such as are planted in the house of the
Lord, shall flourish in the courts of our God; they shall still bring forth
fruit in old age, Psalm. 92.13.14. And the wisdom which is from above, is
first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and
good fruits. Iam. 3.17.

Thus the Macedonians were true sanctified Christians and their deep poverty
abounded to their rich liberality, 2. Cor. 8.2. The like may be said of Job in
his 31. chapter, and of Cornelius, Acts. 10.1.2. and of Dorcas Acts 9.39. and
of Zacchaus, Luke 19.8. and of the poor widow which cast in all her living
into Gods treasury, Mar. 12.34. and of the good women which followed Christ
from Galile, ministering unto him, Mat. 27.55.

Reason.
And indeed it cannot be, but a true Christian must be fruitful. First,
because Christ is his root, Romans 11.18. Secondly, because God the Father is
his planter, Esaias 5.2.

Use.
This may serve to discover many that make show of religion, not to be true
sanctified Christians, because they are barren and unfruitful; their
unfruitfulness argues their unsoundness: but let all such remember the
barren fig tree, which Christ cursed, and let them tremble.

Secondly, It may serve to excite every one of us to fruitfulness. Let us
bring forth fruits worthy of repentance, Math. 3.8. Let us have our fruit unto
holiness, Romans 6.22. Let us be filled with the fruits of righteousness, Phil.
1.11. Let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the
fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his Name, Heb. 13.15. And to distribute or
communicate let us not forget, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased,
Heb. 13.16.

They make you. Whence observe and note, that Doctrine.
grace in the child of God is the cause of painfulnesse and fruitfulness. Of
painfulnesse; thus Paul was besides himself, as it were, in the seruency and
labor of his ministry, because the love of Christ constrains him, 2. Cor.
5.14. Thus Noah, moved with fear prepared the Arc, Heb. 11.7. Thus Jeremiah
was constrained to preach, by that fire of grace which was within, Ier. 20 7.
Thus Peter and John could not but speak the things which they had seen and
heard, being moved by the Spirit of God within them, Acts 4.20. And this puts a
difference between the painfulnesse of worldlings and of Christians. Worldlings
are moved to painfulnesse for greediness of gain, or the like, but Christians
by the motion of grace, become painful; the one sort are moved by an outward
cause, the other by an inward.

Secondly, as grace is the cause of painfulnesse in the child of God, so it is
of fruitfulness. For what moved Rahab to receive the Spies, and to hide them
from the rage of their enemies, but faith? Heb. 11.31. What moved the good
Samaritane to take care of the wounded man? Luke 10.33. but his inward
compassion. What moves the good man to lend? Psalm. 112.5. but mercy and
loving favor. And this also serves to put difference betwixt a true Christian
and an hypocrite. For an hypocrite does all for an outward cause, to wit, to be
seen of men; but a true Christian does that which he does, in sincerity, and
by the inward motion of grace.

In the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. The knowledge of Christ consists
mainly in those things: first, in knowing him to be very God: secondly, to be
very man: thirdly, to be God and man in one person: fourthly, to be the second
person in the Trinity, equal to the Father: fifthly, to be conceived by the
holy Ghost, borne of the virgin Mary, and so as follows of him in the Creed:
sixthly, to know him to be the true Messiah, to be the only Savior, to be a
King to rule over us, a Priest to offer Sacrifice for us, and a Prophet to
instruct us: seventhly, to know him experimentally, to know the working of his
Spirit, the virtue of his death, burial, resurrection, ascension, mediation,
and the like.

This is the chief knowledge of all others, as the Apostle acknowledges,
Philip. 3.8. yea it is eternal life, John 17.3. And Paul himself desired to
know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified, 1. Corint. 2.2. Yea, if a man
knew all other secrets, and were ignorant of Christ, he knew nothing as he
ought to know.

Now the means to attain this excellent knowledge, which passes knowledge,
is: First, to pray unto God, that he would reveal the Son to us; for none
knows the Son but the Father, Luke 10.22.

Secondly, to search the Scriptures, for they are they which testify of
Christ, John 5.19.

He is blind. Hence we are to observe, that Doctrine.
Every graceless person is a blind person: and so they are termed in diverse
places of Scripture, as in Esaias 42.7. where Christ is said to be given as a
Covenant of the People, and a Light of thr Gentiles, to open the blind eyes,
and to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness
out of the prison house: and in Romans 1.21. where it is said of the graceless
heathen, That their foolish heart was darkened: and in Matthew. 15.14. where it is
said of the graceless Pharisees, That they were blind leaders of the blind.

Reason.
And fitly may a graceless person be compared to a blind man for these
reasons.

First, because, as a blind man is apt to stray out of his way, and yet to
think himself to be in the way; so a graceles person is prone to err from
the way of Gods precepts, and yet still to suppose that he is in the ready way
to heaven.

Secondly, because, as a blind man walks on and sees no danger, but thinks
himself safe until he drop into a pit: even so a graceless person goes on
in his wicked course, and is secure until he suddenly drop into hell.

Thirdly, because, as a blind man may easily be wronged in his meats, and
drinks, and the like, taking that to be wholesome which is unwholesome; even
so graceless persons may easily be wronged in their spiritual diet, taking
that to be wholesome doctrine which is unsound and unwholesome.

Fourthly, because, as a blind man is deprived of outward comfort; he sees not
the glory of the Sun, nor the beauty of the Moon, nor the pleasantness of
the fields and of every tree: even so a graceless person is destitute of all
sound consolation; he may seem to rejoice in the face, but he cannot rejoice
in the heart.

Quest.
But here it may be demanded, whence comes this fearful blindness upon
mankind, was man at the first created blind?

Answ.
Not so; Adam and Eve were created in the image of God, but striving for more
knowledge then was fit for them, they lost that sight and knowledge which they
had.

Secondly, the devil the prince of darkness does blind the eyes of infidels,
that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ might not shine unto them, 2.
Cor. 4.4.

Use.
Now, is it so, that every graceless person is blind? Then this does justly
meet with that proud selfe-conceitednesse which is in graceless persons,
especially if they be rich, or learned in humane learning, in that they are
ready to say with the proud Pharisees, John 9.40. Are we also blind? Unto whom
we may answer, Yes verily, ye are also blind, being graceless. For whosoever
has not these things, is blind.

Secondly, this teaches us to take notice of this blindness, and to labor to
get out of it; let us cry after Christ as Bartimeus did, Mark 10.51. and let
us never give over our suite, until we obtain that spiritual eyesalue
whereby we may see.

Thirdly, this shows what need every congregation has of a guide, I mean of
a faithful and understanding Minister. A blind person has not more need of
one to lead him, then we have of Ministers to guide us.

And cannot see afar off. The word in the original signifies winking with
the eyes. Whence we are to observe, that Doctrine.
A graceless person is wilfully ignorant.

This is proved out of Matthew. 13.15. Their eyes they have closed, lest at any
time they should see with their eyes; and out of 2. Peter 3.5. This they
willingly are ignorant of. And out of John 3.19. Light came into the world; and
men love darkness more then light.

Thus we see multitudes which will not come where they may be instructed,
refusing to com to the Church, refusing to dwell in Christian houses, abhorring
to come in the company of the wise, and all because they would not be
instructed.

Reason.
And why are people willing to be ignorant? Surely, first, because their deeds
are evil, therefore do they hate the light, John 3.19. They are loath to know
the worst of their estates.

Secondly, because they are selfe-conceited, and think that they know
sufficient, when indeed they know nothing as they ought to know.

Thirdly, because they are prone to have a preiudicate opinion of knowledge,
esteeming basely of it; like unto fools which prize bables at an high rate,
but despise things precious.

Use.
But let us beware of this sin: for if Christ will come in flaming fire,
rendering vengeance unto them which know not God, 2 Thessalonians. 1: then how much
more will he be avenged of them which cry in their hearts; Depart from us, for
we desire not the knowledge of thy ways? Job 21.19.

Secondly, let every one examine themselves, whether they be guilty yea or no
of this sin; and it will appear by these marks: for first, if thou contemn
powerful preaching, and wilfully neglect it: secondly, if thou art loath that
thy conscience should be pricked with the sense and feeling of thy sin:
thirdly, if thou hate them that would instruct thee: fourthly, if thou
shunnest the company and places where knowledge is to be learned: fifthly, if
thou stand at a stay, and endeuourest not to increase in knowledge: sixthly,
if thou have a base esteem of knowledge; thou need go no further to seek
marks, thou art wilfully ignorant. And therefore pray God to give thee
repentance, that thou may escape his wrath.

And has forgotten that he was purged from his old sins. By old sins we
are to understand sins committed of old: and graceless persons are said here
to be purged from their old sins, that is, to be justified by Christ: not
because they were effectually justified; for if so, then withal they should
have been sanctified; but because justification is freely offered unto them,
and because they make account that they have as good part in it as any other,
therefore they are said to be purged. Lastly, graceless persons are said to
forget this great work of redemption by Christ, to intimate, that they are
grossly unthankful for the same. Thus you see the meaning of the words.

Old sins. Whence observe we, that Doctrine.
Every man and woman are sinners of old. The wicked (says David) are estranged
from the womb, they go astray as soon as they be borne, speaking lies, Psalm
58.5. Have thou marked the old way which wicked men have trodden? says Eliphas,
Job 22.15. Thus Job makes mention of the sins of his youth, Job 13.26. and
David of the sin wherein he was conceived, Psalm. 51: all implying that men
and women are sinners of old.

Besides proofs out of Scriptures, we see it manifest by woeful experience in
the world. For do we not see children, before they can speak plain, to be
subject to take Gods name in vain, to lie, to be proud, to be vain, and the
like? Yes, it is too manifest.

Use.
Let it therefore teach us, not only to repent of our yesterdaies sins, and
of our new sins, but also of our old sins. Let us learn of David to say,
Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions, Psalm. 25.7. And be
it far from us to extenuate or mince the sins of old, as though they were
nothing, because they were committed in our minority, or for want of wit, and
the like. And much more let us abhor to boast of our old sins, as it is the
manner of many doting sinners. But let us know that old sins must have new
repentance; or if they have not new repentance, certainly we may look that
they shall have new judgments.

Purged. Whence note, that Doctrine.
There is a means whereby to be purged even from old sins, that is, from the
guiltiness and punishment of them. There is a fountain opened to the house of
David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and for uncleanness,
Zach. 13.1.

If any shall demand what fountain this is which purges away sin: I
answer, It is no other but the precious blood of the Lord Jesus; according to
that of Reuelat. 1.5. To him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in
his own blood, etc. and that in John 13.8. where Christ says unto Peter, If I
wash thee not, thou shall have no part with me.

Use.
Let us make this use of the point: first, in that there is a fountain opened,
let us bless God for it, and wash our selves in it by the hand of sound
application. Let us not say with Naaman the Syrian, Are not Abana and Pharpar
rivers of Damascus better then all the waters of Israel? 2. Kings 5.12. But
renouncing the puddle of our own merits, let us fly to Christ's merits, the
fountain of pure waters; and let us trust to him alone.

Secondly, let us learn hence to esteem sin (as it is) to be a filthy and
loathsome thing; were it not so, what need we to be purged? Yea, let us esteem
it to be a most capital and heinous thing; for else, what needed such a strong
purgation, as is the blood of Christ?

Thirdly, this may be a remedy against despair: for, grant thou art a great
sinner, and an old sinner; yet thou have this comfort, if thou convert and
turn, that there is sufficient means to purge thee from thy sins, though
never so great, or of never so long continuance. Come by faith to the Jordan of
Christ's blood, and it will wash thee from thy leprosy, though thou wast a
leper borne.

They were purged. Whence observe, that Doctrine.
Graceless persons are not exempted from that redemption which is by Christ.
This is a true saying, and worthy of all acceptance, That Christ Jesus came
into the world to save sinners, 1. Tim. 1.15. whereby sinners we are to
understand as in other Texts of Scripture, graceless persons. The like we
read in Luke 19.18. The Son of man is come to seek, and to save that which
was lost. And in 1. John 2.1. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father, and he is the Propitiation for our sins, etc.

Use.
The Lord offers Christ to all, and the Gospel preaches Christ unto all: if
any man therefore receive not benefit by Christ, his condemnation is of
himself. For howsoever no man has free will to believe if he list; yet in
that he does wilfully reject Gods offer of mercy, therefore he justly deserves
damnation.

Have forgotten. Hence observe, that Doctrine.
Graceless persons are very forgetful of Gods blessings, yea even of
redemption it self.

Thus it is said of the graceless Israelites in Psalm. 106.7 Our Fathers
understood not thy wonders in Aegipt, they remembered not the multitude of thy
mercies, but provoked him at the sea, even at the red sea. And in the 21. verse
of the same Psalm; They forgot God their Savior, which had done great things
in Aegipt, etc.

The reason of which forgetfulness is, because the memory of graceless
persons is unsanctified. Our memories naturally being polluted as well as our
judgments or affections.

Secondly, because graceless persons they know not the benefit of redemption,
they feel not the sweetness of it, and therefore, no marvel if they be
forgetful or unmindful of it.

Use.
This shows how unworthy graceless persons are of Gods benefits.

And secondly, let all that fear God beware of this sin: yea let us remember
night and day, this benefit of redemption, as being the greatest benefit of all
other.

Wherefore. Now the Apostle comes to a third argument, whereby he labors to
enforce the former exhortation, and it is as though he should say: My Christian
brethren, labor to have your hearts furnished with the eight forenamed
graces; for if you be so happy as to attain unto them, then behold you shall
make your calling and election sure; yea, you shall stand, and never totally
nor finally fall.

Wherefore. Before we come particularly to the doctrines of this text, we will
premise something in general, concerning vocation and election.

Vocation is two fold, viz. ineffectual and only outward: or effectual and
inward. Concerning ineffectual calling, we read, Pro. 1.24. Because I have
called, and ye have refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded,
etc. and Isay 65.1.2. I said, Behold me, behold me, unto a nation that was not
called by my name: I have spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious
people. And Mat. 22.14. Many are called, but few are chosen.

Now by this outward ineffectual calling, we are to understand all the outward
means of salvation; as preaching of the word, outward and temporal benefits,
crosses, afflictions, tribulations; for by all these means, God does call and
cry aloud to all men to repent: Never is the word preached, the conscience
pricked, benefits bestowed, and afflictions brought, but the Lord cries, by
these means, Repent, repent. Thus the Lord has called to England and to this
sinful city of London, for many years together; who amongst us can truly
say but he has been called upon, either by the word, or by his conscience, or
by benefits, or by crosses? But we (wretches that we are) have turned the deaf
ear to God; we have been like the adder that stops her ear, which
refuses to hear the voice of the charmer, charm he never so sweetly. How
justly might God forsake us and cease calling unto us? How justly might he say
unto us as he says unto the Jews? Prou. 1.24.26. Because I have called and ye
refused, I will also laugh at your calamities, and mock when your fear comes.

Effectual and inward calling, goes a step beyond this ineffectual and
outward: for in the effectual calling, God does not only afford the bare
means of vocation, but also he adds power to the means, and grace to them
which are called unto, to hearken and to obey the call.

The effectual calling, is like the calling of Lazarus out of the grave, John
11.41.42. Lazarus come forth; for there was not only a bare call, but also a
quickening power to make the call effectual.

The efficient cause of this effectual calling, is God himself; it is he
which calls us out of darkness into his marvelous light, the first of
Peter 2.9. And indeed who is it that can make a dead man hear but God alone?

The isntrumental cause indeed is the word of God, as appears, 2.
Thessalonians 2.14. Whereunto he called you by our Gospel to obtain the glory
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And yet let us not limit the holy One: howbeit therefore God does most
ordinarily call effectually, by the preaching of the word; yet we acknowledge
he is able to call, and that effectually by other means, yea even without
means, if it please him.

The privileges of this calling are diverse: for first, hereby we are
translated out of the kingdom of Satan, into the kingdom of Christ, Col.
1.13. a greater dignity then if we were taken from the dunghill to be
favorites in the kings court.

Secondly, hereby we are called to be Saints, 1. Cor. 1.2. whereas, before our
called estate, we were no better then Devils incarnate, in our selves.

Thirdly, hereby we are called to be sons and daughters of God almighty, 1.
John 3.1.2. which is ten thousand times a greater honor then to be called the
sons and daughters of Princes.

Fourthly, hereby we are called to be heirs, yea to be coheires with Christ,
of the kingdom of heaven, Romans 8.17.

Use.
Let us learn therefore to esteem the calling of a Christian to be an high
calling, Phil. 3.14. Let us not disgrace it by scandal, but rather endeavor to
walk worthy of it; yea let us be thankful for it, if we be partakers of it,
and acknowledge that it is one of the greatest favors that ever God showed us.
Art thou effectually called? thou needst not envy the wicked in their greatest
prosperity, thine estate is far more excellent then theirs.

And election. It is the eternal and unchangeable decree of God, whereby of
his free grace and mercy, he has made choice of some rather then of others, to
bestow upon them eternal life and happiness, and that for the gloty of his
free grace.

That election was from all eternity, it is evident out of Ephesians. 1.4. He has
chosen us in him before the foundation of the world. And that it is
unchangeable, it is as evident, Romans 11.2. God has not cast away his people
whom he foreknew. And Mal. 3.6. I am thy Lord, I change not, etc.

Again, that election was of Gods free grace, and not of men's merits
foreseen, the Apostle declares manifestly in Romans 11.5.6. where he terms
election, the election of grace; showing withal, that if it be of grace, it is
not of works, etc.

Lastly, that election was made to the glory of Gods free grace, it is also
manifest Ephesians. 1.5. Having predestined us unto the adoption of children, by
Jesus Christ, to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the
praise and glory of his grace. Thus we see the proofs of the definition.

Use.
Let it teach us first, to deny our selves, and our own righteousness. Our
salvation is not of works, but of grace. Secondly, let it teach us to advance
Gods free grace, in that he should make choice of us, and pass by others of
our own flesh. Thirdly, let it stay us and comfort us, in that our election is
unchangeable.

To make your calling and election sure. Whence observe we, Doctrine.
That it is the part and duty of every Christian, to be well persuaded and
assured of the truth of his calling and election: of his calling, so says the
Apostle, 2 Corinthians. 13.5. Examine your selves whether you be in the faith,
prove your own selves: Know you not that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be
reprobates? Effectual calling is absolutely necessary to salvation; for
unless a man be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom of God, John 3.3. yea
effectual calling it is that which God especially respects; for circumcision
avails nothing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature, Gal. 6.15. For these
reasons we ought (to our power) make our calling sure.

But some (possibly) will demand, by what means a man or woman may be assured
of the truth and efficacy of their calling. I answer: Thou may know thy
calling to be true and effectual by diverse signs and tokens. First, if it be a
divine calling, that is, if it be of God; the world has a call, and the Devil
and Antichrist have a call; but the effectual calling is from God, and has
warrant from the word.

Secondly, thy calling is effectual, if being of God thou do yield unto it.
It is not the bare call, but the yielding unto the call, which proves the
calling to be effectual.

Thirdly, If thy vocation or calling, be an euocation or calling out: If thou
find thy self called out of Sodom and Babylon, that is, out of the dominion
of former ignorance and wickedness; this is a blessed sign of effectual
calling.

Fourthly, If thy calling be a calling to, that is, if it do not only call thee
out of vice, but also to positive virtue, as to the practice of holiness and
righteousness, etc.

Fifthly, If thy calling be a continued calling; If thou find that the same
voice of God, which called thee and changed thee at the first, does still call
upon thee in every ordinance, and does more and more go on to change thee from
one degree of grace to another.

Sixthly and lastly, If thy calling make thee fruitful in good works, as it
did Zaccheus, Luke 19.8. The calling which procures leaves but no fruit, is
not effectual, I dare boldly say. By these signs thou may in some measure
discern whether thy calling be effectual or no: take some pains in examining
of thy self in private, and be not partial in thine examination.

Again, as every Christian ought to labor to be persuaded of the truth of his
calling, so in like manner he ought to be persuaded of his election. What man
is there if he hear by a flying report, that great matters are befallen unto
him, but he will enquire by all means whether the report be true or not? Or
who is it which does not desire to have deeds and evidences lying by him of
his earthly possessions? Shall we be thus careful to make our houses and lands
sure, and shall we not be much more careful to make our election and eternal
estate sure? Yes by all means.

And the assurance of election is necessary in two respects. First, in respect
of God. Secondly, in respect of our selves. In respect of God, as first, that
we may be thankful to his Majesty for the great benefit of election; for how
can we be thankful unless we know that we are elected? Secondly, that we may
love God for electing of us; and how is it possible that we should love God,
unless we know that he first loved us?

Secondly, this assurance is necessary in respect of our selves. For first, it
is the ground of all sound joy; the especial joy of a Christian, is that his
name is written in heaven, Luke 10.20. Now this joy we cannot have without
assurance.

And secondly, it is the especial means to sustain us in our greatest
trials. What is it which stays us in the billows of temptation, but the
grace of our hope, if it be steadfastly settled?

Now the marks of election are these, whereby we may try our selves in some
measure.

As first, if we find that the word of God has come in power unto us: If it
has wrought powerfully upon our Consciences, to change and alter us. By this
very argument Paul proves the Thessalonians to be elected, in 1. Thessal.
1.4.5. Knowing, brethren beloved, your election of God; for our Gospel came
unto you, not in word only, but also in power and in the holy Ghost.

Secondly, If we find that we have faith to believe Gods word sauingly, it is
a mark of election; for none but they which were ordained to eternal life
believed, Acts 13.48.

Thirdly, If we find that we are truly and effectually called: For indeed
effectual calling, is an effect and consequence of election, according to that
in Romans 8.30. Whom he has predestined, them he has called: Now this effect
does necessarily prove the precedent cause.

Fourthly, If we find the end of election to be accomplished in us: For God
has chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the world, that we should be
holy and without blame, before him, in love, Ephesians 1.4. If we find these
things in us, happy are we.

Fifthly, if we be endued with those graces spoken of in Coloss. 3.12. Put on
therefore (the elect of God, holy and beloved) bowels of mercies, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one an other, and
forgiving one another, etc.

Sixthly, if we find that we have grace given unto us to make choice of God to
be our Summum bonum, or chief good. We could never have grace to make choice
of God, unless he had first made choice of us. Not to multiply more signs of
election: let every soul try himself by these, and the Lord give a blessing
to thy endeavors.

Give diligence. Or, be diligent. Whence observe, that Doctrine.
A great deal of diligence is required for the making of calling and election
sure. And the reason is; first, because it is a difficult work; it is no easy
matter to be undoubtedly assured of Gods favor without wavering. This work
has much opposition; the world says, it is presumption to go about to be
fully persuaded; the devil he labors by all means to weaken our faith; and
lastly, the flesh in us is faithless and unbelieving, hardly drawn to
believe. Thus the work is hard. Secondly, there is required, to the obtaining
of assurance, a great deal of means for the working of those graces whereby
we must try our selves; there is required hearing of the word, meditation in
the fame, prayer, conferring, and the like. And this cannot be done without
diligence. Thirdly, there is required much sifting and trying of our graces,
whether they be true or no. Those graces from which we must conclude the
certainty of our calling and election, had need be sound; and therefore had
need be tried; and this trial cannot be made without some pains.

Objection.
But some possibly will object, I find it no such difficult matter, to
believe, that we should need to use any such great diligence to make our
calling and election sure: I thank God I never doubted in all my life time;
yea, it is pity that he should live that does not believe. Answ.
Thus indeed many a wretched man deceives himself, putting presumption or
carnal security for faith. But let such remember, He which never doubted,
certainly never believed; if thou had faith indeed, thou should find it
more hard to believe.

Objection.
Yea but are not many true Conuerts able to say by experience, that God gave
unto them full assurance of his favor, even from the first day of their
conversion; and that their assurance was wrought without their own industry
and diligence? Answ.
I do not deny but that the Lord is able to give assurance without a man's own
diligence; and that he often times also does give it without our help. But no
man must tempt the Lord in expecting an extraordinary work, considering the
Lord affords ordinary means. God once gave Manna unto the children of
Israel: but this does not prove that others may expect the same in aftertimes.
Yea whosoever expects bread at these days, he must labor for it, and not look
that it should still fall from heaven: even so, if we desire full assurance of
Gods favor, we must be diligent in seeking of it, and not expect it by
extraordinary means. Secondly, even they which find the greatest assurance,
yet (no doubt) they find diverse assaults of Satan between times, shaking
their assurance, and breeding doubts; which doubtings will not be healed again
without diligence.

Use.
This point serves first, justly to reprove such as use no diligence this way;
yea as think it to be curiosity and niceness for any man to give diligence
to make his calling and election sure. And the sin of such is the greater,
because they will use all diligence to get riches, to obtain their lusts, to
have their wills, and the like; but they have no diligence to spare for God, or
for their own salvation. I exhort such to repent of their former negligence
this way, and to redeem the time with double diligence for hereafter.

Secondly, let every man and woman stir up themselves to this diligence,
viz. to make their calling and election sure. It is worth all our pains; for,
what can be more sweet to the soul, then to be fully persuaded of Gods favor?
Neglect not such a comfort.

Thirdly, considering that full assurance is not attained ordinarily, but by
great diligence; therefore let such as have obtained it more easily, try their
assurance, whether it be sound or no. And if they find it to be sound, let
them be more thankful to God, who has given that freely unto them, without
their own labor, which he gives not unto many others, but with much striving
and industry.

Wherefore the rather. These words have respect to that in the latter end of
this tenth verse, where it is said: For if ye do these things, ye shall never
fall. The point to be observed is this; Doctrine.
It is the part and duty of every Christian, the rather to be diligent to make
his calling and election sure, because this is a means to prevent falling away.

But some man may say, How is full assurance of election and calling, a means
to prevent falling away? I answer, Because it is joined with many preservative
graces, as with faith, and the like.

Secondly, because, such is the sweetness of full assurance, that whosoever
has it, he would not part with it again for any pleasure or profit, whereby
he is tempted to fall away. Thus assurance is a strong preservative against
backesliding.

But wherein stands the force of this Argument, which the holy Ghost uses
to persuade every man to make his calling and election sure? For, is it such a
great matter to fall away, that we should the rather give diligence to make our
calling and election sure, to prevent it? Surely yes, it is a sore matter and
grievous for any to backeslide, or to play the apostate. If any man draw
back (says God) my soul shall have no pleasure in him, Hebrews 10.38. Yea,
it had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, then
after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment given unto
them, 2. Pet. 2.21.

And the reason that backesliding is so fearful, is manifest: first, because
it frustrateth or makes vain all former good beginnings; for the
righteousness of backsliders shall not once be mentioned, Ezech. 18.24.
Secondly, because it gives a stronger possession unto the devil then ever he
had before: he reenters with seven devils worse then himself, Mat. 12.45.
Thirdly, because it makes a man or woman more like unto dogs and swine then
Christians; The dog is returned to his vomit, etc. 2. Pet. 2.

Use.
This serves to show the reason or cause, why so many fall off at these days;
it is because they never were diligent to make their calling and election sure.
If they had labored for assurance, their assurance would have prevented their
fall. They should have stood by faith; whereas now they bear the price of
their folly.

For if ye do these things. Or, as it is in the original: Doing these things
ye shall never fall. Now in that the Apostle does seem to intimate, that our
standing is conditional, and that it depends (in some sort) upon our own
endeavors: Quest.
therefore the question may be this, viz. Whether the child of God, elected
before all worlds, redeemed with the blood of Christ, and truly and effectually
called, may ever totally and finally fall out of his election, redemption and
vocation, and so become reprobate and be damned; and whether his standing
depend mainly upon his own endeavors? Answ.
We do not deny but that hypocrites, which seem to be the children of God, and
are not; and seem to have saving grace, but have not, may finally and totally
fall from that which seems to have been in them in former times: as we see in
the examples of Saul, and Judas, and Demas, and many others. And the reason of
their fall is: first, because they began in hypocrisy, and that profession
which is begun in hypocrisy, will commonly end in apostacy. Secondly,
because they never received the truth, or embraced profession for it self, or
in the love of it, but merely for carnal ends, as for profit, or a great name,
or to please others, and the like. And that profession which is undertaken for
such causes, must needs cease, when the causes of it cease. Thirdly, because
they were never any practisers of the word of God. They always built upon the
sandy foundation of an outward profession, making no conscience of sound
practice: and therefore, when the rain descended, and the floods came, and the
winds blew and beat upon them, they fell, etc. Matthew. 7.26.27.

Again, we do not deny but that the very children of God may fall, in some
measure, from some degree of that grace which they have had in former times.
They may fall into great errors of judgment, as we see in the holy Galatians,
which were ready to embrace another gospel; yea which were removed to another
gospel, Galat. 1.6. Secondly, they may fall from their first love in some
degree, Reuelat. 2.4.5. Thirdly, they may fall into gross sin, as we see in
David and Peter, and many other. Fourthly, they may fall from the sense and
feeling of Gods grace; and they may come to think themselves to be reprobates
and cast-awaies, to be utterly deprived of grace, and the like.

The reasons of which downe-falls in Gods children are diverse: first, want or
neglect of powerful means. What was the reason of the fall of the Galatians,
but Paul's absence? Secondly, idleness; for, how came David to fall so
grossly, but in that he was found idle? 2. Sam. 11. Thirdly, bad company.
For, how came Peter to deny his Master, but by being amongst the high priests
servants? Math. 26. Fourthly, natural infirmity, we being too prone to fear
men, and so to be discouraged by their threats and persecutions; or to please
them, and so to yield unto them in all things; or to follow their guise or
example. These, and such like, are causes of the fall of Gods children from
some degrees of grace.

But that Gods children once elected, redeemed and effectually called, should
utterly and finally fall, we constantly deny it; and that for these reasons:
first, because God has expressly promised, that he will make with his servants
an everlasting Covenant; and that he will not turn from them to do them good,
but that he will put his fear in their hearts, that they may not depart from
him, Jeremy 32.40. Now Gods promises are infallible. Secondly, because our
marriage with Christ is an everlasting marriage: I will betroth thee unto me
for ever, Hosea 2.19. Now that which is for ever, shall never have end.
Thirdly, because the Father is stronger then all, and none can pluck us out of
his hand, John 10.28. Fourthly, because God will never cast away any whom he
knew before, Romans 11.12.

If any shall object that in Exodus 32, 33; If any shall sin against me, or
whosoever sins against me, him will I blot out of my book: I answer, The
Lord speaks there figuratively, and to our capacities; and his meaning is,
that he will manifest rebels not to be written in his book: that whereas they
seemed to be the elect people of God, by outward prerogatives and external
profession, now the Lord will demonstrate them to be of the Synagogue of Satan.
This must needs be the meaning of the holy Ghost in that place. For where he
speaks particularly concerning Gods decrees, he shows, that they are
immutable, that they are like the mighty mountains which stand fast for ever,
Psalm. 33.11. Pro. 19.21. The counsel of the Lord shall stand.

For the second part of the question, to wit, Whether a child of God stand
mainly by his own endeavors or not? because it is said; If ye do these
things, ye shall never fall: I answer, He that made us without us, will not
save us without us. We must work out our salvation, Philip. 2.12. so that our
endeavors are required in this business. Howbeit it is not in him that
wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy, Romans 9.16. We
must work, but we stand not mainly by our own work, but we are kept by the
power of God, as Peter speaks in his first Epistle the first chapter.
Practice indeed is an excellent means to prevent the fall, as we shall show
when we come to the Doctrine; but it is not the maine. We have an higher cause
of standing then our own endeavors, to wit, the divine power; or else we
should quickly fall, for any thing we are able to do by our best industry.

If ye do these things ye shall never fall. The doctrine hence to be observed,
is, that Doctrine.
Practice of Gods word, and adding grace unto grace, is an especial means to
prevent backe-sliding. And that practice is an especial means to prevent
backsliding, it is manifest out of Mat. 7.24: Whosoever hears these sayings
of mine, and does them, I will liken him to a wise man, which built his house
upon a rock; and the raynes descended, and the floods came, and the winds
blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell not, for it was founded upon a
Rock.

Secondly, that adding grace unto grace, is likewise a means to prevent
backsliding, it is evident: for these words in the Text, If ye do these
things ye shall never fall, have relation to that which goes before in the
fifth, sixth, and seventh verses of this Chapter; where we are exhorted to add
grace unto grace: which if we do, we have bore a promise, we shall never fall.
Grace is of a preservative power, yea it is the armor of a Christian: Faith is
a shield, Righteousness is a brestplate, Hope is an helmet, Truth is a warlike
girdle, Courage is warlike boots or leg-harnesse: as they are compared, Ephesians.
6. Now therefore to add grace unto grace must needs be a means to prevent
backsliding.

Use.
This serves to discry unto us, the reason that so many carnal Gospellers fall
off or go back from their former true profession; it is because howsoever they
can talk of religion, and discourse of godliness, yet they do not practice
it; if they did turn their talk into practice, they should stand more firmly
then they do.

2. This shows the very cause why many of Gods children do fall from the first
forwardness; it is partly want of practice, and partly want of adding grace
unto grace.

Many of the children of God, for want of practice and adding grace unto grace,
do fall into those sins, which others of Gods servants never fall into,
being more practical; and more careful to add grace unto grace. Therefore as
any of us desire to prevent apostasy in our selves, let us be admonished to
practice and increase in grace, at the least let us use our best endeavors
thereunto. If we do these things, it rests upon Gods fidelity that we shall
never f^ll.

An entrance into the everlasting kingdom. Now we are come to the fourth and
last argument, whereby the former exhortation concerning adding grace unto
grace, is pressed and urged. Wherein first we are to observe, that Doctrine.
Christ has a kingdom: For here, as you see, is made mention of it, and for
the same cause is he termed a king, Zech. 9.9: Behold thy king comes unto
thee; and in many other places. Now the kingdom of Christ is twofold, viz. the
kingdom of grace, and the kingdom of glory. Concerning the kingdom of grace
we read, Col. 1.13. where it is said That God has delivered us out of the
power of darkness, and translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son,
that is, into the kingdom of grace. And this kingdom of grace is exercised in
the hearts of men, in righteousness, and peace and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans
14.17. the laws thereof being the word of God, which is the word of the
kingdom; the subjects, all the elect which are effectually called and
regenerate, Psalm. 2.6.

Secondly, as Christ has a kingdom of grace, so he has a kingdom of glory;
according to that of the penitent thief, Luke 23.40. Lord remember me when
thou come into thy kingdom, that is, into thy kingdom of glory. And this
kingdom is not exercised as the former, by the word and discipline; but
immediately, as seems to be intimated, Reu. 7.17. where it is said that the
Lamb does lead unto the living fountains of waters. Where, by waters (I take
it) is meant waters of comfort: and by leading, an immediate work of Christ.
Now the subjects of this kingdom of glory are, not only the Saints, according
to that in Reu. 14.1. I saw a Lamb standing upon mount Sion; but also the very
Angels; for so much the Apostle Peter does plainly imply in his first epistle,
3.22. Who is gone (meaning Christ) and is on the right hand of God; Angels and
authorities and powers being made subject unto him.

Use.
Which bewrays the blindness of the Jews despising Christ for his
meandness, not knowing indeed his greatness: they take notice of his cross,
but not of his Crown.

Secondly, let it teach us to submit our selves to Christ as to our king; Let
us obey him in the kingdom of grace, that at the last we may live with him in
the kingdom of glory.

Into the everlasting kingdom. The next point hence to be observed is, that
Doctrine.
The kingdom of Christ is not a temporary, but an everlasting kingdom. It is
not for a certain time, but for ever. It is not for a moment, but for
eternity. He shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom
there shall be no end, Luke 1.33. The Lord is the true God, he is the living
God, and the everlasting king, Ier. 10.10. Thy throne o God, is for ever and
ever, Psalm. 45.6. And every creature which is in heaven and on the earth, and
such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I saying; Blessing,
honor and glory, and power, be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto
the Lamb for ever and ever, Reu. 5.13. The which places do sufficiently prove
the eternity of Christ's kingdom, or that his kingdom is an everlasting
kingdom; Daniel the seventh Chapter, the thirteenth and fourteenth verses.

Reason.
And indeed we must not think that Christ shall lose any of his dignity or
greatness at any time, considering he is over all, God, blessed for ever, Romans
9.5. He never cease to deserve a kingdom, because his goodness is
everlasting; and never grows insufficient to manage a kingdom, because for
ever he is very God. Therefore it were very injurious for us to think that his
kingdom were not everlasting.

Objection.
But yet some may (possibly) object, that in 1. Cor. 15.25. where it is said of
Christ, that he must reign till he has put all his enemies under his feet:
and in verse 28. When all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the
Son also himself, be subject unto him that put all things under him.
Therefore it might seem that Christ's kingdom shall only continue till the day
of judgment, and that it shall then be abolished.

Answ.
I take it, that the blessed Apostle means the manner of Christ's kingdom in
that place, to wit, that Christ after the day of judgment shall not rule his
Church by the preaching of the word and the like: But as for the matter of the
kingdom, that it shall continue for ever, and that Christ as God shall reign
with the Father, and the holy Ghost for ever. Other answers might be rendered,
but in my poor understanding I hold this to be sufficient for the clearing of
the Apostles meaning: if any man think otherwise, let him enjoy his own
opinion, I will not contend with him.

Use.
Let the consideration then of Christ's everlasting kingdom, first, be a means
to teach Christians to admire the excellency of Christ. He reigns; and (for
the matter) he shall reign for ever. Let us have no conceit of any future
abasement os Christ. Let us not think that he shall at any time be dethroned
or thrust from his dignity. His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom.

Secondly, let it be matter of comfort to Gods children. Christ our eldest
brother shall reign for ever; therefore as brethren rejoice, that it should
always go well with their brother, even so ought we to rejoice that it shall
always go well with Christ. We do but in this love Christ, because he loved
us first; he rejoices in our prosperity; therefore why should not we rejoice
in his glory and the eternity of it? Yea, it may be matter of comfort unto Gods
children; being coheires with Christ they shall be partakers of an everlasting
kingdom, Dan. 7.27.

An entrance. Whence observe we, that Doctrine.
Christ his kingdom has an entrance. Yea his kingdom of grace has an
entrance, as well as the kingdom of glory; as every house has a door
whereby the family do enter: and as every City has gates whereby the
citizens and others have their ingresse and egresse: So it is with the kingdom
of Christ, it has its ingresse or entrance. And this ingresse or entrance into
Christ's kingdom, it is like the entrance into a City by gates. For so it is
compared, Reu. 21.13. where the holy City is said to have twelve gates, three
on the northside, three on the south, three on the west, and three on the east.
Whereby we are to understand especially the estate of the Church here below,
being indeed the kingdom of Christ, into the which there be many gates or in
lets.

Now the entrance into this kingdom, is no easy entrance; for indeed the
gate is strait, as Christ himself says of it, in Luke 13.24. and it is said
to be strait; First, because there is so much opposition to keep us from
entering in; the world, the flesh, and the Devil, will not have us to enter
into this City, if all their power can keep us back. Secondly, it is said to
be strait, because it leads to an holy strictness. After we are entered into
this holy City or kingdom, we must not think to live loosely as in former
times, but we must come to a more strict course of life.

Thirdly, it is said to be strait, in respect that it will not give entrance
to any that has a purpose in his heart to continue in his dearling and bosom
sins. Unless the proud person will stoop, he shall not enter here. Unless
the vainglorious person abate of his swelling, this gate is too strait for
him. Unless the covetous person be content to lay down his burden of ill got
goods and moneys, this door will not receive him. Unless the luxurious person
cease to embrace his harlot, the gate of Christ his kingdom is too narrow to
receive both him and his harlot at once, being both impenitent and graceless
persons.

Use.
Thus we see there is an entrance into Christ his kingdom, and what kind of
entrance it is. Let it teach us to be thankful to God, who has given unto
man an entrance unto grace and glory. The Lord has not dealt so with the
Angels that fell, but has utterly cast them out of his kingdom of grace and
glory, and left them no entrance at all, nor hope or possibility of entrance.

Secondly, let it teach us not to be discouraged, though we find the entrance
into grace to be strait; if we be content to endure the straitenesse of the
entrance, Christ will make our progress in grace to be the more easy, Math.
11.30.

Thirdly, let it teach us to be content to lay aside all impediments which
might hinder our entrance. Let us cast off every thing that presses down; and
let us earnestly strive to enter into this strait gate: and the rather let us
so do, because without this City there is no salvation. For without shall be
dogs, etc. Revelation 22.

Shall be ministered. That is, shall be yielded by God himself: Whence we are
to note, that men and women do not enter this gate of grace by their own
power, but by Gods power. They do not minister an entrance unto themselves,
but it is ministered unto them by God himself. Who was it that opened the door
of Faith to the Gentiles, but God himself? Acts 14.27. Who was it that opened
a wide door unto Paul's ministry to become effectual and to do good, but
God? 1. Cor. 16.4. Who was it that opened the heart of Lydia, but the same God?
Act. 16.14.

Reason.
And indeed our hearts are shut up, or fast locked naturally. We are shut up
unto Faith, as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 3.23. Now as a lock cannot open it
self, no more can our hearts without the key of Gods Spirit.

Objection.
But here some (possibly) may object: If it be not in our power to enter in at
the strait gate, then why does the Lord bid us to strive to enter in? Shall we
think that the Lord would have us to strive in vain?

Answ.
Though our entrance is not mainly procured by our striving; yet our striving,
through the mercy of God, shall not be in vain. For God may give a blessing
unto it, yea such a blessing, as that it may become a means of our entrance,
though not the efficient cause thereof.

Use.
Now is it so, that it is God that ministers entrance into the kingdom of
grace, then this must teach all that have found entrance, to be thankful to
God, who has showed this mercy on them. If God had not opened the door, here
had been no entrance at all for them.

Secondly, let this teach us, that if we would find more and more an entrance
to be supplied unto us, whereby we may enter farther and farther into this
blessed kingdom of grace; then we must pray unto God that he would give us
this supply. It is he which opens the gate at the first; and it is he that
does open it wider and wider by degrees: as the greek word also in this Text
translated, Ministered, does signify, Shall be supplied by degrees.

Thirdly, let us, whilst God does hold open this gate of mercy, strive to
enter in; lest wilfully refusing to enter when we might, we provoke the Lord to
shut up the gate, and never to be entreated to open again unto us. Take heed
of this.

Abundantly. Or as the word signifies in the greek, richly: whence we may
note, that Doctrine.
There be degrees in this matter of entrance into the kingdom of grace. Some
are entered farther then others be; some find a rich entrance and abundant,
others ^ot altogether so. Thus the Prophets and Apostles were further entered
into the treasures of knowledge, then any ordinary Christian there was. Thus
Moses was brought into more familiarity with God then many of his brethren, in
that the Lord talked with him, as a man with his friend. Thus Paul was led into
more rauishing joy, then many others, being rapt up into the third heaven.

And thus at these days, many have made a greater progress in Religion then
others have.

And what is the reason of this difference? Surely the first and principal
cause thereof is this, viz. the mercy of God and his wisdom: To one in his
wisdom and mercy he gives the degree of grace which he will not give to
another.

The second cause of the difference is, because many are too remiss and
negligent in the seeking of grace they will not take the pains that others do
in the acquiring of grace, and therefore it is no marvel if like unto
trewants they come short in their learning.

Use.
Let this teach us to labor to get more rich entrance; let us not content our
selves that we have an entrance, but let us endeavor to grow rich in grace. Let
us strive to go further and further in Christ his kingdom: We may go far
in this kingdom, even in this life, if we be careful to use the means as we
ought.

For so. That is, by adding grace unto grace, you shall more and more find
entrance into Christ his kingdom: for this verse has relation to that which
went before in the fifth, sixth and seventh verses, in this same Chapter.

Hence we are to note, that Doctrine.
By the eight forenamed graces, an entrance is made into the kingdom of
Christ, and by the growth in those graces, an abundant entrance is more and
more supplied. Thus by knowledge we are entered into the light of Christ his
kingdom, and by increase in knowledge, we are led into greater light. Thus by
Faith we are brought to the presence and fellowship of Christ, and as our Faith
grows, we increase in that fellowship. Thus by godliness, we are brought to
the subjection and obedience which is in Christ his kingdom; and the more we
abound in godliness, the further we make entrance into the kingdom. Thus by
love, and temperance, and patience, we are entered into the temper of Christ's
kingdom, and the sweet affections that are exercised therein; and the more
that we increase in these blessed graces, the further we enter into the
kingdom.

Lastly, by Charity, that is, by works of mercy, we are brought into the
practice of the kingdom; and the more that we grow in these works, the
further we enter into the kingdom: the like may be said of virtue.

Use.
Would thou then enter and go far in the Kingdom of Christ; then labor
to go far in the eight forenamed graces, content not thy self till thou have
these graces in thee: and when thou have them, labor to grow in them. And
thus an entrance shall be ministered abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Which if thou find, happy, and thrice
happy art thou.

Wherefore. Now we come to the third general part of the Chapter, wherein the
Apostle declares the reasons which moved him to write; from the beginning of
this twelfth verse, unto the end of the fifteenth: and secondly, the reasons
which should move the Church to hear him, and to hearken unto him; from the
beginning of the sixteenth verse unto the end of the Chapter. The reasons which
move him to write, are, first, that he might excuse himself from negligence;
which is a foul fault in a Minister, verse 12. Secondly, from the fitness of
the practice, verse 13. Thirdly, from the consideration of the shortness of
his own life, verse 14. Fourthly, from the consideration of the vtility of his
writings in after times, verse 15.

Wherefore. In this twelfth verse, two points: first, the pleading of a cause:
secondly, the removing of an objection.

Wherefore I will not be negligent; or, as the word in the original is, I will
not be careless.

The first point hence to be observed, is, that Doctrine.
It is a great fault in a Minister to be careless and negligent. Else the
Apostle would not thus excuse himself from that imputation. And for the
further euidencing of the truth of this point, I refer the Reader to the 34.
of Ezechiel, 2.3.4.5.6. where it is said; Woe unto the Shepherds of Israel
that feed themselves: should not the Shepherds feed the flocks? Ye feed
upon the fat, and ye clothe you with the wool. Ye kill them that are fed, but
ye feed not the flock. The diseased have ye not strengthened; neither have ye
healed that which was sick; neither have ye bound up that which was broken;
neither have ye brought again that which was driven away; neither have ye
sought out that which was lost. And again in the sixth verse: My sheep wandered
thorough all the mountains, and upon every high hill: yea, my flock was
scattered upon all the face of the earth, and none did search or seek after
them. In all which the holy Ghost does severely tax careless negligent
ministers. The like we read, Esaias 56.10. where the Lord taxes the dumb
dogs for their sleeping, and delighting in sleep, that is, for their
remissness and negligence in their calling.

Reason.
And certainly, it must needs be a great sin in a Minister, to be careless
and negligent, because his employment concerns the very souls of men. It is
a sin in a shepherd, not to look carefully to his sheep, because the life of
the creature is in his hand: but it is a greater sin for a Minister not to
look carefully to his flock, because the souls of his people are in his hand.

Use.
Which may serve, justly to reprove all careless and negligent Ministers,
which look narrowly to the fleece, but starve the flock. So they may have the
pay, they care not what becomes of the souls; let them sink or swim, so
that they may have their skins, all is well. These are worse then the King of
Sodom, Genesis 14.21. For he said unto Abraham, Give me the souls, and take
thou the goods to thy self: but these say to the devil, Give me the goods,
and take thou the souls to thy self.

Secondly, it may serve also justly to reprove many which think the worse of
their Ministers even for their carfulness and diligence. How many Ministers
be there at these days, that fare the worse for their painfulnes? if they
would be more negligent, they should be better esteemed. Oh vain people!
consider if a Minister be diligent and industrious in his place, he does no
more then God does require of him as a duty. Shall God require it as a duty,
and shall man dare to say, It is more then needs?

Thirdly, let people animate and encourage their Minister to this carfulness:
let them be careful to hear, as he must be careful to preach; yea, let them
minister unto him in all good things. An excellent work ought to have an
excellent reward. People must not be like unto Pharaoes taskers, which exact a
great number of brickes, but think much to allow straw; but they must remember
that the labourer is worthy of his hire, as our blessed Savior speaks.

Wherefore. This has relation to that which goes before in the former verse.
And it is as though the Apostle had said: Forasmuch as by grace an entrance is
made into the everlasting Kingdom of Christ, and this grace is wrought
ordinarily by the means of the word, wherefore I will not be negligent, etc.

Whence we are to note, that Doctrine.
It ought to be an especial motive unto a Minister, to be careful and
diligent in his calling, because he may be a means, by his diligence, to bring
souls into Christ's kingdom.

It is the very argument which Paul uses to excite Timothy to be diligent to
preach the word, in season and out of season; because in so doing he shall both
save him self, and them that hear him, 1. Tim. 4.16.

And if any shall demand, What good a Minister shall reap, if he be used by
the Spirit of God, as an instrument, in adding souls to Christ's Kingdom: I
answer in the words of the holy Ghost, Dan. 12.3. They that turn many to
righteousness shall shine as the stars, for ever and ever.

Use.
Therefore the motive should be very forcible with us Ministers, to make us
diligent in preaching and writing, because hereby many souls may be entered
into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. It is a
good service by natural generation to increase the world; but it is a far
better service to be a means to increase the kingdom of Christ.

To put you in remembrance of these things. Whence observe we, Doctrine.
That it is the office of the Minister, to put people in remembrance of those
things which pertain to the kingdom of God. For this cause Gods Ministers are
termed Gods remembrancers; for so I take it, the Hebrew word is best rendered,
Esaias 62.6.

And so the Apostle does directly enjoin Titus in the third of that epistle,
the first verse, that he should put the Church of the Cretians in mind; or, as
it is in the Greek text, that he should remember them to be subject to
Principalities and Powers; intimating thereby, that it is the Ministers duty,
to be a remembrancer.

Use.
Which plainly shows what a short memory we have in the best things, in that
we need a remembrancers help. We can easily remember wrongs done unto us; or,
we can remember with facility what belongs to our worldly gain. Commonly we
need no remembrancer in these matters. But if it come to matters concerning
Gods kingdom, herein we are dull, and cannot remember any thing, unless we be
oftentimes put in mind of the same. For this we ought to be humbled.

Though ye know them. Observe we here from the example of the dispersed Church
of God, unto whom Peter writes, that Doctrine.
It is the part and duty of every true Christian to be well acquainted with the
Scriptures or word of God. Hence it is that Christ says, Search the
Scriptures, John 5.39. Hence it is also that Paul says, Let the word of Christ
dwell in you richly, Colos. 3.16. Thus it was the commendation of Timothy, that
he knew the Scriptures of a child, 2. Timothy 3.15: And of Apollos, that he
was mighty in the Scriptures, Acts 18 24.

Reason.
And indeed, ignorance of the Scriptures is carefully to be avoided: first,
because it is the means of falling into many gross and dangerous errors;
according to that in Math. 22.29. You do err not knowing the Scriptures.
Secondly, because, to be ignorant now in these days of knowledge, it is the
mark of a reprobate or castaway; according to that in 2. Cor. 4.3. If our
Gospel be now hid, it is hid to them which are lost.

Use.
Which doctrine serves justly to condemn the practice of the Pope, which
debarreth the people from the reading of the Scriptures. God would have people
to know the Scriptures: and the Pope would have the people ignorant of the
Scriptures. O man of sin! how great is thy presumption, which dare forbid
that which God has commanded?

Secondly, it may justly condemn the ignorance of these times wherein we live;
for howbeit we have plenty of preaching, yet how many thousands be there which
live ignorant, not knowing the Scriptures?

Thirdly, let it serve to stir up every one of us to be more studious in the
word of God: Let us abandon all vain and wicked books out of our houses, and
let us get every one a Bible, and let us read therein day and night.

And be established. Whence observe, that Doctrine.
It is not sufficient to know the truth, but we ought to be established in it.
Hereupon it is said, Coloss. 2.6. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus
the Lord, so walk in him, rooted and built up, and established in the faith,
etc.

To this purpose also serves that in Ephesians 4.14. That we hence forth be no
more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with euety wind of
doctrine by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait
to deceive.

A Christian must not halt between two opinions, as Israel did, 1. Kin. 18.21.
neither must he be luke warm as the Laodiceans, Revel. 3.16. but he must be
steadfast, immovable, etc. 1. Cor. 15.58.

Use.
Which may serve justly to reprove many in our days, who howsoever they
yield a kind of general consent to the truth, yet they are not settled nor
established in it: insomuch, that if they shall be set upon by any cunning
deceiuer, they are quickly carried away. How many be there at these days,
that are as indifferent for Popery as for the truth? O my brethren, what a
shame is this, that after so much means ye should still remain vnestablished?

Secondly, let this serve to excite every one of us to be more thoroughly settled
in the truth; and that we may be so, let us take these directions:

1. Let us labor to be able to yield a reason of our faith, and to know the
grounds of that which we hold. What is the reason that many go away? Even
because they know not the grounds of that truth which they hold.

2. Let us follow the truth in love; a man is not easily removed from that
which he loves: and so if we could love the truth, and be inflamed with it,
certainly we should not be easily turned from it.

3. We must observe those which are given to sects and schisms, which seek to
unsettle men in their faith, and we must avoid them. Let us never think to be
settled in Religion, so long as we give entertainment to schismatic persons.

4. We must pray unto God to settle and establish us. It is his work to make a
stable soul; according to that in 1. Pet. 5.10. But the God of all grace, who
has called us into his eternal glory by Christ Jesus after that ye have
suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you.

In the present truth. Mark here; the Apostle does not say, In the present
truths, as speaking of many; but, In the present truth, as speaking of one.

Whence we may gather, that Doctrine.
There is but one truth, howsoever there may be many opinions concerning that
truth. Hence it is that the Apostle Paul says, Ephesians. 4.5. There is one faith;
which is meant, as well of the Doctrine or ground of faith, as of the habit or
work of it: and the reason of this point is, because there is but one God who
is the author of it.

Use.
Which may teach us to bewail the multiplicitie of opinions in the world; some
sauouring of Popery, some of Anabaptisme, some of Arminianisme, some of
Brownisme, some of Mahometisme, some of Iewisme, some of Paganism, some of
Atheism, and the like; and yet there is but one truth. But let none be
discoraged for all this; let us remember what Christ told us beforehand: It
cannot be avoided but that offenses will come, etc.

In the present truth. Or, as it is in the original, in the truth that now is.
Whence observe this doctrine, viz. That as there is but one truth, so Doctrine.
That is that one truth which was preached and professed by the holy Apostles
in the Primitive Church. Hence it is that it is said in Galat. 18. Though we,
or an Angel from heaven preach any other gospel unto you, then that which we
have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

Reason.
The Primitive truth was preached by immediate revelation: and it was confirmed
by miracles, which never any truth was since. Therefore that truth is the only
truth.

Use.
Which serves to discover the unsoundness of Popery; for the inventions of
Popery were no part of that truth which was established in the Primitive
Church, but rather contrary to that ancient truth. The Papists complain of our
nouilisme, or new-fanglenesse in Religion; but we may a great deal more justly
complain of their new-fanglenesse in Religion; for we hold to the ancient
truth, taught and professed in the Apostles times: whereas they are removed to
another gospel, and have coined new articles of Faith, which were not part of
the ancient grounded truth taught by the Apostles.

Though ye know. Whence we may note that Doctrine.
it is lawful for a Minister to teach or to write as well those things which
are vulgar, and well known, as those things which are rare, or less known.
Thus we read in 1. John 2.21. I write these things, not because ye know not
the truth, but because ye know it. And Phil. 3.1. It grieueth me not to write
the same things unto you, but for you it is safe.

Reason.
We are not so sharp witted in heavenly things, but we have need of much
inculcation to cause us to understand; neither are we so forward to practice,
but we need to be excited thereunto again and again.

Use.
Which serves justly to tax all such Ministers as think that they never
preach or write well, unless they invent and broach some new-fangle conceit of
their own idle invention: as though known truth were grown too stale for
their mouths to utter. But let such know, that better scholars then
themselves, I mean the holy Apostles, did not scorn to preach and to write
and to inculcate known truth.

Secondly, it serves to reprove multitudes of people, which, having itching
ears, loathe the known truth, and Athenian-like, desire after novelties. But
let such know, that they had more need to have that which they know to be
beat upon their consciences, that they may believe and practice it, then to
lust after novelties.

Thirdly, this may serve to justify the practice of such faithful Ministers
which inculcate and beat upon known truth, choosing rather to profit then to
please. But to leave this verse and to come to the next, which is the second
argument, and is taken from the equity of the practice.

A meet thing, or as it is in the Greek, A just thing. Whence observe we this
doctrine, viz. that Doctrine.
The preaching of Gods word is not an unjust, but a just practice. And that
first, in respect of God. Secondly, in respect of the Church of God. Thirdly,
in respect of the word it self. In respect of God: First, because God requires
it as a duty of Ministers to preach the word, Acts 10.42. And he commanded us
to preach unto the people, and to testify, etc. Now whatsoever God requires
as a duty, must needs be just. Secondly, the preaching of Gods word, makes
for Gods glory, and therefore is termed the Gospel of the glory of the blessed
God; for so the words are in the original, in 1. Tim. 1.11. Now whatsoever
tends to Gods glory immediately, must needs be just and meet. If any shall
demand how the preaching of the word does tend to Gods glory; I answer: first,
because it makes his excellency known. Secondly, because it sets forth his
praise. Thirdly, because it subiecteth the world unto him: in all which God is
greatly glorified.

Secondly, to preach Gods word, is a just thing in respect of the Church, for
it is the means of her conversion. Nineuie repented at the preaching of Jonas,
Math. 12.41. Secondly, it is a means of her daily repast or nourishment: The
lips of the righteous feed many, Pro. 10.21.

Thirdly, it is the means of her salvation: for it pleases God by the
foolishness of preaching, to save them which believe, 1. Cor. 1.21. Now how
just and meet a thing is it, that the Church of God should enjoy that means
which is of such excellent use unto her, judge ye.

Thirdly, the preaching of the word, is a just practice in respect of it self.
For why? Every word of God is pure, Pro. 30.5. It is as silver tried in a
furnace of earth, purified seven times, Psalm. 12.6. It is good, Heb. 6.5. It
is holy and just and good, Romans 7.12. It is spiritual, Romans 7.14. And it
endures for ever, 1. Pe. 1.25. Now it is a most just thing that that which is
pure, and spiritual, and holy, and just, and good, and endures for ever,
should be published and made known to the world.

Objection.
If any shall object against the equity of the practice of the word, because
it comes not to set peace, but a sword where it comes with power, Mat. 10.34.

Answ.
I answer, The fault is not in the word, if contentions arise upon the
preaching of it; but it is in the hearers, which have not grace to make any
better use of it, according to that in the first of the Kings 18.18. I have not
troubled Israel, but thou and thy fathers house, etc.

Use.
The use of this point may be this; first, that Ministers are not therefore to
be censured for their true preaching of Gods word, or to be unjustly condemned
for their pains in their ministry, as though they had done, or committed some
great offense; for if any faithful Minister preach the word, what does he but
that which is just and meet?

Secondly, this shows how unjustly zealous Christians are reproached for
their hearing of Gods word; for their reading, conferring, meditating and the
like. For what do they in this but that which is just and meet to be done?

Thirdly, It shows how unjustly idle ministers deal with the Church of God,
in depriving it of Gods word, through their wretched idleness. These are like
unto bad stewards, which keep back the appointed food from their fellow
servants, and so starve the family. But let such remember that in Mat. 24.51.
That God will cut them asunder, and give them their portions with hypocrites.

Fourthly, it condemns the practice of the Papists and their adhaerents,
which labor by all means to suppress the powerful preaching of Gods word,
and in stead thereof bring in their Masses and their own traditions. These
deal unjustly with the word of God, and with Gods Church: these are they and
such like, which withold the truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. And
therefore woe will be unto them unless they repent.

Fifthly, this may comfort Gods Ministers and Gods people: although they may be
judged hardly of in the world, the one for preaching the word, and the other
for hearing and practicing of it; yet let them rejoice in this, namely because
they do nothing in this practice but which is just and meet in the sight of
God. And if God approve, what need we fear if all the world besides condemn
our practice?

I think it just. Whence note that Doctrine.
the publishing of Gods word is a just thing, not only in the sight of God, but
also in the sight of good men. Peter himself esteems it a just thing; and
Wisdom is justified of her children, Luke 7.35. The feet of them which bring
glad tidings, are beautiful in the eyes of the godly, Romans 10.15. though they
be odious to the ungodly, though the Athenian philosophers accounted Paul but a
trifler or a babbler, Acts 17.18. yet he was honored by others.

Reason.
Gods people are enlightened to see how faithful preaching brings glory to God,
and how it brings good to the Church, and how just a thing it is in it self.
They can look further into these mysteries then unregenerate persons can; and
therefore they have a better faculty to approve the things that are excellent,
Phil. 1.10, then others have.

Objection.
But here it may be objected, Do not many professors disapproue and speak
evil of many a faithful ministry, as well as the profaner sort? And were not
the Apostles persecuted by certain devout and honest women? Acts 13.50.
Therefore it may seem that the faithful preaching of Gods word, is not so
much as approved by the very Church it self.

Answ.
I answer. I doubt not, but that many of Gods people for a time may neglect
and lightly esteem a powerful ministry, being carried away with praeiudicate
opinion which they have of the person of the Minister; but certainly God will
reveal this unto them in time, and then they will repent their prejudice.

Secondly, there be tares in the corne-field of Gods Church, as well as good
corn. Therein be hypocritical professors, as well as sincere worshippers: and
it is the brood of hypocrites especially which persecute Gods Ministers,
having itching ears, and will not endure wholesome doctrine; it is not the best
sort of professors.

This puts a manifest difference betwixt the children of God and others. Gods
children approve a powerful Ministry, others for the most part do not so.

Use.
Secondly, let it serve to stir up all that think themselves to be Gods
children, to approve themselves so by their approving things excellent, and by
their standing for the same.

Use.
Thirdly, let it be matter of comfort to Gods ministers and people. Suppose
that thy godly ways and courses be distasted by multitudes of men of corrupt
minds; yet this may be thy comfort, they are well approved of by them that are
godly, and by such as are truly judicious.

I think. Observe here, the Apostle does not dissemble his judgment or
thoughts, but makes it known what he thinks concerning religious practices,
as concerning the preaching and writing of Gods word, and the like. I think it
a just thing. Whence we may learn this instruction, viz. that Doctrine.
It is the part and duty of a true Christian, not to dissemble his religion,
but he ought to make manifest by his profession, words, and practices, what he
is.

For this we have many examples in Scripture. As first, the example of the
religious Jews which built the Temple at Jerusalem; who when their enemies
came unto them and asked their names, they made answer resolutely, That they
were the servants of the God of heaven and earth, Ezra. 5.11. Secondly, the
example of the three children, who when Nebucadnezar the king spoke roughly,
and threatningly unto them, replied in these words: We are not careful o king,
to answer thee in this matter, etc. Dan. 3.16. Thirdly, the example of Timothy,
who made a good profession before many witnesses, 1 Timothy 6.12. but especially
of Christ himself, who witnessed a good confession before Pontius Pilate, 1.
Tim. 6.13.

Use.
This may serve to condemn the practice of many time seruers, which carry
their religion so closely, that no man can tell what to make of them, whether
they be Atheists, or Papists, or Anabaptists. But let such remember, that as
they have been ashamed of Christ and of his Gospel before men; so will Christ
be ashamed of them at the last day, Luke 9.26.

In this tabernacle, that is, in this body. Whence we are to observe, that
Doctrine.
A Christian is in this world as in a Tabernacle or Tent. Or thus, The body of
a Christian is like a Tent or Tabernacle. For the proof I refer you to that
in, 2. Cor. 5.1. We know that if this earthly house of this Tabernacle were
dissolved, etc. Of this Tabernacle, that is, of this body. And in the fourth
verse of the same Chapter, For we that are in this Tabernacle do groan, etc.
that is, we that are in this body.

Reason.
And the body is fitly compared to a Tent or Tabernacle: First, because as a
Tent or Tabernacle, is not made of any strong matter, having a few poles for
the timber, and thin clothes for the walls. Even so the bodies of
Christians are weak and frail; their strength is not the strength of stones,
or their flesh of brass, Job. 6.12.

Secondly, as tents were for the use of soldiers, and are unto this day; as it
is said of the Arc and Ioab, that they were in tents, that is, in war, 2.
Sam. 11.11. So while a Christian is in the body, he is in a combating estate,
or in a state of warfare, warring especially against his own corruptions.

Thirdly, as a Tent never stood long in one place, but it was taken down and
removed from one place to another, as we read of Israel coming out of Egypt;
sometimes they pitched their tents in one place, sometimes in another, Numb.
33. Even so we must not think that this tabernacle of our bodies will always
stand; God will certainly take it down, it shall not continue.

Use.
This serves for matter of reproof unto all such as put away from them the
evil day, which think that their standing shall not be removed. Alas,
consider with thy self, thou dwell not in a walled City, or within strong
bulwarks which cannot be pierced with gunshot; but thou dwell within paper
walls, in a Tent which may be pierced with a very pin. I mean thy very body
and flesh, is but a silly Tent. Therefore be not so secure.

Secondly, let this teach every one of us to be always ready for death: we
know not how soon God may remove our tent, even to day before to morrow; let
the remainder therefore of our lives, be a serious meditation of death, and a
preparation for the same.

As long as I am in this Tabernacle, that is, as long as I live. Whence
observe, that Doctrine.
It is the duty of a Minister to continue his ministerial pains even to the
death. This was the practice of Paul in 2. Cor. 7.3. You are in our hearts to
die and to live together. And of Stephen, who was seized upon by his enemies,
and slain as he was preaching, Acts 7.57. The like may be said of Moses and
Aaron, and Samuel; yea, of all the Prophets and Apostles: as they lived
faithful Ministers, so they never revolted from their calling.

Reason.
And indeed the Church of God, shall always have need of her Ministers. Gods
Ministers are sheepeheards, and his people are sheep: therefore as sheep shall
always need a shepherd: so Gods church shall always need a Leuite.

1. Objection.
But some may possibly object: Yea but suppose a Minister be sickely and weak,
and that preaching is an enemy to his health; is he bound to continue his
preaching to the impairing of his health? I answer, A good Minister must be
content to spend, and to be spent for the people: he must with Esaias spend his
strength, though it seem to be in vain, Esaias 49.4. He must with the good
shepherd lay down his life for the sheep, John 10.11. Where should a soldier
die but in the field? And where should a good Minister die but in the Pulpet?
Indeed it is true, a Minister must not ouer-charge himself with preaching, but
he must have some respect to his health, that he may continue the longer to do
good. But I shall not need to stand upon this; for there be but few Ministers
which strain themselves beyond their strength. We Ministers need not be
tempted to spare our selves, we are too prone to that of our own accord.

2. Objection.
Again, it may be objected: Yea but a Minister may possibly be restrained from
preaching, by authority; how can he then continue his preaching or pains to
death? I answer, If a Minister be restrained by lawful authority, then he
must think God has wrought by him, and accomplished already the maine work
whereunto he sent him: He must think when he is utterly deprived, as Paul
thought, 2. Tim. 4: That he finished his course, I mean for preaching. Howbeit I
take it, that a deprived Minister is not exempted from writing for the good of
Gods Church. Paul writ diverse Epistles for the use of Gods Church when he was
in prison: and so did Jeremy cause a roll to be written, and to be read to the
people by Baruch, when he himself was in prison, Ierem. 36.4.

3. Objection.
Yea but suppose that a Minister cannot live by his calling, may he not in this
case cast it off, and take upon him a more gainful trade? Answ.
A Minister, in case of want, may lawfully (as I take it) leave this or that
particular Congregation. For indeed it is a kind of persecution to mussle the
Ox which treads out the corn: but utterly to cast off his calling, in
respect of want, I think it unlawful: yea, a Minister must preach still,
though he should be constrained to labor with his hands, as Paul did.

Use.
The use of this doctrine may serve, first for the just reproof of many
Ministers: first, of such as will be Ministers for a time; but afterward cast
off the very name of Ministers, some turning to be Doctors of Physic, some
turning to be Schoole-maisters, and some turning idlers and the like. O my
brethren, these things ought not so to be. You received not your ministerial
calling with condition to leave it, and to cast it off at your pleasure. But
you were married to the Ministry, to have and to hold, etc.

Secondly, it serves to reprove such Ministers as will preach painfully and
diligently until they get living; but when they are once inducted and settled in
a rich Benefice, then cast off preaching, as an impertinent thing: these use
preaching, only as a stirrup whereby to mount into the saddle of preferment. O
wretched hypocrisy! Does not this plainly bewray that thou never preachedst
of conscience, but in mere policy? But let such remember, that he that
knows to do well, and does it not, to him it is sin, Iam. 4.17. Yea let him
never forget that in 1. Cor. 9.16. Necessity is laid upon me, and woe is unto
me if I preach not the Gospel.

Thirdly, this should teach the people, so to provide for the certain
maintenance of the Minister, and to give unto him that kind entertainment and
respect, that he may be encouraged to abide with them, and to take pains
amongst them, even unto death. This care is much wanting in people at these
days, wherein they labor to pull away what possibly they may from the Minister;
using their tongues also to weary out a Minister, because they desire not his
company till death, but rather to be rid of him, and that quickly. But let such
murderers (for so the holy Ghost terms them) remember that God will send
forth his soldiers, and destroy them and burn up their City, as it is said in
Math. 22.7.

To stir you up. Mark; he does not say, to instruct you only, but to stir
you up. Whence observe, that Doctrine.
It is the duty os a Minister, not only to inform the judgment, but also by
his doctrine to endeavor to work upon the affections. To stir up concerns
the affections especially. This was the practice of Paul 2. Corint. 5.11. He
labored to persuade men, that is, he endeavored to work upon the will and
affections. Yea it was the practice of all the Prophets and Apostles, as
appears by their writings. They endeavored to speak to the conscience, and
not to the ear only.

Reason.
And indeed, though the mind were never so well informed; yet, if the will and
affections be not in some measure wrought upon for practice, all the labor in
informing the mind, is but in vain. Religion is more in the will and
affections, then in any other faculty of the soul whatsoever. I confess it
is true, the mind must first be instructed before the will and affections be
stirred up, or else we shall give a heat without light, which is not so safe.
But we must not so insist upon the first duty, as to neglect the second. A
minister must be both a shining and a burning light.

Use.
This makes against them which condemn zealous preaching. For I demand; Does
not zealous preaching especially stir up? Surely it does. And if it do, then
it is very needful. Yea it is after the manner of the Apostles preaching, for
they endeavored to stir up, as appears in this Text.

Secondly, it serves to reprove many Ministers which aim to speak to the
ear, but they speak not to the heart; which so respect the judgment that
they neglect the affections.

Question.
But some may demand, What must a Minister do that he may by his doctrine
stir up, or work upon the will and affections?

Answ.
I answer: he that desires to work effectually upon the will and affections
must observe these rules:

1. He must not bring his own idle inventions, but the pure word of God. Gods
word is the great means of persuading.

2. He must be a son of Thunder, he must speak, not drowsily, but with life
and power.

Thirdly, he must endeavor to make it appear, that he desires unfeignedly the
good of his hearers; and that he preaches not of envy, but of good will.

Fourthly, he must practice himself that which he desires to persuade others
unto. People at these days are persuaded, more by the life of a Minister, then
by Doctrine.

Fifthly, he must pray unto God for the people, that he by his Spirit would
persuade the people. He that teaches or persuades the heart to that which is
good, has his chair in heaven.

Sixthly, he must often put the people in mind of the same things. As the
Apostle does here, he stirs up them unto whom he writes, by putting them in
remembrance. We will not insist upon this clause, By putting you in
remembrance, any further, because we have delivered the doctrine of it before
in the twelfth verse of this chapter. Thus much therefore shall suffice for
this thirteenth verse..

Knowing that shortly I must put off my tabernacle. Now we are come to the
third Argument or Motive which did move Peter to preach and to write so
diligently this blessed Epistle: And that was because he was aware of his death
approaching, and therefore he desired the rather to do what good he could,
whilst life lasted.

Knowing that shortly. The first doctrine from hence is this, viz. that
Doctrine.
It is the duty of every Christian, both of Minister and People, to make
account of short life. So does Peter here; he makes just account, that in very
short time he should lay down this tabernacle of his body.

And was this Peter's practice alone? No verily; it has been the practice of
the rest of Gods children from time to time. Abraham in his perfect health
terms himself dust and ashes, Genes. 18.27. David says, that his life is
always in his hand, Psalm. 119.109. Paul says, I am ready to be delivered, and
the time of my departure is at hand, 2. Tim. 4.6. The Church says, we have
here no abiding City, Hebr. 13.14. Yea, what true converted Christian is there,
but he is taught of God daily to think of his mortality.

Reason.
And indeed it is fit, that every man should make accoun^ of this which is
truth. It is certain and true, that our continuance here shall be but short.
Our lives are but as grass, which in the morning flourishes and grows, and
in the evening is cut down and withers, Psalm. 90.5.6. It is like smoke, which
though it appear for a little time as it ascends out of the chimney, yet if
we follow it with our eye, it quickly vanishes out of sight, Psalm. 102.3. It
is like unto a shadow which declineth, Psalm. 102.11. Now if our lives be thus
frail, it is fit we should so esteem them.

1. Objection.
But here some may possibly object and say, Do we not see some men and women
to live long? Do not some in our age attain unto seventy years, some
eighty, some ninety, some an hundred, and may not I possibly live as long as
they?

Answ.
I do not deny, but God is able to continue thee long upon the earth, though
thy life, in it self, be never so frail; but it is not thy safest course, to
make account of long life. For though some live (it may be) until they be an
hundred years old, yet we find by experience, that there be a great many
which never see half, no not the fourth part of that time.

2. Objection.
If any shall further object and say, But I am strong and lusty; I am young and
in my best years, I find no decay in my body: and therefore what reason have
I to look for death?

Answer.
Yes verily; for thou must remember, that man in his best estate, (that is, in
his best years, in his best strength, in the flower of his age,) is altogether
vanity, Psa. 39.5. Did thou never read that in Job, 21.23. One dies in his
full strength, his breasts being full of milk, and his bones being moistened
with marrow? etc. And besides the evidence of Scripture, we see by experience,
that a man may be slain upon a sudden by diverse occasions of danger, although
he feel himself never so healthie, and strong, and likely to live: therefore
deceive not thy self.

Use.
This may serve justly to reprove them which have made a covenant with death,
and put the evil day far from them; which think in their hearts, that
though a scourge come, and pass through the whole Land, yet that it shall not
come near them. Alas, poor creature, what privilege have thou to escape more
then any other? Art thou any jot the more sure, because of thy security?
Surely no: for when thou shall say, Peace and safety, then is most likely to
come upon thee, sudden destruction. 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.

Secondly, this may serve to teproue such as immoderately do seek after
wealth, being as insatiable in seeking riches, as if they esteemed themselves
and their children to be immortal; or as though they were to provide for an
earthly eternity. O vain man! thou art busying thy self, to lay up for many
years, whereas it may be this night following, thy soul may be required of
thee, and then whose shall these riches be which thou have gathered together,
with the loss of thy salvation? If thou shall say; I shall leave my riches to
my children, I answer, But God may possibly cut off thy children also, as
suddenly as thy self: Or say that thy children shall live long to enjoy thy
riches, yet what joy will it be unto thee, to think when thou art in hell, I
have left rich children upon the earth? and for providing for them
superfluities, I have brought upon my self this eternal torment?

Use 2.
Secondly, as this doctrine serves for reproof, so it serves for
instruction. For first, it should teach us not to defer our repentance, but
whilst it is called to day, we ought to turn from the power of Satan to God,
and that with sound humiliation. But thou will say, I can do this soon enough
when I am old. But consider with thy self, Art thou sure to live until thou
be old? have thou a lease of thy life? Or, suppose thou could be assured
that thou should live until thou be old, yet how know thou that God, at
that time, will give thee repentance?

Use 3.
Thirdly, this doctrine may be matter of consolation: First, unto such as
endure banishment, imprisonment, poverty, sickness, or any other affliction.
They must think that their afflictions cannot be long, because their lives are
but short. They shall not need desperately to make away themselves before the
time. God will take them away soon enough, by one occasion or by another.

Secondly, it may be matter of comfort unto all such as believe; for now is
their salvation nearer then when they believed. Thou art here this year, thou
may be advanced into heaven before the next. Thou art here this week, thou
may be with Christ before the next. Yea, thou art here to day, thou may
be in bliss before to morrow.

Knowing that shortly, etc. As though he should say; Seeing I know that I shall
not remain long, therefore I write unto you this Epistle, endeavoring while I
am with you, to do the best good that I can; and the rather because I shall
not long continue.

The doctrine hence is this, namely, that Doctrine.
The consideration of shortness of life, ought to be an especial spur, or
motive to provoke all Christians, as well people as Ministers, to double
diligence in well doing.

Thus Solomon writ the book of Ecclesiastes in his old age. Thus Paul writ
diverse of his epistles when he was aged. Thus Christ himself exercised his
ministry, wrought miracles, and did all his great wonders in the three last
years of his life. Why were these so diligent at the last, but because they
considered they were not long to continue? As Christ also himself does
acknowledge, John 9.4. I must work the works of him that has sent me while it
is day; the night comes wherein no man can work.

Reason.
And there is great reason that men should bestirre themselves especially
toward their latter end, for they must either then work or never: they must
either then do good, or else hereafter it will be too late, according to that
in John 12.35. Walk while ye have light, lest the darkness come upon you.

Use.
This serves to reprove them which purpose to live idly, when they are grown
old; not considering that approaching of death, should be a motive to greater
diligence in doing good.

Secondly, let this serve to stir us up both Ministers and people, to be more
diligent in our places to glorify God. Let us think we have none of us all to
abide here long; and when we shall be gone, we shall not have liberty to
return to dispatch any thing which we have left unperfected. Therefore, since
with Peter we must shortly lay down this Tabernacle, let us stir up our
selves to more diligence in well doing. Thou which art a Minister, do thou
think that thou shall not live long? Be the more diligent in preaching and
writing. Thou which art an Officer, do thou think or know that thou shall
not long continue in thy office? Be the more careful to do good in it, that
little time thou shall continue. Thou which art a private Christian, art thou
persuaded that death approaches? Therefore work out thy salvation with fear
and trembling, glorify God what possibly thou can, and whilst thou have yet
opportunity, do as much good as thou can, especially to the household of Faith.

I know. How did Peter know that he was not long to continue? Not by the course
of nature, feeling himself to decay, but by express speech from Christ's own
mouth, in John 21.18. But when thou shall be old, thou shall stretch forth thy
hands, and another shall gyrd thee: and in verse 1. This spoke he; signifying
by what death he should glorify God.

Now observe, here Christ told Peter before hand, that in his old age he should
suffer a violent death; and Peter gave such undoubted credit to the words of
Christ that he says: I know that I shall shortly lay down this Tabernacle, as
our Lord Jesus Christ has showed to me.

I know. The doctrine is this, viz. That Doctrine.
every man, both Ministers and people, ought to be infallibly persuaded of the
truth and verity of Gods word. If Christ says it, we may and ought to say by
Faith, We know it to be true. Thus it was with Martha, John 11.24. I know he
shall rise again at the last day. Now how did Martha know that her brother
should rise again, but by the word and Spirit of God? The like we see in the
whole Church, 2. Cor. 5.1. We know that if this Tabernacle be dissolved, etc.
Now how did the Church know this future glory, but by the word?

The like we see in Peter elsewhere, as in the third chapter of this second
epistle, the third verse: Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last
days scoffers. Now how did Peter know this, but by the word and Spirit? Many
other examples might be alleged, but these may suffice sor the proof of the
point.

Reason.
And indeed we have great reason to be infallibly persuaded of the truth and
verity of Gods word. First, because God is not as man, that he should lie; he
is truth it self he cannot lie. Therefore what he speaks, it is infallibly
true.

Secondly, because the word has been proved to be an undoubted truth from
generation to generation; it was never found contrary, and therefore we have no
reason to call the truth of it into question.

Use.
This may serve to condemn Atheism, which is not nor will not be persuaded of
the truth of Gods word. But let all Atheists assure themselves, that they which
will not believe the word for the present, they shall find and feel the truth
of it to their cost in hell fire. For they which will not believe shall be
damned, Mark 16.16.

After my decease. Or, as it is in the original, After my going out, meaning
out of the tabernacle of his body; where from the periphrasis or description
of death, in that it is termed an exodus, or going out, or a decease and
departure, we may observe that Doctrine.
A man when he dies, he does but remove from one place to another, his death is
only a departure, or a changing of place. When Joshua dies, he is said but to
go the way of all the earth, Ios. 23.14. When the Saints die, they are said
but to come to a company of innumerable Angels, and to the general assembly,
and Church of the first borne which are written in heaven, and to God the judge
of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.22.23. And when
Christ himself dies, he is said but to go, Luke 22.22. The like may be said
of Symeon, whose death was but a peaceable departure, Luke 2.24. Lord now
let thou thy servant depart in peace, etc. Thus we see the proof of this
point, to wit, that when a man dies, he does but depart from one place to go
to another.

Quest.
But hence some may say: Is man's death but a departure? I pray you therefore
tell me whither does the soul of man go, when it departs out of the body?

Answ.
Not to Purgatory, or Limbo. For all the Christian world knows, that these
places are merely imaginary, invented by the Clergy of Rome, for the
maintayning of the Popes kitchen, and have no sound ground from the word of God.

But if we would know indeed, according to Gods word, whither fowls depart
or go at the hour of death: we must take notice, that all souls of men they
go not to one place. For as for the souls of the elect, they undoubtedly go
to heaven, as we see in the example of the penitent thief, of whom Christ
said, This day thou shall be with me in paradise, Luke 23.43. And on the
contrary, the souls of the reprobate, they go to hell, as we see in the
example of the rich man, Luke 16.23.

Quest.
If any shall demand further, who conducteth the souls in their passage to
heaven or to hell; Answ.
I answer: As for the souls of the elect, they are carried by the Angels into
the kingdom of heaven; as we see in the example of Lazarus, Luke 16.22. But as
for the souls of the reprobate, whether they be carried by t^ devils to hell,
or driven thither violently by the good Angels as Gods Sergeants, I cannot
peremptorily determine: But sure it is by the one or by the other, they are
transported to the place of torment. Luke 12.20.

Thus we see the point proved and amplified.

Use.
The use of it, is briefly for matter of comfort to the children of God, both
concerning their christian friends deceased, they have but changed their
habitation; they are but gone from earth to heaven; they have but made a
blessed departure: And also concerning themselves, whenever it shall be their
lot to die, their souls shall only depart, or go out of a worse place into a
better. They shall be cut off from the earth indeed, but they shall be
received and find sweet entertainment in heaven.

Secondly, it may make for the overthrow of Atheists, in the point of the
souls mortality, which they wickedly hold. But consider, here the soul is
not said to die, but to depart or to change place; which does plainly imply
that it is immortal and not mortal.

Thirdly, it may make for the terror of the wicked; they shall not die when
they die, death will fly from them when they most desire it. At death they
shall only depart, they shall with Judas go to their own place, Acts 1.25.
But they shall have a heavy departure, they shall go from their pleasures to
their tortures; they shall leave the company of their friends, and come into
the company of devils; they shall depart from their delightful house and
fields and gardens, and shall be brought down to the nethermost hell. O
consider this you that forget God, and repent, that you may prevent this woeful
departure, and that your end may be peace.

I will endeavor that after my decease etc. Whence we are to note that,
Doctrine.
Gods Ministers ought to endeavor to their power, to do good to Gods Church
for aftertimes, as well as during their life time. Thus it was with Peter here;
he was not only careful of the Church in his generation, but also he desired
to take such a course as that the people of God might remember his doctrine
after his decease. The like care was in the Prophets and Apostles; they did not
preach in their times and generations only, but also they did write for the
good of Christians in aftertimes, as God also enjoined them, Isay. 30.8.

Reason
And indeed it makes much for Gods glory, that Ministers should do as much
good as possibly they can for the building up of the body of his Son.

Secondly, Love to the brethren should stir us up if we be Ministers, to this
godly care.

Thirdly, the good of our own souls; for I suppose that if a Ministers
writings many hundred years after his death do convert souls, he shall not
lose the reward of that after good, which is done by his works, but assuredly
his works shall follow him.

Use.
This shows the necessity of writing as well as of preaching. Preaching
indeed is most profitable for the Church that now is; but for the succeeding
Churches, writing is exceeding behouefull. And therefore many Ministers are too
much to blame this way: First, such as are not so much as careful for the
present good of the Church, living idle and neglecting preaching; so far are
they from respecting the future good of succeeding ages. Secondly, such
Ministers are likewise to blame, which howsoever during their life time they
preach, yet they do not what they might for succeeding times; they do not
write though they be able, for the good of the posterity. These succeed the
Prophets and Apostles in the office: but not in Ministerial care and
painfulnesse.

Cunning fables. By cunning or sophistical fables we are to understand
erroneous doctrine, such as had no warrant from the word of God, but was hatched
only in the brain of man. And erroneous doctrine is fitly compared in this
place and in many places of Paul's Epistles, to fables. First, because as
fables have no truth in them, but are merely forged and framed: so erroneous
doctrine has no soundness, or soliditie in it, but is false and lying;
according to that in 1. Tim. 4 2. They speak lies through hypocrisy.

Secondly, because as fables are delightful to an unsanctified ear; so
erroneous doctrine is pleasing and plausible to unregenerate and profane
persons, yea, more plausible then the truth. As it is said, 2. Tim. 4.4. They
shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be given unto fables.

Thirdly, because as fables, although they delight for the present, yet they do
not profit the hearers: even so erroneous doctrine, though it be never so
glorious in show, and never so pleasing, yet it profits not the hearers, but
leaves them in their sins and vnregeneracie; according to that in Gal. 3.2.
Received ye the spirit, by the works of the Law? that is, by the Jewish
doctrine of the Law. Implying that the Galatians never received any spiritual
good by false and erroneous doctrine, which was obtruded upon them by the false
Apostles.

Again, erroneous doctrine is compared to cunning fables, or sophistical
devices: Because as sophisters use much cunning and quercks, and fallacies to
deceive in arguing and disputing; even so erroneous teachers are deceitful
workers, as the Apostle speaks, 2. Cor. 11.13. Yea, they lie in wait to
deceive with cunning craftiness, as we read, Ephesians. 4.14.

Cunning fables we have not followed. Hence Ministers must learn, Doctrine.
In their teaching and preaching to avoid errors and all evil deceit, to
deliver sound doctrine, and that with pure pretense. This was the practice of
Peter here, and of the rest of the Apostles and Prophets, as appears both by
their writings and by their protestations. I say the truth (says Paul) and lie
not, my conscience bearing me witness in the holy Ghost, Romans 9.1. and, We are
not as many, which corrupt the word; but as of sincerity, but as of God, in
the sight of God, speak we in Christ, 2. Cor. 2.17. Yea it is manifest that
these men dealt sincerely with the word of God, in that they did not conceal
their own infirmities, but acknowledged them in their writings; as Matthew,
that he was a publicane before Christ called him, Math. 9.9. And Paul, that he
had been a blasphemer, a persecutor, and injurious, 1. Tim. 1.13. Whereas if
they had been deceitful, they would have kept close their own sins. Yea,
this is that which the holy Ghost requires of all Ministers, to wit, To be
sound and sincere in the dispensing of Gods will. 1. Tim. 4.7. But refuse
profane and old wives tales, etc. 2. Tit. 1. 2. Tit. 1. But speak thou the
things which become sound doctrine. 1. Cor. 4.2. And it is required of a
steward, that a man be found faithful.

Reason.
And the truth is, that unless Ministers deal truly and sincerely in the
preaching of Gods word, they lose their reward. For if any man's work burn, he
shall suffer loss, 1. Cor. 3.15. Yea, they shall be liable to a curse, for
adding to, or detracting from the perfect will of God, Reu. 22.18.19.

Use.
The use of this point may serve to reprove erroneous and deceitful Teachers,
which sophisticate the word of God, by the mingling of their own crotches and
subtle distinctions to deceive. Whether they do this for their credit, that
they might be esteemed witty men; or for their gain, that they might please
humorous men, that so they might the more deeply insinuate themselves into
their purses: certain it is, they run counter to the holy Apostles and
Prophets; they never learned their deceit of them: And they are successors not
of the Apostles, but rather of the false prophets, whose steps they follow.

Secondly, this may justly reprove many people and hearers, which turn away
their ears from the truth, and are given unto fables; as the Apostle speaks
2. Timothy 4.4. How many be there in the world which had rather hear a witty
speech out of some profane writer, then a sound sentence out of Gods word? And
how many be there that are more affected to the idle inventions of Popery, or
to the vain speculations of Anabaptists, or to questions about ceremonies, and
the government of the Church, then in any sort to the solid truth? Oh, let
such remember here, that if Ministers ought not to preach fables, then they
should not be given to them.

For we have not followed. From the beginning of this sixteenth verse unto the
end of the Chapter, the Apostle alleges many reasons, why the Church is to
hear him, and to hearken unto him. As first, because he dealt sincerely.
Secondly, because he was an eye-witnes unto that which he delivered. Both these
arguments are laid down in this sixteenth verse. Thirdly, because he was an
eare-witnesse, and this argument is laid down in the seventeen and eighteen
verses. Fourthly, because in his teaching he did not swerve from the Doctrine
of the Prophets. And this argument is laid down in 19.20. and 21. verses.

For we have not followed cunning fables. In that the Apostle does here
intimate, that the Church ought to respect his doctrine and writings, and to
receive the same, because he dealt sincerely with the word of God: therefore
hence we are to observe, that Doctrine.
It ought to be a great motive to Gods people, to hearken to their Ministers,
when they are convinced in their consciences, that they deal sincerely
between God and them. Thus says Paul 2. Cor. 7.2. Receive us: We have wronged
no man, we have corrupted no man, etc. showing this as a reason why the
Corinthians ought to receive him, because he had corrupted no man. And what was
it that moved the Church to give such credit to the writings of the Prophets
and Apostles, but because they were persuaded in their consciences by the
Spirit of God, that these men did deal truly and sincerely in the matters of
God?

Use.
This makes against such, that the more they are convinced, that Ministers
deal sincerely, the more they will flee from their Ministry, and be less
ruled by them. These are they that hate the light, and will not come to the
light, lest their works should be reproved.

Use.
Secondly, it should teach us Ministers to preach according to the proportion
of faith, and to deal faithfully in the matters of God, that our teaching may
be of the more authority in the hearts of Gods people, and may do the more
good.

Making known unto you. Whence we may observe, that Doctrine.
Every man and woman, yea even the very elect themselves are naturally, without
the knowledge of the Gospel. They know it not until it be made known unto
them: a man may possibly have the law of God by nature written in his heart;
but as for the knowledge of the Gospel, it is far from him. The very heathen
had some glimpse of the law, they were able by the light of nature to conceive,
that vice should be shunned, and virtue followed: but as for the Gospel, they
were utterly ignorant of it, supposing only to come to heaven, by the ladder
of their own virtuous actions. Yea, this salvation by Christ, it is such a
mystery, as that it surmounted the capacity both of Angels and men, once to
dream of it, until it was revealed. For what creature could once have
imagined, that God would ever have given his own Son to be made a man, and
to die an accursed death upon the tree, and that for his very enemies, unless
it had been revealed? And for this cause the gospel is termed a mystery diverse
times in the Word, as in Ephesians. 3.4. and Coloss. 1.26. and in many other
places; because indeed it was hid from the world, and surpassed the conceit of
every creature.

Objection.
But here some may object; Did not Balaam know, being a heathen man, that a
star should come out of Jacob, Numb. 23.17. Had he not some glimpse in this,
of salvation by Christ? I answer, Either Balaam in this his prophecy knew not
what he said, like unto the High Priest, John 11.50.51. Or if otherwise, then
undoubtedly, it was revealed unto him; it came not of himself.

Use.
The consideration of our want of knowledge of the Gospel naturally, should
teach us to be more studious to search into this mystery that we may know it,
according to the examples of the holy Angels, 1. Pet. 1.12. who being ignorant
of the mystery, desire the more to pry into it.

Secondly, it should teach us the more to admire the Gospel, considering what
a deep mystery it is. No doubt, but if the Gospel were now to be first
revealed unto us, we would think it the most admirable thing in the world, for
God to be made man, and for God to shed his own blood upon a Cross, and that
for rebels. Shall we admire these things only for a time? are they not as
worthy to be admired for ever, as for a season? Shall we make the Gospel only
a nine days wonder? God forbid.

Making known unto you. Whence note, that Doctrine.
The Apostles are the especial instruments of manifesting or making known the
mystery of the Gospel. Peter speaks here in the person of the rest; We made
known unto you, etc. We deny not but the Gospel was preached by the Prophets;
for else, what had become of our forefathers, if Christ had not been revealed
unto them at all? Yea, Christ was preached, even by Moses, in the sacrifices
for sin, and the like. But never was the Gospel so manifestly taught, as by
the Apostles: the aim of whose ministry was especially to preach Christ. The
Prophets preached Christ afar off, but the Apostles preached him at hand, yea
already exhibited; Moses preached Christ in dark shadows, but the Apostles
preached him manifestly, without any shadow. And hereupon the Apostles are
termed Ministers of the new Testament, 2. Cor. 3.6. because indeed the
dispensation of the Gospel was especially committed unto them. Hereupon
likewise the Apostles term the Gospel, their Gospel, 2. Corinthians. 4.3. to
show that it was committed unto them after an especial manner.

Objection.
But some possibly may object, that the Apostles were the most unfit persons of
many other, to be entrusted with the great and deep mystery of the Gospel;
for they were unlearned men, some of them being silly Fishermen and the like.
Answer.
I answer in the Apostles words; They had this treasure in earthen vessels,
that the excellency of the power might be of God, and not of them, 2. Cor. 4.7.

Use.
But let it teach us, that if ever we desire to attain the mystery of
knowledge which is in the Gospel, we must be studious in the reading, and
hearing, and meditating of the new Testament, which contains the writings of
the Apostles: This is the field wherein this treasure is especially to be found.

Secondly, let it teach us to be thankful, in that we enjoy these writings;
for in them is contained especially the mystery of the Gospel, and the means
of revealing Christ unto us.

The power and ccming. Under these two words Power and Coming, by a Synechdoche
is understood the sum of the whole Gospel, part being put for the whole. And
by the power of Christ is set forth his divine nature, whereby he did many
miracles; as by his coming we are to understand his incarnation, or first
coming in the flesh.

We made known unto you the Power and Coming. The Apostle did not exercise
himself in unnecessary questions about the Law, or in impertinent froathy
discourses to fill up the time; but he spent both his Sermons and writings, in
speaking and declaring of Christ, which is a good pattern for us Ministers:
Doctrine.
We must learn above all other doctrine to preach Jesus Christ. I do not deny
but that the moral law is also to be taught. For the Gospel does not abrogate
the morality of the law, but does establish it, Romans 3.31. Yea, the preaching
of the law is an excellent preparatiue to the Gospel, as we see by the
ministry of John Baptist, Matthew. 3.3. There must necessarily be a casting
down by the Law, before there be a raising up by the Gospel: there must be a
wounding before there be an healing: there must be a sense of misery before
there be an applying of comfort: the law must be as the needle to make way: the
Gospel must be as the silk thread to follow it. Thus there is a time both for
the Law and the Gospel. But howsoever Ministers begin with the Law, yet they
must go on especially with the Gospel. This was the holy practice of John
Baptist; howsoever he began with the doctrine of repentance, and with terror,
Math. 3.8.10. yet he concluded with comfort, Behold the Lamb of God which
takes away the sins of the world, John 1.29. This was the practice of
Philip, Acts 8.35. he preached Jesus to the Eunuch. This was the practice of
Paul, he preached Christ in the Synagogues, Acts 9.20.

Reason.
And indeed Christ is the foundation of all sound reaching; No other foundation
can any man lay (says the Apostle) then that which is laid, Jesus Christ, 1.
Corin. 3.11. Therefore they which would preach groundedly, must preach Christ.

Secondly, the doctrine of Christ, it is of all other doctrine, the most
excellent. Paul determined to know nothing but Jesus Christ and him crucified,
1. Corin. 2.2. Would a Minister therefore excel to the edification of the
Church? Let him preach Christ.

Thirdly, the doctrine concerning Christ, it is the most successeful of any
other doctrine; the Apostles converted more by the doctrine of the Gospel in
twenty or thirty years, then Moses converted in many hundred years by the
preaching of the Law. Does a Minister therefore desire to convert souls? let
him preach Christ.

Use.
This makes justly for the reproof of such Ministers which preach altogether
the rigor of the Law, keeping Gods Church still under the heavy yoke of the
Law, which neither we nor our Fathers were able to bear; and in the mean time
conceal the doctrine of the Gospel, which is much more successful. Let such
Ministers know, that they shut up the kingdom of heaven against men. They are
cruel Surgeons, they make the wound, but they apply no plaster: how can they
think ever to procure the health of Gods people?

Secondly, this should teach Gods Church, and every congregation, to labor to
be prepared to receive the doctrine of the Gospel: They must be humbled, that
they may be raised; they must be cast down under the burden of sin, that
they may be lifted up by the comforts of Christ. The very reason why many
Ministers so beat upon the Law, is, because people are not yet prepared to
receive the glad tidings of the Gospel.

The power. By power here we are not to understand the authority of Christ
(the Original will not so properly bear that sense,) but rather his
omnipotency, whereby he is able to do great things. And the point hence is,
that Doctrine.
Christ is strong and mighty, able to do whatsoever he will in heaven and in
earth. Hence it is, that he is termed a Prophet, mighty in deed and word before
God and all the people, Luke 24.19. Hence it is that he is termed the Mighty
God, Esaias 9.6. Hence it is that he is called the Strong Redeemer, Iere. 50.34.
Yea, let all his miracles testify of his power; his turning water into wine,
his feeding of many thousands with small provision, his healing of all manner
of plagues with his word, his casting out devils, his walking upon the water,
his stilling of the winds and seas, his raising of the dead, his fasting forty
days and forty nights, with many more which are extant in the writings of the
Evangelists.

Yea, such was, and is the power of Jesus, that he did not only work miracles
in his own person, but also he gave power unto others; namely, to the Apostles
to work miracles in his name. For when he sent them forth, he said unto them;
Heal the sick, cleanse the leapers, raise the dead, cast out devils, Matthew.
10.8. Yea the Apostles professed that they wrought miracles by no other power,
but by the power of Jesus: His name (says Peter) through faith in his name,
has made this man strong, Acts 3.16. and, I command thee (says Paul) in the
name of Jesus Christ to come out of her, speaking to the spirit of divination,
which possessed a certain maid, Acts 16.16. Now how great must needs his
power be which deriueth a power unto others even to work very miracles?

Objection.
Now if any shall object against the power of Christ, that Antichrist has and
does exceedingly prevail against him in all ages, as it is said of Antiochus,
Dan. 11.36. that he did according to his will, and exalted, and magnified
himself above every God: and of the Pope, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. that he opposes and
exalts himself above all that is called God. I answer: Although Christ may
suffer Antichrist for a time, yet he will certainly consume him at the time
appointed, with the Spirit of his mouth, and will destroy him with the
brightness of his coming. 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.

Use.
This may serve to discover the falsehood of that speech of the high Priests and
of the Scribes, He saved others, himself he cannot save, Mark 15.31. Christ
had sufficient power to have rescued himself out of the hands of his enemies,
but he would not: it was not the strength of nails, but the power of love to
the Church which fastened Christ to the cross; had it not been for our
redemption, no humane power could possibly eitheir have seized upon, or
retained Christ.

Secondly, this may make for the terror of all Christ's enemies. Christ is able
to the utmost to requite them for all their spite, both against himself, and
against his Church. He has power in his hand; our redeemer is strong, the Lord
of Hosts is his name, he shall thoroughly plead their cause, and disquiet the
inhabitants of Babylon, Ier. 50.34. Yea he shall drink of the brook in the
way, that is, shall be diligent in pursuing of his enemies, therefore he shall
lift up the head, Psalm. 110.7.

Thirdly, this may minister comfort to the Church in times of danger. Behold
our redeemer in whom we trust, he is able to deliver us out of all danger; for
he is powerful: wherefore let us never be utterly dejected, or despair of
help, but let us look up to the omnipotency of Christ in all distresses.

And coming. This is meant of the first coming of Christ, to wit, his coming
in the flesh, as the phrase coming is also taken, in 1 Timothy 1.15. Doctrine.
Jesus Christ came into the world, that is, was incarnate, or came in the
flesh. Now concerning Christ's coming in the flesh, diverse things are very
remarkable and eminent.

First, that he came of his own accord, and not by constraint; he took our
nature upon him, it was not put upon him, Heb. 2.16. It was no forced marriage
but a sought match.

Secondly, that he came in two respects different from all others; for he came
by an extraordinary conception, to wit, being conceived by the holy Ghost, Mat.
1.20. and by an extraordinary birth, being borne of a pure virgin, Isay. 7.14.

Thirdly, that he came in great humility and debasement, for the first place
that he came into was a stable, as being borne in it; and the first cradle that
he was laid in was a manger or a cratch, Luke 2.7.

Fourthly, that he came into great trouble and vexation: for no sooner was he
borne, but all Jerusalem was in an vproare, and Herod sought his life, Matthew
2.3.13.

Use.
Let this coming of Christ, and this manner of his coming, teach us to admire
the mystery of his incarnation, wherein two natures were married together, to
wit, his divinity and his humanity, in the unity of person, without
confounding either nature; so that he remained still very God and very man, yet
but one person.

Secondly, let it teach us to admire Christ's love, in that he was content to
come from heaven, from the Throne of his glory, thus for to be abased for us.
We may admire this, but we can never be sufficiently thankful for it.

Thirdly, let it teach us to be ready to undergo any debasement or suffering
for Christ, considering what he has undergone for us. If we come to loss and
disgrace, yea, to death it self for Christ; we must remember what he endured
first for us, and that should make us content and patient.

Of his Majesty. By Majesty we are to understand here the appearing of
Christ's divinity, which did now and then shine forth, especially by glimpses
in his speeches, actions, countenance, and transfiguration and the like. The
point hence to be noted is this, to wit, that Doctrine.
There was Majesty in Christ, even whilst he lived upon the earth.

There was such majesty in his words, as that the auditors did not only
admire the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth, Luke 4.22. but also
were enforced to acknowledge that never man spoke like him, John 7.46.

Secondly, there was such majesty in his works, especially in his miracles,
as that it did amaze and astonish the spectators, according to that in Luke
8.56. And the parents were astonished. It is meant of Iairus and his wife, that
they were amazed when they saw their daughter raised from death to life.

Thirdly, there was such Majesty in his gesture and countenance, as that when
he spoke unto the multitude which came with swords and staves to take him, and
said unto them, Whom seek ye, I am he, they fell backward, John 18.6.

Fourthly, in his transfiguration there was that Majesty in his countenance,
as that his face did shine as the Sun, Math 17.2.

Question.
If any shall demand whence this Majesty in Christ came: Answ.
I answer; It flowed from the divine nature which was in him: For even as the
soul within is the cause of beauty and grace in the countenance in men, even
so the divine nature was the cause of Majesty in Christ.

Use.
Let this teach us to admire Christ, for if he was maiesticall in his humbled
estate, how great is his Majesty now in his exalted estate? Yea, let it teach
us to long for the appearing of Christ, and to desire to be with Christ, that
we may behold his glory which the Father has given him, John 17.24. And
secondly, let it arm us against the scandal of the cross: For what though
Christ, for our wretched sins was humbled, or rather humbled himself to the
base death of the cross; yet there was that Majesty in him, which was more of
value to credit him, then there was indignity in the cross to debase him.

We were eyewitnesses. Or as it is in the original, We were made beholders of
his Majesty. Hence observe that as there was Majesty in Christ; Doctrine.
so it was, in some measure visible; the beams of Christ's splendour were not
always obscured by the veil of his flesh, but they did sometime shine forth
and appear. For the proof of this point, I refer you to that in John 1.14:
And the word was made flesh and dwelt amongst us, and we beheld his glory; the
glory, as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth. And that
in 1. John 1.2: The life was manifested, and we have seen it. And unto these
may be added that in 1. Tim. 3.16. God was manifest in the flesh.

Quest.
But unto whom was Christ's Majesty thus manifest or visible? Answ.
Surely not to all, for, He was in the world, and the world was made by him,
and the world knew him not, John 1.10. Yea, some were so blind, as that they
were ready to say, What is thy beloved more then another beloved? Cant. 5.9.
And Herod when he saw Christ, he despised him or set him at naught, Luke 23.11.
Yea, the Princes of this world knew him not, 1. Cor. 2. But the Majesty of
Christ it was especially manifest unto such as were effectually enlightened,
according to that in John 10.14. I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep,
and am known of mine.

Note.
I do not deny, but that this Majesty of Christ was visible also to the
devils: I know thee who thou art. Mark. 1.24. and also unto wicked men, so
far as to amaze them with a sudden glimpse, as it is said of the profane
multitude, Mark 1.26. That they were all amazed, in so much that they
questioned among themselves saying; What thing is this, what new doctrine is
this? for with authority commands he even the unclean spirits, and they do
obey him. But it was effectually visible to none but to Gods elect.

Use.
The use of this point may be to convince the world of palpable blindness, in
that they could not behold the Sun when it shined. Christ was the Sun of
righteousness and his glory was visible, and how many were there
notwithstanding, that knew not his presence?

Secondly, it must serve to confirm our Faith, concerning Christ's divine
nature: that truth which we believe concerning the godhead of the Lord Jesus,
it was visible and apparent in the times wherein he lived, yea it was visible
in some measure to his very enemies, and much more to the Church of God.

Thirdly, it must teach us to desire that our eyes may be anointed with
eie-salue, that we may still behold the Majesty of Christ in his word, and in
his works. The Majesty of Christ is still visible, especially to the eye of
Faith; as Peter and they that were with him in the mount beheld Christ's glory
with corporal eyes: so every believer may at these days see Jesus crowned
with glory and honor by the eye of Faith, Heb 2.9.

Fourthly, this argues that the Majesty of Christ is much more visible now,
especially in heaven: For if the Sun shine bright at some times in a cloudy
day, how much more when these clouds are despelled?

Eyewitnesses. Whence we may note, that Doctrine.
The Apostles had thorough knowledge of the truth of those things which they
did write and preach. They were eyewitnesses, and eare-witnesses. This is that
which John says in his first Epistle and first Chapter, and third verse: That
which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you. And in the first verse of
the same Chapter: That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which
we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have
handled of the word of life, declare we unto you. Hence it is that Luke
terms the Apostles eyewitnesses also in his first Chapter and second verse.

Objection.
If any shall object, that to be an eyewitness, or an eare-witnesse, is not
sufficient to prove the certainty of a thing because the senses may be deluded.
Saul thought he saw Samuel risen from the dead, and that he heard him speaking
to him, when he was merely deluded.

Answer.
Truth it is, that the senses indeed may be deluded, but it was not so with
the Apostles; for they did not only see with their eyes, and hear with their
ears, but they had withal the testimony of Gods spirit, to assure them that
their senses were not deceived: and they had the gift of Faith, whereby they
had power to see more deeply into things, then that they could be deceived.

Use.
Let this therefore teach us to be assured of the truth of the Gospel; it is
delivered, not by hearsay, but by them which were both eyewitnesses, and
eare-witnesses of the same. The Gospel is no devised fable, but a known
demonstratiue manifest truth.

Use.
Let this also teach us that are Ministers of Gods word, to be well assured of
the truth of that, which we deliver for doctrine to the Church of God. For
though we cannot say with the Apostles, that we were eyewitnesses, or
eare-witnesses of the Gospel it self: yet let us always be able to say, we
are assured that* that which we do teach, it is firmly and truly grounded
upon the canonical Scriptures: yea it is to be wished also, that we Ministers
should be men of experience, and that we should, in some measure, speak the
word of God experimentally, and not by bare relation only.

He received from God the Father, honor and glory. In this seventeenth verse,
and in the next verse following, the Apostle declares that he was an
eare-witnesse of Christ his Majesty and greatness; as having been with him
in the holy mountain, when he received honor and glory from God the Father,
etc. Three points are here to be observed. First, the honor that was done to
Christ; He received honor. Secondly, the means of that honor, it was by a
voice from heaven. Thirdly, the witnesses of it; And this voice which came from
heaven we heard, that is, I Peter, and James and John.

He received from God the Father. Does not this derogate from the glory of
Christ, being very God, in that it is said, that he received honor and glory
from God the Father? For what necessity had he to receive honor and glory from
another, which was very God himself? Doctrine.
The truth is, Christ, as God, received nothing from God the Father, but his
subsistence or personalitie; but as he was man, so he received all things from
the Father. And this he confessed himself in diverse places as in Mat. 11.27.
All things are delivered to me of my Father; and in Math. 28.18. All power is
given unto me in heaven and in earth: As the Father has life in himself, so
he has given to the Son to have life in himself, John 5.36.

Yea, whatsoever Christ had, he had it from the Father, as he was man: He had
his humane nature from him; A body have thou made me, Hebr. 10.5. He had his
preservation from him: I was cast upon thee from the womb, thou have been my
God from my mothers belly, Psalm. 22.10. He had his power to work miracles
from him: If I cast out devils with the Spirit of God, Math. 12 28. From him he
had his great authority: The Father judges no man; he has committed all
judgment to the Son, John 5.22. Yea, from him he had his Kingdom or
glorification: I bequeathe unto you a kingdom, as my Father has bequeathed
unto me, Luke 22 29. From him he had his honor and glory, as in this Text.

Use 1.
Let this teach us to admire Christ's humility, and to bless him for his
singular love to mankind, who willing (for our good) was content to put
himself into such an estate, as wherein he was rather to receive then to give;
to pray, to entreat, to be beholden, and the like. This was Christ's portion in
his humbled estate, rather then to command. The time was when Christ thought it
no robbery, to be equal with God, Phil. 2. but now he must be inferior, in
respect of suffering death, to the Angels, Heb. 2.9. The time was when our
Savior said, It is a more blessed thing to give then to receive, Acts 20 35.
but now he must be content himself to receive, though it were never so
contrary to his own royal disposition: O the admirable love of a Savior!

Use 2.
Let it teach us in like manner to be content and patient, if for Christ we
shall at any time be brought to a mean estate. Thou have in former times been
able to relieve others, and art now come to stand in need of relief thy self:
thou have in former times made others beholden to thee for thy gifts, but now
for Christ thou art become a receiver. Be not amazed at this change, but rather
remember, that Christ himself, who before was able to give honor and glory,
is here said to receive it; he that before was a giver, must now be a receiver.

He received honor. Hence we may see the truth of that in 1. Sam. 2.30.
Doctrine.
Them that honor me, I will honor. Christ did greatly honor the Father, and
the Father gave both honor and glory unto Christ, as appears in this Text.
The like may be said of the holy Prophets and Apostles: They sought not
themselves, but Gods glory, and the Lord has made them famous to the end of
the world. The like may be said of the good Kings of Judah; they sought Gods
glory, and God has made them glorious by their histories in the Bible. The
like may be said of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and innumerable other Saints:
they glorified God, and God has made their memorial blessed.

Reason.
Now what is the reason that God will give honor and glory unto such as seek
to glorify him? Surely, first because he has promised to honor such, and his
promise cannot fail. Secondly, to show that it is no vain practice for any to
seek to glorify God. Thirdly, it is to encourage all men to affect Gods
glory.

Use.
This shows, that it is in vain for ill disposed persons to go about to
defame Gods children. God will cast honor upon his servants, in despite of
Satan himself.

Secondly, let us learn here what is the direct way to honor and reputation,
and that is, to set our selves sincerely to seek Gods glory. Let us honor
God, and let him alone to honor us.

Thirdly, let us hence be moved to be thankful to God; first, for that he
gave such honor and glory to Christ our head; and secondly, for that he
offers also to honor us the members, if according to the example of our
head, we shall sincerely affect his glory.

Fourthly, let this teach us, not to fear the reproaches of the wicked, or
their slanders. God is able to put more honor upon us, if we seek his glory,
then all the world is able to put disgrace.

Honor and glory. This is meant of that honor and glory, which Christ
received at his transfiguration, as appears by the words immediately following
in the Text. He received from God the Father, honor and glory, when the voice
came from the excellent glory.

Now if any shall demand, what honor or glory Christ received at his
transfiguration: I answer, He received great honor at that time; first,
because God the father spoke by an audible voice from heaven, and acknowledged
him to be his beloved Son, Matthew. 17.5. Secondly, because the Church was
commanded to hear him, Mark 9.7. Thirdly, because God sent two men, Moses and
Elias from the dead, and that in their glory, to speak with him of his
deceasse, which he should accomplish at Jerusalem, Luke 9.31. All these things
were matter of great honor.

Secondly, Christ received glory, as well as honor, at his transfiguration.
For first the fashion of his countenance was changed, Lu. 9.29. Yea his face
did shine as the Sun, Math. 17.2. which was matter of great glory. Again,
his raiment was white and glistering, Luke 9.29. White as the snow, so as no
Fuller could white them, Mark 9.3. Yea white as the light, Matthew. 17.2.
Thirdly, a bright cloud ouershadowed Christ and Moses and Elias whilst they
talked together, as a rich Canope, Math. 17.5. which did add to the glory. And
lastly, all this was but to shadow out that admirable glory, wherein Christ
shall appear when he shall come in his kingdom at the last day, Matthew. 16.28.
Thus we see the truth of the Apostles doctrine, to wit, That Christ received
both honor and glory, when such a voice came from the excellent glory, that
is, at his transfiguration upon the mount.

Such a voice. If any shall demand what kind of voice it was; I answer, for the
clearing of the Apostles meaning, first, that it was an heavenly voice: it came
not out of the earth, but out of the cloud, Mat. 17.5. Secondly, that it was a
divine voice; for it came not from any creature, but from the excellent
glory, as in this Text.

Came to him. Why is this voice said to come to Christ, considering that it
might seem rather to be spoken to the Apostles, hear him? etc. It is said to
be spoken of Christ, not because he alone heard it; for Peter, James and John
heard the voice when it came from heaven, as being with him in the holy mount:
but rather, because this voice did principally concern Christ himself, as
namely to testify, that he was the Son of God, and that he was beloved of
God, and that in him God was well pleased; yea it was sent especially to honor
Christ, and to comfort him.

When such a voice came. Whence observe, that Doctrine.
God has his time and season to put honor upon his children, though for a
time he suffer them to be debased and scorned; We see it in this example.
Christ was first many ways debased, both by his incarnation, and by many
persecutions; but when the voice came from heaven at his transfiguration, then
he received honor. Thus it was also with Joseph; he was first sold by his
brethren, Genesis 38.28. then accused falsely by his Mistrisse, Genesis 39.17. then
cast into prison by his Master, Ge. 39.20. and there kept till the iron entered
into his soul, Psalm. 105.18. But afterward in due season, he was highly
exalted, and made the second man in the kingdom: Psalm. 105.20. But this was in
the time when his word came, that is, at Gods time appointed, Psalm. 105.19.

Reason.
And God does give to his children honor in due time; first, for the
fulfilling of his promise; for he has promised, that though they be for a time
amongst the pors, yet they shall be as the Wings of a Dove, Psalm. 68. and Gods
promise cannot fail.

Secondly, the Lord is careful, that his children should not put forth their
hands to wickedness, Psalm 125.3. and therefore will not suffer the rod of
the wicked to rest upon the back of the righteous.

Thirdly, the Lord will not have the spirits of his children to fail before
him, and therefore he will not contend for ever, Esaias 57.16.

Use.
This may be a terror to the wicked, which labor to dishonor the godly. Let
them know, God has a time to honor his children, maugre the malice of Satan,
and all his instruments.

Use 2.
Secondly, let all Gods children be of good comfort, though they suffer
reproach for a time, God has a time wherein to give them honor.

Such a voice. Whence note further, that Doctrine.
Rather then Gods children shall want honor, God will give them honor by
extraordinary means. This is manifest, not only out of the Text, wherein we
see God sent an extraordinary voice to honor Christ, but also out of Luke
19.40: If these should hold their peace, the stones would cry. Wherein is
meant, that if people and children had not cried Hosanna in honor of Christ,
the very stones should have cried it, rather then Christ should have lost his
honor.

Objection.
Yea but some may possibly say, We are not at these days to expect
extraordinary works.

We are not indeed to expect miraculous works, but where ordinary means
fail, we may safely expect extraordinary. Has not God dealt extraordinarily
in mercy with this Land, in delivering of it from the Spanish Invasion, in the
year one thousand five hundred eighty and eight; and from the Papists
Gunpowderplot afterward? Yes verily.

Use.
Let this therefore teach us, never to cast away our confidence; God is able to
work by means or without means: yea, where ordinary means fails, he is
able to raise up extraordinary.

From the excellent glory. Whence observe, that Doctrine.
God dwells in the midst of excellent glory, yea of such glory as becomes
his greatness. All this the words in the Original do imply; and for further
proof I refer you to that in 1. Tim. 6.16. where it is said, that God
dwells in that light which no man can approach unto: where by light we are to
understand glory, as by glory we are to understand light, in 1 Corin. 15.41.
One star differs from another in glory, that is, in degrees of light.

But what glory is it which is answerable to Gods greatness wherein he
dwells? It is not meant singly of the glory of the third heaven. For no
created glory can possibly be answerable to an uncreated majesty: but it is
meant of that glory which is in God himself, and which is essential unto him,
as appears by that in Exodus 33.18. where Moses requesteth to see Gods
glory, which is not meant of any circumiacent or aduentitious glory which is
without God, but of that glory which is in God himself, as appears by the
answer; Thou can not see my face, Exodus 33.20. terming that in the twentieth
verse, Gods face, which Moses termed in the eighteenth verse, Gods glory,
expounding the former by the later.

Use.
The consideration hereof should teach us to reverence God in our hearts,
seeing he dwells in such admirable glory. Whose glory should we admire, but
his glory? whose greatness, but his greatness?

Secondly, let it move us to desire faith and illumination, that with open face
as in a clear glass we may behold the glory of the Lord, 2. Cor. 3.18. Yea,
let us desire that the Lord may arise upon us, and his glory may be seen upon
us, Esaias 60.3.

Thirdly, it may teach us to desire to be with God in heaven; for when we are
dissolved, we shall see Gods face and his glory, as the Angels are said to
do, Mat. 18.10.

This is my Son. Doctrine.
Christ is the Son of God by a twofold generation. First, by his eternal
generation, as he is the second person in the blessed Trinity, which
generation who is able to declare? as the Prophet says, Esaias 53.8. Secondly,
by a temporal generation, as he is man. For the power of the Highest
ouershadowed the blessed virgin: therefore that holy thing which was borne of
her, was called the Son of God, Lu. 1.35. None were the sons of God thus,
but Christ alone. Elect men are sons of God, but this is by adoption, and not
by nature. Christ is the only begotten of the Father, John 4.11.

Use.
Let this teach us to take notice, that Christ is very God; for as a man begets
a man like unto his own kind, so God in like manner must needs beget a God;
for else we should make God more impotent then man, yea then any other
creature; for every like begets his like.

Secondly, let it teach us to admire Gods Philanthropie or love to man, in that
he vouchsafed to give his Son, his beloved Son, his only begotten Son,
to the death; yea, to the execrable death of the cross, and that for his
enemies. O unspeakable love! O admirable mercy!

Thirdly, let it encourage us to pray unto the Father in the name of Christ:
What will God deny us if we prefer our petitions in his Sons name? Surely
nothing. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you: so
says our blessed Savior himself, John 16.23.

That beloved one. Whence we may note, that Doctrine.
Christ is beloved of God after an especial manner. He is that beloved one.
God loves the world, and he loves all his works, as they are his works: he
loves the elect Angels, and he loves his elect amongst men. But he loves
Christ above all, and that for just cause. Christ is best worthy to be beloved:
first, because of his excellency; he is the brightness of Gods glory, and the
express image of his person, Hebr. 1.3.

Secondly, he is most innocent, he never ttansgressed the will of his Father at
any time; he finished the work which was given him to do, John 17.4.

Thirdly, he laid down his life, that he might take it up again, therefore
the Father loved him, John chap. 10. verse 17.

Many other reasons might be alleged, to prove that Christ is chiefly beloved
of the Father, but we will not insist upon them. We will rather answer to the
objections which may be made to the contrary.

Some may object possibly that in John 17.23. where it is said, that God has
loved his people with the same love, wherewith he has loved Christ himself. I
answer, It is meant of the same kind of love, but not of the same degree.

Again, if any shall object further, that God gave his Son Christ for the
redemption of the elect world, and therefore that he loved the elect world
better then Christ: I answer, It follows not: For, God did not so give his
Son, as utterly to part with him; he gave him indeed to suffer death, but he
gave him not absolutely away.

Thirdly, if any shall object, that the Father did not so tenderly love Christ
as this text may seem to imply, because he suffered him to live so poor in
the world, so despisedly; because he suffered him to be so wronged, to die such
a death, yea because he stood not by him in his afflictions, but forsook him:
I answer, We must not judge of the love of God, or of his hatred by these
outward things. The Sun does not always shine to us, but it always shines
in the firmament. So the love of God does not always appear, but it is
always fervent in him.

Use.
Let this teach us the more to admire Gods love toward us, in that he would
give his Son whom he loved so dearly, for our redemption; yea, it must teach
us to be content to part with whatsoever we love best for Gods cause.

Secondly, let it be matter of comfort to the children of God: For, certainly
if God has not spared his Son whom he loved so dearly, but has given him
to death for us all, how shall he not, with him, give us all things also? As
the Apostle speaks, Romans 8.32.

Doctrine.
In whom I am well pleased. These words imply or denote unto us two points.
First, that God the Father is, and ever was, well pleased with Christ, and
secondly, in him, well pleased with the Church. For the first point, viz. that
God the Father is, and ever was well pleased with Christ himself, it is
evident. First, because he is the Son of his love, and can any one hate his
son whom he loves? Secondly, because he never transgressed the will of his
Father at any time; and what father is there, but he must needs be well
pleased with such a Son? Thirdly, it is manifest that Christ was highly in
the Fathers favor at all times, in that the Father did so mightily preserve
him in his infancy, in that he assisted him to do so great works, in that he
heard him at all times, John. 11.42. and in that he graced him by an audible
voice from heaven: This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.

Objection.
But here some may possibly object; Did not Gods wrath smoke against Christ
for our sins? Did not Christ tread the wine press of the Fathers wrath? Yea
did he not cry my God my God why have thou forsaken me, upon the cross? And if
so, how then is it true that Christ was always in favor with God?

Answ.
I answer: Christ endured indeed the wrath of God for sin; namely for the
sins of the Church; and thus Gods wrath did smoke against him, and did not
spare him: but the lord was able to distinguish betwixt Christ's person and our
sins, and to express his wrath against sin, but yet to be well pleased
with his Son.

Use.
Let this teach us not to judge of the favor or hatred of God, merely by
outward sense. God was well pleased with Christ, when Christ in the mean time
endured persecution and poverty, a shameful death; yea, the pangs of hell in
his soul, in the Garden, and upon the cross. God hid his countenance from
Christ, in his greatest extreamitie, and yet Christ was in great favor with
him. And so I say to poor dejected Christians, though they may be in great
extremity for a time, as though God had utterly forsaken them, yet let them
not despair: they may be in base estate for the present, and yet be highly
favored of God, with the virgin Mary, Luke 1.48.28. They may, possibly, cry
out with Christ, my God my God, why have thou forsaken me; and yet indeed be
in great favor with God, as we see in this text.

But to come to the second point. As God was always well pleased with his
Son; so, in him, he is well pleased with his Church: And the same point is
also employed in these words; In whom I am well pleased. For the proof of the
point, I refer the reader to that in Ephesians. 2.16; where it is said, that
Christ has reconciled both Jews and Gentiles to God, in one body, by the
cross. And to that in Coll. 1.20. where it is said of Christ, that he made
peace through the blood of his cross, and reconciled all things in heaven and
earth.

Objection.
If any shall object that in Psalm. 106.40. that Gods wrath was kindled against
his people, in so much that he abhorred his own inheritance, and therefore
that God is not fully reconciled to his Church, or thoroughly well pleased with
it.

Answer.
I answer. God indeed is never well pleased with sin, but he will visit
our transgressions with a rod. He is not so merciful but he will still appear
to be just. But let us assure our selves of this, that though the Lord be
displeased at our infirmities; yet upon our Repentance and Faith in Christ, he
is graciously well pleased with our persons.

Use.
Let this teach us to be thankful for the inualuable gift of Christ, our
excellent peacemaker; had it not been for him, the wrath of God had remained
upon us, for ever and ever.

Secondly, Let it be matter of comfort to all them which mourn in Zion. It may
be thou feel nothing but wrath; but be of good comfort, if thou be a new
creature, all thy sins are washed away in the blood of Christ, and thou art
fully reconciled to God, and God is well pleased with thee.

Thirdly, let this teach us to labor to get Faith, whereby we may apply this
reconciliation, wrought by Christ, unto our selves, that we may be assured in
our own consciences, that God is well pleased with us. I marvel how any can
eat, or drink, or lie down in their beds with any peace, without this
assurance.

In whom I am well pleased. Before we pass from this verse, it shall not be
altogether impertinent to clear one scruple which may arise, viz. why the
Apostle does not relate the whole speech which came from heaven, but does cut
it off, as it were, in the midst; for the speech compleately related is this:
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him, Mat. 17.5.
now why does the Apostle leave out this clause, Hear ye him? Which may seem
to be as necessary as the former part of the speech; for, is it not as
necessary that we should hear Christ as our great Prophet, as know him to be
the beloved Son of God; or Know that God is well pleased with him? Surely yes.

I answer: The Apostle does leave out this clause, Hear ye him, for diverse
reasons.

First, because the former part of the speech does imply the latter as a
necessary consequence, though it be not expressed. For if Christ be the beloved
Son of God, then certainly, we ought to hear him; according to that in Math.
21.37. They will reverence my Son, that is, they will surely hear him, and
give entertainment unto him.

Secondly, the Apostle may leave out this speech, Hear ye him, because he knew
it was sufficiently expressed in other places of Scripture, as in Mat. 17.5.
Mark. 9.7. Luke 9.35.

But the point hence to be gathered is this, namely that Doctrine.
The Scriptures have a necessary dependence one upon another, and one place
expounds another.

This is manifest out of the Text, for these words Hear ye him, being wanting
in the Text, are supplied out of the Evangelists, namely, out of the forenamed
places, Mat. 17.5. Mar. 9.7. Luke. 9.35.

The like we read in Math. 26.51. where the name of him which drew his sword
and smote the servant of the high Priest, and cut off his ear, is not
expressed, no nor yet the name of him which was smitten. But that which is
wanting in Matthew, is supplied in John 18.10. where both the name of the
smiter is expressed Simon Peter, and the name of the person smitten, to wit,
Malchus.

In like manner, whereas it is said more obscurely that the disciples had
indignation, saying, To what purpose is this waste, as though many disciples
had murmured against the pouring of the sweet ointment upon the head of
Christ, Math. 26.8. The same is made more manifest, John 12.4. where it is said
that one of the Disciples said, to wit, Judas Iscariot, Symons son; Why was
not this ointment sold, etc.

Lastly, whereas it is more obscurely said Math. 27.44. that the thieves which
were crucified with Christ, did vpbraid him, as though both the malefactors had
railed upon Christ: The same is made more manifest in Luke 23.34. where it is
said, that one of the malefactors which were hanged rayled on him.

Quest.
Here it may be demanded, wherefore the Spirit of God does not fully express
himself in every Text, but leaves some thing vncleared in this or that place,
by some other text elsewhere in Scripture to be cleared and expounded?

Answ.
First, in honor of the word it self, that it might not be despised for the
plainness.

Secondly, in the singular wisdom of God, who will by this means give
occasion to his children to search the Scriptures, and to acquaint themselves
with the whole word of God.

We heard. Whence we may note, that Doctrine.
Gods voice is an audible voice. The Lord spoke from heaven, and his voice was
heard and understood, as appears in this Text and the like. We read in Isay
30.30. The Lord shall cause his glorious voice to be heard, and in Psalm. 68.33.
He sends forth his voice, and that a mighty voice, and in Mark 15.34. At
the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, Eloi eloi lama sabachthani, and
in 37. verse of the same Chapter, Jesus cried with aloude voice, and gave up
the Ghost.

The voice of God is so mighty, as that the insensible creatures are sensible
of it, Hebr. 12.26. Whose voice then shook the earth, but now he has promised
saying; Yet onee more I shake not the earth only, but also so heaven.

Yea, the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God in their very graves
at the last day, John 5.25.

Use.
The audiblenesse of Gods voice may serve to convince us of his mighty power; a
strong voice argues the strength of the speaker; and so the mightiness of
Gods voice does argue the mightiness of his power.

Secondly, it may teach us Ministers which speak in Gods stead, not to favor
our selves too much, but to strain our selves, that we may be heard of the
people, and to extend our voices if it be necessary to make them audible. And
this the Lord requires, Esaias 58.1. Cry aloude, spare not, lift up thy voice
like a trumpet, etc.

Thirdly, it may teach people to do what in them lies, to eleuate the voice of
their Minister. They must pray for him, that God would open unto him the door
of utterance, Ephesians 6.19. Secondly, they must not daunt his spirit by
discouragements, but rather put life into him by their encouragements, Joshua
1.18. where the people say unto Joshua, Only be strong, and of a good courage.
Thirdly, they must beware of rebellion against Gods word and disobedience; for
rebellion and disobedience are an especial cause that the tongue of the
Prophet does cleave to the roof of his mouth, Ezechiel 3.18.

Fourthly, it must teach us to be thankful, in that the voice of God, I mean
the voice of the Ministry, is so audible amongst us: in that we have so many
sons of thunders, to sound the word in our ears. Christ pronounces the
ears of his Disciples blessed, in that they heard, Matthew. 13.16. and so
certainly they were, having grace, not only to hear, but also to obey.

We were with him. That is, we three, Peter, and James and John: for these were
the three which Christ led along with him when he went into the mountain where
he was transfigured; as appears in Mark 9.2. And it is a thing to be
observed, that Christ admitted these three above the rest of the Apostles unto
diverse businesses; as when he raised Iairus his daughter, he suffered no man to
go in with him, save Peter and James and John, and the father and mother of
the maid, Luke 8.57. Also, when he went apart to pray, he took Peter, and
James and John with him, commanding the rest of his Disciples to stay behind in
a place which he appointed them, Mark 14.33.

And so here when Christ went to be transfigured, he took with him Peter, and
James, and John.

And the reason may be; first, because James, Cephas and John seemed to be
Pillars, as we read, Galat. 2.9.

Secondly, it was out of Christ's own freedom; it was lawful for Christ
freely to vouchsafe certain privileges unto these three, which he would not
vouchsafe the rest of the Apostles.

We were with him. Whence observe, that Doctrine.
It is an especial privilege to be conversant with Christ. So it is pleaded
here; we were with him when others were not admitted. We see by experience,
that it is a privilege to be familiar with great men: for great personages
will not be familiar with every one, neither is it fit they should. How much
more then is it a privilege to have familiarity with God?

Secondly, the benefits received by familiarity with God, do prove it to be an
especial privilege. For first, by being familiar or conversant with Christ,
we learn many things; according to that in Prou. 13.20. He that walks with
wise men, shall be wise. Secondly, by being conversant with Christ, we receive
contentment and joy, as it is said, Ioh. 3.20. But the friend of the
Bridegroom which stands and hears him, rejoices greatly because of the
Bridegroomes voice. Thirdly, by being conversant with Christ, we are in safety.
This Jeremy acknowledges in his twentieth chapter and eleventh verse: The Lord
is with me as a mighty terrible one; therefore my persecuters shall stumble,
and they shall not prevail.

Objection.
But some may possibly object: Yea but if any be continually in Christ's
presence, he must walk very accurately; he must not speak an idle word, nor
have a wanton look. And this degree of preciseness may seem rather to be a
bondage then a privilege. Answ.
It is indeed a bondage to the wicked and graceless, to be exercised in true
holiness: but unto the child of God it is the sweetest freedom in the world.

Use.
Let it therefore teach us to labor for this privilege (to wit) to walk with
God, and to be conversant with him; and that we may attain thereunto, observe
we these directions.

First, we must be conversant in the word* 1. John 1.3. That which we have
seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with
us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.
Secondly, we must beware of sin; for God will have no fellowship with the
stool of wickedness: and, If we say, that we have fellowship with him, and
walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth, 1. John 1.6. Thirdly, we
must be very conversant in works of holiness. For, where two or three are
gathered together in Christ's name, there is he in the midst of them, Math.
18.20.

Use.
Let it also teach Christians which are partakers of this privilege of having
fellowship with God, to be thankful. As Henock was much bound to God for this
fellowship, and Abraham and Moses, and Peter, and James and John; even so art
thou which enioyest this fellowship, though it be in an inferior degree. If a
King should admit thee into great familiarity with him, and thou should
despise it, and make light of it, were it not most just for him to cashiere
thee out of his presence, and to deprive thee of his princely familiarity? Even
so, if God vouchsafe to be familiar with thee, and thou prize it not, how just
is it for him to hide his countenance from thee, and to deprive thee of his
familiarity?

Use.
Lastly, this shows the misery of the wicked; for they are not partakers of
this privilege of having fellowship with Christ, but their fellowship is with
the devils; with them they converse, with them they consult, of them they are
taught, and them they obey.

In the holy mount. Here it may be demanded, Why Christ was transfigured rather
in a mountain then in a valley? This might be for this reason, namely, that
the eminency of the place, might put the Apostles in mind to lift their hearts
up unto God, and to have their minds above in this holy business. For what
was the reason that the Temple was built upon an hill, but for the same cause?
And what was the cause that Abraham went up into the mountain to offer his
son Isaac, but for the same reason?

Use.
Let this teach us in heavenly matters, to have our hearts above. Heavenly
actions should be performed with an heavenly mind; and that we may do so,
observe we these rules. First, we must empty our minds of worldly occasions,
before we come into Gods house; we must leave these as servants, at the foot
of the hill, as Abraham did. 2. We must undertake holy businesses with
preparation. 3. We must beware of such objects as disperse our thoughts in the
time of Gods ordinance.

Holy mount. Why was this mountain called holy, more then another mountain?
Surely not in respect of the earth or matter whereof it consisted, but because
of Gods presence.

The point hence to be observed is this, viz. that Doctrine.
Every place, during the time of Gods especial presence and holy ordinance, is
holy. Yea, the very open fields and mountains are holy upon this occasion; as
we read, Exodus 3.5: Moses come not nigh, put off thy shoes, the place where
thou stand is holy ground. Hence it is that Gods temple is termed an holy
Temple in Psalm. 5.7. and in diverse other places of the Psalms.

Use.
This makes against them which carry themselves irreverently in the house of
God, and that in the very time of Gods ordinances, either by sleeping or
gazing, or by pride, or by stealing, etc. Of these it may truly be said; Thine
holy Temple have they defiled; and, My Fathers house is the house of prayer,
but you have made it a den of thieves.

Secondly, this must teach us to reverence Gods Sanctuary, as we are taught,
Leuit. 19.30. Whilst we labor to shun the superstitious opinions which
idolaters have of their Temples, we must take heed that we fall not into the
other extremity, to wit, to have a base opinion of Gods house.

We have a more sure word of Prophecy: Or, as it is in the original: We have a
more sure Prophetical word: as though the Apostle had said, That which I write
unto you concerning Christ, it was confirmed not only by a lively voice of God
the Father from heaven; but also by the Canonical writings of the holy
Prophets.

Whence we are to observe, that Doctrine.
The Gospel of Christ is an infallible truth. It has witness both from God
and man. That it has witness immediately from God, it is evident by the voice
which came from heaven: This is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased;
hear him: And that from man it is manifest; for unto Christ do all the
Prophets give witness, Acts 10.43. Yea, all the Prophets, from Samuel, and
those that follow after, as many as have spoken, have also foretold of these
days, Acts 3.24.

To this purpose is that in Luke 1.60. He has raised up an horn of salvation
for us, in the house of his servant David, as he spoke by the mouth of his holy
Prophets which have been since the world began: And that in John 5.39. Search
the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they are they
which testify of me. In a word, Christ was written of in Moses, in the
Prophets, and in the Psalms, Luke 24.49.

Use.
This must serve to confirm our faith concerning Christ, that he is the true
Messiah; and concerning his Gospel, that it is no other but the very truth. If
we will not believe both God himself and all his Prophets, whom should we
believe?

Secondly, it may serve also to aggrauate the sin of atheism and
infidelity. What do these cursed sinners but give God himself and all his
Prophets the lie?

A more sure word. That is, a more sure word then that which came down from
heaven, saying; This is my beloved Son, etc. Here it may be demanded, how the
Apostle can speak this without blasphemy; for that voice which came down from
heaven, was the voice of God himself, then the which, what could possibly be
more sure?

Some, for the clearing of this doubt, affirm, that the Comparatiue degree
here is put for the Positive: We have a more sure word, that is (say they) we
have a sure word; but we cannot agree to their judgment: but taking the words
as they are in the text, my sentence is, That the word of the Prophets is said
to be a more sure word then that voice which came from heaven, not because it
was more true, but because it was of more authority with the people unto whom
Peter wrote. They distrusted not the voice that came from heaven: but above all
other voices they kept themselves close to the voice of Scriptures.

Hence learn we Doctrine.
To prize the sentences and speeches of Scripture above all other sentences and
speeches whatsoever.Let us esteem the Scripture the surest foundation. For the
proof of this point I refer the Reader to that in the second epistle of John
tenth verse; If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive
him not to house, neither bid him God speed: and to that in Gal. 1.8. Though
we, or an Angel from heaven preach any other gospel unto you then that which
we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. Unto this accords that in
Ephesians. 2.20. Ye are built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets,
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone. And that in 1. Corinthians.
3.11. Other foundation can no man lay but that which is laid, Jesus Christ. By
all which places it is manifest, that the Canonical Scripture is the sure
Foundation.

Objection.
But here some may possibly object, That the Church is said to be the pillar
and ground of truth, 1. Timothy chapter 3. verse 15. and therefore, that we
ought rather to depend upon the authority of the Church then upon the Scripture.

Answ.
I answer: The Church is so termed, not in respect of it self, but in respect
of its Ministry; even as James and Cephas and John were counted to be
pillars, not for their persons, but for their doctrine, Galat. 2.9. So that the
place rightly understood, does rather confirm the authority of the word, then
in any sort infringe it.

Use.
Let us learn therefore to keep close to the word of God, and to ground our
faith upon it alone. Let us not receive, as a foundation, any man's writing,
though never so learned or eloquent, further then he is able to avouch his
writing by the word of God. Remember that in John 10.5. We must not know, that
is, approve the voice of a stranger, if we will approve our selves to be the
sheep of Christ.

Use.
Secondly, this may comfort true Christians. The Lawyer, the Physician, the
Philosopher, have their Authors, upon whom they do especially ground: but the
Christian has a more s^re foundation; namely, the word of God. In like manner,
the Anabaptists have their dreams and fancies, in stead of revelations to
ground upon: and the hypocrite, he has the judgments, or rather the persons
of such and such whom he esteems reverent Ministers to rest upon; but the
sound Christian has respect only to the word of God, and so lays a sure
foundation. And the truth is, this foundation will stand when all other will
shrink and come to nothing.

Whereunto taking heed ye do well. Whence we are to note three points: first,
that it is the duty of all Christians to give diligent heed to the word of God:
Secondly, that it is a commendable thing also so to do: Thirdly, that it is the
duty of a Minister to encourage the people in well doing, by commending them
for their virtues.

First, that 1. Doctrine.
It is the duty of all Christians to give diligent heed to the word of God, it
is manifest: For if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every
transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward: how shall
we escape if we neglect so great salvation? Heb. 2.2.3. Yea it shall come to
pass, that whosoever will not hear that Prophet, that is, Christ in the
Ministry, shall be destroyed from amongst the people, Acts chapter 3. verse
23.

Reason.
And there be many reasons to move us to give heed to the word: first, because
it is the word of God, and not of men: Secondly, because it is the especial
instrument of our salvation: Thirdly, because whosoever despises the word, shall be
destroyed, Prou. 13.13. Fourthly, because he that turns back his ear from
hearing the Law, even his prayers shall be abomination, Prou. 28.9.

Quest.
But, what is it to have respect or to give heed to the word of God?

Answer.
It is, first, diligently to frequent the house of God, where it is faithfully
taught. Secondly, to mark and to hearken carefully to it whilst it is
delivered. Thirdly, to examine our selves by it, and to make conscience to
practice it.

Use.
This may serve justly to reprove multitudes at these days wherein we live:
first, such as are negligent comers to the Church. Secondly, such as come to
the Church, but attend not as they ought to the word, but suffer their minds
and senses to be carried after other matters. Thirdly, such as come and hearken
to the word, but go their way again without any purpose to practice any jot of
that which they hear. All these are negligent hearers, they attend not to the
word of God, or they take not heed unto it.

The second doctrine propounded is, that Doctrine.
It is a commendable thing to take heed to the word. To the which taking heed
ye do well, etc.

For what did our Savior so highly commend Mary in Luke 10.42? but because she
had chosen the good part, that is, attended upon the hearing of the word for
the attaining of salvation. And, for what were the Beroeans so highly
commended? Acts 17.11. but because they searched the Scriptures, etc.

Reason.
And to hear and take heed to the word must needs be commendable: first,
because it is an honest practice. Secondly, because it is a godly practice.
Thirdly, because it is, and has been the practice of all Saints from
generation to generation.

Use.
This serves justly to condemn the practice of them which rail against going
to sermons, against reading Gods word, and other holy duties. These railing
Rabshachees should consider, that it were their duty rather to commend these
practices.

Secondly, this may serve to teach us, never to be ashamed of this practice of
taking heed to the word of God; though all the world should cast contempt upon
it, yet the thing in it self is truly commendable.

Thirdly, this may serve to encourage all such as give diligent heed to the
word of God, always provided, that they be careful to follow two callings,
viz. both their general calling, and also their particular. A true Christian
must so hear, as that he still have time to earne his own bread; and he must
so labor for things necessary for this life, as that still he have his
religious hours every day to attend unto Gods word either read or preached.

Ye do well. Whence observe in the third place, that Doctrine.
It is the duty of Ministers to encourage the people in their hearing of Gods
word, by due commendation given unto them for the same. Thus does Peter in this
Text, when he perceived that his auditory did give diligent heed to the things
that were spoken; he animateth them with this commendation, Unto the which
giving heed ye do well. The like practice we observe in Paul, in 1. Cor.
11.2: Now I commend you brethren that you remember me in all things, and keep
the ordinances as I delivered them unto you. And in 1 Thessalonians. 1.6: Ye became
followers of us and of the Lord, having received the word in much affliction
with joy in the holy Ghost. So that ye were ensamples to all that believe in
Macedonia and Achaia.

The like practice we see in Christ, Luke 8.21. My mother and my brethren are
these which hear the word of God, and do it; he so far commends the
diligent hearers of Gods word, that he seems to prefer them before his
mother which brought him into the world. The like we see in the same our
blessed Savior in Reu. 3.8. where he commends the Church of Philadelphia for
keeping his word.

Reason.
And there is good ground for it, that a Minister may and ought to commend the
people for their diligent heed given unto the word. As first, because it may
be a means to encourage them in their zeal, yea, to make them more zealous.
Secondly, because it may be a means to stir up others, which are as yet
negligent of the word, to become zealous hearers of the same. Thirdly, because
a Minister shall hereby discharge a Ministerial good duty to God, though no
success should follow upon the same.

1. Objection.
But some, possibly, may object, That it is not safe to commend Gods children
for their well doing, lest they should be puffed up by our commendation. Answ.
I answer: We must not be too jealous of our brethren we must hope the best;
let us do that which God requires as a duty of us, and leave the success to
God.

2. Objection.
Others may likewise object, that it is not safe for a Minister, of all other,
to commend people for taking heed to the word of God; because this were the
way to come to be suspected of vainglory, or of going about to draw
disciples after him: so, if a Minister shall give alms, he shall find some
that will tax him for hypocrisy; or if he preach earnestly against sin;
some, possibly, will say he is too busy or contentious: But a Minister in this
case, must pass very little to be judged of man's judgment, there is one which
judges him, which is the Lord. Let a Minister do that which is pleasing to
God, though all the world should censure him for it.

Use.
This may serve justly to reprove too many Ministers, which reprove people for
taking heed to the word, thinking them to be too forward, if they be zealous
to hear: But let such know, it were their duty rather to commend such people,
and to bless God for them, and to turn the edge of their reproach upon
profane neglecters of the ordinance of God.

Secondly, this should teach Gods people, to give such heed unto the word, and
to be so diligent in hearing and attending, and to carry themselves so
reverently in the house of God, as that Ministers may have just cause to
commend them, and to rejoice of them. Every one could be content to be praised,
but how few be there which labor to deserve praise?

Thirdly, this should teach us to be thankful to our gracious God, in that he
is not only content to accept of our zeal and forwardness, but also is
willing that we should be commended for the same.

As unto a light. Whence note this point, viz. that Doctrine.
the word is a light. And for proof hereof, I refer you to that in Psalm.
119.105: Thy word is a Lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path: and 1.
John 2.9: The darkness is past, and the true light now shines: and John
5.35. Ye could have rejoiced in his light for a season: and John 3.14. This is
the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness
rather then light.

Reason.
And indeed the word of God may well be compared to light. First, because as
light is an incorruptible thing; though it shine upon a stinking dunghill, yet
it is not corrupted: Even so the word is incorruptible seed, as Peter terms
it 1. Pet. 1.23. And though it be preached to never so base persons, yet it
receives no tainture or infection.

Secondly, because as light discovers the soulnesse of the room or place
where it shines; even so does the word discover the iniquity of such places
where it is preached. A man sitting in a dark house in the night, may think
he sits in a clean place; but when the Sun arises in the morning, then he
plainly discerns the contrary: Even so people being in darkness, may,
possibly, think themselves to be in a clean estate; but when the word of God
comes, it quickly discovers that they are not cleansed from their filthiness.

Thirdly, because as the light, in respect of the object, has a contrary
effect: For shining upon a dead carkase, it causes to smell the more odiously;
but shining upon herbs it makes them the more fragrant. Even so the word is
the favor of death unto death unto the reprobate, but the savor of life unto
life, unto the elect. It has a contrary effect in respect of the hearers,
though it be one and the same in it self.

Question.
Is it then in the power of the word to enlighten without the Spirit? Not so,
for as the Spirit ordinarily without the word will not work; so the word
without the Spirit cannot work. The word may fitly be compared to a Torch, and
the Spirit to the fire which kindles it; The Torch is a fit instrument to
gain light by, but yet unless it be lighted it gives no shine: So the word
is a fit instrument to enlighten the eyes of the blind, but yet unless the
Spirit do kindle it, it can give no saving light.

Use.
The use of this point may be, first, to discover the very cause why the word
is so hated by lewd and wicked men. It is because it is a light, and
discovers their naughtiness. What does the thief or the adulterer hate
more, then if any come with a candle to reveal his practices? Hence it is that
our Savior says in John the third chapter, and the twenty verse: Every one
that does evil hates the light.

Secondly, this makes for the just condemnnation of ungodly men, that when
light is come into the world yet love darkness more then light, John 3.19. How
many wretched persons be there in the world, that when for the present they
have the light of the Gospel, are weary of that, and desire rather the times
of Popery wherein they might be nuzled up in blindness and ignorance?

Thirdly, this should teach every one of us to be thankful unto God for the
word, as for a comfortable light; and to labor to be sensible, how we should
fit in darkness and in the shadow of death, were it not for this blessed
lamp.

Fourthly, it should teach us, whilst we have the light to walk in the light,
lest darkness come upon us, John 12.35. Yea, being children of the light, we
must walk as children of the light. We that have light must not stumble and
fall, as they that walk in the dark; but we must walk honestly as in the
day, not in ryoting and drunkenness; not in chambering and wantonness, nor in
strife and envying, etc. Romans 13.13. But alas my beloved who (...) conclude,
either, that we have not the true light, or (...) the lest, that we walk not as
children of the light. I speak this to our shame.

In a dark place. That is, in the heart unregenerate. Whence observe we this
instruction, viz. that Doctrine.
The heart of every unregenerate man, is a dark and obscure dungeon; yea, a
dark hell or hades, wherein there is no saving light or knowledge.

For proof of this, consider these places of Scripture, Romans 1.21. They became
vain in their imagination, and their foolish heart was darkened, Math. 4.15.
The people which sat in darkness have seen great light, and to them which
sat in the region and shadow of death, light is sprung up. Luke 1.78.76: To
give light to them which sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death. Isay
60.2. Behold the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the
people. Ephesians. 5.8. You were once darkness. And, Psalm. 82.5. They know not,
neither will they understand, they walk on in darkness.

Reason.
And an unregenerate heart, may well be compared to a dark place. First,
because as a dark place is without light, so is the unregenerate heart. Isay
8.20. If they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no
light in them.

Secondly, because as a dark place is a fit receptacle for deboysht and lewd
persons; even so the unregenerate heart, is a fit receptacle for devils and
foul spirits. Luke 11.20. When the strong man armed keeps the house, etc.

Thirdly, because as men commonly are not ashamed of (...) which they play in
secret, because they think no eye sees them; so whatsoever sins an
unregenerate person, in his dark estate, commits, he is far from being
ashamed of the same. Ier. 6.15: Were they ashamed when they had committed
abomination? Nay, they were not ashamed, neither could they blush.

Fourthly, because as dark places are commonly nastie and unsavory: Even so
is an unregenerate heart foul and filthy in the sight of God; no dungeon, no
sink, no vault is so stinking in our nostrils as an unsanctified heart is in
the nostrils of God. Psalm. 14.1: They are corrupt. It is a Metaphor taken from
things which are putrified for want of salt: Because as that which is
putrified, sends forth an ill savor, so does a putrified and rotten heart.

Objection.
Yea, but many unregenerate persons may have great knowledge in religion,
therefore how is their hearts a dark place? Answ.
Not because they have no knowledge at all, but because they have no saving
knowledge.

Use.
The consideration of this point, may serve to humble all unregenerate persons;
let them remember that their foolish hearts are full of darkness, and
therefore let them not magnify themselves in respect of natural wit; let them
be more humbled for that excellent light which they want, then puffed up, in
any sort, for that insufficient light which they have.

Secondly, this should teach us to loath our selves in respect of our natural
condition. What were we but darkness and corruption before our effectual
calling? Is thy heart now a lightsome Temple? remember that in times past, it
was a dark dungeon.

Thirdly, this should serve to convince us of the necessity of the use of
enlightening means; as of hearing Gods word preached, and the like. We are in
darkness naturally, and therefore have need of light; and what means is it
ordinarily that does turn men from darkness to light, but Gods word truly
preached? Acts 26.18.

Until the day dawne. By the dawning of the day, and the day star, in this
place, we are to understand effectual illumination, or the gift of Christ, as
it is explaned, Luke 1.78.

And effectual illumination, or the gift of Christ, is fitly compared to the
dawning. First, because as the dawning is but a small light at the first; even
so illumination at the first is but small. Job. 26.14: Lo these are part of
his ways, but how little a portion is heard of him?

Secondly, because as the dawning, though it bring but a little light at the
first, yet it brings great joy, both to man and beast; so effectual
illumination, though it be weak as the first, yet being in truth, it brings
joy to the Angels; for the very Angels rejoice of the conversion of a sinner,
Luke 15. It brings joy to the friends of a convert: for what true friend is
there but he rejoices to see his friend converted? It brings joy to God
himself; for the father of the prodigal rejoices to see the return of his
prodigal and graceless son. It brings joy to the Church of God; for what
true member is there, but he rejoices to see the body of Christ to be more and
more perfected? Lastly, it brings comfort, or at the least matter of comfort
to the party himself which is enlightened. Does not a man rejoice to see the
light shine in at the window, after a dark and dismal night? how much more
has he cause to rejoice, in that he himself, who was darkness, is now made
light in the Lord?

Thirdly, as the dawning though it be but a small light at the first, yet it
grows greater and greater until the perfect day. So it is with true
illumination; It is a growing light. Prou. 4.18. But the path of the just is as
a shining light, which shines more and more till the perfect day.

Fourthly, as the dawning is procured by the light of the Sun; even so true
illumination flows from Christ, as from the Sun of Righteousness: The
dayspring which visits us is from on high, that is, from Christ, Lu. 1.78.
And God which caused light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our
hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ, 2. Cor. 4.6.

Thus we see, in some measure, the reasons why true illumination is compared to
the dawning.

Again, we are to note further, that as it is here compared to the dawning; so
it is likewise to the morning Star: and that for these reasons: first,
because as the morning Star is a beautiful creature, so is grace much more
glorious. Secondly, as the morning Star is the forerunner of the Sun, or
of a greater light then it self: so grace is the forerunner of glory.
Thirdly, as the morning Star vanishes when the Sun appears; so faith,
which is one of the first graces, it vanishes away, when Christ shall appear,
and when we shall receive that which we believed or hoped for.

Quest.
May not the reprobate have this dawning and day star arise in their hearts?

Answer.
No verily. For though they have some kind of enlightening, yet they cannot
attain effectual illumination: their enlightening is as the light of some
vapor or exhalation streaming in the air; which sometimes causes men to
think that it is break of the day, when it is not: or, it is like unto a
blazing star, which seems to be a star when it is nothing less.

And there is a manifest difference betwixt the light of the elect, and the
light of the reprobate.

1. Because the light of the elect is an effectual light, the light of the
reprobate ineffectual, 1. Thessalonians 2.13. 2. Because the light of the
elect is a growing light, the light of the reprobate not so, 2. Tim. 3.13. 3.
Because the light of the elect is a transforming light, making them better; but
the light of the reprobate neither transformeth nor makes better, Romans 1.32.
verse.
Until the day dawne. Whence observe, Doctrine.
How long we ought to give heed to the word of God, to wit, until we receive
benefit by the same: yea until we be effectually enlightened thereby, until
the day dawne in our hearts, and the day Star of Christ's spirit arise in us.
And it is necessary that we should continue in diligence in this kind unto
this time, I mean, until we receive profit: for otherwise our labor would
prove to be in vain. If a man knock at a door, unless he have patience to
stay until some come to the door, to give him an answer, his knocking is in
vain: Or if a Scholar come to this or that School, if he be not content to
remain in the School, until such time as he may be taught and perfected, his
coming to the School is in vain: even so, if any shall come for a time to
hear Gods word, and will not be content to wait until it shall please God to
work effectually upon them, their coming is merely vain.

Objection.
But some possibly will say, I have been an hearer of the word these many
years, and yet I cannot see that ever I received any benefit by my hearing; to
what end should I hear any longer? Answ.
Yes, there is reason thou should be constant in hearing, for thou know
not at what hour thou shall be called into the Vineyard, whether at the ninth
hour, or at the eleventh.

Objection.
If any shall object further and say, Are we bound therefore only to hear
Gods word, until we be effectually wrought upon, and may we then lawfully cast
it off?

Not so: but the Spirit of God labors especially to strengthen us to hold
out till we be effectually wrought upon, because we are in the greatest danger
to cast off the word in our carnal estate, when we find no relish in it. For
a Christian that is effectually wrought upon indeed, we need not almost bid
him give diligence to the word, for he hungereth and thirsts after it as
after his appointed food. The like place we have, 1. Timothy 4.11. Till I
come, give attendance to reading, etc. it is not meant he should cast it off
then.

Objection.
But, suppose a man hear the word all his lifetime, or at the least a great
part of his life, and still the day dawne not in his heart: Is he bound still
to attend? Answ.
Yes verily, he is bound to read in the word of God all the days of his life,
that he may learn to fear the Lord, Deuteronomy. 17.19.

Use.
This serves justly to reprove the peevishness of many, which if they receive
not benefit by the word at the first, or second, or third hearing, they will
presently cast off all, and hear no longer. These are like unto him in 2.
Kings 6.33. which cried, This evil is of the Lord, what should I wait for the
Lord any longer? O wicked persons! how long has the Lord waited your leisure?
how long has he expected your repentance, and you repented not? And are you
not content to stay his leisure for mercy, and for your own good?

Of private interpretation. By private interpretation we are to understand such
interpretation as any by their natural wit, or natural gifts shall give upon
the Scriptures, without the help of the Spirit of God.

The point hence to be noted, is, that Doctrine.
None is able to interpret Scriptures by their own natural understanding, or
natural helps, without the Spirit of God.

For the proof of this I refer the Reader to that in 1. Corinthians. 2.14. But
the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God; for they are
foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. Now if he cannot know them, then much less can he interpret them.
And to that in Mark 4.11. But to them that are without, all these things are
done in parables. And to that in Revelation 5.3. And no man in heaven, nor on
earth, nor under the earth, was able to open the book, nor to look thereon.

Hence it is that the book of Job is termed a Parable, Job 27.1. Because
indeed both it and the rest of holy Writ is no other but a very Riddle or
Parable unto the natural man. Hence it is that the Eunuch acknowledged, that
he was not able to understand what he read without a guide, Acts 8.31. And
hence it is why so many thinking to understand Scripture by the strength of
their own wit or learning, fall into gross and damnable heresies.

Objection.
If any here shall object: Yea but do we not see many carnal Ministers, who by
their gifts and learning are able notably to interpret the Scriptures?

Answ.
We deny not but carnal men may be enabled to interpret Scripture, but then it
is not by their own carnal reason, or mere natural helps, but either by the
ministerial spirit, which may be given to a carnal man, as it was unto Judas,
or else by the help of other holy Books, which have been penned by such as
have been spiritual indeed.

Objection.
To what end then (may some say) should carnal persons read the word, seeing
they cannot interpret or understand it? Answ.
Yes, it is necessary for every man to read the Scriptures, but he must not
trust to his own natural conceits for the understanding thereof: he must
read, and he must get spiritual helps; but especially he must desire the
assistance of Gods Spirit for the understanding of that which he reads.

Use.
The consideration hereof may serve to humble the learned men in the world:
for suppose thou had as much learning as ever had any natural man; yet
behold here thou come short: thou art not able with all thy Hebrew, and
Greek, and Latin, with all thy Logic, Philosophy, and Rhetoric to
understand this holy Book, I mean the Scripture. This Book surmounteth thy
deepest and sharpest reason.

Use.
It serves also to reprove the presumption of many carnal persons, which will
wrest the Scriptures to their own sense, though they have no other warrant for
their interpretations, but only their own natural reasons.

Oh consider thou vain man, thy own interpretation is vain, no prophecy is
of private interpretation. Thou must have a better wit then thine own, whereby
to be enabled to interpret Scripture, or else thy presumption is vain.

Use.
This shows also what necessity we have to undertake reading with prayer.
Read we may, but to understand we cannot without the assistance of Gods
Spirit. Let us therefore earnestly crave his assistance upon all assayes.
Reading is sanctified by prayer.

Use.
This teaches us likewise to see the necessity of Ministers. The Church of
God has need of an interpreter; one of a thousand, as Job speaks in his
thirty and third chapter. How shall the people understand without a guide?
They may read and beat their brain, but unless they have a guide, they may
come short of sound understanding.

Use.
Further, it must teach every one that have any ability to understand the
Scriptures aright, to give the glory to God; if his Spirit had not assisted
thee, and taught thee, thou could never have attained the knowledge thou
have, though it may be it is but weak, in comparison of that which thou must
labor for.

Use.
Lastly, this teaches, that we must give no further credit to the glosses and
interpretations of Councels and Fathers, then we find them agreeable to the
rest of the Scriptures. No man though never so learned, can interpret Scripture
further then he is assisted by the Spirit. And that assistance which the Spirit
gives, is light from the rest of the canonical scripture. Therefore as any is
able to confirm their interpretations by scripture; so far we are to give
credit unto them, and no further.

Knowing this first. Whence note, that Doctrine.
None ought to be ignorant of this truth, to wit, that no Scripture is of
private interpretation; yea every one ought to know this in the first place,
or as a thing most necessary to be known.

Reason.
And why? first, because it is a fundamental point; what point is there of
greater consequence in Divinity, then this concerning the interpretation of
Scripture? Now we must not be ignorant of fundamental points, Hebr. 5.12.

Secondly, because if we be ignorant of this truth, we may easily be deceived
by Papists and others, which will be ready to obtrude upon us the private
interpretations of the Pope and popish Councels. I call their interpretations
private, because they come from their own brain and invention, without
warrant from the word of God.

Thirdly, we must not be ignorant of this, because it is written aforetime; and
whatsoever was written aforetime, it was written for our instruction, as the
Apostle speaks, Romans 15.4.

Use.
This makes against Papists and others, which are ignorant of this first point
of Religion, and therefore are ready to receive the private interpretations of
men concerning the Scriptures, as of the Pope and others, which are of an
erroneous spirit.

Use.
If any shall here demand, How they may come to know, that the Scripture is
not of private interpretation: The way to know it, is, first, to know the words
of this Text, and to believe them. Secondly, to pray God to convince our
consciences of the truth of them, that so we may believe them. Thirdly, to
consider that the whole Scripture was given by the inspiration of God; and
being so, then it must needs follow, that none but God knows the meaning of
them, or can interpret them.

Use.
In the next place, let us examine whether we know this necessary truth, or no.
And it may be tried by these signs and marks. First, if we believe not every
interpretation, but first try it by the Scripture, whether it be sound, or no.
Secondly, if we depend not upon the persons or gifts of men, but have maine
respect to that which is written. Thirdly, if we be jealous of our own
interpretations, and give no further credit to them, then we find them
agreeable to the written word. Fourthly, if we never read the word, but we
still desire the assistance of Gods Spirit for the understanding of the same.

Lastly, let such as know, that the Scripture is not of private interpretation,
be thankful unto God for this knowledge. For, how many be there in the world,
especially amongst seduced Papists, which are ignorant of this point; and being
ignorant, greedily embrace private interpretations and idle inventions, to
their own perdition or destruction?

Prophecy came not by the will of man. That is, the Prophets, in old time, did
not according to their private conceits deliver their own inventions in
preaching; the Prophets were not like unto such rash teachers, which preach
that for doctrine which comes first to the tongues end, etc.

The point hence to be noted of us is, that Doctrine.
The Scriptures are not the invention of man. They were not excogitated or
invented in policy, to keep men in awe, as infidelious Atheists affirm.
They came not, neither were they brought in by man's wit or wisdom. So says
the Text.

For the further proof, I refer the Christian reader, to that in Gal. 1.11:
But I certify you brethren, that the Gospel which was preached of me, is not
after man; for I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it: And to
that in 1. Cor. 2.4; And my speech and my preaching, was not with entising
words of man's wisdom.

Reason.
And the truth is, such is the mystery of the word, such is the godly
simplicity, such is the power, such is the style, that it is impossible it
should be invented by man; Never man spoke as this word speaks.

Secondly, the penmen of the Scripture were unlearned and plain men, some of
them being heardmen, and gatherers of Sycamore fruit, as was Amos 7.14. Others
of them being fishermen, as were the Apostles. Therefore it is neither likely
nor possible that they should invent such writings as the Scriptures are, by
their own brain.

Use.
Let this therefore teach us not to receive the word as the word of man;
respecting of it according to the person or quality, or wisdom of him that
does deliver it. It is not to be valued according to any man's worth. Let it
also teach us to abhor all Atheistical thoughts which call into question the
authority of Gods word.

Holy men of God. In which words, three points concerning the Prophets and
Apostles may be observed. First, that they were but men. Secondly, that they
were men of God. Thirdly, that they were holy men.

That Doctrine.
The Prophets and Apostles were men and nor Gods or not Angels: It is evident
not only out of this place, but also by their own confessions in other
places; Isay confesses himself a man of unclean lips, Isay. 6.5. In like
manner Barnabas and Paul, acknowledged themselves to be men of like passions,
Acts 14.15. And Peter says to Cornelius, falling down unto him, Stand up, I
my self also am a man. Acts 10.26.

Reason.
Yea, if they had not acknowledged it, yet reason would have proved the truth
of the point. For first, they were chosen from amongst men, Acts. 1.21. Of
these men which have companied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in
and out amongst us, must one be ordained as a witness, etc.

Secondly, they had human frailties, which proved them also to be men; what
imperfections were there in Moses, in David, in Jonas, and in all the Apostles,
I will not stand to relate them, being manifest unto all such as are conversant
in the Scripture.

Objection.
If any shall object that, in Exodus 7.1. I have made thee a God unto Pharaoh; I
answer: The meaning is, I have made thee in stead of a God, as it is also
explaned, Exodus 4.16. Thou shall be in stead of a God to Aaron.

Objection.
If any object further, that Gods Ministers are termed Angels diverse times in
the 7. Epistles, written to the 7. Churches, Reu. 2. and 3.

I answer; It is true; Gods Ministers are Angels by office, but not by nature.

Use.
We must not therefore wonder, much less be offended if we read or hear of
the humane frailties of the Prophets and Apostles. Alas they were but men as
well as we; let us rather take occasion to admire the power of God, who wrought
so great things by such frail instruments.

Secondly, it must teach us not to worship the Prophets and Apostles, and much
less other Saints which are inferior unto them. Remembering they are but men.

Thirdly, It must teach us not to stumble if we find humane frailties in the
very Ministers. Alas, remember we be but men; yea, let it teach us also not to
dote upon the persons of the Ministers. Let us not rejoice in men, let us not
think of men, above that which is written, 1. Cor. 4.6. I speak not this to
cloak or excuse gross sins in Ministers, or to mask them with the color
of human frailties. Neither do I speak to derogate any thing from that
reverent opinion which people ought to have of reverent Ministers; God forbid I
should: But to teach us in these things to use a godly moderation in our
judgments.

Holy men of God. The next point to be considered, concerning the Prophets and
Apostles, is that Doctrine.
They were men of God. Thus they were acknowledged in diverse places, as in 1.
King 13.1. Behold there came a man of God to him saying, etc. And so in my Text.

Reason.
And thus they were fitly termed. First, because they had their calling from
God, Gal. 1.1. Paul an Apostle not of man, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ,
and God the Father which raised him from the dead.

Secondly, because they stood mainly for God, aiming to promote his glory in
all things: To. 3.4. Let God be true, and every man a liar.

Thirdly, because they were excellent men, even as the great and excellent
Cedars, are termed Cedars of God in the Hebrew, Psalm. 80.10. So are the
Prophets and Apostles called men of God, because they were excellent men.

Use.
Let this teach us to respect the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, above
all other writings: for these men were men of God; yea, they were so called by
a kind of excellency. None were men of God in comparison of them.

Secondly, let it teach us not to nickname Gods Ministers. The Spirit of God
can vouchsafe here to give them a reverent name, as we see, men of God.

Thirdly, let it teach us Ministers to carry our selves, not as sons of
Belial, but as men of God. Let us endeavor to walk worthy of those Titles
which the holy Ghost does give unto us in the Scripture. What avails it, my
brethren, to have a name to live, and in the mean time to be dead? Revelation
the third chapter, and the first verse.

Holy men of God. The third and last thing to be observed, concerning the
Prophets and Apostles, is that Doctrine.
They were holy men. And the truth of this point is manifest by these places of
Scripture following: Luke 1.70. As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets.
Ephesians. 3.5. Which in other ages was not made known to the sons of men, as it
is now revealed unto the holy Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit. Acts 3.21.
Whom the heavens must receive until the times of restitution of al things,
which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world
began. By all which places, and many more, the point is, and might be proved.

Reason.
And the Prophets and Apostles are fitly termed holy men: first, because they
were sanctified of God, and set apart to this holy calling of prophecy and
Apostleship, Romans 1.1. where it is said, that Paul was separated to the Gospel
of God: Secondly, because they were holy and devout men: they were not profane
Esaus, but true sanctified persons; as David acknowledges concerning himself,
Preserve thou my soul, for I am holy, Psalm. 86.2.

Use.
This should teach us the more to delight in the word, it is the writing of
holy men. Secondly, it should teach those that are in authority in the Church
of God, what kind of men they should especially admit for ministers, namely
holy men. Thirdly, it teaches people what kind of men they ought to make
choice of for their ministers, if they have the choice committed unto them:
They ought to make choice especially of holy men: always provided, that those
holy men whom they make choice of, be also men of knowledge, and duly gifted.
Fourthly, it teaches us Ministers as well to endeavor to be holy in our
conversation, as to be sound in our doctrine: We ought as well to be holy men as
to be good teachers: Be clean ye that bear the vessels of the Lord, Esaias
52.11.

As they were moved by the holy Ghost. Whence note, that Doctrine.
The books of canonical Scripture were given by inspiration. They came not by
the will of man, but by the motion of the Spirit. For the proof of this I
refer the Reader to that in 2. Tim. 3.16. All scripture is given by the
inspiration of God: and to that in Mat. 10.28. It is not you that speak, but
the Spirit of your Father which speaks in you.

If any shall here demand, what is meant by the inspiration of God: the answer
is; By the inspiration of God we are to understand the work of Gods Spirit,
whereby he did suggest and dictate whatsoever the Prophets and Apostles
delivered for doctrine in their preaching and writing.

Quest.
But how prove you that the holy Ghost did prompt the Prophets and Apostles in
preaching? Answer.
Surely, this may be proved out of Acts 2.4. They began to speak with other
tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance.

Quest.
And how may it appear, that the Spirit did indite or dictate that which the
Prophets and Apostles did write? Answ.
This appears by that in Acts 15.28. It seemed good to the holy Ghost, and to
us, etc.

Objection.
If any shall object that in 1 Cor. 7.12. But to the rest speak I, not the
Lord: Answ.
The answer is; Paul indeed had no express place of the old Testament to
prove that which he did deliver in that particular; and therefore he says, To
the rest speak I, not the Lord: But yet, in giving his advice, he had the
assistance of Gods Spirit, as is manifest in 1. Corint. 7.40. But she is
happier (in my judgment) and I think also that I have the Spirit of God.

Use.
This serves to put difference between heretical writings and Scripture.
Heretical writings are by the suggestion of the devil, but Canonical
scriptures are by the inspiration of God.

Secondly, between other divine writings and Scripture; for other divine
writings are not without the assistance of Gods holy Spirit; but the Scripture
was given by extraordinary immediate revelation.

Use.
It must teach us to beware of reproaching the holy Scriptures; in casting
reproaches upon the word, we cast reproaches upon the holy Ghost himself, who
is the Author thereof.

Secondly, it must teach us to reverence the Scripture above all other books
in the world: This is the only book given by immediate inspiration. Herein
we must especially delight to read and meditate all the days of our lives.

Use.
This may serve also for comfort; for if the Scripture came by the inspiration
of God, then certainly there is some extraordinary virtue and power in it:
nothing can thus immediately flow from God, but it must be of some
extraordinary vigor.

As they were moved: Or, as it is in the Greek: As they were carried. Whence
we are to note, that Doctrine.
The holy Ghost did strongly reign in the Prophets and Apostles: It did not
only move them, but as it were carry them with an holy violence. This is
manifest out of Acts 4.20: We can not but speak the things which we have seen
and heard; and out of Acts 21.14. where Paul was so violently moved to go up to
Jerusalem, that all the persuasion of his friends, nor the hazard of his life,
could not turn him from his purpose. And out of 2. Corinthians. 13.8. We can do
nothing against the truth, but for the truth: for so the Text is to be rendered,
according to the Original. And out of Acts 16.7. After they were come to
Mysta, they assayed to go into Bythinia, but the Spirit suffered them not.
Whence it is manifest, that the holy Ghost did strongly order the very iournies
of the men of God, causing them to alter their own intentions oftentimes, and
to go another way at his appointment.

It was with the Prophets and Apostles, in this respect, as it was with Christ
himself. For as Christ himself was not moved, but driven of the Spirit into
the wilderness, to be tempted of the devil; for so are the words in the
original, Lu. 4.1. Even so it was with the Prophets and Apostles, they were
acted or driven by an holy violence of the Spirit.

The holy Ghost is compared to a wind, John 3.8. yea to a great rushing wind,
Acts 2.3. because, as it blows where it lists, so he blows or works
mightily where he lists. No ship is more violently carried by the winds, then
the Prophets and Apostles were by the Spirit.

Objection.
But then it might seem, that the Prophets and Apostles did nothing willingly,
but as it were compulsiuely. Answ.
Not so, for there is difference between compulsion, and holy Violence. These
holy men were carried with an holy violence, but they were not compelled; the
holy Spirit finding unwillingness in these men of God, he subdued that
unwillingness, and of unwilling made them willing. This must needs be granted;
for if they had done that which they did, absolutely against their will, and by
mere compulsion, they had lost their reward, as appears in 1. Cor. 9.17. If
I do this thing willingly, I have a reward, etc.

Use.
This may serve to cause us to bewail our coldness of zeal at these days;
where is this holy violence of the spirit, which should urge us to Christian
duties? How often do we resist good motions, and withstand them? which shows
what a poor measure of the spirit we have as yet attained. O my beloved, shall
the Prophets and Apostles be carried by the Spirit, and shall not we be led by
him? shall they be urged by holy motions, and shall not we so much as be
persuaded by them? The Lord that is able to bow the heavens, bow our minds to
good, and persuade us to that which is well-pleasing in his sight.

FINIS.

