AN ANSWER TO THE LAST TEMPEST AND VILLAINY OF THE League, upon the slanders
which were imprinted by the same, against the French king.

INTITVLED: A Declaration of the crimes whereinto the Catholics do fall, in
taking the king of Navarre his part.

Translated out of French into English by T.H.

SIC CREED


Printed at London for Cuthbert Burby, and are to be sold at his shop under
Saint Mildreds Church in the Poultrie. 1593.

ARTICLES.
BY divine and humane right, HENRY of Bourbon, ought to be acknowledged of all
kings, princes, Lords, and commonwealths of Christendom, especially of the
natural Frenchmen, the most christian king of France and Navarre.

2 And so, as he ought to be assisted by them in his defense against the
Spaniard, chief of the League, who is risen up to suppress the liberty, as
well of the Church, as of the French government.

3 All those which do discharge themselves of such a duty, do obey the
commandment given by the prophets, Jesus Christ, and his Apostles.

4 All those which do the contrary, are declared to be seditious, mutinous,
and rebellious, by the express word of God, and by the holy Articles of the
holy Catholic and Christian church.

5 They also declare themselves enemies of nature, and violaters of the
fundamental laws of the realm.

6 By their loosenes, rebellion, and treason, they tread down his honor,
dignity and the excellency of his name.

7 They manifest themselves fauters of heretics, murderers of their king, and
usurpers and destroiers of his Crown.

8 Consequently, they are scismatiques, dividing in pieces the three estates of
the realm, the which they do perpetually desolate, and send the poor souls
into everlasting destruction.

9 They are execrable periurers, breaking the oath which they owe to God, to
their king, to their Country.

10 They cause this realm to be stinking and infamous, to all the nations of
the world, by their unnatural and dishonest rebellion.

11 All natural Frenchmen, which do study to give themselves to the
observation of the three first Articles, declare themselves faithful and
affectionated to the glory of God, to the defense of his religion, and to the
conservation and good of their Country.

AN ANSWER TO THE last tempest and villainy of the League, upon the slanders
which were imprinted by the same, against the French King, entitled: A
Declaration of the crimes, whereinto the Catholics do fall, in taking the
king of Navarre his part.
IN the year of our Lord God, 1585. says the League, Apo 13
came forth of the depth a hideous monster, which having undertaken to combat
with and beat down the state of France, took for material sword, the mines of
gold and silver, hidden within the mountains and dens of the new world.
Afterward the iron and steel of the Pirenee and Alpe mountains, together
with the most fair, exquisite, and most excellent work, that the superficies
of the earth could produce out of the regions of Spain, Portugal, Piemont,
Italy, Scicilia, and Sardaigne, with a great number of other Isles and
Provinces. By this, the general conducter of the leagued band pretended and
deliberated to usurp, not only the kingdoms of France, England, and
Scotland, but all other of Christendom. From the which practiced tyranny, is
nothing else proceeded, but a ridiculous dwarf, like to the teeming of the
mountains in old time. And sithence it is come to pass, that the desperate
children of Moab, finding their natural weapon to be short, thought good to
take the spiritual of Balaam, thereby to turn away the Frenchmen from the
obedience which they owe to their prince: Number. 22.
even as the false prophet would have caused the people of Israel to turn
from their obedience, which they did owe to God. Also here ought not to be
omitted the superlatiue craft and subtilty, which they have used, going about
to draw the Germans to take their part, namely, those of the confession of
Ausbourge, the which they hold for heretics. To whom Pope Sixtus caused to be
told, that if they would acknowledge the dignity of his seat, that in other
things he would declare them tolerable. Yea even unto a Council. By this
means the League, begging as well with the good as with the wicked, have
practiced the saying of the Poet, Flectere si nequo superos, Achaeronta mouebo.
Virg.
If I cannot bend the Gods of heaven to help me, I will provoke the devils of
hell. The demonstration of which iniquities, are therefore most necessary,
seeing that these leaguers would do in like sort to the noble men of France,
which accompany the king, as the dragons of India do to the Elephants, when
as by dazeling them, they cause them to fall. Fearing then that some such
accident should happen to any the well affectionate toward the king, Plin.
li. 8. ca. 12.
we should cause in like sort, that these dragons may sall themselves,
being quashed asunder under the Elephants, when as by these refutations and
answers, which we produce against the Articles of this traitorous, seditious,
and leagued Monk, shall be maintained the just vocation of those which are
armed, as well for the defense of their king, as of their Country. The which
Articles are thirteen in number. And as for the first he says, that the
Catholics helping the king, (these are his terms) do against the
commandment and express word of God: in confirmation whereof, he alleges
seven textes out of the holy Scripture, afterward holding it for a thing
known and confessed, that the king is an heretic, he pretends to maintain
his consequence, that is, that he is incapable and unworthy to succeed the
crown of France.

Now let us see whether this be to the matter, or whether he turns away from
the same texts, as a profane man, or not, And first to prove in general the
falsehoode of these Articles, which concern all the crime of heresy, from the
which this slanderer of dignities does accuse his king. We say, that the vice
called by the Dialecticians, Petitio principij, does declare a manifest
ignorance, Iud. ver. 8.
in the art of disputing, that is, when one would argue and affirm without
proof or reason. And passing further, we add, that there comes a deuillish
rage between, when the truth is called a lie. Within the which two vices, this
Leaguer and pretended great disputer, does throw down himself headlong from
all speech. If he obiecteth that the king has been judged and declared an
heretic, by the Ecclesiastical Romans, little children will answer him,
that the contrary party cannot be judge: also, that the accused ought to be
heard, before he be condemned. If he replieth, that all this has been done,
let him say when? But he knows not. Even as the house of Lorraine, and the
Roman Consistory shall testify, which having enterprised to put the Crown
upon the Guise his head, had need of the false pretense of heresy, thereby
to take it from the king. But let us come to the point. All the world knows,
that the king is accused of heresy by this Monk, and his like: forasmuch as
he says and holds for certain, that the Romish church has need of
reformation: upon the which proposition is demanded, wherefore the king
reigning, shall be sooner accused of heresy, than infinite others of his
like, and others as well in Europe, Asia, or Africa. Besides that which has
been said else where, we faie, that in our region, the last King constrained
(but too late) to know this truth, had given charge to a learned personage, to
set forth certain Articles, concerning the necessity of reforming the Church.

The last Duke of Sauoy, said to an Italian, named Castro Caro, professing the
reformed religion, Thou do well to maintain thy faith. Afterward he placed
him as governor over the vallyes of Angrongne. Apol for Herod.
A Duke of Florence, with like purpose answered the Ambassador of the souldan
of Egypt, that in Christendom the fools were shut up in Monasteries. The
Venetians have of long time detested the persecutions of the Popes. The best
part of Christian kings do confirm this truth, and the noble men, in deed as
much, for it is proved, that there are a great many Gentlemen throughout
Europe, which do even groan and breath after this reformation. If we come to
the Ecclesiastical persons, the quantity of them swarming out of the Couents
and monasteries, does likewise preach on high the same thing unto us. The like
also is found by the Popes being constrained to produce such a like kind of
consent, when as one of the^, upon the abuse of the Roman Church, which was
objected and proved to him, said to the protestant Princes of Germany, that
his intention was to understand it, Sleidan.
and remedy it. To whom it was answered, that that did not appertain to one
Bishop alone. As for philosophers, councellers of lawe-rights, and people of
the third estate, knowing the same truth, and necessity, will be found every
where such a great number, that they will be innumerable. In Asia, an infinite
number of Jews do defer their conversion to the Christian religion, for the
great abuses and idolatries which they see in the Romish church. Let us pass
into Africa, then Presbiter John, great governor over the Ethiopians, making
profession of Christianity, verifieth the same by the general permission of
holy matrimony, instituted by God, and by the entire distribution which the
Bishops do make of the sacred signs of the holy supper, following the
ordinance of Jesus Christ. What will then this malecontent say, when as for
this cause only he accuses his king of heresy, seeing that so many
Monarchies, Princes, Lords, Prelates of the Church, Counselors, Philosophers,
and other great, godly, and learned personages, throughout all Europe, have
holden, said, reproved, and confessed the same truth: the which has been
confirmed by so many Doctors, and so many arguments, that it is impossible for
the gainsaiers to answer them. The which doctors and arguments, durst and dare
maintain and prove, that if there be any Prince in the world, clear and
purged from the crime of heresy, it is our king: for following the greatest
reformation of Christian religion, as ever has been sithence the death of the
Apostles. That it is so, thou shall find by reading and considering the
profession of faith, which he has showed toward the two last kings, which is
come to light a long time sithence. Therefore take a little pains with
patience, to confer it with the holy Scriptures.

Now let us come to the examination of the first Article, containing, as we
have said, seven texts of the Scripture, with the which this ligall Monk
would help himself, for his better rejecting the king, if he could. The
first therefore is taken out of the seuententh Chapter of Deutronomie, Deuteronomy.
17.17
where it is commanded to the people of Israel, to constitute over them the
king whom the Lord their God should choose, comprised in the covenant which he
had contracted with him: from the which place, the aaforesayd Monk does draw
his conclusion, as aforesaid, that is to say, that the king for being an
heretic, ought not to be admitted to the crown of France, no more then in
oldettme a Pagan might to that of the Jews. Therefore (says he) the law of
Moses, concerning the election of the kings of Israel, is moral, and by
consequence, does bind all Christians to the observation of the same. The
answer to this is, that seeing Physic must be applied to the body that is
diseased, let us put the case, whether the question was, concerning a king
being an Infidel, or an heretic. For the regard, namely, of such a
sovereign, I deny the proposition, the which I maintain to be false, for
four resons to be considered in the examination and circumstance of the text,
Deuteronomy. 17
where Moses says thus, Thou shall make him king over thee, whom the Lord thy
God shall choose, from amongst thy brethren: thou shall not set a stranger over
thee, which is not thy brother. Where, first of all is to be understood, that
the king which the Lord would give unto his people, called in the Scripture,
the anointed of the Lord, should be chosen after another fashion, and to
another end than others were. Therefore Moses said, that God himself would
choose this king, differing from them of other nations, for that he would
have him represent and figure the Messiah, his son, being king everlasting,
and redeemer of the world, and that he would have him to reign over an holy
nation: which privilege gives us to understand, that these sacred kings were
holy, and separated from others. Wherefore Moses in this text, 1. Sam. 10
and the history of the Kings do witness, that their election proceeded from
God, and not from the people, for which respects there was a separation and a
difference put between them and others: So as is seen in the election of
Saul, 1. Chron 28. Iug. 9
David, and Solomon. The cause why Abimelech being before appointed king of
Sichem, endured but a while, was for that, that he was not so called of God:
the time of the kings being not yet come. Where it appears, that such
proceedinges are not convenient at this day, for other nations. If thou do
reply, that christian kings have one and the self same holiness, as those of
the Jews had, proceeding from one common God, I answer, that it suffices, to
prove that the Christian nations never had this particular commandment, nor
this special promise, to have power always to constitute over the^ a king of
their own religion, so given of GOD, this is a privilege only which the
Jews had: for the Christians have been, and are bound by the general
commandment of God, to abide subject to their Princes, which he has given
them, of what religion soever they have been or be, as shall be more at large
discussed in his place. To that which remains, thou ought to prove, that
this realm is a chosen kingdom, and that the Ecclesiastical Romans, joined
with some number of ignorant people, seduced by them, have this right of
election, whereof thou speak: such proves are not in the strength of all
your Sorbonne. Behold then the first reason, sufficing to declare the
falsehood of thy Commentary. And so I come forward to the second, drawn from
the nature of the people, over whom the aforesaid king ought to be appointed,
where Moses says thus, Thou shall not set over them, etc. Inferring by this
Pronoune, that amongst these privileges and special graces, which God would
give unto his people, he would give them a king, having the quality of a
brother, and making profession of the same religion which they did, for the
better distinguishing and separating them from other nations, the which should
carry the same common marks of alliance and adoption, Genesis 17.
and also for want whereof, it was said in Genesis, that every man child, not
circumcised, should be cut off. This was not then, neither has been sithence
common to any other nation, for all men know, that God by the preaching of
his Gospel, has never called at once whole nations to the knowledge of him:
and that for the most part, he has rather and first of all converted the
subjects, yea, the meanest sort from amongst the said subjects, as the Apostle
witnesses to the Corinthians, where it appears, 1. Cor. 1.
that the faithful had neither right nor power to appoint a king over
themselves, of their religion. It behooves us then, to hold this resolution
for a maxim in divinity, that God only calls whom he pleases, to the
knowledge of his truth, and gives the kingdoms of the earth to whom it
seems him good, sometimes to a believing Prince, and sometimes to an Infidel.
The sovereign God, says David, has power over the kingdoms, and there
places whom he will, therefore after Nabuch^ donosor he placed Balsasar,
Darius, and Cyrus, all Pagans. As also sithence the death of Jesus Christ, of
long continuance he has rather called Pagan Princes to govern the Empire,
than Christians, the which succeeded one another by the ordinance and pleasure
of him, even as Saint Paul taught the christians, Romans 13
saying, that there is no power but of God, and that those which do resist,
resist the ordinance of God. From thence it insueth, that if any one opposes
himself against God, when for the cause of religion he would depose the
sovereign princes which he has placed, and has not called to the knowledge
of him. Examine then this reason, whiles that Ipasse to the third point, which
goes altoge there against thee, so good an advocate art thou. Behold how thou
would infer, that because it was forbidden to the Israelites, to admit
any heretic for their king, that the same ought to be said and understood of
all Christian people.

To the which I answer, denying the proposition and the illation together:
beginning at the first, thou can not deny, but the most part of the kings
of Judah and of Israel, have been heretics; as their idolatries and
abominable sacrifices do witness, recited in their acts, the which kings
for all that, were not deposed from their crowns. On the other side therefore,
thou shall be constrained to confess, that the Christians, much less then
ought to depose their kings for causes of heresy, Luke 20. Romans 13. Tit. 3
seeing that the commandment of Christ and his Apostles do forbid the
same, as has been and shall be seen.

And for the fourth reason, I silie, that the king being a Christian man,
baptized and nourished in the Christian Church, if he does fall into some
error or defaulte, deserving a grievous censure, ought not for the same cause
to be reputed as a stranger, whiles that he makes some profession of the
same religion, or whiles that he witnesses his love toward the same, for
the which cause Saint Paul speaking of Excommunication, which he calls, 2.
These. 9
marked by the Letter, says, Converse not with him, to the end that he may
be ashmed, nevertheless hold him not as a common enemy, but rather admonish
him as a brother. If thou ought to do this to the meanest in a realm, much
more then to the sovereign: in neglecting whereof, thou show thy self such
a one as thou art? Finally, this law is quite contrary to that of thine, when
as thou do hinder the way which does establish kings at this day, as well
approved of God, as the ancient law of the Jews, the difference being only
in the aforesaid circumstances, and not in the substance of the matter. From
whence it proceeds, that thou do resist the ordinance of God, when thou
do reject him which has right and calling to reign over France, being
approved and received by the natural and lawful officers of the Crown,
having right and commandment so to do.

To conclude, from the aforesaid reasons then it follows, that this law of
Moses is not general, but of old time particular to the Jews. As in deed
thou can not produce any one example out from the primitive church, thereby
to say, that that has interpreted and understood this text so, seeing that
that has taught and practiced altogether contrarily. And as for that that
thou addest, that the king has been condemned by the judgment of the Church:
it is answered, that one Bishop of Italy, assisted with his Romish Consistory,
neither is, neither can represent the universal Church, dispearsed throughout
the whole world.

And furthermore, that he of Rome can have power no where, but in his own
diocese, as the ancient Doctors do witness: Chap. 23
amongst whom Basile, in his book, entitled; The solitary Life, says, That
all Bishops do bind and absolve equally, as well as Peter. The ninth Canon
of the council of Antioch, Can. 9
carries as much, where it is likewise said, that every Bishop has power and
authority over his own diocese. The Roman Bishop ought therefore to content
himself with his own at Rome, and not to usurp over all those of France,
where he has nothing to do, as hereafter more at large shall be discoursed
and proved.

Now I come to the other text, by the which thou do allege, that it is
lawful for thee to kill thy king, if thy credit could do the same. It is
expressed in the five and twentieth of Numbers, Number. 25.
that the Lord commanded Moses to take all the heads of the people, and hang
them up before the Lord against the Sun, which had committed fornication and
idolatry with the Moabitish women: whereof thou do conclude, that the king
ought to be hanged, as culpable of such a crime. This is a leagued hangman that
says so, and I answer, that this example is nothing to the matter, or to the
purpose. Behold therefore the supreme magistrate is not thereby to be
punished, and much less to be rejected. Secondarily, as well the divines as
the politicians, do affirm, that it is neither just nor reasonable, to use the
same rigor, form, and fashion to a sovereign Prince, being the lieuetenant
of God, as is used to his subjects, (amongst others) the example of David
suffices as a witness. And in the third place, for to speak the truth, such
principals of the people, have not been punished for the cause of heresy, but
rather and principally, for the cause of their fornication being qualified,
even as Saint Paul declares to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 10.
where alleging this history, he only makes mention of the aforesaid
fornication, the which idolatry has not been accounted but as accessarie,
seeing that the intention of these back-sliders, was not to commit idolatry,
but only to commit fornication. Behold then the allegation of this text is
altogether from the matter, and very foolishly and falsely applied. Of the
self same nature is the interpretation which thou give, of that which
follows out of S. Math. 18
Matthew, where our savior Christ would have him holden for an heathen man,
which will not obey the church, and also out of the which text thou drawest the
like conclusion. The answer is, that there he speaks of particulars, and not
of sovereign magistrates. Secondly, of an ecclesiastical censure, and not of
a politic. Thirdly, the being taken for a pagan, did not, nor yet does take a
way the politic rightes of this world, which the Lord gives as well to
princes as to their subjects. The interpretation then which thou give to
this text, is altogether repugnant to the intent of the spirit of God. Chro. 21
To this may be applied, say thou, the example of the town of Libna,
belonging to the Levites, which revolted from king Ioram, because of his
idolatry. Wherefore the holy history says, that he had forsaken the Lord
God of his fathers. To prove then, that such an example is nothing at all to
the matter, but rather tending to mutiny and rebellion, the reasons are these.
The king has not forsaken the God of his fathers, and to prove that this is
true, the holy Scripture does describe and propose the same God unto us, to be
creator of all the world, Genesis 1.
and the redeemer of them which believe in him and obey him, according as he
has commanded in his word: Ephesians. 1.
they then which do so acknowledge this only God of our fathers, Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, Matthew. 11
by whom only he has reconciled the world to himself, following all the
mysteries of our redemption, 1. Cor. 5
which they ought to perfect and accomplish in him the only Christ. Act. 4.12.
Forasmuch as there is no other name under heaven by the which men may be
saved. This father of Jesus Christ, and of all faithful Christians, is the God
of our fathers, as the heavenly oracles do witness unto us. Now the king
believes in him as such a God, approves him as such a one, whereupon it
follows, that he has not forsaken the God of our fathers. Secondly, thou
ought to know, that the contract of alliance between God and the Jews, did
more concern divine religion, than humane policy. Wherefore there was such a
reciprocate subjection required between the kings of Judah, and their
subjects, as a thing that was not else where. And for the last point, Ioram
pretended to cause the people to commit idolatry against God, the which our
king would never do nor practice. Thou turnest away then from this example, as
also from the two following, 1. King. 15. 2 King. 11.
of Maacah and Athalia, which thou do associate with him. And as for the
first, let it be considered, that she was a subject, deposed for idolatry, and
not a sovereign, and that in the Country of Judah. And as for the other, she
was a traitor, and an unjust usurper of the crown, which had massacred the two
inheritours of the realm, and therefore was forsaken of those which did belong
unto her, having the government of the young king Ioas. This was then the unjust
usurpation of a kingdom, that was the occasion of this wicked woman's death,
and not heresy. Here ought I to speak one word, and one for all, of the
pretended eloquence, but I will leave it unto the young Orators, and those
wicked wretches, who desire to show unto the world. Howsoever it be, they care
not, the smoakie stinking exhalations of the same, the which thou do
euaporate at all times, as well in this thy first Article, as also in those
that follow, thereby to discharge thy Prince. Thou make the quality of the
vessel, to be known by the stinking smell that comes forth of it. The names
signify the things. I will content my self to use simplicity and sincerity,
according to the property of the truth, aduertising thee, that verba and voces
non leniunt dolorem. Words and voices do not assuage grief. And by thy
maiesticall and injurious speeches, thou doestaccuse the king to have used many
and diverse acts of hostility in the wars, which he has had heretofore.
Upon the which thou can not deny these two tried truths: the one, that he
has had a just calling, and necessary occasion to defend himself against
the forces of Guyfe his enemy: and the other, that he has by diverse
sufferances, and alterations (in comparison) played the part of an Angel,
whilst that they played with him the part of a Devil, until that time, that
by such proceedinges, you have objected against him, that he has used
subtletie, to get as well the good opinion of one, as of another. But go in one
accord your floutes, and let us see the last point of of this Article, which
is contained in the first to the Cor. where the Apostle does reprehend the
faithful Christians, 1. Cor. 6
which having matters of controversies amongst them, go to plead them before
Judges, being Infidels, and not among themselves: showing them, that it was
evil done to submit themselves to the judgment of Infidels, and that they
rather ought to take the least amongst them, and appoint them for their Judges.
Whereupon this Ligall Doctor says: that it is a very reproachful thing to
Catholics to receive him for king, which is now in the kingdom, the which he
calls (more outragiously than before) one that is fallen a relapse and an
Apostata from the Christian religion: concluding that the Catholics ought
rather to choose the least amongst themselves to be theinking, than to submit
themselves under the yoke and tyrannical government of an Heretic. Thou say
all this. But if the heavens should fall, what a noise would there be?
Nevertheless yet let us examine the fame. The agreement of the personages, as
thou comparestable in one with another, does prove that the thing of it self
i^ nothing at all alike, nor to the matter, for to compare the particular
scandale which the Corinthians did give in going to plead their matters before
heathen Judges, with the general right due to Infidel Princes? that does
nothing at all anihilate the obedience or duty which Christians do owe them,
as it appears by the same text, where Saint Paul does not permit the
Corinthians to digress from their obedience for that cause? so far off is he
then from that that he commands in other places, 1. Tim. 2. Kom. 13.
that prayers should be ordinarily made for them, and to honor them, and pay
them tribute. And furthermore, that because the Apostle in this place does
endeavor to take away the scandale which the Corinthians had given; it should
follow by the counsel of this venerable leaguer, that in stead of one should
spring mo then one hundred.

But this is a known thing, that the deciding of a particular wrong, has no
community with the general administration of a whole realm: for we may well
for our own right or wrong, in giving place to our selves, proceed without
scandale or sedition: but the putting a king from his kingdom can never be so
done, and to be short, the one is permitted, the other is forbidden, the one is
in our power, the other not. Consider then this sottish fashion of arguing. It
is lawful for me in respect of my business, to choose him that I would,
then is it lawful for subjects in renouncing their king, to choose such a one
as they think good, because the other is not of their religion. This is well
asimili. I pray you what incongruities are there? What divine or politician
would reason thus? Do thou not see, that besides this thy wickedness
intaking a way the seepter from him to whom the Lord has given it, that it
is not so easy a thing as thou do make it, to rauine up the pray from the
lion. Oh how thou would bite and rend in pieces, if they counsel could
attain so much. Thou sellest man's blood good cheap.

Also what Paradoxe is it, when as thou say, that it were better to choose
one of the most contemptiblest amongst the Catholics, and make him king?
Do thou not perceive, that here we ought to reason of the natural
Frenchman, being valiant, which will never practice the proverb, Ab equis ad
asinos; Out of the hall into the kitchen. Furthermore, that such a little king
should be a poor unadvised Icarus, Virg.
the which the heat of the sun in a moment, would cause to fall into the
sea. And not being therewith content, to have called the king an Ethnicke and
Heretic, but moreover, thou namest him one that is fallen a relapse, and an
Apostata. To the which thou have been already sufficientlye answered else
where, besides that which by and by shall be added. It behooves thee to prove,
sound, and examine the truth of matters, and not falsely to deface the
Magistrates given of God, by odious words, being invented at pleasure against
thy conscience. Behold the answer to thy first Article, the which declares
thee to be a seditious slaunderer, and does cause thee to check thy self of
the fault, the which thou do falsely impute unto thy king: for that, that it
is heresy to wrest the holy scriptures so as thou do, in causing subjects
to turn from the obedience which they owe unto their sovereigns. And as for
those which do object, that the last kings were not admitted to the crown of
France, but by the administration of the Romish ceremonies, the which do
require (as some say) that the king that now reigns, might enter in by the
same gate: we answer, that such ceremonies ought not anyething at all to
prejudice the divine right, because the necessity does present it self to
reform the Church. This being here admitted of all true divines, it shall
also be admitted, that it is not reasonable, so bring kings in subjection to
superstitions, being forbidden of God; and much less to take away their
politic administration, which God has given them over kingdoms, for not
observing the same.

The second Article.
NOw I come to the second Article of this leagued Doctor, containing the
Statutes and Canons of the Councels: to the which, (to be of the same nature
and dependencie) I will add the seventh, comprehending the decrees of the
Pope. For these two Articles, by a common consent do take in hand, to
excommunicate the king as an heretic, with the nobles, and others that follow
him in quality, of fautors and adherents of the heresy. Therefore it is
necessary to see, whether such lightnings do fall from heaven, as sent from
God, or whether they came out of the depth, as proceeded from Satan: and to
know whether the children of light ought to fear them, or not. Let us also be
hold from the entrance, whether this tempester, throwing his tempests
against the king, does shield himself, as in former time, with the pretense of
heresy: which if he does, we may annswere him in like sort as before, how he
ought to address himself to a sick body: and moreover, that the remedy
which he prete^deth to give to the^, which might be holden of such a malady, is
pestiferous and mortal, and by consequence not to be received: wherefore he
shall answer to the names of such spiritual maladies, and not maintain the
heresy; (far off is it) but to show that the Bishop of Rome, nor any other in
the manner of spiritual Physicians, have neither calling, right, mandate, or
warrant, to depose infidel Princes, from their kingdoms, scepters, Luke 22.
and crowns which God has given them, seeing the ecclesiastical censures
ought to do nothing but in spiritual punishments concerning religion, and not
in politic causes of the world. To the which ends we will thus argue against
such abuses and tyrannies. All that which is done in the church, for the cause
and right usage of christian religion, ought to have the word of God for
object and foundation: 1. Cor. 3.
for the authority of the same is altogether argued of in divinity. But the
Canons of such Bishops, and the decrees of such Popes, have nothing for obiecte
nor foundation, but only the corruptible will and inventions of corruptible men;
therefore it follows, that such Canons and decrees do no; carrye themselves to
the right usage of christian religion. The Mayor is proved by this general
maxim. A Bishop can neither add nor diminish to or from the holy scripture,
Deuteronomy. 4 1. Cor. 3.
for that it pronounces a curse against all men that shall take in hand to do
it, and forbids to lay any other foundation but him, which is already
laid, that is to say, Jesus Christ. And like wise it shall be said to them that
do otherwise; who has required these things at our hands? Esa. 1
they are an abomination unto me. The Minor is thus proved; God commands to
approve, Rom 13. 1. Tim. ^.
acknowledge and respect all kings, which he gives to people of what religion
soever they be. From whence it follows, that such decrees and Canons, do
oppose themselves against his commandments: to the truth whereof these texts
are witness. And it shall come to pass, Ier. 27.
that the nation and kingdom which will not serve Nabuchadnezer king of
Babylon, shall be visited, says the Lord. And in confirmation whereof, Jesus
Christ says; give to Caesar that which is Caesar's then, Luke 20.
although he was a Pagan, and thus is the Minor proved. Again, Iargue thus
against the same Canons and decrees which do enterprise to displace Monarkes
and kings, being their Lords. God only is the author and giver of kingdoms;
wherefore it follows, that Popes and Bishops have no right to put them out:
the antecedent is thus proved and produced by Jeremy. I have made the earth,
the me^, Iere. 27
and the beasts which are upon the face of the earth, says the Lord, etc. I
have given to him to who^ it has pleased me: now have I given all the earth
into the hands of Nabuchadnezer king of Babylon, my servant, all people shall
serve him, and his sons, and the sons of his sons. To the same end the
wise man did bring in God, speaking thus: By me kings do reign: Prou. 8.
the consequent is proved in this sort: No man has right or commandment to
take away from any man that which he cannot give, and wherewith he has nothing
to do: The Popes, Cardinals, and Bishops, have no right, nor any thing to do
over kingdoms of the world: from them it follows, that they have no right
to dispossess them, whereof these textes are witnesses, Rom 13. Luke 12.
that the powers are ordained of God. Give to all them to whom it is due,
tribute to whom tribute belongs, and honor to whom honor is due. Luke 12.
The kings of the nations do bear rule, but it shall not be so with you. Oh
man, who has appointed me judge, and a decider amongst you? Mark, Christ
whose wisdom and power was more great than that power of a million of
millions of Popes, and Cardinals, would not then (although required)
intermeddle with deciding between two brothers: Contrarily, the Pope, without
being required in any thing, will by constraint, not only judge, but part,
divide, and take away the kingdoms of the world, to transpose them where he
list, Mat. 4.
imitating Satan when he tempted Jesus Christ, and would have made him
believe, that the kingdoms of the earth were at his disposition, to give them
where he should think good. And I hold a third argument against such Canons
and decrees, upon the calling, right, and nature of kings, to whom (as to
Sovereigns of kingdoms and commonwealths) God has subjected all other
persons, Romans 13.
that do owe subjection, homage, obedience, tribute, and other like duties unto
them. 1. Tim. 2.
So far off is it then, that the kings (as these Canons would have them) in
such sort should be tractable and punishable by the Ministry of Bishops;
whereas on the contrary, such Ministers (as their subjects do owe to them all
the foresaid homages, even to be them selves) not only to be disgraded for
default of this their duty, but also furthermore to be punished, according to
the quality and quantity of the fault that they commit. Now then, that the
kings being sovereign Magistrates, have pre-eminence, dominion, and lordship
generally over all men of their kingdoms, of what condition soever they be,
Romans 13.
as appears by this general commandment of the Apostles, proposed by word,
distributiuely. All persons ought to be subject to their superior powers:
seeing then that the Bishops are comprehended in the same subjection, from
thence it ensues, not only that they have no right or power to deprive
temporal Lords of their estates and dignities; but that contrariwise, they
ought to maintain and defend them, even to death if need be. Let such Bishops
of Rome consider therefore these things, and remember themselves what Solomon
says; Prou. 19.
that it is not convenient for the servant to rule over Princes, and for the
more celebrate commendations of them, the holy Scriptures do adorn them with
the titles of divinity. John. 10.
When then the Bishop, in stead of reuerencing and respecting his king, does
lift himself up against his Majesty, he commits two other abominable
faults. The first is, where he detaineth unjustly that which he owes to
another. The second is, that he is a rebel, traitor, and felon, in lifting
up himself against his Lord, to whom he is in subjection by the laws of God
and nature. The conclusion is then, that a Bishop (yea were it the Bishop of
Rome, undertaking to destroy and overthrow the state of a king) is worthy to
be hanged. S. Jude speaking of such people, S. Jude in h^^ epist.
says, that the obscurity of darkness is prepared for them. And here it
will not serve sufficiently for him, to arm himself with a pretense of a
Romish pre-eminence, seeing that it has no proppe nor foundation in the
Scripture. Let the greatest amongst you be as the least (says our savior
Christ) it was not so from the beginning. Luke 12. Mat. 19.
The contrarieties and absurdities which are found in the Canons and decrees
of the Popes do witness sufficiently, with what spirit they do proceed,
and do show what credit and authority ought to be given to them. Petrarke,
who as one that had more knowledge, than any of his time, did call Rome the
hell of the living, and the prison of wrath. Notwithstanding these leaguers
would make us believe, that when such Bishops shall commit the greatest and
most enormious faults of the world, such as are their conspiracies against
the sovereign magistrates, given and appointed of God, that they are moved by
the heavenly inspiration. The wise king may here consider to whom it does
appertain to destroy the council of the wicked, Prou. 20.
as Solomon says: to turn the wheel upon them. God punishes such when it
seems him good. It is very true, that the not punishing of these kind of
people, proceeding from the ignorance and negligence of the sovereign
Magistrates, is the occasion that these do give themselves leave continually
to do like faults, hoping that it will be always with them as with harlottes,
2. Pet. 3.
which persuade themselves of no punishment, for that they always keep
themselves in Towns or public Stews of the commonwealth, thinking that they
are not only tolerable, but also to be maintained as those of Rome. But if
this injurious time causes that there is not found a Magistrate at this day
in the earth, which does repaye such by Justice, when as they manifest
themselves to be seditious, traiterous, schismatickes, heretics, murderers,
Sodomites, Magitians, and Atheistes, the vengeance of God in the time appointed
can very well pay the interest of such attentions and dilations. This is here
spoken upon the more than devilish sawcines of the Bishops of Rome, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
the which by decrees and Canons, as Giantes, do take in hand, contrary to
the ordinance of God, not only to disgrade, but also to kill and exterminate
the princes of the earth.

This is no marvel then, seeing the Pope challenges power also over the
Angels. Let us continue the examination of this Article. The Author adds
(by exclamation and parenthesis) that for the cause of heresy, such canons do
disgrade even to the Pope, desiring to affirm, notwithstanding that he is
erected above all Monarkes of the earth. What great admiration is this? as if
it were not known, that all men receiving a charge of the Bishop, receives it
with condition to be deposed. If he becomes an heretic, the word of God
does declare it manifestly: and the evil is, that in thy place the practice
does oppose it self. Admit this; yet it is denied that he may take in like
manner from the kings of the earth, Tit. 3.
because that amongst other things their charge is different from the
ecclesiastical, and because they have received their politic administration
without such condition. But if it does fall out, that a prince should be
censured touching the depriving him of the goods and honors of this world, it
belongs to a politic convocation of estates, and not to ecclesiastical
persons. And proceeding, the Monk adds, that these Canons do absolve and
release all subjects, from the obedience that they owe to their Lords or
kings, being heretics. Now for the answer: It has been said and proved
against such injustice, that God reigns over kingdoms, and establishes those
whom he pleases, be they faithful or infidels. I have called thee, says the
lord to Cirus, Isay. 45.
although thou have not known me, and I have named thee by this name, to the
end to make the nations subject unto thee. This is here said of Pagan
princes. Now let us enter into the co^mon-welth of Israel, where the church of
God was, and where all the kings ought to have made profession of the true
religion. There were found many heretics before and after their coming to the
kingdom, nevertheless not one of them was ever deposed for heresy. To be
short, neither the Prophets, Jesus Christ, nor his Apostles, have ever taken
away, Ier. 27. Luke 20. Romans 13.
or abolished the dignities and policies of the world for such respects: but
rather have maintained and confirmed such magistrates, in commanding to give
to Pagan Princes the things which God has ordained and assigned for them.
Here thou do reply, that seeing that we ought rather to obey the creator,
than the creature; if it comes to pass, that the service of the king does
detract us from the service of God: we ought to leave the less, to obey the
greater. The answer is, that this maxim is verefied in it self, but very
badly applied to that which is the question, being considered, that they do
obey the creator which do obey his commandments, as concerning their duties
which they owe unto their sovereign Magistrate. And if for the cause of
religion he would draw thee from the service of God, then the Prophets, Jesus
Christ, and his Apostles, command thee not to digress from it (so far off
is it that thou should root him out) that contrariwise thou ought to pray
to God for him, because he has the hearts of Princes in his hands: and
otherwise, Prou. 21. Math. 10.
they command thee to endure persecution, or to fly and go some where else.
If these be not thy proceedings, thou art no disciple of Christ. Let us see how
thou do borrow the examples following.

The first is of the band of wives toward their husbands. The second is, of
children toward their fathers. The third is, of servants toward their
masters. Where thou say that in the case of heresy such bands do cease:
and from thence thou do infer, that for the same cause the band of the
subjects toward their Princes ought to cease. Now for answer I say, that
the antecedent is false, and that the consequence is not true. Beginning at the
first example, thou do allege and apply falsely; for the text says word
for word: That if any woman has married an infidel, and if he is content to
dwell with her, let her not depart from him. 2. Cor. 7.
Where it is added, what know thou woman, whether thou shall save thy
husband, or not? that is to say, by prayers, instructions, and good
conuersations. It is well said in the text, that if the infidel or unbeliever
will depart, let him depart: But such a separation comes not from the
believer, but from the unbelieving. Behold how thou do falsely allege the
word of God. And in respect of the second example, all men know, that amongst
the duties of the world, the obedience of children toward their fathers, be
they believers or unbelievers, is so generally and profoundly imprinted in the
breast of mankind, that as well the laws divine as humane, do command it
always without exception, so clearly, that to dilate these things by
examples and textes, is to sow nothing else but words of wisdom in vain.
Terent.
A Pagan would answer that nature could not break this duty. If some of
your Canons have given him such great authoriti^ as thou talkest of, it may be
answered, that the anthors of them were worse than infidelles. And as for the
third example taken from slaves, Mat. 5.
which may in case of heresy (say thou) in like sort abandon their
masters. To answer that, Saint Paul the Doctor of the Gentiles, does tell
thee that thou do lie, when he commanded servants in his time to obey
their Masters, which were for the most part infidels, saying: Servants, Ephesians.
6. Genesis 14.
obey them which are your Masters, according to the flesh; for so Joseph was
obedient unto Pharao, and also to his first Master: and Abdias to Achab his
Lord, which was an heretic, 1. King. 28.
and moreover an hypocrite, and a persecutour of the Church.

If then because of religion, private men may not leese their right which they
have over their servants: much less then should Monarkes leese the obedience
and acknowledgement which is due unto them, from those whom the Lord has
subjected unto them, by divine and humane right: otherwise I pray you, what
manner of arguing would this be, if a prince disobeyeth God in a point of
religion, then it is permitted to take his scepter from him.

Now I must enter into the great denth of the Romish excommunication, by the
Ministry whereof this leaguer does pretend to curse and root out, as well the
king, as the nobles, and other subjects which do take his part. He says then,
that if a prince be excommunicated, the Canons do forbid, that any obedience
should be given unto him. And coming from these to Hypothese, he produces the
sentence of excommunication of Pope Sixtus the fifth of that name, denounced
against the king, in the year 1585. the ninth of September, beginning thus: we
do establish in the full power which the king of kings has given us, etc. in
the which are comprised the nobles, and other Catholics which do help the
king, as fauters of heretics. To answer the same, and for the more brief and
easy understanding of this matter of excommunication, it is requisite to
divide it into four parts. The definition of the thing shall be the first. The
second shall comprehend the authority and calling of those who ought to
excommunicate. The third shall have regard to the quality of the crime,
together with the end of the censure. The fourth shall entreat of the
commodities and rightes of this present life, to know whether ecclesiastical
jurisdiction has power to depose them from their proper rights or not. The
word Excommunication is defined in this manner.

Excommunication is a bannishment or rejecting of an obstinate sinner, being
hardened in his sin, the which is thrown out of the company of the faithful,
by the judgment and sentence of the Church, by the authority of Jesus Christ:
following the rule which is contained in his word. The which ecclesiastical
punishment is ordained as well to cause the sinner to repent and amend, as
also for the edification of the foresaid Church. The second part, is
touching the persons which ought to pronounce such sentence of excommunication,
for if it be proffered and done by a man having no calling, it is nothing, like
as a band made without form of law.

It is necessary therefore to know in general, that the power of
excommunication is given to the church, as Jesus Christ does witness in the
Gospel written by S. Matthew, Mat. 19.
where speaking of him that will neither hear in particular, nor in the
presence of one or two witnesses: his brother which then has offended,
commands the party offended, to tell such his rebellion to the Church, as
to the which the judgment and acknowledgement of the censure, which falls to
him that has offended, does belong. After the Master, Saint Paul his
Disciple speaks thus of the proceeding of excommunication holden against the
incestuous Corinthians. 1. Cor. 5.
I have determined (says he) as being present, that he which has done this
thing, be delivered etc. And afterward adding (you and my spirit being
assembled with you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ) to deliver (I say)
such a man to Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, to the end that the
spirit may be saved in the day of our Lord.

It may be seen then, that this judgment is deferred to the Church, which
chooses a certain number of men, to the which she gives charge to watch over
the flocks, and to have certain knowledge of him which has offended, to
bring him back again to the truth, to the end that if there do fall out
the censure of excommunication, it may be done by the sight and agreement of
the Church, Mat. 16.
according to the authority which Jesus Christ has given her. This is then a
certain token, that the obstinate sinner ought to be excommunicated in the
same Church, whereof he is a member, and in the which the fault has been
committed to her great offense. And because that excommunication is the last
and most severe ecclesiastical censure against the sinner, therefore it is
good to proceed in all things deliberately, by good counsel, Epist. lib. 3.
Epist. 19.
and manifest proof of the cause. Wherefore S. Cyprian says, that the Bishops
of his time, did call the other Bishops of their provinces, when there was any
question of excommunicating the rebellious and obstinate. Where it appears,
that there is found no such matter, as in the Romish proceedinges: seeing that
they excommunicate not only those which be not of their diocese, but all
other out of their provinces, as they think good: over the which they have no
more to do, than this my leagued Monk has over the Tartarians. This abuse
does aggrauate it self the more, in as much as the Popes being accused of
many crimes, do notwithstanding judge them which are their accusers: where we
may not omit, that of old time our Fathers did ordain and appoint those things
which they thought convenient, profitable, and necessary for the correction of
those which did belong unto the French Church, without going into Italy a as
is proved and showed amongst others, by the author of the abuses and
nullities of the Bulls of Pope Sixtus that dyed last: the which does show by
many examples, Aim. lib. 5. cap. 26.
that the Bishops of France, warned Pope Gregory the fourth, which came
into the Realm with menaces of excommunications to the king, that if he did
enterprise any thing against him, in stead to excommunicate, he should
return excommunicated. Likewise it was told him, that it was never seen,
that a Pope not being desired, should ever meddle with judging the rightes
belonging to kingdoms, and that the Frenchmen had always accustomed to live
in liberty: for the maintenance of the which, they were resolved not to spare
their own blood. And lastly, they told him that kingdoms were never gotten
by excommunications.

From all which reasons it follows, that the French men have no reason to
sear the Popes encommunications. If it falls out, that any of them do
commit any offense, they may go to the Bishops of France, which ought to
reduce them by fair means, and censure them accordingly, without suffering
them to go to Rome. And for the third part of the excommunication, touching
the person excommunicated, together with the end of such censuring: First I
said, that it is necessary to admonish the culpable by all fair means, even
with tears, as also to hear and understand him in all his reasons, plaintes,
and iustifications, to know thereby whether he be duly informed of the
accusations, or not. Now there has been no such observations in the foresaid
sentence of excommunication; from thence therefore again it follows, that it
is not only a nullitie, but also a detestable abuse. That which does also
again appear for the third, is the quality of the pretended crime of
heresy, wherewith the Pope accuses the king; forasmuch as it is verefied,
that such a proposition (the Roman Church has need of reformation) is
nothing at all erroneous, and much less heretical. Let us now behold the
end of excommunication. It has been said, that it has respect unto the
repentance and salvation of the sinner: wherefore I desire all that be truly
religious, to confider whether the Pope indeuoreth himself to this end, when
he excommunicateth kings: they shall find that he does not. Behold, let a
Prince be a tyrant, a whoremaister, adulterous, a rauisher, a drunkard, a
blasph emer, and an Atheist, doing as much of these things as he will, yea
although he be quallified with all such virtues, yet the Pope will not once
deigne to tell him of the least of them, no not to his Bishops, so far off is
he from speaking of the excommunicating, either of the one, or the other, for
such respects reserving the thunderbolts and threatninges of the same, only
against those which do talk of the abuses and wickedness of the same, and of
the way how to hinder that course. Now the fourth part of the division
remains yet to be looked into, which is as much to say, whether by the
ministry of the excommunications, the Bishops of Rome may deprive Monarchs of
the benefits and rightes of this present life or not; for proof to the
contrary, Luke 20. Romans 13
it has been already said and proved, that God having given the Empires and
kingdoms of the world, to those whom he has chosen from amongst men, does
forbid all Bishops, Cardinals, Monks, and Priests, to disturb or deprive
them of the same. If the Princes be wise, they have tallans good enough to
defend themselves from such injuries, if they do not make them their own
hurt. This iniquity of the Bishopps of Rome, (which under the pretense of
ecclesiastical jurisdiction do transpose kingdoms to who^ they will) shall
better appear by the conferring of the ecclesiastical government with the
politic, which we will also handle. First of all, the power of the Church is
spiritual, and that of the Magistrates is corporal. Secondly, the Church
judges according to the divine laws of the word of God, and the Magistrate
politikely, according to the course of the world. Thirdly, the Church does
punish the rebellious spiritually in the souls with ecclesiastical pains,
and the Magistrates corporally in the flesh with politic pains, over the which
the Church has nothing to do. From whence it follows, that if it should be
such a manner of excommunication, then the ecclesiastical persons have nothing
to do with the worldly goods of private men, and much less with realms,
kingdoms, and Empires. By this conference, the most blockish amongst the
Antipodes, may easily indge of such abuses, much more then the French men. If
for wilfulness of heart they do not pick out their eyes, so that they may
not see at noone time, when as the Sun is in the highest: assure your selves
then, my masters, that all excommunications, John. 16.
being abused, cannot shut the gates of paradise against you, seeing that God
does keep them open for all lovers of godliness and truth, in despite of
him which says, that he has power to shut them against you, for which
cause it is said in the Proverbs, that the cursing without cause will never
come to pass. Prou. 26.
To conclude, the Apostles did not care for the excommunications of the Scribes
and Pharesies: much less then ought the French men to care for the Italian or
Romish estate, because they have less to do with them, than the aforesaid
Scribes and Pharesies had to do with the Disciples of our savior Christ.
Here must not be forgotten the titles and qualities which the Bishop of Rome
does attribute to himself, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
when as he names him self chief and sovereign pastor of the Church,
established (says he) in the full power of the king of kings, and of Saint
Peter and Saint Paul, and of his own together, with his Cardinals. And I
pray you what to do? Only to root out, and excommunicate, if he could,
Henry of Bourbon, at this day our king of France, in despite of his
sentence. In the which we find a description of a pride more than deuillish,
for the holy scriptures do witness, that these divine titles, Chief
sovereign, and sovereign pastor of the Church, do appertain unto Christ,
God be blessed for ever, who only is called chief of the Church, by Saint
Paul, Ephe. 1.4 Col. 1.2
writing to the Ephesians, in the first and fourth Chapters, and unto the
Colossians, in the first and second Chapters. This is also he alone which is
called by Saint Peter, 1. Pet 5
in his first Epistle and fifth Chapter, the chief shepherd of our souls,
and in the Epistle to the Hebrews, and eighth Chapter, Heb. 8
is called the sovereign sacrificer. These two Apostles (whose successors the
Bishops of Rome do call themselves,) they have great regard, not to
attribute to themselves such titles of divinity, knowing that they do belong
to none, but only to Christ, being only just; thereby to distinguish him from
the unjust, therefore they speak simply of themselves in this sort. I desire
the Elders says S. 1. Pet. 5. 1. Cor. 4.
Peter, which am also an Elder with them. And S. Paul says, let men esteem
of us, as of the Ministers of Christ. 2. These. 2
He says in the second epistle written to the Thessalonians, that it
belongs to the son of perdition to attribute unto himself such divine
titles. The primitive church does also give the lie to the ambitious priest of
Rome. In witness whereof, amongst other, the Canon of the third Council of
Carthage says, Cap. 1 sed did. 99.
that the Bishop of the first sea, was not called prince of priests, nor
soueraign priest, Tom. 7. homil. 43. in Mat. ad Eulog. li 7. c. 30
or such like: and that he cannot call himself universal. Chrysostom
speaking of all Bishops, says thus. Whosoever shall desire the primacie on
earth, shall not be numbered amongst the disciples of Christ. Finally, all men
know, that Gregory has been a capital enemy to this title of universal
Bishop, so far forth, that by the same he says, that he did perceive the
nigh coming of Antichrist. Wherefore he concludes, that such a title is
profane, and that such tytles do declare unto us the insupportable pride of
such a Bishop, so does the vantage of having full power (as Satan says of
himself) over the kingdoms of the earth (giving the lie to the prophet
Daniel) which attributes it to one only God. Mat. 4.
Dan. 5
Nevertheless I do agree most willingly to this truth, that the Pope is also
established in the full power, as well of him self, as of his Cardinals. Let us
now end the rest of this Article. This leagall Proctor, willing to let
nothing pass that might serve him toward the excommunication of his king,
has showed forth yet another certain Canon of Lutheran, ordeining, that
kings shall never come to be sacred, until they have first sworn to defend the
Roman Catholic religion. It has bin answered, upon the generality of their
Canons, that the ecclesiastical persons, be it in their councels, or be it
in their consistories, or else where, have no commandment, right, nor calling,
to drive kings from their kingdoms and Lordships, which it has pleased God to
give them, seeing that he will rather serve himself with the ministry of
them in such administration, than of others.

Moreover, we say, that the intention of the king, is to maintain the purity
and truth of the Catholic, Apostolical, and Christian religion, with as good
an affection as any other king that ever reigned in France. He has vowed it,
and the experience will follow, (God helping) to the contentment of al true
religious Christians. And as for the Roman, his intention is nothing else, but
to let every one loose to his own liberty: Holding it for a Maxim, that by
the examples of Christ, and his Aposties, Math. 11 Act. 13 Kom. 10
one neither can nor may bring men to the belief of the Gospel by force,
seeing that that appertains to one only God, to touch and move the hearts,
causing them to believe to salvation.

Let us add, that by a free and amiable conference, that all that which shall
be found good and conformable to the word of God in the Roman Church, shall
be ratified, confirmed, and approved. What is it then that thou do require
more of a faithful Prince toward the christian religion? If not a
reprehension agreeable to such inuectiues, which impudently thou do produce
against his majesty. Thou give us afterward a gradation of of heresies,
touching the reformation of the Church, brought into France, the which thou
call the heresy of Calvin, more detestable then all the rest. To the which
is answered, that it has been sufficiently maintained and proved, that the
Church of Rome does err in many points of doctrine, and that it has need
of reformation.

Hereupon it is come to pass, that many have renounced her errors,
idolatries, and superstitions, to follow christian Religion, according to the
first institution, purity, verity, and sincerity. You call this reformation,
heresy. But if in deed in naming good evil. All those which will open their
eyes, may see this necessity a far off. If there were need to give place to
thy inductions and gradations, I would produce two, the truth whereof thou
can not deny.

And the first is, that at Rome has been made such an assembly of
idolatries, 2. These. 2
errors, and superstitions, that they do justify the religion of Presbiter
John, and of the Muscouite. The other also should be; that the Bishop of the
same town, mounting from degree to degree, is placed in the most abominable
scate of all Europe. Even as they are already verified and proved by those
which thou can not contradict.

Now then it remains, after the counterbatterie of thy Ecclesiastical
Canons, to repulse the application and interpretation, which thou give to
certain imperyall laws, which condemn the heretics in diverse pains, as by
bannishment, confiscation of goods, and other such like. From whence thou
drawest then this conclusion, that the king ought not only so to be handled,
but also to be put to death. These are thy proper terms, when thou say, If
ye will have the laws stand in force, it is necessary that the heretic
should die. And for want whereof the state of France is more miserable, than
the policy of thieves. To all that has been already answered, first, that
the sovereign governors are not to be comprehended in the like rigor of
civil punishments, as their subjects are, for the reasons that we have
alleged else where.

Secondly, that such heretics were punished, some for heresies being
qualified, which did turn up side down the foundation of Christian religion,
being known and approved such, by the true Doctors of the Church. And for
the last, so far off is it, that thou may say so of the king, that
contrarie-wise it has been proved, that if there be any Prince in the
world far from heresy, and from any opinion, that may any kind of wale
approach it, it is he, seeing that he follows Christian religion in the
greatest measure of reformation of the same, as ever has been sithence the
death of the Apostles. Most truly therefore I conclude, that in cursing the
king, like to another Semei, and condemning of him to death, by the examples of
Caiphas, 1. Sam. ^^
thou do demerite meritoriously the condemnation of two. And as for the
prophecy, importing, that for not killing of the king, the above said
inconveniences would come to pass. It may easily be answered, that in killing
the king given of GOD for the government of the people of France, should be
committed the most great and heinous sin of the second table of the Law, by
the which notable wickedness, the wrath and vengeance of God should be
provoked.

And to conclude, it is necessary to show thee a notable error, upon the
ending of the two Articles, within the which thou do inwarp all thy speech,
and this it is, that thou do always infer in thy Arguments, that heresy
is a greater sin than all other infidelity, such as are Paganism, Atheism,
Idolatry, and generally all other defection from God and his religion. The
contrary appears by these arguments. He that denies the greatest
quantity of truth, is a greater liar, than he which denies the less. Such
therefore be the Pagans, which do deny altogether all the truth of Christian
religion, wherefore it follows, that they are greater liers, and more to be
condemned, chan the heretics which deny less.

And again, Every man (such as is the Atheist, which denies the essence of
GOD, and his effects, is more abominable than he which confesses the one and
the other, from whence it proceeds, that Atheists are worse than heretics. To
the like effect or end, I thus argue. Those which do generally abjure from the
true God and his religion, are worse than those which do but in part, from
whence yet it follows, that such destroyers are worse than heretics. As in
deed such Infidelles are altogether strangers from the common weal of
Israel, Ephe. 2
the which cannot be said of the heretic, which shall believe in one God, the
contents of his word, and the truth of his promises, failing only in this
point, that he does understand some Articles and texts of holy Scripture
amiss. If thou do object, that many heretics have malicioussie and against
their consciences, striuen against the truth, I answer, that in such a case
man's judgment cease, seeing that God alone can examine and sound the hearts
of men: Iere. 20.
otherwise, to say the truth, if they come to that point they ought not to be
called heretics, but Apostatates and arch-enemies of God, the which by
consequence, according to the example of one Julian, should sin against the
holy spirit. Possibly Arrius did the like. That being taken away, it is
necessary to observe all such distinctions, for fear of enwrapping them in
the same condemnation which do err by simple ignorance. What should become
of the most part of the ancient doctors, if they were admitted? We do not
only then say, that there is a difference between Apostasy and heresy, but
also between heresy and heresy, and moreover all error is not heresy.

Furthermore, if it be demanded into what predicament simple heretics may or
ought to be put, and what judgment is to be given of them. I answer, that
they ought to be handled more favorably than those which are excommunicated:
the reason whereof (amongst others is this, that because they are not bannished
nor rejected of the Church, and because they have never done any acts of
rebellion or contempts, as the aforesaid excommunicated have: Concerning the
which nevertheless, it is said, 1. Cor. 5.
that they are delivered to Satan, for the destruction of the flesh: to the
end that their souls may be saved in the day of the Lord. Seeing then that
excommunication does not seclude these here from the hope of salvation, much
less then the heretics, seeing they are less withdrawing from the way of
repentance, than the excommunicates. Now to show that all those which do err
in some point of heresy, are not so foul as this leaguer does make them; we
will produce two examples drawn from the word of God.

The Corinthians did err in one of the most principal articles of the
christian faith, in denying the resurrection of the body, a quallified heresy,
if there were ever any, seeing that it did abolish (as S. Paul proves) the
whole benefit of the death and passion of Christ. 1. Cor. 15.
Let us come to S. Peter, who being better instructed than the faithful
Corinthians, mistaking an Article of the Christian liberty, and being
unknown, fell into a point of heresy: because that after the death of Christ,
Act. 10.
he thought it to be a pollution of the soul and conscience, to eat of all
sorts of meat, as if in such, an abstinence did consist in a part of salvation
for mankind, quite contrary to that which S. 1. Tim. 4.
Paul does teach, when he says, that God had created meats, to the end that
the faithful which have known the truth, may use them with giving of thanks.
Behold then here a body of the Church, and an Apostle, heretics every one of
them in a point of heresy. Nevertheless they were not rejected of the church,
nor deposed from their charges for the same. Yea such opinions were not imputed
unto them for heresy, because there was no obstinacy in them, nor a wicked
purpose to resist circumstances, requisite for a formal heresy. Even as the
ancient Doctors have noted, as well as the Schoolmen, affirming, that he is no
heretic, that does simply err, if there comes not a wicked purpose
between, and an obstinacy to strive and stand against the truth. To the
which promise is alleged that which S. Augustine says; I may err, but I
will not be an heretic. If these considerations do purge as well the Church
of Corinth, as an Apostle, why not then also a king, when as he does but only
say, that the Roman Church does err in certain points? A proposition which
has less cause to be charged with heresy than the former. Notwithstanding,
let us grant such a proposition (the Roman church has need of reformation)
be erroneous, we may answer as before. That for not being set forward, with
willing purpose of the heart, to the end to stand against the truth, it ought
not to be imputed heresy. If thou do replye, that it is upon malice and
obstinacy, that the king does maintain such a proposition: I will answer
thee as I have done elsewhere, returning thither; Who will be so wicked to
say, that the king does intermeddle, or has intermedled, and with a malicious
will against his conscience, in the cause of religion? What profit could come
unto him by the same? Leaving then this frenzines unworthy any answer, I
will pass to the third Article, upon the which we need no more to insist,
than in the others going before, forasmuch as the general and necessary
anweres to this subject have been already produced, which will help the
solution of the Articles following.

The third Article.
THe third Article comes to this point, that the Catholics which do
accompany the king, do break the natural law in the act of religion, that
which the barbarous nations never did. For this confirmation, and commendation
of which Article, this author alleges diverse examples drawn out of the
Pagans shop, from whence he conoludeth, that such Catholics are worse than
they, because they accompany a king that is not of their religion. Therein is
contained two points: The first rests in the knowledge and property of the
law of nature, in the which is the question: The second in the nature and force
of the examples. Therefore we ought first to know, what it is to say the
natural law in matter of religion. To this purpose therefore S. Paul says, 1
C^^. 2.
that the natural man does not comprehend the things of the spirit of God,
because they are unto him as foolishnes, and he cannot understand them.
Whereupon it follows, that for the understanding of them, he ought to be
otherwise than natural: that is to say, Ephe. 5
that he ought to have some thing from above, and beyond the gifts of the
humane soul. That which in other places the same Apostle calls the spirit of
revelation: and the eye of the understanding being enlightened. Much more then
the natural man will affecte his natural religion, which is not but of the
world, and therefore the further from the true ordinance of God, considering
that it is foolishnes unto him, and so consequently can never comprehend it, if
the supernatural gifts of the holy spirit do not come between. From whence
it comes to pass, that to embrace the true religion, being supernatural, he
ought rather to go against the law of nature, than to follow the course and
conduction of the same. It appears then, that thou do very badly apply thy
natural law in the case of religion. But if thou do reply that by the law
of nature thou do understand an inseperation and inclination to be borne and
nourished together with man, tending to the good and preservation of man's life.
Upon such an interpretation, thou do show thy self without comparison to
be a greater transgresser of this law, than those upon whom thou do falsely
impose such a crime. Behold the law of nature requires, that one should be
gentle and tractable toward his countriman.

Which does demonstrate amiably, that the difference in religion does desire
examination and conference. The same law abhors civil wars, and does
lament and detest the effusion of man's blood: it desires also the good and
quiet of her neighbor, following the ancient proverb, which says, that man is
God to man.

To be short, the law of nature wishes generally, a peaceable estate, to the
end that all men ought to live in concord, amity, equity, justice, and
blessedness. Cicero called these things, Lib. de scien.
Sequi natural ducem, the following nature as a guide: from whence it
proceeds, that thou, and thy like leagued companions, in writing,
councelling, and pursuing the contrary, declare your selves to be enemies to
nature, and violaters of the law. And as for the other point, touching the
example of the Pagans, and their zeal concerning their religion, I dare say,
that if thou with pride of heart, had undertook to reason in the behalf
of Satan, to the end to commend all the wicked religious, which he has
brought into the world, thou could not have better proceeded to have
pleased him; then in exhorting every Country to follow the religion which it
has found in the world, without any other knowing of the cause. Tell me,
where have thou learned this fashion of arguing? It comes not from the
Apostles, who in stead of commending the Ethnike religions by such examples,
did combat with and beat them down by the authority of the word of God. Ier.
2.
True it is, that in Jeremy, God reasoning, says, that his people are less
constant in his truth, than the idolaters are in their errors. But the Prophet
did not endeavor, to the end to commend the perseverance, nor the obstinacy of
the idolaters, to the which in the mean time thou do intend. Thou take
then this fashion of arguing from the oracle of Apollo, the which wicked
creature did counsel the pagans in times past, always to retain the
religions received into their country from all antiquity, without changing
any thing. Xenoph in his Com. Cicero d^ ^egibus lib. 2.
Know thou not, that amongst the Pagans such examples are not concluded? and
much less amongst Divines, which do argue altogether by the word of God.
Finally, do thou not know that the Gentiles did forsake their false
religions, by the preaching of the Gospel. Thou have done very fairly then in
alleging the Persians, Greeks, and Romans in their paganism, to the end
that by their example a man should not inquire after the certainty and
assurance of the true religion. John 5.
On our side we see again the disciples of Christ, with the contents of his
will written within his book, which is the word of God, and which does
always remain. But the religions of the Pagans, Isay 40.
are perished with their authors, where it appears that thou show thy
religion to be more wicked than the Pagans did theirs, for they neither would
nor durst serve so much wickedness and cruelty, as thou do serve thy self
with, in that which thou call the Romish Catholic religion. Let us see now
whether thou can profit thy self any better in thy fourth Article or not.
But it will sooner be found out, that through a hot disease thou will fall
from the water into the fire.

The fourth Article.
THe sum of this may be drawn to this point: that the Catholics which do
mayntaine the kings part do break the statutes and fund mental law of
France. For the proof of which rupture, this Doctor like unto a mouse, that
has but one wretched hoale, neither knows how, nor can allege any other
text, or reason, but a violent and bloody statute, (or rather the default of a
statute) which the last Duke of Guize did wreste by constraint against the last
king, imitating beggars, which do beg alms with a two handed sword. My
leaguerer then, the better to fill his paper, lays forth unto us here at
large the understanding of his pretended statute, which he calls the
fundamental law of the Realm, and the statute of union solempnly sworn unto
by all the estates of the Town of Bloys, in the year of our Lord God, 1588.
containing these points: (that is to say) that the king would hold (says
he) for an inviolable law: First, that he would live and dye in his
Catholic Romish Religion: Secondly, that he would imploye himself in good
earnest by all the means that he could, to race our the heretics: Thirdly,
that all his subjects should swear, and bind themselves unto the same
condition. And coming to the fourth, that the king dying without children, no
heretic should be received to be either king or prince.

Behold now the substance of the Article. And first of all for answer: It
is demanded, who threw the last king down headlong into his last troubles?
The house of the Guize. Who caused him shamefully, and in danger of his life,
to come out of Paris? The house of Guyze. Who did afterward chase him from
his other Town of Chartres? The Guyze. Who seized himself of the most part of
his Towns? The house of Lorrayne. Who moved the Frenchmen to treason,
rebellion, and reuolting against the same king? The same house. Finally, who
constrained the poor passengers to give that by by force (which they durst not
refuse,) to Robbers, which took them within Bloys? Even he himself, being
guilty of high treason, a traitorous and wicked usurper of the estate of the
Lord.

This was in the same time and state, when the last Duke of Guyze demanded of
the last king, such an infamous and detestable ransom. The which this
leagued Moonke calls the Parliament and Statutes of Bloys, and the
fundamental law of the Realm. Patience I pray you. Is there any thing more
impudent, more falsely named, and more ridiculous, than to call this ravening,
extortion, and constraynte; A Statute, and a solemn and a fundamental Law of
a Realm? Do thou not know, that in the making of a Law, the free will of
the lawgiuer is requisite: And for want whereof the ordinance which shall be
made against his will, shall be rather accounted rebellion and felonye, than
any just and true Law.

If thou do here obiecte, that the swearing of the King passed between in
such a Statute, thou shall be answered in like sort. That is to say, that
the swearing wherein GOD is taken to witness in things, Deuteronomy. 2^.
which in their own nature ought to be holy and just, requires likewise a
free will, that it may be thereby able, wholesomely to foresee, that it
promises nothing unto God, but that which the conscience tells us, must be
justly promised and performed. For want whereof, the swearing is not only a
nullitie, but also ought to be retracted, as being made contrary to the
institution and ordinance of God.

Whereupon it ensues, that he which has sworn rashly, redoubleth his
fault, if he continues and effects the same wicked swearing. Then will thou replye, that the King in such a case ought not to swear at all: wherein
I agree with thee: but so, that thou ought to consider, that I detest and
reprove it, in so much as the fear thereof does bring many kings to this
pass, for to swear rather politikely in Greece, than religiously in Judah,
when matters do concern their estates: and especially if they fall into any
apparaunt danger of their lives.

But in such lamentable default, why do thou rather take an occasion against
the last king, who was constrained through the fear of death, than the Guyze,
who without any occasion, did first show himself to be perjured toward the
king by his treason and rebellion. And wherefore do thou so narrowly search
this fault amongst kings and Princes, rather than amongst Popes, which call
themselves the vicars of Christ Jesus: which do but sport or jest at such
oaths, as this worthy saying does testify: Heretico non est seruanda fides.
By and by he will present a new occasion to speak of an oath, wherefore
then, we say for conclusion of the Article: that even as money being taken
away by force by robbers and thieves, cannot be called a gift, a present, or
an alms, given or received, much less such rapine ought to be called a
statute, and for less cause a fundamental law of the realm. Under the color
of which speech thou do here suppress the truth, which binds all the
gentlemen of France to this duty, which is here spoken of: forasmuch as they
have received their noble possessions of the first kings, being founders of
this Crown, to the intent, and upon this condition, that they should
maintain the kingdom in the state of the Monarchy, and in the line of the
blood royal, and for the want of such obedience, they should be accounted
rebels and felons.

This is therefore the true fundamental law, just, and approved of all
estates, and not thy last false pretended statute, which some varlet has
wrested by subtletie, treason, and violence, from the hands of his Master.
Even as the last king, being set at liberty, did revoke it incontinently
after the death of him that had committed such violence against him, thereby
to show, that such a wicked accident, neither could nor ought to prejudice the
truth, nor the right usage of any thing. And thus let us pass further.

The fifth Article.
THe fifth Article contains two points. The first is, that the Catholieks
which do help the king, do bury in the dust, the honor and glory of
France, which has received this privilege above al other countries of
Christendom, that from the time of the first christian king, unto the last
king that is now dead, it has never received any as king, that has bin any
kind of way spotted with heresy. Heerevpon this malecontent does knock and
torment himself more than ever he did before, falling from frenzy into a
rage. For he comes to this point, that he calls the king the first borne of
satan. Afterward he says, that the miracle of healing the goule granted only
to the kings of France, shall be lost in a king being an heretic. Now to the
first. We answer thus, that the honor and glory of a realm, John. 17
consists in the true knowledge of the true God, and in the celebration and
right usage of his pure service, contained and declared in his word: the
kingdoms and countries, having kings, which do acknowledge and practice these
two Articles, are declared honorable before God. Whereupon it follows, that
in business of religion, the glory and interest of this realm, is nothing at
all diminished or hindered, because of the king, seeing that he is such a one,
and therefore consequently, he is to be accounted faithful, and the son of
the Church of God. But to the end, that thou shall not object that I reason
absurdly, I will come to thy intention. Thou would summarily infer and say,
that in affairs of religion, the glory of a kingdom lies in this point, in
that that it has always had kings, which have acknowledged the Bishop of Rome
decked with all these qualities: first, to be Gods lieuetenant, the vicar of
Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
successor of the Apostles, universal Bishop and chief and sovereign pastor
of the Church, having also this authority, to change, augment, and diminish,
yea, even to the condemning and saving whom he pleases. Thou call this the
honor and glory of a kingdom. But it has bin else where answered and proved
unto thee, that such a doctrine and belief being examined by the word of God
(being the only touch stone) will be found to be ignominious and dishonorable,
so far off is it from all honor and glory. And as concerning that which
remains, we ought to observe the circumstances of the times, in the which
the kings of France have been converted to the Christian religion, from the
year of our Lord God, 472. until this time, which was about the space of
1118. years, within which diverse ages many Bishops of Rome being ambitious,
ignorant, and superstitious, have often times and diversely altered and
corrupted the pure service of God. And for my witness herein, I take the
introduction of this which follows. The marriage which the Lord instituted,
Genesis 2.
was here already forbidden to ecclesiastical persons, as a thing profane,
unto the which was urged the vow of perpetual continency, and
excommunication to them that should be found in falt through ouer-sight and
indiscretion. The service as well of Idols as of superstitious relikes, was
received into use, as a thing necessary to salvation. Hermitages and
dedications of feasts and temples, had as much attributed unto them: in as
much as a great portion of justification to salvation, was sought for in them.
The adoration of the Cross also is a part of it, an abominable error to
say and believe, that in a piece of wood, that may be burned, should consist
a piece of the divine worship. The Prayers and Offerings for the dead, do
sing the same song. The adoration of a sacramental sign brought in sithence,
does justify the sacrifices of the Pagans, the pride of the Popes, and that
of the Demons, which do attribute more unto themselves, than ever the son of
God did, as he was in the quality of a redeemer.

All which traditions, idolatries, and superstitions, are nothing else but pure
heresies: Sermon. 67. ad Eug.
for the which cause Saint Bernard calls the bringers in of these things, the
ministers of Antichrist, and such Prelates, Pilates. These things will
constrayne thee to confess, that the greater part of the kings of France
being instructed in the same sort, were fed with a poor food.
Nevertheless I do agree, that such false beleefes cannot be imputed to
heresy, but simply to error, because they did not err with delight of heart,
and much less through malice, but only thought to do well. Besides that,
following the intention, I will allege the example of two kings of France,
which do show that thou have not seen all things. The first is, of Phillip
the fourth, called the fair, which was not only accounted and holden as an
heretic, but also excommunicated of Pope Boniface, the eighth of that name,
because he would not take in hand the voyage into the holy land, and moreover,
because he did not believe that the Pope had right to transpose kingdoms. The
second example concerning Chilperie the ninth king of France, which held a
damnable opinion touching the article of the Trinity, and commanded the
Bishops to preach it. Notwithstanding all which, France being better taught
by the Bishops that were then, would never enterprise to cast off or forsake
neither the one nor the other.

And now for the second point of the Article, which concerns the healing of
the Goule, a notable miracle (say thou) which will have no force in a king
being an heretic. To the which ptetended miracle I will answer these
things. Those which returned away with their Goules incurable, with
conditions to serve and cherish them all their life time, do show, that thou
take the coals of Saint Laurence, in the stead of the Angel Gabriels feather
or quill.

Secondly, that of the physicians which healed them, which were curable, should
return, they should prove, that their natural remedies were of more force
than the word and touching. Thirdly, thou can not prove, neither by text, nor
by example, that the miracles have been hereditarie, or tied to one house
only. Fourthly, it is an absurd thing, to infer, that God in giving some
miracles to a king dome, has distributed but one kind. Fifthly, we say, that
God has never given or granted these miracles, but for some great mysteries,
which come not in the use of one only and simple healing of corporal
diseases, as such as that is of the Goule. If notwithstanding thou do reply,
that some have been healed, so as thou do suppose I will answer, that it
should be in like sort, as if one amongst a thousand of them which go to Saint
Claudius, or other such like places should he healed. Thou in the mean time
because thou would not be charged with a lie by thy neighbors, do run
into Spain, to search our witnesses, saying that there has been found in
one only Bishopric more than thirty thousand men, which have bin
miraculously healed of the Goule. Thou know that a man dare not tell them
that come from far, that they lie, for which cause master Paul Venetus
returning from the Isles of the East, durst say, that he found a bird of such
an excessive bigness and power, that she took up and carried an Elephant in the
air. Behold here a great bird, and many Spaniards healed of the Goule. Thou
should do better to pray God for prosperity of thy king, Tit. 3.
to the end that he may heal the realm of maladies, which are of great
importance, such as are Atheism, Epicurisme, Wars, Extortions, Cruelties,
Injustice, and other iniquities, which range up and down in France, by the
ministry of the league, to the desolation of the mother, and ruin of the
childen. And thus let us pass to the Article following.

The sixth Article.
THis is the sixth Article, wherein this leaguerly monk says, that the
Catholics of whom he speaks, do declare themselves fautors of heretics, to
the destruction of the Catholic Roman religion: from whence he takes occasion
to compare the heresy to the adama^t, which does not torment it self but with
the iron. Then he says, that all those of that religion ought to be
extinguished and raced out, by the same instrument. He says also, that there
is no obligation toward the Prince which holds, when he sets himself
against the service of God, who commands to put all those to death, which do
turn away the people from the true religion, the which he proves by two
texts of Moses, and in the end he charge the nobles with avarice, because
(says he) they follow the king, to the end to have some recompense, and
thereupon he concludes, that they do leese their souls. These be the whole
contents of the sixth article. The answer to the same, The noble men of France,
being called by the fundamentallawe of the realm, to the handfast keeping of
the monarchy of France, as has bin before said, they are and do feel
themselves bound to the performance of such a duty, and for want whereof, they
show themselves unworthy such honors and privileges, and as for the purpose of
religion, thou ought to know, that they are not ordained to ecclesiastical
charges and functions, to resolve upon it. It is enough for them to send such
disputations to a loving conference of divines, following the promise of the
king. This being here admitted to be necessary, and according to equity,
what have thou to do to bay or bark against Gentlemen, exercising their
duty? Whilst that thou do enforce thy self like a member of Satan to
divert them. The rest is proved unto thee, that not to commit idolatry is no
heresy, nor to acknowledge the Bishop of Rome for such a one as thou do.
That makes thee say, that the heresy ought to be roted out by fire and sword
that is to say, that your Saint Bartolwes day must needs be celebrated from
day to day in stead of amiable conferences: even so as the Jews did, when
they cried, crucify, crucify: by such procedings, worthy such as ye are, ye
show your selves as honorable and commendable as your calling; but the
children of God do abhor these things. Forasmuch as it is written, that
murderers shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven. Gal. 5.
Christ takes occasion to prove, that the Jews which would kill, were the
children of the devil. John. 8.
And now to the two points, which thou would have to serve for their
wickedness. The first is in the thirteenth Chapter of Deutronomie, Deuteronomy. 13.
where it is said, that the false Prophets and others, which should cause the
people to turn from their service of God, or that should themselves be turned
away from the true religion for to serve strange Gods, ought to be put to
death. Here a little before has been answered unto such a like text, for the
special regard of which, we do here add, that Moses does mean by his
speech, the subjects, and not the kings being sovereign magistrates. Secondly,
of a defection and reuolting from God and his religion. Finally, such rigorous
punishment in this deed, ought not to have been done but in Israel, for the
reasons described in the first Article. It appears then, thou do falsefie
this text, as also that which follows out of Exodus, Exo. 32.
the two and thirtith Chapter, where it is said, that Aaron having forged the
golden calf, builded an altar, before the which the people did commit
idolatry, for the which Idolatry, the Lord took such rigorous vegeaunce,
that he slew three thousand men, thou deceiuest thy self in writing of thirty
thousand. This is a marvelous thing, that the vehemency and violent affection
toward the hurting of his king, should so blind this leaged monk, thereby to
cause him to take the adversaries part, even to the justifying and maintaining
of his cause. Behold how he does it. If there be any thing in the substance
of religion which the king does abhor, they are these idolatries. As
contrariwise, this which maintains the fatkitchin of this slanderous deceuer,
is no other thing but the abuse which he imputes to another, imitating the
wolf who troubled the water himself, and yet imputed it to the sheep. Do
thou not see, that thou give thy enemies thy weapons to beat thy self with?
Thou have found out the idolatry very well, but this is not worthy of my
answer. As also the reproching of the Gentlemen for following the king, to the
end to get some great rewards. These valiant hearts will answer thee, that
they have not their souls infected as thine is, considering that they follow
and accompany their king, Tit. 3. Rom 13.
according to the commandment of God, and not in the quality or manner of
mercenaries, but as noble Lords, who respect their duties and the charge
imposed upon them, and in doing this the Lord will bless their labors with a
double blessing, and instead of loosing their souls (as thou say) they shall
save them, seeing that it is written of those which are instruments of
justice, Dan. 12
that they shall shine as the stars in the firmament.

The eight Article.
NOw let us come to the eighth Article (there has bin answer already made to
the seventh) to that which the monkish Leaguer says here, that the Catholics
which do help the king, do make a double schism, the one in regard of the
Pope, the other in regard of the generality of the realm. And for the
qualifieng of the first, he turns himself to call the Pope (as aforesaid)
the chief universal and sovereign pastor of the church: to the which (says
he, that obedience is commanded upon pain of death, Deuteronomie the
seuenteeth Chapter. Now the answer to this is, as has been before said, that
all Christian Catholics are bound to maintain their kings and Country. And
also that belongs to Princes of the earth to bear rule and authority, and
not to Bishops, and as for the point of religion, he of Rome has nothing to
do, no not half a league out of his diocese, so far off is he from having
any thing to do over all France. Deu. 17 Number. 16
Whereupon it follows, that the example of Corath, Dathan, and Abirom, with
the text of Deutronomie which thou alledgest, make nothing to the matter. First
being considered, that the charge of a sovereign high Priest, whereof Moses
speaks, Heb. 8
was given by divine institution, and particularly unto the Jews, figuring
their Messiah, our Lord Jesus Christ, the which was ended at his death. This is
then an error, yea heresy it self, to call a Bishop at this day by that
name, and to constitute him in the same degree. The which should be to bring
Christ back again from heaven, Rom 10
as if he had not ended the figures of the law.

Secondly, the example of Corath, touching the other schism, does plainly show
forth those which do revolt from their sovereign magistrates, and those also
which will not acknowledge them as Magistrates, such a one was Corath and his
accomplices, Number. 16
when as they would not acknowledge Moses any more to be their head.

Seeing therefore, that thou and thy companions do the like unto your king, it
follows, that ye are culpable of the schism, which falsely ye impose upon
others. In doing thus, you imitate Achab, when as he asked the Prophet Eliah,
1. Kin. 17.18
saying, Art not thou he which troublest all Israel? Upon the which like
occurrence, we may also answer with the Prophet, That it is thou thy self,
and the house of thy Romish Father. It appears thhrefore again and always
will, that thou do falsefie these textes and examples, in applying them for
an ambitious wretch, which has nothing at all to do in France. Thou have
then fairly tormented thy self in calling the^ rebels and heretics, which
will not admit of the primacie of Rome, for an Article of the faith. France
has the jurisdiction, as well of ecclesiastical as politic matters in it
self, and wherewith the inhabitants of Rome have nothing to do. Also know
this, that there are in this realm as learned Bishops, just, and wise, as
there be any in Italy. Finally, it has been proved, that thy Romish
pre-eminence is altogether contrary to the commandment of the son of God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Luke 22.
which has expressly forbidden such dominations to Bishops, when he says;
that the kings of the nations bear rule over them, but it shall not be so
with you. Thou at afraid that the abolishing of some ecclesiastical abuse
should do some wrong unto thy belly: but jest not at it. Cast thy self and
thine affairs upon the Lord, and so thou shall have rest in thy soul. And
as for the rest of thy infectious smokie slanders, which thou do
continually blast out of thy mouth against thy king, I leave them unto the
disposition of the winds. And yet in the mean time remember with thy self
what judgments the Lord threw upon the head of Semei, for the like offense.
1. Sam. 16


The ninth Article.
IT follows in this ninth article, to show how this Criminate Monk does
accuse the Catholics with perjury, which will not revolt nor carry Spanish
hearts, but for proof whereof, he neither knows how, nor can allege any
other text, but the forenamed pretended statute, contained in the fourth
Article, wrested as before. Thou do here inuit me to these repetitions,
yet answer me once again I pray thee.

Letting that pass, seeing that the best and greatest part as well of the
Nobles, as of the third estate of France, have neither promised nor sworn,
as thou would make them believe: wherefore we ought to observe that which
follows.

If a man be bound by an oath to some just and necessary duty toward his
country, he ought not to falsefie it by any prejudicial promise, which shall
be contrary to the same being first made. Now let us apply this thing. The
Gentlemen of France, by the abouesaide fundamental law, have plighted their
faith and homage unto their king, in promising to defend him, together with the
estate of his kingdom: whereupon it follows, that neither at the instigation
of the Guize, the Spaniards, nor the Popes, they ought to break their first
oath. Math. 21.
Thou say, that Religion, being of greatest importance, does absolve them
in such a case. But thou may be answered, beyond that which has already
been spoken, that it does rather ratify and confirm such duties, than
otherwise.

And as for the great importance thereof, the which is spoken for other
respects, touching the service of God, being spiritual and heavenly, which
does nothing abolish the privileges and rightes of the governors of the
world. Where do thou find, that Guyze, or that a Bishop of Rome have any
right or reason to dispense with the subjects for breaking their oaths which
they have made unto their kings? The Pagan Priests never produced such a
detestable and horrible Maxiome. Remember thy self of the oath which Herod
made, Mat. 14.
which cost the Church the death of John Baptist. Wherefore I demand of thee:
was this tyrant bound to effect his promise: yes as much as if he had been
bound to have made two devils of one: And if a man be bound to kill his
children, having promised and sworn it to God. Do thou not know, Isay. 45.
that it is never lawful to swear to do evil? Let us now apply this
physically. Thou and thy like have induced some Frenchmen being evil advised,
and worse infourmed, to the supporting of the Spanyard, and Lorrayne, toward
the thrusting out of the King, and for the bringing in of an inquisition, and a
strange government. From thence is it come to pass, that many of the
Gentlemen's consciences of France, having known and considered the iniquity
of the enterprise, are readuised, and repentant, for being wrapped within the
above named condemnation of Chore, Number. 16
who will deny, that they have not had just occasion to do this?

But because thou love blood, thou would induce it to the example of
Herod: to the end, that they may bring thee a thousand heads, to dedicate
them unto the same sacrifices, as Busiris did, when he sacrificed his hosts
to Jupiter. Take heed that thou art not taken as the Dragons are, Plin lib. ^.
cap. 12.
which suck up so much blood from the Elephant, that they make themselves
drunk, and so they dye.

This is now answered and said upon the generallitie of thy question. And
now I come to the particular point: where thou do allege two quotinges
of Scripture, for the upholding and maintenance of thy lewd and wicked
swearing: the one out of the nineteenth Chapter of Leuiticus: Leuit. 19. Deuteronomy.
23.
and the other out of the three and twentieth of Deuteronomie. In the first it
is said, You shall not swear by my name in telling of lies. And in the second
it is said; Thou shall perform thy vows, which thou have vowed unto the
Lord thy God. Whereunto I answer: that in such precepts, and other such
like, always two things are to be understood and forbidden. The first is,
that there be no evil kind of swearing, such as is when any one binds
himself to undertake and execute some wicked things. And secondly, that we
ought always to rule and square our oaths to the will of God specified in his
word: for if one offers him the price of a dog, Deuteronomy 23.
it will be unto him abomination, much more then the blood of mankind, the
which notwithstanding this Monk of the league desires above all things.

This being here admitted, the third text which thou alledgest out of the
fifth chapter of Zachary, makes clean against thy self, Zacha. 5.
seeing that it is a false kind of swearing by the name of God, when one
swears otherwise than he has commanded: and also, when one swears to do
evil. Those which so profane the name of God, ought to fear the curse and
judgment which thou talkest of: but those which do obey him, need nothing at
all to fear. Thy proposition then is found altogether to be false and wicked.
And to this end, praising and approving the massacre, which the Iacobine friar
thy brother committed: thou say thus of the last king; that God has
confounded him, as if God and the devil had conspired together such an
abominable fact. Do thou not draw upon thy self the vengeance of God in
iustifiyng of such wicked crimes? The weapons of iniquity are in your
habitations (says Jacob, Gen 49.
) Cursed be your wrath and fury, for it is impudent, and wicked. Thou would
be ignorant of this, that the murderers shall not inherit the kingdom of
God. Gal. 5.
Can thou better justify the most horrible massacre of the Pagans? Thou will allege here the example of Pope Sixtus thy sovereign, which has
approved the same iniquity, by an express book: and thus much for this.

The tenth Article.
THe malcontent says in this Article, that the Catholics which accompany the
king, do fall into perpetual infamy, and cause the kingdom likewise to be
accounted infamous, as two or three of his Canons d^ import, being framed to
his mind. This objection I say, has been answered in the fifth Article, and
here only will we add, that the infamy of a kingdom consists in the
abuse of Religion, ignorance, Atheism, Epicurisme, schisms, rebellions,
barbarous actions, cruelties, and lewd riotousnes: in the trade of which
iniquities, the children of the league are most skillful, yea even without
comparison of any others. As the proceedinges in receiving the Spanyardes into
France do witness, to whose credit these traitors of all men most wretched
and infamous, do sell their liberty, and the liberty of their kinsfolks,
wives and children, without taking any pledge of them, for the same. Can there
be a more infamous thing thought of then this, as so to yield themselves as
slaves with reioicing of heart to the Spaniards? To the end, to be one day
handled by him, not only after the manner as Pharao in old time used the
Israelites in Egypt. But in like manner as he himself handles and uses the
Mores, as well those of Africa, as of India. And thus may the infamous of the
kingdom be easily discerned, which are not those which would defend and
deliver it from such hardshippe and slavish seruit^de. Alas it is known well
enough that men naturally do love their own liberty, from whence proceeded
this ancient proverb, which says, that liberty is better than all the gold
in the world. Nevertheless, these mad people enemies to themselves, would be
rid of it, as of a thing of small value or price. Wherefore this does
verefie, that if there be any infamous wretch in the world, that thou art he,
which by thy unnatural precepts do cause the holy Christian religon (so
far forth as in thee lies) to be had in execration, and holden in contempt
of all barbarous people, which can but read thy profane writings, tending
altogether to the desolation and ruin of thine own country.

The eleventh Article.
LEt us pass the rest of the Articles, and come unto the eleventh, which
imports, that the aforesaid Catholics do betraye their Mother Church, in
such sort as Judas did his master Christ, or as Sons that will not succor
their mother, when as one would strangle or choke her: And afterward coming
to the application, this Criminal Judge calls the king, the capital enemy
of the Church, and the Catholics which follow him, his hang-men, denyers of
Christianity, companyons of Nembroth, and more barbarous and unnatural than
the Scithians.

To begin mine answer with, I would have thee first assure thy self that
thou will be garnished with defaulte of proofs, as much as ever any man was,
that has made a trade of dawbing paper. Verefie thy propositions by good
textes and arguments, and if it comes to pass that thou have any reason, it
shall be granted: but if contrariwise, then the law is against thy self.
And if being not willing to proceed any further, then hold thy peace, for
thou declarest thy self to be unworthy of any writing or answer.

For the which purpose, sirst I here answer thee, that the diverse charges
and different callinges ought to be distinguished, to the end, that the
Shoemaker may not meddie with the Tailor, nor the Blacke-smith with the
Locke-smith. Now if the Mechanical arts do require such an observation,
much more then those of liberal sciences, and a great deal more those
sciences and diversities of estates, which concern the general and public
administrations of the world. Even as the Apology of Ioathan does teach us,
Judge. 9.
saying; that the Olyue tree does content her self with her fatness, and
the fig tree with her sweetness, without that, that either of them does
trouble each others tree. Signifiyng thereby, that every one ought to content
himself, and to follow his vocation, unto the which the Lord has called him,
without busying himself in any other men's, for fear least some greeuons
punishment should fall upon him according to the example of Ozias king of
Judah, 2. Chro. 20.
who was stricken with leprosy, when as he would have usurped the office of
the high Priest, which did altogether belong and appertain unto the children
of Aaron.

Even so then the Bishop ought to content himself with his Ecclesiastical
administration, and the Nobleman only with the handling of his sword. So
then, when every tree shall content it self with the quality of his own
fruit, shall all things go well. This being here granted, as necessary,
rightful, and reasonable: what will this Leaguerer say, when as he
tormenteth himself so diversely against the Noblemen, which do not take upon
them at his will and pleasure, the affairs of the Romish Religion, for to
defend it without any further knowledge, the passions of his prelates, to the
utter ruin and overthrow of their king, of themselves, and of their country?
The which they have taken upon them to defend, leaving the disputations of
Religion unto Divines. And thus much for the first answer.

And now to the second: where I hope to content the Reader with reasons of
some force, taken from the holy Scriptures, and not from lies and false
suppositions, according to thy fashion. And that we may the better do this,
let us know what this word Catholic Church does mean, and what are the
marks, and who are the true members of the same. This knowledge is here most
necessary, forasmuch as in the stead of the Christian Church instituted by
Jesus Christ, this Leaguerer does always propose unto us a Romish Church,
containing the idolatries and superstitions of the Bishop of the same. In thy
opinion, if Rome should be lost, what would become of all Christendom? Leaving
then this abominable error, to think any further that the universal Church
hangs on the Roman, we will speak of the thing that follows the
description which the holy Scripture makes, Ephe. 4. Romans 8. John. 6. 1. Cor.
12. Ephe. 5
calling the Christian Church an assembly of Saints, being called according to
the ordinance of God in Jesus Christ, and gathered from all the nations of the
world, by the preaching of the Gospel, to the end, that they may obtain
life everlasting. Also the Apostles have spoken in the same sort of the
Christian Church. They have called it the house of God, the body of Christ, and
the edification of the same body. For the building and entertainment of the
which, Saint Paul says, that God has given five sorts of men, Ephesians 4.
which are the Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Doctors, and Pastors.

The same Apostles do always witness, that Jesus Christ has received this
honor of his Father, to be the only head and sovereign Pastor of his
Church. Furthermore, Ephe. 1.
hearken what Saint Paul says: God (says he) has set Jesus Christ at his
right hand, in the heavenly places, and has subjected all things under him,
that he might be the head of the Church: where we ought to note this, that
the Apostle wrote this after that Jesus Christ was ascended into heaven. To the
end, that the Pope which has invested himself into the Empire of this divine
title, Col. 2.
might not say, that after his ascension, the Church should need an other
head. The which if it had been a thing that were necessary, the Apostle
would never have omitted and let pass such an Article of so great importance.

This is then a monstrous thing, 1. Pet. 5.
to give to the Church two heads and sovereign pastors. It is to be seen
also then, that concerning the government and conduction of the same, the holy
Scripture makes no mention of the primacie of Rome, when as otherwise it
names it a revolt and an Apostate: 2. These. 2
thereby to describe and make it seem odious to all good and well disposed
people. To be brief, the holy Scripture does represent the holy Catholic and
christian church, as one entire body, having the members thereof dispersed
throughout the whole world, and of the which body Christ is the only head,
and the Churches dispearsed here and there are members of the same. Ephe. 1
Seeing then that there is but one Catholic Church, it follows, that the
Church of Rome cannot be it, but only a part, as a member of the body. These
reasons and authorities, do maintain, that the abouesayd Catholics are
nothing at all traitorous to the Christian Church, when as they defend
themselves, their king, and their Country, as well against the Spaniard,
Italian, and Lorraine, as also finally against the Leaguers of the Country, be
they ecclesiastical or others. Besides that, the Catholics which are enemies
to the leaguers will answer, that it is sufficient for them to avouch and
acknowledge, for their spiritual mother Jerusalem, Gal. 4
which is on high, which is free, and called in the holy scriptures, the mother
of us all, they have nothing then to do with the terrestrial, which is below,
1. Cor. 12. Ephe. 4.
and which ingendereth her children unto bondage, declared by Saint Paul, to be
enemies to the Church, and not the others. It is sufficient for Christians to
be of the Christian church, described by the Apostles, in the which we consider
three principal marks. Romans ^.
The first consists in the doctrine as well of the law, as of the Gospel,
being well applied and understood. The second, in the right usage ofthe
Sacraments. The third, in the obedience to the doctrine and ministry thereof,
when thou can not deny, but that by the wicked office and tyranny of the
Popes, the essential marks of all things most necessary to Christian
religion, are wanting for the most part, as has been amply showed unto you
in the discourse dedicated to the Nobility, where has been proved, that ye
have left none of the Articles of the faith pure nor entire, and that if there
be any heretics in the world, thou and thy companions are they, namely, 1.
Cor. 1.
who by your traditions have buried the benefits of the passion, death,
resurrection, and ascension of Jesus Christ, which God only has made unto us
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. Thus leaving this
fountain, ye send your scholars to the Italian parchments, bulls, and
traditions of Rome, and yet notwithstanding thou give the allarum, and
causest fire to come forth from the brambles, Judge. 9.
to burn those that will not augment and defend thy cookerie, together with
thy tyranny and Spanish inquisition: and do call the refusers of such
treasons and cruelties, heretics and unbelievers against the Church, says the
pilgrim. But thou ought to know, that these good people are appointed to
defend the verity and purity of christianity, and not the abuse of the
Romish Church. This being considered, apply that which thou do add unto
thy self, and to thy fellows, that is, that this heresy is the cause of all
these present euilles, remembering with thy self, that for the massacres,
treasons and rebellions, vengeance does manifest it self from heaven against
the authors and executers thereof, and not against those which desire the
reformation of the Church. Gal. 5
Here thou do complain that the use of your Churches are diuerted and
changed. This is great pity, if it be thus, that they are not now
profaned, as when the praises of the creatures were sung, 1. Cor. 1.
the which ye did there worship in the stead of the creator: and as when
he preached the Romish tyranny, 2. Cor. 6
in stead of Christ crucified. If one ought so to torment himself for the
beating down of the Churches, alas then how many of the faithful have ye
massacred being the true temples of God. I perceive always, that thou fear
more some ecclesiastical reformation, than any other thing causes thee so to
insist upon the examples of the Emperors and kings, which after their
example, have induced the people to the change of religion. But remember thy
self, that in the eight Article I have counseled thee to commit thy self and
thine affairs unto the Lord, and thou shall find rest in thy soul.

And as for the second, remember thy self of the counsel which Gamaliel did
give unto the chief Priests of Jerusalem, saying: If thy counsel be of men,
it shall quickly fail, but if it be of God it will not move. Act 5.
Now for the third, it will be proved, that thy maxim is not always true, as
the Christians of the primitive Church do witness, and the faithful of our
time, which do love better to die, than to imitate the idolatry of their
forrayne Princes.

Finally, thou say, that the plaintes contained in this Article, are
sufficicient to draw down the stars from heaven. In deed you have done that
by the ministry of your persecutions, when as ye have overthrown, and
caused so many thousands of the faithful to fall, which are compared to the
stars in the heaven. Therefore thou do falsely impute such slanders upon
those which do defend their king and their Country, Apoc. 6
as also thou do declare thy self a traitor to Jesus Christ, when in stead
of defending the purity and verity of his christian Church: thou do
defend the abuses of the Roman, which is resistance and violence offerep
unto him.

The twelfth Article.
LOoking into the contents of the twelfth article, we shall find that this
leaguall advocate says, that the Catholics to whom he speaks, do betray
their kingdom, and procure the desolation and ruin of the same, for proof
whereof, first he says, that about thirty years sithence, this heresy made
some wounds which do bleed yet. Secondly, that within these fifteen years
the king of Navarre has spoiled the realms by strangers, and has used very
many barbarous acts of hostility and cruelties against the orders of the
same. Thirdly, that he is a Nero in maliciousness and cruelty. Fourthly, from
whence it follows, that it is very badly done to give the sword of S. Paul
into his hand, and the key of Saint Peter. And heerevpon this leaguer
tormenteth himself, and cries, help, help my friends, for these Catholics are
traitors unto the Romish Catholic Church, the which they would chase out of
this Country of France, contrary to the prophecy of Saint Remye, and such
like as follows. And now for answer, first I desire thee, that seeing thou
have took pains to have been delivered of these lying affirmations, to be
patient to hear the denialles which are most true, beginning then at the most
general points. We answer in the first place, that the aforesaid arguments
have been sufficiently declared and verified, that the Catholics whereof thou
speak, are not any kind of way traitorous to Christian religion, seeing
that they are obedient unto the commandments of the same, inasmuch as they do
acknowledge the sovereign magistrates. Which it approoueth and commends in
the behalf of God their father.

Secondly, we have proved that the christian religion being followed in the
reformation of the same, contains no point of heresy. Thirdly, we have
produced the diversities of estates, and difference of charges: where it has
been already showed, that the Noblemen, and all other men of war ought to
suffice themselves with the corselet and sword, leaving the disputations of
religion unto the ecclesiastical assemblies. Fourthly, here must be recited
again the fundamental law, which binds the Nobility to the establishing
of the French Monarchy within the line of the blood royal: what loosenes
would it be accounted in the Noblemen, if they should not imploye themselves
with care against the enemies of the kingdom, and above all, against the
Spanyardes, which would at this day not only thrust out, but also exterminate
the king for ever if they could? For the which cause, I will allege a
forceable saying of a Doctor being a late writer to this purpose, speaking
thus: And as for this kind of people which do no service in the world, but to
shed innocent blood, covering their cruelties with a cloak of religion, I
esteem them worthy no other answer, but that which is to be given to
thieves, which should plead against those which are impannelled for the
country, because they should not carry the sword for their defense. And it
makes me to remember this execrable Roman Fimbria (says he) the which
having failed to kill Sceuola, threatened not to delay it, because he should
not be left unslain.

Consider and apply this answer, whilst that I do visit the other
arguments of thy Article. Thou say that within these thirty years this
heresy has made some wound that bleedeth yet, unto the which thou have been
already answered, that the abuses, behauiours, and conspiracies of the Guyze
have caused this mischief, and not the reformation of the Church. Thou addest
also, that within these fifteen years last past, the king has wasted France
in exercising diverse and most cruel actions of hostility. And to answer
the same, it has been said, that by his meekness, tollerations,
sufferances, weet and gentle be hauiours, his enemies have objected the
contrary against him: 1. Cor. 11.
saying, that he used subtletie, thereby to get the good will both of the one
and the other. Read and see, and thou shall find, that it was the Guize that
playde the part of Nero, and not the king. But he is an heretic, say thou.
To this song, having been a thousand times repeated, thou have been answered
a hundred times pertinently and sufficiently: and so much for this.

In the end thou concludest, that it is very ill done to give the sword of
Saint Paul, and the keys of Saint Peter, into his hand: that is to say, to
constitute him king. The which point also has been amply and diversely
answered in the Articles going before, where has been proved, that no matter
or occasion does offer it self, whereby the king ought either to be rejected
or refused, who has both from God and man, a lawful calling, to govern and
conduct the Realm of France. This Maxim is confessed of all men, not being
prevented or lead with a fore judgment. And as for the allusion which thou
make unto the sword of Saint Paul, and the keys of Saint Peter, thy
masters have drawn this profanation and trumperie, from the false
interpretation which they have given unto a text in the two and twentieth
chapter of Saint Luke, where Jesus foretelling the Apostles of the
persecutions which they should suffer after his death, Luke 22.
admonished them to make provision offoure things, that is to say, of purses,
scribbes, coats, and swords: signifiyng by such Metaphors, that they ought
to prepare themselves to suffer many things. But they were yet so ignorant,
that in showing two swords, they thought themselves able to resist by the
same: wherefore Jesus mocking them, said; It is enough.

Here is great matter wherewith to draw your two offices of Magistracy, such
mockeries are therefore unworthy of any answer: as also the prophesies which
thou call Saint Remyes, the which has neither right nor power, to tread
down those of the spirit of God, foretelling that the City with seven
mountains, Apoc. 17.
which has had great government and rule over the earth, shall be razed out.
And as for the examples of the Goths, and other enemies of the Church which
thou do here understand, such persecutors have no community with the
Princes, which love and do procure the advancement of the kingdom of Christ.
Also in regard of any other thing touching the kings of France, it has been
answered in the first Article. And also passing further, thou do object
against the Noblemen being enemies to the league, the desolation and confusion
of the Realm. But I see that thou hastread Esops fabules, seeing that thou
playest the part of a Woolfe, troubling the water before the sheep. Who
advance such mischiefs more than ye, by the traitorous ministry of your
rebellions and reuolts? Yea say thou, but the kings of France in their
sacring, do take the sword at the hands of the Bishop, for to beat down
heretics. And I answer thee again, that the king did take it at the hands
of God, to do this if need should so require, being not bound to receive it at
the hands of a man of the Church, who has nothing to do with the material
sword.

Thou do also further assume, that the king of Navarre, does promise to
intertayne two religions into this kingdom: but what reason did hinder him
from receiving four or eight? Now I may answer, that in this place thy
memory fails thee, for thou have always said, that he would abolish the
Romish Religion, and now thou accusest him, that he would maintain it. But
he may admit mo say thou. The which I answer, does not conclude: for such
a sovereign would tolerate a thing, which he esteems necessary for the
maintenance of his estate, and the which will have great respect unto other
things which should be prejudicial unto him. And as for the profession of
Atheism, whereof thou speak, here with Saint Barnard and Petrarke, we
exile this Epicure into the Town of Rome: for it shall be lodged and accepted
better of there, than elsewhere. Thou make mention also of the massacres and
martirdomes come to pass in England, and in Bearne; which if it be true, then
is it passiuely, and not actiuely: for those which make profession of the
reformed religion, have not learned Christ Jesus so: they leaving such more
than barbarous cruelties of murdering the faintes, Apoc. 18.
unto those of whom S. John speaks in the Apocalypse. And to that which
remains, I dare very well say, that a subtletie of thine own put into the
uttermost cabinet of thy conscience, causes thee here to speak so
figuratively, and as one may say, by the figure Antiphrasis, seeing that thou
call the most pernicious, wicked and seditious men in all Europe, martirs:
which had as martirs of Satan vowed to their master, the ruin as well of their
sovereign prince, as of their country. For what man is there of our time which
knows any thing of the affairs thereof, which does not know very well,
that there has never been any persecution styrred up, either in Bearne, or in
England, against the Romish religion? And who knows not certainly, that those
whom thou speak of, were punished only because of their treasons,
rebellions, and coniurations? Also who sees not, that thou would make of
evil good, and good evil? And that thou do justify the wicked, that by
their examples thou might produce others like unto them into France, and
also incite and encourage them to the like crime? But that which God does
keep, is well guarded.

The thirteenth Article.
NOw only remains the last of thy Articles to be spoken of, the contents
whereof I may rightly compare to a town ditch, or sink, into the which is
powered all manner of uncleanness and filthiness: for thou have distilled
heereinto the quintessence or very substance of thy wicked spirits, to
maintain thereby (if it were possible) that white is black, the good evil,
the light darkness, and the truth a lie: as shall be better seen and proved in
the examination of the same. Thou have inserted the same point into the third
Article, but here thou give a more ample exposition of it. And the sum of
it is this; that the aforesaid Catholics are worse than the Jews, Turks,
Pagans, and Heretics, yea than beasts themselves. The which pretended Maxim
thou do defend in three principal heads: and from the beginning of the first
thou call the Catholics which are enemies to the League, accursed; because
they follow a king which is of an other religion than theirs: yea, and that
which those Infidelles would not do, which thou have already named. For the
beginning of my answer, I must be constrained once again to say, that thy
suppositions (which are nothing but falsehoods and lies) have been by thee so
often said and recited, that they do declare thee to be unworthy of any
answer by writing. It has been sufficiently proved unto thee, that the
king is not found in any thing to be an Heretic. Secondly, that the false
understanding or belief in the case of religion, does not take away the
power of rule and government from kings and princes of the world.

And in the third place, that not only the Jews, Pagans, and heretics, but
the Christians are oftentimes submitted and put in subjection, to the
government of many kings, being iefidels and heretics, the which proofs have
declared thee, and now of new again do declare thee to be a deceiuer, and a
liar, even as the slanders do importe, which thou imposest upon those of the
reformed religion, in saying that they never would, nor will have any other
kings but of their own religion: the which they have debated on this thirty
years, as thou say. For answer whereunto, I would call thy conscience to
witness, if it were not hardened in such sort as Saint Jude speaks of.
Wherefore leaving it to glut it self with sleep, I will summon those before
God, which waken betimes in the morning, to testify before his divine
Majesty, whether all these effects and euentes passed, have not verefied,
that we have always acknowledged, approved, and respected all our kings
which went before us, as men sent from God: our often prayers for their
prosperity, and the rest of our actions, do give the lie unto all those which
do accuse us of the contrary.

But your detestable murders, Apoc. 18.
and massacres, may be dedicated to the children of the slaughter house of
Rome. If thou do object unto us any of our defenses, the house of Guize has
urged and constrained us necessarily and justly thereunto. Thou know it
well enough: but that ought to be accounted amongst the enterprises which ye
have done, and do against the king, and the estate of the realm. The end
does crown the work. Thou have nothing to do here then to call M. Calvin as
a witness, reproaching him, Dan. 6
in that thou say he has written upon Daniel, that the earthly princes do
depose themselves of their power, when as they presume against God: yea, that
then it is better to spitte in their faces than to obey them. Let a man of
conscience read throughout his whole Commentary, and there he shall find thee
to be a malicious liar, seeing that there is no mention made of any such
thing as thou do object. For he says, that Princes ought to be disobeyed
only, when as they would constrain men to offend God. But that has no
community with thy revolt. Thou do reply, that therefore Master Calvin and
Master Bezado condemn an heretic to death. We answer, that that makes thee
to agree with us secundum quid: that is to say, by the means that five
necessary concurrences do there meet together, which are. First the ordinance
of a sovereign Magistrate. The second, a certain knowledge of heresy. The
third, the loving and free conference between him which is in error, and
those which do accuse him. The fourth, a manifest hardening, and malicious
stiffe-neckednes, in continuing in his false belief. The fifth, where we do
add (as aforesaid) that Princes ought not in this case, nor in such like, to
be handled with the same form and rigor as their subjects are: and that
this censure ought to be applied to the crime. To the purpose of which
application, (if the liberty of conference might be granted to Divines) I
dare assure thee, they would find sufficient matter, to obiecte against thee
that, which was objected against Sophistus, who would have proved, that
Diogines was never any man: to whom it was answered: Conclude that of thy
self, which thou would say of an other, and then thou shalt say true.

Let us now discover thy second head, or chief point, importing the third
repetitio^ of the oath made at the parliament of Bloys. For answer hereunto I
say, that I would have thee to remember thy self for the third reiteration,
that the first and generalloath which the Noblemem have made to their king and
country, ought not to be violated by an incidentall cause of the unfaithfulness
and treason of the Guize, when as he rebelled against his king. Now to the
purpose of thy repetition. Thou do still repe at here the zeal of the
Pagans, the which thou do always commend and approve, as if it were not
known that the wisest amongst them would mock at thy pretended maxim, seeing
that they would choose that which Cicero speaks of in his book De Amicitia,
Cice lib. de Amic.
to be more profitable and of more assurance, which says, that all things that
are profitable for the commonwealth, are the best diuinations that may be
found out and done: amongst the which in the mean time consisted the chiefest
part of the Pagans religion. Cato also came to that point, when as he gave
council to appease God with the incense, and to let the calfe grow for the
plough. To be short, this was a subtletie wherewith the wisest amongst the
Gentiles did serve themselves with their religions. And thou do the like in
turning thy self to accuse Noblemen with indeuouring to bring in heresy into
France, the which thou call Caluinisme. It it keth me to repeat one thing
so often, it has been already answered, that the Noblemen are bound to
maintain the estate of the kings of the country, and that in many things
your Church has need of reformation. These two propositions, in stead of
maintaining heresy, do encounter with it, and beat it down. To the which
speech thou do add, that the fury of heretics, joined with the sovereign
power, beeo^meth so bloody, that it never leaves the Catholics at rest, and
do take examples from some Infidels, being persecuters of the Church, to
witness which they bring against the barbarousnes of Calvin, being worse than
that of the Arrians. Thus thou say. But in the mean time search the holy
scriptures, and thou shall find that this is done by the murderer of Rome,
Apoc. 18.
to maintain his pride, his tyranny, and his apostacy, by the horrible
murders which he has committed throughout all Christendom, since that his
filthiness has been discovered. And as touching Calvin, his life, deeds, and
writings, do abhor such deuilish cruelties (as amongst other things) that which
he faith upon this text of the Romans does witness, which says; Rom 12.
Bless them that persecute you: when upon he writes thus, forasmuch as it is
most hard to observe and retain such a mildnes and sweetness, so much more we
ought to labor to attain it. For our savior would that we should be
different from the wicked, as also that no man can name himself the child of
God, if he be not clothed with such a courage: and afterward he adds, that
we ought to be careful of the salvation of those which do draw damnation
upon themselves. Behold now the speeches of Calvin, declaring the wrong which
thou do to his renowmednesse, and to his writings. And now to come unto thy
examples, I say, that the aforesaid testimony does a great deal better
resemble you to Achab, Iezabel, Valens, Julian, and others of the same race,
than those to whom thou do compare it, as in deed thou can not object
any one massacre to be avouched by the reformed Church, but we may justly,
truly, and entirely, object against you all those that have been done in
Christendom any time within this fifty years because of religion: from
whence it follows, that this text of the Prophet has been accomplished
amongst you, the which thou do allege to this purpose against us, Superbia
little qui te oderunt ascendit se^per. The pride of those which hate thee, does
always manifest it self. Also behold thy second chief point discovered, and
now let us lay open thy third, wherewith thou do so greatly charge thy
adversaries with brutishnes, and where thou say that the Catholics which
defend their king and their Country, are more void of reason than beasts, and
take the cranes, eagles, and the honey be to witness, which will never admit
any to their king, but one of the same kind. To this I say, that the example
of the Crane, being a very dull and hurtful bird, may be very well applied
unto thy self. First, because thou do exhort the foolish amongst the
French men, to be like cranes, and so change their condition which is now most
free, into one that is most servile and miserable, imitating the ass, which
desires to serve the Tanner, rather than any other master.

Secondly, the Cranes do eat up the seed from the earth, and thou would
have the French men to be eaten up of the Spaniardes. The examples of the
Eagles is agreeable unto the same, for they are great gourmandisers of the
flesh of beasts and fowls, which do not live upon any pray: in this thy
drift is showed to be nothing else, but to have the good people to be
devoured. Furthermore, the Fagles flic very far, and so would thou have
the Frenchmens liberty, and the Pirence mountains fly into Spain. Alas,
then what should become of our citizens, parents, wives, and children? From
whence comes this, that in stead of imitating Bees, which are profitable,
thou do imitate those drove Bees, or rather dragons, which do wound very
sore. And if the question be in this, that thou would apply the thing to
the imitating of creatures, that is altogether against thee, because the French
men are more bound to follow the Prince of their own nature and nation, than a
Spaniard which is their enemy, and of a contrary humor to theirs. But because
here thou would walk more warily with thy treason, and sale of thy
Country: thou do here again imploie the difference of religion. Whereunto
I answer, that murders and massacres are not the next ways to decide and
avoid the controversies, remember that which is aforesaid, and let the
promise be mutually discharged, without coming any kind of way to this mad
extremity, in putting us into the hands of the Spaniardes, even as thy
council does advise, being drawn from the dungeons of hell.

But behold the mischief, which stops the passage to this ordinary way:
for you, even you do mock and scorn maliciously, and against your
conscience, because the king does offer himself to come to that, in saying
that it is but feigned and altogether contrary, seeing that he has promised
never to change his religion; and thou do add moreover, that there needs
not any council, seeing that we need never call the Catholic Romish
religion into any doubt.

Finally, thou do conclude, that there is no need to attend eppon any
council, because the king does nothing else but deceive the Catholics with
such vain attentions. But because thou should not go unanswered, we say,
that laying aside your lies, excuses, and crafty shifts, which tend to no
other purpose, but to turn backwardes and fly from the listes, that the
Christian kings ought to be careful for the wholesome religion, and to
procure conuocations of Synodes and Councels, when as they are duly
advertised, that there is any abuse, error, or superstition brought into the
Church, Deuteronomy. 17. 1. Cor. 14.
seeing that God commands them to keep the whole words of his law, as
being disposers of the same. This duty was enjoined to David, to distribute
and give unto the successors of Aaron their right places and ordinances,
which were before refused in their charges. By this same commandment also, 2.
Kin. 22.
Josias commanded Helkiah the high Priest to repair the temple, and to pray
unto the Lord, as well for the king as for the people, and to the same end
he assembled the Prophettes and the high Priests, with the aforesaid people,
to read before them all the book of the Law. He also caused the Passe-ouer
to be celebrated, and destroyed the idolatry amongst the Roman Emperors.
Theodose the great assembled the Council of Constantinople against the
heresy of the Macedonians. In many other places it is apparaunt, that diverse
Counsels have been assembled for such like error.

But at this day it is a question, of great corruption being brought into
the Church by the pride and covetousness of the Bishops of Rome, in so much
as one only may now refuse a synodale convocation against those that can
prove, that the infinite nesse of errors in the same, have corrupted and
falsefied the true service of God. Oh what tyranny and malice is this, but to
fear least that your turpitude and filthiness should be further discovered,
is the cause of the refusal thereof: only do but prepare your selves to
enter into conference, if there be any need, and then shall ye find
whether there shall be any faining on our parts or not. But ye care nothing
at all to have it, following the Italian proverb, which says, Chista ben non
si inuoua. He that is well, let him keep him so. Ye live at your ease in all
delights and idleness, rather making those believe which search out your
abuses, Quod sunt infideles and dubii in fide. That they are unfaithful and
weak of belief. As thou say, whilst that in the mean time you doubly
cloak your selves with craft and subtilties, for the which cause ye neither
require Synod nor council, so fearful art thou that the king will go to
mass, saying, that he ought not to be trusted although he would say so.
Thy English pretended Catholic companion feared likewise the same, but thou
have the aun^were unto it, look therein what has been said unto him, and for
the rest, thou shall find in Saint John, that life everlasting consists in
the knowledge of the only true God, and of him which he has sent, Christ
Jesus, and the king most Christian-like has protested to continue in the same
profession. Thou have therefore these thirty times showed thy self to be an
impudent slanderer, when as thou do compare him unto profane kings which
have abused religion, in seeking under the color of the same, to instal and
bring in their tyrannies. Now let us see wherefore thou do accuse the king
of perjury. After that he had sworn, say thou, that he would not
innouate any thing for the space of six months, incontinently he made a
statute at Tours, by the which he does dispense with the regulars, as
concerning their obedience which they owe unto their superiors, if they will
advertise him of those things which they should undertake against him, and
does inioyne the confessors to declare the confessions of the Catholics in
the same behalf. What Divine or Logitian I pray you, is this? A king
commands his subjects to declare unto him those which conspire against his
person, or against his estate of government; Ergo he is perjured, if he
inquireth of traitors who have sworn to do it. But in despite of the rage
which causes these furious to be so mad: I demand, who is the chief in a
kingdom, if the sovereign Magistrate be not? Next unto God, who ought a man
to swear faith and fidelity unto, but only unto the sovereign Magistrate?
Are not the laws in this case clear and formable enough, that is to say, that
the subject is culpable of the crime or treason, if he does not reveal unto
him the conspiracies which are practiced against him. But one has promised and
sworn not to say any thing. I answer, that it has been proved, that it is
not lawful to swear to do evil; and if it be that any has so sworn, that
then he ought presently to call it back again and repent, least that the second
sin be worse than the first. Moreover, true it is, that that which presses
thee without comparison, is the fear of hanging of some Monk or Priest.
Whereupon thou ought to understand, that the crime of treason against his
sovereign, is worthy to be made hanging, as well toward the Ecclesiastical,
as toward the Nobility, and as well toward the counselors, as the Merchants.

Now let us hear thy prophecy. If the king of Navarre were head over the
French Church, that of these two fair heads should Antichrist be borne: for
he would (say thou) take away religion from the Frenchmen, and bring in a
most cruel French inquisition. To the which also I answer, that the Church
neither ought nor can have but one head, Ephe. 1 1. These. 2
which is Christ Jesus. Secondly, that Antichrist is borne long time since.
Thirdly, that the king had rather die a hundred and a hundred times, than to
take away the Christian religion from France, not having any thing at all
determined in his mind to bring in any inquisition whatsoever, so far off is it
from being like to that of Spain, the which thou call just, (but thou have
omitted, amongst the devils in hell) seeing that his unspeakable cruelty and
tyranny is not exercised but amongst those who are most religious, according to
the will of God, and most just amongst men: the which is known of all noble
hearts loving the truth, and virtue. And because ye hate such people, ye do
the more commend such a kind of Inquisition: forasmuch as it hurts none but
them, for the maintenance of your ambition, avarice, superstition, cookry,
idleness, and tyranny. Behold how the treaty of religion is in Spain, the
Sovereign is altogether robbed and spoiled of the knowledge that a Magistrate
ought to have over his subjects, when as there is any capital crime
committed, or any other corporal punishments to be used, upon what occasion
soever it be: for all men know, that king Philip, through a pretended
devotion, has given and transported this right whereof we speak, unto his
Ecclesiastical Romish Spanyardes, which have desired and wrested it from him,
by all the most subtle coosenages, and deceits that any kind of way they
could devise to bring the same to pass, that thereby they might the more
subtly use their deuelish and cruel actions, against those which do but once
open their eyes against their errors, trumperies, and falsehoods.

And all this husbandrying intituleth it self, the Inquisition of Spain, the
which gives such authority and boldness unto his Clergy, that they dare
quarrel with the princes of the blood, and challenge them, even so far
forth, as to the razing of them out, so as is already come to pass. Where is
to be understood, that the Sovereign prince did never rule more imperiously
over Spain, than these ecclesiastical Lord governors do by the ministry of
this Inquisition, which makes them to live like kings, and princes, and in
assurance, being most assured, that their filthiness and deceits shall never
fall into any examination or censure, but amongst themselves. Now this is the
cause that this Leaguerer and his companions, finding all this to be so good,
according to their mind, why they would willingly eat a part of it. And for the
attaining unto the which (say thou) that it is better to take a king of a
strange nation, that is to say, a Spanyard, daring to assure thy self that by
the office and service of his Inquisition, this Metamorphosis would work well
for thee and thy mates, so that of simple priests and prelates, ye might
become little kings, like unto your usurping Spaniards.

Thou have a natutall pretended reason indeed, and go on with it, seeing that
Satan has no more expedient means to maintain your ambition, covetousness,
tyranny, and idleness by.

But for fear of being accused of accusing a king of Spain with such like
ignorance and vndiscreetnes, being reputed wise amongst all the monarchies of
the earth, it behooves me to eschew such a blame, in discovering his intention,
and to what end he proposes himself, when as he gives the jurisdiction and
power, which every Sovereign ought to keep himself, when he should minister
the criminal punishment which belongs unto his subjects, upon what occasion
soever, to his ecclesiastical persons. For there is no cause why we should
esteem or think, that one only and superstitious indiscretion does induce this
great prince to such wicked proceedinges: we shall find and conclude then,
that in making this present Inquisition actiuelye unto his Clergy, he has
imitated the subtle proceedinges of Mahomet, the which being not able to
install his tyranny amongst the Arabians, employed himself under the color of
religion, by the ministry of the which he executed his wickedness more
easily. But had not such a subtletie been, the estates of Spain had hindered
their king well enough from biting and kicking so furiously as he does now, and
as the codition and lesson of those of Arragon do witness, beginning thus. We
which can do more than ye, we choose you for king, with such conditions etc.
By the means whereof, they had expulsed from them this tyranny, had it not
been for the subtleties and villainous aid of their wretched ecclesiastical
priests? What preachers are these, which by their exhortations, preachings,
and authorities, do help to maintain this deuilish inquisition, with the
which office these venerable personages do acquit themselves the more
willingly, because that in stead of feeling their part of the tyranny, they
make it serve to their greatness, immunities, honors, pleasures, commodities,
and other such like benefits coming and issuing from the aforesaid
inquisition. Behold also now the motive and efficient cause of the same, where
it appears, that as well the king, as the Clergy of Spain, do complot, suck,
and gripe the people, over whom God has constituted them, as fathers and
guides. What religious people be these which sport themselves thus with poor
Christians, sending them from Caiphas to Pilate? For which cause, two evident
examples will witness, that the zeal of religion has nothing at all induced
neither the king of Spain to show himself chief of the Leaguerers, nor the
Leaguerers which are amongst the seditious Frenchmen, to rebel against their
king.

The first example hereof is taken from the sudden death of the two last
Popes, being dispatched by a letter of exchange, having adjoined unto it the
Schism which the same Spaniard had brought into the town of Rome, where I
demand, that if the king of Spain be so affectioned unto his religion,
wherefore does he not respect him whom he holds and acknowledges as the
lieuetenant of God, and to be a spiritual Father? One may see then, that by
such workmanships he would have us to understand, that whosoever shall not be
in the nature of a Spaniard, shall never be accounted a good Romish Catholic.
Lastly, the other example comes from the town of Soissons, the Leaguers of
the which, by the ordinance of their superiors (as they call them) have
chased out the lady Abbess from the aforesoid Soissons, being the kings Aunt
(where she has always been preserved both from the one and the other)
notwithstanding that they know, that she is the most ancient princess of the
blood, and reputed of all, for the most zealous and affectionate unto the
Catholic Roman religion which is in the world. An evident token, that a
spirit which is the author of confusion and sedition, does urge the furies of
such Leaguers, and not the zeal of religion. Poor Catholics and unadvised,
which do affect so much that tyrannical Spanish government, consider here the
intention and purpose of your ecclesiastical leaguers, which do so much prise
and praise the Inquisition of such a climate, yea, even as of brideled calves,
if there be any perseverance in such blindness. Assure your selves, most
miserable French men, that the most noble, the most valiant, the most virtuous,
the most advised, the most wise, the most learned, the most just, and the most
rich amongst you, shall evermore under such a schoolmaster, be accounted and
holden as heretics, if it comes to pass, that ye be not found in all
things agreeable unto master Inquisitor. Then ye shall understand by them,
that the mass shall not save you. To this purpose, two examples (among a
thousand, which came unto my knowledge a few days sithence) shall open this
text. It came to pass, that two merchants of Gascoigne being in Spain, and
going by the high way, did contemplate and behold an Image, being much
polished and very fair, and shining as bright as any of their Country,
whereupon they took occasion between themselves, to demand whether that
matter whereof it was made, was either of stone or wood. This was enough to be
said in Spain, they were heard by one of the Inquisitors, and presently lead
unto a miserable prison, wherein they remained the space of three whole years
after, notwithstanding any protestations or proves they could make or bring
for the trial of their being Catholics. And the other example is this. A man
of Poictou, a great Catholic, being at Lisborne, seeing a great Priest, being
grave, fair, and in good habit, and marching accordingly: this man began to
say (thinking to have praised the Priest,) Behold a Priest (says he) and
not one of the durtie Priests of Poictou. This being but once spoken, which was
enough, immediately this Poicteuni is heard and understood, and thereupon lead
presently in dome Petri, into the popes prison, where he was kept safe for the
space of six months, without knowing wherefore, about the end of which
term, he was commanded that he should not call Priests Durtie any more. There
may be a whole book composed of these tyrannies and unjust dealings. These
effects of the Inquisition will be found and proved true, and not thy conceit
of any Catholics to be punished by the magistrates of that religion, either
in England or in Bearne, as has been else where said. Those to whom it
appertains, know that such offenders were punished in the quality of the
seditious, and not as being religious. From thence thou turnest for this
seuententh time, to leap upon the authority of the Popes: saying, that the
king is not the son of the church, because he would not kiss his pantable. To
the which I say again, that it has been proved unto thee, that it is enough
for him, that the Christian church is his mother, and that the Romish church
cannot take from him this liberty and privilege. And for that thou doestalwaies
fear some ecclesiastical reformation, never desiring any other religion, than
that which feeds the belly, thou threatenest the noblemen with their going to
hell, if they do not help to maintain thy cause. Hereupon harken I pray ye to
the preacher: I should love it better say thou, that ye were Huguenits, and
so to see you fight for us Catholics. Mark I pray ye, he holds that the
Huguenits are damned: whereupon it follows, that he should have nothing to
do with condemning of those Catholics of whom he speaks, seeing that they
should defend the kitchen his mother. Behold also how he calls the Huguenits
to the same defense. Thou art in thy triumph: but go to with thy Lyntill
broth, to the which thou do allude. To be short, thou art grieved diversely,
because the Noblemen, which are the principal force of the realm, will not
understand all this. Thou have bin told, that they are indifferently bound,
as well to defend their king, as their cuntry, together with their honors,
liberties, and piuiledges: yea and the more, because they are bearded with the
Spanyard, an ancient enemy, unto whom ye would willingly sell htem. Therefore
remember thy self of the answer that was given to the robbers which pleaded
against the merchantes, for carrying weapons to defend themselves. Thou do
here repeat for the 70. time the difference happened in France for religion. The
which here again I say, have been moved by your clergy, and else where has
been answered in so many sorts, and so often, that it is more than enough.
And now turn again thy leaf. Thou do heap up afterward, proud maiesticall
words of thine own devising, thinking thereby the better to get the Noblemen
on thy side: but thou ought to serve thy self with concluding reasons, and
not with affecting words, thrown into the air, to the abandoning of all that
which might happen to come after.

And how do thou torment thy self in vain on this side? also it is to no
purpose, that thou do propose unto the aforesaid noble men, the examples of
the most excellent Roman knights, as that of Sceuola, amongst others. Thou
malicious blind, do thou not see, that it was for the same cause of defense,
that Sceuola burnt his hand, and that the others employed themselves in the
defense of their Country. It is true, that thou make great account of the
Iacobin that killed the last king, the which thou do produce again, as in a
triumph, using these great words. One that was religious has flaine the king
of France, having given testimony of his zeal unto all France. O miserable
bloody man, thou have had here before alleged unto thee, the sentence which
the spirit of God pronounced against such qualified murderers, saying that the
weapons of iniquity are in their tabernacles, ^en. 19.
and cursed be their fury, for it is impudency. The nobles and valiant
Catholics which thou do exhort unto the same cursed fury, will answer
thee, that they will not give entertaiment unto the devil being a murderer, as
thy Iacobin companion did, when he s^ew the king: and no otherwise, but as the
example of Judas when he betrayed his master Christ unto the Jews. Luke 22.
And as thou would serve thy self with such examples, for the execution of
such a qualified wickedness, so likewise would thou, that the name of a
Catholic might serve for another hangman, when as thou say, if the name of
a Catholic be common unto us, why not weapons also. But to better purpose
will the nobles answer thee, and say, that if the name of Christians does
admonish all French men to one mutual duty, why then do not ye rather
join with us then with the Spaniard? And upon thy repeated objection; where
again thou do accuse them to be mercenaries, they will answer thee, that
they defend their king because of their duetyes above mentioued, and not
otherwise. It belongs to thee and thy companions, to defend that part which
may maintain your pottage pot. Thou reply again, and say; But if this
be an article of your faith to believe in the Catholic church, and leave out
the Roman, what shall become of your faith? They will answer thee again for
the tenth time, that it is enough for them to believe the Catholic christian
church, which has for object Christ Jesus, and his promises, and not the
traditions, Gal. 5
nor the Bishop of Rome. The faithful, that be united unto this church,
need not go to visit the monuments of Palestina, whereof thou here speak,
seeing that they are the children of the Jerusalem from on high, Ephesians. 2. Rom 4.
John. ^. Mat. 6. Ephe. 1. Romans 4.
which does deliver and set them free from such, and other such like
servitude. This church, is the mother of our king, approved of the estates, and
justified by the justice of France, to be in the princes quality, having
right to reign and command there notwithstanding, and in despite of thy
contradictions. In sum, and for conclusion of this article, we say, that we
obtain life everlasting in the christian church, by the faith which is builded
upon the only word of God, the which does teach, 1. Cor. 1.
propose and present, as well unto the noblemen, as unto others, the way and
means how to be enriched, and honored with life eternal, in the heavens, which
trust and hope in God, and in his promises, by the only mean and benefit of
the death, passion, resurrection, Act. 1.
and ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ which dyed for our sins, and rose
again for our justification: and which has been given to us by God for
wisdom, justice, sanctification, and redemption: and finally, which ascended
into heaven, there to prepare a place for us, and to receive us th^ther, to the
end that we may live with him eternally, in a perfect estate offelicitie and
blessedness. These beleefs and promises do suffice the faithful, without that,
that there is any need to adioine the inventions and traditions of the Pope of
Rome, which are hurtful, in stead of profiting unto salvation. All those which
do live in this attention and hope, (above all humane duerie) will have in
sovereign commendation, the honor and obedience which they owe unto their
sovereign Magistrates, and the duties that they are bound to yield unto their
country. By this means the almighty being most liberal and merciful,
shall give them the peace of conscience, in causing their labor to be
profitable, to his glory, and the good of the Realm, and of the King, to the
general contentment of all those, which desire to live according to the will
of God.

The general Conclusion.
ALL which said Articles, being approved and verefied, do declare the author of
the aforesaid false accusations and suppositions, not only to be an impudent
slanderer, but guilty in all, and by all the enormeous crimes, wherewith he
has falsely accused his sovereign prince, together with those which acknowledge
him as their king. S. Jude says that Michael the Archangell durst not give any
cursed speeches against the devil, but says, the Lord rebuke thee, whiles that
thou wicked creature, like to a brute beast, do miscall Lordshippes, the
institution and dignity of the which, thou would maliciously stand in doubt
of, following the destruction of the children of Chore. It would be better for
thee to remember, that the wrath of the king, is as the messenger of death:
Prou. 16.
but the wise man will pacify it. Thou can not deny, but that thy infamous
writings wretchedly written, brought to a lawful Monarch, such a one as he of
France, do declare thee to be the head and chief of profane liars, and
deceyuers: and so much the more excellent in the art of falsely slandering, and
evil speaking of Lordships and honors, by how much the more (like to the
example of Satan) thou being disguised into an Angel of light, do serve
thy self subtly and maliciously, with some true maxims (as they are in
themselves) the which thou do divert and wrest from their true sense, and
right application, to the intrapping by treason, desolation, and ruin of
France. And thus will I shut up this present discourse by this brief
conclusion, as concerning the abuse brought in by the Bishops of Rome, which
shows your religion (being Romish) to be infamous, unto all the most
religious and learned in Europe.

1. Ye make of your high and most worthy ecclesiastical charge, a storehouse
of ambition, avarice, idolatry, and superstition.

2 Ye have in stead of Christ Jesus and his Vicars, placed the most corrupt men
in all Christendom.

3 Ye have adnihilated the commandments of God, and have authorized the
traditions which were forged in the City of Rome.

4 Ye cause the sgnes of the sacraments to be woorshipped as God, and
afterward falling into another error, ye baptize your bells, and your ships.

5 To witness your tyranny and falsehood, ye will not suffer your doctrine to be
examined by the word of God.

6 In stead of obeying your sovereign Magistrate, ye show your selves rebels,
and not so content, but also ye seek to massacre him.

7 Your corruption is so far beyond measure, that to speak of regeneration,
and the truth amongst you, is accounted heresy.

8 Ye sing your Masses likewise for the health of beasts.

9 Ye do apply to the condition of those, the censure of excommunication.

10 Ye show the shamefulparts of your Bishop to princes at the installing of
his pontifical office, and ye make them to kiss his feet, in such sort as
was done to Caligula.

All which patches, and infinite others, being brought together, do show and
veresie, that there has never been any Pagan nation, or people that have so
much sported with, or mocked God, and his religion, as ye do: and then in
wiping the mouth, Prou. 30.
eue^ as the whore does, of whom Solomon speaks, ye say, I have done no
iniquity. And not content with that, ye impute it unto the just, who never
thought it. I have no more to say to thee here at this time, but that the
passions of the soul do always produce contrary effects to their ends and
desires. Plut. in mor.


FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page 2. line 28. for natural, read material Page 1. line 4. for reproved,
read approved. Page 11. line 1. for the which idolatry, read to the which
idolatry. Page 12. line 4. for approves, read and approves. and line 26. for
the pretended, read thy pretended. Page 14. line 29. for there, vead these.
Page 16. line 26. for far off is it, read so far off is it. Page 17. line 6.
for nor, read not. Page 19. line 7. for by word, read by the word Page 25. line
9. for then has, read then he has. Page 30. line 27 for Proctor, read
Doctor. and line 30. for Lutheran, read Latheran. Page 32. line 2. for if in
deed, read it is indeed Page 33. line 31. for chan, read than. Page 35. line
23. for in a part, read a part. Page 36. line 11. for be erroneous, read to be
erroneous. Page 37. line 28. for inseperation, read inspiration. Page 43. line
28. for in affairs, read in the affairs Page 46. line 1 for of, read if. and
line 18. for our, read out. and line 30. for of maladies, read of the maiadies.
Page 48. for Bartolwes, read Bartholmewes. and line 26. for thou, read that
thou. Page 49. line 11. for my, read any Pa. ^1. line 29. for Criminate, read
Criminal. Page 52 line 29. for Maxiome. read Axiom.


