A LEARNED AND FRUITFUL EXPOSITION upon the Lords PRAYER.

By Arthur Dent, sometime Minister of the Word of God at South-Suberry, in
Essex.

LVKE 11.2. When you pray, say, Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

LONDON: Printed for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold at the entering into
the Royal Exchange. 1613.

THE PRINTER, TO the READER.
COurteous Reader, forasmuch as devout Christians, when they have found
comfort in the labors of any learned man, it causes in them a further desire,
not only to reuiew what they have read, but also to have a longing, as it
were, after their further pains, upon any other subject. I doubt not, but am
verily persuaded, that this Exposition of that Prayer, which our Lord and
Savior Christ Jesus taught his disciples; penned by one that has so well
deserved of the Church of God; by publishing so many good and profitable
Treatises, shall find some place among thy heavenly meditations, although it be
not as I think so perfect, as the Author intended it if he had not been
prevented by death. For what will thou do, either for all the benefits that
thou have received, or for those things that are required for thy use, or to
prevent any dangers, that may be feared? I say, what will thou do, if thou will not imitate the holy Prophet, and call upon the name of the Lord? and how
can thou better call upon it, then as the Lord has appointed? and what
profit shall thou have by calling upon him after that manner, except thou
know the meaning of the spirit, in those words which thou pourest out before
him? Wherefore seeing (as an ancient Father says) when thou prayest for thy
self, necessity enforces thee; and Charity binds thee to pray for others:
and seeing the holy one of God has given thee in charge, after this manner,
pray ye; this servant of God shall so instruct thee, that according to the
practice of the holy Apostle, thou shall pray with the spirit, and with
understanding also, and this one thing is necessary: For all the commandments
of the Lord, are so full of counsel, that every word has his weight, yea
every syllable contains a secret, so that we may all say with the Eunuch, Act.
8. How can I understand, except some man should guide me? And albeit I am
persuaded that thou art full of goodness, filled with knowledge, able also to
admonish others: yet thou may be content with skillful Apollos, so eloquent
in speech, mighty in the scriptures, and fervent in spirit, Acts 18. to have
the way of God expounded unto thee by another man more perfectly. And this is
that which I offer to thy Christian devotion. Use it then as becomes thee,
with holiness. Peruse it often. I hope I am truly informed of the Author, I
am but the Minister to publish it for thy good. Give thanks to GOD, that has
brought it to light. And the GOD of all power, when thou prayest, grant thee
thy hearts desire, and fulfill all thy mind. Amen.

S. T.

AN EXPOSITION upon the Lords Prayer.
OF PRAYER: and what it is.
PRayer, is an earnest lifting up of the mind, and calling upon God, according
to his will with faith, by the help and work of his spirit. Psalm. 25.1. Romans
10.13.14. Math. 21.22. Romans 8.26.27.

Prayer, is a familiar conference betwixt God and us.

Prayer, is as a Letter written unto God, wherein we deliver our mind unto him.

Only God is to be called upon, in whom only we believe. Romans 10.

1 First, because he has so commanded. Psalm. 50.15.

2 Secondly, because he has so taught. 6.9.

3 Thirdly, because he has so practiced by example. 26.39.

4 Fourthly, because he has promised to hear our prayers.

5 Fifthly, because the holy Ghost teaches us to cry Abba father. Romans 8.15.

6 Lastly, because none can hear our prayers and grant our requests but God
only. Mat. 6.12.

We must pray at all times. 1 These. 5.17. It must be the Alpha and Omega of
all our actions, if we look for any good success.

We must pray in all places. 1 Timothy 2.8.

There be nine things to be observed in prayer.

Before prayer.

Reading, Meditation, and feeling of our Misery.

In prayer.

Faith, Zeal, and Love.

After prayer.

Watchfulness, Thanksgiving, and Practice.

Prayer is as a Bunch of Keys, wherewith Gods children do open all the doors
of heaven, and enter into every closet.

The effects of prayer are wonderful, as appears by the prayers of Asa,
Iehosaphat, Moises, Ezechias, David, Elias, Paul, and Silas, the Disciples.
Acts 4.31. and 12.5.7.

The Lords prayer is the perfect pattern of all pr^yers for matter, but not
always for words.

The Lords prayer consists of three Parts.
A Preface. Six Petitions. A Conclusion.
The Preface teaches us preparation, that we do not rashly, without
consideration, rush into the presence of God, being so dreadful and holy as it
is. Eccles. 5.1. Psalm. 26.6.

Three of the petitions do concern Gods glory, and three our selves.

We must pray with greater feruencie of the Spirit for the things which
concern Gods glory, then for those which concern our own good, as appears
by the Method: and for the things which concern our own goods, we must pray
with more zeal for heavenly, then earthly things, since this has but one
petition, the other two.

We must pray for the things that concern Gods glory simply* above any
respect at all of our own good, as the Particle (thy) in every one does show.

Our.
THis word (our) does teach, that true charity and brotherly love toward our
neighbors is required in prayer, and that in common we must pray one for
another, Iam. 5.14.
as we are every where taught in the Scriptures. In matters of Faith we say
(I) but in matters of Prayer (our:) for we must love our neighbor as our
self, and therefore pray for our neighbor as our self.

Our Father, our bread, our trespasses, Lead us not, Deliver us, etc. do teach
a fellow feeling one of another good and hurt.

This word (our) brings singular comfort to the poor, because Christ shows
unto them that God has no respect of persons, as though he were more father of
the rich, then of the poor, of the noble, then of the base, but does account
of all alike, for he is no respecter of persons.

Question.
Here a question may be moved, whether in our private. Prayers we should pray
in general, or else in special terms, as us, or me, our father, or my
father.

Answer.
A Christian may in private prayer say my father, Mat. 26.29. Mat. 27.46. as
Thomas said, My Lord, and my God, John 20.28. and Paul, I give thanks to my
God* Romans 1.8. and Gods promise is, Ier. 3.19* Thou shall call me thy father.
For we are not bound unto the words of the Lords Prayer: but if we pray for
our brethren, or for our selves, we fulfill the meaning of Christ.

By the word (Father) is meant the first person in Trinity, and so it is
always taken in the Scriptures when one person is considered with another, as
Math. 28.9. 1 John 5.7.

Sometimes it is taken for the whole Trinity, as Mal. 2.10. Have we not all
one Father?

It is not unlawful to pray to the Son, and the holy Ghost, for invocation
belongs to all the persons in Trinity, and not only to the Father.

Stephen prayed, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, Acts 7.59.

Paul prayed, Now God our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, guide our journey
unto you. 1 These. 3.11.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the communion of the
holy Ghost, be with you. 2 Cor. 13.13.

Men are baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost, that is, calling on the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost.

Objection.
This Prayer is a perfect platform of all prayers, and here we are taught to
direct our prayers only to the Father, therefore it is not lawful to pray to
the Son, or the holy Ghost.

Answer.
The Father, Son, and holy Ghost are in distinct persons, yet they are not to
be severed or divided, because they all subsist in one and the same Godhead or
divine nature.

Further, in all outward actions, as in the creation and preservation of the
world, and the salvation of the elect, they are not severed nor divided: for
they all work together, only they are distinguished in the manner of working.
Now if they be not divided in nature or operation, then they are not to be
severed in worship.

In this place expressly we direct our prayers to the Father, because he is the
first person in order, yet so as then we imply the Son, and the holy Ghost.
For we pray to the father, in the name of the Son, by the assistance of the
holy Ghost.

To what person so ever the prayer is directed we must always remember in
mind and heart to include the rest.

We may pray unto Christ, not only as he is God, but also as he is the
Mediator, that is, as he is in person consisting of two natures, yet as the
Deity be the object or the thing we set before our eyes in prayer.

All our prayers ought to be in faith, respecting Gods promise, and Christ's
mediation: and therefore the person that prays must first be accepted in
Christ, before their prayers and sacrifices can be accepted. Mar. 11.24. Ioh.
14.13. Heb. 7.25. and 11.4.7.

Father.
GOd is the Father of the wicked, and even of al creatures in respect of
creation, but in respect of reconciliation he is only the father of the elect:
for he is their reconciled Father in Christ: he is their Father by adoption
and grace: and therefore they only in truth can and may call him Father.

God will be called by the name of Father, which is a sweet and loving name,
rather then by the name of Lord, or Jehovah, which are dreadful: to allure and
entise us to come boldly unto him, even as children to their dear, and loving
father, to put up any suit or complaint unto him. For Gods children being
iniuried and unjustly molested, have no remedy but to go tell their father.

This word (father) implies a readiness and willingness in God to hear, Es.
58.9. and 65.24. 1 Pet. 3.12. Luke 11.9* 13.

This word (father) does assure us we shall be heard: for can a father not
hear his child? can he deny him any thing? Math. 7.9.

This assurance in prayer is necessary. Iam. 16.7. Hebr. 11.6. Luke 18.7. 1
John 5.14.

God does always hear and grant the lawful requests of his children, in such
time, manner and sort as he sees good, and never fails, if not according to
their will, yet according to his will, and their best good.

This word (father) does assure us of our salvation: for in truth if we call
upon him as our father, as indeed he is our father, then must we needs be his
children, and being his children how can we perish? for there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ. Romans 8.1. And it is as possible for
the Devil to take away from Christ one of the members of his material body,
being now glorified in heaven, as to pluck away, or cut off any member of his
mystical and spiritual body here in earth.

We may in a holy manner boast and rejoice in it that we have such a Father,
so wise, so mighty, so loving, so bountiful, to whom we always may repair
for help in time of need. If one of us had a father that were the richest and
the wisest in a realm, would we not exceedingly rejoice in him, and use him?

This word (father) does note unto us the exceeding deep love, and fatherly
affection which he bears toward us his children, passing all love of mothers
unto their children, as Esaias 49.15. Can a woman forget her child and not have
compassion on the son of her womb? Though they should forget, yet will not I
forget thee. The book of the Canticles does most expressly and abundantly lay
open the unspeakable love of Christ toward his Church, for indeed no lover does
so entirely love his espoused wife as Christ loves us: for he loves us so
dearly, and is so chary over us, that he cannot endure the wind should blow
upon us. If we would eat gold we should have it. This love of his, he does
at all times, and in all things express, and shows it, as we say, and has
always showed it by election, redemption, Justification, sanctification,
adoption, preservation, feeding, clothing, delighting, etc. breaking through
all our unkindness to do us good, and continuing daily unto us new mercies
and favors, notwithstanding all our unworthiness and manifold prouokings of
him.

This word (father) does teach us obedience: a son honoreth his father and a
servant his Master. If I be a father, where is mine honor? etc. Mal. 1.6. Why
call ye me Master, Master, and do not the things I speak? Luke 6.46. And
if you call him father, etc. 1 Pet. 1.17.

By this our obedience we testify our love to him again who loved us so
deeply and dearly: as John 14.21. He that has my commandments and keeps
them, is he that loves me.

This is the love of God, that we keep his commandments. 1 John 5.3.

How can a Child call him Father whom he cares not continually to displease
through his lewd conditions? He cannot do it, neither can any Father delight
in such a child.

If God be a father who is called upon, then true prayer is a note of Gods
child, as Acts 9.14. He has authority to bind all that call on thy name: so
1 Cor. 1.2. the Saints are noted to be such as call on the name of the Lord:
and on the contrary, it is made one of the properties of an Athiest, not to all
on the name of God. Psalm. 14.4.

Which art in heaven.
GOD as touching his essence is no more in heaven then in this inferior world,
but he is said to be in heaven, because his glory and Majesty does there most
clearly shine out.

GOD is said to be in heaven, because his Majesty, that is, his Power,
Wisdom, Justice and Mercy is made manifest from thence unto us.

By the name of heaven is understood the dwelling place of God, of Angels, and
glorified men, where God is more glorious then in this world.

Psalm 115.3. Our God is in Heaven, and does whatsoever he will.

Psalm 2.4. He that dwells in Heaven shall laugh them to scorn.

Esaias 66.2. thus says the Lord, Heaven is my throne, and the earth is my
footestoole.

1 Reg. 8.27. The heaven of heavens cannot contain him, for he is always
every where?

Which is all one as if it had been said of infinite greatness or height, of
incomprehensible power of everlasting immortallitie.

First therefore we are here admonished to use the action of prayer with as
great reverence as possibly may be, and not to think of GOD in any earthly
manner.

Eccles. 5.1. Be not rash with thy mouth to speak a word before God: for he
is in Heaven, and thou art in earth: therefore let thy words be few.

Therefore seeing God is in heaven, away with all drowsy and dead praying, let
us come with reverence in our hearts before the Lord.

God is said to be our Father in heaven to distinguish him from our earthly
Fathers: and that we might understand how much better he is then they, and
more able to help us* as appears. Math. 7.11.

The Fathers of the bodies have oftentimes a will to help their Children, but
are not able, either because they are let by poverty, or distance of place, or
some other means: but God, who is our Father, is rich toward all that call
upon him, he is present every where, etc.

Again, we do here learn that our hearts in prayer must mount up into
heaven, and be lifted up above all earthly and frail things, how beautiful or
goodly soever, and be wholly fixed upon the Lord.

Unto thee O Lord, lift I up my soul, Psalm 25.1.

Here are condemned all cold coursarie prayers, when men's minds are occupied
about other matters, which is but a plain dallying and mocking with God.

Such manner of praying is a very grievous sin, greater then mocking Father
and Mother: for it is directly against God, the other against men. It is a
greater sin to mock God, then to mock men.

This sin because it is against the first Table, and therefore more hard to
be discerned (for the light of the second Table shines naturally more clearly
then the light of the first) is lightly esteemed, and does less trouble the
consciences of ignorant men.

God is in Heaven: therefore he is able to grant all our requests. He is our
Father, therefore he is willing and ready.

This overthrows Popish Idolatry, as worshipping of Crosses, Crucifixes,
Roodes, running a pilgrimage to worship Idols: for the GOD to whom we must pray
is in heaven, and we must lift up our minds thither. How can we do this so
long as our eyes and minds are poaring upon an Image, made by the art of man?

Hallowed be thy name.
THis petition is set in the forefront because Gods glory must be preferred
before all things.

1 For that is the end of our Creation. Psalm. 103.22. and 147.5.

2 The end of all creatures. Prouer. 10.4.

3 The end of all the Counsels of God. Ephesians. 1.6.

4 The only end whereunto all our thoughts, words and deeds must be directed.
1 Cor. 10.31.

Gods glory is a most precious thing, and we must be more chary of it then any
thing, as we are more chary of a golden Cup, then of an earthen Pitcher. But
alas, we care not for Gods glory: Psa. 115.1.
We are all for our selves, our own glory, credit, name, commodities, etc.

Herod took the glory of God to himself, and therefore the Angel of the Lord
smote him. Acts 12.

The name of God in this place is put for God himself, as 1 Kings 5.5. He
shall build a house to my Name.

Also, for the attributes of God, as his Justice, Mercy, Word, Works.
Providence, Power.


For GOD is known to us by all these, as men are known by their names: and as
all man's praise and glory lies in his name, so all the glory of God is in
these.

To Hallow, is to serve, or set apart any thing from common use, to some proper
or peculiar end.

As the Temple was hallowed, that is, set apart to an holy use.

The Priests were sanctified, that is, set apart to the service of God.

All that believe in Christ are sanctified, that is, set apart from sin to
serve God.

In like manner, Gods name is hallowed, when it is put apart from oblivion,
contempt, profanation, pollution, blasphemy, and all abuses, to an holy,
reverent, and honorable use, whether we think or speak of it.

Objection. How can a sinful man Hallow Gods name, which is pure and holy in
it self?

Answer. Not as he does sanctify us, by communicating unto us an inherent
quality of holiness: for we cannot make him holy, or add any thing to his
holiness that is most holy in himself, and the perfection of all holiness:
but we sanctify him, when we acknowledge, and celebrate, and worship him so
in heart, word, and deed, that we cause his glory to be spread among men, and
make manifest to the World, by the right usage of it, that it is holy, pure and
honorable: the like phrase is used, Luke 7.29. Wisdom is justified of her
Children, that is, declared to be just.

The sum of this petition is, that we may so carry our selves in all our
actions, and the whole course of our life, that his holy name be not reproched
by our occasion, but rather be honored and magnified.

Examples.
The children of Israel sung a song of victory, upon Pharaoes overthrow.

I will sing unto the LORD for he has triumphed gloriously: the Horse and him
that rode upon him has he overthrown in the Sea, Exodus 15.1.

David extolleth the majesty of God by his works in the heavens, Psalm. 19.1.
And especially in man, both in his creation and redemption by Christ, Psalm
135. and 136.

O Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth, which set thy glory
above the heavens? Psalm 8.

The very Angels of heaven at the birth of Christ, do sound out the praises of
God.

Glory be to God in the highest heavens, and in earth peace, good will toward
men, Luke 2.13.14.

The Saints of God have magnified his great and holy name, not only in respect
of his great works of Election, Creation, Redemption, Justification,
Sanctification, etc. but even for his judgments and chastisements also, as
Job, The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, blessed be the name of the
Lord, Job 1.21.

And David, Psalm 119. It is good that thou have humbled me.

And the Apostles went forth of the Council, rejoicing that they were counted
worthy to suffer reproach for the name of Jesus Christ. Acts 4.

According therefore to the example of these ancient worthies, every one of us
must zealously strive to glorify God as Heb. 12.1.

And that especially in performing the duties of our several callings, as
Magistrate, Minister, Gentleman and Tradesman: for it is a thing acceptable to
God and man, to be a good man in our place. A good Magistrate, that rules
well: a good Minister, that teaches well and diligently: a good Gentleman,
that distributeth liberally: a good Tradesman, by whom a man may live quietly,
peaceably, joyfully and comfortably.

Abusers of this Petition.
All those which are proud, Ioh. 5.44. Psa. 115.1.
and seek glory to themselves, being so jealous of their own honor, that to
magnify and lift up themselves, they will tread down the name of God.

All those which profess the Gospel, Romans 2.24. 1 Pet. 3.15 16. Act. 19.9. 1 Timothy 1.13. Exo. 20.7.
and stain it with their wicked lives.

All such as delight to raise up and spread slanders against the profession of
Religion.

All swearers and blasphemers of Gods most holy name.

For all these say and babble with their mouth, Hallowed be thy name, but their
hearts never cares for any such matter.

Thy kingdom come.
THese Petitions have a very good coherence in them: for then is Gods name
indeed honored, when his Kingdom is erected in the hearts of men. Here
therefore we pray for the means of the advancement of Gods name.

This word (thy) does note a difference betwixt the kingdom of Christ, which
is spiritual, as he himself says, My kingdom is not of this World, and all
earthly kingdoms.

Secondly, it puts us in mind that there are two Kingdoms, one Gods, and
hat is the Kingdom of Heaven, another the Devils, which is called the kingdom
of darkness.

The pillars of the Devils kingdom are, Ignorance, Error, Idolatry,
superstition, Sin, and disobedience to God.

The Subjects of this kingdom are all profane Atheists, carnal worldings,
and all unregenerate men whatsoever: for he reigns and rules over them at
his pleasure: he is their God and King, and they do very hadtely and
willingly submit themselves unto his scepter and government, fight under his
Standard, against God and their own salvation, Ephesians. 2.2. 2 Cor. 4.3.4. 2 Timothy 2.26. Yet these ungodly men spit at the naming of the Devil, and say they
defy him.

This word (kingdom) is taken three manner of ways in the scripture.

First, for that absolute and sovereign power of God, whereby he rules all
things, yea, even the devils themselves, as Psalm. 103. The Lord has prepared
his Throne in heaven, his kingdom is over all.

Again, The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice. Psalm. 97.

Secondly, for the kingdom of Grace, as Romans 14.17. The kingdom of GOD is not
meat and drink, but Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost. Where,
by Righteousness he means the assurance of our Justification before God, in
the righteousness of Christ, Peace of Conscience, which proceeds from this
assurance, and Joy in the holy Ghost which comes from them both, So Mark
2.15. The kingdom of God is at hand, repent and believe the Gospel.

In a kingdom there are five things to be considered: 1 A King. 2 Subjects. 3
Laws. 4 Authority. 5 Officers.


1 In this kingdom Christ is king, It is he to whom the Father has given all
authority, both in heaven and earth. Math. 28.20

2 Subjects are all the elect, which do willingly submit themselves unto his
government, as Psalm 110.3. and serve the Lord in fear and trembling, or at
least make an outward profession of it, though their hearts be not sound.

3 Laws are the old and new Testament, wherein is set down his whole will:
This is his Statute book.

4 Authority is the compelling power of his Word and Spirit, whereby he
forces the Rebels of the world to come in, as it is written, Compel them to
come in. Such a conquest we read of Acts 2.17.18. And in very deed the Word
and the Spirit, are the very means whereby Christ rules and reigns over
his: and therefore the Word is called the Scepter of his power, Romans 1.16.
Mark. 1.14. The arm of God, Psalm. 110.2. Esaias 53.1. The rod of his mouth,
Esaias 11.4.

Reasons.
Because by it he does set up his Throne in the hearts of men.

By it he does draw men into heaven as with a most mighty arm.

By it he does overthrow and destroy the power of darkness.

5 Officers of this Kingdom are, the Pastors and Ministers of the Church, upon
whom this charge is laid, that they preach the Word, govern the Church, and
see the execution of the Kings laws.

Thirdly, the kingdom of Glory is that happiness which Gods chosen shall for
ever enjoy, as it is written: Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the
Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world. And again, It is
well done thou good servant and faithful, enter into thy Masters joy. Math. 25.

Come.
GOds Kingdom comes when it takes place, and is established and confirmed in
men's hearts, and made manifest to all people, the impediments being removed.

The Sum of this Petition.
That Christ would reign over us by his Word and Spirit.

That we may be subject to his kingdom in word and deed, in holiness and
righteousness.

That he would preserve and increase his Church.

That he would destroy the power of the Devil, and the works of darkness.

That he would frustrate and bring to naught, all the Counsels of the wicked,
against his Truth, Kingdom and people.

Things prayed for in this Petition.
That Christ may guide us, and govern us by his holy Spirit, in all our
particular actions, that he may have a kingdom within us.

Psalm 51. Create in me a clean heart O God, and renew a right Spirit within
me, etc.

Stablish me with thy free Spirit.

Here also we do pray for the prosperous estate of the Church.

Psalm 122.6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love
thee.

Esaias 62.7. Ye that are the Lords remembrancers, give him no rest until he
set up Jerusalem, the praise of the world.

We do pray for Christian Kings and Princes, that God would prosper their
government: for they are nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers to the Church,
Esaias 49.

1 Timothy 2.2. Let Prayers and Supplications, with giving of thanks, be made
for all men, for Kings, and for all that are in authorritie.

We are also to pray the Lord of the harvest to send forth laborers into his
harvest, that is, Math. 9.38.
faithful and zealous Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel, which are the
principal Studs and pillars to uphold the Kingdom of Christ, and most notable
instruments both for the beating down of the kingdom of Satan and Sin, and
for the saving of the souls of his people.

2 These. 3.1. Brethren, pray for us, that the Word of the Lord may have a free
passage, and be glorified, etc.

Prou. 29.18. Where vision fails the people are left naked.

Furthermore, we are to pray for all Christian Schools of learning, because
they are as it were Seminaries and nurseries of Gods Church.

Last of all, we are to desire that the Lord would hasten the second coming
of Christ, as the Saints pray, Come LORD Jesus, come quickly, Romans 22.20.

Therefore the godly are said to love the coming of Christ. 2 Timothy 4.8.

True Petitioners.
First, they that mourn and lament to see the dominion and power of the Devil
to be to great as it is.

Secondly, they that deal earnestly with God every day, that it may be
diminished.

Thirdly they that pray earnestly day and night, that God would multiply the
number of his Children.

Fourthly, they that long for the day of Christ, wherein he shall put down
all rule, and all authority, and power, etc.

Counterfeit Petitioners.
Such as scorn at the Ministry of the Church.

Such as hinder the free course of the Gospel.

Such as oppose themselves against godly Preachers, and good men.

Such as take part with the wicked, and defend bad causes.

Such as labor to quench and smoother all good matters in their hearts.

Such as put far from them the day of evil, and wait not, nor prepare
themselves for his coming.

Thy will be done, etc.
Sense.
Grant that we and all men, renouncing our own will, may readily, and
without murmuring, obey thy will, and so may cheerfully execute whatsoever the
Angels do in heaven.

Coherence.
In the former petition we prayed, that he only might be our King and reign
over us: now we desire that being his Subjects, we may obey him, and do his
will.

Mal. 1.6. If I be a Father where is my honor?
If I be a Master where is my fear?
Will.
Here it signifies Gods word, for in his word his will is revealed.

Of the whole will of God, there be three special points, which are in this
place meant.

1 Faith in the promises. 2 Sanctification. 3 Patient bearing of the Cross.
Proof of the first.
This is then his commandment, that we believe in the name of his Son Jesus
Christ. 1 John 3.23.

This is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son,
and belieueth on him, should have everlasting life. John 6.40.

Proof of the second.
This is the will of GOD, even your Sanctification. 1* These. 4.3.

Proof of the third.
Whosoever will be my Disciple must forsake himself, and take up his cross
and follow me. Mat. 16.24.

The Apostle prays, Phillip. 3.10. that he might know him, and the virtue of
his resurrection, and the fellowship of his afflictions, and be made
conformable to his death.

Thy will, not mine: for since the fall of Adam, man's will is wicked and
corrupt, yea, it is flat enmity to GOD, Romans 8.7. But Gods will is most holy,
right and pure, and therefore all our love ought to be upon it.

Done, that is, obeyed and accomplished of men. Then the effect of the prayer
is this: O Lord, seeing thou art our King, give us grace to show our selves
good Subjects in obaying thy will. For obedience is better then sacrifice, and
to hearken is better then the fat of Rams. 1 Samuel 15.22.

Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven,
but he that does the will of my Father, which is in heaven. Mat. 7.22.

Whosoever does the will of GOD, is my Brother, my Sister, and my Mother, Mark.
3.35.

He that fulfilleth the will of God abides for ever. 1 Ioh. 2.17.

In Earth, as it is in Heaven.
THis clause shows the manner of doing Gods will.

By heaven here is meant the souls of faithful men departed, and the elect
Angels.

Praise the Lord ye his Angels, that excel in strength, that do his
commandments, in obaying the voice of his word, Psalm. 103.20.

By earth is understood nothing but men on earth: because all other creatures,
in their kinds, obey God, only man is rebellious and disobedient.

The word (as) does imply a similitude not an equality.

Sense.
Let thy will be done by us men on earth, as the Angels and Saints departed,
do thy will in heaven, that is, 1 Willingly, 2 Speedely, 3 Faithfully and
continually.


Ezekiel. 1.
Therefore they are said in the Scriptures to be winged.

Things prayed for.
Denial of our selves, our own wills and affections.

Knowledge of Gods will, for otherwise how should we do it?

A fervent desire of obedience, to do his will in all our particular actions.

Patience, and a willing submitting of our selves to the will of God in all
things.

So did Elie the Priest, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good, 1 Samuel 3.18.

So did David, 2 Samuel 15.26. But if he thus say, behold I have no delight in
thee: behold, here I am, let him do to me as seems good in his eyes.

So Christ himself, Father take this cup from me, yet not as I will, but as
thou will, Mark. 14.36.

So the Disciples, and holy Christians, Acts 12.14. The will of the Lord be
done.

Therefore Saint James calls Patience by the name of Wisdom, because man's
chief wisdom stands therein, that in his adversities and troubles, he
patiently submits himself to the will of God.

But on the contrary, it is extreme foolishness and madness, if any dare
resist and set himself against it. For what good does he by it, Can he
change the will of God? No verily, Nay rather he makes his own case worse, as
well with inward grief, that tormenteth him, as also because he pulls the
wrath of God upon himself: for by our stubbernesse he is compelled to lay
more grievous punishments upon us. On the other side, by our patience he is
moved unto pity, even as good Parents are wont, when they perceive that their
Children are brought into good order by their correction.

Who prays this Petition aright.
They which bewail the sins of the world, as Ignorance, Error, Schisms,
Pride, Couetuousnes, Contempt of the word, Oppression, Swearing, Lying, etc.

They which are grieved for their Impatience and disquietnesse of mind,

For their coldness in Gods service.

For their imperfect obedience, and wants even in their best actions.

Give us this day our daily bread.
THe three former Petitions do immediately concern God, these three last our
selves: which teaches that we must prefer God and his glory before all things.

Coherence.
In the first we were taught to pray, that GODS name may be hallowed, which is
done, when God reigns in our hearts, and his will is done:

Now further his will is obeyed in three things.

First, by depending on his providence, for the things of this life.

Secondly, for depending on his mercy for the pardon of sins.

Thirdly, by depending on his power and might in resisting temptations: and
thus is the will of God obeyed.

Bread.
BRead, signifies all things whereby this life is preserved, as Meat, Drink,
Clothing, Health, Peace, Liberty: yea, Goats milk. Pro. 27.27. and the fruit
of Trees. Ierem. 11.19. Genes. 1.29. And all things that pass too and fro in
traffic. Pro. 31.14.

In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread. Genesis 3.19.

Man lives not by bread only, etc. Math. 4.

Jesus entered into the house of a certain Pharisie, to eat bread, Luke 14.

Christ uses this word (Bread) rather then Flesh, Victuals, Meat, Dainties,
Varieties, etc. to instruct us to christian Sobriety and moderation in our
diet, houses, etc. and to teach us to be content with a little, and to be
content if we have no more but Bread, that is, things necessary to preserve
life: and moreover, that we should take that fare thankfully, how thin so
ever it were, which he of his mercy has provided for us, not murmuring
against it, nor fretting through impatience, as the Israelites did, who loathed
Manna, which they had received of God for their present necessity. Phil. 4.12.
1 Timothy 6.8. Heb. 13 5.

We may use things not only for necessity, but also for honest pleasure,
Psalm. 104.15. John 12.3. But notwithstanding if we have to defend necessities
we must be content. 1 Timothy 6.8.

Daily.
THe word in greek, signifies, unto our Essences or Substances: the meaning
is, give us such Bread as may nourish our substances, such as is fit and
profitable for our nature and constitution, and wherewith our life may be
maintained.

Four Reasons may be alleged why Christ uses this word Daily.
First, as has been said before, that we should not seek after varieties
and dainties, but that which may satisfy the necessities of Nature.

Secondly, to bridle all inordinate care, and immoderate desire of Riches, and
therefore Saint Luke calls it, bread for the day, that is, bread sufficient
for to preserve us for the present day.

Although then we be willed to ask all outward things of God, yet we may not
ask them to spend them upon our lusts, James 4.3. Neither may we make
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts therefore. Romans 13.14.

Our money is given us for bread, as it is written: Wherefore do you lay out
your money, and not for bread? Esaias 55.2.

Thirdly, that we should desire no more but a competencie of these things, as
did wise Solomon, who only desired the mean estate, as the most safest and
best. Pro. 30.8.

Fourthly, that we should eat to restore vital humor, which spends every
day by strength of natural heat.

Lastly, we must ask it every day, to the end we may take pleasure in this
custom, of loving and fearing God.

Our.
IN respect of Christ, bread is called (ours,) for having given Christ unto us,
he does in him, and by him, give all things else unto us, so that in Christ we
have a proper interest in them, as it is written: All things are yours, Romans
8.32
and ye are Christ's. 2 Cor. 3.22. and then indeed are they most of all ours,
when they are sanctified unto us by the word and Prayer. 1 Timothy 4.4. that is,
when we use them aright, according to the rules of Gods word, calling upon his
name for a blessing, before and after the use of them.

Furthermore this word (our) does teach us that every man must live of his own
calling, and his own goods truly gotten, by his own sweat, and not another
man's: not by Robbery, Oppression, Deceit, Lying, Fraud, and such other
unlawful means, for such go to the Devil for bread, and not to God: for God
gives no bread after such sort.

Again, it is called, Our bread, because we should not eat it alone, but
distribute it to them that have need, as it is written, Break thy bread to the
hungry, Esaias 58. And again, Cast thy bread upon the waters, for after many
days thou shall find it. Eccles. 11. And Job says, I have not eaten my
morsels alone. Job 31.

This day.
THese words condemn all immoderate desire of riches, and distrustful care
for time to come, and do teach us to rest on his fatherly goodness from day
to day. This is noted unto us, where the Israelites were commanded to gather no
more Manna, then would serve for one day: for if they did, it putrified:
whereby God taught them to rest on his providence, every particular day, and
not on the means.

Yet is it lawful in good manner, to provide for days, years, and times to
come, as Joseph in Egypt, in the seven years of plenty, stored up against
the years of famine. The Apostles provided for the Church in Judea, against
the time of dearth, foretold by Aggabus, Acts 11.28. Solomon says, He that
gathers in Summer is the son of Wisdom, but he that sleeps in Harvest is
the son of Confusion. Pro. 10.5. So then only the distrustful care, that
distracteth the mind, is here forbidden.

Give us.
NOT me: this serves to teach us that a man must not only regard himself, or
pray for himself, but also be mindful of others. 1 Cor. 13. True love seeks
not her own things.

The branches of the Vine are laden with clusters of grapes, not for
themselves, but for others. The Candle spends it self, to give others light:
The eye sees not for it self, but for the whole body.

Give.
THis shows that God is the author and giver of all earthly blessings, and
therefore we must beg them at his hands. If you that are evil know how to
give good gifts unto your Children, how much more shall your Father which is in
heaven, give good things to them that ask them of him? Math. 7.11.

I am not worthy of the least of the mercies which thou have showed to thy
servant: for with my staff came I over this Iordane. Genes. 31.10.

Jacob asked bread to eat, and garments to put on. Genesis 28.20.

The Jews were commanded to bring of the first of all their fruit in a
basket, and to profess that they had received them of the Lord, as the author
and giver of them. Deuteronomy. 26.2.

All such deny God to be the Author and giver of these things, as seek them by
unlawful means, as Theft, Oppression, Deceit, consulting with wisards, etc.
they acknowledge the Devil to be the author of them.

Objection.
The rich need not say, give us this day, for they have abundance already,
and what need they ask that they have?

Answer.
Though a man had all the wealth in the world, and want nothing that can be
desired, yet all is nothing without Gods blessing: if he wants Gods blessing,
in effect he wants all: wherefore even Kings and Potentates are as much bound
to use this Petition as the poorest. For though a man have abundance, yet his
life stands not in his riches, Luke 12.15. Bread of it self cannot nourish
and sustain our life, no more then a stone, or a chip, but the staff of
bread, Esaias 3. that is, a blessing upon bread.

Hagg. 1.6. Thou may eat, and not have enough; be clothed and not warm;
earne wagges and put it into a broken bag, if God do not bless thee.

Prou. 20.22. The blessing of the LORD makes rich, and it does bring no sorrow
with it.

Lastly, here we see, that all labor and toil, taken in any kind of
calling avails not, unless God give his blessing. Psalm. 127.1.

A Reason of the Order.
The reason why this Petition, concerning things of this life, is set before
the other following, concerning a better life, is not because bread is more
excellent then remission of sins, and strength against temptations, but
because men must have a being, and a sustentation by bread in this life, before
they can desire forgiveness of Sins, and strength against temptations. And
because by earthly things we may lift up our minds, and climb up, as it
were, to the consideration of heavenly.

Forgive us our trespasses.
IN this and the next Petition, we crave spiritual blessings, where we note,
that seeing there are two petitions which concern spiritual things, and but
one for Temporal, that the care for our souls must be double more, then the
care for our bodies.

Coherence.
Gods will is done, when we trust in his providence for things of this life,
and in his mercy for the pardon of our sins.

Reason of the order, that first we crave things for the body, and
afterward for the soul, as though the body were more excellent then the
soul.

The reason hereof is, that he will train us by degrees, and draw us on by
little and little to believe the forgiveness of sins, which is a great
matter, and a very high point: he considers our dullness and backwardness,
and therefore deals with us as a schoolmaster with his dull scholars; which
first teaches them easy things, and after carries them to higher points. For
the former petition is a step or degree to these two following, for he that
will rest on Gods mercy, for the pardon of his sins, must first of al rest on
Gods providence, for this life: for he that cannot put his affiance in God for
the provision of meat and drink, how shall he trust in Gods mercy, for the
salvation of his soul?

The ruler, by the healing of the body of his child, was brought to believe in
Christ. John 4.53.

By debts, sins are meant, as Luke 11.4. where it is said, Forgive us our
sins: and in Matthew 6.12. where it is said, Forgive us our debts.

They are so called, because of the resemblance between them: for even as a
debt does bind a man, either to make satisfaction, or else to go to prison: so
our sins binds us, either to satisfy Gods justice, or else to suffer
eternal damnation. Under the name of debts is contained both actual and
original sins.

They are called our debts, because they are of our selves, and not of God, as
Genes. 6.5.

Forgive.
TO forgive sin, is to cover it, or not to impute it. Psalm. 32. When our
sins are imputed to Christ, and his righteousness to us, then are we fully
cleared and discharged.

Through whom is forgiveness?
Forgiveness is only through Christ, Romans 3.24. Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14. Hebr. 9.
Zech. 13.1.

Under this one benefit of remission of sins, all the rest of the same kind
are understood: as namely, Justification, Sanctification, Redemption,
Regeneration, Glorification.

This word (forgive) teaches that all men are sinners, and have need of
forgiveness, as 1 Kings 8.46. There is no man that sins not.

Surely, there is no man just in the earth that does good and sins not,
Eccles. 7.22.

Who can say, I have purified my heart I am clean from my sin? Proverbs.

Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for no man living shall be
justified in thy sight, Psalm. 143.2.

If thou O God, mark our iniquities, who shall be able to stand? Psalm. 130.3.

O cleanse me from my secret sins. Psalm. 19.12.

Seeing we pray for free forgiveness, we are to hold that there is no
satisfaction made by us to Gods justice for sin: for to forgive, and to
satisfy, be contrary: here falls down the doctrine of satisfaction, taught
in the Church of Rome.

Seeing we sin daily, and therefore pray daily for forgiveness, we note the
great patience and long suffering of God, that suffers and forbeares still, and
does not power down his wrath upon us, and it does teach us to use the like
patience toward our brethren that offend us.

Again, we may observe, that our sanctification in this life, is never
perfect, because we crave pardon every day for sin, it is always in
perfecting, but never perfected here.

Where it is brought as a reason taken from the comparison of the less to the
greater, thus: if we which have but a spark of mercy, do forgive others, then
do thou, which art the fountain of mercy, forgive us: but we forgive others,
therefore do thou forgive us.

The Papists make our forgiving a cause, for the which God is moved to forgive
us: but it is no cause, but only a sign or effect, that God does forgive us,
for our readiness and willingness in forgiving others, is a lively token of
the pardon of our own sins: we must therefore be ready to forgive others,
that we may have testimony in our own consciences that God forgiueth us:
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

If you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive
you: but if you do not forgive men their trespasses, neither will your
heavenly Father forgive you your trespasses. Matthew. 6.14.

A man does never freely, franckly, and from his heart forgive others, till he
do inwardly feel that God has forgiven him: but when he once feels that,
then does he easily and readily forgive his brother, that thereby he may have
more and more testimony to his own heart of Gods love toward him: for a man
is toward his neighbor, as he feels God to be toward himself: he
reboundeth upon his neighbor that which he has received from God, therefore
he which feels not God to be merciful to himself, will never be merciful
to his neighbor. A seal does not set any print into the wax, before it has
it in it self. A coal does not warm others, till it be hot it self: so we
do not willingly forgive, till we be forgiven.

But after a seal has received his impression, and is graven, it does imprint
the same upon the wax: and after the coals be hot, they heat others, so after
we feel God to be good to us, we are good to others.

The manner of forgiveness.
Our Savior says, Matthew. 18. that it must be from the heart: therefore wicked
are they which say, I may forgive him, but I will not forget him: he may come
into my Paternoster, but he shall never come into my Creed: behold the Devils
logic, which makes Malice to be Charity.

Blind people play with the Lords Prayer, as the Fly does with the Candle,
till she be burnt: for the more they pray these words, the more they call for
vengeance against themselves.

For if we be so cruel, that we cannot forgive the offenses which men commit
against us, which are but as the debt of one hundred pence, with what face can
we require of God to be forgiven the offenses which we have committed against
him, which are as the debt of ten thousand talents?

Look how often therefore a man does utter this petition with a mind desirous
of revenge, so often does he call unto the Lord, to take vengeance upon him for
his sins.

Objection.
How can any man forgive trespasses, seeing God only forgiues sins?

Answer.
In every trespass which any man does to his neighbor, there be two offenses.

One to God. Another to man.
In the first respect, as it is against God and his Law, it is called a sin,
and that God only forgiueth.

In the other respect, it is called an injury or damage, and so man may
forgive it.

So in the case of these, as it is a sin against God, God only does forgive
it: but as it is a wrong to our neighbor, man does forgive it.

Objection.
Whether a man may lawfully pray this petition, and yet sue him at the Law who
has done him wrong.

A man may in an holy manner sue another for an injury, as a Soldier in
lawful war may kill his enemy, and yet love him: so a man may forgive an
injury, and yet seek in a Christian manner the remedy.

But in doing of this, we must observe five things.

First, we are to take heed of a private revenge and inward hatred, which if we
do not conceive, we not forgive.

Secondly, we must take heed of offense, and have care that our doings be not
scandelous to the Church.

Thirdly, our suits must be taken in hand to maintain godly peace: for if all
injuries were put up, there would be no civil state or government.

Fourthly, that the parties offending may be chastised, and brought to
repentance for his fault: for if many were not repressed, they would grow worse.

Fifthly, law must be the last remedy, as Physicians use desperate remedies,
when weaker will not serve, even so must we use law, as the last means, when
all other fail.

The sum of this Petition.
1 All men are sinners. 2 God only forgiueth sins. 3 He forgiueth it through
Christ. 4 He forgiueth it to them that confess and forsake it. 5 We may know
in our selves, that our sins are pardoned. 6 The envious man can have no
pardon.
Lead us not into Temptation.
The Coherence.
THis Petition is joined with the former, to teach us, that as we must
carefully pray for pardon of sins past, so also we must endeavor to prevent
sins to come: we must not fall again into our old sins, neither must we
be overtaken with new sins.

Having obtained forgiveness of our sins, we desire of the Lord to be
present with us, that we fall not again into them

Though God forgive us our sins, yet he does not free us of natural
corruption, but that still remains and is left behind as the very seed and
spawne of new sins: so that in respect of this, every one of Gods children
has his hands full, and enough to do, to withstand sin, after he is
justified and sanct^fied.

Therefore, whereas it may be objected, what need he care for temptations that
has the pardon of his sins?

Answer.
Because forgiveness of sins, and grievous temptations be inseperable
companions, for there is no man in this world so beaten and buffeted with
temptations, as the penitent sinner, that cries for the pardon of his sins.

This is the estate that few men in the world are acquainted with, for many are
never troubled with temptations, but live in all peace and quietness, both in
body and soul: for when the strong man armed, keeps his house, the things
that he possesses are in peace, Luke 11.2.

Whereby is signified that the wicked of the World, being possessed of Satan,
are not a whit molested by him with any temptations, neither need he trouble
them, seeing he has them at commandment to do what he will.

But when a man once begins at make conscience of sin, and to sue unto the
Lord for pardon of his offenses, and still continues in dislike of sin, and
Satan, then the enemy bestirreth him, and uses all means to bring that man
to confusion.

Objection.
Some Christian conscience may reason thus, no man is so troubled with sin
and Satan as I, therefore I am not in Gods favor, but am a plain castaway.

Answer.
If pardon of sin and temptations go together, all is contrary: if thou
had no grief for sin, no buffeting of the enemies, the Flesh, the World,
and the Devil, thou could not be in Gods favor, but under the power of
Satan: now this great measure of spiritual temtations is a sign rather of
Gods love: for whom God loves, the Devil hates: and where God works in
love, the Devil works in malice.

Sense.
These words be but all one Petition, which has two parts, the latter being a
declaration of the former, Lead us not into temptation, how is that done? by
delivering us from evil.

Temptation.
Temptation is all wicked motions, which entice us unto sin.

Temptation is nothing else but the entisement of the soul or heart, either by
the corruption of man's nature, or the allurements of the world, or the Devil
to any sin.

Kinds of Temptations.
Temptations are of diverse sorts, either of the Devil, the World, or the Flesh.

First, the temptations of Satan are not only innumerable, but also most
sly, subtle, and pitched in method against us, and framed to every man's humor.

Therefore he is called, the tempter, of his disposition, study and care,
Matthew. 4.1. The Apostle also says, He was afraid least the Tempter had
tempted them* 1 These. 3.5.

Our first parents had trial, with the great loss of all mankind.

Christ was tempted by him, Matthew. 4.1.

2 Samuel 24.2.
He drove King David into that mind, that of pride he commanded the children
of Israel to be numbered.

1 Pet. 5.8. Luke 22.32.
He is our professed adversary, the roaring Lion that goes about, etc. he
seeks to winnow us.

Therefore we had need to take heed of the trains and traps of this deadly
enemy.

In the second place comes the World with her two breasts, profit and
pleasure: and with these she carries away thousands.

Thirdly, our Flesh continually fights against us, and is our capital
enemy, and most deadly foe: hereof the Apostle says, I see another law in my
members, rebelling against the law of my mind, Romans 7.23. Again, the flesh
lusts against the spirit, Galat. 5. From hence springs all evil motions.

(Lead us not) or carry us not into temptation: to be led, is to be overcome of
the temptation when it prevails, and wholly gets the victory: so as men
tempted are brought to perdition, the meaning is this, when we are moved or
enticed to sin: Lord keep us that we be not overcome, and give thou an issue
with the temptation.

To be led into temptation, is by the just judgment of God to be delivered
over, as bondslaues to the Devil, and to our own lusts, and that oftentimes,
either for our unthankfulness, contempt of his word, society, nourishing of
secret sins, pride, presumption, or such like.

Objection.
God is just, and cannot sin: but if he lead men into temptation, then is he
the author of evil.

Answer.
Many fearing to charge God with sin, read the words thus, Suffer us not to
be led: but the Text is merely plain, Lead, or carry us not.

The Scriptures elsewhere use the like phrases of God: for God is said to
harden the heart of Pharaoh, Exodus 7.3. And again, GOD moved David to number
the people. 2 Samuel 24.1.
And again, GOD sent strong delusions, that men might believe lies. 2 Thessalonians.
2.11.

Therefore as God heardened Pharaohs heart, moved David to number the people,
delivered the Gentiles into a reprobate mind: and so, in the same sense, he
leads men into temptation.

Objection.
God tempts no man, James. 1.15. therefore he leads no man into temptation.

Answer.
True it is, that in S. James sense, God tempts no man, that is, moves no
man to sin, but as he says, every man when he is tempted is led away, and
snared of his own concupiscence.

Gods tempting of men, is after two sorts, respecting the praise of his
justice, and the praise of his mercy.

Touching the first, he does sometimes, for former evils, throw us to the
Devil, yet he is not the author of evil when after this sort he leads us
into temtation, for he does it justly for some notable evil which he sees in
us.

Touching the second, he tempts us for the praise of his mercy, when he
tries and proves us by corrections and chastisements, as poverty,
reproaches, contempt, afflictions, etc. In which respect, Psalm. 26.2.
David says, Prove me, O Lord, and try me* and S. James says, Blessed is the
man that endures temptation: for after he is tried, he shall receive the
crown of life, which God has promised to them that love him, James 1.

In this sense Abraham and Job were tempted, that is, tried.

Then we see how God tempts after one sort, and Satan after another. God for
our good, by humbling and trying of us. The Devil for our hurt and utter
destruction. Therefore, though God lead men into temptation, yet is he not the
author of evil.

There be four respects, in which God may be a worker in temptations, and yet
free from sin.

First, he tempts by offering occasions and objects, to try whether a man
will sin or not, as a master that lays a purse of money in his servants
way, which he suspecteth. This trial is no sin in the Master, though the
servant sin in stealing: Thou shall not hearken unto the words of the
Prophet, or dreamer of dreams, for the LORD thy GOD proves thee, whether
thou love the LORD thy GOD with all thy heart, Deuteronomy. 13.

Secondly, God leads into temptation, by withdrawing of his grace: neither
can this be a sin in God, because he is bound to no man to give him grace,
and here is a difference between^ the tempting of God, and of Satan: God holds
back grace when he tempts, the Devil suggests evil motions.

Thirdly, every action, so far forth as it is an action, is good, and of GOD,
for in him we live, move, and have our being: Therefore God is a worker in
temptations, so far forth as they are actions. One man kills another, the
very moving of the body in the doing of this villainy is of God, but the
wickedness of the action, is from man and the Devil: a man rides upon a lame
horse and stirs him, the rider is the cause o^ the motion, but the horse
himself o^ the halting in the motion: so, God is the author of the action, but
not of the euil^ in the action.

The fourth way, is in regard o^ the end, for God tempts his servants to
correct and humble them for their sins, to try their patience, faith, and
love, etc.

(Deliver us from evil) that is, free us from the power of the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil: so evil in this place is only from the Devil, but we
may take it more largely, for all spiritual enemies, as S. John says, the
whole world lives in evil, under the power of Satan and sin: our Lord
Jesus likewise says, I pray not that thou would take them out of the world,
but that thou would keep them from evil. John 17.

These words therefore, as has been said, are an explanation of the former,
for when a man is delivered from evil, he is not led into temptation: the
cause being taken away, the effect cease.

The sum of all, is this, that for as much as we are by nature so feeble and
weak, that we are not able of our selves to stand one minute of an hour
against our spiritual enemies, that therefore God would uphold us, and
strengthen us by the power of his spirit, that we faint not in this spiritual
combat: therefore our Savior says, Watch and pray, that you enter not into
temptation: for the Spirit is willing, but the Flesh is weak.

That there is nothing more weak then man, so soon as he is left of the hand
of God, we have many testimonies and examples in the Scriptures: for thus says
the Prophet, The Lord knows whereof we are made, he considers that we are
but dust.

Christ also says, John 15.1.
Without me you can do nothing.

David, Peter, and all the Apostles were examples of many infirmities.

David, when having a little rest from continually war, he, by and by, fell
into adultery. 2 Samuel 11.3.

Peter, when being afraid of a Damsel, he denied Christ.

The Apostles, when they forsook their master.

If this befell them which were endued with so notable graces, what ought every
one of us to think?

For thine is the Kingdom.
THis conclusiue reason, contains the cause, for the which we crave all the
former things, namely* for that they concern his Kingdom, Power, and Glory:
for by the first three, his Kingdom is made manifest, and by the last three
his Power is exercised: whereupon follows the increase of his Glory.

Furthermore, this conclusion is added to encourage us with boldness, and
assurance, to come unto GOD in Prayer: for first, we know, that he is able to
grant all these Petitions, because he is a God of Kingdoms and Power.
Secondly, we know, that he will grant them, because they concern his own
Glory: and so is our faith and assurance confirmed.

FINIS.

