THE HORRIBLE Murder of a young Boy of three years of age, whose Sister had
her tongue cut out: and how it pleased God to reveal the offenders, by giving
speech to the tongueles Child.

Which Offenders were executed at Hartford the 4. of August. 1606.

LONDON Printed by Ed. Allde for William Firebrand, and are to be sold at his
Shop in the Pope's Head Alley, over against the Tavern door. 1606.

A True Relation of the cruel Murdering of a young Boy, not fully three
years old, whose Sister likewise had her tongue cut out of her head, hard by
the roots: which murder and massacre was done by a woman called Mother Dell,
and her Son, dwelling at Hatfield in Hartfordshire, for which monstrous fact,
they were both hanged at Hartford this last Sises. The only witness to prove
the Murder was the tongueles Child, most mightily preserved from death, to
which Child it pleased God to lend the use of speech, notwithstanding the want
of her tongue.
IN Hatfield in the County of Hartford, dwelled an old Widdowe, called Mother
Dell, who had abiding with her in the house, only her Son, named T. Dell:
Into the house of this old woman (some four years since) was seen go in two
pretty Children a Boy and a Girl, the Boy seemed not three years of age, and
the Girl not much above four. These Children were led into the said house by
a wa^dring Peddler and his wife (or Puncke.) The going in of these children was
noted by diverse, but especially by a Tailor dwelling in the town called A. C.
which Tailor marked them so much the more, for that they were hansomelye
appare^^^d and their coats made with new wings, skirtes and ^ags, such as he
had not seen the like of before, which made him presentlye upon the sight of
them, to make a pattern of those wings and Iagges: But doubting that he had
not taken a true pattern, he watched to have another sight of those Children,
But when for two or three days space he could not see them, he went to the
house of Mother Dell, and did ask her for those Children? she answered him
very shortly saying: they were safe enough, for they were gone again with
them that brought them.

With this answer the Tailor was satisfied, because it no further conscernd
him then the getting of a piece of a new fashion. But within a while after the
boy was found dead in a ditch or water not far from the Town, with a great
piece of wood tied to his back. The Child being taken out, it did plainly
appear that he was murdered before he was thrown in, The poor harmless
Infant being found thus cruelly murdered, and none that looked on him taking
knowledge of him. His pretty little coat was taken and hanged up in diverse
market towns and proclamation made in every one of those Towns to this
effect, that if any one whatsoever could and would tell where the Father or
Mother of the murdered Child (which wore that Coat) dwelt, he should have
fortye shillings for his pains, and his charges borne to bring him from and to
the place where he dwelt: But all this proved to little or no purpose, till
at the last, this news came to the hearing of the Tailor, who coming to the
place where the Coat was to be seen, and taking good notice of it, he
presently calde to his remembrance, that, that coat was worn by one of those
Children which he had seen go into the house of Mother Dell.

The news of this coming to the ears of Sir Henry Butler and one other
Knight, being both Justices, and both dwelling near to that place, a warrant
was made, by veride whereof, the said Mother Dell and her Son were brought
before them both, and strictlye examined, where they both confessed ye two such
Children as the Tailor spoke of, came into the house with a Peddler and his
wife, and that they verily thought the Boy at that time had that coat on his
back: but all this was nothing to them, for they neither knew the Penlar nor
his wife, only they came thither to see if they had need of any of their
ware, (as it is a common use for traueling Pedlars to call at diverse houses) and
when they had bestowed some little money with them, both he his wife, and
those Children (which they said were theirs) went out on the backside of the
house, and what after became of them, they knew not.

Upon this their confession, they were both bound over to appear and answer
at the next Assizes, the Justices hoping ere that time to find out the actor
or actors of that more then monstrous tragedy. But alas their hopes were
deceived, for the time was not yet come wherein God had decreed to bring this
cruel, barbarous, and bloody masacre to light: yet notwithstanding, they were
still bound over from Sise to Sise, almost for four years, in which time,
the said Mother Dell bestowed great cost in altering repayring, and furnishing
of her house, which made many of her neighbors much to wonder, for that they
knew not from whence she should have wherewith to defray that charge.

But now let us leave both her and her Son to the bell and horror of a guilty
conscience, which always waytes and attends on murderers, and let us now
speak of the poor mangled and dismembered Girl, who was now in far worse
case then her dead Brother, had not he which prouides for the whose world, in
his good appointed time provided for her: For her tongue was first cut out of
her head by the roots, then was she led by this said Mother of mischief and
her Son, (at a time when they were not seen) to the side of a wood, which
was sildome frequented, in which place stood an old great hollow tree, which
was not very high.

Having brought this helpless and hopeless child to this tree (which they
meant should be her grave) the son got up to the top, and rudely halled up
after him this harmles girl, who having seen her brother murdered before her
face, had no reason to hope of life, yet did she not cease with tears and
signs to beg for pity of these pitiless wretches, whose hearts being much
harder then stone, would not relent: for this merciless villain let her
slip into the tree where they left her, in hope never more to see her, or
hear of her.

But he that preserved Daniel in the Lions den, and made the blind to see, the
lame to go, and the dumb to speak, did not only preserve the life of this
child, but also did give unto her an extraordinary strength and vigor,
whereby she was able, and did make such a noise, that a man coming by that way
(not by chance, but surlye by the providence and appointment of God) hearing a
strange humming, and hollow crying, drawing near to that tree, perceived the
noise and cry to come from thence, which made him get up to the top of it,
where being and looking down into it, he beheld that pitiful, ruthful, and
bloody spectacle: which when he had a while looked on with pity and
compassion, and having spoke to her, and perceiving by her signs that she
could not answer him, he made means to draw her out. Which when he had done,
he began (as may be easily imagined) to bethink with himself, what great
trouble he might come into if he were found with the child, he being a
stranger, as it seems he was.

And this fear of trouble (as was supposed by the grave and wise Judge and
Justices of the Bench, when the matter came to their hearing) made this man
after he had pulled her out of the tree, to make from her with all the haste he
could. But the poor soul pursued him with all the haste she could, crying and
calling unto him for succor and help in the best manner she could, being
thereunto urged by pain and hunger, the least of which will force a man of a
resolute and resolved spirit to break silence, had he vowed the contrary:
much more then being joined both together must they force a child.

In brief then, when she had lost the sight of him, God knows what became of
her, but no one man or woman can tell any certain place of her abode for
almost these four years.

Many say they have seen such a dumb child wander up and down a begging, And
she herself has confessed (since the time that God has lent her use of her
speech and utterance, that she may be easily understood by any that shall
hear her) that she did beg for her food all that time.

And questionless, the Lord who had reserved her, both to bring so monstrous a
murder, and cruel a massacre to light, and also to make manifest his almighty
power to many misbeleeuing and unbelieving miscreants (Atheists I mean) he, I
say, as may most evidently appear, did both preserve her, and provide for her.

And now the time drawing near, wherein it pleased God to give these wicked
wretches some part of of their reward, he so directed the course of this poor
wandering child, that she came back again to the town of Hatsield, where she
received her wrongs, having yet no use of speech nor utterance, whereby she
might be understood. And wandering up and down the town, little thinking she
had been near the place where her innocent brother lost his life, and
herself the instrument of her speech: but going along the street* gasing here
and there, as children will do (yea and old folks too) when they come into a
strange place, At last she came by the house where this bloody tragidie had
been acted: which house she no sooner saw, but she knew, as did appear by
the signs of grief and sorrow, which she made at the sight thereof. For what
with her crying, and the extraordinary noise which she made, she drew
people about her, who did in some sort seem to grieve at the moan she made:
but surely they could not choose but wonder, and desire to know what the sorrow
and signs meant which the child made. For one while she would gape wide with
her mouth, drawing her fore finger to and fro it, as though she had been
cutting of some thing: then would she with her finger point into the house. And
when this mother Dell and her son came to the door, then her crying and her
signs did seem much to increase, which made the lookers on to suspect much,
but alas they knew not what. But at last amongst other folks, came the Tailer
before spoken of, and he no sooner saw the child, noted her signs, and
remembered the other Child found in the water and murdered as is aforesaid,
but straight he says, that this was the other of those Children, which was
led into that house long since by the Peddler and his Wife. Then some of the
Neighbors together with the Tailor, took the child and led her into the
house, she being within, stood staring wildelye round about her, at last she
spied a pair of stayres, to which she went directlye, and coming to them,
she looked earnestlye on them, looking about the house again, she first
pointed to the stayres, and then to a Corner of the house, as who should say,
these stayres did stand there.

This sign the neighbors understood well, because they knew the stayres had
been removed and that made them think some foul^ matter would be picked out
of her other signs. Hereupon they began to lay hands on the Mother and her
Son, to have them again (now with the Child) before the Justice, at which
the child seemed to rejoice.

Being brought before Sir Henry Butler, who was the next Justice, (and had
examined them diverse times before concerning these Children) the Constable or
Head borough began to tell unto his Worship the cause of their coming, and
having related unto him from point to point, what they had seen, the Child
marking, and understanding them well, fell to her former signs again before
the Knight. Whereupon he did with great wisdom and discretion, examine them
aparte, one from another. But they both remained still obstinate, and in their
old tale, confessing nothing, nor would any of them acknowledge, that they
had ever seen the Girl before, notwithstanding the Tailor did still affirm
it to their faces, that that was the Girl which the Peddler and his wife led
into their house long since with the boy.

The Justice assuring himself now, that these were the actors of that bloody
Tragedy, and hoping that God would in time make it yet more plain then if was,
he caused a Mittimus to be made and sent them to the Iayle, there to remain
with out dayle or maine prise until the Assizes. And further he willed the
Constable to take the Child's back again with him to the Town, and to have a
great care that she might be well looked unto, and to see the house of Mother
Dell safely shut up.

All this being done according to the Knights commau^d, and the childs
lodging and diet being much better, then it had been long before, she began to
gather both strength and spirit unto her, and to take delight to play amongst
Children.

But now (Gentle Reader) let me entreat thee as thou readst, not only to
admyre and wonder, but to praise and and magnify the mighty maker and
preserver of us all, for his great mercy and might showed to this poor child,
in this next succeeding action, which if we look into but with the eyes of
natural reason and humane sense, it will be thought incredible and impossible.
But with God nothing is impossible, and this ought not to be thought
incredible, because it was so lately and so near unto us done, and for that
the Child is yet living in Harfield, to affirm for truth, all that is here
written of her.

Now you shall understand, that this girl being playing with other children on
the backe-side of some man's house in the town, where cocks, hens, and chickens
were feeding, It pleased God at that time, to make a cock to be (as it were a
tutor to the child, and) his first messenger of this mighty miracle, like as a
bird of the same name and nature, using the self same note, put Peter in mind
that he had denied his master: from which his remembrance, sprung his true
and hearty repentance. But to proceed: This child being playing (as I said
before) one of the cocks in the yard began to crow, and another answered him
and thus they continued aprettie while. At last one of the children began
(after their manner) to mock the cocks, crying cocke-adoodle-doo: in the end
this dumb child, strayning her self, cried as t^^ rest had done,
cocke-adoodle do, which made all the children amazde: and one of them that
stood next her, said: what, can thou speak now? I that I can (said she)
speaking it so plainly that they all understood her. The hearing of this made
the children break up their play, and run home with joy to the house where
this child was kept, to carry news. And when she came home to the house where
she was kept, and the folk of the house finding the report of the children to
be true, with exceeding joy (after the asking of her some few questions, to
which she did answer very directly) they led her again to the knight before
named, to whom they told what had happened. Which when he had heard (he being
furnished with the fear of God, which is indeed the true fountain and
foundation of wisdom) he first of all gave thanks to God, and then he did
ask her who cut out her tongue? she said, the old woman and her son, that
killed her brother, and put her into the tree: then he asked her who took her
out of the tree? and she said, a man, that when he had done did run away
from her because she could not speak to him. He likewise asked whither she
went then? but alas she could not tell him: then he did ask her, who brought
her to the old woman's house first? and she said a man and a woman that had
killed her father and her mother, and taken a great bag of money from them.
And she said that the man and woman had given a great deal of that money to
the old woman: and that the old woman did at that time lift up her hands
three times, and did swear three times, that she would never tell any body who
they were. These and many other questions the Knight did ask her, to all which
she did answer, with more reason and sense, then is common to one of her age.

To conclude, the Sises being come, an Indictment was preferred against the
mother and the son, to which indictment they pleaded not guilty, and put
themselves to the ordinary trial. Whereupon the child was brought before the
Bench, and stood upon the Table between the Bench and the Jury. Where after
that the foresaid knight had opened some part of this foul offense, the child
was asked diverse of the former questions: to which she answered as before. The
tailor likewise was there, who told unto the Jury what he had seen. Then the
Jury was willed to go together: but before they went, they did look into the
childs mouth, but could not see so much as the stumpe of a tongue therein. The
Jury staid not long before they returned with their verdite guilty, whereupon
they had sentence of death pronounced against them, and were both hanged at
Hartfort the fourth day of August. 1606.

Thus far (gentle reader) have I set down briefly and truly the manner of this
monstrous massacre. And how far it has pleased God to reveal some of the
Authors: and for some secret purpose best known to himself, to conceal the
rest, which questionless shall be made known in his good appointed time, when
it shall be most for his honor and glory. In the mean time, let me entreat
all you which do read or hear this ruthful discourse, to meditate (as I do
and will) on the many miseries and mischances mankind is subject to, which if
you do, questionless you will make less joy at the birth of your children,
and less sorrow at their death then commonly you do, and rather secke (in
some sort) to imitate those Heathens, which did sing and dance at the death of
their children, then those Christians which do mourn and sorrow as men past
hope. As for the love which ordinarily men bear unto their children, it may
more fitlye be called love to themselves, then to their children. For
notwithstanding we all know or ought to know, that no one is truly happy till
his end, if he die well, yet many (nay most of us) do rather desire to have
our children suruine us, then to see them fairly bestowed before us. Never
thinking, respecting, or regarding, what may come to them after our death: so
our humors be fed in our lives. And if this may not truly be said to be
self-love, I know not what is self-love. Therefore let us all and every one
of us, refer and put our wills to Gods will, assuring our selves, that all
things shall work together for the best, for them that love and fear him.

As for the Peddler and his wife, which the child has confessed to have robbed
and killed her father and mother, they are not yet found out, nor is the place
and above of her too unfortunate Parents yet known But yet all in good time,
if it be the will of the Amightie, both the one and the other shall come to
light.

Amen.

