Jests to make you Merry: With The Coniuring up of Cock Watt, (the walking
Spirit of Newgate) To tell Tales. Unto which is Added, the misery of a Prison,
and a Prisoner. And a Paradox in praise of Serieants.

Written by T. D. and George Wilkins.

Imprinted at London by N. O. for Nathaniell Butter, dwelling near to St.
Austins Gate, at the sign of the pide Bull. 1607.

To the Reader.
Books are a strange commodity, the estimation of them rises and falls
faster then the exchange of money in the Low countries, which alters more often
then the english man does the fashion of his apparel. Men that write to feed
fantastike humors, are no better then Apes, that show their tricks to others,
the doing of which is painful to themselves, and at going away are but laughed
at, and so nice are our Paul's Churchyard-walkers in beholding these pictures,
that to day they cry excellent at the drawing of that, upon which to morrow
they will cast a mewing countenance, there is no one Stationer stall can fit all
customers with books to their diet, nor can all men that write (if all that
can but speak should write) fit some Stationers. Go to one and offer a copy,
if it be merry, the man likes no light stuff, if sad, it will not sell.
Another meddles with nothing but what fits the time, I would have his shop stuffed
with nothing but proclamations, because he lies in the wind only for the change
of weather. Since therefore that neither hot nor cold can please, neither
straight nor crooked, can serve as a measure, to some mouths; what a miserable
and endless labor does he undertake that in a few scribled sheets hopes to
wrap up the loves of all men. Better it were for him in my judgment to turn
his leaves into such paper-kites as boys run after, whilst they fly in the
Air, then to publish his wits in Follio, and yet be counted but a fool for
his labor. (...) notwithstanding, with such a tickling Itch is this printed
Ambition troubled, that some are never at better ease then when they are
scratching upon paper, and find no sweetness but in drawing blood. Of those
sharp-toothed dogs you shall find me none, I hold no whip in my hand, but a
soft fether, and there drops rather water th^n gall out of my quill, if you
taste it and find it pleasing. I am glad, if not, I cannot be much sorry,
because the Cook knew not your diet, so that his error was his ignorance, and
ignorance is a venial sin to be pardoned.

Nam veniam pro laud pete: Laudate^^ abunde
Non fastiditus fi tibi (Lector) er^.
T. D. and G. W.

Jests to make you Merry.
What a Jest is.
A Jest is the bubling up of wit. It is a Baum which being well kindled
maintains for a short time the heat of Laughter. It is a weapon wherewith a
(...) does oftentimes fight, and a wise man def^nds himself by. It is the
(...) of good company. if it be seasoned with judgment: but if with too much
tar^ness^, it is hardly disgested but turn to quarrel. A (...) i^ tried as
powder is, the most sudden is the best. It is a merry ^^^deman and has a
brother so like him, that many take them for Twins: For the one is a Jest
spoken* the other is a Jest done. Stay but the reading of this book^ some half
an hour, and you shall be brought acquainted with both.

The 1. Jest.
A Fellow that (to be a fool in print) had spent the stock of his wits upon
ink and paper* and made it into a book, offered it to sell a^ diverse
Stationers (...), but none would buy it: At the length (...) came to one of the
company, and swore to him he should not (...) to fear to venture money upon
it, (...) it would be to him an everlasting book. Oh says the other then I
will not meddle with it; everlasting books are ill commodities in our trade,
bring me a book that will go away, and I am for you.

The 2. Jest.
A Justice of Peace found his man laying his mistress on the lips, at which
the Justice in a rage, and wrapping out a great oath, called him Rascal, and
asked him what he did, why says the fellow (and swore as deep as he) I was
kissing your wife. The Justice told him if he took him kissing there again,
he would make him kiss in another place. Truth sir (says the Seruingman) had
not you come in, I had kis^ in another place indeed.

The 3. Jest.
A Citizen meeting by chance a kinseman of his, about the Strand, that was come
to the Term, asked him where he had been, who told him he had been at
Westminster: And what news (quoth he) at Westminster; Mary says the other
Lawyers get the Devil and all: What an Ass, replied the Citizen is the
devil? if I were as he I would get some of them.

The 4. Jest.
IN the Queens time a couple of Merchants walking on the Change, amongst other
news, the one told y^ other, he thought the peace between England and Spain
would be broken: God help the poor Justices then (answered the other) for if
the peace b^ broken, sure y^ Justices of the Peace cannot be sound.

The 5. Jest.
A Mad country Parson inuiting certain of his friends to the eating of a tyth
pigge and some other good cheer, one of the guests brought along with him a
Precisian, (which se^ the person never could abide) and having carn'd once or
twic^ to the rest. At length he called aloud in latin to the Precisian (for he
took him to be a scholar, because he went all in black) Heus domine, vis tu
Comedere Turdum, vis ^u comedere ^artum, vis tu comedere pistum Fartum. At
which the other blessing himself, to think that a Churchman should utter such
filthy words (as he construed them) rose from the board and d^parted reproving
the Parson for a beastly and unmannerly christian, whereas by Turdum he meant a
black bird, that stood on the board, by Fartum a pudding, and by pistum
fartum, a pan-pudding that's baked.

The 6. Jest.
Do you see ponder bawd, says one to his companion (^tting in a playhouse
together) she should have bin burnt once in Paris for a martir^: A martyr quoth
the other? why she has suffered for the truth here in London, for she was
carted but last weeks.

The 7. Jest.
Sir (says a Justice to a bailie^^e, that had brought a cutpurse before him)
keep that knave till I call for him anon when I am more at leisure: yes quoth
the bailieffe, I will keep the knave for your worship.

The 8. Jest.
A Woman seeing a tumult in the open street, about a man and a woman, asked one
of the standers by, what the matter was: sa^es he* Thou art a whore; Thou art
an arrant knave (says the woman) to call me whore, why about this (quoth the
party that was asked the question) did those two fall out.

The 9. Jest.
ONe called a Captain coward, and said he had no heart, its no matter, quoth
the Captain, I have legs.

The 10. Jest.
What is the reason says, a Gentleman to his friend, that chesse-play (being
so witty a game) is not used so much now as it had wont to be: diverse reasons,
says the others one is because Rookes stand too near the Bishops: another is
because Knights had wont to be better then pawnes, but now a good pawn is
better th^^ a Knight.

The 11. Jest.
A Tailor in this Town maintaind a whore besides his wise, who afterward came
to the knowledge of it: where upon, on^ wondering how it should be discovered,
because the Tailor was a close fellow, asked one of his neighbors, how the
devil his wife could smell out his wench: oh; easily replied the other, for he
kept her under his wifes nose.

The 12. Jest.
An ancient Gentlewoman making her brag^, that she was descend^d from John of
Gaunt: One that stood by, said he thought she was rather descended from William
the Conqueror, because her face was so old.

The 13. Jest.
ONe demanded of his friend what was the reason that when a man (...) a light
Wench, the ^^st word he speaks to her is, Gentlewoman will you go to the
Tavern? O says the other, ^ Leman is never good without wine.

The 14. Jest.
A Couple of Seruingmen, having drunk hard in Southwarke, came to take water
about ten or eleauen of the clock at night, at S. Mary-oueries sta^res: But the
M^^ne ^^ning, and a puddle of water lying before them, which they could not
perfectly discern (without better ^ies) by reason that their shadows bid it,
one of them ^^umbled and fel^ in, laboring with his hands and feet as if he
had bin a swimming, his fellow^ stood (so well as a man in his case could stand
looking upon him and said: Art thou gone? Art thou gon^ Jesus recea^^ thy soul,
yet if thou can but get the Temple stairs, theirs some hope thou shall do
well enough: tush says the other (that was down,) I look not to g^t, so I
may save my self, I care for no more.

The 15. Jest.
A Silly fellow being for some misdemeanor brought before the old Recorder,
after some short ^xamination, was (by him) demanded whom he seru^d; I serve
(quoth the fellow) a poor kinsman of your good worship. A poor kinsman of
mine thou varlet, who is that? look you says he, and drew from under his
cloak a flute.

The 16. Jest.
A Player riding with his fellows (in a year of Peregrination) up and down
the countries, resolved to be merry, the they ^ot little money, and being to
pass through a Town, h^e gets a good way before the rest, crying (wi^h his
drawn Rapier in his hand) which is the Constables house where is the
Constable; the dogs of the parrith at the no^se, fell to barking, the Threshers
came running out with their ^^^iles the Clounes with rakes and pitch-forks,
asking without what the matter was, cried still, and you be men bring me to the
Co^^^able. At last, the wise Gentleman appeared in his (...): Are you the
Constable says the player, yes that I am for fault of a better, quoth he, why
then blurt Master Constable says the other, and clapping spurs to his
horse, gallopd away amain, some of the companions laughing, others railing,
the Constable swearing, and the rest of the players that came behind, post
through the thickest of them, and laughing the whole Town to scorn, as if it
had bin the fool in a Comedy, which made y^ hob-nailewearers stamp ten
times worse then they did before.

The 17. Jest.
A Company of merry Gallants, coming in a winter night late from a Tavern, to
increase that mirth in the streets (as they went along) which the wine had
begotten in them before, fell to taking down of La^thornes that their hung
out. And one of them being nibling to untie the cord at which a Sconc^ hung: a
servant of the house by chance suddenly opened the door, and took him at his
work, roughly asking him what he meant to do there, nothing Sir, says the
other, but to s^uff your candle.

The 18. Jest.
A Young man passing to his lodging somewhat late, was by the dreadful voice
of browne-bilmen, called to come before the Constable; he did so, but perceiving
him that sat there in the examiners office to be no Constable, but knew him to
be a bare Deputy, and had for wages served (for other men) some six or seven
years together, y^ fellow gave him scuruy words, for which the Uice-regent of
the Ward, grew so into choler y^ he swore, the great Turk should not ransom
him from lying by the heels: nay more, he would execute Justice in his own
proper natural person, and lead him himself; he did so, and the other (...)
before, but in the middle of Cheapeside be kneeled down, crying out aloud: O
thou everlasting Constable, what meanest thou to do with me?

The 19 Jest.
A Seruingman bringing a Capon and white-broth to the t^ble, stumbled and let
all fall to the ground, for which his Master reuilde him, and said, I could
have done so much my self, I think so, quoth the fellow; any fool may do
it, now it is done before him.

The 20. Jest.
Upon a time when there was a great muster made by the City, of soldiers, a
country fellow seeing them march thr^ugh the streets, inquired of one that
stood likewise by as a beholder, to what end these soldiers kept this
marching? mary to Mile-end says the other: yea but to what end, are those
Lighters and Boats, and Ships, providing on the River? quoth the country man
why to Theames-end, answered the other, nay but then says he again, to what
end should they make such ado both by Land and water? faith replied the other,
to no End.

The 21. Jest.
I Think (say some to his friend) I am the (...) coxcom^ living: truth, so
think I, says the other: why should you think so (replied the first, and
grew half angry) mary said the second, because you say so, and I hope none
should know that ^^tthen your self.

The 22. Jest.
A Pair of Players growing into an emulous contention of one another worth,
re^ulde to put themselves to a day of hearing (as any Players would have done)
but stood only upon their good parts. Why says the one, since thou would
same be taken for so rare a piece report before all these (for they had a small
audience about them you must note) what excellent parts thou have discharged?
Mary says the other, I have so naturally played the Puritan, that many took
me to be one. True says the first again thou playdst the Puritan so naturally,
that thou could never play the honest man afterward: but I (quoth he) have
played the Sophy: the Sophy, replied the second: what a murren was he? What was
he says the other: why he was a Turk: right, quoth his adversary get to play
as many Turks parts as thou can, for ^^e be hanged if ever thou playst a
good christian.

The 23. Jest.
A Gentlewoman coming to one that stood at a window reading a book, Sir (said
she) I would I were your book, (because she lou^d the Gentleman,) So would I
quoth he, I wish you were. But what book would you have me to be (said the
other) if I were to be so? Mary, an Almanacke (quoth the Gentleman) because I
would change every year.

The 24. Jest.
TWo Brothers meeting together, said the welthier of them, to the other: And
how goes the world Brother? what, you rub out, make shift to live Yes faith
replied the second, I thank God, and live without shifting too.

The 25. Jest.
A Citizen ^^tting with his wife at door, called his child to him (that was
playing before them,) to give him an apple, and bid him say, thank you Father*
the mother likewise was busy to teach him that lesson But a Gentleman passing
by, just at the instant, (who belike had taken up of the wife, some of her
husbands commodities) stepped to her, and whispring in her ear, asked if she
were not ashamed to teach her child to lie being young: the husband seeing a
stranger so sau^ie with his wife, grew half angry, and asked her what customer
that was, and what he spoke in her ear: Nothing Sir (said she) but seeing me
eat apples, he asked if I would have any cheese to my fruit.

The 26. Jest.
What reason (says one so his friend) has your Lord to keep a fool? He has
no reason at all, answered the other.

The 27. Jest.
THou art an arrant Beggar, says a Merchant to a Scholar: true Sir, (answered
the Scholar) for I am an hone^^ man: but you can be no Beggar, for all the
city knows you Play the Merchant.

The 28. Jest.
A Woman finding her husband reeling in the stre^tes, till he was unable to
stand, rayld upon him, and said: art not thou ashamd to lie like a drunken
beast, thus in the open streets? thou lie like a sober whore as thou art,
quoth he, if I were a beast, I would not lie drunk.

The 29. Jest.
ONe that had bin Knighted but lately, ryding through Poules churchyard, his
wife, his chamber-maide, the nurse, and two young children, sitting in the
Coach with him, his son and heir, leading the way before: the creatures in
blew, trotting too and too behind: Oh says a prentice that ^^ood in his shop,
to his fellow: By Jove me thinks, its a brave thing to be a Knight: A brave
thing, quoth (...) fellow: what an ass art thou: a man may have any thing for
money.

The 30 Jest
AN old man talking with his son, and comparing this Age, with that which he
lived in, when he was a Boy: said, that now the world was clean found vpside
down: Nay that's not true father, (replied the other) for i^ it were so, women
should go with their heels upwards.

The 31. Jest.
A Lady that by sitting to see a play at Court, came home late, called for
victuals, and swore she was as hungry as a dog: It may be as a bitch Madam
(said her page, standing by) else the comparison will not hol^.

The 32. Jest.
A Fishmonger having lost all his money at dice, to another gamster, saving
three or four shillings, clapped it all down on the board together: What do
you set (said the other? this Dosser quoth the fishmonger) and then I have done.

The 33. Jest.
ONe that had never bin seen to handle weapon, being met with a great
basket-hilt sword by his side was demanded, why he carried so much Iron about
him. Mary said he, for four causes, to kill dogs, and to keep off Sergeants,
to huff bawdes, and to guard my whore.

The 34. Jest.
A Young man, being taken by a watch in the day time, for an idle fellow, was by
a Constable brought before one of the Sheriffs of London, and being examined
what he was, and whom he had served, it was found that he had bin in diverse
services, but had shifted his Masters, almost every year whereupon the
Sheriff said, he should go to bridewell, and there grind chalk. I am
contented to do so, answered the fellow* but do me Justice good Master
Sheriff, let all your Officers h^^ sent to grind chalk too, for I am sure
they shift their Masters, every year as well as I.

The 35. Jest.
A Barber standing very sadly at his shop door, one of his customers came to
him, and asked him why he looked so scuruily: Oh said the Barber, my maid has
had a sore mischance, my man has played the knave with her, and got her with
child: Call you that a mischance quath the other? of all chances in the dice, I
warrant your maid likes that best: your man has done no more then what he is
bound to by indenture, which is to follow his trade, and that's to trim folks.

The 36. Jest.
A Country Gentleman, coming down Westward by water to London, upon the day
when my Lord Majors Galley ^^ist was in all her holliday attire, and seeing
such triumphing on the Theames, but not knowing the cause, demanded of his
Watermen, why there was such drumming, and piping, and trumpeting, and
wherefore all those Barges (like so many Water-pageants) were carried up and
downs so gaylie with Flags, and Streamers? It was told him, the Lord Mayor went
that day to be sworn, to Westminister. What need your Lord Mayor (quoth he)
go so far to be sworn: I have heard ther^ is as good swearing in London, as
in any place in England: but go all these (in black gowns) to be sworn
there too? No (Sir) said his Waterman, these swear fast enough in the city.

The 37. Jest.
A Company of Gallants having supped in a Tavern, and being (as the fashion
is) extremely ouer-reckend in their bill of Items, yet paying all, departed in
as extrea me a chafe; swearing, never to hold up their hands again, at that
unmerciful bar: One of the rest* as he went along, demanded in mockery,
what was to pay: Nothing, said one of the pewter-potclinkers: All is paid sir;
i will take my oath upon a book: All is paid answered the other, for we paid you
well, and you have paid us soundly.

The 38. Jest.
A Scrinener meeting an Atturnie in Fleete-streete, (after some talk had
passed between them) asked him how they should do (...), so much of the (...)
was cut off: truth says the Atturnie, for my part (...) shuffle for one:
Michaelmas term you know is like a great household loa^e, you may cut out a
good many shi^es, and yet feeds upon it well too, I care not, so I may come but
to have a cut, at the last cantle. But how (quoth the Scrinener) if it be cut
all clean away: Say it be (replied the Lawyer,) its but like a Barbers
cutting off a man's hair, within a little time after it will grow again, and
he (...) to (...) again.

The 39. Jest.
When the Horse (...) on the top of Poules, a Seruingman came sweating to his
Master, that was walking in the (...) I Will* and told him the wonder he had
seen, and what multitudes of people were in the streets staring to behold it,
the fellow most vehemently entreating his Master, to go and make one. Away
thou fool^ (said he) what need I go so far to see a Horse on the top, when
I can look upon so many Asses at the bottom: O yes Sir, replied the
Seruingman* you may see Asses here every day, but peradventure you shall never
see a Horse there again though there were a thousand beasts in the citti^.

The 40. Jest.
A Clarke of y^ Guyide Hall, being requested by his Client (at the end of a
Trial) to draw him out a bill of charges: Yes said the Clarke, I will draw it
out presently, and did so, the Client running it over, knew to himself, that
he was at more cost with him, then was needful, yet said nothing, because he
was to use his help in other matters, but paid it all: and then requested my
young Lawyer, to go drink a cup of Muscadine with him at the Tavern, which
he did: the Client at the end of the shot, paying all too. Nay them (quoth the
Clarke) By the Lord, I have done you wrong, to put you to so much charges. In
good troth answered the Clie^t, so I thought before, though I said nothing, but
since you swear it, now I dare verily believe it.

The 41. Jest.
TWO Citizens ouer-taking one another, as they came from Westminister, (the
one of them being exceeding pen^^ue,) it was asked by the other, why he went so
heavily: O quoth he, I have reason to go heavily, for I had an Action tried
to day at Westminister, of 200. ^. and it is gone against me. Who was your
Counsel said the other: Mary such a one, replied the second. What strange
qualities, (quoth the first) have these men of law, the self same man that
makes you so heavy, has made me exceeding light.

The 42. Jest.
A Prisoner that stood upon his coming forth* was put backs till he had paid,
such fees as the Keepers demanded of him, which he thought were unreasonable,
and against both l^we and conscience, whereupon he raild at them, called them
bloud-hounds, bloud-suckers, hel-hounds, and such other ungodly names: but one
standing by, counsaild him to hold his tongue, and not to spit his venom
against men that are in place, for said he, Keepers of Prisons are as good men
as the best, where they take.

The 43. Jest.
A Young wanton wench that had married an old man, being a Forrester, who^ she
had so transford, that coming amongst the heard of Dear: he went for a Stag,
fell suddenly sick, for the love of a Galla^t, that had a good while together
gone a hunting with her, but upon some dislike of his game, gave it over: the
kind old fellow her husband, that suspected nothing, brought her a Doctor, but
the cause of her disease being love, she proud him a D^nce; he could neither by
her water, nor by feeling her pulse, find what sickness bred within her:
whereupon the old Ranger her husband, persuaded her, to show all how it came
first upon her, for said he, we must hide nothing from our Physician. Why then
(quoth she) good husband show your forhead to him, which me thinks is all
broken out: Alas said he, that's only the weakness of thy sight. Nay husband,
(said the sick lover) if your brows grieve not you, they shall never hurt me.

The 44. Jest.
A Country H^bbin^ll, h^^ing seen she mad-folkes in Bedlam, fell so in ^oue
with their tricks, that he swore he could and in his heart, to live in the
Sommer-time amongst them, and demanded (of him that carried him thither to see
them) how he might soonest be made to run mad, if one had such a mind^,
easily said the other, for do but mary with a whore, or else have to do with
players, and thou shall quickly run mad.

The 45. Jest.
A Wench having a good face, a good body, and good clothes on, but of bad
conditions, sitting one day in the two-penny room of a playhouse, and number
of young Gentlemen about her, against all whom she maintaind talk. One that sat
over the stage said to his friend: do you not think that yonder flesh will
stincke anon, having so many flies blowing upon it. Oh (quoth his friend) I
think it stinckes already, for I never saw so many crows together, but there
was some carrion not far off.

The 46. Jest.
Look (said one) is it not strange? yonder is a fellow that the last day went
for a Lieftenant, and now he is a Pandor: Alas said one that stood next him,
Soldiers you know if they cannot get it by fair means, they will have it out
of the flesh.

The 47. Jest.
A Couple of Gentlemen talking of a common Punck, one of them said she was a
Recusant: Nay before God, quoth the other, that's a lie, she will take any thing.

The 48. Jest.
A Uniuersity man, called one of the Constables of London, Onyon, at which the
Constable, (as if he had bin slyced into pieces) kept a coil, and wondered,
why he should call him an Onyon, that was rather one of the best dishes, that
stood upon the table of Justice; Mary said the Scholar, I tell thee again
thou art an Onyon, because thou have a great head, but no wit in it.

The 49. Jest.
TWo Tradesmen falling out, and vpbrayding one another with housekeeping, and
miserable feeding of their servants: Says the one, I spend more mustard and
vinegar, in a year in my house, then thou do beef in thine. Nay quoth the
other I believe thee, for I always took thee for a very saucie knave.

The 50. Jest.
A Notable scolding Queen, ralling hand to hand, with three men that were her
neighbors, and beating them all three at it, because it was her own weapon;
her husband standing by ^ taking part with neither. At last she began to
revile him, and told those that fl^ckt about her, how her husband thought to
have every rascal a top on her: And reason good, quoth one that ^ood by, what
(...) Iades for, but to be made hackneis?

The 51. Jest.
A Gentleman made all the friends he could, to the Captain of the french Kings
guard, that he might be one of them, but the Captain told him, he was so
hardly pressed upon by sun^ry Noble men for their Servants, and fellows, that he
could not by any means do him the pl^^sure: Oh sir (quoth the gentleman) sure
you mistake* you are not (as I am told) so pressed upon by so many Noble men, but
rather with so many Nobles.

The 52. Jest.
A Water-bearer complaynd before a Justice, of his wifes misusing, and
ouer-maistring him: it is strange quoth the Justice, that you two should jar,
for I am told, that you (Sir) are never seen to go into an Alehouse, but
your wife is seen there too; you are never drunk, but she is drunk too: you
never quarrel with your neighbors, but she quarrels too; I wonder that having
quallities so alike, you should no better agree. So do I and it please your
Worship (said the Waterbearer) for my own part, I could agree with her, if
she were worse, so she would be but better; I pray therefore let me have her
bound, either to her good behavior, or else to the peace. Seek but out a
Scriueuer (quoth the Justice) that can make such a ^ond, and thou shall have my
furtherance.

The 53. Jest.
A Farmer of the country going to Law, for certain Acres, about which he would
never have ve^tured his money but that his Council whetted him on, by telling
him the matter was clear on his side, and that all the Law in England could
not take it from him; came iocundly up to the Term and yet after much heauing
and shouing was overthrown Horse and foot, so that he had scarce money le^t
to carry him home, whereupon meeting an acquaintance of his, and wondering (as
he said) that men of learning should so much ouershoot themselves, in that
wherein they are so perfect: oh (replied the other) the Sun shows men their
shadows, but not their faces.

The 54^ Jest.
AN Apothecary that had a gallant creature to his wi^e, was wondered at, that
she (especially) and himself could be so rich in apparel, and so expensiue
in diet, having no customers resorting to their shop for any physical stuff,
but only a few Gentlemen that came to take pipes of the divine smoke:
whereupon some of his neighbors giving up their credit, that this geere could
not last long, oh (said one of them) you are all deceived in that man, it is
not possible he should sink, he is so well held up by the head.

The 55^ Jest.
A Young bryde (that had married a stale ou^d bachiler) sat at the wedding
dinner with a very sad and discontented look, to think what a ba^ market she
had bin at^ but an Ancient merry gentlewoman ^^tting next to her, cheerd her
up, in her ear thus, daughter quoth the never repent the bargain thou ha^^
this day made, for an ou^d horse will hold out a ^^long journey, as well as a
nagge of four year old: It may be so, (quoth the bride,) but as little skill
as I have in riding. I doubt whether he can hold out in some hye waye^ that I
could name.

The 56^ Jest.
AN impudent fellow meeting a civil gentlewoman upon a narrow cawsie, that she
could not pass him without striving (in courtesy) to give wayrudely brake out
into this question Gentlewoman are not you a whore? She being nothing dan^ed at
his blunt beha^iour, but having more wit about her then he had civility,
answered him thus, trust me Sir I am none now, nor ever was I any but once, and
that was when your father being no better then a Chimny-sweeper, lay with me
all night, whilst she whom you now call mother kept y^ door.

The 57. Jest.
A Company of ^heeues, brake (...) night into a country schoole-maisters
house, but he hearing them, never stired out of his bed for the matter, but
cried out aloude you mistake your mark my masters, go to the next house,
that's a rich Farmers, I wonder you will loose time to seek any thing here by
night, when I my self can find nothing by day.

The 58. Jest.
THree waiting gentlew^men sitting up late one evening began to shriue one
another, and to know what manner of Lovers each other had: says the first I
love o^e of our Seruingmen, and I (quoth the second) love the Tutor, nay (says
the third) then I like my choice best, for I love my Ladies Gentleman Usher:
out upon him, cried one of the other, I had rather ten other men should lie
with me night by night, then one gentleman usher.

The 59^ Jest.
TWo friends having drunk much Tobacco as they safe togeither in a chamber,
(one of which was in love with one of the ^^p^ny (...) sinnets that lay in y^
Spittle in shoredich, and they both having spet much upon the ground, one of
them suddenly started up, and with the end of a wand stood rakeing up and down
in the spettle that lay before them, the other wondering at it, asked what he
meant by doing so? mary quot^ his friend, I am trying if I can find what
^illanie thy (...) punc^ (whom thou dotest upon) is committing in the Spittl^^.

The 60. Jest.
A Pipe of kindled Tobacco being offered to (...) y^ was not^^ to be a greedy
taker of it, was by him refused, and being demanded, why he that loved it so
well, should now leave it? he answered, for three bad properties that he found
in it, for sa^^^ he, Tobacco makes any man a thee^e (and upon that hangs
danger) a good fellow, (and that requires cost,) and a niggard (the name of
which is hateful:) It makes him a thief for he will steal it from his
father, a good fellow, for he will give the smoke to a beggar: a niggard, for
he will not part with his ^or to an Emperor.

(...)
The discoueries made by Cock Wat, the walking spirit of Newgate.
COck Watt, as I am priua^ly known, and commonly called by knaves, thieves and
con^catchers but more properly named C^ck W^r^ who gives warning to Court,
city and country.

Have amongst you then, for the forefront of my name Cock, know I am so titled
and discovered by it, in y^ place where I keep my twinkling (...), as
distinctly as your likely horse by his white star in y^ forehead, your wa^ton
wench, by her black patch worn on the side of her browe your house of
iniquitis, by little cakes and less cans, and your perfect tuddlecap by his
red nose And not improperly neither, (...) called Cock, for about that time
when the last (...) takes his farewell of the ensuing day and that early bird,
the morning^ herald gives his wakefull sum^o^s to the dark clouds (under
whose canopie, thieves, baud^s, and strumpets do their hatefu^l actiuities) to
disport themselves from the desired day by whose cheerefulnes, the honest
laborer reioycingly, eats his bread got by the sweat of his brows, do I
like a cand^e at his half going out, in that stillness of ho^res, making my
sovereignty amongst the monstrous thee^es and murderers, and my pa^lac^ a
prison^ creeping up the wall, from side to side, and roof to roof, appear.

So much for the character of my name Cock, now for my name, and nature of my
name Watt, or Wary, thus: know y^ I am never seen to make my visitation and
nigh^^ progr^sse, to the terrifying of some, and comfort of other: that either
in my Journey see me^ or the next morning hear of me: but about thr^^ days
before the sessions or (...) when coming into the prison. I find for several
offenses, plenty of offenders, some lying on hard (...)-beds, but the most
(...) on harder bordes* some with course (...) and thin couerings, the rest
in (...) of a (...) barle^, or other couer^ure, heavy Irons, some (...)
lawyers, some for walking on the padd, some hor^est^a^^rs, ^ome mi^s, some
foy^^^, some stals, some I^glers, some (...), some morts some li^^s, some
d^coy^s, all cunning (...) and cosoning quea^s, and of all these, wh^^ they
are, and their several course of (...), in their due places.

Where bone^^ reader thou shall perceive, how easily thou (...) be deceived,
bow the goods (...), be ready to accuse, nay even to I^dite thy guiltless
ser^ants, be suspicious of thy Children, and only by the di^elish sleights of
many, who (...) with a fairer gloss of bravery, honest show of behavior, or
private (...): feed like drones upon thy labors, and (...) like vipers in the
common wealth.

But for my power and benefit of arrival in your prison; know I most comm^nly
appear on the side of a wall, and from thence carry my self about in as swift
a motion, as water glides from a spring, from bed to bed, and b^^rde to boorde,
only at the head of every pris^ner, I make a several stay: And as it (...)
given me by divine power* I draw from each particular* the certain
continuance of his life to succeed, and whether at the following sessions or
Assizes, they shall be c^^demned to suffer their deserved and shameful death
or not.

At first I make my seat upon the ^eade, where resting a while, I suddenly
start from thence up to the roof, and down again upon the face, in as quick
motion as lightning, when as if I had then received, by certain Intelligence,
whether the party I have ^oothed on, shall be executed or not, I thus to the
Judgment of any who are then waking make it evident.

For upon my returns, the prisoner I have made trial of, shall shortly (...),
about his head and face, like a lamp near (...) I make a (...) twinkling and
go out. But it has pleased GOD, his present Imprisonment has been laid
upon him, as a (...) and merciful correction, for his future amendment and to
instruct him, that as this certain to dishonest pleasure, is begot a compa^^on
repentance, so to vnlawf^ll actions, does become this succ^ssion, a shameful
death on (...) or the rest, that for that time are preserved, my light saileth
not, but (...) and descends from one to another: (whom I find lying, as they
have lived, like sw^e) but decays not one any but such only whom shortly
the Law shall condemn, and the speedy execution thereof, cut off.

While thus then, I continue my visitation, know that to th^^^ to whom for
that moment I am visible, the horror of thunder, mixed with the ^lashes of
affrighting lightning, dreadful to Beasts, terrible to Man, putting him in
mind, that in such a minut, and by such m^^^ngers, the world shall determine
and every sinner shall be called to a strict account, wherein the best shall be
found short of their reckoning, as I say, the remembrance of that hour, begets
not a more earthquake in the bosoms of the wretched, then does my light
(being no more in show, then a star by us) increase in my beholder: for in
what ra^cke of the seven deadly ^inn^s so ever his conscienc^ does witness
against him, that his prisoned life has marched in, seeing my light, for the
same foot^^^ps, extinct upon another, he expects the like due rewards is
desc^nd upon him self.

And in this terror of his, the plagues here is every several sin, are as
visible in the eyes of his soul, ^s they were then thrusted in Hell, for the
corruption of his body.

If he have been as proud as a Player that feeds on the fruit of divine
poetry, (as swine one (...)) that (...) from the noble O^^ of their ^^ndes, and
in the least Win^er of prosperity, will not stick to make their ^^ye, in that
bo^ome which of late (...) them, in an hour (...) like this, they shall with
trembling remember (what in the height of their vaineglory they presumptuously
forgot) that though they are in their fulst of rankor, fatted up like a Bore in
his trunck that eats up all is brought unto him, yet are they still but swines
flesh, that the damnedst show, will not eat a bit one, nay the Devils
themselves thought them the fittest r^^^es, under which to keep their Court
in, semper excipimus, and that a minuit will come perhaps in this moment, when
they shall be like Tantalus in hell, to gape after their old fodder, but get
none of it or in such an hour as this, when either I or death shall visit them
they shall evidently perceive it was their pride which is the peruerter of all
virtue, taught them to think, themselves wise, but proved fools, instructed
them to despise learning, scorn poverty, mew at desert, yea and that merit,
which from stark Asses, which they naturally were, made their fit momusses
worthy to be laughed at, yet remembers them withal in their best prosperity,
they are but like the flower sparagus, that grows out of every man's dunge, and
contemned of every man.

If he have been as envious as a serpent, enemy to all mankind, and has
given as many pricks, to the destruction of a man's life, and reputation, as a
tailor, stitches in his clothes; for this long tongue and toothed maleuole,
(that looks as desperately on the prosperity of any, as your usurer on a young
heir, greedy to devour him) has not the feathers of his birdboults glewed on
only with backbitings, calumnies, and slanderous reproaches which only
contummate the credyt, but he has as many shapes besides, as Proteus, and like
Signior don spaniardo, who in fight, aymeth all at the heart, or your northern
fencer, in playing his prise, who sticks your mark fairer upon his own breast
yet sends his stoccado cleanly into your bosom, so will he upon any occasion
of reuengement shift himself into several suites of Apparel, into a man's
dish, his drink his nosegay, his any thing he has an excellent wardrop too,
change of garments, and not beholding either to his mercer, merchant or tailors
Book (as I hope most of our gallants are) for a penny. O envy thou forerunner
of murder (as a great man's sumpter-horse who makes show before that his
Masters coming after) ^^sit thy (...), wash thine e^es that looks flaming
like the ceaselesse fire of the Glashouse, do not use to grate thy jaws, nor
have the continual hartburning at other men's happiness, but by y^ misery
which these feel, by beholding of me repent thy life, and reform thy
condition, for know it seems to them in the instant, they are torn by Devils
in the shapes of dogs, in that bl^^^ and read kingdom, for being so dogged to
mankind, twixt whom and them there was a christian affinity here upon earth.

If he have been as letherous as a mountain goat, and to keep his
effeminacy in repair, and make his desires perpetual, has been at cost to
maintain his monthly bathes, somentations, electuaries, and to cherish his
loy^es in high (...), has had his Culle^^es of dissolved pearl, and bruis^
amber, (...), cocksparrows, brains of larks, lambst^^^ all the earths chiefest
vyan^s, to r^^lenish his pleasures, and p^mper up his rancknesse in this minut,
by me his ^essenger, he is remembered, all is vanity: And begins to reckon with
him self, how miserable man is, whose body is preserved from the plenty and
cheifest of the land, and by the delicatest store of the sea, yet thus nourisht
and nusled up, not as all other creatures or for man y^ nobler person, but for
worms the very dregs and ^^^all of the earth* and as he has lived
licentiously like a g^ate, so his skin bathed, rubd, sterket nay perhaps
painted for that purpose, shall then like a goat be tand not to make spruce
spanish leather, fit for wanton Ladies shoes, but to make gloves for friends,
(like Salamanders skins) able to resist the heat of the low country: for
though they are far from the Sun, they always live in the fire, and the
best ^ffice their hides can be put to ^ is to make pumps for Proserpin, gra^^d
Pluto King of Lecyfrs Concubine.

And as of these^ so insues to all the rest, such as by drunkenness, have made
their bodies like dry fats, and their fac^^ like a shriefes post of several
colors or swearers, whose oaths fly out at their mouths, like smoke out of a
chimney, that de^^les all the way it passes, or liars, and such commonly are
thieves: for lying and stealing, or as inseparable companions, in sinful
society, as a theef^ and a receiver, and indeed all sinners of what condition
so ever, are at the sight of me, struck with a sudden and violent remorce,
reckon up their lives, and make themselves Judges of themselves in these
offenses, wherein their conscince gives ^estimonie against them, that they are
guilty, and in (...) present horror, they s^eme in mind to ta^e the upright
Justice and punishment which they know, long before this they have deserved.

Well, having brought these that behold me into this ague, you walking spirit
will (...) them in their (...), and return to the rest, whom we left (...)
^^ely by the way, I could wish that I had that su^^erance in the City, that I
progress once a month, about the Goal, I then durst undertake, you should
soon hear of more charity, and fewer cuckolds, find-lesse houses* and more
hospitality, not so many promises, but more payment, not so many Foles rich,
and so many wise Beggars, nothing should be amiss, all should b^^ amended, or
your Cock Wach would walk the sinful round like a Sentin^ll, and the sinners
should swet ^ort.

But to them whom I left sleeping, not like the rest of good men, wherein they
find comfortable recreation after their careful labors, but like the sleeps
of ^illayns: For somnia bonoru^ meliora quam malorum. So I find these not in
sound sleeps, but distressed flu^bers, troubled dreams, visited with
stairings, groans and passions, and afflicted in mind, as they are persecuted
in body, one that went drunk to bed over night, he reeles in his sleep, and
swears to begin at the last half pot, where he left in the morning, others
that have been ^* soysts, all or the most part of their time, and thriued well
in the profession, and now lately drawn into some other action, as they call
it, as to break a house, or to lift a cup from a Uinteuers red bar, to be
(...) for it at the black bar in the old bailey, he curses his education,
complains of the destynies, malignes his stars, and concludes thus, what a
villon was I, to leave my old trade, meaning picking of pockets, to usurp and
^eale into an othermans mystery, (...)
namely house-breaking, or what other ways; I heretofore have lived well by
mine own, and that which I was brought up in, drawn forty or fifty pound for
me and my punck, in one term, out of a rum coues ^ung, (so called in their
canting use of speech) (and as much as to say in ours, a rich chuffes purse)
and now after in my many escapes, common bale, the help to many a venterous
thee^e, a plague of all Ill lucks, I must ride Crowee as much as to say,
beha^ged for a trifle, and in the bitterness of his passion, breaks out thus,
may all they take another man's trade upon them, never speed better.

Here you must understand every man keeps his own trade, among thieves as
orderly, as they of the twelve companies, as he that is a vintner, is a
vintener and no more, so he that is a pick-pocket, is a pickpocket and no more:
and so of the rest, yet in the end, closes up his elegy, being sung (...) his
dream, with this resolution, well I have seen the worst, it is but half a^
hours hanging, twill save me half a ye^res drinking, two turns, the knot
under the ear, and a wry mouth will do it* let me sweet heart, (speaking by
his mort) have a white sh^^te tied about me, and my black wrought Cap on my
head, my nosegay in my hand, it is but the way, which many a good fellow has gone
before, and welcome death, when she perhaps, then present with him, as if their
souls did ^^mpathise in one, answers dialogue wise to him, making up her
protestations with ^thes enowe, no doubt of it, his will see will s^^
performed, nay for his sake, she will never love none of his (...) more never
come up newgate stairs, nay for ever will be a stranger to the I Will of man, in
remembrance of him.

Well, suppose the Sessions past, our dreamer awake, and carried in a cart to
have a corner of Docter Stories cap, when she once s^ing him gone, makes no
doubt but he has borne a noose with him, will hold him fast enough from coming
back, and straight she forgets her promises, never to have more friends, nay
ten to one, never takes care to see him buried, y^ has brought himself to the
gallows for her, but rather studies, where and how, she may get money to be
drunk with a new love, and in fresh filled cups, make up a new combination
between the^, thus like water men, that shift their fares, from one landing
place to wait for another, so do these morts every sessions shift their
suitors, they dispatch o^e at Newgate stares, and a Noble to a groate, they take
up another betwixt that and Tiburne.

Yet shall it not be Impertinent, that I Cock Watt, your new discouerer, make
evident, what use these kind of people draw from these she creatures, (...).
both abroad and in prison, first know, that your thee^es traveling mort, is
partly a setter of rob beries, partly a thief her (...), but always a
receiver of whats^ ever is ^^lne and brought unto her: for which fellonies, if
him whom she calls her hus^and, chance to be apprehended, she tross in his
business, labors his adversary to be good to him, and suffer him to be bayld
^ut, you shall want no tears, no kneelings, no intercessions, no persuasions,
that it is the first fact that ever the poor man her bedfellow fell into, and
will you s^ke his blood, that he was never in prison before, and will you be
his ^^doing, when if you but search the record at Newgate, you shall (...) him
to have paid his garnish twenty times at least, but if it prove that at her
Importunity you are moved, and in pity of her, spare her mates life.

Take this from me, it shall happen to you, as to an honest Iuror of this City
not long since, who seeing a comely proper young man stand i^dighted for a
purse, and by his verdit given against him, ^as to be hanged, in pity of his
present youth, and hope of better grace to come, being at that time foreman of
the Jury, so labored with his a^^^tants, that for that fact he was acquitted,
who in recompense presently upon his discharge, paying his fees, came to the
place where this Iuror was, and picked his pocket, then i^ poor Cock may not
prevail with ^ou t^ spare none of them, learn this of Horras. Quo semel est
Imbuta re^ens seruabit odorem Testa d^^^

A (...) vessel will never be made sweet, and our english proverb is as
true as old, save a thief from the gallows, and heel hang you if he can,
and though these parties themselves will in person no more steal from you, yet
imboul^^cd by your pity they will be instruments, to entice others to work
you hurt, otherwise if she finds you not moved at her Crocadiles tears, but
according as justice in y^ case has provided will prosecute against him, then
falls she to railing against you, abuses your (...) ^annes your children curs^s
your proceedings, and if she have a child her self, brings it and says at
your door she will leave it, for you or the parish to bring up, if by your
means her hus^^nd perishes, thinking thus to overcome you with impudence, if
she could not do by persuasion, they that have had any trading know this to
be true, then poor Cock leau^ and every man to his ow^e discretion, and will
now tell how these she b^asts behave themselves abroad.

In the day time two of them never less, often more, w^lke up and down
streets together with their handbaskets in their hands, so neat and decent in
atire, that suspicion it self cannot cease on them for other, then people of
honest conversation when vigilantly as thy pass along, they cast their eyes
about, to observe where, they can find a shop furnished, but with one to give
attendance on customers, be it ma^^^^^r, mistress, or man, so but one they
respect not, which taken note of, into that shop of what trade soever they will
enter, for these will play small game before they will sit out, mary their
chiefs venture is either with Mercers, Gouldsmiths, Linen drayers, ha^^da^hers
and such like (now a simple man would think these should be credible people
that thus love to deal with the best^) at first they demand for this, or that
sort of wares, as rings, taffety, cambricks* hats, gloves, garters, or what
soever the shop keeps (...) of, much they desire to see but are contented
with none, yet still requesteth you to turn about and reach her this thing or
th^^ thing, all which trouble is to no more purpose, but that (...) your face
is away from them, they may ^^ke advantage to (...) somewhat away from you,
which at that instanc^ she that is ^ext you fails not (...) ^ffect, and
closely conuayes it to her that stands of fit purpose a pretty way off, thus
having the pray they fish for, she modestly dis^ikes your wares, says she is
sorry she has troubled you, she will now make bold to see further, and if she
cannot speed her self better, she will return to you again, and whilst she
is using this complement, sh^e withal opens her basket, shakes and begins to
gather up her cloth^^, and you seeing no occasion of mistrust, the one, laying
all means to free suspicion opens to you, and the other standing aloof and
not coming near your wares, kindly bids them welcome and so part, you to the
making up of your wares again (and ten to one for that instant miss nothing)
and they to make away that purchase, and by the like to provide for more.

Thus is many an honest Cityzen robbed, ten, nay perhaps, twenty times, vy the
vildnes of this condition, and of long time mistrust nothing, but coming to
cast up his shop, finds his goods gone, and no acount to be made of them, he
suspects his wife, distrusts his children, accuses his servants, when these
make pray of your endeavors, and consume your substance in as vild or vilder
manner then they get it.

Another instruction learn, to avoid these dangers by, at the coming in of two
in this fashion, into your shop, though by your vigilance both in laying out
and making up of your wares, you are certain there is nothing lost, yet of her
that stands aloof have this foresight, that nothing lie within her reach, for
while she perceiues your eye to be diligent on her you are serving, her eye is
not idle to observe what lies at random abroad, for thothey have been hole
^olts of Holla^d, pieces of Taffety, or Sattane probatum est, that many an
honest man having had a care of y^ o^e, have been by the other whom they
mistrusted not in the mean time deceived, for sometimes, they will not come in
as of one aquaintance, but when she perceiues you busied with the other, and
calls hard for such wares which she knows you, have, when you as loath to loose
a customer, entreat her but to slay a little and you will atte^d her straight,
she ^aies she will y^ other who^ you are seuing there prolonges the time, and
she walking about about till she has played her prise, in fit opportunity
takes h^^ leave and says she will come again when you are (...) more
leisure, and so at one time gives you the list and the slip, straight retires
home to her Copesmates, who never go^ abroad unless sometimes to be drunk but
live like ^wl^s, wh^ in the day are wondered at and seldom seen but by night,
when your goods are divided, and you the honor for your neglect iested at.

But if, as it is seldom they miss of their purpose, yet come they not home,
without means to set some other pr^ie^^ a foot, as by noting your doors
sellors, windows, casements, whether your servants lie in your shop, and how
they find all things easily for entrance, or defensiue^ against a burglary, y^
next night, when, with two or three men and a boy, the purposed act, as shall
be after revealed in what manner is undertook.

These that thus steal, for there be of them, both men and women, are among
them selves called running lifts, of which, there are that steal in another
manner, and thus it is. If they perceiu^ a Nobleman or gentleman's door open,
they will straight without asking press in, and so far up, even to the fairest
lodgings where if by chance they are met by any, and resisted with this
question, who would you speak withal, they have either of these two answers,
for their reply, Pray you is not this such a Ge^tlemans house, who dwells
within a ^^re or two of, or is not such a gentleman within, whose lodging they
know it is, and they themselves have watched his going out, but if as it often
happens, they be intercepted by none, what plate, apparel any thing of
worth happens in their way* it is (...) to their net: for in things that are
trifles, these will not venture, as I will now tell you of a trick that happened
to a gentleman of worth, nere Holborne, by one of this profession, and the she
thief yet living, the more is the pity.

This gentlewomans maid being up early in y^ morning it was her chance to
come out at the street door, of li^^^
to go into y^ sellor to fetch coals or some other necessaries, she had
presently to use, with this, she lift perceiving, slept in and in an instant up
toward the chambers (having provided at for the purpose, on her feet, a pair
of cloth (...) with pump soles, so far was she climde ^til she was at the
chamber door where the gentleman and his wife lay, as she suspected a sleep,
for it was in the morning early, the maid^ by this time was come out of the
sellor, and going forward with her business in the Citchen misdoubted nothing:
while she list^^ng at the chamber door if she could hear all quiet, in the
end went in, but it was the gentleman's chance at this time to be awake, and
perceiving between two curtens the glance of a woman to pass by, closed his
eyes of purpose and lay breathing as if he had slept soundly to note the event,
when she thinking all safe opened a press door that stood in the room, and
in which was the whole increase of the gentleman's plate, and began to ^ather it
out as charily, and with as much regard for bruising as it had bin her own,
first she filled this pocket, then y^, t^entother, took up this upper cote then
a second, then a third, even to her very smoke, which the gentlman perceiving
he thought like Banks his horse, or the Baboones, or captain Pold with his
motion, she would have shown him some strange and monstrous ^ight for his
silver and guilt before she had left him, at last having filled some eight or ten
deep pockets, too many for an honest body to bear, made the gentlman think
she had made them a purpose to carry his plate in, down went all her co^es as
the several couers of them, and having now left no more in the c^bbord ^ but
one fair basin and ewer out came that too, and being as charitably minded
toward that as the rest, because it should not lie abroad and take cold, she
g^ue it houseroome in her apron, which he that ought it percie^ing, said
smilingly to himself, I see now that thieves have no conscience, well she
began to trusse up her self, hoping for a boon voyage, and like a thief as
she came up, to steal out of the chamber, mary better ballast by three or
four hundred pound then at her coming to that rode, when the gentleman
stepping out of his bed^ caught her by the arm, and cried half share in
faith, for in this commody I have played a part and deserved it well, thanks
be to the Diuill, she had scarce so much yet as to blush at it, but in
brief, he called for his neighbors, upon whose coming, his goods being sound
about her, she was carried before a Justice, and from thence to prison, but
whether of the gentleman's mercy, or what composition, I know not, (but money
can do much) in three or four days, she outrun the keepers, and was quit of
her trouble, which makes poor Cock Watt to complain, that such ^^ld thieves
should have better luck then honester men, and for that I know, let them have
never so much mercy showed them, they are still like dogs, Redire ad vomitum,
what though one Broker, who had his beginning from an inch of this profession,
is now become an honest man, because he is rich, and a freeholder, he yet must
be no president for the rest, for might I have been her Judge, she should
have had her due, and ^anst Derriks ^ance in a hempen halter. I my self have
lived in the same state, when I was a creature on earth, wherein they remain,
and I know, their custom so vilde, and life so abhorred, that I had rather
choose with those, whom Circes transformed, to live in the nature of bruit
beasts, then to reassume my ancient habit, and live like them.

Another sort of these she morts, of (...)
or monsters. I must Anatomise unto you, who though their nature of stealing be
alike, their manner of atte^pting is different, yet their purpose one, and they
are led Glimerers. Your Glimerer, she is up in the morning between 5 or 6 of
the clock, dressed in her night attire her bodies and cotes scarce laced
together, her apron defusedly put on, and with a black bra^d in her hand, of
the color of her own soul, which she caries under her apron, as if to kindle
that, were her purposd business, about street she goes, taking the like
opportunity with the former, to go into any house where she finds the door
open nay presumes further: If it be in the darkest winter mornings, to knock
for admittance, if she but perceive a light^ when the maid or man servant, but
most commonly y^ maid, coming to know her arrand, she desires to have leave to
kindle her stick, which usual curtes^e be^ing granted, in she goes into the
kitchen^ and while her stick lies in the fire, as if she were a servant: newly
come to some Gentleman or Citizen thereabouts (whom she (...) perfect to
nominate) she begins with that goships chat, which is familiar and in use
amongst ^atling houswiues, which is to discover the humor, and manners of their
masters and mistresses, their form of government in their house, how they
agree, or disagree, one with another, and in what order they must rub their
rooms, wash, dress meat, reckoning up all the form of her huswiferie, to
keep her mistres (...) quiet, (when as she seldom meets it otherwise) finding
the other as ready to enquire and listen after novelties, as she to offer, she
begins to commend her cleanlines, and de^ence in keeping that house in so good
order, praises the pillors of the building, the necessary contriuing of it, and
offers her self to walk further into the next parlor, to have more caus^ to
speak more in her commendation, when this mistru^^les soul, proud to hear
her self praisde, and suspectlesse that she com^^ for any other end but to
kindle her stick, keeps waitfull eye over her, but gives way to her
presumption, which leave given she has dispatched that she came for in a
twinkling, and never comes back empty handed, takes up her stick, gives some
kind farewell at parting, as I hope we shall meet at the Backehouse, or Market
and be merry, or if you receive on Palm sunday next, I would be glad to have
your company, and so with her new purchase departs, the maid she follows her
business, and not long after, rises her master and mistres, when shortly
whatsoever the vulture had before made gripe of, is mist, the maid accused for
it, and the master and mistres angring against her, they saw themselves their
goods but late last night when they went to bed, and of her they must know what
is become of them, y^ accused wretch she weeps, protests she knows not, and
vows to her knowledge, nay she is certain there came none in but such a
gentlewomans maid, rehearsing her name, whose servant she had named her self
to be to kindle a brande, then whiles the master ^rets and is suspicious that
his maid is a thee^e, the servant is a ielous y^ the master or mistres have
been thieves to themselves, and conuaide away their goods, with intent to
defraud her of her wages, in y^ end the gentlewomans house before named is
enquired alter, and the servant examined, and not found to have been in the
others house, as the accused^ had inferd, the suspicion grows more strong: for
the master knows his goods to be lost, finds his servant whom he suspects to
fail in her answer, and doubting no such ^raudulent practice, as these drones
have invented, imprisons his maid, ^ay sometimes as in case of a fellon,
proceeds in ordinary trial against her, that were not our grave bench of
Senators, Preleous, and Patrons of this common wealth, careful to distinguish
betwixt party and party, the Lamb might oftentimes perish for the wolves
rauenings. So this I hope then shall be sufficient for masters to give
admonishment to their servants to be wary over them that come to kindle
sparks.

By your leave yet, and let your new discoueror wade a little further, and give
warning to Merchants wives and women of the best sort, to learn how to prevent
this fresh practice invented to deceive them.

There is a new company arising, though not yet half so many in manner, as y^
fellowship of the Porters, and thus call themselves Reachers, they walk
togeither Male and Female, and keep house together like man and wife, they
will have you a house to dwell at about Endfield, Brainford, or any place
within 6. 7. or 8. miles of London, but withal keep a private lodging for them
selves to retire unto, at one Brokers house or another in the suburbs, upon
the market days these two come to town* she attired like a comely country
woman, in cleanly white linn^ with a muster on her face, and in russet clothes
outward signs of the countries honest simplicity, and in her mawnd or basket
which she bears on her arm, lapt in a pure white cloth, some fine tidy pig,
fat goose, young kid, orh aunch of venison, indeed any provision but of the
daintiest, which either she can buy for her money, or more probably her mate
may steal from any, in this neat manner lapt up, the ware it self of the
delicatest, able to entice any eye to have a desire to buy of her, comes she to
make her markets, when lingering in the town, at on place of receist or other,
as they want no shelter t^^l toward y^ breaking up of the market, which is much
about y^ hour when exchange time is held for the m^ting of our merchants, when
thus co^iecturing, as very profitable it is, that at that time our worthiest
citizens are from home, they go into Milk-street, Bread-street, Lime-street,
S. mary Axe, or the most priuiest places where they kept their residence to
make their ^enture, when she knocks at the door, and demands of the servant
that comes whether her worshipful good mistress be within, and whether it
will be her pleasure, to buy of her, her goose, pig, kid, or whatsoever, when
showing it to the servant, (and she can do no other but commend it,) she prays
her to express the purely of it to her mistres, that she may bargain for it:
For in truth sister, quoth she, we poor country folks, dare not proffer any
thing so dainty as this to the open view of the market, lest any one of spite,
inform either the King, or my Lord Mayors officers thereof, and so our goods
shall be taken from us, we having not half the vallue returned us for
recompense.

With this reasonable and honest seeming prevention, the maid knowing her
mistres to be of the mind of all our Citizens gallant wives, loath to let any
dainties, or good thing go by from their own tastes, which they either have
desire unto, or may have for money, though they pay never so dear and their
husbands prove bankerupts for it, wills her to come stand within the door,
which she indeed requests, left any Catch-pole or busy knave should se her,
and so her commodity be forfeited, being as it is held unlawful, the sale to
be offered not at the market, well the maid goes up to inform her mistres,
(and withal takes the dainties along with her. whom she finds in her chamber,
perhaps scarce ready, for it is grown a fashion amongst them to eat their
breakfasts in their beds and not to be ready till half an hour after noone,
about which time, their husbands are to return from the Bursse and they make
it their dinner time, now while the maid is above, flattering her mistres (as
flattery is a part of their work, for why they have their wages, with the
delicasie of the offer and the cleanlines of the country woman, which brought
it to be sold, the Fox beneath (...) what pray she can espy, to carry home to
her den, when (...) hole piles of broad clothes, Cearses, or such like
commodities, too burdensome for any one to suspect a lone woman could defra^d
you of she straight beckens over her companion, who stands ready at an inch,
and being a quick good sturdey knave, with a hand shifts a way one of them.
This is no surmise, there is merchants in this town, by the loss of
commodities 20 ^ thick can witness it well, by this time the gentlewoman has
lik^ that which was brought her, calls for, and commends the country woman's
cleanliness, bargains with her at her own rate, and requests she may see
her chap-woman on the like occasion, by this also has my porter, though without
the badge of the porters Hall, brought his burden to the Brokers house* where
being once put in: it is an abisse too bottomless for any search to reach out
again. O your cloth is good ware, it may be cut out into several garments, by
this also my merchants come home, where soon taking note of his loss, it
makes his wives markets eat not half so sauery as they would have done, yet in
the end ^ends for a cup of sack, and comforts himself with this, that I in his
behalf, would admonish theword, Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.

And this much for my order of lists, Of F^ys^s.
which I hope shall be a caveat sufficient for courtiers, to have a care of
their chambers, gentlemen their lodgings, citzens their sho^s, chapmen to have
an eye at their fair, and by diligence, defend that hereafter which by these
means heretofore has been their hinderance.

Now to our Foysts, alias, pickpocket, alias cutpurse, he has as many alias as
a good gentleman of Wales* and indeed is as good a benefactor to the alehouse
he consists of an army of three strong* namely, foystes and snaps, his common
wealth to live in, or ground to encamp in, is the ancient great grand father
Powles, and all other little churches his children, besides Parish garden, or
rather (places of more benefit) public, and by your leave private play houses
Westminster hall is his good soil, the dark entry going to the Six clarcks
office, in chancary lau^ his in the term time his dear and special good
friend, London bridge his bountiful benefactor, all markets are his pur^eiors,
and carefully provide for him all faires his diligent factors, that bring him
in his provision in abundance, all pockets his exchequor, that are never shut
against him, progr^sses his true paymaisters, though they pay seldome-in y^
Court or cockpit, though the King himself be there, he dare encounter, he
pri^e^^^ges no person, nor no place exempt with him, only the Exchange
excepted, for says he, where merchants meet, is no meeting for us, If they
once take us, we are sure tog^ to the old turn, for they are men deal all with
great store of money, and very little mercy, the times when his skirmishes are
hottest, is y^ time when they run attilt, is the day the Lord Mayor takes his
oath, a new play, or when some great cause is hard at the Star Chamber, now for
the person himself that dus pick the pocket, and his ministers about him that
give furtherance to the action.

Know at a new play, he is always about the playhouse do^e, watches out of
which side you draw your purse, and then gessing whether the lyning be worth
the ventring, for that serves his turn, if he see you buying of ware at any
stall or shop, he observes when you pay fort, on which side you put your
purse, and that serves him likewise, If in a throng he thus comes to knowledge
whether your pocket be worth the sacking or no, If you be a man that once
appear likely to him, he gathers just behind, or on the side of you, and
there clapping his hand easily on the place where the bottom of your pockets
are, poyses them with all, and by the weight gets how well they are ballast,
if he be a Countryman that comes from far to the term, or one that dwells not
far from London, or seruingman, such either to bestow money, if he walk
without a cloak, as for the most part they will, two of them meet him at a
corner* and only with streaking of their hands on his hose, guess whether this
bail be worth the nibling at, nay perhaps at the first encounter, gave it the
draught, but this happens not always the general. Then thus.

When they have once agreed, which is the Coue they will ^asten on, if it be in
a throng or gasing after any object to delight you, the stall he gets before
you, and there he rings himself too and fro, while the foyst doing as much
behind, they both disquiet you, and the one pick your pocket. If they follow
you in the street, and once know where the bung and the bit is, as much as to
say, your purse and the money, out goes your stall before likewise, when
coming at a corner, by which you must pass, being direct before you, stoopes
of the sudden, as if to take up somewhat, when the other as near behind you,
as if he were to pass by in have, Ius^es you upon to there, and withal
draws your purse: Thus rather then fail, will he follow you, and offer upon
you twice or thrice, if he miss at the first of his purpos^ all this while, now
you shall see like a scout, he come after a loofe, watching, If any stranger
were suspicious of you in the iusle, or the man himself, which if he finds and
you before have sped then comes he apace after you, and ere the man in that
space, has time to miss^ his purse, and come after you, he glides by the foyst,
with these words, kinchen the coue toures, which is as much as, Fellow the man
smokes or suspects you, when the foyst slips the purse either to him or the
stall, and fears not to be searched, nay upon the challenge will so outface
the party: and stand upon his credyt, being sure there is nothing to be found
about him, and the rest gone: that the honest man is rather ready to ask him
mercy then accuse him: and now I will tell you a pretty tale of a foyst, whose
unpudent event happened at Charing Cross, not long since.

Their lived a foyst in this Town, whose gettings by the trade was so good,
that he kept his punck, though he called her his wife: in none worse ware, then
Taffeties and Ueluet of the best, and himself more like a rich knight, then a
kua^ish Cutpurse: and indeed the comeliness of his feature and fair behavior,
was so answerable to the bravery of his apparels, that it procurde him access
into the worthiest places, nay oftentimes made him esteemed as a companion with
the best, this fellow seeing a good lusty Seruingman, and one hopeful to have
some purchase in his pocket would serve his turn, if he could get it, stepped to
him, and as he wished gave him a little Iustle: and withal, twicht 3 ^ out of
his pocket, the seruingman, who but new before had ^ought a penny worth of
pares, and upon this thrust, ^lapping his r^and to his side and ^ist his purse,
stepped after the loy^, and rouded him, what do you here gentleman? (for by his
apparel he apear^d no less) though I put up your iustle, I would be loath ^o
have you put up my purse, there is three pound in it, come let me hat it again
and no more words out, the pickpurse upon this challenge began to revile the
honest fellow, calling him rogue, ^laue, knave, and I know not what, to charge
a Gentleman, of my fashion with thy purse, as they were at these words, being
spoke against a great fair House, where some great personage dwelt, comes me a
Coatch whirring on the sudden, and there made a stand, to discharge his
burden at that lodging, when as the Lady dismounted, the foyst being
exceeding gallant, took occasion by the hand, stepped to her, caught her by the
arm, and lead her in, leaving the f^llow in a muse, whether he were awake, and
might assertaine himself, he had lost his money or no.

The foyst by this time had brought in the Lady, where after some curtes^e
discharged, stepped to her, kissed her and departed, leaving the gentlewoman in as
strange wonder who it should be had done her that present service, and blaming
her memory y^ she should forget in what place was begun their acquaintance.
(when indeed her eyes and his did never parle together before) yet gessing by
his habit, he could be a man worthy of no less then that kindness, a kiss
which she had received, she past it over.

By this time the foyst was come back to the seruingman, and rou^dly began to
tell him, that now he had brought in his honorable Aunt, he should know he had
done him wrong, to charge him with his purse, he would fight with him, y^
^ellow seeing him self thus outfaste out of himself, and holding it his best
to proceed no further, replied, It he had done him wrong, ^r he was sorry fort,
but howsoever he was sure three pound he had when (...) ius^ed him, and he
was as sure it was he ius^ed him, and withal answered the foyst, I am as sure
thou presumptuously did challenge me for it, and I am sure I will fight with
thee.

The fellow half angered for the loss of his money, entertaind this offer: and
into Tuttle fields they went where they had not changed past half a dussen
thrusts, but the foyst had hurt him in the arm, and so they gave over, but ere
they parted, the foist puts his hand into his pocket, told out twenty shillings
of his money, and speaking to the fellow, said that he should see he would
prove himself a Gentleman, since he had but him, there was so much for him,
and so sent him to the Chirurgio^s, the seruingman praising his resolution and
mind of a Gentleman, they so parted, the seruingman with thanks, and the foyst
with this Impudent bost.

If this were not a trick to shift a fool.
A more knave learn me, and I Will go to school.
But now to the manner of the foysting of a pocket, the sharing of the money,
and how honest men may avoid them. First know your pocket is drawn up, that
he may the easier come by your purse with two fingers, only the forefinger
and the middle, and with that forke, he cetches hold not of the lining, nor on
the side next your skin, but the other: for if he should faste^ on that ne^t
your thigh, he were in danger you would feel him sooner then on the other.
When having drawn your pocket up, till he can reach your purse, it is then gone
with the least twitch nay by this means of drawing, If your money be loose,
they will turn you the case clean out, and the bit, into their hands, now for
the sharing of this bit, as they call it, your Stall is equal part with your
foyst, if the foyst his none, which is shift some aside, ere they come to
sharing, but your snap has his wages at their discretion.

For the manner to avoid them, though their cunning be great, it is very
easy, which is, if ever you take any, to hang them, and let not this
composition prevail with you, for that mean of compounding with the
adversary, has been like an usher to ^enstole in this mystery of cutting of
purses, embol^ned many scholars, and increast their number, and also to be
gog^uernd by these instructions,

If being in a Crowd you perceive a busy knave, or cunnin^ whore, (for we
have she foysts as well as he) laboring and thrusting about you, how gallant
so ever they be in apparel) and the male have always one side of his cloak
cast over his shoulder, for that's the perfect badge to know a pick-pocket in a
throng by, seem either not at all to regard him, till you take him in the
trap, or else look once or twice eagerly upon him, then l^^ke away, and then
leere at him, keeping your hands down on the ^ide of your pockets, when
presently he will perceive himself to be smoked, or at least, in his guilty
conscience suspect himself, and so show from you, from whence you may take
note of him for one o^ the trade, and for that time are rid of a knaves company.

If going through the street, or standing at some Corner, your purse be
attempted with a iustell, upon the touch, have this in remembrance straight to
search, if you miss nothing, when, if you find your purse wanting, spare not
to apprehend him that iu^led you, and him that stood next before you, when
though they will appear to you to have no acquaintance, you shall find them a
kin in conversation, when they come to Newgate.

Now if he have mist his hold, and the snap that stood C^ntinell or comes
after, perceiues you upon the shoue together, to your pocket to feel for your
money, then hastens he after you with his old lesson, kinchen the coue towers
you, which is so ^ufficient a warning he will not angle with you after.

Among the profession of theeuing, this kind is held the ba^est, as your
lawyer, whole course is so sufficiently known I shall need to speak of, is
held the worthiest, yet among them selves they reckon if the best, bosting thus
of it, we are not troubles in our venture, with luggage, as your millure quasi
Breakehouse, and others are, which is dangerous to put away: But we as soon
as we have done our work, we have our money. (...)


Thus hoping that this instruction will in City and country, fayers, and
meetings, to keep honest men's money in their purses, and pickpockets, poor
Cock VVatt will only discover a word or two of the mill, quasi breakhouse, and
so go to bed, you Mill or breakhouse, to whom your broker is your only
vpholder, and merchant to transport his commodities, whereas all other thieves
work in the day, he only sleeps in the day and toils in the night, there
is of these as of Foysts and Lifts, both men and weomen, whose Instruments are
either little Iron hooks, which are called picklocks, and they that use the^
termed Iunglers or a strong Iron bar made sharp at one end, and they which
trade with that, are called Mils, withal a boy to creep in at a crushard or
small hole, which they make or find.

The time that they go forth, is about one or two a Clock in the morning, at
which hour commonly the watches are discharged. They lightly set forth four
in number, of which the Boy is one, when if they have in the day taken note of
any casement, without a speere going up in the middle, if there be either
signe-post, or pent-house about, thither do they vpp^n their hands and
shoulders lift up the Boy, who being brought up for the purpose, presently
creepes in, then two of them beneath go to stand Centinell at each end of the
street, and the third waits to receive whatsoever the Boy shall throw out.

If they break a sellor or a shop window, they do the like, but it always
follows not, that these burglaries have a Boy: for sometimes they are all men,
but then are they associated with an excelling iugler, a fellow that will pick
you open a lock, as soon as a man will blow his nose, he has the power of
Gun-pouder, he will blow them open, but not with half so much noise. This
fellow opens the door, if not bolted on the inside, and makes easy entrance,
who where ever they find to the fullest burden, they take away, the
distribution whereof, this is some part to the punck, and the rest to the
Broker.

Now if this robbery shall extend to forty, fifty, or a hundred pound, If none
of it be money, but apparel or commodities she is so Imbusied away in the
sudden, so altered, so transported from one to another, that if the looser
take not his thieves, within two or three days, he shall find his goods bought
and sold, metamorphosd into so many several shapes, and sold for so little at
the first, this little but their lives will be his recompense, A plague of
these Brokers, private buyers, privy receivers, says Cock Watt, they have
given me c^use in time past to curse them my self, and my heart will not let me
be sorry for them. They make me theirs in England, then your owers, and
Schullers dus land men upon the Thames, Your Iuglers exercise besides, this is
picking open the locks as partakers and chesse them, but those that keep
Innes, and have their riches in one ro^me have a cut of them* for your other
sort of mils I have set down the Characterie o^t, advise all men whose shops
and houses are not together, to let a servant lie there: for they stand
dangerous, such as have low windows, as though a story high without a spare,
in the midst to all them, and if there be a paint-house under any window, to
leave nothing they respect there ouer-night, least they say they had it in the
morning. And thus wishing the happiness of honest men, and the end of thieves.
Cock Watt bid^ you. God ^ight.

The misery of a Prison, and a Prisoner.
THis Ghost (that haunts no places but houses of Calamity) being weary of
beholding so much villainy though not weary in discovering it was about to go to
rest, and to walk no more above earth, but to retire to this discomfortable and
gloomy shades (underground whither all such troubled spirits (after the second
Cock crowing) hasting to be assembled. But glyding by a dark and doleful
lo^ging (for it was about midnight) it suddenly stopped at the sound of a voice
which sorrow (who seldom lays her eyes together) sat up heavily playing upon
so late, and filling the vast room with nothing but lamentations. Cock Watch
darted a sudden glaunce in at a cranny to observe what it was, and being
delighted with the object, stepped back behind certain curtains of Cobweb
lawne, which spiders had hung there most richly, and there hid himself,
appearing (not by the thousand part of the least fraction) half so big as the
glymering of a Sextons candle, standing over a Country Church yard in a black
and silent night, when the twinkling of it is scarce discernd the distance of
some mile or two off.

The thing that complained, was a man: that for age, would have seemed
Reverend, but that Care (who sat at the be^s head turning his hairs into
whiteness with too ill handling of it, made his countenance appear miserable,
and discontentedly was he thrown upon a poor and unhandsome pallat: In his
face were the Ruins of youth, In his garments, of Time: In both, the Triumphs
of pouer^y, His Arms were seuentimes folded together, like a withered garland
of willow, worn carelessly by a forsaken Lover: Sometimes did he unwind them,
but then did his hands cla^pe each other so hard, that between them they
embraced many witnesses, for now his eyes stood (like floating Islands
compassed rownde with waters: his cheeks like Banks to Rivers, eaten hollow
by cruel torrents. Had Aduers^ty (with whom he fought long) not given him any
one of these scarres to be known by, it might easily be judged he was a
Wretch, for he was a Prisoner.

And albeit the rest of that wretched and forlorn household, where he lay,
knowing what happiness they were to loose in the world, by want of their
liberty, gladly suffered themselves, (...)
(like these whose limbs are to be cut of by Chirurgions,) to be cast into
drepe and Lethaean slumbers, and so to take away all sense of their pain, yet
he having his heart (like Corat whilst it is under water) continually, soft
by the tears, that inwardly dropped upon it, was more tender over his
affliction, and because he had sometimes been a Scholar, though he could
read comfort to himself out of his own Librarye, (which was his memory) yet
wounds are gri^uous when they receive them, even to those that can cure them,
discord seems most harsh to the Musition, and calamity most Irksome to the
gentle Nature, such was his, it should seem, and therefore such was his
Condolement.

Oh most miserable spectacle of Creatures that I am, His Complaint
the wide and universal World was made (as a goodly Orchard) for thee to walk
in, yet art thou denied to treat upon three times so much ground as must one
day cover thee. Thou went borne free but art likly to dye a Slave, ye and to
dye in the worser state of Slavery, and whereas that but in a Prison^ Better
had it been for thee to have been the Son of a common Beggar, for it then
thou had been smitten by the Law, the hours of thy punishment would
quickly have run out: But these are like Shelues of Sand growing in Rivers
never to be taken away, so long have thou worn the fetters of miserable
thraldom, that thou can scarce remember that there is such a thing as
libert^e. Thy days have gone over thee like the dreams of a fool, thy nights
like the watchings of a mad man, numberless are thy hairs, numberless
therefore must needs be thy sorrows: for at every hairs end does hang a
sorrow.

Oh sacred liberty! with how little devotion do m^n come into thy temples,
when they cannot bestow upon thee too much honor? Thy embracements are more
delicate then those of a young bride with her Lover, and to be deuorced from
thee is half to be damned? For what else is a Prison but the very next door
to hell: It is a man's grave, wherein he walks alive: It is a Sea wherein he is
always shipwrackt, it is a lodging built out of the world, The description of
a Prison.
it is a wilderness where all that wander up and down grow wild, and all that
come into it are devoured, it is an vnsa^^able gulf, a feadomelesse wherlepit,
an everlasting scaffold on which men go daily to execution, it is the cave
where horror dwells, it is a bed of terror, no, no, it stands not next door to
hell, but it is hell it self: for souls lie languishing and cannot dye. The
keepers of i^ are churlish, and so are Diuills, the officers of it tormentors,
and what are torments? goes not a man therefore toward hell when he is lead
to a Prison? for alack what are the comforts he meets, there his wife and
children grieve him, (...)
when he beholdes them, his kinsefolkes grow blind and cannot see him, his
friends are stricken deaf and cannot hear his mones, they upon whose company
he spent his coin and credit, will not come near the sight of that cold
Harbor where he lies, whliest others that fed him with wholesome council do
now laugh at his folly for refusing that good dye^.

What music has he to cheer^ up his Spirits in this sadness none but this,
he hears wretches (equally miserable ^reaking their heart strings, every night
with groans, ^uery da^ with sighs, every hour with cares: the meat heates
does ^ake him pine, his drink is unto him as a poison, if he have money he
shall there soon consume it, if he want it, be must be sure to consume
himself,

How cruel therefore is death in striking the rich man amongst his heaps of
gold, in drowning the voluptuons man in his dry cups of wine, in damning the
Letcher in the fires of his l^st but how much more cruel is he to the poor
Prisoner only in sparing him.

When kne^s ring out (abroad) for joy that souls have made a voyage to
heaven, what sorrow is amongst them that were by at the leave taking, what
shrikes are heard from the wives, because they are become widows? what
sobbings from the children, because they are become Orphans, what complaints
from servants, because they are left comfortless, what (...) flow from
friends, because Society is broken: yet even then when the warning pieces of
men so newly departed from the shores of life, go^ off, the languishing
Prisoner lying on his melancholy bed, abruptly shakes off al other cogitations,
and as one wrapped with joy for his friends good fortune, suddenly cries out to
himself, Oh happy man art thou, that by the hands of death art thus set at
liberty; but most unfortunate am I that coue^ing him day and night, I can no
ways get into his favor. A Prison shure is so dreadful a place that death
fears (...) it, the grates are so strong and so narrow, and the locks so full
of wards and so many, the rooms so wide, and so unwholesome, the beds so
pestered with guests, and yet so old, the diet so costly and yet so sparing,
the family so great and yet so unruly, that death would think it more then
double death to himself to abide in so strange a lodging, or else men that are
compelled to lie there are such forlorn and miserable wretches, that death
scorns to be seen in their company, Yes, yes, it is so.

Dulce noui miseris ^ed mors optata re^ug it, These Latin bullets, were shot so
heavily out of the old man's mouth, (like the songs of fiddlers when they be
ouerwatcht) That sleep hearing him so wronged by his brother (Death) and taking
pity on his greefes, laid charms upon the lids of his eyes, and bound them
fast up in slumbers. At which our nymble Ignis Fatuus, that all this while
stood Centinell in a dark Corner, vanished out of that place and like a piece
of fire-worke running on a line, was, (in the turning of an (...),) at another,
(whether if you please) let us follow him.

A Paradox in praise of Sergiants, and of a Prison.
OUr Newgate-Bird (whose notes you have heard before) spreading his Dragon-like
wings, (which with a horred and a fainting sound, brake open the Air before
him) rested himself in his flight, on he tops of many other pollutes houses,
and looking down (sometimes through chimneys, and sometimes in at dormer
windows that stood gaping wide open to swallow up the air,) he beheld a
thousand Sins, that in the shapes of Bats, Skreech-owles, and such other
ominous mid night-walkers, wasted the bawdy night in shameless and godless
Reuilings, but in the daytime, like snailes they lie covered, hiding in causes
their ugly and deformed heads. Of all which he taking notes, with purpose to
sing their lives openly to the world, when he is perfect in their tunes, he
spent all the next day in a theeuish thicket, not far from the City, to
practice the straynes by himself, but the Sun going to bed, being his hour to
rise, forth flutters he amain, close by the edge of darkness houering under
the E^ues of the suburbs, till he heard watchmen called to their brown bills,
and till Vintners were rea^y to adiourne their Sessions, and to araigne no more
at their fearful Bars till the next morning: Just at that time (being much
about the hour when spirits begin their round) did he enter the city, and
passing by a Tavern door, he might behold a tumultuous crew, (like drunken
waves) reeling from one side to the other; the whirlewinde that raiz'd this
tempest, being nothing else then the clapping of one on the shoulders that was
watched for when he came out of his cup, you would have thought the Allarum had
been given, and that the City had been in an uproar, for you might hear the
clashing of swords, the hacking of bills, and such a confuses noise, as if all
the Devils in hell had fallen together by ye ears. Some called for more lights,
others to put out, some cried clubs, others to strike him down, those then had
the greater part swore, all showed as if they had bin mad, yet on they went,
holding a kind of orderly proceeding in this disorder.

Cock-Watch followed them aloof by the noise, till he came to one of the
Counpter gates, which presently flew open more suddenly, then if they had been
blown up with powder, and as suddenly were ^ard up again: At which the
thunderbolt brake, that kept before such a rumbling, rash Phaeton, that set
a^^ on fire, was thrown headlong into a lodging, the fury of the multitude was
quenched, and every one went to his pillow. Only the good Demon, whose nature
it was to sit out she very last Sceine, of such Tragi-comedies, followed the
chief Actor (that played This) even up into his bedchamber, where he was fast
enough locked all night, to rehearse his parts by himself.

The waking Cock had softly clymbd up to such another Roost, as he sat upon the
night before, for the Inn was all one, but the Guests were not alike.

This was not an old Soldier, that had been beaten to the wars of Calamity,
(as the former was) and being wounded in the^^ lay now sick and groaning on
his bed for cures: But this was a first man in the school of the World; A
gallant that had spent much, and learnt little, one whose outside only showed
he was a Gentleman, (for within the sumptuous tomb of him, was nothing but
Carcas) It was one unto whom Usurers, and Citizens would offer us Golden and
silken robes (as once the Heathen did to the Images of their Gods) because they
knew he was borne to Acts, and now to make him wise, and to take heed what
pasture he breaks into next, have they put him (like a Jade into a pownd) into
a prison.

Where, (because this was the first time that he ever came to the Ten-penny
Ordinary) he went cu^s^ng up and down to think himself so base to leave
that by Paules-wharfe, to come in to this: he bid the crosses of the plain in
all Merters books, wished he had never been brought up like a gentleman, to
this writing and reading, damnd Scriueners and bond-makers to the deepest pit
of hell. Stamped, stared, tore his hair, called for faggots and wine. misusde
the keepers, and cried to every one of them, do you hear goodman Rogue, yet
swore to make them drunk, but they making many lies in mockery to his good
worship, counsaild him to take his naps, and so were ready to turn the key
upon him, and their tails both at one time, but he stroaking up a handful of
his ha^re in diverse parts of his heace, as if he had some great matter there
to fetch out, and thumping the table with his f^st: as if he had been
coniuring up a diuill, called for pen and ink, and vowde that might not to lie
in the streets of captivity.

The instruments of Learning being set before him, and the room cleared after
five or six pair of oaths were spet forth (like wildfire) to think how he
was taken like a woodcocke (being in the company of the only gallants) and
how he was drayde along, and how scuruily he was used in words: he sharply
began to rail against Sergiants, because they knew not their Gamoth, neither
had any mus^ck in them, and yet durst presume to teach him, (that was a
Gentleman) one of the chiefest notes in music viz. Counter tenor, he swore he
would have the statute of Garbling sued upon them for offering Mace to men that
was able to poysen them, as for Marshals men, the black book did never so
tickle them as he would. The next heard whose heads like mad Ajax he uowed to
cut off, were Bailifes, he calde them poor Snakes that lie in every corner at
the towns ends, to sting passengers to death, if they slumble but upon them,
and comparde them to hornets and great humming flies, that are bred out of
cowshards, yet held them the basest Go^lins that walked up and down the
Suburbs, because they were Buttery-bugs, that lay scouting only in bawdy and
beggarly (...)-houses.

The Linstock that gave fire to these Canon threats of our young Colonel of
cockneyes, against three such mighty commanders, was kindled partly out of his
fear, and partly out of an intelligence that both city and country were laid
for him, and that pur^ies and liberties had mousetraps set to catch him; but
looking, well upon the smoaky walls, and the singed roof of his lodging and
remembering that he was but in one of the Counters, he resolved to put on the
cloak of mercy, and to spare the two last for a time, but to draw out the
sword and dagger of his justice, and to stab home the first for arresting him,
and cooping him up, (like poultry ware,) and they were the Sergeants.

Against them would he write Inuectiues Satyrs, Lybals, Rimes, yea causes
such Iambicks as Archilocus made against Lycambes, or such stuff as Hipponap,
the painter of Ephasus: this very ink should be Squ^azed out of the guts of
toades: His pens should be cut out of Indian Canes after the heads of them were
poisoned, and his paper made of the filthy lin^en rags that had been wrapped
about the infected and vlcerous bodies of beggars, that had dyed in a ditch of
the pestil^nce. But behold, Nocte pluit tota, redeunt spectacula mane. It
thundered and lightened all night, yet was it a fair day the very next morning
for furious Tamberlaine, who as you heard, was cutting out 3 sorts of banners
for his 3 sworn enem^es, he had ^^arce taken a nap over his i^ck pot that
stood just under his nose, whilst he leaned on his elbow writing out crabbed
faces as he studied for bitter words to begin his execrations. But into his
chamber came these; who the night before, as he thought made him to suffer
persecution: they gave him the kind good morrow, told him where his cloak and
rapier were, protested they were sorry for him or any gentleman whose unruliness
inforces them to use them hardly, and that for his arrest they could not
prevent it, nor refuse it, because the Creditors were at their elbowes, yet
would they ride or run, and do any office of friendship to work his
delivery, and to show how much they deserved to comfort him, they asked him what
he would drink next his heart, but he that not an hour before had nothing but
daggers in his mouth, leaps about their neeks, calls them mad Greeks, tru^
Trojans, commands a gallon of sack and sugar to us burnt for the Sergiants,
and musc^dell, and ^gges to bruise for the yeamen, empties his pockets of
Tobacco to both, drinks a health to them all, and swears he will over into
the Low Countries, and for love or money get a Captains place, (though he never
be a Soldier) only to make them Sergiants of his company: And whereas before
their coming into his room, he had a foolish humor to pistol them with
paper-bullets shot out of pen and i^ke-hornes, he proteseth (with his eyes
lifted up to heaven, higher then his head) that now he will wait Palinodes
Recantations, and Retractions, yea he will presently eats his own words,
though he were sure like Earl Goodwines dri^ke they should choke him, and
therefore because he felt the divine sury creeping into his brain, he
requested them ^o play off the sack and begone, for he would instantly power
out a parodox to their praises, which should do them more honor when they were
dead, then twenty Epitaphes, they thankt him for his pains, and in requital
promised to deal with his Philistines. (his creditors) that are now come upon
him, to see if they could take them off, and so departed, their backs being
turnde, thus he begins.

What a rank Pagon am I to wish destruction to this Temple of peace. What
In^idels are all you (for by this (...) all that lay on the masters side were
swarming about him,) what In^idels are all you, that cannot be brought into a
belief, that there is no place of safety but a Prison? Look upon your
lodgings, Look upon your walks, Look upon your B^llwarkes, Look upon any
thing that is worth the looking upon, and you may safely swear no Lord lives
such a life as a Prisoner, for note by what stairs he climbes up to his state.
At his first entrance is he led through the streets in pomp, and the more
coil he keeps, (I speak it by experience, my brave garnish dri^kers, upon
rest^rnights work) the more gallantly comes he in triumph, for then Clubbes
are cried, has he his g^arde of Ha^berders, then do an hundred of
Uoluntaries follow at his heels, when before he could scarce keep one man,
being entered, the gates are strongly shut, and there stands his Porters and
double Porters, all whom he keeps in Fee: his Cooks are ready to provide his
Diet, if his purse have a stomach; his Clerks likewise are attendant in their
offices, and all these do live by him, when he goes to bed, so careful are
they over his life, and his forth coming again, that he cannot lie down but
he is watched.

How worthy therefore are they to lie by the heels, that dare not come near a
Prison, and are ashamed to enter it, because it is given out that none shall lie
there but Swaggerers and Banckerupts, that it is a place of ill husbandry, a
receptable for thieves, a drinking house for Beggars, and that though a man
commit all the uillanies that are set down in the Chronicles, yet there he
shall be sure to ly^ safe. But Oh you that thus go about to slander such
Ancient house, (which you cannot do, how much do you ouershoot your selves? Is
not a Prison the only best school, (foundded by our forefathers) wherein is
learnt Experience? Experience breeds Wisdom, Wisdom is mother to Honor,
Honor to Riches, Riches to Hearts^ease, so then on the tree of Thraldom, you
see you may gather the fruits of cont^utation.

I speak this to the comfort of all Captains, and L^i^tenants, whom a little
swelling of War, makes proud, and the laziness of a peace, makes arrant
beggars, and where can they appoint a better Rander-vous, than in a Prison? I
speak it for the good of all young Quats, who (being sent up by the honest
farmers (their Fathers) to be turned into Gentlemen by finding the Law, study
only how to Moote, that is, how to cast all their feathers, and to what nest
can they fly, to lie warm in, and to hide their nakedness, but into this
goodly bird-cages? O you that are the Poets of these sinful times, (over whom
the Players have now got the upper hand, by making fools of the poor country
people, in driving them like flocks of Geese to ^^t cackling in an old barn:
and to swallow down those plays, for new, which here every punck and her
squire (like the Interpreter and his poppet) can rand out by heart, they are so
stale, and therefore so stinking* I know the Lady Pecunia and you come very
hardly together, and therefore trouble not you upon this ancient Theater, you
present, your Tragical Sceines, for here you shall be sure to be clapped, Nay
your mercenary soldiers, or you that are the Switzers to players (I mean the
hired men) by all the prognostications that I have seen this year, you make
but a hard and a hungry living of it, by strowting up and down after the
Wagon; Lea^e therefore O leave the company of such as lick the fat from your
herds (if you have any) and come hither, for here I know you will be Sharers.

Lastly O you Citizens, and you whose craft lies in your hands, It may go
warmer to your hearts than Sack, or Aqua vitae, when you shall know that (by
keeping in your shops, Plaugy vacations and lame Terms, that have their lymbs
cut off.) you your selves are scarce able to stand, yet that (Here) you may
employ your stocks; for in a prison men of all Trades, of all professions, may
set up, by the Customs of the City.

But admit these Castles of no comfort (as the ignorant vulger terms them) had
no such appropriations, Charters, nor privileges belonging to them, and that
they had not such Ordinance in them, nor were so well mand, as they are: yet
the very martial discipline, by which they are held up, is sufficient ^alone^
to ^iue them superlatiue commendations.

For what place of Government (in any Commonwealth) does more resemble a Camp
than a Prison? The Keepers of it, and the vnder-Keepers, and the Colonels and
Captains, and they command all: then have Sergiants, and they double the Fyles:
them have you Clarcks of Bonds, and they be Attorneys: then have you Serieants,
and they double the Fyles: then have you Clarks of the Bonds, and they be
Attorneys, Clarcks, who fly out and in, and discover to the besieged prisoner
how the enemies heart (his creditor) lies misconcde in hardness, or with what
power of Counselors, witness, petty or grand jury men, he comes marching
down to give him battle, then have you Pioners, and they be the ^ame
messengers (of the house) who with Paper instruments (called tickets) hobble from
place to place, to undermine friends abroad, to try what they will do, and
these may properly as I said before, be called Pioners, for these help to dig
out the Prisoner. Nay a Prison does yet come nearer to a Camp, by many
degrees, and can show far more noble marks of it than the former: for
Prisoners lie as hard as Soldiers, drinck as hard as soldiers, swear as hard
as soldiers, go as tattered as soldiers, are as louzy as soldiers, as
discontent as soldiers, go cursing up and down as bravely as soldiers, and to
conclude, are as little regarded as soldiers.

How much then are we beholden to them that keep us here in pay? nay what
thancks are they worthy of, that put us unto so strong a garrison, and who be
those but Serieants? Serieants are the cunning pilots that in all storms bring
men safely to these havens of peace and contemplation: the compass they sail
by, is the Law, which is touched by the Loadstone of Reason; the points of that
compass, are the customs of the Cittye, upon which whosoever keeps not
directly, he runs himself on the sands, and so sincks, or upon rocks, and so
splits.

Serieants are those nymble-footed Cenii, that walk at men's elbowes (on either
side, one) to keep them upright. They are neither Russians nor Turks (though
some count them) that beat ill debterson the shinnes, or on the soles of their
feet (like e^ecutioners) to make them confess the debt, But (knowing how
coldly an ill word from their mouth goes to a man's heart, (when any by chance
fall into their company, they presently play the physicians, and counsel him
to step into a Zauerne, and to drinck wine to comfort his poor heart, or if
wine do no good, then to send for his friends about him, to try if the sight
of them can make him any better, and this is an act pitious and charitable. So
that to a man that is meatefyed in flesh, and whose state (in this world) is
desperate, a Sergiant may serve instead of a Deaths head, to put him in mind
of his last day, and what he is to come to.

They are called in Latin (and so set down upon Records seruientes ad
Clauum: and most properly have they that title bestowed upon them: for Clauus
has many fields quartred out in Herauldry, and all are the Ensigns of a
Sergiants arms, some times Clauus signifies a Nail, and fitly may they
challenge a dignity by that word, for they are Naylers of me^ to their words,
promises, Contracts, Bills, Bonds, and Reckonings, they join them to the
Grounds of the Law and Justice, from whence (like unseasoned boards that warpe
and fly out) they would (but for them) start and reuolt^ Sometimes Clauus is
taken for a Key, and thereby likewise have they an Atcheiuement of honor: for
what are Sergiants but strong Keys (that can hardly be broken) to open men's
hearts and make them look into their estates and by looking to know themselves,
which the Philosopher says is the only wisdom in the world, and the hardest
to learn, Clauus is also a club, the double property of which is in every
officer, for his duty is (and so is his oath) to beat down wrong and to
guard the Right; he must as soon strike the rich, as the poor, and be as
ready to take the poor man's part, as the rich, he is like death to spare no
man. All which attributes, necessarily depend upon his function, and because no
one word could simply in it self express them all, they were made up into one
lu^p or mass together, and of them all (being so compounded) is made the
Serieants Mace, which is nothing else but the Badge of his place, and figure of
his authority.

What should I say more of Sergiants, though I cannot speak too much of them?
they are the painfullest members of the common wealth: they are the laws
Factors, the Citisens men of War, that bring in bad Dettors, who like pir^tes
have seizd upon others goods, as lawful prize: they are the Scriueners good
Lords and masters, they are Relieuers of prisons, good Benefactors, to
Vintners Hall: they are keepers of young Gentlemen, from whorehouse, and driuers
of poor Handy-crafts men, from bowling allies, In one word they are the only
bringers-home of y^ prodigal Child, to feed upon veale after he has lived
upon Acorns. The officers that by reason of the burnt Sack went forth with hye
colors before, are now in smoking clouds of Sweat returned back again, as
if it had been just their Qu. to enter at the fag end of their commendations:
the news that they brought ( vno ore) and which they vttred with a hye and
full mouth together, was, that he must presently go along with them and meet
all his creditors (in a more dangerous place than the field) in a Tavern; for
joy of which, he bestowed his vltimum in wine upon his fellow-commoners, who
were all busy in providing pen ynck and paper, to register (In aeternam rei
memoriam) his learned Encomium of them, their college, and their officers,
whilst he descended in more state of attendants, then he came up in, for the
most part of his money (which flew out as easily as smoke out of a Tobacco
pipe) was cut out (like loins of mutton at the Innes) in fees, and a general
volley of Farewels from all the grates being shot off at his departure, the
key was turned, and he Vno graditur comitatus Achate. has no more but one only
Serieant waiting upon him, (to avoid wonder) whilst the rest of the Infantery,
that took him prisoner, came marching softly behind, to share in his ransom
Cock-Watch had no great desire to follow, but stealing out, (as he came in)
like an Owl from an Iuy to^, he made have to his old Rendez because Sessions
was at hand, where what is done the Crier will proclaim it.

FINIS.

