THE HEAVENLY BANQVET: OR THE DOCTRINE of the Lords Supper, set forth in seven
Sermons.

With two Prayers before and after the receiving.

And a Justification of Kneeling in the act of Receiving.

By John Denison, Doctor of Divinity.

The Second Impression.

John 6.54. Whosoever eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, has eternal
Life.

LONDON, Printed by E. A. for Robert Allot, and are to be sold within the
Turning-Stile in Holborne. 1631.

The doctrine of the Sacrament is here set forth in three especial heads.

1. By the time of Institution, which was Jn the night that Christ was
betrayed. 2. By the causes of constitution, and they are four: Namely, 1. The
Efficient cause or Author: The Lord Jesus, Verse. 23.
2. The material, which is twofold. 1. Outward and visible, Namely, 1. Bread,
and Wine. Verse. 23.25.
2. Inward and invisible, to wit, 2. The Body and Blood of Christ. Verse. 24.25.

3. The formal cause, consisting of the Actions. 1. Of the minister, and they
are five. 1. The taking. 2. The blessing. 3. The breaking. 4. The giving. 5.
The showing the use of the elements. Verse. 24.26.
2. Of the people, and they are two. 1. The taking of the Sacrament. 2. The
eating and drinking of it, Verse. 24.26. With the spiritual application.

4. The final cause which is set forth, First, in general; Do this in
remembrance of me, Verse. 24.25. Secondly, in particular; You show the Lords
death till he come, Verse. 26.

3. By the care that is to be had for the due celebration, which is to be
considered two ways. 1. First, in the danger of unworthy receiving, Verse.
27.29. set forth, 1. By the greatness of the sin: He is guilty of the body and
blood of Christ. 2. By a dreadful consequent: He eats and drinks his own
damnation.
2. In the means to prevent the danger. Let every one examine himself. Verse.
28.


Place this before Folio 1.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, GEORGE, Marquis of Buckingham, Viscount Villiers,
Baron of Waddon, Master of his Majesty's Horse, and one of the Gentlemen of his
Highness Royal Bedchamber, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and
of his most Honorable Privy Council.
Right Honorable,
IT is like, that in the divulging and dedicating of these Papers, I shall
meet with a double censure: One, in that I do so suddenly follow two such
worthy Lights, Episc. Roffens. and Cestrens.
as have lately gone before me in this subject. Another, in that J presume to
present the same to One so eminent.

But for answer to the former; First, the principal of my task is matter
positive, and the controversy about Kneeling, is handled but breuiter, and
obiter; yet I hope sufficiently to give satisfaction to a peaceable spirit. And
that which may seem my prejudice, I esteem my advantage. For had I gone
before them, my lot might have been like the Day Star, which is obscured by
the succeeding Sun; whereas a small Star shines in the Evening.

Again, (that J may continue my Metaphor) He that made the two greater
Lights, made also the Stars, Genesis 1.16.
and the Stars have their influences, yea, Job 38.31.
the Stars fought against Sisera. Judge. 5.20.


Had I no other Apology, I hold it fit to show my conformity, and therein my
duty to the Church, and the blessed nursing Father thereof. For as I would not
be like violent Euripus, P. Mela. lib. 2.
which is ready to toss over all that comes into it; so would I not be like
the River Arar, Caesar Ca^^. de bell. Gal. lib. 1.
whose current is so slow, that a quick eye cannot discern which way it
runs.

Neither is my presumption, in this my Dedication, altogether without excuse.
For as the ancient interest I once had in the favor of that worthy Knight,
your Lordships Father, my much-honoured Friend, somewhat imboldens me: So,
the interest that the Church has in your Honor, and the need she has of
your assistance, for procuring her peace and unity, does very much excite and
encourage me in this my enterprise.

If a Reverend Bishop, Episcop. Cestren.
who has in some sort power coactiue, did lately crave it at your Lordships
hands: much more may J, who have only means perswasiue: Persuadere quis
aliquid potest inuito? Pacian. Epist. ad Sympron. Biblio. patr.
For who can persuade him that will not be persuaded, says Pacianus?

The GOD of Heaven, who has made you gracious with a King of admirable
endowments, multiply his blessings upon your Honor, that you may increase in
grace and favor with God and man.

Your Honors humbly devoted, JOHN DENISON.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
THese, amongst other papers, which have layne long by me, I had long since
destinated to priuatenesse and silence; But such has been the importunity of
friends, that I have at last been ouer-ruled for publishing of them.

If in this discoutse upon the Sacrament, thou find that which may help to
build thee up in Christ, (which is indeed my hope and desire) embrace it, and
make use of it. And when thou come to the matter of kneeling at the
Communion, take heed, I seriously entreat thee, of rashness, wilfulness,
partial and personal respect of men contrary minded. For hence it is that
some cannot endure, even to look upon those things which may draw them from
error, and direct them in the way of Truth. This thou will account wilfulness
and obstinacy in the Papist. And I am sure it is against the Apostles precept:
Try all things, and hold that which is good. I call the searcher of all hearts
to witness, that in the handling of these things, I have dealt faithfully, and
with a good conscience, which wishing thee also to do in reading of them, I
commend thee to God, and to the word of his grace, who is able to build
further, and to give thee an inheritance with all those that are sanctified.

A brief and necessary Table, containing the effect of the whole Book
following.
1. THE time of Institution, and the Efficient cause. page 1 2. The External
matter of the Sacrament. page 43 3. The Invisible matter of the Sacrament. page
77 4. The Form of the Sacrament. page 109 5. The final Cause or End of the
Sacrament. page 149 6. The danger of unworthy receiving of the Sacrament. page
197 7. The means to avoid the danger of unworthy Communicating. page 237 8. A
Justification of the gesture of Kneeling in the act of receiving the Sacrament.
page 293
The several Texts of the Sermons following. 1. Corinthians. 12.23, 29.
Verse. 23. I have received of the Lord, that which I also have delivered unto
you, to wit, that the Lord Jesus, in the night that he was betrayed, took
Bread. 24. And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat:
this is my Body, which is broken for you: this do ye in remembrance of me.
25. After the same manner also he took the Cup, when he had supped, saying,
This Cup is the new Testament in my Blood: this do as often as ye drink it, in
remembrance of me. 26. For as often as ye shall eat this Bread, and drink
this Cup; ye show the Lords death till he come. 27. Wherefore, whosoever shall
eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of
the Body and Blood of the Lord. 28. Let every man therefore examine himself,
and so let him eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup. 29. For he that
eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation, because
he discerns not the Lords Body.
THE FIRST Sermon. The time of Institution, and the Efficient cause.
1. COR. 11. ver. 23. For I have received of the Lord, etc.


AS St. 1. Cor. 10.3.
Paul in the former Chapter does compare the Sacrament of Baptism to the red
Sea: So does Chrysostom compare the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; Chrysostom. in
Psa. 113.
and that very fitly. For as the red Sea was alijs sepulchrum, alijs vehiculum,
to the one a sepulcher to swallow them, to the other a Chariot to carry them
safely from the face and fury of their enemies: so the blessed Sacrament is the
bread of life, and as a sanctuary of comfort to a sanctified heart, but to the
wicked and profane, it is the bane of their souls, and a gulf of eternal
perdition.

Now what more lamentable, then that Gods holy ordinance, provided for the
bliss, should turn to the bane of his people? Yet what more ordinary? And
thus the Apostle finds that the Sacrament was to the Corinthians, who by their
unworthy receiving deprived themselves of spiritual comfort, and drew down
upon them temporal judgments; The abuses of which people he labors to
reform, and to that end sets down the divine frame of that heavenly
structure, drawn by the hand of Christ himself: and that necessarily: For as
he that will either direct his own work, or correct another exactly, must
propound unto himself a perfect pattern: so the blessed Apostle does take a
perfect pattern, and platform of our Savior Christ, as Moses did his
pattern of the Arc and Tabernacle from almighty God. Exodus 25.9.
He comes like Pythagoras scholar with his ipsi dixit. His Office is for
searching for prophaners, and abusers of the blessed Sacrament: therefore he
comes with the aid of authority, and brings his warrant with him; saying, I
have received from the Lord, that which I have delivered unto you. It fares
with men in their errors, as with those that are sick, or asleep; the one
cannot abide to be touched, the other to be awaked.

Reproof hardly finds acceptance, except it be backed with authority, and he
that will reform abuses, must build upon a sure ground; What better warrant
then from the Lord? What sounder direction then the example of Jesus Christ?
What greater authority then from the King of Kings? Now with these the Apostle
is furnished, and for the ground of reformation he lays down our Saviors
Institution: In prosecuting whereof, he shows himself to have been brought
up at the feet of Gamaliel, and a worthy proficient in the School of Christ,
so exactly and divinely does he handle this sacred mystery.

The time of Institution.
The first consideration that occurs in this discourse, is the circumstance of
Time, when Christ did institute the Sacrament; And that is in the night that he
was betrayed. It oft-times come to pass, that in humane discourses wise men do
let fall fruitless and impertinent observations; but behold, there was never
word spoken, nor work wrought by Christ, which the sacred penmen his
Secretaries have recorded, but the same is worthy to be written with the pen of
a Diamond, and to be had in everlasting remembrance. For as the Word of God is
excellent, Psalm. 12.6.
like gold seven times refined; so is it, in all the parts thereof, of singular
use, according to that in the fifteenth to the Romans: Romans 15.4.
Whatsoever was written aforetime, was written for our learning, that we
through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope: so surely the
due consideration of this circumstance of time will minister unto us much
matter of instruction and comfort.

Chrysostom demands, Vt supra modum compungeret. Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. hom. 27.
Why does the Apostle call to mind that time, that night, that treason? and
answers; That the consideration thereof might thoroughly pierce our hearts. That
was a doleful night to the Egyptians, Exo. 12.19, 20.
wherein the first borne of every family dyed. But oh how doleful was this
night, Col. 1.15. Ioh. 1.14. Col. 1.13.
wherein the firstborn of every creature, the only begotten Son of God,
and the Son of his love was betrayed? When the Lord of glory, whose life was
more worth the^ the lives of a thousand Egyptians, (as the people spoke of
David, yea more worthy then the lives of the whole world) was despightly
apprehended? 2. Sam. 18.3
When the women of Jerusalem saw our Savior led to his Passion, they were
moved with compassion, Luke 23.27.
and wept for him. And can we think upon the sorrows of that night without
compassion toward him, and compunction in our own hearts, for our sins,
which were the especial traitors that delivered him into the hands of his
enemies? Jobs desolate estate wrung from him a vehement malediction upon the
night of his birth. Job 3.6, 7.
Let darkness possess that night, yea desolate be that night, and no joy be
in it. Certainly, my brethren, such a one was this night, it was a dark, a
desolate, a doleful night, not admitting the mixture of any joy, when the
Shepherd was smitten, and the sheep were scattered. Psalm. 6.6.
David's night was doleful, wen he caused his bed to swim, and watered his
couch with his tears; most doleful was this night to Jesus Christ, when he
offered up prayers, Heb. 5.7.
and tears, and strong cries in the garden of Gethsemane.

Who then, considering and calling to mind the dolors of this night, except he
be metamorphosed into a stone, Qui nisi plane lapis Chry. in 1. Cor. hom. 27.
and his heart become harder then the nether millstone, can be void of
compunction for his own sins, and compassion to his Savior?

But leaving the prosecution of this meditation to a fitter place, here it will
be material to consider why Christ Jesus did this night institute the blessed
Sacrament.

And there may diverse weighty reasons be rendered for it.

First, Cyprian. expla. ad Caecilium.
it was necessary that it should be instituted after the celebration of the
Passover; that the Passover being a legal Sacrament might be abolished,
Finem legalibus ceremonijs impositurus, etc. Idem de caena domini. Luke 22.15.
before this Eua^gelicall Sacrament was instituted; Except Christ should have
put a new piece of cloth into an old garment. This made our Savior say, I have
earnestly desired to eat this Passover with you, before I suffer. The words
have an Hebraisme, and imply a doubled desire, With a desire I have desired it.
As if he should say, (...)
I have desired it in respect of the Passover, to fulfill all righteousness,
As he speaks of Baptism, Mat. 3.15.
and in regard of the supper to institute the same. Thus the Passover being
that night to be celebrated, that legal shadow must vanish, as others of the
like nature: and receive an honorable funeral before the Supper was
instituted.

Secondly, it was necessary the Sacrament should be now instituted, in regard
of our Sauiors aproching departure. So long as Christ was with his disciples,
they needed no such remembrance of his presence, or token of his love: Mat.
9.15.
For can the children of the marriage chamber mourn whilst the Bridegroom is
with them? Can the disciples need the Sacrament of comfort, whilst they
conuersed with the Comforter himself? But when this Bridegroom departs, then
does he leave this pawn of his love, and this cordial of comfort to his
desolate Spouse. When Elias was taken up, he left his cloak to Elizeus, 2. Kin.
2.13.
as a means to mitigate th'extremity of grief for the loss of his Master:
And when Christ ascends to heaven, he leaves the Sacrament to his Disciples, as
a means of consolation for the loss of their Savior. Yea, that it might be
like the girdle and garment given to David by Jonathan, 1. Sam. 18.4
a pledge of his exceeding love, and a memorial of their mutual covenant.

It is said in the thirteenth of John, Ioh 13.1.
that Christ loved his disciples to the end; surely many testimonies of love
did he give them, even to the end of his life, and in the end he gives them
this lively demonstration, which being a bond of union to the end of the world,
should be a pledge of his love that should never end.

Here Christ does at his passion, as he did at the marriage in Cana of Galile,
He keeps the best wine last. Ioh. 1.10.
And indeed so was it necessary, according to the words of King Lemuel, Prou.
31.6.
Give wine to them that have grief of heart. Now was the time of the disciples
sorrow, because of the Passion, and now was it needful for them to have
comfort by the Sacrament.

When should the Physician give cordials to his Patients, but when their hearts
do faint, and are oppressed with anguish? Now is the hour come, when the
disciples hearts must needs faint, and be oppressed wirh fear and care, and
sorrow; therefore our Savior Christ, who is the Physician of the soul, does
minister unto them this comfortable cordial, against the terrors of his death,
and the scandal of his near approaching Cross.

Thirdly, it was convenient that the Sacrament should this night be instituted:
Scimus enim quantu^ energiae habent extremae voces disced^ntium vel morientium,
Calvin in Act. 20.25.
that leaving it as a farewell to his disciples, they might the better remember
him. For as the last words of an Echo are best heard, and the last words of a
friend dying, or departing from us are best remembered: so this last Action of
our Savior, might be always in their eyes, and his last words ever sounding
and resounding in their ears.

When Darius was deadly wounded in his wars against Alexander, having light
upon a Persian to who^ he might utter his mind, he counted it a great comfort
in the midst of his unfortunate condition, Si non incassum postremas voces
emissurum. Justin. li. 12.
that he should not utter his last words in vain: So is our Savior careful,
that this last Action of his may not be lost, but be had in everlasting
remembrance. We count it a reproach to those that will neglect the last words,
Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. ho. 17
or alter the last will of their friends deceased: and shall it not be our
great reproach, if the last will of our Lord and Savior, sealed unto us both by
his precious blood, and the blessed Sacrament, shall by us be forgotten and
neglected? Vltimum hoc voluit infigere memoria discipulorum, a quibus ad
possionem digressurus esset. Aug. Epist. 118. cap. 6.


Lastly, it was expedient that now the Sacrament should be instituted, when his
Passion was to be suffered; For the Sacrament being a representation of his
Passion, when both of them should thus concur, and meet together, the one
would be a means to imprint the other more lively in the minds of the
disciples; That as a Jewel tied to a string is not easily lost: so that rich
Jewel of Christ's Passion, being tied as it were by the string of the blessed
Sacrament, might be imprinted more deeply, and kept more safely in the closet
of every Christian heart.

This being the time of institution of the Sacrament, grounded upon such
weighty reasons, the same may yield diverse necessary uses.

Rhem. Aun. in 1. Cor. 11.20, and 23.
First, it serves to answer that cavil of the Rhemists, who quarrel at our
appellation of the Sacrament, when we call it the Supper of the Lord, and
challenge us for abandoning other names, as though we would bring it again to
the Supper or even service, to take away the old estimation thereof.

Nubila men's est haec vbi regnant, Boet. de Consel.
That intemperate affections do blind, when men give way unto them, this
quarrel does evidently manifest; For the Rhemists have not power to see how
unjustly they charge us to abandon other names of the Sacrament: though the
know that we call it as indifferently, the Communion and the Eucharist, as the
Supper of the Lord; and though they are not able to mention any amongst us, who
have attempted, or desired to reduce it to the evening service.

Nay they do not consider, how they check antiquity, which generally calls it,
The Supper of the Lord Cyp. de. Caena do^. Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. ho. 27. and ad po.
Ant. ho. 60. Hier. in 1. Cor. 11. and shows the reason of this appellation.
Quia in caena do inus tradidit Sacramentum.
Yea, their own friends, Vetustissimi quida^ patres Apostoli authoritate^
secuti, caenae etiam nomine Eucharistiam vocaru^t Cathechis. Trid. page 238.
Bell. de missa li. 2. cap. 80. does acknowledge that diverse of the ancient
Fathers do probably so take that place, 1. Cor. 11.20.
amongst whom Gregory of Valentia Greg. Val. To. 4. dis. 6. q. 8. pu^. Lu
14.16. Re. 3.20. Re. 19.9. Luke 22.30.
does confess, that it may be so called in respect of the circumstance of the
time, wherein it was instituted, and the use for which it was ordained. And
surely it is gross ignorance, to think that the name of a Supper can any way
diminish th'estimation of the Sacrament, seeing that in the sacred Scriptures,
the participation of divine graces in this life, and of eternal glory in the
life to come, is called by the name of a dinner and a supper.

Again, this circumstance of time may serve to resolve two weighty questions.

The first, whether we do well in administering the Sacrament in the morming:
seeing that herein we vary from our Saviors practice? For as the Church of
God, where there is no precept to enjoin, is not strictly bound to every
circumstantiall action of Christ, or his Apostles, as antiquity has ever well
determined: so this circumstance of time, in this indiuiduail act of our
Saviors, (being grounded upon such reasons as to him were urgent and
necessary, but are not so to us,) does not bind us to imitation. Christ was
furnished with a small number, and tied to a private Chamber, to prevent
violence, and disturbance; We have the benefit of the public Congregations;
our gracious God (blessed be his name) having planted peace in our Tabernacles,
and set open the doors of his Temple unto us, so that every one may have
access to his house, and take of the water of life freely. We have neither the
occasion of Christ's approaching departure to require it, nor his leaving it as a
present pledge of his love to challe^ge it, nor the concurring of his passion
to call for it, nor the necessity of the precedent Passover to urge it, that we
should celebrate it in the evening.

So that this circumstance of time being temporary, is also arbitrary, the
Spouse of Christ having power to order this so, 1. Cor. 14.40.
as may best tend to comeliness and order. And here by the way we may observe
that position of Andradius to be full of absurdity, and presumption: namely,
Andrad. Orthod. explicat. lib. 7.
that the Church may as well take away the Cup from the Sacrament, as alter the
time of administration. For besides that the one is a matter of substance, the
other only of circumstance, there is not the like ground, cause, necessity for
the one as for the other.

Secondly, it may be questioned whether it be lawful to eat or drink before
the receiving of the Sacrament, and this circumstance serves to resolve that
doubt. For if it were simply unlawful, then would not our Savior or his
servants who succeeded him in governing the Church, have celebrated the
Sacrament after supper; which that they did, both this place and the story of
the Evangelists, together with the practice of the primitive Church, do
evidently, and abundantly demonstrate.

This question has been racked on the tenters of curiosity by the Romanists,
who held it piacular to eat or drink before the receiving of the Sacrament:
Aquinas in Mat. 16.
insomuch that some have fallen into these superstitious niceties, to question
whether a man washing his face in the morning, so that a little water go down
his throat, or whether having eaten Annyse seeds over night, and some
remaining between his teeth he swallow it in the morning, whether I say, he
have broken his fast; and consequently disabled himself for receiving the
Sacrament.

But the truth is, that as it is not simply unlawful to eat or drink before
the receiving of the Sacrament: so it is very expedient, (so it be without
manifest indangering of health) to receive it fasting. My reasons are these:

First, the Sacrament being the bread of life, and our spiritual food, it is
most reasonable and regular, that we feed our souls before our bodies; that
so we may observe our Saviors rule, Mat. 6.33.
in seeking first the Kingdom of God, both in time and estimation.

Secondly, Qui ieinnat, leuior est and vigilanter orat. Chrysostom. in Mat. ho. 58.
when we come fasting, we are more fit for meditation and prayer, two especial
duties required in the worthy receiving of the Sacrament. For as in urgent and
extraordinary occasions, the Church is wont to ioyn fasting with prayer, that
the same, being an Act of humiliation, may stir up devotion in our own
hearts, and procure compassion at Gods hands: So is it likewise needful, in
this worthy and weighty duty, that our prayers may pierce the heavens, and
ascend before the Throne of Grace, and that our meditations being therewith
winged, may more nimbly mount up to Jesus Christ the subject of the blessed
Sacrament.

Thirdly, even in reverence to this sacred ordinance, it shall be good to
abstain from meat. For as the Apostle requires a discerning of the Lords
body: so I hold it fit with S. Augustine, Aug. ep. 118.
that by coming fasting to this blessed banquet, we put a difference between
this and all other meats. Neither is the Churches practice to be contemned,
which has usually observed this custom thorowout the Christian world.

Again, this circumstance of Time, with the reasons before mentioned, may serve
to set forth the weight and worth of the Sacrament. If we should see some
understanding man that is ready to dye, totally employed about some one
especial business, we would readily conjecture, that the same must needs be a
matter of great moment. And does not our Saviors serious employment about the
blessed Sacrament, a little before his Passion, plainly argue the excellency
thereof? If a faithful husband departing from his beloved spouse, shall leave
a ring, or some other such remembrance of his love, how much will she esteem
it? how carefully will she keep it? how affectionately will she behold it?
Behold, Christ Jesus departing from his dearest Spouse the Church, has left
unto her the blessed Sacrament, as a rich pledge of his unspeakable love; Oh
how highly then should we esteem it? how comfortable should the use and
participation thereof be unto us?

Lastly, in this circumstance of Time from our Sauiors practice, we must frame
to our selves a rule of direction; that is, to grace our actions with the
choice of opportunity. For opportunity indeed is the grace and glory of our
Actions: so that a word spoken in due season, is like apples of gold with
pictures of silver. Prou. 25.11.


It Is true, as Solomon says, that to every thing there is a time and season.
(...) Eccles. 3.1.
In humane affairs men are careful to take the benefit of opportunity. The
Merchant looks to the Mart, the Seaman to the Tide, the Husbandman to the
Season; yea, all men generally are ready to take the best opportunity that is
offered, and that for corruptible vanities. How much more should Christians lay
hold upon the opportunity, which may give them the best furtherance for the
obtaining of eternal felicity?

Christ had now but a little time, and he would not lose it; he had a fit
opportunity to institute the Sacrament, and he did not neglect it. Time passes
away like a ship with a full sail, very swiftly; and in this ship is
opportunity carried, so that it passes speedily with the time: therefore when
it is offered, let us take it; lest with Esau losing the time, Heb. 12.17.
we lose also the opportunity, and with it the blessing; lest with Jerusalem
neglecting the day of visitation, Luke 19.42.
we be left desolate; lest with the foolish Virgins, by our slothful delay,
Mat. 25.11.
the door of mercy be shut up against us. It is good counsel of St.
Augustines, Aug de verb. Apost. ho. 42.
Emamus occasionem, let us purchase opportunity of doing good: but especially
when it is offered, let us not neglect it. When we see the wounded man lying in
distress, Luke 10.33
then is there opportunity offered with the good Samaritan to open the bowels
of compassion. Luke 16.20.
When Lazarus lies at our doors hungry and full of sores, then is there a time
to show mercy. When the Spirit of God knockes at the doors of our hearts, Reu.
3.20.
by the hammer of the Word, or the sound of any good motion, 2. Cor. 6.3.
then is it our part to take the accepted time, and to lay hold on the day of
salvation. Thus doing, we shall be like the tree planted by the rivers of
waters, that brings forth her fruits in due season; Psalm. 1.3.
so shall we be blessed, Gal. 6.9.
and shall reap in due season, if we faint not.

The Efficient cause or Author of the Sacrament.
That question of the Prophet Isaiah, is very material in all the parts of
Gods worship; Esaias 1.12
Who required this at your hands? And if in all the parts of Gods worship, then
more especially in the blessed Sacraments, which have their eminency above
other of Gods ordinances. Therefore the Apostle, both for the better
reformation of the Corinthians, and information of the Church of God for future
times, shows here, that the Lord Jesus is the Author of this Sacrament; that
so all posterity might esteem reverently of it, and be afraid to profane it, as
being a divine ordinance. When almighty God retained the government of his
Church immediately in his own hands, himself was the immediate Author of the
legal Sacraments. He prescribed to Abraham the Sacrament of Circumcision, and
described the same in respect of the matter, the manner, the time, the sex, the
persons, as we read in the seventeenth of Genesis. He likewise gave direction
to Moses and Aaron, Genesis 17.10, 14.
concerning the Passover, with all the Ceremonies, and circumstances, as they
are largely descrbed in the 12. of Exodus. Exo. 12.50.


Though the Lord honored Moses in making him his Ambassador; yet he retained
to himself the absolute authority of instituting the Sactament. Moses was
faithful, as a servant in the Lords house, yet neither inacted he any Law, or
instituted any Sacrament, but only published the one, Exo. 25.9.
and gave direction for the other: and in all he did, still he had his
pattern, and warrant from GOD.

When the Son of God was incarnate, and swayed the scepter in the time of
grace, he likewise did ordain and institute two Evangelical Sacraments, to
seal up thereby the ancient Covenant of Grace. As there is a pregnant
testimony of the institution of Baptism in the eighty and twentieth of Matthew:
Mat. 28.18, 19. Mat. 26.26. Mar. 14.22. Luke 22.19.
so do three of the Evangelists make very plain mention of Christ's
institution of the Eucharist, and the Apostle here reuiues the memory thereof.
Neither did Christ ordain the Sacraments, only as he was man, Greg. Valen.
Tom. 4 disp. 3 quaest. 5. p. 1. Bell. de sacra. in Genesis lib. 1. cap. 23.
(as Gregory of Valentia would have it) but as he was God and man, as diverse
Schoolmen do confess. Yea Bellarmine does seem somewhat to qualify that
opinion of his fellow Jesuit, saying, that the humanity of Christ is the
instrument, as it was hypostatically united to the divinity.

And surely to affirm, that Christ, only as man, though by Commission from
God, did institute the Sacraments, were some derogation to the dignity thereof.
Ambr. de Sacra. (...). 4. c. 4.
St. Ambrose says well, The Sacraments came from heaven: That is, they had a
divine institution. Now there are diverse reasons why it should be so.

First, the Sacraments are an especial part of Gods worship; they are military
badges, whereby we publicly profess our selves to be the soldiers and
servants of Jesus Christ, whilst we serve in his Camp, and under his colors:
Acknowledging that no other shall prescribe to us any Sacraments but only
Christ, by whom alone we look for eternal salvation. Therefore St. Paul
disclaimes that honor, which some of the Corinthians, forth of their factious
affections, were wont to cast upon their sequestered Teachers, saying, 1. Cor.
1.13.
Were you baptized into the name of Paul? And surely it were odious ambition,
and presumptuous arrogance, if any man should assume unto himself this
dignity, which is peculiar to the Son of God.

2. To him it belongs to institute the Sacraments, who is the author of Grace,
and can thereby make them effectual to the receiver. And that is only Christ,
GOD and man, and not any other who is merely man. The Sacraments indeed are
like to a seal, and as a seal gives force to the writing, so the Sacraments
do confirm to us the Covenant of grace, but yet they do this only as they
are engraven with the death, and printed with the hand of Christ.

Number 21.
If Moses, or any other Israelite, had of his own head, without divine warrant,
set up a brazen serpent, it had never been effectual to cure the stinging of
the fiery Serpents. And had any mortal man been the author of the Sacraments,
they had never bin powerful to cure and comfort the distressed soul. If the
woman with the bloody issue, Mat. 9.20.
had touched the hemmes of ten thousand others garments besides our Sauiors,
she had not bin healed: and if ten thousand Sacraments were ordained by any
other but by Christ, they have small power to heal the maladies of our souls.

Luke 8.46.
The woman touched the hemme of Christ's garment, but the virtue came from Christ
that cured her disease: so we do receive the outward elements at the hand of
the Minister, but the virtue and power thereof proceeds from Christ, to cure the
bloody issue of our sins. The Sacraments are as conduit pipes to convey grace
into the Cesterns of our hearts: but Christ himself is the fountain, Ioh.
1.16.
Of whose fullness we receive grace for grace. Had the anointing of the blind
man's eyes with clay and spittle, Ioh. 9.6.
been the prescription of any other, it had been alikely means to deprive a
man of his sight, but being Christ's direction, it was effectual to give sight
to him that was borne blind. As in humane actions the instrument has his
virtue and actiuity from the principal agent: so have these sacred ordinances
their virtue and efficacy from Christ, the author of the Sacraments. From him
proceeds the influence of Grace. We power on water in Baptism, but he baptized
with the holy Ghost, Mat. 3.11.
and with fire. In the Lords Supper we deliver the elements, but he it is that
gives virtue to the Sacrament. As he did sanctify himself, Ioh. 17.19.
so I may say he does sanctify the Sacraments for the Churches sake, that she
thereby might be sanctified.

3. The Sacraments are seals of the Covenant, and therefore they cannot
without odious forgery be fixed or annexed thereunto by any but by Christ. Is
it Treason to put a private man's seal of a Princes Letters Pate^ts? And shall
it not be found high treason against the most Highest, to put the seal of a
Sacrament to the Charter of Gods holy word? Is there a Sub poena gone forth
against them that add to the Word, Reu. 22.18.
and shall it not seize upon them, that presume to add to the Sacraments? Yes
verily, whosoever shall presume to add or ordain any other Sacraments, God
will surely add to him his plagues. Gal. 1.8.
Therefore, as St Paul does pronounce Anathema to him (though he were an Angel
from heaven) that shall preach any other Gospel, then what he has preached:
so I may boldly say, If any man shall obtrude upon the Church of Christ, any
Sacraments that he has not ordained, he is worthy to be accursed.

4. It was necessary that Christ himself should immediately institute the
Sacraments to prevent schism. For had they bin left to the institution of men,
one would have held of Paul, another of Apollos, another of Cephas. 1. Cor.
1.12.
Therefore the Apostle to reduce the Corinthians to peace, and to draw all
their affections, as it were Sunbeams to one center, asks them, Is Christ
divided? Verse 13.
Were you baptized into the name of Paul? Intimating that it was Gods special
providence, the Sacraments should be founded upon Christ; that so schism might
have no shelter by them amongst the Corinthians. If the administration of the
Sacrament, by some men, was made an occasion of schism, much more in all
likelihood, would the institution have bin the means of a greater rent.
Therefore our Savior, who had his garment without seam, his life without
scandal, and all his courses without contention, so that his voice was not
heard in the street, Mat. 12.19.
was careful, that by reserving to himself the institution of the Sacraments,
he might keep out schism and faction, the inward bane, and Gangrene of his
Church.

5. This is a part of Christ's royal prerogative, Ephesians. 5.25.
as he is the head of the Church, and is to provide all spiritual comforts for
the good of his body. Psalm. 2.6.
He is that wise and sovereign Lawgiuer, and therefore he prescribes to his
servants and subjects that homage and subjection he requires at their hands.
Heb. 5.9.
Yea, he is the author of eternal salvation, and gives it under his great
Seal. And these reasons are employed in these two titles, the Lord Jesus. He is
the Lord, and so forth of his supreme power, and authority, may enjoin his
Church to embrace his ordinances. As he is called The Lord of the Sabbath, M^r.
2.28.
so may we call him the Lord of the Sacraments; and as he forth of his
authority, changed the Sabbath in regard of the day, so did he the Sacraments
in respect of the elements. Again, as he is the Lord, so is he Jesus, the
Savior and Redeemer of his Church: and therefore forth of his mercy and
compassion, he gives the Sacraments as pledges of our redemption. Thus, both
forth of his eminent sovereignty, and exceeding mercy, he becomes the author of
these sacred ordinances. If any but Christ can say, Mat. 28.29.
All power is given me in heaven and in earth, let him boldly and freely
ordain Sacraments. If he shall attempt the one, not being able to affirm the
other, he shall be found an incrocher upon Christ's prerogative.

Yea, this case is so clear, that both Bellarmine, Bellar. de sacro in genesis
l^b. 1 ca. 23. Greg. de Valen. Tom. 4. disp. 3. qu. 5. pun^ 2.
and Gregory of Valentia do confess, That the opinion of certain Schoolmen
can no longer be defended, who hold that diverse of the Sacraments were not
ordained by Christ. Thus the Sacrament, being an especial part of Gods worship
and service, a singular instrument of Grace, a seal of eternal salvation, an
Antidote against schism, and a principal part of Christ's prerogative, to whom
should the institution thereof belong but only unto Christ?

Confirmation. Penance. Matrimony Orders. Extreme unction. Haec quaestio
definitione dissoluitur, Lactan. Institut. 5. 18.
In regard whereof the Church of Rome is hereby justly taxed, as an incrocher
upon Christ's prerogative, by adding and obtruding upon the Church of God five
Sacraments of her own invention. If we had an exact definition of a Sacrament,
the same would lash this Romish presumption; and I see not how we can better
define it, then by these causes here concurring to the constitution thereof. So
that a Sacrament is a visible sign of invisible grace, instituted of GGD, to
show and apply unto us the virtue of Christ's death an^ Passion.

Catech. Trid. Bell. and Greg. de Valen. vbi supra, and alij Pontificij.
For if we thus explane the end, and add to the old definition, the Author or
efficient cause, which the learned of all sorts do generally hold to be
essential in a Sacrament, the^ will it send packing the other five; ^ome of
which diverse learned Pa^ists do truly acknowledge not to ^aue been instituted
by Christ, nor ^o be applied to that end, which is ^equired in a Sacrament. And
in^eed this point Gregory of Valentia ^oth closely intimate, Gre. Valen. disp.
3. desac. qu. 5. p. 1.
whilst he calls Baptism, and the Eucharist, Reuera ^acramenta, True
Sacraments in^eed. For what can those words of ^is import, but that the other
Sacraments are not so? Vere and proprie sacramenta. ^oncil. Trid. sess. 7. Can.
1.
though the Coun^ell of Trent strikes him with Ana^hema, who denies that any of
these ^iue is truly and properly a Sacrament.

The Papists would feign gain ^ome aid for their error, from the ^uffrages of
the ancient Fathers, but ^n vain: For albeit they sometimes use the word
Sacrament in their wri^ings more generally, and improperly (as Hierome says
concerning the Re^elation, Tot sunt Sacrame^ta quot verba. Hieron. prol. ga^eat.
that it contains as many Sacraments as words.) Yet when they ^peake exactly
of the Sacraments, they acknowledge only two, namely, Baptism and the Supper
of the Lord, whilst they say, that The Sacraments of the Church did flow forth
of Christ's side, Aug. in Psalm. 40. Chrysostom. in Ioh him. 48. and alij. Bellar.
de Sacra. in genesis lib 2. c. 27.
when it being pierced with a Spear, there came forth water and blood, water
representing Baptism, and blood signifying the Eucharist.

In answer hereunto, Bellarmin: has a silly evasion, namely, that the issuing
of water and blood forth o^ the side of Christ, may have more expositions: For
we stand not upon the exact exposition of that place: but only show what the
judgment o^ Antiquity has been, yea in some sort grounded upon the Scripture.

And what need any one contend for seven Sacraments, when as two are very
sufficient for the Church of God? There is a notable correspondence between
our natural and our spiritual life. As to the one there is required our birth
and nourishment; so to the other we have Baptism the Sacrament of our new
birth, and the Supper of the Lord the Sacrament of our nourishment. And, as
food and raiment are sufficient for the preservation of the body: so Baptism
which is our clothing, by putting on the Lord Jesus, 1. Tim. 6.8 G^l. 3.17. 1.
Cor. 10.
and the Eucharist, which is our food, by the spiritual eating of Christ, are
sufficient for the soul.

Again, here we shall do well to take notice whence the Blessed Sacraments
have their virtue, namely, from the Author of them, the Lord Jesus. And
consequently, they are not to be refused from the hand of an evil Minister. As
the Word is mighty and powerful through God, by whom-soeuer it is preached: 2.
Cor. 10.4.
so the Sacraments may be effectual to the faithful, from what lawful
Minister soever it be received.

It is very obseruable, that our Savior did not baptize in his own person, to
manifest, John 4.2.
that the virtue of the Sacrament does not depend upon the Minister, but the
Author. And what is Paul, or what is Apollos, but the Ministers of Christ? the
one may plant, 1. Cor. 3.5.6.
the other may water, but it is God, which gives the increase.

The Separatists our new Donatists, forth of their Pharisaicall pride, do
abandon our societies, as profane, and reject our Sacraments, as polluted by
the hands of an unworthy Minister: but let every humble Christian be as far
from their opinion, as they are from a charitable union. If it be the true
treasure of the Word, though it be offered in earthen vessels, despise it not;
and if Christ the great Physician prescribe a cordial, though it be given by a
leprous hand, refuse it not.

Again, for as much as the Lord Jesus is the Author of the blessed Sacrament,
it behooves us to esteem of it very reverently. Behold, here is a princely
table, where the Angels are attendants, Chrysostom.
and the King of Kings is the Master of the feast. As Jacob said of Bethel, How
fearful is this place? So may I say, How honorable is this Sacrament?
therefore (as Chrysostom exhorts) Adora and communica, humble thy self,
Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. bom. 61.
and bow the knees both of body and soul to reverence this rich gift from the
hand of Jesus Christ.

St. Paul says of the Ministers of the Gospel, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
Have them in singular reverence for their works sake. So may I say of the
Sacraments, Have them in singular reverence for their Authors sake.

If the legal Sacraments delivered by Moses the servant of God, being
profaned, could procure the wrath of God, how much more shall the Evangelical,
being the institution of the Son of GOD, if they be abused or despised? So
says the Apostle, If they that despised Moses Law, Heb. 10.28.
died without mercy, under two or three witnesses, of how much sorer punishment
shall he be worthy, that treads under foot the Son of God, and contemns
the blood of the Testament?

If St. Paul, by direction and commission from Christ, had instituted the
Sacraments, they should have been esteemed honorable, but how much more when
Christ himself is the immediate Author of them? It made much for the
excellency of the Tabernacle, Exo. 31.3.
in that Almighty God would have it to be the work of choice men, Bezaliel
and Aholiab, whom he furnished and filled with excellent knowledge. And does
not this make much for the honor of the blessed Sacrament, that it is the
institution of Christ, Colos. 2.3.
in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge? Exodus 16.
Manna was of it self an excellent and dainty food, but so much the more
excellent in that it came from God, and not by the ordinary course of nature;
and so is the blessed Sacrament, in that it comes from Christ, Romans 9.5.
who is GOD blessed for evermore.

We must not esteem this as a constitution of the Church, (which yet is to be
reverenced as the precept of an indulgent mother to her dear children) but as
a divine and heavenly ordinance, coming as a rich gift from the Father of
lights. Iam. 1.17.
If the Institutions of great Princes do in time obtain great honor and
estimation, and are celebrated with great solemnity, as diverse orders of
knighthood, and the like: how much more honorable should this blessed ordinance
of Christ the King of Kings be accounted?

When the King of Persia held out the golden Scepter, happy was he that might
come to touch the top of it: So when Christ has instituted, and does inuit us
to his Sacraments, every one should count it his great happiness to be
partaker of so great favor, and should come to them with alacrity.

It cannot but grieve a Christian heart, to see how the Sacrament of Baptism
is generally disesteemed, and Christ, the author thereof, is thereby much
dishonored. It is usual in most Congregations, when Baptism is administered,
for people to flock away irreverently, as though that Sacrament nothing
concerned them. But they should know, that as they owe their duty of their
prayers to the infant, and their silent suffrages for th'incorporating of it
into the society of the Saints ^ so themselves may take occasion, to revive the
remembrance of their own Covenant in Baptism, and are bound to honor the
ordinance of Christ with their presence.

Lastly, seeing Christ is the autho^ of this Sacrament, it is our duty to
receive it reverently, and to use it religiously. This Sacrament came from
heaven, as St. Ambrose says, and therefore it requires a heavenly mind in the
Receiver. If we be invited to a great man's table, we are careful to carry our
selves with all due reverence and respect, not suffering a word to slip, or
an action to pass us, which may procure disgrace to our selucs, or distaste to
that great man: behold then, we being invited by the Lord Jesus to his Table,
let us both in respect of his ordinance, and presence, banish out of our hearts
all such wicked and wandering cogitations, as may either provoke our Savior, or
prejudice our selves. Happy and thrice happy is he, that esteems of the
Sacrament highly, comes to it cheerfully, and receives it reverently. For he
that is thus feasted by Christ in the kingdom of Grace, shall one day sit
down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of glory.

THE SECOND Sermon. The External Matter of the Sacrament.
1. COR. 11.24. And when he had given thanks, he brake it, etc.


THE second cause in the constitution of the Sacrament, is the matter, and the
due consideration thereof is very material. The matter of the Sacrament is
twofold, outward and visible, and so is obuious to the eye and other outward
senses. Inward and invisible, and is therefore present only to the internal
sense, and the apprehension of the soul. The outward matter is twofold,
namely, bread and wine, and is set down in two verses, the bread in the three
and twentieth, the wine in the five and twentieth verse. The invisible also is
twofold, to wit, the body and blood of Christ, in the four and twent^, and
five and twentieth verses. So that in the Sacrament there is offered and
exhibited to the worthy communicant corporally bread and wine, but spiritually
the body and blood of Christ. F^r the Sacraments must be visible signs of
invisible grace. Therefore Gregory of Valentia his course is very remarkable,
Disp ^. de s^^^ ^^. 1. ^^ct ^.
who to support his seven Sacraments, does disclaim that material bra^ch in
the ancient definition of a Sacrament; namely, that it should be a visible
sign, because that circumstance does discard Matrimony and penance, as having
none such annexed to them; wherein he plays the bad workman, in framing his
rule to his work, not his work to his rule. First, of the outward and corporal
matter, and then of the inward and spiritual.

We find it usual in the sacred Scriptures, that the Lord teaches his
children by signs, similitudes, and borrowed speeches. Thus did our Savior
teach Nicodemus the doctrine of Regeneration, by our natural birth, saying,
John. 33.
Except a man be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. And when that
would not serve, he used the similitude of the wind, both to explain
himself, and to check Nicodemus dullness. Romans 6.19
Thus God speaks to us after the manner of men, expressing divine mysteries by
humane metaphors, S. Aug. tract. 80. in Joh. calls the Sacraments visibilia
verba.
and by outward signs, as it were by visible words, does demonstrate heavenly
matters.

Now some signs are supernatu^all and miraculous, some natural, ^ome
artificial and voluntary. Iud. 6.37.
The watering of the fleece and the floor were extraordinary signs to Gedeon.
The going back of the Sun in the Dial of Ahaz, Isai. 38.8.
as it was miraculous, so was it a most significant demonstration of Hezekiah
his recovery: For man's life passes away insensibly like the shadow in the
Dial, Sensi^^ sine sensis.
the sa^d in the houre-glasse, and the wheels of a clock; the shadow is ever
moving, the sand ever running, the clock always walking; so our time pass^th
away, and we come to the period of our days, many times before we think of
it. Yet he that sets the clock, can set it backward or forward as pl^as^th him.
And so d^alt the Lord with Hezekiah. Again, some signs are natural, Genesis
9.13.
as the Rainbow, which giu^s assurance that the arrow of Gods anger shall never
strike the world any more by a gen^rall deluge. Again, some are arti^ici^ll
and voluntary: thus was the Ar^^ a sign and symbol of Gods pr^sence, the
blood of the Lamb, strooken upon the lyntell of the doors, a sign of his
protection; and thus are the bread and wine lively and infaillible signs of
the presence of Christ in the blessed Sacrament. And as men by a turf in the
field, do take possession of lands, and by a wand in the Court do receive an
interest in Copy holds, with their privileges and appurtenances: so the
servants of God by these outward elements, do obtain the fruition of Christ
with all his divine graces and virtues. And surely the wisdom and goodness
of God are notably manifested in the dispensation of these mysteries; For we
are in part corporal, and the best of us in some degree carnal, and have
therefore need of these helps. Yea, such is our dullness to conceive,
weakness to believe, and brittlenes to retain such divine mysteries, that
the Lord has seen it needful to inform our understanding, confirm our
faith, and strengthen our memories by these outward means.

The incredulity of Thomas cleaues close to all the sons of Adam: Io. 20.25.
we will not believe except we see. Therefore as men by proppes do support
their weak houses, which otherwise would quickly grow ruinous; So Almighty ^od,
forth of his tend^r care and compassion, has ordained th^se outward elements
to be the props of our weak and feeble faith

Again, by the same way and windows that sin entered, it was fit it should
be expelled; so that, as the eyes were employed in seeing, the hands in
handling, and the mouth in tasting of the forbidden fruit; so they might all
be exercised in receiving this comfortable food, the refection of the soul;
wherein the fullness of manifestation, adds to the fullness of consolation,
according to that of Saint John, That which we have heard, 1. Io. 1.14.
which we have seen with these our eyes, and have looked upon, and these
hands of ours have handled of the word of life, these things I write unto you,
that your joy may be full.

Behold th^n, we have here great cause to be thankful to God, who by stooping
to our capacities, has set forth such excellent myst^ries, by these outward
elements, and for our bett^r instru^tion and comfort, has spoken both to our
ear^s and our eyes. As nurses in their loving affe^tion, do frame their
sp^eches to the child's ability: so Almighty God, Chrysostom.
for^h of his tender compa^sion, has framed the Sacraments according to our
capacity. As it was an extra^rdinary favor which Christ aff^rd^d Thomas, Ioh.
20.27.
that he might put his hand into his side, and fe^l^ the wounds; so is it his
great mercy vouchsafed to us, that h^e will help our faith by our outward
senses. It is a great judgment, when a people are denied the means of
instruction: therefore the Church bewailes our present condition; saying, We
s^e not our signs. Psalm. 74.9.
And it is a note of Christ's indignation toward the Pharisees, that when they
crave a present sign of him, they cannot obtain it: Mat. 12.39
but on the contrary, it is a great favor, when the Lord speaks, and makes
known himself familiarly to his people, as he does in the Sacraments. It is a
good sign he intends their comfort and salvation, to whom he vouchsafes the
clear revelation of his will. He shows his word to Jacob, his statutes and
his judgments to Israel, ^sal. 147.19, 20.
but deals not so with every nation; therefore let th^se that enjoy these
privileges and favors (as they are exhorted) praise the Lord.

Again, forasmuch as these outward signs are ordained of God, to represent
unto us spiritual graces, we must not be so grossly co^ceited, as to rest in
the outward view of them, but to have our minds lifted up to higher matters.
For as it is a great misery to want the means; so is it a far more heavy
judgment to want the use of them. When as hearing, Mat. 13.13
men shall hear and not understand, and s^eing, they shall see and not
perceive. When they see things oculis corporis, non cordis, when the eyes and
ears of the body shall be open to the outward elements, but be shut to ^he
inward grace. As when Phy^^^e works not through obstructi^ns it is hurtful to
the body; so when these ordinances of God prevail not, it is dangerous to the
soul. This made our Savior, forth of his compassion, not only to sigh, but
also to entertain an extraordinary passion, even to be angry. Mark. 3.5.
To rest in contemplation of the outward elements only, were to be like the
Anthropomorphites, who resting in the letter of the Word, ascribed unto God the
corporal parts of a man. It were with the Capernaites to conceive a corporal
and carnal eating of Christ, and with little children, Ioh. 6.52.
to gaze upon the gilded cover, and neglect the learning in the book. This
were grossly to pervert the ordinance of Almighty God, who has given us these
elements as a Candle to light us, not as a clowd to hinder us from seeing and
receiving Christ. Though the ignorant Persian, by beholding the Sun and
Moon, be brought to Idolatry: yet the understanding Christian must with David
thereby be stirred up to adore the divine Majesty, Ps. l. 8.^.4.
and to magnify him for his goodness to mankind. When Christ stoopes to our
capacities for our instruction: then must we send up our faith, and lift our
meditations to heaven for our comfort; F^dem mitte m^^^^um. A^g. ep. 3. Col.
3.1. Math. 2.
as the Apostle exhorts in the third to the Colossians, If you be risen with
Christ, seek the things that are above Thus as the wise men were led to
Christ by the star in the East; s^ should we be guided to him by these
outward signs in the Sacrament, and be stirred up spiritually to feed^ upon
his precious body and blood represented to us by these outward ^lements.

But it is not enough to obseru^ the signs in general, we must descend to the
particular consideration of them, and the reasons why this Sacrament should be
instituted in these ^lements of bread and wine, rather then in any other: the
consideration whereof, will yield much matter o^ instruction. There are many of
the works of God, so full of mystery, that though we fear high, yet we cannot
comprehend the reason of them. We can say (...); but not (...), that they are
so, that it is plain and evident, but why and how they are so, it is not so
apparent. Yet are the r^asons of this matter very obuio^s and evident to eu^ry
understanding man.

Now the reasons of using these elements are either general, as they concern
them both, or particular, as they concern them severally.

There are two especial reasons in general. First, these elements of bread
and wine are most usual and common thorowout the Christian world, and so do
fit ^he Church of Christ dispersed over the face of the earth. Secondly, Cypr.
epi. 76.
they are most significant to set forth our union both with Christ, and
between our selves. For as many grains are united in one loaf, 1. Cor. 10.17.
and many grapes in one cup: so all the faithful are by the Sacrament united
each to other, as members of one body, and all of them to Christ as to their
head. And herein the signs of the Sacrament have a notable correspondence with
the phrase of Scripture, John. 6.35. Ioh. 15.1.
which compares Christ to bread, and to a vine. And the like we see in
Baptism, for the Element is very common, all places generally having water,
and very significant, to set forth by the cleansing of our bodies by water, the
cleansing of our souls by the blood of Christ.

Again, there are diverse reasons proper and peculiar to them severally.

First, the bread is fit to set forth the strength we have by Christ; for vita
panis, Aug^st.
and vita Christus, as bread is a principal supporter of our natural life, so
is Christ of our spiritual. In regard of the strength of his creature, L^u^t.
26.2^.
it is called in Leuiticus the staff of bread: because that, as the weak and
weary man is stayed up by a staff, so is the frail and feeble body by bread.
Yea, because that bread is of especial use and force, in the nourishment and
strengthening of our bodies, Mat. 6.11
we comprehend in the Lords prayer, under the name thereof, whatsoever is
necessary for the preservation of this present life. And the Psalmist likewise
says plainly, Psalm. 104.15.
He brings out of the earth bread that strengthens man's heart. Upon which
words Saint Austin, after his allegorical manner of exposition, applies it to
Christ, saying, quem panem? what bread is it that he brings forth of the earth
to strengthen man's heart? and then answers, Christum, even Christ. Thus the
bread, being in especial manner the instrument of our corporal strength, was
fit to set forth our spiritual strengthening by Christ.

And as the bread is very significant: so is the wine in sundry respects.

One use of wine is to quench the thirst, and so it sets forth the quenching of
our spiritual thirst by the blood of Christ: for his blood ^ drink indeed.
Ioh. 6.55.
Ind^ed it is, in ^^^enc^^ing the thirst of the soul^, as ^^^n^ is in quenching
the thirst of ^h^ body. And th^r^for^ the Pr^p^^t Isaiah proclaim^th to the
w^rld t^^^ comf^r^, I^^. 55.1.
Hoe, every one that thirst^th, come you to the w^ters, and you that have no
money came a^^ buy wine and m^ke without ^^^e, an^ w^^h^ut (...). So that he,
who^^ sou^^ pa^e^^ (...) thirst^th after Christ, (...) the Heart after the
rivers of wa^ers, ^^ce^ueth from him that water of (...), which never suffers h
m to thirst again. Ioh. 4.14.


A second property of wine is to refresh and r^uiu^ a weary man, by expelling
cold and crude humors, in regard whereof S. Paul exho^ts Timothy, (who in
respect of his age and calling utterly abstaining from ^i^^, 1. Tim. 5.^^.
^ad hurt his stomack^ by crudities and other infirmitie^) to drink a little
wine. And what more fit to set forth the refreshing and reviving of ^^r
^enummed souls, by the blood of Christ? ^phes. 2.5.
Through whom being dead in our trespasses, we are quickened. Thus whilst
Christ jesus the Sun of righteousness st^n^s upon our cold and frozen hearts,
he expels the cold vapors of sin and quickens us to the acti^ns of
sanctification. A third property of wine, which follows by way of consequence
upon the former, is, to cheer and comfort the heavy heart, by reviving and
releeuing the ^ulled and decayed spirits; ^o says the Psalmist, Psalm. 104.15.
that wine makes ^l^d the heart of man; therefore the Wiseman exhorts, Pro. 31
6.
Give wine to them that have grief of heart. And it has been observed forth
of the ancient Rabbis, Beza de pass. D. ^it. ^o. 28.
that it was the custom of compassiona^e Ma^rons, to provide comfortable
drink^s for them who went to execution, to ch^are up their hearts against the
t^^r^r and trouble of death. In which respe^t, wine is excel^ent to setforth
the sweet joy of heart, and peace of con^cience, that we have by our blessed
Savior. For being justified by Faith, we have peace with God, Romans 5.1.
through our Lord Jesus Christ. Yea, we have peace within our selves; To. 14.17.
for the Kingdom of God is not meat nor drink, but righteousness, and peace,
and joy in the holy Ghost.

A fourth property of wine is in the use of medicine, to mundifie and cleanse a
wound, and Plutarch calls it a most sweet and powerful medicine. Medicamentum
validissimum and suauissimum. Plut. sympos. lib. 3. q. 1.
We read in the tenth of Luke, that the Samaritane powered wine and oil into
the wounds of him that lay by the way side, the one vt morderet, the other vt
foueret; the one like the corrasiue to eat out the dead flesh and to cleanse
the wound, the other to supple and heal it, Ambro. de Poe^it. lib. 1. cap. 10.
as Ambrose says. And in this respect wine does notably represent the blood of
Christ, which cleanses and cures the wounds of our souls, and indeed he is
that good Samaritan, that powers in the mundifying wine, and mollifying oil of
his merits to heal the brokenhearted. Luke 4.18.


Thus we see what the outward Elements are, and the wisdom of God in the fit
choice of them.

Forasmuch then as the Sacrament must have in it necessarily the Elements of
bread and wine, and seeing their significancy is to excellent, the Church of
Rome is hereby justly taxed, which by the doctrine of Transubstantiation does
annihilate the signs, Eucharistia duabus rebus constat terrena and coelesti.
Jren. lib. 4. cap. 14.
and consequently does overthrow the Sacrament. For the Sacrament must consist
of two things, the one earthly, the other heavenly. They may seem to have
taken a po^^icke course for the advancement of the Eucharist, by this supposed
change of the substance; but, if the (...) ^he duly considered, they have (...)
most improuidently, for they ^^^e thereby overthrown it. The ^^hemists do
vehemently challenge us, that we have taken away the blessed Sacrament
altogether; Rhem. Annot. in Ioh. 6. and 1. Cor. 11
but that injurious imputation falls upon themselves, for they indeed have
altogether saken it away, by taking away the signs; for where there are no
signs, there is no Sacrament. If it be answered, the accidents remain, as
namely the color, the tast^, the ^^shion, it will not s^^^ice: For (...) ^he
Sacrament is set forth our ^piritua^l nourishment, by a a^^g^ of ^he corporal.
Now ^he body is ^ot nourished by accidents, but by corporal sub^tances,
Curaeus de sensib lib. 2. cap. 8.
as both Phy^^cian^ and Philosophers do truly ^^ach. And therefore, to set
forth truly our n^urishment by Christ, it is requ^site that the signs be
corporal and substantial.

Again, as they d^e by consequence ou^rthrow the Sacrament, so do they
directly abrogate a part thereof, by denying the cup to the people. And seeing
the wine is so comfortably significant, in setting forth the quenching of our
spiritual thirst, the cleansing, curing, chearing* and refreshing of our
sinful souls, by the blood of Christ, how can it without great injury be
denied to the people? Yea, it is odious sacrilege to deprive the Church of a
principal part of the Sacrament, and that which a man would hardly endure in
his ordinary repast. The blood of Christ is the special price of our
redemption; 1. Pet. 1.18.
For we were redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without
spot. Heb. 12.24
So that whereas our sins do cry for vengeance, 1. Ioh. 1.7.
the blood of Christ speaks to God for remission^; yea, it cleanses us from
all our sins. For as much therefore as the wine in the Sacrament, is a lively
sign and seal of these benefits, it is gross injury, and impiety in the
Church of Rome, to deny it to the people, to whom the benefits do belong. And
what else is this, but to endeavor the damming up of the Fountain, which
Christ Jesus has set open to the house of David, Zac. 13.1.
and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin, and for uncleanness? But herein
they deal with Christ and his Church, Bellarm. de verb. Dei. lib. 4. cap. 1.
regulam fidei non totalem sed partialem.
as they do in other matters; for they account the Scriptures not a perfect,
but a partial rule of Faith, and patch it up with their traditions. Yea, they
make Christ but half a Savior, whilst they make others ioynt-purchasers with
him, and ascribe to him the satisfaction for the fault, but leave to others to
satisfy for the punishment. No marvel therefore, that these men do square
the Sacrament after the same proportion, and bring in half a Sacrament for
half a Savior. If the people should deal with the Priests in their offerings
after this manner, it would either cool their devotion, or work a reformation.

Our blessed Savior doubtless, as he had respect to the demonstration of his
passion, and the shedding of his blood, by the whips, spear, nails, and
crown of thorns: so had he a purpose by these outward elements, Iausen.
Comor. c. 131. Ludolp. de vita Christi. par. 2. c. 56.
to set forth our full redemption, and perfect nourishment we have by him;
which cannot be showed but by eating and drinking. And this diverse learned
Papists, yea the Roman Breuiary, set forth by Pius Quintus do observe.

Christ himself says of the Cup, as it is here in the Text, This Cup is the
new Testament in my blood. Gelas. de Co^secrat. distin. 2.
Who then without injury, can alter or abrogate any part of this Testament?
Yea, the dividing of one and the same mystery, is not done without a grievous
sacrilege, says a Bishop of Rome.

This practice of the Church of Rome does oppose it self to the institution of
our Savior Christ, Mat. 26.27 Mar. 14.23 Luke 22.20
and crosses the general practice of Antiquity,

Three of the Evangelists have carefully recorded the use of the cup, and St.
Paul here has duly related the same; that in the mouth of many witnesses, this
doctrine might be established; and the Churches right might remain upon
record, against this Romish sacrilege. Yea, lest the historical narration
might seem insufficient to enforce it, we have Christ's precept to his
disciples (who did represent the laytie) to urge it. For as in the six and
twentieth of St. Matthew, Christ's commands, Mat. 26.27
Drink ye all of this: so in the foureteenth of St. Mar. 14.23
Mark it is said, They all drank of it And Caietans reason upon that place is
good. Caietan. in Mat. 26.
Drink ye all of this, because it is shed for all For it is very rea^onable,
that all who have an interest in the blood of Christ, should be partakers of
the wine, which repr^sents his blood. I may say therefore with Cyprian to
Cecilius, If it be not lawful to us late the least Command^ment of Almighty
God, how much less one so great and weighty?

M^reouer, as ^ur Saviors institution does teach and prescribe the use of the
Cup; to the general practic^ of succe^ding ag^s does approve i^ which how
evident it is, may appear by Bellarmines shallow arguments and w^ak proofs of
the contrary. Bellarm. de Eueha. lib. 4. cap. 24. Andra^ Ortho. expli. li. 7
Andradius a principal stickle^ at the Council of Trent, and a vehement
d^fender thereof, justly reprooues the opinion of those, who held that the Cup
was anciently taken away from the laytie, and restored by Leo.

And Cardinal Cusanus can go no ^urther for the head of this stream, As
appears in his Epistle to the Bohemia^s.
^hen the Council of Lateran, which was twelve hundred years after Christ. So
that they who are wont ^o brag of antiquity, and challenge ^s for nouelty,
are herein manifestly ^ound to be mere nouilists, and shake ^ands with the
Maniches, Leo quadra. Ser. 4.
who abstained from the use of the Cup.

The Romanists do pretend reasons for this their sacrilege, but such as are
no less absurd, then their practice is impious.

Andradius says, they had learned by long experience, Andrad. vbi supra.
that the use of the Cup could not be retained without maruailous danger. In
which speech, he not only taxes our Savior Christ of inconsideration, who
could not foresee, but the Church also of extreme ignorance or negligence, that
in twelve hundred years could not observe, or would not avoid such dangers.

But what are those dangers, I pray you? Gerson will tell you, lest men's beards
should be wet, and lest the wine should be sour, if an over plus were
consecrated.

Rhem Ann. in John 6.58.
The Rhemists say, Because the Communicants being many, so much wine could not
at once be conveniently consecrated, and there might be danger of sheading.
Which Reasons with some others of the like stamp, coming forth of the forge
of drowsy brains, were it not a serious and sacred matter, do rather deserve
laughter then answer.

The Apostles constitutions ran with this tenor, Acts 15.28
It has seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us: but behold the pride of these
men, who practice what seems good unto themselves only, without direction of
the holy Ghost, and contrary to the institution of the Lord Jesus.

Whatsoever reason therefore flesh and blood may have for taking away of the
Cup, I may well say in this case of a matter of certainty, what Bellarmine
says of a matter of probability, (that is, the use of unleavened bread) Neque
enim dubitari potest, quin illud sit melius, Bellar. de sacra. Euchar. li. 4.
cap. 7.
and faciendum, quod Christus fecit: It is not to be doubted but that is best,
and fittest to be practiced, which Christ himself has done. And if the Church
of Rome will persist in this sacrilege, 1. Cor. 10.16.
let her take heed lest for taking away the Cup of blessing, she draw upon her
the curse of God, and taste of the wine of his wrath, as the Lord himself
threatens, Reave. 16.19.

Again, here the Papists are justly taxed for some alterations and additions,
in the matter of the Sacrament, as namely, in using and urging unleavened
bread, in the mixing of water with the wine, and dipping the bread in the wine.

1. They urge very nicely the use of unleavened bread; Rhem. An. in 1. Cor.
11.23
yea the Rhemists vehemently charge us, that we neither follow Christ, nor St.
Paul in doing the contrary. Indeed, if either the Evangelists or the Apostle
had said (...), not (...), the Rhemists had said somewhat to the purpose, but
it being otherwise, the Text yields them not the least color for their
conceit. For the P^sseouer must be celebrated with unleavened bread.
All that ca^ be said, is grounded occasionally, because the Passover being
now celebrated, it is like, our Savior took such bread as the time and place
did afford him. Not because the Sacrament did necessarily require it, but
because the celebration of the Passover did presently yield it. Now it is not
fit, that an accidental ceremony should bring in a perpetual necessity.
Anse^m says Multis Catholicis rati^nali u^ videtur, quod agunt non est contra
fidem Catholicam. Epist Wi^eram. Ep. Do. Soto in 4 sent ^is^^^. 9. qu. (...).
Ier. 2.13.
Yea, this me thinks might stop the Rhemists mouths, in that the learned
amongst them do hold it indifferent. For though Scotus account the Grecians
schismatikes for using leauened bread; yet does Dominicus Sot^, and others
apologize for them. Yea the Council of Hor^nce definitiuely allows their
practice. 2. They urge exceedingly the mixing water with wine: wherein I may
say with the Prophet Jeremy: These people have committed two evils, one, by
taking away the cup from the people; the other, by adding water to the wine
in the Priests cup. Yet could I easily pass over this in silence, Rhem.
Anno. in 1. Cor. 11.23.
were it not for the Rhemists v^h^mency, who urge it as a matter of necessity,
and affirm, that we in neglect thereof, do contemn Christ and his Church
impudently, and damnably: for Christ (say they) and the Apostles, and all the
Churches in the world, have ever mixed their wine with water. But this stone of
impudency rebounds upon themselves. For as there is no mention of this mixture
in the word of God: So a great Popish Antiquary affirms, Po. Virgil. de
invent. lib. 5. cap. 9. Primus autem vino miscuit. Do. Soto in 4 s^nt. did. 9.
qu. 1. Art. 6. ^q^inas in 1. Cor. 11. Lect. 6. probabile est, etc.
that Alexander the seventh, Bishop of Rome, did first of all, when he
consecrated, mix water with the nine.

Domini^. Soto (as likewise diverse others) says, It is not a matter of
necessity, and only probable, that Christ, to allay the h^at of the wine in
those hot climats, did mix it with water. Is it not strange that they should
hold that damnable in our pactice, the contrary whereof, is only probable and
occasional in their judgments, The taking away of the cup.
and yet not tremble to practice that which is directly contrary to the
institution of Christ, and the constant practice of so many succeeding ages?
Neither is it to be neglected, that this their mixture has brought them into
many perplexed disputes; as namely, whether the water be incorporated with the
wine, and transubstantiated; or whether it remain entire* and serve only for
signification, and the like. A third nicety is the Priests dipping of the bread
in the wine, which indeed is folly from a false ground, namely from the soppe
given to Judas. Ioh. 13.26.
For that soppe was at a second course, which they used to have after the
Passover, and before the Supper of the Lord. As may appear page 205.
This confounding of the elements takes much away from their several
significations.

As in the time of the Law the sacrifices were so killed and offered, that the
blood was distinctly shed by it self: so our Savior in the institution of
the Supper does take, consecrate, and give the bread and wine severally; and
fitly, because the Sacrament does represent Christ's passion, To. 5.7.9.
wherein the shedding of his blood is noted as a distinct thing. The Schoolmen
do urge very justly the consecrating of wine by it self, because it did flow
apart from the body of Christ at his passion: and if it be necessary in the act
of Consecration, why not also of administration?

Again, forasmuch as the bread and wine do remain distinct substances from
the body and blood of Christ, the Romish adoration, grounded on a vain
supposition of Christ's local presence, is no less then odious idolatry,
whilst that is given to the creature, Romans 1.25.
which is due only to the Creator, who is God blessed for ever.

Again, the matter of the Sacrament may be a motive to unity; It should be our
vinculum pacis, the bond of Peace, or glutinum charitatis, the cement of
Charity, as Barnar^ calls it. Bern septuag^s^ser. 1.
That as many grains ar^ united in one loaf, and many grape in one cup; so
our hearts and souls should be joined in one; according to the Apostles
speech, 1. Cor. 10. 1. Cor. 10.17.
For we that are many, are one boar, because we are made partakers of ^^e
bread. St. Paul exhorts the Ephesians Ep. 4.3-6.
to keep the unity of Spirit in the bond of peace, because There is on^ Lord,
one Faith, one Baptism, on^ God and Father of all: So let us consider, my
brethren, that we we^^^ one livery, serve one Master, have one God to our
Father, one Church to our Mother, we feed and feast^ one table; Oh how well
then does this unity acc^^d with that we pr^fesse to be? That we may b^ (...)
those w^rthy Christians* who were as it were one soul in many ^^di^^. (...).
^^t. (...).
Our Savior Christ makes this vnit^, of affections a (...), an esp^ciall badg^
of his ^^^lowers, Ioh. 13.35
saying, B^ this shall all m^^ know that you are my Disciples, if you love one
another. Were it only our general profession, the same were su^ficient to
move us to unity; for we acknowledge our selves members of one body; but add
hereunto the mutual participation of Divine graces, and Gods sacred
ordinances, and amongst others the comfort of the blessed Sacrament, and the
same must needs be a singular bond of unity, peace and amity.

Lastly, from this significant relation of the visible sign with the invisible
grace, there rises a meditation of singular comfort. For Christ is our bread,
our wine, he is our strength, our refreshing, our cure, our comfort. If we
consider our own estate and condition, we shall find what ne^de we have of
Christ. Faciles sumus ad se lucendum, debiles ad operandum, Bern.
fr^giles ad resistendum. We are easily seduced, a less bait then the fruit
of Paradise will entice us, a w^a^ ^r enemy then the subtle serpent can seduce
us. Genesis 3.1.
We are feeble in doing the L^rds wi l, having many encumbrances withour, and
our own infirmities within, being of our selves not a^le so much as to think
a good thought. 2. Cor. 3.5.
We are frail in resisting the temptations of the Devil. For the case stands
between him and us, 1. Sa. 17.33
as Saul said of David and Goliath, Thou a^t but a child, an^^he is a man of
war from his youth. Yet behold, Luke 11.22
here is a stronger man that ouercomes him, takes from him his armor, and
deuides the spoil. Neither does Christ retain this strength to himself
only, but communicates it in some measure unto his servants; so that they are
able to do all things through the help of Christ that strengthens them Our
souls do receive deadly wounds in our spiritual combats, Phil. 4.13.
but behold, bear is a gracious Physician, that applies both the mundifying
wine, and mollifying oil of his mercy, and by his word is able to cure every
one that lies at this poole of Bethesda. Whose spirit is not sometimes dejected
with the terrors of sin? What tender heart is not sometimes ready to cry out
with these mournful Conuerts, Men and brethren, what shall we do? Act. 2.37.
But lo, here is a blessed Comforter, who binds up the broken heart, Luke
4.18.
speaks peace to the wounded soul, and gives joy unspeakable and glorious.
In a word, 1. Pet. 1.8.
all sufficiency of Grace is to be had in Christ, Amb. de virgin. lib. 3.
Omnia Christus est nobis, says St. Ambrose: Christ is to us whatsoever our
hearts can desire. Are our souls wounded with sin, behold, he is our
Physician; If we be laden with iniquity, he has taken the burden upon him,
he is made our Righteousness. If we be weak and feeble, he is our strength;
If we fear death, he is our life; if we desire to come to heaven, he is our
way; if we would be free from darkness, he is our light; if we be thirsty,
he is the fountain of living water; if we be hungry, he is our meat. Gustate
igitur and videte quam suauis est Dominus. Psa. 34.8.
O come and taste, and see then how sweet the Lord is! Blessed are they that
put their trust in him.

THE THIRD Sermon. The Invisible Matter of the Sacrament.
1. COR. 11.25. After the same manner he took the cup, etc.


YOU have heard of the visible matter of the Sacrament, which leads us, as it
were by the hand to take notice of the invisible, which is the body and blood
of Christ: and this is full of comfort. For by how much the body is more
excellent then the shadow, by so much does this heavenly substance excel the
earthly.

When we say that the body and blood of Christ is the invisible matter of the
Sacrament, we comprehend under them, whole Christ, both soul and body, with
all his divine Graces and Merits: Yea the Divinity also in respect of efficacy;
yet because the humane nature of Christ is as it were the Conduit pipe, by
which the Divinity does convey grace to us, therefore we mention only the
receiving of that in the Eucharist. But the truth is, that whole Christ, both
God and man, is made ours, by the worthy participation of this Sacrament. The
elements and author of salvation are both received at one instant, if the heart
and hand of the receiver do their mutual offices: as the Minister gives the
visible sign, so the Spirit of God imparts the invisible Grace. As John
Baptist said, when he baptized with water. Mat. 3.11.
Christ Jesus baptized with the holy Ghost, Hieron. ad Hedib. quae 2
and with fire. So that Christ is in the Sacrament both Conuiua and conuiuium;
by him we are invited, and by him we are nourished.

This is plain from the sacramental relation between the signs and the
thing signified. For Christ Jesus is not like Zeuxes, who fed the birds with
painted berries. To offer bare signs without the substance, were a greater
delusion, then can agree with him who is the God of truth. Therefore are the
Bread and Wine in llible pledges of the presence of Christ in the Sacrament.

It is said of the children of Israel, that they did eat of the same
spiritual meat, 1. Cor. 10.3, 4.
and drink of the same spiritual rock, and the rock was Christ. It cannot
be said that they did eat and drink of the same in respect of the signs:
therefore it must needs be understood of the thing signified, which is Christ.
And so St. Augustine says, Those Sacraments were different from ours in the
signs, but equal in the matter signified. Now, if the Isra^lit^s did by
virtue of their Sac^^ments eat and drink Christ spiritua^ly in the time of
the Law, who will doubt but the Church and children of God do so in the time
of the Gosp^ll? And St. Paul's dr^ft in that place is by showing the equality of
the Sacraments, to wr^st a vain buckler of defense out of the hands of the
Corinthians. For they were r^ady to object their priuiledg^s as a Sup^^sedeas
to Gods judgments, esteeming their case to be better then the Israelites, in
respect of those divine privileges: but the Apostle shows them their error,
and lays upon the vanity of their conc^it of safety, by manifesting, that the
Israelites were insconsed with as strong bulwarks, and invested with a^ great
privileges as themselves, in reg^rd of the su^^tance of the Sacraments,
notwithstanding which, the wrath of God did break forth upon them. And what
else could the Corinthians expect, if they were culpable in the same kind?

Again, the Sacraments are not only signs to demonstrate, but scales also to
ratify the word of promise. And indeed there cannot be a more lively
comparison to set forth the nature and difference of the Word and Sacraments.
For the Gospel may fitly be compared to a Charter, or to a Will and Testament,
and the Sacraments to the seals, whereby the l^gacy of eternal life
bequeathed in the Gospel to all the faithful is ratified. Bellar. Praef. ad
controuer. de Sacramentis.
But this comparison Bellarmine quarrels, and calls a foolish comparison. His
reason is, Because a seal should of it self be better known, give power and
honor, and add authority to the writing, Obsignari pre^^ siones nusq am
legimus, nisi forte in Euangelio secundum Lutherum Bellar. vbi supra.
whereas the Word of God is by it self of absolute authority, and the
Sacraments of none at all, without the testimony of the Word. Yea, says he,
We do not read in any Apostle or Evangelist, that the promises of God are
sealed up unto us, except peradventure in the Gospel, according to Luther.

In which scornful speech, it is hard to say, whether the Jesuit show himself
more ignorant or impudent, For the comparison is divine. St. Paul shows in the
fourth to the Romans, Romans 4.11.
that Abraham received the sign of Circumcision, as the scale of the
righteousness of faith. Aug. de vera Relig. c. 17. Lt Angaepist. 203 al
Maximinum. And to Clemens Alex. calls the Sacrament, Strom li. 2. Tertul. calls
Baptism si^naculum fidei. (...) de spec^ae. 24.
And as the legal Sacraments were seals of the Covenant, so are the
Evangelical which succeed them in that kind, as Saint Augustine says; and so
diverse other ancient Fathers call them.

But I would know of Bellarmine, how a seal is a thing better known then the
Charter, or what power it has without some writing? If the Jesuit should have
had the Popes scale or bull to a blanke, he would have found small power or
virtue in it to him for a Cardinalshippe; whereas a writing without a seal,
may be known to be a man's deed, express his mind, and carry with it in some
cases, power to convey a gift or legacy.

Who doubts but that the bare Word of God is of sufficient authority, and
yields great assurance? Yet (as the Apostle says) God being willing more
abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise, Heb. 6.17.
the stablenes of his Counsel, bound himself by an oath: So I may say, that
the Word of God written, is the Word of Truth, 1. Tim. 2.15.
like the writing of a faithful man; his promises are Yea and Amen, 2. Cor.
1.20.
and shall surele be accomplished. Yet as the Rainbow was given for a full
assurance of the worlds preservation from a general Deluge (which should have
been ratified if there had never been Rainebow:) So the Sacraments are given as
seals of the Covenant of Grace and salvation, which God has made to his
servants, that having both his hand and seal, their faith might more fully be
strengthened. Therefore for Bellarmlne to scoff at the title of a seal, and
applied to the Sacrament, is great impiety, and to quarrel the Comparison, is
gross impudency.

The truth of the presence of Christ in the Sacrament will more fully appear,
if we consider the lively analogy between the soul^ and the body. For as the
body has through the soul a natural life, so has the soul through grace a
spiritual. As the body is subject to hunger, Mat. 5.6.
so is the soul. As the body does languish and pine away without corporal
food, so does the soul without spiritual nourishment: and therefore the one as
well as the other must be preserved by means. Now the same that corporal food
is to the body, Christ Jesus is to the soul of the believers, according to
that in the sixth of John, Ioh. 6.51.
I am the living bread which came down from heaven, if any man eat of this
bread, he shall live for ever. Verse 53.
And on the contrary, Except we eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood,
we can have no life in us. As certainly therefore as our bodies are made
partakers of the outward elements, so certainly are we assured, that being
duly prepared, our souls do feed upon Jesus Christ. For, the cup of blessing
which we bless, 1. Cor. 10.16.
is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? and the bread which we break,
is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ?

Now albeit Christ is truly in the Sacrament, yet is he not locally there,
according to the conceit either of Consubstantiation or Transubstantiation. For
the body and blood of Christ are not present to the elements, but to the
Communicants. There is only a symbolicall and rational union betwixt Christ
and the Elements, but the spiritual and real union is betwixt Christ and his
members. Andradius says well; If Christ were locally present with the
elements, as Consubstantiators hold, then he should have said, In hoc loco est
corpus meum: Andr. Ortho. expl. lib. 7.
My body is in this place: and should he not have said so, if he be there by
Transubstantiation? The truth is, that as the Sun and other celestial
bodies, remaining in their proper spheres, do communicate their light and
influences to the terrestrial: So Christ being in heaven, Calu. Justit. lib.
4. ca. 17. sec. 7.
does by his Spirit in a most inexplicable manner communicate unto his Church
on earth, the influence of grace, yea communicates himself.

The doctrine of Transubstantiation cannot be maintained, without many
impieties and absurdities. It is injurious to God, in attributing to a mortal
and sinful man such a marvelous, yea transcendent demonstration of that
divine attribute of omnipotency. For as GOD is showed to be Almighty in making
heaven and earth: so of all the creatures on earth, man being most excellent,
and amongst men our Savior Christ, to ascribe to the Priest the making of him,
does derogate from God, and attribute to man that omnipotency whereof he is most
incapable. It is inglorious to Christ, ascribing unto him a fantastical body,
like the Manichees, and such other heretics. Yea, it utterly overthrows, by
diverse consequences, the humane nature of Christ, and consequently does
demolish a principal foundation of our faith. What greater indignity can be
offered to that blessed body (which Joseph of Arimathea so religiously
imbalmed, Ioh. 19.20 Acts 2.17.
and God himself so carefully preserved from corruption) then to expose it to
moulding, stinking, yea to be turned into an excrement, and to be devoured of
rats and mice? Indeed, Pope Innocent the third has helped one absurdity with
another, Durand Rationale divine. lib. 4. ca. 41.
affirming that the body of Christ, being eaten by the mice, is
retransubstantiated into bread. What baser injury can be offered to Christ,
then this, that a man should have power to make him, and a mouse to mar him?
Transubstantiation overthrows the grounds of Philosophy, inferring a
Platonicall Idea, and granting Accidents without a subject: which conceit
Bellarmine would defend by instance of light created, Bellarmin. de Euchar. li.
3. cap. 24. Genesis 1.
and remaining three days without any subject. But Pererius, Perer. in Genesis
lib. 1. page 95. It were in prima effectione, institutione and dispositione ad
miracula co^fugere, cum illis non sit opus. Perer. Bella de gratia primi
hominis. c. 19.
a learned Jesuit, does upon good ground of reason impugn it, in his
Commentaries upon Genesis, books much commended by Bellarmine himself.

There needs no better argument or artillery to cast down this Idol, then that
which the Romanists hold for their principal pillar to support it: namely,
these words of the Apostle, Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body. For
Sacramental speeches are to be taken sacramentally, as many places both of the
old and new Testament do manifest: Ge. 17.10. Exo. 12.11 Tit. 3.5.
Circumcision is called the Covenant, the Paschall L^^abe the Passover, and
Baptism is called the Latter of Regeneration: whereas they are only external
signs of those sacred things. Tertu aduer. Marc. lib. 1. and 4. de anima, cap.
17. H^^r in Mat. 26. (...) de Sa^^a^ l b. ^. c. 5 d^^^ q^i in^^^ntur. cap. 9.
And that those words being Sacramental, are so to be understood, it cannot be
denied by any, without begging that which is in question. Neither is it to be
contemned that diverse of the ancients have so expounded them, nam^ly, This is
my body, that is, a figure, a representation, Aug. in Ps. 3. and 31. Bern. de
ass^mp. Mar. ^ser. 5. Aug epi. 23.
or a signification of my body. And St. Austins reasons, annexed to his
assertion, in this matter is very pregnant. The Sacraments, usually, in respect
of the resemblance they have of the things signified by them, do take the
names of the things themselves. Now if we understand these words on this
manner, Ipsi eru^t dur^ non ser. Aug. in Ps. 98.
the speech cannot be hard to any, but those who are hard of understanding, as
St. Austin speaks in alike case.

There is nothing more frequent in the Scripture, Ge. 41.26. Gal. 4.25.
then this kind of trope, namely, to take est for significat, but to
understand by est, mutatur, this is my body, that is, it is changed into my
body, is without instance or example: and it is to be observed, that those who
do urge a change in the Eucharist, are not able to say whether it be formal,
P. Lumb. sen. lib. 4. did. 11. A.
substantial, or of some other kind. True it is, that some of the ancient
Fathers do speak of a change, but what that is, Ambr. de sacra. lib. 4. c. 4.
St. Ambrose shows by diverse similitudes: as namely, when a natural man by
Regeneration becomes a new creature, and the bitter waters, by Moses casting in
the wood, Exo. 15.25
became sweet: which changes yield no alteration of the substances, but of the
qualities. And indeed we should rather labor to find a change in our selves by
the elements, then in the elements themselves. If we obtain our regeneration
by the virtue of Baptism, without any substantial^ change of the element, why
may we not as well have spiritual nourishment by the Eucharist without any
such change?

But why should any man stand to dispute that which has no ground in the
Scriptures, Caietan. Biel. Fisher, etc.
as diverse learned Papists have confessed; And was never held a dogmaticall
point of Faith, till the Council of Bellarm. de Euchar. li. 3. ca. 23. says
this was opinio probabilis. De consecrat. 2. did. Ego Bereng.
Lateran, as Scotus a great Schooleman, and others have acknowledged? Which
Council, how unworthy of respect it is, may appear, in that it caused
Berengarius to confess in plain terms, that Christ in the Sacrament is
sensibly handled with the hands of the Priest, broken and torn in pieces with
the teeth of the faithful. The credit of which Council Bellarmine Bell. de
Euch. li. 3. cap. 23.
seeks to maintain with the loss of his own. For he cites some places in
Chrysostom, where the like phrases are used; But who knows not, that there is
great difference between an hyperbolicall Encomium in a declamation, (which
are very frequent in Chrysostom) and a solemn recantation and confession, as
in the case of Berengarius? the one admits any Rhetorical florishes; the other
requires the greatest plainness that may be.

But my purpose is not to dwell upon matter of Controversy, but rather matter
of comfort, and only to give a touch of the truth, that thereby I may make the
positive doctrine more clear and evident.

This Doctrine of Christ's presence in the Sacrament yields many excellent uses.

First, the world may witness with us, how slanderous the Papists are, who
charge us to hold, that there is nothing in our Sacrament but a bare piece of
bread, Rhem. Ann. in Jo. 6.58.
and say that our wine is but common wine. For we do confidently believe, and
constantly teach, that the Sacrament does as well consist of the body and blood
of Christ, as it does of bread and wine; and that the one is received by the
worthy Communicant, as well as the other. And albeit the substance of bread and
wine do remain in the Sacrament; yet are they not esteemed of us as common
bread and wine; but, being sanctified and set apart to a sacred use, are holy
Though a Charter granted from the King, in respect of the outward matter, be
only ink and wax, and parchment, yet in regard of that which is contained in
it, and conveyed by it, we do not call it a bare piece of parchment, but by a
more fit and worthy name, we style it The Kings Charter: So albeit the
Sacrament, in regard of the outward elements, is but bread and wine; yet in
regard of the inward grace conveyed and confirmed to us by it, we call it, as
there is just cause, the blessed Sacrament; yea, speaking sacramentally, we
call it the body and blood of Christ. And if we differ from the Romanists
concerning the manner of Christ's presence, let them not blame us, whilst they
differ amongst themselves as touching that point. And their contending for
Transubstantiation might find somewhat the more favor, if they could show what
further benefit is received by the carnal eating of Christ, then is by the
spiritual; seeing that many who thronged, touched, kissed him, received no
good thereby.

Again: 3. here the love of Christ is manifested, in that he finds nothing
too dear for his Church, no not himself; who, as he gave himself to death
for us in his passion, so has he also given himself to us in the Sacrament:
he drank the bitter cup in the garden, and tasted ^he gall and vinegar upon
the Cross, but behold, he has prepared a better cup for us to taste of.

If God did show kindness to David in preparing a corporal table for him,
Psa. 23.5.
how much love has Christ showed in preparing this spiritual table for us?
Chrysostom. ad Pop. Antioch. hom. 60.
Chrysostom says notably, Christ is not like a Mother which puts forth his
child to nurse, sed proprio sanguine nos pascit: but feeds us with his own
precious blood.

Therefore I may say in admiration of this mercy, with Bernard, Vnde h^c,
Bernard do Ca^a. domi.
pi^^ime Jesus? Whence is it. O most holy Io^te^, that thou should aff^rd us
this favor, to give us thine own body and blood for the nourishment of our
souls? 1. Cor. 16.22.
Surely of thy abundant love. If therefore any one love not the Lord Jesus,
A^athema maranatha; Let him be accu^sed.

Again, seeing we do truly receive Christ in the Sacrament; hence our union
with him is strengthened. As he by our incarnation was made flesh of our flesh,
Heb. 2.6.
and bone of our bones: so by the blessed Sacrament we are made flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bones. Every son of Adam has his portion in that
natural union; but only the Sons of God are partakers of this spiritual.
It Is true, that we are united to Christ by the preaching of the Word, but the
especial confirmation of that union is by participation of the Sacrament. For
thereby Christ is so made ours, that he dwells in us. That we may be ingrafted
into Christ, we must have Faith through the Gospel, but that like good Cions,
we may abide in him, Ioh. 15.5.
and bring forth much fruit, the Sacrament is very necessary. St. Paul calls
this our union with Christ, a great mystery, Ephesians. 5.32.
and I may call it a gracious mystery. For hereby we have satisfied the
justice of God in Christ our head; hereby we receive the influence of grace
from Christ, as the body receives sense and motion from the head. Cyril. in Job
13. ca. 10.
Nos vitam habemus ab hac Vite: we have life from this vine, as Cyril says.
Hereby we have an interest in all comforts, both corporal and spiritual; 1.
Cor. 3.22.
Whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death;
whether they be things present, or things to come, even all are ours, because
we are Christ's. Yea this our present union with Christ in the Kingdom of
Grace, yields full assurance of our future union with him in the Kingdom of
glory; according to his heavenly petitions in the seventeenth of John, where he
first prays that all the faithful may be one with him and the Father; Io.
17.21.
and presently after, Father, Verse. 24.^
I will that they which thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they
may behold my glory. So that now by the Sacrament we behold. Christ as in a
myrror, but hereafter we shall see him face to face; now he feeds our souls
with his body and blood, but then shall he beautify both soul and body with
endless glory.

Again, seeing that Christ Jesus is offered in the blessed Sacrament to be the
food of our souls, those are justly reproved, who being graciously invited,
refuse to come to so blessed a banquet. Wisdom, Pro. 9.1.
says Solomon, has builded her a house, she has killed her fatlings, mingled
her wine, and prepared her table; behold her dainty and diligent preparation.
Yet cannot the same prevail with many; Mat. 22.5.
but as they in the Gospel being bid to the marriage, made light of it,
absented and excused themselves, one by his Farm, another by his Oxen, and
another by his marriage: so do many esteem too meanly of this heauely Feast,
and have their several excuses; one wants leisure, another wants cloehes,
another wants charity, and I may say, they all want grace. Have thou leisure to
fill thy body every day, and want thou leisure to feed thy soul? Our
Savior gives thee better counsel, Labor not for the meat that perishes,
Ioh. 6.27.
but for the meat that indureth to eternal life. It is not the outward
apparel, but the inward ornaments that must make thee gracious in the sight of
God. Here is the best garment, if thou will put it on, To. 13.14.
even the Lord Jesus. Art thou not in charity? will thou, by cherishing a
froward spirit, deprive thy self of this sweet comfort? who do not pity the
folly of little child^n, that for cursed stomach refuse their meat? but how
much more are those to be pitied, whose uncharitable disposition depriues them
of the Food of their souls? in the mean time, how can thou who art
uncharitable pray? Ad ^a^. A^t. h^nt^^ and in epist. ad Eph^s ho. 3.
For as Chrysostom says, Non es commu^ione dignus, ergo nec ora^ione. If thou
be not fit to communicate with the Church, thou art not fit to supplicace the
Lord.

Number. 9.7.
We read in the book of Numbers, that it troubled cer^aine men to be disabled
for celebrating the Pass^ouer; and so should it grieve a good Christian heart
to be any way hindered from receiving the Communion. If our spiritual wants
were as sensible as our corporal, we could not choose but hunger and thirst
after the Sacrament: but as bad humors in the body do kill the appetite,
though the meat be dainty, so our inward corruptions do make flat our
affection to this food, though it be heavenly.

It is dangerous for a healthful man to forsake his food, and for a sick man
to refuse his physike. Behold, the Sacrament is both food and physike to the
soul, it is food to the strong, and physike to the weak: what assurance can
there be of the spiritual life and health to him that refuses it? But alas
for pity, how many are there who neglect this blessed means of life and
health, and so do sin against their own souls? Remember the doom of those
excusers in the Gospel, I say unto you, Luke 14.24
that none of those men which were bidden, shall taste of my Supper.

Again, seeing that Jesus Christ is the especial matter of this Sacrament,
those are very worthy of reproof, who profane and abuse it. The more sacred
and precious the ordinance, the more odious and pernicious is the abuse and
profanation thereof. Procul, o procul este profani.

The Papists do charge us with dishonouring of the Sacrament: but if any
Prof^ssor of the Gospel can be showed to have so profaned it as diverse Papists:
yea some among the Popes have done, let him bear the ex^remest degree of
reproach that can be cast upon him. What more ordinary with them, then to make
it a bond of secrecy for shedding of blood, and a mystery of iniquity to
confirm them in their cruel and treacherous designs? so was I arg^:
confirmed, who made assault upon the Prince of Orange, as appears in the
printed discourse touching that business.

So were diverse confirmed and c^mbined in that late horrid and hellish
Gunpowder treason, as appears by diverse voluntary confessions, and
depositions. What greater dishonor could be offered to our Savior, or what
viler profanation to the Sacrament, then to abuse such a sacred ordinance to
savage and barbarous designs? Yea, some of them have not stuck to make that a
means for poisoning the body, which Christ ordained for the preservation of
the soul. As Platina writes of Henry the Emperor, Platina in vita Cl^mens. 5.
And who doubts but his Holinesss had a finger in it?
that he was poisoned by a Monk in receiving the Eucharist. Yea (that which
would make a man almost amazed to consider and tremble to write.)

Cardinal Benno reports of Pope Greg^ry the seventh, called Hildebrand, (he
might be w^ll called a brand of hell) that he d^manding of the Eucharist
resolution of diverse questions, as the Gentiles were wont to do of their
Idols, and receiving no answer, cast the Eucharist into the fire. Oh horrible
profaneness of a vile wretch, Les vies des Papes Romans
worthy (as the hi^torian says) himself to have been ^ast into the fire!

Others there are, who albeit they come not to that height of impudency and
impiety, yet do they offend in coming to the Sacrament carelessly, and
receiving it unworthily. Men that celebrate the Sacrament as those did their
sacrifices in the first of Esaias, Esa. 1.15.
having their hands full of blood, and their hearts full of malice. As those
sacrifices were an abomination to the Lord, so are these Sacraments.

Our Savior said, It is not fit to put new wine into old vessels: and I may
say, It is not fit to put holy wine into loathsome vessels.

How many alas are there, who profane and pollute these mysteries, by bringing
with them profane souls? Tit. 1.15.
For to them that are defiled and unbelieving, nothing is pure, their hearts
are like filthy caskes, which mar all that is put into them.

We know the fearful estate of him who came without a wedding garment: Mat
22.
when he was questioned, Friend, how came thou in hither? he was stricken
speechless; and having no word of defense, being bound hand and foot, was cast
into utter darkness. And this should terrify all those, who come to the
Sacrament without these ornaments of grace, which should make them gracious in
the sight of Christ, Ge. 41.14.
and fit to be entertained at his table. When Joseph came before Pharaoh, as we
read in Genesis, he changed his garments and haued himself: so it is our duty
when we come into so great a presence, and to be partakers of such a holy
ordinance, Job 9.31.
to put off the clothes of our corruptions which defile us, and to shave off
the locks of vanities, which disgrace us. I may say therefore to every
approaching Communicant in Saint James his words, Iam. 4, 8.
Cleanse your hands you sinners, and purge your hearts you double minded, and
then draw near to the Lord. And your hearts must answ^re with David, Psa. 29.6.
I will wash my hands in innocence, and so will I come to thine Altar, O Lord.

Again, seeing Christ Jesus is truly offered and exhibited in the Sacrament;
the consideration thereof should stir us up with an earnest desire to be
partakers of it. It is sa^d in the Psalm, Psa. 78.25.
They did eat the bread of Angels, which was a great prerogative: Cypr. de
Coena Domini.
and Cyprian calls this, Panem Angelorum, the bread of Angels.

I may here make a fit exposition of Samsons riddle, Out of the eaten came
meat, Judge. 14.14.
and out of the strong came sweetness: For out of the dead Lyo^ of the Tribe
of Judah, there comes to us in the blessed Sacrament, mos^ sweet and
unspeakable comfort. Here is sanguis pretiosior balsamo, Bern. de Coena Domini.
that blood which for the cure and comfort of the soul, is more precious the^
Balm. This is called by the ancient Fathers, our Viaticum; and fitly, for as
the Israelites in their passage to Canaan had Manna, Sap. 16.
which yielded omne delectamentum, all delightful tastes. So, whilst we pass
this our pilgrimage, we have the bles^ed Sacrament, which yields most heavenly
delectation.

Here is that King in the Gospel, which inuites his guests, saying, Behold, I
have prepared my dinner, Mat. 22.4.
my oxen and my fatlings are killed, and all things are ready. For here is
whatsoever good the soul of man can desire.

Here the Spirit and the Spouse do cast to every man to come and take of the
waters of life freely. Reu. 22.17
Other meats and drinks may suspend, they cannot quench hunger and thirst;
but he that comes to Christ and feeds upon him, Ioh. 6.35.
shall never hunger or thirst any more.

Therefore my brethren, I must say to you, as the Angel spoke to Elias, Up and
eat: come with cheerfulness to this holy table. I doubt not but some of you
have found much heavenly comfort by receiving the Sacrament: So that you are
able to say with the Psalmist, Psa. 66.16.
Come and I will tell you what the Lord has done to my soul.

Yet for your further comfort, I must wish you to remember, that the banquet is
only begun in this life, which shall b^ perfected in the life to come. When
Christ shall say in heaven, as it is in the fifth of the Canticles, Cant. 5.1.
Come my friends, eat and be merry. Now the Spouse has Christ in sacramento,
but then she shall have him sine velamento; Bern. de Coena Domini.
now she rec^iues him in mystery, then she shall enjoy him apparently. Hic
dulce praeludium, illic nuptiale conuiuium. Here is but the first course, like
the preludium to a song, but there shall be the banquet, kept with all joy and
heavenly harmony.

Lastly, for as much as Christ is offered to us in the Sacrament, it shall be
very necessary that we examine whether, h^uing received the Sacrament, we have
received Christ. Because, as Saint Augustine says, Aug. cant. Faust. Mani.
lib. 13. c. 16. Et tract. 59. in John.
there are many which eat panem Domine, but not panem Dominum. They receive
the outward signs, but not the inward grace. I will therefore deliver a few,
but infaillible marks, whereby we may know whether we have received Christ.

First, where Christ is received, he works mortification in the soul of the
Receiver, and abates the strength of those corruptions, which otherwise would
be potent, and violent. So says St. Paul in the eight to the Romans, Romans 8.10
If Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the Spirit is life
for righteousness sake. As a good corrosiue eats away the dead flesh; so the
body and blood of Christ, do eat away the fleshly corruptious of dead works.
Therefore Chrysostom Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 1.
calls Christ curatorem animarum, the Curer of souls. And indeed where Christ
comes, he makes a threefold cure, he cures the heart, the hand, the tongue. He
banisheth evil motions out of the heart, Bern. de Aduent. sermon. 5.
binds the hand from evil actions, and bridleth the tongue from evil
speeches.

A second note of our receiving Christ, is our vivification, and quickening of
our souls to live the life of God. For as the body of the dead man, 2. Reg.
13.21.
by touching the bones of E^zeus, received life: So by touching and tasting of
the body of Christ* our souls that were dead in trespasses, do live the life
of grace, and our selves are quickened to the performance of all Christian
duties. Ber in Cant. sermon. 17.
For vnxit Deus, vt vngeret; therefore was he anointed with the oil of grace,
that of his fullness we might receive grace for grace, Ioh. 1.16.
both the grace of remission, and the grace of sanctification; so that we are
able to lay with Saint Paul, Gal. 2.20.
Now I live no more, but Christ lives in me.

A third note of our receiving Christ, is our alienation and estranging from
the world, according to that of St. Paul in the third to the Colossians, Col.
3.2.
If you be risen with Christ, set your affections on things that are above.

The young man that only came to Christ, would not part with his wealth bring
commanded, Mark. 10.22.
but Zaccheus, having received him into hi^ house, makes a voluntary offer of
dispersing to the poor and making restitution. Thus if we have received Christ
in our hearts, the World will be crucified to us, and we to the World. The
greatest pleasures and profits of the world, will be dung and dross, even
vile in our estimation, in respect of him, and the heavenly comforts we
receive from him.

4 Whosoever receives Christ in the Sacrament, receives him into his heart, as
Zacheus did into his house, joyfully. O blessed Jesus, says Bernard, Luke
19.6. Ber. in Cant. sermon. 32.
how often when thou camst unto me did thou comfort my wounded conscience by
pouring unto it the oil of gladness!

As the Sun arising upon our Horizon, makes it cheerful and glorious: so
the Sun of Righteousness, when it arises upon the Horizon of a sanctified
heart, causes it to rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious. Yea all the
blessings of God are made comfortable to us, 1. Pet. 1.8.
as it was with those happy conuerts, who did eat their meat together with
gladness and singleness of heart. Acts. 2.46.
For vbi Christus, ibi Angeli, ibi lux, ibi coelum: Chrysostom. in Mat. ho. 49.
Where Christ is, there are the Angels, there is the light of Heaven, there is
Heaven it self. Yea, the privileges are excellent we obtain by receiving
Christ. For as it is a means of our adoption, so it is a pledge of our
eternal salvation. As many as received him, Ioh. 1.12.
to them he gave this prerogative to be made the sons of God. Romans 8.17
And if we be sons, we are also heirs, yea coheyres annexed with Christ. And
as the Israelites had a taste in the wilderness, of the fruits of Canaan, Nu
13.24.
which afterward they did enjoy more plentifully in that promised Land. So
have we in the wilderness of this present world, the first fruits of that glory,
which hereafter we shall enjoy in the celestial Canaan more abundantly for
ever.

A fifth note of receiving Christ, is our thankfulness of heart, stirring us
up to cheerful obedience. David having receiue^ r^^^efe from Barz^llai, gives
this charge to his son Solomon, Show kindness to the Sons of Barzillai. 1.
Reg. 2.7.
So Christ Jesus furnishing us with this heavenly food, may justly chal^enge
at our hands all that we can do to manifest our thankful hearts for such a
singular benefit. As the King^y Prophet says, What shall I render to the Lord
for all his benefits bestowed upon me? Ps. 116.12.
So must we consult all the faculties of our souls, and enquire with what we
may present our Savior Christ for this great mercy; and our conclusion must be
his resolution; I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thank^sgiuing, Verse. 17.
and call upon the Name of the Lord.

Thus, if upon the receiving of the Sacrament, we find, in some measure, the
strength of sin abated, grace augmented, our affections estranged from the
world, our souls filled with heavenly joy, and our hearts stirred up to
unfeigned thankfulness; then may we with marvelous comfort and assurance
conclude, that we have truly received Christ. And to such a Communicant I may
say, as our Savior said to Zacheus, Luk 19.9.
This day is salvation come into this house.

THE FOVRTH Sermon. The Form of the Sacrament.
1. COR. 11.26. For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this cup,
etc.


Having spoken of the Author and matter of the blessed Sacrament: It follows
tbat we consider the form; which gives being and perfection to the matter,
and without the which as the physical matter would be like the Chaos, rudis
indigestaque moles, so the matter of the Sacrament would be common bread and
wine, without any sacred use. Yea, as the soul is the form and life of the
body, so the form is the life and soul of the Sacrament. Now this Form
consists of diverse actions expressed in the institution, and to be imitated in
the celebration of the Sacrament. For if other actions of Christ are a kind of
speech for our direction, Facta Christi sunt genera Locutionum, Aug. in Ioh.
tract. 25.
as St. Austin says, certainly these are so to be conceived in a more
special manner, especially when there is a precept annexed to the actions,
requiring imitation, as here it is. For, Hoe facite, Bellar. de sacram. lib. 1.
cap. 19. Cusan. epi. 3. ad Bohem. de Communione.
Do this, is referred to the whole action, as Cardinal Bellarmine truly
writes. So that the silly evasion of Cardinal Cusanus, making nothing for his
present purpose, is no less absurd then false.

Christ says, Hoc facite, non hoc modo; Do this, but not after this manner,
which is in effect, Imitate this form, but not according to this form.

Gregory of Valentia, and some others, do make these words only, Hoc est
corpus meum, to be the form of the Sacrament: but falsely, as afterward we
will show. As the Form of the Sacrament consists of the actions, so the
actions are in number seven, whereof five do belong to the Minister, and two
to the Communicants, according to the practice of our blessed Savior and his
Disciples, he representing the Pastor, they the people. First, Christ takes the
bread: 2. He consecrates: 3. He breaks it: 4. He gives it: 5. He shows the
use of it. The actions of the people are these: 1. They take it: 2. They eat
and drink it. All which actions, like the visible matter of the Sacrament,
have reference to Divine and Spiritual mysteries.

The first action of our Savior is the taking of the bread, that he might
consecrate it, break it, and deliver it to the Disciples: which signifies the
taking of our nature, that it being sanctified, might be broken with sorrow
for satisfaction to God, and given to us in the Sacrament for the comfort of
our souls. So that hereby is represented the Incarnation of Christ, when the
Word did take flesh. Ioh. 2.14.
This action of Christ yields matter of admiration and consolation. First, here
is great cause of admiration. For, as Bernard says, Bern. in vigil. natal.
domini sermon. 3.
Deus and homo, Matter and Virgo, One to be both God and man, one to be both a
Mother and a Virgin, are great mysteries. If a mighty King should descend from
his Throne, lay by his Scepter and his Diadem, and take upon him (for some man's
sake) the state of a base beggar, would not this strike the hearts of the
beholders with amazement? How can we then without admiration consider, that our
Savior, Phil. 2.6, 7
who was equal with God, should descend from heaven, and cloth himself with
the base shape of a mortal man, and take upon him the form of a servant, for
our sakes? Well might the Apostle say, 1. Tim. 3.16.
Great is the mystery of godliness, God manifested in the flesh, justified in
the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, and received up into
glory.

And as it yields matter of admiration, so does it also of consolation. For
this taking of the humane nature was for our sakes, that Christ might therein
satisfy the justice of God, and accomplish the work of our Redemption,
according to that in the tenth of the Hebrews, Burnt offering, and sacrifice
for sin would thou not have, but a body have thou prepared. For it was
expedient, Hebr. 10.5, 7.
that as a man had sinned, so man should suffer and satisfy for the sin. And
therefore he in no wise took the seed of Angels, but the seed of Abraham.
Heb. 2.16.
Yea, had not the Son of God been incarnate, all the men and Angels in
heaven and in earth had never been able to satisfy the justice of God. Romans 8
3.
Wherefore that which was impossible to the Law, because of the weakness of
the flesh, God sent his Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin
condemned sin in the flesh: that so sin being punished in Christ, it might
be pardoned in us.

Mat. 1.23.
Thus Christ by taking our nature, is become our Emmanuel, even God with us, yea
God for us. Therefore the Angels sent by God to publish the incarnation of
Christ to the world, do call it Tidings of great joy, Luke 2.14.
and sing that joyful Anthem, Gloria in excelsis, Glory be to God in the
highest heavens, peace on the earth, and good will toward men. So that the
Communicants, when they behold the Minister taking the bread, should for their
instruction meditate with admiration and comfort, upon the great mystery of
Christ's incarnation.

The second Action the Giving of thanks. It is obseruable, that the
Evangelists and the Apostle, speaking of this action, do use two different
words: Mat. 26.26
St. Matthew does use the word (...), he blessed; Luke 22.19
Saint Luke (...), he gave thanks; St. Paul both, Ca. 10.16. Ca. 11.24.
the one in the tenth chapter, the other in this.

Hereupon diverse do confound the words, but diversely. Some would have both the
words translated, to give thanks. Others would have them both translated to
bless, which may not be: For though (...) may signify the same that (...)
yet that (...) should be rendered by (...). Valde duru^ est, Bellar. de Euchar.
1.10. Luke 9.16. Ioh. 6.11.
I confess with Bellarmine, it is very harsh. It is true that the Evangelists
Luke and John, relating the miracle of the five thousand fed with five loaves
and two fishes, do use these two words severally: St. Luke has, he blessed,
S. John has, he gave thanks. Yet this does not necessarily enforce a
confounding of the words, that both should signify only to bless, or only
to give thanks; but in my judgment do rather show a double action in that
benediction, namely, that he both prayed and gave thanks. And so he does in
this matter of consecration. For these two parts of Invocation, Prayer and
Thanksgiving, should in these actions, like Hippocrates twins, be inseparable
companions, acccording to the Apostles rule, 1. Tim. 4. 1. Tim. 4.4, 5.
The creature is not to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving: For
it is sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer. And as these two do concur
in the sanctification of our corporal food; so do they also in the
consecration of our spiritual. And therefore S. Mark Mark 14. verse. 22.23
uses both the words; So that our Savior taking the bread in his hands, gave
thanks to God for the redemption of mankind, for the revelation thereof by the
Word, and the assurance of the same by the blessed Sacrament: And withal
prayed, that whereas the bread and wine of themselves had no power or virtue
for that spiritual use, wherein they were to be employed: It would please
God, so to be present with his ordinance, that through his grace and blessing,
the Sacrament might become a faithful means to confirm our union with
Christ, and to seal up unto us the work of our redemption.

Now from the Conduit-pipe of this benediction, Bella. de Eucharist. lib. 1.
cap. 10.
Bellarmine and the Rhemists would feign convey their doctrine of
Transubstantiation: but herein they foget themselves, and contradict their own
doctrine. For they generally hold, that consecration is effected by these
words; Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body. Now this benediction goes before
ever Christ speaks these words; so that they must either reject their maine
ground of consecrating by hoc est corpus meum, Justin. Mart. Apol. 2. Origin.
Cont. Cells. lib. 8. Cyprian. de Coena domin. Theod. Dia 2 Hier. epist. ad
Euagrium. Aug. de Trin. lib 3. cap. 4.
or deny that this benediction is operative to! change the substances. But the
truth is, that consectation is done by this thanksgiving and prayer, as the
ancient Fathers do generally teach, and consequently not by a bare rehearsal
of those words, Hoc est corpus meum: as hereafter we shall observe more fully.

Now this consecration of the elements, by prayer and thanksgiving, is a
sanctifying and setting apart of them for a sacred use, and consequently yields
matter of much comfort. For by it is represented Christ Jesus sanctified and
set a part by Almighty God, for the sanctification and salvation of mankind;
according to that in the seventeenth of John, Ioh. 17.19
For their sakes I do sanctify my self, that they also may be sanctified
through thy truth. So that as the ointment did descend from Aarons head to his
beard, Psa. 133.2.
and went down to the skirts of his clothing: so the oil of grace and
gladness is hereby derived from Christ our head, to every member of his body,
and he being consecrate, is become the author of eternal salvation to all them
that obey him. Heb. 5.^.


Again, seeing that the elements of bread and wine are sanctified to a sacred
use, we must put a difference between them and other bread and wine. For the
bread after consecration is not common bread, Iren. l. c. 4. cap. 34.
as Ireneus truly says. As the gold, which was profane in the furnace, became
holy when it was sanctified to the use of the Temple: so the bread which was by
nature common, by consecration and use is made holy. As the waters of Jordan
being sanctified by God for the cure of Naaman, 2. Reg. 5.
were to be esteemed by him more excellent then all the rivers of Pharphar and
Damascus; And as the water in Baptism, being sanctified by prayer and
thanksgiving, is more to be regarded, then any the most excellent and costly
distilled waters in the world: so the bread and wine being consecrated for the
Sacrament, are to be had in more reverend estimation then any other whatsoever.

Again, seeing our Savior does sanctify the Sacrament by prayer and
thanksgiving; this is an action for imitation. Yea, if he gave thanks to God
in our behalf, how much more should we do so for our selves, who receive the
benefit? and from this duty of thanksgiving the Sacrament has that ancient
name of Eucharist. And indeed this action does yield approbation and
commendation to the celebrating of the Sacrament in solemn Congregations,
where many joining together, their combined prayers and praises do more
powerfully pierce the heavens, to send up the sweet incense of thanks, and to
bring down the deaw of grace upon the Congregation.

To conclude, seeing that the Sacrament is sanctified by prayer and
thanksgiving, we must be careful to use it in a holy and reverend manner. Is
it blessed by prayer and thanksgiving? Let us not profane it by unworthy
receiving; lest we turn that blessing into a curse upon our selves. Act. 10.15
As it was said to Peter, so may I say to every Communicant, Those things which
God has purified, pollute thou not. And as the assembly at the Passover was
appointed to be a holy Convocation, Numb. 28.18.
so let our assemblies be at this our Evangelical Passover.

The third Action is the breaking of the Bread. A man would think this a
needless ceremony, Mat. 26.26 Mar. 14.23 Luke 22.19 1. Cor. 10.16. and 11.24.
Act. 20.7.
but indeed it is very material. Therefore all the Evangelists, and the
Apostle likewise do diligently mention it. Yea, this action gives denomination
to the whole celebration of the Sacrament, which argues that it is a ceremony
of great moment, and very worthy of observation. And reason, for it is very
significant to represent the pains of Christ's Passion; Ioh. 19.36. Exo. 12.46
Not that his body was broken (which by divine providence was prevented that
the Scripture might be fulfilled) but to set forth the intolerable torments,
that Christ endured in his death, when he might justly complain, as it is in
the Psalm, Psa. 69.20.
Rebuke has broken my heart.

Hereby is set forth that which Esaiah speaks of, Esaias 53.5.
He was wounded for our iniquities, he was broken for our transgressions, the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are healed.

In which place the Hebrew words are very significant, to set forth the extreme
pains that Christ endured for our sakes; they imply the whip, the spear, the
nails, the thorns which did pearce the body, and the sword of sorrow which
did wound the soul of our Savior. Yea, this breaking of the bread, does set
forth the renting of the soul and body of Christ asunder.

This Action makes against the carna^l presence, as indeed, almost every
passage in the institution does. For the body of Christ is present only as it
is broken, but it is broken only in mystery, therefore it is present only in
mystery.

To break the natural body of Christ actually, were an act of great cruelty,
Ioh. 19.^2.
and more extremity toward our Savior in his glorious estate, then the rude
soldiers showed in his infirmity on the Cross.

But concerning this action, the Papists are exceedingly distracted, Vide P.
Lu^. Sent. 4. did. 12. A. B. C. D.
not knowing what to affirm; as whether it was bread or his body which was
broken. To say it was the body of Christ, were to make his body perpetually
passible; and to say it is bread after consecration, they are loath, because it
overthrows their local presence. Therefore, these shelues of absurdities, upon
which they do cast themselves to maintain their errors, should make them
sail willingly down the clear channel of truth.

Again, the necessary and significant use of this action, condemns the
practice of the Romanists, who neglect the same, and give whole cakes to the
people. For as hereby they violate the ordinance of Christ, so do they deprive
the people of a comfortable and significant ceremony.

Iansenius confesses, that the Eucharist was wont to be broken, Iansen.
Concor. ca. 131.
but says he, Now it is not so, lest any one should think he receives less
then another, or doubt that he receives not whole Christ. But our Savior
Christ and the Primitive Church, were much ouerseene, that could not think of
these inconveniences: or else the Papists are too blame, that cannot teach
their people better, or (which is the truth) these correcters of the
Institution do play the Impostors, who to maintain an opinion of their
carnal presence, have abandoned this comfortable action of breaking the bread.

Lasty, here the Communicants must observe, that when the bread is broken, and
the wine powered out, they should then stir up their hearts to meditate upon the
pains and Passion of Christ, and apply the same to their souls as a
sovereign cordial of comfort. For his sufferings were for our sakes. His
wounds, his stripes, his anguish of soul, and torments of death, were the
blessed means to deliver us from the pains and torments of eternal death.

The fourth action of our Savior is, the giving of the Bread and the Cup. This
action, though it be not here expressed, yet it is employed in the word Take,
and is plainly mentioned in all the Evangelists, Mat. 26.26 27. Mar. 14.22
Luke 22.19.
which speak of the institution of the Supper.

This action is of great moment, for it represents GOD the Father giving his
Son to us, with all the merits of his painful Passion and perfect obedience.
Ioh. 6.27.
Him has GOD sealed, as it is in the sixth of John. As God by his eternal
decree did ordain Christ Jesus to be our Savior, who is the Lamb slain from
the beginning of the world: Reu. 5.12.
So has he sealed up this mercy unto us, in giving us the Sacrament. 1. Ioh.
4.10
And here is that love of God, that he sent his Son to be a reconciliation
for our sins.

This action yields matter of reprehension, of consolation, and instruction.
First, from the person and action meeting together, namely, Christ giving the
Sacrament, I may well collect that it belongs only to the Minister, who is
Christ's substitute, to give the Sacrament. As none but he may take, bless, and
break the Bread, Canon 21.
so none but he may deliver it; according to the Constitution of our Church.

As God by a special ordinance in time of the Law, Nu. 3.10. De. 33.10.
did separate Aaron and his sons for offering of the sacrifices: so I may say
in the Apostles words, Hebr. 5.4.
No man may take to himself this honor, in the time of the Gospel, to
administer the Sacraments, but he only, who has an ordination to these sacred
offices. Secular men have smarted for meddling with sacred things; Vzzah for the
Arc, 2. Sam. 6.7 2. Chr. 26.19.
Vzziah and Saal for their sarcifices, albeit they had fair pretenses for
their enterprises. Therefore Tertul. Tertul. de Coron. mil. c. 3.
says, Eucharistiam nec de aliorum manu quam praesidentium sumimus. Gregory of
Valentia says, that a Lay man may administer the Sacraments, Tom. 4. did. 3
quaest. 5. pun. 2.
for that the applying cause does not concur of it self to produce the
effect. But his Position is unsound, and his reason absurd. For although the
applying cause does not of it self concur to the producing of the effect,
yet by accident, and the ordinance of God it may and does. Had any man beside
Ananias put his hands upon Paul's eyes, he should not thereby have received his
sight. But Ananias, Act. 9.17.
being ordained by Christ for that employment, his hands were the effectual
applicant cause to confer sight to the blessed Convert.

It is objected by some, that our Savior said to his Disciples, concerning the
Cup, Luke 22.17
Divide this among you. But that is spoken of the Cup in the Passover, as
every one may easily perceive, that will look upon the place in the
Evangelist. For this is before any mention is made of the Supper.

Again, this condemns that lurching sacrifice, wherein often times the Priest
gives none to others, but retains all to himself. What is this practice, but
the lighting of a candle to put it under a bushel? For wherefore is the bread
blessed and broken, but to be given? And in this we must imitate our Savior
Christ, Compare Psa. 68.18. with Ephe. 4.8.
who received gifts, that he might give them.

It is no less absurd for a man to affirm, that another should receive good
by the Priests receiving, (as the Rhemists teach) then to hold, that he may be
fed by the meat another man eats, or be saved by another man's faith: which
conceits were very absurd and ridiculous: For a man must be nourished by his
own meat, H^b. 2.4.
and The just must live by his own faith. Therefore the faithful Minister of
Christ, must be like the good Samaritan, Lu. 10.34.
who did not only prepare, but power in the Wine, and the fervent Communicant
must say, Ioh. 6.34.
Lord, evermore give us this Bread.

Again, this makes against the Romish Reservation; for the Sacrament is
consecrated to be given and received, not to be reserved. The ancient practice
of the Church does control this vain corruption. Saint Hierom shows that,
which in all probability was the general custom of the Primitive Church,
Hieron. in 1. Cor. 11. In ecclesia communem caena^ comedentes pariter
consumebant. De hisce post caenamepulis, loquitur Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. ho. 27.
prope finem. Peracta pietatis celebratione consumitur. Aug. de Trin. 3.10
Origenin Leuit. hom. 5.
whilst their love feasts called (...) after the celebration of the Supper,
were in use: namely, that what remained of the Eucharist, was spent with their
other meats and drinks in these feasts. And after the abolishing of those
common Suppers, we find for some hundreds of years the practice of Churches,
though different, yet utterly against reservation. For Origin, who lived in the
second hundred years after Christ, writes that in his time, what remained of
the Eucharist was burned. And Euagrius, upon occasion of relating a miracle
that happened in the days of Bishop About 400. years after Christ Vetus fuit
consuetudo Constantinopoli. Euang. lib. 4. ca. 35.
Menas, (who succeeded Epiphanius) writ^s, that it was an ancient custom in
the Church of Constantinople, that if any part of the Sacrament remained, the
young youth which frequented the Schools did eat it. But what speak I of the
Churches practice against Romish reservation, Canon trib. grad. did. 2. de
Consec.
when the Pope Clement himself, besides his express prohibition, has a
caveat that only so much be consecrated as may at that time be spent.

Again, this action of Giving the Sacrament makes against oblation. For the
use of the Sacrament is, that it be given to the people, not offered to God;
this being a maine difference between a Sacrifice and a Sacrament, that in the
one we give to God, in the other God gives to us. And it is very obseruable
against the Church of Rome, which stands upon her real Altars and Sacrifice,
that if any such had remained, St. Paul, who was divinely wise in pressing and
proouing the points he had in hand, did strangely neglect a forcible argument,
in not requiring maintenance to the Ministers for their serving at the Altar
and offering Sacrifice, Rh^m. An. in Luke 22.19.
it being (as the Rhemists say) the principal act and work of priesthood.
Yea, if any such altars and sacrifice were remaining, did not he make a
needless change of the office of the Priests under the Law, and the Ministers
under the Gospel, saying, 1. Cor. 9.13.
As they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar: so they which
preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel?

Again, this checks that nice curiosity of the Romanists, who contrary to the
ancient custom of the Church, Eusebius. hist. lib. 7. cap. 8.
do put the Sacrament into the mouths, not give it into the hands of the
Communicants. Yea, their scrupulous niceness, who require, that they should
not willingly touch it with their teeth, but only dissolve it with their
tongues. Whereof I know not what reason can be rendered, except they doubt the
devil might be in their Eucharist, and do some mischief to the receiver for
biting of him; as it is in the fabulous story of Gregory's, cited by the
Rhemists: Rhem. An. in 1. Tim. 4.5.
where the devil entering into a woman that bit him in eating of Lettice, Ego,
quid feci? sedebam super lactucam, and venit illa and momordit me. Greg. dial.
li. 1. cap. 4.
and being reproved for it, answered, What have I done? I did but sit upon
the Lettice and she came and bit me.

Secondly, as this doctrine yields matter of confutation, so does it also of
consolation. For here is represented the best and greatest gift that ever was
given to the sons of men, even the Son of GOD himself. That is a great
gift which Zaccheus spoke of, Lk. 19.8.
Behold, the one half of my goods I give to the poor. That is a greater which
Herod promised to the dancing Damsel, Mar. 6.23.
Whatsoever thou shall ask of me, behold, I will give it, even to the half
of my Kingdom. But that the greatest of all, which that prodigal giver offers
to our Savior, Math. 6.9.
when showing him all the Kingdoms of the world, he said, All these will I
give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. Yet behold all those gifts,
had they been in their purpose and power to dispose, are of infinite less
value then this transcendent gift. Therefore St. John, when he speaks of it,
Ioh. 3.16.
does single and set it forth with an Emphasis, Sic Deus dilexit mundum, So God
loved the world: whereupon Chrysostom says, Sic Deus dilexit? Did God so love
the world? Chrysostom. in Genesis ho. 27.
Dic beat Johannes, quomodo sic? tell us, O blessed John, how was that So?
Even that which follows, So God loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Sonno, that whosoever believed in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life. Lo here the greatest gift that heaven could yield, or the
earth desire. Blessed therefore be the Giver, and blessed be the gift for
evermore.

Thirdly, this giving of Christ in the Sacrament, yields matter of instruction.
For this gift of God to us must stir up our hearts and hands to give praise
and thanks to him, and to study with the Prophet what we should render to the
Lord for this admirable benefit: yea, Ps. 116.12.
seeing God has not spared his own Son, To. 8.32.
but given him for us to death, we should think nothing too dear for the
testification of our thankfulness. We are bound by the mercies of God, Romans
12.1.
to give up our bodies a living sacrifice to him. Even to consecrate our
selves, our souls and bodies, and all that we have and are, to his service,
who has vouchsafed unto us forth of his abundant mercy, this inestimable gift
to our exceeding comfort.

The fifth action of Christ, and consequently of the Minister, is that which I
call verbal, as comprehending words of promise; This is my body which is given
for you; This cup is the new Testament in my blood, which is shed for you. In
which our blessed Savior does necessarily show the use and benefit of the
Sacrament, performing therein the office of a careful Physician, in preparing
a medicine, prescribing to his Patient the use, and showing the virtue of it.
Necessarily I say, for albeit the Sacraments are visible words, Aug. in John.
tract. 79.
yet must they also have audible words annexed to demonstrate the use of them;
else will they be but dumb shows. Which president of Christ's does justify
the practice of our Church, that appointed those words to be used in the
delivery of the Sacrament. If any man object, he knows these things before; I
answer that our weakness considered, we had need not only to have the
understanding informed, but the memory also revived, and the affections stirred
up for our better meditation of these mysteries. So that this stirring of us up
by these words, may be like the Angels stirring the people of Bethesda, Ioh.
5.4.
that the Sacrament may yield virtue for the cure and comfort of our souls.

In this verbal action I will briefly explane the words. Concerning the first,
This is my body, I have showed by conference of Scriptures, and testimony of
Fathers, that the same are a tropicall speech, and import thus much, This is a
figure, a sign, a representation of my body. In the other there are diverse
tropes. First, where he says, This cup is the new Testament in my blood.
Every one knows there is a metonymy of the subject, the cup being taken for
that which is in the cup.

Again, there is another trope in the word Testament: For the cup or wine in
the cup is the Testament, only as Circumcision is the Covenant; that is, a
sign of the Covenant. And indeed this Testament and Covenant are both one:
and so the Hebrew word Berith, and the Greek Diatheke do signify: For that
which is called Berith, a Covenant; Genesis 17.10.
is called Diatheke, Acts. 7.8 And Hieron. in Zach. 9.11. renders the word
Berith. testamentu^. And in his exposition he says, Testamentisiue pacti tui.
Heb. 9.10. Homers Illia.
a Testament. The reason of this appellation arises partly forth of
Sacramental phrases, partly from of a reference and resemblance of Moses
speech, when sprinkling the blood, he calls it the blood of the Testament.

Neither is this manner of speech a stranger to humane writers: For Homer calls
their sacrifices (...), the faithful leagues of their gods. But here it may be
questioned why it is called the new Testament, or Covenant, Genesis 3.15. Genesis
17.2. Act. 10.23
seeing the same is very ancient, being made in Paradise to Adam, renewed to
Abraham, witnessed by the Prophets, figured in the sacrifices? I answer, it may
be called a new Covenant in diverse respects.

First, in regard of the matter, the one being a Covenant of works, the other
of Grace.

Secondly, in regard of the manner, and so it is the new Covenant, as our
Savior calls his precept of Love, A new commandment. Ioh. 13.34
For as that commandment is called a new commandment, because it is newly
revived, and more effectually urged then before: so this Covenant may be called
a new Covenant, because it is more plainly renewed, and more powerfully
confirmed to the Church of God.

Thirdly, it is called the new Covenant, in regard of the Minister; for Moses
was Minister and Mediator of the old Testament, being the servant of God: but
Christ is the Minister and Mediator of the new Testament, being the Son of
God.

Fourthly, it is so called in regard of time, the one containing a promise, the
other showing an accomplishment thereof; the one premonstrating Christ to come,
the other demonstrating him already come.

Fifthly, in regard of the new form or ceremonies wherein it is set forth: Not
in those legal types, as the blood of Bulls and Goats, but in the elements of
bread and wine, which do lively represent the body and blood of the Son of
God as without spot. Heb. 9.11.12.


Thus the words being cleared; From hence we may infer, that seeing the
Sacrament is called the Covenant of Christ, we must have the hand of faith to
aprrehend it. For there is a mutual relation between sides and foedus: Hes^.
5.2.
as Assuerus holds out his golden Scepter, so Queen Hester must draw near and
touch the top of it; as God tenders to us a Covenant of mercy, so we must
reach forth the hand of Faith to lay hold upon it. Yea, this Covenant requires
also the hand of obedience. For there must be a mutual stipulation concurring
betwixt God and man in this case. As God does covenant with Abraham to be his
all-sufficient God: Genesis 17.1.
So Abraham must covenant to walk before God and be upright. Now if we have
this hand of Faith to apprehend, and this hand of Obedience to demonstrate our
apprehension, then happy and thrice happy are we, 2. Cor. 1.20.
all the promises and Covenants of God shall be to us in Christ Jesus, yea and
Amen.

Thus much for the actions of the Pastor. Now to the Actions of the people,
wherein I will be brief, in regard that what concerns them, is in some sort
handled (by reason of relation) in the actions of the Minister.

The first of these actions is the taking of the Sacrament. This action is of
great use, and therefore mentioned by all the Evangelists.

It signifies our apprehending of Christ, with the merits of his death and
passion. And indeed what avails the preparation and sanctification of the
elements, if they be not received? Hence I observe; first, that it is no
arbitrary thing whether we receive the Sacrament or not, seeing we are enjoined
it by virtue of this precept, Take, eat. The Centurion said to our Savior,
speak the word only, Mat. 8.9.
and my servant shall be whole: Now Christ has spoken the word, and commanded
us to take the Sacrament, therefore we should do it. But here we may observe
(as it is in the speech of the Centurion) not only Christ's precept, but our
benefit also, which is maruailous great. The servants of Naaman said well unto
him, 1. Reg. 5.13.
If the Prophet had commanded thee a greater matter, should thou not have
done it? how much more when he says, Wash and be clean? So may I say, My
brethren, if we had only Christ's commandment, should we not obey it? how
much more, when much comfort is to be obtained in obeying the commandment? The
want of this taking in many may justly cause the Prophets complaint, Esa. 6.47.
There is none that stirred up himself to take hold on thee. The woeful fruit
of which neglect, we may observe in the same place, when he says, We do fade
like a leaf. Verse. 6.
As the body must needs pine away without food, and the leaf wither, without
the Sun and sap to nourish it: so without laying hold upon Christ, that
virtue may proceed from him to be as food and sap to our souls, they must
needs decay and famish. That is a heavenly proclamation; Reu. 22.17
Let whosoever will come and take of the water of life freely; but that is a heavy
complaint, He came amongst his own, Ioh. 1.11.
but his own received him not. And this complaint falls as a just reproof
upon them, who refuse to take the blessed Sacrament.

Again, here it must be remembered, that we bring the hand of Faith, when we
come to the Table of the Lord. Our hearts and hands in receiving of the
Sacrament, must be like two buckets in a well, one going up, when another is
going down. Whilst the hand of our bodies goes down to take the bread and
wine, the hand of our soul must go up to Christ in heaven to lay hold on him.
To which purpose St. Augustine says well, Aug. in Ioh. tract. 25.
Quid paras dentes? Why do thou prepare thy teeth and thy belly? Prepare thy
mind: Believe, and thou have eaten.

Again, in this case it is our duty to be as ready to give as to take. As we
receive the blessings of God, so must we return our praise and thanks unto
him. As the bird when she takes a drop of water, lifts up her head and her
eyes: So we, when we taste of these mercies, must lift up our hearts and hands
with all thankfulness to our gracious God the giver of all good gifts, and
not be like the swine, which deuoures the acornes, but never looks up to the
tree from whence they fell.

The second Action of the people is the eating of the bread, and drinking of
the wine. This action also is very necessary, being very significant, as that
which comprehends the particular applying of Christ to every communicant. For
as S. Austin says, Aug. contra Faust. Mani. lib. 20. c. 21.
This is the eating of Christ, the communicating of his Passion, with a sweet
remembrance that his body was crucified, and his blood shed for our sins.

To eat and drink, is often in Scripture phrase transferred from the body to
the mind, as in the sixth of John, Ioh. 6.53.
Except you eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, you have
no life in you: and very fitly; for as our bodies are nourished by eating of
corporal meats; so our souls are nourished by the spiritual feeding upon
Christ. Hence it comes to pass that Christ dwells in us, Ephesians. 3.17.
and we are made the Temples of the holy Ghost. For we abide in Christ, as S.
Austin says, when we are made his members, and he abides in us, Aug. in Ioh.
tract. 27.
when we become his Temples.

Now this action, and the other do meet with diverse corruptions in the Church
of Rome, whose presumption discards her from being the Spouse of Christ. For
she is still tampering with his ordinances, abolishing what he has ordained,
and establishing what her self has devised: which is no less then to advance
her self in wisdom and authority above the Son of God.

What ground of Scripture has she for her idolatrous adoration? the Sacrament
was ordained to be taken and eaten, not to be adored. What warrant has she to
make the Priest the only actor, and the people mere spectators, in the
celebration of the Sacrament; seeing that taking and eating are the consequents
of Consecration? What an absurdity is it to inuit men to a banquet, and not
suffer them to taste a bit? Does she not in witholding from the people the
participation of the Sacrament, bring upon them that judgment inflicted upon
the incredulous ruler, who did only see the plenty prophesied of by Elisha, 2.
Kin. 7.19
but did not eat thereof?

The Council of Trent would wish that those who are present should always
communicate, Council. Trid. sess. 22. c. 6.
that they might thereby receive more fruit by the Sacrament. But either they
dissemble in this wish, or else their people are very disobedient in their
practice; that amongst so many as are usually present at their Masses, none of
them should have care to communicate.

Again, these actions of eating and drinking do give a wound to their carnal
presence. For as they are fit actions for bread and wine; so are they;
altogether unfit for flesh and blood. Aug de doct. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 16.
Therefore Saint Austins rule is good, Si Locutio sit flagitium iubens, etc. If
there be a speech in the Scripture which commands some wicked act, it is a
figurative speech; and he gives his instance even in this eating and drinking
the body and blood of Christ. If this speech were not figurative, the act were
odious, for it is more horrible and inhumane to eat man's flesh then to kill
it, Aug. contra aduers. leg. and Prophet. li. 1. cap. 9.
to drink man's blood then to sheade it. Those therefore which hold this
carnal eating of Christ, are as senseless as the Capernaites, as cruel as
the Canibals: It Is no great mar ell that these men be so inhumane to kill their
King, who are so barbarous as to eat their God.

That evasion of the Catechism of Trent, is too poor a cover for this foul
corruption. It was Gods especial providence, that the body and blood of Christ
should not be eaten and drunken in their kinds, because humane nature abhors
it. For what do they else in this, but with the lewd woman in the Proverbs,
Pro. 30.20
if they can carry it closely, wipe their mouths and say, Have we committed
iniquity?

But to leave matter of controversy, and conclude this point; let every one
have care when he eats the blessed Sacrament, to apply Christ to his soul
effectually, and to say with Thomas, My Lord and my God. Ioh. 20.28.
For it is not enough to have a sovereign cordial, except it be received; It
is not enough to know that the death of Christ is meritorious, except it be
applied: therefore we must apply Christ to our souls in the Sacrament, 2.
King. 4.34.
as Elizeus applied his body to the dead child, that we may have life and
comfort thereby. Joseph's feasting of his brethren (no doubt) was very
acceptable: Genesis 43.
but this our Saviors feasting of us is far more comfortable: they did but
feed their bodies, we do refresh our souls. We have cause to celebrate this
festiuity with much joy, if we come with sanctified hearts. For never was the
honycombe so comfortable to fainting Jonathan, 1. Sam. 14.27.
as this Sacrament will be to our frail and fainting souls.

In a word, remember that this eating is more then a bare receiving of Christ:
It imports a sound incorporating, and requires that we as good Cyons be
ingrafted into him, not to be removed. Aug. ad Pan. epist. 59.
This is votum maximum, our greatest vow (as St. Austin says) that when we
receive the Sacrament, we will constantly abide in Christ. And as he says
elsewhere, alluding to the two Disciples, who by their importunity caused
Christ to stay with them, Aug. Sermon. de temp. 140
Tene hospitem, si vis agnoscere Saluatorem, Let Christ be thy guest, if thou will know him to be thy Savior. Let him dwell with thee, and ever have a
room in thy heart: so shall thou be sure to have thy habitation, and dwell
with him for ever in the heavens.

THE FIFTH Sermon. The final Cause or End of the Sacrament.
1. COR. 11.24. Do this in remembrance of me, etc.


WE are now come to the final cause or end of the Sacrament; which though it
be the last in action, is the first in intention: Aug. Ch^^^^^ aduers. legi^
lib. 2. cap. 6.
for finis est propter quem fiunt omnia. It is the first mouer to all the other
causes, like the plummets of a clock, which sets all the wheels on work, and
gives both entrance and continuance to their motion. As the skillful Archer
shootes not at random, but has his eye upon the mark, and the careful Sayler
propounds to himself the wished haven: So the discreet Christian must so
guide his actions, that by no means he neglect the end. And surely the
neglect thereof does precipitate most men into many miscries and iniquities:
Pro. 14.12
for there is a way that seems good to a man in his own eyes, but the issue
thereof is death. Thus many a fair path leads into a dangerous pit, and men
through inconsideration are carried forward in their actions, like the silver
streams of a swift river, which runs speedily, and falls suddenly into the
brackish Sea. How unseemly is it for a man endued with a reasonable soul, to
be like the horse and the mule which have no understanding, Psa. 32.9.
but are only led by sense, and rush giddily into the battle? Ier. 8.6.
As the Form gives being, so the end tends very much to the well being of our
actions, and is a great stickler either in the approbation or reprehension of
the same, as Saint Austin shows against the Manichees, and therefore demands
of them, Quo fine faciatis? Aug. de mor. Man. 1. 31.
Hence it is, that diverse men may concur in one and the same action, yet in
respect of their several ends and tendments, that may be lawful and lawdable
in one, which is culpable in another; as St. Augustine does demonstrate in the
Passion of our Savior, in which Almighty God, the Jews and Judas had their
several hands; but God intending it in love to redeem the world; In re vna
quam feceru^t, causa no^ vna est oh quam fecerunt. Aug. Vince^. epist. 28.
Judas forth of a covetous humor to fill his purse, and the Jews out of their
malice to be revenged, that which was gracious in our merciful God, was
odious both in perfidious Judas, and the malicious Jews.

This observation yields a check to the inconsiderate Christian, whose hand is
in the action before the eye to the end. 1. Tim. 3.1
He that desires the office of the Ministry, desires a worthy work. But if
he undertake that function only to support his estate, and being possessed
with a dumb spirit, 1. Cor. ^.10.
betake himself to rest, there is a fearful woe belongs to him. Magistracy
is a place very honorable; Romans 13.1. Psa. 82.6.
but if it be sought after only to heap up riches, or to hunt after honor, and
not do good by the execution of justice, the end is extremely perverted.

Did not the Pharisees, through those hypocritical ends they propounded to
themselves, lose the glory of those worthy duties of fasting, prayer, Mat. 6.2,
16.
and alms? And are not the Papists works extremely stained with the end and
intention of merit? And surely, it may justly be feared, that many lose the
sweet comfort of the blessed Sacrament, whilst they come to it for fashion,
fear, custom, company, or other by-respects. As the Master of the feast
propounds that to his guests, Mat. 22.12.
Friend how came thou in hither? So will Christ Jesus one day question every
Communicant, Friend, wherefore came thou in hither? Then happy shall that
Christian be, who can answer forth of a sincere heart, Lord, I came to be put
in remembrance of thee, and to see a lively demonstration of thy death and
Passion: that so my faith might be strengthened, sin weakened, and the graces
of Gods holy Spirit confirmed, and augmented in me.

Now the end of receiving the Sacrament is set forth by the Apostle.

First, in general; Do this in remembrance of me.

Secondly, in particular: As often as you eat this bread, und drink this cup,
you show the Lords death till he come.

Here a question meets us in the first words, namely, what our Savior means
when he says, Do this? Rh^m. Annot in Luke 22.^ 19.
The Rhemists say, that in these words, the holy Sacrament of orders is
instituted, because power and commission to do the principal act of
priesthood is given to the Apostles: that is, to offer up the body of Christ in
sacrifice. But is this the principal act of Priesthood, to offer the body of
Christ in sacrifice? Behod how they do deiect the office of a Minister, making
it inferior to diverse mechanical trades. For, whereas there is scarce a trade
so mean, but a man must have much time to learn it; he is very simple, who in
a few days cannot attain to this Art of sacrificing. For the greatest
difficulty is the turning and winding of the body, and the acting of diverse
ridiculous and antike g^stures. No marvel though it grew into a proverb
amongst them, He is good enough to make a Priest.

Job. 33.23
Elihu in Job makes another matter of the office of a Minister, when he says,
Scarce one of a thousand is found to be a fit Messenger from the Lord of Hosts.
2. Cor. 1.16.
St. Paul held it to be of a higher nature, and requiring excellency of gifts,
when he demanded, Ad haec quis idoneus? Who it sufficient for these thing? But
what does (...), signify Sacrifice this? This is such an interpretation as
never was heard of.

The learnedest amongst the Papists do truly confess, Greg. Valentom. 4.
did. 6 qu. 8. pun. 5.
that these words have relation only to the precedent actions in the
Institution; but in those there is no one syllable of sacrificing. Yea
Bellarmine himself expounds the words thus, Do this, Bella. de Eucha. 4. 16.
Et li. 1. cap. 19.
that is, Take, consecrate, and deliver it to others, as you see me do.

And indeed it is remarkable that in the new Testament, our Savior and his
Secretaries, have continually distinguished the Ministers of the Gospel, from
the Legal Ministers, both in name and office, appropryating to them in the
Law, the title of Priests, and the office of sacrificing; but never ascribing
either that name or service to the Ministers of the Gospel. The words
therefore import thus much, Celebrate this Sacrament, according to the
president I have left you, and to that end, namely, Psa. 111.4.
in remembrance of me. The Lord has made his wonderful works to be had in
remembrance, says the Psalmist.

Surely, all the works of the Lord are worthy of remembrance, but some above
others are worthy to be remembered and admired. Amongst others, our happy
deliverance by the death and Passion of our blessed Savior, is both admirable
and comfortable. But it may be said as Solomon speaks of delivering a besieged
City; Eccle. 9.15
There was found in it a poor and wise man, who delivered the City by his
wisdom, but no man remembered the poor man. Aug. contra Acad^m. li. 2. cap. 9.
The memory ofttimes becomes insida custos cogitationum, a bad recorder of
divine favors. And whereas it should be like the Arc, that held the holy
things, it is rath^^ like the Sine, which lets go the flower and retains the
branne. Holy and heavenly matters are let slip, when carnal and earthly are
remembered.

Therefore the Lord Jesus, for the help of our bad and brittle memories, has
commanded unto us the celebration of the blessed Sacrament, saying, Do this in
remembrance of me.

So that this Sacrament must be celebrated in remembrance of Christ, like the
pillar that Joshua erected, Josh. 4 9.
in memorial of that wonderful passage over Jordan. And like the Omer of
Manna, that the Lord appointed to be kept in remembrance of the miraculous
feeding of the Israelites in the wilderness. Exo. 16.32


This being the end of the Institution, namely, the remembrance of Christ, we
have need to search our hearts, and cause no doubt to bewail our wants, who
neither without, nor with this memorial do so fruitfully and effectually
remember our Savior as we should. Exo. 13.3.
The children of Israel had a charge, that they should remember the day of
their deliverance out of Egypt, and the maruailous providence of God, Exo.
12.1.13.
in protecting them from the stroke of the Angel; yea, for the better
remembrance of those mercies they had the Passover: yet is it said in the
seventy eight Psalm, that they remembered not his hand, Psa. 78.42.
nor the day that he delivered them from the enemy: and who does not condemn
their ungrateful forgetfulness of so great benefits? But if we cause our
cogitations to retire upon our selves, and consider the unspeakable mercy of
Christ, in delivering us from eternal condemnation, aad his gracious goodness
in ordaining this memorial of our deliverance, I doubt not but we shall find
greater cause to tax our selves for our unkind forgetfulness, whilst it may be
said of us, as the holy Historian says of Pharaohs Butler, Genesis 40.23
yet did not the chief Butler remember Joseph, but forgot him.

When our Savior told Peter that he would deny him, Mat. 26.
Peter promised confidently that he would not, but afterward, having through
humane frailty done it, when the Cock did crow, he remembering the words of
Jesus, went forth, and wept bitterly.

Behold, my brethren, have not we as just cause to mourn for our shameful
forgetfulness, who notwithstanding these remembrances, do neglect these great
mercies, which we should lock and lay up in our hearts like rich Jewels, and
keep them safe as sovereign preservatives?

If a King having ransomed a captive, should give him a piece of plate, and
wish him when he drinks therein to think upon the favors he had done him:
how unworthy were that captive of this favor, if he should forget him? Lo
here, our King of Peace has delivered us from a miserable captivity, and has
given us the Cup of salvation, requiring us when we drink thereof to think
upon him. Oh how unworthy are we of this great mercy, if we will not remember
him? We may well say in the Psalmists words, Psa. 137.5, 6.
If I forget thee, O my Savior, let my right hand forget her cunning. Yea, if
I do not remember thee in thankfulness, let my tongue cleave to the roof of
my mouth.

Justin. li. 5.
The Athenians enacted Legem (...), a law of oblivion: but here Christ has
ordained Legem (...), a law of remembrance. We should often times have Christ in
remembrance, but especially when we come to the Sacrament, he should be the
matter of our meditation.

L^k. 22.42
Lord remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom, says the penitent
malefactor, and Christ's answer is, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise.
So let us carefully and fruitfully remember Christ, when we come to the blessed
Sacrament, and then we may be assured, he will remember us now he is in his
Kingdom.

But how shall we remember him fruitfully? Not by oaths and blasphemies, not
by execrations and cursings: not to cherish presumption in our selves; for thus
only do some remember Christ.

Some alas, have the name of Christ very sildom in their mouths, but when they
swear by him; some sildome have him in their minds, but when they do vainly
presume upon him. But miserable and wretched men they are, who thus do turn,
the grace of God into wickedness. Which take boldness to sin, Romans 6.1.
because grace has abounded, and so make a poison of a Mithrydat. But let us
so remember Christ, that the remembrance of him, may be a preservative against
sin, by considering how dear it cost him to redeem us; and if we have
fallen through frailty, that it may be a restoratiue; by remembering that he is
a gracious Advocate, 1. Ioh. 2.1.
and the propitiation for a penitent sinner.

Let us remember the baseness of his birth to humble us, the painfulness of
his life to make us diligent in his service, and the bitterness of his death
to confirm our patience. Let us depend upon him both in health and sickness, in
life and death. In health let us remember him as a merciful Redeemer, in
sickness let us think upon him as a gracious Comforter. In health let us say
with the Spouse in the Canticles, Can. 1.7.
Show me, thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest, for why should I be as
one that turns aside to the flocks of thy companions? In sickness let us
with Bartimeus cry unto him, Mar. 10.48
Jesus thou Son of David have mercy on me. And in the hour of death, let us
with blessed Steven, commend our souls into his hands, saying, Lord Jesus
receive my spirit. Act. 5 9
Lo, this is a fruitful, this is a blessed remembrance of Christ.

And so much for the end in general: now to the end in particular, verse 26.
For as often as you eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, you show the
Lords death till he comes.

These words as often are here twice used, and there may be diverse reasons for
the same. First, to put a difference between the Passover and the Supper. The
Passover was celebrated but once a year, and at one certain time of the
year; but the Supper of the Lord may be administered many times, and at any
time of the year.

And herein also this Sacrament differs from Baptism, which is only once
administered, and not iterated; and reason, for as it is sufficient that we be
once borne into the World, but necessary that we be often fed: so is it
sufficient, that we do once receive Baptism, the Sacrament of our new birth,
but very expedient that we often receive the Eucharist, the food and nourishment
of our souls.

Secondly, as these words may serve to distinguish between this and the other
Sacraments: so may they also very aptly carry with them an intimation of
receiving often. First, in that the Apostle says not, (...), when, but (...),
how often soever, which implies an itteration. Again, the word being before used,
and here again repeated, cannot but import an often receiving of the Sacrament.

But here it may be questioned, how often a man is to receive the Sacrament?
Chrysostom. in Tim. hom. 5.
For answer whereunto I might say with Chrysostom, The Apostle has not
limited this Sacrament with any observation of time. But for further
resolution, we will consider; First, the practice of Antiquity: Secondly, Hier.
ad Lucin. Ambr. de sacr. li 5. c. 4. Chrysostom. in 1. Cor hom. 28. Aug quaest.
dogm. q. 53.
the rules of Direction grounded on reason. We read that in the Primitive
Church, both the East and Western Congregations used to celebrate and receive
it every day; afterward every Lords Day: to the which practice S. Austin, or
whoso^uer was Author of the Dogmaticall questions, does exhort. Afterward it
came to once a month; but devotion waxing every day colder then other, P.
Lumb. sen. 4. did. 12.
it was decreed, that every one should receive it thrice a ye^re, which was
somewhat tolerable; But Rome, who brags of her renowned and neuer-failing
Faith, does in this particular show a glimpse of her Apostasy, and gives
evident demonstration of her want of zeal and devotion. For the Council of
Trent is feign to come to saltem semel in anno, Council. Trid. sess. 23. can. 9.
to require that at least once a year the people receive the Sacrament

But in this variety of practice, we must for our better guidance observe the
circumstances of necessity, conueniency, and vtility. For the first, it is true
that we have daily need of the remembrance of Christ's death, and consequently
of the Sacrament. As our bodies have daily need of nourishment by our
corporal food, so have our souls by our spiritual. Yet must not this be the
only guide or ground of our receiving; but we must also have respect to
conueniency. For seeing there is required a due and diligent preparation for
the receiving of this Sacrament, the same must moderate our necessity: so that
we should as well look to our fitness, as our need. But yet in the third
place, the due consideration of the inestimable benefit and comfort we obtain
by receiving the Sacrament, must stir us up, so often as with conuenience we
may, to be partakers of this blessed banquet; that if it were possible, we
might every day be fit to communicate, as St. Ambrose does exhort: Sic viue, vt
quotiaie merearis accipere. Ambr de sacra. l. 5. c. 4
That so we may, as near as our frail nature will permit, resemble those
blessed spirits, who are exercised incessantly in singing Halleluiahs without
weariness.

But it is objected, that as familiarity breeds contempt: so, frequent
receiving may cause a disestimation of the Sacrament.

To which I answer. First, it is not like, that what God has ordained as a
means to increase and kindle zeal, should be a cause to cool or quench it.
And if it be an occasion only, divine ordinances must not be neglected for
humane corruptions.

Secondly, albeit amongst some men much samiliarity has this effect; yet it is
not so amongst those who are wise and intimate: for their daily familiarity
confirms their bond of love.

Thirdly, though we may weary men by often coming to their tables: yet the
often we come to the Lords Table, the better welcome we are, so that we come
prepared; without which preparation, I say not once a year, but even once in
our lives is too often. Therefore Saint Chrysostom speaking of some who once a
year would be sure to come (whether prepared or unprepared) because of the
festival time, Chrysostom. ad ^op. Antioh hom. 64.
does justly check them, and cry out thus against their practice, O
consuetudinem, O praesumptionem! O evil custom, O vise presumption! In a
word, Satan will endeavor to keep us both from preparing, and communicating:
but we ought so much the more diligently to stir up our selves, to
preparation and receiving the Sacrament.

Thus having satisfied that qu^stion concerning the time, we will now consider
the particular end of celebrating the Sacrament, which is the showing of
Christ's death, as his death is an Epitome of the Gospel. Never did God set so
remarkable remembrances upon any thing since the foundations of the world were
laid, as he has done upon the death and Passion of our blessed Savior; the
heavens were darkened, the earth trembled, the graves opened, the veil of the
Temple rented, the dead were raised; and therefore it is no marvel, that he
has ordained the Sacraments for a memorial thereof to the end of the world.
Now as men who have paid debts in diverse particular sums, will be careful
for their discharge, to keep the particular acquitances: So every part of
Christ's death being as a particular acquittance for the debt of our sins, it
will be very expedient for us to take notice thereof, and to lay them up
carefully in our hearts for our comfort.

When we speak of the death of Christ, we must not consider it as the expiring
of his soul only: but his death with all the concomitants of his Passion. And
though his whole life was a continued passion; yet will I only observe those
things which he suffered the night that he was betrayed, and the day that he
was crucified. And this I will consider in five general passages, as it were
five tragical Acts, having in them many doleful Scenes. 1. His agony in the
garden. 2. His apprehension in the same. 3. His appearing before the high
Priest. 4. His arraignement before Pilate. 5. His execution at mount Caluary.

It commonly falls out, 1. His Agony.
that before a great storm, the heavens are obscured with clouds, and the
skies ouer-cast with a melancholy darkness: So before the storm and tempest
of our Saviors extreme troubles, sorrow and heaviness do ouer-shadow his
soul, not suffering the Sun of comfort to shine upon the Son of
righteousness. (...) Mat. 26.37 Mar. 14.13
1. The Evangelists say, that when he came into the Garden of Gethsemane, he
began to be sorrowful, and grievously troub^^d and amazed; so that himself
complained, (...) Mat, 26.38
My soul is very heavy ^^en unto a^ath.

Is it not strange, that he who is the only comfort of every Christian soul,
should have his soul so sorrowful, troubled and amazed? Yea, 2. such was his
extensiue and intensiue fear and sorrow, that he entreated his Disciples to
tarry there and watch with him. Mat. 26.38


Great was the discomfort of Naomi, upon the loss of her husband, and her
sons, yet not so great, but that she could want the company of Ruth, Ruth.
1.15.
yea persuade her to depart: But so great is the discomfort of our Savior,
that he cannot tell how to want the comfort of his Disciples. 3. How grievous
this conflict, and how bitter this cup of affliction was, Mar. 14.35 Heb. 5.7.
may appear, in that he cast himself prostrate on the earth in prayers and
supplications, with tears and strong cries that the cup might pass, and 3.
times he ingeminates that petition, Father, if it be possible, let this cup
pass. 2. Sam. 12.
Yet can he not hear of Nathans Dominus transtulit; the Lord has taken away
the cup of affliction; but rather Jobs Dominus abstulit, Job 1.
the Lord has taken away his comfort. If the beginning of the cup be so
irksome, Lord, how bitter will the bottom be? 4. The greatn^sse of Christ's
horror and heauin^sse was manifested by a miraculous effect, the like was never
heard of, that is, his sweating drops of blood, yea those drops were not
guttae, (...) Lu. 22.44.
but grumi, not small drops, issuing forth of the subtle pores, but great
ones, and that not sparingly, but even running down to the ground. Whereas the
blood, in the case of f^are and sorrow, Non solum oculis, sed membris omnibus
fleuisse videtur. Bern hebd. pavos. s^rm. 4.
should have had recourse to the heart as it were the center and the castle:
contrary to the course of nature, it disperseth it self through the dilated
pores; so that, not only the eyes of Christ did weep, but all the parts of
his body did weep tears of blood. It was a heavy doom upon Adam, considering
his former happy estate, In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread: Genesis
3.19.
But here is a far more doleful doom upon our Savior, considering his
excellent and innocent condition. In the sweat of blood thou shall redeem the
world. 5. Our Saviors sorrow is much aggrauated by the Disciples drowsinesse,
who though they were awaked by him, and desired to watch with him, do sleep
again and again, which caused that sorrowful and emphaticall expostulation,
What, could you not watch with me one hour? What, not with me, who day and
night have been conversant with you, and always ministered comfort to you?
what, not one hour, in my greatest need of the comfort of your company? surely
I would never have d^sired you any more to watch with me. Here, if our
meditations did watch a little longer in the view of this agony, the time might
very profitably be spent; but we must proceed to his apprehension.

In this turbulent act, 2. His Apprehension.
let us first observe to whom he is betrayed, and that Christ himself tells
us, The Son of man is deliuerd into the hands of sinners, that is, sinners
(...), most wicked and flagitious sinners: and could they be better, who were
not afraid to imbrue their hands in the blood of the most Innocent? It is no
small disparagement for a Nobleman injuriously prosecuted for rebellion, to be
apprehended by an enemy being a man of mean quality: Phil. 2.6.
yet our harmless Savior being in his divine nature equal with God, and in
his humane, descended of the blood Royal of Judah, yields himself into the
hands of most malicious miscreants, his base adversaries.

2. Consider by whom he is betrayed: and it is by his own servant, one of the
twelve, Luke 22.47
as Saint Luke speaks, a Disciple in ordinary, he becomes the captain of
this wicked crew. If it had been an enemy, he might more easily have borne it;
Psa. 55.12.
but being done by a familiar friend, it was intolerable. Where a man expects
faithfulness and duty, there to meet with treachery and villainy, it must needs
be a great grief. And this is added to make up our Saviors grief, and the
traitors villainy, that he couers his treachery with a vizard of kindness,
which makes Christ say passionatly, Luke 22.48.
Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss?

3. The price for which Christ was sold, is very base, only thirty pieces of
silver. Lactan. Inst. lib. 3. cap. 5.
Seneca censured Anyceris as a man that undervalued Plato, because he redeemed
him for eight sestertijs. But how much is our Savior dis-esteemed, who is sold
for thirty pieces of money?

4. Consider the manner of their assaulting our Savior; who, to fasten some
color of a disgraceful imputation upon him, came forth with Lanthornes and
staves as it were to a thief. What, is Christ become some heinous malefactor?
Behold, all the world cannot say black to his eye. What, will he offer
violence? Surely he so laid by his divine power, that he might say with David,
Are you come forth to hunt a flea, or pursue a Partridge? 2. Sam. 26
Here Chrysostomes dilemma against Herod is good: Chrysostom. opus imper. hom. 2.
What needs such a band of armed men come forth against him, if he will use no
violence? or if he will exercise his power, what can such an army do to him,
who can bring to his aid twelve Legions of Angels? Mat. 26.53.


5. Consider their madness, that being stricken to the ground by the voice of
Christ, and suffered to rise without the least harm, yet offer to bind him,
who was able far more easily to have broken these bands, then Samson did the
cords of the Philistines. But Nectuntur vincula, tenetur iastitia. August. Ge.
42.24.
As Simeon did voluntarily suffer himself to be bound for his brethren; so did
our Savior for us sinful wretches, and to be led as a Lamb to the slaughter.

6. Consider the place whither they lead him as it were in triumph, even to the
high Priests Palace, the house of his sworn enemy. Alas, what peace or safety
can the innocent Lamb have in the den of the ravening Wolf, and the roaring
Lion?

Mar. 14.50
Lastly, consider that all his Disciples fly and forsake him, both Peter who
had promised to die with him; and James and John his kinsmen, Mat. 20.22
who professed their ability to pledge him in the cup of persecution. Where
promised and expected comfort fayles, it causes much perplexity.

But let not us so leave our Savior with his Disciples, but follow him with
our meditations to the high Priests hall.

3. His ap^e^ring before the chief Pri^st. 2. Reg. 25.6.
It was no small part of Zedechias misery, that he being a mighty King, was
carried to Riblah, there to be tried before the King of Babylon. And is it a
small matter, that Christ being the King of Kings, must be conuented before
Annas, Caiphas, and such other caitifes? What indignity is this, that he who is
the Judge of all the world, must stand before the tribunal of sinful wretched
men?

Here first consider, that in the high Priests presence, which should have
been the sanctuary to the innocent, even for a modest answer, he is
injuriously smitten by one of the high Priests servants. Doubtless, if one in
anger had smitten the high Priests dog in that place, he should have smarted
for it.

2. Consider how they seek and suborne false witnesses to accuse Christ, who
though they agreed in their evidence, like Samsons foxes with firebrarnds in
their tails: yet their accusations are accepted against our Savior.

3. Consider how the high Priest charges him with no less a sin then
blasphemy, a sin which the soul of Christ did abhor.

4. Consider how the graceless Soldiers, when they see the furious behavior
of the high Priests, do play their prizes. First they mock and scoff him:
Luke 22.63 65. Judge 16.25
an injury hardly endured by any ingenuous man; and that which stirred up
Samson to great indignation: but Christ might say, Psa. 22.6.
I am a worm and no man, a reproach of men, and despised of the people.
Chrysostom.
Again, Tam factis quam verbis furorem explent; as they scoff him with their
tongues, so they buffet him, Mar. 14.65 Mat. 26.27
some with their hands, some with their fists, some with their rods.

5. To this cruelty they add a great indignity; for they spet in his face.
Number. 12.14 Deuteronomy. 25.9.
This has ever been counted a matter of great disgrace, as both the
Scriptures and experience teaches: but to spit in that face which the Angels
do desire to behold, was an intolerable injury.

And again: 6. They scoff him in his Prophetical office; for blindfolding
him, Mat. 26.68.
they strike him, and then bid him prophecy who struck him. We read that the
man of God took so to heart the mocking of little children, that he cursed them
in the name of the Lord, 2. King. 20.23.
so that they were torn with Bears. How much more justly and easily might the
Son of God have inflicted the like judgment upon these graceless men? but
behold, his revenge is patience and silence.

The Prophet David says, Heaviness may endure for a night, 4. His arraignment
before Pilate. Psa. 30.5.
but joy comes in the morning. But alas, our Savior finds not this; for
having all the night been wrestling with the terrors of death, and vexed by
the abuses of the degenerate Jews, he is in the morning brought to his
arraignment before Pilate: Mat. 27.2.
where though they can fasten no just accusation upon him, yet they forge and
suggest diverse.

1. They charge him to be a peruerter of the people, whose time was wholly
spent in converting them; they charge him with disloyalty, in forbidding
Caesar's tribute, whereas his practice confuted them. M^t. 17.27
They accuse him of ambitious aspiring to the Kingdom, albeit he utterly
disclaimed that honor. Ioh. 6.15. Ioh. 18.36.


2. Consider that Pilate being urged in Conscience to favor Christ's apparent
innocence, and yet being also pressed with the malicious and clamorous
importunity of these men, is glad to rid his hands of him, and send him to
Herod.

3. It is said, that when he comes before Herod, Luke 22.10.11.
the chief Priests vehemently accused him: Herod set him at naught, and his
men of war mocked him, and so they sent him back to Pilate, where again he
meets with all disgrace and despite that malice can devise.

4. Consider that he is so disesteem'd, that Barrabas a thief and a murderer
is preferred before him, and pardoned when Christ is punished.

5. Consider how he is despightfully scorned, and pitifully scourged by the
merciless soldiers, and how disgraceful and paineful instruments of scorn
do to meet together; for they put upon his holy body a purple robe, Vestis
purpurea, Corona spinea, Arundo vacua. Mat. 26.29 Mar. 15.17
plat upon his tender head a Crown of thorns, and give him in his hand a
hollow reed, in stead of a regal scepter, and so they scoff him in his
kingly office.

6. Consider that when Pilate, though a partial man, moved with compassion,
desires by all means to mitigate the wrath, and qualify the rage of these
violent men, brings forth Christ, having his body dyed into a Crimson color
with blood, and his head pierced with the sharp thorns, supposing it
impossible, but that the view thereof must needs stir them up to compassion:
they whose tiger hearts were harder then the nether millstone, cry out like
hell hounds, Crucify him, crucify him.

This cannot but grieve our Savior to see their hellish fury, but how much
more does it wound his compassionate heart, to hear them power forth that
fearful execration upon themselves, Mat. 27.25.
His blood be upon us, and upon our children.

7. Consider, when neither the innocence of Christ, the pleading of Pilate,
nor the former cruelty of the Jews could suffice; Malice being the Accuser,
Rage the Prosecutor, and Partiality the Judge, he is condemned to death.

Lastly, when our Savior had exhausted his spirits, and spent his strength, by
the pains of his body, the sheading of his blood, and the anguish of his
soul, they laid upon his feeble shoulders a ponderous Cross, and so led him
away to be executed.

5. His execution.
Here consider first, whither our Savior goes; not to mount Tabor there to be
transfigured, but to mount Caluary to be crucified: a place full of st^nch, by
reason of the bodies of men that had been executed there: too soul a place
for so sweet a sacrifice.

2. What death must he die? The most painful, shameful, and accursed death
they could devise. The most painful, in that his hands and feet must be
pierced, and all his body distended on the Cross; the most shameful, in that
he is lifted up naked in the view of that great confluence of people, and so is
made, as the Apostle speaks, 2. Cor. 4.9.
Aspectacle to to the World, to Angels, and to Men. The most accursed, for this
death only was liable to that legal curse, Cursed is every one that hangs
on Tree. Gala. 3.13.


3. Consider the cold comfort they afford him: for when he thirsts, they give
him a bitter Potion, gall, mirrh, and vinegar to drink.

4. To show their great despite, and to work him the more disgrace, Mat.
27.44 Luke 23.39
they placed him between two notorious malefactors, both which began, and one
of them continued to rail upon him. Mat. 27 39
So did the rascal people that passed by, wagging their heads, with bitter
scoffs, and disdainful reproaches.

If ever pity be to be showed, it is in the case of misery; but Christ might
truly take up those words of the Psalm, Psa. 69.21.
I looked for some to have pity on me, but there was none. For the Rulers,
Soldiers, people, malefactors, and all the wicked rabble, do scoff, revile,
and rail upon him, without measure, without mercy.

Lastly, the most evident and admirable demonstration of our Saviors extreme
dolor and distress, is his doleful complaint, and woeful outcry, Mat. 26.46
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Here were frightings and terrors,
that caused this pitiful complaint.

There was more in this death of Christ then any mortal eye could see, more
then all the men and Angels in heaven and earth were able to suffer. Well might
the ancient Fathers take up that complaint of the Church, and apply it to this
purpose; Have you no regard all you that pass by? Lam. 1.12.
behold and see, if there be any sorrow like my sorrow. But let not us (my
brethren) slightly pass by this sorrow, this death, this Passion of our
Savior Christ. If we do, we are most unworthy to have any interest in it, any
benefit by it. And that we may behold and consider it, the blessed Sacrament
was ordained. For as often as you eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, you show
the Lords death till he come.

Lo, thus you have heard of the Final cause or end of the Sacrament, namely,
the remembrance of Christ, and the showing of his death. Yet are not these the
vltimus terminus of this Action: But are amongst those subordinate ends, by
which, Aug. de Tri. lib. 11. ca. 6.
as by certain steps, we attain to eternal felicity. As one river
begets many streams; so is it in this case. For hence we have our faith
confirmed, sin weakened, the grace of GOD augmented in us, and eternal life
sealed up unto us.

St. Cyprian shows, that the Martyrs in the Primitive Church were wont, Cypr.
lib. 1. epist. 2.
when they appeared befors the cruel Tyrants, to receive the Sacrament, that
they might thereby be strengthened with the spirit of Fortitude. Aug. in Ioh.
Tract. 27.
And Saint Austin says, that the Sacrament gave courage to Saint Laurence to
undergo martyrdom.

Again, the Sacrament is a notable means to demolish and raze the foundation
of sin, by reason of a perswasiue and operative property. A perswasiue; for
it will suggest this meditation to a Christian heart, Shall my Savior dye for
my sins, and shall not I dye unto sin? Shall I cherish those sins that
were the death of my Savior?

An operative; for Christ Jesus being received into the soul, will be as a
good corrosiue to eat out the dead flesh of our corruptions. Therefore Cyprian
calls the Sacrament, Medicamentum ad sanadas infirmitates. Cypr. de Caen. Them.
Physic for our infirmities. Again, it is a powerful means to cherish and
increase the graces of Gods holy Spirit in us; for it is as a conduit pipe,
which being set to the fountain of Grace Christ Jesus, conueyes grace, from
that holy Fountain, into the Cisternes of our souls. Yea, like a sovereign
medicine, that is beneficial to all the parts: it serves to strengthen our
Faith, revive our Hope, renew our Repentance, kindle our Charity, confirm our
Patience, guide our Temperance, that we may be ready to every goodworke.

In a word, Immortalitatis alimonia. Cyprian.
it is the fruit of Immortality. It is unto us an assured pledge of eternal
life: for our Savior says, He that eats my flesh, Ioh. 6.63.
and drinks my blood, has everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the
last day. Thus as, Elias, 1. Reg. 19.8.
in the strength of the food ministered to him by the Angel, went on till he
came to Mount Horeb: so the servants of God go on in the strength of the
Sacrament, till they come to the Mount of Immortality, and then the Sacraments
shall cease, as Manna did, when the Israelites were furnished with the fruits
of Canaan.

Then shall they eat of the hidden Manna, Reave 2.17 Reu. 22.1. Reave. 1.7.
drink of the Crystal fountain, and taste of the Tree of life in the midst
of the Paradise of God.

This doctrine is of singular use, both for Confutation, Reprehension, and
Instruction.

First, here are in these words, expressing the end of the Sacrament, diverse
pregnant arguments against the doctrine of the carnal presence. What needs
there be a remembrance of Christ? What needs a memorial of his death, if he
were corporally and locally present in the Sacrament? St. Augustine says
truly, Aug in Psa. 37.
Men use to have a memorial of those things only that are absent. And that
which Lactantius has, is much to this purpose, A man's picture is needful
when he is absent, Lactan. Inst. lib. 2. cap. 2.
but to have it when he is present, it is very superfluous. Therefore our
Savior did not institute the Sacrament till he was departing out of the World.
And in that the Sacrament must be celebrated in remembrance of Christ till he
come, John 17.11 Luke 24.51. Act. 3.21.
does it not manifestly argue his absence which the Scriptures also do
abundantly teach?

Again, how injurious are those to Christ, who vnder-valew these his
intolerable torments, making them effectual to satisfy for the fault, but not
for the punishment? For the Papists hold, that Christ has left some
satisfaction to be made by us in our life, Bella. de Po^n. lib. 4. cap. 2.
and some likewise after our death. But what, cannot all these reproaches,
stripes, raylings, nails, thorns, spear, gall, vinegar, sweating of blood,
offering up prayers and tears, cannot all these be sufficient to procure an
absolute discharge? Ca^pian. R^t. 8
Could one drop of his blood have redeemed the whole world, and will not all
these torments serve to make a perfect satisfaction to God for the sins of
the Elect? Yes surely. For (as Chrysostom says) Ipse punitus soluit peccatum
and poenam: Chrysostom. ad Colos. hom. 7.
He being punished, has delivered us both from the sin and punishment.

Let the Romanists therefore say what they will, I will say with the blessed
Apostle to the Romans, seeing Christ has suffered all these things, Romans 9.33.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? Heaven will not, Hell
cannot. Mat. 3.17.
O God, thou have proclaimed from Heaven, that thou art well pleased with
Christ, let his Passion be my satisfaction, his Death my Redemption; so will thou be well pleased with me, albeit I am not able to yield any personal
satisfaction.

2. This doctrine reprooues the peruerters of the Sacrament, as the using of it
like the water of Ielosie, for the purging of those who were charged with some
crime, to whom when the Sacrament was administered, Corpus Dom. nostri Jesus
Christi sit t^bi ad probation^m.
these words were spoken, Let the body of our Lord Jesus Christ be a trial of
thine innocence, or guiltiness. Supposing, that hereupon the judgments of God
must needs seize immediately upon the guilty.

Likewise, the celebrating of it, Tilman. de miracul. Euchar. ca. 1.
to free houses from the haunting of spirits, ad diverse other absurd and
ridiculous ends; as against tempests and sickness, for preservation of
Cattle, trees, corn, grass and the like: All which, what are they else, but
a mere profaning and preuerting of the use and end of the Sacrament? So that a
man may in this case very aptly use S. Austins words: Aug. in Ioh. tract. 25.
Vix quaeritur Jesus propter Iesum. Christ Jesus is not sought in the Sacrament
for his own sake.

3. Here is matter of instruction: For by this holy Table Christ both saues and
teaches. Chrysostom. in Mat. hom. 83. Pe^ sacratissima^ mensam istam and saluat and
docet.
Seeing that the Eucharist is a memorial of our Saviors death, whatsoever
uses the meditations of his death may yield, the same also may the celebration
of the Sacrament. I will mention two or three. First, as in the Sacrament we
see the death of Christ, so in the death of Christ we must take a view of our
sins, and be stirred up to remorse and serious sorrow for the same. For, had
not our sins made way to it, neither could Judas have betrayed him, the high
Priests accused him, the people scoft him, the Soldiers scourged him, Pilate
condemned him, nor the Jews have crucified him. Our sins were the thorns,
the whips, the spears, the nails that pierced and wounded the soul of our
Savior. And justly therefore should our souls be pierced with sorrow for the
same. Shall Christ smart for thy sins, and shall not thy heart smart and
smite thee for them? Luke 23.48.
When the people, that came to behold the Passion of Christ, saw what was done
at his death, they smote their breasts in sign of sorrow. So every Christian,
when he sees the Sacrament, a memorial of Christ's death and Passion, should
with the penitent Publican smite his breast with the hand of compunction, and
say, Luke 18.13.
O God be merciful to me a sinner. And if our hearts cannot in the meditation
of these things be touched with remorse, the earth which trembled, the rocks
which rented, the graves which opened, shall one day rise up in judgment
against us.

Again, the meditations of these things may be a notable means to stir us
up to thankful obedience. Christ has showed the greatest love that may be
in dying for us. For greater love can no man show, then to lay down his life
for his friends. Ioh. 15.13.
Yet I may say with Bernard, Bern. de passi Dom.
Etiam tu Domine maiorem habuisti. O blessed Lord, thou have had greater: for
thou have laid down thy life for thine enemies. Therefore should every one
that looks for an interest in this extraordinary favor, say with the Kingly
Prophet, My soul praise thou the Lord, Psalm. 103.1.
and all that is within me praise his holy name. Let all that is within me and
without me, magnify him for his mercies: let all that I have, and am, be
devoted to his service. As Christ has thought nothing too dear for us, no not
his blood, his life; as he has thought no pains too great, not his bloody
agony, his torments on the Cross; so let us think, all the cost we can
expend, and all the pains we can take, exceedingly too little to be employed
in his service.

Again, here is matter of much comfort. Let no man think it strange that these
contrary streams of joy and sorrow should arise both out of one fountain.
For we must come to the Sacraments, Mat. 28.8.
as the Mary's came from the Sepulcher, with fear and much joy. As we must
sorrow, that our sins were the cause of Christ's death: so must we rejoice,
that Christ's death is the means to eternal life. Hence we obtain victory
over Satan, 1. Cor. 15.57. Heb. 2.14.15. Heb. 9.17.
death and hell. Hence we have tendered to God full satisfaction for our
sins. Hence we have an interest in the legacy of eternal life, and for
pledge of this legacy, we have the blessed Sacrament. Here is sovereign
plaster for every penitent heart. Esa. 53.5.
He was wounded for our iniquities, he was smitten for our transgressions;
the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are healed.
As Saint Paul says, 2. Cor. 8.9.
Christ was poor, that we might be rich: So I may say, He was humbled, that
we might be exalted; he was disgraced, that we might be honored; he was
wounded, that we might be healed; he was condemned, that we might be acquitted;
he ware a crown of thorns, that we might have a Crown of glory; he
complained that he was forsaken, that we might be assured our God will never
forsake us; he was numbered among the wicked, that we might enjoy the society
of Saints and Angels for ever. Therefore my brethren, let this be the solace
of your souls, and the joy of your hearts, against all the afflictions of this
life, the terrors of death, and the torments of hell.

THE SIXTH Sermon. The danger of unworthy receiving of the Sacrament.
1. COR. 11. v. 27, 28, 29. Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread, and
drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and blood of
the Lord, etc.


WHen I first began to handle this Scripture, I showed that it contains three
principal points: 1. The time of Instirution. 2. The Causes of constitution 3.
The care that is to be had for the due celebration of the Sacrament.

The two former I have handled, and now the third remains to be considered,
in these words; Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink the cup
of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, etc.

Wherein the Apostle shows 2. things, 1. The danger of unworthy receiving. 2.
The means to prevent this danger.


The danger is great in a twofold respect. First, he that receives the
Sacrament unworthily, sins hainously against our Savior; for he is guilty of
the body and blood of the Lord. Secondly, he sins fearfully against his own
soul; for he eats and drinks his own damnation. Now to avoid this Scylla
and Charybdis of injury to Christ, and misery to our own souls, this is the
means, Let a man examine himself.

The Prophet David in the fifteenth Psalm propounds this question, Lord, Psa.
55.1.
who shall dwell in thy Tabernacles, who shall rest upon thy holy mountain?
Having handled the doctrine of the Sacrament, this question is very necessary;
Lord, who shall be admitted to thy Table? who shall be partakers of thy blessed
body and blood? Aug. in Ioh. tract. 62.
For (as St. Austin says) We must as well consider who may receive, as what is
to be received: As the Oracle from heaven answers to the Prophets demand, He
that walks uprightly, and works righteousness, etc. So the Apostle here
does satisfy my question, showing that he only who receives it worthily: For
he that receives it unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of
Christ. From whence I observe, that the Sacrament is no banquet for wicked and
unworthy receivers. As a stranger to the Commonwealth of Israel might not eat
the holy things in the time of the Law: Leui. 22.10.
so a stranger from the life of God, may not taste of the holy Sacrament in the
time of the Gospel. The Lord was strict concerning them who were to appear
before him at Mount Sinai, as we read in the ninteenth of Exodus; Exo. 19.13.
in so much that if a beast did touch the mountain, he must be stoned to
death. And shall not those who dare approach into Christ's presence, and come to
his Table with beastly affections, be liable to his judgments? Yes surely.

1. Reg. 5.51.
As Solomon said of Adoniah, If he show himself a worthy man, there shall not a
hair of him fall to the earth; but if wickedness be found in him, though he
take hold of the horns of the Altar, he shall die: So he that comes worthily
to the blessed Sacrament, shall be free from danger, nay, he shall find much
comfort, but if he come wickedly and unworthily, his soul shall surely smart
for it.

Mar. 14.15.
The Chamber was trimmed wherein the Passover was celebrated, and the Supper
instituted: and so should the chamber of every Christian soul be cleansed from
profaneness, and adorned with grace, that is to receive Christ Jesus in the
Sacrament. Ioh. 14.2.4.
The Disciples feet were washed before they did partake of the Supper, and
does not that call for a cleansing of our hearts, before we communicate? It is
very remarkable, that when Christ did institute the Eucharist, he admitted
only the eleven Disciples. For I confidently hold, that wicked Judas was sent
away packing with a Quod facis, fac cito, what thou do, Ioh. 13.27. Hilar. de
Tri. lib. 8.
do quickly. Neither are there wanting amongst the Fathers and Schoolmen,
Durand. Ratio. li. 4. ca. 4. Maldonat. in Mat. 26.
who affirm that Judas was absent: So that Maldonat was too nice in saying,
he could willingly be of that opinion, but that the contrary has many
favorers. We may be confident, especially when the Evangelist himself says
plainly, Ioh. 13.30. For that this sop was no part of Supper.
that so soon as Judas had received the sop, he went immediately out. So that
from this our Saviors practice in not admitting Judas, I may say with
Chrysostom, Nullus assistat Judas. Chrysostom. ad op. Ant. hom. 60 Psa. 50.16.
Let no Judas be present or approach this holy Table. If the Lord expostulate
thus with a wicked man for meddling with his Word, Why do thou take my
Covenant into thy mouth, whereas thou hate to be reformed? Will he not be
provoked to anger with him, who takes this Sacrament into a profane mouth? If
he who did eat the Peace Offering, Leuit. ^.20.
having his uncleanness upon him, was cut off from his people, as we read in
the seventh of Leuiticus: What shall become of him who comes unworthily to take
this holy Sacrament, the memorial of that wonderful Peace Offering which
Christ tendered to his Father upon the Altar of the Cross, whereby he
reconciled all things to God, both in heaven and earth? Col. 1.20.


There are two especial reasons of this doctrine. First, in regard of the
difference between the Sacrament and the Communicant. For what fellowship has
light with darkness? what agreement between the holy Sacrament and a profane
heart? who will put precious waters into filthy vessels, or wholesome wine into
soul caskes? This is the ground of Ioshuaes speech to the children of Israel,
Ios. 24.19.
You cannot serve the Lord, for he is a holy God; that is, whilst they were
wicked, the righteous Lord who loves righteousness, Psa. 11.7.
would not accept of their service. Almighty God has ever carefully required a
correspondence between his holy ordinances, and those who were to be
partakers of the same. Thus the Shewbread was appointed only for Aaron and
his sons, because they were holy. Exo. 29.33.
Thus the Trespasse-offring must be eaten in the holy place, Leuit. 7.6.
because it is most holy. Therefore as the Lord says, 1. Pet. 1.16.
Be you holy, because I am holy, so may it be said to the Communicant, Be you
holy, because the Sacrament is holy. This was the caveat given to the
Communicants in the Primitive Church, when one of the Deacons holding up the
Sacrament in the view of the people, Chrysostom. ad pop. Ant. hom. 61.
cried with a loud voice, Sancta, sanctis; Holy things belong to the holy. And
where there is no holiness to entertain these holy things; there in stead of
comfort, the heart is more and more corrupted. For as the Spider gets strength
of poison from the sweetest herbs and flowers: so the profane and impenitent
heart is strengthened in wickedness by receiving this holy and heavenly food.
The Word of God has many excellent Encomiums in sundry places of Scripture. It
is the sincere milk of the Word. 1. Pet. 2.2. Psalm. 12.6. Psalm. 19.10.
It is more purer then gold seven times refined. It is sweeter then the honey
and the hony-combe. Yet we often find by lamentable experience, that it
becomes to some the savor of death unto death: 2. Cor. 2.16.
and so to the Sacraments which were ordained to be the seals of our
salvation, the comfort of our hearts, the strength of our souls, being
unworthily received, becomes the seal of condemnation, the bane and poison
both of soul and body for ever.

A second reason why the wicked and unworthy must not meddle with the
Sacrament, is the danger that thereby is incurred. When Almighty God delivered
the Law upon Mount Sinai, Exo. 19.12.
as he did fence the mountain with marks and bounds, so did he the
Commandments with comminations and threatenings. Above other, the third
Commandment has a dreadful threatening; The Lord will not hold him guiltless
that takes his name in vain. Exodus 26.7.
Now when the Sacrament is profaned, the name of God is taken in vain in a
high degree. Let him therefore take heed to himself, who by unworthy receiving
does profane this holy Sacrament. The temporal judgments that have seized
upon men for laying profane hands upon holy things, are left to us as a warning
to avoid the like dangers. 1. Sam. 5.6.
The hand of God was heavy upon them of Ashdod, for meddling with the Arc.
Baltazar was ^ro^ght into a marvelous trembling and astonishment, and received
a doleful doom by the handwriting on the wall, Dan. 5.3-6.
for quailing and carowsing in the holy vessels. And the Apostle here would
have the Corinthians take notice of the wrath of God upon diverse of them for
receiving the Sacrament unworthily. For many were sick and weak amongst them,
Verse 30.
and many slept. Seeing then that weakness, sickness, and death also did
befall those profaners, the same should make every profane and irreligious
receiver of the Sacrament to tremble, as being liable to the like judgments.
The Iraelites had quails at their desire, but when the meat was yet in their
mouths, the wrath of God fell upon them. Psalm. 78.30.
And this surely was a great judgment. He that is an unworthy receiver, may
justly fear l^st the wrath of God in some such fearful manner fall upon him
whilst the cup is in his hand, and the bread in his mouth. It is true, that as
fathers chastise their children that are come to ripe years, in another
fashion then they did when they were little: So God has another kind of
discipline under the Gospel, then he had under the Pedagogie of the Law, as
St. Chrysostom says. He does not so often scourge offenders with the rods of
temporal chastisements, but rather reserues for them eternal torments, Magnum
ac quirit torme^tum. Aug. in Ioh. tract. 62.
so that Whosoever receives the Sacrament unworthily, procures to himself a
great torment. Yet who doubts but that the hand of God is upon many unworthy
Communicants, even by sorrow, sickness, death, and sundry other temporal
chastisements?

But let us observe the dangers of unworthy receiving, as they are laid down
by the blessed Apostle. The first is, He becomes guilty of the body and blood
of Christ. That is, he is guilty of offering contumely, injury and indignity
to him. Saint Paul, when he disswades husbands from offering violence to their
wives, Ephe. 5.29.
gives this for a reason, No man ever yet hated his own flesh. And may not I
reason thus, Let no man offer injury to Christ, because he is flesh of our
flesh? Yea, he is our head, and a wound or maine given to the head is more
odious and dangerous then to another part. To offer violence to an ordinary
person, it is a fault, to strike a Magistrate, a greater, but to wound a King
who is the Lords anointed, is a sin in the highest degree. O what a heinous
sin it is then to offer violence, and as much as in us lies, to strike and
wound the Son of God, Reu. 19.16. 1 Cor. 2.8.
the King of kings, and the Lord of glory?

To be guilty of the death, and sheading of the blood of any innocent man, is a
fearful sin, and this made David cry out in the bitterness of his soul,
Psa. 51.14.
Deliver me from bloud-guiltinesse, O God. Oh how fearful is it then to be
guilty of the body and blood of Christ? Yea, the injury and indignity is
greater then is obuious to every eye, if we consider the double union in
Christ, not only the two substances, the body and the soul, but the two
natures, the divine and humane. Whose heart is not moved with indignation
against the Jews, when he hears or reads their villainies and violence done
to our blessed Savior? But take heed, says Chrysostom, Chrysostom. ad pop. Ant.
hom. 60
lest thou be guilty in the like kind, by unworthy receiving of the blessed
Sacrament. He that defiles the Kings garment, and he that tears it, offend
both alike, the Jews did tear it, thou defilest it, here indeed are diuersa
peccata, Chry. hom. 41 in Joh.
but par contumelia, some difference in the sin, no difference in the
disgrace.

Joseph and Nicodemus their pious devotion, in begging and embalming the body
of Christ, is worthily recorded and commended to all generations. Mary
Magdalen, John 19.38.40.
by bestowing that box of precious ointment upon his holy head, has gained to
her self endless honor, in stead of her former infamy, in so much, that
Wheresoever the Gospel shall be preached in the whole world, Mat. 26.7.
that her reverend and religious act shall be spoken of for a memorial of her.

Beloved, if we receive the Sacrament unworthily, oh wretched men that we are!
For we join with Judas and the Jews, being guilty of the body and blood of
Christ; but if we receive it worthily, how happy are we! For we communicate
with honorable Joseph, and penitent Mary Magdalen, our memories shall be
blessed, and our souls receive unspeakable comfort.

The next danger which is also a consequence upon the former, is this, He that
eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation.

It is indeed an inevitable consequence; For he that is guilty of the body and
blood of Christ, how can he but incur the danger of condemnation? The word
(...), some would qualify, as though it did import only some temporal
punishment: but that acception is too short. For as the word is more large in
signification, so the dependence it has upon a heinous sin, must needs imply
a correspondent judgment. And so indeed it does import, not only a temporal
punishment, but also eternal condemnation both of soul and body. And reason,
Heb. 20-28 29.
for if he that despised Moses Law dyed without mercy under two or three
witnesses, of how much sorer punishment shall he be worthy, which treads
under foot the Son of God, counts the blood of the new Testament as an
unholy thing, and so despites the Spirit of grace?

This is a fearful thing, to be in the state of the damned, and is not
therefore to be passed over slightly. Our blessed Savior compar^s a damned
soul to an offender bound hand and foot, and cast into some woeful prison,
where there is nothing but wayling, and weeping, Mat. 22.13.
and gnashing of teeth. And surely the comparison is good, if we consider the
nature and adjuncts of the place. For the place is a place of maruailous
horror, being as it were a dungeon of compacted darkness, Jude v. 13. Reu.
21.8.
and a Lake that burns with fire and brimstone. The company there are woeful
souls, and wretched hellish spirits, pouring forth nothing but woes and
execrations upon themselves. There is the worm of conscience gnawing the
soul; there is the merciless fire tormenting the body.

Will you have a resemblance of the darkness of Hell? Think upon the palpable
darkness of Egypt. Exo. 10.22.
Will you behold an Idea of that vlolent fire? Meditate upon the hot Furnace,
prepared by Nabuchadnezer for Shadrach, Dan. 3.19.
Mishach and Abednego. Will you view the doleful state of the Damned? Look
upon Dives tormented in those cruel flames of fire, Luke 16.24.
and not afforded one drop of water to cool his tongue. Yea, suppose you saw
one upon some tortouring rack, with a greedy Vultur ever gryping at his heart,
and yet consider that all these come too short to set forth the doleful
condition of the damned. No tongue is able to express, no heart is able to
conceive the woe and miseries the tormented soul is subject to in hell, which
are as endless as easelesse: But these things I do only touch in brief, In
my threefold Resolution.
having elsewhere handled them more largely.

And here by the way, I observe the form of the Apostles phrase, He that
eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation; (...).
or as the new translation has it, both more literally, and more
significantly, eats and drinks damnation to himself. In which St. Paul does
so appropriate the danger to the particular Communicant, that he seems to
exclude any other.

And indeed to hold, that the Sacraments are polluted or profaned to the worthy
Communicant, by the unworthy receiver, is an absurd conceit. Gala. 6.5. Ezech.
28.
For every man must bear his own burden: and the soul that sins must dye
the death. Yea, it is a very uncharitable error. For what comfort could any man
have in receiving the Sacrament, if this conceit were current?

Were a man never so well prepared himself, yet not knowing how the case
stands with others, it must needs make him come with more doubting concerning
others, then he could have comfort in himself.

But leaving this erroneous opinion, which has come in the way like the body
of Amasa, ^. Sam. 20.12.
I come to the reasons why the unworthy receiving of the Sacrament becomes so
dangerous.

The Rhemists do give this for a reason, Rhem. Anno. in hunc locu^.
namely, because Christ is locally present, and received by the wicked. For,
say they, They could not be guilty of that which they receive not; And it
cannot be so heinous an offense to receive a piece of bread, or a cup of wine,
etc. And this they call an invincible proof of the real presence. 1. Reg.
^0.11.
But let not him that puts on his Armor, boast like him that puts it off. This
Romish Argument is like the Spanish Armado, 1588.
which they called the Invincible Navy. Thus men's conceits make those things
seem which are not. So the Philistims thought their Champion Goliath an
invincible Combatant, which caused them to insult: but as Goliath brought with
him a sword to strike off his own head, so do the Rhemists bring forth that
for a weapon of defense, which indeed cuts the throat of their own cause. For
if a man that eat^s the Sacrament unworthily, eat and drink his own
damnation, it follows necessarily, that he does not receive Christ, which if
he did, then must Christ by his Spirit dwell in him, 1. Ioh. 6.56. Rom 8.9.
and consequently being Christ's, he must needs be partaker of eternal
salvation.

Saint John says, Ioh. 1.12.
As many as received him, to them he gave power to be the sons of God; and
our Savior says, He that eats my flesh, Ioh. 6.54.
and drinks my blood, has life everlasting. But was it ever heard or read,
that a man should be condemned by receiving Christ? No surely: but as this is
the condemnation of the world, John 3.19.
that light came into the world, and men loved darkness rather then light: so
this is the condemnation of the unworthy receiver, that Christ the life and
light of the world being offered to him, he does not receive him.

The true reason why the Sacrament becomes so dangerous to the unworthy
Communicant, is that which has been before observed: namely, because Christ
in respect of the institution is the Author, in respect of sacramental
relation the matter, in regard of the showing of his death and Passion, the end
of the Sacrament. Which answers that silly cavil, It cannot be so heinous to
eat a piece of bread. Who would think it should be such a heinous offense to
eat an Apple, as that it should be the condemnation of the whole World? Genesis
3. Romans 5.12.
And if Adams disobedience therein could procure condemnation to many, who
doubts but an unworthy Receiver of Bread and Wine, may justly draw down
condemnation upon one? especially if we consider that these elements are
ordained for such a sacred use.

Does not a man become a Traitor and worthy of death by clipping the Kings
coin, and offering contumely to the Broad seal, upon which the Kings image is
stamped, though he touch not his person? And may not an unworthy r^ceiuer
become a Traitor to Christ, and be worthy of eternal death for profaning the
blessed Sacrament, which is a lively representation of his presence, and a
seal whereupon his death and Passion is so stamped, without any carnal
presence or touching of his body?

And if you mark the connection of the Apostles words, you shall see most
evidently, that this is the reason of the danger. For whereas he before he had
spoken of the final cause of the Sacrament, you show the Lords death till he
come, he inf^rres these words immediately by way of illation; Therefore
whosoever shall eat this bread, or drink this cup unworthily, shall b^e
guilty of the body and blood of Christ.

Again, it is very obseruable, how it has pleases God to open the Apostles
mouth, to stop the mouths of the Rhemists. For he says not, Whosoever eats
this body, and drinks this blood, (which had been very material to set
forth such a mighty danger, by so weighty a reason) but, Whosoever eats this
bread, and drinks this cup unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood
of Christ.

Hereunto it may be objected, We do not read that the Word of God being
perverted or abused, does incur such danger, or draw down such judgments:
how comes it then to pass, that the Sacrament being profaned, should be so
dangerous, except we admit a real presence?

To which I answer, First, that albeit such dangers are not mentioned in these
express terms, Prou. 1.24.26. 2. Cor. 2.16. Act. 13.46.
yet are they obuious and evident in many places of Scripture.

And secondly, that the abuse of this Sacrament is more heinous and dangerous
then the abuse of the Word, it is no marvel, in regard that Christ is herein
offered more plainly, applied more particularly, and exhibited more firmly. He
is offered more plainly, for diverse senses are made as so many windows to
convey this saving grace into our souls. He is applied more particularly: for
whereas the Gospel is the Will and T^stament of Jesus Christ, the Sacrament is
as it were a particular transcribing of every man's legacy, and giving it into
his hands. He is exhibited more firmly, in that the Sacrament being a seal of
the Covenant of Grace, it confirms unto us our immortal inheritance. So that,
albeit we do daily eat the flesh of Christ, Non solum in mysterio, sed etiam
inscripturae lectione. Hier. in Eccl. lib. 3. Aug de verb. dom. ser. 33. Ipsam
caenam fide quotidie ma^ducamus.
and drink his blood, not only in the Sacrament, but also in reading of the
sacred Scriptures, as Saint Hierome says: yea though we daily (in some sort)
eat the Supper it self by Faith, as S. Austen says; yet forasmuch as we do
feed upon Christ, by receiving the Sacrament, in a more excellent and
extraordinary manner, it is no marvel though the abuse of that heavenly
mystery be esteemed a more heinous sin, and incur a more fearful dang^r.

Seeing now the unworthy receiving of the Sacrament is so dangerous, the due
consideration thereof yields direction to the Minister, terror to the profane
receiver, and admonition to every Communicant.

First, it yields direction to the Minister, that he admit none to the
Sacrament whom he knows to be unworthy. St. Paul speaking of the Incestuous
Corinthian, exhorts, Purge out the old leaven, 1. Cor. 5.7.
that you may be a new lump. And the Ministers of Christ must be like the
Porter, which Iehoiada set by the gates of the house of the Lord, 2. Chro.
23.19.
that none that was unclean in any thing, should enter in. For the Lord has
made them as watchmen, to see that no profane person, or those that are
polluted with gross sins, be admitted to the Lords Table. They must endeavor
to sanctify the Communicants, when they come to the Sacrament, as Job did his
sons when he offered his sacrifice. Job 1.5.
They must prepare them for the Supper, 2. Chr. 35.6
as Josiah required the Priests to prepare the people for the Passover. But if
there be any that will not be reclaimed and reformed, then must they separate
the precious from the vile, Ier. 15.19.
and repel the wicked and unworthy from the Communion, according to the
commandment of God and the Canons of the Church And great reason: Canon. 26.
For it is not meet to take the childrens bread, and give it unto dogs. Mat.
15.26. Mat. 7.6.
And why alas should the Minister of Christ incur the Lords displeasure, by
being partaker of other men's sins? 1. Tim. 5.22. Si indigne accedat, prohibe.
Chrysostom. ad pop. Ant. hem. 60
That is a notable exhortation of Chrysostomes, Be he whosoever, though he were
a magistrate in eminent place, a Captain or a crowned King, if he come
unworthily, repel him. And a worthy resolution of that Father, who said, He
would rather suffer his own blood to be spilt, then offer the blood of Christ
to a profane receiver.

Again: 2. Seeing the unworthy receiving is so dangerous, the same may stand
up like the Angel with the flaming sword, Genesis 3.24.
to keep Adam from eating of the tree of life. It may cause every one to
tremble, who offers to come to the Table of the Lord with unwashed hands; (...).
Theodor. Illo^a Consci. Cyprian.
I mean with a foul conscience. Those that come with hearts full of
profanenes, heads full of ungodly imaginations, and hands defiled with wicked
actions, how unworthy are they to be admitted to this blessed Banquet? As Iehu
said to Iehoram, 2. Reg. 9.
What have thou to do with peace? so I may say, What have these to do with the
Sacrament?

Indeed the Sacrament is a robe to cover the penitent sinner, but not a cloak
to a wicked profaner of it: to such a one it is like the forbidden fruit of
Paradise, Genes. 3.
the bane of the eater, and like a fair bait swallowed with a deadly hook,
the death of the receiver.

Who being guilty, would drink of that cursed water, Number. 5.22.
which made the thigh to rot, and belly to swell? And who, being guilty of
gross sins, will dare, without repentance, to take that Sacrament, which
shall make him guilty of the body and blood of Christ? and become an occasion
of his condemnation? Who does not condemn and condole the Jews for that
fearful execration, His blood be upon us and our children? Behold, he that
receives unworthily, the blood of Christ is upon him to his utter destruction.
It is a pitiful thing when that curse befalls any, Psalm. 69.22.
Let their Table be made a snare: But that this holy Table should be made a
snare to a Christian soul, it is very lamentable.

Reu. 1.7.
It is said in the first of the Revelation, That every eye shall see him, even
them that have pierced him. Not only Judas that betrayed him, Pilate that
condemned him, and the Soldiers that crucified him, must appear before him,
and come to their arraignment; but also every one, who by unworthy receiving
has made himself guilty of the body and blood of Christ, must receive his
fearful doom. Mat. 26.24.
Our Savior said of Judas, It had been good for him if he had never been
borne; and I may say of such, It had been better for them that they had never
been partakers of the holy Sacrament; for alas, they have eaten and drunken
their own damnation; better had it been for such to have eaten some venomous
thing, or to have drunk some deadly poison, for that had only been the death
of the body: but they by eating and drinking the Sacrament unworthily, have
damned and destroyed both soul and body for ever.

Lastly, this danger may admonish every Christian to endeavor with all care and
diligence to come worthily to the Sacrament. Aug. ep. 118.
For as Manna was to every man's taste according to his will; so is the
Sacrament to every one according to his worthiness. Alas, it will not be
enough to say to our Savior with them in the Gospel, Luke 13.26.
We have eaten and drunk in thy company, we have been admitted to thy
Table. But we must see that we come thither as we should. For as the body
abounding with evil humors, the corporal food does rather hurt then nourish
it: Chrysostom. de prodit Iudae.
So the soul being fraught with vices, this heavenly food does rather kill
then comfort it. People will be unwilling that men should see them come to the
Lords Table with foul hands: and should they not be more careful that God do
not see them come with foul hearts? A man would be loath to let a spoke of fire
all into a chest that has rich and costly clothes in it: so should every one
be loath, that any spark of corruption should enter into his heart, when he is
to receive the body and blood of Christ. The Communicants, Ambr. de fac. li. 5.
cap. 3.
as St. Ambrose says, must be familia candidata. For as none uncircumcised was
admitted to the Passover: Exo. 12.44
so none of uncircumcised hearts should be partakers of the Lords Supper.
Augustine.
He must be of the body of Christ, that eats the body of Christ. Adam in his
state of integrity, had free liberty to take and taste of all the trees of the
Garden, (one only excepted;) but after his transgression, he was justly
restrained: So does the Lord Jesus admit us to his Table, if we come worthily,
otherwise we are no welcome guests unto him. Therefore, as it was said to
Moses, Exodus 3.5.
Put off the shoes: for the place where thou stand, is holy ground. So let
us put off the shoes of our corruptions, and then we may with comfort approach
unto the Table of the Lord.

But here it may be justly questioned, Can any one be worthy of the Sacrament,
it being of such excellency as has been showed? For answer whereunto, we
must consider, that there is a twofold worthiness, the one in act, the other
in acceptance. The worthiness in Act, requires a proportionable
correspondence between the Sacrament and the Communicant. But this worthiness
(I hope) no man is so ignorant to hold, so impudent to plead. For as Origin
says, every one must say with the Centurion in this case, Lord, Origin. hom. 8
in diverse. Mat 8.8.
I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof. And we do truly
acknowledge that we are not worthy to gather up the crumbs under the Lords
Table. In the Communion book.


The worthiness in acceptance is, when God in mercy, without desert on our
behalf, does count us worthy, as it is in the 21. of Luke, Luke 21.35
Pray that you may be counted worthy to escape all these things. And this must
be our worthiness when we come to the Table of the Lord. Now this gracious
acceptance of Almighty GOD, though it do not challenge an absolute
worthiness, yet does it require a certain fitness, which in some degree we
call a worthiness. And so also the word imports. For (...), is opposed to
(...), which sometimes signifies meet or fit, Romans 16.2. 1. Cor. 16.4. Col.
1.12. (...), as meat is, though it be d^gnum in the vulgar Latin. 2. These.
1.3. Bellar. de Euchar. l 4 c. 18
as we fitly translate it in diverse places. Yea the Rhemists, though they make
themselves slaves to the vulgar Latin, yet in the second Epistle to the
Thessalonians, they have so translated it. Now what it is that makes a man fit,
or unfit, is duly to be considered.

Bellarmine labors to prove, that no man is fit for the Sacrament, but he
only, who is free from the trouble or touch of conscience for any mortal
sin. So that he will have only those that are whole, to come to the
Sacrament. But both the Scriptures and ancient Fathers do show, that they
whose consciences are troubled, and those that find weakness in themselves,
are fit Communicants. The Disciples had their fraileties, there was presumption
in Peter, and emulation in the rest. If we stay till we be without sin, we must
never come to the Sacrament. Christ came not to call the righteous, Mat. 9.13.
but sinners to repentance. He is no Physician for the whole, but for the
sick. Mat. 9.12.
It is not infirmity that makes a man unworthy, if he labor and strive against
it. For Christ will not break the bruised reed, Mat. 12.20.
nor quench the smoking flax. He comes best who comes most humbly, being
conscious of his infirmities, and is therefore troubled for them, like the man
that came to Christ with tears, Mar. 9 24.
and said, I believe, Lord, help my unbelief.

Those that refrain the Sacrament, because they feel weakness in themselves
are like those that will not come to the fire till they be hot, nor to the
Physician till they be whole. Dominicus Soto says well, Ex Attrito fit
Contritus. Dom. Soto in sent. li. 4. did. 12. quaest. 1. Art. 11.
It many times comes to pass, that by the receiving of this Sacrament, a
sinful man becomes a sound Penitent; bewayling his sins, not with a slavish
fear, but in love and reverence to the Majesty of God. And therefore he does
worthily condemn the custom of the Spaniards, who deny the Sacrament to those
that are condemned to death.

The places are almost infinite in the ancient Fathers, where this Sacrament is
called and compared to Physic, to cure and comfort the sick soul. And
fitly: For when should Melchisedeck King of Salem bring forth bread and wine,
Gen 14.18.
to relieve Abraham and his Army, but when they are weak and wearied in the
battle? And when should our King of Peace afford us this spiritual food so
fitly, as when our souls do hunger and thirst after righteousness?

To conclude this point, my Brethren, it is to be considered that there are
diverse degrees of unworthiness. Even smaller distractions, a disestimation of
the Sarament, want of faith and fear, of reverence and devotion, may hinder
the fruitful receiving of the Sacrament, But especially take heed of open
profanenes, irreligion, Atheism: such sins must needs draw down the
judgments of God upon the head of the Receiver.

As Joseph's servant said to his brethren, New transl. Genesis 44.5.
Is not this the cup whereby my Master makes trial whether you be true men? So
I may say, Is not this wretched condition of life an evident proof of such
men's unworthiness, and an assured testimony that they are guilty of the body and
blood of Christ, and consequently, eat and drink damnation to themselves? But
if you be free from these gross sins, and your hearts sincere and upright,
though not utterly void of infirmities, know this beloved, that Christ is as
ready to admit you to his Table, 2. Kin. 10.15
as Iehu was to take Iehonadab into his Chariot.

THE SEVENTH Sermon. The means to avoid the danger of unworthy Communicating.
1. COR. 11. ver. 28. Let a man therefore examine himself.


WHEN our blessed Savior told his Disciples, Verily, Math. 26.21, 22.
I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me; they were exceeding
sorrowful, and began every one of them to say, Is it I, Master? So me thinks,
my brethren, when you hear that those who eat and drink unworthily, do
(like Traitors) become guilty of the body and blood of Christ, every one should
be exceeding careful, and enquire, Is it I? am I one of those that are guilty
of this heinous sin? When the Apostle Peter rowzed up the Consciences of
those happy Conuerts, taxed them roundly for their sin, and laid the
judgments of God to their hearts, like the axe to the root of the trees, they
found themselves wrapped in their sins like Jonas with the weeds, Jonas 2.5. 2.
Reg. 6.14
and environed with Gods judgments, like Dothan compassed with the Syrians
Army, and being pricked in their hearts, they cried out, Men and brethren, Acts
2.37.
what shall we do? Beloved, the dangers mentioned before, cannot but touch
the quick: for what greater danger then to be guilty of the body and blood of
the Lord, and to eat and drink damnation to ones self? And should not this
cause every one to use all care and diligence to avoid those dangers, and to
enquire with those Conuerts, What shall we do? What course shall we take, that
we may escape the judgments of God, Now to a man thus affected? the Apostles
resolution is at hand, Let a man examine himself. This examination is like the
two Disciples that our Savior sent to prepare a room for the celebration of
the Passover. Mar. 14.13.
For it is the means that he has ordained for preparing the heart, that it
may be trimmed and furnished with Grace for the comfortable receiving of the
Sacrament. This examination and preparation is necessary at all times, and in
every act of Gods worship and service.

The children of Israel, when they were to appear before God upon mount Sinai,
were appointed three days for their sanctification. Exo. 19.10, 11.
And when they did celebrate the Passover, they were allowed four days for
their preparation. Now if so large a time were allotted for these legal
services, Exo. 12.3, 6.
we may well conclude, that a due preparation is necessary for the receiving of
this Evangelical Sacrament.

For the better prosecution of this point, we will consider these three
circumstances. 1. The persons who: 2. The manner how: 3. The matter whereof
this examination consists.

1 Whom a man must examine.
You shall find many very forward and busy in prying into others, pursuing
them with their examinations, and taxing them with their censures, who in the
mean time do utterly neglect themselves: they can espy the least mote in
another eye, the least spot in his garment, the least defect in his life, but
the greatest corruptions in their own hearts, the extremest deformities of
their own lives, they cannot behold. These men are like Lamia in the Poet, who
put on her eyes when she went abroad, but laid them aside when she came home;
and like a foolish man, that runs to quench another man's house, whilst his
own flames about his ears. All the Mariners are upon the jack of Jonas,
Jonas 1.8.
and examine him strictly of his person, his profession, his country, his
religion, and what not? but never a one of them examines himself. So that if
the Prophet Jeremy had been there, he might have said of them as he spoke of
the Jews, I harkened and heard, but no man said, Ier. 8.6. Romans 14.4.
What have I^ done? But who art thou that iudgest another man's servant, seeing
he stands or falls to his Master? Though the Lord has commanded thee to
examine thy self, yet has he not made thee an examiner of others; that
office he has reserved to himself. Remember our Saviors check for Peter's
busy inquisition concerning John, Ioh. 21.22.
What is that to thee? follow thou me. And as S. Paul says in the sixth to
the Galatians, Gal. 6.4.
Let every man prove his own work, that he may have joy in himself: so I
may say, Let every one examine his own heart, hat he may have comfort by the
Sacrament, and not eat and drink damnation to himself.

The manner of our examination.
In the next place we are to observe, forth of the Apostles phrase, the manner
of our examination. For the word (...) imports a diligent scrutiny and
examination; it being a metaphor drawn from Goldfiners, who try their metals,
till they leave them utterly without dross. And therefore St. Jerome upon that
word says, Prudentissimotra^ezitae. Hieron. in Ephesians. lib. 3
A Christian must in this case be like a prudent exchanger, who will not judge
of coin only by a superficial view, but tryes it by the weight, the sight,
the sound, and eu^ry other means. Such a diligent examination does the Apostle
call for elsewhere, when he says, Prove your selves, 2. Cor. 13.5 (...).
Examine your selves, doubling his phrase, as it were his files, thereby
showing, that it is not a superficial, but a substantial examination that is
required in these weighty matters. And reason: In humane affairs this diligent
examination is seldom neglected. Who will take Physic without consideration
of the state of his body, the air, the season, and other necessary
observations? And, as our Savior says, What man will build, Luke 14.28, 31.
but he sits down first, and considers his ability to finish the work?
What King going to war, sits not down, and examineth his power for the
encounter of his enemy? Shall humane affairs be attended with all diligent
circumspection; and shall one of the gr^atest mysteries and waightiest duties
of a Christian be undertaken without diligent examination?

Again, if we consider either the difficulty, or the danger of neglect, the
same may cause our diligent examination. The difficulty is exceeding great; For
the heart is deceitful above measure, who can find it out? Ier. 17.9.
Ask thy heart whether thy life be culpable: it will be ready to excuse, and
say with Gehazi, 2. Reg. 5.25.
Thy servant went no whither. Call it to acccount of thy particular actions,
and it will answer like the Ruler in the Gospel, All these things I have
observed from my youth. Luke 18.21.
If thou examine it whether thou may go safely to the Sacrament, it will say
with Elizeus, (though without cause) Go in peace. If thou object unto it, 2.
Reg. 5.19
Thou art in danger of eating and drinking damnation to thy self, it will
answer as Peter did to our Savior, Mat. 16.22.
Master, pity thy self, it shall not be so to thee. When Christ asked the
sons of Zebedeus, Mat. 20.22.
Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of? they answered as
roundly, as rashly, We are able. And who is of so unclean a heart, or so lewd
a life, but he holds himself fit enough for the blessed Sacrament? Such is
the force of self-love seated in every soul, that (if diligent examination
do not prevent it) it makes men vaunt with the Church of Laodicea, of those
perfections they are void of, and to shake hands with the Pharise, (qui
iactauit merita, Aug. hom. 42 ^^ter. 50.
texit vulnera) who boasted of those merits he had not, and concealed the
wounds of the soul that he felt not. Luke 18.11.
I thank thee O God (says he) that I am not like other men; and he said
truly: for neither were they like to him in ostentation and vainglory, nor
he like them in humbleness and sincerity. He was no extortioner, yet could he
rob God of his glory: he fasted, yet in the mean time he was so filled, that
he even swelled with pride. He gave alms, but his left hand could tell his
right hand that it was a hand of hypocrisy. Thus where self-love bears sway,
many have their souls like the bodies of dropsie-men, fair and full without,
yet stuffed within with watery humors.

6. Again, as self-love, so Satan will be excceeding busy to hinder this
examination, either by taking up our thoughts for worse employments, or by
mixing distractions for our disturbance, he presents us with a false glass,
wherein whilst we view our hearts and lives, even deformity it self seems
fair and beautiful, and our corruptions being covered with a vizard of
hypocrisy, the greatest blemishes seem to be ornaments.

Again, this examination should be diligent, because of the danger. The curse
of God is liable to every one that does the work of the Lord negligently; Ier.
48.10.
yea here is no less danger, then being guilty of the body and blood of
Christ, and to be subject to eternal condemnation.

If a man were to pass over some deep and dangerous pit, by a narrow bridge,
how warily would he look to his feet? Oh how circumspect should he be, that
passes over this pit of death and destruction, by this narrow bridge of
examination?

Lastly consider, that if we neglect this duty, we expose our selves to the
strict and dreadful examination of Almighty God. The Apostle tells us here,
V^rse 31.
That if we will judge our selves, we should not be judged. Intimating on
the contrary; that if we will not examine and judge our selves, the Lord
himself will take us to task, he will examine and judge us.

He is that King that came in to see his guests, and said, Friend, Math.
22.11, 12.
how came thou in hither, not having a wedding garment? H^e says not (as
Chrysostom has well observed) How satest thou down? Chrysostom. ad pop. Ant. hom.
6.
but How came thou in? As if he should say, Thou ought to have looked to
it beforehand, according to Salomons counsel, Eccl. 4 vlt.
Take heed to thy foot when thou art going to the house of God. Before thou
set foot within his Sanctuary, look to, and remember that the Lord will not
have the threesholds of his House worn with profane feet.

If this question were propounded to many a^on^, Friend, how came thou to the
Lords Table? The true answer would be, Without consideration, Without
examination. The Corinthians found by woeful experience, that if they would not
examine themselves, the Lord would be their Examiner. Woeful, I say, Chrysostom. in
Psalm. 96.
for Christi iudicium suit morbus and mors. When Christ examined them, and
found them unprepared, he struck some with sickness, some with death. Consider,
I pray you, that the Lords examination as it is severe, so is it most exact.
He will bring his light, Zeph. 1.12. Ios. 7. Genesis 31.
and search Jerusalem with a candle. Neither Achans accursed stuff, nor Rahels
stolen Idols, nor Gehazies close bribery, can be concealed from him, 2. King. 5.
whose eyes are like flames of fire. Reave. 1. Gene. 3.
In vain it is for Adam to hide himself amongst the trees of Paradise, Jonas
1. Genesis 18.
for Jonas to lurk in the side of the Ship, for Sarah to laugh b^hind the Tent
door. It is neither Captivity for remoteness, Carmel for height, Amos 9.
the Sea, nor H^ll it self for the depth, can secure or shroud an unworthy
Communicant from God, Psalm. 7.9.
who searches the heart and the reins. When the Lord falls to his
examination, he will set men's sins before their eyes in order. Psa. 50.21.
If they will not examine themselves, and set their sins before their eyes for
their compunction and conversion, the Lord will set them before them, to their
utter confusion and condemnation.

The Rhemists in their notes upon these words, do strangely collect the
necessity of auricular Confession. It is something against them, Bell. de
^aeni. li. 3. c. 3. and 4.
that their great Goliath having gathered what places of Scripture he could to
this purpose (and some of them absurd enough) had no power to touch upon this
Coast. It is more, that the ancient Fathers, in their exposition of these
words, have flatly contradicted the Rhemists collection. For Athanasius says,
Atha. vel qu^squis suit author eorum Commentar. Tit tui ipsius arbiter ^sio.
I would propound no man for thy Judge, but thy self. Theodoret says, Be
thou thine own Arbiter and examiner. But most of all, that the place it self
makes directly against them, and is rather a Canon to batter, then a Bulwark
to support their Auricular Confession. For when the Apostle says, Let a man
examine himself, he sends no man to the Priest, but rather referres and
restraines this examination to a man's own care and conscience.

There is a maruailous difference between Examination and Confession, and it
is impossible to conclude the one from the other. And albeit I deny not, but
the faithful and skillful Pastor may, when occasion is offered, be helpefull to
a man in the examination of himself, by resolving of doubts, informing the
judgment, and quieting the troubled conscience: yet to make that absolutely
necessary, which is only accidentally expedient, neither sorts with reason or
Religion.

But leaving that erroneous collection, we may from hence infer directly,
that forasmuch as every one who comes to the Sacrament must examine himself;
children, fools, and madmen, and all those, who are altogether disabled by
nature, for this examination, are by no means to be admitted to the Communion.

Again, this doctrine serves to lash those lazy Communicants, who having
sufficient ability, either utterly n^glect, or very negligently practice this
weighty duty of examination, before they come to the Sacrament. This is one
principal cause why many do receive the Sacrament unworthily, to the
dishonor of God, and the danger of their own souls.

It fares with some as with bankrupts, who cannot abide to behold their
decayed estate, and therefore it is irksome to them to turn over their books
of account. And many there are, who of mere neglig^nce are wanting to
themselves in this behalf. Were they to undertake some matter of life and
death, it would make them vig^^ant and diligent; and albeit they hear that
this is matter of salvation or condemnation, yet are they very car^lesse and
negligent. But let our practice, my Brethren, be an Echo to the Apostles
precept. Let every one of us with all diligence examine our selves; Let us (as
Jeremy speaks) search our hearts and try our ways. Lam. 3.40. Io. Buxdorf.
synag. Judah. cap. 12.
As the Jews sought every corner of their houses, lest any leaven might
remain there, when they celebrated the Passover: So let us seek every corner
of our hearts (as St. Austin exhorts) lest any leaven of iniquity, Omnes animae
latebras. Aug de temp. Sermon. 2. Gen 44.12.
hypocrisy, vanity do lurk there, when we come to the Lords Supper. And as
Joseph's officers sought his Brothers sacks, from the eldest to the youngest,
for the Cup: so let us search our souls, and examine our lives, from the first
to the last, for our corruptions; that either the view of our guiltiness may
humble us, or the consideration of our innocence may give us comfort.

And to that end, we shall do well to acquaint our selves with the word of
GOD, and to make it the Lydius lapis, and rule of our direction. For it will be
as a light unto our feet, Ps. 119.105.
and a lantern unto our paths. It will be as a looking-glass to discover
the errors of our lives, Iam. 1.23.25
and an exact guide, for our effectual imagination.

We read that the Shipmen in the seven and twentieth of the Acts, Act. 27, 28,
29.
did diligently sound those troublesome Seas wherein they were tossed, that so
they might prevent those perils which incountred them in that dangerous voyage:
So must we take the Word of GOD for our sounding plummet in this our
examination. As they doubting to fall into some quicksands, struck sail; so
must we, Verse 17.
to avoid the quicksands of this guiltiness, pawse and deliberate before we
come to the Sacrament.

And lastly, as they, fearing lest they should fall upon rocks, Verse 29.
did cast four ankers out of the stern: So we, if we will avoid this
dangerous rock of condemnation, must have our four ankers to cast out. The
matter whereof our examination does consist.
The first is knowledge, the second faith, the third, repentance, the fourth,
charity. And these four ankers may fitly be called four Interroga^ories,
whereupon every one must diligently examine himself.

1. Knowledge.
The first Anchor, and the first interrogatory in this our examination is
knowledge, which is as the eye to the body, the Sun to the world, the Pilot
to the ship; The ship is not troubled or tossed (says St. Ambrose) wherein
providence sayleth. No Christian duty can yield good performance, or obtain
good acceptance at the hand of God, without knowledge. Some services may be
performed to a King by a man meanly qualified, but some require much
judgment. Behold here one of the greatest services we tender to the King of
Kings, and does it not therefore require a correspondent knowledge and
judgment?

The Lord never appointed a blind sacrifice, and he will not accept blind and
ignorant service.

What is zeal without knowledge, but a rash precipitation? what is devotion,
but vain superstition? what are mortal actions, but glorious transgressions?
Knowledge gives a good tincture to all virtues: therefore St. Peter exhorts, 2.
Pet. 1.5.
Join with your virtue, knowledge. It is dangerous to set foot within the
Lords sanctuary, or to approach near to his Table, without the guidance of
this Lamp.

Most men are desirous to get humane knowledge, whereby they are enabled to
discourse and converse with others, but few study to be wise to salvation. And
Satan, whose works are opposite to Almighty God, in stead of fiat lux, says,
Genes. 1.
fiant tenebrae, he either labors utterly to clowd the understanding with
ignorance, or else he makes a league like the league of Naash, 1. Sam. 11.2
to put out the right eye, the eye of Divine knowledge, not caring to spare the
left eye of humane: for he knows, that if a man were the most exact
Grammarian, the acutest disputant, the most eloquent Orator, the profoundest
Astronomer, yea had all secular knowledge; all these without sacred knowledge,
are but like the husks whereupon the prodigal Son did feed, Hieron. in 1.
ad Titum.
yielding no good nourishment to the soul.

It were a happy thing if every Communicant were capable of that commendation
St. Paul gives the Romans, Romans 15.14.
I know that you are filled with all knowledge. But that is too high a pitch
for every one to soar unto, yet is there a certain competency in some
special things, required of every one that int^nds to be a comfortable
partaker of the Sacrament.

The first of these is the excellency of man by creation, which the holy
Historian expresses, saying, God created man in his Image, Genesis 1.27.
that is in righteousness, holiness, and other divine indowments, Ephe. 4.24.
wherewith his soul was beautified and adorned.

The second is the misery of man by transgression; for as the knowledge of man's
excellency may be scientia inflans, so the knowledge of his misery will be
scientia contristans, Bern. in Ca^. sermon. 36.
As the one may puff him up, so the other will serve to humble him: forasmuch
as he has lost that blessed estate, defaced that gracious image, brought
himself into the woeful slavery of sin and Satan, and wrapped himself in
the fearful snares of death and condemnation.

The third is the restored estate by Redemption, by the death and obedience of
Jesus Christ, both God and man. Man, that he might satisfy for the
transgression of man. God, that he might enable the humanity to bear the
infinite punishment, which all the men and Angels in heaven and earth had not
been able to bear, and to make his Passion and obedience of infinite merit and
efficacy. Yea God and man, that he might reconcile God unto man, and become our
Emmanuel, even GOD with us.

The fourth is the obedience and thankfulness, that we are bound to tender
unto Christ for this merciful deliverance. We are serui a seruando, as Saint
Austin says. Aug. de Ciui. Dei. lib. 19. cap. 15.
Christ Jesus has paid our ransom, rescued and redeemed us from that woeful
estate of hell and condemnation; therefore we must serve him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life. Luke 1.75.
We owe to him our Halleluias, prayers, and tears, and all the pains, that
possibly we may be able to take in his service.

The fifth is man's felicity in the state of glory; when he shall be made
partaker of that immortal inheritance, which was forfeited by Adam, but
purchased again by Christ, and in that inheritance of those sweet joys, which
eye has not seen, 1. Cor. 1.9.
nor care heard, neither have entered into the heart of man: the meditation
wher^of, as it yields much joy, so may it be a notable spur to piety.

Lastly, he that will be a fruitful receiver of the Sacrament, must have
knowledge of the author, nature, use and fruit thereof, it being a
demonstration of man's happy Redemption in this life, and thrice blessed
condition in the life to come. Herein is set forth the body and blood of
Christ, redeeming us from thraldom of sin and condemnation: that we might be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light. Col. 1.12.
And therefore have the Evangelists so diligently recorded, and the Apostle
here so carefully repeated the institution; and therefore have I also so
largely handled the doctrine of the Sacrament, that you might be able to
discern the Lords body. Thus the knowledge of man's innocence by creation, his
misery by transgression, his recovery by Redemption, his duty of
sanctification, his felicity of glorification, and the demonstration of this in
the blessed Sacrament, must in some measure be required of him, who is to be
admitted to the Table of the Lord.

The second anchor is Faith, Faith.
which Saint Chrysostom calls the holy Anchor; Chrysostom. in Psa. 115. est sacra
quad^^ anchora.
and e^ewhere, the Lady and Queen of virtues. Therefore as St. Paul exhorts,
that in our spiritual warfare, above all we take the shield of Faith: Ephe.
6.16.
So I may say, in this our spiritual worship, we must take the hand of Faith.
The Apostle here bids us ^xamine our selves, and in the next Epistle he shows,
that this is the chiefest Interrogatory in this our Examination, 2. Cor. 13.5
saying, Examine your selves, Ioh. 1.12.
prove your selves whether you be in the Faith. Faith is the hand whereby
Christ Jesus is applied to the soul of every receiver.

By this hand the woman with the bloody issue received virtue from Christ. Luke
8. Virtue is gone out of me, ver. 46.
For as the grace was not included in his garment, but issued from his bl^ssed
body: so was it not the hand of her body, but of her soul, that conveyed it;
According to our Saviors saying, Daughter, Verse 48.
be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole.

This hand of faith we must be sure to bring, when we come to the Sacrament.
Aug. de verb. Apost. ser. 2.
For it is Sacramentum fidelium, the Sacrament that belongs otely to the
faithful. And indeed Faith is very necessary to this purpose: for it purifies
the heart, and so makes it a fit receptacle for Christ. Act. 15.9.
Saint Paul therefore bows his knees for the Ephesians, that Christ may dwell
in their hearts by faith. Ephesians. 3.17.


Faith is the wedding garment, Nuptiale vestimentum est fides Chrysostom. op.
imperfe. hom 41.
which makes us welcome to this Feast of the great King. This made Noah's
diligence, Abraham's obedience, and Abels sacrif^ce to find acceptance; and
without this, it is impossible to please God. Heb. 11.4.8
If therefore thou come to offer this Eucharisticall sacrifice without faith
(says Bernard) non placas, sed peccas. Bern. super Cant. ser. 24.
In stead of pacifying God, thou shall purchase his heavy displeasure. Except
faith go before, the Sacrament comes but like a seal to a blank, and serves
only to seal up thy unbelief to condemnation. Aug. in Ioh. Tract. 26.
For he that abides in Christ, nor Christ in him, neither eats his flesh, nor
drinks his blood. Faith works wonderfully, makes things absent present. It is
scala a terra ad coelum, Chry. in Psalm. 116.
a ladder whereby we mount up from earth to heaven, and lay hold upon Christ.
It gives assurance of Christ's presence in the Sacrament. Heb. 11.
For it is the evidence of things that are not seen. It makes things that
seem incredible and impossible to flesh and blood, both possible and certain.
For it assures us, that we shall have cure by Christ's wounds, life by his
death, joy by his sorrow, and glory by his ignominy.

But what? does Christ abide and dwell in us by faith? how is it then so
needful to receive the Sacrament? I answer, That our faith may be
str^ngthened: for as men do not ^ate and drink, only to maintain life and
soul (as we say) but to get strength also: so should we not rest in that
Faith, Mat. 12.20.
which is like smoking fiaxe and a bruised reed, but labor to grow from faith
to faith, Romans 1.17.
that having a full apprehens^on of Christ, our joy also may be full.

Now, it is not every kind of faith that will serve for this emploiment. For
the devils do believe and tremble. Iam. 2 19.
But it is that faith which excludes doubts, rests upon certainties, and seals
up the promises. Chrysostom. sermon. de fiae, spe, etc.
A sound says stands as well upon application as apprehension. The most
sovereign plaster in the world, if it be not applied, is fruitless: so is
Christ to us without this application, he yields small comfort. Therefore every
one must learn to say with Thomas, Ioh. 20.28.
My Lord and my GOD.

This lamp of faith is kindled by the fire of the Word, Chry. in Mat. hom. 52.
as Chrysostom says: and I may say that it must be maintained by fervent
prayer, and devout partaking of the Sacraments. This holy Anchor should be as
carefully kept, as the holy fire was in the time of the Law. Chrysostom defide, spe,
charitate.
For by it we come to Christ, we go to God, we haste to heaven.

3. Repentance.
The third Anchor or Interrogatory whereof a man must examine himself, is
Repentance; a virtue very excellent to fit a man for the Sacrament: Coelum
aperit, in Paradis^ ducit. Chris. de Poen^ten. sermon. 3.
for if it it open heaven, and lead into Paradise, then may it well conduct a
man to the Lords Table: and it is powerful to keep out the judgments of God.
For he that has decreed to punish by Justice, Tertul. lib. de Poe^^t sect. 2.
has promised to grant pardon by repentance.

This is a matter would ask a large discourse, but I will briefly observe some
few material passages thereof, as it were so many links of a chain. The first
link of this chain is the sight of sin, and the punishment due to it. For
how can the soul be possessed with fear or sorrow, except the understanding
do first apprehend the danger? for that which the eye sees not, (...) acu^u^
^on videt aer ^^n dol^^. B^^nar^^. Ier. 8.6.
the heart rues not. If Satan can keep sin from the eye, he will easily keep
sorrow from the heart. It is impossible for a man to repent him of his
wickedness, except he say, What have I done? therefore that is worthy counsel
of the kingly Prophet, Psalm. 4.4.
Commune with your own hearts, on your beds, and be still. The serious
Penitent must be li^e the wary factor, he must retire himself, look into his
books, and turneouer the leaves of his life. He must consider the expense of
his time, the employment of his talent, the debt of his sin, the strictnes of
his Audit; then will fear and anger look him in the face, and bring in the
next link, which is Sorrow. For he that seriously considers, Ephesians. 4.
how he has grieved the Spirit of God, and endangered his own soul, by his
sins, cannot but have his spirit grieved with remorse. Psalm. 51.17.
The Sacrifices of God are a troubled spirit. It is not single sacrifice, but
sacrifices, because it is instar omnium. Tremel.
These sacrifices we must bring with us when we come to the Sacrament. These
are the sour herbs wherewith we must eat our new Passover. Neither must we
sorrow only, but look to the quality of our sorrow, that it be godly; and the
quantity of it, that it be great: we must fit the plaster to the wound, and
proportion our sorrow to our sins. If our sins have been many, great, and
of long continuance, or aggrauated by any other circumstances of time, place,
person, or the like, our repentance must be correspondent. He that with Peter
has sinned heynously, or with Mary Magdalen frequently, Mat. 26.75. Luke 7.38.
must with them weep bitterly, and abundantly. Like that worthy Roman
Matron, Hieron. in Epitaph. Paulae
who for her much laughter, entertained much weeping: for her painting of her
face, bedewed her cheeks with her tears, and in detestation of pride, changed
her silks into sackcloth.

The third link of this chain, which is knit to the former, is The loathing
of sin: For as the surfeit of meats, though dainty and delicate, will
afterward make them loathsome: so he that has had the surfeit of sorrow for
his sins, will loath them, though never so full of delight. Yea, it will
cause a man to loath and dislike himself for his sins, and to repent in dust
and ashes. Job 9. and 42.6.
It will make him in a mourneful manner to cry out with S. Paul, Romans 7.24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin? It
will cause him to rate himself, and to say, What a beast was I to commit these
sins, to the dishonor of God, the disgrace of my profession, the grief of
the godly, the danger and (if God be not merciful) the damnation of my soul
and body for ever? Yea, this godly sorrow will cause a holy indignation, a holy
revenge, 2. Cor. 7.11. 1. Cor. 9. vlt
by keeping under the body, and bringing it into subjection.

And this brings in the fourth link of this chain, which is leaving of sin.
2. Sam. 13.7
For as Amnon hating Tamar, shut her out of doors; so he that loathes and
hates his sins, the sight, the thought, the remembrance of them will be
grievous to him; and he will labor by all good means to expel them.
Poenitentia est delictorum consumptio, Chrysostom. proem. in Isa.
For true repentance must be the consumption of sin. To what purpose does the
Physician euacuate ill humors, if the Patient afterward distemper himself by
disdyed? What shall it avail a man to endure the lancing, searching, tenting
of a wound, if he stay not the cure? and in vain is that repentance, Hieron
in Mat. 27.
where the works of darkness remain. Therefore as Amnon not only put his
loathed sister out, but bolted the door after her: so must a man keep out his
loathed sins with the bolts of resolution and circumspection. He must make a
Covenant with his eyes, Job 31.1. Psalm. 39.2. Ier. 4.4.
keep his mouth with a bridle, circumcise his heart. And as Noah pitched the
Ark within and without to keep out the waters: Genesis 6.14.
so must he set a watch over all his senses, external and internal, to keep
out sin.

When Almighty God dispersed and bounded the waters, as we read in the first of
Genesis, it was, that the earth might be furnished with herbs, trees, and
plants yielding their several fruits: So in this act of repentance sin is
banished, that the soul of man might be planted with the trees of grace, and
filled with the fruits of righteousness. Phil. 1.11.
So that here comes in the last link of this chain, namely, The cleaving unto
God in newness of life. For therefore we put off the old man, Ephe. 4.22.24.
that we may put on the new. We forsake Egypt, to go to Canaan. We fly forth
of Sodom, Genesis 19.17
that we may haste to the mountains. We endeavor to be undefiled in the way,
that we may walk in the Law of the Lord, Psalm. 119.1.
and where there is no reformation, there repentance is idle and fruitless.
Vbie me^datio nulla ibi poenitentia vana. Tertul. de Poenitent. Hier. in Esa,
lib. 16.
But contrarily, where repentance is sound and serious, it changes a Moabite
into an Israelite, and an Ethiopian into a Christian. It yields a universal
and constant change. Repentance is like to a ladder, so many rounds as we
descend in vice, so many we must ascend in virtue. As we have been rebels to
God, and given our members weapons of unrighteousness to fight for sin: Romans
6.83.
so must we become loyal subjects, and give them up as weapons of
righteousness t^ God We must have respect to all the Commandments of God.
Psalm. 119.6.
And when we have taken footing, and entered into the paths of holiness, we
must be constant, not looking back with Lots wife to Sodom. For it were better
that we had never known the way of righteousness, 2. Pet. 2.21.
then to turn from the holy commandment. We must therefore labor to grow in
grace, 1. Pet. 3. vlt.
and to go from strength to strength, Psalm. 84.7.
till we appears before God in Sion.

Lo thus must we look to the Anchor of Repentance, if we will escape the
danger of condemnation. We must in some good measure have all the linkes of
this chain, if we will be worthy Communicants. As St. Augustine says, Aug de
tem. sermon. 1.
Matet vitam, qui vult acc^^ere vitam. He mu^t change his life, that will
receive Christ Jesus to eternal life.

The fourth Anchor or Interrogatory is Charity. 4. Charity.
This is a virtue seasonable and necessary at all times, but especially it must
be our companion when we come to the blessed Sacrament, a Sacrament of unity,
as the very elements do show, having many grains united in one loaf, and
many grapes in one cup.

That which our Savior says of Sacrifices, may very well sort with this
Sacrament. Mat. 5.23, 4.
When thou come to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has
ought against thee, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer
thy gift. For how can the Eucharist be a Sacrament of comfort, that is
celebrated in discord? The Lords Table must be like Gedeons Altar, Iehoua
Shalom, Iud. 6.^^. August.
The God of Peace: For, It is a Sacrament of Piety, the Ensign of unity, and
a bond of Charity. This virtue has many considerable circumstances, some of
which we will briefly observe in the Object, the Manner, the Motives.

The object of our love is that coccus bis tinctus, Greg. Pastor par 2. cap. 3.
our skarlet with a double dye, That is our love to God and man, yea so to man,
that like a goodly Cedar of Libanus she sttetch forth her branches far and
near, Vsque ad inim^cos, Aug. de tempo. 1.
that is, both to friends and enemies, as our blessed Savior stretched out his
arms on the Cross to both malefactors. As Almighty God causes his rain to
fall, and his Sun to shine upon the grounds of the wicked as well as the
godly: Mat. 5.44.
so must our charity extend it self, not only to friends, but also to
enemies. The love to our enemies is a hard task, but behold, we have for our
inducement, many notable patterns and presidents of Gods worthy servants, As
David, Psa. 35.13. S, Paul, 1. Tim. 2 2. S. Stephen. Acts 7.60.
who (as Chrysostom well observes) have so loved their enemies, that hardly
shall a man be able to match their charity in his love to his friends.
Concerning the manner of his love, it must be such as S. John speaks of, 1.
Ioh. 3.18
My little children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed
and in truth. The seat of this love must not be the tongue, but the heart, the
ground of it sincerity, not hypocrisy. Courteous speeches and fair promises
were wont to be Court holy water, but this Gangrene has dispersed it self
too generally over the Land. Beloved, such as we would have the love of our God
be unto us, such must our love be to our brethren, sincere, hearty, fruitful,
wishing, and doing good to them in their bodies, souls, and outward estate.
Now the motives to the practice and performance of this duty are many, I will
mention a few. First, this love and Charity is our Saviors badge, whereby his
servants are known from others; Ioh. 13.35.
such were those good Christians who continued daily together with one accord
in the Temple. Acts 2.46.
Yea this makes men not only Disciples, Angelos reddit. Chrysostom. in 2. Cor. ho^.
39.
but even Angels, as Chrysostom says.

Again, Charity is a notable mark of our union with Christ, when for his sake
we love those that bear his image: 1. Ioh. 4.16.
For he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him. Thus love
makes room in the heart for Christ to dwell there; so that the soul of man
becomes even heaven, and the habitation of God. Bernard in Cant ser. 27. 2.
Cor. 13.11.
This therefore is the sum of St. Paul's farewell to the Corinthians, Finally,
my brethren, be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of peace shall be with
you.

Again, if we consider the love of God in sending his Son, the love of
Christ in offering up himself in sacrifice for us, the same may be a singular
spur to Charity. For God commends his love toward us, Romans 5.8, 10. 1.
John 4.9, 11.
in that, when we were sinners and enemies, Christ dyed for us. If therefore
God so loved us, should not we love one another? Yea, should not we love our
enemies? When S. Paul makes that earnest suit to the Corinthians for peace and
unity, the g^^und of it is this, 1. Cor. 1.10.
I beseech you brethren; by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. As if he should
say, Though you would cast off all respect of my self, yet let me entreat you
for Christ's sake, that as he has been the Author of Reconciliation between
God and man, so he may be an effectual reconciler of man to man, that it may
be said of him, as it is of Jacob, Genesis 32.28.
Because thou have had power with God, thou shall also prevail with men.

Again, such is the excellency of this virtue, that it graces and seasons all
others. And as all Joseph's brethren were welcome for Beniamins sake, so all
Christian duties are accepted for Charities sake. Otherwise if a man gave all
his goods to the poor, 1. Cor. 13.14.
and his body to the fire; yet if he have not love, it profits him nothing.

Again, whereas other virtues have their period in this life, Chrysostom
says, Charitas inchoatur in mundo, perficitur in coelo: Charity is begun on
e^rth, but perfected in heaven. Whereas others, even the great cardinal
virtues, Faith and Hope, 1. Cor. 13.13.
do vanish, this excellent virtue of Love remains and unites us to God, to
Christ, to the Saints and Angels for ever. Yea, such is the excellency of Love,
that God himself is called Love. Though he be justice, power, wisdom, truth,
and whatsoever else is good: yet it pleases him to be styled especially by
this Name, as Saint John says, 1. Ioh. 3.8.
God is Love. In a word, as the fire from heaven gave approbation to the
ancient Sacrifices, so this feruor charitatis, this fire of Love kindled in our
hearts by the Spirit of God, makes the Sacrament acceptable to God, and
comfortable to our own souls.

And contrarily, as God regarded not the sacrifice, that was offered with
broils and tears of discontent: Mal. 2.13.
so will he not look upon that Sacrament which is received with an
uncharitable heart or hand. He that receives the Sacrament in this kind,
August. sermon. ad infant. de sacram.
(as S. Austin says) receives not the mystery for himself, but a testimony
against himself. Yet behold, men dare, yea do come to the Sacrament with
hearts full of rancour, malice, envy, bitterness: alas, what comfort can such
have by coming? Hierom writes, Hieron. li. 3. super epist. ad Gal.
that when St. John was grown so old that he was feign to be led betwixt two,
and when through feebleness he was able to say no more, yet would he still
ingeminate this exhortation, Filioli, diligite alterutrum: My little children,
love one another. And so say I, my brethren, that you may be worthy partakers
of the blessed Sacrament; Love one another.

Lo, beloved, these are the Anchors you must cast forth, these are the
Interrogatories whereof you must examine your selves. If upon diligent
examination you find in your selves a competent knowledge of those matters and
mysteries before mentioned, a steadfast Faith in Christ Jesus, serious repentance
for your sins, and unfeigned love to your brethren: then need you not to fear
the danger of unworthy receiving, then need you not dread the strict
examination of Almighty God: Yea, then may you offer your selves to his
examination, and say as it is in the Psalm, Psalm. 26.2.
Examine me, O Lord, and prove me, try my reins and my heart. Then may you
come to the Sacrament with cheerfulness, and receive it with comfort; then
shall the Sacrament be a means to build you up in saving grace in this life,
that you may be partakers of eternal glory in the life to come.

A Prayer before the receiving of the Sacrament.
O Eternal GOD, most gracious and loving Father in Jesus Christ, I thy
unworthy servant, do here humble my self, and present my prayers before the
throne of grace, confessing from the ground and bottom of my heart, that I am
a miserable and wretched sinner. If I stood guilty of Adams transgression
only, the same were enough to condemn me: but behold, my own personal
sins are exceeding many and grievous, they are great and heinous, that I have
committed against thee, in thought, word, and deed. I have neglected many
blessed opportunities, whereby I might have glorified thy name, and gained much
comfort to mine own soul: and I have committed many iniquities, the least
whereof were sufficient to plunge me in the gulf of despair. Yea I have
deserved by my manifold sins, to be deprived of all the favors and comforts,
that I have received from thy gracious hands, to taste in a deep measure of
thy heavy indignation in this present life, and to be subject to eternal
condemnation in the life to come.

But this is my comfort, Lord, that thou art a gracious and a merciful God to
them that are truly penitent, and lay hold upon thy Son Christ Jesus with a
lively faith; In regard whereof, I am bold to come unto thee in his Name,
beseeching thee for his sake, to have mercy and compassion upon me, to pardon
and forgive me all my sins, to cleanse me with his blood, and clothe me with
his righteousness. Strengthen, good Lord, my weak and feeble faith, mortify
the corruptions of my vile nature, give me true and unfeigned repentance for all
my transgressions, assist me with thy blessed Spirit agaiast Satan's dangerous
assaults, and the Worlds vain allurements. Yea, sanctify me, I beseech thee,
with that blessed Spirit of thine, in soul, and body, and spirit, that I may
sanctify thy Name in holiness and righteousness all the days of my life.

And forasmuch as thou have ordained the holy Sacrament to be an especial
means of working these and other graces in the hearts and lives of thy
servants; I humbly beseech thee for Christ his sake, that thou will vouchsafe,
both now and at all times to bless this thy holy ordinance to me, and to
prepare me for the worthy receiving of it. Lord open my understanding, that I
may by the eye of faith behold thy dear Son, and my blessed Savior, the
author and matter of this blessed banquet, that my Soul may be employed in the
diligent meditation of these sacred mysteries, that by partaking thereof, I may
find those sweet comforts wherewith my heart may be abundantly refreshed. Lord
make me able, in this holy Sacrament, to b^hold the death and Passion of my
Savior, and in his death and Passion, his wonderful love and compassion; and
that the consideration thereof, may kindle in my heart those excellent graces
of love and zeal to thy glory, and may stir me up to compassion and love to
my brethren. Make room in my heart for the entertaining of Christ, and grant
me grace to receive him into the house of my soul, like the Centurion, humbly,
and yet like the Publican, cheerfully and joyfully: That by this heavenly
food, I may have thy mercies in Christ sealed up unto me, that so I may be
preserved to the glory of thy saving grace, through Jesus Christ my Lord and
only Savior, Amen. Amen.

Thanksgiving after the receiving of the Sacrament.
I Humbly thank thee most gracious God and loving Father, for all thy
blessings and benefits bestowed upon me, who am not worthy the least of all thy
mercies. Thou did elect me to life and glory before the foundations of the
World were laid; thou did create me after thine own Image, whereas thou
might have made me the vilest of thy creatures. And when thine Image was
defaced, thy favors forfetted, and my self become the bondslaue of sin and
Satan; it pleased thee, forth of thy exceeding mercy and compassion, to send
thy Son to be my Savior and Redeemer, and have with him given me all things
belonging to life and godliness. Thou have continually preserved me from those
infinite dangers, into which I have cast my self by the demerit of my manifold
offenses. Thou have let me live in these happy days of grace and peace,
wherein the sight of thy Gospel shines most brightly. Thou have vouchsafed me
many temporal blessings, whereby my life might be cheerful to me, and my
self careful in thy service. But when I remember thy unspeakable love, in
that great gift of thine, the Son of thy love, Christ Jesus: and when I
consider that thou make him mine, and bring him home to my heart, in a
wonderful manner, by participation of the blessed Sacrament, it makes me say
with admiration, What is man, O Lord, that thou art so mindful of him! What
am I, sinful wretch, that thou should vouchsafe to make me partaker of so
great mercies!

And now, O blessed GOD, what shall I render to thee for all thy unspeakable
favors? I have nothing, Lord, but the sacrifice of my unworthy praise and
thanks, which I desire may be perfumed by the merits, and offered up to thee by
the hands of my Savior Christ. I will ever say to my soul (which is all that
I can say,) My soul praise thou the Lord, and all that is within thee praise
his holy Name. Lord make me able and willing, to offer up my self, an holy and
acceptable sacrifice to thee. Lord pardon my great unthankfulness, make me
daily more and more thankful to thee, and give me grace to express my
thankfulness by my obedience; that I may walk worthy of thy mercies, and live
as one that has been brought up in thy house, and fed at thy Table. Lord let
me find the power of thy saving and sanctifying grace, by virtue of thy
blessed Sacrament, whereof through thy mercy I have at this present been made
partaker. Let my Savior be unto me as a good Corrosiue to eat out my
corruptions, that the power of sin may be daily weakened, and the graces of thy
blessed Spirit quickened and strengthened in me: that my affections, being
wayned from the love of this evil world, they may mount up to heaven and
heavenly things: that so in this life I may have fruition of thy favor, and in
the life to come be partaker of everlasting bliss and glory, and that through
the merits and mediation of Jesus Christ, my all-sufficient Savior and
Redeemer. So be it, good Lord. So be it.

A Justification of the gesture of Kneeling, in the Act of receiving the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

ROMANS 14.19. Let us follow after the things which make for peace, and wherewith
we may edify one another.

LONDON, Printed by ELIZ. ALLDE for Robert Allot. 1631.

To those who oppose and dislike the gesture of kneeling in the act of
receiving the Sacrament.
WHen our blessed Savior ascended, he left this legacy to his servants; Ioh.
14.27.
My peace I leave with you, Pacem dedit iturus, pacem dabit venturus. Aug. in
Ioh. tra. 77.
my peace I give you. At his departure he bequeathed to his Church peace
spiritual, and at his return, he will give to it peace eternal. And for
better conservation of this rich legacy, he gave the blessed Sacrament, as a
badge and bond of unity. Is it not therefore lamentable to see this rich
legacy neglected, and that sacred ordinance, which should be the bond, become
the bane of our peace? But behold, my brethren, as it is the excellent work of
God, to bring light out of darkness, and good out of evil: so is it the
malicious endeavor of Satan, to bring darkness out of light, and evil out of
goodness. For he being the first peace-breaker in the World, labors
continually to vex the Church of God, by raising up the storms of contention
about the blessed Sacrament, not only between opposites, who differ in
substance, but even amongst brethren, only for matter of circumstance. And
albeit our gracious Sovereign, who (if ever any a mere man) may fitly be
styled a King of peace, has by excellent courses seconded that great
Peacemaker; yet alas, through men's contentious dispositions, his just
expectation has been frustrate, and his worthy endeavors have been too
fruitless; which might discourage any man for entering into these lists: yet
when I see Hebrews striving together, I cannot be silent, but say to him that
does the wrong, Why fmitest thou thy fellow? Exo. 2.13.
Not forth of any pragmaticall disposition, or love to contention, as all that
know me can witness, but forth of a heart unfeignedly affecting the peace of
Sion; and desirous by appealing to your better cogitations to effect it. That
worthy fact of Master Calvin has ever affected me much, who seeing some take
offense at the Wafer cakes used in the Church of Geneua, Beza in vita Caluini.
persuaded them not to raise up any contention about that which was
indifferent, and shall not I do so in a matter of like nature? Bethink your
selves, my Brethren, what distractions these divisions do cause; and can these
divisions be without great thought of heart, Judge. 5.15.
whilst we stand like Cato and Scipio in the Senate, with mihi videtur, mihi non
videtur? The one approues, the other reiects the ordinances of the Church. The
godly are grieved, the weak are troubled, the wicked are strengthened; yea, as
Nazian speaks, Cur hosti co^muni gladios porrigimus? Nazi aduer. Eunoni
Oration. Non quia vera, sed quia sua est.
we by our contentions, do put a sword into the hand of our common enemy.
Remember, I pray you, that (as Saint Austin says) There is some man who
defends his opinion, not because it is true, but because it is his own; for so
self-love does draw men into error. Consider that opinions, though grounded on
error, through time become strong resolutions.

Bethink your selves carefully what holds you in opposition. Is it a doubt,
that yielding may disparage your persons, or discredit your Ministry? Consider
that the Ancients have never gained more honor, then in retracting their
errors. Or is it zeal to Gods glory? Consider then, I pray you, how this
affection has transported diverse, very excellent and eminent members of the
Church of God, and this will make you look rather how safely then how speedily
you sail. Ponder I beseech you seriously, how many faithful and famous
servants of God (yea some of which have laid down their lives for the
testimony of Jesus) have advisedly and willingly yielded to this ordinance of
the Church. And has it not some smacke of presumption, to think that all
others judgments have been clowded, and the light of truth has shined only
upon you?

Suppose that these private opinions may seem evident truths in our own
conceits, yet have they not found the weight of probability in the judgment of
others. Yea, if ie were certain, that the gesture of kneeling were unfit in
the act of receiving; consider whether such a circumstantiall point should be
esteemed of that moment, as worthy to disturb the peace of that Church, where
the Gospel is so soundly preached, and the Sacraments so duly administered?

In answering long discourses I intended breuity; in regard whereof, I have
contracted the arguments, Neque versutis disputationibus opprobrijsque
turbemini. Hicr. in Phillip. 1. Si december modo persuasi fuerint; si vnus, nonne
nobis hic sufficit ad consolationem. Chrysostom. de Laz. Con. 1.
and shaped their answers accordingly. Yet what seemed to have weight, I have
pondered and answered, with as much plainness as I could, even the vulgar. I
doubt not but I shall hear from some, what Moses did from the Hebrew, Who made
thee a Judge over us? But Saint Ierom has taught me, not to regard subtle
disputes or reproaches. My conscience bears me witness, that I have in this
matter dealt sincerely. And if I should be smitten with the tongues and pens
of many, yet the reducing of a few that err, and satisfying of some that
doubt, shall be a sufficient comfort to me. Non sunt litigandi is^a sed orandi
^e pora. D. Perkinsus. ^pi. ad Lect. Harmo. Bibl.
It is an excellent speech of a worthy servant of Christ, Prayers are fitter
for these times then Controversies. I would to God we were all effectually
persuaded of the truth hereof: for so might Controversies be easily decided,
oppositions be turned into unity, contention into amity, and those lamentable
digladiations which afflict the Church, into the precept and practice of piety
and charity; which blessing of peace, the Lord in his good time grant unto his
Church.

Now those who are no disputers, but only (being misled) do dislike the
gesture of kneeling, I earnestly entreat, that they will consider, what
uncertain Oracles and unconstant guides they follow. For some of them have
supplycated for sitting, as a gesture fit to set forth rest, and the
accomplishment of Ceremonies in Christ. Some have urged standing, as better
agreeing with the Eucharist, it being a Sacrament of Thanksgiving. Others
again have condemned both the name of Eucharist, and the gesture of standing;
and have disputed for sitting: because it consorts with our Coheire-ship. In
which conceits, this is very obseruable, that they all have agreed, only in
opposing the Churches practice, and in crossing their own Positions, which
disclaim all significant ceremonies. For each of them ties significancie to
his gesture.

The due consideration whereof, may be a strong motive to every modest and
ingenuous Christian, to conform himself to the Churches unity and uniformity
in this matter of indifferency.

A Justification of the Gesture of kneeling in the act of receiving the
Sacrament.
IN the handling of this question, I will first give reason for the lawful and
necessary use of this gesture; and after that I will answer some arguments,
that are made to the contrary.

And for the better proceeding herein, I will first show, that the Church has
power and authority to impose it. Secondly, that being so imposed, it is to be
embraced.

For the first point I reason thus.

All things indifferent which are to be used in the service of God, are in the
disposition of the Church.

The gesture in the Act of receiving the Sacrament is a thing indifferent, and
to be used in the service of God.

Therefore the gesture in the Act of receiving the Sacrament, is in the
disposition of the Church.

The proposition is the general judgment of Divines, both ancient and
modern. So that to spend time in proof thereof, were to set up a candle to
help the light of the Sun at noone.

And the assumption is also as plain, by the general description of things
indifferent.

For, Those things which have neither precept, prohibition, nor express
determination in the Scriptures, are indifferent.

But the gesture in the act of receiving the Sacrament, has neither precept,
prohibition, nor express determination in the Scriptures. Therefore the
gesture in the act of receiving the Sacrament is indifferent.

The very quotation of learned Divines for proof of this proposition, and the
other in the former argument, would fill many sheets of paper. Yea these
things are so general and evident truths, His first reply page 18.
that Master Cartwright himself says, I know no man that ever denied, that
the Church may make orders, in such things as are not specified, and precisely
determined in the Word. In which words he intimates what are things
indifferent; namely such things as are not specified, and precisely determined
in the Word: and then, that the Church may determine or make orders concerning
the same: and so acknowledges all that goes before.

Now for further proof of the last assumption, I confidently affirm, and
shall, I doubt not, evidently manifest, that there is neither precept,
prohibition, nor precedent in the Scriptures concerning the gesture in the Act
of receiving.

And albeit it were sufficient to prove the matter of indifferency, that there
is no precept, prohibition, or precise determination thereof (as Master
Cartwright speaks:) yet because the Institution of Christ is so much in every
ones mouth, I will make it evident by the Scriptures, that nothing herein is
determined, so much as by any practice or precedent of our Savior, or his
servants the Apostles.

If it be objected that learned men writing in defense of kneeling, have let it
pass by way of concession, that Christ sat at the Sacrament:

To this I answer, that peradventure they have not so seriously considered all
the series of the sacred story. Or it may be they have not very carefully
regarded it, knowing that if Christ's sitting were granted, yet it does not
enforce any necessity of imitation, Page 223. Dr. Reynolds his Conference with
Heart.
as afterward shall appear.

But for my own part, as a learned man, when the Papists urge Peter's exercise
and resignation of Episcopal jurisdiction at Rome, does press them to prove
that Peter was Bishop of Rome.

And as a reverend Bishop in an acute allusion, Reu. Epis. Eliens. Tort. Torti.
whilst the Romanists dispute, whether the Pope has temporal power directly
or indirectly, calls upon them to prove that he has any such temporal power
at all: So I say, that they who urge an imitation of Christ's sitting at the
Sacrament, should first prove that he sat, which (like the former) they shall
never be able to do. And this shall appear by the examination of those
passages of Scripture which mention the Institution.

First St. Paul, 1. Cor. 13.23.
who handles the doctrine of the Sacrament at large, has not one word
concerning any gesture.

Again, all the Evangelists, Mat. 26.20. Mat. 14.17. Luke 22.14. Ioh. 13.12,
etc.
though their testimony be produced, are utterly silent in this matter. For,
whereas they mention Christ's sitting down with his Disciples, that was at the
Passover.

This shall be evident to any man that looks diligently into the story. Two of
the Evangelists, namely, Matthew and Mark, are very like in relating the
celebration of the Passover, and the institution of the Supper, so that to
have showed what one says, is to show what both say. Saint Matthew, chap. 26.
having mentioned Christ's sending of his Disciples to prepare a place for the
Passover, Mat. 26.19.
says verse 19. And the Disciples did as Jesus had commanded them, and made
ready the Passover. So when even was come, he sat down with the twelve. And
as they did eat, he said unto them, Verily I say unto you, that one of you
shall betray me. And they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of
them to say, Is it I Master? And he answered and said, He that dippeth his hand
with me in the dish, he shall betray me.

Here it is evident that this sitting down is at the Passover. For it was
when the evening was come, according to the ordinance of Almighty God, (...)
Mat. 26.20. 1. Cor. 11.23. (...).
Exodus 12. Leuit. 23. and not in the night, at which time the Supper was
instituted.

Again, it was at that eating wherein one dipped with him in the dish: which
must needs be at the Passover, the Supper yielding no occasion of dipping:
for our Savior delivered to every one the bread and the cup severally.
Therefore a learned man says truly, Piscat. in Mat. 26.20.
They are very much deceived, who think that the Evangelist here speaks not
of she Passover, but of the Supper.

Now thought this might seem sufficient: yet S. Luke makes it plain; Luke
22.13, 15.
for he says, After the Passover was made ready, when the hour was come, he
sat down, and the twelve Apostles with him; then he said unto them, I have
earnestly desired to eat this Passover with you. Here (to let pass that this
sitting down was with the twelve, which could not be at the Supper, Judas
being sent away presently after he received the sop, which was at the
Passover) a double circumstance of time does euict, Ioh. 13.30.
that it was at the Passover. For first it is said, When the hour (meaning the
time prescribed by Almighty God) was come, Christ sat down, which cannot be
understood of Christ's last Supper: for there was no direct time appointed for
institution or celebration thereof; but the Passover was by divine Institution
to be celebrated in the evening of the foureteenth day of the month Nisan.
Secondly, the Evangelist says, that when Christ sat down, then he said, I
have desired to eat this Passover with you. Whereby it appears that it was
not the Eucharist, but the Passover that he had in hand presently upon his
sitting down. And in the verses next following, he shows the celebration of
the Passover, and afterward speaks of the Institution of the Supper, without
mention of the gesture.

The fourth place alleged for Christ's sitting at the Supper, is the thirteenth
of John: which is a place indeed very excellent to confirm what has been
delivered concerning the narrations of the other Evangelists. In this Chapter
there is mention made of Christ's sitting down twice: his first sitting is
intimated verse. 4. his second is plainly expressed, verse. 12. But what? at the
Supper of the Lord? Surely no, but at the Passover. For evidence whereof I will
show the manner of the Jews celebrating of the Passover, as it is set down
by him who has collected it from Paulus Burgensis a very learned man; John 13.
Beza in Mat. 26.20.
from Emanuel Tremelius a Jew by birth, but through Gods mercy a learned
Christian by education; and from Josephus Scaliger (besides all other excellent
learning) a profound Antiquary, and it is thus.

At the time appointed for the Passover, there did use to meet at the least,
ten in a chamber, and there sitting, after a certain fashion, did eat a Lamb
roasted, with vleauened bread; which being done, they rose from table and washed
their feet: and after that sat down again to an after-supper, as it were a
second course, whereat they had unleavened bread, and salets of Succory and
Lettice, mixed with a certain kind of sauce. The Master of the family divided
the bread into two parts, and first he blessed the one, saying, Blessed art
thou, O Lord God, in the eating of unleavened bread. And the other part (which
he had put under a napkin) he brought forth at the end of the banquet, and
dividing it into so many parts as there were persons, delivered it and said,
This is the bread of sorrow which our Fathers did eat in Egypt: Paschatizet.
Whosoever has need, let him come and take the Passover. And after that,
taking the Cup, he said; Blessed art thou, O Lord, who have created the fruit
of the Vine: and so it was delivered from one to another. After all which
things finished, they sung diverse Psalms, and so departed.

In this manner of celebrating the Passover, we may observe diverse
particulars. First, that our Saviors first sitting down, intimated in the
fourth verse, was for the eating of the Paschall Lamb.

Secondly, that his next sitting down, mentioned in the 12. and 28. verses,
was to the after-supper of the Salets and sauce.

Thirdly, that it was at this second Supper our Savior gave Judas the soppe
(for there were no soppes at the Supper) which having received, he went forth
immediately, verse 30.

Fourthly, that there was a great intermission between the Passover and the
Supper, and so there might be in the mean time any change of the gesture.

Now in all this discourse, St. John has not one word concerning the
institution of the Supper, and consequently nothing of the gesture: but the
sitting mentioned by him, does directly belong to the Passover.

Object. But we read in the twelf^h of Exodus, Exo. 12.11.
that standing at the Passover was by divine institution; for there the Lord
says, Thus shall you eat it, with your loins gi^ded, your shoes on your
feet, and your staves in your hand, and ye shall eat it in haste. Now if our
Savior, who came to fulfill all righteousness, Mat. 3.15.
and to make satisfaction for us, should fail in the least ordinance of
almighty God, miserable were our condition, therefore it is not like that he
sat.

Vt Iansen. Concord. in Euan.
To which I might answer, that as there is no express mention specified, so
there can no necessary iniunction of standing be deduced from that place: only
the other circumstances of haste, may seem to require a correspondence of
gesture. But I rather assent to them, Haec enim quatuor ad istud tantum
pascapertine^t quod in E^ypto celebra^^^. Jun. in Exodus 12.11.
who acknowledge that standing was in that place enjoined: yet the same was a
temporary iniunction, and (like diverse other circumstances) was but for that
night only wherein the children of Israel departed out of Egypt. And this,
says Beza, Quod summo consensu omnes Haebraeorum doctores testantur. Beza in
Mat. 26
All the Hebrew Doctors do testify with singular consent.

Thus our Savior might lawfully sit at the Passover, as the Evangelists do
show he did. But that he sat at the institution of the Supper, they show not;
Neither can it by any passage of Scripture be proved. Therefore, foreasmuch as
there is neither precept, or precedent, concerning any gesture to be used in
the act of receiving the Sacrament, and consequently it being a matter
indifferent, the disposing thereof is in the power of the Church, who has made
choice of kneeling, as the fittest for that holy action.

It is objected that kneeling at the Communion is a part of Gods wgrship,
Dispute page 155.
and therefore it is not indifferent.

To this I answer, Zanch. de externo cul. qu. 4. These.
that the parts of Gods worship are either essential or accidental, as learned
Divines do aptly and generally distingush. Now the accidental are not simply
and properly of the worship of God, Bez. Confess. cap. 5. sec. 18. simpliciter
and per se, etc.
as the essential are.

It is true that the essential parts of Gods worship are so necessary, that
they may neither be abrogated, omitted, or altered, upon any pretense
whatsoever. As for instance, Whosoever neglects the inuocating of God, or
inuocates any, either St. or Angel, sins against God, because he fails in
an essential point of Gods worship: As Calvin Inst. 4.10. sec. 30. And Aug.
quaest. vartar. ad Simp. li. 2. q. 4. Non est perscriptum quomodo corpus
constituatur ad orandum, etc. As they are set down in page 1. For so we do in
time, place persons, etc.
but for an accidental it is otherwise. For albeit to kneel in prayer, is a
part of Gods worship, yea a very extraordinary ceremony; yet being accidental,
it is of it self a gesture indifferent, so that it may without sin be either
used or forborne. And so in the Lords Supper, if we add to, or alter any of
the causes of constitution, we transgress against Christ; but if we shall in
some circumstance either vary from the institution, or, where nothing is
prescribed, appoint some outward ceremony for decency, a^ in the matter of
gesture, the same may be done without offense.

If any thing (says Zanchius) be altered in the worship of GOD, Zanch. vbi
supra.
so it be not a thing commanded of God, or be added, so it be not as
essential, but accidental and indifferent, for comeliness, order, or
edification, we cannot say that therefore some part of Gods worship is changed,
or some other erected.

Peradventure it will be further objected against the last assumption, that,
albeit the gesture of kneeling in the act of receiving, is not particularly,
and expressly forbidden, or prescribed by any direct precedent or example of
Scripture; yet by way of consequence, and by general Apostolical rules, for
the use of things indifferent it is. For, whereas the Apostle requires all
things to be done according to comeliness, order, and edification, and
consequently to the glory of God, this gesture of kneeling, in the act of
receiving, seems uncomely, scandalous, and Idolatrous.

Of this see more for answer to the 4. Argument.
To the first of which I answer: These men, whilst they take upon them to
determine of comeliness and order, do that which is very disorderly and
uncomely, in thrusting their sickles into other men's haruests. For it is not
the office of every private man to judge of comeliness, and dispose of order
in the public affairs of Church or Commonwealth: but to them it does belong
who have places of government therein, and the spirits of the Prophets must be
subject to the Prophets. 1. Cor. 14.32.
We find it true in experience, even about this particular action, that so
many men, so many opinions: One likes sitting best, another standing, a third
kneeling. Now if every one shall in this case assume unto himself the liberty
of choice, what order, what comeliness shall we see in our assemblies? yea,
what confusion will there not be? and forth of this confusion, what
dissentions, judge you, are like to arise? so that this cannot be to the glory
of God, who is not the God of contention and confusion, but the God of peace
and order. 1. Cor. 14.33.


And if, for the avoiding of our own partial conceits, standers by shall
judge between us in this matter: hear what Master Calvin says concerning
comeliness in the use of things indifferent. Illud nobis decorumerit, etc.
Calvin Insti. lib. 4. cap. 10. sec. 28. and 29.
That (says he) shall seem most comely to us, which shall be fit for
procuring of reverence to the holy mysteries, be an exercise apt to show and
stir up Piety, and an ornament to the action in hand. Now, he will be judged
either senseless or very froward, who will not acknowledge, that kneeling is
fitter to stir up reverence to the holy mysteries, to move to piety and
devotion, and is a better ornament to the holy action in hand then sitting is.

And Master Beza acknowledges, Beza epi. 12.
that it has a show of pious reverence. In regard whereof, it shall become you
well to embrace that gesture, which the learned both abroad and at home do
judge to be most comely.

2. Concerning scandal: It is true, that even the best actions of the holiest
persons, through men's corruptions, Mat. 13.57 John 6.61, etc.
are many times subject to scandal, as the stories of our Savior do
abundantly show; and therefore no marvel, if the actions of men not so
worthily qualified, do in the use of indifferent things meet with the like
success.

But here I would demand of them who plead for sitting, whether that gesture
can be free from this exception? If you take scandal for offending and
grieuing others, As Romans 14.13, 15.
or for causing them to offend, by not coming to Christ, or by doing any thing
against their Conscience; certainly sitting cannot be without scandal. For as
you shall have many who esteeming that an irreverent gesture, will be offended
thereat; so may they also by example be drawn to the practice thereof against
their own conscience, or by dislike thereof be kept from the Communion, and so
run into a double scandal. Now what must be the Moderator in this action?
The answer will be, Charity; for, 1. Cor. 8.9.
I must not offend my weak brother. It is true; but behold here a double bond,
that is, Charity and Duty: For as Charity toward my brother binds me, so does
Duty to my Prince, Romans 13.5.
to whom every soul must be subject, even for conscience sake, and likewise to
the Church, 1. Cor. 10.13. Vt Beza e^i. 24.
to which I am in especial warned to give no scandal. Yea, here is a kind of
necessity, by reason of the Churches determination, and the Princes imposition,
whereby you ought to acknowledge, that your arbitrary act is limited. Quauis
quod obtruditur, scandalum assert: quid tamen per se verbo Dei no^ repugnat,
co^cedi potest, maxim vbi mayor numarus peruine^t Calvin epist. 379.
And further this bond of Charity is on this side strengthened by a
circumstance, which in this case Master Calvin accounts very material. For I
assure my self, that in the most Congregations of this Kingdom, where one
will be offended with kneeling, ten at the least will be offended with sitting.
If those who are irregular, would lay by singularity, and teach their followers
Saint Austins direction (which also agrees with S. Paul's) for preventing of
scandal: Aug. in Psalm. 30. 1. Cor. 13.5. P. Mar. epist ad. Hooper. Call.
Instit. 4.10.32.
Have no evil conceit of thy brother. If they would admonish them that these
things are indifferent, as P. Martyr exhorts, and Calvin also requires
faithful Pastors to do: Nay, if they would not teach them to be uncharitable
in censuring rashly and sinisterly the constitutions of the Church, and the
actions of their brethren; these scandals would easily be prevented and
removed. In the mean time this should be every Christians resolution, If
others will be offended with me for doing that which in it self is
indifferent, and being enjoined by lawful authority, is in some sort
necessary, I will pity them, but not run into the like error with them.

And thirdly, for the crime of Idolatry imputed to those that kneel in the act
of receiving, there can be nothing more absurd. For we neither worship any
imaginary Deity in stead of God, or worship God in any Image, As Zanch.
describes Idolatry.
nor do we give religious worship to any creature existing by nature or Art,
either simply or respectively, which are the grossest kinds of Idolatry.
Indelatus cultus, as the School men speak.
Neither is this our worship which we tender to God, unfit for his Majesty, or
unbeseeming the holy action in hand. For if the children of Israel, upon report
of their approaching deliverance from their corporal thraldom, by the
ministry of Moses, Exo. 4.31.
bowed down and worshipped; shall not we (when we receive an excellent pledge
of our spiritual deliverance, by the Death and Passion of Jesus Christ,)
humble our selves, and upon our knees offer up the sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving?

Thus the gesture of kneeling, being most consonant to comeliness and order,
of it self not scandalous, and neither of it self, nor by our abuse
idolatrous, but only orderly and pious, and consequently tending to
edification, and to the glory of God; It is not contrary to those Apostolical
rules, whereby things indifferent are to be guided and warranted.

Now having showed that the Scriptures yield neither particular precept,
prohibition or precedent, concerning any gesture in the act of receiving, so
that the ordering of that circumstance is left to the disposition of the
Church; and that the Church in appointing kneeling, has not transgressed
against the general rules of Scripture, concerning things indifferent; It
follows directly, that the gesture of kneeling, being in it own nature
indifferent, and lawfully enjoined by the Church, every one that lives under
the government of that Church, Quod neque contra fidem neque contra bonos mores
iniungitur, etc. Aug. ep. 118. cap. 2.
is bound to submit himself unto it.

Saint Austin says, That which is enjoined, being neither against faith nor
good manners, is to be accounted indifferent, and to be observed in respect of
their society amongst whom we live.

Reformed Churches do acknowledge, These. Bell. 3. Ger. Art. 6.
that Things of themselves indifferent, being enjoined, do in some sort change
their nature.

And Master Beza says expressly, Adiaphora. quando praecipiu^tur, etc. Bez.
epi. 24.
that Things indifferent, when they are commanded, are after a sort necessary.

Many such Positions might be alleged forth of the best hoth ancient and
modern Writers, neither are their reasons less forcible, then their
assertions are clear. Horribilem (...) in ecclesia pareret. D.P. Paraeus in
Romans 14.5. Quantum rixarum semen futura est earum rerum confusio. Calu. Jnstit.
lib. 4. cap. 10. sec. 32.


D. Paraeus says, If men should be suffered in matters indifferent to do what
every one list, it would bring forth horrible disorder in the Church.

And Master Calvin says as truly, that confusion in the use of such things,
must needs be the seed of exceeding great contentions, whilst it should be
lawful for every one to do what he list.

Sect. 31.
And in that very Chapter he reproues those, who either arrogantly reject, or
negligently omit such ceremonies as have been ordained by the Church.

Therefore as it was an excellent work of God in the Creation, to remove that
strife which made a Tohu and a Bohu in the works of nature: Hanc. litem Deus
and melior natura diremit.
so is it an excellent work of Gods servants, who have the hand of authority to
reform the like deformity and confusion in the works of Grace.

To conclude, if the Church may upon so good ground of reason dispose of things
indifferent, what reason has any one forth of a private spirit to oppose or
despise her authority? If a child disobeying his natural mother in a matter
indifferent, do sin against God, how can they clear themselves from
guiltiness, who disobey their spiritual Mother, which has brought them forth
unto Christ, and nourished them with the sincere milk of the Word, and with
the spiritual food of the blessed Sacrament? And I wish every one that fears
God unfeignedly, to ponder these things seriously.

It is thought very severe, that the Canons of our Church do enjoin all so
strictly to kneel, and lay the Censure of suspension upon the Minister, who
shall deliver the Sacrament to them that do not. Far be it from me to
exasperate or animate authority in any strict course against irregularity, Vt
ad religionis ac disciplinae simul capita iuraretur. Both the Ministers and
people were sworn both to their doctrine and discipline. Beza in vita Calvin.
I will leave that to their wisdoms who have place of government. But those
that do challenge our Church of severity, let me entreat them to cast their
eyes upon the Church of Geneua, and there they shall find far greater
strictnes and severity, (then our Church does practice) in the enforcing of
their Constitutions. And I would propose this to their due considerations; If
the power of Church-gouernment were in their hands, whether they would permit
any to execute the office of a Minister, who would deliver the Sacrament to
them that kneel? And in those Congregations that stand, whether they would
admit any to the Sacrament that should sit? I assure my self they would not.
Why then should the restraint of that exorbitancy seem severe in others, which
themselves would practice? Yea, should a famous Church in her many worthy
members give place to a few private persons?

Having briefly given reason for the gesture of Kneeling in the act of
receiving, it remains in the next place, that I answer some arguments that
oppose it, In a book entitled, A dispute upon the question of kneeling in the
act of receiving the Sacramental bread and wine.
which (for any thing I know) remain yet unanswered Haec enim mea responsio
long ante responsiones Reverend. Episcoporu^^ Reffens. and Ces^^ens. exarata
f^it.
.

There are three arguments which have great resemblance both in the proposition
and prosecution of them. The first is this, I deny the Antecede^t.
Kneeling suits not with the person of a coheyre, therefore it is unlawful.
And why does it not? Answer is made, that kneeling is a carriage whereby we
acknowledge our selves to be in a condition of inferiority and disfellowship
with Christ: Disput. pa. 7. Disput. pa. The like is page 30. Here I deny the
Argument.
whereas sitting is such a position of body, as argues not subjection and
humility, but rather equality and familiarity, therefore kneeling suits not
with the person of a coheyre. Here are in my understanding, strange positions
and reasons against kneeling. I should rather have reasoned quite contrary,
thus; We are in a condition of inferiority and disfellowship with Christ, we
owe subjection and humility to Christ, therefore we should kneel rather then
sit at receiving of the Sacrament.

It is true: we are coheyres with Christ, yet this imports not any equality.
Christ is the Son of God by nature, we by adoption and grace: Ambrose. Heb.
6.17.
Christ is heir ex propria dignitate, twe ex promissione. Heaven is his by an
eternal right, our inheritance is his purchase; Hab. 1.2.
he is the heir of all things, happy are we if we can obtain the meanest
mansions in the Kingdom of heaven. Ioh. 14.2.
Which way soever we cons^der Christ, either in his person, actions, or
offices, we shall find him far our superior, and consequently our selves in
a condition of inferiority with him. Yea do we not acknowledge him to be the
head of his whole Church? Ephe. 5.^^.23.
and that not only as it receives from him sense and motion in the course of
Christianity, but as it owes him subjection also, in regard of his so^eraignty.
Aug. in ^sal. 29.
And if the natural head be the most noble of all the parts, how exeellent
then is he who is the Head of the ^hole Church?

It is true that Christ has advanced our nature by his Incarnation and
Passion: but that must rather humble us, then so puff us up, that we should
account our selves his fellows.

And lest the white feathers of our adoption might Swan-like make us ^well, yet
the black feet of our manifold corruptions may justly deiect us. The greater
favors and honors Christ affords us, the more it becomes us to be humble.

Thus the blessed Virgin, Luke 1.28.29.
when the Angel delivered that honorable Embassage from the GOD of heaven,
was not lifted up in pride, but answered in an humble fashion, Behold the
handmaid of the Lord. And John the Baptist, who had the honor to be the
instrument of our Saviors inauguration at his Baptism, Luke 3.16.
how humbly does he acknowledge: His shoo latched I am not worthy to unloose!
So, if Christ shall vouchsafe to esteem us his servants, (as the prodigal son
entreated his father) we are blessed and happy, though we do not account our
selves his fellows. Luke 15.19. Phil. 2.6.
It was no robbery in Christ to be equal to God, but it is no less then
Luciferian pride in us, to make our selves equal to Christ.

Ob. But when we come to the Sacrament, Disp. pa. 10.
we are to act the persons of coheyres, so that this humble deportment cannot
then become us.

Resp. Yes surely, very well. Our Christian duties must not be like Pharaohs
kine that ate up one another, but like the Cherubins that looked one upon
another, and both to the Mercy-seate. Many virtues, though different in
themselves, are so entwined, that they consort very w^ll in the same action, as
St. Austin has observed in the Centurion, and the Publican, Luke 19. Mat. 8.
Aug. ep. 118. cap. 3. And it is said that the devout women departed from the
Sepulcher with fear and great joy. Mat. 28.8. Romans 8.15.
one receiving Christ with much joy, the other with great humility; Ambo
saluatorem honorificantes diuerso, and quasi contrario modo; Each of them
honoring our Savior in a diverse, and as it were a contrary manner. And do we
not act the persons of coheyres when we pray? for we speak familiarly to God
as to our Father: yea, it is the spirit of Adoption that makes us cry Abba
Father, at those times when upon our knees we become humble petitioners to our
gracious God for his favors. Thus joy, humility, and confidence man all
concur in the very same act: yea, what duty is exempt^d from humility, which
must balance all our actions? When we hear the Word of God, we must bring
trembling souls; Esa. 66.5.
when we pray, it becomes us well to prostrate our selves before the Thr^ne of
Grace. And will not the like humble demeanor become us when we come to the
Table of the Lord? yes, and to confess there upon our knees, As it is in the
Communion book.
That we are not worthy to gather up the crumbs that are under his Table.

kneeling crosses the assurance of our coheirship with Christ, I deny the
Antecede^t.
and therefore it is unlawful.

Resp. That this proposition is untrue, I appeal to the experience of
thousands, who do humbly kneel at the receiving of the Sacrament. For my
self, I have received it diversely, According to St. Ambrose direction. Aug.
epi. 86. and epi. 118. cap. 2.
as the practice of the present congregations have given occasion, and I thank
God comfortably. Yet have I received it with as much fruit and comfort when I
kneeled, as when I used other gestures. And I am confident that those who use
to receive it sitting, do gain no more assurance of their Coheirship, then
those who receive it kneeling.

But let us examine the reasons of this position, the first whereof is this: It
directs our hearts to an apprehension of disfellowship with Christ in our
future estate of glory represented at the Lords Table, I deny the consequence
of this reason.
by reason that it conuinceth the performers thereof to be of an inferior, and
vnfellow-like condition with Christ: Ergo, it crosses our assurance, and
therefore it is unlawful.

To this I answer, that there is great difference between our Coheyrship, and
equality of fellowship with Christ. For though we be now Coheyres with Christ
through hope; Tit. 3.7.
yet do we challenge no fellowship of equality with him, but acknowledge our
due subjection to him, as our Lord.

And when we shall hereafter be in actual and real possession of our
inheritance, I hope Christ shall challenge that privilege, Genesis 42.40.
In the Kings throne I will be above thee, yea far above all principality,
and might, and domination, etc. Ephe. 1.20.
So that if kneeling be a bar to our equality and fellowship (as well it may)
yet is it not any hinderance to the apprehension of our Coheyreship with
Christ, which is assured to us of our blessed Savior by participation of the
blessed Sacrament, without consideration, intention, or institution of any
gesture. For it is a groundless conceit, to hold that Christ intended the
gesture of sitting as a means to give assurance of our coheyr-ship; and it
crosses their opinions who will have no gesture, or other ceremony in the
service of God to be significant.

Another reason why kneeling hinders the assurance of our Coheyreship, is this,
It does not.
Because it diuerteth our hearts from meditating on the death of Christ; for we
cannot at the same time meditate and tender to God a worthy sacrifice of
prayer. This proposition is not true. Dispute page 20.


I answer, that these are not such opposite employments (as they are called)
that they cannot stand together. For, if intention and prayer may concur, yea
ought not to be separated, why may not meditation also which has great
affinity with the same? Yea such correspondence there is, (rather then
opposition) between meditation and prayer, that they are both comprehended in
one Hebrew word. (...) Which Ge. 24.63 some translate, to meditate, some to
pray.
And surely it seems strange to me, it should be held impossible, that at the
same instant a man should meditate upon the benefits of Christ's Passion, and
pray that he may have an interest therein and benefit thereby.

That This proposition is not true.
it does debar us from partaking with Christ of the privileges and
prerogatives of this Table, The argument employed in these words is bad.
because it debarreth us from sociall admitance and entertainment, This
argument is worse.
in regard we are not at that time and act, of an equal and fellow-like
condition with Christ at his Table Dispute page 30.
.

For answer to this: First I may truly say, that this reason is grounded upon
pride, and has affinity with the former, which suppose, that we can neither be
guests, nor Coheyres with Christ, except we make our selves his equals But
irregularity had need to reconcile it self, before it impugn the
constitutions of our Church. For this argument, which by no means will admit
the Lords Supper to have resemblance with a running banquet, condemns the
manner of administering in diverse irregular co^gregations, where the Sacrament
is received standing. Yea it requires things impossible; namely, that this be a
set banquet of the greatest solemnity, Disput. pa. 26.
with guests sitting thereat. For how can this be performed with any such
solemnity, where a thousand are to receive in a morning? Together at one time
they cannot, because it is impossible to have a table to receive them all,
neither can they do it successively, except they shall sit down and step up
again presently, and that has small show of solemnity in it.

Secondly, I answer, that civil Tables yields not these supposed privileges,
and prerogatives of an equal and fellow-like condition to every Guest. ^f a
poor man were invited to a Noble-mans Table, would not an humble carriage
beseem him? And could he, without gross presumption, entertain a thought of
equality, and fellowlike condition with the Inuitant? Yet must we, poor
wretches, by this manner of reasoning, hold our selves wronged and debased,
except upon our entertainment at Christ's Table, we assume presumptuous thoughts
of an equal and fellow-like condition with him the King of Kings.

Thirdly, it is considerable, that this holy Table and Banquet do differ from
others which are merely civil, neither do they yield us those privileges
that the civil do.

At civil banquets, being at Table with men of worth, it is ciuility to put on
our hats, but not seemly to do so at this holy Banquet.

Again, when we are at a civil table, it is a common liberty and privilege,
for a Guest to take meat, and carue to himself (an action of more moment then
a Gesture:) but it is not so at this holy Table, where every man must receive,
only what is delivered to him by the hand of another: neither may he refuse to
take and eat what is delivered him; which comes too short of that liberty we
have at a civil table.

And whereas this sociall sitting is urged, as an essential privilege of the
Lords Table, it may seem strange, that till of late it was never so esteemed,
nor held so much as any whit material. For whereas we find plain precedents
As namely for kneeling: Chrysostom. ad Popu. Antioch. ho. 61. Ambros. de Spiri. and
li. 3.12. Aug. in Psalm. 98.5. And the Disputer produces testimonies for the
gesture of stand^ng.
in the ancient Writers for practice of other Gestures, I suppose it would be a
troublesome task, to find amongst them any one evident Record for the Gesture
of Sitting at the Sacrament.

All these three Propositions are denied.
1. Repugnant to the Law of Nature. 2. because it is repugnant to Decency: 3.
being no gesture for a Table of repast, and therefore is unlawful.

For answer whereunto I might first distinguish between a civil and a sacred
Table, and show that they require not correspondence of all comportments, as
before I showed. But it is obseruable, that Nature has not prescribed any such
particular Table Gesture, as Sitting, Standing, or kneeling, at our meat. We
know that the Muscouites neither have any Table, nor do sit at their meat, as
we do. And we read that the Jews leaned, so that their Gesture was nearer
Lying, Posset hod^e id videri purum decoru^, Calvin in Ioh. 13.63.
then Sitting. Now these Gestures, in our conceits, seem very indecent (as M.
Calvin has observed concerning the Gesture of the Jews) because they are
dissonant from ours: Yet far be it from us to say they are repugnant to the
Law of Nature; for so we should tax our Savior and his servants for that
they could not justify. Neither may we fitly say these Gestures are indecent,
except we be content that they shall likewise censure ours, which no doubt
seem so to them. And if it were granted, that kneeling at a table of common
Repast, were in all men's judgments indecent, yet can it not be so concluded
for our kneeling at the Lords Table, where we are to esteem our selves rather
Beggars then Benchers. Qui nisi quod ipsi faciunt, nihii rectum aestimant.
But there are some (as St. Austin says) who think nothing good but what they
do themselves. If the more general judgment and practice of men, both wise,
learned, and religious, might prevail, I assure my self, the Gesture of
Kneeling would be accounted Decent; and the best reason that can be given to
the contrary is, that they which write against it, do not think it so.

But for the further clearing of this point, we must understand, that the Law
of Nature is taken properly and improperly; properly, Zanch. de Lege Dei, The. 7
as it is Dictamen rationis, that which Nature does dictate to all Nations:
improperly, as it is a custom of some particular Country.

1. Cor. 11.14.
As for instance, the Apostle condemns men's wearing of long hair, as a thing
repugnant to Nature; not because it was against the general Law or Rule of
Nature: for the French, Germans, Romans, English, and diverse other Nations, as
their Writings and Monuments do witness, have used in sundry ages to wear
long hair; yea, the Spartans especially, because it is an ornament of little
charge: but because Custom, Ornamentum minimo suspendio. Pluta. in Apotheg.
which is another Nature, had made it as it were natural for the Corinthians
to wear it short, the Apostle does condemn them for violating the same. And
so, Custom having amongst us made that Gesture, which was of it self
indifferent, the most solemn and seemly Gesture at the Lords Table, those
that impugn and condemn the same, come under the Apostles censure, and
dispute against themselves.

I deny the Antecedent
that kneeling is a private worship during the time and act of the public:
ergo, it is unlawful. And why is it a private worship? Because it presents a
worship wherein the Congregation does not jointly partake; for they are not
appointed to kneel, when the Receiver does kneel.

I answer; 1. This Argument condemns directly those Congregations where the
Sacrament is received Standing: For whilst some do stand at the Table, others
sit in remote places, and are not appointed to stand when the Receivers stand:
So that the Congregation not partaking with them in the act of Standing, they
present a private worship.

2. It condemns diverse Congregations where the Sacrament is received either
Sitting or standing. For in those Churches wherein I have seen most
preciseness, in the time of the celebration of the Sacrament, whilst some are
receiving, others are employed, either in singing of Psalms, or hearing some
Scripture read. Now these actions, of singing and reading the Scriptures, are
more dissonant from meditation, then prayer is: and therefore if the one be
unlawful, the other must needs be so. But thus, men forth of their
inconsideration and disposition to contend, care not whom they wound in defense
of their own conceits.

Yea, this condemns all Congregations in the world, upon a ground of
impossibility; For it is usual that some one, or few, are receiving whilst
others are not (which cannot possibly be otherwise, except there were as many
to deliver the Sacrament, as there are to receive it at the same instant:) So
that the Congregation does not, in your account, jointly partake in presenting
the same worship, except you will say that bare meditation upon the Sacrament
is the same that actual receiving is, and so shake hands with the Papists,
Bellar. de Missa, lib. 2. cap. 9. Rhem. Annot. in 1. Cor. 11.24.
that hold the spiritual communicating effectual to make the Communion
public. Now if this actual receiving by some particular persons, being a
substantial action, do not cross the public worship, but may have
concurrence with it: How much less can a circumstantiall gesture of a
particular person do it? Actions that have such affinity, may concur in the
same worship, without opposition of public and private.

Lastly, I may truly say, that this Argument is a mere Paradox, which, to
avoid kneeling, excludes praying: Insomuch that if a Communicant, during the
time of public administration, and after he has received the Sacrament, do
but beseech God to bless the same unto him, that it may be a means to
strengthen his faith, to help him in the act of mortification, and building of
him up in grace, by this reason he shall sin against God; then which, what can
be more absurd and senseless?

I deny both parts of the Argument.
and in lieu thereof to observe a worse: therefore it is unlawful.

Resp. In this Argument two things are to be considered. First, whether we vary
from the practice of Christ: and this I confidently deny; neither shall it be
possible for any man, forth of the Scriptures, to prove directly what gesture
Christ used at the institution of the Supper.

Secondly, if it were granted, that our Savior, and his servants the Apostles
did celebrate and receive it Sitting: Yet are not we necessarily tied to
imitate them therein.

It is truly said, Dispute p. 47.
that to restrain our imitation of Christ and his Apostles, to every
particular circumstance of their carriage, were against common sense. And
howsoever in Moral actions we ought to follow Christ in matter of substance,
yet are we not always so in respect of circumstance, especially where there is
no Precept. Now that the Gesture is not of the substance of the Sacrament, it
is clearly euicted, in that neither the Evangelists, nor the Apostle, does
once mention it: For who dares affirm that any substantial matter is omitted
by them, who have handled the doctrine of the Sacrament most excellently and
exactly? Mal. 5.1. Mark. 4.1. Luke 4.29. John 5.2. Aug. sermon. Domini in Mon.
li. 1.
But to make this more evident by an instance. It was our Saviors custom to
preach Sitting, as all the Evangelists do show, and S. Austin gives reason for
it; namely, because it does very well sort with the dignity of a Teacher: yet
the most precise do not imitate him therein, but use to stand when they preach,
though the people sit. Now (supposing that Christ sat at the institution of
the Supper) if the general practice in the one does not tie us to imitation:
how can one individual act do it in the other?

So that albeit we should grant, that our Savior and his Apostles did
celebrate and receive the Sacrament sitting: yet both by the Positions and
practice of them who are our Opposites, we are in this matter of circumstance
freed from necessity of imitation. Yea, if Sitting had been Christ's gesture,
and we bound to imitation, how durst the ancient Churches, and diverse modern
Congregations make Standing their usual Gesture in celebrating the Sacrament:
as you do write of the one, and experience shows of the other?

The seventh Argument: Kneeling in the Act of receiving, I deny this Proposition
is a bowing down before a consecrated creature, forth of a religious and
reverend respect of it, and so is against the second commandment, and
consequently is unlawful.

I answer, that kneeling at the Communion is no breach of the second
Commandment. It will be evident, if we consider the branches of the
commandment, which are two. The first, that we make not any graven Image to
our selves, that is, of our own heads, ^^a Zanch de Redem^.
or, as Tertullian says, Nis^ and ^^bi Deus iusseri^ Tertul. de^^alat cap. 5.
It is ^ignum ^iuinitus institutum. Aug. de doct Cor. li. 2. c. 9. 1. Cor.
11.3.5.
Except God command us. Now the Sacrament, and Elements in the Sacrament, are
no humane invention, but Gods sacred Ordinance, as it were a Crucifixe, which
Christ himself has commanded, and left to perpetuate the remembrance of his
death till his coming to Judgment, and therefore we offend not against the
first branch.

The second branch of the commandment forbids the bowing down to an Image,
which imports the giving of religious worship to any creature: and this we
utterly disclaim; for albeit we kneel at the Sacrament, yet we do not
kneel to the Sacrament, but to God the Author of the Sacrament, And this may
appear to any, who loves not to be contentious; for that in the act of
receiving only, and not of beholding the Sacrament, we do kneel. It is
confessed, Dispute p. 66.
by way of approbation, that the ancient Fathers carried a very reverend regard
to the Bread and Wine of ^he Lords Supper, and had a reverend conceit of them.
And so do we likewise reverence the Sacrament, as an excellent Ordinance of
almighty God, yet is not that the cause we kneel: but the Majesty of our God,
to whom at that instant we pray; and the mercy of our God, who vouchsafes us
this great blessing, causes us to humble our selves. And if we receive upon
our knees temporal favors at the hands of mortal Princes, how much more will
it become us to receive this inestimable spiritual favor from the hands of
the Immortal God, with all submission and reverence?

If the worship at our receiving, did determine in the Sacrament, or were
transient by it to God; As the Romanists diversely hold concerning the worship
of their Images, Bellar. de Jmag. sanct. li. 2. ca. 20.21.
then would we not justify our action. But forasmuch as it is tendered
immediately to God, there is no just cause of condemning our practice. For we
give to the Sacrament that which belongs to the Sacrament; namely, a reverent
estimation: and to God, that which belongs to God, that is, humble adoration.

This Argument used in the Dispute, is like Bellarmine, Bell. de Beatitud.
sanct. li. 1. cap. 13.
to prove the adoring of creatures: For whereas it is said in the 99. Psalm
the 5. verse, Fall done before his footstool, the Cardinal would infer,
that the Arc was adored. And thus our disputants, because we kneel before
the Sacrament, do conclude that we kneel to the Sacrament.

But indeed, as the four and twenty Elders falling down to him that sat on
the Throne, though they fell down before the Throne, did not worship the
Throne, Reu. 4.10.
but him that lives for ever: So we, when we kneel before the Sacrament, at
the receiving of it, do not kneel to the Sacrament, but to Christ the Author
of the Sacrament, Romans 9.5.
who is God blessed for ever.

It was brought in by that Antichrist of Rome, I deny both parts of this
Argument.
for the worship of his Breaden god, therefore it cannot lawfully be
entertained by the true Professors of the Gospel.

For answer to which, I deny both parts of the Argument. Concerning the
Antecedent, it has two branches, and neither sound: the one, that Kneeling was
brought in by that Antichrist of Rome; the other, that it was brought in for
the worship of his Breaden god.

Now to the first. I demand what Antichrist that was who brought in Kneeling at
the Sacrament? As the Admonition to the Parliament: and others.
Some there are, who peremptorily affirm that it was Honorius the third. But
that is not true: For albeit Honorius made a Decree for the adoring of the
Sacrament, at the time of Elevation; yet we find not one syllable to prove
that he decreed any Gesture for the time and act of participation. Yea, Disp.
pa. 81.
it is confidently affirmed by him who wrote the Dispute, that Kneeling in the
Act of Receiving, was not brought in by Honorius.

Now if you demand, by whom was it then brought in: silence, or ignorance must
be the answer. But me thinks, such a confident assertion, that both crosses
the practice, and troubles the peace of the Church, should have some direct
and positive proof, and not depend upon probability. In stead whereof there is
this reason given; We find neither decree nor practice of kneeling, till after
the time of Honorius: therefore it is not like, that either he, or any before
him brought it in. But if that reason be good, then I may conclude that it was
neither decreed by Honorius, nor any other Bishop of Rome following, because we
find no decree thereof upon record.

It is further affirmed, that sitting was the gesture in the act of receiving
in the time of the institution, and diverse years after; and then standing,
from about the year one hundred and fifty, to the year one thousand two
hundred and twenty and upward.

I answer, that concerning the gesture used by Christ in the institution, I
have already spoken, and now I will very briefly examine the testimonies
inferred for proof of the ages succeeding.

Where first Justin Martyr says, Apal. 2. ad Antonin.
After the Pastors exhortation upon the Sundays, we all rise up and pray, and
afterward the Sacrament is delivered to every one.

Now says the Dispute, If the people had kneeled in the time of receiving, he
would as well have she wed that, as the other practices in praying and hearing
the Word of God. For answer whereunto might not I say, If the people had stood
or sat in the time of receiving, would he not as well have showed that, as the
other practices in praying and hearing the Word? But further, I say, had that
Father esteemed the gesture at the Sacrament a thing so material, as you
account it, doubtless he would have showed their practice, but because he did
not so esteem it, he did not at all mention it. For whereas it is said, We
will rise up and pray: that rising up from their seats, might be as well to
kneel as to stand.

Clemens Alexandrinus says, that when some have divided the Sacrament, Strom.
lib. 2. Eius partem sumere.
they suffer every one of the people to take his part. Now how could they take
their parts without being reached to them, except they stood or sat at the
Table?

To this I might answer, that sumere partem, to take his part, does not
necessarily import an immediate taking without delivering. And further, if it
be granted, that in the Church of Alexandria they stood at the Table and took
the Sacrament themselves; yet it is evident by that place in Justin Martyr
before mentioned, and likewise by Tertullian, Tertul. de Cor. milit. cap 3. de
manu praefidentiu^.
and others, that in other Churches the Sacrament was delivered to the people
by the hands of their Pastors, which might be done without sitting or standing
at the Table.

Eusebius hist. Eccl. 2.17.
For the age 300. Eusebius is alleged, to prove sitting at the Communion, from
a comparison of the Christians with the Philosophers, mentioned in Philo
Iudaeus. The indirectnesse of which collection I might easily show, were it
material. But what need I do it, when as the Disputers Proposition, page 93.
confutes it? And why do you urge sitting then so eagerly?
For there he affirms, that standing was the usual gesture from the year
150. to the year 1220.

For the year 400. Chrysostom is cyted, who says, In apist. ad Ephesians. hom. 3.
Frustra stamus ad altar, In vain we stand at the Altar. But what is that to
the peoples gesture in receiving? For Chrysostom speaks only of the
Ministers gesture in the time of Divine service and Sacrament, at which the
people were not present; and therefore there is no mention of their gesture.

It is said in the Dispute, If Gregory and many more Fathers and Doctors, Page
82.
should in their writings mention, that Gorgonia, and sundry others, prostrated
themselves on their knees in the act of partaking at the Lords Table, the same
is no disadvantage to the present question. The reason intended is, because
such (though many) particulars do not show the general practice of the
Church. And may not I use the same words concerning Dionysius in Eusebius, and
Clemens Alexandrinus in his Stromats? Can that which they write of some
particular Church, show the practice of the universal?

Lastly, the custom and constitutions of the Church are urged Yet Danaeus in
orat. Dom. par. 2. cap. 4. has this exception, Nisi cu^ caena domini
celebraretur: except when the Lords Supper was celebrated. In which words he
in^imateth they used to pray kneeling. De oratione Dominica.
, which from the second age of the Church, to the year 1220. forbad kneeling
at prayers, on every Lords Day; for if kneeling at prayers was removed, it
cannot be imagined that kneeling at the Sacrament should be allowed. Now to
prove that kneeling at prayers was removed generally on the Lords Day, diverse
Fathers and Councels are inferred, yet some of them impertinently, some of them
inconsideratly; impertinently (that I say not cunningly) as namely Cyprian,
Stamus ad orationem, We stand at prayer; as though this had been the only
gesture, whereas he says, Quando stamus ad orationem, When we stand at
prayer, without reference to time or place. In Col. 4. For he says, Cum
stamus, whereas the Dispute leaves out cum, as it did quando in Cyprian. Eras.
praes. ad lib. Cocus in Censura.
And the like may be said of Anselme cited after the same manner.

Again, inconsideratly, as that of Basil, de spiritu soncto, cap. 27. For not
only Erasmus sufficiently, but M. Cook abundantly has showed, that this
book of Basils, or at least the later part of it (whereof this 27. chapter is
a part) is a mere conterfeit.

Concerning the testimonies of Tertullian, and the Council of Nice, they
indeed seem to testify this practice of praying standing on the Lords Day. But
yet that this was not a universal practice, it may appear by St. Austins
addubitation, who epist. 119. says, Epist. 119. cap. 7.
Vt autem stantes in illis diebus and omnibus dominicis oremus, vtrum vbique
seruetur ignoro: That we pray standing on those and every Lords Day, whether
it be every where observed I do not know. And more evidently by Chrysostomes
relation of the Churches practice in those parts, As appears by the book of
common prayer.
which accords directly with ours at this day. Before the celebration of the
Sacrament (says he) Prayers are made in general for all people; and after
that those who do not communicate, are dismissed, another prayer is begun,
Omnes humi peraeque iacemus, omnes peraeque consurgimus. Chrysostom. in 2. Cor. hom.
18.
wherein we all (not stand, but) cast our selves down in prayer together, and
rise up together. By these testimonies it is evident, that kneeling at prayer
was not generally removed every Lords Day, and consequently the foundation of
this Argument does fail. Again, the inference, if the Antecedent were
granted, is not good, They did not kneel upon the Lords Day at prayer, Ergo,
not at the Sacrament.

Thus we see, that what has bin urged and alleged, does not prove the first
branch of the Antecedent, namely, That kneeling in the act of receiving, was
brought in by that Antichrist of Rome, and therefore much less can the second
be proved, videlitet, that it was brought in for worship of a Breaden god. For,
as we find no footing concerning the Author, so much less concerning that end.

Now as the Antecedent is uncertain, so is the Argument unsound. Some
Antichristian Bishop brought in kneeling in the act of receiving: or thus, it
has been abused to Idolatry by some Antichristan Bishop, therefore it is
unlawful. A man might as well reason thus: Macrob. Satur. lib. 3. c. 6.
It was proper and peculiar to the sacrifices of Hercules, that the Heathen did
celebrate them sitting, therefore it is not lawful for Christians to celebrate
this Eucharisticall sacrifice of the Lords Supper so. The unclean spirit said
to our Savior, Mark. 1.24.
Thou art the Holy one of God; and the spirit of divination by the Damsel
concerning Paul and Silas: Acts 16.17.
These men are the servants of God, (yea, and this they spoke to evil ends)
therefore we may not say so. Yea, if this argument be good, we must remove
fire from our houses, the Sun out of the heavens, bells out of steeples,
fonts out of Churches, Churches out of the world; because the Chaldeans abused
the one, the Persians the other, and the Papists the rest. The places of
Scripture cited for proof of the argument, are very impertinent. Some which
have a particular reference, are made too general, as that in Leuiticus. For
whereas it is said, Leu 18.3, 4.
After the doings of the land of Egypt, and the land of Canaan, you shall not
do, that has relation to those sins of uncleanness which are mentioned in
the same Chapter. And the same being general, can no more abide the light then
this. After the manner of the Pagans and Padists shall you not do: But the
Pagans and Papists do kneel in prayer: therefore you shall kneel in prayer.
Or rather thus, the Papists and Pagans do kneel to their Idols, therefore
Professors of the Gospel may not kneel to God. For so indeed it is inferred,
because the Papists in the act of receiving do kneel to the bread, therefore
we in the same act may not kneel to God.

The other places require the defacing of Images and Idols, Deuteronomy. 12.2, 4. Esa.
27.9, 30, 22.
but what is that to kneeling? For there is great difference between that
which in it self is lawful, and that which is unlawful, as their Idols were
which represented false gods; between a permanent substance, and a transient
action; between that which may have good use, and that which cannot.

If Antichrist have stained this gesture by his Idolatry, shall Christians
therefore, having purged it, be debarred of their lawful interest therein? Or
rather as the Israelite having taken in war a woman amongst the enemies, when
he had shaued her head, and paired her nails, might take her home as his own:
may not the Church of God take this gesture, being pared and purged from Romish
corruption, and apply it to the service of God?

Master Cartwright tells us, that, Epistle to the Church of England.
If amongst the Romish filth we find any good thing, that we willingly
receive, not as theirs, but as the Jews did the holy Arc from the Philistims.
For (says he) herein it is true that is said, The sheep must not lay down
her fell, because she sees the wolf sometimes clothed with it. St. Austin
shows that we may lawfully use the water of fountains and woods of the
forests, which by Pagans have been dedicated to their Idols, Epist. 154. S.
Paul has taught us, 1. Cor. 10.25, 27.
that it is lawful to eat that meat which has bin sacrificed to Idols: and
may we not use that gesture that has been abused to Idolatry?

But it is objected, that this gesture can never be purged. And to this purpose
are urged the positions of sundry learned men, As Calvin, Bucer, Petrr Martyr,
Beza B^sh. Jewel, etc.
who would that all things which have appeara^ce of Popery be banished, and
the same is confirmed by the practice of diverse godly men in the like case.

To which I answer first, that this position is absurd, and goes a note above
Ela, which will admit no possibility of purging any ceremonies corrupted in the
Church of For corruption and abuse being only accidental, may be removed,
salua substantia.
Rome.

Fare fall Master Robinson, yet a resolute separatist, who says; We do
acknowledge in it (meaning in the Church of England) many excellent truths of
Doctrine, which we also teach, and many Christian ordinances which we also
practice, In his book against Master Bernard, p. 16.
being purged from the pollution of Antichrist.

Again I say, that if the authority, positions, and practice of men excellent
for learning, venerable for antiquity, admirable for sanctity, being urged for
some of our Ceremonies, be rejected by you; what reason have you to press us
with the opinions of a few particular men of later times, and inferior quality?

3. I might oppose to these few you mention, many even of late times nothing
inferior to them, who dissent from them in these opinions. Diuersa est
temporum ratio, says Beza, confess. ca. 5. sect. 16.


4. Though the present times wherein those men wrote (Popery being as yet newly
banished, and the Gospel planted) might give occasion of vehement opposition;
yet is there not the like cause now. The Surgeon deals otherwise with a
foul sore, and a wound that is come to agglutination.

5. I may say truly of these good men, as Basil speaks of Gregory
Neocaesariensis, Non dogmatice sed contentios^. Bafil. epist. 64.
that they wrote some times (...); their zeal against Popery, carrying them
further then in strictness their judgments went. And that they did so in the
rejecting of this and some other ceremonies, Calvin has many things to this
purpose, Instit. l. 4. c. 10. and in diverse of his Epistles. Bucer epist. ad
Hooper. Et fimilia habet in alijs epistolis.
may appear by their other writings, when they wrote calmely and purposely
concerning the same. I will only give a taste.

Bucer says, that to make a Rite Antichristian, it is not in any of Gods
creatures, in any garment, in any figure or color, but in the mind and
profession of those which abuse them.

Beza epi. 12.
Beza says of this very gesture, Geniculatio speciem habet piae venerationis,
etc. This bowing of the Knee has a kind of godly reverence, and therefore it
might heretofore be used to good purpose.

Bishop Jewel says, Against Hard. Artic. 1. disp. 8.
I grant that sitting, standing, and other like ceremonies in the holy
ministration, are left to the discretion of the Church.

Yea Master Cartwright acknowledges again and again, In his first reply page
131. 132.
That sitting is not necessary; and though he say that kneeling is dangerous;
yet he says not that it is unlawful.

P. Martyr says in general, P. Mart. epi. ad ep. Hooper.
I cannot be persuaded, the wickedness of the Pope to be such, that whatsoever
he touches, must thereupon be polluted, that afterward it may not be of use
to the godly.

And concerning this matter in particular he says elsewhere, P. Mart. Loc.
Com. Cla^. 2.
It is no matter of difference, whether we receive the Sacrament, sitting,
standing or kneeling, so that Christ's institution be preferred, and occasion of
superstition removed.

And surely those are bad Chirurgions, that have no other means of cure, but
only by the saw and the cautery.

Again, to the positions of these men they add the fact of Hezekiah, who did
not seek to purge, but brake in pieces the brazen Serpent; and the practice of
our Savior Christ, who held it not sufficient by doctrine to speak against
the Jewish washings, and so to use them to another end, but refused that
custom wholly.

Hereunto I answer first, Particular facts, even of worthy men, do not tie us
necessarily to imitation. Moses proceeded far against the Israelites
Idolatry, Exo. 32.20
when he took the golden calfe, burnt it in the fire, and ground it to powder,
strew it upon the waters, and made them to drink of it. What, have others
sinned that have not done the like?

Again, there is great difference between the brazen serpent, and kneeling at
the Communion, both in their nature and use. In their nature, the one being a
transient action, the other a permanent substance, and consequently more apt to
be abused to Idolatry. In their use: for the virtue of cure being vanished, the
brazen serpent ceased to be of use. But the act of kneeling will ever remain
necessary, to manifest our humble thankfulness for so great benefits, as we
receive by the blessed Sacrament.

3. There was great cause why Hezekiah should thus proceed against the brazen
serpent, in regard that To those days the children of Israel burnt incense to
it. 2. Reg. 18.4
But so is not the gesture of kneeling abused by us, and therefore needs not
such an absolute abolishing.

And for our Saviors practice, it is rather with us then against us; for
though he did shun the superstitious washings of the Pharisees: yet who can
think that he did utterly forbear all civil and wholesome washing before
meat? So we do shun and detest the Idolatrous kneeling of the Papists, at the
Sacrament, but to abandon kneeling totally, we have no cause, no warrant.

FINIS.

