The Queens visiting of the Camp at Tilsburie with her entertainment there,
To the Tune of Wilsons wild.


WIthin the year of Christ our Lord
a thousand and five hundredth fi^^ie
And eighty eight by just record
the which no man may disanull.
And in the thirtieth year remaining,
of good Queen Elizabeth's reigning.
A mighty power there was prepared
By Philip then the king of Spain:
Against the maiden Queen of England,
which in peace before did reign.
Her Ryall ships to sea she sent,
to guard the coast on every side:
And seeing how her foes were bent,
her realm full well she did provide.
With many thousands so prepared:
as like was never erst declared.
Of horsemen and of footmen plenty,
whose good hearts full-well is seen:
In the safegarde of their country,
and the service of our Queen.
In Essex fair that fertile soil,
upon the hill of Tilsbury:
To give our Spanish foes the foil.
in gallant camp they now do lie.
Where good orders is ordained,
and true justice eke mantained.
For the punishment of persons,
that are lend or badly bent.
To see a sight so strange in England,
it was our gracious Queens intent.
And on the eight of August she,
from fair Saint James took her way:
With many Lords of high degree,
in princely robes and rich array.
And to bardge upon the water,
being King Henryes royal daughter.
She did go with trumpets sounding,
and with dubbing drums apace:
Along the Thames that famous river,
for to view the camp a space.
When she as far as Grauesend came,
right over against that pretty town:
Her royal grace with all her train,
was landed there with great renown.
The Lords and Captains of her forces,
mounted on their gallant horses.
Ready stood to entertain her,
like martial men of courage bold:
^elcome to the camp dread sovereign,
^hus they said both young and old.
The Bulworkes strong that stood thereby,
well guarded with sufficient men:
Then flags were spread courageously,
their cannons were discharged then.
Each Gunner did declare his cunning,
for joy conceived of her coming.
All the way her Grace was riding,
on each side stood armed men:
With Muskets, Pikes, and good Caleeuers,
for her Graces safegarde then.
The Lord general of the field,
had there his bloody ancient been:
The Lord marshals coulors eke,
was carried there all rent and torn.
The which with bullets was so burned,
when in Flaunders he soiourned.
Thus in warlike wise they martched
even as soft as foot could fall:
Because her Grace was fully minded,
perfectly to view them all.
Her faithful soldiers great and small,
as each one stood within his place:
Upon their kneees began to fall,
desiring God to save her Grace.
For joy whereof her eyes was filled,
that the water down distilled.
Lord bless you all my friends, she said,
but do not kneel so much to me:
Then sent she warning to the rest,
they should not let such reverence be.
Then casting up her Princely eyes,
unto the hill with perfect sight:
The ground all covered she espyes,
with feet of armed soldiers bright.
Whereat her royal heart so leaped,
on her feet upright she stepped.
Tossing up her plume of feathers,
to them all as they did stand:
Chearefully her body bending,
wauing of her royal hand.
Thus through the camp she passed quite,
in manner as I have declared:
At master Riches for that night,
her graces lodging was preparde.
The morrow after her abiding,
on a princely paulfrey riding.
To the camp she came to dinner,
with her Lords and Ladies all:
The Lord general went to meet her,
with his Guarde of yeomen tall.
The Sargeant trumpet with his mace,
and nine with trumpets after him:
Bare headed went before her grace,
in coats of scarlet color trim.
The king of Heralds tall and comely,
was the next in order duly.
With the famous Arms of England,
wrought with rich imbroidered gold:
On finest velvet blew and crimson,
that for silver can be sold.
With Maces of clean beaten gold,
the Queens two Sargeants then did ride
Most comely men for to behold,
in velvet coats and chains beside.
The Lord general then came riding,
and Lord marshall hard beside him.
Richly were they both atired,
in princely garments of great price:
Bearing still their hats and feathers,
in their hands in comely wise
Then came the Queen on pranceing steed
atired like an Angel bright:
And eight brave footmen at her feet,
whose Ierkins were most rich in sight.
Her Ladies likewise of great honor,
most sumpteously did wait upon her.
With pearls and diamonds brave adorned,
and in costly cales of gold:
Her Guarde in scarlet then rid after,
with bows and arrows stout and bold.
The valiant Captains of the field,
mean space them selves in order set:
And each of them with spear and sheelde,
to join in battle did not let.
With such a warlike skill extended,
as the same was much commended.
Such a battle pitched in England,
many a day has not been seen:
Thus they stood in order waiting,
for the presence of our Queen.
At length her grace most royally,
received was and brought again:
Where she might see most loyally,
this noble host and warlike train.
How they came martching all together,
like a wood in winters weather.
With the strokes of drummers sounding,
and with trampling horses than:
The earth and air did sound like thunder,
to the ears of every man.
The warlike Army then stood still,
and drummers left their dubbing sound:
Because it was our Princes will,
to ride about the Army round.
Her Ladies she did leave behind her,
and her Guarde which still did mind her.
The Lord general and Lord marshall,
did conduct her to each place:
The pikes, the colors, and the lances,
at her approach fell down apace.
And then bespake our noble Queen,
my loving friends and countriemen:
I hope this day the worst is seen,
that in our wars ye shall sustain.
But if our enemies do assail you,
never let your stomachs fail you.
For in the midst of all your troop,
we our selves will be in place:
To be your joy, your guide and comfort,
even before our enemies face.
This done the soldiers all at once,
a mighty shoute or cry did give:
Which forced from the Assure skies,
an Ecco loud from thence to drive.
Which filled her grace with joy and pleasure,
and riding then from them by leisure.
With trumpets sound most loyally,
a long the Court of guarde she went:
Who did conduct her Majesty,
unto the Lord chief generals tent.
Where she was feasted royally,
with dainties of most costly price:
And when that night aproched nigh,
her Majesty with sage advice.
In gracious manner then returned,
from the Camp where she soiourned.
And when that she was safely set,
within her Barge, and past away:
Her farewell then the trumpets sounded,
and the cannons fast did play,
T. D.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by John Wolf for Edward White. 1588.


