THE MONVMENT OR TOMBE-STONE: OR, A SERMON PREACHED at Laurence Pountnies
Church in London, Nouemb. 21. 16 19. at the funeral of Mrs. Elizabeth Iuxon,
the late wife of Mr. John Iuxon.

By STEPHEN DENISON Minister of Gods word, at Kree-Church in the honorable
City of London.

Pro. 10. 7. The memorial of the just shall be blessed, but the name of the
wicked shall rot. Math. 26. 13. Wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached in
the whole world, there shall also this that this woman has done, be told for a
memorial of her. The third impression.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Field dwelling in Great Wood-streete. 1620.

TO Mr. JOHN IVXON, CITIZEN OF THE FAMOVS CITY OF London, and his five
children, whom I love in the truth.
STEPHEN DENISON wishes increase of all true happiness and prosperity.

Dear friend, it has been my purpose a long time, to give some public
testimony before I die, of your love and kindness showed unto me: and
considering that God has offered such an opportunity as this, I thought I
could not do less, ^hen to testify my thankfulness unto you, and to* ^iue
Gods Church an occasion, both to bless God for you, and to remember you and
yours in their prayers. I do acknowledge that you have been, and so unto this
day you do remain, the most faithful friend, and bountiful benefactor, which
hitherto I have found upon the earth. You and your worthy wife now deceassed
were the good Shunemites, which gave me the first constant entertainment in
this City. Your care over me has been great, your saithfulnesse true, and
your bounty to me not little. I am persuaded God will bless you for it, and
that Gods dear people, will love you for it; and for mine own part I shall
still remain in your debt, to pray for you, and to do you the best spiritual
good that I can. God has deprived you of a virtuous wife, and me of a dear
friend; but the will of the Lord is good and he knows what is best. Comfort
your self concerning her death, by the sound experience which you had of her
godly and virtuous life: and remember with joy, that which drew tears from you
at her death, to wit, what a great care she had of your soul whilst she
lived. Remember also with comfort those excellent marks which were in her,
which you saw in her, and knew in her, as well as my self. I confess you have
a great miss of her many ways, but the consideration of her undoubted
happiness, must comfort you concerning that miss. Labor you to make a good
use of her visitation and death; let it move you to renew your covenant with
God, and to be mindful of your own mortality, to prepare for it in due time,
to work out your own salvation with fear and trembling. Get oil into your
vessel whilst you have time, that so you may be ready when the Bridegroom
comes, to enter in with him. And now give me leave to speak a word or two to
your beloved children.

You M. John Iuxon the first borne, let me exhort you to fly the lusts and
vanities of youth, and give your mind unto goodness: remember your Creator now
in the days of your youth. Learn with Timothy to know the Scriptures of a
child: as you are the first borne in age, so be you the first borne in grace;
be an example unto the rest of the children in virtue and stayednesse: fulfill
the prophesies which go of you. Your tender father rejoices in you, and hops
that grace is in some measure begun in you; and for my own part I hope good
of you, therefore be you good.

And you M. Thomas Iuxon, let me admonish you, not to turn the grace of God
into wantonness: use that capacity which God has given unto you, for the
glory of God: be careful to give your mind unto learning, and to know God: be
obedient to your parents; fear God and keep his commandments, for this is
the whole duty of man, as Solomon says, Eccles. 12. And otherwise, if you will
not hearken unto this, then must I say with the same Solomon: Rejoice ^ young
man in thy youth, and let thine beart cheer thee in the days of thy youth,
and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes. But know
thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into judgment. Eccles. 11.
9.

And you Mistress Elizabeth Iuxon, let me put you in mind, that as you bear the
name of your virtuous mother, so you would be careful to follow her godly
steps: be you diligent to hear Gods word preached, and to read the same in
private every day; meditate that which you hear and read, and be careful to
practice that which you learn, both in your general and particular calling.
For these were the stops of your worthy mother.

And you Mistress Sarah Iuxon, remember also after whom you are named, to wit,
after Sarah the wife of Abraham. Be diligent to read the story of Sarah in the
book of Genesis, and follow her in all things that are good and imitable. And
remember the words of the Apostle, that women are the daughters of Sarah so
long as they do well, 1. Pet. 3.

And lastly, you mistress Marie Iuxon, if God shall give you life to live to
come to years of discretion and understanding, consider what I say unto you.
You are named after the blessed virgin Marie. As she therefore conceived
Christ in her womb, so do you conceive him in your heart. As she pondered the
words of the sh epheards in her heart, so do you meditate of the word of God
day and night. Yea consider what graces were in her, and labor for the same.
Yea let me say unto all you three pure virgins, beware you of the sins of the
times, take heed of following the vain fashions of the world, take heed of
pride, take heed of whoredom and all manner of uncleanness: have a care with
whom you consort your selves: marry not without the consent of your parents or
governors, and be sure that you marry in the Lord. In a word, be careful to
read and consider the marks which were in your mother, and labor to find the
like in your selves. And thus you shall lead a blessed life, and accomplish a
happy death, and at the last shall come to that heavenly kingdom, whither
your dear mother is gone before. Unto the which heavenly kingdom, the Lord of
his mercy bring us all for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen.

Yours in all Christian duty, STEPHEN DENISON.

TO THE READER.
COurteous Reader, I have been exceedingly importuned, and that by many worthy
Christians, for the marks which our worthy sister deceassed left behind her. I
could not tell how so well to satisfy the religious request of my brethren in
this thing, as by making public for the common good both the Sermon and the
Marks. Here therefore I offer them to thy Christian consideration; read them
with a single eye: weigh them well; and if thou reap any benefit, give the
whole glory to God, and remember the unworthy writer in thy prayers.

Thine in the Lord, S. D.

THE MONVMENT, OR TOMBE-STONE.
Job 7. 3. 4. So am I made to possess the months of vanity, and wearisome
nights are appointed to me: when I lie down, I say, when shall I arise, and
the night be gone? and I am full of tossings to and fro, unto the dawning of
the day.
IN the first verse of this chapter the holy man Job lays down a general
position, to wit, that the days of mor^all man are like the days of an
hireing: and this position he labors to make good in the subsequent or next
ensuing verses, and that by d^claring wherein the comparison stands between
the days of an hir^ling and the days of mortal man, these words following:
As a serua^ earnestly desires the shadow, and as a hireling looks for the
reward of h^ work, so am I made to possess the m^neths of vanity, and
wearisome nigh^ are appointed for me, etc. This is t^ coherence.

Now this text is for the matter it a lamentable complaint, where for order and
methods sake, we m^ take notice of two points, first of t^ person complaining,
and that was I in this word I. Secondly, of the ma^ter of the complaint, which
is tw^fold. First, for the vanishing of (...) time, in these words, So have I
ben^ made to possess the m^neths of vanit^ Secondly, for the tediousness and
^^tremitie of his pain, in the rest of t^ text: And wearisome nights are
appo^ed unto me: when I lie down, I say, when shall I arise, and the night be
gone? and I am full of tossings to and fro unto the dawning of the day.

So am I made to possess the months of vanity. It may here be demanded in the
first place, what is meant in these words by v^nitie. Unto which just demand
for the clearing of the text, I answer, that this word vanity is taken in two
senses in holy Scriptures, viz. sometimes for the vanity of sin, and so it is
used in Psalm. 119. 37. where David entreats the Lord to turn back his eyes
from beholding vanity, that is, from beholding sinful objects. And in deed my
dear Christian brethren, sin is justly styled by the name of vanity, for there
is no vanity to the vanity of sin. For how vain a practice it is for a little
momentanie pleasure, and for a modicum of transitory profit, that a man or
woman should set the glory of God, the merits of Christ, the kingdom of
heaven, and their own salvation to sale, I leave it to your own conscience to
judge. But for mine own part, I esteem wilful and desperate sinners to be
the most vain and foolish people in the world. But concerning this kind of
vanity Job does not speak in this place: for it is not meant that Job had
spent his months in the vanity of sin, as they do which spend their precious
time in pricking and pinning, and painting and pampering, in running to stage
plays, in haunting of tauerns and alehouses, in prosecuting of unnecessary
suites at law, and such like: for Job indeed was none of this cursed crew: but
he was perfect and upright, and one that feared God, and eschued evil, as God
himself gives testimony of him in the first chap. of this book, at the first
verse: yea this blessed Job was such a man, as that there was none like him in
all respects in the whole world, at the least in his age and ^ime. For so it is
said of him in the second chapter and third verse, of this holy book.

We must note therefore and observe, that the word vanity is taken also in
Scripture for the vanity of a saying condition; and so it is used in Psalm. 144.
4. where it is said, Man is like to vanity, his days are like a shadow that
vanishes: and in Romans 8. 20. The ^reature is made subject to vanity: that ^s,
to a fading condition. And thus the word vanity is used in our present ^ext: I
have had as an inheritance the ^oneths of vanity, that is, vanishing and fading
months, the abstract being put for the concrete, or vanity for vanishing.

And wearisome nights, etc. Here it may be also inquired what it was that Job
endured in the night, for the which ^e terms his nights wearisome ^ights, or,
as it is in the original, nights of labor. To this I answer: Job endured three
things in the nights, the which three things made his night^xs the nights of
labor and unrest.

First, he endured fearful dream and visions, as appears in this present
seventh chapter and fourth verse where it is said, When I say, my bed sha^
comfort me, my couch shall ease my complaint, then thou scarest me wit^
dreams, and terrifiest me through visions. And this was a great passion; for
i^ is grievous to be scared with dreams ^ut it is more to be terrified with
visions and apparitions of Angels whether good or evil. The want of natural
rest unto a weak person is very tedious, but this addition of terro^ and
horror is much more grievous.

2 The second thing which Io^ endured in the night as well as by day, it was
anguish of mind and trouble of conscience: For his calamiti^ was heavier then
the sand of the sea, the arrows of God Almighty were within him, the poison
thereof drunk up his spirit, yea the terrors of God set themselves in array
against him, Job 6. 2. 3. And this was matter of sore labor; for as Solomon
says, A man will be are his infirmity; but a wounded spirit, who can bear
it? Prou. 18. 14.

3. The third thing which Job endured in the night, was extremity of pain in
his body, expressed by very grievous and doleful fits; for when he lay
down, he said, when shall I arise, and the night be gone? and he was full, or
as it is in the original, he had his belly full of tossings to and fro to the
dawning of the day. And there is none which have had experience of extremity
of sickness, but I hope they will easily acknowledge, that extremity of pain
is a sore labor.

Thus much for the clearing of the meaning of the words.

Now before we come to the doctrines and instructions, one maine question may
be moved concerning the practice of Job in complaining, whether he did well or
ill in it? And to this I answer, that in many things Job sinned in the matter
of complaint, as in cursing the day of his birth, Job 3. and in desiring for
anguish to be cut off before his time, Job 6. 9. and choosing to be strangled
was like wise a great sin in him, Job 7. 15. But in these words in the text, I
take it that Job did not mainly sin, (howbeit I do not excuse him altogether
from infirmity,) but for his words used, they are warrantable; as for his
secret affection, we have nothing to do with it, we leave it to God that knows
it.

You will then demand, Is it lawful therefore for such as are in distress to
complain?

To this I answer, that all complaint is not sinful. David complained in the
si^t Psalm, that his soul was sore troubled, and ^et he sinned not. Hezechiah
mourned like a dove in his sickness, Esaias 38. 14. and yet for that is not justly
to be reproved.

But lawful complaint in time of extremity, must be joined with these
limitations.

First, it must not be with murmuring or repining against God, but rather with
a patient submitting to his blessed will: so that though we do declare our
grief, yet we must be content to endure it, in obedience to God; and we must
learn of Christ, to say, If thou will that I shall drink of this cup, thy
will be done.

Secondly, our complaint must not be to the weakening of our faith: we must so
complain, as that still we hold fast some ground of joy. For indeed we ought
to rejoice evermore; and we should not mourn without hope, as the Apostle
speaks.

Thirdly, our complaints must be moderate; for there is but a time to mourn.
We ought to find time, as well for the declaring of Gods mercies which we have
received, as to express our griefs, or else we are greatly unthankful.

Thus much for the meaning. Now come we, by Gods permission and assistance, to
collect such doct^ines and instructions as may make for our edification.

Months of vanity. Where note we, that Job speaking of his life, does not
term his months, months of certainty, as though he had a lease of his life,
but months of vanitle, as implying that Man's life is very frail and 2. Doctr.
subject to vanish away. And indeed there is nothing more frail, and more
uncertain. For this cause the Scripture compares our lives to things that are
very inconstant: as sometimes to grass, which in the morning flourishes and
grows, and in the evening is cut down and withers, Psalm. 90. 5. 6. And
sometime to a vapor, which appears for a very little time, and afterward
vanishes away, Iam. 4. 14. Sometime to a weauers shuttle, which quickly
passes from one side of the web unto the other. Sometime to smoke, which is
driven away and dispersed with every wind or blast, Psalm. 102. 3. Sometime to a
shadow which declineth, Psalm. 102. 11. And sometime to vanity it self, as in
my text.

Gods Church and people have taken diligent notice of this frailty from time to
time, and therefore have made account of short life. Hence it is that Abraham
in his perfect health terms himself dust and ashes, Genes. 18. 27. Hence it
is that David says, that his life is always in his hand, Psalm. 119. 109.
Hence it is that Paul says, I am ready to be delivered, and the time of my
departure is at hand, 2. Tim. 4. 6. Hence it is that the Church says, We have
here no abiding city, Heb. 13. 14. And hence it is that so many faithful
Christians do so ordinarily remember their mortality and their grave when they
lie down in their beds.

And indeed very experience does 1. Reason.
teach us that man's life is frail. For do we not see young men die as well as
old? Do we not see strong men die as well as weak? Do we not see wise men die
as well as foolish? Yea do we not see Physicians die as well as patients? Yea
there is none, rich or poor, high or low, noble or mean, which can promise
himself to live for the space of one poor hour.

Again, our lives must needs be 2. Reason.
frail and uncertain, in respect of the manifold dangers whereunto they are
continually subject. For first, they
are subject to infinite diseases, as to the pestilence, to the burning fever,
to consumptions, to the gout, to the stone, to the dropsy, to the bloody
issue, and to innumerable other.

Secondly, they are subject to the stroke of Angels, to the layings in wait of
enemies, yea to Gods immediate stroke.

Thirdly, they are subject to many sudden accidents. If they travel by land,
they are subject to be taken by the eues and robbers, and to be left for dead.
If they ride, they are subject to fall from their horses, and to break their
necks. If they travel on foot, they are subject to take immoderate heat. If
they eat, they are subject to take surfeit, though they eat never so little.
If they fast, they are subject to grow into weakness. If they sit in their
houses, diseases will grow upon them by much sitting. If they walk^ abroad, a
thousand dangers both over their heads and under their feet, and before them
and behind them, and at their right hand and at their left do attend and wait
upon them, and therefore how frail is the life of man?

Yea but some possibly will object Object.
and say, Do we not see some men and women to live long? Do not some in our age
attain seventy years, some eighty years, some ninety years, some an
hundredth? and may not I hope to live as long as they?

I do not deny, but God is able to continue thee long upon the earth, Answ.
though thy life be never so frail. But it is not thy safest course, my
Christian brother, to make account of, or to expect long life. For if they
which are strong, live until seventy or eighty years, yet we find by
experience, that there be a great many which never see forty, some which never
see thirty, some which never see twenty, some which never see ten.

Yea but some, it may be, will further object and say, I am strong and lusty, 2.
Object.
I am young, or in my best years, I find no decay in my body; and therefore
what reason have I to look for death?

Alas poor soul, whosoever thou 2. Answ.
art, thou art too prone and ready to deceive thy self. Have thou never read,
that Man in his best estate, that is, in his best years, in his best strength,
in the very fl^ure of his age, is altogether vanity? Read Psalm 39. 5. and
it will teach thee. Have thou never read what Ioh says in his 21. Chapter and
23. verse, where he testisieth, that One dies in his full strength; his
breasts being full of milk, and his bones being moistened with marrow? Read
and consider, and be not incredulous, but believing.

Now having proved the truth of this point, to wit, that the life of man is
very frail and uncertain; and having answered the Objections which might be
made against the same: it remains now to make application of that which has
b^ne delivered. And a threefold use we may make of this our frailty; to wit,
an use of Reproof, an use of Instruction, and an use of Comfort. An use of
reproof. And it may reprove diverse. First, such as have made a covenant 1. Use.
with Death, and put the evil day far from them; which think in their hearts,
that though a scourge come and pass through the whole land, yet it shall not
come near them. Alas poor soul, what privilege have thou to escape more
then any other? art thou any jot the more safe, because of thy security? No
verily. For when thou shall say, Peace and safety, then shall there come upon
thee sudden destruction. As Paul says, 1 Thessalonians. 5.

Secondly, this may serve to reprove such as immoderately do seek after
wealth, being as insatiable in secking riches, as if they and their children
were not mortal, but immortal; as if indeed they were to live here always,
and were to make provision for an earthly eternity. O foolish and filthy
covetousness! when will thou say, It is enough? O vain man, thou prouidest
with the danger of thy soul for many years, when it may be this night thy
soul shall be taken from thee, and then whose shall these riches be which thou
have unjustly gathered?

Thirdly, it may make for the just reproof of them which labor to persuade
others that they shall live long. These are like unto them which promise others
liberty, and are themselves the bondslaues of corruption. And in this many
Physicians are too much to blame, which will make such large promises to their
patients, as though it were in them to recover health at their pleasure, when
as in the mean time the poor patient dies under their hands.

The second use is an use of Instruction: 2. Use.
ction: for considering that man's life is thus frail, therefore hence we
should learn to be humbled in our selves. We must remember we are but dust and
ashes, and therefore we must not have high conceits of our selves: neither must
we affect the too much pampering and pranking of the body. Alas, it may be thou
art feeding nicely
and curiously to day; it may be thou art now pranking thy self in pride and
in strange attire, or painting thy face with Iesabel; and before to morrow thou
may be dead. O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord; humble thy
self before the Lord, in consideration of thy mortality. If thou will not
humble thy self, thou have just cause to fear that the Lord will humble thee,
and bring thee low.

Secondly, the consideration of our frailty must teach us, not to defer or
put off our repentance: but whilst it is called to day, to call our selves to
a secret examination of our ways and courses, to humble our selves for them,
to renew our covenants with God of our obedience, and to turn from the power
of Satan to God. Thou think thou may do this soon enough when thou art
old: but how do thou know, whether thou shall live to be old, or no? Or
suppose thou live to be old, how do thou know that God
will give thee repentance at the last, when thou have hardened thine heart
against him by thy sins? Therefore, whilst it is called to day, either now
turn or never, either now repent or perish. Either seek the Lord in time
whilst he may be found, or else never se^ke him.

Thirdly, the consideration of our frailty must teach us, first to seek Gods
kingdom and righteousness, and to lay up for our selves a good foundation
against the time to come. We must labor to be rich in faith, that when death
comes upon us, we may not slauishly fear it, but rather chearefully embrace it
as a most welcome messenger. It is lamentable to see what pains men take to go
to hell, how they labor for the obtaining of their lusts and insatiable
desires, and in the mean time remain altogether void of care how they might
attain heaven. O awake, awake, remember out abode here, it is but for a short
time; but that estate which is to come, whether it be for happiness or woe, it
is eternal, and whithout end. Therefore strive and take pains to enter in by
the straire gate. We find by experience, things of value in the world, to wit,
riches and honors, and high places, they are not attained without great meane^
used: and shall we think that saving grace, and Gods kingdom will be obtained
without great striving? Let no man or woman deceive themselves: for if the
righteous which labor hard in the use of means, as in hearing, in reading,
meditating, in the use of the Sacrament, in conference, in keeping ^aith and a
good conscience, in prayer, and such like: if such, I say, shall scarce^y be
saved, notwithstanding all their ^are and striving; then what shall be^ome of
such as strive not at all; or if ^hey do strive, it is very coldly and
negligently? Surely such, unless they ^end their pace, they can never each
their iourneys end, which is the glorious kingdom of heaven. They will be
found like travelers dead in ^he way before they half reach ^ome.

The third and last use is for comfort 3. Use.
and consolation. For considering that man's life is so frail; therefore first
^t may be a comfort to such as en^ure exile, or banishment, or imprisonment, or
hard usage, or poverty, or sickness, or the like, they may remember, that
their afflictions here cannot be long, because their lives are but short. Peace
shall come, and they shall rest in their beds, Esaias 57. 2. and Blessed are they
which die in the Lord yea says the Spirit, they rest from their labors,
Revel. 14. 13.

Secondly, the consideration o^ shortness of life, may be matter o^
consolation and comfort unto such a^ believe; for now their salvation i^ nearer
then when they began to believe. What know thou, but tha^ there is but a
step between thee an^ heaven? Thou art here this year, tho^ may be in
heaven before the next thou art here this month, tho^ may be with Christ
before the next. Yea thou art here to day, tho^ may be in bliss before to
morrow O thrice happy estate! how would men admire the happiness of such
beggar as were in possibility every hour to be advanced to a kingdom? And how
much more admirable is the estate of every true Christian, who stands in
continual possibility to be advanced to such an estate, as neither eye has
seen, nor ear has heard, neither can it sufficiently enter into the heart of
man to conceive? 1. Cor. 2. 9.

Thirdly, the consideration of our shortness of life may comfort all such
faithful Christians as do desire to be freed from sin. Though Satan
and the world, and their own corruptions, do disquiet them for a time, yet
they shall not always disquiet them. Death will come and that quickly, and
then thou shall sin no more, neither shall thou be tempted ^o sin any more,
but thou shall be ^ike unto an elect Angel, yea like unto Jesus Christ in
perfect holiness and righ^eousnesse. Which estate Gods children more affect
then they affect the very happiness or joys of heaven. And thus much for the
first doctrine.

Months of vanity: Hence observe ^. Doctr.
we in the next place, That afflictions sanstified are an especial means ^
bring a man or woman to a clear sight of the vanity of earthly things. Job
being greatly afflicted, and having his affliction sanctified unto him, was
enabled out of the bottom^ of his affliction to see that his months were but
vanity. And the lik^ may be said of David, who being sick^ and weak, obtained
withal an hol^ contempt even of his very kingdom, and was content that
Salom^^ should be crowned King even in hi^ life time, 1. King. 1. 33. The like
w^ read of Barzillai in 2. Sam. 19. 33. 34* who when David offered him great
honor and preferment in his Court he considering with himself that h^ was now
grown very old, refused the kings offer. And thus many Christians
which in time of health did too much affect riches and honors, and finenesse
in apparel, afterward in time of sickness come to see the vanity of all
these. To this purpose Solomon speaks well in Eccles. 12. 4. that in old age,
which is a laborious affliction of it self, the daughters of singing shall be
abased: as implying, that though in health and youth, men or women stand too
much affectionated to the vanity of earthly delights, yet in affliction and
old age they shall attain the sight of the vanity of these things. So that
afflictions are like unto the clay wherewith the blind man's eyes were anointed
in the Gospel, and whereby he came to attain his sight, which before he
wanted. Yea afflictions are like crystal spectacles, whereby Christians are
helped much in the discerning and discovering of earthly vanity.

And there be two reasons for the 1. Reason.
euidencing or clearing of the truth of this point, to wit, That afflictions
sanctified are special helps to bring to sight the vanity of earthly things.
As first, because men and women in afflictions find by experience the
helplesnesse of earthly things, they find that they may lie in pain and
misery, yea that they may die, and be turned to dust, for any thing which
their riches or honors can help them: and therefore they may easily conclude,
How vain o Lord do I now find these things, upon the which formerly (fool
that I was) I have so doted, and set my mind? Behold now I see and say with the
Preacher, as I find also by evident experience, Vanity of vanities, vanity of
vanities, all is vanity, Eccles. 1. 2.

Secondly, in sanctified afflictions 2. Reason.
men and women come to the sight
of the excellency of true saving grace: now they can value one dram of faith
above many talents of gold; now they had rather have oil in their vessels,
then treasure in their coffers. And the more that any one is brought to the
sight of the true worth of grace, the more they are brought withal to the
sight of earthly vanity. Do I see the price of heaven? Then I see the baseness
of the earth. Do I see the excellency of the knowledge of Christ my Lord? Then
I see all other things to be dross, and count them to be dung.

Yea but some, it may be, will be Object.
too busy to object, that afflictions are more like to drive us from God then
to bring us unto him, and that afflictions are dead helps of themselves, and
cannot profit.

Unto whom I answer, that afflictions Answer.
separated from the working of Gods Spirit are indeed of no value; which is the
reason that though Turks and Infidels have afflictions as well as Christians,
yet they are no whit bettered by their afflictions, because indeed their
afflictions are not sanctified unto them. And the like we may be bold to say of
the written word of God. For the word it self separated from the Spirit cannot
work. So that we put not this virtue of bringing to the sight of earthly
vanity, in the very afflictions themselves, no more then we ascribe the
recovery of the blind man's sight unto the clay wherewith his eyes were
anointed. But this we affirm, that afflictions sanctified, that is,
afflictions joined with the work of Gods Spirit are excellent means to bring to
the sight of earthly vanity. Yea had it not been for afflictions sanctified,
there be many now in heaven which had never come there. And had it not been for
afflictions, there be many prodigals in the world, which had not known (as
they do know) what had belonged to the turning from the power of Satan to God.
And therefore as I desire that there may not too much be ascribed to
afflictions: so I would forewarne men to take heed how they make too slight
account of them, considering to what excellent purposes God has sanctified and
appointed them; and considering withal the confessions of many sound and
experienced Christians, which do ingenuously acknowledge that such and such
afflictions were especial means to bring them to God.

But may not afflictions lawfully 2. Object.
be desired and prayed for, considering that they may be means, if they be
sanctified, of much good unto us?

To this I answer, that as we are not Answ.
to condition with God that he would never touch us with any affliction, but we
must refer our selves unto his will. So we are not to hasten afflictions
upon our selves* and the rather because we know not what ability we have to
bear afflictions, or what grace we shall have to make the right use of them.
We may indeed pray that if afflictions be upon us they may be sanctified unto
us, and it is an holy and necessary prayer: but to pray that God would scourge
us, it is a presumptuous request, and does savor too much of ouerweening our
own strength. And if any for their presumptuous practice shall allege the
example of David in Psalm 6. 1. that he prayed, not to be corrected in Gods
wrath, whereby he seems to be content that God should scourge him, so that it
were not in his fury: to this I answer, that such know not of what spirit they
are which thus reason. For a^t thou able to make as good use of afflictions as
David was? I trow not. Secondly, David does not absolutely pray for
afflictions, but taking it as granted, that God would afflict him, he prays
that the Lord would not afflict him in his wrath and fury. Therefore we
conclude, that though much good be wrought by afflictions, yet that afflictions
are not to be prayed for, or to be hastened.

But to come to the use and application 1. Vs^*
of this point: Is it so that afflictions sanctified are an especial means to
bring us to the sight of the vanities of earthly things? Then this should teach
us in the first place, to take notice of, and to admi^e the excellent power of
God, who is able out of darkness to bring light. For what is more unlikely, in
the judgment of flesh and blood, to do good, then afflictions are? For by
reason, when a man is sick, he is more fit to see the excellency of health
then the vanity of it; and when he is poor, to see the happiness of riches,
then to see their impotency. And therefore great and admirable is the work of
our good God in all things, and particularly in the sanctification of
afflictions. We may justly say with the Apostle, Romans 11 33. O the depth of the
riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God: how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out!

Secondly, this consideration of the usefulness of afflictions must be an 2.
Use.
especial means to persuade us to patience under the cross, and to a willing
submitting of our selves under the mighty hand of God He is a wise and prudent
Physician, he knows indeed what Physic is best for us. We have a great God
to deal with when we are under afflictions, and if we submit unto him, he will
raise us up. But if we walk stubburnly against him, he will walk stubburnly
against us. Gods wrath is like to the thunder and lightnings, which commonly
hurt not soft and yielding bodies because they do not resist, but they exercise
their force upon stout oaks and iron locks and bars, etc. So God deals
gently with such as submit themselves, but if any resist, he will surely crush
them and make them tame. They shall be sure to gain nothing by obstinacy
against God, but increase of their miseries. Yea God will walk obstinatly
against his very elect if they resist his proceedings, as we see in the example
of Jonas: how did God persecute Jonas with wind and tempests, yea how did he
toss him into the seas, and plunged him into the hell of the whales belly, and
never left him until he had brought him to submit to go to Nineue? And
therefore
make a virtue of necessity; that which thou must suffer of necessity, suffer
it with patience and willingly* It may be the Lord aims at greater good
toward thee in thine affliction then thou art aware of. And therefore as thou
art content to receive many a bitter potion at the hand of a physician in hope
of health, so be content to drink of the cup which God has tempered, in hope
that it shall work for thy good.

In the third place we must duly 3. Use.
examine our selves if at any time we have been afflicted; whether our
afflictions
have wrought thus with us or no: viz. whether they have brought us to the
sight of the vanity of earthly things. If they have, we may be persuaded that
they are sanctified unto us: and we have great cause to be thankful to God for
them.

But if we have been scourged, and yet are never the better, we have just cause
to be humbled, and to fear that our afflictions were never sanctified unto us.
The Lord has smitten us, but we have not grieved, he has consumed us, but we
have refused to receive correction; we have madeour faces harder then the
rock, we have refused to return: as the Lord complains against the
disobedient Jews, Iere. 5. 3. And thus much for the second Doctrine; to wit,
That affl^ctions sanctified, are special helps to bring us to the sight of
the vanity of earthly things.

Painful nights: Or as it is in the original, nights of labor. Whence
observe we, That it may befall the 3. Doctr.
dear children of God, to be visited with painful and tedious visitations.
They may be sick and grievously pained, and that not for a night, or for a
day, but for nights, that is, for many night^ together. The truth of this we
see, first here in Job: Nights of labor, or painful nights have been
appointed unto me: for thus he complains.

And that Gods children may be visited with grievous pain, and with laborious
sickness, it is further manifest by examples; as first by the example of
David, a man after Gods own heart. For, how does he complain in the sixth
Psalm? That his bones were vexed, that he was weary of his groaning, that his
eye was consumed with grief: and in Psalm 39. 10. That he was consumed by the
blow of Gods hand: but especially in Psalm 38. Where he says, That the
arrows of God did stick fast in him, and his hand pressed him sore. That
there was no soundness in his flesh, because of Gods anger: and that there was
no rest in his bones, because of his sin. That his wounds did stink, and
were corrupt; that he was troubled and bowed down greatly. That he went
mourning all the day. That his loins were filled with a loathsome disease. That
he was feeble and sore broken: that he roared for the very disquietnesse of his
heart, etc. And the like we see in the Church, Lamen. 1. 11. 12. where she
says, Behold and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is
done unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce
anger: from above has he sent fire into my bones, and it prevails against
them. Yea, what pains did Christ himself endure in the Garden, when he sweat
water and blood? and what torment upon the Cross when he cried, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? I suppose, that at that time the pains of hell
came about him, as it is said also in Psalm. 18. 5. I suppose that then Christ
descended into hell, when he felt the very fire of Gods wrath in his soul for
our sins, when the Lord withdrew the light of his countenance, and left him to
the intolerable sense and feeling of his indignation. Now if David, a man so
dear to God: if the Church, bought with so dear a price: yea, if Christ Jesus
the Son of God, were left to this extremity of pains: then it follows
undeniably, That Gods (...) dear Saints and children may be (...) with very
grievous pain and sickness, with painful nights, yea with nights of pain.

And for the proof of the second clause of the Doctrine, to wit, that Gods
children may be visited with long and tedious sicknesses, as well as with
extremity of pain: consider we first the example of Aeneas, who kept his bed,
and was sick of the palsy for the space of eight years, Acts 9. 33.
Secondly, the example of the poor man, John. 5. 5. who had an infirmity for
the space of eight and thirty years, lying at the Poole of Bethesda.

Thirdly, the example of the faithful woman, Luke 8. 43. who had an infirmity
twelve years together, and had spent all her substance upon Physicians, and
could not be healed of any. Yea, as Saint Mark is bold to say, She was never
the better for her tampering so much with Physic, but rather much the worse,
Mar. 5. 26. I might be large in the pro^fe of this point, but I will abstain.
Come we to the reasons.

And there be many causes wherefore God does thus heavily and tediously afflict
his servants.

First, that hereby he might correct 1. Reason.
some remainder of dangerous corruption lurking in them; according to that in
Esaias 27. 9. By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged; and this is all the
fruit, to take away his sin. Some
of Gods children are subject to spiritual pride, some to rash anger, some to
worldly-mindednesse, some to infidelity, some to neglect of the best things,
some to discontentednes with their estate. And the Lord he lays ^
an heavy chain upon their loins, to correct and mortify their co^ruptions
in them. And herein God deals like a skillful Goldsmith; he casts his
children into fiery afflictions; not because he means utterly to cast them
away, but because he means to take them out more pure, and purged from their
dross of sin: yea he fineth them seuenfold, that yet they may be more pure.

Secondly, God does heavily afflict his people, of purpose to weane 2. Reason.
them from the vain delights and pleasures of the world. And in this the Lord
deals like a nurse; he annointeth the teates of the world with bitterness, to
the end that his children sucking them might desire them no more. How came
Jacob to distaste and to forsake Labans family, but by the affliction which he
found by the change of Labans countenance? Genesis 31. How came the Prodigal
son to be weaned from the citizens service, Luke 15. but by the affliction of
hunger and want which he found in it? And lastly, how come many of the dear
children of God to be so far mortified to the world, as that they desire to
be dissolved, and to be with Christ, but by the bitterness of afflictions?

Thirdly, God does thus scourge 3. Reason.
his Church, and afflict his children, for the trial of his graces in them;
according to that in 1. Pet. 4. 12. Brethren; think it not strange concerning
the fiery trial, which is come upon you to try you, etc.

God afflicts his Church, partly for the trial of their patience, to see
whether they will submit themselves unto him, as well in suffering as in doing
his will: partly for the trial of says, to see if they will believe against
sense and feeling, and whether they will say with Job, Though the Lord kill me,
yet will I trust in him, Job 13. 15. Yea the Lord afflicts for the trial of
wisdom, to see if his children will endeavor to make good use of their
afflictions and of their crosses. Thus God I say afflicts for trial.

In the fourth and last place, God 4. Reason.
sorely afflicts his Church in this world, that he might the highlier advance
it in glory in the world to come. For howsoever The affliction^ of this
present time are not worthy to be compared to the glory that shall be
revealed, (as the Apostle speaks, Romans 8. 18.) yet our light affliction which
is but for a moment, works for us a far more excellent and eternal weight
of glory 2. Cor. 4. 17.

Thus the holy Martyrs, as they suffered most, so no doubt they are glorified
most. And thus many dear Saints of God, which have endured a very hell of
torment here, no doubt but they receive a more ^xcellent heaven of comfort
hereafter: as they have been partakers of the suffering, so they are of the
consolation.

But to come to the use and application 1. Use.
: Is it so, that God does sorely afflict his dear children? Then this should
teach us in the first place, not to judge or censure those which suffer, as
though they were greater sinners then others. You know what Christ himself
says in Luke 13. 2. Suppose ye, that those Galileans were greater sinners then
all other Galileans, because they suffered such things? I tell you nay, etc.
And it was the sin of Jobs friends to judge Job an hypocrite, or a notorious
offender, because the hand of God was so heavy upon him. Let us therefore
learn on the contrary with Gods Church, Iam. 5. 11, To esteem them happy
which suffer. Let us hope, that afflictions laid upon our brethren or
sisters, are signs of Gods love toward them, and not of his hatred. For
whomsoever the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he
receives: as we read Hebrews 12. 6. 7. And therefore lewd and uncharitable is
the practice of all such which take upon them to judge and to censure many a
sound Christian, by their very afflictions, to be hypocrites, to be
dissemblers, to be some way notoriously wicked: For else, say they, God would
never thus have punished them. O most unjust and rash censure! Does not God
scourge every son whom he receives? and shall we not through many
tribulations enter into the kingdom of God? Therefore let God be true, and
every rash iudger shall be proved a liar.

Secondly, are Gods own dear children subject to grievous and tedious 2. Use.
afflictions? Therefore this may be just matter of terror to the wicked and
ungodly. For if judgment begin at the house of God, what shall be the end of
such as obey not the Gospel of God? as the Apostle speaks, 1. Pet. 4. 17. If
God correct his own with strokes, surely he will punish the wicked with
scorpions. If he afflict Lazarus here with pouerrie and sickness, surely he
will punish Dives hereafter with hell fire.

Yea, if God spared not his Angels which sinned, but cast them down into hell,
and delivered them into darkness, to be reserved to judgment; then how shall
the wicked think that the Lord will spare them, going on in their sinful
courses? Oh therefore let all the sharp corrections laid upon Gods children in
this life, be so many warning peales to the ungodly speedily to repent, and to
turn to God in time, lest worse punishments seize upon them then ever seized
upon the elect.

Thirdly, the consideration of this truth, to wit, that Gods children are 3.
Use.
subject to so great afflictions; it must teach every one of us, to be prepa^ed
to endure great trials. We must be prepared to endure loss of our dearest
friends, loss of good name, loss of our whole estate, loss of liberty,
loss of health, extremity of pains in the body, and that for a long time
together: yea we must be prepared for the fiery trial; for what do we know,
what God has in store for us? Lastly, we must be prepared to endure troubles
of mind and vexations of conscience; we must be content to be brought to
heaven by hell-gates. Brethren, we must not think it strange if these things
befall unto us. The like have befallen unto Gods own sons and daughters that
are in the world, or have been. Let us learn to get strength now in the time
of our peace; we may have more use of it hereafter then it may be we are aware
of.

Fourthly, considering that Gods 4. Use.
elect are subject to so great afflictions, let us which enjoy freedom from
these torme^ting miseries, be the more thankful to God for our freedom. We
might live in sickness, in pain, in poverty, in persecution, in distress of
mind, and yet remain the true children of God. Therefore what cause of
thankfulness have we, with whom the Lord deals more mildly, and yet gives us
the same hope of glory, which he has given unto others which suffer great
trials? God deals with us as he dealt with Henoch; he takes us away, and we
hardly see or feel death: whereas many others are carried as it were in a
fiery chariot to the kingdom of heaven. Consider this all ye which sit under
your own vine and under your own figtree, and be thankful.

Fifthly, considering that Gods children 5. Use.
are subject to so great afflictions; therefore this must teach us to have a
fellowfeeling of the miseries of others. We must not make small reckning of
their pains, as though they ailed nothing; but we must compassionate them, and
use all the means we can to comfort them, and to support them, as we our
selves desire to be comforted and to be supported if we were in their estate.
Be it therefore far from us to add affliction to affliction, or to increase
the sorrows of such whom God has wounded: But let us rather think with Job,
that he which is in affliction ought to be comforted of his friends. It is a
cruel practice to lay on more weight upon a poor beast, when he is ready to
sink under that burden which is upon him already. So, much more it is a
tyrannous fact to add to the sorrows of them which are already heavy laden.

And thus much may suffice to have spoken concerning the third doctrine, to
wit, that Gods dear children are subject to painful and tedious sicknesses.

Many painful nights have been appointed unto me. Where observe, that Job does
not say, It was my hard fortune to see much misery, or by evil luck and hard
chance I came to this affliction; but many painful nights have been appointed
unto me: wherein is intimated unto us this truth, namely, that There is no
affliction befalls 4. Doctr.
any of the children of God, be it never so sharp or tedious, but it befalls
by the determinate counsel and purpose of God. This is manifest out of diverse
texts of holy Scripture, as out of Esaias 45. 7. I form the light, and create
darkness: I make peace, and create evil: I the Lord do all these things. And
out of Amos 3. 6. Shall a trumpet be blown in a city, and the people not be
afraid? shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord has not done it? But yet
this point is more especially proved by that in Acts 4. 27. where it is said,
Herod, and Pontius Pilate, and the Gentiles, and the people of Israel, were
gathered together, to do unto Christ that which Gods hand and counsel had
determined before to be done. Yea indeed, all things both great and small are
governed and guided by the providence of God: there is not a sparrow which
falls unto the ground, nor an hair which falls from our head, without our
Father; as Christ himself says in Matthew 10. 29. And this truth the Saints
have acknowledged from time to time. If Sheme^ curse David and rail upon him,
David will acknowledge, that the Lord bids him curse, 2. Sam. 16. 17. If the
Sabeans take away Jobs oxen or his asses, and the Chaldeans deprive him of his
camels; if a fire from heaven take away his sheep, aad the winds stirred up by
Satan destroy his children, yet he will acknowledge, that the Lord has given,
and the Lord has taken away, Job 1. 21.

Yea but this might seem to be an Object.
hard saying, that God should be the author of all afflictions. For suppose
that a man be robbed of all that he has, is God the cause of the robbery? or
suppose a man be wrongfully slandered, is God the cause of the slander? This
might seem to make God the author of sin.

Nothing less. For howsoever God Answer.
is the author of the actio^, yet he is not the author of the evil of the
action* he tempts no man to steal, he infu^eth malice into no man's heart, to
move him to curse or slander. But the evil of the action is partly of the
devil, and partly of man himself. Therefore let no man when he is tempted,
say, that he is tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither
tempts he any man: but every man is tempted, when he is drawn away by his
own lust, and is enticed, Iam. 1. 13. 14.

But it may be objected further, Do not many crosses fall out by mere ill
luck? Does not a man's experience tell him of many ill chances which have
befallen him? Does not a man sometimes break his neck, falling from his
horse? Does not a child upon a sudden fall into a pit, and is drowned? Does not
an axe head fli^ from the helue, when no such thing is intended, and slayes a
man? And what is this but hand luck or bad fortune?

These indeed may seem to be mere casualties unto us, in respect Answor.
of the suddenness of them, and because we see not always the causes of them.
But with God these things are certain, and proceed from his decree: according
to that in Pro. 16. 35. The lot is cast into the lap, but the disposing thereof
is from the Lord.

Therefore we must not be like the very heathen, ascribing that unto chance and
fortune, which we should by right ascribe to the providence of God.

But to come to the use and application. 1* Use.
Is it so, that all afflictions come by the providence of God? Then this must
teach us in the first place, not to murmr, but let us say with David, in
Psalm. 39. 9. I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because thou did it. If
we consider, we have no cause indeed to murmr against God. For first, he
lays not upon any of us the thousandth part of that which we do deserve. And
secondly, he causes those afflictions which he does lay upon us, to work for
our good: so that we have more cause to give him thanks, then in any sort to
murmr against him.

Secondly, considering that all our afflictions are from God; therefore 2. Use.
it must teach us to fear God above all. Let us not fear the devil, nor
tyrants, nor our professed enemies. For none of these can hurt us without God.
But let us fear that great God, who when he has afflicted us here, is able to
cast both soul and body into hell fire, Luke 12. 5. It is a miserable thing,
that we can fear a great man because he is able to hurt us, and that we cannot
much more fear God which is able to damn us. This bewrayes a great deal of
infidelity in us: this shows that we do not believe the certainty of Gods
threatenings. We consider God only according to his mercy, and so make an
idol of him: but we fear him not for his justice. We pretend that we love
God; but where is that awful respect which we owe unto him?

Thirdly, is it so, that all afflictions 3. Use.
are from God? Therefore this must teach us, that whenever God does afflict
us in any kind whatsoever, either in our good names, or in our goods, or in our
friends by taking them away, or in our bodies, or such like: it must teach us I
say, to ^ie our selves and to fan ou^ selves, what the Lord has against us,
or for what cause he does afflict us. Thus did Moses, Psalm. 90. 7. 8. We are
consumed by thine anger, and by thy wrath are we troubled: thou have set our
iniquiti^s before thee, and our secret sins in the light of thy countenance.
And it is a blessed use of afflictions, to make them as our looking glass,
wherein we discern and discover some things amiss in our selves. Let us
therefore which taste afflictions, find out our secret or open sins, and then
let us acknowledge them to God, and humble our souls for them; let us renew
our covenants with God of new obedience. Yet let us justify God in all his
proceedings against us; and let us say, Lord, it is thy great mercy that thou
layest no greater punishment upon me, yea it is thy mercy that I am not
consumed and brought to nothing. Let us say with Daniel, To us belongs
nothing but shame and confusion; yea let us say as the truth is, that hell fire
and the second death is due unto us. By this humiliation joined with resolution
of newness of life for time to come, we shall obtain mercy and forgiveness
of sins past, Prou. 28. 13. Secondly, we shall turn away Gods wrath and
judgments from us for time to come, as Nineue did: and without this
repentance, there is no possible escape from Gods vengeance, but his hand will
be still stretched out against us: he will break us with one breaking after
another, until we be content to break off our finnes. If we will make no end
of sinning, let us never think that God will make an end of ouni^hing.

Fourthly, is it so, that God is the 4. Use.
author of all afflictions? Therefore this must teach us to fly unto God for
help in the time of distress. We must say with the Church in Hos. 6. 1 The
Lord has torn, and he will heal; he has smitten, and he will bind us up.
We must not seek to witches or wizzards for help, neither must we trust in
our Physicians as Asa did, in 2. Chron. 16. 12; but we must seek to the living
God. I speak not this, to the end we should neglect the means, but that we
should not too much dote upon the means, as it is the sin of too many. And I
speak it furthermore to this end and purpose, that we might be stirred up the
more fervently to seek to God by prayer and humiliation in the time of our
trouble. For it is too manifest how earnest we are in seeking after the means,
while in the mean time we neglect to seek unto God by prayer for his help.
We are like unto Rachel which cries (though otherwise a good woman) and says
unto Jacob, Give me children or else I die: not remembering that it was in God
only to give children. And so we cry with feruency, Give me this help or else
I die, whereas it is the Lord only which is able to help.

Fifthly and lastly, Do all afflictions 5. Use.
come by the providence of God? Then this may be matter of comfort and
consolation unto all Gods afflicted people: for certainly God will lay no other
affliction upon his Saints, but that which is for their good. God is our tender
Father, and can we think that a tender father will give any thing to his
beloved child, but that which is good and whole some? God is our faithful
Physician, and shall we think that a faithful Physician will wittingly give
any thing to his patient, which may do har^e and not good? God is our chief
friend, and shall we think that our chief friend will seek our bane? Be it
far from us so to imagine. Yea be assured of this, thou afflicted in Sion,
and tossed with tempests; if God did not know and purpose to do thee good by
afflictions, I dare be bold to say, he would never afflict thee. And therefore
say with Christ, and that with comfort and willing subjection, The cup which my
Father has given me, shall I not drink it? Ioh. 18. 11. Yea count it for
matter of great joy, that the Lord does vouchsafe to correct you for your good:
for when y^ are judged, ye are chastened of the Lord, that ye might not be
condemned with the world; as the Apostle speaks in 1. Cor. 11. 33. And thus
much for the fourth doctrine, to wit, that all afflictions come by the
providence of God, and by his decree and determinate purpose.

When I lie down, I sa^ when shall I arise, and the night be gone? and I am
full of tossings to and fro, etc.

Whence observe, That afflictions may be irksome and troublesome to 5. Doctr.
the very children of God. This is manifest by this example of Job. For it
appears both by his words and by his gesture, how irksome his sickness was
unto him. The like we read of David. For how was he perplexed for the loss of
his son Absolon: crying out in a most lamentable manner, O my son Absolon,
my son, my son Absolon: would to God I had died for thee, o Absolon my
son, my son. The lik^ we read of Jeremiah in his fourth chapter, 19.
verse, crying out, My bell^e, my belly, I am pained at the. very heart, my
heart makes a noise in me. The like we see in Rachel, Matthew. 2. 18. For, In
Rama was there a voioe heard, lamentation and weeping, and great mourning:
Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be comsorted, because they were
not. The like we see in Hezekiah, Esaias 38. 14. for in his sickness he
chattered like a crane or a swallow; yea he mourned like a dove. The like we
read of the Church in affliction, Esaias 59. 11. saying, We roar like Bears,
and mourn like doves. Yea what shall we speak of Elias, who was even weary
of his life, by reason of the idolatry and persecution in the days of Iesabel?
1. Kin. 19. 4. What shall we speak of Naomie who named her self Mara or
bitter, in respect of her bitter afflictions? Ruth 1. 21. What should we
mention Jonas, who was exceedingly vexed and troubled, when he had no just
cause so to be? Jonas 4. 9. Yea my beloved, it befell even to Christ himself
to be troubled, and to be sensible of his smart. For else why does he pray
aagaine and again, that the bitter cup might pass from him? Or, why does he
cry, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? and the like.

Yea, the child of God may be so sensible of his afliction, and his cross may
be so irksome unto him, as that he may fall thereby into diverse dangerous
temptations.

He may come to think that God has forsaken him, as we see in the example of
David, Psalm. 77. 7. 8. Will the Lord cast off for ever? will he be favorable
no more? Is his mercy clean gone for ever? Does his promise fail for
evermore? Has God forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger shut up his
tender mercies? etc.

Secondly, the child of God in afflictions, may possibly be very impatient, and
may utter dangerous speeches, as we see in the forenamed example of Jonas, I do
well to be angry. Yea, he may come to curse the day of his birth, with Job and
Jeremiah. Yea, he may come to have his words swallowed up that he cannot pray,
Job 6. 3.

Thirdly, the very elect may possibly be comfortless in their affliction,
according to that in Esaias 54. 11. O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and
not comforted! Yea, they may die mourning, their gray hairs may go with
mourning to the grave; as Iac^b speaks of himself, Genesis 42. 38.

And there be great reasons why afflictions are thus irksome to Gods children:
as first, because our nature is traile and weak, our strength is not 1. Reason.
the strength of stones, nor our flesh of brass* as Job speaks, Job 6. 12.
but we are fl^shie bodies, and therefore very sensible of the least pains.

Secondly, the devil does especially tempt unto impatiencie in the 2. Reason.
time of our affliction: we have then of all other times the strongest
temptations. When did Satan most tempt Job to curse God, but in the depth of
his misery and calamity? And therefore it is not much to be marvelled at, if
we descrie natural frailty and weakness in our brethren and sisters at such
a time.

God delivers his children to much frailty, that in their weakness his 3.
Reason.
power might be seen. For, how admirable is the power of God, in the
preserving of such a man or woman to eternal life! which oftentimes neither
know what they do, nor what they say. It is a great work of God to bring any
to heaven, though they pray, though they call for mercy, though they give
evidences of faith and repentance: but to bring such to heaven, which for the
present cannot pray, it is a wo^ke rather to be admired then conceived.

God also suffers his dear children to die uncomfortably for their cause 4.
Reason.
which stand by, as either for the warning of his Saints standing by, to teach
them to take heed of nourishing corruption, lest it trouble them at the last:
and to forewarne them also to prepare great strength against the needful time.
Or else the Lord does it in his justice, to be a stumbling block to the wicked
that stand by: that they may depart and say, Lo these are the Professors,
these are the holy people, these are the runners to Sermons; and yet you see
what ends they make: God bless me from their profession, etc. A just judgment
of God, that forasmuch as the wicked will not receive any good by Gods people
in their life time, either by their good counsel, or good example, that
therefore they should receive hurt and bane by their death.

But here some may possibly object: 1. Object.
Does not Christ himself say, that The Comforter shall remain for ever with
his Elect? John 14. 16. Yea does he not say further, that No man shall take
away their joy? John 16. 22. Which being true, how can it possibly be, that the
child of God having had at any time sound joy, should die uncomfortably?

To this I answer, that indeed it is Answer.
true, soundioy shall never utterly be taken away from any elect vessel; but
it is not to be denied but the sense and feeling of that joy may be taken away.
Though Christ was always the Son of Gods love, and remained for ever in his
favor, yet he was not always sensible of that love, which caused him to cry,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

If any shall object further, and say; 2. Object.
Do we not read, that the Apostles rejoiced, In that they were thought wothie
to suffer rebuke for Christ? Acts 5. 41. And do we not hear of those holy
Martyrs in Hebr. 10. 34. who suffered with joy the spoiling of their goods?
Yea, do we not behold with our eyes, many Christians which depart out of this
life with much heavenly joy? Therefore it may seem, that the end of Gods
children is a joyful end.

I answer, it is true that many Christians, Answ.
yea I hope the most of Gods children depart with joy. But this is not the
condition of all. There be some that go weeping to heaven, as well as there be
others which go triumphing. There be some that are carried in fiery chariots
with Elias, and as it were in a whirlwind: when others are carried in a more
mild manner, or as it were in a horselitter.

If any shall object yet and say, Do 3. Object.
we not read in Psalm. 37. Mark the upright man, and behold the just: the end
of that man is peace? Therefore how is it possible that the end of the child of
God should be uncomfortable?

It is most true, that the end of Answer.
Gods children is peace, but this peace is especially obtained in the world to
come; for so says the Prophet: Peace shall come, and they shall rest in their
beds, Esaias 57. 2. Yea what says our blessed Savior? In the world ye shall
have assliction, but be of good comfort, I have overcome the world. John 16. 33.

But to come to the use and application 1. Use.
of this point: Is it so, that afflictions may be thus troublesome and tedious
to the very children of God? Then this must teach us, not rashly to censure all
such as in whom we discover much weakness and signs of impatiency. For in so
doing we might quickly come to condemn the generation of the righteous. Shall
we judge Job to be an hypocrite* if we hear him cursing the day of his birth?
God forbid. Theresore judge not, that ye be not judged. For with what judgment
ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with what measure ye mete, it shall be
measured to you again, Matthew. 7. 2. In stead of judging and censuring other,
in this case rather learn to judge thy self: think thus with thy self, when
thou see signs of impatiencie in good people, first, that surely their pangs
and pains are exceeding great, for otherwise they would not thus complain:
and secondly suspect thy self, that if thou were in their case, and did
endure that which they endure, thou thy self would be far more impatient.

Secondly, is it so, that afflictions 2. Use.
may be thus tedious unto the children of God? Therefore this must teach us to
be thankful to God, when our brethren and sisters make a comfortable end. How
great cause had the sriends and kindred of holy Martyrs to praise God, when
they beheld with their eyes the steadfast faith, the undaunted courage, the
marvelous patience which appeared in those worthy se^uants of God. And so when
we behold our friends upon their deathbed, justifying God, condemning
themselves, laying hold of salvation by Christ, giving good instruction unto
others, and commending their spirits into the hand of their Lord which has
bought them: surely, I lay, in this case we have great and just cause to
glorify God. And so much the rather are we bound to be thankful for this,
because it is not given to all the Saints to have this comfort at the last: but
some upon their deathbeds are constrained with Christ Jesus to cry in the sense
of their pains, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

Thirdly, is it so, that afflictions may be thus tedious unto Gods children? 3.
Use.
Therefore this must teach all Christians to endeavor, and that betimes, to lay
the foundation of a comfortable death; and for this end we must observe these
rules.

First, we must take away the sting of death, which is sin. There is nothing
which makes death terrible or troublesome unto Gods child, but sin: as for
the pangs, many Christians have comfortably endured them, especially being
assured of Gods favor, and also privy to themselves of a well spent life. But
as for such which would not be ruled, but would still retain a felfewill,
their end has been commonly uncomfortable. Therefore my dear brother and
sister, whosoever thou art, let my counsel be auailable with thee; cast away
all thy transgressions whereby thou have transgressed. Spare not thy bosom
sins. For I say unto thee, every sin which thou keep unmortified, does
threaten to make thy death uncomfortable. Wherefore let us every day be
lessening the sorrows of death by our daily practice of mortification. Have
thou mortified lust, mortify also
covetousness: have thou mortified covetousness, mortify also pride: have
thou mortified pride, mortify also rash anger: in a word, have thou mortified
some sin, strive to mortify all sin. For assure thy self, if thou keep any
one sin alive, it will be bitterness in the end.

Secondly, if we desire to make a comfortable end, we must walk faithfully,
and labor to glorify God in our particular calling. How came Paul to finish
his days with comfort, but by this, that he had finished his course? 2. Tim.
4. that is, he had been careful to accomplish the work whereunto he was sent.
For it is not sufficient, my well-beloved, that we observe with diligence the
works of piety, and that we walk faithfully in our general calling as we
are Christians, but we must also walk faithfully in our particular callings. It
is not sufficient to seem to be a good Christian, but we must be good
Magistrates, or good masters, or good husbands, or good wives, or good
servants, or good children, etc. We must glorify God in the rank wherein God
has set us, if ever we mean to die with sound comfort.

Thirdly, if we desire to make a comfortable end, we must be careful to think
of our end betimes. When sickness and death come unexpected, they are the more
unwelcome, they come as unbidden guests: but if we have seriously thought of
these things before hand, and made them part of our daily meditation, then they
are the less troublesome, and the more easily borne. Even as a heavy burden,
if it be thrown upon a man's shoulders at unawares, it is ready to break his
back; but if he be aware of his burden, and fit himself to receive it, i^ is
far more tolerable: So it is with death and sickness: if thou think of
these things before hand, they will be far more easy; but if thou put this
evil day far from thee, thou shall find by woeful experience, that unexpected
death is the most
bitter and terrible. Therefore let thy bed put thee daily in mind of thy
grave, and thy sleep of thy death; let the putting off thy garments put thee
in mind of laying down this tabernacle of thy body; yea let thy sheets put
thee in mind of thy winding sheet; and the clothes which cover thee in thy
bed, put thee in mind of the earth which shall cover thee in thy grave. Thus
thou shall imitate Job who waited all the days of his appointed time until his
changing came Job 14. 14. And thus thou shall imitate many dear children of
God, which are taught of God thus to think of their mortality. Thus thou
shall be more and more mortified to the world, and thus no doubt thou shall
make thy end comfortable.

Fourthly, if we desire to make a comfortable end, we must endeavor betimes to
make our calling and election
sure. Thus Simeon departed in peace, because his eyes had seen Gods
salvation. And indeed how can we expect to die with comfort, while we are
unresolved what shall become of our souls in the world to come? And that we
may make our calling and election sure, we must observe these rules. First, we
must be diligent hearers of Gods word; for Faith comes by hearing, as the
Apostle speaks. What is the reason that so many waver? Is it not because they
are idle, and because they will not take the pains to hear so diligently, as
their case requires? Secondly, that we may make our calling and election
sure, we must frequently receive the Lords Supper. What experienced Christian
is there, but he is able to tell you, that the Sacrament by Gods blessing has
a notable confirming and establishing power? And therefore those negligent
Ministers are guilty of the weakness of the faith of the people, in that they
do not so frequently as they ought, administer the holy Sacrament. Thirdly, if
we desire
our calling and election to be made sure, then we must pray unto God, as the
Apostles did, that the Lord would increase our faith. For unless Gods Spirit
do testify together with our spirit, we can never come to any full assurance.
Paul may plant, and Apollos may water, but it must be God alone which must give
the increase of saving grace. Fourthly, if we would
make our calling and election sure, we must meditate often of Gods promises,
and we must try our estate by the ma^kes which are peculiar unto Gods elect.
Fifthly, if we would make our calling and election sure, we must be plentiful
in good works. For, whom has God promised to strengthen upon the bed of
languishing, in Psalm. 41. 3. but such as consider wisely of the poor? And who
are they which lay up for themselves a good foundation against the time to
come, laying hold of eternal life, but such as are rich in good works? 1. Tim
6. 19. Thus we see the way to a comfortable departure. God almighty give every
one of us grace to take this way, that so by our death we may glorify God,
bring comfort and good example to our brethren, and eternal benefit to our
own souls, and that for the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with the
blessed Father, and the holy Spirit, three most glorious persons, and one God,
be ascribed, as is most due, all honor, praise and glory, all true fear,
reverence and obedience, from this time forth for evermore, Amen.

The occasion of this Sermon (as you know) was for the celebration of the
funeral of that excellent servant of God, Mistress Elizabeth Iuxon, the late
faithful wife of Master John Iuxon Citizen of this famous City of London. And
the reason which moved me to make choice of this Text rather then of any other,
was the request of our dear sister deceassed, who upon her deathbed called
for her Bible, and turned to this portion of Scripture, and desired me to
entreat of it at her bu^iall. And indeed if I had been left to mine own free
choice, I think I could not have made a fitter choice of a Text in all the
Bible. For the estate of Job described in these words, does notably answer to
the estate of our sister.

For, were the months of Job, months of vanity? did they vanish away like
smoke? did they pass away quickly like the Weauers shuttle? Even so it was
with the life of this our sister; her days were but few and evil; her
pilgrimage here was but short; for she was not full seven and twenty years
old when God took her away, as I am informed. As it was with Henoch, because
he walked with God, therefore the Lord took him away in his middle age: even
so it was with this worthy woman; she walked with her God, and therefore he
has now taken her up unto himself in the midst of her days.

Secondly, did Job endure a painful and tedious grief in his body? Even so
did this our sister; her pains were very great, her trial was a fiery trial;
yea her sickness was not only dolorous, but likewise it was long and tedious,
continuing upon her with great extremity for the space of a year and upwards.
God did grind her in the mortar of his fatherly correction like spice, that so
she might be made the more fragrant sacrifice unto himself.

Thirdly, was Job brought by his sickness to the sight of the vanity of
earthly things? So was this servant of God; she had attained an holy scorn of
the contentments of this life. For when I demanded of her, whether the
comeliness of the room where she lay, and furniture of her house did not
somewhat tempt her to desire still to live: she answered me, That nothing in
the world did move her to desire life, no not her very children, which were
far more dear unto her, then any worldly riches whatsoever. So that I found
she was quite dead to the world in her mind, before she was dead or deprived of
life in her body. God grant that every one of us may labor for the like grace
of s^und mortification. For, if we be dead and crucified unto the world, it is
a good sign that we are alive to God.

Fourthly, was grief and smart irksome and troublesome unto Job himself?
Then it was the great mercy of God, to give patience unto this our sister in
any measure. And let us not think it strange if she roared and cried with
pain at some times; but let us rather fear, that if we had been in her case,
and had tasted her sorrows, we had been like to fall into greater extremity
then ever she fell. It is the property of a good child to cry whilst he is a
beating, as well as of a bad. But here is the difference; a good child, when
the smart is gone, will kiss the rod, and love his parents, and be sorry for
his fault; whereas a wicked child will murmr against and hate his parents.
Now this our worthy sister showed her self to be a good child; for she cried
when she felt the smart: but when she had a^y mitigation, she condemned her
i^patiencie, and justified God, kissing ^is rod, by showing a very tender
affection of love to God, whenever she thought or spoke seriously of him.

Fifthly, were these painful nights appointed unto Job, not by fatal
necessity, or by chance and fortune, but by the providence of God? Even so it
was with this our sister. For ho^so^uer the first occasion of her sickness
might seem unto us to be merely casual: yet the truth is, that even
casualties themselves are guided by the divine providence. For (as Solomon
says) The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposition thereof is from
Jehovah, Prou. 16. 33. And thus I have declared unto you, how fitly this text
does answer unto this present occasion. Now may it please you further to
consider the spiritual estate of this our sister.

And her spiritual estate shall appear by a strict and serious examination
which she took of her self in the time of her health. It is set down with
her own hand, and was found by her husband after her departure, amongst the
rest of her things which she most esteemed: and for my own part, I know them
t^ be no fables. For I knew her spiritual estate, by sieve years experience,
living in the house with her. Now I thought good to make them public, not
only for a due memorial of this blessed servant of God; but also for the
common good of Gods Church: as being indeed exceedingly importuned by good
people thereunto. If you desire
to reap benefit by the marks, read them not as a bare report or
commendation of the party deceassed; but duly observe every mark what it
imports; and next, observe in what manner it was found in this worthy woman:
thirdly, weigh well the places of Scripture which are alleged to prove the
Marks to be peculiar to Gods elect: and lastly, examine whether thou find
these
signs in thy self or no; for this is the way to benefit by them.

The Marks which this our sister found to be wrought in her, by Gods holy
Spirit, are many: I will reduce them to as few heads as I can, for the help of
your memory: I will not add any thing above the sense of that which she has
written; only it shall be my endeavor to bring that which she has written,
into distinct order for better capacity, and to declare unto you my own
particular knowledge conc^rning her estate. And the Marks are these following,
being noted in the small letters for distinction. And behold, she that is dead,
shall yet speak unto you.

The first Mark.
First, I desire to be exercised in the word day and night: and I find a
willing receiving of Gods commandments, they are not grievous.
And that this precious sign was in this worthy woman, let her practice show
it. To my knowledge, when she was in the City, she heard for the most part,
nine or ten Sermons every week; whereof four of them constantly upon the
Sabbath day, besides catechizing. Also, she read daily morning and evening some
part of the Scripture, from the beginning of the Bible unto the end thereof.
And she did not read the Scripture as many do, in haste, but with serious
consideration, application, and meditation. Moreover, Gods commandments were
not grievous unto her, but she obeyed them with cheerfulness. I never made
any motion unto her for any that were in distress, but as soon as she heard
it, she obeyed. Yea, the word was so far from being grievous, as that it was
more sweet then the honey and the honey comb, (as she acknowledged.) Yea she
slept every night with this meat in her mouth: the word being her last
meditations in the night, and her first thoughts in the morning.

And this constant meditation of Gods word, is given as an infallible mark of
a blessed person in Psalm. 1. In that Law will he meditate day and night. And if
this be a sign in any, then much more in this good Christian. For indeed,
until it pleased God to convert her soul (which was about sieve years ago)
she walked according to the course of the world, and marvelled (as she her
self confessed) what people meant to run dragling to Sermons. But the Lord
changed her mind, and then I think she ran as fast to Sermons as the rest of
her brethren and sisters; I mean as the rest of Gods dear Saints and children.

The second Mark.
The word works in me a redress of my ways. And that this sign was in this
worthy woman, it was evident unto me, who was made thoroughly acquainted, by her
voluntary confession, with her estate. She acknowledged unto me after her
conversion, how vain her course had bin in former times. Yea she concealed not
from me the greatest sins that ever she committed in all her life time. And
therefore I saw with mine eyes, what an admirable redress of ways the word
and Spirit of God had wrought in h^. Now brethren, when the word of God works
a through
and effectual redress, it is an evident sign of an happy estate and
condition. For the word works effectually in none but in such which do
believe: as we gather out of the words of the Apostle in 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13.

The third Mark.
I find a respect to all the commandments of God, desiring to obey in the
least commandment as well as in the greatest; I find a willingness to obey
against profit, pleasure, credit, ease, liberty, and the liking of carnal
friends. And that this sign was in this worthy Christian, it is also evident.
She has desired to obey in the least, and much more in the greatest
commandments. She, for her part, made conscience, as well of little oaths as of
great; of deceiving in a shilling, as well as in a pound; of the lust of the
eye, as well as of the act of uncleanness; of words, as well as of deeds;
and of thoughts, as well as of outward practices. This was manifest unto me by
her complaints against herself, in such things as a carnal hypocrite would
have esteemed but motes, whereas she esteemed them beams. And that she had a
willingness to obey against profit, it is likewise evident; for she was an
especial means to persuade her husband, not to incomber himself with too
much worldly employment, but rather to content himself with less worldly
gain, and to redeem time for hearing Gods word, and for other holy occasions.
Secondly, she obeyed against
pleasure; for whereas she had wont to seek her bodily recreation upon the
Sabbath day, in walking up and down, in sitting at her gate, in talking of
worldly matters, and such like: now she was grown so devout and pious, as that
she made conscience to expel worldly thoughts upon the Lords day, as appeared
by many godly questions, from time to time put forth unto me by her. Thirdly,
she obeyed against credit; for whereas in her carnal estate, her carnal
neighbors respected her; afterward, when they observed this godly change in
her, they ceased to give her that respect which was due unto her; yea indeed
they enuyed, hated, and neglected her. Fourthly, that she obeyed against
liberty and ease, it was also manifest; for whereas in her carnal estate she
could take liberty to keep her bed upon the Sabbath day till eight of the
clock, now in her spiritual estate, she could afford to rise by five a clock
in the morning, and that in the cold winter, and when she was with child, and
to go to the Lecture in the city at six a clock; and this she did constantly.
Fifthly, that she obeyed against the liking of carnal friends, it was also
plain: for they stormed against her for these godly courses, and did not spare
to tell her, That if she thus proceeded, she would utterly undo her self, and
overthrow her estate: and yet, against all these pull-backes, she held on her
godly course unto the end.

And know this my dear brethren, that there is no surer evidence of a good
estate then universal obedience. What was it that confirmed the estate of
Zachary and Elizabeth to be a blessed and happy estate, but this, in that they
walked in all the commandments of God, without rebuke? Luke 1. 6.

The fourth sign or Mark.
I find feruencie and frequencie in prayer, in secret. Concerning the feruency
of this good woman in prayer, and that in secret, I my self have been an ear
witness, for I have heard her pray when she was not aware of me. And for her
frequencie, the family are not ignorant how exactly she kept and observed her
religious hours in private. There is no hungry person does more duly observe
his mealetimes, then this faithful person observed her times for prayer and
reading.

And who will not easily acknowledge, that the true spirit of prayer is a
notable sign of a blessed estate? For God does power the spirit of prayer upon
none, but upon such upon whom also he powers the spirit of grace, Zach. 12.
10. And what says blessed Paul? Whosoever shall call upon the name of the
Lord, shall be saved, Romans 10. 13. Yea what says Christ himself? Matthew. 6. 6.
Pray unto thy Father in secret, and the Father which sees in secret, shall
reward thee openly.

The fifth Mark.
I find a striving against the most secret corruptions of nature; I bewail my
transgressions against the inward worship of God, as well as against the
outward; I bewail the hardness of mine heart, and mourn because I cannot
mourn as I ought. How exceedingly this holy Christian did bewail her failings
against the inward worship of God, I was not ignorant: for many a time has she
complained unto me, what distractions she has found in prayer, and in the
hearing of Gods word. Yea she observed the subtlety of Satan, how he would
thrust other good motions and meditations upon her unseasonably, of purpose to
hinder her in her present holy business: and moreover, mine ears were
continually filled with her complaints in respect of hardness of heart, and
with her mourning because she could not mourn as she ought. And that she had a
striving against the most secret corruptions, it was likewise apparent unto me,
which was made acquainted with her spiritual estate: for it was her godly care
still to be instructed how she might cast out and resist evil motions, groaning
and sighing under them, as under a most uncomfortable, heavy, and intolerable
burden.

Now what greater sign is there of a good and gracious estate, then to be
sensible of the combat of the spirit against the flesh? What greater evidence
was there that Paul was now a regenerate person, then this, to wit, that he
found this striving in his heart, and that he was sensible of the law of his
mind resisting the law of sin which was in his members? Romans 7. 23. What
greater sign was there that Rebeccha was conceived with child, then when she
felt such a struggling within her self between the children, as she never
felt before? So what greater evidence that we are conceived of Christ, then
when we feel him sensibly st^uggling in us against the old Adam?

The sixth Mark.
I find a dislike of sin in all, even in them that are most dear unto me.
This mark I know to have been in this worthy woman: she grieved for sin in
kindred, in familiar acquaintance, in servants, in children. Yea she grieved
for the very appearance of evil, as when she saw that some walked not wisely
in the use of Christian liberty, as in the use of recreations and such like.
And much more did she grieve for the common swearing in the land, for
Sabbathbreaking, for whoredom which is so ordinary, and for all such
abominations.

Now to grieve for the abominations
of the time, is an undoubted sign of a good and happy estate. For whom does
God set his mark upon for his own, Ezech 9. 4. but upon such as sigh and cry
for the abominations of Jerusalem?

The seventh Mark.
I desire to stir up mine affection after God, and to avoid what might
steal away mine heart from him, delighting in all the ways whereby mine heart
might be inflamed toward him. This mark was apparently in this our sister by
these signs. She feared both the company and doctrine of such Ministers, as
she perceived would give her too much liberty. She was likewise best pleased in
the greatest strictness, so that it were not curious but commanded of God. She
maintained in her self a godly iealosie, lest that riches and worldly
contentments should lessen her affection to Christ. She was fearful to lose
any part or dram of her first love. She delighted most in such conference, both
at her table, and in company, which sauoured of religion: it was her grief to
hear some how they would spend their precious time in frothie discourfe,
preferring trifles and toys before such speech as might have ministered grace
to the hearers. So that it was evident, that she delighted in such ways
whereby her heart might be inflamed to love God. Yea I do suppose, that her
inner man was come to that degree of love and zeal, that she desired to hear
no other noise but the noise of Gods word, nor any other knocking but the
knocking of Gods Spirit at the door of the heart. She found that want of Gods
word publicly preached in the time of her long sickness, as that she
resolved, if God would give her but so much strength to endure to be carried in
a chair to the Church, she would desirously go.

Now what surer sign is there of a blessed estate, then sincere inflamed love
to God? The Lord promises to show mercy unto thousands of them which love him,
and keep his commandments, Exodus 20.

The eight Mark.
I find an holy rest and quietness of conscience, with spiritual boldness,
and confidence of trust in God sometimes. She found that degree of spiritual
boldness to my knowledge at some times, as that in her perfect health she has
desired to be dissolved, that she might not live to have that confidence
weakened. She acknowledged unto me in the midst of many temptations upon her
deathbed, that the Lord had freed her heart from bellish fears, and that she
found much peace. Yea not many days before her departure out of this life, she
made a very excellent sensible acknowledgement of the goodness of God unto
her, and how she knew that it should be well with her after this life ended;
blessing God withal for the benefit which she had received by the Ministry
of the Word, and exhorting her kindred and friends which were about her, that
they should be careful to hear Sermons, and to meditate of them. Yea she did
so speak with that evidence of Spirit, as that she drew tears from them which
heard her at that time.

Now what more evident mark is there of a true Christian, then a sound faith?
what surer testimony then the testimony of Gods own Spirit bearing witness
with our spirits that we are the children of God? Romans 8. 16. Now indeed this
our dear sister did not feel this full assurance at all times, but she groned
many a time under the sense of much unbelief. But what experienced Christian
does not sufficiently know, that the dear children of God are subject to these
pangs? in so much that we say, That surely that man or woman never believed
aright which never doubted. But my dear brethren remembe the estate of that
good father in Mark 9. 24. No sooner did he believe, but presently he was made
sensible of his unbelief. For thus he cries with tears, Lord I believe, help
my unbelief.

The ninth Mark.
I find a desire of the practice of mortification of sins past and present.
There is no sin but I could willingly judge my self for it, so soon as I
know it to be a sin. This holy feruant of God, she was come to that degree of
mortification unto her especial sins, that she did not only quite forsake
the practice of them, but also she lothed them inwardly, and confessed to the
glory of God, that she found her self quite dead to the least pleasing motion
tending that way. And her especial sin having been the abusing of things
lawful, she came so far to be mortified, as that she was tempted to abhor
even the lawful use. She was inclined not only to an holy revenge upon her
self, but even to exceed in that revenge and selfeiudging.

Now what greater argument is there of our spiritual rising with Christ, then
if we mortify our earthly members? Coloss. 3. 1. 5. and what greater sign
that we shall escape the judgment of God, then if we judge our selves? 1. Cor.
11. 31.

The tenth Mark.
I love all Gods children, and that for the truths sake: I esteem them the
only excel^^nt people in the world. She loved poor Christians as well
as the rich, to my knowledge; she preferred them before rich kindred. She
loved them merely sor their graces, and not for worldly respects. For indeed
she was a giver, and not a receiver. So that it was not with our sister as it
is with the children of this world, which speak evil of all such as will not
run with them to the same excess of riot. She was far from contemning of
Gods dear children, under a color as though they were Puritans and
Precisians, and irregular persons, or the like. But she judged as David did in
Psalm. 16. that those that feared God, and were endued with grace, they were the
Excellent ones. All that she hated in them was their corruptions, which they
themselves also hate.

Now whosoever they be which have their hearts sincerely seasoned with true
Christian love, it is an evident
sign that they are the children of God. For as the Apostle speaks, Every
one which loves, is borne of God, and knows God, 1. Ioh. 4. 5. 7. And again
he says, in the 16. verse of the same Chapter, He that dwells in love,
dwells in God, and God in him.

The eleventh Mark.
I desire after purity, and to be holy as God is holy. This our Christian
sister labored against all impuritie both of flesh and spirit: the least
secret impure motion did much vex her, as appeared by her feeling complaints.
And as for holiness, I am persuaded she affected it far above salvation: for
what was still her especial request? even this, that God would be pleased to
give her a more holy heart. And Moreover, the more holily that any minister
preached, the more was she delighted to hear him. The more holily that any one
conferred, or prayed, gave thanks, the more heartily she showed her zeal in
saying Amen. And indeed, as for Sermons, and prayers, and thanksgiving, which
seemed to be very eloquent, if there was not some holy zeal in them, they were
but a burden unto her. Yea she stood so affected unto holiness, as that
sometimes walking in her hall upon the Sabbath day, and conferring of Gods
word, she has heartily desired, never to go again into the world, but if it
were the will of God, that she might spend all her days in that blessed
fellowship with God. And yet she was none of those that lived inordinately or
idly, who living by the sweat of other men's brows, under the color of
giving themselves unto holiness, do altogether neglect or cast off their
particular callings, especially if they be any thing painful. But she thus
spoke, being careful of that holy condition, If it might stand with the will
of ^od.

By these symptoms and signs, we may see how this our sister stood affected
for holiness. And what greater sign is there of a true child of God, then
holiness? Be ye sure, says David in Psalm 4. that God has chosen to
himself a godly man. And Saints or holy persons, is one of the names which is
given of God unto his children in the holy Scriptures, as you are not ignorant.

The twelfth Mark.
I desire to be good at home as well as abroad, in absence of others as well as
in presence, in secret as well as openly. Concerning the domestical goodness
of this our sister, we had sufficient knowledge: for we daily beheld her
Christian practice. And how constant she was in her holy courses in our
absence, I have been sufficiently informed by others which were in the family.
She had attained that degree of sincerity, as that her study was to hide her
graces, at least so far as grace could be hid. For you know that grace is
like sweet oil, it will utter it self in the sweet savor whether the
Apothecary will or no. Fearful she was lest any should think more to be in
her, then she thought to be in her self. She hated vain shows; she could not
brook those that would publikly make show of more then was manifest by their
private practice, was in them.

Yea upon her death bed she affirmed, that she had nothing in her self to
comfort her but poor sincerity.
She knew that howsoever she had walked weakly before God, yet she had walked
sincerely. Another argument of her sincerity was this, in that she desired her
estate to be thoroughly sifted both in health and in sickness. And to that end,
in health she repaired to godly Ministers for the trial of her estate; and
also in sickness she desired the judgments of more then of one Minister, that
she might know the very truth of her estate. Yea she desired to hear of her
sins, and to that end desired me, either in my own person, or by some other
good Minister, to preach a Sermon of the cursed estate of man by nature, and of
the uttermost terrors of the Law against sin; that so her stony heart might
be more and more broken: and for that pains she would have given me or any
other Minister of Christ, which would have made the Sermon, a large reward in
gold.

Now what greater sign is there of a good estate, then is sincerity? What
greater evidence was there of David's blessed estate then this, to wit, that he
walked in the uprightness of his heart in the midst of his house? Psalm. 101. 2.

The thirteenth Mark.
I can pray for mine enemies, and humble my soul for them in their distress;
I will be at peace with them without revenge, I can forbear them, when I could
bring them to shame. That this servant of God could pray for her enemies, and
humble her soul in their distress, we may well believe it if she avouch it:
for great was her truth in speech, and thoroughly tried. I do not deny but she
might sometimes report an untruth, as receiving it by report from others whom
she believed: But to speak a lie, or to speak against her own knowledge, to
wrong any, or advantage her self, it was far from her. Again, that she
would be at peace with her enemies, without revenge, and without seeking their
shame, it was manifest. For when some had exceedingly wronged her by their
slanderous tongues, after she had conferred with me, what I thought she might
do with a good conscience in such a case; she was content to sit down under
the wrong, being persuaded that God would clear her innocence as the light at
noone day. And this was the more excellent patience in this our godly sister,
because
indeed by nature she was very choleric, and subject to passions.

And what greater evidence is there of a good estate, then to forgive our
enemies? For Christ him self has said, that If we forgive men their
trespasses, our heavenly Father will for give us our trespasses, Math. 6. 14.

The fourteenth Maarke.
I find a willingness, to suffer any thing for God, by his assistance. She
was content (for the present) to endure the hatred of the world for her
profession sake, to endure the persecution of the tongue, and the taunts of
carnal friends. And these sufferings she did not much respect. Nay further,
she was very mindful of the fiery trial which might come upon us: and she for
her part looked
for it, and prepared for it. Yea, she was minded rather to burn at a stake,
then ever to yield unto Popery, or to betray the truth of the Gospel. And in
these godly resolutions, she did not trust in any sort to her own strength,
but was very jealous how she should be able to endure the fire: Oh said she,
how shall I endure to be drawn upon an hurdle under Newgate, and to be bound
unto a stake, to suffer the violence of the fire? etc. But yet she still was
comforted with this, namely, that God was able to cause her to stand.

And what greater sign is there of
a sound estate, then when it is given unto us, not only to believe in the
behalf of Christ, but also to suffer for his sake? Phil. 1. 29.

The fifteenth Mark.
I desire to deal faithfully in the charge and calling in which I am, and to
discharge it in the conscionable fear of God. This our sister was not only
faithful in her general calling, but also in her particular. For first, she
was a very faithful wife, her very desire was subject to her husband. I am
persuaded, that if her husband had commanded her to does vilest drudgerie
about the house, she durst not have refused, in very conscience of Gods Law.
And moreover, whereas in her carnal estate, it was her common practice to put
forth her children to be nursed abroad, according to the practice of the proud
women in our times: when the Law of God began to be written in her heart, she
durst no longer nurse her children abroad, but took pains to nurse them with
her own breasts. Again, she did most diligently ouersee the ways of her
family: and she eat not the bread of idleness, but still she employed her
self in some commendable employment. And as for her children and servants, she
did diligently instruct them in good ways. She was grieved at any
profaneness found in them: she mourned for them: she prayed for them; she
pitied their estate: and as for the soul of her loving and kind husband, she
had an especial care.

Now it is an especial ma^ke of a true convert, to be found faithful in the
particular calling. As we see it is given by Paul as an evidence of the truth
of the conversion of Onesimus, that now he was become profitable unto his
master, Philem. 11.

The sixteenth Mark.
I desire to glorify God by a fruitful profession. The faith of this our
sister was no dead faith. To my knowledge she was exceeding fruitful in good
works. What money she had of her own in the time of her health, she
distributed it freely, partly to poor Preachers about this City, partly also
to poor Christians. She was like unto
Dorcas, she made garments, and that both woollen and linen, and gave them
unto poor Christians, and to their children. She was a friend of the
fatherless and of the widow: and what she had not of her own to relieve Gods
poor, she entreated her husband to supply. Yea, she was a very patroness for
such as were in distress; she was a blessed instrument to stir up her
willing husband to many secret gifts, and bountiful almes-deedes, especially
unto them which were of the household of faith. To my knowledge she has given
gold and silver plentifully, to some more, and to some less. And amongst the
rest of her charitable works, I remember that she gave
to the Minister which was the means (under God) of her conversion (as she
supposed:) She gave, I say, unto him, by the consent of her husband, the sum
of fifty pounds, besides a large portion which she begged of her husband to be
distributed after her death unto charitable uses. The sick had cause to bless
God for her in her health, for she visited them with meat, with bodily
presence, with necessary help both by her self and by her maids. And many
that enjoy health, have great cause to bless God for her in her death, in
respect of her liberal gifts. And for mine own part I have especial cause to
bless God in her life and in her death; for a most kind mother and nurse she
was unto me.

Now this fruitfulness did argue the goodness of the Tree; for how does a
Christian show his faith, but by his works? And the Lord (as you know)
promises a Prophets reward unto such as do good unto his members, Matthew. 10.
42. Yea, at the day of judgment Christ will say unto all such fruitful ones,
Come unto me, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I
was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in:
naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and
ye came unto me.

The seventeenth Mark.
I find a daily holy strife to preserve graces given unto me, and to prevent
falling away. She continued faithful to the end in the most substantial
graces. For howsoever she mourned for the want of that degree of joy which she
had felt in former times, yet she continued in repentance, in the practice of
holiness and righteousness, in a tender love to God, and to his word and
children, in holy zeal, and fruitfulness even to the last period of her
days. And indeed her want of full joy was so sanctified unto her, that it was
a furtherance to a better grace, namely to repentance and self-denial, and
base esteem of her self. And I call repentance a better grace then joy,
because howsoever joy is a most excellent gift of the Spirit, yet unto us
repentance is more profitable. For I make no doubt but that a mourning
Christian may be saved without rauishing joy, and that Christ may wipe away his
tears in heaven; but no Christian shall be saved without repentance and self
denial.

Now constancy and perseverance in a good and holy course, is an undoubted
argument of a blessed and happy estate; as does appear by the words of our
blessed Savior himself, Marth. 10. 22. He that endures to the end, shall be
saved: and Revel. 2. 10. Be thou faithful to the death, and I will give thee a
crown of life.

The eighteenth Mark.
I find an universal change in my self, from that which I ^^ue been in former
times. This mark and the two following, I propounded unto her upon her
deathbed; which I mention now because they are as useful for the church as the
former marks which I found n^ted in her paper. And that this sign was in our
sister as well as the former, it was evident. For there was a marvelous
change, wrought in her mind and understanding. She that before knew not the
right hand from the left in religion, she was grown to a very great
understanding in so much that she was able both to speak divinely, to instruct
her servants and children, and to write letters in the very language of Canaan
with great sufficiency.

Secondly, she found a change in her will and affections. For she that was dead
before unto any sound piety, now she was revived above all things to affect
and to seek Gods kingdom.

Thirdly, there was an evident change in her life and conversation; this we all
knew which knew her, and can testify.

Now wheresoever this universal change is, from darkness to light, from evil
to good, from the power of Satan to God; it is an evident sign of effectual
calling; and effectual calling is an undoubted sign of election. 2. Cor. 5.
17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature; old things are passed away,
behold all things are become new.

The nineteenth Mark.
I find an utter denial of myself, I know that in me, that is, in myflesh,
abides nothing which is good. This blessed servant of God had attained a great
measure of self denial. She groned long under the burden of the feeling of
spiritual wants.

She admired any ones graces save her own: she lothed her own prayers for want
of sufficiency and zeal: she was always co^plaining for the most part of her
spiritual wants. She was brought to plain nothing in her own eyes. She
esteemed herself to be poor, yea to be a plain beggar in grace, as all those
knew which knew her thoroughly.

Now my beloved, what greater sign is there of a true disciple, then self
denial? What greater sign of a safe estate, then spiritual poverty, felt and
groned under? For what says our blessed Savior? Matthew. 5. 3. Blessed are the
poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Yea whosoever do loathe
themselves for their iniquities, and much more for their spiritual wants, and
for the evil of their good works, it is evident that they are in the covenant
of mercy, Ezekiel. 36. 31.

The twentieth Mark.
I find mine heart inclined to seek after God and Christ in the use of divine
ordinances with feruency. This sign our sister acknowledged upon her death bed
also; for when I demanded of her in the sense of her present wants, whether her
conscience did not testify with her, that in her health she had zealously
sought after God: She made me answer, That her chamber, and closet, and
orchard, and garden, and watergate, and turret, and every corner could testify
that she had dearly and earnestly sought after God. Yea out of that knowledge
and experience, which I had of the holy courses of this sanctified woman, I may
well say, that it was with this woman in some measure as it was with David,
Psalm. 42. As the Heart pants after the water brooks, so panted her soul
after thee o God.

Now where there is given this strong affection after God, the affection being
constant, and also joined with a fervent use of the means, it is an evident
sign of a blessed estate. For blessed are they which hunger and thirst after
righteousness, for they shall be satisfied, Matthew. 5. 6.

Thus I have for the common good set out unto you the marks and evidences of a
blessed woman. I have spoken that which I knew in her. And the uses which I
would have you to make of that which has been spoken are these. First, give
thanks unto God for his wonderful work upon our sister. Secondly, learn
henceforth not to judge of Christians by the outward appearance. For it may be,
many which did not so thoroughly know her, would not have thought that she had
been so rare a woman. Thirdly, learn not to envy the good name or praise of
others, but learn to be of Salomons mind, Pro. 31. 31: where speaking of a
good woman he says, Give her the fruit of her hands, let her own works
praise her in the gates. Fourthly, examine thine own estate by these marks,
and that by weighing every particular sign, with the explanation and
confirmation of the same. Fifthly, pray unto God that thou may find them in
thy self. Sixthly, if thou do find them in thee upon diligent search, then
see thou be thankful to God, the giver of all grace: and say with David, Psalm
16. 6. The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places, I have a goodly
heritage. Yea say with him in Psalm. 23* 4. Though I walk through the valley of
the shadow of death, I will fear none evil. The which childlike boldness,
and holy confidence, God Almighty give unto us all, and preserve in us unto the
end, and that for Christ Jesus sake, our only Lord and Savior, Amen.

FINIS.

