A LIBELL OF Spanish Lies: FOUND AT THE Sack of Caies, discoursing the fight
in the West INDIES, twixt the English Navy being fourteen Ships and Pinasses,
and a fleet of twenty sail of the king of Spaines, and of the death of Sir
Francis Drake. With an answer briefly confuting the Spanish lies, and a short
Relation of the fight according to truth, written by Henry Sauile Esquire,
employed Captain in one of her Majesty's Ships, in the same service against
the Spaniard. And also an Approbation of this discourse, by Sir Thomas
Baskeruile, then General of the English fleet in that service: Auowing the
maintenance thereof, personally in Arms against Don Bernaldino, if he shall
take exceptions to that which is here set down, Touching the fight twixt both
Nauies, or justify that which he has most falsely reported in his vain
Printed letter.

Proverb. 19. ver. 9. A false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that
speaks lies shall perish. LONDON Printed by John Windet, dwelling by Paul's
Wharfe at the sign of the Cross Keys, and are there to be sold. 1596.

celestial model

TO THE COVERteous Reader.
WHereas, DON BERNALDINO DELGADILLO de AVELLANEDA, General of the Spanish
fleet, has by his Printed letters published to the world diverse untruths,
concerning our fleet and the Commanders thereof, seeking thereby his own
glory, and our disgrace; I have taken upon me (though of many least able) to
confute the same, the rather for that the printed Coppie came first into my
hands, having my self been Captain of one of her Majesty's ships in the
same voyage: Take this therefore (gentle Reader) as a token of my duty and
love to my Country and Countrie-men, And expect only a plain truth, as from
the pen of a Soldier, and Nauigator: Which if you take in good part, may draw
me shortly to a greater labor, by publishing unto you our whole voyage.

Henry Sauile.

THe true Coppie of a letter found at the sacking of Cales, written by Don
Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda, General of the king of Spain his Navy
in the west Indies, sent unto Doctor Peter Flores, President of the Contraction
house for the Indies, and by him put in Print, with privilege: wherein is
declared many untruths, and false reports, tending to the disgrace of the
service of her Majesty's Navy, and the Commanders thereof, lately sent to the
west Indies, under the Command of Sir Frances Drake, and Sir John Hawkins
Generals at the Sea; and Sir Thomas Baskeruile General at land: with a
confutation of diverse gross lies and untruths, contained in the same letter:
together with a short relation of the fight according to the truth.
COPIA DE VNA Carta, ^embio Don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Auellaneda, General
dela Armada de su Magestad, embiada al Doctor Pedro Florez Presidente dela casa
dela Contratacion de las Yndias, en que trata del sucesso dela Armada de
Ynglaterra, despues que pattio de Panama, de que fue por general Francisco
Draque, y de sumuerte.
DE Cartageua di cuenta a. V. m. como sali del puetto dela ciudad de Lisbona,
en busca de la armada Ynglesa, aunque por la mucha priessa, no se pudierou
reparar tambien los Galeones como fuera necessario, y conel tiempo se perdio
uno, y por desgracia se quemo un Filibote, y a vie^do andado muchos dias en
busca del enemigo, hasta quellegue a Cartagena, don de auiendo tomado el
parecer de Don Pedro de Acuna Gouernador y capitan general de aquella ciudad,
porque tenia mucha necessidad de agua, y reparar los Nauios por que venian
faltos della, me detuue en aquel puerto, a doude tuve noticia por un Aniso, que
Francisco Draque murio en nombre de Dios, de pena de aver perdido tantos
Baxeles y gente, aunque despues se supo mas por estenso, y avie^ do dado a. V.
m. cuenta de lo que hasta alli a sucedido agora la doy de que sali de aquel
puerto a dos de Marco, y tome la derrota de la Hauana, donde entendi hallarlo,
y aviendo hecho la diligencia posible. Lunes a onze del dicho mes, alas dos
despues de medio dia, al salir dela Ysla de Pinos, enla ensenada de
Guaniguanico, tope co^ elque yva con catorze Nauios muy buenos, fueme arrima^do
a el, aun que tenia el viento por suyo, y el Almiranta q^ yua mas al viento co^
orros dos Nauios commenco arrimarsele, y aunque vino sobre ella con todos los
suyos tres vezes, no fue part acei carsele para quequi siesse enuestir, los
que estauamos mas apartados fuymos dando bordos acercandonos hasta jugar la
artilleria, Mosqueteria, y Arcabuzeria delos mas dellos, en lo qual el recibio
m uy conocido dano, ello hiza conel artilleria como suele, y particularmente el
Almiranta, y en reconociendo la volu^tad con que a el nos arrimauamos, con mas
diligencia delo que se puede creer se desembaraco de todosponiendose en huyda,
dando las velas, dexando en le mar todas, las La^ chas que traya. Yole segui
con nueve Nauios toda la noche, y con quatro mas to do el dia hasta hazerle
doblar el cabo de san Anton, y tomar la derrota de la Canal de Bahama conform
alas instruciones de su Magestad, siruio de poco el verme con menos numero de
Nauios, ni todas las diligencias que se hizieron, para que se inclinase a
esperar ni abordar, ni tirar un Arcabuz, ni una pieca, porque el se dlo la
diligencia que pudo, porque sus Nauios los ania reduzido a la mitad y los
mejores, y estos acabaua de reparar en Puerto Belo, donde se estuvo mas de
quarenta dias, y ansi venia^ muy reparados y yo saque los mios desbaratados,
que no me dio el tiepo lugar para aderecarlos. A que nauego dos meses y medio,
y traygo la capitana que desde que parti de Cartagena no an parado las bombas,
y el dia que sali me ie arrimo ura Zabra con esta necessidad; la Almira^ ta y
los demas Nauios vienen conel mismo trabajo, perosin embargo, por lo que yo vi
en los enemigos; era muy conocida la ventaja que nos hazia, y mucha dicha seria
apoderarse delsino es hallarlo sobre el Ferro. Con todo esso me an dexado un
Nauio muy bueno en las manos con muy buena gente, la qual dize como murio el
Draq^en nombre de Dios y que va por general dela dicha armada Ynglesa, el
Coronel Quebraran, y por el poco lugar que se a dado no an podido tomar: Agua;
lena, ni carne, y van de manera que no se como an de llegar a Ynglaterra. Enter
la gente deuen de ser ciento y quarenta, y quinze nobles capitanes delo mejor
de alli, y algunos ricos segun se echa de ver enellos. No se ofrece otra cosa:
nuestrose no^r guarde a. V. m. como puede y yo desseo.

Dela Hauana. 30. de Marco; de 1596. An^os. Don Bernaldino Delgadillo de
Auellaneda.

EL Licenciado Don Iuan Bermudes e Figueroa, Tenientemayor de Assistente desta
ciudad de Seuilla ysu tierra, que hago oficio de Assistente della por ausencia,
de su Sen^oria del Conde de Priego, Doy licencia a Rodrigo de Cabrera, para
quepueda imprimir la Relacio^ dela muerte de Francisco Draque. I a qual haga
por dos meses, y por ellos no lo imprima otro alguno. Sopena de diez mil
marauedis para la camara de su Magestad.

Fecha en Seuilla a quinze de Mayo, de mil y quinientos y nouenta y seys an^os.
El Licenciado Don juan Bermudez e Figueroa. Por su mandado Gregoria Gutierrez.
Escriuano.

THE SPANISH Letter Englished.
The Coppye of a letter, which Don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Auellaneda, General
of the king of Spain his Army, sent unto Doctor Peter Flores, President of
the contraction house for the Indies, wherein he makes mention of the
success of the English Army, after they departed from Pannama, whereof was
General Frances Drake, and of his death.
FRom Cartagena, I gave relation unto you, how I departed from the City of
Lisbone, in the pursuit of the English Army: although for the great have the
Gallions could not be so well repaired as was needful, and with foul weather
one was lost, and a Fly-boate was burnt, and having sailed many days in
pursuit of the enemy, until I arrived at Carthagena, whereas having taken
the advice of Don Pedro de Acunia, Governor of the City, and Captain
general; for we had great need of water, and to repair our Ships, we
stayed in that port, whereas I had intelligence by an Indian, that Frances Drake
dyed in Nombre de Dios, for very grief that he had lost so many Barks and
men, as was afterward more manifestlye known: And having given you a
relation of all that happened hitherto: Now I let you understand, that I left
this Port the second of March, and took our course toward the Hauana, where I
thought to have found the English fleet, and also used all the diligence
possible: upon Monday the eleauenth of the said Month, about two of the clock
in the afternoon, at the issue of the Isle of Pinas, in the entrance of
Guaniguanico, I met with the English fleet, being fourteen very good
Ships, I drew toward them although they had the wind of us, and our
Admiral who bore up toward the wind, with other two Ships began to draw
near them, and although we set thus upon them, three times with all their
Ships, yet would they not set again upon us, and those of our men which
were farthest off cried to them amain, being both within shot of Artillery,
Muskats and Caliuers, whereby they received evident hurt by us: They shot off
now and then at us, and especially their Admiral, and seeing our resolution
how sharp we were bent toward them, they with all expedition and speed
possible prepared to fly away, hoysing Sails and leaving their Oars for
have in the Sea: but I followed them, with nine Ships all the night
following, and with four more the next day, till I made them double Saint
Antonies point, and so I took the course toward La Canet de Bahamet,
according to the instructions from his Majesty: It little auailed us to be
seen, with less number of Ships, neither yet all the diligence we could
use, could cause them to stay or come near us, nor to shoot off one
Hargabush or piece of Artillery, for they fled away as fast as they could, and
their Ships were well diminished, and that the best part of them, the rest
they repaired in the port Bella, whereas they were about forty days before,
and so by that means they were all well repaired, and our Ships very foul,
because the time would not permit us to trim them: I have sailed two Months
and a half in the Ship called the Capitana, sithence we departed from
Carthagena, we have not repaired their Pumps nor cleansed them: And the same
day I departed thence, my Ships were all foul with Barnacles, our Admiral
and the rest of our Ships have the like impediment, but no great hinderance
unto us for ought J could perceive by our enemies: It is manifest what
advantage they had of us, and by no means was it possible for us to take them,
unless we could have come to deal with them with fire and sword.
Nevertheless they left us one good ship behind for our share, well manned,
which told me that the Drake dyed in Nombre de Dios, and that they have made
for General of the English fleet, the Colonel Quebraran, and also by means
of the small time being straightly followed by us, they had no opportunity to
take either water, wood or flesh, and they are also in such bad case, that J
know not how they will be able to arrive in England, the number of men we have
taken are about 140. and 15. Noble Captains of their best sort, and some of
them rich, as well may appear by their behavior: J have no other thing to
write at this time. Our Lord keep you who best can, and as J desire.

From the Hauana the 30. of March. 1596 Don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Auellaneda.

THe Licenciat Don John Barmudes of Figueroa Leiuetenant of the Assistantes of
the City of Cyuill, and the province thereof, who does supply the Office of
the Assistaunt in the absence of the Right Honorable the Earl of Priego. Give
license to Roderigo de Cabrierae to Imprint the Relation of the death of
Fraunces Drake, which only he may do for two Months, and no other to Imprint
the same within the said term, upon pain of ten thousand Marauedis for his
Majesty's Chamber.

Given in Cyuill the 15. of May. 1596. The Licenciat Don John Bermudes of
Figueroa. By his Assign Gregory Gutierrez Notarie.

THis letter of the General Don Bernaldino sent into Spain declaring the
death of Sir Fraunces Drake and their supposed victory; was altogether
received for an undoubted truth, and so pleasing was this news unto the
Spaniard, that there was present commandment given to publish the letter in
Print, that all the people of Spain might be partakers of this common joy: The
which letter Printed in Cyuill, bearing date the xv. of May, 1596. came to the
hands of Henry Sauile Esquire who being employed in that service for the west
Indies, and Captain of her Majesty's good Ship the Adventure, under the
conduct of Sir Fraunces Drake, and Sir John Hawkins, Has caused the said
Printed letter to be translated into English. And that the impudency of the
Spanish General may the more plainly appear, the said Henry Sauile does
answer particularly to every untruth in the same letter contained, as
hereafter follows.

THE ANSWER TO The Spanish letter.
First whereas the General does say, that Fraunces Drake dyed at Nombre de
Dios, as he had intelligence by an Indian.
THe General sent this news into his Country confirmed with his hand and
seal of Arms: The Generals first news, and his best news is in part lying
news.
It is the first news in his letter, and it was the best news that he could
send into Spain. For it did ease the stomachs of the timorous Spaniardes
greatly to hear of the death of him, whose life was a scourge and continual
plague unto them: But it was a point of great simplicity, and scarcely
beseeming a General, to tie the credit of his report locally to any place
upon the report of a silly Indian slave. For it had been sufficient to have
said, that Fraunces Drake was certainly dead, without publishing the lie in
Print, by naming Nombre de Dios: for it is most certain Sir Fraunces Drake
dyed twixt the Island of Scouda, and Porte-bella: But the General being
ravished with the sudden joy of this report as a man that has escaped a
great danger of the enemy, The General seems to want friends in Court,
sending such great news to a private Doctor.
does break out into an insolent kind of bragging of his valor at Sea, and
heaping one lie upon another, does not cease until he has drawn them into
sequences, and so does commend them unto Peter the Doctor, as censour of his
learned work.

Secondly, The general does write unto the doctor, that Frances Drake dyed for
very grief that he had lost so many Barks and men.
A Thing very strange that the General or the Indian, who^ he does vouch for
his lie, should have such speculation in the body of him whom they never saw,
as to deliver for truth unto his Country, the very cause or disease whereof
he dyed: And this second report of his is more gross then the first. For
admit the mistaking of the place might be tolerable; notwithstanding, this
precise affirming the cause of his death, does manifestly prove that the
General does make no conscience to lie. Don Bernaldino does lie impudently.
And as concerning the loss of any Barks or men in our Navy, by the valor
of the Spaniard before Sir Fraunces Drake his death, we had none (one small
Pinnesse excepted) which we assuredly know was taken by chance falling single
into a fleet of five Frigots (of which was General, The success of the kings
five Frigots.
Don Pedro Telio,) near unto the Island of Dominico, and not by the valor of
Don Bernaldino: the which five Frigots of the Kings afterward had but ill
success, for one of them we burnt in the harbor of S. John Portrico, and one
other was sunck in the same harbor, and the other three were burnt amongst
many other Ships at the taking of Cales: This I think in wise men's
judgments, will seem a seely cause to move a man sorrow to death. The
certain cause whereof Sir Frances Drake dyed.
For true it is, Sir Fraunces Drake dyed of the Flixe which he had grown
upon him eight days before his death, and yielded up his spirit like a
Christian to his creator quietly in his Cabin. And when the General shall
survey his losses, he shall find it more then the loss of the English, and
the most of his destroyed by the Bullet: But the death of Sir Fraunces Drake
was of so great comfort unto the Spaniard, that it was thought to be a
sufficient amends, although their whole fleet had been utterly lost.

Thirdly, The general does say of his own credit, and not by intelligence
from any Indian or other, that on the eleauenth of March last he met the
English fleet at the Isle of Pinas, being fourteen good Ships, who although
they had the wind of him, yet he set upon them three times with all their
Ships, but the English fleet fled, and refused to fight shooting now and
then a shot, but especially the Admiral.
THis third lie of the General Don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda, (whose
name for the prolixitie thereof may be drawn somewhat near the length of a
Cable) has no color of protection, but it has a just proportion in measure
to the lies of old Barnardino de Mendozza his Countrieman, A pair of Spanish
Liars.
concerning the overthrow of her Majesty's Navy in the year 1588. for except
Don Barnaldino the General, did purpose to win the whetstone from Don
Barnardino de Mendozza the old Spanish liar: I cannot conjecture why he
should write to his Country for a truth, that he chased the English Nauye
with nine Ships, and did three several times give the onset to the English
fleet, who being fourteen good Ships (as he says) did fly and refuse to
fight, being that the Spanish Viceadmiral (if he be living) and many other,
The spanish Viceadmirall a man of valor.
can witness the contrary, who fighting like a true valiant man, departed
from the fight with a torn and battered Ship to save her from sinking.
Neither can I imagine that there is any one in the Spanish fleet ( Don
Bernaldino excepted) that will say they were less then twenty sail of
Ships when they met the English fleet: And the Spanish Navy can witness that
they received such store of Bullets from the English fleet, that they were
glad to depart, The number of the Spanish Ships after the fight.
and in despite of them the English Navy did hold their determined course:
And taking a view of the Spanish fleet the next day, their number was not
above thirteen Ships, which did argue that they were either sunk, or fled
to harbor to save themselves.

Fourthly, The general says, that the English fleet fled away, and left
their Oars for haste behind them in the Sea.
IT was strange that they should leave behind them Oars in the Sea, being
there was not in the English fleet either Gally or gallyasse, This lie was
made in the Generals own forge.
which required the use of Oars, as for the Oars of their ship-boates and
other such small vessels, they had stoed them aboarde their Ships, and were
no impediment unto them, but most necessary for them to use, and therefore not
likely they would cast them ouerboard: But it is most likely, that the General
fell into some pleasant dream at Sea, wherein he did see a false apparition
of victory against the English, and for lack of matter did set this down in
his letter for news to his country: It is sin to belie the Devil, and
therefore the General shall have his right, A commendation of the General
the letter is so well contrived, (and yet with no great eloquence) but with
such art, that there are not many more lines, then there are lies, which shows
that there are wonderful and extraordinary gifts in the General: But I am
persuaded if Don Bernaldino had thought that his letter should have been
Printed, he would have omitted many things contained in the letter, for the
Doctor did use him somewhat hardly in showing the letter openly, The General
does practice to lie, for recreation.
and more in suffering it to be Printed: for friends may like good fellows
send lies one to the other for recreation, and feed their friends with some
small taste thereof, so it be kept close, without danger to incur the title
of a lying General: But as the matter is now handled through the simplycitie of
the Doctor, I cannot see but the General Don Bernaldino, is like to carry the
title equally twixt both his shoulders.

Fifthly, The general does say in his Printed letter, that notwithstanding all
the diligence he could use, he could not cause the English fleet to stay
nor come near them, nor discharge one Hargebush or piece of Artillery, but
fled away as fast as they could.
ANd this lie also he does not receive by intelligence from any other, but
himself was an eyewitness in the action, which made him bold to send this
with the rest into his Country for current news: But herein Don Bernaldino
was more bold then wise, for the torn and battered sides of his Gallyons,
being compared with her Maiestes Ships, and others that served in that fight,
The torn sides of the Spanish Ships do condemn Don Bernaldino of lying.
do declare, that his Ships received at least two bullets for one. Neither can
it be concealed but his own Countriemen (if any do favor truth) may easily
see the loss, and late reparations, done unto the Kings fleet sithence they
did encounter with the English Navy, whenever they that remain shall arrive
in Spain: But the General seems to be a very good proficient in his
profession, and waxes somewhat bold, treading the true steps of old
Barnardino de Mendozza, and yet Mendozza was somewhat more wary in his lies,
for he had sometime the color of intelligence to shadow them, but the General
growing from boldness to impudency, makes no scruple to say, that the English
Navy fled as fast as they could without discharging any Hargebush or piece of
Artillery, when as the battered sides of his ships do return the lie to his
face: Note the valor of Don Bernaldino.
For in this conflict Don Bernaldino did behave himself so valiantly, that he
was always farthest of in the fight, and had so great care of his own person
that he stood clear from the danger of Muskat or any small shot, and durst not
approach, whereas our general was the foremost, and so held his place, until
by order of fight other ships were to have their turns, The order of the
English Navy.
according to his former direction, who wisely and pollitickly had so ordered
his vantgard, and reregarde, that as the manner of it was altogether strange to
the Spaniard, so might they have been without all hope of victory, if their
General had been a man of any judgment in Sea fights: I know no reason why
the English Navy should fly from him, The Spaniard cannot brag of his gain.
for the Spaniard may put all the gain in his eye that ever he did win from
the English: Peradventure some siely nouice of our country meeting the general
in Spain, and hearing a repetition of so many sillables in one name, as Don
Bernaldino Delgadillo de Auellaneda, might think them to be words of
Coniuration, and for fear of raising a Spirit, might fly from him as from the
Devil, or some simple Indian slave hearing the like repetition of his long and
tedious name, might suppose it to be an Army of Spaniards, and for fear run
away: But the commanders and Captains of the English Navy, Spanish bragges
are of no value with the English.
were men of such resolution, that no Spanish bragges could dismaye them, for
they have often met them with their Pikes in their Spanish beardes. Nor the
countenance of Don Bernaldino quail them, although he were acowtred in his
gilt Leather buskins, and his Toledo Rapyer.

Sixthly, The general says in his letter, that notwithstanding their flying
away so fast, the English left them one good Ship well manned, who told him
that the Drake dyed in Nombre de Dios, in which Ship were one hundred and
forty men, and fifteen noble Captains of the best sort.
THe General Don Bernaldino, Don Bernaldino very resolute,
like a resolute Spaniarde having already gonne over his shoes, makes no
danger to wade over his Boats also: and as he has begun so he does
conclude, I marvel that he did not in writing his discourse remember this
old saying; that is, A liar ought to have a good memory: It were much better
for him in mine opinion to revoke the testimony which he says he had from
the English men, concerning Sir Fraunces Drake his death at Nombre de Dios, and
stand to the intelligence received from the siely Indian slave, as it
appears in his first lie, The Indian slave, is the best shadow, to the
Generals lie
for without al doubt, there is no English man that will say (if he have his
right senses) that he dyed at Nombre de Dios, for they all know the contrary:
Neither can the General avouch that he received intelligence from any English
man, that after the death of Sir Frances Drake they did elect for General
Colonel Quebraran, Don Bernaldino his rare gift in coining a new and strange
name.
as he does most falsely affirm in the latter end of his vain and frivolous
letter, being that the name was strange, and unknown to any in the English
Navy. Neither do I imagine that any of those which the General says he has
taken were so forgetful as not to remember their generals name. But without
all doubt this addition of so new, and strange a name to the English General,
does prove that Don Bernaldino is not unfurnished of a forge and storehouse of
lies, The Generals storehouse of lies.
from whence as from an euerflowing fountain, he sends forth lies of al
sorts suffcient for his own store, and great plenty to furnish his friends:
The General was much beholding to his godfathers who gave him the name
Barnaldino, which we in English do take to be plain Barnard, which name has
as it were a kind of privilege from being sharply reprehended when the party
is thought to err: for it is a common saying amongst the Schoolmen that
Barnardus non videt omnia, The schoolmen of modesty do use this kind of
reprehension, when they do think the Author to err.
viz. Barnard sees not all things, (when he does dissent from their opinions)
the which favor we could be content to yield to Bernaldino for the name
sake, if he were not taken with so many manifest and impudent lies, neither do
I think that Signior Bernaldino will say that he saw all that he has written,
be it spoken in council for shaming the General, for is there any man so void
of reason as to think? That any Englishman being demanded of his Generals
name, would write or speak Quebraran for Baskeruile, so much difference there
is in the sound of the sillables, The difference twixt Quebraran and Baskeruile.
as there is no affinity at all, or likelihoode of truth: But such are the
Generals rare gifts, (be it spoken to his small praise) that we Englishmen must
of force confess that the General has given a proud onset to carry the
whetstone from Signior Barnardino de Mendozza: Neither will the 140. men and
15. noble Captains (which he says he did take, of whom he might have been
rightly informed of their generals name) acquit him of lying forgerie, The
General convicted of lying and forgery.
for giving the name of Quebraran to the English General: as for the good
Ship well manned, which he says the English left them after the fight, I am
persuaded he has no man to witness that lie, for the ship was separated by
weather from the English fleet in the night thirteen days before the fight,
with the Spanish Navy, and never to any man's knowledge came more in sight of
the English fleet, The General makes great brags in taking a distressed
Ship, which is supposed not to strike one blow.
if the Spanish Ships by chance did take the said well manned Ship (as they
call her) I doubt not but they have the Ship, the 140. men, and the 15. noble
Captains to show: But evermore I guess the Spanish reckoning will fall short
when it is examined, for the fifteen noble Captains will prove (as I take it)
but three, whose loss I grieve to think on: The fifteen noble Captains
according the generals lying occupation, will prove but three.
Neither did the Spaniards gain them by valor, or we loose or leave them for
cowardice, as most untruly this bragging liar has certified. But the General
like a provident man, to make his fame and credit the greater with his Prince
and country, does take upon him (amongst other his miracles performed before
the English fleet) by way of amplification to make small matters seem great,
as a little shoe to serve a great foot, and finding that it can hardly be
brought to pass, he does stretch the Leather with his teeth that it is ready
to break, and notwithstanding, all this will not serve his purpose, The
Printing of the letter does shame the General.
for the Printing of the letter does mar the play, and brings such matter in
question, as the General does wish might be concealed, and were he not of so
dry and choleric complexion, as commonly Spaniards are, he would blush for
very shame in publishing so impudently such manifest untruths. Don Bernaldino
of an excellent complexion
For sithence his meeting with the English fleet at the Isle of Pinas, there
has been by the worthy English Generals, an honorable expedition from
England into the Continent of Spain, The first discovery of the Generals
Printed letter.
where amongst other exploits having taken the City of Cales, in the sack
thereof was found some of Don Bernaldino his Printed letters: and coming to
the hands of a Captain that served in the voyage to the west Indies, he has
thought very fit (in regard of the slanders to the English Navy contained in
the said letter) to quote the errors, that the truth only may appear, to all
such as have a desire to be rightly informed of such accidents, as befell the^
in this late voyage to the west Indies: and this may suffice to show Don
Bernaldino Delgadillo de Avellaneda his great judgment in amplyfying small
matters, The Generals great skill in amplifying.
or of nothing to make in show seem somewhat. And now having thus far
informed you of the truth in reproof of the slanderous, false, and untrue
reports of this glorious lying General, with a true disproofe to some of the
grossest of his lies, I will leave him with the rest of his lying letter, and
the circumstances therein contained to your censures: who in discretion may
easily discern the same. And have here following plainly and truly set
down the course and order of our whole fight after we met.

THE MEETING Of our English Navy and the Spanish fleet, and the order of our
encounter.
Monday the first of March, according to our computation, we scryed the Island
of Pinas, where haling in for the western part thereof, thinking there to have
watered, being within four leagues of it Southerly, we sent in three of our
Pinnasses to discover the harbor, The first discovery of the Spanish fleet.
and to sound before us, about one of the clock in the afternoon; the same
day we discovered a fleet of twenty sails, and deeming them to be the
Spanish fleet, we kept our loofe to get the wind but their Viceadmiral with
diverse other ships went about to cut off our Pinnasses, so that our General
with some other of our Ships, was forced to tacke about upon the larbour
tacke, and so ran in toward the land keeping the wind, so as we recovered
our Pinnasses, which ^orced the enemies Ships to tacke about, and to take the
aid of their fleet, and being come near unto them they shot at us, we still
approached, having our close fights up, our flagges, ensigns and s^reamers
displayed, our men orderly placed ^n each quarter, but forbear our fight until
our General began, and gave us warning to come in and fight, by shooting off a
great piece, according to his former directions, so being within Muskat shot,
The encounter twixt the English and the Spanish Ships.
the Viceadmirall of the Spanish fleet came nearest unto us, to whom our
Viceadmirall John Traughton Captain of the Elizabeth Bonaduenture gave fight,
betwixt whom there was the greatest volee of small shot changed that lightly
has been heard at Sea, which continued a long half hour. In which time the
Spanish fleet came into fight, our General Sir Thomas Baskeruile being in the
Garland, whereof Humphrey Reignolds was Captain, being the next Ship unto
the Elizabeth Bonaduenture, bare up to the enemy, playing with her great
Ordinance hotly until she came within Muskat shot: Jonas Bodenham Captain of
the Defiance, and Henry Sauile Captain of the Adventure, came likewise into
fight with the^: After the Garland (being within Muskat shot) played her part
and made good fight for the space of an hour. The Defiance bare up likewise
and had her turn, after came the Adventure again within Muskat shot, who
having changed many a great Bullet, with them before, renewed his fight, and
continued it an hour with small shot. Then came Thomas Drake Captain of the
Hope, who last of all had his turn. Thus had all the Queens Ships their
course: The Merchants Ships with other small vessels being without the
Queens Ships shot when they saw opportunity: After the enemy finding no
good to be done, (being well beaten) fell from us, the Adventure, playing upon
them with her great Ordinance, The Spanish Viceadmiral can witness, what
success they had in this fight.
made three of the last shot at them: Their Viceadmiral with diverse others of
their Ships, were so beaten, that they left off the fight, and were forced to
lie in the wind, for that they durst not lie of either board by reason of
their many and great Leakes, which they had received by our great shot. The
General with the rest of their fleet, tacking about fell in our wake,
thinking to get the wind, The English Admiral carried his Creset light,
notwithstanding the enemy was upon his broad side.
which in the beginning we sought to hinder. But our General seeing that in
holding the wind we should shoot our selves into the Bay, gave them the
wind. All that night they kept themselves upon our broad side,
notwithstanding our Admiral carried his Cresset light all night: having great
care of our smallest Ships: This fight continued about four hours til it
was near night, in the which fight, thanks be to God, there was slain so few
persons of our English fleet as I think the like conflict has not been
performed with so little loss of men: What harm befell the Spaniards in their
fleet I leave to your judgments. The English received little loss in this
conflict.
Yet our eyes can witness their Ships were sore beaten and raked thorough,
whereby there was such falling back and lying by the Lee to stop their
leakes, as some of them were driven to haste away, and rather to run on
shore to save themselves then sincke in the Sea: Besides within two hours
after our fight with them, we saw one of their great Ships on fire which
burnt into the Sea, and all the Stern of another of their Ships blown up:
And in the morning a Ship of our fleet was run so near the land, that to
double the Cape current he must of necessity tacke about and fall in the wake
of the enemy, which caused our General in the Garland and the Defiance to
tacke about, which two ships forced the three Ships of the enemies which were
put forth to take our Shipp, or else to cause her run on ground) to return
to their fleet to save themselves, hoysing all their sails for haste: This
morning they were fair by us having the wind of us, being but thirteen sail
of their twenty to be seen, The remainder of the Spanish fleet were but
thirteen sails.
then we stroke our top sails thinking to have fought with them again, which
they perceiving tacked about from us, and after that never durst nor would come
near us: What became of the rest of their fleet we know not, but true it was
that they were in great distress mightily beaten and torn, by having received
many Bullets from us. All this day we had sight of them, but they showed
little will to fight or come near us, so we keeping our course west, and by
North, about six of the clock at night lost the sight of them. And this is a
true discourse of our fight with the Spanish fleet. The which the Author
hereof will justify with the adventure of his life, against any Spaniard
serving in that action, that shall contradict the same.

FINIS.
Henry Sauile.

THOMAS BASKERVILE KNIGHT, His approbation to this Book.
I Thomas Baskeruile Knight, General of her Majesty's late Indian armado in
the late conflict had between the Spanish fleet and us, having perused the
Spanish letter written by Don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Auellaneda, General of
the King of Spaines Navy, and also having perused Captain Henry Sauile his
answers unto the six exceptions in the Generals letter with his discourse of
the manner of our fight with the Spanish fleet, do say, that the said Henry
Sauile has answered the letter, and set down the order of the fight sincerely
according to truth, for testimony of which I have hereunto set my hand.

And if Don Bernaldino Delgadillo de Auellaneda the General shall take any
exceptions to this my approbation, or stand in the justification of his lying
letter written to Doctor Peter Flores, President of the Contraction house for
the Indies, and by him for Bernaldinoes glory lately put in Printe: I then
say that he falsely lied, and that I will maintain against him with
whatsoever Arms he shall make choice of. And because the kingdoms wherein we
abide are enemies, by reason of which there is no means in either of them, to
maintain that I have written. Let him make choice of any indifferent kingdom,
of equal distance from either Realm, and I will there be ready to maintain
as much as I have written: But if by my employments into France, Ibe so stayed
by her Majesty's Commandments, that I cannot out of that Realm meet him in
any other, I cannot see why he should take any exception to that,
considering the equality of the place, and that the Armies of both our Princes
be there resident.

FINIS.
Tho. B.

Galleon


